A VINDICATION OF THE ESSENCE AND UNITY OF THE CHVRCH CATHOLIC VISIBLE. AND
The Priority thereof in regard of Particular CHURCHES.

In answer to the Objections made against it, both by Mr John Ellis junior, and
by that Reverend and worthy Divine Mr Hooker, in his Survey of Church
Discipline.

By SAMUEL HUDSON Minister of the Gospel at Capell in Suff.

LONDON, Printed by A. M. for Christopher Meredith at the Sign of the Crane in
Paul's Churchyard. 1650.

TO THE Reverend Assembly of DIVINES assembled at Westminster.
REverend, and much honored Fathers and Brethren, it is a received Maxim,
that public rights and interests are to be preferred before private and
particular; spiritual, before secular; divine before humane. Now as the
internal spiritual government of Christ in the invisible Church, is far more
excellent then any other: so also his external visible government of the
visible Church, has the pre-eminence above all visible civil governments and
Kingdoms of this world. And if it be lawful even for private persons to
vindicate, by humane Laws, the extents and rights of their particular civil
inheritances and possessions: and if it be accounted the duty of good subjects
to vindicate the extents and rights of their civil Sovereigns Dominions, with
their Estates and Lives, even by the Sword: then much more is it the duty of
Christ's Subjects, by disputes and argumentations to vindicate the extents and
rights of Christ's external political Kingdom; the one being but of civil
concernment, the other divine; the one tending but to a civil end, the other a
spiritual. And therefore I hope none will blame me for appearing in public to
contend for the extent and rights of Christ's political Kingdom in his Church
here on earth.

My first Thesis on this Subject was composed for the private use of my self,
and some few neighbor Ministers, in a monthly private meeting, according to
our custom. But being made public, at the desires of others, it met with
opposition from two reverend Brethren: first by M. John Ellis junior, who
undertook to confute it, with other Tractates of diverse of my betters that were
(...) the same subject* and secondly by Reverend Mr. Hooker, who is since
departed out of the visible militant Church, into the invisible Triumphant; the
loss of which burning and shining light, the Church of God cannot sufficiently
lament. Now because some things therein set down were by them mistaken, and
other things not so fully cleared, as I desired, I thought good to set it out
again more enlarged, and vindicated from the mistakes and oppositions that it
met withal.

The reasons of my so long delay herein were, First, because I was the least
and least concerned therein, though the most tartly dealt withal by M Ellis.
And secondly, because I desired to see some of my betters go before me, in
vindication of their own Tractates of the same subject. And thirdly, because I
understood by M. Ellis's book, and by common fame, that there was an answer to
M. Rutherford coming out, wherein I should find my question discussed, by that
eminent and worthy Divine M. Hooker, which was indeed sent over, but perished
in the sea, and so was retarded one year longer, until it could be transcribed,
and sent over again. And since that was printed, the seat of the war, by the
siege of Colchester, coming so near us, we were all in a fear and danger, so
that I thought it no fit time to attend to controversies: and I had indeed
almost laid it quite aside, but that the importunities of some, and the
insultings of others excited me again to take it in hand.

And now I find a fourfold unhappiness has betided me herein.

First, The darkness and sublimity of the Subject, which I could no way make
plain, so as to be understood by vulgar apprehensions, because the handling
thereof put me necessarily upon the use of so many latin words, and logical
terms of art, which are not usually understood by common people. And therefore
despairing to be understood but by those that had some skill in the Latin
tongue, and in Logic, I have set down the words of such Authors as I have had
occasion to cite, in their own languages, in which I found them, lest otherwise
this Tractate should swell too great.

A second unhappiness is, that this Tenet seems to cross so many of our own
Divines, in their writings against the Papists. But indeed it does only seem
so, for it is manifest that the Church Catholic which they intend, is not the
same with this that I have to deal about. For they speak of the Church
Catholic consisting only of the Elect and I consent unto them that th^^ Church
is (...) ^^le: but my question is about the external state of the Church,
containing hypocrites as well as those that are truly godly, in which Church
the Ordinances of worship and discipline were set.

A third is, that I am fallen upon a subject wherein I can find so few going
before me, and therefore could have the less help from Authors.

A fourth is, that I being a mean Countrey-Minister, want both those abilities
and opportunities, to enable me to write of controversies, having constant
employment of preaching in mine own Congregation, and frequently abroad, lying
upon me, so that I cannot attend polemical Divinity, as they must that
undertake such a work.

My principal scope in this and the former Thesis, is to prove that there is
one Church Catholic visible on earth: and that Gods intention and donation of
the Ordinances of worship and discipline, was first to the whole Church, and
secondarily to the particular Churches, as parts thereof. And yet I acknowledge
the ordinary and constant exercise of those Ordinances is primarily in the
particular Churches, and a secondary and only occasional exercise of them in
greater parts thereof; and a very rare exercise of them in the whole conjunctim
upon some general extraordinary occasion, and that can be no otherwise, then by
delegated Commissioners from the several parts of the whole, when convenible.

If it be conceived by any that some of the Arguments in this Tractate are
multiplied more then is needful, and are laid down more singly then was meet,
I will not deny it: Be pleased in the reading of them to consider them
together, and I hope they will prove conclusive.

I find also by the review of this Tractate, that some things are ofter
touched upon then I was aware of: be pleased to impute it partly to my
forgetfulness, and partly to mine endeavor to follow the method of my former
Thesis, and yet to answer what was objected against it by others, who followed
their own methods, which occasioned some coincidency.

And since the transcribing of it for the Press, there came to my hands two
other Tractates about the same subject, written from N. E. the one in Latin by
that reverend and worthy M. Norton, Minister at Ipswich there, in answer to
Apollonius; the other by two reverend Ministers, viz. M. Allen, and M. Shepard,
in answer to M. Ball.

It grieved me much that I saw them no sooner: I have only inserted a few
annotations upon those tractates, because I was loath to make a Postscript; and
because I found that most of the material passages in them concerning this
subject, were already spoken unto in this book.

I have now showed mine opinion on this question, and submit it to your sage
and mature judgments, and should be glad that my betters would show me theirs,
and either correct what I have erred or failed in, or make more clear what I
have endeavored to prove and defend. If I have herein erred, I would not
willingly be an heretic, but shall be willing upon conviction and proof to
retract the same, but if I have defended a truth (as I conceive I have) I
should be glad to be confirmed in it, and gladder to have the truth confirmed,
that it may appear so to others.

Now God the Father, who is the God of truth; and Jesus Christ, who is the way,
the truth, and the life; and the holy Ghost, who is the Spirit of truth; guide
you and us into all truth. So prays,

Your unworthy fellow laborer in the Lord, SAMUEL HUDSON.
September. 8. 1649.
AN EPISTLE TO THE READER.
THe Reverend Author of this learned Tractate, some few years ago, did put
forth a Book about the Essence and Unity of the Church-Catholike visible, and
the priority thereof in regard of particular Churches. This Book was written
with so much ingenuity, perspicuity, and learning, that Reverend and godly M.
Hooker is pleased to pass his judgment upon the Author and his Book in these
words; Survey of Church Discipline. page 15.
While I was enquiring and writing touching this Ecclesia Catholica visibilis,
an especial providence brought a book to my view, which did purposely entreat
of this particular subject. The Author M. Hudson a learned man and a faithful
Minister of the Gospel, when I had considered his writing (...), I found his
judgment sharp and scholasticall, his spirit Christian and moderate, his
expression succinct and pregnantly plain to express his own apprehensions: So
that my heart was much contented with the acumen and judicious diligence of the
Author, though I could not consent to what he writ, yet I could not but
unfainedly prize the learning, perspicuity and painfulnesse expressed in his
writing. To this Book (by him so much commended) he returns an answer, and
before him one M. John Ellis junior. And it seems there are two other Tractates
about the same subject written from N. E. The one by M. Norton in answer to
Apollonius, the other by M. All^^ and M. Shepherd in answer to M. Ball. For the
truth is, the ^^^tion there held forth, if granted, would utterly overthrow the
grounds and pillars of the Congregational government. For (...) there be a
Church-Catholike visible, and this Church be not only a Church-Entitive but a
Church-Organical, and a Totum integrale having all Church Power habitually
seated in the Officers of it, which they have commission from Christ to exert,
and put into act upon a lawful call. And if particular Congregations are
integral parts and members of the Church-Catholike, as the Jewish Synagogues
we^ ^f the Jewish Church. And if the Ministry, Ordinances, and censures were
given by Christ first to the Church-general-visible, and secondarily to the
Church-particular, Then it will necessarily follow, That the particular
Congregation is not the first receptacle of Church Power, And that all
Church Power is not entirely and independently in a particular Congregation,
which are two of the chief foundations of the Congregational government* I
shall not at all speak to the first, but as for this last, That all
Church Power is solely and independently in a particular Congregation, it seems
to me not only to be contrary to the Scripture Act. 15. Mat. 18.17. Deuteronomy. 17.8,
9, 10, 11, 12. 1 Timothy 4.14.
, but to the very light of nature, and to carry many great absurdities with it.
For,

1. It takes away all authoritative appeals, and all authoritative ways of
uniting particular Churches one with another.

2. Then the Churches of Jesus Christ should have no Church Communion in
discipline one with another. They may have Christian-communion, but no
Church Communion.

3. Then no Minister could preach as an Officer out of his own Congregation,
but only as a gifted brother and as a private Christian.

4. Then no Minister could administer the Sacraments (which is an act of
office) out of his own Congregation, nor (as I conceive) give the Sacrament to
a member of another Congregation.

5. Then when his particular Church is dissolved, he cease to be a Minister,
and must receive a New Ordination.

6. Then a Minister baptizing a child, baptizeth him only into his own
Congregation. For if he be not an Officer of the Catholic Church, he cannot
baptize into the Catholic Church which is directly contrary to 1 Cor. 12.13.

7. Then when the Officers excommunicate a person, he should only be
excommunicated out of that particular Congregation, etc.

8. Then Christ should have as many entire bodies as particular Congregations;
Christ should not only have one Body whereof particular Congregations are part,
but every Congregation should be a Body of Christ by it self.

9. It would make way for toleration of heresies and blasphemies, and let in as
many religions as there are particular Congregations.

10. It would make the Churches of Christ stand divided one from another in
respect of government, and thereby bring ruin upon one another. Even as in a
civil State, if particular Corporations should be independent from the whole in
point of government, it would quickly bring destruction upon the whole.

For the removing of these and such like absurdities, This learned and
judicious Author in the Book forementioned laid down a quite contrary Thesis.
That there is a Catholic, visible, organical Church, to which Ordinances and
censures are firstly given by Jesus Christ. And that every Minister is seated
by God in this Catholic visible Church, and has a virtual and habitual power
to preach as a Minister in any place where he shall be lawfully called. Indeed
he is not an actual Minister of the Church-Catholike, nor has actually the
charge of the whole Church as the Apostles had: but habitually only by reason
of the indefinitenesse of his office. He has power in actu primo by virtue of
his office, though not in actu secundo sive exercito, he has jus ad rem every
where, but not in re any where, without a call. He is a Minister of Jesus
Christ, and thereby has right and power to perform the acts belonging to his
office, but for the execution of it, there is required a call thereunto.

This position is opposed and confuted by the forenamed Authors. And in
answer to them (but especially to M. Hooker and M. Ellis) This Reverend
Minister has here written a Vindication, which he has done with so much
meekness, moderation, ingenuity, perspicuity and learning, that if that holy
men of God M. Hooker were alive, I doubt not but he would pass the same
judgment upon this Book which he did upon the former. The truth is, The
Question is full of difficulty and intricacy, the path in which he walks is an
untrodden path, and the pains which he has taken in the compiling of this
work, and the learning which he has discovered herein is so great, as I am
very confident, That whosoever reads the Book will commend the Author and his
abilities, though he should not in every thing resent his opinion. The Scope of
the Book is to contend for the extents and rights of Christ's political Kingdom
in his Church upon earth, and to demonstrate the unity of it, and thereby to
lay a foundation of unity between particular Churches, which is as necessary
for the preservation of them, as purity and verity. For a Church divided
against it self cannot stand.

Sad it is to consider, That whereas Jesus Christ has left two ways for the
uniting of Christians in faith and love, the devil should make use of both of
them to disunite and divide us. The first is, The Sacrament of the Lords
Supper, which was instituted to be a Feast of Love, and a Band of Union between
Christians, but by Satan's cunning it has proved an apple of strife and of
great contention, not only between the Papists and the Protestants, the
Lutherans and the Calvinists, but between us also, and our dissenting brethren.
The second is, The Government of the Church, which was ordained by Christ to be
(...), and as a golden chain to link them together in purity, verity and unity,
to heal breaches, and to make us mind the same things, and to be perfectly
joined together in the same mind, and in the same judgment, But by the devils
policy (whose property it is to bring evil out of good) it is become the great
bone of contention, and a middle wall of partition between Christians and
Christians. This is a lamentation and shall be for a lamentation.

But my comfort is, That Jesus Christ came into the world to remove the wall of
partition that was between Jew and Gentile, and to make both one, and he is not
only a foundation (...) his people to build their faith and hope upon, but also
a corner stone to unite believers one to another. He it is that will shortly
remove all these Walls of partition between brethren, and will become not only
our Redeemer, but our Peacemaker. For he has prayed for all those that should
believe in him, That they may be one, as thou Father art in me, Joh. 17.21, 22
and I in thee, that they also may be one with us, that the ^^^^ld may believe
that thou have sent me. And the glory which thou have given me, I have given
them, that they may be one even as we are one. This Prayer will in due time be
fulfilled, together with those three soul-comforting Prophecies concerning the
times of the New Testament, Ier. 32.39. Zeph. 3.9. Zach. 14.9. In the mean time
it is our duty to study unity as well as purity. To this the Apostle exhorts us
with great earnestness and affection, 1 Cor. 1.10. Phil. 2.1.2, 3. Ephesians. 4.3,
4, 5, 6. This the present times call for with a loud voice. And this shall be
the care and prayer of

Your unworthy servant in the work of the Ministry, EDMUND CALAMY.

Errata.
PAge 10. line 16. for priatively read privatively. p. 14. l. 36. for vale e
quantums. valeat quantum. p. 1^. l. 24. for Foance r. France. p. 18. l. 5. for
Catechism r. Doctrine of the Church, correct the like fault, p. 7. l. 10. p.
18. l. 37. put a ^^ddlepoint after these words, Members for your part, p. 29.
l. 5. blot (...) ^at aliquid significat. p 545, l. 34. for or. r. for. p. 59.
l. 31. for visibly r. visible. p. 7^. l. 5. blot out not. p. 73. l. 32. blot
out there. p. 74. l. 11. is consisted r. consists. p. 87. l. 13. for (...) r.
(...). p 91. l 4. for for a particular r. of a particular. p. 103. l. 34. for
(?) set (.) p. 107. l. 18. for chough r. though. p. 127. l. 5. for it r. is. l.
16. for integrals r. integral. p. 136. l. 17. for as well as r. as well as. p.
144. l. 20. for to what r. in what. p 163. l. 31. for presbyterio r.
presbyterio. p. 168. l. 5. for no more it is, r. no more then it is. p. 176. l.
6. for p^stors r. pastors. p. 191. l. 16. for and Israel r. in Israel. p. 194.
l. 1^. for diut^s r. diuit^s. p. 201. l. 14. for good r. goods. p. 231. l. 1.
for Christ r. Christian. p. 238. l. 13. for primally r. primarily. p. 260. l.
2. for folds r. fields. p. 262. l. 5. for two men r. two women.

This Leaf being forgotten to be inserted in the former part of this Thesis, it
was thought fit to add it here.
M. Norton a reverend Minister in N. E. in his Treatise of the Doctrine of
Godliness, printed since his answer to Apollonius, defines the
Church-Catholike to be the number of the elect and redeemed, whom God has
called out of the world unto a supernatural estate and communion of grace and
glory with himself in Jesus Christ. And affirms that there is but one Catholic
Church, because there is but one faith. And then comes to distinguish this
Catholic Church in respect of its adjuncts into invisible and visible. And
then defines a visible Church to be a similar part of the Catholic Church,
consisting of a competent number, knit together by way of visible Covenant, to
exercise an holy communion with God in Christ, and so one with another,
according to the order of the Gospel. And then distinguishes this visible
Church into pure and impure; impure into 3. branches, viz. Simply erring,
Schismatical, Heretical. And then makes the matter of this visible Church to be
Saints, i. e. visible believers. From whence we have these concessions. 1. That
there is a Church-Catholike which is but one* 2. That this Church Catholic is
visible, yea, let me add further out of his answer to Apollonius, Politica
visibilitas est adjunctum respectu Ecclesiae Catholicae, page 87. i. e.
political visibility is an adjunct in respect of the Church-Catholike. 3. That
this Church-Catholike is an integral. 4. That the particular Churches are
similar parts of that integral. 5. That these particular Churches consist of
visible believers, which as himself in his answer to Apollonius, confesses are
not all Saints in truth, (...), but many of them only (...), in appearance. 6.
That some of these visible Churches may be impure, not only simply erring, but
schismatical, yea, heretical.

But (saving my honorable respect to so worthy a man) I cannot see how these
things are consistent with his definition of the Church-Catholike: for how can
the Church-Catholike consist only of the elect redeemed ones, called out of the
world into a supernatural estate, and yet the particular Churches which are
similar (and constituent) parts of it, consist of members that are ((...) of
them) only Saints in appearance, and not in truth; yea, some whole Churches
erring, schismatical, (...) ma^t^^ as the particular visible Churches, which
are the members of the Catholic consist of, such must the Church Catholic
consist of, which is the similar integral. And though such as are only Saints
in appearance, and not in truth, are said by M. Norton in his answer to
Apollonius, p. 87. to be equivocal members of particular Churches, yet are they
as truly members of the whole as they are of the parts, and they are so for
true as that their external communion and administrations (if any such be
Officers) are true and valid, both in respect of the particular Churches, and
the Catholic, quond (...) ^^^station. And it is his own rule, Resp. p. 88.
Quicquid inest parti inest toti, that which is in the part is in the whole. And
again he says Ecclesiae Catholica and Ecclesiae particulares communicant
essentia and nomine: and Ecclesiae particulares, pro varijs earum rationibus
habent se ut parts and ut adjuncta Ecclesiae Catholicae. Ex natura, and ex
ratione sunt ut res (...), i. e. similares: ut mare appellatur aqua, ita and
qualibet gutta maris appellatur aqua. Resp. page 87. therefore they must needs
consist of the same kind of matter, as they are both visible.

A TABLE Of the chief things contained in this Tractate.
CHAPTER. 1.
The explication of the terms of the Question. Page 1.
Section 1.
WHat is meant by Ecclesia or Church. It is taken in a civil and theological
sense. In a theological sense: 1 Primarily and properly for the whole company
of the elect, which is called the Invisible Church. 2 2 For the company of
visible believers. 3 For the members as distinct from the Officers of the
Church. 4 For the Elders or governors of the Church as distinct from the body.
3 5 For the faithful in some one family. 4

Section 2.
What is meant by visible. The distinction of the visible and invisible Church
opened. The difference between visible and visum. The Churches mentioned in the
N. T. were visible Churches. 6 An Objection of the absurdity of wicked men's
being members of the body of Christ, answered by a distinction of Christ's body.
The distinction of the Church into visible and invisible is not exact. 8 The
invisible members of the Church are also visible. What a Church visible is. 9
The description vindicated from some objections against it. 10
Section 3.
What is meant by Catholic, universal, or ecumenical. 11 Four acceptations of
the word Catholic, and which of them suit the question. What the universal
visible Church is. 12 Diverse descriptions of it, and quotations out of Divines
both ancient and modern about it. 13 What a National Church is. 15 Diverse
proofs from Scripture for a National Church under the Gospel. The description
of a particular visible Church given by Gersom Bucerus, scanned. 17 Mr Cottons
description of a visible. 18 Four Quaeries about it propounded. 1. Whether the
matter of it consists only of Saints called out of the world? 2. Whether
every particular visible Church be a mystical body of Christ, or but only a
part of it, seeing Christ has but one mystical body, in the same sense? 3.
Whether the form of a particular visible Church be a particular Covenant? 19 4.
Whether all the Ordinances of God can be enjoyed in a particular visible
Church? 20
Which for some of them seems very inconvenient. And for others impossible.
M. Nortons description of a particular Church. 22 A Congregational Church
standing alone, hardly found in the New Testament.
Section 4.
What is meant by prima vel secundaria and orta. 23 The primity of the
Church-Catholike in a threefold respect. 24 The difference between this
question and M. Parkers.
Chapter. 2.
Proofs by Scripture for a Church-Catholike visible. 25
Section 1.
Our Divines in answer to the Papists, mean by Church-Catholike the invisible
Church only. 26 Yet is there also an external visible Kingdom of Christ, as
well as an internal and invisible. M. Hookers acknowledgement of a political
body or Kingdom of Christ on earth. 27 D. Ames testimony of a Church-Catholike
visible. 28
Section 2.
Diverse proofs out of the Old Testament for a Church-Catholike visible. 29
Section 3.
Diverse proofs out of the New Testament for a Church-Catholike visible. 31
Act. 8.3. and Gal. 1.13. vindicated. Act. 2.47. vindicated. 33 1 Cor. 10.32.
vindicated. 35 Gal. 4.26. opened. 37 Ephesians. 3.10. vindicated. 38
Section 4.
1 Cor. 12.28. vindicated. 39 Two answers of M. Hookers concerning this text
considered. 40 Diverse answers to this text by M. Ellis, refuted. 41 An
Objection of M. Hookers about Deacons set in the same Church where Apostles
were set, answered. 51
Section 5.
1 Timothy 3.15. vindicated. 53 Diverse texts vindicated where the
Church-Catholike is called the Kingdom of God and the Kingdom of heaven, 55 Mr
Hookers answer to those texts considered. 1 Cor. 15.24. vindicated. 56 Heb.
12.28. vindicated. 57
Section 6.
1 Cor. 5.12. vindicated. 58 Ephesians. 4.4, 5. vindicated. 59 Mat. 16.18.
vindicated. 60 M. Hookers acknowledgement that this text is meant of the
visible Church. 61 3. Ep. of John ver. 10. vindicated. 62
Chapter. 3.
Proofs by arguments and reason that there is a Church-Catholike visible. 64
Section 1.
1 From Gods donation unto Christ of an universal Kingdom. 2 From Gods
intention in sending Christ, and the tenor of Gods exhibition of Christ in his
word to the whole world. 65 3 From the general preaching and receiving of the
Gospel. 66 4 From the general Charter whereby the Church is constituted.
Section 2.
5 From the generality of the Officers of the Church, and general donation of
the Ministry. 67 6 From the general vocation wherewith, and general Covenant
whereinto all Christians are called. 68 7 From the generality of the initial
seal, admittance and enrowlment. 69 8 From the external catholic union between
all visible Christians. 70
Section 3.
9 From the individual system or body of laws (proceeding frrm the same
authority) whereby the whole is governed. 10 From the general, external
communion, intercourse and communication between all Christians. 71 11 From the
general extension of excommunication. 73 12 If there be parts of the
Church-Catholike there is a whole.
Section 4.
Many metaphors in Scripture setting forth the whole Church under an unity. 74
Chapter. 4.
That the Church-Catholike visible is one Integral or Totum integrale.
Section 1.
First, Negatively, that it is not a Genus. 77 1 Because a Genus is drawn by
mental abstraction of species, but the Catholic visible is made up by
conjunction or apposition of the several members. 2 A Genus has no existence
of its own, which the Church-Catholike visible has. 3 It appears by the
definition of a Genus, both according to the Ramists and Aristotelians, neither
of which can agree to the Church-Catholike.

Section 2.
Secondly, Affirmatively, that it is an Integral. 79 1 Because it has an
existence of its own, which no Genus has. 2 Because the particular Churches
constitute the Ecumenical, which has parts extra parts. 3 Because it is
made up not only of particular Churches, but of particular believers also. 4
Because it has accidents and adjuncts of its own, existing in it. 80 It is
capable of being greater or less. It is mutable and fluxile. 81 It is measured
by time and place.


Section 3.
5 Because it has admission into it, nutrition and edification in it, and
ejection out of it. 6 Because it has a head and Governor of the same nature,
as man, and Officers on earth, that are habitually indefinite Officers to the
whole. 82 7 Because it has actions and operations of the whole. 8 It appears
by the several appellations given to it in the Scripture. 84 9 It appears by
the Scripture-expressions of the union of the members of the whole Church. 86
10 Because the invisible Church may in some sense be called an integral,
therefore much more the visible. 87
Section 4.
An Objection from the possible contraction of the Church-Catholike into narrow
limits, answered. Whether every essential predication will make the arguments
to be Genus and Species. 89 Whether the right to the Ordinances and privileges
of the Church arise from the common nature and qualifications in believers, or
from a Covenant. 90 If from a Covenant, whether from a particular Covenant
between man and man, or the general Covenant between God and man. The variation
of situation or accidents vary not the species. 91 The method of conveyance of
the right of Church Priviledges asserted. 94 The particular Churches are
similar parts and parcels of the Church-Catholike. 95 As the several Synagogues
were of the Jewish Church. Mere cohabitation makes not a man a member of a
Church. Yet for a visible believer to inhabit within the limits of any
particular Church, and not to be a member of it, implies it either to be no
Church, or a very corrupt one. 96
Chapter. 5.
That the Church-Catholike is visible. 97
Section 1.
There is an invisible company or Church of Christ. But that is not meant in
this Question. Four distinctions of visible. 98 What kind of visibility is
here meant.
Section 2.
Arguments to prove the Church-Catholike to be visible. 1 Because the matter
thereof is visible. 99 2 Their conversion is visible. 4 Because their
profession, subjection, obedience and conversations are visible. 100 4 Because
the Officers of the whole Church are visible. 101 5 Because the admittance
into, and ejection out of the whole, are visible. 102

Section 3.
6. Because the Doctrine, Laws, Ordinances, and Covenant of the whole are
visible. An Objection of M. Hookers against this, answered. 103 7. Because all
the administrations, dispensations, and operations of the whole are visible. An
Objection against this, answered. 8. Because it is our duty to join our selves
visibly thereto. 104 9. Because the accidents of the whole Church are visible.
10. Because the several parts of the whole Church are visible. 105
Section 4.
Some Objections of M. Ellis answered. The Church-Catholike which our Divines
in opposition to the Papists speak of, is not the same with this which is meant
in this question. 107 Neither can that Church-Catholike be considered as a
Genus, which this is affirmed by our brethren to be. 109
Section 5.
An Objection against the visibility of the Church-Catholike, because it wants
an existence of its own; answered. 111 Another Objection from the necessity of
the whole to meet together sometimes; answered. 113 Some exceptions of M. Ellis
answered. About general Councels and their power. 116
Section 6.
Another Objection from the necessity of a visible head of the Church-Catholike
visible, answered. 117 How Christ may be said to be a visible head. 118 Some
exceptions against Christ's visible headship, answered. 119 Another Objection,
viz. that the Church-Catholike is an article of our faith, and therefore cannot
be visible, answered. 121
Chapter. 6.
That the Church-Catholike visible is an Organical, yet similar body. Yea, one
Organical body. 123
Section 1.
That particular Churches are or ought to be organized.
Section 2.
That particular Churches thus organized are similar integral parts of the
whole. 124 This assertion vindicated from M. Ellis's charge of a contradiction.
The similarity of the Churches asserted by D. Ames and M. Bartlet, etc. 125 It
neither crosses mine own scope, nor Apollonius, as is suggested. 126
Section 3.
The Church-Catholike is one Organical body. 127 The distinction of the Church
into Entitive and Organical. Whether the Church or the ministry be first. 128
An explication how the Church-Catholike may he said to be one Organical body,
and how not. 129
Section 4.
Arguments to prove the Church-Catholike one Organical body. 131
1. From the metaphors whereby it is set out in Scripture. It is set out by a
natural body. 133 By a political body; as a Kingdom, City, Army. By an
Oeconomical body. 134
2. Because a baptized person is admitted a member of the whole. Also because
excommunication ejecteth out of the whole. Certificates indeed were sent from
one Church to another to signify the inflicting of the censure, but no new act
passed.
3. It appears by the Identity of the Covenant, Charter, Promises, and Laws of
the whole. 135 4. By the general communion that all the members of the
Church-Catholike have indefinitely with other members or Churches, wherever
providence cast them. 136 5. From the opposition which the adversaries of the
Church make against it as one organical body. 137
Section 5.
6. By the indefinitenesse of the Office of Ministers. This Indefinitenesse
appears. 1. From the generality of the Donation, Institution and Commission of
the Evangelical Ministry. 138 They bear a double relation, one to the whole
Church, another to the particular. 139

M. Rutherford, M. Balls Crakenthorp, and Salmasius cited. 140
Section 6.
2. From the subject matter whereabout their office is exercised, which is
common to all. 141 3. From the end of the ministerial function, which cannot
otherwise be attained. 142 4. From the actions which every Minister does
perform, by virtue of his office, indefinitely. 143
Section 7.
5. From the double relation which private members bear, one to whole, another
to the particular Church. 147 6. From the great absurdities which otherwise
will follow. 148
Section 8.
Obj. Then ordinary Ministers differ nothing from Apostles and Evangelists,
answered. 150
Chapter. 7.
About Combinations of particular Congregations in Classes, and of them in
Synods. 151
Section 1.
A double integrality of the Church, First, Entitive. Secondly, Organical. A
double combination, one habitual, another actual. 152
Section 2.
The combining of particular Congregations into a Classis. 153 Scripture-proofs
and Instances thereof. 154 Reasons to prove the necessity of it. 156
Section 3.
Concerning Synods. 158 The authors that handle this subject, The nature,
kinds, and authority of Synods. 159
Section 4.
A threefold power of Synods, Dogmatical, Diatactical, Critical. 160 A ground
of a Synod in Scripture, acknowledged by our Protestant Divines. 161 The Synod
Act. 15. exerted all those three kinds of power. 162
Section 5.
About the equality of power of single Congregations. 163 Their subordination
to the combined. 164 This subordination is also a coordination.
Scripture-proofs for this subordination. And reasons for it. 165 The like
subordination found in the Jewish Church. And is dictated by light of nature,
and common to all societies.
Section 6.
Diverse Objections answered. As, 166 Obj. Then there must be 2. kinds of
Presbyteries. Then every particular Minister has a very transcendent power and
authority. 167 Then they are standing-Officers of the Christian world. 168 Then
they are Christ's Vicars general. 169
Section 7.
Then the Church of the whole world should choose every Officer. 170 Diverse
exceptions of M. Ellis's. 171
Section 8.
Then the whole is to honor and contribute to the maintenance of of every
Minister. 173 Then the Ministers perform not their whole office to the
Congregation that maintains them. 174 This will be too great a burden for
Ministers to meddle in the affairs of many Congregations. Then Ministers
exercise rule where they do not ordinarily preach, so the keys should not be
commensurable. 175
Section 9.
This was a grand objection formerly against the Bishops, that they ruled where
they preached not. 176 Then great and stubborn persons will never be brought to
censure. This will occasion much trouble and charge to the party grieved.
Synods are in danger of erring as well as particular memberships. 177
Section 10.
The liberty of appeals proved. But why then should Christ let his Church want
general Councels so long. 178 But how then dare particular Churches abrogate
the decrees of general Councels. 179
Chapter 8.
An answer to M. Ellis's Prejudices, Probabilities, and Demonstrations against
an universal, visible (and as he calls it) governing (but should have said
organical) Church. And his wrong stating of the Question rectified. 180.
Section 1.
What M. Ellis denies to be the question. 1. He says it is not meant of the
essential oneness. Answ. But this is meant, and is the foundation of the
other. 2 It is not (says he) meant of engagement to mutual care one of
another. 182 Answ. Not amicitial or fraternal only, but authoritative, the
greater part to regulate the less. 3 Nor is it meant (says he) of a voluntary
association, as occasion requires for mutual assistance. Answ. Their
association, though it be necessary, yet it is voluntary, but not arbitrary. 4
Nor is it meant (says he) whether all or most Churches may occasionally become
one by messenger, in a general Council. 183 Answ. This is the highest effect
this unity produces.

Section 2.
What M. Ellis grants in this question. 1 An authoritative power from Christ to
make directions and rules, to which the conscience is bound to submit, and
which are to be obeyed, not only because materially good, but because formally
theirs. Answ. This is even as much as the Presbyterians desire. But this he
denies to be done by Church Officers, as Officers. 184 2 If the universal
Church were convenible, he grants what is contended for. Answ. The parts may
rule themselves (being similar) as well as the whole the whole. 185

Section 3.
M. Ellis's corrupt stating of the question in diverse places. 186 Apollonius
and the London-Ministers vindicated. 187 The particular Churches act not by
commission from the general. 188 The whole company of Christians on earth are
not in their ordinary settled Church-constitution, one single actual
Corporation, but habitual. 189 Yet there may be causes to draw the Officers of
many Congregations together, yea, happily some Officers from the whole Church, if
it could be, occasionally. 190 The Ministers are not actually Ministers of the
whole Church, but habitually. They are given to the whole Church, as the
Levites to the whole house of Israel. 191
Section 4.
Answers to M. Ellis's prejudices, probabilities and demonstrations. 192 His
Objection of novelty, answered. That the Church is one habitually, and that the
particular Churches bear the relation of members to it, is not novel. That the
Ministers are Ministers beyond their own Congregations, and can perform duties
authoritatively, is not novel. Diverse instances given thereof out of Scripture.
Diverse Canons regulate Ministers in the exercise of their functions abroad, but
none deny them power. 193 Diverse instances out of antiquity. 194 Frequent
coventions of Synods and Councels anciently, and their acting authoritatively.
196 Five answers of M. Ellis's hereunto, considered of. 197
Section 5.
M. Ellis's witnesses against the unity and integrality of the Church
considered, viz Chrysostom, Clemens Alexandrinus, Cyprian, Augustine,
Eucherius, and the Council of Trent. 198 That it is not novel in respect of
Protestant Divines. 201 Some quotations out of Calvin, etc. 202
Section 6.
M. Ellis's prejudice from the dangerous consequences of this opinion,
answered. 203
Section 7.
Another prejudice that it is Papal and Antiprotestant, answered. 205
Section 8.
M. Ellis's arguments answered. 206 His first argument from the silence of the
Scripture herein. 2 From the institution of Christ. 207 3 From the first
execution of the greatest act of entire power exercise^ in a particular
Congregation, 1 Cor. 5. 208 4 Because entire power was committed to particular
men, viz. the Apostles severally, and to all jointly. 5 From the reproofs given
by Christ to the 7. Churches of Asia, in the Revelation.
Section 9.
His second sort of arguments from the matter and members of the Church,
answered. 209
Section 10.
A third sort of arguments is from the form and nature of all bodies and
corporations, which consist of superior and inferior, answered. 210 Six
pretended inconveniences, answered. 211
Section 11.
A fourth sort of arguments from the authors of this opinion, answered. 212 An
objection That the whole world is one humane society, and yet this makes them
not one Kingdom politically, answered. 213
The second Question. Whether the Church-Catholike visible, or the particular
Churches be first.
Section 1.
What kind of priority is meant here. 216 First, Negatively, not a priority of
time. 2 Not in regard of constitution by aggregation and combination. 3 Not in
regard of ordinary operation. But positively, the visible Church-Catholike is
prime. 1 In Gods intention. 217 2 In regard of Gods institution. 3 In regard of
Gods donation of Ordinances and privileges. 4 In regard of dignity. 5 In
regard of perfection. 6 In regard of the essence or entitivenesse. 7 In regard
of efficient ministerial causality. 218 8 In regard of distinct and perfect
knowledge or noscibility.
The difference between ortum and secundarium.
Section 2.
The first argument for the priority of the visible Church-Catholike from the
names that are given to the Church in Scripture. 219 The second argument is
because the Covenant, Promises, Laws and Privileges primarily belong to the
Catholic Church. The Covenant, commission for gathering the Evangelical
Church, the promises made to it, and Laws of it, proved to be universal. 220
The Privileges are also catholic. First, Federal holiness is a privilege of
the Catholic Church. 221 Secondly, Right to the Ordinances of Christ. 222
Proved in regard of Baptism. 223 And the Lords Supper. 224 Hearing of the word,
and joining in Prayer. 225

The query about the Ordinances of Discipline discussed. 226 1 Every member of
the Church (though but entitive) is bound to submit thereto. 2 Every Minister
has an habitual indefinite power annexed to his office to administer them. 3
The Ordinances of discipline were first given to general Pastors. 227 4 The
censures dispensed have influence into the whole Church. 5 Otherwise great
inconvenience will follow. 6 All polities administer justice to strangers
offending within their limits.
And the like power must be allowed to Ecclesiastical polities.
Section 3.
The third argument is because Christ's Offices are first intended for, and
executed on the Church-Catholike. 228 The fourth argument is because the signs
to difference the true Church from a false, belong primarily to the whole. 229
The fifth argument is because all the members are members of the
Church-Catholike primarily. 230 Both those that are born members, and those
converted. This illustrated by three similitudes. 231
Section 4.
The sixth argument is because the Ministers are primarily Ministers of the
Church-Catholike. 232 Diverse proofs hereof. The absurd consequences of binding
the Ministers office to his particular Congregation only. 233 The Ministers
office and power cease not by the dissolution of his particular flock. 235 An
Objection against this by M. A. and M. S. taken from the ceasing of the ruling
Elder or Deacons office, at such dissolution, answered. 236 It appears because
the censure of excommunication inflicted by particular Officers, reaches the
whole Church-visible. 237 The distinctions of formally and virtually, and of
antecedenter and consequenter, discussed. 238 It appears also because
particular Officers admit into the Church-Catholike by baptism. 239 Baptizing
is an act of the ministerial office. All are baptized into one body. Many
examples of persons baptized without relation to any particular Congregations.
Though it be objected that this was done by extraordinary Officers, yet this
salves it not, because if it be an Ordinance belonging to particular,
congregational members, these being not so, they could have no right to receive
it, no jus in re. 240 Some are called Ministers in Scripture in regard of more
Congregations then one. 241 And ruled in common over more Congregations then
one.
Section 5.
The seventh argument is, because every Christian bears his first relation to
the Church Catholic, and that relation continues last, and cannot be broken
off without sin. 242 Hence strangers tried where they reside for the present.
Ephesus commended for trying strangers. Rev, 2.2. Non communion is a sentence
denounced against strangers. Heretics and false teachers not fixed, must not
be suffered. It is no sin to remove from one Congregation to another. 243 The
eighth argument is, because particular Churches spring from the
Church-Catholike, and are an additament thereto. 244 The Church-Catholike is as
the main Ocean, and the particular as the arms thereof. A double rise of
particular Churches out of the Catholic. 245 First, They are made up of
members of the Church-Catholike, i. e. of visible believers. Secondly, They
find the Church-Catholike constituted and invested before their addition.
1 The Church-Catholike is instrumental to their conversion. 2 And gives them
ministerially their admittance, both into the Church entitive and organical.
Section 6.
What is sufficient in foro externo to make a man a member of the
Church-Catholike visible. 246 The absurdities of accounting true believers only
members of the visible Church. Apollonius and Mr Norton cited. Obj. Holiness
of dedication is founded on holiness of sanctification, answered. 247 Instances
out of the Old and New Testament for the contrary. Personal and Ecclesiastical
judgment differ. 248 The rules of the invisible Church serve not for the
visible. There are the same qualifications for the members of the
Church-Catholike visible, as for the particular Churches. 249 Two Objections
against the priority of the Church-Catholike, answered. 250 The conclusion of
the premises. 253
Section 7.
Corollaries from the former Thesis. 254 24 Corollaries concerning the
Church-Catholike. 12 Concerning particular Churches. 255 7 Concerning the
public Officers of the Church. 256 12 Concerning private members. 257
Section 8.
An application of the Thesis bewailing our division. 258 First, in judgment.
259 Diverse errors reckoned up that are broached. Secondly, in heart and
affections. 260 Thirdly, in way or practice. 261 An exhortation to unity in all
these 3. respects. 262
THE ESSENCE AND UNITY OF THE Church Catholic visible, etc.
QUEST.
Vtrum Ecclesia visibilis universalis sive Oecumenica sit prima, vel secundaria
and orta a particularibus?

Whether the vis. Chapter Cath. or the particular Churches be first?

CHAPTER I. The Explication of the Terms.
FOR the handling of this Question, here are these four terms to be opened.
First, What is meant by Ecclesia, or Church? Secondly, What by visibilis, or
visible? Thirdly, What is meant by universalis, sive oecumenica, or universal
and ecumenical? Fourthly, What by prima and orta, or the first Church, and
that which rises of it or secondary?

1. First, What a Church is? SECT. 1.
The word Church is taken in a civil or theological sense. In a civil sense,
for a company of people summoned, or gathered together for some civil affairs,
Acts 19.39. It shall be determined in a lawful assembly; the word in the
Original is (...), a Church. Yea even the rout met together, Acts 19.41. is
called Ecclesia, (...), He dismissed the assembly; or the Church, as the word
is in the Original.

Secondly, In a theological sense, it signifies a company of people that are
called, or to be called and joined together, standing in some spiritual
relation to God. And so the word is taken diversely

First and most properly, for the whole company of the elect, as they are
opposed to the reprobates, whether Jew or Gentile: and in this sense it is
taken Ephesians. 5.25, 26. As Christ loved the Church and gave himself for it, that
he might cleanse it with the washing of water by the Word. So verse. 23, 27. and
32. Again Col. 1.18. His body the Church.

Interdum cum Ecclesiam nominant, eam intelligunt quae rever a est coram Deo,
in quam nulli recipiantur nisi and adoptionis gratia filij Dei sunt, and
spiritus sanctificatione vera Christi membra. Ac tunc quidem non tantum sanctor
qui in terra habitant comprehendit, sed electos omnes qui ab origin mundi
fuerunt. Calvin Instit. lib. 4. cap. 1. sect. 7. where you may see more of this
subject. Of these there are three sorts: The first are elect uncalled, which
are not actually the Church, but in potentia, and in Gods decree: the second
sort are militant, warring with principalities and powers, with flesh, world,
and devil, being actually justified and sanctified persons; the third sort are
triumphant in Heaven, having finished their course, and are now the spirits of
just men made perfect: For the fourth, which the Papists make, viz. Ecclesia
dormiens, in Purgatory, we acknowledge not.

Secondly, The word Church sometimes signifies more then the elect, viz. the
multitude of believers whether truly or in show only. So Act. 8.3. Saul made
havoc of the Church. Act. 12.1. Herod stretched out his hands to vex certain
of the Church. Now it is certain that neither Herod nor Saul knew who were
elect; but as himself expounded it, He persecuted this way unto the death. And
he desired letters to Damascus, that if he found any of that way, he might
bind them, Act. 9.2. So Act. 5.11. Fear came upon all the Church. Now it
cannot be conceived that they were all elect that feared that judgment of God.
So 1 Timothy 5.16. Let not the Church be charged with them, that it may relieve
widows indeed. Now we cannot conceive that only the elect gave collection, but
the whole number of professors, which yet are called the Church, In Ecclesia
plurimi sunt permixti hypocritae, qui nihil Christi habent, praeter titulum and
speciem. Calvin Institut. lib. 4. cap. 1. sect. 7.

Thirdly, The word Church is sometimes taken for the members of the Church, as
distinct from the officers, Act. 15.22. Then pleased it the Apostles and Elders
with the whole Church. And ver. 4. They were received of the Church, and of the
Apostles and Elders. And this was before their convention in the Synod. And
Act. 14.23.

Fourthly, The word Church sometimes signifies the Governors of the Church,
to whom of right it belongs to administer and dispense the censures of the
Church. Matt. 18.17. If he will not hear them, tell it to the Church, i. e. the
Ministerial Church, where Christ seems to me to speak of a Church that was in
present being among the Jews, because he applies his speech to the capacity of
the Jews present, Let him be to thee as an heathen and Publican, who might not
have communion with Heathens, and would not with Publicans, but Christians
might eat and drink with both: and the same course by analogy was to be taken
by Christians when they had Churches set up, as it follows, ver, 18, 19.
Whatsoever ye shall bind on earth, etc.

Now we know that matters of complaint were not among the Jews brought unto the
Assembly or body of the people, but to their Elders and Rulers. And the word
Kahal, which signifies Ecclesia or Church, is frequently used in the Old
Testament for a Court of Elders, not only Ecclesiastical, but even civil. See 1 Chronicles. 13.1, 2, 4. And 1 Chronicles. 29.1, 10, 20. And 2 Chronicles. 29.28, 31, 32. And 2 Chronicles. 30.2, 4. called Psalm 82.1. The Congregation of the Gods. Compare also
Number. 35.12, 24, 25. and Deuteronomy. 19.12. with Josh. 20.4, 6. By Congregation in one
place is expounded Elders in the other. Also Exodus 12.3. with v. 21. Deuteronomy. 31,
28. (...) gather me the Elders, or make a Church of Elders. The same word we
find 1 Kin, 8.1. of Solomon's assembling the Elders of Israel. And 1 Chr. 28.1.
of David's assembling the Elders. The Septuagint translate Kahal Ecclesia or
Church, by (...) Prove. 26.26. His wickedness shall be showed before the whole
Congregation, (...). Compare also Deu. 23.1, 2, 3, 8. No bastard, Ammonite,
Moabite, etc. might enter into Kahal, the Congregation, which is rendered by the
best Divines to be Consessus Iudicum, the Congregation of Judges. For by Exo.
12.48, 49. and Number. 15.14, 15. and 9.14. and Lev. 22.18. All strangers upon
circumcision were admitted into the Congregation of the people to offer to God
as well as Israelites. Chap. 1.
Demosthenes uses the word (...) pro concione maguntum, says Pasor. It is
very frequent in the Scripture to speak of executing of judgment and justice,
and putting away of evil from the Congregation, indefinitely by ye and thou, as
if it were spoken to the whole Congregation, which was done by the Elders and
Judges only, judicially: Levit 19.15, 35. Deuteronomy. 16.19. Ier. 7.5. Amos 5.15, 24.
Zach. 7.9, 16. 1 C^^. 5.4, 7, 12.

Fifthly, The word Church is sometimes used to signify the faithful in some
one family, Philem. 2. etc. To the Church in thy house, Unless those families
were the meeting places for the Christians that dwelt about, to enjoy the
Ordinances of God in, because there were no public meeting houses built. And
to this I confess I incline. The second acceptance of the word Church, suits
best with this question. Sect. 2.


The second (...) to be opened is, what is meant by Visible? The Church is
distinguished into visible and invisible, which yet are not two distinct
Churches or species of Churches, but it is a distribution of the Subject by the
Adjunct, viz. a duplici modo communion is, externo and interno. Such as have
spiritual communion with Christ, (...) inwardly, are said to be invisible
members, which are only known to God, and not to men, having this seal, The
Lord knows who are his. Such as have external communion in outward Ordinances
(...), they are called visible members, because their communion is visible and
apparent. I grant the internal communion is invisible, but the external is as
visible as of any civil society: and Gods Ordinances are as visibly
administered, as justice at the Sessions or Assizes, and the profession of
Christianity is as visible as the profession of any tratle: the general calling
to be Christians by profession, is as visible as the particular calling and
trade of life. The inward grace is indeed invisible, but the outward
administration of the Ordinances, and communion in them, is visible, i. e.
perceptible by the senses. And this external communion in the Ordinances,
though it were distributively in the several places where men live (which is
confessed by all) would serve my turn for this question which I have in h^^^.
But visible taken in the sense which M. Ellis takes it in, in his Vindiciae
Catholicae, for that which Vno intuitu videtur, is seen with one view, was not
my meaning, and therefore to expound it so, which he knows I did not, is to
prevaricate, as he charge me, page 59. If visible, i. e. that which may be
seen, and visum, that which is seen actually, be the same, then is not the
world visible. But when we say the whole world is visible, there is required an
act of the mind: we conceive that all countries are visible as well as our
own; and if we were there we might see them. They cannot be said to be
invisible, because we see them not actually. Nam visibile est quod videri
potest, licet nunquam videtur. Visible is that which may be seen, though it be
never actually seen. Videri potest, or may be seen, is referred to the
capability of the object to be seen, not to the particular act of every agent
at all times. But take visible in his sense, Quod u^o intuitu videri potest, as
a Kingdom representative in a Parliament.

Is a Parliament only visible ^o such as do actually see it, and invisible to
all others? Is it not visible because not visum? Men know it may be seen,
though they see it not; though they exercise their knowledge only about it, and
not their senses, yet that makes it not a genus or secunda notio: It is
visible, though not actually seen. Cameron de Ecclesiae conspicuitate, page
245. says, the Church is visible as the world is: we cannot see the whole
world together, but secundum parts, successive, non uno obtutu: attamen nulla
est pars terra habitabilis quae non possit cerni.

Now only the invisible company have internal spiritual communion, and are
elect: many of those that have external communion and are visible members,
shall perish. And yet by reason of their profession are said 2 These. 1.1. to be
in God the Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ, as Ames also confesses, Ames.
med. lib. 1. cap. 32. art. 9. Such was the Church of Corinth and Ephesus, etc.
wherein all were not in communion for life. And of such Christ speaks Ioh
15.^. Every branch in me that bears not fruit, he takes away. And verse. 6. If
a man abides not in me, he is cast forth as a branch, and is withered, and men
gather them, and cast them into the fire, and they are burned. These are said
to be redeemed, 2 Pet. 2.1. denying the Lord that bought them. And sanctified,
Heb. 10.29. And has accounted the blood of the Covenant wherewith he was
sanctified, an unholy thing. And in Paul's exordiums to his Epistles, To the
Church of God, to them that are sanctified in Christ Jesus, called to be
Saints, 1 Cor. 1.2. These are called the sons of God, Genesis 6.2. And Deuteronomy.
14.1. It is spoken of Israel in general, ye are the children of the Lord your
God. And Gal. 3.26. Ye are all the children of God by faith in Christ Jesus.
Now it is not to be conceived that all the members of the Churches in Galatia
were true believers. They are called the children of the Kingdom, Mat. 8.12. i.
e. reputed so, but yet many of them were cast out into utter darkness. And
Act. 3.25. Ye are the children of the Covenant which God made with our fathers.

Their advantage by being of the visible body was great every manner of way,
Romans 3.1, 2. To them pertained the adoption, Romans 9.4. and the glory, and the
Covenant, and the giving of the Law, and the service of God, and the promises.
Which adoption is not internal adoption (proper only to true believers) for it
is a privilege belonging to the body of that people; but it is the honor of
being separated and reputed the children of God, and so to live under the
external Covenant and service of God, and promises, though they had not grace
to improve them. They are called To. 11.17. branches of the true olive,
partaking of the root and fatness of the Olive, which were broken off, and
others ingraffed in their room, which cannot be meant of the invisible company
of elect, but the visible Church. God did not blot some out of his book of
election, and put others in; or break off any true believers, and graff others
in, but only out of their visible Church, standing, and partaking in outward
Ordinances.

Object. But is not this absurd that Christ should have wicked men, who are
limbs of Satan, to be of his mystical body? Carnal wicked men to be members of
such a gracious, glorious head?

Answ. If by mystical body be meant the company of elect, faithful ones, that
are knit to Christ by the Spirit on his part, and by faith on their part, and
receive spiritual sap and virtue, and grace from Christ internally; it were
altogether absurd to suppose any limb of Satan were so: but mystical body is
taken in opposition to a natural and civil body. Now draw a word (as suppose
head) from its natural and proper signification to a civil use, and head will
signify a King, who is called a civil head, and then draw it to a theological
use, and it is called a mystical use of that word, and so Christ is called a
spiritual or mystical head, and the Church a mystical body. And in this sense
mystical and organical are competible, for both visible and invisible members
may be said to be of the mystical body of Christ, though in a different respect
in regard of their communion, the one visibly only, the other not only v^sibly
but also invisibly. And in this sense M. Cotton in his Catechism calls a
particular Church a mystical body of Christ, wherein all are not of the
invisible company. And as the body admits of such a distinction, so does the
head also, for Christ affords spiritual communion to some inwardly, as well
as outwardly by Ordinances, even saving graces and comforts by the Spirit of
grace; to others only outwardly by Ordinances, and by common works of his
Spirit. In the same sense that a visible Church may be called a mystical body
of Christ, Christ may also be called a mystical head thereof. As Christ terms
himself a Master, so he has evil, slothful, unfaithful servants and stewards:
as a King, he has rebels that will not have him to rule over them, even in his
Church, Mat. 25.26. Luke 19.14. as a shepherd he has goats as well as sheep:
Mat. 25.32. as a householder he has vessels of dishonor as well as honor, 2 Timothy 2.20. Mat. 25.2. as a bridegroom he has foolish virgins as well as wise
invited to the wedding* as a husbandman, he has tares among his wheat, Matthew.
13.25. as a fisherman, he has rubbish in his net as well as good fish Mat.
13.47. as a vine, he has unfruitful branches as well as fruitful, Joh 15.6.
Christ says, my people are foolish, they have not known me, sottish children
that have no understanding, that are wise to do evil, but to do good they have
no knowledge, Ier, 4.22. yea, stubborn and rebellious people. In the N.T. there
were some in the Church of Corinth, 1 Cor. 11. that had not the knowledge of
God, denying the resurrection, guilty of drunkenness at the Lords table,
guilty of fornication and uncleanness, and lasciviousness, and had not
repented. And Tit. 1.16. Paul speaks of some in the Church, that professed they
knew God, but in works denied him, being abominable, disobedient, and to every
good work reprobate. And 2 Timothy 3.5. Having a form of godliness, and denying
the power thereof. And Phil. 3.18, 19. Enemies to the cross of Christ, whose
end is destruction, whose God is their belly, whose glory is in their shame,
who mind earthly things. See what manner of persons Jude speaks of in 12, 13,
and 16. verses. Spots in their feasts of charity, feeding themselves without
fear, clouds without water, carried about with winds, trees whose fruit
withers, without fruit, twice dead, plucked up by the roots, raging waves of
the sea, foming out their own shame, wandering stars, to whom is reserved the
blackness of darkness for ever: murmurers, complainers, walking after their
own lusts, etc. Yet these were Gods people by dedication and consecration, and
God owneth them so. And is it not as absurd for Christ to have such branches as
such members?

But though the Metaphor taken from the natural head and members, seem to imply
such a strict union and communion as to set forth only the elect, yet we know
that many of them are not called, and so in their natural condition as vile as
any, and even the best on earth are but sinful men; yet as it is borrowed from
a civil head and political body, it is no absurdity at all. For God himself is
head and Governor of all the world, and thereby of devils as well as angels,
beasts as well as men, wicked men as well as good, for he is the sovereign
ruler over all. And Christ Ephesians. 1.22, is said to be head over all things to the
Church his body. There is therefore a visible Ecclesiastical body, which may
also in some sense be called mystical: and there is also an invisible spiritual
body of the elect only, which is most properly called mystical. There are two
sievs or garbles which God uses, the first is, to fifth the world into a
visible Ecclesiastical body, over which Christ is a mystical, political,
governing head and ruler, and this sieve is managed by the hands of the
Ministers; the second is to sift the visible Ecclesiastical body into a
spiritual invisible body; and that is in Gods hand only.

Now we are to know that this distinction of visible and invisible is a very
lame one, and the lamenesse thereof deceives many: For whereas all
distributions should have their parts distinct and different, and the more
opposite the members be, the better the distribution is; these two branches of
this distinction interfier one with another, and the one comprehends the other:
the visible comprehend the invisible here in this world, I mean, the persons
though not the notions For though indeed every visible member is not invisible,
yet every invisible member in the Church is also visible. Ad Catholicam
Ecclesiam visibilem in terris se recipere debent, quot quot invisibilis illius
cives esse cupiunt. Polani Syntag. l. 7. c. 9. Invisibilis Ecclesia latet in
Ecclesia visibili ut pars in toto, frutramque consideres ut coetum vocatorum
externa vocatione, quae communis est invisibili and visibili Ecclesiae. Ibid.

They that have inward communion with Christ for life, are not taught and
nourished only by an inward unction or inspiration, but are fain to have
external communion also in the outward Ordinances of God. De Ecclesia vivorum
modo agitur, cui Symbolum Apostolicum praescriptum est, non decoelesti. Ram. in
Symb. So that this distinction is like the old distinction of Gratia gratis
data, and gratia gratum facient, whereas Omnis gratia gratum faciens, est etiam
gratia gratis data.

If invisible had been taken for Saints in heaven, and visible for Saints on
earth, it had been a complete distinction. Or if visible had been taken for a
Church conspicuous, flourishing with liberty of Ordinances; and invisible for a
Church latent, as under persecutions, and general heresies, then it had been
complete; but the terms are not used in either of those senses, and therefore
the distinction halteth. So that in what is to be said we must take heed that
by visible we mean not only such as are hypocrites and reprobates, but those
that are also truly godly: not only such as make external profession of faith,
whereby they are differenced from heathens, but such as have inward sincerity
also, whereby they are differenced from hypocrites.

The Church visible (I said) is a company of people called or separated by God
from Idols to the true religion, What a Church visible is.
and yielding professed subjection to that call, which is true of the godly as
well as of the hypocrites. This description is excepted against by some,
because it is said to be a separation from Idols, whereas many Athiests and
Jews, etc. which worship no Idols, may be converted, and therefore (say they)
it had better have been said, called out of the world. But I answer, that that
expression would have admitted of as much exception, for there is much of the
world in the Church. I pray not for the world, says Christ, Ioh. 17.9. which
was meant of the reprobate Jews, which yet were in the visible Church. If I had
made a description of the invisible Church, it had been right to have said
called out of the world, but speaking of the visible Church, Idols are the most
proper contradistinct term to the living God, and Idolatry that which only
causes a divorce between God and a visible Church; and obstinate
profaneness, which is opposite to the professed subjection, mentioned in the
description. And though some converted should have been Jews or Athiests, etc.
that never were Idolaters, yet my description takes them in, for I mean a
separation or call both privatively and negatively, priatively, if they have
been Idolaters, negatively, though they never were, i. e. there must be a
disclaiming of Idols negatively, though there never were a positive worshipping
of them. As if a neuter who never struck in of any side, shall side with one
opposite, there must be a disclaiming of the other opposite.

An Objection much to this purpose, reverend M. Norton has, In Respons. ad
totum Quaestionum Syllogem. p. 115. whereby he would infer. That a Synod is
not a Church; his words are these, N^s^^ catus cujus membrorum vocatio non
habet ^mundum terminum immediatum a ^p^o, and Christum terminum immediatum ad
quem, habet sancte vocatos pro proxima materia. At omnis Synodus est talis
(...) cujus membrorum vocatio non habet terminum i^^e ^^^tum a quo, etc.
Materia Synodi sunt pij and docti viri, membrae Ecclesiae. But with due respect
unto him, I conceive, he little considered how much this argument strikes at
all the Churches in New England, which are made up of members, not immediately
called out of the world, but of members of our Churches in Old England, and by
Gods Ministers here converted, and sealed with the seal of the Covenant.

A second exception against it is, Because a Church may be a Church, though
they fall to some Idolatry, as the ten Tribes were owned by God as his people
though Idolaters.

I answer, there were 7000. in Israel in the worst times, that lived latent
among the Idolaters, who never bowed the knee to Baal, nor kissed him, and God
might own the people for their sakes, being the better part, though the less.
Secondly, though God does not divorce a Church for all Idolatry, yet they
deserve it. And at last came forth the sentence of Lo-ammi and Lo-ruhamah
against the ten Tribes for it, Hos. 1.6.9. Thirdly, I answer, it may be vere
Ecclesia (as is said of the Church of Rome by some) but not vera and pura: and
it was needful for me, as near as I could, to give a description of a true
Church. But I will not contend with any about this description, you may take a
more comprehensive description. A visible Church may be described to be a
company of those that own or do profess the doctrine of Christ. Or such as
profess the true Religion.

The third term to be opened is, Sect. 3.
Catholic, universal or Ecumenical. The word Catholic is frequently given to
such Churches as hold the true doctrine of the Apostles, and in that sense it
is the same with Apostolical, as it is opposed to heretical, and so we find it
frequently used in Eusebius, Socrates and S^zomen. So Damasus is called Bishop
of the Catholic Church at Rome, and Aurelius of the Catholic Church at
Carthage, and Callinicus of the Catholic Church at Peleusium. And the Council
of Nice calls the Bishops of the Orthodox Churches, Bishops of the Catholic and
Apostolical Church. And in that sense I suppose M. Ellis intends it in the
title of his book which he calls Vindiciae Catholicae, a found or Orthodox
vindication. For if he means by it A general vindication against all that
assert a Church-Catholike visible, he is mistaken therein also; for M.
Rutherford has written professedly of my question in both the branches of it,
that there is a Church-Catholike visible, and that it is the prime Church:
though I confess I knew not of it when I printed my Thesis. But this
signification does not fully comprehend my meaning of the word. Secondly,
Catholic is taken for an office in the Church, next under a Patriarch, that
was as his Vicar general, and is called in Latin Rationalis: See Salmas. de
primat. Pap. p 21^. Thirdly, Catholic, universal or general is taken for a
logical second notion, abstracted by the mind of man comprehending diverse
different species under it. Fourthly, It is taken in the same sense that we use
to take Ecumenical, that which is or may be all over the world. The first and
last sense are only pertinent to this Question, viz. the Orthodox Church over
all the earth, and especially this latter, and therefore now I have inserted
the word Ecumenical into the question.

And in both these senses Augustine takes it, who says, the Church is called
Catholic, Quia universaliter perfecta est, and in nullo claudicat, and per
totum orbem diffusa est. Aug. de Genesis ad let. cap. 1.

We are to know that the Church of God admits of several distinctions from
several accidents. As in reference to the times wherein the Church has
existed, or does exist, it is distributed into the Church under the Old
Testament, and the Church under the New; And this again is distributed into the
primitive and successive: So in regard of the places where the Church does
exist, or persons of whom it consists, it receives the distinction of
universal and particular. Now in this question, universal is meant principally
in regard of persons and places, and not in regard of time. The Church
Catholic existing on earth at the same time, is compared with particular
Churches existing at the same time also.

What the universal visible Church is.
The Universal visible Church, is the whole company of visible believers
throughout the whole world. Now whereas M. Ellis vind. p. 52. says, this
definition of the Church Catholic reaches not the subject of my question, but
contains what is of all hands confessed. I answer, I aimed at no more in the
first part of my question, but to prove that there is a Church Catholic
visible, which he says is of all hands confessed, and then I have as much as I
desired, namely, the subject of my question granted. But I will further add
that which M. Ellis thinks wanting to make it pertinent to this question,
viz. That this company is one visible Kingdom of Christ on earth. The
Evangelical Church, which is so often called by Christ, the Kingdom of heaven,
several men give several descriptions thereof. I shall set down some of their
sentences.

Ecclesia Dei vivi est columna and firmamentum veritatis, toto orb terrarum
diff^^sa, pr^pter Evangelium quod praedicatur, sicut dicit Apostolus, in omni
creatura quae sub coelo est. Aug.

Sancta Ecclesia nos sumus, sed non sic dico nos, quasi ecce qui hic sumus, qui
me modo auditis, sed quot quot sunt Christiani fideles in universo terrarunt
orb, quoniam a solis ortu usque ad occasum laudatur nomen Domini. Sic se habet
Ecclesia Catholica matter nostra, Aug. Sermon. 99. Adhuc habet Ecclesia quo
crescat donec illud impleatur, Dominabitur a mari usque ad mare. Aug. in Matthew.

Dissemina^a est Ecclesia super omnem terram. Iren. lib. 3. cap. 11.

Non altera Romana urbis Ecclesia, altera totius orbis aestimanda, Gallia and
Bithinia, and Persis, and Oriens, and India, and omnes barbarae ge^tes,
nationes, unum Christum adorant, unam observant regulam veritatis. Si
authoritas quaeritur, Orbis major est urbe. Jerome. ad Evan^r.

Distincti per Orbem Ecclesiarum conventus, unam Catholicam faciunt Ecclesiam.
Beda in 1 Pet. 2.

Catholica Ecclesia est illa quae diffusa est per universum orbem. Cyril.
Hierosol. Catech. 18.

Quum unus sit Deus, una fides, unus Dei and hominum mediator Jesus Christus,
unicum Ecclesiae caput, consequitur necessario unam quoque esse Ecclesiam.
Bezae conf. fid. cap. 5. art. 2.

Saepe Ecclesiae nomine universam hominum multitudinem in orb diffusam
designamus, quae unum se Deum and Christum colere profitetur. Calv. Iustit l.
4. c. 1. s. 7.

Est Congregatio omnium per orbem universum qui consentifide Evangelica.
Bulling.

Est caetus hominum Christum, suum regem, sacerdotem, and prophetum
profitentium. Keckerm.

In novo Testamento, vocamus Ecclesiam pro omnibus qui Christo nomen dederunt.
Zuingl.

Vniversa multitudo Christianorum quae se fidelem censet, simul number fidelis
populus, una Ecclesia dicitur. Idem.

Ecclesia significat totam illam omnium multitudinem qua generatim ex
vocatione, and professione externa astimatur. Trelc.

Ecclesia Catholica ex hominibus unius temporis, est Caetus eorum omnium, qui
doctrinam Evangelij de Jesu Christo in carne jam manifestato per universum
mundum profitentur. Dicitur (...), Heb. 2.5. i. e. mundus ille futurus, quem
praedixerant prophetae, and priore adventu Christi inchoatus, etc. Polani
Syntag. l. 7. c. 7.

Statuimus Ecclesiam quandam vniversalem externam per totum orbem dispersam,
nobis in sacris literis describi, quae visibili quadam politia unicum
Ecclesiasticum Organicum corpus constituit, sub quo omnes Ecclesiae
particulares Classicales, Provinciales and Nationales tanquam parts totius
continentur. Apollon. p. 29.

Vbicunque and quandocunque fuerint homines Apostolica fide informati,
Christianam Electorum rem-publicam constituunt, etiam fi dispersi in omnes
orbis parts. Sic Antoninus Philosophus civem Romanum dixit esse, quicunque
Romany legibus viveret. Ita quicunque Christiani^ legibus moribusque vivis,
ubicunque sit nihil interest, civis est Christianus, and ad publicum de regenda
civitate Dei consilium adhibendus, ut Ecclesiae Catholicae disciplina Catholica
sit. Ram de Eccles.

Against these testimonies M. E. says page 5. that I bring the description of
the visible Church out of several Authors, none of which, except Apollonius
and Ramus, take it in my sense.

Ans. They all imply a Church Catholic, and that to be visible, and this
Church Catholic visible, to be one, which is all I brought them for.

And whereas he seeks to blast Apollonius because he was pre-engaged, I answer,
It is more then I know, he is still alive, and may answer for himself. And
against Pet. Ramus he alleges a clause out of Beza's ep. before Aristotle's
Organ. But I could cite much more in his commendation out of others, but I
write not to commend men, valere quantum valere potest, I am sure I have cause
to bless God for him.

Sometimes, says Bifield, Church signifies a company of men in one city or
Province, that did outwardly profess the true religion, 1 Cor. 11.18, 22. And
so usually in the writings of Divines, the company throughout the world, so
professing, is called the visible Church, Bifield. on Art. 9.

Catholic in the most evident sense agrees to the Church now under the
Gospel, since the partition wall between Jews and Gentiles was broken down, and
yet in some sense it may agree to the Church from the beginning. Idem.

For particular Churches, either single or combined, either National,
Provincial, Classical, or Congregational, it is not belonging to this question
to discuss the Queries about them; and therefore I shall only set down some
descriptions of them positively, as they are usually taken by others, and give
you my present apprehensions of them.

A National Church is where all the visible, public, What a National Church is.
religious Assemblies of a Nation, being parts of the Church Catholic, living
under one politic, civil government, are by the profossion of the same faith,
and communion in the same worship and government, united into one body
Ecclesiastic, or Ecclesiastical Re-publike. Two things (as I conceive) are
required to make a National Church. First, National agreement in the same faith
and worship. Secondly, National union in one Ecclesiastical body, in the same
community of Ecclesiastical government. The Churches in Foance and the
Netherlands have the same faith and worship, and kind of government, but they
are not in the same National community thereof. See Apollonius consid. cap. 3.
Assert. 2. Asserimus Ecclesiam visibilem in sacra Scriptura descriptam, non
tantum fuisse Parochialem seu particularem, sed esse etiam Ecclesiam quandam
Nationalem unius gentis aut regni, quae constat ex diversis and multis
Ecclesijs Parochialibus, uno regimine Ecclesiastico junctis, and mutua quadam
communione and societate Ecclesiastica visibili inter se devinctis. See clear
proofs for National Churches under the Gospel, Isa, 55.5. Thou shall call a
Nation which thou knew not, and Nations which knew not thee, shall run unto
thee. It is spoken of Christ under the Gospel. And there is set down both Gods
call of a Nation, and a Nations answer to that call. And these two things are
sufficient to make a Church. Also Isa. 19.24, 25. In that day shall Israel be a
third with Egypt, and with Assyria, even a blessing in the midst of the land,
whom the Lord of hosts shall bless, saying, Blessed be Egypt my people, and
Assyria the work of my hands, and Israel mine inheritance. It is a prophecy of
the times under the Gospel, where Egypt and Assyria are promised to be called
in, to be Churches as well as Israel, and are preferred in order before Israel,
however it is clear those three Nations are owned, and blessed by God as three
sister Churches. Also Psa. 72.11, 17. All Kings shall fall down before him, all
Nations shall serve him. All Nations shall call him blessed, i. e. Christ. Mat.
21.43. The kingdom of God shall be taken from you, and given to a nation
bringing forth the fruits thereof. Romans 10.19. I will provoke you to jealousy
by them that are no people, and by a foolish Nation will I anger you, i. e. God
choosing the Gentile Nations, and giving them the privileges of the Jews, it
should anger the Jews, and provoke them to jealousy, Isa. 65.1. I said, behold
me, behold me, to a nation that was not called by my name. The Commission of
the Apostles was to go teach and baptize all Nations (not Congregations only)
i. e. some of all Nations, if they received the Christian faith; and the whole
Nations, if the whole received it, Mic. 4.2. Many Nations shall come and say,
Let us go up to the mountain of the Lord, and he will teach us his ways, and
we will walk in his paths. Isa. 52.15. He shall sprinkle many Nations, i. e.
with his grace, Jer. 4.2. The Nations shall bless themselves in him, and in
him shall they glory. And Romans 4.17. Abraham is said to be a father of many
Nations in a spiritual sense, as well as a carnal. In thee shall all the
Nations of the earth be blessed. He is said to be the father of us all, Rev.
11.15. The kingdoms of this world are become the kingdoms of our Lord, and of
his Christ. The Ecclesiastical polities in converted kingdoms, are said to be
commensurable to the civil. Rev. 21.24. The Nations of them that are saved
shall walk in the light of it, i. e. of the new Jerusalem. Zac. 2.11. Many
Nations shall be joined unto the Lord in that day, and shall be my people.
Whereby we see the current of the Scripture runs that God not only would
convert Congregations out of several Nations, but the whole Nations, which also
he performed, and many whole Nations joined themselves to the Lord, and made
Christian Kingdoms or Commonwealths, though they proceeded not from the loins
of one man, as the Israelites did, which some make the ground of the National
Church of the Jews: yet we know there were proselytes of all Nations that were
members of that Church, and had right to all the Ordinances as well as the
Israelites, and servants that came not out of Abraham's loins.

And by the same reason when a part of a National Church shall join in
particular consociation and community in a City or Province, or Classis, they
may receive denomination from thence: the one containing a greater part of the
Church Catholic, the other a less.

For the Church Catholic being a similar body retains the name Church, in what
parts, parcels, or quantities soever it be divided into, for convenient
community, until it be brought in minimum quod sic, as the Philosophers say, i.
e. into the least parts that can enjoy public communion in Ordinances, which
is a particular Congregation. The division of the Church Catholic into
particular Congregations, seems to me to be no further of divine institution,
then as it fitly serves for order and edification, by cohabitation, for
enjoyment of Gods Ordinances together publicly (as the Jewish Church was
divided by Synagogues, for their constant enjoyment of word, prayer, and
discipline, which they could not constantly enjoy, as a National Church, by
their National worship thrice in the year) and the same reason will by
proportion carry it for Classical, Provincial, and National divisions, for
community of a greater part of the Church.

Gersom Bucerus in dissert. de Gub. Eccles. p. 11. has this description of a
particular Church. Nos particularem Ecclesiam intelligimus quem libet
credentium caetum in unam vocationem divinam, Evangelij praedicatione,
sacrarumque Institutionum observatione adunatum, ac uni presbyterio subjunctum,
sacros vero conventus uno aut pluribus locis agitantem. Nam paraeciarum in
quibus convenitur numerus, accidentaria res est, nihil ad Ecclesia particularis
essentiam pertinens. Now this seems to me to be a description of a
Presbyterial or Classical Church, and so not to divide the Church Catholic
into any less parts, for the enjoyment of all the usual public Ordinances,
then a Presbyterial, Classical Church: and so, though it be a description of a
particular Church indeed, yet not of the least particular Church.

M. Cotton a reverend Minister in N. E. in his Catechism tells us, that a
visible Church is a mystical body, whereof Christ is the head, the Members,
Saints, called out of the world, and united together into one Congregation, by
an holy Covenant, to worship the Lord, and to edify one another in all his
holy Ordinances. But (with due respect to so grave and worthy a man) much of
this description seems to me to belong to an invisible Church, and not to a
visible. First, because the matter thereof is the mystical body of Christ,
consisting only of Saints called (not only from Idols, but) out of the world,
and therefore truly godly; but much of the world is in the visible Church.

Secondly, Every Congregation, though it be in some sense of the mystical body
of Christ, yet is not the, or a mystical body of Christ, for Christ has but
one mystical body; it behooveth therefore a particular Church to be defined
with reference to the rest of the body, and not to the head only, it being but
a part of the body. It would seem strange to define the little toe to be a body
made up of flesh, blood and bone, of such a figure, informed by the head,
without declaring the reference of it to the rest of the body. Or a Corporation
in England to be a body politic whereof the King is the head or Sovereign,
without mentioning its reference to the rest of the Kingdom, whereof it is but
a part, and so the King, the head or governor thereof, but secondarily, it
being a part of that Kingdom whereof he was Sovereign. It is true, the Apostle
says, the head of every man is Christ. 1 Cor. 11.3. i. e. they are of the body
of Christ. So it may be said of every Congregation, Christ is the head thereof
and that it is of his body or kingdom visible Ecclesiastical, but then we must
add that which the Apostle does of the Church of Corinth, 1 Cor. 12.27. Now ye
are the body of Christ, (...), i. e. members of a part, rendered in the old
English Translation: Members for the part in the new, Members in particular. On
which words says Beza in his large notes upon the place. Nam omnes Ecclesiae
per orbem dispersae, diversa sunt unius corporis membra. And the English
Annotations upon the Bible, paraphrase it thus. That is, members of this Church
of Corinth, which is but a part of the Catholic Christian Church: for all the
faithful wheresoever they are, make the whole body: you Corinthians are not
the whole body, but members only, neither all the members, but a part only of
them. Paraeus renders it partiatim, Peter Martyr, Vosestis pars membrorum.
Thirdly, I dare not make a particular explicit holy covenant to be the form of
a particular Church, as this definition seems to do, because I find no
mention of any such Covenant, besides the general imposed on Churches, nor
example or warrant for it in all the Scriptures, and therefore cannot account
it an Ordinance of God, but a prudential humane device to keep the members
together, which in some places and cases may happily be of good use, so it be not
urged as an Ordinance of God, and so it be not used to inthral any, and abridge
them of liberty of removal into other places and Congregations, for their
convenience; or urged as the form of a Church. I deny not but mutual consent of
persons within such a vicinity, to join together constantly in the Ordinances
of God under the inspection of such and such officers, is requisite to a
particular Congregation.

But it is the general preceding Covenant sealed by baptism, and not this, that
makes them of the body of Christ: they must be conceived to be of the visible
body of Christ, before they can be fit members to constitute a particular
Congregation; neither is it this particular Covenant that gives right to the
Ordinances of God, but the general, and therefore they must be judged to have
right thereto before they be admitted as members of the Congregation. Only this
mutual joining together, and choice of such and such a Pastor or Teacher or
ruling Elders, gives such Officers a call to take immediate inspection over
them, and administer the Ordinances of God belonging to their offices, unto
them, to which they had right before their particular consociation, which is
but an accidentary thing, and may many ways be dissolved, and yet they not
lose their right to Gods Ordinances by that dissolution. Such a consent,
joining, and call of, or submitting to a Presbytery, gives to those Elders
right of exercising of their offices, over, or toward them, rather then over
others; and to them, to expect or require the Ordinances of God from those
particular Officers, rather then from others.

Fourthly, For the enjoyment of all the Ordinances of God in one Congregation,
it seems to me very incovenient for some of the Ordinances, and altogether
impossible for others. First, It is inconvenient, that a Church consisting of
7.10.20. or 30. should inflict the formidable sentence of excommunication
against any person, to cast him out of communion, not only with themselves, but
the whole Church-Catholike visible, and deliver him up to Satan. For if it be
inflicted by the votes of the whole Congregation (as some would have it) many
of the members being private men, and happily altogether illiterate and
unexperienced, through want of age, education, or parts, are not able to
understand the nature of the allegations and probations, they may be so
intricate, or not able to apply the rule unto the ^ase, for inflicting of a
just censure; and may be in danger to bear particular favor or ill will unto
their persons, and so apt to be swayed by love, pity or hopes from them, or to
be over^wed by fears or threatenings, being poor men, servants, children,
workmen, tenants: and therefore our brethren for Congregational Churches, have
of late, seeing this inconvenience, debarred the people from votes, and put it
into the h^^d^ of the Elders only. See M. Cottons keys of the Church.

Yea even the Elders of one Congregation may be in danger of the same
temptations, because of particular relations, and their dependence on them for
maintenance. But suppose they were (...) as Angels from ^^^g^tations or
infirmities (which they are not) yet the weight mass and solemnity of the
censure would require to be performed by a College of Elders of a combined
P^^^bytery, that so it being not passed by the votes of 3. or 4. only, but by
the joint advice, consent and authority of a combined Presbytery, may be the
more dreadful to the party, and be the better accepted and submitted unto,
without be^^^ burning and grudge against the particular Elders, or fears of
revenge. Yet I (...) not power in the Elders of the particular Congregation,
with the consent of the Congregation, to exercise even that sentence upon an
offender, if there be a notorious clear cause: but I speak in regard of
convenience, in respect of the Elders, or the cause, or the person on whom it
is to be inflicted, who may be of civil eminency and degree, etc.

It is worthy of note which Zanchy says in this case. In praecept. 4. p. 388.
Si Ecclesia aliqua exigua sit, and non multis eruditis hominibus constans, non
deb^t excommunicationem far, nisi vicinioribus consultis Ecclesijs. Profecto
neque Chirurgus, si sit timens Dei and prudens, scindit alicui manum ant
brachium, nisi audiat prius vicinorum etiam periorum medicorum judicium atque
sententiam.

Secondly, It is impossible for one Congregation to enjoy all the Ordinances of
God within themselves. First, Synods and Councels are acknowledged to be an
Ordinance of God, and particularly by that reverend Divine M. Cotton himself,
and he groundeth it on Act. 15. And though some of our brethren for
Congregational Churches wave that place, yet grant the thing, and are members
of one at this time; and this Ordinance all men will grant, cannot be had in
one Congregation, but sometimes requires the help of a whole Province, Kingdom,
yea many Kingdoms. Yea secondly, The Ordinances that more nearly and
particularly concern a particular Congregation cannot be performed by that
alone. For how can a Congregation, of private Christians try the sufficiency of
an Elder, to be elected over them, to labor in word and doctrine? and if they
have a tried man among them, who shall give him imposition of hands, which
belongs only unto Elders of the same kind to perform? Neither have our
brethren of Congregational Churches (whatever their judgment is herein) ever
dared (as far as I have heard) to permit private members to impose hands on
their Elders, but always desired Elders of other Congregations to do it, and
therefore they cannot have this Ordinance within themselves. And though this
seems to some a thing of small moment, yea, but a complement, yet it is an
Ordinance of God. The truth is, election is but a nomination of a man which
they think fit to be invested with, and put into such an office, and to whom so
invested they are willing to submit themselves in the Lord, but that gives no
power at all to execute the office, nor does it invest him with it, for that is
given and done by Ordination, and imposition of hands, which they cannot give
because they are but private Christians out of office, and the less ought to
be blessed of the greater. And the Apostle Heb. 6.12. reckons it up amongst
the principles of Religion, and part of the foundation. Which place Hen. Jacob
urges vehemently to overthrow the lawfulness and essence of all the Ministers
of the Church of England, because (says he) they have erred in the foundation,
not having right, and due imposition of hands of the Presbytery: though by his
leave, he was mistaken, for all those that imposed their hands on them, were
Presbyters. But this dealing is not fair, to hold imposition of hands a part of
the foundation, that so they may overthrow the Ministry of the Church of
England; and then make it but a complement, that they may establish their own.
Now this impossibility befalls a Church, either in the beginning of it, and
first constitution, or may at other times by mortality of Elders, and will be
frequent, yea, constant in small Congregations, where there is but one or two
preaching Elders, as is the case of most, if not all Congregations.

M. Norton a reverend Minister in N. E. in his answer to Apollonius, has a
description of a particular Church, much like this. Ecclesia particularis, est
caeius fidelium visibili vinculo mutui consensus politice unitus, ad incedendum
in fide and observantia Evangelij, juxta ordinem seu politiam Evangelij* p. 22.
But I see nothing in the description but is applicable to the Church-Catholike.
For they are the company of believers, and they are politically united
together, under Christ a political head, and they are united together by a
visible bond of voluntary consent to yield outward subjection to the government
of Christ. See all these particulars yielded by M. Hooker, Survey, p. 3. His
own words I shall cite, Chap. 2. Sect. 1. And M. Norton himself, Resp. p. 50.
acknowledges thus much, Omnes Ecclesiae uniuntur politice sub eodem capite. 2.
Vniuntur eadem forma Politias and cultus. 3. Vniuntur relatione sororum
politicarum, and hac unione communi s^^^datur communio Ecclesiarum inter se.

And because it is not rationally probable that the Churches of Jerusalem,
Rome, Corinth, Philippi, Thessalonica, or the seven Churches of Asia were
merely Congregational, but rather Presbyterial, as has been by the Reverend
Assembly, the London Ministers, and diverse others abundantly evidenced; it
seems difficult to me to find in the New Testament an express Instance or
example of a Congregational Church, standing and continuing so by it self. The
Church of Cenchrea mentioned Romans 16 1. is the most probable, because of the
conceived smalnesse of the place, yet it is not certain, for it was a port
Town, 8. miles from Corinth, as H^lyoke tells us, and Gualter in Romans 16. says
it was Oppidum Corinthiorum navium statione celeberrimum, and ideo frequens
valde and populosum.

The clearest evidence is from 1 Cor. 14.14. for a particular Congregational
Church. Let your women keep silence in the CHURCHES, which word (Churches)
seems to import several Congregations meeting in several places, to enjoy
public Ordinances by the Corinthians (your women) and these Congregations are
called Churches, and yet were all one combined Church of Corinth, often spoken
of in the singular number.

But this dispute belongs no^ to this question, yet the present difference of
opinions and practices have caused me a little to dilate upon this subject,
beyond the explication of the term. And I understand by particular Churches,
any, or all the forementioned Churches, whether National, Provincial,
Presbyterial, Classical, or Congregational; and this last principally; for
those that have first moved this question, mean principally, if not solely, the
Congregational Church, because (as I suppose) they hold no other particular
Churches but such.

The fourth term to be opened is, What is meant by Prima, Sect. 4.
vel Secundaria and Orta. This distinction, or at least in these terms, is not
ancient; for M. Parker in his Politeia Eccles. was the first that sprung it, as
far as I know. Primum in Logic is defined to be Quod est suae Originis: Ortum,
quod oritur a primo. Secundarium is properly that which is next after the first
in order, for it is an ordinal. I do not mean strictly, next immediately, but in
the largest sense, for that which has not the first right or first
consideration, but a Posterior. In the Question, Primum, or first, is meant,
that which has the priority in consideration. Whether in our apprehension of
Churches we are to begin at the Church-Catholike, and descend to particular
Churches, or begin at the particular, and ascend to the Church Chatholike?
which notion is first in distinct knowledge, whether Ecclesia Vniversalis, aut
Particularis? Whether the nature, privileges and Ordinances, belong first to
the Church Catholic? and secondarily to the particular Churches: I do not mean
(as M. Ellis supposes) that the power of Ordinances go by way of discention or
derivation of power from the Church-Catholike, indispensation of Ordinances,
but in consideration: for I acknowledge power to be given immediately to every
particular Church therein, yet under regulation of a greater part of
Church Officers, in case of maladministration. The properties and power of
water is primarily given to the whole element of water, but is immediately, yet
secondarily in the particular parcels thereof.

But the Catholic Church is the primary in a threefold respect. First, as the
Orthodox Catholic Church is a means or instrument by the Ordinances, Ministry
and members thereof, in the several parts and places thereof, to convert, add,
and bring in more new members thereunto; and in continually conquering out of
Satan's and Antichrists Kingdom, and leavening the world with the doctrine of
Christ. Secondly, as the Church-Catholike affords matters and members, to make
up or constitute the particular Congregations, which consist only of the
members of the Catholic Church, gathered up from any place of the world into
particular vicinities. Thirdly, in regard the Ordinances and privileges of the
Church, are primarily intended and given by Christ, by one Charter unto the
whole Church, and to particular Churches secondarily, as parts thereof. And so
they partake of the benefits and privileges of the Church, not because they
are members of the particular Churches, though there they have the immediate
opportunity, but of the Church-Catholike. As a Corporation already constituted
by Charter, receives in free men continually, and gives freedom to new
members which come any way to have right thereto, and those members have right
to the privileges of the City, not because they are of such a street, or ward,
or company, but because they are tree of the City.

So that though I have retained the terms of M. Parkers distinction, prima and
Orta sive secundaria, yet my question differs much from his. For he compares
the particular Churches who delegate and send members or commissioners to
constitute a Classis or Synod, with such a ministerial Church, a Church of
Officers so constituted, for some especial ends, pro tempore, which some call a
representative Church: and I confess with him that such a Church may well put
on the notion of Ecclesia Orta, and the particular Churches out of which these
members are delegated, may in some sense (in reference unto them) put on the
notion of Ecclesiae prima. Yet I do not conceive that those particular Churches
give either the office, or the power in actu primo, whereby those delegated
Commissioners do act when they are met, but by such delegation they do evocate
and call forth the exercise of that power which Christ has annexed to their
office habitually, in actum secundum, to act pro hic and nunc, for the good of
all those Churches so sending, which acts of theirs bind the delegating
Churches to submission in the Lord. But in my Question the whole Church
Catholic visible is compared with the particular Churches, and they are
considered as parts thereof.

CHAP. II. Proofs by Scripture that there is a Church-Catholike visible.
NOw I have opened the terms of my Question, I find two Questions in stead of
one, and whether of them is the most difficult I cannot tell. Whereas the
subject of every Question uses to be taken for granted, and the predicate only
to be proved, I find the subject of my Question exceedingly questioned and
opposed, Chap. 2.
and that by some of our own Divines, and therefore though my first aim in
undertaking the Question was to clear, the Predicate, yet I must crave leave to
confirm the subject, or else whatsoever I shall say of the Predicate will be as
a house built on the sand, or a Castle in the air; for if there be no universal
visible Church, then it is not capable of being either Prima or secundaria.

In handling both these Questions, I shall follow my wonted method. I prefer
one Divine Testimony before ten arguments, and one good argument before ten
humane testimonies.

Sect. 1.
First then, Whether there be a Church-Catholike visible?

I know that our Divines in answer to the Pontificians, do deny the
Church-Catholike to be visible, as Zanchy, Gerard, Whitakers, Chamier, and Ames
against Bellarmine, and Sadeel against Turrianus, and against the Monks
Confession of faith, and D. Willet in his Synops.

For they restraining the signification of the word Church, to the better part
of the Church, the Elect only, and considering them in respect of their
internal communion with Christ their head, and not their external communion one
with another by Ordinances, did deny the Church-Catholike to be visible. Nec a
quovis impio, nec pio videri potest, says Whitaker. And if the word Church be
taken in that sense, it is most certainly true, it must needs be invisible, But
there is also an external communion (as has been showed before) which the
visible members have, both with Christ and one with another, which is visible,
and makes the enjoyers thereof visible one to another, and to all others also,
viz. their praying one with another and for another, and their hearing the
Word, and receiving the Lord's Supper together as occasion is offered, and their
receiving all those as visible members of the visible mystical Kingdom and body
of Christ, that are admitted in any part of the Church by baptism, and the
avoiding of such as are any where excommunicated, and the receiving again into
communion those that are any where absolved.

So that there is an external visible Kingdom of Christ, as well as an internal
and invisible, and the elect are of the visible Kingdom as well as of the
invisible; they are as Ezechiels wheels, a wheel in the midst of a wheel.

It is true which reverend M. Hooker puts me in mind of, that these 4.
Questions between the Pontificians and our Divines: are distinct. Vtrum
Ecclesia sit visibilis? Vtrum Ecclesia visibilis potest deficere? An sit semper
frequen^ and gloriosa? Vtrum Ecclesia opus habet visibili monarcha and summo
Judice? But they are rather marshalled so by our Divines in their answers, then
distinguished by themselves; for they often confound visible, conspicuous,
glorious, manifest specious, splendid, magnifical, and flourishing together,
yet the Church is visible when latent under persecutions, and is deprived of
the other properties, for all the members even then are not invisible members
of Christ. Cameron grants that these properties may betide the visible
Church, but not always (and so say some of the Papists also) and that when
they do betide the Church, they rather show Quid sit Ecclesia, quam quae sit:
that it cannot be discerned which is the true Church by these accidents of
perpetual clarity. Cameron de Conspic. Eccl.

The Pontificians notion of the Church Catholic is very absurd, for they hold
the name Church-Catholike to belong to one Church, viz. the Church of Rome: and
that being the Church-Catholike, and comprizing the universality of the Church
in it self, all that will be members of the Church-Catholike must submit unto
them and be members of that. Of which Tylen. in Syn^^g. says well, Orbem urbi
includunt.

And the necessity which they make that this one visible Church should be under
one visible universal head on earth, viz. the Pope, as Christ's vicar general,
is as absurd: and therefore they are worthily confuted by our Divines.

But to deny an external Kingdom or Church of Christ upon earth: or to deny
the visibility or perceptibility of it: or the unity of it, or the univesality
of it under the Gospel (is as I conceive) as absurd on the other side. To the
particulars I shall speak more fully in following Chapters. I find reverend M.
Hooker in his Survey of Church Discipline, par. 1. page 3. acknowledging Christ
a political head by his especial guidance in means and dispensations of his
Ordinances, as well as a mystical by spiritual influence: and the Church a
political body as well as a mystical. The political body or Church-visible
(says he) results out of that relation, which is betwixt the professors of the
faith, when by voluntary consent they yield outward subjection to that
government of Christ which in his word he has prescribed, and as an external
head exercises by his Word, Spirit, and Discipline, by his Ordinances and
Officers over them, who have yielded themselves subjects to his headship and
supreme authority. And page 25. The visible Church is truly styled and judged
by Scripture light to be the visible body of Christ, over whom he is a head by
political government and guidance, which he lends thereunto, 1 Cor. 12.12. And
that it is a visible politic body, appears quite through the whole Chapter,
but especially ver. 27, 28. Because in that Church God set Orders and Officers,
Some Apostles, Teachers, Helpers, Governments. The like to this Ephesians. 4.12.13.
Again p. 16. The Church is the visible Kingdom in which Christ reigns by the
scepter of his word and Ordinances, and execution of Discipline.

The testimony cited out of Ames by me was this, Congregationes ille
particulares, sunt quasi parts simulares Ecclesiae Catholica, atque adeo and
nomen, and naturam ejus participan^. And further he says, Illi qui pro^essione
^^ntum sunt fideles, dum rema^ene in illa societ^^^, sunt membra illius
Ecclesia, sicut etiam Ecclesia Catholice, quo ad statum exter^^m, Ames. medul.
l. 1. c. 22. Sect. 11.

And in his Bellarminus euer^atus he says, Nos fotemur Ecclesiam militantem
visibilem esse quo ad formam accidentalem and exteruam, insuit partibus, and
singulatim and conjunctim, etc. Here I am taxed by M. Ellis vind. p 53. for
citing this author for me who is known to be against me. But I answer, I dealt
heartily with D. Ames, acknowledging him to be against a Church-Catholike
visible in some sense, and yet not against it in some other sense, (...)
express words declare. Neither does he reject i^ terminis, an universal
visible Church in my sense, as M. Ellis affirm, but my position stands good
for ought that I find in D. A^^^, though I (...) consent to his judgment in
all things. But let M. Ellis observe that Ames does not hold the Church which
is mystically one, to be a genus, or one generically, sed quasi species
specialissima, vel Individuum, quia nullas habet species proprie dictas.
Dicitur igitur Cat^olica, non ut (...), genus, aut generale aliquid significat,
sed ut denotat aliquid significat, sed ut denotut aliquid integraliter
universale (ut quum dicimus Orbis universus) quia complectitur fideles omnium
gentium, omnium locorum, and omnium temporum, Med. l. 1. c. 31. n. 18, 19.

Again cap. 32. n. 5. he says, Ecclesia particularis, respectu communis illius
naturae, qua in omnibus particularibus Ecclesij^ reperitur, est species
Ecclesiae in genere, sed respectu Ecclesia Catholicae, quae habet rationem
integri, est membrum ex aggregatione variorum membrorum singularium compositum,
atque respectu ipsorum est etiam integrum. Which is as much as in this part of
the question I contended for viz. that the Church-Catholike in regard of the
external and accidental form, is an integral, and not a genus. But M. Ellis
makes the Church-Catholike one only in regard of the internal essential form,
and not in regard of any external form, wherein he expressly crosses Ames. And
therefore I retort it upon him again, that he cites a man for him, which is
expressly against him. The external form is that which is visible, and if the
Church-Catholike be one in the external accidental form, it must needs be
integrally and visibly one.

But I come to Scripture proofs, which are the most sure, Sect. 2.
because they are a divine testimony. And first I shall show you that an
Occumenical universal Church was frequently foretold in Scripture, Psa. 22.27.
All the ends of the world, shall remember, and turn unto the Lord, and all the
kindreds of the nations shall worship be fore him. Which comprehends all
places, all the ends of the earth, and all persons that should be converted,
all the kindreds of the Nations: and by worshipping is meant embracing the true
religion, and performance of religious duties. So Psa. 72.8. He shall have
dominion also from sea to sea, and from the river unto the ends of the earth.
It is a prophecy concerning Christ in the times of the Gospel: where he is set
forth by his Kingly office; and the extent of his Kingdom is set out to be to
the ends of the earth. This is his external political Kingdom, because it is
set out by the external prayers and praises and gifts that should be tendered
unto him by his Subjects, and by the judgment, peace, and flourishing estate
that he shall bestow upon them. So Psa. 86.9. All Nations whom thou have made,
shall come and worship before thee, O Lord, and shall glorify thy name. This
is a prophecy like the former, So Isa. 2.2, 3, 4. It shall come to pass in the
last days, that the mountain of the Lords house shall be established on the
top of the mountains, and shall be exalted above the hills, and all Nations
shall flow unto it, and many people shall go and say, Come ye, let us go up to
the mountain of the Lord, to the house of the God of Jacob, and he will teach
us his ways, and we will walk in his paths. For out of Zion shall go forth the
Law, and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem, and he shall judge among the
Nations, and rebuke many people, etc. Where is set down Christ's call of all the
Nations, and the time of this call, in the last days, i. e. the times under
the Gospel, as the Apostle Act. 2.17. expounds the like phrase in Joel 2.28.
And here is the means of the call, by the Law out of Zion, and the word of the
Lord from Jerusalem: and the answer to this call, All Nations shall flow unto
it: and there is Christ's executing his prophetical office by public teaching
them in his house, by his Ambassadors, and his Kingly office in judging and
rebuking. So Isa. 25.6.

So Daniel 7.14. There was given unto him (Christ) Dominion and glory, and a
Kingdom, that all people, nations, and languages should serve him. And in the
New Testament Matt. 28.9. Go, teach all Nations, baptizing them, etc. Romans
15.11, 12. Rev. 14.6. But because these places will be turned off with this
answer, that some of all Nations should embrace the Gospel, and be turned unto
the Lord, not the whole Nations: I answer, that experience has proved it true
of multitudes of great Nations, that wholly did embrace the Gospel, and
submitted unto it. Neither can any of these places be avoided (as some plead)
by the general Kingdom of Christ, which is given him over all Nations, whereby
he is head over all things to the Church, Ephesians. 1.2. For it is clear they are
meant of that Kingdom wherein are prayers, praises, gifts, worship, service,
and attendance upon Gods Ordinances, flowing unto Christ, worshipping before
him, and glorifying his name, as the several texts express; and these things
are proper to the visible Church. So also Zech. 14.9. And the Lord shall be
King over all the earth: in that day shall there be one Lord, and his name one,
which is clearly meant of one religion and way of worship of God in Christ.

But secondly, Sect. 3.
I will give you places of Scripture where the word Church is applied both
indefinitely and generally, which cannot be understood of any particular
Churches. See first Act. 8.3. Saul made havoc of the Church. To which may be
added that of Gal. 1.13. I persecuted the Church of God, and wasted it. I
showed before that this must needs be a visible Church, for they could not else
have been persecuted; persecution is a visible opposition of a visible Church.
And certainly Saul could not discern who were of the invisible company, but
persecuted promiscuously all that were that way. Neither was it a particular
Church, for this persecution was in Jerusalem, and in every Synagogue, and it
reached to Damascus, and even to strange cities, Act. 26.11. So that by Church
here is meant an indefinite number of visible Churches or Congregations, which
were in no other community but profession of the same faith, and an indefinite
is equivalent to a general: which axiom although it should not be stretched
according to the old rule, Omne indefinitum potest esse infinitum, it being
without limits, yet it is true in suo genere, it is as large as a general. But
this we may safely say, that by the same reason that the word Church would
reach all those Churches, it would reach all the Churches in the world.

Reverend M. Hooker excepteth against these two places, and affirms that the
word Church is taken here by a Synechdoche for the particular Church of
Jerusalem, and not all that neither, but only such Christians as forsook Moses
ceremonial Law, and not the Christian Jewish Church. Surv. c. 15. p. 269.
Because says he, his Commission was to pursue such as he found of that way.

The answer to this exception will lie in the meaning of these words, all that
he found of that way, whether by that way, be meant the forsaking the
ceremonial Law, or confessing Christ to be the Messiah: If the former, then
Paul would have found but little work in Jerusalem, for the Jewish Christians
did generally cleave to the ceremonial Law. As the Elders told Paul Act. 21.20.
Thou see how many myriads of the Jews do believe, and they are all zealous of
the Law, and therefore he needed not persecute them for neglect thereof, for
they were zealous therein, yea, the Apostles themselves observed that in
Jerusalem a long time. But the persecution was such, as that they were all
scattered abroad except the Apostles; and therefore it was for Christianism
that he persecuted them. It was to cause them to blaspheme, as Paul himself
expounds it: now though reducing of them to the ceremonial Law had been an
error, yet it was not a blasphemy, for then the Apostles themselves should
have lived in blasphemy. Surely it was to cause them to blaspheme the Lord
Jesus Christ, and deny him to be the Messiah. It is most likely that Saul's
Commission was according the former decree of the chief Priests, Ioh. 9.22.
That if any did confess that he was Christ, he should be put out of the
Synagogue. And this appears by what Ananias says to Christ concerning Paul.
Act. 9.14. Here he has authority from the chief Priests to bind all that call
on thy name. And verse. 2. If he found any that way; Not all of Jerusalem, or if
he found any of Jerusalem that were fled thither, but any Jews; for the
Gentiles had not yet received the Gospel. For Chap. 10. Peter was charged for
eating with Cornelius and his company, that were Gentiles. And they that were
scattered abroad by Saul, preached the Gospel to none but to the Jews only,
Act. 11.19. And some of those whom Saul persecuted were men of Cyprus and
Cyrene, Act. 11.20. But it was all that call on thy name, not all that had
forsaken the ceremonial Law, for that very few Jews as yet had done, if any at
all. And this was the reason, as I conceive, that the commission given to Saul
by the chief Priests, teached the Jews at Damascus, and other cities, because
they were not fallen off from the ceremonial Law, but kept fellowship with the
Jewish Church at Jerusalem, and came up to the feasts still, and so were under
their Ecclesiastical jurisdiction, and liable to their censure, and they could
write to the rulers of those Synagogues to see them punished.

Also it is said upon the conversion of Saul, Act. 9.31. Then had the Churches
rest in all Judea, and Galilee, and Samaria. which yet were but some parts of
the Church, (in the singular number) which he persecuted. Now if Saul had
persecuted only the members of the Church of Jerusalem, which had forsaken
Moses law, then they might have had rest before, for all him, for they should
not have been within his commission: but he persecuted them also. So our
brethren themselves expound it. Except. p. 17. Also it is said Act. 12.1. that
Herod stretched forth his hands to vex certain of the Church, and he killed
James, and attached Peter. Now this was a visible Church, because a Church
liable to visible persecution; and an Organical Church, because the persecution
was against the Officers; and the Catholic Church: for it is not said, Certain
of the Church of Jerusalem, but indefinitely, The Church: and the two persons
named were not Officers or members of the Church of Jerusalem, but Officers of
the whole Church, being Apostles.

Also it is said Act. 2.47. God added to the Church daily such as should be
saved Or, saved men, as some render it. Not that all should be saved, or were
saved men that were added unto it, for there were many hypocrites added, but
those that should be saved, or were sanctified, were added. Which Church was
not a particular Congregational Church, but the Catholic.

Reverend M. Hooker excepteth against this, and says, that it was not the
Catholic Church, but the Apostolical Christian Church now erected, and not the
whole company of believers in the whole world, for such a company they never
saw nor knew, and therefore could not be added to them. Surv. c. 15. p. 270.

Answ. It is true indeed, it wa^ to the Apostolical Christian Church, but not
to any particular Congregational Church. For first, no man by conversion is
added unto, or made a member of a or the particular Church where he was
converted, but is made a member of the Catholic society of Christians by
conversion, and then joins himself unto some particular society of them.

Secondly, This Apostolical Christian Church was not a Congregational Church,
for those 120 (suppose them the 12 and 70 and some others) were many of them
men of Galilee, and resided at Jerusalem but for a time, per accidens, by
command, until they were further endued with the holy Ghost. And those 3000
that were added to them, Act. 2.41. were men out of every nation under heaven,
ve. 5. and their particular countries, named, ver. 9, 10, 11. And this is our
brethrens own exposition, in their exceptions to the proofs from the Church of
Jerusalem, p. 16. Where they say they were not settled dwellers at Jerusalem,
but strangers, commorants of the 10 Tribes which were dispersed, and were but
sojourners at Jerusalem, coming up to the feast, having their wives, and
children, and families at home, to whom they used after a time to return. And
that this continuing steadfastly in the Apostles doctrine and fellowship, was
but only while they were there at Jerusalem. Yea, some of them were of Judea,
ver. 9. and so of the country round about, and that of them might be Churches
erected in their proper dwellings, is rationally supposeable.

And the proof M. Hooker gives (to show it was not the Church-Catholike) from
Act. 2.42. They continued steadfastly ((...)) in the Apostles doctrine and
fellowship; makes much against a Congregational Church, as I conceive. For the
Apostles were not Congregational Elders to Jerusalem, but general Officers of
the Church-Catholike by their Commission. So that this communion of theirs with
the Apostles, was not a particular Church Communion, but a Catholic communion
of Catholic members (not reduced into particular Congregations) with Catholic
Officers. Neither might the Apostles join as particular Elders of the Church of
Jerusalem. For how could they bind themselves by an holy Covenant to the
constant performance, or enjoyment of all the Ordinances of God, to or with
them, seeing their charge was to go over all the world; yet such a Covenant our
Brethren say, is requisite in a particular Congregation. Neither as yet were
there any particular Elders of the particular Church of Jerusalem constituted,
nor do we find it expressed how long after. If it had been said, that they
continued in the Apostles doctrine and fellowship, with the Elders of
Jerusalem, it had carried some probability. Moreover, it could not be the
communion of a particular Church, because they had the Lords Supper in several
companies. Breaking bread from house to house. Gods providence ordered it so
that the Christian Church should be (as I may say) at the very birth of it,
Catholic, in regard of Officers and members, before any reduction into
particular societies under particular Officers. It was so, potentially, from
the giving of the Apostles commission, and now it is actually in the members as
well as Officers, before their number could make up Congregations in several
countries.

Yea, but (says he) it is not to the whole company of believers in the whole
world, for such a company they never saw nor knew, and therefore could not be
added to them. p. 270.

Answ. It is not requisite they should see or know them all by face, but know
that there was, or was to be such a company which was already begun. It is like
every member of the Church of Jerusalem, did never see or know all the myriads
that were of that Church, nor do every member of the greatest Congregation in
London, know all the members thereof. A forreigner that is naturalized by
Parliament, and so added to this Kingdom, did never see nor know all the whole
Kingdom.

Again 1 Cor. 10.32. Give no offense to the Jews, nor to the Gentiles, nor to
the Church of God. Where the word Church cannot signify the Elect only, nor
any particular Congregation or Kingdom, but indefinitely it reaches the whole
body though in never so remote parts.

M. Hooker excepteth against this proof, because (says he) the Church here
spoken of, is contra-distinct to the Jews, and therefore cannot comprehend the
whole company of believers through the whole world, because some believers were
of the Jews. Surv. c. 15. p. 270.

Answ. It is true, I find Beza in his large notes upon the place, interpreting
the Jews here spoken of, to be the believing Jews, and the Gentiles to be the
believing Gentiles. Partibus subijcit totum. But then he crosses M. Hooker in
making the Church an integrum, and Jews and Gentiles to be the integrant parts.
Yet he adds as the more probable meaning, Nisi malimus istud Iudais and Graecis
de extrancis intelligere, quorum etiam nobis sit habenda ratio, etc.

And all others that I have met withal interpret the words of the unbeleeving
Jews and Gentiles in opposition to Christians. Or else of the believing Jews
and Gentiles making one Church, but most in the first sense. So Calvin, Iudaeos
and Gentes nominat, non tantum quia duobus illis generibus constabat Dei
Ecclesia, sed ut doceat nos omnibus etiam alionis esse debitores, ut eos si
fieri potest lucrifaciamus. So Paraeus on the verse. Also Amb. Thomas Aqu.
Goran, and the English Annotations on the place. And the reason diverse of them
render is, because the unbeleeving Jews (abhorting Idols) might be beat off
from Christ by seeing Christians eating things sacrificed to Idols: (which is
the particular offense here mentioned by the Apostle) and the unbeleeving
Gentiles might be confirmed in their Idolatry thereby: and the believers both
of Jews and Gentiles take offense at it.

Again (says M. Hooker) that Church is here meant, whom a man may offend by
his practice in the particulars mentioned: but he cannot offend the whole
company of believers, through the whole world: because a scandal must be seen
or known certainly, etc.

Answ. All indefinite negative precepts (as against murder, adultery, theft,
etc.) as they are general for the time, binding semper and ad semper, so
concerning place and persons; though no one man is ever like to have
opportunity or possibility to commit them in every place and upon every person.
So is this prohibition.

Some might give offense in one place, some in another, and some one in many
places, in those traveling times; and the whole was liable to offense, though
happily not by one man, and therefore the object is set down indefinitely to
comprehend the whole. Yea, the word comprizeth not the Church Entitive, but
Organical and combined, for they may so be offended, and we are not to affront
or offend them: the greater the part of the whole body is, and the more
completed, the greater respect is to be had to it, that we give no offense
thereunto.

Also Gal. 4.26. But Jerusalem which is above is free, which is the mother of
us all. By Jerusalem is meant a Church, because it is that which brings forth
children to God, which sometime may be desolate and in sorrow, because of the
paucity and dispersion of them, sometime is bidden to rejoice for the multitude
and prosperity of them, as verse. 27. It ^s also an Evangelical Church freed
from the ceremonies of the Law, because it is called Jerusalem, answering to
Jerusalem that was in Paul's time, and was in bondage with her children, verse.
25. i. e. to the Church of the Jews that were under the ceremonial Law, and
would not forsake it, which was soon after destroyed. The Apostle changes the
manner of this speech from the person of Sarah, who was the type of the
Evangelical Covenant, to Jerusalem, which is the Church wherein the Evangelical
doctrine and Covenant is preached, and this Jerusalem is the seed of Sarah, i.
e. the Evangelical Church is the seed and offspring of the Evangelical
Covenant. This Evangelical Church is called Jerusalem and Sion in Heb. 12.22.
which text is parallel to this: and Rev. 21.1, 2. the New Jerusalem. The legal
ceremonial service did beget all under it to an external bondage, and brought
them up under bondage; especially hypocrites which were not led by the Law to
Christ, but rather hindered from him, they were in external and internal
bondage. It cannot be the Church Triumphant, for that is not the mother of the
Church militant, that has no Orrdinances to beget children. And though it be
called Jerusalem which is above, yet that is meant because it has its Original
from heaven: as Rev. 21. the New Jerusalem is said to come down from heaven;
and we are said to be begotten from above. 2. Because their conversation is in
heaven, Phil. 3.20. 3. Because they shall in the end be brought thither. It
cannot be the invisible Church as so considered, but must be a visible
organical Church, because it does no otherwise become a mother of children, but
by the use of Ordinances and keys committed to her. It is by the preaching of
the word, that children are begotten in her womb, the seed is the word: and by
the same word as milk, and the use of the Sacraments, they are nourished in
their mothers house, and as a mother she educates and rules them by discipline.
And this cannot be a particular Church, but must be the general, because the
Apostle says it is the mother of us all; the Apostle puts in himself and all
believers. And the 27 verse. makes it more plain, because the Apostle confirms
and explains himself by a quotation out of Isa, 54. f. 2, 3. which shows the
calling in of the Gentiles to be of this Church. And thus all the protestant
Expositours that I have met with, expound it. Calvin on the place says,
Caelestem vocat, non qua calo sit inclusa, non quae sit quaerenda extra mundum;
est enim diffusa Ecclesia per totum orbem, and in terra peregrinatur. Luther
also says, This heavenly Jerusalem which is above, is the Church, i. e. the
faithful dispersed throughout the whole world, which have one and the same
Gospel, faith, Christ, holy Ghost, and Sacraments. -- It is the Church which is
now in the world, and not the Triumphant Church. -- To be the mother of us all,
it is necessary that this our mother should be on earth among men, as also her
generation is. -- This spiritual Jerusalem which took her beginning in
corporeal Jerusalem, has not any certain place, but is dispersed throughout
the whole world. This free mother is the Church it self, the spouse of Christ,
of whom we are all gendred. So Musculus, Perkins, Baldwin, and Bullinger,
Loquitur de Ecclesia in terris ex omnibus gentibus collecta. It is another body
which is correspondent to Sarah, viz. the Christian Church. Beza and Calvin on
Hebr. 12.22. a text parallel to this has these words, Caelestem Jerusalem
intelligit, quae per totum mundum extruenda erat, quemadmodum Angelus apud
Zachariam funiculum ejus ab Orient usque in Occidentem extendit.

Again Ephesians. 3.10. To the intent that unto the principalities and powers in
heavenly places, might be known by the Church, the manifold wisdom of God.
This Church was not a particular Congregatian, neither was it the Church of the
elect, neither does Beza so expound it (as is alleged) for he speaks hereupon
of the government of it sub variata Oeconomia: neither was the Church of the
Gentiles only (which yet is more then one Congregation) neither can the
circumstances carry it so beyond control, as is alleged, because of the
mysteries here spoken of, that were kept secret since the beginning of the
world, and the multifarious wisdom which was now made known by the Churches,
but were before made known to the Church of the Jews, as M. Hooker conceives,
p. 271. For the mysteries revealed in the New Testament, were never known to
the Jews before. Eye never saw them, nor ear heard them, nor entered it into the
heart of man to conceive of them. But he that is least in the kingdom of the
Gospel, knows more then John the Baptist. But it was the Church-Catholike under
the Gospel, whereof Paul was made a Minister, as it is verse. 7. It is that body
of Christ, the Church, whereof Paul was made a Minister, as himself says more
fully, Col. 1.24, 25. which must needs be the external, visible, organical,
Catholic Church of Christ, consisting of Jew and Gentile.

Again it is said in 1 Cor. 12.28. God has set some in the Church, Sect. 4.
first Apostles, secondarily Prophets, thirdly Teachers. The Church here spoken
of, is not the Church Triumphant, for that has no officers but Christ the
head, there shall be no Pastors and Teachers, qua such, yet such are in this
Church verse. 8. neither shall there be any gifts of healing, tongues, miracles,
Deacons, or ruling Elders. Neither is it the Church as invisible, consisting of
the elect only: for the invisible Church qua invisible, has no Officers
neither.

For though intentionally they are indeed given for the good of the Elect, yet
they are set in the visible Church. For both the ordinary and extraordinary
Officers were visible messengers; and some of them but visible believers only,
for Judas had obtained part in the Apostleship and ministry, and was sent to
preach and work miracles: and many Prophets were not of the invisible number:
for many shall say, Lord, Lord, we have prophesied in thy name. etc. and yet
shall not be saved. But to be sure they were sent to afford the Saints visible
communion in Ordinances.

Again, This is not meant of the Church entitive, which is a similar, and (as I
may say) an homogeneal body, every member as a member being equal, and of the
same capacity: but it is meant of the Church Organical, an heterogeneal,
dissimilar body, because here are set down the Officers. I mean dissimilar and
heterogeneal in regard of the integral parts, viz. the several Congregations,
because they all have or ought to have the same kind of Officers and members,
as so many flocks of sheep under several shepherds. Therefore the several
particular Churches are called by some, an Epitome of the great body: now the
Epitome has no other parts then the great body has. Neither is here meant a
particular Church, but all collectively, that were within the bounds of the
Apostles commission, which was the Church in the whole world, Go teach all
nations, etc. and all the Churches which have teachers over them, which all
Churches in the world have, or ought to have, and yet all these are called but
one Church, one body, verse. 20. And this whole is one Organical body, v. 12. As
we have many members in one body, and all members have not the same office: so
we being many, are one body in Christ, and every one members one of another.
Romans 12.4, 5.

M. Hooker has two Expositions of, or answers to this place. First, that the
Church here meant is totum universale, existing and determinined in its actings
by the particulars.

Answ. That cannot be, for genus qua genus can have no officers, seeing it is a
second notion abstracted only in the mind: therefore the Church qua totum
universale is no existing polity: if it has Officers it must be considered as
an integrum existens.

And as for totum genenericum existens, it is nothing else (as I conceive) but
integrum similare. For genus existeth not as genus, but only under distinct
specifical forms, and is abstracted from the species or individuals by the
understanding. Now that which has no existence of its own, can have no
existing Officers. Omne conporeum existens, vel est integrum, vel membrum.

Neither will it help the cause at all to say, that Apostles, Prophets,
Evangelists, were extraordinary temporary officers. First, here are ordinary
Officers inserted also, given to the same Church, as Teachers, ruling-Elders,
Deacons. Secondly, a genus admits of no variations in regard of time or place,
or any other accidents: nothing extraordinary can betide a genus, but an
integrum or existing being. Genus, ut est aeternae veritatis, sic est aeternae
identitatis. Genus is abstractum quid, non concretum, but the Church-Catholike
is concretum quid, and constatum, and aggregatum ex membris, non ex speciebus:
as shall be showed more fully afterward.

His second Exposition is, that the Apostle points at one particular, but
includes all particulars, by a parity and proportion of reason.

Answ. This cannot be; for this Church here meant is the political body of
Christ, as M. Hooker himself expounds it, as I showed before. Now all the
members of a particular Church (as suppose Corinth) are but members of a part
of that body, as I showed before.

Secondly, God did not set all these in every particular Church. Had every
particular Congregation Apostles, Prophets, miracles, gifts of healing,
diversities of tongues? yea, take the constant Officer, the teacher, and
ordinarily, one Congregation has, not teachers, but only one teacher:
therefore this parity of reason cannot hold, except all these Officers were in
the plural number in every Congregation. And if the Apostles, Prophets,
Evangelists, were Officers of every particular Congregation, qua particular,
then all those incongruities which our brethren bring against Presbyterial
government; of choice, ordination, maintenance, honor, from the particular
Congregations to them; and their constant teaching, watching over, and ruling
of them, fall directly upon these Officers. I suppose many Congregations never
had all these kinds of Officers among them. If it be meant distributively,
some to one, some to another, then it should have been said Churches, not
Church.

This place being a main fort that stood in M. Ellis's way, he lays his main
battety against it: and gives many answers thereunto, which yet are not
subordinate or subservient one to another, nor yet consistent one with another:
but if any one will serve the turn to batter it down, it matters not (it seems)
what become of the rest. He parallels this place with Ephesians. 4.4, 5. And says,
that one body or Church here and there spoken of, is meant in the same sense
that One faith, One Baptism is, viz. one in kind: and as there are many single
faiths, hopes, baptisms, though one in kind, so there is one body in kind,
but many singular bodies. vind. p. 34. But M. Ellis might have seen, that if he
had run his parallel a little further, he had run over shoes and boots too. For
there it is said, that there is One Spirit, one Lord Jesus, one God and Father,
not in kind, but in number; and why may not the Church, in which there is one
individual doctrine of faith, and body of laws, and into which there is one
manner of inrowlment by baptism, and in which only there is hope of salvation,
be one numerically also: especially considering that as the head, the Lord
Jesus Christ, is one in number; so his body the Church can be but one in number
also: For Christ has not more bodies, in the same respect, then one.

But even his granting of a mystical oneness in Essence, drives him to grant
willingly, that this does imply an union visible also, as much as may stand
with the institution of Christ, and the edification of the Church, p. 34. And I
think the Presbyterians desire no more.

Also he says, the Church is one as the worship and government is one, viz.
for nature and kind, in the substantials of it, or that general platform of
it, Mat. 18. etc. but as the Church is not one visible policy or corporation in
number, so neither in outward government of it, vind. 35.

Answ. The Presbyterians do acknowledge many distinct particular corporations
of particular Churches, exercising government actually and constantly by their
own Officers. But as this oneness in kind of worship and government, gives
every private Christian, whose constant actual exercise of public worship is
in one Congregation, an habitual right to worship God, and communicate in any
(though never so far remote) Congregation, if occasion serve: and makes him
liable to reproofs and suspension there: if there be known cause; why shall not
the Officers also whose constant actual exercise is but in one Congregation,
have the like privilege to exercise their office in any remote Congregation
upon an occasion, or call to it?

But there were two Objections vind. p. 35. which played so hard upon him, that
they beat him from that battery, and therefore he betakes himself to another,
mounted much higher. I grant (says he) the Apostle speaks of the Church,
whether visible or invisible, universal or particular, but not of it in these
respects, but mystically and totally, as comprehending those in heaven also,
and this sense I will stick unto. page 35. Now in this body, or this Church, as
Ephesians. 36. or in this family in heaven and earth, as verse. 15 He has set some
Apostles, some Pastors. Though they have exercise of their functions only, in
that part which is on earth, and in that part of it on earth which is visibles
yet they are placed in the whole, page 36.

But here M. Ellis grants more then was desired. I fear this opinion will prove
but a novel opinion: and he will have but few fellows to stand by him in
managing this piece of battery. For as it expressly crosses D. Ames
before-cited, who says, the Church-Catholike is one in regard of its external
and accidental state, and not internal and essential: so it crosses himself,
who holds that the Officers of a particular Church are Officers only in their
several Churches, vind. p. 8. therefore not set in the Church Triumphant.
Certainly there they are where they were set, but they are in the Church
visible militant only: the Church Triumphant has no Officers. This opinion
will make all the Ministers notable Non-residents, who never come at the place
where they were set, all their life time. It were a happy turn for the
Ministers if they were all placed in the Church Triumphant as well as militant:
I am sure many of them will never come there. The Saints in heaven have no hand
in the election of Officers here below, which by his arguing they ought to
have, as well as the Church-Catholike in the election of every particular
Officer. vind. p. 40. The Church in heaven have neither word, Sacraments, nor
discipline, which are counted the notes of the Church where the Ministry is
placed. The Ministers preach not to them, pray not with them, have no external
communion with them, watch not over them, neither admonish nor censure them,
not perform any part of their ministerial office to them. Nay, the Officers are
not so much as placed in the invisible Church on earth; for as invisible it
has no Officers, but as visible only. It is true they are set for the good of
the invisible Church, and for the perfecting of the Triumphant, but they are
set only in the visible, and they are altogether visible, and many of them only
visible, and yet are true Ministers. Are the gifts of tongues, and of healing,
and Deacons, set in the whole Church Triumphant, as well as Militant?

Are all that are baptized into one body, baptized into the Triumphant as well
as militant? I think you will not say so, But how are we flown from a
particular, visible, congregational Church, to the Triumphant on a sudden, from
one extreme to another? Remember that of the Poet Ne si dimissior ibis, Vnda
graves pennas, si celsior, ignis adurat. Inter utrumque vola. Medio tutissimus
ibis. It is clear the Apostle speaks of that body wherein is suffering, and
rejoicing one with another. But Abraham is ignorant of us, and Israel
acknowledges us not.

It is contrary to re^^on it self, that the Officers reckoned up in 1 Cor.
12.28. and Ephesians. 4.11. should be set in the Church essentially taken; for
discipline is not essential to the Church, but for the ^in^esse or well being
of it. Considering also that by those Officers the Church becomes political.
It were a paradox to say that a King, Judges, Justices, and Sherifs and Laws,
etc. are given to a Kingdom essentially, and not as it is a po^^^i^; for they
are the very formalis ratio, and sinews of the polity thereof; without which
it might indeed have an essence, but no polity. Our brethren for
Congregational Churches hold that there may be a Church entitive or essential,
before they choose any Officer, else they were in no capacity to choose them;
how then can Officers aggree to them essentially? But it is contrary to sense
to say they are set in the Church Triumphant.

But fearing that he cannot keep this battery, he retreats to a third, and that
is a double one. In the general he says, should I grant (which I do not) that
the Apostle is to be understood of the Church on earth, yet he speaks as well
of in particular Church as of the general. And to avoid the dirt of this Fort
or A^b^^^^^ (is he ta^^ it) viz. 1 Cor. 12.28. He brings in two significations
of the word Apostle: which worth alone. (says he) is the ground of the
Objection. And says, if we take the word for such Officers as were sent out
with commission from any Church upon special occasion, which is the literal
signification of the word, and is so taken, 1 Cor. 8.23. of Barnabas, and Phil.
2.25. of Epapbroditum; so the Argument hence were voided.

Answ. But there is not the least probability that the Apostle in setting down
the Officers of the Church, both extraordinary and ordinary, should set down
occasional messengers first, before Prophets and Teachers.

And in Ephesians. 4.11. keeping the same Order, should prefer them before
Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors and Teachers. And leave out in both places the
highest office in the Church, viz. Apostleship, especially considering that the
Apostle there does not set down the Officers ^aptim, promiscously, but adds
an ordinal numeral with them, first Apostles, secundarily Prophets.

But again, If it be taken properly, in that he applies his speech
particularly, though not exclusively, to the Corinthians: ye are the body of
Christ (to wit, ye are a particular body) and members in particular, and so
Chap. 3.21, 22. All are yours, whether Paul or Apollos, or Cephar, or life or
death, all are yours, and ye (Corinthians) Christ's. Where all are the whole
Churches, and each Churches in particular, as their occasions require; each in
their order (He might also have said, and each particular member.) So that the
sense is (says he) he has given or set in the Church, i. e. in this Church of
Corinth, and so in that of Ephesus, etc. Some Apostles, etc. as their need
shall require: yet not therefore making them one external society (among
themselves) As some general Officers make not England and Scotland one Kingdom.

Answ. M Ellis goes upon a mistake in all his book. The Presbyterians say not
that the Church-Catholike visible is one external, constant, actual society,
but habitual; or in actu primo: or constantly and actually, in actu secundo
sive exercite, the regiment is exercised in the particular Churches or
vicinities: yet has the whole Church, or some great parts of it: some common
interests that may require to be handled in Synods and Councels, by their
combined or delegated Officers occasionally: and those Officers therein, act
not as private men, but as Officers, and may exert their indefinite habitual
power annexed to their office, for the good of the whole, or of so great a part
of the Church-Catholike as did delegate them.

And as for the parallelling Apostles and Prophets in this case with life and
death, it is not equal: for God did not set life and death as Officers in the
Church, but they are general accidents to the whole world, overruled by God
for the good of his people. All things work together for the good of them that
love him.

But in that he grants the word Church to extend to Corinthians and Ephesians,
etc. he must grant it to comprehend all the Churches as well as them, and that
they all are one Church habitually, having then some general Officers over
them, viz. Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists and Teachers, and the same Apostle,
the same Prophet, and the same Teacher (if need required) in any of them.

But fearing he could not keep that battery, he retreats to a fourth, and
says, that though by Church were meant the Church-Catholike visible, yet it
follows not that because it was so then, and in respect of the Apostles, that
therefore it was to be so to the end of the world, and in it self. page 37.

Answ. it is true, it was not Christ's mind that the extraordinary office of
Apostleship should continue, there were to be no more such men of extraordinary
gifts, and divine immediate mission, of an infallible spirit, that had actual
regiment over the Churches of the whole world, without any delegation from
others, but by immediate commission from Christ. But how comes that which was
an integrum in the Apostles days, to be now sublimated into it genus, and lose
the integrality, and so prove a second notion, existing only in intellectu
nostro? Did it cease to be one body as soon as the Apostles were all dead?
seeing the same doctrine, worship laws, discipline, enrowlment by baptism,
confirmation and communion in the Lords Supper continued still: and the liberty
of all the members of the whole Church to communicate in these, in any place of
the world, where they become (though but occasionally) continue still. And by
the same reason the habitual power in actu primo which the Officers have to
dispense the Ordinances of God, may be drawn forth in any part of the Church,
in actum secundum, upon an occasion and call, according to their measure, which
the Apostles had habitually and actually, every where, both in actu primo and
secundo, extraordinarily.

Yea, but (says he) the Churches were not one in themselves, but one in the
Apostles, and that by accident, as England and Scotland were one in the King,
because he governed both; Israel and Judah in David: the whole world one in
Nebuchadnezzar. But they are not therefore one, considered in themselves. Vind.
p. 37.

Answ. I grant, the Church was but accidentally and temporarily one in regard
of the Apostles, but integrally one in it self. It was not one, because that
they were set over it, but it was one in it self integrally, because Christ is
set over it, and therefore they by commission from Christ, were set over it
extraordinarily, for the present good and necessity thereof. An Empire being
made one under one Emperor, has imperial laws and constitutions, which being
divided under diverse governors it loses again, and cease to be an Empire,
but the Church has the same laws under the same head that it had then, and
ever shall have. The world was one Empire under Darius by imperial laws, not
because the three Presidents were set over it, neither did it cease to be so by
their death or ceasing. So etc.

But fifthly, says he, though we grant, that while the Apostles were living,
there was one body of Officers over the whole Church, and so in respect of them
the Church might be said to be one governed body, yet it was never one
governing body: for whilst the Apostles lived, the universal governing power
was committed to the Apostles only, and not with them to any other Officers or
Churches; no not to all the Churches together, but they with their Officers
were all in subjection to them.

Answ. I acknowledge the Church-Catholike was never one governing body:
although M. Ellis is pleased to set down that expression in capital letters, in
the frontispiece of his book, and upon the top of every page, and in diverse
other places, as the opinion of the Presbyterians. But where does he find any
such expression in their writings? It may more truly be affirmed to be the
opinion of some of our brethren of the Congregational way, who put government
into the body of the Congregation (whether M. Ellis be of that opinion or no, I
cannot say) and so they are a particular governing body, and if all the
Churches in the world were of that way (as certainly they desire) and these
Churches might in any sense be called one Church (as is confessed by all that
they may) then they must needs be one governing body. But as they are now, they
not only govern their own body, but pass the censure of Non-communion against
all persons, nay whole Churches, if they judge there be cause.

But the Presbyterians hold that governments belong to the Organs, i. e. the
Officers of the Church, not to the body. It is for good of the body, but
belongs not to the body to exercise. The Church-Catholike is the subject in quo
exercetur, or cui datur, non ad utendum, sed ad fruendum.

Neither are the Officers of the Church-Catholike one constant collective
governing body actually, but habitually; for constantly and actually they are
distributed into several Congregations for the exercise of government there.
But if the necessity of the whole (when it could be) or of any great part of
the body, call the Officers of many particular Churches together (which may be
by themselves or their Commissioners) then can they exercise their office
collectively conjunctim, yet only according to the word of God. And this M.
Ellis grants in effect p. 7.8. only he says their power being met, is only
consultatory and suasory, not obligatory: it is the acting of officers, but not
as Officers: but I suppose he cannot think, that consultatory and suasory
power, is sufficient to cure the Church of the malady of obstinate heretics,
whose mouths (says the Apostle) must be stopped. And though the universal,
constant, actual power of government was given to the Apostles only, yet we see
they did join with the particular Elders in the government of their Churches,
when they were among them: and did also join them with themselves in making
decrees to bind the Churches. Act. 15.6. and Act. 16.4.

But fearing lest he had granted something too much in his former answer, he
plucks away part of it in his sixth, and says, that the Apostles were not one
joint Ministry. For besides that each had entire power; some had one part
committed to them, and some another, Thomas sortitus est Parthiam, Andreas
Scythiam Johannes Asiam, etc.

Answ. The Apostles did first act in Jerusalem as one joint combined ministry:
and did afterward disperse themselves into several parts of the world,
according to their commission, yet retained their power of uniting and acting
together jointly without any delegation or commission from any Churches, and
this power of theirs no ordinary Ministers lay claim to. And though the
planting and watering of Churches required this dispersion, and several lots
voluntarily, yet were they fixed in no Congregation, as Elders are.

Seventhly, He denies the consequence of a Church-Catholike visible, from that
place, and that he proves by a parallel, supposing such like words had been
said of the whole world for civil government: his words are these; If it follow
not, when we say God has set in the world, some Emperors, some Kings, some
Princes, some inferior Officers and Magistrates, therefore the world is but
one governing Kingdom, and all particular Kingdoms do but govern in the right
of the Kingdom of the world in common; the Officers whereof are the Kings of
the several Kingdoms, etc. Neither does it follow, that because the Scripture
says, God has set some in the Church, Apostles, etc. therefore the Church
throughout the world is but one Congregation, to whose Officers first, as the
general Officers of the whole Church, not by way of distribution, but as a
notionally (at least) collected body of Officers, the power of government is
committed, etc.

Answ. He has not paralleled the question rightly, but it should run thus.
Suppose there were one Emperor over all the Kingdoms of the earth, and he
should set down one form of government and enrowlment for freedom in the whole
world, for such as will be his subjects, and should first set 12 Presidents
over the whole world, to abide so for their life time, as extaordinary
Officers, and for ordinary standing Officers, should set in the several
Provinces or Kingdoms, several Officers that should rule under him or them, in
their several places: and yet appoint, that as every free member of the whole,
though his fixed habitation be in one place, yet is free of the whole
habitually, and upon occasion can make use of it, to trade freely in any place:
so the several governors, though ordinarily, fixedly and actually, they
constantly govern their own Provinces, yet upon occasion of difference, danger,
or for the good of the whole, or any great part of the same, they shall have
power to convene, either all, if it may be, or some of them by way of
delegation, to act for the good of the whole, or so many Provinces as the
matter concerns, and their delegation is for. Whether would not this prove the
world one entire Empire, and body politic habitually? And so is the case of
the Church-Catholike.

But take earthly monarchies as they have been on earth, and we find that the
several kingdoms of the Empires did enjoy their several liberties, with respect
had to the whole, that nothing should be prejudicial to the Empire, that the
Emperor should have no damage, Dan. 6.2. And yet in reference to the Emperor,
and some certain common laws, they were one monarchy. Because the Emperor
could send messengers and Officers of any country, and commands to them all,
and all were to take care in their places for the whole (though happily there was
no general convention of all Officers) and to keep as much as lay in them
neighbor Kingdoms from rebelling, even where they had no ordinary
jurisdiction, and to subdue them to the Emperor if they did rebel, and yet not
retain ordinary power over them. Now these things agree to this spiritual
monarchy the Church; yea, and much more. For they are all one in the head, one
in all the laws, and in one form of government; and ought all to do what they
do in reference to the whole; as to admit every where into the whole by
baptism, to eject out of the whole by excommunication, to keep any neighbor
Church from defection, and to reduce them if fallen off, though they have no
ordinary jurisdiction over them. Christ can send a Minister out of any Kingdom
into any, not only occasionally, pro tempore, as a messenger, but settle him
there as an Officer, and call back or remove him any whither else. And
therefore the Church-Catholike is one Kingdom in general, and yet particular
rights and liberties of particular Churches be preserved, so far as may stand
with the good of the whole.

There is one Objection which M. Hooker in Surv. c. 15. p. 273. has against
this proof in this text, which is of some difficulty, vix. That Church where
Deacons are set is not an unlimited Church: But ordinary Deacons were set in
the same Church wherein the Apostles were set, as in the place, 1 Corinthians. 12.
it is affirmed jointly and indifferently of them both. Therefore that Church
does not argue an unlimited power.

Answ. It is not affirmed that the Church-Catholike has an unlimited power,
but unlimited extent of the power given them by Christ, in regard of place
within the compass of the Christian world; and so I conceive M. Hookers
meaning is.

But to the Objection itself, First I premise, that Deacons were not primarily
set in a particular Congregational Church, but 7 of them were at the first
institution of the office set in the Church of Jerusalem over Jews and
Grecians, where there were many Congregations, and therefore a Classical,
Presbyterial Church divided into many Congregations necessarily, at least for
some Ordinances (as the Lords Supper, etc.) yet governed by one common
Presbytery, and yet always called one Church. But whether their Officers were
fixed in the several Congregations or no, I know not, neither do I think it can
be proved.

Secondly, The subject about which their office was exercised, was not the
Ordinances of worship or discipline, as the other offices were, but about alm^,
which in their own nature are or ought to be, and were then, voluntary. And in
regard those alms come not by divine dispensation, as the immediate gift of
Christ to the Church, though they be commanded indeed by Christ, but out of
men's purses by contribution, being a money matter, in which the Congregation
has, or had propriety, there may be something said for the limitation of that
office in their act of ordinary distribution to the members of that single or
combined Church contributing, that it may be performed according to the will of
the donors, to whom also the Deacons are to render an account.

Thirdly, I desire the manner of the Apostles speech in setting down Deacons
and governors, may be considered, not adding an ordinal numeral unto it, as to
Apostles, Prophets and Teachers, but (...) and (...) deinde: and 2ly.
interposing 2 extraordinary endowments of miracles, and gifts of healing: and
3. the change of speech from the concrete to the abstract, helps, governments.
Which though they imply men by whom they are to be exercised, viz. helpers and
governors, yet are not so set down: what the meaning of the holy Ghost is
herein I cannot affirm, but I conceive that the office of Apostles, Prophets,
Teachers, is of somewhat more large extent then the other two, because they
were executed as well without the Church (though set in it) as within it, viz.
among heathens for their conversion: And in Ecclesia constituenda, the other in
constituta only: and the exerting of the Deacons office not so usually and
frequently out of the limits of their particular Churches, as theirs that are
entrusted with the preaching of the word: nor yet their call thereunto so facil
as the others: for to the exerting of government there is required a voluntary
combination of many instituted Churches, and for distribution to other Churches
there is required a more then ordinary necessity, and the consent of the
particular Church contributing: but no such solemn call is required to the
preaching the word in any other Church or Churches.

But fourthly, more directly to the Objection: Though alms, which is the
subject of the Deacons office, be not reckoned among the Ordinances given by
Christ, but are the gift of particular men in particular Congregations, as the
rest of them: yet the necessity, command, and distribution of them, may extend
further then the particular Church, and in that regard the office of Deacons,
which is to collect and distribute, extends it self equally. We are bidden to
do good to all, but especially to the household of faith (i. e. as we have
occasion and ability) which is as extensive as the Church-Catholike. Any
foreign Church may stand in need of our contribution and distribution. And
even the Law of our land enjoyneth, that if any Congregation cannot maintain
their poor, there should be help by collections from other neighboring
Congregations. And the maimed soldiers of the whole County are maintained by
constant collection from every town in the County, and there are County
Treasurers that receive it, which are (as it were) County-Deacons. And if a
great Town be visited with the plague, or suffer losses by fire, etc. it is
frequent to make collections for them in many Countries. Yea, for whole
Counties, as the whole Kingdom, has lately done for Lancashire; yea, for a
whole Kingdom, as for our own Kingdom under war; yea, for foreign Kingdoms, as
England, yea, and the Netherlands (though under another civil regiment) have
done for Ireland. And we read what the Churches of Asia did for the Churches
of Jerusalem. And we have had contribution to redeem captivated Christians
under the Turk, and not only of our own Nation, but other Nations, sometimes
Grecians. Now though these contributions and collections run among us in
another channel, viz. through the hands of Churchwardens, Overseers,
Constables, Collectors, yet this is the proper work of the Deacons; and
therefore that office in regard of the extent of their possible object, may
well be said to be habitually Catholic, or given to the Church-Catholike,
though their constant distribution should be limited to their own Congregations.

Another proof is from 1 Timothy 3.15. Sect. 5.
These things I write unto thee, that thou may know how thou ought to
behave thy self in the house of God, which is the Church of the living God, the
pillar and ground of the truth. This Church must be the visible Church where he
and others must exist, and converse together, and carry themselves in mutual
duties. Also it must be an organical Church, for the Epistle contains
directions about Bishops and Deacons, yea, even in the context. Neither can the
directions be solely concerning Ephesus; for they are written to Timothy an
Evangelist, the limits of whose office are commensurable to the Apostles,
though under them. Neither do they concern Ephesus in any especially manner,
but all Churches where ever Timothy should come. Therefore not to it
particularly. For he prescribes canons concerning public prayer: and the
habit and carriage of women in the Church: concerning the office of Bishops and
Deacons: concerning the censuring and reproof of all degrees; the Ordination
and maintenance of Elders: the choice and provision for widows: concerning the
duties of servants: and a charge to rich men, not of Ephesus particularly or
only, but every where. Neither did they concern Ephesus primarily; for the
Officers were already set in that Church; Paul found Elders there Act. 20.17.
in his visitation of them, and had lived there three years, verse. 31. as
himself acknowledges. Primarily therefore these canons concern the whole
Church. The manner also of the Apostles speech is to be attended; he does not
say the Churches, houses, pillars, grounds, to be ordered pari rattoni; but in
the singular number house, church, pillar, ground, (...), as if there were but
one Church, one house (whereof Ephesus was but one room, and that already
furnished) one seat, one large pillar, that has the same truth written on
every side of it, which holds it forth unto others, both Jews and Gentiles,
within the Church and without, more forensi. And as Timothy being an Evangelist
conversed with many Churches, so it is like did the members of the Church of
Ephesus. The English Annotations on this place are these. "As the Catholic
Church is, as it were, "the whole house of God; so every particular Church as
this of Ephesus was, in which Timothy resided, was a part thereof, and by a
Synecdoche (totius) may be called the house of God, etc. The words also of the
following verse will lend us some light, Great is the mystery of go^linesse:
God manifested in the flesh, justified in the spirit, seen of Angels, preached
unto the Gentiles, believed on in the world, received up into glory. This is
the truth supported by this seat, and holden forth by this pillar. Does this
concern Ephesus solely, or particularly, or primarily? Is there not a larger
subject expressed, viz. Gentiles and the believing world? All these are the
family and household of God, Ephesians. 2.19. and 3.15.

Again, it is the Catholic visible Church that is so often in Scripture called
the Kingdom of God, Mat. 4.26, 30. And the Kingdom of heaven, Mat. 13.24, 31,
33, 47. Christ calls them not Kingdoms but the Kingdom. And compares this
Kingdom to a field of wheat mingled with tares, This must be the Church visible
in this world, because it is where the sower ordinarily sows his seed visibly
and audibly, verse. 8. which is the preaching of the word. And because here are
good and bad, wheat and tares, and the tares visibly discerned after the wheat.
And it is the Catholic Church, for Christ himself expounds it so, the field is
the world, not of the Jews only, but of the Gentiles also, Joh. 3.16. and
17.11, 15. And this must be the Christian world; for the other is a field of
tares only, where there could be no danger of plucking up of wheat, because
none grew there. They shall fever the wicked from among the just. And in this
field, particular Churches are but as particular ridges, enjoying the same
tillage, seed, fencing, watering. It is a barn floor with wheat and chafe. It
is a draw net, gathering together good and bad. It is a marriage, where wise
and foolish virgins, some had oil, and some only lamps of profession, It is a
feast where some had wedding garments, some had none. Now these things cannot
be spoken solely, or primarily of any particular Congregation, but they agree
to the Church-Catholike visible, this Kingdom is here spoken of as one; and to
particular Churches as parts thereof: and this is also an organical body,
therefore called a Kingdom. Here are servants sowing and viewing this field,
proffering to weed it. And this weeding must be by Ecclesiastical censures, not
the civil sword; they were not so void of reason as to go ask whether they
should kill all the world besides the godly, with a civil sword: then these
tares must be members of the Church, else they were not capable to be cast out,
if never in. Here were fishermen (officers) that cast this net: and servants
that invited these guests, every where in high ways and hedges, Luke 14.23.
indefinitely, without respect of Country or Town.

That which is objected against this by M. Hooker is, that the Kingdom of
heaven beside other significations, as the Kingdom of glory, etc. it does by a
metonymy imply the word of the Kingdom, and the dispensation and administration
of the Gospel in the Churches, and the special things appertaining thereunto.
And cites these parables for that sense.

Answ. I deny not the several significations of those words, the Kingdom of
heaven, in ^everal places. But they cannot signify so in the fore-ceited
places. For it is said, the Angels shall gather out of his (Christ's) Kingdom,
all things that offend, and them which do iniquity, and shall cast them, etc.
can this be meant of the word or Gospel? Is there any thing that offends
therein, or does iniquity that shall be cast, etc.? Is there any tares, any
chaff, any rubbish there? Or can it be meant of the dispensation thereof?
Should sinful or erroneous dispensations of Gods Ordinances be suffered to the
end of the world, for fear of plucking up good dispensations? Why do we then
endeavor a reformation? Does not Paul say false teachers mouths must be
stopped, and wishes such cut off?

It is clear the texts speak of a Kingdom consisting of persons, the tares,
chafe, rubbish, foolish virgins, and evil guests, are the children of the
wicked one, man that offend, and do iniquity, that shall be gathered out of
Christ's Kingdom, therefore they were in it. And the wheat, good fish, wise
virgins, and good guests, are the children of the Kingdom, without respect to
any particularities, of Town or Country, much less of any Congregation.

And when we say, Thy Kingdom come, we pray not only for the conversion of the
elect, nor only for the coming of the Kingdom of glory, but also for the
Church-Catholike visible, that it might be enlarged, and have freedom and
purity of Ordinances, which are things that concern it as a visible, organical
Kingdom, because the dispensations thereof are by Officers.

Again in 1 Cor. 15.24. it is said, Then shall Christ deliver up the Kingdom to
God his Father. This is not the natural or essential Kingdom, which he has
with the Father and holy Ghost as God: for that he shall never deliver up.
Neither is it the Kingdom of grace which he by his Spirit exercises in the
hearts of the Elect, for that shall continue for ever, and be more perfect in
heaven. For the Kingdom of grace here, and of glory afterward, differ only
gradis communionis, as Ames tells us; here the degree is imperfect, then it
shall be perfect, both in graces and joys. But it is the Kingdom exercised in
the visible Church-Catholike, in the Ordinances of worship and discipline,
wherein our communion is mediate with God, which shall then cease. For as the
Evangelical external service and manner of communion with God, thrust out the
legal and ceremonial: so shall the heavenly immediate, thrust out the
Evangelical.

But this Kingdom (says M. Hooker) cannot be the Catholic visible Church,
because that consisting of sound-hearted Christians and false-hearted
hypocrites, these are not delivered up into the hand of the Father, that he
might be all in all to them. Surv. p. 276.

Answ. I do not conceive by Kingdom to be meant the children of the Kingdom,
but the external donative regiment of Christ over his visible Church-Catholike
dispensed by Ordinances and Officers here below, which shall then cease. And
though the Ordinances (as he alleges) are distinct from the Kingdom in sense
and signification. Yet they strongly argue a Kingdom constituted and governed
by them: as the Kings laws argue a King and Kingdom. As from helps and
governments, 1 Cor. 12.28. we gather the consequence of helpers and governors,
as officers in the Church: so from the external laws of this Kingdom, we
necessarily conclude there is such a Kingdom, commensurable to the extent of
these laws, and that external, Organical and Catholic, which is spoken of Isa.
9.6. And the 25. ver. makes it plain, for he must reign until he has put all
enemies under his feet: which reigning relates to professed Subjects as well as
professed enemies; and these Subjects comprehended in a Kingdom.

Again Heb. 12.28. Wherefore we receiving a Kingdom which cannot be moved, let
us have grace whereby we may serve God acceptably, with reverence and godly
fear. This Kingdom cannot be meant of the internal Kingdom of grace in the
heart, for that was also exercised by Christ in his peoples hearts, under the
old Testament, but it is meant of the external, unalterable, perpetual
Ordinances of worship and government, which differed from those under the Law:
else the Apostles antithesis of the Church under the Law, and the Church under
the Gospel, had not been good, which are the things he compares in that place.
Externals under the Law are opposed to externals under the Gospel. It cannot be
meant of the Kingdom of glory, for they had not yet received that. And it is
plain he speaks of a Kingdom wherein we may now serve God acceptably, with
reverence and godly fear. Now these Ordinances of worship and discipline being
Catholic or universal, and relating to a Kingdom, and therefore set down under
the name of a kingdom, by a Metonymy of the subject for the adjunct, the
Kingdom for the Ordinances of the Kingdom, do strongly argue the being of the
Kingdom. Can we conceive that the holy Ghost would choose to use such a metonymy
of the subject, where there is no such subject? It is true (as is alleged) the
unalterablenesse lies in the adjunct Ordinances, i. e. in regard of God, who
will not alter them: and that the subject or kingdom may be moved and shaken by
persecutions or heresies, and so may the Ordinances also, and have been we
know; but that kind of alteration, moving, or shaking, is not meant in the
text, neither was intended by me. I have the rather mentioned this text,
because I find one of our brethren for Congregational Churches, viz. M.
William Sedgwick, giving this Exposition of it in a Sermon of his in print,
which was preached before diverse members of the House of Commons.

Sect. 6.
Again 1 Cor. 5.12. The Apostle says, what have I to do to judge those that
are without? The preposition or adverb (...), I desire to know what it does
relate unto, Is it not meant (...), without the Church? And can we think that
that Church was the Church of Corinth only? Had Paul nothing to do to judge any
that were out of the Church of Corinth, when he was an Apostle all over the
Christian world? This could not be meant of the invisible company only: what?
had Paul nothing to do to censure any but invisible members? Why did he then
excommunicate Hymenaeus, Philetus, Phigellus, Hermogenes and Alexander? And
says, I would they were cut off that trouble you. Also it must be meant of an
Organical body, because here are censures mentioned as belonging to all within.
And therefore it must be meant of the Church-Catholike visible Organical: What
have I to do to judge those that are not brought into the Church? They are not
under my power or cognizance, but belong only to the civil Magistrate.

And we usually speak of the Countries that are within the Pale of the Church,
and those that are without. And we have an axiom, Extra Ecclesiam non est
salus; which cannot be meant of any particular Congregation in the world, but
is true of the Church-Catholike visible, typified by the Ark of Noah, without
which ordinarily and visibly there is no hope of salvation. Extra ejus gremium
non est speranda peccatorum remissio. Calv. Inst. l. 4 c. 1. S. 4.

Again, Ephesians. 4.4, 5. The Apostle proves the Church to be but one by diverse
Arguments, First, says he, There is one body of Christ, which is therefore
called, Ephesians. 3.6. (...), both of Jews and Gentiles, i. e. the same body. And
this an Organical body, because Paul adds, ver. 7. whereof I was made a
Minister. Secondly, there is but one spirit in that whole body, which is as one
soul in one body. Thirdly, there is but one hope of their calling. Fourthly,
There is but one Lord, or King over the whole Church. Fifthly, There is but one
faith, i. e. One religion, doctrine, worship, the same Commands and Statutes
for all. Sixthly, There is but one Baptism, to admit into this Church. Now if
the whole world were under one King, and governed by one Law, and all one body,
and all capable of the same privileges, and all made Denizons by the same way
of enrowlment, it would make but one Empire; yet so it is with all the
Christians and Churches in the world; they have the same King, Law, Word,
Sacraments of admission and nutrition, which they visibly subject themselves
unto and receive, therefore they are all one visibly Church. Upon this text,
ver. 12. Beza in his large Annotations has this note. Being the Church is to
be considered, either as a Communalty of a sacred Commonwealth, or as a
spiritual Temple, or as a mystical body, the ministry of the word ought
likewise to be referred to these three heads, etc. All which 3. considerations
show the unity and integrality of the whole.

And that this is meant of the visible Church, and not invisible or Triumphant,
as M. Ellis conceives, appears, because it is the Church to whom Officers
are given, ver. 11. to be edified, ver. 12, 13. compacted together by joints,
ver. 16. of whom mutual duties both religious and civil are required, for such
are set down in that Chapter, and the following. And so M. Hooker understands
it, Surv. p. 3, where he cites this text for the political body or Church
visible of Christ, ruled by the donative, delegated power of Christ, and that
visibly by his Ordinances and officers. It is therefore the militant visible
Church which holds forth the truth, Phil. 2.16. contending for it, Jude 3.
Into which the thief may possibly enter. Joh. 10. Act. 20.29, 30.

Again Christ says, Mat. 16.18. On this rock will I build my Church, and the
gates of hell shall not prevail against it. Was this a particular Congregation?
No surely, but the Church Catholic, for any particular Church may be prevailed
against, but the whole shall not, The place is meant of a Church future, to be
built, which Christ then intended to set up, which was the Evangelical
Catholic Church, consisting of Jews and Gentiles as one body, and not
Catholic (as some take it) for the Church past, present, and to come, for
those already in heaven are out of gunne-shot of assault, but it is meant de
Ecclesia vivorum, de militante, de Ecclesia quam Christus erat aedificaturus.

Object. O but this place is meant only of the Church invisible, for they that
are only visible may be prevailed against?

Answ. It is true, that any particular merely visible member may be prevailed
against, yet all shall not; and even the invisible members which cannot be
prevailed against (so many as are left in any, though never so general and
fierce persecution) shall remain as visible. For Ecclesia nunquam definit esse
visibilis. Therefore Satan or men shall never so far prevail, as to cut off all
visible members. And though heresies should come that deceive all but the elect
(which is not supposable) yet as long as the Elect are not deceived, there
remains a Church Catholic visible, still in their visibility. But it cannot
be affirmed that all are invisible members that are left, or hold out in the
hottest persecutions, or subtlest heresies: strong enlightnings and covictions,
and struglings of conscience, and other by-ends may do much. Latent members may
not be invisible.

But the reasons which induce me to think that this text is meant of the Church
visible, are these; two I find in the context. First, because this Church is
built upon this visible or audible profession, that Christ is the son of God,
which Peter made; The rock there spoken of, is not an indefinite Messiah to
come, for so the Church from the beginning of the world was built on that work:
but the profession and doctrine that the Messiah is already come, that this
Jesus is the Messiah, and this Jesus the Messiah is the son of God. It is the
confessing that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh, 1 John 4.2, 3. And the
believing that I am he (says Christ) Joh. 8.24. And therefore the Jews that
believed before in an indefinite Messiah to come, were upon their conversion to
the Christian faith built upon this rock, and by a new Sacrament admitted into
this Christian Church, as well as the Gentiles.

Secondly, Because Christ immediately in the next verse affixeth officers to
this Church, by promising the keys of the Kingdom of heaven unto Peter (and not
to him only but to the rest also, as appears in other places) which keys are an
Ensign of office in that Church which Christ would build.

Thirdly, Because the admission into this Evangelical Church was upon a visible
profession of their belief of this doctrine, and a visible receiving of a
visible external badg of baptism.

Fourthly, Because this Church is assaulted by visible adversaries, viz.
persecutors and heretics, and that visibly: and though they shall never wholly
prevail against it, yet visibly waste great part of it many times.

And M. Hooker himself acknowledges that he does incline to this judgment of
this text, viz. that it is the visible Church that is there meant. Surv. c. 15.
p. 278.

Only he objecteth against a reason which I brought of it, which was to this
purpose. If all the visible members should fail, then all the invisible must
needs fail also, for none are invisible (in the Church I mean) but must be
visible also. His Objection against this is, because an invisible member may be
justly excommunicated, and so cast out of all the visible Churches in the
world, and so be no visible member, and yet remain an invisible member still,
for that membership cannot be lost.

Answ. It is very doubtful to me how far excommunication casts a man out of
the visible Church; it debars him indeed from the Lords Supper, because it is a
seal; and from familiar intimate society with Gods people, because he is an
infected member, and so does a notorious sin, though the man be not
excommunicated. But I conceive it cuts him not off totally from the visible
Church; For first, the seal of baptism remains on him, and therefore is not
iterated at his readmission. Secondly, he is admitted to hearing the word, and
prayer, and conference with Gods people. He is a diseased leprous member under
censure, shut from the most intimate actual communion, until he be cured and
cleansed. That which is done to him is under consideration of discipline, as to
a member now diseased, in order to cure, not as to one that is damned, or to
one that is under the sin against the holy Ghost, as Julian the Apostate was.
And if any godly person through weakness of judgment concerning Churches not
rightly gathered, refuse to be baptized (as M. Hooker suggesteth) he is indeed
no complete member in that regard, but he being converted by visible means, and
making visible profession, he is an incomplete visible member of the
Church-Catholike Entitive.

Again, Excommunication in 3 Ep. Joh. ver. 10. is called casting out of the
Church, What Church is that? It cannot be the invisible Church, for all the
censures in the world cannot cast a man out of that, if once he be in;
therefore it is the visible Church. Then I would know whether a man truly
excommunicated in one Church or Congregation, is not thereby excommunicated
from brotherly fellowship with all Congregations, yea, and Christians not
gathered yet into Congregations? Or whether the delivering up to Satan, by the
Officers of a particular Congregation, be only within the bounds of one
Congregation, or in reference to their members only; so that if he remove out
of such a circle or circuit of ground to another, or from those members to
others, he be out of Satan's bonds again, and may communicate there de jure?

This M. Hooker says, is per Synecdochen generis pro Specie, that particular
Church where Diotrephes usurped pre-eminence is understood. For when a person
is justly excommunicated from the Congregation in which he was, it follows of
necessity that all that fellowship he might enjoy by virtue of communion of
Churches, must of that necessity be denied unto him, and he justly deprived
thereof, because in the virtue of his fellowship with one, he gained fellowship
with others.

Answ. Whether the word Church be there properly, or per Synecdochen generis,
or Synecdochen Integri, I shall not now enquire but refer it to a Chapter by it
self, in which shall be enquired whether the Church-Catholike be a genus or
integrum. But I question much whether a man's fellowship with one Congregation
be the ground whereby he gains fellowship and communion with others. For then
how came the Apostles and Evangelists by right of communion with any Churches,
seeing they were fixed members of none? And how could the 120. and 3000.
converted by Peter have right of communion, and breaking bread together, before
any Congregations were set up or settled? Therefore I conceive the primary right
to communion is gained by being of the visible body, not by being of this or
that Congregation, By being within the general Covenant, not by any particular
Covenant. And I conceive, that Baptism and Excommunication run parallel herein;
for as by Baptism a man is admitted externally into the whole visible body, and
then may have fellowship with any part of the body: so by Excommunication a man
is cast out from communion with the whole, and therefore may communicate with
no part. This is Apollonius his assertion. Sicut per Excommunicationem
legitimam excommunicatus non tantum ex hac vel illa particulari Ecclesia
ejicitur, sed ubicunque terrarum ligatur, and ex communione fraeterna
universalis Ecclesiae exeluditur. Mat. 18.17, 18. Ita and per Sacramentum
Baptismi, and sacrae Eucharistiae, homini communio Ecclesiastica, Chap. 3.
non tantum in particulari, sed and universali Ecclesia obsignatur. Confid.
quarund. contro. c. 2. Art. 3.

And though the power of Excommunication lies in the particular Congregation,
where a person enjoies his membership under the Kingdom of Jesus Christ, as M.
Hooker says, yet the Officers of that particular Church dispense that censure
in reference to the whole body, whereof he that is so censured was a member, as
well as of that Congregation, for being cast out of that, let him be or go
where he will, he is under the Kingdom of Satan, and all Churches should look
at him as a Traitor against Christ, and so deal with him as one incapable of
Church Communion. Surv. c. 15.

So on the contrary, though Baptism be administered in a particular
Congregation, yet a man so admitted in any Congregation, ought to be counted a
subject to Christ, and not to be denied fellowship in any other Congregation,
being a member of the visible body, except he some way forfeit his right. So
that both admission into, and ejection out of the Church, though performed by
Officers in a particular Congregation, yet relate first to the whole body.

CHAP. III. Proofs by Arguments and Reason that there is a Church-Catholike
visible.
Sect. 1.
THe first Argument is from Gods donation unto Christ, and it stands thus. If
the donation of a Kingdom by God the Father unto Jesus Christ be universal and
Ecumenical, then his Kingdom (which is his Church) is also universal and
Ecumenical. But the donation was of an universal Ecumenical Kingdom:
Therefore there is such an universal Ecumenical Kingdom or Church.

The major proposition is clear: for whatsoever God the Father gave or promised
unto Jesus Christ, that he performed. The minor or assumption is proved out of
diverse places of Scripture. As Psa. 2.8. Ask of me, and I will give thee the
heathen for thine inheritance, and the utmost parts of the earth for thy
possession. Which is spoken of the donative Kingdom of Christ given to him at
his asking, and not the essential or natural Kingdom as God, Psalm. 72.8. He
shall have dominion from sea to sea, and from the river unto the ends of the
earth. Where is mentioned the external worship and offerings given unto him.
The like promise we find Isa. 49.6. It is a light thing that thou should
raise up the Tribes of Jacob, I will give thee for a light unto the Gentiles,
that thou may be my salvation to the ends of the earth. Also Dan. 7 14. And
there was given unto him (Christ) dominion and glory and a kingdom, that all
people, nations and languages should serve him, his dominion is an everlasting
dominion, and his Kingdom that which shall not be destroyed: Which is meant of
the donative Kingdom given to Christ incarnate at his ascension, answering to
Ephesians. 4.8. where the officers of his Kingdom are set down. And to Phil. 2 9.
This is not only the internal Kingdom in the heart, for that he exercised from
the beginning, but also an external Kingdom, or Church polity over all
nations, after the ruin of the four Monarchies, which should be exercised over
those Kingdoms which formerly were subject to those Monarchies: which Kingdom
is that little stone cut out of the mountain without hands, which became a
great mountain and filled the whole earth, which the God of heaven should set
up visibly in the stead of those Monarchies. Dan. 2.44. not in a civil power of
this world, but in spiritual and divine Ordinances, which all Kingdoms that
should be converted to the Christian faith should submit themselves unto. And
this one mountain filling the whole earth, must needs be one Church-Catholike
visible, submitting visibly to Christ. 2. If Gods intention in sending Christ,
and the tenor of Gods donation, and exhibition of Christ, and redemption by
Christ in his revealed will, be general to the whole world, then the visible
Church is to be Catholic. But the former is true, and therefore so is the
latter. I mean by general, Generibus singulorum, non singulis generum.

The donation of Christ and redemption by him was not to the Jews only (as the
Jews conceived) but to the whole world. Ioh. 1.29. Behold the Lamb of God which
takes away the sins of the world. Joh. 3.16. God so loved the world (not the
Jews only) that he gave his only begotten son, that whosoever believes in
him should not perish but have everlasting life, i. e. that whosoever in any
part of the world, of what nation soever, should believe, should have
everlasting life, That the world through him might be saved, verse. 17. The
Antithesis is not between the elect and reprobate, that whosoever of the elect
believe, as the Arminians make our sense of the words to run ridiculously
(though I confess the elect only do truly believe) but it is between the Jew
and the rest of the world. So Ioh. 4.42. Ioh. 6.33.51. 2 Cor. 5.19. 1 Ioh. 2.2.
a propitiation for the sins of the whole world, 1 Ioh. 4.14. The Savior of the
world.

Now though many of the benefits purchased by Christ for his elect be spiritual
and invisible, and obtained only by the invisible company, yet Christ himself
and his death were visible, his righteousness visibly performed, his active
and passive obedience were visible, and multitude of benefits that the external
Catholic Church receive thereby are visible.

3. If the Gospel of the Kingdom, the seed and means of converting and bringing
in (not only of the invisible company, but) the visible Church, be Catholic,
and universally preached and received, then the Church so converted and visibly
brought in, is Catholic also. But the Gospel is a general gift, and is
scattered like seed indefinitely in all the world, and works a visible
conversion of the whole world, in Scripture phrase. Therefore the Church is
Catholic also. The major is clear of it self. The minor is proved Mat. 24.14.
This Gospel of the Kingdom shall be preached in all the world, for a witness
unto all Nations, Mar. 14.9. Wheresoever this Gospel shall be preached
throughout the whole world, etc. Romans 10.18. Col. 1.6. The Gospel is come unto
you, as it is to all the world, and brings forth fruit. Also Tit. 2.11.
appeared unto all men.

4. If the Charter whereby the Church is constituted, be Catholic, then the
Church constituted thereby is one Catholic body: But the Charter constituting
the Church is Catholic. Therefore, etc.

The major is clear of it self, One charter makes one polity. The minor will
appear by those places of Scripture wherein the right of all Nations
indefinitely is set down. Mat. 28.19. Go teach all Nations, baptizing them,
etc. Mar. 16.15. Ioh. 3.16. Ephesians. 3.6. That the Gentiles should be fellow-heirs
and (...) of the same body, and partakers of his promise in Christ by the
Gospel, whereof I was made a Minister. When the partition wall was broken down
between Jew and Gentile (and then the Church began to be Catholic) what second
limits did God set unto his Church? none, except men would sever themselves by
rejection of the Gospel, but external vocation and submission gave right in
foro Ecclesiae to be admitted members of the Church, and that was universal. If
there be any particular Charter by which any particular Church was constituted
beside the general, let that be produced, I know none. For if there were, then
that particular visible Church could never fail, or else a Gospel Charter must
be lost. But all particular Churches hold their privileges by the general
Covenant applied to themselves, as all the twelve Tribes did theirs by the
Covenant made with Abraham and his seed. And all the several promises, which
are as appendices to the Covenant, are made to the whole Church-Catholike, and
commensurable therewith, respectively, without any respect to any particular
Congregation or membership therein.

5. If there be Officers of a Church-Catholike visible, Sect. 2.
then there is a Church-Catholike visible. But there are Officers of a
Church-Catholike visible. Therefore, etc. The major cannot be denied. The minor
appears by the donation of the Ministry to the Church-Catholike visible, Man.
28.19. Go teach all Natons, baptizing them, etc. They are not circumscribed or
limited to any one place, but are sent into the whole world to all Nations, 1
Cor. 12.28. God has set some in the Church, first Apostles, secundarily
Prophets, thirdly Teachers, Ephesians. 4.11. He gave some Apostles, and some
Prophets, and some Evangelists, and some Pastors and Teachers, for the
perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the Ministry, for the edifying of
the body of Christ. These two last places M. Hooker himself confesses to be
meant of the external, political body and Kingdom of Christ. Now these
extraordinary Officers, Prophets, Evangelists, were Officers of the
Church-Catholike visible; for they had no limits of place, but were over all
the Churches, and yet are said not to be set in the Churches, but in the Church.

And this is granted by some of our brethren for Congregational Churches, that
they were Catholic Officers, and therefore did not baptize in reference unto
particular Congregations. And this M. Cartwright also in his Catechism
acknowledges. The Apostles are usually called (...) universal Judges.

M. Hooker in answer to this argument, Surv. c. 15. page 272. First, mistakes
my words and meaning, for whereas I proved the universality of their office
from the unlimitednesse of it, he conceives it of having no limits in their
works, and so set down, but I meant no limits in regard of places. And then he
says the reason of their unlimitednesse arose from their commission, because
it was general, being immediately called by God to preach to all nations, and
they had vertually all Church Power in them, but this did not issue nextly from
the Church in which they were firstly set.

Answ. I confess it did arise from their commission, which commission being
general, made them general Officers, for what more can be required to make a
general Officer but a general commission? it did not issue nextly from the
Church, I confess, neither does the power of any particular Minister, but his
power is given him by Christ, and not from the people, but is annexed unto his
office; only the exercise thereof is drawn forth by the people, pro hic and
nunc, and so the necessity of the whole Church drew forth their Apostolical
Office into execution, and the necessity of a greater part of the Church may
draw forth the exercise of any particular Ministers office beyond the limits of
his Congregation occasionally.

6. If there be a general, external vocation, wherewith all Christians are
called, and a general external Covenant whereinto all Christians voluntarily
and externally enter, and are therein bound up in an unity, then there is a
general external Catholic Church. But there is such an external general
visible vocation, and external individual visible general Covenant, etc.
Therefore, etc. I mean by general, Catholic, Universal, Ecumenical, in regard
(not only of kind, but) of places.

The major appears by evidence of reason and experience; for one Covenant with
one King in any extent of compass makes it one Kingdom. So etc.

The minor appears as evidently: For first, there is but one external general
vocation divine, distinct from all other particular vocations, not only civil
bu^ Ecclesiastical, which is usually called our general calling: and this is
external, else none but invisible believers were members of the visible Church,
which is that we speak of.

And there is one individual express external Covenant, not only on Gods part.
Act. 2.39. The promise is to you and to your children, and to as many as the
Lord our God shall call. Which is an external Covenant and call relating to
baptism, which they were invited to in the former verse, yet not excluding the
inward Covenant or call, but often separated from the inward, and yet the right
to baptism remain in for^ Ecclesiae. But also it is one external visible
Covenant on men's part, which all Christians as Christians enter into, by their
professed acceptance, and express restipulation, and promised subjection and
obedience: though not altogether in one place, or at one time.

7. If the initial visible seal, admittance and enrowlment, be Catholic and
O^cumenical, then so as the Kingdom into which members are so initiated: But
the initial seal, admission and enrowlment by baptism is Catholic. Therefore,
etc.

The major is clear without control, be that takes up his freedom into a whole
Corporation or Kingdom, is free of the whole, and in every part thereof, and
has right to all the general privileges and immunities thereof.

The minor also appears, both by ^he patent for Baptism, Go baptize all
Nations, And by the consequences and privileges thereof, they that are
baptized in any Church are accounted visible subjects of Christ's Kingdom in all
places of the Christian world, no new baptism is required of them upon any
removal: and also by the tenor thereof, for they are not baptized into the
particular Congregation, but into the whole visible body, and into the general
Covenant, not into any particular Covenant.

8. If there be an external Catholic union of fraternity between all visible
Christians in the whole world, there is one external visible Catholic Church.
But there is one external Catholic union of fraternity between all visible
Christians in the whole world. Therefore, etc.

The consequence of the major appears, because this fraternal union arises
from the unity of the Church, which is constituted by one Covenant, into which
they are all entered visibly. They are not made brethren by being invisible
believers only, or in the same respect for then only invisible believers were
brethren, in the Scripture sense. If any one that is called a brother, be a
drunkard, railer, extortioner, etc. 1 Corinthians. 5.11. Now few true believers are
fornicators, idolaters, drunkards; therefore this brotherhood is in regard of a
visible profession and membership.

The minor appears, because wherever the Apostles came if they found any
visible believers they are said to find brethren, Act. 28.14. And it is the
most usual term, that the Christians were called by, both in the Acts of the
Apostles, and in the Epistles; not because they were of one particular
Congregation, but because of the Church-Catholike, which are also called the
household of faith. Do good unto all (i. e. though heathens) but especially to
the household of faith. Gal. 6.10. The household is commmensurable to the
entertainment of the faith. Not the invisible members only, for they could not
be known as such, but all the visible members.

9. If the same individual systeme or body of external laws, under one command,
whereby all Churches equally should walk and be governed, be Catholic, then
the Church is Catholic. But there is the same individual systeme or body of
external laws under one command, whereby, etc. Therefore, etc.

The major is proved by evidence of reason, and experience of all bodies
politic.

The minor is undeniable. For the same individual systeme expressed in the
Gospel totidem verbis governs and guides the whole Catholic Church, It cannot
be said the same in kind only, but the same for matter, manner, end, method,
and express words: unless we can say the several copies are several species,
and then we in England have so many species of laws as there be copies printed
of our laws. Neither is it the law written in the heart, and put in the inward
parts; but the external systeme given to the Church as a body politic. Neither
is it the moral law qua moral, but that in the hand of a Mediator, with other
positive laws added thereto.

Neither is this subjection unto these external laws arbitrary by the
concurrent consent of diverse Churches out of custom, or because of the equity
and convenience of them, vi materiae, as diverse Kingdoms now use the civil
laws, or for intercourse with foreign Churches; but by virtue of the command
of the author of them. Neither have particular Churches any municipal laws
divine of their own superadded to distinguish them, as England and Scotland
have, but are wholly ruled by this Catholic systeme.

10. If there be a Catholic external communion, intercourse, and communication
between all the members, and in all the particular Churches in the world, in
worship, doctrine, and sign or seal of confirmation, nutrition, or
commemoration of the same redemption visibly wrought by the same visible
Savior; then all those members or Churches, having this external communion,
intercourse and communication, are one Catholic Church: But there is such a
communion, etc. Therefore, etc.

The consequence appears, because communion arises from membership; there is
an union presumed, before there can be a communion admitted, especially in the
Lords Sup^er, which is a seal, and if an union, then a membership, for thereby
they are made of the body: and if the communion be visible and external, then
so is the union from whence it flows, for qualis effectus talis est causa.
And though there may be an admittance of a heathen to be present at the word,
singing, prayer, yet it is not an admittance into fellowship, for then we
should have spiritual fellowship with idolaters; they may come and see what
fellowship Christians enjoy with Christ, and one with another, but they are not
admitted into that fellowship while heathens and idolaters, but after
conversion professed subjection and believing. After the 3000. were converted
by Peter, and were baptized, they continued steadfastly in the Apostles doctrine
and fellowship, and in breaking of bread and prayer, Act. 2.41, 42. And yet
were not of one particular Church, not as our brethren themselves tell us, as I
showed before, therefore as members in general. And nothing is more usual then
for members of one Congregation to join in the fellowship of the word read and
preached, in singing and prayer with members of diverse Congregations together,
as at lectures or other occasions, and frequently also at the Lords table, even
among our brethren in New England, members of far distant Congregations do
communicate occasionally. Also all the visible Churches on earth pray
publicly, and give thanks, and on occasion may fast for the welfare of the
whole Church on earth.

As for the evasion which some of our brethren have, that this communion of
strangers with them is by virtue of a particular, present, transient membership
with them; I conceive it of no force, nor warranted in the word of God. Then
should those men be members of two Churches at once, then ought they to
contribute to that Minister, then ought that Minister to take the charge of
them, then (by some of our brethrens positions) should the whole Congregation
have a hand in their admission. Also if there be any Ecclesiastical admissions
or censures or transactions, or contributions that concern that particular
Congregation, they also ought being members to have their vote and consent and
hand therein. And then by the same reason all that came to a lecture which is a
Church Fellowship in divine Ordinances of singing, prayer, preaching, and
blessing the people, must so many times turn members of that Congregation,
where such a meeting is. And then is it a dangerous thing to hear a lecture in
a Congregation where the Minister or people are corrupt, for we thereby make
our selves members of that Congregation, and so put our selves under that
Pastor and those Elders for the present, and thereby give our allowance of
them. It is not a sub^tane, occasional meeting, that can make a person a member
of a Congregation, but constancy, quoad intentionem saltem, says Ames in
medul^a, lib. 1. cap. 32. Sect. 21. And for communion of Churches, I shall
speak of it afterward. And by this that has been said, I suppose the minor is
cleared also.

11. If the censure of excommunication of a person in one Congregation cuts him
off from the Church-Catholike visible in regard of communion, which formerly he
had right unto, then is there a Church-Catholike visible* But excommunication
does so, etc. Therefore, etc.

The consequence appears, because the ejection (being a casting out of the
body) cannot extend it self beyond the body, but ejection is general, therefore
so ^s the body. The privation cannot extend it self beyond the habit: if
therefore the extent of the depriving censure be Catholic, the habitual body
is so also. There is not only a potentiality of right to communicate every
where, while a man is a member, but an habitual right, not rising from
courtesy, but from membership, not particular membership, for then none could
communicate but particular members, but from a general habitual membership, to
which the communion belongs. So far as the expulsion or disfranchisement
reach, so far the Corporation reaches, and as the particular ward or street
(where such a man dwelt) loses a particular member, so the who^e Corporation
loses a member of the whole. So is it in this spiritual Corporation of the
Church-Catholike visible. There is not only an habitual fitness and capacity
lost, but an habitual general right lost, during the censure. The man is said
to lose a member, when the hand loses a finger, therefore the finger was a
member of the whole man, as well as of the han^ in particular. So is this case
of excommunication.

12. If there be parts and members of the Church-Catholike visible there, then
there is a whole Church Catholic visible: but there are parts and members,
etc. Therefore etc.

The consequence is undeniable, for whole and parts are relata. Pars est quae
continetur a t^to, membrum ab integro. The minor is proved also, because
particular Congregations and particular Christian families and persons are
parts and members of the Church-Catholike visible. Either they are parts and
members, or they are none, and so out of the body, and without in the Apostles
sense. If no members, then no right to Ordinances, for right arises from
membership, membership from qualifications. The same relation that particular
believing persons bear to a Christian family, and which Christian families bear
to a Congregation, the same relation by proportion do particular Congregations
bear to the whole Church-Catholike or any great part thereof. But particular
persons are members of families, and particular families of Congregations, and
therefore Congregations are members of the whole body of the Church Catholic
visible. The family is consisted of the persons, the Congregation of the
families, and the Church-Catholike visible, or any great part thereof, of the
particular Congregations. A Genus cannot be said to consist of species, but to
give essence to species. Animal rationale, or humanity, does not consist of
particular men, but exist in particular men. But whether the Church-Catholike
be a genus or an integrum, or both, I shall handle in the next Chapter.

Sect. 4.
I might urge also the several metaphors whereby the Scripture sets out the
whole number of visible believers under an unity. As Rev. 12.1. by a woman
clothed with the Sun, (the righteousness of Christ) and the Moon (all
terrestrial things) under her feet: or clothed with the Sun, the purity of
doctrine, and the moon (as some interpret it) discipline under her feet: or, as
some others expound it, Idolatry, whereof Diana the Moon was chief and most
general: or by Moon some understand the legal ceremonial service which was
guided much by the Moon, under her feet, i.e. now abolished. So M. Mede. Now
this was a visible Church, because it is said to be seen, and is opposed either
to the Jewish Church that had these ceremonies formerly on her back, or to the
Jewish Christian Church, which could not for a long time cast them off; but
this Christian Church did. Surely it was not a particular Congregation that
John saw, nor is it meant of diverse particular Congregations, for then it
should have been women, not a woman, therefore it was the Church-Catholike
visible bound up in an unity.

Also Joh. 10.16. It is set out by one sheepfold. Other sheep I have which are
not of this fold, them also I must bring, and there shall be one fold and one
Shepherd. Which is by all interpreted of the union of Jew and Gentile, which
are the two integrant parts of the Church-Catholike. And though by sheep should
be meant the elect, yet they are considered as visible, because brought into a
fold in this world, and such a fold as the thief may enter possibly into, as it
is in the former verses, yea, and the wolf also, Act. 20.19. Beza notes upon
that place in John, that by sheepfold is not meant the flock it self, but
something that holds them together, and makes them one flock. Camerarius on the
place, Est Indicium Ecclesiae sanctae Catholicae in toto Orb terrarum, etc.
And Salmasius, Vt una est Ecclesia, ita unus est grex Christi, vel unum Ovile.
Portiones gregis illius, sunt greges civitatum particulare^. Hinc grex and
Ecclesia idem sunt, tam in generali, quam speciali notione. Salmas. apparat.
263.

Also it is called the body of Christ, Romans 12.5. As we have many members in
one body, and all members have not the same office: so we being many are one
body in Christ, and every one members one of another. This was not meant of the
particular Church of Rome, for the Apostle puts in himself into this body, who
had as then never come at Rome, therefore it is the Church-Catholike there
spoken of, whereof Paul was both a member, and a Minister. And this body is a
visible body, because it is Organical, and organical because the Apostle
thereupon reckons up the several offices in the Church, as teaching, exhorting,
giving, ruling, showing mercy, which some compute to be an exact distribution
of Church-Offices. So called also 1 Cor 10.17. 1 Cor. 12.12, 13. Ephesians. 4 4. Also
the house of God, as I showed before, 1 Timothy 3.15. And a great house 2 Timothy
2.20. which sets out the Church-Catholike. Now had these places been meant of
particular Congregations, then they should have been called bodies, houses,
sheep-folds. But as many members in a body hinder not the unity of the whole,
and many Towns in a Kingdom, and many houses in a city, and many rooms in a
house, or in the Ark, hinder not the unity thereof; so many particular
Congregations hinder not the unity of the Church-Catholike. Est una sola
Christi Ecclesia, quae ob idetiam dicitur Catholica Particulares Ecclesiae non
sunt impedimento quin una sit Ecclesia. Zanch. de Ecclesia.

Chap. 4.
My Dove, my undefiled is but one, she is the only one of her mother, Can. 6.9.
She is the Lilly among the thorns, Can. 2.2. which is the Church militant. She
is called the Spouse of Christ, Cant. 4.8, 9, 10. Again, Cant. 6.4. Thou art
beautiful O my love as Tirzah, comely as Jerusalem, terrible as an army with
banners. These things are spoken of the Church militant: and though some things
here mentioned be spoken in regard of the invisible company only, the better
part, yet to them as visible, and as terrible by discipline. And 2 These. 2.4.
It is said of Antichrist, that he as God sits in the temple of God By Temple
is meant the Church of God, and this a visible Church, yet no particular
Congregation, but the general Church-Catholike, or at least the greatest part
of it, for it is said, Rev. 13.3. All the world wondered after the beast. And
Rev. 17.1. She is said to sit upon many waters, which are as is expounded,
verse. 15. Peoples, and multitudes, and Nations, and tongues. And Rev. 18.3. It
is said that All Nations have drunk of the wine of her fornication, and the
Kings of the earth have committed fornication with her.

Yea, the holy Ghost chooses to join many particular Churches together by
Nouns collective, Nouns of multitude in the singular number. Remarkable is that
1 Pet. 5.2. where writing to the strangers scattered throughout Pontus,
Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia, and Bithinia, he calls them all one flock, Feed the
flock of God which is among you. And from this place M. Bayns grants that all
the Churches of the world may be called Ecumenical. Bayns Diocles. Trial. p.
12. conclus. 1. And so Act. 20. To the Elders of Ephesus. The Churches of
Galatia are compared to one lump. Gal. 5.5.

CHAP. IV. That the Church-Catholike visible is one Integral, or totum
Integrale.
NOw because I see it is much stumbled at, that I made the Church-Catholike to
be Totum integrale, and because it will let much light into the Question in
hand, I shall endeavor to prove that the Church-Catholike visible is an
integral, or totum integrale.

And first negatively, that it is not a Genus. First, Sect. 1.
a Genus is made or drawn per abstractionem Logicam (vel metaphysicam, as M.
Ellis conceives:) but an Integral is made or constituted per conjunctionem
sive appositionem physicam, vel politicam. Now the Church-Catholike visible is
not made or drawn by logical or metaphysical abstraction, but by political
conjunction, combination or apposition of the parts and members thereof. So
Ames. medul. lib. 1. cap. 33. Sect. ^8. Sicut per fidem Ecclesia habet statum
essentialem, and per combinationem, integralem, sic etiam per ministerium habet
Organicum quendam statum.

2. A Genus has no existence of its own, but so has the Church-Catholike
visible, viz. Per combinationem, sive aggregationem. No genus can be capable of
combination or aggregation, for that is an accident belonging to an integral.

3. It appears by the definition of a genus both according to the Ramists and
Aristotelians. The Ramists say, Genus est totum partibus essentiale. The genus
is essential to its parts, i. e. species. But Integrum est totum cui parts
sunt essentiales vel integrales. Now the several Churches are integrant to the
Church-Catholike visible, they make and constitute the Ecumenical by
aggregation.

And according to the Aristotelians, Genus est totum quod de pluribus specie
differentibus potest praedicari in quid. Now this cannot agree to the
Church-Catholike or Ecumenical, for the particular Churches do not differ
specie^, by any specifical forms, but only by accidental and numerical
differences. Unless you will say that Individua sunt species, which as it is
generally denied, so it is most unlikely in similar bodies of all others. And
if the single Churches be Individua, then at the most the Ecumenical can be
but a species, yea, species insima. So Ames med. c. 31. s. 18. Ecclesia haec
(viz. Ca^h.) est mystica ratione una, non generice, sed quasi species
specialissima, vel individuum, quia nullas habet species proprie dictas. And
yet I acknowledge he says, c. 32. s. 5. Ecclesia particularis respectu
communis illius naturae quae in omnibus Ecclesi^s particularibus reperitur, est
species Ecclesiae in genere, sed respectu Ecclesiae Catholicae quae habet
rationem integri, est membrum ex aggregatione variorum membr^rum singularium
compositum, atque adeo respectu ipsorum est etiam integrum.

A similar totum differs much from an universal, similarity of parts does not
at all hinder integrality, but universality is of another nature, being an
abstract second notion. Society or polity is a Genus, and is divided or rather
distinguished into civil and Ecclesiastical: now indeed civil polity has
distinct species, viz. monarchical, aristocratical, democratical, and mixed:
but Ecclesiastical polity has none of Gods appointment. Indeed there is Papal,
Prelatical, and Presbyterial, but the former are humane, the last (as I
conceive) divine. I confess also this last is in dispute whether it be
combined or independent, but this distinction our ignorance has brought forth,
there is but one by Gods institution. It is true also, that some members are
invisible, and some visible only, but the invisible have their external
communion in Ordinances qua visible; as they are under Ecclesiastical polity
they are all considered as visible: but this distinction makes not two species
of Churches or polities, for as invisible members they have no officers, but as
visible.

I acknowledge there may by the mind of man, a community of nature be
abstracted from any similar bodies, and so consequently from the similarity of
Congregations, but whether that be sufficient to make a genus, where there are
no distinct specifical differences under it, I shall leave to the Logicians to
dispute it out. And to make this totum genericum existens, is beyond my
apprehension, seeing genus being a second notion existeth not, but in
intellectu nostro: habet fundamentum in rebus, non existentiam. For as it does
exist it is an integral, and loses its abstract nature, wherein the
universality does consist. That which existeth in the Individual is not totum,
but pars essentialis individui. As it is abstracted by the mind, and relates
to the Genus, it is but symbolum causae materialis, as it is existing in the
Individual, it is ipsa causa materialis Individui. And therefore though it be
said that tota natura Generis conservatur in una specie, and by this rule in
uno individuo, it must be fundamentaliter only, non formaliter, for there is no
such universality formally in specie, and multo minus in Individuo. As the
nature of a flock is not reserved in one sheep, or a corporation in one man, to
use M. Hookers own words. Sur. cap. 15. page 261. One Church also may be more
pure then another, and larger then another, but these accidents vary not the
species.

But 2. I shall prove the Ecumenical Church is an Integral. Sect. 2.
First, because it has an existence of its own, which no Genus has. And this
existence appears because it has an external form and state which no Genus can
have. This Ames confesses, as I showed before, yea, the Church Catholic
visible had an existence before it was divided into particular societies, in
the beginning of it, in the Apostles days, as I showed before, and that not as
Entitive only, but under the general Officers, with whom they did communicate,
in doctrine, fellowship, breaking of bread and prayer.

2. Because the several and singular Churches do constitute and make up the
Ecumenical, as members of it, now membrum and integrum sunt relata. A genus
has no members. The particular Churches are integrant to the whole, and the
whole results out of them. Hence Salmasius has this passage, Vniversum
Ecclesiae corpus in majora membra divisum. Apparat. 285. Every particular
Congragation contains part of the matter and part of the form of the whole, I
mean with Ames in respect of the external state of it. But a Genus has no
external state. Quod habet parts extra parts est Tetum integrale, sed
Ecclesia universalis visibilis habet parts extra parts; Ergo. The mayor is
the very definition of totum integrale. The minor is clear, for the particular
Churches are different one from another and sitis and ordine, and singulae sua
praedi^ae sunt quantitate, and non se invicem permeant. They are not only
distinct in consideration, but in existence, and exist one besides another as
Towns in a Kingdom.

3. Nay, it appears further to be an integral, because it is made up not only
of the particular Congregations, but of individual Christians, not only such as
are particular members of particular Congregations, but such as are not members
of any particular Congregation, as I suppose all Christians are not fixed
members, nor can be, as I could give diverse instances, as in regard of
habitation, perigrination, banishment, want of opportunity, scrupulosity. If
such be not members of the Church-Catholike because not fixed, then the
Apostles themselves and Evangelists were none, for they were not fixed: but we
find that they were not only members, but officers, and so related to the body
as organical. A Corporation or City consists not only of streets, wards, and
companies, but of persons within their liberties though dwelling alone. Now if
the Church-Catholike be a genus, it cannot be abstracted from them both, if it
be abstracted from particular Congregations, and so be a genus of societies and
polities, then it does not contain such as are not in any societies or
polities: if it be abstracted from them as particular unfixed members, then it
is no genus of particular Churches, for they are none, nor of any. But as the
Church is an integrum it may be made up of both, and result out of both.

4. That which has inherent accidents and adjuncts existing in it, as its own,
that is an integral, for a genus is not capable of them: But the
Church-Catholike visible has accidents inhaering, adhaering, and betiding unto
it and existing in it. Therefore it is an integral.

The major is undeniable. The minor appears by instance. Beauty, strength,
offensive, defensive, purity, terriblenesse with banners ( viz. of discipline)
conspicuity, order, visibility, etc. are accidents that may and sometimes have
been, and some of them are still existing in the whole Church, as belonging to
the whole: therefore it is an integral.

Again, That which is capable of being majus and minus, i. e. is sometimes
greater and sometimes less in extent, that is an integral, but so is the
Church-Catholike or Ecumenical. The consequence is clear, because a Genus can
neither be greater or less then it ever was. Animal was as great a Genus when
there were but two men, and a few beasts in the world, as it is now there are
many millions: for the greatness of the genus is not measured by continuous or
discreet quantity; but the nearer Ens it is, and the further from Individuals,
the greater the Genus is, i. e. the more comprehensive; and the further remote
from Ens, and the nearer the Individuals, the less the Genus is, i. e. the
less comprehensive. But the Ecumenical Church is measured by quantity
continuous in regard of place wherein it is, and discrete in regard of number
of the Churches and members thereof: sometimes the bounds thereof are enlarged,
and sometimes straightened. There is an augmentation by addition of members, a
diminution by substraction, and the whole resulteth out of the aggregation of
the parts, not by local contiguity always, but by political, Ecclesiastical,
habitual consociation and union in the same external profession, subjection,
and fraternity.

Again, that totum which is mutable and fluxile, is an integral, for a Genus is
immutable, constant, permanent, aeternae veritatis, But the Church Ecumenical
is very mutable and fluxile, sometime flourishing, sometime under persecution:
sometimes conspicuous, sometimes it may be laten^: sometimes more pure,
sometimes more corrupt: sometimes it has more beauty and strength, and
sometimes less: and though this be in the parts and members, the particular
Churches, yet it may be in the whole, and the beauty and strength of the parts
of a natural or civil body is the beauty and strength of the whole man, City,
Kingdom: every member has his own beauty and strength, and out of them all
resulteth the beauty and strength of the whole.

Again, That totum which is measured by time and place, is an integral: for
Genus which is a notion is capable of neither of them; but so is the Church
Ecumenical: Hence we divide the Church into primitive and successive. From the
time of John the Baptist the Kingdom of Heaven suffers violence, Mat. 11.12.
Sometime the Church has been planted in the Eastern parts of the world, and
now is more Westerly, and is in likelihood still going more Westward. We use to
limit the Church within the pale thereof, though potentially, in regard of
permission, and (happily) promise, it may be actually over the whole earth.
Amplitudo and vetustas sunt accidentia Ecclesiae visibilis. See Cameron de
conspic. Ecclesiae.

5. That Totum whereinto there is admission, Sect. 3.
wherein there is nutrition and edification, and out of which there is
ejection, that is an integral: But there is admission into the Church-Catholike
visible by Baptism, nutrition and edification by the other external Ordinances,
and ejection out of it by excommunication: Therefore it is an Integral. For a
Genus is capable of none of these. Indeed if you consider this society in
reference to other societies or religions, it is a distinct kind, in regard of
the Author, laws, qualifications of members; but in reference unto its members
it is an integral: If this be all that is meant by totum genericum existens, it
may pass without any damage to this question. So the several companies in
London are distinct from other companies, yet in reference to their own members
they are integrals, and in reference to the whole they are parts.

6. That society which has not only a head or governor in heaven, of the same
nature as man: but Officers on earth, which are indefinitely and habitually
Officers to the whole, that is an integral: but so has the Ecumenical Church,
therefore it is an integral. A Genus is not capable of Officers: But the
Church-Catholike had once (by M. Ellis's own confession) actual, universal
Officers, and was then one governed body: and still the Officers are
indefinitely and habitually Officers to the whole, as shall be proved in Chap.
7. And the visibility of the head in Chap. 5. Sect 6.

7. That which has actions and operations of its own, that is an integral, for
a Genus is not capable thereof, but the Church-Catholike or Ecumenical has or
may have actions, operations and effects of its own. Therefore, etc.

The minor, upon which all the weight of this argument lies, is proved thus.
The Church-Catholike visible may by their delegates meet in a general Council,
about the affairs that concern the whole, and though their power therein were
but only consultative and suasive (as M. Ellis grants) yet it is an act of the
whole, as the acts of a Kingdom represented in Parliament are said to be
national acts; but I conceive they may do more, even make decrees, as well as
the Synod, Act. 15. They may confute and suppress general heresies and
disorders. Yea, and the whole Church-Catholike may yield consent, submission
and obedience thereunto, as their acts, finding them agreeable to the word of
God. Sect. 4.
There may be a general humiliation of the whole Church-Catholike visible, or a
general thanksgiving, as occasion may be offered. There may be a general
contestation with the same heretics, and renouncing of their errors, a
general suffering under, and conflict with, and conquest over the same
adversaries, as suppose Antichrist, and Triumphing over them. See Rev. 19. the
7. first verses, All Gods servants both small and great are called to it. I
heard as it were the voice of a great multitude, and as the voice of many
waters, and as the voice of mighty thundrings, saying, Allelujah. This was not
the act of a particular Congregation, but of the Church Catholic, and yet all
these are verse. 8. bound up in an unity, and they are called the Lambs wife,
and unto her was granted, etc. The Church-Catholike visible also conquereth and
subdueth spiritually the rest of the world, and brings them into external
subjection to Christ, and leaveneth them with the doctrine of Christ, and
uniteth them to themselves in this spiritual society, so that they become (...)
one body. And though this be done by particular members and Churches, yet that
hinders it not from being the act of the whole, as when an army of soldiers of
one Kingdom conquer neighbor Kingdoms, and add them to their own (as the
Romans did all the world) it is accounted the action of the whole nation, or a
national act: so is this case though the conquest differ in kind. And this may
serve for an answer to M. Hookers query, Surv. c. 16. p. 256. 259. Whether the
Church-Catholike can be considered as distinct from the particular Churches
(not by separation of the whole from the parts, but) in apprehension, by
presenting some distinct Officer, act, or operation, which do not pertain to
the particular Churches. For as there is a head and King of the whole, as
visible, and one systeme of laws, and habitual, indefinite Officers of the
whole, so you see there are acts and operations of the whole, both by their
delegates, and by themselves, which though they be performed by particular
persons belonging (happily) to particular Churches (as the soldiers making up an
army belong to several Towns) yet do not perform them as particular members of
the particular Churches, but of the whole, neither do they convert into the
particular Churches, but into the whole: as such soldiers fight not as members
of such a Town, but of such a Kingdom, and conquer not to enlarge their several
Towns, but the Kingdom in general. And for constant actual Officers, and
distinct services, such as the national Church of the Jews had, because they
could meet together three times every year, and oftener upon occasion, they
cannot be expected in the Ecumenical body, it being too large for such
constant meetings.

If the Church-Catholike can bring forth sons, then it can perform operations:
But it can bring forth sons. This M. Ellis himself confesses by consequence,
for in the close of his Epistle Dedicatory before his vindiciae Catholicae, he
subscribes himself a son of the Church. What other Church can he mean but the
Catholic? If he means the particular Church whereof he is Pastor, he is not
a son but a father, and governor of that: and then he should more properly
have said, Son of a Church, not Son of the Church, for there be more
Churches then this, unless he meant the by way of eminency. He cannot mean of
the Church of England, for he denies all National Churches, therefore it must
be of the Church-Catholike, and yet he denies that there is any such thing
visible, and that which he does acknowledge he makes a Genus; which is a second
notion without existence, and then, as himself confesses, Non existentis nulla
sunt operationes. The species or Individuals cannot be sons of the Genus. And
therefore he should more safely have subscribed himself a member or Minister of
the Church; and yet that must have proved the Church-Catholike: or of a Church,
and then he might have meant his own.

8. It will appear by the several appellations which are given to the
Church-Catholike in Scripture. For in Scripture it is called a Body, yea, (...)
one and the same body, which has one head or governor, which has constant
influence into that body: even into those that are only visible members in
common works, and into the invisible members in saving works, and governs both
by external laws. Now a Genus, though it has subordinate species, yet is no
body, nor has any head or governor, nor any influence given unto it, neither
is it governed by any external laws, for then it must exist. Yea, the
Church-Catholike visible is called a body fitly joined together and compacted,
Sect. 3.
by that which every joint supplyeth. Ephesians. 4.16. which appears to be the
external, political Kingdom of Christ, as M. Hooker calls it, and applies this
Chapter, because here are the Officers reckoned up, yea, the extraordinary
general Officers. Vbi omnes parts existunt simul compactae, ibi totum
integrale existit; Sed omnes parts Ecclesiae Catholicae visibilis existunt
simul compactae. Ergo totum integrale totius Ecclesiae Catholicae visibilis
existit. This M. Hooker says is true of a Totum genericum existens, but not
that all particular Congregations do exist aggregated together, as members of
the Catholic, p. 268. But how a Genus can be a body, and the particular
species fitly joined together and compacted, by that which every joint
supplyeth, I cannot understand. The relation between a Genus and species cannot
be compared to joints compacting and joining a body together, but most properly
relates to the union of an integrum.

Also it is called a Kingdom, as I showed before. The Kingdom of his dear
son, Col. 1.13. The Gospel is called the Gospel of the Kingdom, Mat. 4.23.
And the word of the Kingdom, Mat. 13.19. And such as are only visible members
are called the children of the Kingdom, Mat. 8.12. And this Kingdom has a King
and Laws and Officers in it; now a Kingdom or society is no Genus, but an
Integral. It is also called a Tabernacle, Revel. 21.3. which was a thing
coupled together with tenons, sockets, loops, and taches, and so an integral,
no Genus, nor could signify any. It is called also an house or building, 1 Timothy 3.15. The Church which is the house of God. 1 Cor. 3.9. Ye are Gods
building, Ephesians. 2.21. In whom all the building fitly framed together, etc. which
is the Catholic Church visible consisting of Jews and Gentiles, built on the
visible foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, Jesus Christ being the chief
cornerstone. And a household, Gal. 6.10.

Also it is called a Temple in the forecited Ephesians. 2.21. 1 Cor. 3.17. 2 Cor.
6.16. Now the Temple was an Integral. Also it is called a city, and the members
thereof Jews and Gentiles are called fellow-citizens. Ephesians. 2.29. Also an army
terrible with banners, Cant. 6.10. Also it is called a sheepfold, a
wheat-field, a barn-floor, a dragge-net. a loaf of bread made up of diverse
grains, 1 Cor. 10.17. Now all these, and many more appellations have no analogy
to a Genus, but to an Integrum. Therefore the Church-Catholike visible is an
Integrum.

9. It appears to be an Integral from the words which the Scripture uses to
express the Church and union of the members of the Church-Catholike together.
As Act. 2.41. There were added about 3000. souls (...). They were put unto
them, as an increase: now a Genus is not capable of addition by numbers, but an
Integral only. Also Ephesians. 4.12. The Officers (general as well as particular) are
given to the whole external, political body of Christ (to use M. Hookers own
words) for the perfecting of the Saints, (...), ad coagmentationem sanctorum.
It signifies properly to make a thing perfect by filling of it up, omnibus
numeru absolutum reddere, or as some render it, to set in joint again. All the
significations agree only to an Integral. And for the edifying of the body of
Christ, (...). i. e. the building up of the body, relating to the whole Church.
This is proper only to an Integral. A word also much like this, and more
significant for the purpose in hand, we have Ephesians. 2.22. In whom also ye are
builded together for an habitation of God, etc. (...), which signifies a
knitting together in a building. Also verse. 21. In whom all the building fitly
framed together grows unto an holy Temple. Here are three words note
Integrality. First, the whole building (...), 2. fitly framed. (...): 3.
grows, (...). So Ephesians. 4.16. From whom the whole body fitly joined together
and compacted by that which every joint supplyeth, according to the effectual
working in the measure of every part, makes increase of the body, unto the
edfying of it self in love, Here are diverse words which properly notify an
Integral: 1. (...), the whole body, 2. (...) fitly joined, congruente
proportione constructum vel connexum. 3. (...), compactum, compacted. 4. by
that which every joint suupplyeth, (...) per omnem commissuram suppeditationis,
vel juncturum subministrationis. 5. (...) in mensura uninscujusque membri. 6.
(...), augmentum corporis facit. 7. (...), in aedificationem sui. The like we
find, Col. 2.19. From whom all the body by joints and hands having
nourishment, ministered and knit together increases with the increase of God.
The words are most of them the same with the former in the Original. There is
1. a whole body, 2. joints, 3. bands, (...); and nourishment ministered (...).
4. knit together. 5. increases with increase, (...) And though much spoken in
these places seem to be applicable to the invisible company, yet to them as
visible, receiving edification from their Officers, and having visible
communion one with another: and the Apostle speaks indefinitely of the Church
under their Officers, without making any difference of kinds of believers.
Also Act. 17.34. certain men clave unto him (...) were glued unto him, i e.
Paul. And in the Old Testament, Isa. 14 1. The strangers shall be joined with
them (Israel) and they shall cleave unto the house of Jacob. (...) and
copulabit se (...) and adhaerebunt. All which and many more words in Scripture
about the Church, show it to be an integral.

10. If the invisible Church be one body of Christ (as in the primary sense
they are) then by the same reason the visible also (as visible) are one body,
for the only difference between them (as to this purpose) is in regard of the
manner of communion; the one invisibly and inwardly, the other visibly in
outward Ordinances. The invisible are called Christ's body in allusion to a
natural body more properly; the visible in allusion to a political body. The
invisible Church are only in reference to Christ their head and
fellow-invisible members, but have no Officers under Christ ( qua invisible:)
the visible are one in reference to Christ their professed King, and his
written laws, and fellow-visible members, and indefinite Officers under Christ.
The invisible body might with better reason be called a Genus, because their
unity is only in the head, and in one kind of nature, and in spiritual
relation to invisible brethren; and therefore if they be called one body: then
much more the visible Church, whole union is in King, laws, the same
qualifications, and external relation to visible brethren, under indefinite
Officers.

M. Hooker takes much pains in Surv. c. 15. to prove that the Church-Catholike
visible cannot be an Integral. To which I shall answer under the several heads
as they come in the Thesis.

His main Argument is because that an Integrum resulting out of the members, is
Symbolum effecti, and so is in consideration after the members whereof it is
constituted, and out of which it does result, and so that crosses the second
part or predicate of the Question. This I shall refer to the second part of the
Question.

Secondly, That it will then require one visible head over it. This I shall
refer to that Objection in Chap. 5. Sect. 6.

Sect. 4.
Thirdly, That which he objects against the visibility of the Church-Catholike I
shall refer to the next Chapter. Cha. 5.

An Objection may be raised here, That the Church-Catholike may by
persecutions, wars, etc. be brought into a narrow room, and happily to one
Congregation.

Answ. It is possible, yet all the essence and privileges of the
Church-Catholike visible are contracted and reserved therein, and from them
conveyed and derived ministerially to those whom they shall convert, and so
shall dilate it self again.

To this M. Ellis replyeth first, with little better then a scoff. We see
(says he) what straights this large conceit of the universal visible Church
does drive unto. Vind. page 58. But I let that pass. He answers secondly, that
this answer implies that the Church-Catholike is a species, and the particular
Churches the severals of it: this confounds universal and particular.

But how does this imply it? Suppose a city should by pestilence or fire, etc.
be brought to the tenth of the buildings and men that sometime it had; yet
retaining the same Charter and Officers, and privileges, it is still the same
city, though not so great as before: and must this imply that the city as a
genus or universal, and the particular streets the species or particulars under
it? no, but the city was the integral, and they the parts: it is now mutilated
and maimed, but it may be reedifyed, and grow populous again: and so may the
Church though much wasted. Nay it implies that it is not a genus, for that
cannot be contracted nor dilated, for it is a notion not existing, as M. Ellis
himself confesses. Vind. page 58.

M. Hooker also Surv. ^60, 261. has an Objection much to the same purpose, and
to that the same answer shall serve.

But he further objects, That this contracted Church extends not it self to all
persons and places, as was said of the Church-Catholike before.

Answ. Actually the Church-Catholike did never so extend it self when at
largest, but potentially in regard there is liberty for all to accept it and
enjoy those privileges, and so there is still left.

O but this Congregation may fail, the Catholic cannot.

Answ. The whole may in it self, but is kept by Gods power and promise, at
least some remnants of it. For it cannot wholly fail.

O but an Integrum cannot be reserved in a member of it.

Answ. It cannot be so large an Integrum, nor every way the same, yet the whole
being similar, though great part be taken away, yet the remainer is an integral
to the parts that are left, though but a member to what was formerly.

I shall here also consider a little that notion whereby he would seem to untie
the knot of this difficulty, p. 259. and 260.

That only (says he) which put fair colors upon this false conceit, is the
misapprehension of some particular examples, viz. when they say, that any
portion of water divided, every part of it is water, and has the name and
nature of it. The answer is, that the predication or affirmation of it is not
by virtue of that division of a portion of water that is made, as Integri in
membra: but because the nature is preserved in the least portion of it, and
thence this predication, this water is water, is made good, because a Genus and
Species are there preserved and attended, going along with the division of
Integri in membra. For when we say Haec aqua est aqua, the Arguments are Genus
and Species.

Answ. That it is an essential predication it cannot be denied, but this does
not necessarily make them genus and species, for there is an essential
predication of species infima on all the Individuals, as well as of the genus
on the species, but there is a great difference between the species and
Individuals; for the species exist not, and therefore cannot be brought into an
integral, but the individuals may: as we see many great integrals of water in
the sea and rivers, etc. which contain many individuals in one integral, but
not many species: as may be showed both in natural and political bodies.

It is true, the predication is not by virtue of that division of Integri in
membra, but because the form of water, to which the properties of water do
belong, is retained in the particular parts or members. And so every visible
believer is called a Christian, and a member of Christ's visible Kingdom,
because the form ( viz. visible believing) common to all Christians and all
members, is found in him: and every particular Church is called a Church,
because the form common to all Churches is found in it: to which forms all the
privileges and properties and promises of a Christian or of a Church, as
members of the whole body, do belong.

Now hence arises another Question more likely to decide the controversy,
viz. whence this right in this common nature does arise? whether from its self
or by virtue of a Covenant? If by virtue of a Covenant, then whether by a
Covenant between man and man, or between God and man? If by virtue of a
Covenant between man and man, such as is the Covenant of particular
Congregations (which our brethren make the form thereof) which the particular
members enter into: then none that want particular membership, or are not
invested thereinto by that particular Covenant, can have any right to any
privileges or promises of the Church. Then the Apostles, Evangelists, etc.
either wanted right to the Ordinances, privileges and promises, or had their
right by virtue of some particular membership of, and covenant with the Church
of Jerusalem, or some other particular Churches; but we read of no such thing.

Then how can a man converted from heathenism have right to Baptism, which is a
privilege of the Church, and an Ordinance of God, seeing he is no member of,
nor in Covenant with any Congregation, neither can be until baptized, as I
conceive, See Qu. 2. S. 4.

If this right come by the general visible covenant between God and all visible
believers, and all these visible believers by this general visible Covenant are
made an external body and kingdom of Christ, then all these privileges, and
promises belonging to visible believers are given first to the whole body, and
secondarily to the members thereof. The being a member for a particular
Congregation gives only opportunity of enjoying the privileges of the
external body, but not the actual immediate right thereunto, for that they had
before any such admittance or combination by virtue of their being visible
believers,, and so being members of the body, in the general external Covenant.
No man will say, that this particular drop of water is cold and moist, because
it is a part or member of this particular pond or river, but because it is a
part of the element of water, unto which primarily those properties do belong,
and yet the element of water is not united into one body, by any Covenant, as
the whole Church is.

But if this be true that haec aqua est aqua, be genus and species, then it
follows that there are so many species of water as there be drops in the
whole element of water, and so by consequence a hundred thousand species of
water in every pail-full: and as many species of wine as there are drops of
wine, and so many species of milk as there are drops of milk, for it may be
said of every drop of water, wine, or milk, they are water, wine, or milk.

Can the variation only of situation, or accidents vary the species? This man
is a man, there is genus and species. 2. This man is an English man, there
should be another subalternal species. 3. This English is a Suffolk man, there
should be another inferior species. 4. This Suffolk man is of such a
particular hundred, there should be another inferior species. 5. This man is
of such a Town in that hundred, as suppose Ipswich, there is another inferior
species. 6. This Ipswich man is of such a Parish, there is another species. 7.
This man of such a Parish is of such a street in the Parish, there is another
inferior species. 8. This man is of such a Family in such a street, there in
another inferior species. The like descention may be made of particular
Churches. By this reason man will prove a very large Genus, that has so many
subalternal species under him, and many more may be made by the same reason.
Yea, the same man will vary his species as often as he varieth his place. I
conceive this proposition Haec aqua est aqua, will at best be but species
infima and individuum: and the like of hic homo est homo: but the predication
of this man by the several particular divisions and subdivisions of the Kingdom
will prove denominatio adjunctae personae a subjectis: and this division of a
Kingdom into more particular parts, will rather prove a division of integri in
membra then generis in species,

But suppose this should be granted (which Logicians will not) yet it must also
be granted, that as there may be such second notions of this man, or this
Church, raised by logical abstraction, so there must needs be an integrality
resulting out of physical contiguity, or political conjunction and aggregation
of places, persons and Churches.

But let it be supposed that by logical abstraction we may draw a notion of a
genus from the similarity of all Churches, or community of nature in all
Churches, though the Churches differ not from each other by any essential,
different, specifical forms, but only accidentally, as individuals: yet also it
must be granted that by the unity of the Covenant and Charter wherein they are
all bound up in an unity, and by political combination which necessarily
follows thereupon, we may raise an integrality, for they are all members of
the Church-militant, of Christ's external Kingdom on earth, and so they become
really and necessarily members of a political integrum. And on this Integral
were the privileges of the Church bestowed primarily, and on particular
visible Churches but secondarily, as members of the whole body. Let it be
granted that these privileges are bestowed by God upon such a sort of men, so
and so qualified ( viz. visible believers) and from their similarity of
disposition, may be drawn a community of nature or disposition, yet the
privileges of the Church do not accrue unto them, because so and so qualified,
but by virtue of that one external, individual Covenant of God, made unto such
qualified persons, by which external Covenant they are made externally one
habitual, external, visible body.

And if the same company of men so qualified can make a Genus by abstraction
(though there be no specifical distinct subalternal forms) and yet be an
Integral because of the external visible Covenant under one head, into which
they are all entered, which is the fountain of all their privileges, I shall
yield the Church Catholic visible to be a Genus, as well as an Integrum: and
call it with Ames, Vniversaliter Integrale. But if such an use can be made of
that logical tenet, that Individuals are species, (which yet most Logicians do
deny) that those individuals cannot be political members of one greater body, I
fear it will prove more prejudicial to policy, then beneficial to Logic.

Again, that which M. Hooker makes peculiar to an Integral, from that which we
call totum universale is, that what belongs to this, does not belong to all its
members, Sur. c. 15. p. 256. Is true only of Integrum dissimil^re, for it is
not true of Integrum similare, for as a whole pint of water does moisten and
cool, so does every drop in its measure and proportion. And so it is peculiar
only to a dissimilar Integral.

I shall note also two things in that Chapter wherein M. Sect. 5.
Hooker mistaketh my meaning. First, in the seventh proposition which he
collects out of my Thesis set down, p^ 52, Every particular Church partaketh of
part of the matter, and part of the form of the whole. Which p. 261. he makes
use of again^ and renders it thus, Ecclesia Catholica gives part of the matter
and part of the form to all particular Churches. But my meaning was, it does
consist of part of the matter, and part of the form of the whole: as a room in
an house consists of, and so (in that sense) may be said to partake of part
of the matter, and part of the form of the whole, not as a species, but as a
member of the house.

A second mistake of my meaning is, that he conceives I accounted the Jewish
Church the Catholic Church, because I defined the Church-Catholike to be the
Whole company of believers in the whole world. p. 263. And thereupon undertakes
to prove that the Church was in populo Israelitio^, and not in populo
Catholico. But this never came into my thoughts; but I acknowledge the Jews to
be a national Church. But my description of the Church-Catholike was of the
Church as it is now, since the partition wall is broken down, for then it
became Catholic. I conceive there were believers of the sons of Keturah,
that did not partake of all the privileges of the Jewish Church, except they
became proselytes. It is the Evangel^cal Catholic Church which my Question is
about; into which the Jews themselves, being converted, were admitted by a new
initial seal, viz. Baptism, and did not stand in it by their former national
membership, but received a Catholic membership by baptism.

And hereupon he undertakes to make out my method of conveyance of the right of
Church Priviledges to cross Gods method. He sets down my method thus. First,
when a man is converted to the profession of the Gospel, and so becomes a
visible believer, he is then a member of the Church-Catholike. 2. He has by
this profession and membership with the Church-Catholike right unto all
Church Priviledges, 3. He then becomes a member of a particular Church, but
has no right to Church Priviledges because of that, but because of his former
membership with the Church-Catholike.

I shall own this method rightly understood, though they were not my words, but
only collected out of them. I conceive that a man of any Nation converted to be
a visible believer, is a member of the Church-Catholike entitive, being within
the general external Covenant: and hereby has right to all Church Priviledges,
that belong to the whole Church, and that his particular membership which he
comes to next, does not afford him his right but opportunity only.

But when M. Hooker comes to show how this crosses Gods method, he only
shows that it crosses the method that God used in the national Church of the
Jews, which being in populo Israelitico must needs differ from the method in
populo Catholico. A person being a visible believer must join himself to the
Jewish Church before he can partake of their privileges, because the
privileges by Gods Covenant were so given, but now the Covenant is Catholic,
it is sufficient to be in the general Covenant to make a man have right to the
privileges of the Covenant; opporunity indeed comes by joining himself with
some particular Congregations, where the Ordinances are administered, or some
particular privileges, but not the general.

For my part therefore I conceive and conclude, that the Church-Catholike
visible is Totumintegrale, and the particular Churches are parts similares, or
members thereof and parcels thereof. As the Jewish Synagogues were of the
Jewish Church, though with some more privilege for both Sacaaments. And
therefore Jam. 2.2. the Apostle calls a Christian Assembly a Synagogue, in
the Greek. If there come into your Synagogue a man with a gold ring. And Heb.
10.23. The Apostle calls their assembling in Christian Congregations (...), a
coming together into a Synagogue. So, Tylenus in Syntag. de Eccl. dis. 1 These.
3. Quamvis Ecclesiae nomen usitatius sit pro Christiano caetu, quam Synagogae;
tamen ne hanc quid^m appellationem respuit Scriptura. Cum enim utriusque
Testamenti Ecclesia, una eademque sit, secundum essentiam; uno eodemque nomine
utrumque populum indigitare nihil vetat. Neither am I averse from the opinion
of such who make the several Synagogues of the Jews several depending Churches;
for they had there the word read and preached, and prayer, and there they kept
days of humiliation, and there they had their Officers of the Synagogue, and
the dispensation of discipline, even of excommunication, Joh. 9.22. Only the
censures were with liberty of appeals, in case of male administration. And they
are called by the Psalmist, the houses of God, Psalm. 83.12. And the Apostles
separated not from them any where, until they persecuted them.

Totum essentiale sive genericum does not comprise the form of the species in
it self, but gives the matter or common nature to the species, but the
Church-Catholike is made up of the matter and form of the particular Churches
conjoined, as a whole house of the particular rooms in it: and the particular
Churches have in them, and consist of part of the matter and part of the form
of the whole qu^ad statum exteruum. And these parts are limited and
distinguished from others by prudential limits for convenience of meeting and
maintenance, and transacting of business: and every Christian is or ought to
be a member of the Church in whose limits he dwells, being already in the
general Covenant by baptism. I do not hold (as M. Hooker conceives from my
words) that mere cohabitation divolveth a Church Membership upon a man, for
then a Heathen, Turk or Jew, should be a Church member, if cohabiting with a
Church: but I expressed the condition of being baptized, and so in the general
Covenant, and then he ought to associate with the Church where God lays out
his habitation, and they ought not to refuse him, except there be sufficient
cause of censure. For of any Christians dwelling in any city or Town, where
there was a Church, and he not to be a member of that Church, or to be a member
of another Church in another Town or City, and reside in his own but per
accidens (as some distinguish) has neither example nor warrant in the
Scripture. And must imply either that he holds them not to be a Church and so
not of the Kingdom of Christ, or else such a corrupt part that he dares not
join himself with them. And as a man that comes to dwell in a Town ought not to
refuse to be a member of that town, but shall be ruled by the Officers thereof
in civil affairs, and if he like not, he may, yea must remove from them, if he
will not submit himself; and if he continue with them, he will be liable to
punishment or restraint, by those civil Officers, if there be just cause: so I
conceive If any professed subject of Christ's Kingdom shall sit down, and
cohabit with a Church within the civil limits allotted for such a Congregation,
he not only ought to associate with them, but the Officers of that Church ought
to take the inspection of him, and if he be dangerously hererical or profane,
and thereby dangerous and offensive, they ought to take care of his cure, and
the preservation of the rest of their members, by censuring of him, whether he
will or no, in regard of his habitual general membership, and their habitual
indefinite office. And though civil prudential limits, wherein a Congregation
dwells, give no formality to the Church being heterogeneal, yet as the limits of
the particular seas, and their names, are from the shoars and lands they are
bounded by, though heterogeneal; so may particular Churches well be bounded and
denominated by their civil limits. We find frequently in Scripture, the Church
which was at Jerusalem, Antioch, Corinth, Ephesus, and Cenchrea. And so it is
in New-Englaad, the several Churches are limited and named by the precincts,
and names of the civil divisions of Towns. The Christians of Boston associated
together make the Church of Boston: if there be any not associated, yet it is
their duty to join, and they ought to be received, except as I said before.

CHAP. V. That the Church-Catholike is visible.
I now proceed to prove the Church-Catholike to be visible, Sect. 1.
which is the thing so much denied by many Divines. There is indeed an
invisible Church of Christ, and that Catholic, but if you take Catholic for
Orthodoxal, and also for universal, and that in the largest sense of all,
comprehending all places and all times, both past, present, and to come, some
militant, some triumphant, for whose sakes principally Christ died, and the
Ordinances were given, and the visible Church was instituted. Which invisible
company are only known to God, and are given by the Father to Christ to redeem
and save. And these persons though they be visible in their generations, and
enjoy visible communion in the visible Church, whereof they are ordinarily
visible members, yet besides that they have invisible grace, and invisible
communion with Christ their head, by faith on their parts and the Spirit on his
part, and only these shall be saved: yet that is not the Church that is meant
in this question, but the external Church of Christ consisting of true
believers and hypocrites; in which sense the Scripture often takes the word
Church, I say, the external, political body and kingdom of Christ, as M. Hooker
calls it.

The same Church which Valle Messalinus, or Salmasius, Apollonius, Spanhemius,
and Cameron de regimine Ecclesiae, and Polanus de Ecclesia visibili universili,
and M. Rutherford, M. Richard Hooker, and M. Parker, and diverse others, mean ^n
their tractates of this nature, wherein hypocrites as well as true believers
are partakers of external Ordinances of worship and discipline. And of this
Church it in that Cameron says, Non negamus simpliciter Ecclesiam esse
visibis^m, quaestio est quomodo sit visibilis, quatenus, quando, and quibus.
Came. de conspic, Ec. p. 248. And he adds that this visibility rather shows,
Quid sit Ecclesia, quam quae sit.

Now visible is that which may be seen, Visibile est quod videri potest, i. e.
that which has a capablenesse in it self to be seen: herein it differs from
visum, for that is that which is actually seen. Now as Cameron and others of
this subject do distinguish, things may be said to be visible either per se and
primario, and so only light and color are visible, or else per accidens, and
so figure, magnitude, motion, and all other things, which we say are visible
are seen: a man is not seen per se, but per accidens. The second kind of
visibility is meant in this question, viz. per accidens and per effecta, as all
other societies are visible.

Secondly, a thing may be said to he visible, either distinct or confute. The
Church-Catholike is visible in the second sense, which Cameron also grants,
p. 246. And aliquatenus, aliquando, and aliquo modo, and aliquibus. p. 247.

Thirdly, a thing may be said to be visible either uno intuitu, and simul; or
secundum parts, at several aspects. The first way only one side of a thing can
be seen, viz. one plain, and small superficies. The same man cannot be seen at
the same view in all his external parts, nor yet the Sun which is most visible.
The Church-Catholike cannot be seen uno intuitu, but secundum parts, sive
membra.

Fourthly, some things are visible only by the eye, and judged of by the common
sense; but some other things require an act of the understanding to put those
visible parts together, to apprehend the unity thereof. The unity of a man or a
tree the very beast can discern, but the unity of a society or Kingdom, though
it be visible, they cannot discern, because they want understanding to put the
parts together.

And in this last sense the Church-Catholike is said to be visible, as a
Kingdom or Empire is: the eye and common sense alone cannot discern the unity
of it, but there is requisite an act of the understanding to put the visible
parts together in apprehension. No man will deny an Empire to be visible,
because he cannot see the union of it with his eyes.

Again, I did not take visible in the strictest sense, visibile est quod radiat
per medium, ut luminosum, and coloratum, but for that which is perceptible by
any of the senses, yea, to the perceiving of which there is required an act of
the understanding also, to conceive of it, and put the parts together, yet not
by logical abstraction, but mental apposition and conjunction, as we must do to
perceive the unity of a Kingdom. The nearer the parts lie, the more is the
visibility; and the further off, the less. A Congregation is more visible (in
this sense) then a National Church, and a National then the Ecumenical. The
more visible the copula or bond is, the more visible the thing is.

Having showed you what Church-Catholike is visible, and how the
Church-Catholike may be said to be visible; I come to prove by arguments that
it is visible or perceptible. But indeed the difficulty lies not here, but in
the integrality, for if the Church-Catholike be an integral, it will easily
appear to be a visible one.

First, If the subject matter, Sect. 2.
the persons of whom the Church-Catholike does consist, be visible, the whole
Church is visible also: But they are all visible: Therefore so is the whole
Church.

That the whole Church consists of men and women who are visible believers
(not visible as men, but as believers also) none will deny. That the visibility
of the whole will necessarily follow, is as undeniably true, for what makes a
thing visible, but the visibility of the materials? The essential forms of the
most visible things are not visible, as of a stone, or a man. Nothing can be
said to be invisible, whose materials are visible.

Secondly, If the conversion into the whole Church be visible, then the whole
Church is visible. But the conversion is visible. Therefore, etc.

That conversion into the visible Church is visible, none can deny. The
Apostles made a visible conquest of the world by their preaching. They were
charged by Demetrius to have turned the world upside down, Act. 17.6. They
turned men from Idols, to serve the living and true God, 1 These. 1.9. That this
conversion was not into a particular Congregation, but into the external
visible body and kingdom of Christ, is as clear; and the gathering them into
particular Congregations, and setting Elders over them was a second work. Chap.
5.
And the consequence will follow, for such as the conversion is, such is the
Church into which they are converted; visible conversion makes no man a member
of the invisible body, but of the visible only, invisible grace is required for
that.

Thirdly, If the profession, subjection, obedience, and conversation of the
members of the whole Church be visible, then the whole Church is visible. But
they are visible. Therefore, etc.

The assumption none will deny. It is called a professed subjection, 2 Cor.
9.13. And Romans 16.19. Your obedience is come abroad unto all. Let your light so
shine before men, that they may see your good works, Mat. 5.16. It is toward
God in duties of the first table, and toward men in duties of the second, in
charity, chastity, equity, truth, humility, meekness. Phil. 1.27. 2 Pet. 3.17.
yea, visible to them that are without, 2 Pet. 3.11. Now what reference has
this profession, subjection, obedience, conversation to the particular
Congregations? Do they profess, subject themselves to the laws of Christ, and
yield obedience thereunto in a godly conversation, because they are members of
this or that particular Congregation, or because they are entered into the
general Covenant, whereby they are made subjects and members of Christ's
Kingdom? Is the particular confederation the ground and cause of their
profession, subjection, obedience, and godly conversation? Were not these found
in them before they were thought meet to be entered into the particular
confederation? were they not judged to be subjects to Christ, and visible
members of his body, and in external Covenant, before their admittance? How
then could that be the ground thereof? Indeed there are some particular duties
and privileges which relate in an especial manner to the particular
Congregation, and a particular unity of a particular Church, as a member of the
whole body resulteth therefrom, but not the general duties, privileges, or
membership.

Suppose a man be a freeman of some Corporation, as Ipswich, though thereby he
has the privileges of the particular Corporation belonging to him, and
particular duties belonging to the Corporation are required of him, and he
requires and receives the privilege of a subject the execution of the laws of
the Kingdom there; yet he must be conceived a member of the Kingdom, before he
can be admitted a free man of the Corporation, and he receives the general
privileges, and performs the general duties, in reference to that, and not in
reference to the particular Corporation, and his membership thereof; though he
has the opportunity of enjoying the one, and performance of the other, in that
particular society. And yet this does not make the kingdom a Genus, and the
Corporation a species thereof, but the kingdom an integral, and the Corporation
a member thereof. So is the case between the whole Church and the particular.
Yet with this difference, all the particular Churches are similar patts of the
whole Church, so are not all Corporations, nor all villages, they differ
sometimes in kinds of Officers, sometimes in particular immunities.

Also the similarity of the parts of the whole Church, gives the same
denomination to the particular Churches with the whole, the particular
Congregation is called a Church as well as the whole, whereas no particular
Corporation is called a Kingdom: and this is the cause why the particular
Churches are deemed to be species, whereas indeed they are members of the
whole, viz. because of the identity of denomination, but identity of
denomination or similarity of parts, are not sufficient to make a genus and
species, especially where the whole is constituted by an external Covenant.

4. If the Officers which Christ has given to the whole Church, be visible,
then so is the Church. But the Officers are visible. Therefore, etc.

That the Officers are visible none will deny, because they are visibly called,
ordained, and execute their office visibly. That visible Officers argue a
visible polity, is as clear, such as the Officers are (in respect of visibility
or invisibility) such is the Kingdom. That the ministry is given to the whole
Church, as the Levites were to all Israel, and that they are all Officers of
the whole habitual, and habitually have power to dispense the Ordinances of
Christ in any part of the whole Church upon a call, shall be proved. c. 6. s. 4.

5. If the admittance into the whole Church, and ejection out of it be visible,
then the whole Church is visible. But admittance by Baptism, ejection by
excommunication are visible. Therefore, etc.

That admittance and ejection being public acts before the whole Congregation,
are visible, none will deny. That such as the admittance or ejection is (in
regard of visibility) such is the society or polity, is as clear. That the
admittance is into the whole, and ejection out of it, has been proved already,
and shall more fully afterward. Either by Baptism men are admitted into the
particular Church, or the whole Church, or no Church: but not into the
particular Congregation, no man is baptized into the particular Congregation,
it is not the seal of the particular Covenant: therefore it is into the whole
or none. If a heathen be converted in a Congregation, first he receives
baptism, afterward is admitted a member of the particular confederation.

Sect. 3.
6. If the Doctrine, Laws, Ordinances, Charter, and Covenant of the whole
Church, be visible, then so is the whole Church. But they are visible.
Therefore, etc.

That the Doctrine, Laws, Ordinances, Charter, and Covenant of the whole Church
are visible, none will deny, for they may be seen, read, preached, and heard.
That they belong to, and constitute the whole, is as undeniable. Of the same
nature that the laws, and charter of a kingdom is (in respect of visibility) of
the same nature is the kingdom. Now it is not the invisible law of nature
written in the heart, that constitutes the visible Church, for the heathens
have that, Romans 2.15. nor is it the invisible law of grace, promised to be
written in Gods peoples hearts, Jer. 31.33. for many members of the visible
Church have not that; but it is the visible systeme of laws, and Covenant given
by Christ to his visible Church.

And these Laws, Charter, and Covenant are the very copula or bond of the
external body and kingdom of Christ, and thereby they are bound to worship and
discipline. Now where the copula or bond uniting visible parts together, is
visible, there the whole is visible, But the copula or bond is visible,
Therefore so is the whole. A visible bond cannot unite invisible members.

Against this it is objected by M. Hooker, That diverse several kingdoms may be
governed by the same laws, and yet remain several kingdoms.

Answ. It is true, it is possible that all the kingdoms of the earth may submit
to, and be governed by the same systeme of laws, and many now are by the civil
law, and yet remain several. But they arise not from the same fountain, the
same King or Governors, nor bind not in subjection and obedience unto the
same King, nor to mutual duties of subjects between themselves as
fellow subjects: but are embraced vi materiae or formae, because found
convenient, and receive a several stamp of authority from the several States or
Governors, whereby they are obliging in the several kingdoms. But these laws
proceed from the same fountain, the same Lord Jesus, the king of the whole, and
are obliging from the same authority to all Christians in the whole world,
therefore they are one visible Church or kingdom mystical. If the whole Church
be a Genus, it is constituted and united together by a visible external
Covenant and Laws, which is not consistent with the nature of a Genus as a
Genus.

7. If all the administrations and dispensations, and operations of the whole
Church be visible, so is the whole Church: But they are all visible. Therefore,
etc.

That they are all visible (being publicly done) none will deny.

Obj. But these administrations, dispensations, and operations are acted in the
several Congregations, and are not actions of the whole Church.

Ans. So is justice administered at Assizes and Sessions in several Counties and
Corporations, but is it the justice of the whole, because it is administered by
the same laws, and by the same authority, and is common to all the subjects of
the kingdom? A man dwelling in any part of the kingdom being tried at Suffolk
Assizes may receive his sentence and execution there, if guilty. So all
Church-administrations are by the same laws, and upon the same command; and
persons of any Church in the world may hear, sing, pray, and communicate any
where indefinitely upon occasion, though constantly the particular members only
enjoy those particular administrations from those particular Officers.

I answer further, that the Church-Catholike may act visibly by their delegates
(as a Kingdom in a Parliament) in a general Council, if they can convene:
though their power were wholly consultatory and suasory (as some plead) but it
is more. All their debates, arguings pro and con, all their advice and decrees
are visible: therefore the whole whose delegates they are, is visible also. The
invisible Church (as invisible) send none.

8. If it be our duty to join our selves visibly to the Church-Catholike, then
it is visible: But we ought to join our selves to the Church-Catholike.
Therefore, etc.

The Assumption none will deny. As soon as the 3000. were converted by Peter,
they were added to the Church. Christians may not stand alone independently.
Now that must be a visible Church that we must join unto, for the invisible is
within the visible, and cannot be known. God commands no impossibilities. It is
true indeed we must join to some particular Congregation (as a forreigner
coming over into England to inhabit, being naturalized, must dwell in some
particular Town) but to that Congregation as a member of the whole, wherein we
may enjoy the general privileges of subjects of Christ first, and the
particular privileges of that Congregation secondarily. There is no particular
command to join to this or that particular Congregation, but the whole;
necessity compels to choose one. Our particular joining to this or that
Congregation is not in obedience to the command, for then, had we joined to
another we had broken a command, therefore that is arbitrary and limited by
civil habitation necessarily.

9. If the accidents of the whole Church be visible, then so is the whole
Church. But there be visible accidents of the whole Church. Therefore, etc.

An invisible subject has not visible accidents. But so has the whole Church,
as beauty, strength, order, amplitude, which may increase or decrease, and
these are accidents of the whole arising and resulting from all the parts
conjoined, and made up of the beauty, strength, order, and amplitude of all the
parts.

Also there may be general, visible opposition against the whole Church, not
because in particular confederation, but the general. These persecutors are
visible, their actions are visibly managed, by attachments, prisons, fire and
faggot: their effects visible: fines, imprisonments, confiscation, banishment
and death: and therefore the object hereof, the whole Church, must needs be
visible also. And all this merely because they belong to Christ, and have given
up their names to him. And because they will not visibly run to the same
excess of riot, or worship the same Idols that they do.

10. If the parts of the whole Church be visible, so is the whole, But the
parts of the whole Church are visible. Therefore, etc.

By parts I mean not the particular persons only, but particular Congregations.
Now none deny the particular Churches to be visible, neither our brethren for
Congregational Churches, nor yet the separation. And Gerard though he will not
grant the Church Catholic to be visible, yet says, Ecclesias particulares
visibiles esse concedimus, The consequence will necessarily follow, for the
visibility of the whole results out of the visibility of the parts. An
innumerable number of visible parts cannot make an invisible whole.

Against this M. Ellis vind. 59. alleges that it is too lax a medium in so
weighty a subject as this is. Sect. 4.
There is (says he) great difference between natural and metaphysical, or
civil and politic bodies. For in a natural body all whose parts and members
are actually and naturally joined together, the whole is visible, because the
parts are visible: but in a metaphysical body or totum or whole, that is in
Generals, that are by the reason of man drawn from particulars, the case is far
otherwise. Peter, James, and John are visible, but manhood which is the
universal agreeing to them all, is not visible. This being the same with my
first Objection I set down in my Thesis, one answer shall serve for both.

Answ. M. Ellis knows I took not the Church-Catholike for a Genus, but an
Integral. But let it be supposed a Genus for argument sake, or as M. Hooker
calls it, Totum genericum existens, which is something fairer then M. Ellis's
grant; for by M. Ellis's reasoning the Church-Catholike should be a Genus drawn
by the reason of man, and so existing only in intellectu nostro. I say, suppose
the Church-Catholike to be a Genus, and the particular Churches Species, yet
this is not sufficient to make the Church-Catholike to be invisible, Will any
man say, that Animal est substantia invisibilis, because it existeth only in
homine and bruto? Indeed animality in the abstract is invisible, but not animal
in concreto: so Ecclesietas (as I may say) is invisible, but Ecclesia is
visible. Visibility is an accident belonging primarily to a higher Genus then
animal, viz. Corpus celoratum, and though every Individual animal is visible,
as John and James, yet not qua John or James but as colored bodies: and if a
higher Genus be visible, which is nearer Ens, and further from Individuals,
then much more animal. So in this case the Church-Catholike is a society of
men, and that M. Ellis denies not; now every society of men is visible, and
therefore the Church which is a species of society must needs be so also, for
the visibility does not betide it, because it is a particular Congregation, but
because it is a society of men, which is a higher Genus: I mean this in a
logical consideration.

Then he proceeds to deny a civil body or Corporation, if great, as an Empire,
Kingdom, or large city, to be seen in it self, but in the parts.

Answ. Here he confounds visibile and visum uno intuitu: and by this reasoning
he should deny the visibility of the world, or any particular man, for all his
parts cannot be seen uno intuitu. Attamen insaniat qui neget se videre hominem,
says Cameron. Yea, the sun it self should not be visible by this reasoning,
because we can see but the surface of it. He could not be ignorant that I did
not mean that the Church-Catholike was actually seen uno intuitu.

And whereas I had said the whole is visible, because the parts are so. He
says it is untrue even in the smallest bodies, but where the parts are
actually united together, not where they are thousands of miles asunder.

Answ. It is true indeed in natural and artificial bodies, whose being or
integrality consists in a corporeal continuity, or contiguity of parts; for
if that continuity or contiguity cease, the integral also cease, except in
potentia.

But in political bodies joined together by laws, under one government, it is
otherwise; the distance of place hinders not the integrality of the whole, and
though it cannot be seen uno intuitu, by the same man at once (unless by way
of representation, as in a Parliament or Common Counsel, as M. Ellis says) nor
yet be perceived to be one without some act of the understanding, yet this
makes not the City or Empire invisible.

He confesses the Church-Catholike to be visible in respect of the several
parts, and places where they dwell: but this (says he) is to prevaricate, and
to prove that which is not in question. But he might remember that I took
visible in the explication of the terms of the question, to be meant in regard
of visible communion in holy Ordinances, though the persons never congregate
into one place, to be seen with one man's eye; but in opposition to inward
invisible communion. Let him grant but such a visibility of the
Church-Catholike as was in any of the four Monarchies, or a civil kingdom,
which yet are seen but in their several parts and places, and I contend for no
more. I suppose no particular Congregation was ever seen together, in all the
members thereof, uno in^uitu: and yet is visibly one in regard of the
particular confederation, and usual meeting of most of the members. Is not
England a visible Kingdom, though seen but in the parts of it? was it not
visible before there was a Parliament to represent it, or does it cease to be
visible in the intervals of Parliaments? The visibility of it consists in the
visibility of the Persons, Corporations, Places, Laws, Government. So is the
case of the Church-Catholike whose Persons, Places, Laws (which are the visible
bond) and government are as external and visible as those of the Kingdom, i. e.
liable to sense, and perceivable by sense, though not actually seen by the same
man at once.

I desire it might be noted that the Church-Catholike which our Divines speak
of in their disputes against the Papists, is not this Church-Catholike which we
have now in hand, but that is the whole Church or company of the elect, both
past, present, and to come. It is the Church taken in the first sense, in the
explication of the terms of the Question, not the external, political, mixed
Church or kingdom of Christ. Neither does that Church agree with this, but only
nominally and equivocally, in that it is called by the same name, but it is not
the same in nature or sense: and therefore should that and this be used in a
syllogism, there would be 4 terms. For that Church is neither external, nor
visible, nor existent, nor organical, it has no Officers, it is no polity: it
is not that which M. Hooker calls T^tum genericum existens: for many of them are
already in heaven, and the spirits of just men made perfect, many not yet born,
many not yet converted.

Now to make that the Genus of the visible, external, political Churches of
Christ, were as absurd as to make the vessels of gold to be the Genus of the
silver, brazen, pewter, wooden, stony and earthen vessels of a house, or a
marble building to be the Genus of all the buildings of other stones, brick and
timber. And therefore to dispute from that to this, is not ad idem. I suppose
that neither M. Hooker nor M. Ellis meant that Church, no more then I.

If the genus comprehend only invisible members, the species should be only of
invisible members also. The genus is of the same nature or predicament with the
species, and all that is common to all the species is found in the genus, and
fetched from thence. There is nothing in man, but it is in animal, except the
specifical form, whereby he differs from a brute, and nothing in animal but it
is in man, except its totality or generality, whereby it comprehends man and
brute. If homo and brutum be visible living substances, they received it from
animal.

The genus gives essence to the species, and is symbolum causae materialis:
but the Church of the Elect gives not essence, nor matter to the visible
Church: for there are many members of this which are not invisible: neither are
the elect members of this, qua invisible, but qua existent and visible. The
visible and invisible Church are contra distinct branches of a distribution ex
adjunctis, vel (...) communionis, therefore the one cannot be the genus of the
other; for then genus and species should not be of the same general predication
or denomination; but the invisible should be genus of the visible; one branch
be genus of the other, which is contrary to all Logic.

The invisibility of this genus arises not from a separation of the invisible
members from the visible, or the sheep from the goats, but arises from a
mental abstraction; it is the invisibility of a notion, not of the persons: It
is not by culling out such as have invisible grace, and leaving the rest; for
that which is so culled out, is not comprehensive of them both. The Genus drawn
by logical, mental abstraction from the most corporeal, visible substances, is
as invisible, qua genus, as a genus of incorporeal, invisible substances.

Either that Church-Catholike which our Divines speak of, is the Genus of
particular visible Churches, or it is not. If it be, then it must be an
external visible polity (in general notion) which must comprehend all the
external, visible, Ecclesiastical Polities on earth; and so hypocrites as well
as the elect. The species consist of such matter, and therefore so must the
genus, in the notion, I mean: but that they deny of their Church-Catholike
visible.

If it be not: then it is not the Church-Catholike which M. Hooker and M. Ellis
intend; for they intend a general Church which comprehends in notion all the
visible Churches under it. And therefore they differ from our Divines in their
meaning of the Church-Catholike, as much as I do; And so join not, nor concur
with our Divines in the same subject, neither is it adidem.

Now if we make the Church-Catholike an abstract, general notion, comprehending
all particular Churches under it as a genus, then we make Christ's visible,
external Kingdom on earth, only a logical, non-existing notion; and the
particular Congregations to be the several species of the kingdom of Jesus
Christ, all comprehended under one logical, comprehensive notion; and the
particular Covenant or confederation of such or such a company between
themselves, should constitute a kingdom of Jesus Christ. And so when a man
removes from one Congregation into another, he should remove out of one species
into another: and in the interim be quite out of the kingdom of Christ; because
he is out of all the species of Christ's kingdom, and a particular member cannot
exist under this genus, for it is a genus of Congregations, qua Congregations,
and not of single persons. And then it will follow, that many a visible
believer shall be no member of Christ's visible external kingdom; or else that
after he is a visible existing subject of Christ's kingdom, he may choose which
species of Christ's kingdom he will exist in; and that is as absurd, as if there
should be an existing animal, that will choose whether he will be a man or a
brute: who sees not that there is a visible existence of many a visible
believer, who is a subject of Christ's visible kingdom, before he be admitted
into any of those Congregations, which are (by this opinion accounted) species.
Now if we account the particular Churches members of Christ's Kingdom, it is not
absurd for any subject of Christ, to choose which part of Christ's kingdom, or
which Ecclesiastical Corporation he will dwell in or adhere unto, for the
actual enjoyment of the Privileges, Laws, and Ordinances of Christ's Kingdom:
no more then for a subject of a King to choose in what part of the Kingdom he
will dwell. The Kingdom of England though a political body, yet contains
under, or in it, not only all Corporations and villages, but all single
persons, that are subject to the King and Laws, though they be not fixed, and
though they want by their unfixednesse the particular privileges of the
particular Towns they might have inhabited, and so the actual opportunity of
enjoyment of the benefit of the Laws administered in such Corporations or
Counties, yet have an habitual right to the general privileges, by being
subjects: so have unfixed members of Christ's external Kingdom, which reaches
single visible subjects as well as combined. Nay, a man may better make the
kingdom of England a Genus, and all the Corporations and villages species
thereof, because they are many of them distinct and different in their
constitutions, then the Church-Catholike a Genus, and the particular
Congregations species, which are of one constitution. And if totum genericum
existens, can have any sense put upon it, it will agree to the Kingdom of
England (or any other kingdom) for it consists of a sort of men ( viz.
Englishmen) existing in several Counties and Towns: but as that notion hinders
not the integrality of the Kingdom; so no more it will the Church-Catholike
visible.

Obj. Yea, Sect. 5.
but the Church-Catholike cannot be visible because it wants an existence of
its own; and existeth only in the existence of the particular Churches, the
members thereof.

Answ. Where there are existing visible members, there must be an existing
visible Integral. Omne membrum habet suum integrum.

The same Objection lies as well against any aggregative body. A heap of
stones may as well be said to exist only in the existence of the particular
stones, and a particular Congregation exist in the existence of the particular
families, and particular families exist in the particular persons. But if the
members exist qua members, the existence of the integral results out of their
conjoined existence, and so does the visibility.

An army existeth in the several brigades, and regiments, and they are billeted
or quartered in distant places, and yet having the same General, the same Laws
martial, the same cause, the same enemies, although they should never be drawn
up together in one body at one place, yet are they one visible Army. So is the
Church-Catholike one, and that visibly (as I showed in the beginning of this
Chapter) though there goes an act of the mind to the perceivance of the
unity. It is a political union by the same visible Charter, and laws, and way,
under one Commander in chief, and therefore visible, i. e. perceivable by sense
though not by sense only, the very uniting bond, the laws are visible: yea, the
existence of it will more appear, because it has privileges belonging
thereunto, which particulars have not, or but in part, and at second hand, as
has been showed in the former Chapt. and shall more fully in the second
Question.

This Objection M. Ellis vind. p. 56. undertakes to set down, and marks it in
the margin, as if he had cited my words, but misseth both my words and sense.

And then falls upon the Answer, and says, that it amounts not to an answer,
for no collected body that is made up of several things, has its being in
these things severally considered and apart, but as united altogether, it is
not an heap of stones, if one lie at York, some at London, others in France,
Spain, etc.

I answer, It is true, in bodies made up by physical or artificial aggregation,
there must indeed be some contiguity or nearness of parts; but in political
aggregation (and such M. Ellis acknowledges, vind. p. 5. l. 38.) it is not
necessary. M. Ellis makes the Empire of Germany one by aggregation; and yet
has not (I suppose) cast those several territories one upon another; as the
Giants are feigned to throw Pelion upon Ossa; but they ly further distant then
at M. Calamies door, and M. Hudsons; as he is pleased to make the allusion, or
illusion rather, vin. p. 35. One Kingdom may consist of diverse Islands, if under
the same King, and laws, etc. and so may all the Churches in the world be one
Church, though far distant; and visible, though not actually seen, because
the persons and places are visible, and the things wherein, and whereby they
are conjoined, as Profession, Laws, Doctrine, Seals, Worship, etc. are
external, and so visible. And though an aggregative body is not made up of the
several parts considered severally and apart, yet out of the existence, and
visibility of them conjoined, either physically or politically, etc. (according
as the thing is) the existence and visibility of the whole will result, as I
said before.

And Sir, I cannot but right my self from an injury which in your answer to
this Objection, vind. p. 24. you offered me: by intimating bitingly, to delude
your reader, and wrong M. Calamy (the licenser of that Thesis) as if he were
the Author of it, or partly the Author, or at the fairest the inciter
thereto. What other construction can these words of you bear? A man-midwife may
be father also. And another jerk you give to the same purpose, vind. p. 80. in
these words Moses mother was his nurse also. But Sir, that which is mine I am
not willing should be charged upon any other; I owned it in print; and to put
you and others out of doubt, I assure you that neither M. Calamy nor any other
incited me thereto, neither so much as made or altered one sentence in the
whole Thesis. Neither was it of such a texture as that you or any man else,
should suppose it had any other Author or Authors, then a mean
Countrey-Minister, such as I acknowledge my self to be. You might have known
who was the Author thereof, if you would have been pleased to have come to our
company, at the reading of it, as you were lovingly invited, out of desire to
enjoy your society, for the learning and piety we conceived to be in you.

Obj. If the Church-Catholike or Ecumenical be one visible Church, it is
necessary that they should all meet together at some times.

Answ. It is not at all necessary, neither to the unity, nor yet to the
visibility of the Church. It is sufficient that the persons be visible in their
several places, and that they be combined together under the same head, by
visible laws and profession, under the same visible seal and enrowlment, walk
visibly in the same godly conversation before men, pray one for another, as
fellow members, rejoice in the welfare, and mourn for the ill-fare one of
another, and contribute assistance one to another, as occasion is offered. As
therefore it is not needful to the unity or visibility of a kingdom or Empire,
that they should meet together sometimes: so is it not needful for the whole
Church: indeed there may be some convenience in both, ad been, vel optimum
esse, sed non ad esse simpliciter.

This M. Ellis excepteth against, vin. p. 55. First, he asks whether ever
there were such a kingdom in the world, that the members did not meet
sometimes, if it be not a mere visible monarchy, as under Popery. If there be
any liberty left to the Subjects, etc.

Answ. Let him show that ever the four Monarchies did meet together
respectively, either in their persons or deputies, or delegates from every
Province, yet that hindered not their unity nor visibility. And his answer
implies, that the Ecclesiastical Monarchy under Popery did never meet. He
makes it but a sign of liberty to meet, not a sign of visibility. And for the
point of liberty inherent in the subjects as their proper right, distinct from
what is derived and given by Christ as their head; there was never any Monarchy
so merely depending on the will of the Monarch, as the Church-visible on
Christ, for the Church deriveth all its power from Christ, and has all its
laws given and imposed only by Christ, without any vote of the Churches in the
making of them. It is probable that the kingdoms under the four Monarchies had
some enjoyment of their municipal laws, only might have some imperial general
laws superadded: but it is not so in this, for the whole Church (as a Church)
has no laws, but of Christ's arbitrary donation. Christians are not subdued by
Christ as Englishmen were by William the Conqueror, viz. on condition that he
would suffer them to enjoy their former rights, and the Laws of Edward the
Confessor, but absolutely to receive Laws from him: And yet this can neither be
thought tyranny in Christ, nor yet slavery in us, for Christ's Laws are more
beneficial to us, then any of our own making, and his service is perfect
freedom.

And yet we read of general Councels of the Church by their delegates, which
were as it were a ministerial Church-Catholike: which in former times of the
Church under Christian Emperors were frequent; and there is no intrinsecal let
in the Church that they do not meet so still, but only extrinsecal, and
extraneous, by reason of the divisions among the civil Governors: but even in
our days a great part of that great body has met, as in the Synod of Dort,
etc. by Commissioners.

D. Whitakers and Apollonius acknowledge the meeting, Act. 1. to be a general
Council. The members were the Apostles, who were Pastors of the
Church-Catholike, and brethren out of Galilee and Jerusalem. The work was to
elect an Apostle, who was to be a Pastor of the universal Church: and they that
undertake and dispatch such a business which concerns the extraordinary
teaching and government of the whole Church, should represent the whole
Church-Catholike.

M. Ellis vin. p. 25. utterly denies that ever there was any general Council
which might be said to be the Church-Catholike, viz. ministerially. But I took
general in the usual sense of it, and not precisely considered. He knows the
four Councels are known by the name of The four general Councels. And so
himself calls them, vind. p. 15. l. 37. I took the term general in the sense
that we call the four Monarchies, the Monarchies of the whole world, and yet we
know there were many countries that were never under them. And as Luke Act.
2.5. says, there were dwelling at Jerusalem Jews, devout men out of every
nation under heaven: and yet there were many Nations where Jews never dwelt,
some of which were discovered lately. But let him look into Eusebius. de vita
Constantini, lib. 3. and Socrates Scholast. lib. 1. cap. 8. and he shall find
from how many Countries the first Council of Nice was gathered. There were
gathered (says he) together into one, the chief Ministers of God inhabiting
all the Churches throughout all Europe, Africa, and Asia. That sacred Synod
framed as it were by the handiwork of God, received also both Syrians and
Cilicians, and such as came from Phoenicia, Egypt, Arabia, Palaestina,
Thebais, Lybia, and Mesopotamia. There was also in this Synod the Bishop of
Persis, of Pontus, Gala^ia, Pamphilia, Cappadocia, Asia, and Phrygia.

Moreover the Thracians, Macedonians, Achaians, Epirotes, Also of the Spaniards
there was an eminent man, (...). The Bishop of the imperial city (...) (viz.
Rome) by reason of his old age absented himself, yet there were present of his
Presbyters, which supplied his room. Diverse things M. Ellis excepteth against
that Council, as some extraordinarinesse in the summoning of the members of it,
without election and delegation of the particular Churches. And that
Constantine was the visible head of it; and that he called for Bishops chiefly,
if not only, which will not be pertinent here to answer. Something there might
be extraordinary in the summons: for the civil and Ecclesiastical State not
concurring together until Constantine, happily there could not be a regular
election. In extraordinary times and cases, our brethren will grant something
may be done extraordinarily: as there is in the calling of this present
Assembly, as is acknowledged by M. Gillespy. There were also others besides
Bishops and Ministers. Neither did Constantine either sit as President of it,
nor presume to be head: but confesses himself to be (...) not (...): but by
his civil sanction he did confirm their decrees, and send them abroad. Neither
is there any ground that in that or any other Council, the members acted only
each for his own particular Church that sent him (as M. Ellis suggesterh) but
the whole for the whole, as far as their delegation was.

I acknowledge there is power given to every particular Church to rule it self,
and exercise the discipline of the Church for the being and well-being of it
ordinarily. Yet so as it is a part of the whole Church, into which also the
censures there passed, have influence. And on some great occasions there may be
cause to ferch help further, as Cranmer appealed to a general Council. But if
that extensive power cannot be had, as now it is very difficult; then must the
particular, national, provincial, classical, or congregational Church rest in
that intensive power that remains within its own limits; or also if they stand
so as that they cannot combine with neighbors, or have recourse unto them.
Extraordinary cases cannot be regulated by ordinary rules. And this I conceive
is the reason why the Scripture has not determined more particularly the
Synodical Assemblies; but only gives general rules that may be drawn to
particulars, because all Churches and seasons are not capable of national or
provincial Synods, in regard of many things that may be incident.

In some cases also all civil power must rest in one Congregation, as if it
were in a wilderness, where there were no neighbor Towns or cities to which
it might be joined. Yet it follows not that it must be so in England, or any
other kingdom, where there are Counties, Shires, Cities, great Towns, or a
Parliament. Yea, I know not but a particular family may, yea, must be
independent in such an extraordinary case, both in Ecclesiastical and civil
matters also: yet it follows not that there is such an inherent right in every
town or family all over the world, and that therefore particular Towns and
families in England are debarred of an inherent privilege belonging to them,
because necessity may put such an Independency on some, in an extraordinary
case; as by shipwreck, or being cast into some Island not inhabited.

Here M. Ellis charge me to say, that the power of a general Council, (or of
a Church-Catholike visible) is but extensive, and only extensive, and not
intensive, and the power of the particular Churches is intensive. But Sir, do
as you would be done by. It is not fair dealing to note them as my words which
were none of mine, nor my sense. For first, I never conceived a general Council
to be the whole Church-Catholike visible, but only an ecumenical, ministerial
or representative body of Officers, or Organs of the Church, much less the
prime Church to which the Ordinances and privileges of the Church were first
given, of which I spoke, as appears in my second part. Secondly, I never said
the power of a general Council was only extensive; for as the particular
Officers have intensive power over their particular Congregations, so has a
general Council intensive power also, but their power is larger in extension
actually, then the particular Officers is, being Officers sent from a larger
part of the Church-Catholike, and entrusted by more, and acting for more then
one Congregation, or one Eldership. This distinction M. Parker de polit. Eccl.
lib. 3. p. 121. sets down in these words. Distinguo de potestate clavium,
quae intensiva aut extensiva est. Intensiva potestate caret nulla Ecclesia
prima ( viz. particularis) ne minima quidem; extensiva vero e^^ caret, quam
habet Synodus, cum potestas ad plures Ecclesias extenditur. And so it neither
overthrows my first nor second tenet, as he infers. Sect. 6.


Obj. If there be a Church-Catholike visible here on earth, it is fit it should
have a visible head over them, that so the body and head may be of the same
nature.

Answ. This was indeed used as a main argument by the Ponficians for the
supremacy of the Pope. The avoiding whereof made our Divines so shy of granting
a Church-Catholike visible, but it was not necessary that they should deny upon
this ground, as M. Hooker conceives, Surv. p. 251. I say it is not necessary to
grant a visible head to the Church-Catholike visible, no more then to a
particular visible Congregation, which our brethren hold to be a body of
Christ. And though they call it a mystical and spiritual body, yet that does
not imply it to be invisible. The Sacraments are called mysteries, and
mystical, and the Ordinances are called spiritual, and yet are visible, though
the grace signified or conveyed by them to the Elect, is invisible. They are
spiritual in respect of the author God, and the divine subject about which
they are, in opposition to natural and civil, and so our Ecclesiastical Courts
were called spiritual, though indeed as they managed them they made them carnal
and sinful. The members of the particular Congregations are visible members,
and their union and confederation is visible; and they are a visible body,
mixed of true believers and hypocrites, as Gerard, Whitakers, Cameron, and even
M. Bartlet in his model, confesses. And their communion is visible, and yet
there is no visible head on earth required for them, and why then should there
be for the Church-Catholike? Such a head therefore, whether visible or
invisible, present or absent, as will serve a particular mystical body of
Christ, as M. Cotton calls a particular visible Congregation, will serve the
Church-Catholike visible.

I answer further, that the Church-Catholike visible has a head of the same
nature, consisting of body and soul, who sometimes lived in this visible
kingdom of grace, in the days of his flesh, and did visibly partake in
external Ordinances, though indeed now he be ascended into his kingdom of
glory, yet cease not to be a man, and so visible in his humanity as we are,
though glorified and glorious, yet not less visible in himself for that, but
rather more: and cease not to rule and govern his Church here below, for it
is an everlasting Kingdom, Esaias 9.7. As when King James was translated from
Scotland to England, and lived here, he did not cease to be King of Scotland:
so neither does Christ cease to be the head of his Church, though he be
translated and ascended to his other kingdom, the kingdom of glory. And as for
a Vicar or Deputy here below, it is not needful. We confess the government of
the Church in regard of the head is absolutely Monarchical, but in regard of
the Officers, it is Aristocratical.

This second answer is excepted against, both by M. Ellis vind. p. 56. and M.
Hooker Sur. p. 258. It is insufficient (says M. Ellis) for Christ is head
invisible, and thence our Divines affirm his body the Church to be mystical
also, and invisible taken properly.

I answer, That Christ is not only head of the invisible company, which
headship and body allude to the natural head and body, which is indeed the
Church in the most proper and prime sense, but he is head also of the visible
company or Ecclesiastical body, in allusion to a civil head or governor.

Christ not only affords invisible communion to his invisible members, but
externally by Ordinances to both invisible and visible members of the Church,
yet to both visibly. For Christ by his Ambassadors, and in his written word
speaks externally to their senses, and they speak externally to him in prayer
and singing. And as he was once visibly on earth in our nature, a visible head
of his Church: so also, if the millenary opinion be true, (which some of this
way hold) he shall come again, and shall sit and reign a thousand years
visibly. But whether that opinion be true or no (which I much doubt) yet he
shall come again visibly, as the Son of man, at the end of the world, and
take account of the managing of these Ordinances, and of the carriage both of
Officers and private Christians, and the elect shall be gathered together into
heaven, and enjoy him visibly to all eternity, and he shall visibly condemn the
reprobates, and every eye shall see him. So that this is but an interval,
wherein Christ though he be now visible in himself, yet appears not to us
visibly, ordinarily, though he did to Paul and Steven, even after his
ascension. Yet, now he affords visible communion to his people by his
Ordinances, and they do visible service unto him, though he resideth not with
them. If the absence of the King make the kingdom invisible, then Ireland is an
invisible kingdom.

M Hooker affirms this opinion to be not only untrue, but very dangerous, to
hold that Christ as mere man consisting of body and soul is a visible head of
his Church. And thereupon cites Whitakers words, that Christ did not reside in
the Church as a visible Monarch, nor came into the world to set up a visible
Monarchy.

Answ. I do not conceive that Christ as mere man consisting of body and soul is
the head of the Church, either invisible or political, but as God-man, yet that
person was visible, though but in one of his natures, and in but half of that
neither, viz. his body. The visibility of one nature makes visibility to be
predicated of the whole person, else no man is visible, for his soul is
invisible. It is the meanest half of him that is visible, and so no earthly
King should be visible. Christ is called God manifested in the flesh, 1 Timothy
3.16. And the word became flesh, and dwelt among us, and we beheld his glory,
the glory as of the only begotten of the Father, Joh 1.14. We were
eyewitnesses of his majesty, 1 Pet. 1.16. That which was from the beginning,
which we have heard, which we have seen with our eyes, which we have looked
upon, and our hands have handled of the word of life. 1 John 1.1. I hope these
speeches are neither untrue nor dangerous And for his donative power and
authority, Christ says of himself, Joh. 5.27. that the Father has given
authority to execute judgment because he is the son of man, The Son of man
has power on earth to forgive sins, and that was a kingly action. And the
Apostle says Act. 17.31. God has appointed a day wherein he will judge the
world in righteousness, by that man whom he has ordained. It is true indeed
all the virtue and power come from the deity to gather and perfect the Saints,
forgive sins, raise the dead, judge the world; and by his deity only he is
present with us now, yet as man also he is head of his Church and not as God
only; for had he been only God, he could not have been a suitable head or second
Adam, but that he became by becoming man, and taking our nature upon him. The
seed of the woman must break the Serpents head. The governing power and wisdom
of a King is in his invisible soul, yet he is a visible King. It is true also
that Christ came not in the days of his flesh as a visible, temporal Monarch,
in David's civil throne, yet Christ confesses then unto Pilate that he was a
king, though his kingdom was not of this world, i. e. civil, to oppose Caesar's,
yet it is in this world, and external in this world also. God overruled Pilate
to set a true title over Christ on the Cross. Jesus of Nazareth king of the
Jews. As a King he had all power in heaven and earth given hem, Mat. 28.10, 19
and immediately thereupon as a King he issues out his Commission to his
Apostles, Go ye therefore, and teach all Nations, etc. It is not because Christ
died for all as a Priest, that this commission is so general, but because all
power in heaven and earth was given to him, therefore as a King he summons in
all, even the very rebels to yield obedience to his lawful authority, but only
such as yield obedience and come in are saved by him. He set Officers and
offices, and gave commandment to his Apostles, Act. 1.2. And appointed the form
of Ecclesiastical proceedings in discipline, in case of scandal, Mat. 18. And
this is no other doctrine then our reverend Assembly has set out, both in
their larger and shorter Catechism. That Christ our redeemer executes the
offices of a Prophet, a Priest, and a King, both in his estate of humiliation
and exaltation. Neither can I see any reason why Christ should be denied to
execute his kingly office while he was here below, any more then his Priestly
or Prophetical. If he was then a King and had all power given him, he did not
suspend the execution of it, while he was on earth, Joh. 5.17. neither does
Beza in conf. fid. ob. 5. art. 5. cited by M. Hooker, deny Christ to be head as
man, though he acknowledge him to be head as God also. And though he says,
that he communicates that degree of dignity to none else: He by those words
excludes the Pope, etc. but not Christ's own humane nature; by which it is
indeed that we come to our union with God.

All that can truly be alleged in this case is, that Christ is not now visibly
seen as King with our bodily eyes, nor can we come to him bodily, nor receive
any verbal commands from his mouth, as we may from an earthly King. But how few
subjects have that privilege in regard of their earthly Sovereigns! The legal
commands are counted the Kings commands, and not his verbal only, nor chiefly.
Yet we find that Christ after his ascension did in Rev. 2. and 3. Chapt. write
a letter by John unto the 7. Churches of Asia, and reproves or commends and
exhorts them particularly: and in the inditing of it appears as a man to John:
and uses arguments therein from things betiding him as man: as that he was
dead and is alive again, and washed us from our sins in his own blood, etc.

Object. Though there be a Church-Catholike, yet it is not visible, because it
is the object of our faith, it being an Article of our faith, I believe the
holy Church-Catholike. Now faith is the evidence of things not seen, Heb. 11.1.
Things seen are the object of sense and knowledge, not of faith. For what a man
sees, how can he be said to believe? faith and sense are opposed each to other
by the Apostle.

Answ. If indeed we take the Catholic Church in the largest sense, for the
elect past, present, and to come, as some do; the Church-Catholike is
invisible. Also the grace of such as are invisible members, is invisible: but
that is not the Church we are speaking of: The Church we have in hand is the
whole company of visible believers in the world, considered as visible.

Secondly I answer, it is not true that that which is in it self visible cannot
be the object of faith. Indeed that which is actually seen is the object of
that man's sense and knowledge that sees it: but that which is visible, i. e.
which may be seen, may be the object of faith to him that sees it not
actually. I believe there is Orbis universus a whole world, but I never saw it,
and yet it is visible. I believe that there is a kingdom of Spain, and Empire
of Germany, and they are visible, but I never saw them, nor am ever likely to
see them. I believe there are constellations about the South-pole, but I never
saw them, and yet they are as visible as those about the North pole: So I
believe that the Church visible is now no longer included in the land of
Canaan, but is spread over many kingdoms, and may be into all, but I never saw
it in the extent thereof, and yet it is visible in it self. The extent of place
though it lessens the visibility, yet it takes it not away. I know this was an
argument of an eminent Divine of ours against a Jesuit, and it holds strongly
against the visibility of the Church-Catholike taken in the first sense, but
not in our sense. Yea, grant the Church-Catholike to be a Genus, yet the
argument reaches it not, for a Genus is not the object of faith, but of
knowledge, because the assurance thereof arises not from the credit of any
ones word, but from our own understanding.

CHAP. VI. That the Church-Catholike visible is an Organical, yet similar body.
Yea, one Organical body.
THat the particular Churches are or ought to be organized, Sect. 1. It is
Organical.
is not a thing questioned by M. Ellis or M. Hooker, nor any one that I know
of. And therefore I shall neither trouble my self nor my reader about that. It
may not only be drawn from Mat. 18. Tell the Church, which cannot be referred
only or chiefly to the Church-Catholike, for that even in a general Council
ministerially is seldom convened, and cannot be informed by every one that it
scandalized, But also from Tit. 1.5. I left thee in Crete, that thou should
ordain Elders in every city. And Heb. 13.6, 17, 24. Remember, obey, and salute
them that have the rule over you. Of the Elders of Ephesus we read, Act.
20.17. And of the Angels of the seven Churches of Asia, Rev. 2. and 3. Chapt.
And yet many of these were combined Churches of many Congregations, and might
be so all for ought I know. And we read of the Elders of the Church of
Jerusalem in the Acts, but whether fixed to particular Congregations or no I
know not, to be sure they ruled in common. Only we find Romans 16.1. Of Phaebe a
servant of the Church at Cenchraea, which is the most probable example of a
Congregational Church, as I said before, but not certainly. But I shall take
that for granted that particular Churches ought to be organized.

But with what Officers? whether with a Pastor and a Teacher, or with preaching
and mere ruling-Elders? Or by whom these ought to be elected or ordained, or
how maintained? Or whether their power be from Christ immediately, or from the
Congregation, the Officers being as their stewards and servants? Or whether the
Congregation has votes and suffrages in the dispensing of censures, and the
Elders but their mouth to pronounce and execute their censures, as he that sits
for judge and gives the charge at a Sessions, or a chairman at a Committee is,
in regard of the rest of the Justices or whole Committee to propound, gather
their votes, and pass sentence accordingly? whether their work in such
Ecclesiastical meetings be only to convene and dissolve, Chap. 6.
and to bring things into order for the hearing of the rest? are different
questions, which are not to my purpose, and therefore I will not meddle with
them.

Now seeing every part is or ought to be organized, the whole may be said to be
Organical in that sense. Sect. 2. It is similar.
If all the species be be organized (supposing they were species) the genus in
a logical consideration must be said to be organized, because it is the common
nature of the species so to be. Much more if we consider the several
Congregations as members, as indeed they are.

Now because I said that these particular Congregations thus organized, are
similar, integral parts of the whole, M. Ellis charge me with a contradiction
to mine own end and scope, and disagreeing with Apollonius, vind. 54.

First, he thinks he has caught me upon the hip of such a contradiction
against my self and scope, and that I can come off no otherwise then with a
Veniamque damus, petimusque vicissim, nor any otherwise be relieved but by the
charitable benevolence of my readers ingenuity. But if there had been such a
palpable contradiction, it is a marvel that reverend, judicious M. Hooker
should not find it, and show it as well as he. If all the countries in the
world had the same kind of civil government, both officers and laws
respectively, though not dependent, were it a contradiction to say they were
similar integral parts of the world? And if all the Corporations in a Kingdom
(though organical bodies) were of the same constitution, and had the same
Officers, as Majors, etc. would they not be similar integral parts of the
kingdom? yea, even in physical mixed bodies, as medicinal potions compounded of
several ingredients, yet because the mixture is alike in all parts they may be
said to be similar parts of the whole. Materialia componentia sunt
dissimilaria, parts integrales compositi and constituti sunt similares. So the
Church-Catholike in regard of the constituent materials, or essential parts,
viz. Officers and private Christians, is dissimilar, but in regard of the
several Congregations constituted, which are integral parts of the whole, it is
similar because they are similar. I did not mean by similar quarto modo
similare (as I may say) in the strictest sense, as happily the pure element of
fire is, but such a similarity as is consistent with a mixture of ingredient
materials. Every Congregation in reference to other Congregation is similar,
being of a like constitution, but in reference to it self it is dissimilar,
consisting of Officers and private Christians.

This assertion need not seem so harsh, seeing D. Ames as I showed before
asserteth the same. And M. Bartlet in his model, p. 45. confesses the
particular Churches to be similar parts of the Church-Catholike: and says the
Independents have left it upon record that they are so, and for that cites,
Ames. medul. c. 32. And M. William Sedgewick in his Sermon before diverse of the
Parliament, page 4. And charge the London-Ministers for an untruth in
affirming (in the preface of Jus divinum) that they deny it. But the charge is
unjust; they only set down the difference between the Presbyterians and
Independents there to be in this, that the Presbyterians hold that there is one
general Church of Christ on earth, and that all particular Churches and single
Congregations are but as similar parts of the whole: and the Independents (say
they) hold that there is no other visible Church of Christ, but only a single
Congregation, meeting in one place to partake of all Ordinances. The
London-Ministers affirm only that the Independents deny one general Church of
Christ on earth, not the similarity of particular Congregations. But it will
necessarily follow that they deny them to be similar parts, if they deny the
whole to which the parts must relate. And if they make the whole Church a genus
(as they do) then must they make the particular Churches similar species, which
is little less then a contradiction, for the formality of a species lies in
dissimilarity and difference from the opposite species.

Now to show that this assertion of the similarity of particular Churches
crosses mine own scope, M Ellis sets down mine opinion, with a mark as if the
words were mine own, which neither are my words nor my sense, viz. That the
Church (visible Catholic) is an Organical, ministerial, governing body, i. e.
(says he) not such a body as is the element of water and air, every part
whereof is of the same nature, virtue and power in it self considered, but such
a body as a man has, which is distinguished by several members, etc. And such
a body as all Corporations are. Now this (says he) contradicts plainly the
former both opinion and expression; for if the Church-Catholike be a similar
body, and all Congregations alike, and the whole nothing differing in nature or
constitution from the parts, then the Catholic visible Church is no more the
governing Church then a particular.

Ans. To let pass his unfair dealing with my self (and others) in misreciting
my words.

I said indeed the Church-Catholike was an Organical body, but not a
ministerial governing body. For the scope of my Thesis was and is to prove the
Church-Catholike as it consists of Officers and private Christians, to be the
prime Church to which the Ordinances are given respectively, as the Officers or
private members are capable; and to particular Churches secondarily. I spoke
not of the Organs or Governors only. The body of Officers is indeed a
governing body, called a ministerial Church, but the whole Church either
particular or general, is no governing body, no more then a whole Corporation
or kingdom can be said to be a governing body, but they are governed bodies,
and so is the Church both particular and general.

Indeed I find the words ministerial governing Church in M. Rutherford in his
due right of Presbyt. 177, 178, 179. etc. but it is clear that he takes it not
in M Ellis's sense, but for a Church furnished with Officers, and having
discipline and government exercised in it: for he was far from making the
body of the Church to be the receptacle of the keys, and having power of
governing. He says the keys were given for the Church, but not to the Church.

It is only a Scottish expression not to be so expounded and strained, as M.
Ellis does, who bends his whole reply against a sense of it, which I believe
was not M. Rutherfords meaning.

Neither did I make the whole to differ any thing in nature, constitution or
power from the parts; but said they have the same kind of intensive power, but
in the Church-Catholike it is of larger extension. Similar bodies conjoined
exert their power more intensely and extensively, then when single. All the
water of the Sea will cool and moisten more and further then one drop; a great
fire will warm, yea, burn more and further then a spark: a great heap of stones
extends further and will weigh more then a little one. So all Churches (if they
could meet) have no other power when met together, then a single Church, but
being combined, the power both reaches further in extension of places, and it
more august and solemn, and to be the rather respected and submitted unto.

But this (he says) crosses Apollonius, whom (says he) I follow, but indeed
I never saw his book, nor heard of it, until a good while after I had composed
my Thesis, and then inserted I think but 2. or 3. sentences of his. Apollonius
(says he) says that Ephesians. 4.16. is meant of an organical, ministerial body,
differing in members, which M. Hudson expounds to be meant of a similar body
whose parts are all alike.

Answ. They are alike in the integrals, as I said before, but not in the
essentials. But where does Apollonius deny the particular Congregations to be
similar integrals parts of the Catholic? There is therefore no disagreement
among the Presbyterians in this point (as M. Ellis suggesteth, vin. 54.) that
one of them would have one thing, another another.

But the main question comes now to be discussed, Sect. 3. It is one Organical
body.
viz Whether the whole Church-Catholike visible be one Organical body? which if
it can be made appear, will end the whole controversy.

The Church is distinguished into Entitive and Organical.

The Church visible is called Entitive, not because of the inward grace which
is essential to an invisible member, but from the reception and embracing the
Christian Catholic faith, which is essential to a visible believer. And it is
called Organical, in reference to the Officers thereof, which are the Organs of
the Church, or in regard of the Offices which Christ has instituted to be in
his visible Church. This distinction halteth as much as that of the
Church-visible and invisible: for the Organical Church is also Entitive, viz.
it is of such as have received and embraced the Christian faith, and is made up
of such, and only of such: yet there is a difference in notion, but not in
persons. Indeed in some sense a company of visible believers may be said to be
a Church-Entitive, and not Organical, because they are not actually under any
particular Officers: as a company of visible Christians in New England
inhabiting together to make a Congregation, but as yet have chosen no Officers,
may in reference to other organized Congregations be said to be inorganical,
and entitive only: but this sense is not the most proper sense of the word. For
if they be, then but a Church-entitive, then also after they have Officers, if
those particular Officers die, they should return to be a Church-Entitive only
again, in the interim before they have chosen any new ones.

Now though in consideration we may distinguish between the essence of
believers, as believers embracing the Christian faith, and their existence
under Officers, especially under particular Officers: yet the existence of
visible believers, members of the Church-Catholike, can hardly be without
reference to Officers. For the ministry of the Officers is the usual means of
their conversion: and to be sure they cannot be admitted to be actual members
of the Church-Catholike by baptism, but by some of the Officers, though not
considered as their particular Officers, yet Officers in general. And such
persons as receive the doctrine of Christ which denominates them to be
believers, are bound to receive his commands also, to submit themselves to his
Ministers for their edification. And though they have no particular Officers,
yet as they look upon the Church as a society of men and fellow members to whom
they join themselves in the general, though not as yet in any particular
membership: so they look upon the Ministers as Christ's Ministers, to whom they
are to be subject in the Lord, to receive their doctrine, exhortations and
reproofs, and from whom also, if they prove scandalous, heretical, infectious,
or apostates, they must expect disciplinary censures, though they be no
particular members, under a particular Minister.

There is a question whether the Church or the Ministers be first, because the
Ministers are the instrumental cause of the conversion of the Church, and the
Church of the choice of the Ministers, which is something like that
Philosophical question, Whether the hen or the egg were first, for as the egg
comes of a hen, so the hen comes of an egg. And as that is resolved by the
consideration of the creation, and then God made the hen first: so is this
question by consideration of the first institution and setting up of the
Evangelical Catholic Church; and then we find that Christ set up the Officers
first to convert men to be believers, and they being converted to the faith of
Christ are bound to submit themselves to Christ's Ministers in the Lord. And
because they will stand in need of constant inspection, teaching and ruling,
which they cannot enjoy from Ministers in general, as so considered: because
they are dispersed into several places for habitation, and take particular
parts of Christ's Church to watch over; therefore they are to desire and
endeavor to have some of Christ's Ministers to take the particular inspection
of them. But we know that at first they receive Baptism not from their own
particular Minister, or not as so considered; for being newly converted into
the Church, and not baptized, they cannot as I conceive be members of a
particular Congregation, until after baptism, but they receive it as from one
of Christ's Ministers in general, and are by him admitted into the visible body
the Church, and after this have liberty to choose under the inspection of what
Ministers they will put themselves. See more of this Qu. 2. S. 2. 4.

Now before the proof of this assertion, it will be needful to explain a little
what I mean by one Organical body; I do not mean that there is one universal,
visible, actual society, consisting of all such as are accounted or to be
esteemed Christians, subjected actually to one or many universal, general,
actual Pastors or guides, from whom subordinates must derive their office and
power, and with whom they must communicate in some general sacred things, which
may make them one Church as the Jews were. And which general sacred services or
duties can be performed by that universal head or heads, and that Church only.

Such an universal Christian Church Christ never ordained, no, not in the days
of the Apostles, to whom the extraordinary care of all the Churches was
committed. Nor that all the whole Church should be subjected to one supreme
Tribunal of Officers constantly erected, and continued among them. Nor yet to
communicate with Christ himself (though in some sense he may be said to be a
visible head) in some worship to be performed by all jointly assembled at some
especial solemnity, as the Jews at the Passover.

But an habitual, Politico-Ecclesiastical society, body, flock, in one
sheepfold of the militant Church, in uniform subjection to the same Lord, the
same Laws, in the same faith, and under the same visible seal of Baptism,
performing the same worship and service in kind: and though the members be
dispersed far and wide, yea, divided into several particular places, and
secondary combinations of vicinities, for actual, constant enjoyment of
Ordinances (as particular Corporations in a Kingdom, which is an accidental,
not essential relation to them as subjects of the Kingdom) yet still those
Ordinances, admissions, ejections, have influence into the whole body, as it is
a polity: and the members indefinitely may of right communicate one with
another in any place, or any company of Christians, though every person so
meeting but occasionally, may be of a several particular Church, and the
Minister dispensing, a particular Pastor to none of them all, yea, though none
of them all be fixed members of any particular Congregation, nor the Minister
dispensing fixed to no particular Congregation neither: by virtue of their
general membership in the visible body and kingdom of Christ, and of the
habitual indefinitenesse of the Ministers office, and the common donation of
the Ordinances by Christ to his whole visible Kingdom, and to all the subjects
and members thereof, which have a common freedom therein. And in this sense the
word Church is taken in Scripture. His bodies sake which is the Church, whereof
I Paul am made a Minister. The house of God which is the Church. Now because
there is no such civil society or kingdom that will in every thing parallel
this: but there use to be some general offices and officers, and some inferior
subordinate, receiving power and authority by descention, derivation, or
subordination, and the inferior Officers of less extent of place and power
then the superior. As the Lord chief Justice of England is above inferior
Justices, and his warrant can reach all persons in all the Counties of the
Kingdom, and there be constant Courts of Kings bench and Common Pleas for
judicature for all the Subjects of the whole Kingdom (though happily it was not
so in the four Monarchies) this make men stumble at the name and notion of a
Church-Catholike visible. But as in other things Christ's Kingdom is neither of
this world, not like unto worldly polities, so neither in this. But every
Minister of the Church in his particular place serves the Church-Catholike
visible in admitting members to general freedom in it, and ejecting out from
general communion, prays publicly for the whole body, and manageth his
particular charge, in reference to, and so as may stand with the good of the
whole body, whereof his Congregation is but a member. And the Ordinances
therein administered, are the Ordinances given to the whole, not as to a genus,
which is but a notion, and can have no Ordinances, but as to a spiritual kind
of an habitual organical body and polity; as to a sort of men so and so
qualified, bound up in an union and unity of the same head, laws, seals,
worship and communion.

Now the same arguments which prove the Church-Catholike an Integral, will
serve to prove it one organical body also, Sect. 4.
and therefore I shall take some of them into consideration again, under this
head and in this notion.

1. It will appear by the names and metaphors whereby the Church-Catholike is
called and set out in Scripture, which are taken from things which are not only
each of them an Integral, but each of them one Organical body: and in ea
formali ratione lies the analogy between them and the Church.

It is compared unto a natural body, which is an organical integral having many
members and Organs, which though they lie indeed in the several members, yet
are Organs of the whole, and the several members members of the whole, and do
their several actions, and perform their several offices for the good of the
whole, and sympathize together, 1 Cor. 12.12. For as the body is one, and has
many members, and all the members of that one body being many, are one body: so
also is Christ.

This is not meant of the Church of Corinth only, but of the Catholic Church,
because it is the whole body to which Christ is the head, and Christ's person as
the head of the whole, and this whole body is called Christ, i. e. mystically,
the whole receiving denomination from the better part, the head.

And so M. Bartlet takes it in his Model, page 35. for the whole Church. And so
all Expositors that I have met with, except some few of late, who to avoid the
dint of this argument would have it meant of the Church of Corinth, as a
particular Church. But it will sound very harsh to make Christ and the Church
of Corinth to be called Christ, when they are but the head, and a part of
Christ's body. It is the body whereof Paul was a member, v. 13. We are all
baptized, where Paul puts in himself and all believers.

Object. But this is meant of the invisible company of believers.

Answ. It is true, but it is spoken of them as visible, because it is brought
in there to show the diversities of gifts, offices, operations and
administrations in the visible Church: there is an eye and an ear, etc.
mentioned, and the Officers of the Church named; now there are no Officers of
the invisible Church as invisible, nor different administrations; as they are
members of the invisible body they are all similar, and have the same standing
and operations of their general calling as Christians, not as Apostles,
Prophets, Evangelists, etc. And many that have these common gifts of the holy
Ghost (which are by the Spirit of Christ) and the Offices there mentioned, were
not invisible members of Christ, yet were not only members, but Officers in
this body there spoken of. It is also the visible body there meant, because the
2. external seals, viz. Baptism and the Lords Supper are specified in v. 1^. as
means and signs of this union in one body, and they are visibly administered.

There is an invisible body of Christ and a visible, the invisible is in
organical, the visible organical; the invisible while they are in the visible
Church are visible members thereof, and so put on the relation of Officer and
private member. It is true, some things are spoken of the whole in reference to
the better part, the invisible number; and as they (...) professed themselves
to be of the invisible body, so the Apostle speaks of them, and to them, as if
they were as they ought to be, and at least made a show as if they were. But
that the place is meant of an organical body as one, is out of question, and
that the analogy between the Church and such a body, lay in the unity and
organicalnesse, is as clear.

The like is spoken Romans 12.4, 5. For as we have many members in one body, and
all members have not the same office; so we being many are one body in Christ,
and every one members one of another. It is the Church-Catholike, not Roman
particular Church; Paul puts in himself, yet had never been at Rome then. It is
organical, for the Officers are there enumerated. It is one, for there is a
sympathy of members spoken of. To this purpose is that of Salmas. Retinebitur
(...) communicativa, and (...) inter omnia membra Dominici corporis, i. e.
Ecclesiae, quae nisi una sit non potest esse vera, Appar. p. 281.

Also it is set out by a political body. Sometimes it is called a kingdom, and
the kingdom of heaven, as I showed before out of many places of Scripture. Now
a Kingdom is one Organical body; for so many men living together within the
same limits make not a Kingdom, but as it is combined by the same Laws, under
one Governor or Government. In the Heptarchy, this one Kingdom since, under
one King and body of laws, were seven Kingdoms. Now if the Church-Catholike
bears such an analogy to one Kingdom as to be called a Kingdom, it is from this
that it is one organized Integral.

It is also called a city, and sometimes Jerusalem, and as it is reformed it is
called new Jerusalem, and the members both of Jews and Gentiles are called
fellow-citizens, Ephesians. 2.19. Now a City is one Organical body under one common
government: otherwise so many houses or streets and inhabitants being together,
would not make them a City. Sometimes the buildings and inhabitants, which if
under one government would make one city and Corporation, being great and near,
and happily contiguous, yet wanting a charter to make them a Corporation are
none; yea, by difference of Charter, Government and chief Governors are two
Cities as London and Westminster. The Church-Catholike therefore being one city
is one organical body.

Also it is set out sometimes by one martial or military body, and is called an
Army terrible with banners, Cant. 6. 10. which by some is interpreted
Church Censures. M. Cotton indeed expounds it of the Church of the Jews, when
they shall be called home by conversion to the Christian faith; to be sure it
is the Church-militant. Now an Army is one organical body under one General,
and the same Laws martial, though quartered in diverse places: therefore so is
the Church-Catholike.

It is also set out by an Oeconomical body, a family or household, Ephesians. 2.19.
Now a family is one Organical body, wherein are Governors or a Governor, and
governed, an husband, father, or master; and therefore so is the
Church-Catholike, else the analogy should not hold. All these metaphors and
many more, whereby the Church-Catholike is set out, show it one visible,
organical body.

Secondly, That the Church-Catholike visible is one society virtually and
habitually, appears, because by Baptism wherever administered, the baptized
visible believer is admitted a member not of the particular Church among whom
he was baptized, nor to bear any special relation to the Minister baptizing
him, that he must take a special inspection over him as one of his particular
flock and charge, but into the whole general body of Christ's kingdom visible.
For, as I showed before, there was Baptism administered as the seal of the
general covenant, before particular Congregations were set up. See more of
this, Qu. 2. S. 2. and S. 8.

And also because by excommunication a person is not cast out of that
Congregation only where the censure was past, but out of general communion with
all other Churches in the world, even the whole visible body of Christ.
Certificates indeed we find in Scripture to others, of their excommunication,
that so others might avoid communion with them. As of the excommunication of
Hymeneus and Alexander, 1 Timothy 1.20. And so we read also of certificates of
Apostates, who it is like were excommunicated. As of Phigellus and Hermogenes,
2. Tim. 1.15. And of Hyntentus and Philetus, a Tim. 2.17. The former of which
was encommunicated, and it is probable the latter also, by the same reason. The
like certificate we find again of Alexander, 2 Timothy 4.14, 15. But no new act
of excommunication past upon them any where else.

Alexander Bishop of Alexandria having excommunicated Eusebius Bishop of
Nicomedia an Arian, writes an Epistle to certify it to all other Ministers.
Charissimis honoratissimisque fratribus, qui ubique gentium sunt nobiscum in
Ecclesiae ministerio conjuncti (...). Cum in sacris literis sit unum corpus
Ecclesiae Catholicae nobis traditum. etc. therefore he signifies by letters
what he had done, (...), Socrat. lib. 1. cap. 3. Nine Bishops excommunicated
Jovius and Maximus, and that excommunication by Cyprian and others was approved
as valid. The like we find of Novatus excommunicated at Rome by Cornelius and
a Council there, and it was certified to Fabius Bishop of Antioch, and approved
by him, and by Dionysius Bishop of Alexandria to whom the Epistles came. Eusebius.
lib. 6. cap. 35. And Santo satenus excommunicated at Antioch, was so accounted
of the whole world, Niceph. 6.28. The Novatians excommunicated in Africa are so
held at Rome. Cyp. l. 1. Ep. 3. and 13.

Thirdly, It appears to be one organical body by the identity of the external
Covenant, charter, promises, and laws of the whole Church. The Covenant,
charter, and promises, are but one grant, not one Covenant in kind and many
species thereof, but one individual Covenant of grace granted to the whole
Church. This is not the Covenant whereby particular Congregations are said to
be constituted, but the whole body. The Churches constituted by particular
Covenants are alterable, divisible, extinguishible (as M. Norton confesses, p.
30.) which this is not: they are many and particular Covenants, this one and
general: they are accidental, humane, arbitrary, and superadded; this
essential, divine, necessary, and prime. And though this Covenant may seem but
to belong to the Church as Entitive, yet the Laws which are also one visible
systeme, argue it to be organical, because they relate to Officers and
discipline: and they bind all not only vimateriae, but as proceeding from the
same fountain and author, the King of the whole Church, not qua particular
members, but qua members of the whole.

Fourthly, It appears by the general right of communion, that all the members
have habitually and indefinitely to join in, as providence offers
opportunity, though not cast into a Congregational combination, as all cannot
be. Any visible believer under the seal of Baptism only, has an inherent right
to worship with any other visible Christians in confession, petition,
thanksgiving, and praise; and to prophecy with them in the Apostles sense, i.
e. join with them in partaking of that Ordinance, to sing with them, and
receive the Lords Supper with them, and to be entreated by any Minister as an
Ambassador of Christ to be reconciled, 2 Cor. 5.20. and is bound to submit to
the doctrinal admonitions and reproofs of any Minister according to the word:
and the reason why any Minister may not pass a judicial censure also, if there
be cause (seeing the keys are commensurable) is not because he wants habitual
power in discipline, at well as doctrine, but because that is to be performed
in a Court of Elders, and a strange Minister wants a call to join with any such
Court, to bring his habitual power into act: yet our brethren will
non-communion or deny communion with a stranger, if they have any thing against
him, which is virtually a suspension of him; yea, if they have not positive
assurance by testimony (not of his being in the general Covenant, for that is
requisite, but) of his being a fixed member of some other Congregation which
they approve of, not only for having the essentials of a Church, but as a pure
Church: for upon that ground they deny the communion to some members of our
Churches that go over with certificates (though not to members of their own
Churches) because they judge us as impure. Indeed certificates are requisite
from strangers to notify their general right by being in the general Covenant,
and to notify their personal innocence from error or scandal which might
debar them.

But they only declare a right, they give none: neither does their right
proceed from the membership of the particular Congregation, from whence they
come, but from the general, which is employed in their particular membership,
because Congregations consist only of such; and they are witnesses of his godly
conversation, he having lived with them.

As for judicial, Ecclesiastical censures, I confess it is most orderly to
turn the accused person, and his accusations to his own Congregation, where an
Eldership has taken the particular inspection of him, and have power in actu
secundo already called forth to deal with him: but suppose they will not, or
neglect it, or he will not return, but abide still in another place; or suppose
he be not a fixed member in any Congregation, but a wandering star, and yet is a
baptized person, and is very scandalous, or very erroneous, and fit to infect
the persons among whom he converseth; shall there be no remedy for that
Congregation? For ought I know, they may put their general, habitual power into
act, and upon sufficient witness proceed against him, and finding him
obstinate may excommunicate him, as well as a civil Officer will keep the kings
peace in his own Town, by clapping an unruly, riotous, or traitorous stranger
by the heels, if he take him within his limits.

Fifthly, I might argue also from the opposition of the adversaries of the
Church, both Satan and persecutours, who oppose it not essentially only, but
politically; their spite being against the Officers and Organs of the Church,
not only qua Christians, but qua Ministers, not qua Ministers of this or that
particular Congregation, but qua the Ministers of the Church, and not only as
dispensers of Word and Sacraments, but as dispensers of censures especially for
they do most usually gaul men, and move their anger. They look upon the Church
as one body, and upon Ministers as Officers of the Church in a general
consideration, and so may we.

Sixthly, Sect. 5.
It appears by the indefinitenesse of the office of Ministers: which I reserved
for the last, because I shall dilate a little more upon it then the former, And
indeed upon this hinge hangs the whole question of the Organical integrality
of the Church Catholic visible. And turn the question which way you will, it
will rest on this center, viz. Whether a Minister be a Minister to any but his
own Congregation?

I find M. Ellis affirming that a Minister is an Officer only to his own
Congregation, vind. p. 8. And the answer of the Elders of several Churches in
New England, unto 9. Positions, p. 8. Their words are these, If you mean by
Ministerial act, such an act of authority and power in dispensing of Gods
Ordinances as a Minister does perform to the Church, whereunto he is called to
be a Minister, then we deny that he can so perform any Ministerial act to any
other Church but his own, because his office extends no further then his call.

So M. Best in his Church-Plea p. 30 says, Officers of Churches may be helpful
to other Churches as Christians, but not as Ministers. To the same purpose M.
Bartlet in his model, p. 69. Hereby it appears they suppose the Ordination of a
Minister to his office, is limited to the particular Congregation that call
him. Indeed the call of the people exerts or calls forth the exercise of his
office unto them in particular constantly; but his Ordination to his office is
more general, and gives him habitual power in actu primo, to exercise and
perform the acts belonging to his office elsewhere upon a call. Christ gives
the office, and has annexed power of dispensing his Ordinances: the Presbytery
ministerially admit this or that man into it, not as a Presbytery of that
particular Congregation, for they may none of them belong unto it, but as a
Presbytery of Christ's Ministers having a call to give that Ordination in a
regular way: and the particular Congregation, by desire and election give a
call to the exercise of this power among them, pro his and nunc.

Habitu and potestate omnes Episcopi sunt Episcopi cujusvis in orbo vel
paraecia, vel provinciae, quia in quavis apti sunt, habiles, and idonei
exercere Episcopalia sua munera, quando illuc legitime vocantur, ac mittamtur.
Actu vero and quoad legitimum exercitium, ibi solummodo Episcopi sunt ubi per
missionem and vocationem illam modiatam Dei, etc. huic illive Paraeciae, etc.
praeficiuntur. Crakenthorp. Def. Eccl. Aug. c. 28.

Now that a Minister is a Minister and so habitually in office to more then his
own Congregation, and therefore indefinitely to all the whole Church, will
appear by these proofs. First, because the donation of the keys, and the
institution and commission of the Evangelical Ministry was in reference to the
whole. Go teach all Nations, and baptize them. Whenas yet there was no
distinction of Congregations. God set some in the Church, first Apostles,
secondarily Prophets, thirdly Teachers, 1 Cor. 12.28. So Ephesians. 4.12.

As God gave the Levites to the whole house of Israel, and they did at first in
the wilderness serve all the Tribes conjunctim, as one body of Officers over
one combined large Congregation, but afterward when the Tribes were dispersed
in Canaan, the Levites were dispersed among all the Tribes, and exercised their
office of teaching and judging in the several places where they dwelt; yet this
divested them not of their general habitual power, this made not their office
to stand in relation to the particular city or Synagogue where they did
constantly exercise: and when they removed from place to place, as the wandering
Levite, Jud. 17.8. did, they still retained their habitual office and power,
and needed no new consecration, but by virtue of their office did exercise the
acts belonging to it where they had their particular station and call.

So is it with the Evangelical Ministry of the New Testament: a Minister of
the Gospel bears a double relation, one to the Church-Catholike indefinitely,
another to that particular Congregation over which he is set for the constant
exercise of his office. And if he removes to another place, he needs no new
Ordination; for that continues and abides still upon him; it being to the
essence of his office, and not in reference either to the place from whence he
comes, or to which he goes only. A Physician or Lawyer needs no new
license, or call to the Bar, though they remove to other places, and have other
patients and clients. The Justice of peace who is in commission for the whole
County, though he exercised it in one part of the County, while he lived there,
yet if he removes to the other end of the County, he needs no new commission
to execute his office there, where he never did before, because it was habitual
to the whole County, though actually exercised where he lived; so though a
Minister removes, he needs no new Ordination, but a new call to the exercise
of his office there, no more then a private Christian by removing into another
Congregation, needs a new Baptism, because neither Ordination nor Baptism
stand in relation to the particular Congregation, but the Church-Catholike. As
he that is admitted a freeman in any Hall of any Company in London, is admitted
a freeman of the whole City, as well as of that Company: and he that by reason
of his birth has right to be baptized in any Congregation, is admitted a
member of the whole society of the Church-Catholike visible, as well as of that
Congregation: so he that is ordained a Minister, as by the occasion of the call
of a particular Congregation he is ordained their particular Minister, so also
is he ordained a Minister of Christ and the Gospel, and Church in general.
Ordination (says M. Rutherford) makes a man a Pastor under Christ formally
and essentially, the peoples consent and choice do not make him a Minister, but
their Minister, the Minister of such a Church: he is indefinitely made a Pastor
for the Church. Ruth. peaceab. plea. 263.

And to the same purpose it is that M. Ball says. A Minister chosen and set
over one society, is to look unto that people committed to his charge, etc. but
he is a Minister in the Church universal: for as the Church is one, so is the
Ministry one, of which every Minister (sound and Orthodox) does hold his part.
And though he is a Minister over that flock which he is to attend, yet he is a
Minister in the Church-universal. The function or power of exercising that
function in the abstract, must be distinguished from the power of exercising it
concretely, according to the diverse circumstances of places. The first
belongs to a Minister every where in the Church, the latter is proper to the
place and people where he does minister. The lawful use of the power is limited
to that Congregation ordinarily; the power it self is not so bounded. In
ordination Presbyters are not restrained to one or other certain place, as if
they were to be deemed Ministers there only, though they be set over a certain
people. And as the Faithful in respect of their community between them, must
and ought to perform the offices of love one to another, though of different
societies; so the Ministers in respect of their communion, must and ought upon
occasion to perform Ministerial offices toward the faithful of distinct
societies. Trial of new Church. ^ap. p. 33.

To the same purpose is that of Crakenthorp. Episcopi omnes qua Episcopi
universalis Ecclesia pastores sunt, and jure Divino sic pastores sunt.
Episcopus item unusquisque particularis sua Ecclesia pastor est, non qua
Episcopus sed qua Romanus, aut Alexandrinus Episcopus, nec jure Divino sed
humano solum, and Ecclesiastico, pastor sic est. Cura omnium ovium, qua
Episcopi sunt, ad omnes spectat, says Salmas.

Praeter peculiarem curam quam singuli habent pastores suarum Ecclesiarum,
generalem etiam quadantenus habere censendi sunt universalis Ecclesiae in his
rebus quae ad salutem and bonum omnium Ecclesiarum cedunt, Apparat. 270. For,
says he, as in the natural body, the particular members have a double office,
one general and common for the defense and service of the whole body, and
another special and proper; speciale ac proprium; so it is in the Church. It
was the commendation of Athanasius by Basil in Ep. 7^. Tantam geris omnium
Ecclesiarum curam, quantam ejus quae tibi peculiariter a Domino tradita est.

Secondly, Sect. 6.
It appears by the subject matter whereabout the office of the Ministry is
exercised, viz, the Ordinances of God, the Word and Sacraments, and Prayer: the
good news of the Gospel, the profers, promises and precepts, which equally
pertain to all parts of the Church-Catholike. Therefore their function is set
out indefinitely, in reference unto the subject matter of it, and not the
people to whom they dispense them. A Minister is an Ambassador of Jesus
Christ, and is in office habitually to the whole Church: and though he be set
to lie leiger in a particular Church, yet the subject of his office reaches to
the whole Church, and not that place only; yea, to all that are capable of
reconciliation, for the Ministry is the Ministry of reconciliation; and even
when he delivers his Embassage in his own Church, he is to deliver both
profers, promises and precepts indefinitely to strangers of other
Congregations, yea, of foreign nations, if they come into his Congregation.
Suppose a Mayor of a Corporation should send abroad his Sergeants to summon the
whole Corporation to a general Court, and for expediency should send one into
one street, another into another, a third into a third street: if any of these
sergeants in their walks should meet a freeman that dwells in another street,
ought he to forbear to summon him, because he dwells not in his particular walk,
seeing he is an indefinite Officer to the whole Corporation, or is that summons
without authority, because the man dwells out of his particular limits, seeing
the business concerns all? Surely no, he ought to exert his general, habitual
power of his office, and summon him. So seeing Gods message is general to all,
though the Ministers (who are indefinite Officers) be settled in particular
Congregations for expediency, yet they have power by virtue of their office to
deliver it to any Christian that God offers them an opportunity to preach unto.
It is unreasonable, that seeing the message is indefinite, and concerns all in
general, the commission to deliver it should be but particular. But I shall
touch upon this in the second question.

Thirdly, It appears by the end of the Ministerial function, viz. to increase
and edify the body of Christ, not only the invisible body but the visible
also, by converting such as do not as yet believe the Gospel. And this was a
great part of the work of the Ministers in the primitive times: but how could
they baptize those they had converted, when the Apostles and Evangelists were
dead, if they had power to baptize only their own members? And this work, as
there is occasion offered, lies on Ministers still, for the office of the
Apostles and Evangelists is ceased, and yet many remain still out of the
Church. Indeed while the Churches of New England constitute Churches of members
already baptized, this difficulty appears not; but if they come to convert
natives, how shall they be baptized but by an Officer of the Church-Catholike?
for they are members of no Congregation, either they must admit them members of
their own Congregation, and then baptize them, as their members, as I perceive
their practice is, for which practice we find no precept or precedent or
intimation in Scripture, or else baptize them into the Church-Catholike, and
then admit them members of their particular Congregations, and yet that will
not stand with this opinion: or else they must grant them liberty to gather
into a Church-Entitive (as some call it) and so make them capable of choosing
Officers, and of being a political body before they be baptized; but neither
will this stand with our brethrens principles: but should this latter be
granted, who shall ordain a Pastor over them? Shall unbaptized persons lay on
their hands on them? See more of this, Q. 2. S. 2.

Also the feeding and edifying of the body already converted, requires that
this power of the ministerial function should be indefinite, for the minister
of any particular Congregation through sickness or absence, or the like
occasions, may not be able to afford sufficient spiritual food to his own
people, neither Word, Sacraments, nor discipline, without the help of single
fellow-laboures, or a combined, classical Eldership. What shall become of a
Congregation in the intervals between the death of a former Pastor and the
election of another? or who shall ordain him if he be elected? seeing all
Officers of all particular Congregations in the world are but as private men to
them, by this opinion.

The end of the Ministerial function is threefold, to convert into the visible
Church, to convert into the invisible Church, and to edify such as are
converted. Now this opinion cuts the two former ends quite off; for they
suppose them both visibly and invisibly converted, before they think them fit
matter for a Church, and so before admission into a particular Congregation,
and then restrain the Ministers office only to the particular Congregation so
constituted, so that his work is only to edify and govern such as are supposed
to be truly godly, and train up their children. And by consequence it must
follow that all conversion must be by men out of office, or at least as so
considered. But Pro. 9 3. Wisdom sends out her maidens to call in those that
are without, viz. the simple and that want understanding. The Ministers by
virtue of their office may exhort and entreat and summon ^n, to submit unto
Christ, such as refuse and are unwilling and such as against whom (they
continuing perverse) they are to shake off the dust of their feet, for a
witness against them. They are (...) under-suitors for the Bridegroom, Joh.
3.19. to woo such as are of themselves unwilling, and to make motions for
Christ to such as either heard not before of him, or had not before consented
unto Christ.

Fourthly, It appears from the actions which every particular Minister does
perform, both in his own Congregation and out of it. Every Minister does in his
own Congregation serve the Church-Catholike, by admitting members into the
Church-Catholike, and by preaching the word to strangers that come to his
Congregation, both fixed members of other Congregations, and such as are not
fixed in any, and administering the Lords Supper to members of other
Congregations, and in other Congregations by preaching or administering the
seals there, upon a desire. And by excommunication they eject not only out of
their own, but out of the whole. They also can keep lectures in other
Congregations frequently. If it be objected, That this is occasionally done,
and a charitative act and not an act of office. I answer, indeed charity and
necessity may be the occasion of the performance thereof pro hic and nunc, but
that cannot enable them to do it, if their office did not give them right and
power habitually thereunto, no more then to private Christians.

It is observable what M. Ball in his Trial of the new Church Way says, p. 80.
That to suppose a Minister to be a Minister to his own Congregation only, and
to none other society whatsoever, or to what respect soever, is contrary to the
judgment and practice of the universal Church, and tends to destroy the
unity of the Church, and that communion which the Church of God may and ought
to have one with another. For if he be not a Minister in other Churches, then
are not the Churches of God one, nor the Ministry one, not the flock which they
feed one, nor the communion one which they had each with others. Again p. 90.
he says, If a Minister may pray, preach, and bless another Congregation in
the name of the Lord, and receive the Sacrament with them, we doubt not but he
being thereunto requested by consent of the Pastor and the Congregation, he may
lawfully dispense the seals among them, as need and occasion require. That
distinction of preaching by office, and exercising his gifts only, when it is
done by a Minister, and desired of none but Ministers, and that in solemn, set,
constant Church Assemblies, we cannot find warranted in the word of truth, and
therefore we dare not receive it.

The Ministers are the light of the world, and though they stand like a light
upon a particular Candlestick, yet are occasionally to enlighten all that they
can, either that come to them, or that they occasionally go among. Reverend M.
Norton in his answer to Apollonius says, this is mediantibus candelabris
Ecclesiarum. His words are these, cap. 7. pa. 91. Nobis ergo judicibus,
Ministri ordinarij virtute muneris Ecclesiastici, sunt pastores certis
Ecclesijs, and mediantibus candelabris Ecclesiarum, ministri omni creaturae,
pro occasion data, etc. But this concession is too narrow: for every Minister
gives light to others, not only as he stands in his own Candlestick, viz.
when others come to him; but also out of his Candlestick, when he goes to
them. And when he preaches or administreth Sacraments abroad, he does it not
as the Minister of such a particular Congregation, but of the Church-Catholike;
for the particular Congregation has nothing to do to send an Officer to
exercise his office in another Church, if it be confined and peculiar to that
particular Congregation only, no more then a Corporation can send their Mayor
to exercise his office in another Corporation, no not charitative. It is
therefore mediante officio sive munere, by reason of the indefinitenesse of his
office, not of his particular station and relation, that he can dispense the
Ordinances to other Congregations. M. Norton p. 80. acknowledges that a
Minister has potestatem exercendi actus officij charitative, and modo debito,
in aliis Ecclesiis, and that this ministerial power whereby he exercises such
acts, in an Ecclesiastical power, p. 81. and that it is Ecclesiastical, not
only in regard of the dispenser and administrer (as it is when he preaches to
heathens) but in regard of the receivers or people to whom he does dispense;
and that Churches non tantum sub ratione Christian a exercent communionem
Christianam, sed etiam qua Ecclesiae exercent communionem Ecclesiasticam inter
seipsas, and in seipsis ad invicen: quare etiam Ministri, praecipue cum sint
parts ejusdem totius organici, etiam qua Ministri, actus ministeriales officii
in Ecclesii^ non exercerent? And even from this concession of his (as I
conceive) will necessarily follow that every Minister has an indefinite,
habitual, Ecclesiastical power, by virtue of his office in the whole
Church-Catholike visible in toto eodem organico, which if it may be brought
into act and exercise by charity, then much more by necessity, combination,
mission or delegation, and if for the exercise of one key, why not of another,
so it be in a due manner? They are the Stewards of the mysteries of God, 1 Cor.
4.1. and though by particular assignment they dispense the Ordinances to a
particular company of Christ's family, yet may not deny them to others of the
family that have the same right thereto. They are spiritual fathers, and do not
only beget their own people to Christ ministerially, but strangers also. They
are Christ's shepherds, and are to neglect none of Christ's sheep, as
opportunity is offered, though they have a particular charge of a set flock.

When M. Ellis preached before the Parliament, did he preach as a private
Christian, a gifted brother, or as a Minister? Surely they summoned him as a
Minister, and heard him as a Minister: for they could have found many able
Gentlemen members of Parliament, Lawyers or Citizens, who could have spent an
hour or two in prayer, and exposition, and exhortation, but they never summoned
any such to perform that work. Or had they summoned him to have been a member
of the Reverend Assembly, would he have acted there as a private man, or as a
Minister? Or do the d^ssenting brethren sit there as private men? or keep
Lectures in London as private men?

Indeed skill, fitting endowments and willingness give a capacity to be called
to the office, but Ordination and mission gives habitual power, and a call
gives occasion of exercise thereof, and of drawing forth that power and office
into act.

A private soldier may have as much skill to lead a Troop as a Captain, but
he cannot do it authoritatively without a commission: so happily many private
Christians are able to preach and govern in the Church, by reason of their
skill, knowledge, wisdom and faithfulness, but cannot do it authoritatively,
having no commission by office thereunto. And should such private man pass the
censure against a scandalous brother that the Elders would do, yet it is not
Ecclesiastical binding, yea, though such a scandalous person should refer
himself to them as arbitrators, and promise to submit to their censure, yet
they cannot Ecclesiastically excommunicate him, or restore him; no more then
private men in an arbitration can condemn and execute a malefactor, or absolve
him (though he be innocent) if indicted. Many times private men standing by, and
hearing the evidence at the Assizes against a malefactor, will say he is but a
dead man, yet that is no judicial condemnation of him, though it be materially
according to the law of the land, yet it is not formally, for so is the act of
the Judge only, who is in office for that purpose.

Fifthly, If private Christians bear a double relation, Sect. 7.
one to the Church Catholic visible as members thereof, and another to the
particular Congregation where they are particular members, then so do the
Ministers also. The universality of private Christians membership necessarily
requires an universality of the ministerial office, for dispensing the
Ordinances to them, though but occasionally. As particular members agree with
other particular members in Christianity, so particular Ministers agree with
other particular Ministers in the ministerial office. If particular private
members can join with any Congregations in the Word, Sacraments, and prayer,
and are bound to contribute to them as members of the same general body (if
there be need) though in foreign countries; then may also particular Ministers
dispense the Ordinances of Jesus Christ as generally, if there be necessity or
occasion. Epiphanius Bishop of Cyprus ordained a Deacon and Presbyter at
Bethlehem, in monasterio Bethlemitico, in the jurisdiction of John Bishop of
Jerusalem, when they were almost destitute of spiritual food, and defended his
action thus. Oh Dei timorem hoc facere compulsi sumus, maxim quum nulla sit
diversitas in sacerdotio Dei, and ubi utilitati Ecclesia providetur. Nam et si
singuli Ecclesiarum Episcopi habent sub se Ecclesias quibus curam videntur
impendere, and nemo super alienam mensuram extendatur, tamen praeponitur
omnibus charitas Christi. It seems he accounted his office habitually genera^,
and though the order of the Church required him to keep within his own bounds
ordinarily, yet necessity, the profit of the Church, and the love of Christ,
might draw forth the execution of his office further.

He adds further, Non considerandum quid factum sit, sed "quo tempore, and
quo modo, and in quibus, and quare factum sit, i. e. if it be not done to make
a schism in the Church, as he expresses himself afterward, ne que feci
quicquam ut Ecclesiam scinderem. Afterward he adds, Multi Episcopi communionis
nostrae and presbyteros in nostra ordinaverunt Provincia. -- Ipse cohortatus
sum beata memoriae Philonem Episcopum, and Sm Theopropum ut in Ecclesiis Cypri,
quae juxta se erant, ad meae autem paraeciae Ecclesiam vide bantur pertinere,
ordinarent presbyteros, and Christi Ecclesiae providerent. Epiph. Epist. ad
Johan. Hierosol. quam Hieronymus lutinam fecit. Extat in Hieron. Ep. T. 2. and
in Ep. Hieron. ad Paumachum. T. 2. Vide Baronium Anno Christi 392. Sect. 42.
etc.

The universal pastoral care which lies on all Bishops as Bishops, says
Crakanthorp, puts forth it self both in general Councels, yea, and out of
Councels this universal care of the Church lies upon all Ministers that they
provide for the safety of the Church as much as lies in them, consulendo,
hortando, monendo, arguendo, increpando, scriptis simul and voce alios omnes
instruendo, and cum vel h^resis ulla vel schismain Ecclesia grassari caeperit,
velut incendium publicum illud restinguendo, and ne latius serpat providendo.
Def. Eccl. Angl. c. 28.

Sixthly, There will follow diverse great absurdities, if the office of a
Minister stands only in relation to his own Congregation. For then he cannot
preach any where as a Minister but in his own Congregation, nor yet to any that
come to his own Congregation occasionally, much less administer the seals of
the Covenant to them, though they come never so well approved by testimonials,
or by their own knowledge of them, which yet has been the ancient custom of
the Church, and is practiced still among our brethren in New England, by virtue
of communion of Churches, as they say: but this being an act of office, cannot
be done except there be an habitual, indefinite power of the ministerial
office, which by this desire of strangers and their testimonial, is drawn forth
into act.

Also hereby a Minister is rendered but as a private Christian to all the
Christian world except his own Congregation, and if his Congregation be any way
dissolved, he is but a private man again. Also the censore of excommunication
which has been inflicted by such Officers in such a Congregation can never be
taken off by any other Officers in any other Congregation after the dissolution
of that, for no Congregation can receive an excommunicated person to be a
member before absolution, and absolve him they cannot, because he is none of
their members; Ejusdem est ligare and solvere: yea, and if he be wronged by
censures in any particular Congregation, no Church in the world can relieve
him, except there be an indefinite, habitual power of office, which by such
occasions can be drawn forth into act. It makes way also for any private man
to preach publicly if he be able, for Ministers themselves, by this opinion,
should preach but as private men, if they preach out of their own Congregation.
Also it necessarily implies that a Minister cannot remove from his particular
Congregation, though for the great advantage of the Church, unless he will
divest himself of his former Ordination (which was in reference only to his
particular Congregation, by this opinion) and take a new Ordination to his
Ministerial office again, as if he had never been ordained before. And all
acting in Councels must be the actings of private Christians. And all the
Lectures that are kept by neighbour-Ministers in combination, or singly (except
by the particular Ministers of that Congregation where the Lecture is kept) are
performed by private men, for so (by this opinion) they are to all the world,
except their own Congregations. And so if any of their own members come and
hear them preach at any such Lectures, Funerals, Marriages, or Baptizings, it
is authoritative preaching indeed to them, because of their particular relation
to him, but only a charitative exercising of gifts, as a private man out of
office to all men else.

And if this opinion be true, what shall become of all the unfixed visible
Christians in New England? who by reason of their unresolvednesse, where yet to
fix their civil habitations, or of scrupulosity or want of ability utterance,
and boldness, to express themselves so as to obtain an admission into a
particular Congregation, or happily though visible Christians under the seal of
the Covenant, yet have not the inward true work of grace in them, yet are
neither ignorant nor scandalous, but live inoffensively, and willing to join in
and submit unto all Gods Ordinances: I say, what shall become of them and their
seed? Shall they all be left without the Church in Satan's visible Kingdom,
because they are no particular members, and there is no extension of the
Ministerial office beyond the particular Congregations?

Sect. 8.
Object. If every Minister be a Minister of the Church Catholic visible, then
what do they differ from Apostles and Evangelists, for that was their especial
privilege that their commission extended it self to all Churches? This
Objection M. Bartlet has in Model* p. 69.

Answ. There is this difference; Every minister has by his Ordination power in
actu primo to administer the Ordinances of God in all the Churches of the
Saints, yet not in actu secundo without a special call. But the Apostles and
Evangelists (which were vicarij Apostolorum) had both: and the Evangelists
power was called forth by the Apostles, for they exercised their function where
the Apostles appointed them. The Apostles received their office immediately from
and by Christ: The Evangelists theirs from Christ by the Apostles: ordinary
Ministers theirs from Christ indeed, but ministerially by the Presbytery. The
Apostles and Evangelists were not fixed officers in any particular
Congregation, but itinerant from place to place: ordinary Ministers are fixed
in their own Congregations. They served the Church-Catholike actually
wheresoever they became, and could draw forth the exercise of their offices
without any mediate consent or call of the particular Churches or places, but
so cannot particular ordinary Ministers. So that ordinary Ministers they are
Ministers of the Church Catholic, though not Catholic Ministers actually. But
if Ministers be Ministers only in their particular Congregations, where they
are fixed, and to which they were called by the Congregation, I marvel that our
brethren of the Congregational way here in England are so desirous to have
itenerant Ministers to be sent into all parts of the land that shall be fastened
to no particular Congregations: yea, and also to have gifted men, not ordained
at all, to be suffered to preach publicly and constantly in Congregations;
surely these things are not consistent with their principles.

CHAP. VII. About Combinations of particular Congregations in Classes, and of
them in Synods.
A further question is about the combination of Congregations and Elderships in
Classes and Synods. Sect. 1.
For though it cannot be denied but that particular Ministers in their
particular Congregations do serve the Church-Catholike in their admissions,
ejections, and other Ordinances, as preaching to, praying with, and
administering Sacraments to members of other Churches, in their own
meeting houses, and upon occasion in other meeting houses, for the case is the
same, whether they come to him, or he go to them; yet it may be doubted whether
the Ministers and Elders may combine together, and jointly exercise acts of
government, etc. And though this does not necessarily belong to my question,
yet because it has some reference to the integrality of the Church-Catholike,
I shall speak something of it.

Now there is a double Integrality of the Church-Catholike, the first is
Entitive whereby they are all bound together in the visible embracing,
profession of, and subjection unto the visible doctrine, covenant, and laws of
Christ, whereby they become Christians in the genera^, whereby all Christians
are bound as opportunity is offered, to perform Christian duties one to
another, as fellow members, ex officio charitatis generali, not only by virtue
of the moral law, but by the law of Christ, and to Christ as the King and head
of his Church. As all dwelling within the kingdom of England are members of the
Kingdom, and bound to carry themselves as subjects to the governors and laws,
and as fellow subjects one to another, though they be fixed members of no
Corporations nor Townships. And this integrality is always actual.

The second is as it is organical by combination, as all the Counties and
Corporations and Towns by combination make one kingdom: so all the particular
Christian Congregations, Provinces and Kingdoms by combination make one
Church-Catholike visible under Christ, Chap. 7.
and this is an habitual integrality. Of this it is that Ames speaks, the
Church-Catholike in regard of the external state thereof, Per combinationem
habet suam integralitutem, Am. med. l. 1. c. 33. f. 18.

There is likewise a double combination, one habitual, whereby all Churches and
Christians are united and habitually combined into one political Kingdom under
Christ, and are obliged to be mutually helpful one to another, as need
requires, as becomes fellow subjects and fellow members: secondly, there is
actual combination, whereby any particular Churches shall actually agree, and
so unite together for mutual help of each other, and for transactions of
businesses of common concernment. And this is either a constant combination of
vicinities in a Classis, because there will be constant cause; or occasional
and more seldom, as of a whole Province or Nation, and may be of the whole
Church-Catholike, if convenible by their delegates. This latter combination is
fundamentum exercitij: by the former they have jus adrem, by this latter they
have jus in re, to act conjunctim for the good of those Churches so actually
combined.

And of this second kind of integrality and combination it is that we are now
speaking, which necessarily arises from the former, as the organical
integrality of a Kingdom arises from the Entitive. For seeing all are
fellow subjects under the same Sovereign and Laws, though they have particular
Counties, Corporations and Towns wherein they live, and actually enjoy
constantly the general privileges of subjects under the King and Laws, yet
there will necessarily result a community and habitual integrality of the whole
by coordinate combination.

The civil and Ecclesiastical combinations as they proceed from a parallel
ground, viz. subjection to the same laws and Sovereign (I mean respectively) so
they must necessarily run parallel in things that are general and essential to
combination. Our brethren make them run parallel in the two first steps, viz.
in combining particular persons into families, and particular families into
Congregations of them that are (...), dwellers together in some vicinity, which
is nothing else in English but Parishioners, the English word comes of the
greek. The Christians dwelling together made one Church at Jerusalem, Ephesus,
Corinth, etc. by Ecclesiastical combination, as well as one city by civil
combination respectively. And I doubt not but if all the Inhabitants of any one
Town in New England were judged fit to be members of the Church, they would
combine them as members of the Church in that Town, and that Town would give
denomination to them all as the Church in or of such a Town. And seeing the
subjects of Christ's Ecclesiastical Kingdom ^unne parallel further with the
subjects of a civil Kingdom, they all being Christians, Why may not the
combination also run parallel, and the denomination be parallel for transaction
of common Ecclesiastical affairs, as well as civil, if prudence so dictate it?
and the Churches in a hundred if they lie convenient, combine ^to a Classis as
well, as into a hundred for civil transaction? And the Classes into a Province
as well as hundreds into a County or Shire? and the Provinces into a national
Church as well as the Counties into a civil Kingdom? and seeing Christ's
Ecclesiastical Kingdom reaches over many Kingdoms, why may they not make one
habitual Church-Catholike, as well as many Kingdoms under the same laws and
head make one Empire? The actuality indeed may cease where the constant or
frequent community of acting cease, whether at the Congregation or Classis
where all the Officers are combined in frequent common acting, or at the
National Church where the civil community cease, and so the frequent occasion
of common acting by delegates cease, I determine not, but the habituality
cease not in the whole Church-Catholike visible.

I shall first speak of the combination of particular Congregations into a
Presbyterial Church, Sect. 2.
commonly called for distinction sake a Classis. That there may be a college or
body of Elders that can act conjunction as well as divisim, appears from 1 Timothy
4.14. where the Presbytery are said to lay their hands on Timothy. There is the
name and thing, and their acting conjunctim in Ordination, which was not the
Presbytery of a single Church, or at least not so considered in their
Ordination of an Evangelist, an itinerant, universal, actual officer under the
Apostles. Our brethren also in New England join the Elders of diverse
Congregations together in ordaining Elders for a new-erected Congregation, and
not only the erecting of new Congregations will require it necessarily, but the
supplying of other Congregations vacant by death, for there are but few
Congregations so well stored with preaching Presbyters, as can ordain new ones,
if one or two of them die. Also we find an Eldership acting together, Act.
15.6. The Apostles and Elders came together to consider of this matter. Also
Act. 11.30. and Act. 21.18. Christ gave the keys to the Apostles together, Mat.
28.19. Go ye and teach and baptize, etc. who though they received their
extraordinary calling of Apostleship for themselves only, yet they received the
ministerial office for all succeeding Ministers, and we find no other especial
donation of the keys; and this appears by the following words, Lo I am with you
always even to the end of the world; which must needs be meant of the succeeding
Ministers, for the Apostles were not to last to the end of the world, neither
their persons nor their office. Therefore as the Apostles could from that
donation exercise the keys conjunctim and divisim in their extraordinary
function, so may the Presbyters exercise theirs also, and some keys cannot be
used but conjunctim, as in Ordination and dispensing censures: and if Elders of
several Congregations can act together as Elders in ordination (even in
New England) and in censures, much more th^^ in a greater body. And if our
brethren in New England dared admit private men to lay on their hands in
ordination of their Ministers, doubtless they would appoint some of their own
private members to do it, that so (according to their tenet) they might enjoy
all Gods Ordinances independently in their particular Congregations, and not
admit of a foreign Officer to come and act as an Officer among them.

That diverse Congregations may combine and make one Presbyterial Church,
appears by diverse instances in the New Testament. The Congregations in
Jerusalem are called one Church, Act. 8.1. Act. 11.22. Act. 15.4. The
Congregations in Antioch are called one Church* Act. 1^.1. and Act. 11.26. The
Congregations in Ephesus are called one Church, Act. 20.17. Rev. 2.1. And the
Congregations in Corinth mentioned in the plural number, 1 Cor. 14.34. are
called one Church, 1 Cor. 1.2. and 2 Cor. 1.1. Now that there were several
Congregations in each of these cities appears, because there were in each of
them so great a multitude of believers, as that they could not meet together to
partake of all Gods Ordinances, especially if we consider that they had no
public eminent buildings for meeting houses, but met privately (...) Act.
2.46. in an upper room, Act. 1.13. and in the house of Mary, Act. 12.12, in the
school of Tyrannus, Act. 19.9. in the house of Aquila and Priscilla, 1 Cor.
16.19. in Paul's hi^ed house at Rome, Act. 28.30. in the house of Nymphas,
Colos. 4.15. etc. therefore called the Church in their houses. And this manner
of meeting continued in the times of persecution in that age, and some
succeeding.

Also it appears by the multitude of Church Officers, Elders, Prophets and
Teachers that were in each of them, which could not busy themselves in one
Congregation, and sure they were not idle in those days. Also by the variety
of languages, especially at Jerusalem, Act. 2.5, 8. etc. See these and other
arguments of this nature more fully explained, and more particularly proved and
applied in Jus Div. part. 2. chap. 13.

And if these Churches were such (as in all rational probability they were)
then that position* That there are no other Ecclesiastical societies instituted
by Christ but particular Congregational-Churches, will not hold good; and the
Basis of the Congregational way will fail, and the partition wall that seems
thereby to be between them and the Presbyterians, must fall down.

And this unity of these Churches was not a spiritual unity in regard of saving
grace, for all the members had not that; nor in regard of judgment, belief,
heart and way, for that was common to all the Christian^ in the world: but a
political union by an especial Ecclesiastical obligation together (though we
find no mention of any explicit Covenant, as the constituent form of the
particular Churches) nor only in regard of the administration of Word,
Sacraments and Prayer, for these were dispersed in their several Congregations,
and could not be jointly together in regard of their multitudes. Neither were
they one in reference to the Apostles general power and office only, they being
universal Pastors; for so the universal Church over the whole world was one;
but in regard of the common Presbytery whereby they were governed constantly,
and the Apostles themselves being in these several Churches did act as
co-Presbyters with their Elders, and so they call themselves Elders, 1 Pet.
5.^. and Joh. 2. And though indeed it cannot be peremptorily affirmed, that
these Presbyterial Churches had their several Elders fixed to their several
Congregations; yet that (as I conceive) varies not the question at all. And yet
it is very probable that the Elders in those cities did divide those cities
between them, for particular teaching and inspection of manners, to avoid
confusion, and for a better means of conversion and edification of the whole,
that so the members and others might the better know where they should be
baptized, taught and instructed (so far I mean as the persecutions and ^ange^s
of those times would permit) and yet for more weighty manners of ordination,
excommunication, or confuting any heresies, or transacting any business of
general concernment they did meet together.

Now that these several Presbyterial Churches had each of them a common
Presbytery set over them to govern in common, appears for Jerusalem, by Act.
11.27, 30 and Act. 15.2. and at Antioch by Act. 13* 1, 2, 3. with Act. 15 35.
and at Ephesus by Act. 20.17, 28. (...) at Corinth, 1 Cor. 1.12. and 1 Cor.
4.15. and 14 29. and at Philippi, Phil. 1.1.

And not only Scripture proves it in the practice, but right reason and
necessity requires that there should be a combination of particular
Congregations, for the attaining the end for which government was appointed,
both because there are many things that jointly concern many particular
Congregations, and therefore it ^s fit they should be transacted in common: as
also some particular Congregations are too weak to perform some things that may
concern themselves, as probation and ordination of their own Ministers, and
censuring of persons of great external (...), or civil dignity; the resolving
of difficult controversies, and cases of conscience; the confuting of subtle
and dangerous errors, and learned subtle heretics. There may also be through
men's weakness and corruption, maladministration or presumption thereof in a
particular Congregation, which without combination and appeal cannot be
remedied. There may also fall out a difference between the Congregation and
their particular Presbytery, and then who shall decide it? yea, the very
Presbytery in a Congregation may differ, and be equally divided among
themselves, and who shall decide that difference? There may be some great
difference between one Congregation and another Congregation, and they being
equal in authority as Congregations are, Par in Parem non babet imperium, who
then shall end these differences, if both be resolute, and will not yield each
to other, or to the advice, counsel and persuasion of neighbour-Churches?
Therefore it is necessary that there be an authoritative conjoined Presbytery,
wherein the whole has power to regulate the parts; the greater part of the
body to heal and help the less, either in keeping them from division* or to
cure them of divisions, when they are risen.

Sometime again many neighbor Congregations are scandalized by some notorious
evil breaking out in one Congregation, or their members endangered by the evil
example of some persons dwelling in one of the neighbor Congregations, and
having recourse unto, and converse with the members of the rest, and happily that
Congregation cannot, will not, or do not censure that offendour: shall there be
no means to bring him to censure, and afford a remedy for the rest? Some
heretic may endanger the members of diverse Congregations, and yet live but in
one, and that one not able (happily) to grapple with him; or happily he be a fixed
member of none (as may easily fall out, especially if Churches consisted only
of gathered members, as some would have them) or one that shifteth up and down
to avoid Congregational censure, how shall he be dealt withal, without
combination of Churches?

Sometimes the offendour or scandalous person is a member of one Congregation,
and the witnesses live in two or three neighbor Congregations, how shall this
man's cause be brought to trial? The Elders of that Congregation where the
accused person dwells cannot authoritatively send for witnesses out of
another, and if they will come voluntarily, they cannot (by our laws) safely
administer an oath unto them: neither can the Elders where the witnesses dwell
send for the accused person authoritatively, nor censure him if he will come
voluntarily. And yet many such like cases may, and will fall out. If all civil
causes were confined to the trial of the chief men in the several Parishes, we
should soon find the difficulty, disability, mischief, and impossibility
thereof, and the case is the same for Ecclesiastical causes, for ought I know.
There is no way (says M. Rutherford) to reduce or judge scandalous, dissenting
Elders without there be a combination; for they will not censure themselves,
and the people cannot. Peaceab. Plea. 191. But (says he) the spirits of the
Prophets must be judged by the Prophets, 1 Cor. 14.39. And otherwise we must
leave all scandalous Elders to the immediate judgment Christ.

Sect. 3.
But still there remains a greater Query about Synods consisting of delegated
Officers of particular Churches, which because they are most properly Ecclesiae
ortae, I shall say the less of them, as being not so pertinent to my question,
it being about the whole Church, consisting of both Officers and private
members respectively. Concerning Synods and the subordination of the particular
Churches unto them, diverse have written so fully, learnedly, and punctually,
that I shall refer the reader to them. See M. Paget in his defense of
Church Government, par. 2. and of the power of Classes and Synods, chapter 6. And
M. Gillespies Assertion of the government of the Church of Scotland. And the
four Leiden Professors, Synops. purior. Theolog. disp. 49. The advice of our
Reverend Assembly concerning a Confession of faith and a form of
Church Government. And Jus Divinum by the London Ministers. And M. Parkers
Polit. Eccl.

The nature of Synods is all one, whether they be Provincial, National or
Ecumenical, and they only differ as greater or less, but their power in
reference to their precincts, and delegation is alike. They differ from
Presbyteries called Classes, because the Provincial is constituted only of
certain delegated members from the classical Presbyteries of the same Province:
the National of delegated members from the Provincial Synods: and the
Ecumenical of delegated members from the National Synods: whereas the Classis
is constituted of the Elders of the particular Congregations combined together.
The Classes are more frequent, constant, and ordinary in their meetings, the
other more rare and extraordinary. The power of Synods is not at all civil, but
Ecclesiastical, neither is it destructive to the power of Classes, or single
Congregations, but perfective and conservative. They are not infallible, but
may err as well as a Classis, or single Eldership, yet are not so subject
thereto, because in the multitude of Counselors there is safety, and they
consist of more choice able men, and not so liable to personal prejudice
against the accused, nor likely to be swayed by fear, or favor, or sinister
respects. Their power is not merely consultatory and suasive, but
authoritative, and to be submitted unto by those for whom their delegation is,
so far as their acts are according to the word of God, In Synodo est
authoritatis apex, totius Ecclesiae unitas, ordinis firmamentum, Leid. profes.
de council. If it be no more but consultatory and suasive, that is no more then
a few private men may do, yea, one man or woman may counsel, advise and
persuade. By M. Ellis's opinion Councels and Synods being void of all authority
are but as a company of private Christians met together to advise one with
another how to act in their own Congregations, where only (says he) they are
in office: it may be an act of those that are in office but not as Officers, so
that in that act they are to be considered as private members, who by such
consultation take or give private advice how to act as officers, where they are
Officers. Which is no otherwise then if in these times of trouble and danger, a
company of peti-constables should meet occasionally, or by appointment together
at a market town, and there consult together how to act most commodiously and
uniformly in their several Parishes, in the pressing of Soldiers, or gathering
Assessements: or a company of Mayors of several Corparations should meet by
appointment at London, and there advise together, how to order their several
Corporations. So that a Synod whether Provincial, National, or Ecumenical, can
have no power to summon any heretic or scandalous person, and if any such
should voluntarily come before them, or be brought before them by the civil
Magistrate, that should before their faces blaspheme the whole Trinity, or be
convicted of Sodomy, yea, though any of their own members should curse God
himself, or be convicted of a present act of whoredom, or of sorcery, they have
no power to censure him Ecclesiastically, but fraternally admonish him, and
send him back to his own Congregation to be censured, and they themselves only
go thither as witnesses against him, because they are there (by this opinion)
out of office, and all censures belong to the particular Elderships, as
particular. But suppose now this heretic or scandalous person being departed
(happily) from the Congregation where formerly he lived, or that Congregation
being dissolved be a fixed member of no Congregation (as ten thousands of
visible Christians, i. e. that have received the doctrine of Christ, and are
under the seal of Baptism, may be, if particular Churches consist only of such
as can give evidence of the work of true grace in themselves) shall he remain
an entitive member of Christ's visible kingdom a gangreened limb, a rebel and
traitor under the name and notion of a subject, and infect the rest of the
body, and there be no remedy?

Sect. 4.
But as the subject matters that Synods have to deal with are of three sorts, so
their power and the acts of it which they put forth are of three (...)
likewise. First, they are to act in reference to matters of faith, i. e.
doctrines to be believed and embraced, and of divine worship, i. e. duties of
worship to be performed unto God: not to coin or frame, or add any new
articles of faith, or new acts of worship, or alter any that God has
instituted: but to explain, prove and apply those Articles of faith, and rules
of worship laid down in the word, and to confute and declare against the
contrary errors, heresies, and corruptions; and the power they exert herein is
called dogmatical. Secondly, they are to act in reference to external order and
polity in matters prudential and circumstantial, which are determinable by the
true light of nature, right reason, and general rules in the Scripture ^ to set
things in order, that all things may be done uniformly, decently, and in order:
and the power they exert herein is called diatactical. Thirdly, they are to act
in reference to error, heresy, schism, obstinacy, contempt and scandal, and
to repress them, and to censure such persons as are guilty of any of them, and
are referred over to them: and the power they exert herein is called critical.

This is none other power then the particular Elderships in their several
Congregations or Classes may exert in their sphere and precincts, with
submission to the superior assemblies, and all must be according to the word
of God. As in the natural body God has set several senses to act upon the
several sensible objects, visible, audible, tactile, etc. and several faculties
in reference to truth and falsehood, good and evil, to discern and embrace the
one, and avoid the other: so in the body Ecclesiastical has he set several
powers in the organs thereof to act diversely, according to the occurrent
objects and incidents in the Church, both in the particular Congregations for
the good of them, and in greater parts of the body for the good of them, and in
the whole if convenible, for the good of that: but because remote parts cannot
meet personally and generally in all their Officers, therefore that trouble and
confusion is avoided by delegation of particular elected choice officers, and
is but occasionally, and pro tempore,

A ground and pattern of a Synod is laid down Act. 15. and 16. which is
acknowledged to be a Synod, and warrant for a Synod by reverend M. Cotton in
his keys of the kingdom of heaven, cha. 6. And is called an Ecumenical Council
by Chamier in Panstrat. Tom. 2. lib. 10. cap. 8. sect. 2. and Whitak. cont. qu.
6. And generally by our Protestant Divines. And is abundantly proved and
explained by the London Ministers in their Jus Divinum, par. 2. chap 14. and
15. to which I refer the reader for satisfaction.

The occasion of that Synod was an error broached at Antioch, and
neighbour-Churches, to enforce the observation of the ceremonial Law by all
Christians, and this was promoted by lying, as if they were sent by the
Apostles and Elders at Jerusalem to preach this doctrine. Hereby the Churches
were much troubled, and in danger to be subverted in their souls, This could
not be suppressed by the disputes of Barnabas and Paul: hereupon the Elders of
Antioch decreed and ordained ((...)) that Paul and Barnabas, and some others,
should go up to the Apostles and Elders at Jerusalem about this question, and
they submitted to this order, there was an authoritative mission, and probably
members were also sent from Syria and Cilicia, for they were involved in the
same danger, by the same persons, Act. 15.23, 24, 41. But if there were
delegates but from two Churches, it will justify delegates from ten or twenty.

And as the Church of Antioch did not send Paul and Barnabas as extraordinary
and infallible and authentical Oracles of God, as M. Cotton notes, for then
what need the advice and help of Elders that were below them, being but
ordinary and particular Officers of Jerusalem? But as wise and holy guides of
the Church, who might not only relieve them by some wise counsel and holy
order, but also set a precedent to succeeding ages, how errors and dissentions
in Churches might be removed and healed. And with Paul and Barnabas they joined
others messengers in the same commission. So when this Synod was met, the
Apostles acted not by their Apostolical, infallible, transcendent power, or by
immediate inspiration, as in the penning of the Scripture; but the matters were
carried on in an ordinary Synodal way by disputes and discourses, they
deliberated about the true state of the question, and the remedy thereof, and
after deliberation and disputes, they decisively conclude and determine the
matter, and put forth all the three forenamed power. First, they exert their
dogmatick power in confuting of the heresy and in vindication of the truth of
justification by faith, without the works of the law: and their critical power
in branding the false teachers with the infamous brand of troublers of the
Church, and subverters of souls, and of bely^rs of the Apostles and Elders of
Jerusalem: and their diamctick power in ordering and framing practical rules or
constitutions for the healing of the scandal. They passed (...) Act. 16.4. they
imposed them, for they are said (...) Act. 15.28, 29. yet were not all the
things they imposed necessary in themselves, as abstaining from things
strangled and from blood: they are called necessary not intrinsecally, for then
they are so to us but for that time, because those things were so odious to the
Jews, who could not be so suddenly brought from all ceremonies.

It is true our Divines in their writings against the Papists do cry down the
infallibility of Councels, and the over-high esteem they had of them, and the
injurious and sinful decrees of their Popish Councels, but they honor the
general Councels, and account Synods an Ordinance of God. Calv. Inst. lib. 4.
cap. 9. sect. 13. says, Nos certe libenter concedimus, siqua de dogmate
incidat disceptatio, nullum esse nec melius nec certius remedium, quam si
verorum Episcoporum Synodus conveniat, ubi controversum dogma excutiatur. Multo
enim plus ponderis habebit ejusmodi definitio in quam communiter Ecclesiarum
pastores, invocato Christi Spiritu, consenserint, quam, etc.

Whitak de consilijs cap. 2. not only allows but commends Synods and
Councels from the necessity and utility of them, and marvelleth that Nazianz^n
should say he never saw a good end of a Synod, alleging the good end and
profit of the Council of Nice. And cites Augustine in Ep. 118. Conciliorum in
Ecclesia Dei saluberrimam authoritatem esse. And adds further, Etsi Concilia
non sunt simpliciter and absolute necessaria, tamen multum conferun^, and valde
utilia sunt, idque propter multas causas. And then reckons up the causes. And
divides Synods in (...) and (...). And brings Act. 15. for an example and
warrant of them.

And Chamier in his Panstrat. tom. 2. lib. 10. cap. 8. De omnium toto orb
Ecclesiarum politia, shows the lawfulness and use of Synods. And lib. 5.
says, Ad Synodos convocatos fuisse atque admissos omnes Episcopos nemo
dubitat, sedisseque judices, suo jure, prout fieri solet in Aristocratia. And
M. Parker in Polit. Eccl. l. 3. p. 355. says, Fundatur haec progressio a
Presbyerio ad Classem, a Classi ad Synodum, in instituto Christi, Mat. 18.17.
ex proportione. And p. 123. he foundeth them upon the same Scripture, Per
gradationem ratiocinandi: a little after he says they follow from that place,
per sequelam ratiocinandi, and per consequentiam. Innumerable might be the
citations of Protestant Divines in this kind.

It is confessed, Sect. 5.
that particular Churches are endued with the power of discipline within
themselves, if the matter does particularly and peculiarly concern themselves,
and none others: or if there be no others that can join with them, they may do
much alone, but that case is extraordinary.

It is confessed also that every single Congregation is equal in power to any
other single Congregation, considered as a Church, only one may be greater and
purer then another, and furnished with more and more able officers. And
therefore how one sister Church by its single power can non-communion another,
that is of equal power with it, I know not, for it is a censure, and no less
then a vertu^^ excommunication: and the other Church has as much power to
non-communion them, and so there is a principle laid of perpetual and frequent
division, and splitting asunder of Christ^ political body and kingdom. Such a
principle in a Commonwealth between Town and Town in civil affairs would be
very dangerous, and bring deadly feuds and civil wars, and at last ruin to the
whole.

And though there be a subordination of particular Churches to greater
Assemblies, yet it is not absolute and arbitrary, but in the Lord: also it is a
coordination, because the Officers of the particular Congregations are there,
and help to constitute the ^lasses, or if it be a Synod they are vertually
there by their delegates or Commissioners, as the Counties and Corporations are
in a Parliament.

The subordination of particular Congregations to greater Assemblies,
consisting so of members taken out of the particular Congregations, and the
authoritative power and Ecclesiastical jurisdiction of those greater Assemblies
over them appears, because we see the Church of Antioch was subordinate to the
Synod at Jerusalem, Act. 15. Also Christ's direction to deal with an offending
brother, Mat. 18. ascends by degrees from private ad^onition to admonition
before two or three, and from them if he amend not, to the Church: but what if
the greater number of a Church, or suppose a whole Church offend? by the same
rule of proportion they are to be brought before a higher Assembly, else no
remedy can be had for offending Congregations, as well as offending persons.
But neighbour-Congregations or particular persons may be offended by a
neighbor Church, and there is no reason that that Church should be partee and
judge also in their own case; and therefore it is requisite that there should
be a greater combined Assembly to complain unto.

And as the unity of the whole visible Church and political Kingdom of Christ
requires this, as the London-Ministers have well noted, wherein all things are
to be managed as between members and fellow subjects, and the greater part in
coordination to rule the less in the Lord, and the whole the parts: so also
there is the same necessity of Synods as of Classical combinations, and
otherwise there will be irremediable difficulties.

Also we may observe the like subordination and appeals in the Jewish Church:
the several Synagogues were subordinate to the great Assembly at Jerusalem, and
had their appeals thither in greater causes, Deuteronomy. 17.8, 12. 2. Chron. 19.8,
11. Exo. 18.22, 26. And this could not be a ceremonial Law, for it did typifie
nothing. The appeals were not to the high Priest, typifying Christ, but to
their highest Court: and though it were judicial to them, yet the equity of it
remains, and so far as it was grounded on common right it is moral. Now the
like difficulties and dangers that occasioned that Law then, remain still as
great among us, and ever will. And it is observable that this thing was not
learned by Moses in the pattern showed him in the Mount, but was taught by the
light of nature to Iethro, and by him was given in advice to Moses, Exo. 18.22.
and afterward was approved by God, as being according to right reason, and a
thing common to all societies as societies, not Ecclesiastical only, and not a
positive law only, but dictated by the light of nature, right reason and
necessity, and therefore is practiced in all ages, nations, armies and
societies, though not in every particular circumstance. And therefore except it
were forbidden, or some other way instituted to avoid those difficulties and
dangers that will arise, it ought to be in use also in the Church under the
Gospel, as well as summoning, convening in fitting times and places, and a
moderatour or chairman, and silence, obedience and respect, and due order in
proceedings according to allegation and probation, which are things common to
all Judicatories, as Judicatories. And surely God would not have Christians
under the Gospel under a more grievous yoke, and irremediable inconveniences
then the Jewish Church, that if any of them be oppressed by the ignorance, or
ill will of their Elders, they should have no relief.

Sect. 6.
Obj. If their be appeals from one Presbytery to another that is higher, then
must there be two kinds of Presbyteries, and two kinds of Presbyters; but the
Scripture speaks but of one, and gives no rules for any Presbyteries, but one.
Indeed in Universities the same men may be heads of the Colleges respectively,
and heads of the Universitie also; but there are differing and distinguishing
names, relations, and Statutes: but it is not so for Elders of particular
Congregations to be Elders of Classes and Synods, etc.

Answ. The Church is but one visible, political Kingdom of Christ, made up by
the collection and aggregation of all visible believers, who are called into an
unity of Covenant, and laws, and way: and all the Ministers and Officers of the
Church are given to the whole primarily, for the gathering and edifying of it,
and they are all to teach and rule, and perform all their administrations
respectively, with reference to, and the best advantage of the whole. And they
did serve the whole as one actually when they were convenible, but their number
increasing they divided into several companies, for their better ordering,
edification and increase: and therefore the instance is not parallel, for the
office of the Ministers is first to the whole, and the Charter and Statutes of
the whole and of every particular Church are but one: and therefore the
Ministers though they ordinarily act in their particular Congregations, as it
were in their particular Colleges, being called by them to take the immediate,
constant, particular inspection of them, yet can they exercise their general
office when and wheresoever they have a call thereunto. Now this call is not
that which gives them their office, but is proximum fundamentum exercitij
only. Neither is the particular Congregation the adequate correlate to an
Elder, for it does not mutu^ ponere and tollere, but the Church-Catholike only.
But of this see more in the 2d question. S. 4.

But against this M. Ellis vind. 40. brings an Objection which he ushers in
with a Let it be observed by all sorts, By this means (says he) the power
being given not to any one Church, but to the whole Church as one body, and not
to the members with the Officers, but to the Officers only, there is derived a
very transcendent power and authority upon every particular Minister, more then
any Parliament man has, yea, more then a King, who is limited to his dominion.

But I answer, that the Presbyterians acknowledge that power of government is
given immediately to every Congregational Eldership, or at least to such a
College of Elders as may frequently and constantly meet and rule in common, as
they did at Jerusalem, and it is not derived unto them by any superior
authority on earth, by way of descention, except by a Ministerial investment by
Ordination. And this power is to be constantly exerted for the actual,
Ecclesiastical regiment of that Congregation, or those Congregations over whom
those Elders are set in the Lord, yet with reference to the rest of the body,
whereof they are but a parcel, and they may stand in need of the help of more
Elders then their own, upon occasion.

It is true, government is not given to the members with the Officers, but to
the Officers only: not to the body of the Congregation as the subject of it;
either in whole or in part, as they are private members distinct from the
Officers, much less are they the (...), or first receptacle thereof.

And for the inference hence of such a transcendent power and authority upon
every particular Minister more then a Parliament man or a King. I suppose M.
Ellis is not ignorant that the office of every particular Minister in his
Congregation gives him authority to do more in administering Gods Ordinances,
(as authoritative preaching, and administering the seals of the Covenant, and
the Officers in administering spiritual censures) then a Parliament man or a
King can do. Remember Vzziahs example. And yet in all civil affairs they are as
dutiful subjects as any else, and as much subject to civil authority. Because
the Priests and Levites were in the matters of God set over all Israel, will it
therefore follow that the meanest Levite was greater then the Nobles, Princes
and Kings of Israel? Indeed the meanest Priest might offer sacrifice, which the
King could not do, but this was no disparagement to the Nobles or to the King.
No more it is to them that the meanest Physician may administer physic virtute
officij, and the meanest Pilot guide the Ship, which the greatest Princes may
not do. The office and power and honor that belong thereto is of another
kind, then Parliaments and Kings, it is not civil but spiritual. You know Gods
Ministers have power to baptize Parliament men, Nobles and Kings, and their
children, and to give them the Lords Supper, and to teach, admonish, reprove,
and from God to threaten and denounce judgments against them, even eternal
destruction, if they go on in sinful courses. They do doctrinally bind and
loose Princes, and their whole Kingdoms, and the whole world, as occasion
serves. And can any man say that the greatest men are by their greatness free
from Church Censures, if they be notoriously vile? and yet none can impose them
but Ecclesiastical Officers. Suppose diverse Parliament men or Noble men, yea, a
King himself were members of a Congregational Independent Church, would not the
Officers of that Congregation account it their duty to administer all Gods
Ordinances to them, as occasion requires, yea, the Ordinances of discipline and
censures, if there be just cause?

Sir, would you now be willing to have a retortion of your own kind? with a
Let it be observed by all sorts, that by the Independent way power is given to
2. or 3. Officers in a Congregation (or as others of them say, if the
particular Congregation join) to censure, yea, excommunicate Parliament men,
Nobles and Kings, if they judge there be cause, and all the Churches in the
world shall have no power to relieve them, except that Congregation, or those
Elders please.

It makes (says M. Ellis) every Minister one of the standing Officers of the
Christian world, to whom with his colleagues (not severally and by distribution,
but jointly and as one body) is committed the government of the whole Christian
world, and managing the affairs of the son of God throughout the face of the
earth. And this is marked with (") as if these were the very words of the
Presbyterians, which are but his own paraphrase and collection, and not their
sense, much less their words.

But I answer, Every Ministers office is habitually indefinite, but he is not
actually a standing Officer of the Christian world. But as a Physician by this
calling profession and license, is a Physician to the whole world habitually,
and may act upon the bodies, and about the lives of men, of what nation soever,
where and when he has a call. And as a Lawyer is a Lawyer to the whole
Kingdom, and has power by his call to the bar to deal about any man's case or
estate (so far as the Law allows, and his calling serves) where and when he
is required, and yet these are but professions, not offices, which would make
the habitual power happily more reducible into act, upon a lawful call: but
Christ's Ministers have an indefinite habitual office, beyond their particular
Congregations, yet in regard of exerting and constant exercise thereof, it is
distributively over their own flocks, which are as their constant Patients and
Clients, but if there be necessity, just occasion, and a call to be helpful to
any others jointly with them that have the same office, they may exercise their
power in any part of the whole body.

And so (says M. Ellis) he is one of Christ's vicars general (and not
particular only, which I acknowledge every Minister to be in his place) magnum
surely and memorabile nomen. But this is but magnum and memorabile scomma, and
so I pass it by. M. Ellis knows that th^s power though habitually it belongs
to the office, and so to the person that has that office, yet is not drawn
forth in a general Council for the actual, immediate service of the whole
Church, once in many hundred years: and diverse generations of Ministers die,
and it is not called forth in their ages; and when it is, they are usually the
most able and eminent persons that have that call, and not one of many hundreds
of them neither, therefore that scoff might well have been spared.

But he confesses every particular Minister in his place to be Christ's Vicar
(as he terms him) i. e. to act vice Christi, and all distributively to be
Christ's Vicars general. I see he is not sublimated so high (as some are) as to
make the Ministers to be the Vicars or Stewards of the Congregation, and to
carry their keys for them. But can they act vice Christi no where else? in
whose name do they preach, baptize, administer the Lords Supper, and bless
the people, when they act abroad occasionally? This arises from that principle
(disclaimed in all former ages of the Church) that a Minister is a Minister,
but in his own Congregation, and out of office to all the Church besides.

Sect. 7.
But M. Ellis has another Objection against it, viz. If it be so (says he)
great reason it is that the Church of the whole world should choose these
universal Officers, and so the Church of a Nation the National Officers, etc.
by whom they are to be governed in that which is dearest and of highest moment,
viz. the precious soul, or else their condition is most sad.

Answ. Is there not the same reason that the whole world should have a hand in
the choice of every Physician? and the whole Kingdom of every Lawyer? And by
the same reason it will follow, that the whole Christian world should have a
consent in the admitting of every member of the Church, seeing they be members
not of the particular Congregation only, into which by particular association
they are admitted, but of the whole Church-Catholike visible. But as every
Minister is entrusted with the admitting of members into the whole, and every
Eldership with casting out of the whole: so may every conjoined Presbytery be
also with the admittance of an Officer. It is impossible that the whole Church
should meet about admittance either of members or Officers, but the particular
parts are entrusted in the places where they live: and if any man or woman can
give in any just exception against either member or Minister, that is to be
admitted, it shall debar their admission, or procure an ejection.

The new Jerusalem Rev. 21. it said to have 12. gates, and there was an
admission into the whole city by every gate: so is there admission into the
whole Church by baptism in every Congregation. The Temple spoken of in Ezekiel.
40. etc. is conceived to typifie the Evangelical Church in general, and the
several chambers the particular Congregations: now as those that were admitted
into any chamber had thereby admission into the whole house, so they that are
admitted in any Congregation, are admitted into the whole Church. And though
the admission of particular Officers or members is not done interventu totius
Ecclesiae, yet it is done intuitu totius Ecclesiae, with reference and respect
had to the whole.

But secondly I answer, That when that habitual power is drawn into act in a
part^cular Congregation, as their particular Minister, then that Congregation
meets to give him a call: and if an unworthy, unskilful man get into the
profession of Physic or Law, for all his habitual power by license, he may
have patients and clients few enough to call his power into act: the like may
be said of an unworthy Minister, if Churches have their right of calling or
approving their Ministers. Or if there be a call to act in a Synod, so great a
part of the Church as the Synod extends unto, have a hand to call to that
action. Indeed in a Classis the whole vicinity of Officers may meet personally
by their actual combination, but if it be a provincial Synod, every Classis in
the Province chooses the members thereof severally: if in a National Synod
every Province chooses and calls the members thereof, and so there is a call
of the whole Kingdom: and if it be a general Council of the whole Church, all
the Christian Nations elect and call the members thereof respectively: and so
this sadness he speaks of is salved.

And for unworthy persons intruding into the Church by a little learning, to
live idly on the sweat and cost of others, or that shall have a friend,
patron, or purse to make one, and so come into the Ministry and a living;
which (says he) is the Kings road in some Churches: the Presbyterians abhor it
as much as he.

But such an one (says he) shall become a Parliament Man, and joint governor
of the whole Church on earth, by whose one vote all the liberties and truth of
religion in them may be destroyed. This is another scoff, in calling every
Minister, though unworthily crept in, a parliament man, and joint governor of
the whole Church on earth.

But Sir, your passions make you forget your self much. It is not to be
actually such a Parliament Man and joint governor, but habitually ^^pable to
be occasionally chosen pro tempore, into a Provincial, National, or Ecumenical
Council. And is ^^ not as great danger in a kingdom, that any man, though of
never so mean br^eding, or vicious life, if he get wealth or honor by hook or
crook, shall be capable to be chosen a Parliamen-man, and by his vote (only, as
it may be) all the civil libe^^^^ of a kingdom may be destroyed? Any Gentleman
or ^^^ght though he has not an habituality, yet has a poten^^^^ty to be a
Parliament Man, which is reducible into act as well as if it were an
habituality. And proportionably there are forty nay five hundred Gentlemen
chosen to be members of Parliaments, for one Minister chosen to be a member of
an Ecumenical Council.

A glimpse whereof (says he) we have seen in the Convocations or Synods in our
own Nations. But when did M. Ellis see a Presbyterial Convocation or Synod in
our own Nation? Prelatical Convocations and Synods indeed we have seen and
felt, but no Presbyterial ones. And therefore his second sadness might have
been spured.

O but none (says he) attains the honor of being an universal Officer, a
Parliament man, but by the consent (formal or vertual) of all or the major part
of them. And therefore the condition of the Church is more sad then the
condition of men in their civil liberties in this kingdom.

Answ. I pray wherein? For as the freeholders in the kingdom choose Parliament
men for themselves, their wives, children and servants, and all the
cop^holders, and meaner poor people in their several Counties, which are far
the greater number: so the Ministers and Elders, whom the Congregations have
chosen and entrusted over them in the Lord, do formally or ^e^^ally choose all
the members of Provincial, National, and Ecumenical Synods and Councels. And
if the Laws of the Kingdom would bear it (happily) it would be as commodious (if
not more) if a prime man or two in every Town had the power to (...) and elect
a Parliament man or two for the whole County.

O but no such agreement has been made (no not tacitly) by the
Church-Catholike, nor no such institution of Christ has appeared yet.

Answ. We find a pattern of a Synod in Act. 15. consisting of delegated
members, with formal disputes and decrees, not of the Apostles only but the
Elders also. And if one Church may delegate and send to a Synod, then may
another, yea, twenty.

And we find that the Churches did then submit unto them, to their great
profit, Act. 15.31. And the Churches formerly have agreed unto, honored, and
submitted unto Councels, and received much good by them; especially the first
and general Council of Nice, etc. And indeed the choice and sending of members
to make up Synods, is more then a tacit agreement to them, as well as the
choice of Parliament men is a vertual agreement, and promise of submission to
the Parliament.

Object. But if the Ministers be Pastors to the whole Church, Sect. 8.
then the whole is to honor them, and contribute toward their maintenance,
because they serve the whole, ordinarily in their own Congregations, and
occasionally by preaching and ruling in Classes and Synods, for it is due from
them that are taught and ruled. Gal. 6.6. 1 Timothy 5.17.

Answ. That all men are bound to honor all the Ministers for their office and
works sake, is true; though they cannot actually apply and give testimonies of
that honor, but to such as they know. But for maintenance, the people over
whom the Minister has the particular inspection, and among whom he does
assidiously labor, are ordinarily to afford it, being the persons that
actually partake of his continual labors, and it is the most convenient way of
certain and speedy raising of it, as the Levites had maintenance from the
several places where they dwelt, both cities and gleabs, and other comings in.
Micah gives a stipend to Jonathan the Levite, his diet and apparel, Judge.
17.10. It is like the Elders of Jerusalem were maintained by the Church of
Jerusalem, but whether it was collected in the particular meeting houses for
such as did labor there particularly, or put into one stock for the
maintenance of their whole Eldership, I know not.

But suppose one able man will maintain a Minister for the whole Congregation,
or a Lecturer or Minister in another Congregation, or the State shall maintain
a Minister in a Congregation, i^ that Congregation bound to afford him a second
honorable maintenance? Or suppose a Combination of Ministers having sufficient
maintenance from their several Congregations will join together, and maintain a
Lecture freely, may not the people hear them, because they do not maintain
them? I fear you will find but few Congregations will make that scruple.

Obj. But the Ministers perform not their whole office to the Congregation that
maintains them, but part of it to the Classis, and part to the Provincial or
National Churches, and part to the Catholic Church.

Answ. A particular Eldership perform their whole office to their own
Congregation, which concerns their Congregation only, as far as they are
able. But in some things the particular Congregation stands in need of the help
of other Elders, as in maladministration, and matters of more weight; and
there be matters of more general concernment then can be transacted in one
single Eldership: and other Congregations likewise may stand in need of the
help of their Eldership in the like cases: and so the particular Congregation
is not hindered but helped by combination. And even in their greater
Presbyteries they serve their own Congregations also, as well as in their own
Congregations they serve the Church-Catholike, in admitting members in, and
casting them out that are scandalous, and in feeding, nourishing, and governing
the members thereof, in their own Congregations.

Ob. But this will be too great a burden for Ministers to meddle in the
affairs of many Congregations, who will have work enough in their own.

Answ. As they shall afford help to others, so they shall receive help for
their own Congregation from others with whom they are combined. But what
greater burden will it be to do it in an authoritation way, more then in a
charitative? and yet that our brethren will allow.

Object. But then the Ministers exercise rule where they do not ordinarily
preach, and so the keys are not commensurable.

Answ. The keys are commensurable, though the exercise of them be not always
commensurable. Neither is a Minister bound always to put forth the exercise of
every key, where he puts forth one. A man may preach where he administreth no
Sacraments. Paul preached much at Corinth, but was not bound to baptize there:
though no doubt he converted many, yet he baptized but few, 1 Cor. 1. Christ
himself preached much, but baptized not, Joh. 4.2. Peter preached to Cornelius
and his company, but baptized them not: it is said he commanded them to be
baptized. And the Apostles usually carried about with them a Minister to
baptize those whom they converted; as shall be showed more in the second
question.

A man may administer Sacraments where he preaches not, as the Apostles
baptized, but Christ only preached there. And he that baptized Cornelius and
his company, did not preach unto them, but Peter only preached. We read not
that the (...) or Minister, which Paul and Barnabas carried about with them,
did preach.

A Minister may both preach and administer Sacraments where he rules not, As
Philip to the Eunuch, The Apostles and the 70. in Christ's time: and Ministers
that preach abroad in a journey, or at a Lecture.

Also a Minister may rule where he neither preaches nor administreth any
Sacraments: for all the Elders in Jerusalem ruled in common; but preached and
admnistred Sacraments from house to house, and could not preach to every
Congregation whom they ruled. Also the Elders at Jerusalem, Act. 15. did
exercise discipline in making decrees for Antioch, Syria, and Cilicia, where
they preached not.

Object. Sect. 9.
This formerly was a grand Objection against the Bishops; that they undertook
to rule where they preached not.

Answ. The exceptions against the Bishops, were first, That they or most of
them arrogated that power of rule to themselves upon a wrong ground, viz. not
as Presbyters, but as men of a superior order and office, viz. of being
Bishops, and so above Presbyters, even Pastors of Pastors. Secondly, They
challenged that to be due to one that belonged to a College or Eldership, or
combination of Elders. Thirdly, They robbed the people and Postors of their
liberty and power: for they did not associate Congregations with them, but
subdued them unto them. They were not mutually subject to Presbyteries, but
made the Presbyteries subject to themselves. They did not carry things in way
of consociation and confederacy as inter Pares, but as Lords both of Ministers
and people. They took the whole Diocese to be their actual cure, and all
Ministers were but their Curates. They forced men to bring in presentiments to
them and their delegates, which concerned the particular Congregations only,
and ought and might have been transacted there. But it was not for exercising
an act of discipline merely where they did not preach, but because it was not
on a right ground, nor in a right way. See these things noted by the Assembly
in their answer to the dissenting brethren. page 11.

Obj. If there be superior and more general Assemblies, and appeals unto them,
then great and stubborn persons will never be brought to censure, for they will
appeal higher and higher, even to a general Council, which happily will not
convene in their life time.

Ans. The Officers of the particular Congregation have power to inflict the
censure, if they find just cause, and that censure remains on them,
notwithstanding their apppeal, until their cause be heard in a greater
Assembly, and if it then be found to be just, they confirm it, and leave it
upon them, if unjust, they ought to relieve them.

Obj. If appeals be admitted to greater Assemblies, as Provincial, National,
and much more Ecumenical Councels, it will occasion much trouble and charge to
the partee grieved, and to the witnesses and prosecutours to go so far to bring
their causes to trial. This Objection or to this purpose M. Ellis makes, vind.
page 16.

Ans. That may be prevented by stating the question in difference, and putting
it inter controversias juris, and so it may be determined indefinitely: and the
matter of fact may be proceeded in accordingly in the particular Congregation
or Classis, in application to the particular persons, secundum allegam and
probata.

Obj. But if appeals be admitted from the Congregational Eldership, because
they may err, the same danger will lie against Classes, Synods and Council,
for they may err also, and by the same reason a man may appeal from a general
Council, for that may err.

Ans. The appealing from the particular Eldership to superior assemblies, is
not because they are infallible and cannot err, but because there is less
danger of erring, and fewer temptations to err or be swayed, then in the
particular Eldership. In the multitude of Counsellor^ there is safety. Many
eyes see more then a few: and those greater Assemblies consist of more choice
eminent persons usually, then the particular Elderships. And they are freer
from all suspicion of personal grudg or animosities, and not so subject to fear
of revenge from the censured person.

This liberty of appeals, as it is founded in the law of nature, Sect. 10.
and seen by the light thereof, and in use in all societies, and granted to the
Jewish Church, and practiced by the Church of Antioch in Act. 15. and in use
anciently in the primitive times, Providendum est ^ne^innocens damnetur, ideo
habeat potectatem is qui abjectus est ut Episcopos finitimos interpellet, Conc.
Sard. Can. 17. etc. So also it is in effect granted by the Apologists
themselves, Apol. Nar. p. 21. It is the most abhorred maxim that any religion
has ever made profession of, and therefore of all other the most contradictory
and dishonorable unto that of Christianity, that a single and particular
society of men professing the name of Christ, and pretending to be endowed with
a power from Christ to judge them that are of the same body and society with
themselves, should either arrogate to themselves an exemption from giving an
account, or being censurable to any other, either Christian Magistrate above
them, or neighbor Churches about them. But what kind of account or
censurablenesse they mean, I know not. But as the censurablenesse from the
Christian Magistrate above them must be meant of a judicial censure in his
kind, which is civil; so that from the neighbour-Churches about them should be
judicial also in their kind, which is Ecclesiastical.

Object. But if general Councels be an Ordinance of God, and the supreme
Ecclesiastical judicatory, it is a marvel that Christ should suffer his Church
to be so many hundred years without it; it should then rather be a constant,
standing Court.

Ans. It is not necessary that there should be a standing Court Catholic
consisting of constant Officers of the Church-Catholike actually, as there is
of particular Churches, but only occasionally pro re nata: for there is power
put into particular Churches for the managing their own affairs; and such
affairs as are of general concernment, and of greater weight then can be
transacted in a particular Eldership, or Classis, or Provincial, or National
Assembly, fall out very seldom. The Apostles themselves after their dispersion
kept no such general standing Court, much less is it needful now. Cogi
Optimates non semper est necesse, Chamier tom. 2. lib. 10. cap. 8. sect. 15,
16. where he answers this objection fully. A general Council ought to be (says
Salmas.) only, Quoties exigit causa communis, etc. Apparat. 273. It is not ad
esse Ecclesia, nec ad been esse Ecclesiae, sed ad optimum esse Ecclesiae, says
M. Rutherford. The Church of Antioch had once an occasion of appeal to a Synod
at Jerusalem, but no such cause of constant recourse thither. This Objection
may be made as well about the Christian Magistrate; seeing he is to be a
nursing father to the Church, and such were promised by God, it may be
marvelled that God should let the Evangelical Church want them in the infancy
of it for above 300. years: and many of the Emperors after they proved
Christians were wasters of the Church and promoters of Arianism and Popery, and
not nourishers of the Church. But we must not undertake to prescribe God what
is best. Times and seasons are in his hand.

Obj. If general Councels be the supreme Ecclesiastical Judicatories, "then how
dare any particular Churches, at most but (if) National, abrogate and swear
against the Ordinances and government established by the Catholic Church. And
this Objection he bids me mind, vin. p. 56. I suppose he meant the Objection,
in reference to the National Oath and Covenant against Archbishops, Bishops,
etc.

Answ. Although Councels are very reverend and to be submitted unto in the
Lord, yet are they not infallible, but may err; they are not regularegulans,
but regulata and regulanda, and to be tried by the word of God, and if they
speak not according to that, they are not to be obeyed. Clavis errans non
ligat. Yet it is safer to be guided by a multitude of Counselors in a great,
yea, general Assembly, if it were rightly gathered (which the Popish Councels
were not) then to stand bound by two or three Elders in a particular
Congregation without relief.

The doctrine of that famous Council of Nice, and some others following, was
found, and we have not departed from them therein. And we know, that although
many Councels were corrupt and not rightly chosen, nor acting uprightly
according to the word, but guided by factions, and swayed by the Pope, and the
best not infallible, yet the Scriptures are a constant, infallible rule to walk
by. Nec ego Nicenam Synodum tibi, nec tu mihi Ariminensem debes, ^anquam
praejudicaturus, objicere. Nec ego hujus authoritate, nec tu illius detineris.
August. advers. Maximin. lib. 3.

Chap. 8.
CHAP. VIII. An answer to M. Ellis's Prejudices, Probabilities and
Demonstrations against an universal visible (and as he calls it) governing (but
should have said Organical) Church. And his wrong stating of the question
rectified.
MR Ellis has set down diverse just prejudices (as he calls them) and strong
probabilities ( vind. chap. 3. page 10.) and Demonstrations ( vind. chapter 4. p.
19.) against this position, or rather against an opinion of his own stating and
framing, for I know none that own it as he has stated it. But it is an easy
thing to set up a man of straw, and then beat it down at pleasure.

Sect. 1.
Before I answer these prejudices, probabilities and demonstrations, it will be
requisite to view what M. Ellis denies, and what he grants, and how he
stateth the question, and what is the true state of it, and where in the
difference lies between him and his opponents, and then we shall the better
see how his prejudices, probabilities and demonstrations will lie against the
question in hand.

First, he denies the question to be meant of the essential oneness of the
Church, whereby all the Christians in the world divisins, and in their several
places do visibly, outwardly, and openly profess (for substance) the same
faith, seals, worship and government, and so may be said to be one company, one
society, one Congregation in nature and essence, vind. p. 7.

But indeed this oneness is included in the question, and is the very
foundation and ground of all: we desire no other unity then will necessarily
flow from this. This Entitive visible unity of the whole as one society under
one head, in one visible Covenant, under the same seal, under the same laws
from the same authority, is enough to denominate a Church-Catholike visible,
and one visible kingdom of Christ here on earth. And to this Church as one
integral society, were the Ordinances and privileges primarily given, and for
their enjoyment thereof was the organicalnesse and politicalness added, and it
was made one habitual, organical, visible Kingdom of Christ on earth, because
all these visible subjects have one common right to, and communion in the same
Ordinances and privileges indefinitely in this whole visible kingdom.

But I fear this will not su^e our brethren who make not the general Covenant,
which gives the essence and entitivenesse to the Church, but the particular
Covenant, compact and confederation to give the right to the Ordinances. Their
tenet (as far as I can collect from their books) is, that a company of visible
believers being joined together in a particular holy Covenant, have thereby
right to the enjoyment of all Gods Ordinances; and hence flow their right of
choosing and ordaining Officers over themselves (the Ordination in their sense
being nothing else (as I conceive) but a designation or assignation of those
chosen men) by the imposition of hands (of some men appointed by them in their
name and behalf) to be their particular Officers, to dispense the Ordinances of
Jesus Christ unto them. And hence also flows their right of censuring and
ejecting those Officers again, if they miscarry themselves. Ejusdem est
instituere and destituere, and if the Congregation can appoint men to lay hands
on their Officers in their behalf, and set them up, then also if they see cause
they can appoint men to lay hands on them by censures, and pluck them down
again, or else they must go out of their Congregation to neighbor Elders for
that censure, which is contrary to their own tenet, if it be an Ordinance of
God. Yea, they must go out of their Congregation for discipline, which is most
contrary to their principles, and that indeed where the greatest pinch lies,
for they do not so much startle at a Ministers dispensing the word or
Sacraments to other Congregations, for that is done frequently by them, or at
the exercise of the key of discipline, and as I conceive, that it is that which
breeds this difference between us. And if they must go out of their
Congregation for the censure of their Elders, why not by the same reason in
some cases for the censure of some private members? So that by their tenet
their right to Gods Ordinances neither arises from their being in the general
Covenant, for so they were before their confederation, nor yet from their
organicalness, for they have power to organize themselves, and disannul those
Organs again, and to perform some Church-acts before and without Organs, but it
arises merely from their particular covenant and consederation.

2. Neither is the Query (says he) whether the several companies or Churches
of this profession as they are one in nature so also in spirit and affection,
and thereupon in engagement of mutual care one of another, and to take notice
what doctrines are dispersed, what conversation used among the Churches page 7.

If by Engagement he means an^amicitial or fraternal Engagement, as he seems
by his paralleling it with the Engagement of brethren of the same family,
indeed it comes not up to the question in hand, but if he means an
Engagement not only founded upon similarity of nature and unity of Spirit and
affection, but upon an express command of Christ to his subjects in their
places and Offices, to uphold his honor, and purity of his Ordinances, and
watch over their fellow subjects to keep them from profaneness and error, or
cure them if they be fallen thereinto, and this not by advice and persuasion,
but by Ecclesiastical censures, if they be stubborn and obstinate, then it
comes up to the question in hand. And surely the case may be so, that the key
of doctrine will not serve, but the key of discipline (which our brethren
acknowledge is commensurable with it) must be exerted also. Stroakings and
lenitives will not cure all maladies in the natural body, nor good counsel all
the distempers in the Commonwealth, nor yet in the Church, there must
sometimes be corrosives of censures applied.

Nor 3. is it doubtful (says he) whether such Churches may voluntarily, as
occasion shall require, associate together for mutual assistance, and act (in
many things) by common and joint consent, etc. This the Scripture and light of
nature dictates.

If by voluntary he does not mean arbitrary, but such a voluntary and yet
necessary obedience to the dictates of Scripture and the light of nature as is
in the observation of Gods commands, and as the voluntary joining of members to
a particular Congregation, then it is the very ground of Synodical Assemblies.
And though it be but occasional, yet these occasions falling out frequently and
constantly, so ought those meetings to be as frequent and constant, which is
all the Presbyterians contend for. And the same Scripture and light of nature
that dictates this voluntary, occasional meeting, dictates also that they
should have power to act together when they are met, else to what purpose
should they meet? no occasion can warrant them to do that which God has not
given them power to do. And whereas he says the testimonies alleged by
Crakenthop. in Def. Eccl. Ang. cap 28. are meant of an obligation of charity
and not of office, it is utterly mistaken, for they speak of their power as
Bishops, ^ura omnium ovium, qua Episcopi sunt, ad omnes spectat. And Episcopi
omnes, qua Episcopi, universalis Ecclesiae pastores sunt, and jure Divino sic
pastores sunt.

Nor 4. (says he) is it the scruple, Whether all or most of the Churches in
the world may not possibly become occasionally one by their messengers in a
general Council. But as I concieve this is the highest thing that the
Presbyterians aim at in such a Council, and is the thing which himself makes
question of, vind. page 8. lin 1. and yet four lines further seems to yield it
again.

Then M. Ellis vind p. 8. comes to state the power of associated Churches,
whether less or more, Sect. 2.
and especially a general Council. And there he grants an authoritative power
(at least virtual) from Christ to act, and give not only advice, but directions
and rules, to which the conscience is bound to submit, unless special cause
dissuade us. And this authority is more august and solemn (though not greater)
the greater the number is, and the more public the manner of giving forth the
precepts shall be. And (a little further he says) in doubtful cases, or upon
occasion of grosser errors and scandals, God has by Ordinance (virtual)
appointed recourse to others, especially Churches whose prescriptions, not
disagreeing from the Word, are to be obeyed, not only because they are
materially good, but formally theirs.

Here he grants almost as much as the Presbyterians do desire, yet plucks it
away again in the very next words in saying That their acting in giving such
directions and rules, is the acting of Officers, but not as Officers, for such
they are only in their several Churches, but yet by reason of that relation
they are the more fit for that work, etc. But hereby he overthrows the
analogy of their acting with the acting of an assembly of Lawyers or Judges, or
a College of Physicians convened by public consent, which he there makes the
parallel of this Ecclesiastical acting, for their acting conjunctim is by
virtue of their office and professions respectively, as much as divisim, and
not merely as friends or men skilled in those subjects and sciences; for it (by
their office and profession) becomes (as he confesses) authoritative, and to
be submitted unto, not only because materially good but formally theirs, who by
office and profession have power and authority to give it. If he would have
made his parallel to run to his mind, he should have resembled the actings in
Councels to the advice of understanding friends and neighbors in matters of
Law and Physic, who have no office therein, or profession thereof, but have
some knowledge and experience therein, and thereby are fit to give friendly and
neighbourly, charitative advice and directions. How men can have authority to
make rules which are to be obeyed because they are formally their rules, and
yet do this as men without office, I understand not. The Synod Act. 15. did
make decrees and give commands, he confesses, but did not impose any penalty:
but surely the making decrees and commands employed an authority, and that
conjunctim so to do, and the imposing of them employed a power of office, and
that a coercive also, else decrees and commands are to little purpose.

And to pass by his second grant, what power the Church-Catholike may possibly
have in unusual and extraordinary cases or accidents, I come to his third gram,
viz. what power the universal visible Church might have (if possibly
convenable) together, as it was at Jerusalem (in which case (says he) we grant
what is co^tended for) but the Query is. What power the parts have asunder, and
without endeavoring the joining with the other: For even in a Kingdom, though
all the Corporations gathered in one, have power over all particulars: yet not
some of these, much less a few of them asunder; which is the way our brethren
now practice. vind. page 9.

Here he grants what is contended for, if the whole were convenable, i. e.
(as I conceive) all the Officers of the whole Church. But if that could be, I
doubt he holds they must, either act as men out of office, or an particular
Officers, every one in reference to his particular Congregation: or can their
convention together put a general office upon them which they had not before?
or draw forth general actions that concern the whole, from them that had no
habitual power reaching the whole? but if all the Officers met together can
rule the whole, because every particular Congregation has its Officer there,
why has not a part thereof convened, power to rule that part also? seeing the
right and reason is the same, seeing the Church is a similar body in regard of
the integrals, and the parts are similar parts. And if so, here will be an
unavoidable ground for classical associations, where all the Officers may meet.
And himself freely acknowledges the convenience and necessity of Classes, yea,
and Synods also, for direction and determination, and that by divine right,
though not with power properly juridical. vind. page 3. But then their
directions and determinations must be by his opinion, but charitative, and by
their skill only, and not by virtue of their office.

But the reason why his parallel of a Kingdom, where a part cannot make laws
for that part, holds not, is because the whole Kingdom is under one
legislative power, and combined together in a body representative under one
head, who have power to make uniform laws for the whole, but neither the
Church-Catholike nor any particular Church can make any new divine laws, or
abrogate any of them which Christ has set down, but explain them, and make
particular rules according to the general, and not otherwise: and put Christ's
laws in execution: and this a particular combination may do in their sphere,
for their limits. And so as far as their Commissions reach, the Officers in a
Corporation may make constitutions for the Corporation, so they be not contrary
to their charter; and the Justices or Committees for a County may make Orders
for the County, so they be agreeable to the Laws of the Land, whereof the
County is a part: and have habitual power to execute justice in any part of the
County, as occasion serves, though they, for convenience sake, do usually act
in their several divisions.

A Justice or Mayor or Constable cannot act beyond their County, Corporation,
or Town, though they be desired and called, without a new Commission, but a
Minister may preach and administer Sacraments in any part of the
Church-Catholike upon a call, and why not also act judicially and juridically
and where (according to the foresaid limitation) if he has a call to bring his
habitual power into act, seeing the keys are commensurable?

Sect. 3.
But then he comes to state the question positively what it is. And he sets it
down thus, viz. Whether the whole company of Christians on earth are in their
ordinary and settled Church-constitution, so one entire single Commonwealth,
Corporation and Congregation, as that of right, and by the will and appointment
of Jesus Christ it is the first subject of all Church Power: by authority
whereof, and commission from which, all particular Churches act, and to the
determinations of the major part whereof they are to yield obedience (if not
apparently contrary to the word of God) and the Catholic governing power
whereof, resides immediately as in its proper subject under Christ, only in the
Ministers and Elders; and they not taken severally, but jointly as one entire
College or Presbytery: to whose charge severally and jointly the whole and
every particular Church is committed, etc.

And this assertion M. Ellis sets down with (") in the margin, and cites
Apollonius and the London-Ministers as the Authors of it, as if they were their
very words: but they are niether their words non sense. I wonder, Sir, who ever
dreamed of such an assertion, but your self. It is not honest dealing to lay
the births of your own brains at other men's doors, to make them father them.

The like stating of it is again, vind. page 40. where the same Authors are
cited, viz. Apollon. cap. 3. sect. 4. And Jus Divinum page 43. and page 163.
And again, vind. p. 27. and there are cited for it, Apollon. cap. 3. page 41.
And Hudson p, 25. as assertors of this opinion expressly. But I am sure there in
no such thing asserted by these Authors in any of those places. And if he
says it is drawn by consequence from their tenets, I answer, it is not
accounted fair dealing to affirm those consequences that may be drawn from any
man's opinion, to be his opinion, when (happily) he was never aware of any such
consequences, or does deny the consequence of them from his opinion. Much less
is it fair to set them down in capital letters, and with marks in the margin,
which usually imports them to be their very words: or to make that the main
controversy which is not owned by the opposite partee, but (happily) may be
drawn by consequence.

The scope of Apollonius and the London-Ministers is to set down the proper
subject and receptacle of the keys, first, negatively, not the people or catus
fidelium, nor the civil Magistrate (though they grant him a defensive,
diatactick, compulsive, cumulative power, a power circa sacra, non in sacris)
nor Papal Officers, as Cardinals, etc. nor prelatical, as Deans, Archdeacons,
etc. nor political Officers, as Committees, Commissioners, nor Deacons. But
positively all those Church-guides, extraordinary and ordinary, which christ
has erected in his Church, vesting then with power and authority therein, viz.
Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors and Teachers, governments or
ruling-Elders, these Christ has made the immediate receptacle, and first
subject of the keys, or of Ecclesiastical pover from himself. So say the
London-Ministers expressly.

Now suppose they had undertaken to set down who were the proper subject of
civil authority under the King: and should first negatively say, it is not the
Physician, nor the Surgeon, nor the Mathematician, nor the Merchants, nor
Mariners, nor Tradesmen, nor Husbadmen, and Farmers, but positively they are
the Judges, Sheriffs, Justices, Majors, Bailiffs, and Constables: Would any one
gather from hence that all these Officers, not taken severally but jointly, are
one entire, actual college of Officers, to whose charge severally and jointly
the whole, and every part of the Kingdom is committed; by authority whereof,
and dependence upon which common Officers, the Officers of every particular
Town do act?

Besides, this stating of the question is not consistent with it self, for it
makes the Church-Catholike the first subject of all Church Power, and then
makes the Ministers and Elders the proper subject thereof: but the proper
subject is the prime subject* Unless he means in a logical sense, as sight is
predicated of the whole man, and yet is seated properly in the eye: or reason
is given to the whole man, and yet is seated in the understanding. Christ has
given all his Ordinances to his visible Church; for the public dispensation of
which he has instituted Church Officers, to whom he has committed that power
respectively: these officers are distributed among, and settled in their several
Congregations, and there actually and constantly dispense their Ordinances to
them, as by their office they are enabled, according to the word; and yet
because there are some things of common concernment with other Congregations,
and of greater moment and difficuly then can be transacted by a few Elders in a
particular Congregation, therefore upon such occasions they make act
conjunctim, with the Elders of other Congregations; and may also dispense both
Word and seals occasionally to other Congregations, upon a call by opportunity,
want, or desire of other Congregations.

Yet do not the Presbyterians hold, that the particular Churches or Officers
act by authority of, and commission from the one entire, single Commonwealth,
Corporation and Congregation of the whole company of Christians on earth, as M.
Ellis is pleased to set it down, to render their tenets odious: but they hold
that every Minister by virtue of his office has an immediate habitual power
from Christ to dispense his Ordinances, but the con^tant exerting and exercise
of this power is called forth into act by that parcel of the Church-Catholike,
which has given him a call to take the particular immediate inspection and
care over them in the Lord, yet upon occasion for the honor of God, the
vindicating of his truth, the suppressing of more general errors and scandals,
the propagating of the Gospel, and the good of others as God gives opportunity,
it may be exerted and exercised in other places, and to other persons, so
confusion and disorder be avoided.

Neither do the National Churches act by commission from the Catholic, nor the
Provincial from the National, nor the Classis from the Provincial, nor the
Congregational from the Classis; but every Minister acts by commission from
Jesus Christ, by virtue of his Office. And the Congregational Eldership is
first in acting, though last in Christ's intention, in instituting the office.
Every drop of water is similar to the whole element, and is cold and moist, but
receive not those qualities from the whole Element, but has them immediately in
its self, and though it actually exerts them only where it is placed and
applied, yet has an habitual power to exert them any where else, if applied:
So the Church Officers have their powder, neither from the Church Catholic nor
from their particular Congregation, but from their office, which they receive
from Christ (though ministerially admitted thereto by the Presbytery) which
power though ordinarily and constantly they exert in their own Congregation,
yet can elsewhere upon a call.

Neither do the Presbyterians say, that the Church-Catholike or the whole
campary of Christians on earth, are in their ordinary and settled
Church-constitution one entire, single Commonwealth, Corporation and
Congregation actually, but one habitual Commonwealth and Corporation, made up
by the aggregation of all the single, actual Congregations of Christians in the
world (as an Empire of all the Provinces and Kingdoms under it) and that beside
the particular, actual, constant affairs of the Congregations, which are
properly to be managed by such as are the particular actual Officers thereof,
there are some things that concern more then themselves, and those are to be
transacted (as such occasions arise) by the Officers of so many Congregations
as they concern, they belonging properly to the cognizance of Officers, as
Officers: and if those matters be of more general concernment, then that all
the Officers concerned therein can meet, without confusion, to transact them,
then they are to delegate some choice Officers from the several vicinities to
transact them, as has been showed before: and as the call of the Congregation
draws forth the power of the Officers to act among them constantly, so this
delegation calls forth their power to act occasionally pro tempore in this
greater meeting. The case was once that Totus mundus ingemuit sub Arianisino:
this concerned the whole, or the greater part, and could not be cured by
particular Officers, as particular, in their several Congregations divisim, and
therefore required a more general meeting of Officers (to whom by reason of
their office it did appertain) to consider of it, and suppress it conjunctim,
by confutations and censures: and these having done the work they were called
forth unto, then are to return to their particular charges again: for this work
is but occa^ional, and these occasions fall out very rarely. This makes not the
whole Church-Catholike under one actual constant regiment.

Yet because in Churches that are near together in a vicinity, matters of
common concernment or that require the help of more Elders then one or two
Congregations can afford, will frequently and constantly occur, and if there
be not a set time and place appointed by consent for a certain number of
Officers of that vicinity to meet, they will be drawn together with much
difficulty, charge, labor, trouble and confusion, and with less certainty (as
appears by the case of M. Ward in the Netherlands, who being unjustly cast out
of his place, could not under two years get a meeting of neighbour-Elders to
hear and right his cause, and when he had obtained a meeting, it was ^ut of
very few, viz. the Elders of Aruheim, as I have been informed) therefore it is
conceived that there should be a certain time and place appointed for the
Elders of such a vicinity as are in combination for mutual assistance, to meet
in.

M. Ellis mistakes the state of the question, in saying the Ministers and
Elders of the Catholic Church not taken severally but jointly, as one entire
College or Presbytery, have the charge severally and jointly of the whole, and
every particular Church committed to them, vind. page 9. For they are not
actually Ministers and Elders of the Church-Catholike, nor actually one entire
College and Presbytery, nor have not actually the charge of the whole and every
particular Church, but habitually only, by reason of the indefinitenesse of
their office. They have power in actu primo by virtue of their office, but not
in actu secundo sive exercito: they have jus ad rem every where, but not in re
any where without a call. They are the Ministers of Jesus Christ, and thereby
have right and power to perform the acts belonging to their office, but for the
execution of it, either in a particular Church constantly, or conjunctim
occasionally with others, there is required a call thereunto. And the not
observing of this distinction is the cause of this difference in this question.
The Levites were by their office consecrated to do the service of the
Tabernacle, and to stand before the Congregation to minister unto them, Numb.
16.9. And the Priests to offer sacrifice: and both Priests and Levites were to
be Teachers and Judges and Israel: and they had 48. Cities with their suburbs
given unto them: but they might not at their pleasure exercise this power, and
dwell where they listed, and minister in what they pleased, or offer sacrifice
promiscuously when they listed, or be Teachers and Judges where and when they
listed, but according to appointment and assignation, and according to their
courses, and as they had a call to exert their power. So it is with the
Ministers of the Gospel, They are vested with an office to dispense Gods
Ordinances of worship and discipline, but they may not execute this office, but
as they have an especial call thereunto, no more then require maintenance,
which also belongs to their office, except from those that call them to
exercise their office among them. There are houses and gleabs and maintenance
allotted by the law of the land for the Ministry, but every Minister may not
carve for himself where and what he pleases. The particular exerting of the
office and reception of maintenance in and from particular Congregations is not
qua Minister indefinitely and habitually, but qua Romanus, Alexandrinus,
Londinensis, Gippovicens^s. The whole Church in reference to Christ the King
thereof, is indeed an actual polity, but in reference to the ordinary
Officers, whose office though habitually it be indefinite, yet is actually
drawn forth into exercise by a particular or special call and evocation, it may
be styled an habitual polity.

Sect. 4.
Now let us see how M. Ellis's Prejudices, Probabilities, and Demonstrations
will lie against this habitual integrality of the Church-Catholike visible, and
against the habitual indefinitenesse of the Ministers office.

First, he objecteth the novelty of this opinion. And indeed well he may, as he
has stated it, for he was the first that hatched it, in his own brains. But
that the Church is one habitually, and that the particular Churches bear the
relation of members to the whole, and of fellow members one to another, and
that Ministers are Ministers beyond the limits of their particular
Congregations, and can upon occasion administer the Ordinances of God to more
persons then those of their own Congregation authoritatively (upon which hinge
hangs the whole question) this is no novel opinion.

For the first execution of the Evangelical, Ministerial office, in teaching
and baptizing by John Baptist, and by the Apostles before they had their
general commission, and the preaching of the 70. was without any respect to any
particular Congregations, for there were none set up. And when they were set
up, the Apostles send faithful teachers to the several Churches whom they
commended also to them, exhorting them to receive, respect, and obey them; as
Timothy and Apollos, 1 Cor. 16.10, 11, 12. Phil. 2.19, 23. And the many places
whether Timothy and Titus traveled, and where they preached and exercised
their office, is abundantly set down in the Scriptures, and gathered out by
S^^^ct ymnuus, and M. Prin^e in his unbishoping of Timothy and Titus.

The Apostle also sent Tychicus a faithful Minister to the Ephesians, Ephesians*
6.21. and under the same notion of a faithful Minister he sends him also to the
Colossians, Col. 7.8. as is further noted in the second question. And lest this
should be said to he done as he was an Evangelist (though we find him not
expressly called an Evangelist) yet it is clear that there were many that
preached the Gospel in the Apostles days in more places then one
authoritatively. The brethren that John writes of in his 3d Epist. meant forth
and were helpers to the truth, taking nothing of the Gentile^, were Ministers
which might have taken maintenance, but did not, that they might spread the
Gospel. It appears also even by the false Teachers that crept into Galatia and
Corinth in Paul's absence: and those that went from Jerusalem to Antinch and
bred the broil there, and those that preached the Gospel of envy and strife,
Phil. 2.^5. who certainly were no Evangelists, neither do I allow of their
false doctrine, yet it proves that it was ordinary for Ministers to preach to
more Congregations then one. And it is very probable that those dispersed which
went up and down preaching, Act. 8.4. were officers, as one has lately showed*
for what should the Apostles do at Jerusalem if there were no private
Christians there? and it is likely that the heat of the persecution fell most
upon the officers, and therefore they were generally scattered abroad, except
the Apostles.

And in the after ages of the Church there was nothing more frequent, then for
Ministers to act out of their own Congregations. We find indeed provision made
by Canons for the ordering of Ministers in the exercise of their function in
other places then their own, but no prohibition to exclude them from it. As
first, that they must have leave to do what they did: which was a wise
provision against such as creep into other Churches without a call. It was
provided in Conc. Nic. Can. 17. Caranza. That no Bishop should ordain any that
belong to another Bishop, Cum non habeat consensum Episcopi ipsius a quo
recessit clericus. And Conc. Constinop. Can. 2. secundum Zonaram* (...), etc.
Non vocati Episcopi ultra Diocesim ne transeant ad ordinationem vel aliquam
aliam administrationem Ecclesiasticam. There is not taken away from them power
of exercising of any of those things in other Dioceses, when they were called
by others to help therein. Nullus Episcopus ex alia provincia audeat ad aliam
transgredi, and ad promotionem ministerij aliquos in Ecclesijs ordinare, nisi
literis regatus adveniat. Conc. Antioch. Can. 13. Caranz. Nisi forte cum
consilio and voluntat^ regionis Episcopi. Can. 22. Yea, the Council of Sardice
provideth, that if a Bishop in a Province where there have been more Bishops,
did neglect to ordain more Bishops, then might the Bishops of the neighboring
Province (being desired by the people of that Province) come ex vicina
provincia and ordinent Episcopum. Conc. Sa^d. Can. 2. secund. Isidor. sed Can.
^. secund. Caranz.

Secondly, No Bishop ought to solicit an Ecclesiastical Officer of another
Diocese into his own, and ordain him there. Conc. Sardic. Can. ^8. Cara^^12.2.

Thirdly, When Presbyters traveled abroad they could not be admitted to
officiate (...), Absque literis commendatitijs proprij Episcopi nusquam ullo
modo ministrare. Conc. Chalced. Can. 13. secundum Zona^^^ 1^. sec. Caranz. Then
if they came commended by their bishop they might perform any Ecclesiastical
duty. Vide Concilij septimi canon, ^0. apud Zonaram.

Fourthly, They were not permitted to stay too long abroad. Non multo tempore
in alicua civit^te residere. Definire ergo tempus, qu^a and non recipi
Episcopum inhumanum est, and si diutus resideat per^ciosum est. Conc. Sard.
Can. 14. Car. Per multa tempora nititur immor^^ri, Con. Antioch. Can. 3.

Fifthly, When they were abroad if they were recalled they were to return to
their own charge, Conc. Antioch. Can, 3. Many other provisions were made,
directing how Ministers were to carry themselves when they were abroad, but
none of those provisions of them off from officiating abroad, only they
regulate them in their carriage to prevent disorders.

Many examples antiquity affords us of the dispensing of Ordinances of worship,
ordination and discipline, beyond the limits of the Ministers (...) particular
charge.

(...) of Alexandria was famous this way, Tantum studij in Scripture propaganda
posuisse serunt, ut praeconem Evangelij Gentibus Orian^^libus, and Indis sese
conferret, (...). It is said also, that there were many Evangelists, and
faithful messengers prepared to promote and plant the heavenly word after the
gui^e of the Apostles, (...). Eusebius. lib. 5. cap. 9, 10.

Auici^us Bishop of Rome granted leave to Polycarpus Bishop of (...) for the
re^erence that he owed him, to administer the Lord Supper in his Church (...).
Eusebius. lib. 5. cap. 24. So Nicephorus relates, ^. 4. cap. 39. And the
Centurists, Century 2. cap. 10.

Anicetus, Pius, Hyginus, Telesphorus, and Xystus Bishops of Rome, gave the
Eucharist to the Bishops of other Churches that resorted to them, though
differing from them about Easter. Eusebius. ibid.

Athanasius consecrated Frumentius Bishop at Alexandria, and sent him into
India, and there he converted many to the faith, and builded many Churches.
Socrates lib. 1. cap. 15.

Athanasius traveling from Jerusalem by Peleusium the ready way to Alexandria,
preached in every city where he came, and exhorted them to eschew the Arians:
and in diverse of the Churches he ordained Ministers, though it were in other
Bishops Provinces, (...). Socr. lib. 2. cap. 19. 24.

Basil Bishop of Caesarea in Cappadocia fearing that the Doctrine of Arius
would creep into the Provinces of Pontus, went into those parts and instructed
men in his doctrine, (...), and confirmed the wavering. Socrat. l. 4. c. 21, 25.

Gregory Bishop of Nazianzum did the like in many cities, and often went to
Constantinople for that end, Ibid.

Paulus Bishop of Emisa came to Alexandria in the days of Cyril Bishop there,
and there he preached a famous Sermon. And Cyril writes of him in an Epistle to
John Bishop of Antioch, that he labored there in preaching beyond his
strength, that he might overcome the envy of the devil, and join together in
love the scattered members, (...) Evagr. lib. 1. cap. 6.

Epiphanius Bish. of Cyprus came to Constantinople where John Chrysostom was
Bishop, and in a Church not far from the walls of the City, he celebrated the
communion, and made a Deacon without the leave of Chrysostom. And though
Chrysostom reproves him for it, yet only for the breach of an Ecclesiastical
canon. Multa contra canones agis Epiphani, primum, quod ministros Ecclesia
ordinas in Ecclesijs quae sunt in mea Diocesi. Soc. l. 1. c. 13.

Moses a Sarac^^ by birth, an eminent man, being much desired by Mavia the
Queen of the Saracens to be their Bishop, was sent to Alexandria to be
ordained: and though he refused to be ordained by Lucius the Arian Bishop, yet
certain exiled Bishops ordained him in a mountain. Socrat. l. 4. c. 29.
Theodorit. l. 4. c. 21.

Origin being sent for by the Churches of Achaia, as he was upon his journey to
Athens, he went through Palestina, and was ordained to be a Presbyter by
Alexander Bishop of Jerusalem, and Theoctistus Bishop of Caesarea, though he
was a man of Alexandria, and went to officiate in Achaia, Histor. Magd. C^n. 3.
c. 10. cited also by M. Pat. Symson History of the Church. page 268.

Yea, the dividing of Dioceses (and the same we may say of Parishes which are
the bounds of particular Congregations) was but an humane prudential act. And
therefore in the Council of Nice, they pleaded no higher ground for it but Mos
antiquus obtinuit, etc. And in the Council of Constantinople consisting of 250.
Bishops it was forbidden by canon that Bishops should leave their own Diocese,
and intermeddle with foreign Churches, for until that time by reason of the
great heat and storm of persecution it was (...) indifferently used. Socrat.
lib. 5. cap. 8.

And what frequent use the Church anciently made of Sy^^^^ and Council, and how
authoritatively they acted, M. Ellis cannot be ignorant whole Volumes might be
written of this subject. And there^^re Reverend M. Cotton in Keys, chap. 6.
handling the Question, Whether a Synod has power of Ordination and
excommunication, though his judgment seems to inclin^ to the negative, yet
says, we will not take upon us hastily, to censure the many notable precedents
of ancient and latest Synods, wh^ have put forth acts of power in both these
(...). The refo^^^ of all arguments this of novelty might well (...) may most
justly be retorted upon the contrary (...).

(...) answers M. Ellis gives against the antiquity of Syno^^.

(...) ^^ndling of things of common concernment does not conclude them one
Corporation, no more then the common Treaties of Nations in things of joint
concernment. vind. p. 10. But this common concernment arose from the unity of
the head, body, charter and Laws, and the mutual relation of members, and
therefore that parallel holds not.

2. Says he, this (it is certain) was at some distance of time, after the
discipline of the Churches were corrupt and declined to worldly policy, vind.
p. 11.

Ans. Surely this is not so of all. For the first convention, Act. 1. about the
installing of a new Apostle, and that before the Church was divided into
particular Churches, and for a thing that concerned the whole Church, a meeting
which our Divines usually account a Synod, yea, a general Council, though not
in all formalities, where there was a joint exercise of the key of order: this
I say was before the corruption of discipline, or declining to worldly policy.
And that Synod Act. 15. where decrees were made and imposed on the Churches,
and that by Elders of diverse Churches as well as Apostles, and concerning
things indifferent in their own nature (some of them) though necessary in
regard of that present time: that Synod was not liable to this exception. Nor
those two Synods in Asia where John the Apostle sat President, mentioned by M.
Patrick Symson in his first Century of Councels, page 482. out of Eusebius. lib.
3. cap. 20. mentioned also by the Magdeburg. Centurists.

3. It might be (says he) by decree and judgment only, not by actual
execution. Or

4. Each Church might act its own power, though in union with others, as so
many several and distinct Churches united, and Elders congregated, and so they
might excommunicate from their own heap or Congregation only.

Ans. The history of the Councels does abundantly confute this, for they acted
as one body jointly for all the Churches they met for, and not severally, and
did both ordain Bishops, and also actually excommunicate many heretics. For
what several distinct Churches did the convention Act. 1. act, seeing there
were none then in being?

5. It was (says he) a voluntary association, by right of fraternity, and not
oneness of corporation: which appears by astringing and confining in after
times the power of Bishops and Ministers to, and within Dioceses and Churches.

Ans. Though it were voluntary, yet might it be necessary and not arbitrary, as
was showed before. The oneness of Corporation was not actual, but habitual.
The astringing of them by canon to avoid confusion, took not away their
habitual power, for by leave they might act any where, as has been showed
before. But if they had not been endued with habitual power by office, their
voluntary association could not have enabled them to exert their power jointly,
when they were met.

Sect. 5.
Let us now hear what witnesses he produces against the unity and integrality
of the Church, and the habitual power of the Ministers beyond the limits of
their Congregations, or their joint acting together as Ministers upon a call.

First, Chrysostom in Sermon. 1. de Pash. says; The Sacrifice or Passover was
to be eaten in one house, and not to be conveyed out, i. e. the house is one
that has Christ; and the many houses of the Hebrews have but only one power,
nature and condition, as the Churches throughout the whole world, and in
several Provinces, being many in number, are but one Church.

But wherein does he differ from the Presbyterians herein? They grant the
Churches are many in number divisim, and yet make but one conjunctim
habitually. But he is expressly against M. Ellis, for he grants Provincial
Churches; and that all the Churches throughout the whole world are one, and
this must be one integral, for a Genus is not made by aggregation of Provinces.
And all these though organized are similar parts of the whole, having but one
only power, nature and condition.

2. Clemens Alexandr. lib. 7. Strom. There is absolutely but one ancient and
Catholic Church in the unity of one faith. And say not the Presbyterians the
same also? and it appears he held the Catholic Church to be an Integral,
because he says it is ancient, but a Genus ^ever grows ancient.

He might have gone higher, for another Clemens in his constitutions, who (if
he be of any credit) speaks more home. Nos Apostoli scripsimus vobis Catholicam
hanc doctrinam ad fulciendum and confirmandum vos, quibus universalis
Episcopatus creditus est, (...) Constit. 6. c. 14.

But Basil in Ep. ad Neo-Caesarienses will be of more credit, Interrogate
patres vestros and annunciabunt vobis, etiamsi loci situ divisae sunt
paraeciae, tumen veluti coronamento quodam unitae, unaque sententia gubernatae
fuerint. Assidua quidem populi fuit inter se commixtio: ipsi pastores vero
tanta praediti fuerunt mutua charitate, ut alius alio praeceptore ac duce usi
sunt.

And Cyprians testimony de unitate Ecclesiae is direct against him; for he
defines the unity of the Church by doctrine and discipline. As there is one
God, one Christ, one faith; so there is one Church, one discipline in it, one
Bishopric, etc. Episcopatus unus est, cujus a singulis in solidum pars
tenetur. Now Bishopric argues the Church to be one politically (though but
habitually) and as many that are bound in a bond pro toto and in solido, are
every one liable to be arrested for the whole; so many that have a joint
interest in a thing in solidum, have all a joint right to the whole. Upon which
words of Cyprian M Parker in Polit. Eccles. lib. 3. page 122. has this
inference. Quid ni and unitas Ecclesiae in uno Petro primitus designata,
unitatem, idest aequalitatem authoritatis in singulis Ecclesijs quibusque
denotet? sic ut Ecclesia una sit, and Ecclesiastica potestas una, cujus ab
Ecclesijs singulis pars in solidum tenetur.

Cyprian is abundant in this point, Episcopatus unus est Episcoporum multorum
concordi numerositate diffusus. Cypr. Ep. 53. Etsi pastores multi sumus, unum
tamen gregem pascimus, and oves universas, etc. colligere and fo^ere debemus.
Ep. 67. Cyprian gathered together an authoritative Synod. He stoutly opposed
Steven Bishop of Rome for receiving some Bishops that were justly deposed, pro
sua quam gerebar universalis Ecclesiae cura. Cyp. lib. 1. Ep. 4.

Vt unitatem Dominus manefestaret, unam Cathedram constituit, and unitatis
ejusdem originem ab uno incipientem sua authoritas disposuit. Cyp. de unitate,
Upon which words Salmasius has this Comment, "Omnes Ecclesiae una sunt, and
unitatem "conspirantes faciunt omnes Cathedrae unam Cathedram, De Prim. page 87.

Ecclesiae nomine, non tantum una sed multorum unitas designatur. Bernard in
Cant. Sermon. 61.

Augustine in Tract. in Joh. 1.14. is more against him then for him. And
whereas he says, universa Ecclesia ligat solvitque peccam. He cannot mean
thereby that the Church is only one in nature and kind, but not in number,
because he speaks of Priesthood, and what one Minister does bind is bound to
all, so that he violates (says he) the rights of holy Priesthood that joins
him to himself that is cast out by another. Neither does Eucherius (by his own
relation, for I have not seen him) say any other thing then the Presbyterians;
in that he says the Church dispersed throughout the whole world consists in
one and the same faith, and fellowship of Catholic truth.

And whereas there is an innumerable multitude of the faithful, yet they are
rightly said to have one heart, and one soul in respect of their society in the
common faith and love. For he grants in these words an universal visible
Church, and that to be a society, now every society of men is one external
visible integral. And M. Ellis grants that there does flow an external
communion from the internal, and that the mystical union does imply an union
visible also. vind. pa^ 34.

His quotation out of the Council of Trent might well have been spared, for it
crosses himself most. Therein is confessed a general Council, and that with
authority, and the major part to bind the rest. Indeed they contend that a
Council binds not the absent Churches which have no delegates there: and who
says the contrary? But as those Churches who had delegates there are concerned
in their decrees (so they be agreeable to the word) and that formally, because
they are their decrees: so should the Church-Catholike if the whole had
delegates there. But this we gain by this quotation, that a general Council is
confessed by him to have doctrinal authority; and are not the (...) equally
extensible? Have they power to decide points of doctrine (as i^ there confessed
by M. Ellis) and not to exercise discipline? who cut one key shorter then the
other? It is granted also here, that Councels have to do with matters of common
right and joint concernment. And thereby the necessity of Synods and Councels
will follow, seeing there are things of common right to many Churches, and may
be to all. And this will necessarily require that they should be furnished with
authority to transact those affairs of common concernment, and that is as much
as the Presbyterians contend for in the behalf of Synods. No State (says he)
can take my wife from me, or dispose of my children in marriage: this is of
peculiar right: so in Churches. Answ. No more can the Elders of the particular
Congregation, nor the civil Officers of the particular Town. But the civil
Officers or State can dispose of men's children and good (according to Law) for
the good and defense of the whole, notwithstanding a man's peculiar right. So
the peculiar rights of persons and Congregations must be subservient and give
way to the good of the whole, or the greater part.

And though a master of a family ought not to yield up his family-government
over wife, children and servants, to rule them in common with other Masters of
families, as M. A. and M. S. note in their Def. p. 110. yet if he abuse his
government over them, the wronged persons either wife, children or servants,
may be relieved by the Magistrate, who yet has no constant actual hand in the
family-government.

And whereas he says, all the Christians in England would be loath to stand
bound to the determinations of 2. or 3. sent in their names to a general
Council. I answer by retortion, so would a Congregation or our Nobility and
Gentry be loath to stand bound by the censures of two or three Elders in a
particular Congregation without relief.

But it is pretended by M. Ellis to be new also relatively in reference to the
Protestant Divines. Calvin is brought in here, vind, p. 13, It is true Calvin
says, Instit. lib 4. cap. 1. sect. 3. Ad amplexandam Ecclesiae unitatem nihil
opus est Ecclesiam ipsam oculis cernere, vel manibus palpare, quin potius eo
quod in fide sit^ est. But his meaning i^, we cannot distinguish the elect from
the reprobate by sense, referring it to what he had spoken in the former
Section. Soli Deo permittenda est cognitio suae Ecclesia, sect. 2. Deus
mirabiliter Ecclesiam suam quasi in latebris servat.

But here M. Ellis cites a man for him who is directly against him. For Calvin
makes the Ministry of man which God uses in governing the Church, to be the
chief sinew whereby the faithful cohere together in one body, Inst. l. 4. c. 3.
s. 2. where also he dilates upon Ephesians. 4.4. etc. and says it is meant of the
Church militant only. And in sect. 7. he says, though the Minister be tied to
the particular Congregation, yet he may not only help other Churches, but may
be removed to other Churches, of the public utility require it.

And for Councels he says, l. 4. c. 9. s. 1. That he reverenced the ancient
Councels, ex animo, and wishes all other men did so. And says the promise in
Mat. 18.20. where two or three are gathered together in my name, etc. as it
reaches to particular Assemblies, so also to a general Council, Sect. 2. And
he gives to Councels power dogmatical, and says there is no better remedy
against errors, as I cited the words upon the like occasion before, Nullum est
melius remedium, etc. and also Dialactick power, c. 10. s. 27. in making
constitutions according to the general rules, 1 Cor. 14.40. and jurisdiction c.
11. not only doctrinal binding and loosing, but disciplinary by inflicting
censures, s. 2. and c. 12. s. 22. shows the ancient manner of yearly Synods,
and of appeals if any were wronged by their Bishops, and not only the relief of
the wronged person, but the deposition of the Bishop, or suspension for a time
from communion. And he says, that always before one Synod ended, the time and
place for another was set, and then complains that these things were now out of
date.

So that Calvin was not against an habitual unity of the whole Church, nor
against the exerting of the Ministerial power beyond the particular
Congregation, or exerting it conjunctim, in Synods and Councels.

Chamier also has been alleged for it before. And the difference is vast
between the Church-Catholike visible, which our Divines deny, (...) this, as
has been showed before, Chap. 5. Sect. 4.

M. Ellis's second just (or rather unjust) prejudice, is from the dangerous
consequences of this opinion. But indeed they flow from his ill stating of the
Question, and not from the Tenet it self.

To the first, viz. a necessity of universal and general Officers, and some one
above the rest, to whom the particular Churches may have continual recourse,
has been answered before, Cha. 7. Sect. 6.

To the second, viz. the necessity of a continual standing Court, Sect. 6.
has been already answered, Cha. 7. Sect. 10. The suiting of the Church too
much to worldly policy, occasioneth this scruple. And yet we see that
Parliaments, and Diets civil, are not standing continual Courts, no more need
Councels Ecclesiastical be. And whereas he says it were notably vain to
imagine that Christ has committed the government of his Church first, and
chiefly to that body that should not meet six times in sixteen hundred years,
nay never.

I answer, that I never affirmed a general Council to be the first subject of
the keys, nor the London-Ministers, that I can find, nor Apollonius, that I
remember. But the Church Officers in general, in opposition to the caetus
fidelium, or the civil Magistrate, etc. A general Council is but occasional,
yet is it Reverend and August, and of more large extent, by reason of the
general delegation, then any other meeting; and is full of authority, for the
exerting of all Ecclesiastical power of the keys, as I conceive. The gift of
the keys was primarily to the whole body of Officers, or Organs of the Church
respectively, as their Offices were capable of them* and as they were given to
the Apostles together, so they may he exercised together: And secondarily to
the particular Ministers or Officers, as being a part of that body. And though
the power habitually considered be indefinite, yet the constant, actual
exercise thereof is in their particular Congregations or Classes.

The Ordinances of God, for the enjoyment and use of them, were given to the
whole visible Church for the conversion and edification of the Elect, and if
they could meet together, as the Israelites did in the wilderness, and the
Saints (for ought I know) shall in heaven, they might partake of them together,
as their rightful portion, but because they cannot meet but in parcels,
therefore they have right to enjoy them divisim, by virtue of that general gift
to the whole, which every Congregation or parcel appropriates to it self, as
being a member of the whole: and yet it is not notably vain to say, The gift of
them by God, and his intention in giving them, was to the whole, though they
never meet, nor can meet together in this world.

So is the case of the Ministers also, the Ministry is primarily given to the
whole body of them, and if they could meet together they might exercise the
keys together conjunctim (a representation, or an epitome whereof is in a
general council) but because they cannot meet but in parcels where they are
seated, and have a particular call to give especial attendance, therefore they
exercise them divisim, yet as parts of the whole body of Organs of the Church;
and there they serve the whole Church, and their dispensations have influence
into the whole,

The third danger, viz. the trouble and charge of appeals, and the trial of
causes by them that can have no personal knowledge of the cause, or persons to
be tried, but by information, has been answered before. c. 7. s. 9.

Sect. 7.
His third prejudice is, that this opinion is Papal and Anti-Protestant. And to
prove this he brings in Bellarmines description of the Church-Catholike, viz.
That it is one visible Church or Congregation of men bound together by the
profession of the same faith, and participation of the same Sacraments, under
the government of lawful Pastors, and especially of that only Vicar of Christ
on earth, the Pontiffe or Bishop of Rome. This latter clause indeed is papal
properly, and therefore justly rejected by the Protestants. But the former part
if it be understood of one habitual body or Congregation, is not to be
accounted Papal, because set down by a Papist* for then all the Articles of the
Creed which they hold as well as we (though not on the same ground) should be
accounted Papal also. Where they differ from the Scripture therein they err,
and therein only we dissent from them.

Neither is it Anti-protestant (unless as he has stated it) Calvin's judgment
(whom he cites here again) I have showed before. and it is opposite to M.
Ellis in point of the power of the ministerial office beyond one Congregation
(which is the very hinge of the question) and in the power and use of Synods.
Chamier indeed makes the Church to be one general or universal: yet he makes it
to be aggregated of many particular Churches, which strongly argues an
integrality, for no Genus is made by aggregation, and he says it is compounded
of infinite particular Churches, but no genus is made by composition, Omne
aggregatum and compositum est integrale. He makes it also to consist of many
parts* yea, to have parts extra parts, which is the Logicians definition of
an integral. But how all the Kingdoms in the world (as he says, to make a
parallel with the universal Church) may be called one Kingdom in the general
(except by logical abstraction) I understand not. Certainly it cannot be by
aggregation and composition, and by apposition of them as parts of that general
Kingdom he speaks of, which yet he yields in the Church-Catholike. They have
not all the same systeme of written Laws, authorized by the same authority,
neither have they indefinite habitual Officers, as the Church has.

And for Bishop Jewel in his answer to Harding, he disputes against the
headship of the Pope, but denies not Christ to be head of the visible Church.
And though indeed he rightly calls it a new fancy, to prove the Pope to be head
of the Church from (...), as if there were therefore but one King to rule over
the whole world, yet he denies not that Christ rules over the whole Church,
but calls the Church One Kingdom, One body, One sheepfold. And he cites for the
unity of the Church many sentences out of Cyprian, viz. Vna est Ecclesia a
Christo per totum mundum in plura membra divisa. Item Episcopatus unus,
Episcoporum concords numerositate diffusus, Cyp. l. 4. Ep. 2. Also, Ecclesia
una est, and connexa, and cohaerentium sibi invicem Sacerdotum glutine
copulaeta. Ep. 9. Quando^oramus, non pro uno oramus, sed pro to^o populo; quia
totus populus unum sumus. Cyp. in Orat. Dominic. Again, Hanc unitatem firmiter
tenere, and vendicare debemus, maxim Episcopi, qui in Ecclesia praesidemus: ut
Episcopatum quoque ipsum unum and indivisum probemus, Cyp. l. 3. Ep. 13. Et si
pastores multi sumus, unum tamen gregem pascimus, etc. Copiosum est Corpus
Sacerdotum, concordiae mutua glutine atque unitatis vinculo copulatum, ut si
quis ex collegio nostro haeresim facere, and gregem Christi lacerare, ac
vastare tentaverit, subveniant caeteri Ibid.

So that Jewel was far from restraining the Ministers office or power to one
Congregation, or from denying the authority of Synods and Councels.

And for M. Rutherford in his Due right of Presbytery, I marvel M. Ellis should
cite him, who is professedly point black against him, and has handled both
parts of my question, and concludes them affirmatively, Due Right of
Presbyteries, p. 55. etc. and 418. Now whose fault is it to cite authors for
him, that are known to be against him?

Sect. 8.
I come now to view his greater Artillery (as he calls it) and his first argument
is, because (says he) the Scriptures, Christ, and his Apostles are silent, and
speak nothing of one Catholic visible Church: yea (I may add) and all men
else, as he has stated it. But for Scripture-proofs I refer the Reader to
what I said formerly, and now have added, Chap. 2. But my proofs from Scripture
he was pleased to run over in vind. page 42. in 7. lines without any answer
to the particulars.

His second argument is from the institution of Christ; because (says he) the
keys of government were given first and fully, entirely and immediately to the
particular Congregation: and this he proves from the Church of the Jews, to
which all Church Power was given first and fully: but this was (says he) a
particular Church, not the universal, unless by accident, because there was no
other Church State in the world at that time. And though he grants it to be a
Type of the Church of the New Testament, yet not as Catholic, but as
Congregational as it self was, or else as mystical. Vind. page 21.

Answ. It cannot be denied but there were some things peculiar to the Church of
the Jews, as typical Ordinances, and a typical high Priest, and that it was
bounded within certain limits, and they were bound to meet, in their males
three times yearly; which pertain not to the Evangelical Church. But in that
one Church there were particular Assemblies for ordinary worship, and
extraordinary also, and for acts of government, and they had particular
Officers, and Ecclesiastical rulers over them: and there were appea^s reserved
to the great Council at Jerusalem, and so it could not be a type of a
Congregational Church, for there can be no appeals to that, it being the lowest
Church that can be. The particular Synagogues were rather Types of the
Congregational Churches, for they are called by the same name, Jam. 1.2. And
the Ministers under the Gospel are called by the same names that the indefinite
Officers of the Jewish Church were, viz. Priests and Levites, Isa. 66.21. which
place is spoken of the time under the Gospel. And if it be granted that the
Ministers of the Gospel be given to the whole Church, as the Priests and
Levites were indefinitely to the whole Church of the Jews, notwithstanding any
particular relation to the particular Synagogues and places they resided in,
and taught, or judged in, it is as much as I contend for. And if by mystical he
means the elect only, or entitively only; it could not be a type of the
Church-Catholike so, for the Jewish Church was visible and organical.

His second proof is from Mat. 18. Tell the Church, which says he was a
particular Congregation which was endued with entire power even to
excommunication. Whatsoever ye shall bind, etc.

Answ. This was not the Institution, neither was there any donation of the
keys, but a supposal of the keys in the particular Churches, which is a thing
confessed by all (and this power was also in the Jewish Synagogues) But this is
not spoken exclusively, that this power is no where else. If the rulers of the
Synagogue had power to excommunicate (to which it is like Christ alluded in
that speech) then much more the Sanedrim, or highest Court: and so I conceive
it is in the Church of the New Testament: If the least combination of Elders
have this power given them for matters that concern that Congregation only,
then much more a greater company and combination, for matters that concern a
greater part of the Church under their combination, and for matters of greater
moment then can be transacted by the smaller company. But the donation of the
keys was to the Apostles together, and they were general Officers, and stood in
relation to no particular Church, and therefore the keys come to the particular
Congregation or Ministry there, as to parts of the whole company of Organs, yet
immediately, and not by commission from any Catholic Court.

His third proof is, because the first execution of the greatest act of entire
power was exercised in a particular Church, without consulting with the
universal Church (though the Apostles were then surviving) 1 Cor. 5.

Answ. For ought that I know the Church of Corinth was a Classical Church, and
not a mere Congregational one, for there were Churches in it, 1 Cor. 14.34.
Besides the probability that Cenchrea was a member thereof. But Sir who
requires the consulting with the Church-Catholike in admitting or ejecting
members? Or did the particular Synagogues consult with the Sanedrim, or the
whole Church of the Jews when they excommunicated any man? Surely they had work
enough to do then.

His fourth proof or argument is Because entire power was committed to
particular men, viz. the Apostles severally, and to all jointly, and therefore
not to one visible governing Church. Vind. p. 23.

Answ. By this argument it appears, the power is given not to the Congregation,
but to the Ministers, whose representatives the Apostles were in receiving the
keys, severally and jointly, which is as much as the Presbyterians require,
viz. that the Ministers have power to exercise their ordinary power jointly
together upon a call, as well as severally in their particular Congregations,
as the Apostles did their extraordinary. Their receiving the keys together
signified their representation of the Ministers not multiplied only (as M.
Ellis would evade it) but conjoined.

His fifth argument is from the reproofs given by Christ to the 7. several
Churches in the Revelation, and not to the combination of them, though near one
another.

Answ. For ought appears they might be all Presbyterial Churches, and not
Congregational only. The Church of Ephesus was one, and that was of more
Congregations then one, as has been showed before. But how does this prove
these Churches were nor, or might not actually have been in combination, if
civil authority would have permited? Were not the Elders of the several
Churches worthy of blame for not doing their duty in their several Churches? Or
will combinations of Congregations now in Classes or Provinces, free their
Ministers from blame in neglecting their du^^es in their particular
Congregations? A Classis or Synod is not to be blamed for the faults in a
particular Congregation, which ought to be censured in the particular, and not
there, neither indeed can be, except they had been brought before them. The
several Churches there had their several faults, and therefore though the
Epistle is written to the seven, yet it was needful the reproofs should be
applied to rhem severally. And yet some think that the whole Epistle was
writeen and sent to all the 7. Churches, from Rev. 1.4, 11.

His second sort of Arguments are from the matter and members of the Church,
Sect. 9.
and he makes it necessary that the whole Church should be gathered together
into one place, as the Jewish Church was, and Corporations in their hals, and
Kingdoms in their Parliaments: And this he says I deny against all experience
and reason, Vind. p. 24.

Answ. This has been answered before among the Objections. I add further that
though usually it is so that there are some general meetings in worldly
polities, that are several actual governments, yet it is not always so, as
has been showed, and where it is so it is a fruit and effect and token of
liberty, but arises not merely from unity: because there have been polities
that had them not: for this Kingdom was one a good while before there were any
Parliaments, and after they were granted they were but occasional: and so there
may be occasional meetings in general Councels, only the vastnes of the Church,
and diversity of civil governments and governors render them very difficult in
our days.

But he says that such an oneness as is in regard of kind and nature in all
the Churches, and in relation to the same head, and in order to, and dependence
upon one rule or Law, the word of God, is no actual or real oneness, but in
imagination and conceit.

Ans. It is not actual indeed but habitual, as has been said many times over,
yet it is real, as well as the four monarchies were real monarchies and not in
imagination only and conciet. He might as well make the head of the Church, and
the Laws of the Church, and the Covenant of grace, and the seals of the
Covenant to be but imaginary and in conceit, as the Church-Catholike, for they
are the bonds of the unity, and real visible bonds make not an imaginary
integral, but a real. And where (I pray) is this oneness denied by the
brethren, as you allege, Vin. p. 24. The enlargement and confirmation of this
argument, A non existentia, and ab impossibilitate existendi, have been
answered before, Chapter 7. Sect. 10.

Sect. 10.
A third sort of argument he takes from the form and nature of all bodies
incorporate, which consist in order of superior and inferior, etc.

But Christ's Kingdom is not to be regulated herein according to worldly
polities (as himself also elsewhere in his vind. has noted) so also Christ
has said of the Officers of his Kingdom, that it shall not be so among you,
Mat. 20.26. i. e. there shall be no superiority among you: and yet they were to
be Officers of a body, a kingdom, an Ecclesiastical polity. But this difficulty
is easily salved, because though one particular Officer has not power over
another, yet the greater number in actual consociation, or combination, has
over the less: as it is in a Parliament, or any meeting of the like nature,
where all the members are equal divisim, severally taken, yet the less number
is ruled, yea, censurable by the greater, if there be cause.

Diverse inconveniences he raises from hence, As 1 a necessary existence in one
place, and why not at Rome? 2. Constant standing Officers. To these have been
answered before. 3. A common form of faith, discipline, worship, and
profession, agreed on and formally propounded and taken. I answer, these are
for the essentials one in the Church-Catholike, set down in the word, and so
acknowledged often by himself, and they are submitted unto divisim, by the
whole Church. 4. that all must act by authority, and by virtue of commission
from the Church-Catholike, and in the name of the Church-Catholike: and this
the Assertors of this opinion (says he) say expressly. I answer, it is a mere
figment of his own brain, and a great injury to those he fastens it upon.

And hence the fifth inconvenience ( viz. that the Magistrate cannot reform
within his own dominions, before he has authority derived from the
Church-Catholike, either in a general Council, or from their Committee) falls to
the ground. For as the Ecclesiastical Officers of particular Churches have
power from Christ, and not from a general Council, to reform their own
Congregations, if they be able: so also the Magistrate within his dominions, is
Custo^ utriusque tabulae, and has a power circa sacra, though not in sacris:
not intrinsecally as a Church Officer, yet extrinsecally as a nursing father;
and so the Kings of Judah had, without authority derived to them from the
Sanedrin.

But I should think that this Inconvenience lights unavoidably upon such as
derive the power of the Minister from the people of a particular Congregation,
and make them to act as their servants in their name, and according to their
votes: for then If the Congregation grow corrupt, they may cast off their
faithful Elders, but their Elders cannot reform them, if they be unwilling; and
in a corrupt or infected condition, whether by error or profaneness, they
will not be willing to reform.

The sixth inconvenience of a solemn meeting for the election of such general
Officers, is answered already, C. 7. S. 7.

The inconvenience of meeting in a general Council by reason of multitude, is
salved by delegates rightly chosen. And the difference of languages is salved
by learning. That was no impediment in the Council of Nice, or any of the
general or large Councels. Neither does this hinder Princes (as himself
confesses) from one end of the world to another, to hold mutual
correspondency. Sect. 11.


His fourth sort of arguments (that so he might seem to fetch an argument from
every cause) is from the end of the Authors of this opinion, ^ind. page 29.
Either it is (faith he) to found the right of Presbyterial government as is now
endeavored, and to deprive particular Churches of entire power in themselves,
or at least of Independency in their government from other Churches: or else to
lay a ground work of a more effectual cure and remedy then hitherto, for all
distempers of particular Churches.

An. The Presbyterial government spoileth not Congregations of that due power
which Christ has given them, but helps and strengthens them in things of
greater difficulty wherein they are too weak, and regulateth
male-administrations in the particular Congregations, it serves for the
transacting of business of common concernment: it preserves unity in the
Church which is the body and family of Christ: it suppresseth errors and
heresies that arise and spread to the infecting of more Congregations then one,
or which particular Congregations cannot suppress.

And as for absolute independency, as it is disavowed by M. Ellis, and (as he
says) by the greatest patrons of that way in this Kingdom, and beyond the
seas: so that way which is provided thereby for the curing of error and
scandal, merely by advice and swasion, which may or may not be followed ad
libitum, it is not a sufficient remedy against obstinacy therein: and for the
Non-communion of Churches by sister-Churches without authority, I fear it will
prove unwarrantable, and is a vertual though not formal censuring of them,
though their equals; and is a way not to cure Churches, but to cause rents in
the Church of Christ, and confusion.

Neither can this associating of Churches together open a wide gap to tyranny,
as M. Ellis affirms, any more then associating of families into Congregations,
where the irregularities and miscarriages even in their particular houses are
reproveable and cens^rable, is a spoiling of families of their liberties, and a
tyrannizing over them. The actual union of a Congregation, and the constant,
near inspection of the Officers over the the particular families, will more (in
the eye of reason) entrench upon family-liberties, and call them oftener to
censure, then the habitual (...) of the whole body, or association of Churches
remote, who can when they meet (which is but seldom) handle only matters of
joint concernment, and of presumed male administration brought to them by
complaint, can infringe the liberties of those Congregations. And if the Church
in general be a society to all its members, to which there belong certain
common rights and privileges, as spiritual food, the Word and Sacraments (as
M. Ellis confesses) why not spiritual physic also, which is as necessary?

Obj. The whole world is one humane society under God the creator and
governor thereof, 1 Chronicles. 29 11. All that is in the heaven, and in the earth
is thine: thine is the Kingdom, O Lord, and thou art exalted as head above all.
And yet this makes them not one Kingdom politically, no not habitually; but
they are distinct Kingdoms, notwithstanding they have the same head, and the
same Law of nature common to them all. And therefore the identity of the head
and Laws of the Church-Catholike are not sufficient to make them one
Ecclesiastical visible (though but) habitual Kingdom or body.

Ans. There is not parratio. For first, the laws of nature are not one entire,
explicit body of written Laws, as Christ's Laws for his visible Church are, but
internal and invisible written in the heart only, and that but dimly, and not
apprehended by all, in all the parts thereof alike, through ignorance,
rudeness, barbarism, or evil customs.

Secondly, There are no Officers of the whole world, as it is a society,
directed by the internal Law of nature: but so there are of the visible Church:
and Therefore the visible Church is more then a society, it is Christ's
external, political Kingdom.

Thirdly, There are several chief governors over the several Kingdoms of the
world, which are Gods vicegerents, and Gods anointed ones in their Kingdoms;
and written municipal laws belonging to every Kingdom, distinct from other
Kingdoms; and privileges proper to the several Kingdoms, wherein the subjects
of other Kingdoms partake not. But Christ has set no such several, supreme,
anointed ones over the several Churches, nor permitted the several Churches to
make any different laws from his, nor from those laws which are common to the
whole Church. And the privileges of the Church are common to all the members
of the several Churches, and they have freedom to communicate together in the
holy Ordinances, wherever they dwell.

Fourthly, The Law of nature is given by God as an invisible Creator, the Laws
of the Church are given by Christ, a God man, as a Mediator. As he is God he
has an essential right to be governor of angels and men, and all other
creatures, but as Mediator he has a donative Kingdom of grace, and is a
political head of an external visible Kingdom, which is but one.

Fifthly, All mankind are not entered into one body by one external instituted
sign, badge, enrowlment, and initial seal, not are entered into one explicit,
actual Covenant, nor make an explicit, actual profession of subjection to the
same God, or to the same systeme of written Laws. And therefore that parallel
which these two reverend Ministers M. Allen and M. Shepard (whom I love and
reverence much in the Lord) endeavor to draw between mankind and the
Ecumenical Church in their Defense unto the nine questions or positions, p.
79. will not suit and agree in all things.

6. Yet as all men are one society, though they want Officers, as such, yet are
they bound to combine, even from that internal union, to preserve themselves,
and maintain the Law of nature. Suppose there were some circumcelliones or some
conjurers that sought to destroy mankind in general, not because they are of
this or that Kingdom, upon some particular quarrel, but because they are men:
or that endeavored to poison and infect the air, or let in the sea to drown
the earth, or take away the light of the Sun (if such things were possible) or
any kind of wild beast should multiply that would destroy all mankind; then
all mankind setting aside their particular immunities, combinations, Laws,
yea, and quarrels, ought and would unite themselves as men to preserve
mankind, and oppose such common enemies of mankind. Foreign Nations will
combine to vindicate Jus Gentium if it be violated. All Nations combine against
Pirates, notwithstanding particular distinctions and oppositions, yea, so far
as men's positive laws are general, as the civil Law reaches far over many
Kingdoms, if there be any oppositions or obstructions that hinder the exercise
thereof, for common good; all that submit themselves thereunto would
notwithstanding their particular distinctions join together to remove the same.

Much more then ought there to be an union and combination between the several
parts of the Church, which has the same head and King over the whole, of our
own nature, who has given us one systeme of written laws, and but one charter
for the whole, and made Officers for the good of the whole, enduing them with
an habitual power of office to administer all his Ordinances in any part of the
Church upon a call. And if they could meet together, they might actually teach
and rule the whole Church, as one Congregation, as M Ellis grants: and
because they cannot so meet, yet by the same reason if a great part of them
meet together, the Elders set over them may teach and rule them jointly
together, as well as severally asunder. For the greater number of Churches
being considered as combined and consociated parts of the whole, bear the same
relation in a proportion to the less, that the greater number in the same
Congregation do to the less: and therefore if the major part in the
Congregational Eldership shall overrule the less by their votes, so by
proportion shall the greater number of any greater Presbytery whether
Classical, Provincial, or National, etc. being in actual consociation and
combination, overrule the less, if they dissent.

But because there are so many superstitions, errors and heresies in the
Asian, African, European and American Churches, as M. A. and M. S. in their
defense p 92. do take notice of, (which book I confess it was mine
unhappiness not to hear of until this tractate of mine was transcribed for the
press, and who have dealt exceeding heartily upon this question, and seem to
yield the fairest concessions toward the universality, unity, integrality, and
priority of the whole Church in some respects of reason, page 77. though not so
much as is contended for) yet I say for these things sake, I should be very
tender in defining (as the case now stands) what Churches, or how far the
visible Churches may with convenience or safety enter into actual combination,
Quest. 2.
lest the truths of God, or the liberties of the more sound and pure Churches
should be prejudiced thereby.

The second Question.
I come now to handle the predicate of my Question, which I may well call a
second Question, and that is, Which of these two Churches is Prima or first,
and which Secundaria or secondary?

Sect. 1.
BEfore I answer, I desire it may be remembered that the comparison is not
between the invisible and the visible Church, but between the visible Catholic
Church, and the particular visible Churches. And then I answer, I conceive the
Church-Catholike visible is pri^^a, and the particular Churches are
secundariae, and in that sense or^ae, as being ministerially converted and
admitted by it.

But for our better understanding of this priority, I shall first set down what
kind of priority this is, and what not. I do not mean a priority of time, as
if the Church-Catholike should be (...) (...) and antiquius quid: and yet the
Evangelical Church was first set up in time, before there were any divisions
into particular Churches: but now it is divided, the members that are born in
the several Congregations, enter into the general and particular Churches,
simul tempore, though not ratione and naturei. As a freeman in London takes up
his freedom of the City, (...) of such a ^all or company at once. But those
that are born in it, and converted to it, find the Church-Catholike already
constituted before them even in time. Also, I do not mean in regard of
constitution of the whole political Kingdom of Christ by aggregation and
combination, as M. Hooker understands me, for the particular Congregations must
exist before they can be combined and aggregated. Neither do I (...) in regard
of operation, for now the Church is constituted, and divided into particular
combinations, the particular Churches are first in their ordinary operations.
And yet the Evangelical Church did put forth operations at first, before any
such divisions, and without any reference to them.

But positively I mean the Church-Catholike is before the particular.

1. Intention divina, in Gods intention: as Nature intends first the whole
man, and not any part of man, although the parts are in some sense before the
whole in consideration, for the whole is made up of them.

2. Institutione divina in regard of Gods institution. God did first institute
the whole by one Charter, Covenant and systeme of Laws, and the particular
Congregations secondarily, for convenient communication of persons, and
transactions of business. Go teach all Nations was the first Commission after
Christ's resurrection.

3. Donatione divina, for the Ordinances and privileges of the Church were
first given to the whole, and secondarily to the particular Congregations: as
the privileges of any Kingdom and Corporation are.

4. The Church-Catholike is prior dignitate in dignity, a Kingdom is of more
dignity and honor then any particular town; and a city then any street or
ward. The whole has more dignity then any part. Yea, and I may say also in
authority, for the authority of the whole is greater in diverse respects then of
the parts.

5. Perfectione, for the perfection of the whole is made up of the perfection
of the parts, a whole Kingdom of the parts of it: and any whole comprizeth the
perfection of the parts of it; a particular street or ward is an imperfect,
incomplete thing, and not consistent alone, but as a part in reference to the
whole: and as a member in reference to the whole body. The particulars may have
the perfection of parts, and some be more perfect then others, but the whole is
most perfect; and the perfections of the parts concur in the perfection of
the whole.

6. Entitive or essentialiter, the Church-Entitive is before the Organical, for
the organical is made up of the members of the Church Entitive, and the
Church-Entitive affords materials to the Church-organical. And in this respect
the particular Churches are properly ortae, arising out of the Entitive: and so
also is the whole Church-organical, for it arises out of the combination of
the particular Congregations, and both it and they consist only of members of
the Church Entitive. And herein I consent unto M. Parker in this sense; but not
that the habitual power of Elders should arise from the particular
Congregations to act in Synods, but only in regard of their evocation, and
exciting of their power to act in reference to them pro hic and nunc.

7. Causalitate efficientis Ministerialis, For the Church-Catholike already
converted is a means of converting more unto them, as opportunity is afforded,
and of admitting ministerially into the Church-Catholike both entitive first,
and then organical, both private members and also Officers into their habitual
office.

8. Cognitione sive noscibilitate perfecta. For though this or that
Congregation be proprior ad sensum, and so notior respectu nostri, which is
cognitione confusa, yet the Church-Catholike is (...) noscibilior simpliciter.
Distincta enim cognitio sequitur ordinem naturae, in se, and in mente been
disposita. As universalia sunt notiora minus universalibus, and species infima,
individ^^^. The Kingdom of England as a Kingdom is propius ad (...), and so
noscibilius distincta ratione: but particular towns are propiora ad sensum. The
notion of an English man comes first upon a subject of this Kingdom, before of
a Suffolk man.

A man may have knowledge of England as a Kingdom, and be well skilled in the
polity, laws, and privileges thereof, and yet by sense have but little or no
knowledge of particular Towns: so a man may know much of the Church, as Christ's
Kingdom, and be well skilled in the Laws, Ordinances, and privileges thereof,
and yet know but few particular Churches.

So that the priority of the Church-Catholike visible, in respect of the
particulars, is like the priority of a Kingdom to the parts of it, or of a
Corporation in respect of the parts of it; which is not meant in a mathematical
or techtonical consideration, for so the particular buildings are prima, and
the whole city ortae, yet so M. Hooker understood me in his acute arguing about
integrale, Surv. page 255. But in regard of intention, institution, donation of
privileges, dignity, perfection, essence, instrumental efficiency, and perfect
cognition of it.

There is also a difference between ortum and secundarium, for every ortum is
secundarium, but every secundarium is not ortum. But I principally meant
secundarium or secundary: yet in regard the particular Churches arise and
spring out of the Church-Entitive, and are converted and admitted ministerially
by the Church-Catholike already in being, they may truly be said to be ortae,
and the Catholic prima.

First, Sect. 2.
All the names that are in the Scripture given unto the Church-visible, agree
primarily to the Church-Catholike: and secondarily to particular Congregations.
As (...): we are first considered as called out from Idols, and devoted to be
the Lords people, before we can be considered of this or that Congregation. We
know they were given even to the Jews, before ever any Congregational
Evangelical Churches had existence, Act. 7.38. The Church in the wilderness,
And the Jews are frequently called the Lords people. So the Church is called
the house of the living God, 1 Timothy 3.15. And the ground and pillar of truth,
Gods vineyard Joh. 15.1. Wherein branches in Christ bearing no fruit are cut
off, Christ's sheepfold, Joh. 10.16. Barn-floor. Mat. 3.12. Drag-net,
Wheat-field, Kingdom of heaven, Mat. 13.37, 38. A great house wherein are
vessels even of dishonor, 2 Timothy 2.20. These names cannot be limited or
appropriated to any particular Congregation, but are first true of the whole
Church, and of every particular Church as a part thereof. Congregationes
particulares sunt quasi parts similares Ecclesiae Catholicae, atque adeo and
nomen and naturam ejus participant. Ames. med. l. 1. c. 32. s. 4.

2. That is the primary Church to which the Covenant, Promises, Laws and
Privileges of the Church do primarily belong: but the Covenant, Promises, Laws
and Privileges do primarily belong to the Church-Catholike. Therefore, etc.

The minor I prove, because the Covenant of grace and salvation by Christ, and
the first Evangelical promise that ever was made in the world, was to Adam and
Eve, representing all mankind, and therefore consequently the whole Church of
God. This was before there was any division or distinction made of Churches
into Jew and Gentile, National or Congregational.

Again, the main commission for gathering the Evangelical Church was, Go teach
all Nations, and baptize them, in the name of the Father, Son, and holy Ghost,
Mat. 28. And this was before any divisions or subdivisions were appointed: and
they were secondarily brought in, for order and convenient administration of
Ordinances, and communication of members, and transaction of business: and
they being similar parts of the whole, receive their particular distinctions
from external, accidental, and adventitious particularities, as the places
where they exist, the particular Officers set over them; their purity or
impurity, eminency or obscurity, multitude or paucity, zeal or remissness,
antiquity or late constitution, etc. They all retain the general essential form
and difference from heathens, and among themselves, as parts of a similar body,
are distinguished but by accidental differences.

And that promise that the gates of hell shall never prevail against the Church
is primarily given to the Church-Catholike visible have (...); For that in
heaven is not assailed by the gates of hell, but only that on earth. And though
it may seem to be applicable to the invisible only, yet to those as visible;
for so they are assailed by persecutions and heresies.

Again, He that believes and is baptized, shall be saved, Mar. 16. This does
primarily belong to the Church Catholic, and that a visible Church, because
capable of Baptism, and though it be applicable to every member of any
particular Congregation, yet not as being a member of that particular society
or confederation, but as being in the general Covenant, and so a member of the
Church Catholic, to which that promise was made. Yea, look over all the
promises in the New Testament, and you shall find them under in general,
without the least respect or reference to the particular confederations or
Congregations wherein the believers lived. In any similar body, as water, the
accidents do not primarily pertain to this or that particular drop, and
secondarily to the whole, but first to the whole, and secondarily to this or
that drop. So the promises and privileges of the Church do not primarily
belong to this or that particular Church, and secondarily to the Catholic: but
first to the Catholic, and secondarily to this or that particular Congregation
or person, as being a member thereof.

The Laws also are given to the whole Church primarily, as the Laws of England
are to the whole Kingdom primarily, and to the particular division^
secondarily, and all are bound to obedience not as Suffolk or Essex men, but as
Subjects of this Kingdom. So the Laws of Christ bind every particular Church,
but not because in such a particular Covenant or confederation, but because
Subjects of Christ's visible Kingdom.

The like may be said of the privileges of the Church. Two main privileges of
the Church are federal holiness of the children of visible believers, and
right to the Ordinances, on for ^^llcclesia. Now neither of both these betide
any primarily as a member of a particular Congregation, but as a member of the
Church-Catholike.

For federal or covenant-holinesse, whereby the children of visible believers
are, (...), it betideth no man's children because the parents are of this or
that, or any Congregation, but because of the Church-Catholike, yea, though but
entitive, if under the seal of Baptism.

This I prove thus. That which should have been, though the particular relation
to a particular Congregation had never been, and which continues when the
particular relation cease, that is not a proper privilege of that relation,
but such is federal-holinesse, in regard of relation to any particular
Congregation. Therefore, etc.

Suppose those baptized by John Baptist or by Christ's Disciples before there
were any particular distinctions, should have had any children: or the Eunuch
(if he were an Eunuck by office only, and not in body) baptized by Philip, who
went immediately home into his own country, or Cornelius and his friends
baptized in Peter's command, should not their children (...).

Suppose ^ Church dissolved by war, the Minister and people slai^^ick dying by
some raging pestilence, and some women left with child, and happily they carried
away captive, should not their children be (...), because the particular
relation is extinct? Do not those women remain members of the Church? But they
cease to remain members of that particular Church or Integral, for that
inceased, Therefore of the Church-Catholike or of none. Are thereto he
accounted without in the Apostles sense? Are visible be leevest not yet joined
in Church Order or fellowship by a particular Covenant to be accounted without?
Or is a Congregation deprived of Elders by death, land in that interval (...)
of Word, Sacraments, and discipline to be accounted (...) joining of a company
of private Christians together without Officers, before they be organized, that
gives them their right primarily to the Ordinances? I fear, too (...) to that
particular conjunction and covenient, (...) weight laid upon it, which is a
very accidental (...) to Ordinances, and enters not into it (...) and
extinguishible, without the least impeaching of the right to Ordinances.

If the reason whereupon the Apostle says the Church of Corinth. was not to
judge them that were without, was, because they were not within the Church of
Corinth, and so not under their particular (...) or judgment, this holds
true of them that be of another society or Congregation, desiring to be
admitted to the Sacrament, as well as of such as are no set members, desires to
be received to the Lords Supper. And so all (...) of (...) society, are without
unto another. See M. (...) But by fornicators of this world, whom the Apostle
points into by the title of being without, 1 Cor. 10.11. he means such as had
not received the Covenant of grace: such as (...) the Commonwealth of Israel,
strangers from the (...) of promise, having no hope, and without God in the
world, (...).

And (...) right to the Ordinances, it arises from the general Covenant (...)
privilege primarily belonging to visible believers, though in no particular
consociation, the admission into the particular Congregation only affords an
opportunity, because thereby a particular Minister has taken the charge of
him, and must administer the Ordinances to him, which any other Minister may do
upon occasion.

For Baptism, it cannot be a privilege of the particular Covenant, for if a
Pagan be converted he must be baptized before he can be admitted a member of
the particular Congregation, and this must be by some Minister, Therefore
baptism is a privilege of the Church-Entitive; and a Minister can, yea, and
must sometimes exert his power of office, not only beyond his own Congregation,
even into others, but beyond the Church organical into the Church-Entitive, to
set Christ's seal there. And for the children of visible believers though born
never so far from the place where the particular Minister lives which has
the actual care of his parents, be it by sea or by land, any Minister may
administer Baptism to them, because they are holy. Infantes baptizandi sunt,
non ut sancti sint, sed quia sancti sunt. Whitak.

The promise is to you, and to your children, and to all that are afar off,
even as many as the Lord our God shall call, says Peter, Act. 2.39. This
promise is that external Covenant to which Baptism does belong; for it is
brought in as an argument to move them to repentance, and receiving of Baptism,
and declares their right, and their childrens right, which is nothing else but
the call of God, and their answer thereunto.

The Sacraments are not seals of the particular Covenant, but the general, and
therefore all that are in the general Covenant have right thereto, as they are
capable. The 5. Apologists acknowledge that some of them had children born
after they were actually in this way of communion, which were baptized by some
of our Ministers in our Parishional Congregations. Apol. Narr. p. 6.

And some of our brethren (and none of the meanest) falling hence to
New England, after their departure from then particular Congregations here, and
before their particular combination there, had sea-born children, which were
baptized on shipboard: and I my self was desired to baptize one of them,
before the Ship could put forth out of the channel.

And for the Lords Supper, it is a privilege not springing from the particular
Covenant, but the general: and as all that were circumcised were bound to keep
the Passover, wherever they dwelt, so every baptized person being of age, and
otherwise fir, is bound to receive the Lords Supper, and therefore has a right
thereto, though his condition of calling, or other accidents hinder him from a
fixed membership. And in Congregational Churches the brethren of one
Congregation communicate at the Lords table in other Congregations, as occasion
is offered: but surely it cannot be by virtue of a particular Covenant, entered
into with their own members, for that can give right no where else, but it is
by virtue of a Covenant that is common to all visible believers, which is the
general Covenant. Can we conceive that a visible believer having visible right
to Christ, and living holily should want right to the seals? Can any man forbid
water that these should not be be baptized that have received the holy Ghost as
well as we? says Peter of Cornelius and his company. So (may I say) can any
man forbid the Lords Supper to be administered to such as have received Christ,
and his Spirit, and are baptized as well as we? See more of this, Que. 2. Sect.
4.

M. Norton in his answer to Apollonius, p. 32 acknowledges the Sacraments are
not signs or seals of the Ecclesiastical Covenant (as he calls it) but signs and
seals of the Covenant of grace, and yet the Sacraments are to be administered
only to such as are entered into the Ecclesiastical Covenant, explicitly or
implicity: his reason is because the Sacraments are to be administered only
^^deratis i. e. to such as are in Covenant, and so members first.

If M. Norton means by Covenant, the Covenant of grace, it is true, they must
be in the Covenant of grace, externally at least, by professed yielding
themselves to the Lord, or by federal holiness, (...) they be capable of
baptism, but then it is nothing to his purpose, but if he mean a particular,
Ecclesiastical Covenant, whereby he is ^ade a member of a particular
Congregation, (...) is no way requisite unto baptism. It is against the order
of nature that the particular Covenant which is but humane, arbitrary, mutable,
extinguishible and accidental, should precede the general which is divine,
necessary, immutable, perpetual, and essential to a Christian: it is as if a
man should first be made a freeman of London, and then a Denizon of England.
Indeed he is not capable of the privileges that are peculiar to that
Congregation, except he be a member of it, but baptism is a general privilege
of every subject of Christ's Kingdom. Neither have we any precept in the
Scripture for the precedence of the particular Covenant before the general: nor
any example or intimation of any such practice in Scripture, but of the
contrary. What particular, Congregational Covenant did those that were baptized
by John Baptist, or Christ's Disciples enter into before baptism? or the Eunuch,
the Jailer and his household, or Lydia, or Paul, or Cornelius, or the 3000.
converted by Peter, that were inhabitants of so many several countries? True
indeed some of them were members of the Jewish Church, and so in the general
Covenant, but what is that to the making of them members of a particular,
Evangelical Congregational Church? Infants are acknowledged to be members of
the Church before baptism, p. 25. and Bucer Loc. 47. cited for it, yet they
enter into no such Covenant before baptism. M. Norton confesses, p. 25. that
the Protobaptizatus could not be a member of a Church, unless one man might be
a Church, or a member be without an integral. It is a marvel that seeing so
much weight lies on this particular Church Covenant, viz. the interest in the
seals of the Covenant of grace, the Scripture should never give any intimation
of it, or directions about it.

The like may be said of hearing the word; any visible believer may hear it
wherever God gives him opportunity, not as a heathen, or man without, but as
his rightful portion. And any Christian may join in prayer, and say, Our
Father, etc. with any Christians in the furthest parts of the world, if he
should come into their company, in the performance of such duties.

The greatest Query is about the Ordinances of Discipline, because they cannot
be dispensed by a single Elder, but in a College or Presbytery of Elders in
combination, and require a joint power to be exercised in the inflicting of
censures, and this power it not so facil to be drawn into act as the power to
administer Ordinances of worship, which may be by entreaty of any single
Minister in any place. But first every one, even as a member of the
Church-Catholike, yea, though but entitive, is bound to submit thereunto by his
entering, by the general Covenant, into the Kingdom of Christ, that being one of
his Ordinances, and is needful and beneficial to all Christians.

And every Elder, as he is given to the Church-Catholike, as every Levite was
to all Israel, has right in actu primo to dispense the Ordinances of
Discipline every where, if he has a sufficient call. And in consideration,
this Ordinance is given in the same method that the others are, viz. first to
the whole body and Kingdom of Christ, and secondarily to the particular parts,
and yet as in other Ordinances the particular Churches which are last in
intention, are first in execution and operation, so it is likewise in this: and
so it is in administration of justice in a Kingdom, the Laws are made for the
whole Kingdom, and come secondarily to particular Counties and Corporations,
are executed primarily and immediately in those particular Counties and
Corporations, and yet this hinders not the power of Parliaments, or Officers
called thereto, to dispense justice to diverse Counties, yea, to the whole
Kingdom, and to relieve such as are wronged in their particular associations.

Suppose an Apostle should have preached in a city, and converted but a few,
happily most or all of them women, as it was Paul's lot to preach to a company of
women, Act. 16.13. so that they could not be brought into an Organical
Congregation: could it be conceived that they, though baptized, were still
without? And were not their children (...)? And if any of them should miscarry
in their judgments or practices, had Paul nothing to do to censure them,
because they were not congregated and combined by a particular Covenant in a
Church Way (as some term it) but remain unfixed members of the
Church-Catholike. If they be liable to censure, then does discipline belong to
the Church-Catholike primarily.

Nay, let that be supposed for illustration sake which Paul Gal. 1.8. supposes
of himself, that he or any of the Apostles should have apostatized, and either
preached another Messiah, or lived scandalously, or proved a persecutour: had
Christ left the Church no key to bind him, because he was a general Officer
and a fixed member of no particular Congregation? might not the rest of the
Apostles excommunicate him? then that censure would be Catholic, without
respect to any particular Congregation.

The Ordinances of Discipline were first given to the Church-Catholike, because
the keys were first given to the Apostles, who were general Pastors, and
therefore the keys are Catholic.

Also the censures past in one Congregation reach the whole Church-Catholike
visible, and are binding to the whole, and their absolution reaches as far,
and ^ets the person into an habitual right to communicate any where again, as
has been showed before.

That which belongs to every part of a similar body, that primarily belongs
to the whole: but Discipline belongs to every part of the Church-Catholike
which is a similar body: and therefore it primarily belongs to the whole.

If the keys be not Catholic then this inconvenience will follow, that a
visible believer obtaining baptism before he be a fixed member, may either
through pretense of scrupulosity, or perigrination, factorship, or frequent
removing, or refusal to join with any particular Congregation (though never so
heretical or scandalous) shall thereby escape all censures, because the keys
are only particular, and no body can inflict any censure upon him: and yet
being a visible member, under the seal of the covenant, shall converse with
other Christians, and happily upon his habitual right, hear the Word, or happily be
admitted to the Lords table. Which is as if a Subject of England, because he
will be a fixed inhabitant in no Town, but wandering up and down, drinking,
thieving, and whoring, thereby should escape all civil censures.

It is common to all polities that every County, Corporation, or division that
have power to administer justice, according to the ^ane of the policy, shall
apprehend malefactors within their (...) (wherever the malefactor has his
constant dwelling) and either punish them themselves, or turn them over to such
a^ are called to administer justice to the whole: and otherwise outrages cannot
be avoided or punished, which are committed by men in places remote from their
dwellings.

The like power must be allowed in Christ's Ecclesiastical policy, that the
visible members of Christ's Church may either be censured by the particular
Church in whose limits they offend, or be sent to the Church to which they
belong, which the offended Church has no power by civil compulsion to do, or
that Church i^ (...) the off, happily in another Country: or happily they belong
to none or else there must be a combined Eldership that may censure such
persons. Though civil limits be appointed for cohabitation of the members of
particular Congregations, and for maintenance of their Ministers, and providing
for the poor, and (...) essential to the Church, but the members are to be
accounted as members of that Congregation every where, and the (...) in travel
with any of their Congregation, ought to watch over them and admonish them as
their Elders, and they to obey there wherever they become, which shows that
external limits bound not the Ministerial power, as it does the civil power of
a Ma^or or Constable: yet there must be some kind of proportion holden with
civil polities for the censuring of wandering Christians; else may heretics and
scandalous Christians come from foreign parts, and do much hurt, and yet avoid
all censures,

Sect. 3.
Thirdly, Christ's Offices are first intended for, and executed on the
Church-Catholike here below. He is a King, Priest, and (...) primarily in
respect of the whole, and but secondarily in respect of a particular
Congregation or member. Gods aim in redemnation was to redeem the whole
primarily, and secondarily the particulars, God so loved the world that he gave
his only begotten Son, etc. i. e. not the Jew only, but the Gentile also: And
so in the application of that redemption, as Christ is a Priest be reconcileth
and intercedeth for all the elect: as a Prophet he teaches all; as a King he
rules all primarily, and particulars secondarily. So is it also in Christ's
external Kingdom, as well as his internal. As an earthly King is indeed King of
Thomas and John, etc. but not primarily, but secondarily as they are members of
his Kingdom. And the natural head is indeed head to the little finger and toe,
but not primarily, but as they are parts of the whole body, whereof it is head:
so Christ is a mystical head of the whole Church primarily, and secondarily of
the particular parts contained in, and under the whole.

Fourthly, The signs that difference the true Church from a false, do not
primarily belong to a particular Congregation, but to the Church-Catholike
visible, viz. Profession of the true faith, administration of Gods true
Ordinances, for therein the whole Church agree, and is thereby distinguished
from those that are without, not from those that are within. These are no notes
to know this or that particular Church by from another, for they are common to
the universal Church, they distinguish them not among themselves, but from the
general common opposite, the heathen, or the gross heretic. A man being led
into a vault, where were the skuls of many dead men, and understanding that
Alexanders skull was there, desired his guide to show him that, his guide told
him it was that skull with the hollow eyeholes, and grisly nose, and futures
crossing the brampan, and when the man replied that they had all so, yea, says
his guide, there is no difference between Kings, and other men's skuls, when
they are dead. So if any man should ask which is the Church of Ipswich, De^ham,
etc. it were a folly to say it is the Church where the word of God is preached,
and Sacraments administered, and that profess Jesus to be crucified, dead and
buried, risen again, and ascended into heaven, etc. for so do all the
Church-Catholike, but we must give other notes to distinguish any of them, for
these are not distinctive because common. That which is primary to any thing is
distinctive to that thing, but that which is secondary and common is not
distinctive from other particulars of the like kind, or from other parts of a
similar integral.

Fifthly, All the members of the particular Churches are members of the
Church-Catholike, yea, that relation belongs first unto them.

If they be born within the pale of the Church, they have federal holiness,
and are (...), not because members of this or that Congregation, but because
born of parents within the general, external Covenant, and so within the
Church-Catholike. If they be converted from heathens, they are not first
converted into this or that particular Church, but converted first into the
Church-Catholike, and then secondarily admitted members of this or that
particular Congregation, after they be baptized. A man may dwell it one City,
and hear the word of God by accident in another city, and thereby be converted,
but he is not converted to be a member of the Church where he was converted,
but into the Church-Catholike. So that particular Congregations are made up of
members of the Catholic, and therefore most properly in that sense are said to
be Ortae. For such a convert may join himself after his conversion to what
Congregation he pleases to inhabit among. If a man comes into a Parish that is
an heathen, he is not a member of that particular Church (though he shall be a
civil member of the Town) because be is not a member of the Church-Catholike,
but if he be a Christian, then he is a member of that particular Church where
he resideth, or fit so to be, and ought not to be denied admission or communion
(if no just exception lies against him) though he had never been a member of
any other Congregation. The particular companies in London are made up only of
freemen that are joined together in some particular body or society, belonging
to such or such a Hall; now the first notion that comes upon any such persons
or companies, is, that they are freemen of London, and secondarily that they
are distinct from other freemen, by being of this or that particular company,
belonging to such a Hall. So it is for all Churches: first of all, the members
are conceived to be free of the Church-Catholike, and secondarily, distinct by
their societies, in this or that particular Assembly.

And though happily this similitude holds not in every thing, as the not
removing from one company to another, and being received in there, because he
is a freeman; yet it is free for any Christ to change his particular relation
from one Congregation to another, because he is a Christian, and takes not up
his first freedom into a particular Congregation or company, but into the
Catholic. They are made members of the whole body and kingdom of Christ, by
conversion to the faith, and initiated by the Sacrament of Baptism, but are
secondarily made members of a particular Congregation by cohabitation or
consociation. He that is free of one Corporation may not thereupon remove to
another, and set up his trade as a freeman there, because they are constituted
by several charters: but the whole Church-Catholike has but one charter, and
by that a Christian is free in any Ecclesiastical Corporation, wherever he
please to inhabit, and may not by them be inhibited. As he that was free of
Rome was free wherever he became in all the Roman Empire.

Suppose a man had abundance of sheep, as Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and Job,
who had 14000. and these sheep had all one brand of the owners upon them, and
these sheep were divided into several flocks, unister several shepherds, in
several sheep-walks, of the same owners, according to his appointment: the
primary consideration of any of these sheep or flocks, is not that they are
under such a keeper, in such a sheep-walk, but the first consideration of them
is, they are such a man's sheep, bearing his brand, and fed by his servants, on
his ground, and then the more particular and secondary consideration and notion
is, that they are under such a particular shepherd, in such a walk. And the
like may be said in a civil respect; the first consideration of a man, is that
he is an English man, and so a subject of this kingdom, and the secondary that
he is a Suffolk man, or an Ipswich man. So the first consideration in a
spiritual respect of a man, or a Congregation, is, that they are the Lords
people, that they belong to Christ, and are his subjects, born, or converted to
him, fed, and nourished, and ruled by his Ordinances and Officers, and then the
particular secondary notion is, that they are fed and ruled by such Elders, in
such a place or society.

It is an usual similitude on all hands to compare the Church to the Sea or
Ocean; which though it be one, yet as it washes upon this or that Country,
receives the name and distinction of the Germane, Spanish, Irish, or British
Seas. And so when it puts in at any creek, because it is continuous with the
Sea, we call it the Sea. And we say the sea comes up at Harwich, Ipswich,
M^^itras, Colchoster: now it were absurd for any man to think that the
particular Seas were the prime Seas, and the main is M^r^secundarinus or ortum,
Or because the name Sea i^ ind^^^ed to this or that arm or Creek, that
therefore that should monopolize the name Sea to it self, that there should be
no Sea, but such Creeks, or that any such Creeks should arrogate the came and
privileges of the Sea, first, to themselves, and leave them but secondarily to
the main. So it is for particular Congregations, which have the name and
privileges of the Church indulged to them as second or third hand (because
they are members and similar parts of the whole) to usurp and challenge the
name and privileges given by God to the Church-Catholike, primarily to
themselves, and leave them secondarily to the Church-Catholike.

Sect. 4.
Sixthly, The Ministers are primarily Ministers of the Church-Catholike,
secondarily of this or that particular flock or Congregation; and therefore the
Catholic is the prime Church. And this appears thus. That Church to which the
donation of the Ministry was first made, is the first subject thereof: but that
was the Church-Catholike. Therefore, etc.

For proof hereof, see Mat. 28.19. and 1 Cor. 12.28, 29. God has set some in
the Church, first Apostles, secondarily Prophets, thirdly Teachers. Now this
Church was the Church-Catholike, and not any particular Congregation, for it is
the Church to which God gave Apostles. Note also from hence, that the same
Church to which God gave Apostles and Prophets, to the same he gave Teachers
also: though not with general, actual power, as to the extraordinary Officers,
yet with habitual power of office. And although Bishop, Pastor, Elder and
Minister do carry a reference to some particular place wherein by the polity
of the Church such Officers are set; yet have they a more general relation
extending to the whole Church-Catholike, as has been showed before.

Paul an Apostle calls himself a Teacher and Preacher, 2 Timothy 1.11. Peter also
and John the Apostles call themselves Presbyters, 1 Pet. 5.1. 2 Ep. Joh. 1. and
3 Ep. Joh. 1. We find also Ministers are in Scripture spoken of under a
general notion. They are called Ministers of the word, Luke 1.2. and Ministers
of God. 2 Cor. 6.4. and Ministers of Christ, 1 Cor. 4.1. and Ministers of the
New Testament, 2 Cor. 3.6. and Ministers of the Gospel, 1 These. 3.2. and
Ministers of the Lord, Ephesians. 6.21. Where the Ministerial Office is set down by
the reference thereof to the Author that employeth them, and the subject about
which they are employed, and not the object persons, unto whom they ministered.
They are not called Ministers of the people, as if they carried their keys, and
were their stewards, but their Teachers, Rulers, Pastors, Overseers, Fathers
or Ministers for them, Col. 1.7. Indeed the Apostle says, they are your
servants for Christ's sake, 2 Cor. 4.5, As the Gentlemen that serve a Noble man,
serve the meanest that are invited to his table, but therein they do service to
their Lord.

And the Angels themselves (by whose names Ministers are called in 2. and 3. of
Revelation) they are ministering spirits sent out for the good of the Elect, but
it is in subjection and obedience to God, and not to them.

And if a Minister of this or that Congregation be not a Minister of the
Church-Catholike visible, then he is no Minister out of his own Congregation,
and therefore cannot preach or administer any Sacrament as a Minister, out of
his own Congregation, yea, if any members of another Congregation should come
and hear a Minister preach in his own Congregation, he could not preach to
them, nor they hear him as a Minister but only as a gifted brother. And though
he may pray and beseech his own flock as an Ambassador of Christ, to be
reconciled unto God, 2 Cor. 5.20. yet he cannot say so to any other, except he
be an Ambassador in office unto others also. And if he be a Minister to one
member besides his own Congregation, then is he so indefinitely to all, by the
same reason.

But if he deliver the word as a Minister to his own Congregation only, then
the same word which is delivered at the same time by the same man, is delivered
by virtue of the Ministerial office to some, and to others ex officio
charitatis generali, only as a gifted brother. And if this be granted, which is
absurd, yet a greater absurdity will follow, viz. that if he administer the
Lords Supper to any members of another Congregation, he must do that also as a
gifted brother, and as a private person; whereas a private person out of
office, has nothing to do to administer the seals of the Covenant, as is
confessed by all, except a few Anabaptists of late on purpose, as I conceive,
to avoid this argument. And yet this communion of members of other
Congregations is frequent among our brethren for Congregational Churches.
Neither can this be answered that it is done by virtue of commnion of Churches,
except there be a communion of offices and Officers, and so every Minister be
an indefinite, habitual Officer, and a Minister of the Church-Catholike.

And if a Minister has an indefinite office, and can administer the seals of
the Covenant, to strangers in his own Congregation, in his own meeting house,
then any where else, in any other meeting house; for no man will say his
Ministerial office is circumscribed by, or tied unto the fabric of his own
meeting house, or any especial influence or authority afforded him in the
execution of his Ministerial function by the presence of his own Congregation.
He whose office is limited within, and stands wholly in relation to a
particular place, is out of office when he is out of that place, as a Mayor of
a Corporation, and a Constable of a Parish: but so is not a Minister, he is no
private man as soon as he is out of his meeting house, or the limits of his
Congregation.

And though indeed he be more peculiarly their Pastor or Bishop, one that has
the oversight of them in the Lord, in a more immediate, especial manner
actually, yet this extends to all places, wherever he or they shall come by
occasion, though never so far from their dwellings, but so is not a Mayor or
Constable. And besides this particular relation he has an indefinite office,
he is a Minister in general to all others, and may exert his power of office to
them, as God gives occasion, and they give him a call, without taking a new
especial relation to them: but so cannot a Mayor or Constable, though they were
entreated to use their office out of their limits, because they are only
particular Officers. See this more fully in Chap. 6. Sect. 4. and 5.

Suppose a Ministers flock by mortality, or the sword should be dissolved,
extinct and cease, indeed he cease to be their Pastor, because the
correlative fails, but he cease not to be a Minister of the Gospel. A King
or Mayor happily cease to be so any longer, if his Kingdom or Corporation should
sink or be swallowed up, because there is no Catholic Kingdom or Corporation
whereof they were Officers, but the office of the Minister cease not, because
he was an Officer of the Church-Catholike, which correlative sinketh not: but
still his power in actu primo to dispense all the Ordinances of Christ, which a
single Officer can perform, remains, only his call ad actum secundum sive
exercitum, pro hic and nunc, which is appointed by the polity of the Church for
order, cease, because they are cut off that gave him a call thereto.

An Objection against this I find made by those two Reverend Ministers M. A.
and M. S. in their Defense, p. 208. It is to this purpose. If Ordination of a
Minister be an indeleble character (like Baptism) and cease not when his
particular relation to a Congregation cease, why then should not a
ruling-Elder or Deacon remain an Elder or Deacon in the Church, though their
particular relations cease?

Answ. 1. If you please to cast your eye back to the answer of an Objection of
M. Hookers that is like to this, Chapter 2. Sect. 4. it may afford some light to
the answering of this Objection, to which I refer you, being loath to repeat
the same again.

2. I premise also, that for ought I can find, both ruling-Elders and Deacons,
should continue in their offices as long as they lived, if the Congregations or
Presbyterial Churches which chose them be not dissolved, or if they be not
ejected by censure.

3. I deny not but that the Deacons office may cease at the dissolution of the
Church that chose them, because the subject of their office. viz.
contributions, cease with the contributers: and so it may be said of the ruling
Elders also, because the particular object of their office cease; and yet
both of them while they are in their offices may extend the execution of their
offices beyond the particular Church that chose them, to a greater part of the
Church, and possibly to the whole.

4. There is a great difference between the Minister of the word and the
ruling-Elder, the first has two keys, viz. of doctrine and discipline, the
other has but one, viz. of discipline. The superior order is conceived to
comprehend the power of the inferior; and so the Apostles had all the power of
the inferior, even of Deacons; the like may be said of the rest.

5. The key of discipline cannot be exercised but in a combination, and
therefore must cease when that cease, which must be at the dissolution of the
particular Church, whether Congregational or Presbyterial which chose them: but
the key of doctrine, with which the Minister of the word is invested, may be
exercised by a single person out of combination, and therefore that cease not
at such dissolution. Indeed the exercise of his key of discipline is suspended
by such dissolution, yet is reserved in him habitually in actu primo, because
it is annexed to (if not comprehended under) his key of doctrine. And if there
can be any use made of that position of dispensing Ordinances to other Churches
mediantibus candelabris, it is more proper to this key then the other, because
his particular relation to the particular Church lets him into the particular
combination, and so into a greater upon occasion of a call.

6. And for ought I know this might be the reason why the Apostle changed the
manner of speech from the concrete to the abstract, 1 Cor. 12.28. from teachers
to helps, governments; to intimate that they that have those offices cease to
be Officers when they cease to be helps, or to be employed in government, but
the others are affixed indelebly unto their persons, and may be exercised more
at large in the Church, and out of it, (...), and singly without actual
combination.

Suppose a part of a County wherein a Justice of peace formerly dwelt, and
executed his office, should sink, yet, if he be preserved, he remains still
in his office, and may execute it in any other place in the County, where he
shall dwell, because his office stood in reference to the whole County, though
he exercised it actually but in one place. So is the Ministers office (as a
Minister of the Gospel) general, though they take but particular divisions and
parcels of the Church to feed and watch over actually and particularly, and do
not ordinarily stretch themselves within another particular line and limits
without a call, by permittance, or entreaty, or combination.

And that a Minister is a Minister of the Church Catholic visible, appears
thus. He that can ministerially admit or eject a member into, or out of the
Church-Catholike visible, is a Minister and Officer of the Church-Catholike
visible, But every Minister by Baptism, or Excommunication admits or
ejecteth members into, or out of the Church-Catholike visible. Therefore, etc.

This Argument I find more fully laid down by Apollonius, Pastor ut Pastor
exercet multos actus ministeriales, non tantum erga Ecclesiam suam particularem
cui ordinario ministerio est affixus, sed erga Ecclesias alias particulares,
and Provinciales, and Nationales, imo and erga Ecclesiam universalem: Nam per
Baptismum membra in Ecclesiam universalem admittir: per excommunicationem
membra, non tantum ex sua particulari, sed etiam Provinciali, Nationali, and
Universally Ecclesia eijcit, Matthew. 18.18, 19. Ex ^ffi^^^o pastorali preces Deo
offert pro omnibus alijs Ecclesijs labo antibus: verbum Dei in alia Ecclesia
particulari praedicare potest, non tantum virtute and ratione donorum sed cum
pastorali authoritate, ita ut verbo suo liget and solvat peccatores, vomittat
and retineat peccata, and ut legatus m^ssus a Deo obsecre^ homines ut
reconcilientur Deo.

Of excommunication I spoke before, proving that it ejecteth a man from
communion with the whole Church-Catholike visible.

This M Ellis says is not formally but virtually done. But I answer, then it
will follow that by Baptism they are not formally admitted into the
Church-Catholike, but virtually. But into what Church were they baptized that
were baptized by John Baptist and the Apostles, before particular Congregations
were constituted? And now they are constituted, it cannot be said they are
formally baptized into them, for happily the person baptized in a particular
Congregation, will never be a member thereof, but of some other. Our brethren
hold that it is entering into their particular Covenant, that makes them
actually members of their Congregation, and that the children of their own
Church Members are by baptism but incomplete members of that Congregation.

Our brethren will not say (I suppose) that those persons that go from hence to
them, being already baptized, are heathens and without, though they have lost
their particular membership? Surely they account them subjects of Christ, and
under his seal; why else do they admit any of them members of their
Congregations (into which they may admit only Christ's Subjects) and set no new
seal of Baptism upon them?

And as Baptism admits primally, formally, and antecedenter into the
Church-Catholike, and secondarily and consequenter into that particular
Congregation, so the same order is in ejection by excommunication. If a finger
were added to a man's hand, the primary consideration is, that there is a limb
given to that man, such a man we say has recovered his sight or hearing,
though it be seated in the eye or ear.

And if a hand could be conceived to cut, nip, or sear off a gangreened finger,
it would not be conceived as an act of the hand only, but as an act of the man,
and the man would be said to loose a limb primarily, and the secondary
consideration is, that the particular hand has lost a finger. When D. Cranmer
burnt off his right hand, it was not the act of the arm only, but of the whole
man primarily. And if this be so of members that are fixed, and have their
particular place and office in the body, and cannot be removed and set any
where else: then much more of the members of the Church, which were members of
the Church-Entitive, before they received their particular membership in any
Congregation, and may be removed from one Congregation to another, as often as
occasion or convenience serves.

But because excommunication is an act of many, (...), 2 Cor. 2.6. I will
therefore insist more particularly upon Baptism, which is an act of a single
Pastor or Minister, though passed with the knowledge and consent of the
Congregation.

That by Baptism we are admitted into the Church, I think is without doubt: for
if persons baptized be not members of the visible Church, then the seal of the
Covenant is administered to those that are and remain o^^ of the Church, and so
were no initial seal, which were absurd to say.

M. Ball in his Catechism has this passage. Baptism is a Sacrament of our
ingrafting into Christ, communion with him, and entrance into the Church, for
which he cites, Mat 28.19. Act. 8.38. And afterward explains himself. It does
(says he) solemnly signify and seal their ingrafting into Christ, and confirm
that they are acknowledged members of the Church, and entered into it.

And that we are thereby admitted members, not of a particular Congregation but
the Church-Catholike, appears, because we are baptized into one body, 1 Cor.
12.13. And this appears further, because he that is baptized in one
Congregation, is baptized all over the world, and is not to be rebaptized, but
is taken as a member of the Church wherever he becomes. See before Chap. 6.
Now that baptizing is an act of office, appears, Joh. 1.33. He that sent me to
baptize. And Go teach all Nations, and baptize them, etc. Mat. 28. was the
substance of the Apostles Commission. And though Paul 1 Cor. 1.17. says,
Christ sent me not to baptize but to preach the Gospel, yet that is meant not
principally, for he was sent also to baptize, else he might not have done it,
which we read he did.

And that by an act of this office we are baptized into the Church-Catholike,
appears, because John Baptist baptized all Jerusalem, Judea, and all the region
round about Jordan. And the Disciples of Christ made and baptized more
Disciples then John, and that without any relation to any particular
Congregations; which had it been necessary, or had baptism been ordained in
reference to particular Congregations, they could have combined them into. So
Peter caused Cornelius and his friends to be baptized, Act. 10.48. but no
mention is made of any Congregation into which they were baptized. And Philip
baptized the Eunuch but not into any particular Congregation. Into what
Congregation did Ananias baptize Paul, Act. 9.18.? Or how can it appear that
Ananias was an Evangelist, or any extraordinary Officer? he is called a
Disciple at Damascus, it is probable he was one of the Elders there, but that
Paul was ever a fixed member of any particular Congregation, it appears not.

That which is answered to this is, that they which administered Baptism so
indefinitely, were extraordinary general Officers, which are now ceased. But
this salves it not, for if the immediate right to Baptism, etc. comes to the
receiver by being a member of a particular instituted Congregation, as M.
Norton, and M. A. and M. S. in Def. Chapter 4. page 73. tells us, then John Baptist,
Christ's Disciples, Philip and Ananias (though he had been an Evangelist)
administered it to such as had no actual and immediate right to receive it.
Indeed the answer implies a more large, actual, extensive power in the
administrers, either to have constituted new Churches, or to administer in any
constituted Churches, but it gives not them power to administer any Ordinance
of God to such as had no right thereto, nor power to the receivers to receive
it without actual right, in an undue order. It gives them not jus in re, who
had in themselves only jus ad rem, as their distinction is. And the proof
brought p. 76. out of Act. 5.14. is, as I conceive, mistaken. Their words are
these. Believers were added, first, they were believers standing in that
spiritual relation to Christ and his whole body, and then added to the Church
by visible combination. But it is not said they were added to the Church, but
added to the Lord: and it were incongruous to gather thence that they were
first believers, and after that were added to the Lord by a second act, seeing
their adding to the Lord was by believing, and that which added them to the
Lord the head and King, added them to the body and Kingdom.

And whereas they say, that Justification and Adoption, etc. flow immediately
from internal union with Christ, but instituted Ordinances and Privileges
mediatly, and in such an order as Christ has in wisdom ordained, and the
nature of visible government and Ordinances of Christ necessarily require, page
76. If they mean by it, being members of particular Congregations: then would I
know whether hearing the word publicly preached or read, or joining in public
singing, or in keeping a day of public thanksgiving, or fasting, or making
rows, or taking oaths, which are instituted Ordinances, may not be permitted to
any but such as are members of particular Congregations?

The Apostles carried about one with them whom they called (...) a Minister,
Act. 13.5. who was no Apostle, and he baptized for them into the
Church-Catholike, and when a sufficient number were converted and baptized,
then followed the particular relation of a particular Congregation, by
ordaining Officers to take the particular care over them.

So Tychicus Col. 4.7. is called a beloved brother and faithful Minister, and
fellow servants in the Lord. And Ephesians. 6.21. he has the same style given him.
Certainly he could not be a peculiar Minister to both those distant Churches:
and happily he was so to neither of them, if we may give any credit to Dorotheus,
who says he was Bishop of Chalcedon in Bithynia. Apollos baptized at Corinth,
1 Cor. 3.4. and yet was no Apostle but a Minister and steward of the mysteries
of God as well as they. 1 Cor. 4.1. Hence is that distinction of Iunius in his
Animadversions on Bellarm. c. 7. nor. 7. Alia est electio sive vocatio
communis, qua vir bonus, pius doctus, aptus, absolute eligitur ad ministerium
verbi (...): alia particularis sive singularis, qua ad ministerium singulariter
huic vel illi Ecclesiae praeficiendus eligitur, (...).

And the Scripture always calling the believers in one city, one Church, even
Jerusalem, though there were many thousands, yea myriads, i. e. many ten
thousands of believing Jews therein, as James tells Paul, Act. 21.20. (...),
which were all probably of Jerusalem, as appears, first, because they were not
such as could bear any witness against Paul, but by hearsay, they are informed
of thee. But the Jews dispersed amongst the Gentiles, having seen and heard
Paul, could have testified of their own knowledge, and would not be blinded
with Paul's present conformity. And secondly, because they only or Jerusalem
could receive satisfaction by Paul's conformity to the Law at Jerusalem at that
time, and not the others.

Also the holy Ghost calling the Elders of those cities, the Elders of the
Church in communi, it leaves it uncertain to me whether the several Elders
were fixed over the particular Congregations, or taught and ruled in communi,
as the Ministers do now in Middleburgh, and Strasburgh, and other places: yet
because it makes most for edification and order, to have them fixed, I shall
think they were, until the contrary shall be proved; but however they ruled in
common in the exercise of discipline, which is the Ordinance which our brethren
are most unwilling to grant should be exercised out of the particular
Congregation.

Sect. 5.
Seventhly, That Church to which every Christian first bears relation, and which
relation continues last, and cannot be broken by him without sin, is the first
Church, but such is the Church-Catholike visible. Therefore, etc.

The major is undeniable, The minor appears, because none can be admitted into
a particular Congregation, except he be judged first of the Church-Catholike,
and that not merely Entitive, but under the seal of the Covenant administered by
some Officer, and so stands bound to submit himself to all Christ's Ordinances
and Officers, by one of which he receives his admission. So again, though he
change his habitation never so often, bear relation to never so many particular
Congregations one after another, yet in all those the general relation holds
still: he is still a baptized visible member of the Church-Catholike, and
therefore to be received wherever he comes into any particular Congregation.
Yea, in the interim after his breaking off from one Congregation, and placing
in another, he retains the general relation and baptism, and is not an heathen
or infidel, he is not one without in the Apostles phrase.

Yea, suppose a man should be a Traveller, Merchant, or Factor, and settled in
no particular Congregation, yet being a Christian, he is a member of the
Church-Catholike: yea, and if he breach any errors, or live inordinately, he
shall be accountable to the Church where he for the present resides, or such
crimes are committed, and be liable to their censure, as being a member of the
Church-Catholike. And this appears, because the Church of Ephesus is commended,
Rev. 2.2. for trying strangers that came among them under the notion of
Apostles, and found them liars, and so would not receive them. And our brethren
undertake to inflict the sentence of Non-communion (for so they call it a
sentence of Non-communion denounced. Apollog. Nar. page 18. and 19.) against
strangers, yea, whole Churches: but how it will stand with some other
principles of theirs, I know nor: if it be a sentence denounced, it is a
censure, and so an act of discipline exercised against those out of their
particular confederation; which in my apprehension is but changing an old
warranted censure of the Church, into a new and doubtful one: but both seem to
agree in the general nature of a sentence or censure.

Surely heretics and false teachers are not to be left to the Magistrate only,
but to be referred to Ecclesiastical trial: for those things come not under the
cognizance of the civil Magistrate properly: or he may be an heathen, and will
not regard an heretic, nor can judge of him, Act. 18.15.

And if every kingdom will try murder, treason, or any foul crime committed in
the same, though by a stranger or alien, because the crimes are against their
laws and sovereign, though their Laws pertain not to the country where the
forreigner was born and dwells: then much more shall every Church try those
members of the Church-Catholike, residing among them, for their crimes or false
doctrines, seeing they have all the same sovereign head, the same Laws, and are
all one habitual body.

Again, It is no sin for a man to remove from one Congregation to another, as
often as occasion or convenience require, but for a man to remove out of the
Church-Catholike, either Entitive by disclaiming the doctrine and faith of
Christ, or organical by refusing to join to any Christian society, or to be
under, and submit unto any Church Discipline, is a great sin and apostasy. No
man is accounted a schismatic for removing from one Congregation to another,
but he that shall separate himself from all Church Communion, and shall rend
himself from the Church-Catholike, he is a schismatic he is an Apostate. And
therefore the several sects though they pretend, because of wants or blemishes
to rend from the Church of England or Scotland, etc. yet not from the
Church-Catholike by no means, because they know that were a sin.

Eighthly, That Church from which the particular Churches spring, and to which
they are as an additament and increase, that is the prime Church, but that is
the Church-Catholike. Therefore, etc.

The major is clear of it self, The minor appears, because they are the
instrument to convert the rest, and bring them into the same kingdom of Christ
with themselves, Act. 2.47. God added to the Church daily such as should be
saved. That little handful to which the Catholic charter was first given,
leavened the whole world, and brought them in as an addition to themselves.
They were to be witnesses in Jerusalem, and then in Iudaea, and to the ends of
the earth. Act. 1.8. For the Law shall go forth of Zion, and the word of the
Lord from Jerusalem, Isa. 2.3. The Lord shall send the red of his strength out
of Zion, Psalm. 110.2. It was with the Church then as was said of the river of
Eden, Genesis 2.10. A river went out of Eden to water the garden, and from thence
it was parted into four heads. So the water of life flowed from Zion into the
four quarters of the world.

As there is no creek but has its rise from, and continuity with the Main, and
receives influence from it: so there is no particular Church but has his first
rise, and ministerial influence from the Church-Catholike, and received the
Gospel and privileges of it from thence ministerially. God calls no Evangelical
Churches by inspiration only, but by the ministry of those that are members of
the Church-Catholike, or some part of it. God would not have Cornelius
instructed by an Angel, though he could have done it, but by Peter a Minister
of the Church-Evangelical: and likewise the Eunuch by Philip.

So that the Church-Catholike is as the Sea, and particular Churches as so many
creeks or arms receiving a tincture and season of her waters. The
Church-Catholike is as the tree, Christ as the root, the particular Churches as
branches, as Cyprian makes the comparison. She is the mother, and they as
daughters born of her, and receiving from her ministerially both nature and
privileges. Gal. 4.26.

Paul indeed was called extraordinarily from heaven by Christ himself, the head
of the Church (and not by an Angel) that he might be, or some conceive, a type
of the second call of the Jews, who (as some hold) shall be so called, as he
was, by the appearing of the sign of the Son of man: and therefore that Church
is said to come down from God out of heaven, Rev. 21.2, 10. And the ground of
this type they take from 1 Timothy 1.16. For this cause I obtained mercy, that in
me first Jesus Christ might show forth all long-sufferance for a pattern,
(...), to them that should or shall hereafter believe on him.

But these things are mysteries, and I dare not be too confident in them, yet
should they come to pass, they infringe not this truth, because their
conversion shall come from the head, root, and fountain it self of the Church;
as Abraham's call was. And no question but Christ did convert many in the days
of his flesh, when he was actually and visibly a member of the Church here
below. And if any be converted by secret inspiration or revelation, and neither
converted nor fed by any external Ordinances, as happily some infants of heathens
or any Philosophers, as Plato (if happily there were any so converted) they are
not to be accounted of the visible Church, and so not belonging to this
question.

There is a double rise of the particular Churches out of the general.

First, All Congregations are made up of the members of the Church Entitive, or
of persons that are visible believers, and their children, which are holy,
being born in the Covenant.

Secondly, Consider the Church-Catholike as Christ's Kingdom or Corporation,
already invested with Evangelical Ordinances and Privileges, and it affords a
twofold rise to those that are added to them.

First, They are instrumental by their preaching, godly conversation, and
sometimes by their sufferings, to convert those that are aliens from the
Commonwealth of Israel.

Secondly, They give them ministerially their admittance, entrance, and as I
may say freedom in the Church, both as private members, and if any of them be
ordained Officers, it is by such as are Officers before, and not qua Officers
of the particular Churches (for it is an extrinsecal act to them as so
considered) but of the general. And in the erecting of a new Congregation in
New England, there is to be the consent, advice, and help of the Elders of
neighbour-Churches, they are not only to allow thereof, but also to ordain them
Elders, which cannot be an act of particular Officers, for it is no act toward
their own flocks, it is extraneous to them: but it is as they are are
habitually general Officers, and this occasion draws forth their power for the
good and increase of the whole.

Sect. 6.
If it be asked What is sufficient to make a man a member of the visible Church?
I answer, knowledge and belief of the main points of the Christian faith, and
professed subjection thereunto. And this is as much as the Apostles required,
as in the case of the Eunuch and Simon Magus, etc. and if it were sufficient
then, it is so still: for those were the purest Churches erected by infallible
men: and yet they went upon no other grounds. So many as gladly received the
word were baptized, Act 2 41. And yet this is no more then may be found in an
hypocrite, out of novelty, sudden flashes, admiration at the extraordinary
gifts and miracles: and was found in the stony ground which received the word
with joy. And we have no other rule to go by in gathering Churches, or
receiving members into a Church, then they had, neither may we presume to make
any other.

Sic omnes fere Reformati Theologi celebres materiam visibilis Ecclesiae
asserunt esse homines externe vocatos fidem Christi profitentes: namque
definiunt caetum hominum vocatione externa seu praedicatione verbi and
Sacramentorum communicatione evocatorum ad cultum Dei and societatem
Ecclesiasticam inter se celebrandam, Apol. p. 8. Vide etiam utrumque Trelcatium
in locis com. Loc. de Ecclesia, and Professores L^idenses, Disp. 40. These. 3.

It is true, God commands true piety: and no man shall see Gods face in bliss,
nor be of the invisible company without it. But I speak what is requisite in
fora Ecclesiae, and what matter must be for a visible Church, and then I
conceive it is not absolutely requisite that the persons should be truly godly
to make them members thereof. For if it were otherwise, no man could tell when
he is in a true Church, or who are true members, or whose child ought to be
baptized. And if the living members of Christ were the only or essential
members of a visible Church, then none are true essential members but they: and
a truly godly Minister is a more essential Minister then another, and the
Ordinances administered by him, are more essentially administered then by
another: and then the virtue of the Ordinance should depend not on Christ's
Institution, but on the worthiness of the person administering. And happily after
many years living under a Minister that seemed godly, that Minister by falling
away shows himself that he was not so, and then all those Ordinances were null,
being administered by one that was not only no Minister, but no true member of
the Church. I therefore conclude with that saying of Ames in his Bellarm.
Enervat. Falsum est internas virtutes requiri a nobis ut aliquis sit in
Ecclesia quo ad visibilem ejus statum.

And this M. Norton in Resp, ad Apollon. p. 3. acknowledges, Potest aliquis in
externa Ecclesiae communionem admitti, qui reali sanctitate regenerationis, and
justificante fide non est praeditus, seu qui rigido examine exploratus, signa
verae fidei, and sanctitatis internae realis tam eviden^ia non dederit, quae
omnem conscientiam hominum convincere possint a^ sincer a ejus fide, etc. Neque
necessario quaerendum, an articulatim possint demonstrare evidentiae verae
gratiae salutaris (...), etc. but only they must be fideles (...), and (...),
as he expresses himself in diverse places, they must be Ecclesiastice fidelos,
and apparenter, etc. non semper (...), page 11. In casibus Ecclesiasticis Judas
revera non fidelis, ita aestimandus a co-Apostolis, ut se gerant erga illum ac
si esset fidelis, p. 12.

There may be a holiness of dedication and consecration, where there is no
true holiness of regeneration and sanctification.

Object. But holiness of dedication and consecration is founded upon holiness
of sanctification, at least supposed, and therefore all the Church Members
ought to have supposed sanctification.

Answ. That sanctification is commanded by God to every one that will dedicate
himself unto God, is clear. But for the supposition of it in all, it will be
hard to prove. God enjoined his people of Israel to consecrate themselves unto
him to be his people, yet he did not suppose them all to be godly: for he
expresses the contrary of them; neither did Moses and Aaron suppose so of
them, not the Prophets, for they express the quite contrary.

And if we come to the New Testament, it cannot be conceived that John Baptist,
or Christ's Apostles did in their personal judgments apprehend all those to be
truly godly whom they baptized and dedicated to God. For John called the
Scribes and Pharisees a generation of vipers, and yet adds, I indeed baptize
you with water, Matthew. 3.7, 11. Indeed they confessed their sins, and it is
like promised amendment, and so will the worst in our Congregations do, though
they never perform it. The ground therefore upon which this supposal is to be,
must not be any man's personal particular judgment, built upon such evidence as
may convince the understanding of a judicious, experienced Minister or
Christian, that the persons are truly godly, but an Ecclesiastical judgment in
foro Ecclesiae raised upon such grounds as the Ministers of God directed by God
have formerly gone upon; which conditions if they find they are not to deny
administration of the seals unto, which are the seals of the visible not
invisible Church. The same causes and rules are of admission that are of
ejection vice versa: and as no man is to be censured and cast out of the
visible Church, because the Elders particular judgment makes them think the
man has not the true power of godliness, and grace of God in sincerity,
except he commit that which deserves an Ecclesiastical censure: so neither is
admission to be denied to any man that desires to dedicate himself unto God,
and will promise and profess subjection to Christ in all his Ordinances,
though it be suspected by judicious Christians, that he has not the true work
of grace in his heart. The Church of God in their Ecclesiastical judgment
censureth only ignorance, error and scandal. A Scholar that is admitted into a
school, is not admitted because he is doctus, but ut fit doctus, and if he will
submit to the rules of the school, and apply himself to learn, it is enough for
his admission: the like may be said of the Church visible which is Christ's
school. John Baptist did not in his conscience think they had all actually,
really and completely repented and reformed themselves whom he baptized, but he
baptized them unto repentance, Mat. 3.11. and they by receiving the same bound
themselves to endeavor the practice thereof. It were a sad case for Ministers
if they were bound to admit none, or administer the Lords Supper to none, but
such as were truly godly, or that they judged in their conscience to be so, or
were bound to eject all that they judged were not so. I fear the Elders in
New England do not in their consciences judge so of all their members. It is
not confederation that can give right to Ordinances, if by Gods laws they ought
not to have them.

There is a great difference between the visible and invisible Church: the
rules of the one will not serve for the other. No Minister could ever
administer the Sacrament without sin, if he ought not to administer it to any
but such as are truly godly: neither has God given us any rules to judge
certainly of the truth of grace in any man: but the most judicious Divine in
the world may be deceived by a cunning hypocrite: And to salve this by saying
we ought to think in our conscience that they are godly, is vain; for as we
have no such rule to go by in Gods word: so it is very harsh to pass an
Ecclesiastical censure upon that ground, and the like may be said of denying
admission thereupon: and it is also a very doubtful rule for a Minister to go
by, for some men judge very well of him that others judge but slieghtly of; and
there will be a division among people in their communicating together according
to their several judgments one of another, still suspecting that they have
fellowship with unbeleevers: and both Ministers and peoples judgment very very
much concerning the same man; according to the variety of his carriage there
will sometimes be hopes and sometimes fears: but Ecclesiastical judgment is
not guided by such uncertain, variable rules, neither in admission nor
ejection, but upon clear evidence and palpable grounds, which must reach all,
and may be clearly known and proved.

There are some I find that distinguish between the qualifications of the
members of the Church-Catholike visible, and of the members of particular
instituted Churches. For the former, viz. the general membership, they
acknowledge that these forenamed qualifications will be sufficient; and
therefore will admit such and their children to baptism, which (say they) is an
Ordinance of the Church-Catholike visible: and every Minister being a Minister
of the Church-Catholike visible (besides his particular relation to his
particular Congregation) may, say they, administer baptism to them, though they
be members of no instituted Churches: but to make a member of a particular
instituted Congregation, they require evident signs of true grace, and a
consent and submission to the Ordinances of Discipline dispensed by the
particular Officers. But this distinction of qualifications I find not
grounded upon the word of God, nor that any should be fit to be members of the
Church-Catholike visible, and not to be members of a particular visible
Congregation. If they be brought into Christ's sheepfold, they are fit to have
some of Christ's shepherds to take inspection of them: if they be admitted into
Christ's Kingdom, City, Family, they are fit to be under the regiment of some of
his Officers. If the Ordinances of worship, yea, the seal of the Covenant be
administered to them, I see no ground that these should be freed from the
Ordinances of Discipline, who in all likelihood will stand in most need thereof.

The great Objection which M. Hooker urges against this assertion, that the
particular Churches are ortae, and whereby he would prove the Church-Catholike
to be Orta, is because if the Church-Catholike be an integral, it is made up of
the aggregation of the particulars, and oritur ex illis: And every Integrum is
in respect of the parts Symbolum effecti. And the parts must have a being
before the whole can result out of them.

Answ. My main intention in the Question was to prove the Church-Catholike to
be the prime Church in those respects which are enumerated in the explication
of this part or the predicate of the Question, to which I refer you: and that
the particular Churches are secondary in the same senses also.

And for the particular Churches being Orta, I have already both in the
explication of the terms of the Question, Chap. 1. Sect. 4. and in this second
part expressed my meaning thereof. Sect. 1. etc.

My meaning is not in regard of the aggregation and combination of the
particular Churches to make one aggregated, combined integral: for so indeed
the Church-Catholike puts on the notion of orta. But I meant it first in regard
the particular Congregations are made up of, and arise out of the members of
the Church-Entitive or of visible believers, which are the matter thereof. And
whereas it is objected against this, that that Church is no political body:
happily never had the sight or knowledge one of another, never entered into
agreement of government one with another: and are wholly destitute, according
to reason, and all rules of the Gospel, of all Church Priviledges, Surv. p.
^37. I answer, the Church indeed so considered is no actual polity, yet it is
an integral, and it is visible in regard of the persons, covenant, laws, and
profession. As all the subjects of the Kingdom of England are an integral in
reference to the King and Laws, though they should for a time want inferior
Officers. And though they be not in particular combination, and so are
destitute of the particular privileges, and have no particular Officers to
dispense Gods Ordinances to them constantly, yet have they right by reason and
Scripture rules to all the Ordinances of God, as well as baptism, and they
covenant to submit to all Gods Ordinances, even those of discipline: and are
habitually under the habitual power of the Ministers office, and are capable of
censures, as has been showed before: only they want the opportunity of
enjoying them constantly by particular Officers of their own. The right of an
English man to the privileges of the Laws, does not arise by being actually
under such and such particular Officers in a Corporation, etc. but by being
members of the Kingdom. So is the right of visible believers to
Church Priviledges, by being Christ's visible subjects.

Secondly, the particular converts are brought into Christ's Kingdom by the
Church-Catholike visible already in being: and spiritually conquered and
subdued by them to Christ: they are the fruits and success of their Ministry,
as Organical. Christ's Ministers are their spiritual fathers, and they are
children born to the Church, and are added to the Church.

Thirdly, The Church does initiate them, and ministerially convey the
privileges to the converts, by enrowling them as freemen of the Church by
baptism, and ministerially ordaining officers over them, and so makes them
organical also, and adding them into combination with themselves: and this
cannot be done as they are particular Officers, for so, they are not to them,
Therefore as general, and it is to be accounted an act of the Church-Catholike,
as has been showed before. Chapter 1. Sect. 4.

And though in a constant, permanent or continuous integral, whose particular
members rise and fall together with the whole, so that it cannot consist but of
so many necessary integral, individual parts whereof it is constituted. There
the whole, and the parts whereof it does consist, as they stand in relation
unto one another must be simul: yet the Church-Catholike being (as I may say) a
kind of discreet, successive, indefinite integral, always transient, and in
flux, some members being always in their adding, and some always in
departing, so that in respect of the particular parts it is not one hour every
way the same it was the former, I say, that in reference to the members that
are to be added, the whole must needs be accounted first, because it is
constituted and has a being entitive and organical before the addition, and
the members born or converted must needs be first added to the whole, before
they can bear the relation of parts unto it. And herein the Church is like unto
a Corporation, whose first members whereof it was constituted were simul natura
and tempore with the whole, yet all the members that are added successively,
find it a Corporation before their addition: and so it is with the successive
members of the Church-Catholike.

Object. That which belongs to a similar body or integral, qua tale, it does
not arise from the integrality, but from the nature which is common to the
whole, and so it agrees to it primarily, qua tale, nun qua totum, sive
integrum: so though such and such privileges and Ordinances belong to the
whole Church Catholic: yet it is not primarily, qua Catholic, or qua an
Integral, but qua tale, and so they may belong to the parts primarily, and to
the whole secondarily.

Answ. Though the properties of a similar body do belong to it qua tale, as
such, yet the whole being tale they agree to the whole primarily, though they
be found immediately in the particular parts.

Secondly, The privileges and Ordinances of the Church do not belong to the
Church primarily qua tale, for it might possibly have had such a nature, and
yet wanted such Privileges and Ordinances: but they arise ex institutione and
donatione divina, and from the Covenant between Christ and his Church, and flow
from thence, and that institution, donation and covenant, being first intended
and given to the whole, the privileges and Ordinances belong first to the
whole, and secondarily to the parts, though they be set immediately in the parts
also.

Now then, seeing it is evident by the former Scriptures and Arguments, that
there is a Church-Catholike visible both Entitive and Organical: and seeing the
Names, Nature, and Privileges of the Church, the Promises and Ordinances of
God, the Offices of Christ, the Signs of the true Church, the Members of of the
Church, and Ministry of the word belong first to the Church-Catholike visible,
and that every particular Christian bears first and last relation thereunto,
which relation cannot be broken off by any removal, or without sin, and that
the particular Churches spring out of the members of the Church-Catholike, I
therefore conclude, according to the light God has given me, That the
Church-Catholike visible is Prima, in Gods intention, and by Gods institution,
and by Gods donation of Ordinances and Privileges, and in dignity and
authority, and in perfection, and in nature and essence, and in ministerial,
instrumental causality, and in perfect cognition and nostibility: and the
particular Churches secondary or posterior in all the forenamed respects: and
likewise are Ortae in regard they are made up of the members of the
Church-Entitive, and are converted instrumentally by the Church-Catholike
Organical, and initia^^d and organized by them, and added to them, and combined
with them.

Sect. 7.
From this Thesis give me leave to propound to your further consideration these
Corollaries or Conclusions.

Concerning Churches Catholic. Particular.
Persons Public, viz. the Officers. Private, viz. the Members.



Concerning the Church in general.
1. That there is a Church-Catholike.

2. That the Church-Catholike is but one.

3. That the Church-Catholike is visible.

4. That though the Church-Catholike be always transient and in flux by
addition and substraction of the members thereof, yet it shall never cease to
be visible.

5. That if the Church-Catholike be contracted into narrow limits, yet the
remaining part thereof conserves both the nature and privileges of the
Church-Catholike, and puts on the notion thereof, more properly then of a
particular Church: as a City burnt down or wasted into a few streets, reserves
the Charter and Privileges of the whole; and that which was accounted but a
part of it before, now puts on the notion of the whole.

6. That the Church-Catholike is mixed of good and bad, as well as particular
Congregations are.

7. That the Church-Catholike may be considered either as Entitive or Organical.

8. That the Church-Catholike is one habitual, organical body, or Integral.

9. That the keys of Discipline are Catholic as well as of Doctrine.

10. That the Church-Catholike is one similar body: if considered as Entitive,
the members are similar parts of it, if as organical, the particular Churches
are similar parts of it.

11. The Promises, Privileges, and Ordinances of worship and discipline,
belong primarily to the Church-Catholike.

12. That the Church-Catholike is constituted by one Covenant, Charter, and
Systeme of Divine Laws.

13. That the Privileges and Ordinances of the Church arise not from the
Nature of it, but from the covenant, donation, and institution of Christ.

14. That the Church-Catholike is the prime Church.

15. That the Church-Catholike visible is of greater dignity then the
particular Churches.

16. That the Church-Catholike visible is more august, and of more large
authority then the particular: though the authority differs not in kind.

17. That the Church-Catholike is of greater perfection then the particular
Churches.

18. That the Church-Catholike visible is ministerially an instrument to convey
the Nature, Privileges, and Ordinances of the Church to such as are added
thereunto.

19. That the whole Church-Catholike is the primary and adequate object (suo
genere) of Christ's Offices, and the particular Churches, but as parts thereof.
Joh. 3.16.

20. That the Notes and Signs of the true Church belong first to the
Church-Catholike visible, and therefore are distinctive to that only.

21. That the Church-Catholike visible has an existence, accidents, and
operations of its own, as it is Catholic.

22. That the Church-Catholike visible has an head or governor over it, and
but one head, even Jesus Christ, who is very Man as well as God.

23. That though Christ be the only supreme head and ruler of his Church, yet
has it immediate rulers over it under Christ.

24. That the unity of the Church-Catholike requires not a meeting of the
whole body together at any time.

Concerning particular Churches.
1. That the particular Churches are made up of the members of the
Church-Catholike Entitive.

2. That the particular Churches organized, and all visible believers make up
the Church-Catholike Organical by aggregation, and the particulars are
inferior thereunto.

3. That the particular divisions of the Church-Catholike visible for
convenient enjoyment of public Ordinances, have the name (Church) and the
Privileges and Ordinances (as far as they are capable of them) secondarily in
consideration.

4. That the particular Churches being similar parts of the whole Church,
having no essential, specifical differences, are to be distinguished by
accidental differences and circumstances, as their limits of place, etc. though
they be heterogeneal to them.

5. Many Congregations may be in the same community of discipline, and be ruled
by their Elders in communi by coordination, and so be called one Church,
National, Provincial or Presbyterial.

6. If the particular Churches claim power of dispensing all the Ordinances of
Christ, by virtue of the general Charter, Covenant and donation, they being
parts of the Church, then much more may the whole Church-Catholike, for which
they were primarily intended and made.

7. The greater the parts of the Church-Catholike be, and the more united by
combitation and coordination, the stronger they be, and the smaller the
divisions be, the weaker.

8. The division of the Church Catholic into small parcels, to stand alone by
themselves without coordination, is dangerous.

9. Yet necessity in regard of distance of place, etc. may cause a particular
Church to be Independent, and stand alone in regard of actual, external
consociation or combination.

10. The necessity of an explicit Covenant, as the essential form whereby the
particular Church is constituted, implies a denial of all other Churches to be
true, that are not so constituted, because they must want the essential form.

11. The ordinary and constant operations of the Officers of the Church in
dispensation of Christ's Ordinances are in the particular Churches primarily.

12. Any particular Congregation may fail, apostatize, or be dissolved and
cease, but should the Church-Catholike be reduced into so narrow limits, and
the being thereof be reserved therein, and it sustain the notion of the
Church-Catholike, God would not suffer it in such a case to fail or cease, for
then the whole must cease also.

Concerning the public Officers of the Church.
1. Every Minister is an Officer of the Church-Catholike visible, and that
relation is primary to him, yet the particular relation he stands in to a
particular Congregation, gives him a more immediate especial call, and charge
to administer the Ordinances of God constantly to them.

2. Any single Minister by virtue of his office has power ministerially to
admit a member into the Church-Catholike visible, if he be fit.

3. Although the election of a Minister to a particular Congregation be an act
of liberty in the people, yet his mission is from Christ primarily and
ministerially by the Presbytery.

4. He does not administer the Ordinances of God in the name of the
Congregation as their servant, but as the servant of Christ. As a Mayor in a
Corporation though chosen by the people, yet executes his office in the Kings
name.

5. If he administreth any Ordinances out of his own Congregation, he does it
not as a gifted brother, but by virtue of his office, 2 Cor. 5.20. And the like
may be said of their dispensation of Ordinances to members of other
Congregations that come to their Congregations.

6. Although the particular flock over which a Minister was set be dissolved,
yet he cease not to be a Minister, because the Church to which he bare first
relation is not dissolved, which is the Catholic.

7. The Elders of several particular Congregations as they may exercise the
keys of their office divisim, in their several Congregations, so they may
exercise them conjunctim, in combinations, if they be called thereunto.

Concerning private members.
1. Particular converts are first converted into the Church-Catholike Entitive,
and secondarily conjoined into particular consociations, for the more oppurtune
enjoyment of Ordinances actually and constantly.

2. Every member of a particular Congregation is a member of the
Church-Catholike Entitive, and that relation does primarily belong unto him.

3. External profession of the true faith, and subjection to Gods Ordinances,
is enough to make a man capable of being a member of the Church-Catholike
visible, and so also of a particular Congregation, quoad externam formam.

4. By Baptism members are visibly and ministerially admitted into the
Church-Catholike visible.

5. By excommunication rightly administered an offender is cast out of the
Church-Catholike visible, as much as out of a particular Congregation.

6. Federal holiness belongs to none primarily, because born of members of a
particular Congregation, but of the Church-Catholike.

7. They that are only in the Church-Catholike visible, are not without in the
Apostles sense.

8. Children of believing parents have right to Baptism, though their parents
were not members of any particular Congregation, and are debarred from their
due, if denied it.

9. Every visible believer is or ought to be a member of the particular Church,
wherein and among whom he dwells.

10. The being in the general Covenant gives right to the Ordinances, and not
any particular Covenant, neither do we find any mention in Scripture of any
particular Covenant either urged or used at admission of members into a
particular Congregation, or at the constitution thereof.

11. The invisible members of the Church which have internal communion with
Christ, are also visible members, and have external communion in external
Ordinances.

12. The departure of a member from a particular Congregation, and removal to
another for convenience, or by necessity, is no sin, but departing from the
Church-Catholike, and ceasing to be a member thereof, is a sin.

Sect. 8.
I know it is not usual to make uses and applications to Theses of this nature,
and should I enter thereinto, I might drown my self in sorrow, to bewail the
rents, not in Christ's seamlesse coat, but in his body the Church, which Christ
preferred in some regards before his natural body, for he assumed his natural
body for their sakes, and was willing to be crucified for their sakes.

The divisions of the Church are of three sorts, in judgment, in affection,
and in way or practice.

For judgment, First come the Romists, and they rend away the second
commandment: then come the Antisabbatarians, and they rend away the fourth,
though placed in the heart of the Decalogue, and so extraordinarily fenced by
God, and a memento set before it, and so many arguments after it: then come the
Antinomians, and they pluck away the whole Law from us, denying it both
punitive, coactive, and directive power, and so render it wholly dead and
useless to Christians: then come the Socinians, and they quench the Deity of
Christ, and the holy Ghost, and deny our redemption by the blood of Christ, and
so consequently would deprive us of the benefit of the New Testament: then come
the Anabaptists, and they deny, and deride our Baptism, and render us and our
children no better then heathens: then come the Separatists, and they would
pluck up our Church by the roots, and call us Rome, Egypt, Sodom, Babylon, and
so consequently call their mother whore, for if they have had any conversion,
they had it in the bosom of our Church. Of whom that is too true which the
Psalmist says, Psa. 50.20. Thou sit and speak against thy brother, and
have slandered thine own mothers son. Then come the Antiscripturists and they
cashier both Old and New Testament. And then come the Ante-Trinitarians, and
they blaspheme the whole Trinity: And then come the Familists, and they leave
the sure rule of the word, and trust to Satanical delusions and revelations.

Yea, there be others of our honored and beloved brethren, whom I forbear to
name among the former, who, though they acknowledge us true Churches, yet deny
us to be one Church, and would have us rent into a thousand pieces and parcels,
and these to stand as so many entire, complete bodies, without any
coordination, as so meny Spouses of Christ, as so many Queens appointing their
own orders and Officers, with liberty to censure both Officers and members
within themselves, by the votes of the whole body; and not to be except
arbitrarily. Not endeavoring with us to reform our Churches, but to gather
Churches out of our Churches, by gathering our best members out of our
Churches, and uniting them into several bodies by a particular Covenant, though
distant far in habitation. But if the cream of our Congregations be fleeted
off, our wheat transplanted by it self into other men's folds, who sowed it not,
our fattest sheep gathered into men's folds, it will be very sad for Gods
Ministers to have none but the tares, and goats, and lees, and dregs of men
left them to look after.

Others would wrest the keys of the Church out of the hands of the
Church Officers, and hang them at the girdle of the civil Magistrate; but
seeing God made civil and Ecclesiastical Officers differing in kind, the one
entrusted with a civil Magistracy, the other with an Ecclesiastical Ministry,
as it is an usurpation for the Church Officers, as such, to claim the power of
the Magistrate, so I fear it will prove but sacrilege for the civil
Magistrate, as such, to claim the power of the Ministry. If (...) was so great
a fault, I fear (...) will be as great.

Others there are who plead for liberty of judgment, conscience and practice,
that every one may hold, and hold forth what opinions he please, and be of what
religion and sect he pleaserh, because judgment and conscience cannot be
forced, but must be left to God only, as they say: and thereby they would make
England another Amsterdam of all sects and religions: and some flown so high
already as to name that City for an example and pattern of the model they would
have in England: but I must clear our brethren in New England from this, and
commend them for banishing the Familists, etc. from amongst them, who would
otherwise have utterly overthrown the peace and truth in their Churches.

Yea, generally men cover new opinions, and account it their glory to differ
from others in judgment, and he is no body that has none but old truths; and
so men under the color of new light and new truths, rake up a multitude of old
errors.

Secondly, Our divisions are in heart and affections: for difference in
judgment causes alienation of affections, and great thoughts of heart: so
that if there prove once a clashing and crossing in opinions, though they were
never so near allied, or well acquainted and familiar, yet then they grow
strange, and fall out, and oppose, and censure each other deeply: then they are
superstitious, or Antichristian, or enemies to Christ's kingly office, and hence
come so many invectives in Pulpit and Press.

Thirdly, Our divisions and differences are in way: for as men's judgments
differ, so do their ways. Some are for one way of worship, some for another;
some for one way of discipline, some another; some for one way of constituting
Churches, some another; some are for gathering of new Churches out of old, and
yet let the o^d ones stand as mock-Churches, when they have gleaned all that
are good out of them: they would take all the golden and silver vessels,
vessels of honor, and leave none but of wood and stone, vessels of dishonor;
And some are for separation wholly, and so turn all the rest over to
Antechrist: yea, some so violent, as that they would pluck down our very
meeting houses (tropically called Churches) which they deride by the name of
Steeple Houses. And all are in ways of contention, so that we are like
Sampsons foxes tied together by the tayls with firebrands between them, to burn
up the standing corn.

I shall conclude with an earnest desire of, and exhortation to unity and
peace. The unity of the Church should be a strong motive to unity in judgment,
heart, and way. It is that the Apostle presses, Ephesians. 4.3, 4. Endeavoring to
keep the unity of the spirit in the bond of peace: for there is one body, and
one spirit, etc. This spiritual unity is that which Christ so earnestly and
often prayed for in that short prayer, Joh. 17.21, 23. That they may be one as
we are one, that they all may be one, that they also may be one in us, that
they may be made perfect in one. And this was Paul's prayer, Rom 15.5, 6. Now
the God of patience and consolation grant you to be like minded one toward
another, according to Christ Jesus, that ye may with one mind and one mouth
glorify God, etc. And this was Paul's earnest request, 1 Cor. 1.10. Now I
beseech you brethren, by the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye all speak
the same thing, and that there be no divisions among you: but that you be
perfectly joined together in the same mind, and the same judgment. And again
2 Cor. 13.11. It is one of the last things he concludes his Epistle with,
Finally brethren, farewell, be perfect, be of good comfort, be of one mind,
live in peace, and the God of love and peace shall be with you. And Phil. 1.27.
He presses it as the only thing he desired of them, Only let your conversation
be as becomes the Gospel of Christ, that whether I come and see you, or else
be absent, I may hear of your affairs, that ye stand fast in one spirit with
one mind, striving together for the faith of the Gospel. Certainly unity of
judgment is of more importance then we are aware of, else the Apostle would
not press it with such solemn adjurations and entreaties, so often as he does.
Yea, when there were but two men that differed in opinion (as it is conceived)
the Apostle thought it beseeming Apostolical gravity, and the holy Ghost judged
it meet for a piece of canonical Scripture to take notice of it, and compose
it. Phil. 4.2. I beseech Evodias, and beseech Syntiche that they be of the same
mind in the Lord, Though it might seem but women's brabbles, yet we know how
great a matter a little fire kindles, a little strife and error will increase
to more ungodliness.

Consider we, that there is but one truth, and that is of God, and God is
truth, and error is of the devil.

Consider, that the understanding is the highest and foremost faculty of the
soul, it is as the forehorse in the teem, the leading faculty; and as that is
informed, so the will and conscience, and affections must needs work, and
follow that, and if that be led into error, it must necessarily misleade the
whole man.

Consider, that a chief part of the image of God in man consists in
knowledge, and so is upon the understanding, which by error is defaced.

Remember, the solemn caveats given by the Apostle, Romans 16.17. I beseech you,
brethren, mark them which cause divisions and offenses contrary to the doctrine
which ye have learned, and avoid them. For they that are such serve not the
Lord Jesus Christ, but their own belly, and by good words, and blessed or fair
speeches deceive the hearts of the simple. And Ephesians. 4.14. That we henceforth be
no more children tossed to and fro, and carried about with every wind of
doctrine, by the slieght of men, and cunning craftiness (or after the methods
of error) whereby they lie in wait to deceive. Christ himself tells us, that
false Prophets shall come that shall deceive (if it were possible) the very
elect. Behold, I have told you before, Mat. 20.30, 31. And Paul tells us, Of
your selves shall men arise speaking perverse things, to draw disciples after
them, Therefore watch, Act. 20.30, 31. Therefore hold fast the form of sound
words, which thou have heard of me, says Paul, 2 Timothy 1.13. They that coin new
words, and new strange expressions to amaze the people, it is a sign, as Calvin
tells us, that they have some new opinion upon the Anvil.

O let us labor to be of one heart, seeing we are all but one body, and have
but one head, and one spirit, and because we are all brethren, children of the
same heavenly Father. This is that which God has promised his people, Ezekiel.
11.19. I will give them one heart, and I will put a new spirit within you. And
we find Christ inculcating this exhortation, Joh. 13.34. A new Commandment I
give unto you, that ye love one another, as I have loved you, that ye also love
another. By this shall all men know that ye are my disciples, if ye love one
another, Joh. 13.34, 35. Again, This is my commandment, that ye love one
another as I have loved you, Joh. 15.12. and verse. 17. These things I command
you that you love one another. And this I find practiced, Act. 4.31. And the
multitude of them that believed were of one heart and one soul. And this Paul
exhorts to, Romans 12.10. Be kindly affectioned one to another with brotherly
love, in honor preferring one another. And we find the unity both of
judgment and heart exhorted unto, 1 Pet. 3.8. Finally, be ye all of one mind,
having compassion one of another, love as brethren, be pitiful, be courteous.

Division is the devils music, but that which makes the devil laugh, should
make us cry. O what a solemn obsecration is that of Paul, Phil. 2.1, 2. If
there be any consolation in Christ, if any comfort of love, if any fellowship
of the Spirit, if any bowels and mercies, fulfill ye my joy, that ye may be like
minded, having the same love, bring of one accord, of one mind.

O that we might labor to be of one way also. This is that which God promised
his people, Jer. 32.39. I will give them one heart, and one way, that they may
fear me for ever, for the good of them, and of their children after them. And
Zep. 3.9. Then will I turn to the people a pure language, that they may all
call upon the name of the Lord with one consent, or one shoulder. And this was
the blessing that God gave Hezekiah in his people, 2 Chronicles. 30.12. Also in
Judah the hand of God was to give them one heart to do the commandment of the
King, and of the Princes by the word of the Lord.

Certainly there is but one rule for doctrine, worship, discipline. And as many
as walk according to this rule, peace be on them, and on all the Israel of God,
Gal. 6.16. And this is the Apostles exhortation, Roman. 15.6. That ye may with
one mind and one mouth glorify God, Yea, though we be not of the same
judgment in every thing, yet as it is Philip. 3.16. Whereto we have already
attained, let us walk by the same rule, let us mind the same things.

And this unity in way is that which we have sworn unto, and covenanted in our
late National League and Covenant, in the first branch of it. That we shall
endeavor to bring the Churches of God in the three Kingdoms of England,
Scotland and Ireland, to the nearest conjunction and uniformity in Religion,
Confession of Faith, Form of Church Government, Directory for Worship and
Catechizing; That we and our posterity after us may as brethren live together
in faith and love, and that the Lord may delight to dwell in the midst of us,
And we shall all be forsworn, if we endeavor it not.

All the members of the same body natural agree to go the same way, Yea, the
strength, health, and beauty of the body natural, consists in the fast
knitting of all the members together to each other, and to the head, and the
luxation thereof is dangerous: so and much more it is in a body politic or
Ecclesiastical. And though the divisions in our civil estate be very sad, and
might deserve tears of blood to bewail them, yet I look upon the divisions in
the Church as a matter of more sad and doleful consequence, and I fear (but
wish I might be mistaken) that when the breaches of the Commonwealth shall be
closed, the breaches in the Church may grow wider, and the differences rise
higher: and such errors are sown among us as will not be plucked up again in
our age: which having seized upon the understandings and consciences of men,
cannot be composed by commands, nor clubbed down by force. Only here is my
comfort, that though our condition is such, that we know not what to ask, yet
God is wise, and knows what to bestow. And this is my hope herein, that he
which found a way to reconcile God and man, when they were at enmity, can find
way to reconcile man and man, though they be at difference. Now the God of
peace that brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus Christ, that great
shepherd of the sheep, through the blood of the everlasting Covenant, make us
perfect in every good work to do his will, working in us that which is
well-pleasing in his sight, through Jesus Christ, to whom be glory for ever and
ever. Amen. *

FINIS.

