TRUTH Lifting up its Head above SLANDER: IN An ANSWER to THOMAS JACKSON, late
Priest of Stoke in Sussex, his Lying Paper which he left in the North of
England. By FRANCIS HOWGILL.

Whereunto is added something by way of Letter, from another hand, to the said
T. J. showing the Reasons why it is judged meet to publish the same at this
time. Namely, because He the said Jackson continues still his old course of
Slandering, and private Backbiting the Innocent, by his devised Fables,
notwithstanding he has been privately admonished, and since more publicly
reproved in Print, by E. B. wherein his Scandalous Imputations of Popish
Tenants, falsely cast by him upon others, are deservedly laid upon himself.
Likewise, a Brief Rehearsal of some Remarkable Passages, out of E. B. his Book,
Called Satan's Design Defeated; In Answer to another Manuscript of the said
Priest Jackson's, by way of Prophecy, to that remaining part of the Old
Parliament then sitting; threatening their destruction, if they took part with
such malicious Priests against the Innocent; which since in a great measure the
Lord has fulfilled upon them and him. Which may serve for a Warning to this
Present Generation: By a Friend to Truth, and an utter Enemy to Persecution, J.
S.

Printed in the Year 1663.

TRUTH Lifting up its Head above SLANDER: IN An ANSWER to THOMAS JACKSON, late
Priest of Stoke in Sussex, his lying Paper which he left in the North of
England, etc.
THOMAS JACKSON, thy Paper which thou lestest in the North of England, with thy
brother Parson, I have received; wherein I find many devised Fables, which thou
have invented in thy corrupt heart, which thou would fasten upon me as my
Doctrine and Principles: And coming to London, I also find most part of the
same things spread abroad by thee, and sent to some of the late Parliament;
which thou call, The Tenetns of the Quakers in the North; which thou say,
thou have Recited, and also they Maintained: Thou have recited for the most
part, the deceit of thy own frothy brain; and thou must not think when thou
bring forth thy own Imaginations, who watchest for iniquity, that the
Quakers will maintain those things; but if thou assert things of thy self, and
from thy dark understanding, which thou have raked up out of the dungeon of
confusion, which thou say thou have waded in, as in thy Letter to thy
Honorable Sir, to whom thou writest in feignedness and flattery these things,
that thou have charged us with; thou must stand to thy self; for that which the
Quakers do assert, they will stand to and vindicate, against thee and all
Opposers. Thou say, Thou have more soul-refreshing work than to answer my
Letter, which I sent unto thee, with the Queries. Forging up of Lies, and
inventing of Mischief, is no soul-refreshing work, but is the work which is
brought by him, who is the Father of Lies, whose work thou have been working,
which shall be made evident to thee, when the Lord shall arise to plead with
thee, for all thy ungodly deeds and hard speeches against the Truth; thou
say, Thou wast willing to write a few words, that it might appear, whether
thou or I were the Liar; because I said unto thee, in thy own words, what thou
declaredst before near twenty people, after I had spoken two or near hand three
hours; when I know Truth had power over thee, that thou could not open thy
mouth against what was spoken that day by me; but after the Meeting, in thy
brothers house, thou said, That no godly Minister in England would deny what
I had spoken then in the Meeting to be Truth: Which words I returned unto thee,
when I heard that thou backbited when I was gone, and said, I held Popish
Tenants, and thou challengedst me to produce one witness that did confess unto
the words before mentioned, as, [that no godly Minister would deny what was
spoken by me to be Truth:] Now that thou may be convinced that thou art the
Liar, and not I; I give thee four Witnesses, whose hands are subscribed for my
Testimony against thee, to the aforesaid words; that is to say, William
Pearson, James Adamson, John Cay, Jane Pearson, with several others: And so
thou must either plead thy forgetfulness, or else thou show thy self, in
thine own words, to have an Impudent face, that dare deny that which thou
spakest before many Witnesses; so there is no way now to acquit thy self, but
to confess and repent of the envy which is in thy heart.

Further, thou say, That I denied Imputed Righteousness, which thou say,
is a Popish Doctrine; thou must reckon that to them, and not to me; for I told
thee then, and now again, Whatsoever was Imputed or reckoned to them that did
believe, I owned; but for thee and the rest of you Parish-Teachers, Imputing or
reckoning that unto your flock who are unconverted, which God reckons not nor
imputes to them, is delusion and deceit.

And further thou say, that I made the Gifts in the Heathens of the same
quality with the Graces in Believers. These are thy own words, and not mine:
But that the Light in Unbelievers, and the Light in Believers, is of the same
quality or nature; which is evident by its Operations, and by the Testimony of
Scriptures; this I shall stand unto. Christ says, I am come a Light into the
World. And the World in the Spirit's account is not taken for Believers, though
many of you Parish-Teachers have said so; but the World are such as are
unredeemed and unsanctified, and yet Christ is that true Light which is come
into the world; and that he is the Light of Believers thou will not deny. Now
this is one and the self-same Christ, one and the self-same Light; his Nature
one, and his Quality one, which is pure, holy and divine: yet the manifestation
of this Light is more clear in them that believe, than in them that believe
not; yet this alters not the quality of the Light: for Unbelievers have also
some manifestation, and that is it which convinces of sin, and shows them
things reprovable; for whatsoever things are reprovable, as it is written, is
manifest by the Light; but that the Heathen are reproved, and Unbelievers are
reproved, when they sin against that which is manifest in them, as is clear,
Romans 2. and that which reproves for impurity is of a pure quality, as that
which justifies Purity and Righteousness. But I see, though a prize be put
into the hand of a fool, he regards it not; and though I then did declare,
and now do, the Wisdom of God, yet thou being in the night perceivest it not.

And thou say, that I hold falling away from Grace, which is a Popish
Tenent: Then in this the Papists are nearer the Truth than thou; and although a
Papist hold it, I must not deny it, because it is true. The Apostle Jude speaks
of some, who turned the grace of God into wantonness; or, more truly rendered,
from the grace of God into wantonness, and then walk after their own ungodly
lusts, being gone from the grace of God which had appeared unto them, which
afterward they turned their backs upon, and fell from. And the Grace of God,
which brings Salvation, has appeared unto all men, yet all men are not taught
by it; my reason is not, because they want a Teacher; neither, because Grace is
not given to lead them, and to uphold them in Righteousness: but because they
love it not, or stand not in his Counsel; and so, falling from his Counsel,
fall into ungodliness. And furthermore, the Apostle says, as concerning Faith
and a good Conscience, they had put away and made shipwreck of it: They could
not put Faith away which had none, neither make shipwreck of a Ship, that never
had one. And furthermore, Christ said unto his Disciples, Except a branch abide
in the Vine, it cannot bring forth fruit; no more can you except you abide in
me. So that it is evident, that there is a possibility for a branch to be cut
off from the Vine, and to wither; and also that there may be a coming unto
Christ, and a bringing forth fruit unto God, and yet losing the Power of God,
the ^ight and life thereof, by which they have ability to do the Will of God,
may wither and die, and so become unprofitable.

Thou bidst me read the Jesuits Writings if I had so much understanding. Thou
art more conversant with the Jesuits Writings than I desire to be: it may be
thou have waded seven years in the old Popish Colleges, in which there are
great store of such, and what thou have done since, the Light in thy Conscience
will let thee see: Yet I see before the Jesuits or their Writings, and need
not to search there in such blackness and darkness. And then thou say, Tell
me who thou art like? I say, I deny them all in the root and in the ground: but
as for thee and the rest of the Parish-hirelings, you are a stem sprung from
the same root, manifest clearly to thousands in England, by very many of your
practices, which have been made evident in public, and so in that I shall
forbear.

Thou say in thy rage, I am given over to a mind without Judgment, because I
said unto thee, thou knew not what the Soul was, because thou said and
affirmed it was a created thing, which thing I bid thee prove; which thing thou
did not then, neither yet have; and yet most impudently have set it down as a
tenent of mine that I should affirm, when only I desired thy proof: but let the
Serpent be blind for me, I shall not feed that which is for destruction; for
thou art not one of those which watch for the Soul, to see it brought out of
the grave, or out of death, but for thy gain from thy quarter, and for
Iniquity. Thou say, Do not Souls go to Hell? and, can the Eternal Birth go
thither? I Will ask thee a Question, What was it that delivered David from the
nethermost Hell, that brought his soul out of the Pit, and delivered his
darling from the devouring Lion? And what is it that tormenteth the wicked in
Hell? Is it not written, If I go up into Heaven, thou art there: or, if down
into Hell, thou art there. Whither shall I go from thy Presence? or, whither
shall I flee from thy Spirit? Art thou fit to be a Leader of a Flock who art
ignorant of what Salvation is preached to; or what it is that wants Redemption?
I say, thou preachest up the report of Christ, without the knowledge of him;
and thou say, Blessed are those that believe thy report, unto whom the Arm
of the Lord is revealed. Many have heard thy Report, and such Reporters as
thou, and yet know not Blessedness, neither is the Arm of the Lord revealed to
them, or in them. Thou preachest him in words, but in works deniest him. Thou
say, What gracious souls can but bleed, to hear how the Offices of Christ
are rejected and denied amongst us, yea, his Blood and Sufferings, as to be
only report or signal thing: Signal thing is thy own words; and it is evident
who deny the Office of Christ, and who deny his Sufferings: for we say, He
suffered once to take away sin: but you say, that the dearest Saint of God
cannot be cleansed from sin while upon Earrh. We say, that the Blood of Christ
cleanses from all sin; and there is no remission without blood: and you say,
that none is to expect clensing from all sin in this life. We say, Christ is
anointed of God to be a Leader to his People, whose lips only are to preserve
knowledge, and the Law is to be received at his mouth, who says, Learn of me;
and we say, the Testimony of Jesus is the Spirit of Prophecy; and that Christ
is to rule as King; and where sin rules, he rules not; where sin is acted and
brought forth, Christ is not King over them: But you say, the acts of sin, or
the relics or remainders thereof must never be subdued, while upon Earth, or
done away wholly. We say, according to Christ's own words, Believe in the
Light, and this is an Ordinance of Christ: but this you call delusion, and
would make it void. So thou may take a view of your Doctrines, and let thy
heart bleed when thou come to consider, how thou rejectest the Office,
Ordinances, Blood and Sufferings of Christ; and, in a word, deniest the very
End of his Coming, which is, to save his People from their sins. But thou
say, the Children of the Promise can by Faith glory in him, and rest in him
for Eternal Life. There is none knows Eternal Life, but who have the living
Faith through which it is revealed; And the Life is the Light of men: but you
deny the Light, and so deny the Foundation of Faith, and the Author of it, and
live in a life which is carnal, and take up a rest in these things which are
invented in the Apostasy by corrupt-minded men; which things are polluted,
which all them that come to know Eternal Life must rise out of; for this is not
their Rest, but their Rest stands in him, who subdueth and puts under that
which has resisted him in all that believe, and then they come to know their
Rest. Thou say further, What, is it a cankered way to preach Repentance and
Faith, and to mortify the deeds of the body, and to have their conversation in
Heaven? I say, Nay; But to make people believe that they have repented, and
have Faith, and that they are cleansed, and that they are mortified, and that
they have their conversation in Heaven, when they are alive to Deceit and to
Unrighteousness, and to the Lusts of the flesh, and converse with the worldly
lusts, which make war against the soul: I call this Cankered Doctrine, and it
eats as a Canker where it is received in. What art thou out of thy wits? or,
have thou lost thy understanding? Do thou look that any have their
conversation in Heaven, whilst they are here? is it not written, No unclean
thing enters into the Kingdom of God? And stands not this as an Article of your
Faith, That none is to expect cleansing from all sin here? What, art thou
putting people upon impossibilities, as to converse with God, or have their
conversation in Heaven? What blindness and ignorance is here!

And further, thou say, There are many Ministers in England, whom I call
Babylons Merchants, which cause both Hell and Rome to shake, and to rage. Alas,
what have you done? The Covenant of Death is not yet broken, the Agreement with
Hell is not yet disanulled; for many are at union with it in their rage and
envy, and would kill and destroy for their worldly maintenance, and to set up
and establish those Relics of Popery, and of Rome, which yet are unpurged
out, out of the Nation; as the Popes wages, Tithes, Masse-houses, sprinkling of
Infants, and many more things which I might enumerate, which the Devil keeps
himself alive in, and Rome has an interest in; and you rage and revile, and
draw out your carnal weapons to destroy unmercifully them that bear witness
against those things; witness of late the Conspiracy of thy Brethren in
Cheshire, Lancashire, and diverse other places, who labored to set all on a
fire, and to kill and destroy them, who bore witness against Death, Hell and
Rome; and so your Preaching is to stir up Sedition amongst people, for your own
Interest, and for the Interest of Hell and Rome, which is yet unpurged out of
the Nation. And what tellest thou of the suffering Martyrs in Queen Mary's
days, to whom you are not to be compared; many of them bore witness against
many of those things, which you are holding up, and pleading for, as Tithes,
Hire, and killing for Religion, and throwing into Holes and Dungeons them that
cannot comply with you, to the upholding of these and the like deceits, which
God will overthrow and confound. And thou say, When I will make it appear
either by word or Writing, that I have learned which be the first Principles,
the Oracle of God, and do own the Person and Offices of Christ, thou will
answer my Queries. Now I let thee know both by word and writing, that I have
learned and know which be they, as Repentance from dead works, and Faith
toward God, and the Doctrine of Baptisms, and the laying on of hands, etc. and
the Person, Ordinances, and Offices of Christ (as I have proved before) I own:
therefore see that thou fail not the second time to answer my Queries. And as
for the Dishes thou speak of, I have left them behind me; I say, they are
thy own for the most part (and not mine) which thou have scattered up and down
the World to feed the Devil with.

As first, That the Scriptures are neither a Light, nor the Saints Rule,
neither is it every ones duty to search them. Two parts of this is thy own
forged lie: but yet the Saints Rule, and the Son's Rule, is the Spirit that
gave forth the Scriptures.

2. That the Seed of the Woman is in every one; Else what should bruise the
Serpents head? or what should destroy the works of the Devil? And, the seed is
sown in stony ground, thorny ground, and highway ground, and good ground: Go,
learn what it means.

3. That the Body which worms eat, shall never rise again. This is thy own
forged lie: carry this Dish to the Table of Devils, from whence thou fetched it.

4. That all who are reconciled unto God, have a measure of that Seed, which
was conceived in the Virgins womb by the holy Ghost. Two parts of this is a
lie, and thy own words: But all that are reconciled unto God, have Christ the
Seed revealed in them.

5. That the Soul is not a part of Man, nor created. This is thy own Assertion,
and not mine. The Soul is immortal, and came from God, and is preserved in the
hand of the Lord.

6. The Light in every one is a spiritual substance, and a measure of God;
Christ that has enlightened every man, is a spiritual substance; and that which
convinces of sin, is the Spirit of God; and God is a Spirit.

7. That the Talent which was lost, was that which Christ came to save. This
thou have forged up in thy dark mind. But the Sheep that were lost, he came to
save; and they that were hid in Prison-houses, he came to redeem; and they that
were snared in holes, and were for a prey and for a spoil, these he came to
save from the Spoiler. Go learn what it means.

8. That the Clouds in which Christ is said to come, are in Man, and so are the
Elements which are said to melt. This thou must see thy self before thou see
his appearing; for a Cloud covers him out of thy sight, and therefore thou art
gazing and imagining abroad thou know not where.

9. That we are justified by the sufferings of Christ in us; and that Christ as
he is the Seed of the Woman does suffer, and has suffered from the foundation
of the world.

They that are justified, know him that has suffered by them, and in them, and
do believe his suffering at Jerusalem; and by his Life revealed and manifested
in them, they are justified; and by his Righteousness which he has revealed in
them, and which he has wrought for them, and by receiving of the Gift,
Justification comes upon all that do believe. And is this such a strange
Doctrine to thee, [ that Christ the Seed has suffered in all ages by
unbelievers] and yet thou profess thy self a Minister of Christ? Was he not
slain from the foundation of the world? did he not suffer after at Jerusalem?
has he not been slain since in Sodom and Egypt, and now suffers by thee who
art an inhabitant in that City? A terrible day will come upon thee before thou
know his Life revealed, or him to live in thee; and this thou shall witness
to be true in the Day of the Lord.

Answer my Queries, and do not evade as thou have done, in forging thy own
Imaginations, and then send them to me as my Assertions to prove. Thy things I
return back to thee, thy Dishes, that thou may carry them back again, to the
Table from whence thou had them; and be no more a servant to him whose work
thou have been doing, lest misery and perplexity be thy end.

Fra. Howgill.

Something by way of a LETTER, from another hand, to the said THOMAS JACKSON,
etc.
FOrasmuch as the Private Admonition contained in the foregoing Letter, sent
unto thee in writing by F. H. nor the Public Reproof by E. B. in his printed
Answer to a Manuscript of thine, sent in the year 1659, to a Member of the Old
Parliament, then sitting; Nor yet the Word of the Lord, therein prophesying
against thee, and them; which has since in a measure been made good upon thee,
and them; has taken no good effect upon thee to beget a true Repentance in
thee; 2 Timothy 3. 13.
But like evil men and seducers, thou growest worse and worse, deceiving and
being deceived, still continuing in thy old course of backbiting, railing, and
secret smiting the Innocent: And because the Judgment of God has reached thee
in some measure, according to the Word of the Lord by his Servant aforesaid, in
his said Answer, even so as thou can not now vent thy devilish Persecution
openly in a Pulpit; yet still, as I have heard, thou take occasion, 2 Timothy 3.
6.
by creeping into houses and corners, when thou can but get together a
company of silly women laden with sins, and led away with diverse lusts, then
thou take opportunity to vent thy old Lies and Blasphemies afresh against
God, Rev. 13. 6.
his Name, his Truth, his Tabernacle, and them that dwell in Heaven; calling
the Truths of God, Popish Tenants, and they that hold the same, Heretics; when
as it is thou thy self and thy Presbyterian Brethren that do hold such things,
and not the innocent People of God called Quakers.

As witness;

1. Your denying the Doctrine of Christ and his Apostles, which they held
forth, preached up, pressed after, and attained unto in this life, viz. A
freedom from sin; and Perfection; As these Scriptures following do testify and
bear witness unto.

How shall we ( says the Apostle) that are dead to sin, live any longer
therein, Romans 6. 2. knowing this, that our old man [is crucified] with him,
that the body of sin might be destroyed, that henceforth we should not serve
sin: for he that is dead [is freed from sin] ver. 6, 7. Being then made [free
from sin] ye became the servants of Righteousness; for when ye were the
servants of sin, ye were free from Righteousness: but now being made [free from
sin] and become Servants to God, ye have your fruit unto Holiness, and the end
everlasting life, ver. 18, 20, 22. What can be more plain?

And then again, He that commits sin, is of the Devil; for the Devil sins
from the beginning* For this purpose the Son of God was manifested, that he
might destroy the works of the Devil. Whosoever is born of God [doth not commit
sin] for his seed remains in him, [and he cannot sin] because he is born of
God, 1 John 3. 8, 9.

And so for Perfection.

Be ye therefore [Perfect] says Christ, even as your Father which is in Heaven
[is Perfect] Mat. 5. 48.

We speak Wisdom among them that [are Perfect] says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 2. 6.

And he gave some, Apostles; and some, Prophets; and some, Evangelists; and
some, Pastors, and Teachers* (what to do? why mark) [for the Perfecting of the
Saints] for the Work of the Ministry; for the Edifying of the Body of Christ:
till we all come in the Unity of the Faith, and of the Son of God, unto [a
Perfect man] unto the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ, Ephesians.
4. 11, 12, 13.

And this was the end of the Apostles preaching, to present [every man Perfect
in Christ Jesus] Col. 1. 28.

And this is the end of all Scripture, even that the Man of God [may be
Perfect] thoroughly furnished unto all good works, 2 Timothy 3. 16, 17.

For the Law made Nothing [Perfect] but the bringing in of a better hope did
(viz. Christ) by the which we draw nigh unto God, Heb. 7. 19. Heb 10. 1 Heb. 9.
9, 11.


For by one Offering he has [perfected for ever them that are sanctified] Heb.
10. 14. What can be more plain?

And ye are come unto Mount Zion, and unto the City of the living God, and the
heavenly Jerusalem, and to an innumerable company of Angels; to the General
Assembly and Church of the Firstborn, which are written in Heaven; and to GOD
the Jvdge of all; and to the spirits of Just men [made Perfect] Heb. 12. 22, 23.

But your denying of this Truth, shows you have made a league with Sin, Death
and Hell: for as long as you live, you teach others to do so too, telling them
they must not look to be free from corruption and sin while they live here. The
Consequence of which Doctrine of yours must in the end bring in that Popish
Tenent of Purgatory: For, if Perfection and freedom from sin, is not attainable
unto in this life, as you say on the one hand; Nor no unclean person or thing
can enter into Heaven the Kingdom of God in the life to come, as the Scriptures
of Truth say on the other hand, Ephesians. 5. 5. Rev. 21. 27. Then tell me when and
where must the time and place of cleansing be? must it not be in a middle
place, and a middle time? between Earth and Heaven, and between this life and
the life to come, and so equal to the Papists Purgatory? If this be not the
Consequence of this your Doctrine, let the wise in heart judge.

Again witness;

2. Your maintaining the lawfulness of Swearing now under the Gospel, against
the express words of Christ and his Apostles to the contrary, who says, But I
say unto you Though the words [ Swear not at al] be free enough from any
exception, yet (in regard some of the corrupt sons of Adam say) this was meant
in our communication only, that is, say they, in our ordinary discourse; But
yet liberty is left thereby for Swearing before a Magistrate, being thereunto
lawfully called. I say, the Apostle James, as one foreseeing these two Cavils
or Exceptions, says (to put the matter out of doubt) neither by any other
Oath, and also leaves out the word Communication; so as there is no room left
for any Exception at all.
Swear not at all, ( what more full) neither by Heaven, for it is Gods Throne;
nor by the Earth, for it is his Footstool; neither by Jerusalem, for it is the
City of the great King: Neither shall thou swear by thy head, because thou
can not make one hair white or black: But let your communication, be yea,
yea: nay, nay: For whatsoever is more then these, comes of evil, Mat. 5. 34,
35, 36, 37. And the Apostle James says, But above all things, swear not,
neither by heaven, neither by the earth, neither by any other Oath; but let
your yea, be yea; and your nay, nay; lest you fall into condemnation, Jam. 5.
12. which is plain without all exception.

And whether is not that an Antichristian and Popish Tenent, to put
constructions and meanings, upon plain places of Scripture, contrary to the
mind of Christ and his Spirit which wrote them; which are so plain, that none
that are simple-hearted, can oppose or evade.

Again witness;

3. Your former taking, and now pleading for, and justifying that Popish
maintenance of Ministers by Tithes, which in its first Institution, in the time
of the Law, when it was in full force, was appointed for the Levite (because he
had no part nor Inheritance among his brethren; and therefore he was not to be
forsaken nor forgotten) and for the Stranger, and the Fatherless, and the
Widow, that they might eat and be satisfied, Deuteronomy. 14. 27, 28, 29. and so there
was no lack among them. But you plead for it now under the Gospel, and that by
the same Law, which Law Christ has since ended, and also changed that
Priesthood, and disanulled that Commandment, by which it was both taken and
given, Heb. 7. And the Stranger, and the Fatherless, and the Widow, have little
or no benefit by it at all from your hands, neither are our streets free from
Beggars; and besides, they are taken by you, who have great Inheritances in the
Land, and yearly Revenues besides.

Again, in the first Institution of Tithes, they were all to be brought into
one Treasury, into the House of God, year by year, for the ends aforesaid, Neh.
10. but you carry it into your own Barns and Houses, and there use it for your
own ends (if not to abuse it, and spend it upon your lusts.)

Again, then the Levites, ( whose right the Tithes then were) they were to
offer up a Tenth part of all the Tithes, for a ^eave Offering unto the Lord,
but you do not do so.

Again, they were not to eat the Tithes by themselves, in their own houses, or
within their own gates, but with the Strangers, and Fatherless and Widows, in
the house, and in the place the Lord had chosen, Deuteronomy. 12. 17, 18. But you do
carry it into your own barns, and do eat it within your own gates, and do shut
out the Strangers, and the Fatherless, and the Widows, so that they have no
part nor portion in this matter with you.

And thus it was in the time of the Law among the Jews, about Tithes, when it
was in force; which though you will take as by virtue of that Law, yet you will
not pactise in all things, no nor in any thing according to that Law, except in
the very taking of them.

But now under the Gospel, since Christ, (as I said before) has put an end to
that Priesthood, and changed the Law, and disanulled the Commandment thereof;
we do not find, that ever Christ Commanded Tithes to be paid, or ever appointed
any set maintenance for his Ministers to receive, which he sends forth to
preach the Gospel: Neither was any such practice used in the Primitive times;
but Christ sent them forth, without gold, without silver, and without brass in
their purses, and without a Scrip for their Journey, etc. Mat. 10. 9, 10. And
they had as hard a hearted people to deal with then, as any are now; for who
more hard-hearted then Jews? (and therefore it is become a byword amongst us
to say, as cruel and as hard-hearted as a Jew) and yet they lacked nothing,
Luke 22. 35.

And Paul, who was an Apostle, not of men, neither by man, but by Jesus Christ,
etc. Gal. 1. 1. says, (whom all men are to follow, as he followed Christ) he
behaved not himself disorderly, neither did he eat any man's bread for naught:
but wrought with labor, and traveled night and day, (with our hands, 1 Cor.
4. 12.) that we might not be chargeable to any of you, 2 These. 3. 7, 8, 9. And
is not then the matter of Tithes, now under the Gospel, a Popish Intrusion,
which you stand up to maintain for your Bellies sake?

Again witness;

4. Your calling the Popish Mass-Houses, built of material wood and stone,
Churches: when as the Church of Christ is in God, 2 These. 1. 1. and is built up
of living stones, fitly joined together by him; whereof he himself is the chief
Corner Stone, elect and precious, 1 Pet. 2, 4, 5, 6.

Again witness;

5. Your late fleeing from your Flocks, when you saw the Wolf coming, leaving
them to be scattered and caught by the Wolf in the time of their greatest
danger; which proves you to be hireling Priests and Idol Shepherds, and not
true Shepherds, whose own the sheep are not; for then would you care for the
sheep, and lay down your lives for the sheep, and for the Truth, the Pasture of
the sheep; and so make good the words of Christ against you, who says, The
good shepherd gives his Life for the sheep, but he that is a hireling, and not
the shepherd, whose own the sheep are not; sees the Wolf coming, and leaves
the sheep, and flees: and the wolf catches them, and scatttreth the sheep;
the hireling flees, because he is a hireling, and cares not for the sheep,
Joh. 10. 11, 12, 13.

Yea, and that which is worse; thou Tho. Jackson more especially, have not
only, contrary to thy duty, left thy flock, and left off preaching the Gospel,
for fear of Persecution; and so thereby brought thy self under the woe the
Apostle pronounces, 1 Cor. 9. 16. who says there, that a necessity is laid
upon me, yea woe is unto me, if I preach not the Gospel; but also have, with
some others, most treacherously betrayed your simple ignorant flocks into the
very hands and mouths of the Wolves; by persuading them, (poor silly sheep,
whose Faiths are too much pined upon your sleeves) to go to the public, to the
high places, there to hear the Service Book, etc. and those that Preach there
in all the Whores Robes, rather than not go to the public at all (which some
have done to the wounding of their Consciences) and all this lest peradventure,
(as you fear) they your Proselytes when they have used themselves to a
separation from the public, may hereafter separate also from you, when the day
of your Restoration shall come, which you daily hope for; or otherwise, it is
to be feared, that if you had not many of you taken the Covenant, you would
have stooped to and crouched under all the relics of Popery that are now
publicly in use, rather then to have quit your Livings, which now you cannot
some of you, (though too many of your brethren have) and all because if you
should, your more discerning hearers would easily discern your Perjury, and so
decline you for ever.

And now have not thou hereby betrayed the souls of the Ignorant, and sold them
for bread; Amos 2. 6. chapter 8. 6.
and made merchandise of them for a pair of shoes, and will they not be
required one day at thy hands? Consider and repent, if it be possible, before
it be too late.

But oh! you simple-hearted People who have been long hearers of these men, and
a long time learning, and not yet come to the knowledge of the Truth; why are
ye so blind? and see not that these be the men, most of them, that the Apostle
speaks of, that have but a Form of godliness, but deny the Power, from whom you
are warned and commanded to turn away from, 2 Timothy 3. 5, 6, 7.

Wherefore, Come forth from among them and be ye separate says the Lord, and
touch no unclean thing, and I will recieve you, and will be a Father unto you,
and ye shall be my sons and daughters, says the Lord Almighty, 2 Cor. 6. 17,
18.

Turn your hearts and minds inward, and look within, For the Grace of God which
brings Salvation, has appeared unto all men, teaching us, that denying
ungodliness and worldly lusts, we should live soberly, righteously, Read
diligently and mark these places. Isa. 30. 20, 21. Joh. 2. 20, 27. Luke 17. 20,
21. 2 Cor. 13. 5. 2 Cor. 6* 16. Act. 3. 22, 23. Romans 10. 6* 7, 8.
and godly in this present world, Tit. 2. 11. Therefore look not for it without
you, but look for it within; your outward Teachers are taken away, and removed
into corners, that you may look within for a Teacher that cannot be removed
into a corner; And the Word of God is within; and the true Teacher which can
teach you all things, is within; and the Kingdom of God is within you; and
Christ the King of that Kingdom is within you too, except ye be reprobates; and
the Temple of God is also within; therefore have no fellowship with the works
or workers of darkness, neither without nor within; for what agreement has the
Temple of God with Idols? For ye are the Temple of the living God, as God has
said, I will dwell in them and walk in them, and will be their God, and they
shall be my People, 2 Cor. 6. 16. Therefore hear the Call of the Lord, for it
may be the last time that some of you may hear it, who Calls out of Babylon;
Come out of her my People, says the Lord, that ye be not partakers of her
sins, and that ye receive not of her plagues; for her sins have reached up to
heaven, and God has remembered her iniquities, Rev. 18. 4, 50 But to return.

Again witness;

6. Your Popish Ordination to the Ministry, which is of man, and by man, and
derived either from the Pope, to the Bishop, and from the Bishop to the
Presbyter, and so from the Presbyter to You, or from a Congregation of men, in
an University or otherwise; and so still of Man and not of God, nor separate by
the Spirit, unless by such a spirit as can be bought for money, at the
University or elsewhere, by being sometime a Student in Arts, Tongues, and
Languages, Humane and Natural Sciences; (the Seat of the Whore, Rev. 17. 16.)
and for this are you reckoned by men, and do account of your selves, to be set
apart for the Ministry, and to be superior to others, thereby to lord it over
God's Heritage; Luke 20. 46, 47. Luke 11. 43. Mat. 23. 6. 7, 8, 9, 10.
to be set in the uppermost seat in the Synagogues, and at Feasts, and to be
greeted in the Marketplace, and called of men Master, and (Master of Arts)
contrary to the Scriptures; although you must for all this, study hard for a
Sermon, and having compiled one, you must either con it without Book, and so
put it to Sale, by repeating it over again, or read it within Book, to make
money of it, yea sometimes you sell them two or three times over; Mich. 3. 11
Ezekiel. 13. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, etc.
and after this manner do you divine for money and preach for hire (and own the
Name of Divines) and say, Thus says the Lord, when the Lord has neither
spoken to you, nor sent you. Therefore read your Portion in Ezekiel. 13. to the
end.

Now are not these your Tenants, Popish Tenants indeed? and these your
Practices, Popish Practices indeed, which are practiced by you? Well, I shall
leave it to the Judgment of all those that are but a little enlightened in
their Consciences, with Christ the true Light, Joh. 1. 9:
which lights every man that comes into the world, to determine.

And now, Do not thou show thy self a true Son of the Church of Rome in this
matter? who whore-like, cryest out whore first, and a right Merchant of
Babylon, in crying out Error, Heresy, and Blasphemy; Heretics, and
Schismatics, Popish Tenants, and Seducers! when thou thy self art found in the
self same thing. Well, read thy state in the Second Chapter to the Romans: Read
the whole Chapter with a spirit of meekness and patience; and if it were
possible I would (or rather the Lord by me) persuade thee to Repentance, before
it be too late; For the Lord is come, and coming (according to the Prophecy of
Enoch) in ten thousand of his Saints, to render judgment upon all, and to
convince all that are ungodly among them, of all their ungodly deeds, which
they have ungodlily committed; and of all their hard speeches which ungodly
sinners have spoken against them, Jude 14, 15. Read the whole Epistle with a
sensible heart, and weeping eyes, in fear and trembling; and remember and call
to mind all thy railing, lying, slandring, backbiting, and malicious reproaches
thou have cast upon all persuasions differing from thee, in secret and in the
dark. Remember what thou have said against, and how vilely thou have reproached
the Author of that Book, called, The Retired Man's Meditations, as also the
Baptists, and our Friends. Now thou will not, nor can not Preach in Public,
consider what thou art doing in Private: The Lord sees thee, and a Book of
Remembrance is taken of it, and shortly thou must come to account, and what a
sad reckoning will thou make, and an account give to him that has said, The
reproaches of them that reproached thee, are fallen upon me, Psalm. 69. 9. Romans
15. 3. And, In all their afflictions he is afflicted, Isa. 63. 8, 9. And, In as
much as ye have done it unto one of the least of these, my brethren, ye have
done it unto me, Mat. 25. 40. And, Whosoever touches them, touches the apple
of his eye. Therefore repent betimes, else horror and terror, tribulation and
anguish will fall upon thee, and torment thee without end.

And know also, that that which Edw. B. did write unto thee from the Lord, in
the Year 1659. (when part of the Long Parliament was sitting) in his Answer to
thy Manuscript, is Truth still, and thou, if not ^eared, may both see it,
and feel it made good, upon thy self and others at this day, and the rest
hastens apace to be fulfilled. A taste of which, by reciting some of the
Passages in that Book, to put thee a little in remembrance thereof, thou will
find at the end hereof.

Now I say, for these Reasons aforesaid, it is judged meet to Print that Letter
foregoing, which was sent to thee in Writing so long ago; for the making thy
folly more manifest, and if it might be that thou may bethink thy self, and
that thy poor deluded Proselytes may see, if it may be, what a deceiver thou
art; who continuest still to whisper thy lies and envy about, and seek
darkness for thy cover, as being ashamed of the Light, and all because thy case
is naught, and thy deeds be evil; whereas he that does right, seeks no corners:
For every one that does evil, hates the light; neither comes to the light,
lest his deeds should be reproved: but he that does truth, comes to the light;
that his deeds may be made manifest, that they are wrought in God, Joh. 3. 19,
20, 21.

The 12th. Month, 1662. From an utter Enemy to all manner of Persecution for
Conscience sake, but a real Lover of thy Soul, J. S.

Some Passages of E. B. his Book, in Answer unto Tho. Jackson's Paper, written
to all the remaining part of the Old Parliament, then sitting; as well as to
the said T. J. in 1659.
Which in a great measure is fulfilled already, and the rest is hastening, to be
fulfilled in due time; Which may serve also for a Warning to this present
Generation.
THomas Jackson, in the Conclusion of his Paper written to W. C. Member of that
remaining part of the Old Parliament aforesaid, says thus, Worthy Sir, It will
be your honor to stand in the Gap, to stop the violence of this hellish
Torrent ( meaning those Tenants he falsely charge upon the Innocent harmless
People of God, called Quakers) that is so high, that it sounds from Dan to
Beersheba, and threatens Judgment to our Israel, etc.

To which E. B. Answers thus, Page 16. and Part of the 17.

Answ. Here is the concluson of thy matter, which is the sum of it; A running
to the Powers of the Earth for help. What, have you Ministers lost the Lord to
be your strength, that you must fly for help to Men, to defend you from the
Spirit of God in his People? Must they make Laws to establish you, and set you
up; is not this the Whore that rode upon the Beast, and that the Beast carries?
Is not here a description of her, out of the mouth of this Author? Is he crying
to you to Persecute the Innocent? It is true, the Seed of God is risen, the
Elect Seed, that is able to make War against the Beast, and against the false
Prophets, even with the Word of the Lord, and is he offended that Truth is
risen so high? And would he have some Fire and Mark, is he not the same man
still? though he be a Sufferer under a pretense of Conscience, yet his
Principle nor Nature is not changed to this day.
Faggots again in Smithfield? and some Persecution and Banishment, acted upon
the People of God? Is this the standing in the Gap, and stopping Violence, or
would ye have it done this way? Yea, Judgments indeed are threatened to your
Generation; for if God will not destroy you soon enough, you will destroy your
own selves; and Your own Iniquity will be upon you, and the wickedness of the
wicked shall slay him. mark.


But my Counsel is not only to that particular Member, but to the whole Body of
them, that they be wise and take heed what they do; for the Eye of the Lord is
over you, and his Hand can dash you in pieces; and if you be Oppressors of the
poor People of God, Mark, is not this made good to the full at this day?
sand will not relieve the Opressed, the Innocent, and break the bonds of
Oppression, the Lord will break you in pieces;
for this is the Rock that has broken all before you, [ Persecuting People for
Conscience sake] and if you go on in this way, Yea surely, a Prophet of the
Lord has been among you.
your Destruction shall be the most lamentable of any that was ever yet before
you: Do you not yet see the wickedness of this Generation? will you yet contend
for them? Surely you might learn wisdom even by their folly; And if you do not
shut your eyes, there needs no more discovery than their own present ways and
works.

Wherefore consider the Day of God's Visitation is upon you, make good use of
your time, lest the Lord break you down, and never build you up; Mark.
and let the Spirit of the Lord have its Liberty, and limit it not, for if you
do, you shall never prosper, nor never be made a blessing unto the People under
your charge. Remember you are warned by a lover of your Souls.

And Page 17, 18, 19, 20. E. B. says,
And this I say unto you in the Name of the Lord, that whilst that Interest (of
this false Priesthood I mean) is so much favored and defended, you can never
prosper, nor the Nations be ever happy under you; for it is one of the greatest
oppressions this day in the Nation, the maintaining and upholding of this
Ministry by Tithes and other unrighteous wages; and the very Land groans under
the oppression of this Church and Ministry, which lies as a heavy Burden upon
both Persons and Estates, and Consciences of many good People, even of your
dearest Friends; And though the Lord does manifestly (even from Heaven) show
signal Tokens of his Displeasure against them; And the Servants of the Lord
they also cease not to warn you concerning them; and their own doings are
sufficient Testimony of the Malice of their Hearts against you, and all good
men in the Nation; yet nevertheless some of you seem to shut your eyes, as if
you would see no evil in them, and are crying up your godly Ministers; and some
of you despising the man (as not worthy to live) that does but speak against
them: And thus are you blinded, and perceive not where the cause lies of your
interruption to bring forth Righteousness. I say, it is the favoring of that
Interest which stops the Issues of good things; and while you oppress peoples
Persons, and Estates, and Consciences, to uphold this Ministry and Priesthood
aforesaid, the Lord shall never prosper you, nor make the Nations happy under
your Charges. And this you shall witness eternally.

Therefore, clear your selves; do not any longer drink the Whores Cup, neither
be ye Carriers of her, to execute her wickedness upon the Bodies and
Consciences of People; for it is written, the Beast has carried the Whore, and
we see it has been thus, as John saw it was to come to pass; and so clear your
selves from her Tyrannies and Oppressions, and leave this false Church and
Ministry to themselves; and if God will not uphold them by his Power, why
should you do it? If these Priests have not yet planted Vineyards that will
yield them fruit, and if their Flock will not yield them milk freely, why
should you unjustly impose upon Peoples Consciences, and compel Tithes and
Money from them, for the maintenance of these men? ye ought not to do it; for
while ye compel and force People by Violence, contrary to good Conscience, to
maintain and uphold this Ministry, and Church, and Worship, you do but cause
People to drink the Whores Cup, and you are but them which carry the Whore,
viz. the false Church. And this is plain-dealing, to tell you the Truth,
whether ye will reject it or receive it: wherefore cast them off, and let them
not lurk under your wings, etc. They will cry out Heresy and Error of others,
that themselves may seem clear, while as the same lodges in their own hearts;
wherefore, I say, do not make a false Peace with them, neither do ye flatter
with treacherous minds, etc.

I say unto you, Mark.
Better were it for you to lay these men aside, and their Flatteries and
feigned prayers, and to save your selves from their Flattery, than to perish
with them. And one of these will come to pass; Was not this truly prophesied?
for it is decreed of the Lord, if you uphold them, and oppress peoples Persons
and Estates, and Consciences on their behalf, and in their evil cause, for
Tithes and Wages to them; ye shall fall with them, and none shall be able to
deliver, neither you nor them, etc.

Wherefore, Take heed unto your selves, and be wise, and learn, and do us
Justice; or else God will do us Justice upon you; if you will not take off our
Burdens, and ease our Oppressions, the Lord will ease us of you, Mark.
and the Earth shall not be oppressed with you: And if ye will uphold this
Priesthood against Equity and good Conscience, the Lord will free good
Consciences both from you and them. And this is the Word of the Lord God unto
you.

The Open Enemy has not prevailed against you, Let this Generation beware; for
there is no resisting the Hand of the Lord.
but the secret hand of the Lord will not miss you.

THE END.

