ONE OF Antichrists Volunteers DEFEATED, AND THE True light vindicated. IN
Answer to a Book called Ignis fatuus, Published by one R. I. Wherein he
vindicates Edward Dod, and Samuel Smith (of the County of Salop) in their
lies, folly, and wickedness, and has added more of his own, with diverse of his
false doctrines, lies and slanders, etc. brought to light, and reproved: As
That the Law of the Spirit of life, is imperfect, and not fit to be a Christian
Rule, and also, humane Nature may be taken for the regenerate part of man, and
the Soul, etc. And likewise calls Idolatry, Civillity, and heathenish
complements, Courtesy. His Vindication made void, and his weapons broken, and
he taken Captive, and left with E. D. and S. S. among the slime pits of Siddim
near Sodom, with his Ignis fatuus.

By F. H. a witness to the perfect Law, of the Spirit of Life.

The wicked are estranged from the womb, they go astray as soon as they be
borne, speaking lies.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Simmons at the Bull and Mouth near Aldersgate, 1660.

ONE OF ANTICHRISTS VOLUNTEERS DEFEATED, AND THE TRUE LIGHT VINDICATED.
AMongstall the opposers of the truth that yet has appeared among the black
army of the old Dragon, who like the Philistims has always defied Isreal's
God, and also their camp, through their ostentation and boasting, and with
their clamorous loud cries in the ears of the people, like Rabshekah, to
dishearten and dismay Israel; none has appeared more out-ragious and virulent
then one who subscribes himself, R. I. who in vindication of his brethren in
iniquity, Edward Dod, drunkard, and Samuel Smith an unprofitable talker,
otherwise called a Minister at Cresige, who has preached that which he calls
the Gospel there diverse years, and yet sees no fruit at all, and yet this
impudent R. I. whom I believe to be another dreamer like him, for his language
do manifest him to belong to mystery Babylon, the great City, the mother of
Harlots, he says, One may minister and preach the Gospel, and the people not
be profited at all, as Samuel Smith has done at Cresige; And he says farther,
that they are barren professors, yet says R. I. that S. S. need not be abashed
at it; And for instance he says, Was Paul's preaching of less credit, because
there were many Runnagates, in the end showed themselves hypocrites? yet this
comparison will not excuse S. S. neither E. D. nor R. I. who would cover them
with an old patched Cloak, some pieces he has scraped up out of Aesop's
Fables, a book full of lies and altogether compacted and patched up of
fictions, and some out of Ovid and Seneca, Heathens in their own account, and
the like frivolous stories, and Plato, and Diogenes, they must serve for a
covering, if it will, to the two former opposers of truth: but stay R. I. Did
Paul stay seven years in any place, and saw no fruit? And though there were
many unbeleevers among the Jews notwithstanding the publication of the word and
the miracles of Christ, yet some believed; and though the Apostles and
Ministers of Christ labored in the work of the Lord, yet some believed and
clave unto them: but there is no fruit at Cresige at all, but they are barren
professors, as R. I. says; but if this will not serve, take another of R. I.
his arguments; That God sends his word sometimes for the hardening of people,
and upon this account, S. S. teaching and Ministry must be kept in credit. A
sad thing for the people of Cresige, that they should hire a man for seven
years together, and pay him wages for hardening of their hearts, and for
counting them barren professors, yet I judge, S. S. E. D. and R. I. counted
them fruitful, and abounding in zeal and fervency to God, when they came into
the meeting of the Quakers, some ringing Pans, some Candlesticks and Frying
pans, and throwing water, like people void of understanding, and says this R.
I. these yielded a better sound then the Quakers; So that thou may see what
will not this R. I. vindicate, and what wickedness as can be acted and spoken,
here they may look for a shelter, rather then they shall want a Guardian (as
Pictures, images, crosses, cuffs, ribons, lace, and such other like things
invented by the Devil to draw people from serving and worshipping the living
God) R. I. will patronize them all being brought forth, and when they are not
brought forth he will reach forth his hand to help to elevate iniquity, and to
under-prop the Devils kingdom, which is exalted in the children of
disobedience, as all along may be seen in his Fabulous Scrole, called Ignis
Fatuus, when like his two brethren before him, he goes about to vindicate
Idolatry, Images, Hirelings, Mass-houses, Cuffs and Ribons, Tithes, Flattering
Titles, and vain Customs, and Popish practices, Pride, Persecution, and lying;
all those things he pleads for, and has used many vain arguments and false
interpretations of Scripture, so that the two former, it may truly be said they
have done wickedly, but this R. I. exceeds them all, who is so stout hearted
against the truth and power of God, that whatsoever he can invent in his
corrupt heart against it, and gathers up the rest of the Priests lies that they
have vomited up before, and cast in the face of truth, and tenders them as good
proof, and some Scriptures perverted with Aesop's Fables, and Ovid, and
Diogenes stories, and upon such materials he has framed his book (called Ignus
Fatuus) which he has writ in vindication of E. D. his book called A pair of
Spectacles for a dark-sighted Quaker, and S. S. Malice striped and whipped, three
Pamphlets whole Title will discover what the substance of their matter is, and
whose work they drive on, so that I need not say much, some of them vindicating
persecution, and encouraging the rude behavior of the people, another mocking
at innocence and scorneth them who trembles at the word of the Lord; and last
of all, R. I. who has made a Fortress for both the other, and has cast up a
heap of confused darkness to guard his brethren, he mocks at the light within,
and calls it Ignis Fatuus; and the law which is light which God has promised
to write in his peoples hearts, this he calls an imperfect thing, and therefore
to be ruled, and not fit to be a rule of the Saints, as may be seen in the 55
page of his book, and so ha^h spoken contrary to the Spirit and Scripture of
truth, Prove: 6. and the law of the Lord which is the law that endures for
ever, this says R. I. is imperfect and the letter or law without written is
perfect, and is a standard, as R. I. says, for all controversies, then if it
be so perfect and so fit to decide all controversies, why does R. I. borrow his
proofs and raise his arguments from Aesop's Fables, Ovids stories, Plato and
Diogenes discourses, and to omit Seneca, because R. I. says, Ambrose has
reckoned him in the Bead-row of Saints, it may be which Saint Dominick, and
Saint Patricke, Saint Francis and some others of the Popes Canonizing; but
however, I shall set many of his envious and frivolous and impertinent
arguments pass, as things of no validity or worth, being they have been
answered over and over by money hands, and all the fortresses and strong holds
thrown down, so that to any judicious man they will appear, to be but rubbish,
however R. I. would be gathering together the rubbish again, and would make it
appear as goodly a fabric as he can, when indeed there is nothing in it all;
so thou may see Reader, in R. I. his vindication of this mouldey cankered ware
of Babylon which he would hold up, his own folly, ignorance, and error made
manifest in the ensuing discourse of his doctrines, and most of his principles
thou may view and see which I have taken up and answered, and his confusion and
blindness thou may see, and also view the Spirit that acts this man, and how
this man is like to convince any who has not power over his tongue, but lets
it run to utter forth the deceit that proceeds out of his own corrupt heart,
thinking thereby to blind peoples eyes that they should not see, how ignorant
and light, vain, and treacherous, these Priests are, who would monopolize all
into their own hand; nay though God command and move by his Spirit, yet this
must not speak nor declare the mind of God, except these Priests will allow of
it, (in whom the welfare of all people lies, if thou will believe R. I. in the
11 page of his book, yet if these count it disorderly for any to speak as he
has received of the Lord, from his Spirit) it must go for such, and be
accounted such, as disorderly.

In the Epistle to the Reader R. I. says, Such Schismatics as these Quakers,
has torn the Church in pieces, and its authority condemned, and the Ministry
slighted, and false Religion advanced.

Answ. It seems that the Church that R. I. is of, is none of the true Church
which is built upon the rock (Christ) which the gates of hell prevails not
against, neither any weapon that is formed against it, can prosper, but R. I.
his Church is torn in pieces and may be prevailed against, sure it is but
Babylon, whose stones must be scattered, and whole building must be thrown
down, and it is but the whores attire which is renting off, that her nakedness
may appear, and her deceit made manifest; and the authority which is condemned
and reproved, is no authority but the authority of the beast, upon which the
false Church has ridden, and has called it by the name of higher power; and
the Ministry, is but such as traffic with the whores sorceries, by which she
has deceived the Nations, and this indeed, and those Ministers indeed are
slighted by us, because we know him who is the Minister of the everlasting
Covenant, whose Spirit is manifest according to his promise, to lead his people
into all truth; and so the Religion which stands only in the traditions of
men, and in idolatry, such things as R. I. goes about to maintain, as Images,
Crosses and Picture, Mass-houses, Hirelings, Priests, Popish tithes, and
Popish-ceremonies, which R. I. so much pleads for, all these are slighted, as
not to be consistant with the true Religion, or the true Church of Christ.

Yet nevertheless says R. I. in his Epistle, I have adventured voluntarily to
side with those that contend for the truth against the Quakers, and yet in the
same Epistle, says, He was moved of the Lord thus to declare.

Answ. What confusion and lying, and blasphemy is here, has R. I. adventured
voluntarily in his own willfulness and perverseness, to take part with those
contenders against the truth, in which the Quakers live and worship, and God
must be made as the author of this, and all the heap of lies and confusion,
which is declared and uttered forth in his Ignis fatuus, which if no more were
said then has been, were answer enough unto his railing discourse; and yet
what impudency this man has to say, he was moved of the Lord, when as he has
confessed, he has voluntarily took part with the contenders, so that it is
manifest to all reasonable men, who set thee awork, and whose work thou have
been doing, for which thou shall be sure to receive a reward, in the mighty day
of the Lord.

And R. I. says, Forasmuch as their counterfeit coin, has been offered to me
for good silver, I thought it fit to nail it to the Market-Post, that it might
not deceive others, and instead thereof I have here made a tender of other
Money (viz:) this ensuing Treatise, which I doubt not, but that it may pass
with truths approbation.

Answ. That which R. I. calls counterfeit coin, was made public by our selves,
and it has been and shall be received by them that know Gods Image and the
inscription of the Spirit, and though R. I. has denied it when it was
proffered to him, the value and worth of that, which has been proffered, is no
worse; For though a price be put into the hand of a fool, he regards it not.
And now Reader thou shall see, what kind of Coin he has tendered, and how thou
judges it may pass with truths approbation, as hereafter will be made manifest
in his further discourse.

Wherefore Reader, says R. I. Have not so great regard to the authority of the
Writer, as the truth of the matter written by him, who was moved of the Lord,
as thus to declare against those who are adversaries to truth.

Answ. Indeed the authority of a writer or of that which is written, is of no
great moment, seeing he is but one of Antichrists Volunteers, who has not only
belyed them that feared the Lord, but also has uttered forth many damnable
doctrines, and yet would fasten all these upon the Lord, so that his deceit
might be of more authority, and none might question the matter thereof, because
the Lord always moves to truth and righteousness, and so R. I. is one of
them that has taken the name of the Lord in vain, which will not be holden
guiltless, but will be found guilty, when the searcher of all hearts shall
make all things manifest.

And then R. I. further says, That sprinkling of infants is commanded by the
Scriptures, and is a seal of the Covenant; and baptism of infants is that
which answers to circumcision, for mortification of the flesh and remission of
sins, and admission into the Church, are sealed unto infants by sprinkling, or
that which R. I. calls baptizing.

I say Baptism of infants, is a Popish-Tradition, as has been proved by
diverse, so that of it I need not say much, but where it is commanded in the
Scripture as R. I. says. Coll. 2. 11, 12. is but a bad proof for R. I. for the
Colossians were circumcised with the circumcision made without hands, and they
were buried with him in baptism, baptized into the death and sufferings of
Christ, such a baptism as the Priests never administered with their hands, and
the Spirit of the Lord was wont to be the seal of the Covenant to them that did
believe, but now it must be turned out of doors, for visible water has taken
up its place in R. I. his judgment, which is corrupted, and how does
sprinkling answer to circumcision, the Males only were circumcised, and not
the Females, and why do you sprinkle Fenales, if baptism must answer to
circumcision, and if the extent of the one, must be as large as the other: and
as for mortification of the flesh and remission of sins; that which mortifies
the deeds of the flesh, has life in it, and that gives a living testimony
within, and remission of sins is in the blood of Christ, and the seal thereof
is by the Spirit unto them that believe; but this Popish tradition has a^en up
all in R. I. his account, if his argument be true; Nay the Papists themselves
who are as zealous for sprinkling of infants as R. I. or any of his brethren
can be, yet one of their own Bishops (at a Council in France, of both
Protestants and Papists, at Pisoy 15 61.) Claudius Espencious says, Many
things are to be believed by tradition only, as the baptism of infants, which
cannot be proved from Scripture, but this R. I. would have the Scripture to be
a Cloak and a cover not only for Popish Traditions, but for his own invented
imaginations, which he has set forth to blind people withal.

The next thing that R. I. goes about to vindicate, is swearing, which their
Ministers teach men to swear, which ought to be in righteousness and truth,
and for his proof, Deuteronomy. 10. 20. he brings, and he says, Christ only prohibits
rash and vain swearing, and superfluous oaths.

Answ: Unto this much has been said and answered already by many pens, and so
that in the answer thereof I shall be brief; in the first Covenant it was
lawful to swear in truth and righteousness, and likewise all rash and vain
oaths under the Law were forbidden, but Christ who is the end of the Law for
righteousness, who is greater then the Prophets, and greater then Moses and
Solomon, and greater then the Angels, unto whom they all worship, he says
expressly, swear not at all; Now whereas R. I. and others have said, Christ
only in these words prohibits vain oaths, or false oaths, then he had reproved
nothing but what the Law had reproved, but he says, It has been said of old
time, thou shall not forswear thy self, but Christ says, I say swear not at
all, so that it is manifest, that all oaths are forbidden by him, who is the
oath of God; and why says R. I. it is not contrary to the Gospel of Christ for
to swear, and yet does account the writings which is called the New Testament
the Gospel, wherein Christ has expressly forbidden it, and therefore those
Ministers that teach men to swear, are not the Ministers of Christ, but teach
those things that are repugnant to the Gospel of Christ, For he that breaks one
of the least of the commands of Christ, and teaches others so to do, is least
in the Kingdom of God.

The next thing that R. I. would vindicate, is their singing of David's Psalms,
in invented Tunes, such as pleases the carnal mind, and for his proof he
brings Matthew. 26. 30. They went out and sung a Hymn, and Paul and Silas sang in
prison, and singing is divine worship for the praise of God, and the comfort of
our souls, and it is a soul-ravishing, and heart-raising ordinance.

Answ: It is acknowledged, and always has been by us, that praises belongs
to the Lord, and that they that are made alive, whose souls are raised out of
death, can, and does praise the Lord, and they that sing with the Spirit and
with understanding, are acceptable unto God, and they that are in the Spirit,
does that which the Spirit moves unto, and so worships in the truth, and is
accepted of God; and Christ, and Paul, and Silas and many more praised the
Lord, and many now does praise the Lord, and he that has a Psalm may sing,
but what of all this? what does this prove for R. I. and the rest of the
Masse-house-singers? and what does this prove, as to the singing of them that
is void of understanding, who sometime sing, I go mourning all the day long,
and just at that moment are singing, and what does R. I. think it cannot be a
Psalm, unless it be in Meeter? or does he think it is not accepted, except it
has a Tune with so many stops, and to sing David's prayers, and call it
praises, is this with understanding? and even to return R. I. his words upon
himself; A more ungrounded opinion was never invented by the Devil; For them
to sing or to pretend to praise God, whose souls lies in death, and do not
know what it is to partake of Gods benefits, neither the unsearchable gift;
This kind of singing and imitation does not comfort the soul, but burden it,
and this does not raise the witness, but kills it, and you make merry over it;
and this kind of singing must be turned into howling and lamentation.

And says R. I. Our worship does not differ neither in whole, nor in part, in
matter or manner from the Saints worship in the Primitive times.

Answ. This man's confidence or rather impudence, is in opposition to knowledge
and wisdom, for it were easily proved, that it neither in whole; nor in part,
neither in matter nor manner agrees with the Primitive times; as for example,
it is no where recorded in the Scripture, that any Apostle, Minister, or
Ministers, did take a little water and did sprinkle a few drops on a child's
face, and called this an ordinance of God, and say, it is a seal of the
Covenant, and mortification and remission of sins, neither any such doctrine
did they declare; neither did any of the Ministers and Apostles of Christ,
cause people to buy them bread and wine, and then give it the people back
again, a bit of bread and a sup of wine at the middle of the day, and call this
the Lords Supper, or a great Sacrament; neither had they bells in their Churches
to call people together; neither had they soft cushions, and pulpits, and a
hour-glasse hanging by them; neither did the primitive Churches prohibit, or
limit the Spirit of the Lord God amongst any, but if any was moved to speak
any thing, or had any thing revealed from the Lord, the first was to hold his
peace.

These and many more things you differ in, both in matter and manner, which
largely has been declared by other pens, and so in this I shall be brief;
neither had the Ministers of the Gospel their maintenance by force; neither had
they Easter Reckonings, Midsummer dues, Mortuaries, money for Churching of
women, Marriages, nor for the burials of the dead, nor money for Funeral
Sermons, neither did they preach over the dead: all these and abundance more of
such like invented things, was never practiced nor found amongst the Churches
before the Apostasy; which things considered may cause R. I. to blush, that
ever he durst be so impudent as to say, they differ not, neither in whole, nor
in part, in matter nor in manner, from the primitive Churches; and until such
time as R. I and his Brethren contenders can clear themselves of these things,
let them not think any whose eyes God has opened can receive them for a Church
of Christ; nay most of the parish Ministers holds up those practices which the
Papists did deny, as money for Marriages and burialls, baptism, the Sacrament,
or the ground in which the dead were buried, this was reprehended and condemned
by the Council of Trent, in the height of all Popery, 1547.

Says R. I. It seems these tithes are a great matter to many, or rather a
great trouble for them to pay the Ministers, though Abraham paid tithes of all
to Melchizadeck before the Law; and this proves E. D. his Argument as says R.
I. That it is contrary to the Light and Law of God to withhold them from the
Ministers, because they were given by Abraham before the Law.

Answer, Yea, It is a great matter with many to pay tithes, and a great trouble
too, because he that confesses Christ is come in the flesh, cannot uphold the
shad owes of the first Covenant, which belonged to a changeable priesthood,
having no other portion among their brethren, which was given unto them for the
service which they performed unto the Lord, and likewise were a Twelfth Tribe,
and near a Twelfth part of the people; And now the Law being changed, and the
Priesthood changed, and the Covenant ended, and the Ordinance thereof
abolished, that such a company of covetous men, as the Parochial Priests
generally are, that they should claim the tithes that belonged to this
Priesthood, and not do the work which they did, and yet has a portion among
their Brethren in this land, neither are they the three hundred part of the
people; and that such a company, I say, as these should claim the tenth part
of all the increase in the Land, this is a great matter, and a thing not
consistent with the Law of God, neither equity or reason.

And it is but a poor and feeble argument neither of E. D. or R. I. that
because Abram gave the tenth part of the spoil to Melchizadeck before the Law,
that therefore it must be a binding thing to all generations to pay the tenth
part as due to such as are neither after that order of Aaron, neither after the
order of Melchizadeck. Abram gave the tenth, and that but once, and freely, and
Melchizadeck brought forth bread and wine to Abram's Army; and we may as
justly, and upon as good ground, demand bread and wine for our whole families
of the Priests, as the Priests can demand the tenth part of our substance from
Abram's gift to Melchizadeck, and say, it is against the Law of God, nature,
and reason, as E. D. and R. I. does conclude by their feeble arguments which
they make upon Abrams giving the tenths, for if the example of the one be
binding, then the example of the other is also as binding; Abram gave the tenth
part of the spoil and that but once, and Melchizadeck demanded none, then why
do the Priests who are but usurpers claim it every year? and where they
cannot get it freely, as few will give it them who witness Christ come in the
flesh, then they take it by force and constraint; or would Melchizadeck have
pleaded with Abram (as this ignorant R. I. does) that the spoil was none of
his own? as he says Tithes are no man's own; or as I said before to E. D. would
Melchizadeck have taken away Abrams Oxen, Cowes, or Horses, Sheep, or Camels,
if he had not given him the tenth part? Or did any of the Ministers of Christ
require or demand, force or constrain any maintenance whatsoever from any,
which this R. I. says they differ nothing from, neither in whole nor in part,
in matter or manner, neither in practice; but says R. I. This is nothing to
the purpose, unless it could be proved that the Apostles might have had
tithes, which they could not being persecuted. Yes it is something to the
purpose if you take them for an example, as you say you do; and though it be
granted the Apostles were persecuted from place to place, and sometimes went
from place to place when they were not persecuted, which R. I. would have
condemned for runnagates, if he had lived in that time: But without all
controversy, if it be a duty now to pay tithes unto the Ministers of the
Gospel, then it was a duty in the Apostles time, that though the Rulers were
persecutors, yet the Apostles would have minded them, whom they had begotten
into the Faith, of their duty; but we find no mention neither by Commandment,
Reproof or Exhortation, unto any of the Churches, about any such thing, and so
thy argument R. I. is foolish and frivolous; for it may be easily proved, that
tithes was never demanded, not for 7 or 8 hundred years after the Ascension of
Christ.

And R. I. says, The Apostles took whatsoever was given them, and this
satisfies the Ministers Conscience to take tithes which the Magistrates give
them, so they may of such maintenance live of the Gospel.

Answer, If the Apostles took nothing but what was given them, then this shames
your forcing, and also your seeking it of them who receives you not, which
manifests you are out of the Apostles example, and though it satisfies your
Consciences to take tithes (which thou says the Magistrates gives you) both of
them that owns you, and them that owns you not; yet I believe it would not have
satisfied the Apostles of Christ, if any Magistrates would have sent them back
to the Jews who believed not, or the Gentiles who received them not, this they
would not accounted as a free gift; though this diverse hundred years many
Rulers have drunk of the Whores cup, and has given their authority to the
beast, and has forced and compelled to a worship, and also to give to the
Whores Merchants, yet this is but bad proof that they ought to have done so;
and the Apostles never counted this living of the Gospel to live of tithes and
forced maintenance, which none of the Ministers did receive, or ever will. And
so for shame call in thy Ignis fatuus again, in which thou have published so
many lies, among which this is one, [which will stand as a record against thee]
(viz.) That ye differ not in doctrine and practice, matter and manner, neither
in whole nor in part, from the Apostles and Primitive Saints. And this is
another lie, that Timothy and Titus was settled in a parochiallike way in their
quarters. Nay the Parochial quarters, is all people, old and young, believers
and unbeleevers, between such a water and such a wall, or betwixt such a hedge,
and such a ditch. And because thou said I had not named the Apostate that
builded your Masse-houses, I shall take away the occasion of thy clamouring
this, and tell thee who invented your Parishes, and your parochial way, (viz.)
The Pope Dyonisius, which it may be thou will calculate among the Bead-row of
Saints, for his great devotion, as thou said Ambrose did with Seneca.

The next thing that R. I. contends against, is no less thing then the
Doctrine of Christ, and yet it may be he reckons himself as one of his
Ministers, and yet he raises arguments strongly against the Doctrine of Christ,
viz. Be not ye called Masters. But it may be thou will say as one of thy
generation said lately of some of the Doctrine of Christ, that these words give
an uncertain sound, and therefore they must have an exposition, and it is this,
that Christ condemns ambition, and superiority over our brothers Religion and
faith.

Answer. Then all your parochial Ministers by thy own Exposition falls under
condemnation; for this is a point of our faith, that if we be moved of the Lord
and by his Spirit, to come into your Assemblies to speak the word of truth,
that we ought to speak it, and you ambitiously would arrogate unto your selves
superiority over our faith and Religion; like as we believe that we ought not
to give flattering titles to men, neither to give maintenance unto them, of
whom we are persuaded, and do believe are no Ministers of Christ; And in these
and many more things that pertains to Religion, faith and godliness, you
ambitiously and proudly have arrogated unto your selves superiority over
Religion, faith and consciences: Therefore repent of it, and see you do so no
more left you fall into condemnation. And as for calling any man Master who is
our Master we own, and it is the practice of such as are servants; but to call
him Master who is not our Master, is to speak an untruth, or else to give
flattering Titles, and we have not so learned Christ; but enough of this has
been spoken by diverse, so that I shall pass on and touch a word about
complements, and doffing off hats, and bowing of knees, a thing that R. I. and
his Brethren so dearly loves that they are loath to part with it, and these
things we believe we ought not to do; and although R. I. does confess, that
none ought to usurp authority or superiority over his brothers faith, yet
notwithstanding he has forgotten his own Exposition in a moment, and falls a
wrangling about hatts and Caps, Knees and Complements, which we cannot do for
conscience sake.

And says R. I. If the Quakers will not put off their hatts because it is a
custom, or bow the knee because they are abused, they must not eat nor drink
because it is abused by gluttons and drunkards.

Answer. A pitiful lame argument, we eat not, nor drink not, because it is a
custom, nor wear apparel, but because of their service and of necessity; and
yet I would have R. I. know, that we have learned to distinguish betwixt a
thing that may be customary and good in it self, and a custom which is vain;
and the Saints did not salute one another because it was a custom, but because
their hearts was joined to one another in love and in truth. But for doffing
the heart and bowing the knee to a fellow with a feather, or a woman with a fan,
or a Gold-Ring, or powdered hair, this is a vain Custom, and the Antiquity of
a thing does not prove the goodness of it, neither customarinesse the worth of
any thing, nor because a multitude of Roysters and Ruffins do practice such
things, that therefore they are lawful; for we know broad is the way that
leads to destruction, and many there be that enter in, and we have learned not
to follow a multitude to do evil, though R. I. be untaught.

But says R. I. When sallutations are observed with a good decorum, they are
like a hand dial which shows what order the wheels observe within, and the
abuse of any thing does not abollish the use thereof.

Answer. Now what R. I. does count a good decorum, Reader thou may judge by
what he has before pleaded for; for doffing of hatts, bowing the knee, and
saying Your Servant Sir, or, if it please your Highness, or, if it like your
excellency, with such feigned practices, and this is the decorum, which is
counted civil; and so reader thou may observe how the wheels runs within.

It so came to pass that I was amongst a Company of these that would be called
Ministers of the Gospel, in number no less then ten, and in the Room I was
when they all came in, and they courted and bowed, and scraped with their feet,
with their hats to the ground many of them one to another, and reeling up and
down the house in this manner, and one striving to outstrip another in
complements; and though they had all intentions to sit down, yet they strave
among themselves who should be last, and in this posture they continued half
an hour together, at the which I admired, and indeed was ashamed, that men who
professed godliness should be found in such transgression; and it is like R.
I. will count these civil salutations with a good decorum; And now Reader
observe again how the wheels went within, and what they did drive after, but to
gratify one another in deceit, with these kind of decorums, like stage players
and Fiddlers; and thou errs not knowing the Scriptures neither the power of God;
when that which was commanded by God came to be abused they came utterly to be
abollished, as the Brazen Serpent came to be idolized it was taken away, though
there was no command for so doing, but they might have pleaded the former
against them; likewise the Temple commanded to be built by God, and was to have
continued for ever, yet being abused and made an Idol of, it was utterly
abollished and was left unto them desolate, and the glory of God did not appear
in it as before, and because of the iniquity of such a company of Priests, Sion
became as a plowed field, and Jerusalem became heaps, and the daily sacrifices
ceased, and not one stone left upon another of the Temple that was not thrown
down: And so for thee or any other to plead custom or antiquity, and examples,
which was neither commanded or commended as to be standing and a binding rule
to all generations, demonstrates thy great ignorance and blindness, and
manifests thee to be one who pleases the spirit of the world, in whom the love
of God dwells not.

The next thing that R. I. falsely accuses, and impudently affirms against
the Quakers, is, That they deny honor to Superiors, and to them to whom it is
due, and so blasphemes the name of God and his Doctrine; and further says,
Charity, though shooting at random, cannot miss the right mark.

Answer. It is one thing what God accounts true honor, it is another thing
what R. I. counts honor. True honor is to obey the commands of Superiors
who rule in the power of God, and this the Quakers do, submits to all the
just and equal commands which are required of them that rule in the power of
God, and this is not to blaspheme the name of God and his Doctrine; but this
fellow would have accused the Apostles, as his generation did, who put them out
of the Cities charging them to speak no more in the name of Jesus, and then
when the Apostles returned, plead their authority, saying, Did not we command
you to speak no more in his name, and now you are disobedient, blaspheming the
name of God and his Doctrine. Is this good reasoning R. I. And charity shoots
not at random, neither misses the mark, but it is pure, and singles out its
object to join unto, and joins not unto deceit; But this is R. I. his charity,
to think well of them that are doing evil, and join to them who are doing the
Devils work, but this man honors charity as he does the Scriptures, he says
charity shoots at random, and the Scriptures are the true cards, as hereafter
thou shall see.

And says R. I. F. H. labors to disgrace, if not to deface our Churches, he
like a cunning gamster knows how to alter the course of true cards, the
Scripture, as R. I. calls them.

Answer. Because F. H. would have them to take away their crosses and Pictures
and Images, which was set up in the time of gross idollatry, this R. I. counts
graces and adorns their churches, and so he is joined to Idols I shall let him
alone; and the Reader may see how R. I. honors the Scriptures, when in one
place he pleads for the same Titles to be given unto them which is given to
God; And says No man can dishonor Christ by giving as honorable Titles to
the Scriptures, as to God or Christ; Then by his own argument he has brought a
great dishonor to God and Christ and the Scripture by giving them so base a
Title as the name of Cards, and so in going about to exalt his own
imaginations, he has villified the Scriptures of truth.

And says R. I. To call steeple houses churches is no addition to the
Scripture, but a true exposition thereof; and what if there be some Relics of
Idollatry in our material Temples, as thereis some relics of sin in our
living Temples, must they therefore be called Idol Temples?

Answer. The Temple in which the Jews worshipped was builded by the command of
God, which all these Steeple Houses cannot be compared unto, which was invented
and set up in the Apostasy since men has departed from the faith, and turned
into formallities and Idollatry. When Christ was offered up the everlasting
offering, them that did believe in Christ separated from the Temple; and the
Gentiles who believed separated from their Idols Temples and they met together
in houses, which we do not read of was filled with pictures, Images, and
Crosses; and Steeple Houses now was not then invented, and the Council of Nice
diverse hundred years after the Apostles, decreed that Images and Crosses were
to be placed in the churches, and also worshipped; and there is the Original of
those things which R. I. says, does grace and adorn their Church. And if some
of the Relics of Idollatry do abide in your Temples, then it demonstrates
that you are in the same spirit as they were that set them up. And if your
Temples take its denomination from the people that met therein, as R. I. says
in the 32 page, then they may be truly called popish houses and Mass-houses
from the people that meet therein. And if the relics of sin abide in your
living Temples and bear rule there, then they that defile the Temple will God
destroy, for holiness becomes the habitation of his house for ever, and the 1
Kings 8. 11. will be but a bad proof for thee, for the glory of the Lord shall
fill the House of the Lord, for that is the Temple, blind man, which was
commanded by God, and the glory of God did appear there; but if this will not
serve we must have another proof, Psalm. 76. 2. In Salem is his Tabernacle, and
his dwelling place in Sion, which may be understood allegorically of our
Temples says R. I. Does the glory of the Lord fill your Mass-houses, you glory
in deceit, and in pride, and your glorying is not good, and thy allegory is
false, though his Tabernacle was in Salem, and his dwelling in Sion, and his
presence in the Temple; is yours the Temple, or Salem, or Sion, or the
Tabernacle, if not, for shame pervert not the Scripture, nor bring it to cover
your idollatrous practices, which R. I. pleads for, and says Images, Pictures,
and Crosses, may be continued in some places: and it is like R. I. would count
it sacrilege to take them away, he is far from the exhortation of the Apostle,
abstain from every appearance of evil, and hate the garment that is spotted
with the flesh.

And R. I. says, I plead not for Baal, nor for proud fantastic, spirits, and
yet a little after, says that putting off lace, ribbouds and costly apparel,
may be putting on of pride. Now who will believe this R. I. that he pleads not
for Baal, when he pleads for Pictures, Crosses and Images, for cuffs, ribbonds,
lace and costly apparel. Now Reader thou may observe by R. I. his decorum how
the wheels goes within.

And further R. I. says, It is utterly unlawful, for any Christian
whatsoever, gifled or not gifted, to preach the word in the name of the Lord
before the Church publicly assembled, unless they be ordained and set apart
by the Church for such a work.

Answer. This man is far from Moses spirit, who wished that all the Lords
people were prophets, and would not forbid Eldad and Medad, to prophecy in the
Camp, which was a public assembly, and Israel then the Church of God, and R.
I. has made too hasty a conclusion, who would prohibit all from speaking the
word of God, if they wanted outward ordination; then Paul was a great
transgressor, who consulted not with flesh and blood, neither with any other of
the Brethren, nor went not up to Jerusalem for ordination, but preached three
year the word of God, and then afterward went up to Jerusalem, and saw none
except Peter and James, and had no ordination then as we read of; and afterward
he went into Syria and Celecia, and furthermore says, he was not known by face
to the Churches of Judea; So who ordained him all this time, for there was no
Churches of the Gentiles but what he had planted then, and so they could not
ordain him, Gal. 1. 17, 18, 19, 21, 22. And who ordained Apollo; but it may be
that R. I. will say that Paul was ordained at Antioch, Act. 12. 2. But I would
have R. I. to understand that here was 17. years that he preached publicly
before that, and where was his ordination? Many of the Brethren who was
scartered abroad in the persecution that was at Jerusalem, went every where
preaching the word of God, and when or where was these ordained? and who
ordained the Brethren that was persecuted after Stephens being put to death,
who travilled as far as Phenecia, and Cyprus, and Antioch, preaching the word
and the hand of the Lord was with them, and a great number believed and turned
unto the Lord, Acts 17, 19, 20, 21. Yet these things I bring not as to deny but
that many went out with the consent of the Church, and many were ordained
Elders who were grown up in the truth and established, who had received the
Holy Ghost, by whom many was confirmed and strengthened in the faith; but what
is all this R. I. to your ordination, and who ordained you, the Pope, a Bishop,
or a Council, or a Parliament, and what are they you irdaube? such as learnes
the art of speech seven years at Oxford, who has read Homer and Aristotle,
Plato and Diogenes, and learned to play on a Fiddle; These are no Mechanics
but gifted men indeed and quallified, and fit to be ordained and made
Ministers, Pastors and Elders to carry a broad the Traffic of Mystery
Babylon; but this R. I. is very peremptory, and says, it is utterly unlawful
for any that are gifted to preach the word; Contrary to the Apostles doctrine,
who says, as every one has receives the gift so let him administer, and not
such as R. I. would have to be Ministers, who has learned an art to speak, and
this must be called a gift, and a quallification, and a fit man to be a
Pastor, and thus they have ordained one another, and has set up a trade of
preaching, and with their confused stories has filled the world with darkness.

And as concerning an infallible Spirit, says R. I. None except Christ who was
without sin can challenge it, or lay claim to it, and I may say of such
runnagates and wandering stars, as this F. H. and the Quakers are, as John
did, 1 John 2. 9. They are gone out from us, because they were not of us.

Answer, However this R. I. has cleared himself and the rest of his brethren
for being Ministers of Christ, for they do not only deny an infallible Spirit,
neither look to be made partakers thereof, but quite shut out all the Saints
from enjoying it; and though in Christ the fulness of the Godhead dwelt, who
was full of grace and truth; he is the Root from whence all that believe come
to be made partakers of his virtue, and so many of his members may lay claim
to it, as they have received it by a free gift according to the promise of
Christ, I will send you the Spirit of truth which shall lead you into all
truth, and the Apostle had received the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus, who had
freed him from the Law of sin and death, and the sons of God had received it,
and they were led by it, and the Ministers of Christ was made Ministers of it,
who has made us able Ministers as it is written, not of the letter, but of the
Spirit, and that Spirit was infallible and true, and that Spirit which they
declared of, was an unerring Spirit, and as they were led by it they erred not,
but were kept by it that the evil one touched them not, and they spoke from
it, and ordered the Church in it in the wisdom of God. But what does these men
minister from, who waits not to be made partakers of this, but denies that ever
any had it, or even shall have, and so are but a company of dreamers, and tells
their dream that they dreamed in the night, or at best steals the words from
their neighbor, and says, Thus says the Lord when God has never spoken to
them. And though thou may say we are runnagates, because we sit not dreaming
over 30 or 40 families 20 years, but travills from city, and from country to
country to publish the word of truth freely, as the Apostles and Ministers of
Christ did; We must by such as this R. I. and his Brethren, who has gotten
holes and nests in the earth to creep into, be counted as runnagates; and
though John said, they are gone out from us, because they were not of us, this
he spoke of them who went out of the light, in which he and the rest of the
Disciples had fellowship with God, and one with another; and they that went out
from this, went into the spirit of the world; and you are such as they that are
gone out already, and blasphemously calls the light of Christ Ignis fatuus; and
so all that fear the Lord will come out from you, and out from Babylon, where
the blood of the prophets has been shed, and the witnesses killed; you who
deny an infallible Spirit, is like to be in blindness and follow the spirit of
error, for you have naught else to cleave unto.

And further, R. I. says, When the Lord said by Joell, that he would pour out
his Spirit upon all flesh, and his sons and daughters should prophecy; the
prophet speaks not of a ghostly power to open the Kingdom of Heaven, given by
Christ to his Apostles and Successors, but of an extraordinary measure of
enlightening grace, and a more copious effusion of the Spirit, and also to
pastors to whom more is given, more is required; and this Text does not prove
that all sheep shall be Pastors, and all scholars Teachers.

Answer. Nay this Text does not prove all Sheep to be Pastors, neither all that
are taught to be teachers, for all are not Prophets, neither Pastors nor
teachers, for as Christ said the Laborers are but few, but this man is afraid
that there should be too many, and indeed there are too many hireling
loyterers, that are ready to supplant one another for filthy lucre; and though
many may be said to believe, yet all have not received the Spirit of prophecy,
or a gift to be pastors, but only they to whom it is given of the Lord for the
work sake, yet notwithstanding they who have received it ought not to be
limited, either Son or daughter, for them who do, quenches the Spirit, and
despises prophecy, as this R. I. does, and how should he do otherwise, seeing
he has denied the infallible Spirit, from which all the Ministers ministered,
and all the prophets prophesied and spoke as they were moved by the holy Ghost.
But R. I. says, the Prophet spoke not of a ghostly power to open the Kingdom
of heaven, if by ghostly power he mean the Spirits power, as I believe he will
not deny, then was it not by a spiritual power, sons and daughters prophesied,
and did not this power open the Kingdom of Heaven, and if it be a more Copious
effusion of the Spirit which is given under the Gospel then the Law; then how
is it that R. I. would straiten or lessen the effusion thereof under the
Gospel; for there was Daughters that prophesied under the Law, and many Sons
that spoke by the Spirit of God; but now all must be confined to the letter,
and your Pastors now has far less of the Spirit, if any at all, who speaks
from the strength of natural parts, and denies the unerring Spirit, and so
shuts up the Kingdom of Heaven against men.

And R. I. is so grieved at this infallible Spirit, or this spirit of
prophecy, that he cannot endure that a Daughter should prophecy or speak by
the Spirit of God in the assembly of the Saints, and the main stresse of his or
all their arguments is the 1 Cor. 14. 34. Let your women keep silence in the
Church, for it is not permitted for them to speak and if any woman speaks in
the Church, it contradicts the Spirit, and though they have a gift, they ought
not to improve it in a disorderly way.

Answer. That which has been said in this particular unto E. D. is sufficient
to them whose eyes God has opened, but this R. I. is one of the evil beasts
that the Apostle speaks of, whose mouth must be stopped. And so I further say,
that the Apostle writ to the Church of Corinth which were believers, which few
will deny but that it consisted both of men and women, and he expressly says,
ye may all prophecy one by one, and, furthermore, if a woman prophecy with
her head uncovered dishonors her head; so that it is manifest that thee was
women did prophecy and also labored in the Gospel; but says R. I. that was
but in a private way, or amongst some few, this had been lawful or orderly in
R. I. his account, and if she might speak to two or three, or twice three it
may be, as there is in many houses, is not this called a Church, and does not
Christ say, Where two or three are gathered together in my name, I will be in
the midst of them. Moreover, was not that a Church which was in Aquilla and
Priscilla's house? 1 Cor. 16. 19. and was not Priscilla a Daughter that did
prophecy? what must Priscilla go out of her house in which was the Church if
she had any thing to speak by the Spirit? was it lawful to speak without doors
and not in the house? and if she might speak in her house, then she spoke in
the Church, and R. I. would have said she had contradicted the Spirit of God;
and is not Christ one in the Male and in the female? and is not male and female
both one in Christ Jesus? is Christ's power and the Spirits authority any whit
less efficacious or powerful when he speaks in the female? or is it the
sects only that adds or diminishes from the authority of the Spirit; thou
ignorant man who art void of the knowledge of God? and was not Mary a woman,
and did not she preach Christ's Resurrection to the Disciples, and were not they
the Church? but this is like will not satisfy R. I. his unreasonable mind who
does not believe that a woman may prophecy or speak in the Church, for this
would contradict Paul's saying; not at all, I grant Paul's words to be true, this
was spoke occasionally to one Church? concerning them that were unlearned and
untaught of the Spirit, that usurped authority over the man, and such as was
disorderly whose spirit was not subject to the Prophet, and what must this be a
binding example, as to quench the Spirit, and limit the Lord from generation to
generation as to bind or limit them, who are in subjection to their husband
and who usurped not authority? for it is one thing to have authority, and
another thing to usurp authority; now they that are come to feel the power of
God, and thereby be moved to speak, the power gives her authority, but she that
is not in the power neither does feel the motion of the Spirit, such a one
usurps authority and is unlearned, and such, and they only were prohibited by
Paul and no other; for if it had extended unto all, then the women before
mentioned had been transgressors; and likewise further for the satisfaction of
all; Anna a prophetess, the Daughter of Phanuell of the Tribe of Aser, she
coming into the Temple gave thanks unto the Lord, and spoke of Christ unto all
them that looked for Redemption in Jerusalem, and that was in a public place,
and in a public congregation, Luke 2. 36, 37, 38. And last of all, if E. D.
and R. I. will not confess that the meeting near Cond, in which the women
spoke, was a Church, which F. H. justifies, then E. D. and R. I. has lost
their cause, and wrangled about nothing, and the thing proved against them
both, (viz.) That a woman declaring, speaking or prophesying by the Spirit of
the Lord and in the authority of God, is a lawful and a commendable, and a
justifiable act in the sight of God and all the children of light: And
therefore cease your foolish clamor, and let no such ignorant stuff come in
print again, lest your folly be more and more made manifest, and the stone fall
upon you which will grind you to powder.

The next thing which R. I. quarrels about, is a lie, which Edward Dodd
asserted, that some of the Quakers should say they were equal with God, unto
which F. H. replied and said, he that has the Spirit of God, is in that which
is equal, and he that is joined to the Lord is one Spirit, there is unity, and
that unity stands in equallity, and these expressions says R. I. offers
violence to God and his glory.

Answer, This R. I. is so in love with the spirit of error, for he has denied
the infallible Spirit, and is in such love with an unequal spirit, that he
cannot endure to here that any should be joined to the Lord in an equal
Spirit, and so quarrels with plain Scripture, and says, it does violence to
the Majesty of God; the Spirit of the Father, and the Spirit of truth, is an
equal Spirit, and them that are led by it and are in it, are in that which is
equal, and so are joined to the Lord, and are nearly related to him; but that I
said or any other, that the creature is equal to the Creator, in power, or in
glory, is false and a lie, and let E. D. and R. I. know, that (...) are for the
lake.

R. I. says, Christ is glorified in his humane nature, and humane nature and
flesh may be understood of the regenerate part, and humane nature may be
understood both of soul and body, and this may confute F. H. that does contend
against humane nature, and goes on and tells another lie, as every page is filled
with some, and says F. H. says, Christ has no real body.

Answ. This man speaks out of thick darkness, and intrudes into those things he
has not seen, being vainly puffed up in his fleshly mind; I said unto E. D. that
Christ was the seed of David according to the flesh, and according to the
Spirit, the son of God; And furthermore said, and new says, that Christ is
glorified in a spiritual body, and incorruptible body; and so by incorruptible
body and spiritual body, according to R. I. his dark understanding, must also
be understood humane nature; and again, humane nature may be understood of the
soul, O dark and fortish man, what art thou like to confute, who says the
humane nature may be taken for the soul, and also it may be taken for flesh,
and also it may be taken for the regenerate part, and thus like a blind man
has lost all aim, thou runnest rambling up and down in every by-path, but how
should thou do otherwise, seeing thou have denied that Spirit that does not
err? and also would have all others to deny it, and says, that none may lay
claim to it, although God has promised it, to give the spirit of truth to
lead his people into all truth; and if into all truth, then out of all error,
but this doctrine of Christ comes too near perfection for R. I to own, which is
a doctrine so offensive to him, that he cannot endure to hear of it, or that
ought should be perfect, and therefore he has condemned the law of the spirit
of life, and says it is imperfect, as may be seen in the 55 page of his book,
and if flesh, and the regenerate part of man, and the soul, may all be
understood by humane nature, then they are all one, and then the soul is humane
and earthly, but the soul is spiritual and immortal, and flesh and blood
inherits not the kingdom of God, and the regenerate part is that which is
begotten and brought forth by the immortal word of life, and that which is born
of the spirit is spirit, and so the ignorance of this man is made manifest, and
so R. I. may take his lie home unto himself, as that F. H. denies the real
body of Christ, for F. H. has said, and now says again, and that according
to knowledge, that Christ has an incorruptible body, and a glorious body, and
a spiritual body, and in this body is Christ glorified with the Father, and
humane nature, is no where taken for a spiritual and incorruptible body, in the
Scriptures account, as this R. I. and his blind tribe does imagine, and yet the
flesh of Christ is owned, and the word that was made flesh the Saints know and
does feed on, by which they are nourished up into everlasting life, and so I
say unto thee, as I did to E. D. when thou writes again speak plainly, if by
humane nature thou intend a carnal body, or the same flesh thou art on, and
thou would devide the flesh of Christ from his Spirit, would devide Christ, and
Christ is not divided; and thus he goes quarrelling on and heaps lie upon lie,
and says that F. H. says, Christ has no real body, but his mystical body,
which thing is thy own and never affirmed by me either in word or writing, and
so repent of thy lies, and for shame call in thy Book least the judgments and
plagues of God be multiplied upon thee.

And further says R. I. How do the Quakers condemn themselves, when they so
proudly boast themselves, as the Pharisees did, to be clear from sin, who needs
not Christ's righteousness for their justification; how then can they say that
Christ's righteousness is their justification, when they are so righteous in
their own eyes, for Christ has not promised to justify any, but those that
confess their sins.

Answ. We have confessed our sins, and also departed from them, and not like you
feigned hypocrites, who are confessing from year to year with your feigned
lips, and your hearts never turned to the Lord from iniquity, and takes the
name of Christ's righteousness to be a cloak to cover your iniquity withal;
and we do not say, that we have no need of Christ's righteousness for our
justification, for if we should say so, we should be liars like thy self, for
we have need of Christ's righteousness, for he is our life, who is called The
Lord our righteousness, he is our justifier, and who art thou that condemns
any? but the false accuser of the brethren, for Christ's righteousness is our
covering, and we are not righteous in our own eyes, but in the eyes of him who
has made us so; and we never said that we have not sinned, and so we have not
made God a liar, as this vile slanderer would make men believe through his
false aspertions, for we say, we were once darkness, but now are we light in
the Lord, and he who is our light and life, is our justification and
righteousness, and his blood cleanses from all sin, and the power of God
keeps us that the evil one touches us not, and yet all boasting is excluded.

And the further R. I. goes on the lower he sinks toward the bottomless pit,
and there we shall find him at last before we have done with his book, and
speaks out of thick darkness, like a man that never saw the Sun, who has
altogether taken up his dwelling place in Deaths Region, and as though that
were the Land of his nativity, and thou shall see Reader by what ensues.

R. I. says, Though it be said, He that commits sin is of the Devil; not that
the Devil can claim him for his own, or that he is in his possession, but he
is captivated of the Devil and everpowered. And for his proof he brings Peter
was cried up to be a Saint, and at that same time when he was cried up to be a
Saint, Christ called Peter a devil, and that must be understood a Saint had
sinned.

Answer. He that is captivated by the Devil, has gone from the power of God,
and he that commits sin does the Devils work, and he may claim him for his
workman; and he that is overpowered is brought into captivity, and he that
carries into captivity has the Captive in his possession, as it is written,
his servants you are to whom you obey, and he that commits sin is the servant
of sin. And these black confused distinctions R. I. makes to make people
believe that they are Saints of God, when they are the Devils captives, and
that they are in the possession of Christ, who yet do the works of the Devil
who is an enemy to Christ, and thou knows no more of a Saint then thou knows of
a devil, who says that Peter at the same time that Christ called him a Saint,
called him a devil; for thou must know, that Matthew recorded many things it
may be in one Chapter, which was acted and done, and spoken in many days and
weeks, for when Peter confessed Christ to be the Son of God, he was in the
faith, and Christ said, flesh and blood had not revealed that to him, but at
this time had spoken little of his sufferings; as it is written, Mat. 16. 21,
from that time forward began Jesus to show unto his Disciples, how that he must
go unto Jerusalem and suffer many things, and be killed, and rise again the
third day; So that it is manifest, that here was distance of time and space
betwixt Peter's confession of Christ and of his rebuking of him; however the
unbelief was gotten up in Peter, and he that had need to be taught, came to be
a rebuker of him who was his Teacher, this was another state then the former;
but of these things R. I. is ignorant, and let the Serpent feed upon dust, for
I desire to give him no other food.

And further R. I. says, Though Saints sin not Devil-like unto death, yet if
any man say he has not sinned ofter the similitude of Adam's transgression,
he, says John, is a liar and the truth is not in him, for when all is done the
best men are men still, and the best earth is earth ever, and will bear nettles
and brambles; me and if these things were well considered by F. H. he would not
say and E. D. for pleading for sin or Satan, for we plead against those who say
they have no sin.

Answer. This R. I. is so in love with sin, that by his arguments which he
makes, one would judge that he accounts it as necessary as his daily food, and
these are strange kind of Saints that R. I would make, at the best they are but
still sinners, and unsanctified; but they that are called to be Saints, who are
begotten by God the father and preserved in Christ Jesus, they are sanctified
and made clean through the washing of Regeneration, and through the
sanstsification of Gods holy Spirit which divelleth in them, by which they have
power to mortify the deeds of the fiesh, and to overcome and to be made
partakers of the promises; but here lies the difference in R. I. his account,
betwixt his Saints and his Sinners, The sinners sins devil-like, yet the
Saints sin not devil-like, I say they that sin are in one nature,
notwithstanding R. I. his blind distinctions, for they that sin are liker the
Devil then God, and liker his image then Gods Image, for Gods Image consists
in righteousness and ture holiness, and the devils image consists in
unrighteousness, sin, and unholiness. And now Reader thou may judge whose Image
R. I. his Saints bears, and if thou be one that can plead against them who are
born of God, and sins not, and who are cleansed from all sin by the blood of
Christ, then R. I. will rank thee with E. D. and himself in his Bead-row of
Saints, as he calls it.

And if any man say, he has not sinned after the simititude of Adam's
transgression, he is, says John, a liar; Nay it is R. I. that says it and not
John, and so R. I. is the liar, for the Scripture says on this wise, Romans 5.
14. Death reigned from Adam to Moses, even over them that had (not) sinned
after the similitude of Adams transgression. So that it is manifest, that there
were many that death reigned over, and yet they sinned not after the similitude
of Adams transgression. But this R. I. will accuse every man with whom he has
a mind to quarrel, and will not only tell lies himself, but publish false
Doctrine, but he will bring the Saints for his author; and John says not, If
any man say he has no sin; And thou that say, when all is done, the best
men and the best earth, will bear nestles, brambles, and tricks, as I said to
E. D. so I may to thee, thou have given thy verdict for the Devil, and not for
God and his Saints, for They that are born of God sin not, and them that are
cleansed by the blood of Christ from all sin, and are clear in his sight, and
are kept by his immortal word which dwells in them that the evil one touch
them not, but has overcome the wicked one, and the best earth is that wherein
righteousness dwells, which R. I. is altogether a stranger too, and that
brings forth no briars, no brambles, nettles nor pricks, for that ground is
cursed; so this man by his devilish Doctrine, has made the coming of Christ of
none effect, and the blood of Christ of none effect, and so have denied the
work of redemption to the best of men, and deliverance to the Creature who has
traveled in pain. This dreamer is far contrary to the Prophet Daniell, who
saw by the Spirit of Prophecy (which this R. I. so deadly hates, both in men
and women that if it be not allowed of by such as he, it must not speak nor
they by ir) This Prophet I say testified of the coming of the just one, and of
his work, that he should make an end of sin, and finish transgression, and
bring in ever-lasting righteousness; but says R. I. The best men are men
still, and the best Earth earthever, and the best saints sinners, though they
sin not devil-like, and nettles and brambles and pricks they will all bring
forth. Now if this doctrine be true, how is the soul raised out of death, and
where is the restoration of the creature from under the bondage of corruption,
and where is the redemption of the seed which is heir of the promise. Nettles
and brambles, briars cumbers the ground, and choakes the seed, and these things
F. H. has well considered, and I see more and more that thou art a pleader for
sin and Satan, and imperfection, for a spirit of error, for Images, Pictures
and Crosses, for Cuffs, Ribbonds and Lace, for Nettles, Brambles and briars,
and art a man that does lay claim to the utmost borders of the Devils
Kingdom, and a greater servant of his Master I have not met with long, whose
reward will be according to his works.

And the lie being the chief cognizance of his Master, in which he greatly
gloryes in, he goes on and says, Another error of the Quakers is, they do not
believe the Scriptures to be true, because they deny them to be the word of
God; for if they believe what the Scriptures say of themselves; and they say of
themselves that they are the word of God, and for his proofs he cites, Mar. 7.
13. Romans 10. 8. 2 Cor. 2. 17. 1 Pet. 1. 25.

Answer. The Scriptures we own to be true, and whatsoever the Scriptures say of
themselves, that we own them to be (to wit) a declaration, Scriptures of truth,
holy Scriptures, the words of God, of Christ, and of his Apostles, a Treatise;
And for his proofs I could wholly refer them to the Readento examine them
himself, and to discover the ignorance of this R. I. who tenders these
Scriptures aforementioned for sufficient proof, as that the Scriptures calls
themselves the word of God, as for Mark 7. 13. making the word of God of none
effect by your tradition; He does not say of making the word of God, the
Scriptures of none effect; neither does he say you make the Scriptures, which
is the word, of none effect by your Traditions, and as for Romans 10. 8. The word
is nigh thee in thy mouth and in thy heart, And this is the word of faith which
we preach; Here the Apostle says, the word is nigh thee in thy heart, but he
does not say, the Scriptures is nigh thee in thy heart, which is the word of
God, And 2 Cor. 2. 17. For we are not as many which corrupt the word of God; he
does not say, we are not as many that corrupt the Scriptures, which are the
word of God, or the word of God which is the Scriptures. And as for 1 Pet. 1.
25. But the word of the Lord endures for ever, and this is the word which by
the Gospel is preached unto you; he does not say the Scriptures endures for
ever, or this is the word, the Scriptures, which by the Gospel is preached
unto you. And as for 1 These 4. 15. For this we say unto you by the word of the
Lord, that we which are alive, and remain unto the coming of the Lord, shall
not prevent them which are asleep; He did not say, this we say unto you by the
Scriptures, for there was not such a Scripture written before, and therefore we
say this unto you by the Word of the Lord: And what a foolish man is this, to
assert his own imaginations, and then imagins the Scriptures will prove it; and
what an improper speech were this, to call twenty thousand Sentences one word;
and it is called a declaration; and what a declaration would that be which
consisted but of one word; But enough of this has been published before
concerning this particular by diverse hands, so I shall be brief. However R. I.
doubts his proof already, that it will not satisfy F. H. and therefore he
thought good to make this conclusion upon him, That he does not believe the
Scriptures at all; and though F. H. say, that these Scriptures are nothing at
all to prove that thing; to deny his imaginations, is not to deny the
Scripture; But F. H. believes what the Scriptures says of themselves, and does
not deny the Scriptures at all, but R. I. his lie, and also his false
conclusion.

And further says R. I. The Scripture was delivered to the Church in writing,
that it might be an infallible standard ^f true doctrine, and a determiner of
controversies, and the Saints Rule of knowing God and living to him.

Answer. Reader take notice here is no room for the Spirit at all, the
Scriptures and writings have taken up the room of it in R. I. his account, for
it has lost its office, if his doctrine be true; the letrer is become the
infallible judge and standard to try doctrine, and a determiner of all
controversies, and of the Saints rule of knowing God, and living to him, and
indeed is become all in this man's account, then what does R. I. bring Aesops
Fables, Ovids fictions, Plato's and Diogenes stories, in this controversy to
join with this infallible rule; and because he has the Scriptures so high to
be a tryer of doctrines without the Spirit, doubtless is the cause here is no
mention made of it, and so he shall be judged by his rule; in the 42 page take
his Exposition upon the words of Joel, I will pour out of my Spirit upon sons
and daughters, and they shall prophecy; This is not meant of a ghostly power,
but of an extraordinary measure of enlightening grace. Ignorant man, is not
Ghostly power of spiritual power an extraordinary measure of enlightening
grace? and was it not as spiritual power, and an extraordinary light the
Prophets prophesied by; But it is this man's meaning that must be the standard
when all comes to all, and the determiner of cases; and he speaks contrary unto
his own rule, as may be seen through his whole book, who has either added to
the Scriptures, or perverted them, or otherwise given his false
interpretations, or villified them in calling them the True Cards, and so
though he extolled them in words, he denies them in practice; The Jews tried
Christ's doctrine by the Scriptures, and judged him a blasphemer, and a breaker
of the Law, and the Apostles seditious; and so though a man have the Scripture,
and have not the Spirit, it is all as a sealed book, wherein such unlearned men
as this R. I. is cannot read; and therefore he says in his 55 page, That it is
a great fault in us, because we say the Law of the Spirit of life is the Rule,
and so like him will not say it is imperfect, as he does, and so says R. I. it
is not fit to be a rule, and so blasphemously he detracts from the authority
and power of the Spirit, and like Antichrist and his Ministers sets the letter
above it, and calls it living and an infallible standard, and says the
Scripture inclines the heart unto obedience and like a drunken man this R. I.
reels up and down and contradicts himself: Before he said The law of the Spirit
chiefly gave power to conform to the Rule, and within four lines contradicts
himself, and says The Scriptures inclines our hearts to the obedience of the
Rule, and the Scriptures it self has caused us to know it, as we have it from
the Church, it is a probable aid, and yet gives but a confused belief, with a
light impression. Answ. It is probable enough indeed that thy faith is
confused, and the faith of your church, and that makes thee utter forth all
this confused heap, but in what has been said, the spirit of this man and his
doctrines will be manifest to all whose eyes God has opened, and so will
depart out of his paths and not give heed to his fabulous stories.

It is true says R. I. There is an inward law written in our hearts, called
the law of the Spirit of life, Romans 8. 2. And there is the outward Law written
in the Scriptures; Now the outward and external law is properly the Rule of a
christian life, and not the inward and internal law; for the outward law is
perfect in that it declares in what is the will of God, and in what it is not;
but the inward law received and written on the heart is imperfect, and
therefore unfit to be our rule, the law within is that thing that is to be
ruled, Psalm. 17. 4. The outward law therefore is the Rule.

Answer. This man would set the Sun by his dial, as it might be said, although
he confess in the very same page, that the Law of the Spirit of life gives
power to the creature, yet now it is become imperfect, and not fit to be a
rule; this man like one unlearned, sets the Law which was written in Tables of
stone, which the Apostle calls the Ministration of condemnation and was
glorious, this he sets above the Ministration of the Spirit of life, which the
Apostle says is much more glorious; but nay says R. I. The law written in the
heart is imperfect and not fit to be a rule, but to be ruled; contrary to the
Apostles doctrine; and so this R. I. is tried by his own infallible standard,
to be a deceiver, who teaches contrary to that which he calls his law and
testimony; and the Law which is outward, is the Law of the first Covenant,
which made nothing perfect, but the bringing in of a better hope did, by which
we draw nigh unto God, Heb. 7. 19. Therefore the Lord said by the mouth of the
Prophet, Behold the days come that I will make a new Covenant with the house
of Israel, not according to the Covenant I made with you when I brought them
out of the Land of Egypt, when I was as a husband into them, which Covenant
they brake; but I will write my Law in their hearts, and put my spirit in their
inward parts; I will be to them a God, and they shall be unto me a people, Jer.
31. 33. Heb. 8. 9, 10. Now this blind man, who gropes as at noon day, says,
This is imperfect which is written in the heart, and so faulty with him, and
therefore to be ruled over; and the other which is outward is perfect, and
faultlesse, and so ought to be a Rule; but says the Apostle contrary to R. I.
If the first Covenant had been faultlesse, there had been no place for the
second, which second the Apostle says, is a better Covenant, and stands upon
better promises; but yet says R. I. this is not the rule, not fit to be a
rule; And furthermore the Apostle said, as many as are led by the Spirit of God
are the sons of God, and this was their rule, and the Law of the Spirit of life
made the Apostle free from the law of sin and death, and was the new creatures
rule by which they were led into all truth, and as many as did walk in it, out
of all sin: But nay says R. I. It is not sit to be a rule, for this is
imperfect, and is that thing to be ruled, and for his proof brings Psalm. 17. 4.
By the word of thy lips I have kept me from the path of the destroyer; and how
does this prove that the Law in the heart is to be ruled. Thou ignorant man,
who litters forth nothing but deceit and error? and so the Scriptures declares
against thee, for they say, The Law of the Lord is perfect converting the soul;
The Commandment of the Lord is pure enlightening the eyes, Psalm, 19. 7, 8. For
the Commandment is a Lamp and the law is light, Prove. 6. 23. And the Commands
of the New Covenant are spiritual and not carnal, and they are perfect and
fit to be a rule to guide all them that believe in a perfect way, and not as
this R. I. says, unfit to be a Rule because of their imperfection, and would
in his blind distinctions, cast a mist before peoples eyes; and all may judge
not only of this R. I. his mistake, but of his wilful impudence, in preferring
that which is visible and outward, and may be seen, which was given forth in
time, (viz.) the Commands outward, and the letter outward, above the Law of the
Spirit of Life, which is invisible, spiritual and eternal: And as I said to
S. S. So I may say to thee, Lean souls are they like to be, who receives such
damnable Doctrine as this for Articles of Faith. But however Reader thou may
take notice of R. I. in his Epistle to the Reader, he says, The Quakers money
is counterfeit coin, which he has nailed on the Market post, and instead
thereof has tendered other money; and that thou may see what kind of other
money the Priests is, and what Image it hears by the Principles here
discovered, which is altogether. Tin and dross and Reprobate Silver, which
will be received by none, but them whom the God of this world ha^h blinded the
eyes of, that they should not see the things that belongs unto their peace.

And Edward Dodd being sensible that he and all his stuff, or he and all his
arguments was carried Captive, and become a booty and a prey, he is glad that
any will step in and rescue him, and flatters R. I. and says, I am engaged to
you, to embrace you as a precious friend, that of so weak principles as mine,
have raised so perfect a structure, so absolute, rational, and demonstrative,
that more need not to be done.

Answ. R. I. his Vindication has not redeemed E. D. his principles at all, but
rather has labored in vain, and spent his strength for naught, and has
brought forth such a birth as sober men will blush at, made up of Ignorance,
Blasphemy, Derision, and lies, which they that have the lest moderation will
abhor and detest* And the Principles of E. D. and R. I. are not only weak and
feeble, but wicked and impious, as is manifest in what has been declared; And
the structure that R. I. has made, is but builded with untempered Mortar,
lies, falsehood, error, false Doctrine, which the stormy wind of the Lord will
Rent and scatter, and confound, and exalt his Truth above it all. But E. D.
says, What can be said to reduce such a people I know not, since so many
convincing arguments cannot prevail. Alas poor men whether would you reduce
us, or bring us back, to the slime pits of Sodom, where E. D. fell with his
stuff, or turn us back again to Images, Pictures and Crosses, to Mass-houses,
Hirelings and Tithes, to Lace, Ribons, and Cuffes, which both E. D. and R. I.
has strongly pleaded for, as faithful Servants to their Master, who would not
have him loose a foot of his Territories; however E. D. has resolved to
continue one in life and death with R. I. who has shaken hands with the Prince
of darkness, and made a Covenant with death, which must be broken; and though
S. S. E. D. and R. I. join hand in hand, yet the wicked shall not go
unpunished, for every one shall receive a reward according to their works.

And so I have done with R. I. his Book called Ignis fatu^^, whose arguments,
false doctrines, errors and lies are dissolved into nothing; his Vindication
made void, his ignorance made manifest, his false Doctrines brought to light,
and reproved by the word of truth; Only I shall return him a few of his lies
back again for him to review the second time, and repent of them, and remember
the sentence for all Liars is, The Lake that burns, Rev. 22. 15.

First, That their worship differs not in whole nor in part, in matter nor in
manner from the Churches in the Primitive times.

Secondly, According to the Scriptures their whole worship is framed.

Thirdly, That Jezabel was never more madder against the Prophets, then these
Quakers are against Christ's Ministers.

Fourthly, The Quakers contemn Magistracy and infect the Commonwealth with
^action.

Fifthly, That the Quakers burnt some houses at Oxford.

Sixthly, That Timothy and Titus were settled in a Parochial way in their
quarters.

Seventhly, That F. H. complains of the darkness of the Sun, when the fault is
in his own eyes.

Eighthly, The Quakers deny honor to Superiors, and to whom it is due, and so
blaspheme the name of God and his doctrine

Ninthly, F. H. would never have cried out of deceit, but a purpose to deceive
the more.

Tenthly, That the Quakers bid open defiance to the worship of God.

Eleventhly, That I. N. did say, That he was as just, and holy, and good, as
God.

Twelfthly, That F. H. said, That Christ Jesus was not glorified in Heaven with
a real body.

Thirteenthly, Humane nature is taken for the regenerate part of man, and the
soul.

Fourteenthly, That the best men (though regenerate) bears Nettles, Brambles,
and Pricks.

Fifteenthly, There is an inward law, called the law of the Spirit of life,
which is imperfect; and not fit to bear rule, but to be ruled.

Sixteenthly, And the Scriptures leads us to the Spirit, and enclines our
hearts to the obedience of the rule.

Seventeenthly, And F. H. prefers Ignis Fatuus, before the clear light of
Gods word. Eighteenthly, and lastly, when he has spoken all these lies, and
published them in Print to the world, he blasphemously says, in his Epistle to
the Reader, Have not so much regard to the authority of the Writer, as the
truth of the matter written by him, who was moved of the Lord thus to declare.
So all these lies with many more, and all these damnable Doctrines which he
has uttered forth against the truth, these things he would fasten upon the
Lords motion, and so make him the Author of iniquity, and a cloak for his
ungodly speeches against them who love the truth as it is in Jesus, who has
suffered many reproaches for its sake, and has been killed all the day long by
this Generation, amongst which R. I. is, who has bent his tongue to mischief,
and his lips to utter forth deceit; and as Jannes and Jambres resisted Moses,
so has this R. I. resisted the truth, being a man of a corrupt mind, and
concerning the, faith, reprobate; but he shall not proceed much further, for in
what he has written his folly will be manifest unto all men, and them that
fear the Lord will depart out of his footsteps, which leads to the chambers of
death, and from those dark paths in which R. I. treads, which leads into
utter destruction.

Westmorland, the 15. of the 4. month, 1660.
THE END.

