A Hue and Cry AFTER THE DUTCH FLEET OR, Joyful Congratulations for our late
VICTORY.
SHall Fires expire through Joy, and yet shall I
Express no sense of this Great VICTORY?
I swell, and needs must burst, if not declare
My Joys as ample as our Conquests are.
Shall Bells in Changes Ring our GENERALS Praise,
Whilst some standstill, and do no Trophies raise
Unto their lasting Name? Let all such be
Hung up like Bells for their Malignity?
Shall roaring Oannons every where proclaim
Our English HEROES everlasting Fame,
And I be Dumb? Can ROYALLISTS forbear
To speak, when they such joyful tidings hear?
Let Vultures, Vipers, and Woolfs clothed like Sheep,
Instead of joy, be silent now, and weep.
Whose Zeals Detraction, and whose chiefest good,
Is traitorously to Spill, not spend their Blood
For King or Country; whose late mischievous words
Import more danger then the hostile Swords
Of our now Vanquished Foes; whose Reason
Is flat Rebellion, and their Truth is Treason.
Never hope that Dutchmen fed on Mire, and Mud
Shall bathe your Plots in the sweet sented Blood
Of LOYALLISTS. This was their fatal Lot,
They turned up Tromp, but we the HONORS got.
These Gamesters played for Fuel, Food, and Fish,
Instead thereof they will have this in their Dish,
That a small Sloop of Ours, two Guns, no more,
Should fight their Admiral on their own Shore.
For shame let us not this Observation make,
That Our small Cock should make Their Lion Quake.
In this all Quarrels reconciled we see,
And no more talk of inconformity;
But like true English men we will make it known,
We Are for no King or Country, but our Own,
Now give me leave to speak as to the Fight,
And first of the two Squadrons, Red and White.
Never were Ships so thronged with Noble Spirits,
Striving t outvye each other by their Merits.
About to Fight, they one and all did cry,
We for our Country willing are to dye.
These joyful Shouts excited us to Fight,
But made their Courage show it self in flight.
Our Valor caused Horror to appear
In their pale Faces, and distracting Fear
Did so inslave their Hearts, that straight they run;
A most approved way (by them to shun
Approaching harm: we in the Rear pursue,
Leaving a share o'th Conquest to the BLUE.
Brave SMITH has verified on the Maine,
This proverb, that True Blue will never Stain.
Environed round with Foes, with Fire, and Smoke,
Made the Dutch know he had an heart of OAK.
Death staring in his Face, he still did mind
To husband all the advantages of Wind.
His Foes did wait Him, but at last did meet,
They Would paid for waiting, were they not too Fleet;
If ought the had cause to boast of heretofore,
We Have more then ev'ned that pretended Score
This Conquest shows our GENERALS understand
A Kingdoms Steerage, and how to Command.
They Have so out done themselves, their Actions past,
Seems but as Gleams, and Shadows of this Last.
For which eternal Bays their Brows adorn,
And time shall never see their Race out-worn.
Beloved by PRINCES, and by all desired,
By Holland feared, and by the World admired.
Printed with Allowance. LONDON, Printed by L. Miller, for Richard Head, 1666.

