Something that lately passed in DISCOURSE Between the KING And R. H. PUBLISHED
TO PREVENT THE mistakes and Errors in a Copy lately printed, contrary to the
knowledge or intention of the party concerned: and not only so, but also
misprinted and abused in several particulars, therefore it was thought
convenient for the removing of Errors and mistakes to be reprinted in a more
true form and order for the satisfaction of others. R. H.

LONDON, Printed by A. W. for G. C. and are to be sold at his Shop at the Black
Spread. Eagle at the West End of Paul's, 1660.

Something that lately passed in DISCOURSE Between the KING And R. H. etc.
R. H. SINce the Lord has called us and gathered us ^o be a people, to walk in
his fear, and in his truth, we have always suffered and been persecuted by the
Powers that have ruled, and been made a prey of, for departing from iniquity;
and when the breach of no just Law could be charged against us, then they made
laws of purpose to ensnare us, and so our sufferings were unjustly continued.


King. It is true, those that have ruled over you, have been cruel, and have
professed much which they have not done.


R H. And likewise the same sufferings do now abound in more cruelty against us
in many parts of this Nation, as for instance, one at Thetford in Norfolk,
where Henry (...) (ministering unto the people) was taken out of the meeting and
whipped, and sent out of the Town from Paris^ to Parish toward Lancashire, and
the chief gro^nd of his Accusation in his Pass (which was shown to the King)
was because he denied to take the Oath of Allegiance and Supremacy, and so
because that for conscience sake we cannot swear, but have learned obedience to
the Doctrine of Christ, which says, swear not at all; hereby an occasion is
taken against us to persecute us: and it is well known that we have not sworn
for any, nor against any, but have kept to the truth, and and our yea has been
yea, and our nay, nay, in all things which is more than the Oath of those that
are out of the truth.


King. But why can you not swear, for an Oath is a common thing amongst men to
any engagement?


R. H. Yes, it is manifest, and we have seen it by experience; and it is so
common amongst men to swear and engage either for or against things, that there
is no regard taken to them, nor fear of an Oath, that therefore which we speak
of in the truth of our hearts, is more than what they swear.


King. But can you not promise as before the Lord (which is the substance of
the Oath)


R. H. Yes, what we do affirm, we can promise before the Lord, and take him to
our witness in it, but our so promising has not been accepted, but the
ceremony of an Oath they have stood for, without which all other things were
accounted of no effect.


King. But how may we know from your words, that you will perform?


R. H. By proving of us; for they that swear are not known to be faithful but
by proving of them; and so we b^ those that have tried us, are found to be
truer in our promises than others by their Oaths, and to those that do yet
p^ove u^, we shall appear the same.


King. Pray what is your Principle?


R. H. O^^ Principle is this, That Jesus Christ is the true light which
enlightneth every one that comes into the wo^ld* that all men through him
might believe; and that they were to obey and follow this light, as they have
received it, whereby they man be led unto God, and unto righ^^o^sn^sse. and the
knowl^dge of the truth, that they may be saved.


King. This do all Christians confess to be truth, and he is not a Christian
that will deny it.


R. H. But many have denied it, both in words and w^itings, and opposed us in
it* and above an h^ndred Books are put forth in opposition unto this Principle.

That some of the Lords standing by the King, said, that none would deny that
every one is enlightened.


Lord. And one of the Lords asked, How long we had been called Quakers, or did
we own that name?


R. H. That name was given to us in scorn and detision about twelve years
since, but there was some that lived in this truth before we had that name
given unto us.


King. How long is it since you owned this judgment and way?


R.H. It is near twelve years since I owned this truth according to the
manifestation of it.


King. Do you own the Sacrament?


R.H. As for the word S^crame^t, I do not read of it in the Scripture; but a^
for the body and blood of Christ I own; and that th^re is no remission without
blood.


King. Well that is it; but do you not believe that every one is ^ommanded to
rec^ive it?


R. H. This we do believe, that according as it is written in the Scripture,
that Christ at his last Supper took bread and brake it, and g^ve to his
Disciples; and also took the Cup and blessed it, and said unto them, and as
often as ye do this (that is, as often as they brake bread) you show fo^th the
Lo^ds death till he come; and this we believe they did, and they eat their
bread in singleness of Heart from house to house: and Christ did come again
un^o them according to his promise, after which they said, we being many are
one bread, for we are all partakers of this own bread.


Kings Friend. Then one of the Kings friends said, It is true: for as many
grains make one bread, so they being many members were one body.

Another of them said, If they be the bread, then they must be broken.


R. H. There is difference between that bread which he brake at his last
Supper, wherein they were to show forth, as in a sign, his death until he
came: and this, whereof they speak, they being many, are one Bread for herein
they were come more into the substance, and to speak more mystical, as they
knew it in the Spirit.


Kings Friends. Then they said, It is truth, and he had spoken? nothing but
truth.


King. How know you that you are inspired by the Lord?


R.H. According as we read in the Scriptures, That the inspiration of the
Almighty gives understanding, so by its inspiration is an understanding given
us of the things of God.


Lord. Then one of the Lords said, How do you know that you are led by the true
Spirit?


R..H. This we know, because the Spirit of truth it rep^oves the world of Sin,
and by it we were reproved of sin, and also are led from sin unto righteousness
and obedience of truth, by which effects we know it is the true Spirit, for the
Spirit of the wicked one does not lead unto such things.


King and Lords. Then the King and his Lords said, It was truth.


King. Well, of this you may be assured, That you shall none of you suffer for
your Opinions or Religion, so long as you live peaceably, and you have the word
of a King for it, and I have also given forth a Declaration to the same
purpose, that none shall wrong you nor abuse you.


King. How do you own Magistrates or Magistracy?


R.H. Thus we do own Magistrates, whosoever is set up by God, whether King as
Supreme, or any set in authority by him, who are for the punishment of evil
doers, and the praise of them that do well; such we shall submit unto, and
assist in righteous and civil things both by body and estate: and if any
Magistrates do that which is unrighteous, we must declare against it, only
submit under it by a patient suffering, and not rebel against any by
insurrections, plots and contrivances.


King Then the King said, that is enough.


Lord. Then on of the Lords a^ked, why do you meet together, seeing every one
of you have the Church in your selves?


R. H. According as it is written in the Scriptures the Church is in God, These.
1.1. And they that feared the Lord, did meet often together in the fear of the
Lord, and to us it is profitable, and herein we are edified and strengthened in
the life of truth.


King. How did you first come to believe the Scriptures were truth?


R. H. I have believed the Scriptures from a child to be a declaration of
truth, when I had but a literal knowledge, natural education and tradition:
But now I know the Scriptures to be true, by the manifestation and operation of
the Spirit of God fulfilling them in me.


King. In what manner do you meet, and what is the order in your meetings?


R^ H. We do meet in the same order as the people of God did, waiting upon him:
and if any have a word of exhortation from the Lord, he may speak it, or if any
have a word of reproof or admonition, and as every one has received the gift,
so they may minister one unto another, and may be edified one by another,
whereby a growth in^o the knowledge of the truth is administered to one another.

One of the Lords. Then you know not so much as you may know, but there is a
growth then to be admitted of.


R.H. Yes we do grow daily into the knowledge of the truth in our exercise and
obedience to it.


King. Are any of your friends gone to Rome?


R. H. Yes, there is one in Prison in Rome.


King. Why did you send him thither?


R. H. We did not send him thither, but he found something upon his Spirit from
the Lord, whereby he was called to go to declare against Superstition and
Idolatry, which is contrary to the will of God.

Kings Friend said, There were two of them at Rome, but one was dead.


King. Have any of your friends been with the great Turk?


R.H. Some of our friends have been in that Country.

Other things were spoken concerning the liberty of the servants of the Lord,
which were called of him into his service; that to them there was no limitation
to parishes or places, but as the Lord did guide them in his work and service
by his spirit.

So the King promised that we should not any ways suffer for our opinion or
Religion, and so in love passed away


FINIS.

