Supplementum Sublatum: John Tombs HIS SUPPLEMENT Or, Second Book About
Swearing, Disproved, and made Void; and his abusing the Scripture plainly
manifested.

Against which the Truth of Christ's words is vindicated and maintained.

In a few words briefly returned to him From Richard Hubberthorne, And Samuel
Fisher.


LONDON, Printed for Robert Wilson, at the Sign of the Black Spread-Eagle and
Windmill in Martins le Grand, 1661.

Supplementum Sublatum, John Tombs his Supplement, or second Book about
Swearing disproved.
JOhn Tombs, thy first part of speech in proof of the Lawfulness of Swearing,
being (it seems) such an Adjective as could not well stand by it self against
such as have answered it, without the supply of some other words to be joined
with it, thou have added another part of speech, (for even this also is but a
part of what thou say thou yet intendest to make upon that subject) as a
little Supplement (so thou cal'st it) to supply the defects of the former,
which thou confessest did want framing, method, and matter. But when thou again
reviewest this thy last Supplement, it will need little more condemnation than
the words of thy own mouth. Therefore we shall say a little to thee, lest thou
be wise in thy own conceit, if thou be unanswered altogether; and yet but a
little, lest we should seem to be like thy self, in multiplying words without
method and matter. The substance of thy book being answered already in a book
called One Antidote more against Swearing, we shall speak to some passages in
it relating to our selves.

As first, Thou say page 5. that the using of these speeches, God knows, or I
affirm before God, or God is our witness, or This we say in the presence of him
that shall judge the quick and the dead; as an appeal to God's contestation, is
plain swearing; and that Sam. Fisher swears in his book entitled The Rusticks
Alarm to the Rabbis, p. 48. 61. in saying, God knows, I affirm here before God
and all men; and so while we speak against all swearing, we practice some
swearing.

Reply, It is made plain in that book entitled One Antidote more against
swearing, that these are no oaths, and here again, that if they were oaths, it
being very frequent with Paul (as Hen. Den says) to use them, then that
Apostle (whom ye justify therein) uncalled to it, by or before a Magistrate,
(which is the only swearing now disputed for) did swear as frequently,
commonly, ordinarily in his communications with the Saints and Churches, (among
whom his credit was so good, that his word might at any time be taken without
an oath) and consequently as unnecessarily as other men, which do use frequent,
ordinary, and unnecessary swearing, which both J. Tombs, Hen. Den, and Jer.
Ives do unanimously diallow; and so ye are guilty of egregious partiality,
condemning in some the things which ye allow in others.

Mor^over, if those be Oaths, how is it that the Judges and Jus^ces in Sessions
will not own them as so, and set free those prisoners when they offer to say
G^d knows, God is witness, etc. that we intend no other but good,
peaceableness, faithfulness and truth to the King, and all men, etc? Surely the
Magistrates in England do not believe the Priests doctrine, for if they did,
they would practice it; so that we may conclude, That they do but beat the Air,
and spend their strength for naught, when both Magistrates and people will
neither believe nor practice that for truth, which their Priests deliver for
doctrine.

And whereas J. Tombs says in p. 5. That those Baptists of Maidstone have
offered an Engagement taken before some Justice of the Peace in a solemn
manner, with calling God to witness to the truth of what they say, and that
they do offer to swear, and take an oath.

Reply. Herein he has condemned the Judges at Maidstone, either to be ignorant
of an Oath, or else to proceed in unjust judgment against them; seeing the
Judges required nothing of them but an Oath, and they offered an Oath, and yet
they would not receive it; so that instead of condemning the prisoners because
they cannot swear, he has condemned the Judges, for not knowing, or at least
not owning an Oath when it was offered them: and so contrary unto right Rule
and Justice, keeping them still in prison for not swearing, who offered
willingly to swear (as he says) so that it appears that the Judges do no more
agree with J. Tombes's judgment that that was an Oath, then the Quakers do;
But what strange Doctrine (or rather confusion) is this in J. Tombs, to accuse
the Quakers because they will not swear, and yet say that they do swear fully
and plainly? And yet the Judges, Mayors, and Magistrates will not take it: So
that by J. Tombes's book, and the rest that have been written for swearing, the
Quakers are found guiltless, and the Magistrates only are to be blamed and
reproved, because they will not accept of an Oath, when it is offered to be
given by those of whom they require it.

But again secondly, If to say, God knows, or God is witness, as an appeal to
Gods contestation, be swearing by God, then to say such a man knows, or such a
man is witness to the truth of what I say, ^s an appeal to that man's
contestation, is a swearing by that man; which (Absit absurdum hoc nigro
carbone no tandum) if these Baptists J. T. H. D. Jer. Ives, or any others shall
say it is, We shall say they are not yet so wise as they will be, when they
once come with the Quakers to own the truth, which they now deny.

Again, Jo. Tombs says, That Christ is no where called the Oath of God.

Reply. In the same sense, and place, in which he is called the Covenant of
God, as Isa. 55. 5. he is called the Oath of God; for God's Covenant is his
Oath, which he swore Luke 1. 72, 73.

Again, J. T. says, That there is no instance given by Sam. Fisher of any
place where (...)is used in a more moderate sense then to bind by Oath.

Reply* What needed one to be given by S. F. when thou gave one thy self?
viz. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 27. which is translated (truly enough) I charge you by the
Lord; which is no more but I will, require, or command you, in God's sight,
presence, or such like; which thou falsely say is a charging or requiring one
to swear by the Lord.

Or secondly, What need any more instance be given then thou have given thy
self, who confessest it over again in thy Supplement, p. 8, 9. more plainly
then in thy former? confessing to thy further confutation, that these three
places, viz 1 Thessalonians. 5. 27. 1 Timothy 6. 13. 2 Timothy 4. 1. are alike charges, and
that the word (...)used 1 Timothy 6. 13. is only to command, or enjoin, and does
not include an oath, or swearing; and that the word (...) used 2 Timothy 4. 1.
signifies no more then I witness before God; so that as it was told thee
before, it is most evident, that Paul at that distance wherein he was from them
when he wrote to the Thessalonians and Timothy, either did not charge them to
take an Oath, or if he did, they did not take it, nor swear to him; unless we
shall suppose they swore to some other that stood present as Paul's proxy, by
word of mouth to exact it of them; which absurdity is more fit to be exploded
then supposed.

Again, Thou say p. 10. That S. F. shows no instance where in with an
Accusative case is a particle of affirming without swearing, and till he does,
it necessarily is a particle of swearing.

Reply. No, not necessarily; for whether with or without an accusative case,
(...)sounds out no more then some strong asseveration of a thing, as with
verily, truly, indeed, or such like; and differs little more from (...)in Greek
(with is yea in English) then the English yea, and yea verily do differ from
each other; witness the Latin adverb nae, with ae dipthong, derived (as is to
be seen in the Latin Dictionaries) of (...)or (...)in the Greek, with eta or
long e, which is englished no otherwise then by truly, verily, in very deed, or
such like; and the very Accidence it self makes it a particle of affirming
only, and not of swearing. And however J. Tombs says, that Grammarians make
the Greek (...)a particle of swearing, yet the Lexicographers make it as well a
particle of affirming only, without swearing, as in that place 1 Cor. 15. it
being evident enough, that Paul in that place did not swear, when he says, I
protest by your rejoicing, etc. for to swear by any thing but God, is by all
judged to be unlawful.

But I. Tombs replies thus; That Paul swear by God even in those expressions
an Oath (says he) of Oppignoration, Pawning, or Execration, wishing therein
the forfeiture of his own rejoicing in Christ Jesus, if it were not so as he
said; as when we say On my salvation it is so, etc.

Reply. If this had been an Oath of Oppignoration (as thou vainly cal'st it) or
pawning of his own part or share in Christ's joy, then he would have mentioned
his own rejoicing in Christ Jesus only, and not that of the Corinthians also;
for what reason soever he had to with the forfeiture, or to pawn his own, yet
he had neither right nor reason to wish the forfeiture of theirs, or to pawn
the Corinthians part in the joy of Christ Jesus upon it, that it was so as he
spoke unto them; no more then any of us have to wish evil to another man, or to
pawn other men's salvation, or to wish another man damned, in case it be not
true that we speak; which is a thing altogether ungodly, unlawful, and
unreasonable unto those that have the spirit of judgment and understanding.
And so J. Tombs his pleading for swearing from such places, is only to be
judged a fruit of ignorance of Christ's Doctrine, or rather enmity against it.

But J. Tombessaith, that swearing is a moral commandment, and therefore lawful.

Reply. If swearing be a commandment, and a duty to be continued, as the rest
of the commandments are. Then it is to be performed as a duty and command
continually, without any respect to the Magistrate's imposing or requiring of
it; for we are to love God with our whole heart, etc. without being required by
the Magistrate, which is the first Commandment; and we are to love our
neighbor as our selves, being the second, in which all the other is included;
none of which respect are a command from man for the obedience of them.

But again, I. Tombs falls from the command, and says, his greatest argument
and inducement to swear, is, because the denying of it has caused, and is like
to cause great persecution to those that hold the truth about Baptism, and
that they will be counted persons* intolerable; and also he says, that by his
preaching swearing lawful, he has saved hundreds, yea thousands (having
brought them and their families by it to enjoy their liberty) from ruin.

Reply. So that it appears it is to save people from persecution, and spoiling
of their goods, and to keep their outward liberty, that I. Tombs has preached
up swearing, and so it seems they have the reward of their obedience to his
Doctrine already; and upon this account, he, nor those that follow him, need
never suffer persecution, if they will but always deny the commands of Christ,
as any outward power comes upon them to threaten them with suffering; so that
in the day of his trial, we have no ground otherwise to believe, but that he
will deny and break any of Christ's commands, (and teach men so) rather then
suffer persecution, seeing he has thus begun with this command of Christ,
Swear not at all, which he would make of none effect by his tradition.

Now seeing the Scripture says, He that breaks the least commandment, and
teach men so, he shall be least (or not at all) in the Kingdom of God;
therefore all such are to be denied, who make a trade of preaching, and when
their Doctrines come to be tried, they are found to be but the Ministers of
sin, and to live by the sins of the people; so that all people may consider and
take notice, whether this be a sufficient ground or plea, either for preaching
up, or believing swearing to be lawful, because thereby they may be freed from
persecution; which is the greatest hypocrisy that can be either preached or
practiced by those that profess to be religious. But the day is come which to
some has made, and to others is making all things manifest, and is declaring
every man's work of what sort it is, that the deceivers folly may be made
manifest unto all men, that from them the people may be brought into the
doctrine and way of salvation, which is now freely held forth and published by
the power, and in the demonstration of the Spirit of God, as they have freely
received it; not for filthy lucre, but of a ready mind; for the earth has
been cumbred, and the land filled with such who have made a Trade of the Saints
words, preaching them for filthy lucre sake, not freely, nor of a ready mind,
but time-servers, having men's persons in admiration because of advantage, and
for a piece of bread such men will transgress; as it is evidently manifest.

And whereas Jo. Tombs writes himself B. D. yet he is read among such as are
truly wise, by the name of Blind Divine, rather than Bachelor of Divinity;
who has spent so much of his time in such vain Treatises, tending to nothing
but to bring people out of the obedience to Christ's Doctrine, who says, Swear
not at all; and having also confuted himself in his own words, there needs the
less be said by others to make him manifest; so for the further evidencing of
the truth of those things unto people, and for ending of the Controversy
between the Owners of Christ's Doctrine, and the Opposers of it; we shall
commend our selves, and our Testimony unto every man's Conscience in the sight
of God; that his witness may justify the Truth, and clear it unto all men.

THE END.

