A LEARNED TREATISE OF Globes: Both Celestial and Terrestrial: with their
several uses.

Written first in Latin, by Mr. Robert Hues: and by him so Published.

Afterward Illustrated with notes, by Jo. Isa. PONTANUS And now lastly made
English, for the benefit of the unlearned.

By John Chilmead Mr of A. of Christ-Church in Oxon.

LONDON, Printed by J. B. for Andrew Kemb, an^ to be sold at his shop, on S.
Marga^^^ hill in Southwark, 1659.

To the Reader.
THat nothing is at once brought forth, and perfected* is an observation we may
make, as from other things so in a more especial manner from Arts and
Sciences. For (not to speak any thing of the rest, which yet have all of them
in succession of times, had their accessions of Perfection) if we but take the
Astronomicall writings of Aratus, or of Eudoxus, (according to whose
observations Aratus is reported by Leontius Mechanicus to have composed his
Phenomenon) and compare the same with the later writings of Ptolomy; what
errors and imperfections shall we meet withal; And in the Geographicall works
of the ^ncients, whether we compare them among themselves, the later with the
former; er either of them with the more accurate descriptions of our Modern
Geographers: how many things shall we meet wit haltherein, that need either to
be corrected (...) erroneous, or else supplied as defective? There shall we
find Strabo, every w^ere harshly censuring the extravagances of Eratosthenes,
Hipparchus, Polybius, and Posidonius; Authors among the Ancients of very high
esteem. For as for Pytheas, Euthemeres, Antiphanes, and those Indian
Historiographers, Megasthenes, Nearchus, and Daimachus, whose writings are
stuffed with so many fabulous idle relations, he accounts them unworthy his
censure. In like manner, Marinus Tyrius, however a most diligent Writer, is yet
hardly dealt withal by Ptolomy. And even Ptolomy himself, a man, that for his
great knowledge and experience may seem to have excelled all those that went
before him: yet if a man shall but compare his Geographicall Tables with the
more perfect discoveries of our later times: what defects and imperfections
shall he there discover? Who sees no^ his errors in the bounds he sets to the
Southern parts of Asia and Africa? How imperfect are his descriptions of the
Northern coasts of Europe? These errors of Ptolomy, and of the Ancient
Geographers have now, at ^ngth, been discovered by the late Sea voyages of the
Portugals, and English: the Southern Coasts of Africa and Asia, having been
most diligently searched into by the Portugals; as the Northern parts of
Europe, have in like manner been by our own Countrymen. Among whom, the first
that adventured on the discovery of these parts, were, Sir Hugh Willoughby, and
Richard Chanceler: after them, Stephen Borough. And farther yet, then either of
these, did Arthur Pet, and Charles Jackman discover these parts. And these
voyages, were all undertaken, by the instigation of Sebastian Cabot: that so,
if it were possible, there might be found out a nearer passage to Cathay and
China yet all in vain, save only that by this means, a course of traffic was
confirmed betwixt us and the Moscovite.

When their attempts succeeded not this way; their next design was then to
try* what might be done on the Northern Coasts of America: and the first
undertaker of these ^oyages was Mr. Martin Frobisher: who was afterward
seconded by M John Davis. By means of all which Navigations, many errors of
the Ancients, and their great ignorance was discovered.

But now that all these their endeavors succeeded not, our Kingdom at that
time being well furnished, in ships, and impatient of idleness: they resolved
at length to adventure upon other parts. And first Sir Humphrey Gilbert, with
great courage and Forces attempted to make a discovery of those parts of
America, which were yet unknown to the Spaniard: but the success was not
answerable. Which attempt of his, was afterward more prosperously prosecuted,
by that honorable Gentleman, Sir Walter Rawleigh: by whose means Virginia,
was first discovered unto us, the General of his Forces being Sir Richard
Greenvile: which Country was afterward very exactly surveighed and described
by M. Thomas Harriot.

Neither have our Countrymen within these limits bounded their Navigations For
Sir Francis Drake, passing through the Straites of Megellane, and bearing up
along the Western Coasts of America, discovered as far as 50. degrees of
Northern Latitude. After whom, Mr. Thomas Candish, tracing the same steps, has
purchased himself as large a monument of his fame, with all succeeding ages. I
shall not need to reckon with these, our Countryman, Sir John Mandivel, who
almost 300. years since, in a 33. years Voyage by land, took a strict view of
all India, China, Tartary, and Persia, within the Regions adjoying.

By these, and the like expeditions by Sea, the matter is brought to that pass,
that our English Nation may seem to contend, even with the Spaniard, and
Portugal himself, for the glory of Navigation. And without all doubt, had they
but taken along with them, a very reasonable competency of skill in Geometry,
and Astronomy: they had by this, gotten themselves a far more honorable name
at Sea, then they. And indeed, it is the opinion of many understanding men,
that their endeavors have taken the less effect, merely through ignorance in
these Sciences. That therefore there might be some small accrwment to their study
and pains, that take delight in these Arts; I have composed this small
Treatise: which, that it may be for their profit, I earnestly desire. Farewell.

The Contents of the Chapters, of this TREATISE.
THe Preface: wherein is showed the Antiquity, and excellency of Globes, in
comparison of all other Instruments, as being of a form, most apt to express
the figure of the Heavens and Earth. The roundnes of the Earth, is defended
against Patricius. The height of Hills, how much it may detract from the
roundnesse of the Earth.

The first PART.
Chapter. 1. WHat a Globe is, with the parts thereof; and of the Circles
without the Globe: What the Horizon is, with the things described therein, in a
Material Globe. What the Meridian is, the Poles: and Axis; as also the
Hourcircle and Index. Cap. 2. Of the circles, which are described on the
supersicies of Globes. Of the Equator or AEquinoctiall circle. What a day is,
both Natural, and Artificial: as also of Hours, both Equal, and Unequal.
Of the Zodiac, and Eccliptick. What a year is, and the Indeterminate limits
thereof: together with the diverse opinions of Authors concerning the same; as
also many of their errors. What the AEquinoctium, and Solstices are; with
changeing of their places, and Anticipation in the Calendar, confirmed by many
observations. The error of Sosigenes, and Julius Caesar, in designing the
place of the AEquinoctium. Of the Colurs. The Longitude, and Latitude of the
fixed Stars,, are proved by observations, to have been altered. A place of
Ptolomy, l ib. 1. cap. 7. Geograph. is vindicated from the injury of his
Interpreters, and confirmed by the authority of Strabo. Of the Tropickes: with
the changing of their declination. What the Arctick, and Antarctick Circles
are: Of the Vertical Circles, and Quadrant of Altitude. Chap. 3. Of the three
positions of Sphere, Right, Parallel, and Oblique: with their several
affections. Chap. 4. Of the Zones, and their number. The vain opinions of the
Ancients, concerning the temperature of the Zones, are rejected; both by the
Testemonies of some of the Ancients themselves, as also by the experience of
later times. Chap. 5. Of the Amphiscij, Periscij, and Heteroscij. Chap. 6. Of
the Perioeci. Antoeci, and Antipodes, compared to each other. Chap. 7. Of
Climats, and Parallels.
The Second PART.
Chap. 1. OF such things as are proper to the Celestial Globe: as namely of
the Stars. And first of the Planets, or wandering Stars. Chap. 2. Of the fixed
Stars, and their constellations. Chap 3. Of the Constellations of the
Northern Hemisphaere. Chap. 4. The signs of the Zodiac: and first of the
Northern. Chap. 5. The Constellations of the Southern Hemisphaere: and first of
those in the Zodiac. Chap. 6. Of the rest of the Constellations of the
Southern Hemisphaere. Chap. 7. Of the other Stars which are not expressed in
Globes. Why the Stars appear sometimes in greater number, then at others times,
and sometimes greater, and at other times less: with the confutation of some
vain opinions concerning the same. The idle relations of Americus Vespasius,
Cardan, and Partcis, concerning the extraordinary greatness of the Stars about
the South Pole, are refuted out of the Authors own experience.
The third PART.
Chap. 1. THe Geographicall description of the Terrestrial Globe, with the
parts of the world that are yet known. The errors of Ptolomy, concerning the
Southern bounds of Africa and Asia, as also of the Northern limits of Europe,
are condemned, out of the Writings of the Ancients; and various experience of
later Writers. Chap. 2. Of the compass of the Earth and the measure of a
Degree: with diverse opinions concerning the same of the Greeks; as namely.
Eratosthenes, Hipparchus, Posidonius, Cleomedes, and Ptolomy: as also of the
Arabians, Jtalians, Germans, English. and Spanish. Posidonius, and Eratosthenes
are confuted out of their own observation and propositions. Ptolomyes opinion
is preferred before the rest, and he freed from the Calumnies of Maurolycus,
who is also taxed, in that without cause favoring Posidonius, he unjustly
condemns Ptolomy.
The Fourth PART.
Chap. 1. HOw to find out the Longitude, Latitude, distance, and Angle of
position or situation of any places, expressed in the Terrestrial Globe. Chap.
2. Of the Latitude of any place. Chap. 3. How to find the distance, and Angle
of position of any two places. Chap. 4. To find the Altitude of the Sun, or
Stars. Chap. 5. To find the place and declination of the Sun for any day,
given. Chap. 6. To find the Latitude of any place, by observing the Meridian
altitude of the Sun, or Stars. Chap. 7. How to find the Right and Oblique
Ascension of the Sun, and Stars, for any Latitude of Place and Time. Chap. 8.
How to find the Horizontall difference betwixt the Meridian and the vertical
circle of the Sun, or any other Star, which they call the Azimuth, for any
time, or place assigned. Chap. 9. To find the hour of the day, as also the
amplitude of rising and setting of the Sun, and Stars, at any time and Latitude
of place. Chap. 10. Of the threefold rising and setting of Stars. Chap. 11. How
to find the beginning and end of the Twilight, for any Latitude of place and
time. Chap. 12. To find for any Latitude of place, and time, the length of the
Artificial day, or night; or the quantity of the Suns Parallel that remains
above the Horizon, and that is hid beneath it: and to perform the same by any
other Star. Chap. 13 To find the hour of the Day, and Night, both Equal and
Unequal, for any time and Latitude of place. Chap. 14. To find the Longitude,
Latitude, and declination of the fixed Stars, as they are expressed in the
Globe. Chap. 15. To find the declination of the Needle from the true Meridian,
which they commonly call, the Variation of the Compass, for any Latitude
assigned: Where the errors of those are discovered, who assign to the
Magneticall Needle a certain Meridian, and fixed po^nt which it always
respects; and that affirm this change of variation to be regular. All which
vain conjectures of theirs, and ungrounded Hypotheses, are refuted both by
more certain observations of others, as also of the Author himself. Chap. 16.
How to make a Sun Dial, by the help of the Globe, for any Latitude of place.
The fifth and last PART.
OF the Rumbes that are described upon the Terrestrial Globe: wherein their
nature, Original, and use in Navigation is declared.
The Preface.
THere are two kinds of Instruments, by which Artificers have conceived, that
the figure of this so beautiful, and various fabric of the whole Universe,
might most aptly be expressed, and, as it were, at once presented to the view.
The one, exhibiting this Idea in a round solid, is called a Globe, or Sphaere:
The other, expressing the same in a plain, they term a Planisphaere, or Map,
Both of which, having been long since invented by the Ancients, have yet even
to our times, in a continued succession, received still more ripeness and
perfection. The Sphaere or Globe, and the use thereof, is reported by Diodorus
Siculus to have been first found out by Atlas of Libya: whence afterward sprung
the Fable, of his bearing up the Heavens with his shoulders. Others attribute
the invention of the same to Thales. And it was afterward brought to perfection
by Crates, (of whom Strabo makes mention) Archimedes, and Proclus; but most of
all, by Ptolomy; according to whose rules, and observations especially,
succeeding times composed their Globes, as Leontius Mechanicus affirms. And
now there has been much perfection added to the same, in these our later
times, by the industry, and diligence Gemma Frisius, and Gerardus Mercator; as
it may appear by those Globes, that were set forth at London, Anno 1593. so
that now there seems not to be any thing that may be added to them. The
Planisphaere indeed is a fine invention, and has in it wonderful variety of
workm^nship, if so be, that the composition of it be rightly deduced out of
Geometrical, and Opticall principles: and it wants not it is great
delightfullnesse, and beauty also. But yet that Other, being tbe more ancient,
has also the priority in Nature, and is of the most convenient form; and
therefore more aptly accommodated for the understanding and fancy, (not to
speak any thing of the beauty, and gracefulness of it) for it represents the
things themselves, in proper genuiue figurs. For as concerning the figure of
the Heavens, whether it were round, was scarcely eever questioned by any. So
likewise, touching the figure of the Earth, notwithstanding many, and sundry
opinions have, been broached among the ancient Philosophers, some of them
contending for a plain, others an hollow, others a Cubic all, and some a
Pyramidall form: yet this opinion of it is Roundnesse, with greatest consent of
reason, at length prevailed, the rest being all exploded. Now we affirm it to
be round, yet so, as that we also admit of it is inequalities, by reason of
those so great eminences of hills, and depression of valleys. Eratosthenes, as
he is cited by Strabo in his first book, says, that the fashion of the Earth
is like that of a Globe, not so exactly round as an artificial Globe is, but
that it has certain inequalities. The earth cannot be said to be of an exact
orbicular form, by reason of somany high hills, and low plains: as Pliny
rightly observes. And Strabo also in his first book of his Geography, says,
that the Earth and the water together, make up one sphaericall body, not of so
exact a form, as that of the Heavens, although not much unlike it. This
assertion of the roundnesse of the Earth, with the intervening Sea, is
confirmed also by these reasons. For first, that it is round from East to West
is proved by the Sun, Moon, and the other Stars, which are seen to rise, and
set. first with those that inhabit more Eastwardly, and afterward with them
that are farther West. The Sun rises with the Persians that dwell in the
Eastern parts, four hours soonner then it does with those that dwell in
Spain, more Westward: as Cleomedes affirms. The same is also proved by the
observing of Eclipses, especially those of the Moon; which although they happen
at the same time, are not yet observed in all places at the same hour of the
day or night, but the hour of their appearing is later with them, that inhabit
Eastward, then it is with the more Western people. An Eclipse of the Moon,
which Ptolomy reports lib. 1 Geogr. cap. 4. To have been seen in Arbela, (a
town in Assyria,) at the fifth hour of the night; the same was observed at
Carthage at the second hour. In like manner an Eclipse of the Sun, which was
observed in Campania to be betwixt 7. and 8. of the Clock; was seen by Co^bulo,
a Captain in Armenia, betwixt 10^ and 11. as it is related by Pliny. Now that
it is also of a sphaericall figure from North to South, may be clearly
demonstrated by the risings, settings, elevations and depressions of the Stars,
and Poles. The bright Star that shines so resplendently, in the upper part of
the stern of the Ship, Argo, and is called by the Greeeks (...), is scarcely
to be seen at all in Rhodes, unless it be from some eminent high place: yet
the same is seen very plainly in Alexandria, as being elevated above the
Horizon, about the fourth part of a sign: as Proclus affirms in the end of his
book, de Sphaera. For I read it, Conspicue cernitur; not as it is commonly,
Prorsus non cernitur; notwithst anding, that both the Greek text, and also the
Latin translation are against it. Another argument may be taken, from the
figure of the shadow, in the Eclipse of the Moon, caused by the interposition
of the Earths opacous body: Which shadow being Sphaericall, cannot proceed from
any other then a round Globous body: as it is demonstrated unto us out of
Opticall principles. But this one reason is beyond all exception: that those
that make toward the Land at the Sea, shall first of all descry the tops of the
hills only, and afterward, as they draw nearer to shore, they see the lower
parts of the same, by little and little: Which cannot proceed from any other
cause, then the gibbosity of the Earths superficies.

As for those other opinions of the hollow, Cubicall, Pyramidall, and plain
figure of the Earth, you have them all largely examined both in Theon,
(Ptolomies Interpreter) Cleomedes, and almost in all our ordinary Authors of
the Sphaere: together with the reasons why they are rejected. Yet that old
conceit of the plainness of the Earths superficies, is again now at last,
tanquam Crambe recocta, set forth in a new dress, and thrust upon us by
Franciscus Patricius; who by some few eold arguments, and misunderstood
experiments, endeavors to confirm his own, and consequently to overthrow that
other received opinion of the sphaericall figure of the Earth. I shall only
lightly touch at his chiefest arguments; my present purpose and intention,
suffering mce not to insist long on the confutation of them. And f^rst of all,
the great beight of Hills, and the depression of valleys, so much disagreeing
from the evennesse of the plain parts of the Earth, scem to make very much
against the roundnesse of the Earth. Who can hear with patience, says he,
that those huge high mountains of Norway, or the mountain Slotus, which lies
under the Pole, and is the highest in the world, should yet be thought to have
the same superficies with ^he Sealying beneath it? This therefore being the
chiefest reason, that may seem to overthrow the opinion of the Earth, and Seas
making up one sphaericall body; let us examine it a little more nearly, and
consider, how great this inequality may be, that seems to make so much against
the evennessc of this Yerrestitall Globe. Many strange, and almost incredible
things are reported by Aristotle, Mela, Pliny, and Solinu^, of the unusual
height of Atho^, an Hill in Macedonia, and of Casius in Syria, as also of
another of the same name in Arabia, and of the monntaine Caucasus. And among
the rest, one of the most miraculous things which they have observed of the
mountain Athos, is, that whereas it is situate in Macedony, it casts a shadow
into the market place at Myrrhina, a Town in the Island Lemnos; from whence
Athos is distant 86. miles. But for as much as Athos lies Westward from Lemnos,
as may appear out of Ptolomies Tables, no marvail that it casts so large a
shadow: seeing that we may observe by daily experience, that as well when the
Sunriseth, as when it sets, the shadows are always extraordinary long. But
that which Pliny, and Solinus report of the same mountain, I should rather
account among the rest of their fabulous Stories; where as they affirm it to be
so high, that it is thought to be above that region of the air whence the rain
is wont to fall. And this opinion (say they) was first grounded upon a report
that there goes, that the ashes which are left upon the Altars on the top of
this hill, are never washed away, but are found remaining in heaps upon the
same. To this may be added another testimony, out of the Excerpts of the
seventh book of Strabo, where it is said, that those that inhabit the top of
this mountain, do see the Sun three hours sooner, then those that live near
the Sea side. The height of the mount^in Caucasus is in like manner celebrated
by Aris^otle, the top whereof is enlightened by the Suns b^ames, the third part
of the night both morning and evening. No lesle fabulous is that which is
reported by Pliny and Solinus o^ Casius in Syria, from whose top the Sun rising
is discovered about the fourth watch of the night: which is also related by
Mela of that other Casius in Arabia. But that all these relations are no other
then mere fables, is acutely and solidly proved by Petrus Noninus, out of the
very principles ^f Geometry. As for that which Eustathius writes, that Hercules
pill^ called by the Greeks Calpe and Abenna, are celebrated by Dionysius
Perlegetes for their miraculous height is plainly absurd and ridiculous. For
these a^ise not above an hundred Else in height, which is but a furlong:
whereas the Pyramids of Egypt are reported by Strabo to equal that height; and
some trees in India are found to exceed it: if we may credit the relations of
those Writers, who in the same Strabo affirm, that there grows a tree by the
river Hyarotis, that casts a shadow at noon, five furlongs long.

Those fabulous narrations of the Ancients, are seconded by as vain reports of
our modern times. And first of all Scaliger writes, from other men's relation,
that Tenariff, one of the Canary Islands, rises in height fifteen leagues,
which amount to above sixty miles. But Patricius not content with this
measure, stretchth it to seventie miles. There are other hills in like manner
cried up for their great height; as namely the mountain Andi in Pe^u, and
another in the Isle Pico among the Azores Islands* but yet both these fall
short of Tenariffe. What credit the relations may des^rve, we will now examine.
And first for Tenariffe, it is reported by many writers to be of so great a
height, that it is probable the whole World affoards not a more eminent place;
not ex^pting the mountain Slo^us it sel^; which whether ever any other mortal
man has seen, besides that Monk of Oxford (who by his skill in Magic
conveyed himself into the utmost Northern regions, and took a view of all
the places about the Pole, (as the Story has it) is more then I am able to
determine. Yet that this Isle cannot be so high as Scaliger would have it, we
may be the more bold to believe, because that the tops of it are scarcely ever
free from snow: so that you shall have them coverd all over with snow all the
year long, save only one, or, at the most, two months in the midst of summer:
as may appear out of the Spanish Writers. Now that any s^ow is generated 60 or
70 miles above the plain superficies of the Earth and Water, is more then they
will ever persuade us: seeing that the highest vapour^ never rise above 48
miles above the earth, according to Eratosthenes his measure; but according to
Ptolomy, they ascend not above 41 miles. Notwithstanding Cardan, and some other
professed Mathematicians, are bold to raise them up to 288 miles; but with no
sma^ stain of their name, have they mixed those trifles with their other
writings. Solinus reports that the tops of the mountain Atlas reaches very
near as high as the circle of the Moon: but he betrayeth his own error, in
that he confesses that the top of it is covered with snow, and shines with
fires in the night. Not unlike to this, are those things which are reported of
the some mountain, and it is height, by Herodotus, Dionysius Afer, and his
scholiast Eustathius: whence it is called in Authors, Coelorum columen, the
pillar that bears up the Heavens* But to let pass these vain prodigious
relations: let us come to those things that seem to carry a greater show of
truth. Eratosthenes found by Dioptricall instruments, and measuring the
distances betwixt the places of his observation, that a perpendicular, drawn
from the top of the highest mountain, down to the lowest bottom or valley, did
not exceed ten furlongs. Cleomedes says that there is no hill found to be
above fifteen furlong^ in height: and so high as this, was that vast steep rock
in Bactriana, which is called Sisimitrae Petra, mentioned by Strabo in the 11
book of his Geography. The topps of the Thessalian mountatns are raiscd to a
greater height by Solinus, then ever it is possible for any hill to reach. Yet
if we may believes Pliny, Dicaearchus, being employed by the Kings command, in
the same business, found that the height of Pelion, which is the highest of
all, exceeded not 1250 pases, which is but ten furlongs. But to proceed yet a
little further, least we should seem too sparing herein, and to restrain them
within narrower limits then we ought: we will add to the height of hills, the
depth also of the Sea. Of which the illustrious Julius Scaliger in his 38.
Exercitation against Cardan, writes thus. The depth of the Sea (says he) is
not very great: for it seldom exceeds 80 pase^, in most places it is not 20
pases, and in many places not above six, in few places, it reaches 100. pases,
and very seld^me, or never exceeds this number. But because that falls very far
short of the truth, as is testified by the daily experience of those that pass
the Se^s: let us make the depth of the Sea equal to the height of mountains:
so that suppose the depth thereof to be ten furlongs, which is the measure of
the Sa^dinian Sea, in the deepest places, as Posidonius in Strabo affirms. Or
if you please, let it be fifteen furlongs, as Cleomedes, and Fabianus, cited by
Pliny lib. 2. c. 102. will have (...). (For Georg. Valla in his interpretation
of Cleomedes, deals not fairly with his Author, where he makes him assign
thirty furlongs to be the measure of the Seas depth.) These grounds being thus
laid, let us now see what proportion the height of hills may bear to the
Diameter of the whole Earth: that so we may hence gather, that the extubcrancy
of hills are able to detract little or nothing from the roundnesse of the
Earth; but that this excrescency will be but like a little knob or dust upon a
ball, as Cleomedes says For if we suppose the circumference of the whole
earth to be 180000 furlongs, according to Ptolomies account, (neither did ever
any of the Ancients assign a less measure then this; as Strabo witnesses:)
the Diameter thereof will be, (according to the proportion betwixt a circle
and it is Diameter found out by Archimedes,) above 57272. furl^ng. If then we
grant the highest Hills to be ten furlongs high, according to Eratosthenes and
Dicaearchus; they will bear the same proportion to the Diameter of the Earth,
that is, betwixt one and 5727. (Peucerus mistakes himself when he says, that
the Diameter of the Earth to the perpendicular of ten furlongs is as 18000. to
one for this is the proportien it bears to the whole circumference, and not
the Diameter. Or suppose the topps of the ^ighest hills to ascend to the
perpendicular of ^ifteene furlongs, as Cleomedes would have it: ^he proportion
then will be of one to 3818. Or if ^ouplease, let it be thirty furlongs, of
which ^height is a certain rock in Sogdiana, spoken ^f by Strabo, in the
eleventh Book of his Geography, (notwithstanding Cleomedes is of o^inion, that
a perpendicular drawn from the top of the highest hill, to the bottom of the
dee^est Sea, exceeds not this measure:) the proportion will be no greater, then
of one to 1908. Or let us extend it yet farther, if you will, to four miles,
or thirty-two furlongs, (of which ^eight the mountain Casius in Syria is
repor^ed by Pliny to be,) the proportion will yet be somewhat less then of
one to 1789. I am therefore so far from giving any credit to Patricius his
relation of Tenariffes being seventy^wo miles high, (unless it be measured by
ma^y oblique and crooked turnings and windings: ^n which manner Pliny measures
the height of ^he Alps also to be fifteen miles;) as that I cannot assent to
Alhazen, an Arabian, who would have the topps of the highest hills to reach ^o
eight Arabian miles, or eighty furlongs, as I think: neither yet to Pliny, who
in his quarto lib. cap. 11. affirms the mountain Haemus to be six miles in
height: and I can scarcely yield to the samc Pliny, when as he speaks of other
Hills four miles in height. And whosoever should affirm any Hill to be higher
then this, though it were Mercury himself, I would bardly believe him. Thus
much of the height o^ hills, which s^emed to derogate from the roundnesse of
the Terrestrial Globe. Patricius proceeds, and goes about to prove that the
water also is not round or sphaericall. And he b^rroweth his argument from the
observations of those that conveigh or level waters, who find by their
Dioptricall Instruments; that water^ bave all an equal and plain superficies,
except they be troubled by the violence of winds. On the contrary side,
Eratosthenes in Strabo affirms, that the superficies of the Sea is in some
places higher, then it is in other. And he also produces, as assertors of his
ignorance, those Water-levellers, wbo being employed by Demetrius ab^ut the
entting away of the Isthmus, or neck of land betwixt Peloponesus and Greece;
returned him answer; that they found by their In^ruments, that that part of the
Se^ which was on Corinth's side, was higher then it was at Cenchraee. The like
is also storied of Sesostris, one of the Kings of Egypt, who going about to
make a passage out of the Mediterranean into the Arabian gulf, is said to have
desisted from his purpose, because he found that the superficies of the
Arabian gulf was higher then was the Mediterranean: as it is reported by
Aristotle, in the end of his first Book of Meteors. The like is also said in
the same place, by the same Author, to have happened afterward to Darius. Now
whether tbe Architects or Water-levellers, employed by Demetrius, Sosostris,
and Darius, deserve more cre^it, then those whom Patricius names; I shall no^
^uch trouble my self to examine. Yet Strabo in^igheth against Eratosthenes for
attributing any ^ch eminencies, and depressions to the superficies (...) the
Sea. And Archimedes his doctrine is, ^at every humid body, standing still and
with^t disturbance, has a Sphericall superficies, whose ^enter is the same
with that of the Earth. So that ^ee have just cause to reject the opinions,
hoth of those that contend that the superficies of the Sea is ^aine; as also of
those that will have it to be in ^me places higher tben in other. Although we^
cannot, in reason, but confess, that so small a por^on of the whole
Terrestiall Globe, as may b^ ^mprehended within the reach of our sight, cannot
^ee distinguished by the help of any Instruments ^om a plain superficies. So
that we may conclude ^atricius his agreement, which he alleges from ^he
experience of Water-conveighers, to be of no ^eight at all.

But he goes on, and labors to prove his ^ssertion from the elevation and
depression, rising ^d setting of the Poles, and Stars, which are ^served daily,
by those that traverse the Seas: ^ll which, he says, may come to pass,
al^ough the surface of the water were plain. For (...) any Star be observed,
that is in the vertical ^int of any place; which way soever you tra^ell from
that place, the same Star will seem (...) be depressed, and abate something of
it is ele^ation, though it were on a plain superficies. ^ut there is something
more in it then Patri^ius takes notice of. For if we go^ an equal measure of
miles either toward the North, or toward the South; the elevation or
depression of the Star, will always be found to be equal: which that it can
possibly be so in a plain superficies; is more then he will ever be able to
demonstrate. If we take any Star situate near the Equator, the same when yo^
have removed thence 60. English miles, will be elevated about a degree higher,
above the Horizon, whether the Star be directly over your head, or whether you
depart thence, that so it may be depressed from your Zenith, for 30. or 50. or
any other number of degrees. Which that it cannot thus be; on a plain
superficies, may be demonstrated out of the principles of Geometry. But yet me
thinks, this one thing might have persuaded Patricius (being so well versed in
the Histories of the Spanish Navigations, as his writings sufficiently
testify) that the superficies of the Sea is not plain; because that the Ship
called the Victory, wherein Ferdinand Magellane losing from Spain, and
directing his course toward the South-west parts, passed through the
Straights, called since by his name, and so touching upon the Cape of good
hope, having compassed the whole World about, returned again into Spain. And
here I shall not need to maintain the famous Voyages of our own Countrie-men,
Sir Francis Drake, and Master Thomas Candish, not so well known perhaps abroad;
which yet convince Patricius and the same error. And thus have we lightly
touched the chief foundations that his cause is built upon: but as for ^ose
ill understood experiments, which he brings (...) the confirmation of the same.
I shall let them ^sse, for that they seem rather to subvert his opi^n then
confirm it.

Thus having proved the Globe of the Earth (...) be of a Sphaericall figure,
seeing that the E^inency of the highest Hills has scarcely the ^e proportion
to the Semidiameter of the ^rth, that there is betwixt 1. and 1000. which how
small it is, any one may easily per^ive: I hold it very superfluous to go
about to love, that a Globe is of a figure most proper and ^t to express, and
represent the fashion of the Hea^ns and earth, as being most agreeable to
Nature, ^siest to be understood, and also very beautiful (...) behold.

Now in material Globes, besides the true ^d exact description of places,
which indeed is ^e chiefest matter to be considered; there are ^o things
especially required. The first where^ is the magnitude and capacity of them;
that (...) there may be convenient space for the de^ription of each particular
place or region: the ^cond is the lightness of them, that so their ^ight be
not cumbersome. Strabo in his eleventh, ^ok, would have a Globe to have ten
foot (...) Diameter, that so it might in some rea^nable manner admit the
description of particu^r places. But this bulk is too vast, to be ^nveniently
dealt withal. And in this regard, (...) think that those Globes, of which I
intend (...) speak in this ensuing discourse, may justly be perferred before
all other, that have been^ set forth before them; as being more capacious then
any other: for they are in Diameter two foot, and two inches: whereas
Mercator's Globes, (which are bigger then any other ever set forth before him,)
are scarcely sixteen inches Diameter. The proportion therefore of the
superficies of these Globes, to Mercator's, will be as 1. to 2^ and somewhat
more, Every Country therefore in those Globes will be above twice as large as
it is in Mercator's: so that each particular place may the more easily be
described. And this I would have to be understood of those great Globes, made
by William Saunder^on of London; concerning the use of which especially, we
have written this discourse. For he has set forth other smaller Globes also,
which as they are of a lesser bulk^ and magnitude, so are they of a cheaper
price: that so the meaner Students might herein also be provided for. Now
concerning the Geographicall part of them, seeing it is taken out of the newest
Charts and descriptions; I am bold to think them more perfect then any other:
how ever they want not their errors. And I think it may be the Authors glory
to have performed thus much in the edition of these Globes. One thing by the
way you are to take notice of: which is, that the descriptions of particular
places are to be sought for else where; for this is not to be expected in a
Globe. And for these descriptions of particular Countries, you may have
recourse to the Geographicall tables of Gerardus Mercator, whose diligence and
industry in this Regard seems to exceed all other before him. To him,
therefore we refer you.

PONT. STRABO in the place above, cited by the Author, speaks of a Globe of
that bigness, not such an one as himself had made but such an one as he could
wish were made; that so it might be every way absolut^. And indeed with in this
age of ours, the magnificent and Illustrious Tvcho Brabe, who is now deservedly
celebrated with the titl^ of a Second Atlas, has made a very fair Celestial
Globe composed all of wood within, and covered over with plates of Copper,
artificially wrought, containing six foot in Diameter, besides the Meridian,
and Horizon, and other ^ppendances which may be guessed at by the rest* the
like whereof, so coldly and elaborately framed, and every way exactly answering
it self, I think was never made by any. And indeed, it is a vast and
magnificent piece of work: insomuch that many strangers came out of diverse
parts into Denmark, while it was there, only to see this Globe But Tycho
^fterward betaking himself to the Emperour^ Court, carried this Globe with some
certaino other Mathematicll instruments with him. All which after the death of
Tycho, were ^ought for a great sum of money by the Emperor, and are now
preserv^d at Prage in the ^mperiall Castle, and showed among other ^arities
there. About the Horizon are read these words, written in letters of gold.

Anno a Christo nato M. D. XXCIV. Regnante in Dania Frederico secundo, hunc
Coelesti machinae conformem Globum, in quo affi^a octavae Sphaerae sidera
c^litus organis deprehensa, suis quaeque locis ad amussim repraesentare,
Errant^umque stellarum per haec apparentias perpervestigare decrevit, coelo
terrigenis, qui rationem eam capiunt, Mechanico opere patefacto, TYCHO BRAHE,
O. F. Sibi and posteris. F. F.

Which Globe, by reason of i^s extraordinary magnitude, has this praerogative
above all other* that all things may be done upon it most exactly, and in the
very minute, especially as far as concerns the doctrine of the First
moveable, together with the observations of the Stars, and their aspects in
respect of the Ecliptic and Equator: all which may be done mechanically,
without any ^edious computations.

The great Duke of Tuscany has also two very fair Globes, as large as this,
but made after the ordinary manner; the one a Terrestrial Globe: but the other
an Armillary Sphaere, consisting of Circles, and Orbs only.

Now concerning those Globes of Mercator, spoken of by our Author, the same
have been since, accurately corrected, according to Tycho'^ observations, and
set forth both in a great, and lesser form^ by J Hondius, and are still made,
and sold by his Son.

And because that in this ensuing discourse of Globes, there is often mention
made of a Point, Line, Superficle^, Angle, Rhombus; Axis, and other the like
Geometrical terms: I have thought good to set down the several definitions
of the same.

A Point, is that which has no parts: or a thing supposed to be Indivisible,
or that cannot be divided into parts.

A Lin^, is a supposed length without breadth; whose extremes or bounds are t^
Points.

A Right Line, is the shortest of all Lines, drawn from any two of the same
Points.

Parallels, are Lines equidistant from each other: which though they should be
protended infinitely* would never meet in one point, but keep still the same
distance mutally.

A Perpendicular, is a right Line, falling directly on a Right Line, and making
on each side that Point where they touch, two equal Right Angles.

A Superficies, is a Longitude, having only Latitude: whose terms and limits
are two Lines.

A Figure, is that which is comprehended within one, or many bands: under one
bound is comprehended a Circle: and all other Figures under many.

A Term or Limit, is that which is the end of any thing.

A Circle, is a plain Figure, comprehended under one round line: in the midst
whereof there is a P^int, from whence all Lines drawn to the Circumference are
equal.

The Center of a Circle, is that point in the midst, from which all equal
lines are drawn to the Circumference.

The Diameter of a Circle, is a Right line passing through the Center,
terminated at each end with the Circumference, and dividing the Circle into two
equal Parts.

A Semicircle, is the half of a Circle, contained within the Diameter, and
half the Circumference.

An Arch, is a portion of a Circle, comprehended within a Right line, and any
part of the Circumference. and is always either greater or lesser then a
Semicircle.

An Angle is, when two lines are extended upon the same superficies, so that
they touch one another in a Point, but not directy.



A Right Angle, is that which is produced of a Right line, falling upon a Right
line, and making two equal Angles, on each side the Point, where they touch
each other: As the Lines A, B, C.

An Obtuse Angle, is that which is Greater then a Right Angle, as the Angle A,
C, D.



An Acute Angle, is that which is less then a Right: as the Angle A, C, B.

A Solid Angle, is that which is comprehended under more then two plain
Angles, which are not in the same superficies and meeting all in one point: as
are the Angles of a Cube, or Die.

Rhombus, is a Figure Quadrangular, having equal sides, but not equal Angles.

Rhomboides, is a Figure having neither equal sides, nor equal Angles: yet the
Opposite sides and Angles are equal.

A solid Body, is that which has length, breadth, and thickness; as a Cube or
Die: and the Limits or Extremes of it are superficies.

The Axis is that Diameter, above which the Sphaere or Globe is turned.

The Poles of a Sphaere, are the Extremes, or ends of the Diameter, and are
terminated in the superficies of the Sphaere.

A Sphaere is defined by Euclide to be, when the Diameter of a semicircle
remaining fixed, the Semicircle is turned about, till it return again to the
place, whence it began to move at first.

The first Part, Of those things which are common both to the Caelestiall and
Terrestrial GLOBE.
CHAP. I. What a Globe is, with the parts thereof: and of the Circles of the
Globe.
A Globe, in relation to our present purpose, we define to be an Analogicall
representation either of the Heavens, or the Earth. And we call it Analogicall,
not only in ^egard of it is form, expressing the Sphaericall figure, as well of
the Heavens, as also of the Terr^stiall Globe, consisting of the Earth it self,
together with the interflowing Seas: but rather because that it represents
unto u^ in a just proportion and distance, each particular constellation in the
Heavens, and every several region and tract of g^ound in the Earth, together
with certain circles, both greater and l^sser, invented by Artificers for the
more ready computation of the same. The g^eater Circle we call those, which
divide the whole superficies of the Globe into two equal parts, or halfes: and
those the lesser, which divide the same into two unequal parts.

PONT. A Globe is also called a Sphaere: only with this distinction, that a
Sphere is properly such an one, as consists only of circles or little hoopes of
brass, or like matter, and is not a solid body, as is a Globe: the Latins
call it Armillaris. Now those Circles whereof it is made, although we are not
to cone eive that there are any such reallones in the Heavens, yet they have
been invented by Artificers, to the end, that by means of the same, the
doctrine of the true motions of the Celestial bodies might the more easily
be apprehended. And what is said of the Equator, Zodiaque, Axes, and the
other Circles, is also to be understood of the other Orbs themselves, and
their Hypotheses. For as concerning the objection made long since by Rhoeticus,
and lately by Peter Ramus lib. 2. Schol. Math. touching the facility the
ancient Egyptians had in search ing out the courses of the Stars: I think it
not amiss to let you see what the Noble Tycho's opinion is herein, and what
answer he, once upon occasion gave Ramus himself, proposing the same unto
him: as we find it related by himself in his book of Astronomicall Epistles
page 60. And thus it is.

Quod celeberrimus ille noltri aevi Philosophus Petus Ramus, etc. Where as that
famous Philosopher of our times, Peter Ramus, was of opinion, that the Science
of Astronomy might be framed by some certain Logical ways of computation,
with Hypotheses: this is nothing else but a mere ground-lesse conjecture.
Which con^eit of his, he proposed indeed to me about sixteen ^eares since,
when as we were together at Au^purge: wishing me withal, that when as I had
^nce reduced the course of the Stars into some ^xact order, by the Hypotheses
now in use; I ^ould then try what might be done without them. And that this
might possibly be effected, he brought this for his reason, because that he
had read, that the Egyptians, had anciently a most easy and facile way and
method in their Astronomy. And therefore, seeing that this way of computation
by Hypotheses is very intricate and difficult; it must needs follow, that they
had a more plain and compendious way to the knowledge of the course of the
Stars, and that without them But I opposed him herein, showing withal, that
it was altogether impossible that the Caelestiall Apparen^es should be reduced
into any certain order or science, so as to be understood, without the help^
of Hypotheses. And that this facility of the Egyptians was only in the
AEquators of the Planets, whereby they freed themselves from all tedious
supputation; Whereas, the ease and facile use of the Ephemerides was not as yet
brought to light. But for as much as he (thought otherwise a man of an
excellent apprehension and wit, and a great lover of the truth) seemed not to
be so thoroughly acquainted with the hidden secrets of this intricate Science,
and considered not that the course of the Heavenly bodi^s did not keep a
constant period at any set time: I neither could nor indeed desired to get any
thing of him, in this matter. He has many Sectaries at this day, who have a
strong faith of the possibility of this thing: but such they are, that neither
understand the matter themselves, nor will ever be able to bring it to any
effect. For seeing that all things consist in number, weight, and measure:
without these, there is no^ any thing in this visible world that can be
explained or understood. Now the office of these Hypotheses is only to show the
measure of the apparent motion of the Heavenly bodies, by circles and other
figures: which are again resolved into numbers by Arithmeticke without which,
whosoever shall think to attain to the knowledge of the motion of the Stars: he
may be said to invoke Fortune, (as the Proverb is:) and dreams of some strange
incorporeall, and more then Seraphicall way, above the reach of humane capacity.

Besides the body of the Globe it self, and those things which we have said to
be thereon inscribed, there is also annexed a certain frame, with necessary
instruments thereto belonging: which we shall declare in order.

The fabric of his frame is thus. First of all, there is a Base, or foot to
rest upon: on which there are raised perpendicularly six c Pillars b or a
Columns, of equal length and distance; upon the top of which there is fastened
to a level, and parallel to the Base, a round plate or circle of wood, of a
sufficient breadth and thickness, which they call the Horizon: because that
the uppermost superficies thereof The Horizon.
performs the office of the true Horizon. For it is so placed, that it
divides the whole Globe unto two equal parts. Whereof that which (...)
uppermost, represents unto us the visible ^emisphaere, and the other, that
which is hid ^omus. So likewise that Circle which divi^es that part of the
world which we ^ee, from that other which we see not, is called the Hori^on.
And that point which is directly over our ^eads in our Hemisphaere, and is on
every side ^quidistant from the Horzion, is commonly ^ailed Zenith: but the
Arabians name it Se^th. But the former corrupted name has yet ^revailed, so
that it is always used among Wri^ers generally. And that point which is
oppo^ite to it in the lower Hemisphaere, the Arabians ^all Nathire; but it is
commonly written Nadir. These two points are called also the Poles of the
Horizon.

Furtheremore, upon the superficies of the Ho^izon in a material Globe there
are described, first, the twelve Signs of the Zodiaque: and ^ach of these is
again divided into twenty lesser portions: so that the whole Horizon is divided
unto 360. parts, which they also call degrees. And if every degree be div^ded
into sixty parts ^lso, each of them is called a Scruple or Minute: and so by
the like subdivision of Minut^ unto fixty parts, will arise Seconds, and of
these Thirds, and likewise Four h^, and Fifths, etc. by the like partition
still of each into ^xty parts.

PONT. In the midst among these Signs are there described certain Characters,
to denote the particular Planet, to whose dominion each Sig^ does appertain.
Next to this there is another Section, wherein are set down the several day^
of every week: after that, follows the number of the days of every Month,
throughout the whole year. Besides this number of the day^s, each of them has
in their several orders some one of these three letters affixed, K. N. I.
signifying the Kalends, Nones, and Ides, which terms the Ancient Romans used
in their accounts, to sign^ fie the days of every Month. For they did (...)
reckon as we do now, from the first day of every Month to the 30. or 31. of
the same; but their account was according to the Kalendes, None^, and Ides. So
that the first of each Month w^ the Kalends; and the rest of the days of the
same month were not reckoned forward, but after a retrograde manner. As for
example: The last day of December, with us is the 31. They called the second of
the Kalends or January, and the 30. of the same month, the third of the Kalends
of January Thus reckoning backward till they came to the Ides, which was the
foureteenth of December, and the nineteenth of the Kalends of January,. The
like order they observed in the Ides and Nones also. Now what months have more
or fewer Kalends or Nones may be found upon the Horizon, as we have said: and
as may be gathered also out of these old verses. Majus sex Nonas, October,
Julius, and Mars:
Quatuor at reliqui. Tenet Idus quilibet octo.
Ind dies reliquos dic omnes esse Calendas.


There is also described upon the Horizon the Roman Calendar, And that three
several ways: ^o wit, the ancient way, which is still in use ^ith us here in
England; and the new way, ap^ointed by Pope Gregory 13. Wherein the E^uinoxes
and Solstices were restored to the same ^laces, wherein they were at the time
of the ce^ebration of the Council of Nice: and in the ^hird, the said
Equinoctial and Solsticial points ^re restored to the places that they were in,
at ^he time of our Savior Christ's nativity. The ^onths in the Calender are
divided into days and weeks: to which are annexed, as their pe^uliar
characters, the seven first letters of the Latin Alphabet. Which manner of
designing ^he days of the month, was first brought, in by Dionysius Exigum, a
Roman Abbot, after the Council of Niee.

The innermost border of the Horizon is divided into 32. parts, according to
the number ^f the winds, which are observed by our mode^ne Sea-fareing men in
their Navigations; by which also they are wont to design forth the ^uarters of
the Heavens, and the coasts of Coun^ries. For the Ancients observe but four
^inds only: to which were after added four ^ore: but after ages, not content
with this ^umber, increased it to twelve and at ^ength they brought it to
twenty four, as (...) is notes. And now these latertimes have ^ade them up
thirty two, the names whereo^, ^oth in English and Latin are set down in the
^he Horizon of Material Globes.

PONT. The true Horizon is either Rational or Sensible. The Rational or
Intelligible Horizo^ divide th the Sphaere into two equal parts exactly; and
these are called the upper and the lower Hemisphaeres. The sensible or apparent
Horizon, is s^ called, because it only seems to divide the Heavens into two
equal parts, or Hemisphaeres: whereas indeed it does not divide it so exactly,
but only seems so to do. The Rational Horizon, is also called the
artificial, because that it was brought in, for the use of Astronomy.

The use of the Horizon is manifold. First, it divides the Heavens into two
Hemisphaeres. Secondly, it shows what Stars never set, and so what never
rise from under the Earth; and so, likewise what Stars do both rise and set.
Thirdly, it shows the cause of the equality, and in equality of the
artificial days and nights. Fourthly, it condueeth to the finding out of the
latitude of any place. Fifthly, it is the cause of the Rectitude and obliquity
of the Sphare; whereof we have occasion to speak more largely hereafter.

There is also let into this Horizon, two notches opposite one to the other, a
circle of brass, making right angles, with the said Horizon, and placed, so
that it may be moved at pleasure up and down, by those notches, a^ need shall
require. This circle is called the Meridian, because that one side of it, which
is The Merinian.
in like manner divided in 360. degrees, supplyeth the office of the true
Meridian. Now the Meridian is one of the greater circles, passing through the
Poles of the world, and also of the Horizon: to which, when the Sun in his
daily revolution is arrived in the upper Hemisphaere, it is midday; and when it
touches the same in the lower Hemisphaere, it is midnight, at that place whose
Meridian it is.

These two circles, the Horizon and Meridian, are various and mutable in the
Heavens and Earth, according as the place is changed. But in the material
Globe, they are made fixed and constant: and the earth is made moveable: that
so the Meridian may be applied to the vertical point of any place.

PONT. The us^s of the Meridian are these, especially. First, It determines
the paynt of midday, and midnight: whence the Astronomers begin the day always
from the Circle.. Secondly, in the Meridian is observed the Zenith or v^rticall
point of places, whence afterward the distances of Stars and Parallel circles
are gathered. Thirdly* The Longitude and Latitude of places are taken from
hence. Fourthly, It shows the greatest elevation of the Sun, and other Stars:
which elevation is called their Meridian Altitude. Fifthly, By the Meridionall
elevdtion of the Sun, when he is in the AEquinoctiall point, may be found out
the elevation of the Pole, and habitude or position of the Sphaere. For the
quarter of a circle being 90. degrees, if then we substract the Mer^dionall
Altitude of the Sun in the AEquinoctiall from 90. degrees, the remainder
shows the elevation of the Pole. As for example, The elevation of the Sun at
noon, when it is in the AEquinoxe, is about 38. degrees with us here at London:
which being deducted out of 90. there remains 52. Which is the elevation of
the Pole with us. So at Rome the AEquinoctiall altitude of the Sun is about 48.
degrees; which being subtracted from 90 degrees, which is a Quadrant, there
remains 42. for the elevation of the Pole.

In two opposite points, of this Meridian, are fastened the two ends of a^ iron
pin, passing through the body of the Globe and its Center. The Poles and Axis.
One of which ends is called the Arcticke, o^ North Pole of the world; and the
other the Antarctick, or South Pole: and the pin it self is called the Axis.
For the Axis of the world is the Diameter about which it is turned. And the
extreme ends of the Axis are called the Poles.

To either of these Poles, when need shall require, there is a certain brass
circle or ring, of a reasonable strong making, to be fastened, which circle is
divided into 24. equal parts, according to the number of the hours of the day
and night: and it is therefore called the Houre-circle. And this circle is to
be applied to either of the Poles The Houre-Circle.
in such sort, as that the Section where 12. is described, ^ay precisely agree
with the points of mid day, and midnight in the superficies of the true
Meridian.

There is also another little pin, or style to be fastened to the end of the
Axis, in the very center of the Houre-circle: annd this pin is called in
Latin, Index Horarius: and is so made, as that it turns about and points to
every of the 24. sections in the Houre-circle, according as the Globe it self
is moved about: so that you may place the point of it to what hour you please.

PONT. The use of this Houre-circle and Index is to denote the hours of the
riseing and setting of the Sun and other Stars, which must be practiced after
this manner. First, you must set the Globe to your elevation or Pole, and then
apply the degree of the sign, in which the Sun at the time is, to the
Meridian, and the Index to the twelfth hour which is uppermost. And so having
thus done, you must turn the Globe about, till the degree wherein the Sun is,
come to the Eastern side of the Horizon; which done, the Index will point out
the hour of his riseing, and if you turn it about to the West side, you shall
in like manner have the hour of his setting.

There is also belonging to the Meridian a Quadrant of Altitude, being made of
a long thin plate of steel or brass, and fashioned crooked, so that it may be
applied to the conuexs Superficies of the Globe, and having the fourth part of
the circle in length. And this Quadrant is made in such a sort, as that The
Quad^ant of^ Altitude.
it may be fastened on the Meridian, and so be applied to the Zenith of any
place whatsoever, being divided from one end to the other into 90. equal parts
or degrees.

There is besides at the foot of the Globe, a Mariners compass placed: which
serves to show, how to place the Globe rightly, according to the Four winds or
quarters of the world.

CHAP II. Of the Circles which are described upon the Superficies of the Globe.
ANd now in the next place we will show wh^ Circles are described upon the
Globe it self. And first of all there is d^awn a circle, in an equal distance
from both the Poles, that is 90. degrees, which is called the AEquinoctiall, or
The Equator.
Equator; because that when the Su^ is in this Circle, days and nights are of
equal length in all places. By the r^volution of this Circle is defended a
Natural day, which the Greeks call (...) For a day is (...); Natural and
Artificial. A Natural day is defined to be the space of time, where in the
whole Equator A day Natural and Artificial.
makes a full revolution* and this is done in 24. hours. An Artific^all day is
the space, wherein the Sun is passi^g thorough our upper Hemisphaere: to which
is opposed the Artificial night, while the Sun is carried about in the lower
Hemisphaere. So that an Artificial day and night are comprehen^ed within a
Natural day.

The Parts of a dav are called hours; which are either Equal or Unequal. An
Equal hour is the 24. part of a Natural day, in which Hours equal and
un^quall.
space, 15. d^grees of the Equator do always rise, and as many are depre^ied
on the opposite part. An Unequal hour is the 12. part of an Artificial day,
betw^xt the ^ime of the Suns rising and setting again. Th^se hours are again
divided into Minutes. Now a Minute is the 60. part of an hour* in which space
of time, a quarter of a degree in the Equator, that is, 15. minutes do ^ise,
and a^ many set.

PONT. The use of the AEqu^tor consists chiefly in these things. First, it
shows the time of the AEquinoxes, which are always when the Sun falies upon
the AEquinoctiall circle. And this is, when as the Sun enters into the first
degree of Aries and Libra: according to that of Manil^us.

Libra Ariesque parem reddunt noctemque diemque

In English thus.

The Sun in Libra, and Aries placed, each year:

The day and night are equal every where.

Secondly ^he Equator divides the Heavens into two equal parts, or
Hemisphaeres. whereof one is called the Septeutrionall or Northern Hemisphaere:
the other, the Meridionall or Southern. Thirdly, it shows the ascension and
descension of the parts of the Zodiac: whence the length of the Artificial
day and night, for any position of Sphaere, may be known. Fou^thly (...) shows
what Stars, and parts of the Eclipticke have any Declination.

The Equator is crossed, or cut in two opposite points, by an oblique Circle,
which is called the Zodiac. The obliquity of this Circle is said to have been
first observed by Anaximander Milesius, in the 58. Olympiad. as Pliny writes
in hi^ lib. 2. Cap. 8* who also in the same place affi^mes, that it was first
divided into 12 parts, which they call Signs, by Cleostretus Tenedius, in like
manner as we see it at this day. Each of these Signs is again subdivided into
30. parts: so that the whole Zodiac is divided, in all, into 360. parts, like
as the orher circles are. The first twelfth part whereof, beginning at the
Vernal Intersection, when the Equator and Zodiac cross each other, it
assigned to Aries, the second to Taurus, etc. reckoning from West to East. But
here a young beginner in Astronomy may justly doubt, what is the reason, that
the first 30. degrees or 12, part of the Zodiac is attributed to Aries,
whereas the first Star of Aries falls short of the Intersection of the
AEquinoctiall and Zodiac no less then 27. degrees, The reason of this is,
because that in the time of the Ancient Greeks, who first of all observed the
places and situation of the fixed Stars, and expressed the same by Asterismes
and constellations, the first Star of Aries was then a very small space distant
from the very Intersection. For in Thales Milesius his time, it was two degrees
before the Intersection: in the time of Meton the Athenian it was in the very
Intersection: in Timocharis his time it came two degrees after the
Intersection. And so by reason of it is vicinity, the Ancients assigned the
first part of the Zodiac to Aries, the second to Tauru^; and so the rest in
their order: as it is observed by succeeding ages, even to this very day.

PONT. Thales Milesius was the first that calculated the time of the AEquinoxe
and Eclipses: and he flourished about the years of the Creation, 3370. which
was about 634. years before Christ, Meton lived about 431 years before
Christ, in the year of the Creation, 3517. He was the Son of (...), and was a
man of excellent knowledge in Astronomy. He also first invented the Moons
Circle of 19: years: whose first new Moon fell upon the 13 day of the month
Scriophorion, which is the same with our 16 of June, being on a Friday. Vid
D^dorum Siculum. Censorinus writes of him thus. Praeterea sunt etc. There are
(says he (besides, many other great years: as the Metonicall year which
Meton the Athenian invented and consisted of 19. common years etc. Timochares
was by nation an Alexandrian, and he lived 300 years before Christ.

Under this Circle, the Sun and the rest of the Plane^s finished their several
courses and periods, in their several manner and time. The Sun keeps his
course in the midedst of the Zodiaque, and therewi^h describes the Ecliptic
circle. But the rest h^ve all of them their latitude and deviations from the
Suns course, or Ecliptic. By reason of which their digressions and
extravagations, the ancients assigned the Zodiaque 12. Degrees of Latitude. But
our moderen Astronomers, by reason of the Evagations of Mars, and Venus, have
added on each side two degrees more: so that the whole latitude of the Zodiaque
is confined within 16. degrees. But the Ecliptic only is described on the
Globe, and is divided, in like manner as the other circles, into 360. degrees.

PONT. The whole latitude of the Zodiaqu^ is divided into two parts by the
Ecliptic, which is the circle, or Circumference under which the Sun steeres
his course continually. whence it is called in Latin, Via Solis, and Orbita
Solis, the Sun^ high way. And in G^eek, (...), a Circle divideing the Zodiac
in the midst. And it is called the Ecliptic, because the Eclipses of the Sun
and Moon never haeppen, but when they are either in conjunction or opposition
under this line, or very near the same.

The Sun runs thorough this Circle in his yearly motion, finishing every day
in the year almost a degree by his Mean motion, that is 59. minutes, 8.
seconds. And in this space, he twice cro^seth the Equator; in two points
equally distant from each other. So that when he passes over the Equator, at
the beginnings of Aries and Libra, the days and nights are then of equal
length. And so likewise when the Sun is now, at the farthest distance from the
Equator, and is gotten to the beginning of Cancer, or Capricorn, he then
causes the Winter and Summer So Istice^. I am not ignorant, that Vitruvius,
Pliny, Thco^ Alexandrinus, Censorinus, and Columolla are of another opinion;
(but they are upon another ground,) when as they say, that the

AEquinoxes are, when as the Sun passes through the eighth degree of Aries and
Libra, and then it was the midst of Summer and winter, when the Sun entered
into the same degree of Cancer end Capricorn. But all these Authors defined
the Solstices by the returning of the shadow of Dials: which shadow cannot be
perceived to return back again, as Theon says, till the Sun is entered into
the eighth degree of Libra and A^ies.

PONT. The office and use of the Zodiac is. First, in that, it is a rule or
measure of the proper motion of the Planets. Secondly, By the help of the
Zodiac the true place, of all the Stars are sound: besides it may be known
in what sign any fixed Starr or Planet may be said to be. Thirdly, It shows
the Latitude of the Planets and fixed Stars, Fourthly, All Eclipses happen
when the Sun and Moon are under the Ecliptique. Fifthly, The obliquity of the
Ecliptique is the cause of the inequality of the artificial days and nights.

The space wherein the Sun is finishing his course through the Zodiac, is
defined ^o be a Year, which consists of 365. days, and almost 6. hours. But
they that think to find the exact measure of this period, will find themselves
frustrate: for it is finished in an unequal time. It has been always a
controversy very much agitated among the Ancien^ Astronomers, and not yet
determined. Philolaus a Pythagoraean determines it to be 365. d^yes: but all
the rest have added something more to this number. Harpalus would have it to be
369. days and a half: Democritus 365. days and a quarter, adding besides the
164 parts of a day. Oenopides would have it to be 365. days and almost 9.
hours. Meton the Athenian determines it to be 365. days 6. hours, and almost
19. minutes. After him Calipius reduced it to 365. days and 6. hours, which
account of his was followed by Aristarchus of Samos, and Archimedes. of
Syracusa. And according to this determination of theirs, Julius Caesar defined
the measure of his Civil year, having first consulted (as the report goes)
which one Sosigines a Peripatetick, and a great Mathematician. But all these,
^xcept Philolaus, (who came short of the just measure) assigned too much to the
quantity of a year. For that it is somewhat less then 365. days, 6. hours,
is a truth, confirmed by the most accurate observations of all times, and the
skilfullest Artists in Astronomicall affairs. But how much this space
exceeds the just quantity of a year, is not so easy a matter to determine.
Hipparchus, and after him Ptolomy would have the 300. part of a day subtracted
from this measure: (for Jacobus Christmannus was mistaken, when he affirmed,
that a Tropicall (...), according to the opinion of Hipparchus and Ptolomy, did
consist of 365. days, and the 300 part of a day) For they do not say so, but
that the just quantity of a year is 365. days, and 6. hours abating the 300.
part of a day: as may be plainly gathered out of Ptolomy, Almagest. lib. 3.
Cap. 2. and a^ Christmannus himself has else where rightly observed. Now
Ptolomy would have this to be the just quantity of a year perpetually and
immutably: neither would he be persuaded to the contrary, notwithstanding the
observati^s of Hipparchus, conc^ning the inequality of the Suns periodiacall
revolution. But yet the observations of succeeding times, compared with those
of Hipparchus, and Ptolomy, do^ evince the contrary. The Indians and Jews
substract the 110. part of a day: Albategnius the 600. part: the Persians the
115. part: according to whose account Messahalah and Albumasar wrote the tables
of the Mean motion of the Sun. Azaphius, Avarius, and Arzachel affirmed that
the quantity assigned was too mcch, by the 126. part of a day. Alphonsus
abateth the 122. part of a day: some others, the 128. and some the 130. part of
a day. Those that were lately employed in the restitution of the Roman
Calendar, would have almost the 133. part of 1. day to be subtracted, which
they conceived in 400. years, would come to three whole days. But Copernicus
observes that this quantity fell short, by the 115. part of a day. Most true
therefore was that conclusion of Censorinus, that a year consisted of 365.
days, and I know not what certain portion, not yet discovered by Astrologers.

By these diverse opinions here alleged, is manifestly discovered the error of
Dion, which is indeed a very ridiculous one. For he had a conceit that in the
space of 1461. Julian years, there would be wanting a whole day for the just
measure of a year; which he would have to be intercaled, and so the Civil
Julian year would accurately agree with the revolution of the Sun. And Galen
also, the Prince of Physicians, was grossly deceived, when he thought that the
years consisted of 365, days, 6. hours, and besides almost the 100. part of a
day: so that at every hundred years end there must be a new intercalation of a
whole day.

Now because the Julian year, (which was instituted by Julius Caesar, and
afterward received, and is still in (...)) was somewhat longer then it ought to
have been: hen^e it is that the AEquinoxes and Solstices have gotten before
their ancient situation in the Calendar. The mutation of the AEquinox. and
Solstices,
For about 432. years before the inca^nation of our Savior Christ, the
Vernall AEquinoxe was observed by Meton and Euct^mon, to fall on the eighth of
the Kalends of April, which is the 25. of March, according to the computation
of the Julian year. In the year 146. besore Christ it appears by the
observations of Hipparchus, that it is to be placed on the 24. of the same
month, that is the 9. of the Kalends of April. So that from hence we may
observe the error of Sosigenes (notwithstanding he was a great Mathematician)
in that above 100. years after Hipparchus, in instituting the Julian Calendar,
he assigned the Equinox^ to be on the 25. of March, or the eight, o^ the
Kalends of April, which is the place it ought to have had almost 400. years
before his time, This error of Sosigenes was derived to succeeding ages also:
in so much that in Gallens time, which was almost 200. years after Julius
Caesar, the AEquinoxes were wont to be placed on the 24. day of March and
September: as Theodorus Gaza reports. In the year of our Saviors Incarnation,
it happened on the 10. of the Kalend^ of April, or the 23, of March. And 140.
years after, Ptolomy observed it to fall on the 11. of the Kalends. And in the
time of the Council of Nice, about the year of our Lord 328. it was found to
be on the 21. of March, or the 12. of the Calends of April In the year 831.
Thebit Ben Chorah observed the Vernal AEquinoxe to fall on the 17. day of
March: in Alfraganus his time it came to the 16. of March. Arzachel a Spaniard
in the year 1090. observed to fall on the Ides of March, that is the 15. day.
In the year 1316. it was observed to be on the 13. day of March. And in in our
time. it is come to ^he 11. and 10. of the same month. So that in ^he space of
1020. yea^s. or thereabout, the AEquinoctiall points are gotten forward no
less then 14. days. The time of the Solstice also about 388. years before
Christ, was observed by Meton and Euctemon to fall upon the 18. dav of June: as
Joseph Scaliger, and Jacobus Christmannus have observed. But the same in our
time, is found to be on the 12. of the same month.

The Ecliptic and Equator are crossed by two great circles also, which are
called Colures both which are drawn through the Poles o^ The Colures.
the world, and cut the Equator at ^ght Angles. The one of them passing
thorough the points of both the Intersections; and is called the Equinoctial
Colure: The other passing through the points of the greatest distance of the
Zodiac from the Equator is therefore called the Solsticiall Colure.

PONT. The office of the Colures in general is. First to show the four
principal points of the Zodiac, in which, by reason of the motion of the Sun,
there are caused the great changes of the Seasons of the year. Of which points,
two are in the Equator, at Aries and Libra, determining the place of the
AEquinoctial Colure: and Capricorn, which constitute the Solsticiall Colure.
Secondly, To distinguish the Equator Zodiac and the whole Sphaere of the
Heavens into four equal parts. The use of which is principally seen in
examining the ascensions of the Signs. These Colures differ from each other,
in that the Solsticiall Colure passes through the Poles of the world, and also
of the Zodiac: but the AEquinoctiall Colure passes through the Poles of the
world only.

Now that both the Colures, as also the AEquinoctiall points have left the
places, where they were anciently sound to be in the heavens, is a matter
agreed upon, by all those that have applied themselves to the observations of
the Celestial motions: only the doubt is, whether fixed Stars have gone
forward unto the proceeding Signs, as Ptolomy would have it: or else whether
the AEquinoctiall and Solsticiall points have gone backward to the subsequent
Signs, according to the Series of the Zodiac, as Copernicus opinion is.

PONT. What the opinion of Joseph Scaliger was, concerning the procession of
AEquinoctial points thus diversely thought on by Ptolomy and Copernicus, you
have expressed in an epistle of his ^o Isaac Casaubon, there having been not
long before a disputation holden concerning some certain Mathematical
question, at the entreaty of some of the chiefest of the States of the Low
Countries; among which number Scaliger was chosen also, as an Arbitrator: which
Epistle of his, was afterward Printed, amongst some other of his Epistles at
Paris. What the Illustrious Tycho also thought concerning this point, you have
in his Progym^asmata Instaur. Astron. p. 255. But I will first set down
Scaliger's opinion: and afterward add Tychoe's, and some others also. Scaliger
speaks thus.

Alterae literaetuae, etc. I received (says he) ^eur second letters, the next
day aster your former. In which you make mention of one that undertakes ^o
discourse of the Magneticall direction of the Needle. Many indeed have
endeavored in this matter, and doc daily endeavor, being thereto encouraged
by the rewards proposed by the Illustrious States. To whose hands some have
delivered up their opinions in writing: and Arbitrators forthwith have been
called about it. O^ which number, it was my chance to be chosen f^ one: there
being indeed amongst them many excellent, both Mathematicians and (...) But
those that professed the Mathematics, were altogether unexperienced in
Nauticall affairs: an^ the Navigators were as ignorant of Astronom^call.
Besides these Authors of whom we were (...) pass our judgments, performed
nothing worth (...) great expectation. Neither has that Englishman, who wrote
a Book three years since, of the Magnet, produced anything answereable to the
great opinion was raised of it. I my self have often proposed, to these
Mathematicians that profess in this place, a thing which it seems can never
sink into their heads: insomuch that they entertained it with scorn and
laughter. Hipparchus was the first that brought in that merry conceit of the
eight sphaeres moveing toward the East: and so persuaded Ptolomy, that the
fix^d Stars in the eighth sphaere moved all in the same order, situation, and
distance from each other, toward the East. Which Ptolomy so confirmed, that it
had been a heinous matter for posterity to have doubted of the same. And first
of all within the memory of our Fathers, Nicolaus Copernicus, that great
restorer of Astronomy, perceived the weakness of this conceit of Hipparchus:
and withal observed, that the eight Sphaere did not move toward the East, but
that the AEquinoctiall points went forward in^o the precedent Signs: and this
he calls (...) But this observation of his, he only nakedly proposed, without
any demonstration at all. But I have observed, that the Stars have not (as
Hipparchus and Ptolomy dream) gone on to the subsequent parts: and that the
Cynosure, or Polar Star was at the same distanoe from Pole in Eudoxus his time,
as it is at this day. For proof of which assertion I have collected many
instances. which being granted, the procession of the AEquinoctiall point must
necessarily follow. For one of these two must needs be granted; to wit, either
of the motion of the eighth Sphaere toward the east, or else the progress of
the AEquinoctiall points into the precedent Signs. Now that the first is not
to be admitted appears manifestly, because that the fixed Stars have not
(...) all ^hanged their situation in respect of the Pol^, since Eudoxus his
time. Therefore the other must needs be granted. The AEquinoctiall points
therefore, have gone forward to the ant^cedent Signs. Which proposition
notwithstanding the great Copernicus had no way to demonstrate, (...) out of
the Phenomenon; by which that other motion might as well be defended* as ^his.
We therefore now have this (...) But what is it? Even nothing else, b^ the
motion of the AEquinoctiall points into the precedent Signs. Now if the
AEquinoctiall points be^ moveable; and the AEquinoctiall C^cle b^e de^cribed by
these points; the AEquinoctiall Circle ^hen must needs be moveable also: which
is as true, as truth it self. And if the AEquinoctiall circle be moveable; his
Pole must be moveable also; and so the Poles of the AEquinoctiall must be
diverse from the Poles of the world. for the Pole of the World is immovable;
but this moveable. Besides, all the Meridian circles do pass through the Poles
of the AEquinoctiall: and in the superficies of stone Dialls, the Meridian
line, which is drawn for the placing of the Sun Dial, is understood to pass
through the Poles of the AEquinoctiall; which is confessed by all men, and is
most true. But because the Poles of the AEquinoctiall are moveable, the
Meridian line. that passes through the same, must be moveable also. And
therefore it necessarily follows, that after some certain number of years,
there will be no further use of these Meridian lines in the designing of the
hours in Dialls; but a new Meridian line must be taken, and the situation of
the Dial altered, though not the Dial it self. We may therefore conclude,
that the Sun Dialls, after some certain time, will prove false, unless the
Meridian line be rectified. This is demonstrated of the very principles of the
Mathematitcks. But besides this, we have some notable instances out of the
Ancients, which do manefestly evince, that after some term of years, Sun
Dialls do not agree to their first designations: all which I have diligently
collected. These things thus demonstrated, I proposed them to these
Mathematicians, that, because the whole businesses of the Magneticall Needle
had dependence upon these Meridians, they would consider, whether or no, this
doctrine, by me first proposed, might open the way to the matter in hand, etc.

Thus far Scaliger. Let us now hear Tycho. Inaequalitatis, inquit, circa
motum, etc. That the reason (says he) of the inaequality observed in the
motion of the fixed Stars, or as Copernicus calls it, the Anticipation of the
AEquinoctiall points (which is a very subtle and ingenious speculation of his
own, that so he might reconcile and maintain the inventions of all that went
before him) that this conceit, I say, does not constare sibi, these 70. years
observations of the Starr called Spica Virginis, since his first observing the
same; do manifestly prove. For in this space of time, the reciprocation of the
AEquinoctiall points, or promotion of the Stars, is swifter, by much, then he
conceived it would have been. So that, whereas now they ought to have finished
but one degree in an hundred years space, or thereabout, they finished the same
in 70. the quantity of the years being not so slow as he imagined it to be:
as appears plainly by that we have delivered in the former Chapter. For these
two things do mutually cohere together in Copernicus, that when the quantity of
the year is greatest, the motion of tho fixed Stars should then be slowest.
But these things the accurate observat^ ons of these present years do
manifestly elude, for as much as they do not answer his periodicall
restitutions.

Thus these two great lights of our times, Tycho, and Scaliger, to whom we may
add the opinion of our Countryman Dr. Gilbert, who in his 6th book de
Magnete, will have the praecession of the AEquinoctiall points to depend upon
the Magneticall mot^n of the Poles of the Earth* And this is that Englishman,
as far as I can gather, whom Scaliger mentions in his forecited Epistle: Unto
whom I refer you for satisfaction in this point, in his lib. 6. cap. 8.

The first Star of Aries, which in the time of Meton the Athenian, was in the
very Vernall Intersection, in the time of Thales Milesius was two degrees
before the Intersection. The same in Timochares his time, was behind it two
degrees 24. minutes: in Hipparchus time, 4. degrees, 40. minutes: in Albumasars
time, 17. d^grees, 50. minutes: in Albarenius his time, 18. degrees, 10
minutes: in Arzachels time, 19. degrees, 37. minutes: in Alphonsus his time,
23. degree^, 48. minutes: in Copernicus and Rhoeticus his time 27. degrees, 21.
minutes. Whence Franciscus Baroccius is convinced of manifest error, in that
he affirms that the first Star of Aries, at the time of our Saviors
Na^ivity, was in the very Vernall intersection: especially contending to prove
it, as he does, out of Ptolomies observations, out of which it plainly
appears, that it was behind it no less then 5. degrees.

In like manner the places of the Solstices are also changed, as being always
equally distant from the AEquinoctiall points. This m^tion is finished upon the
Poles of the Ecliptic, as is agreed upon, both by Hipparchus and Ptolomy, and
all the rest that have come after them. Which is the reason that the fixed
Stars have always kept the same latitude, though they have changed their
declination. For confirmation whereof, many testimonies may be brought out of
Ptolomy, lib 7. cap. 3- Almag. I will only all dg one, more not able then the
r^st, out of Petolomies Georgr. lib. 1. cap. 7. The Starr which we call the
Polar Starr, and is the last in the tail of the Bear, is certainly known in
our time to be scarce three degrees distant from the Pole: which very Starr, in
Hipparchus his time, was above 12. degrees distant from the Pole: as Merinus in
Ptolomy affirms. I will produce the whole passage, which is thus. In the Torrid
Zone, (says he) the whole Zodiac passes over it, and therefore the shadows
are cast both ways, and all Starrrs there are seen to rise and set. Only the
little Bear begins to appear above the Horixon in those places, that are 5 0
furlongs Northward from Ocele. For the Parallel that passes through Ocele
(...) distant from the Equator 11. gra.. And Hipparchus affirms, that the
Starr in the end of the little Bears tail, which is the most Southward of
that Constellation, is distant from the Pole 12. degrees*. This excellent
testimony of his, the Interpreters have, in their translating the place, most
strangely corrupted (a^ both Johannes Wernerus, and after him Peter Nonius have
observed) setting down in stead of 500. Quinque mill, 5000* and for
Australissimam, the most Southern, Borealissimam, the most Northerly: being led
into this error, perhaps, because that this Starr is indeed in our time the
most Northern. But if these testimonies of Marinus and Ptolomy in this point
be subtracted, Strabo in his lib. 2. Geogr. shall acquit them of this crime.
And he writes thus. It is affirmed by Hipparchus (says he) that those that
inhabit under the Parallel that runs through the Country called
Cinnamomifera (which is distant from Meroe Southward, 3000. furlongs* and from
the AEquinoctiall, 8800.) are situated almost in the midst, betwixt the
Equator and the Summer, Tropic, which passes through Syene (which is distant
from Meroe 5000. Furlongs) And these that dwell here, are the first that have
the Constellation of the little Bear, enclosed within their Arctick Circle, so
that it never sets with them: for the bright Starr, that is seen in the end of
the tail (which is also the most Southward of all) is so placed in the very
Cirele it self, that it does touch the Horizon. This is the testimony of
Strabo, which is the very same that Ptolomy and Merinus affirm; saving that
both in this place, and elsewhere, he always assigns 700. Furlongs in the
Earth, to a degree in the Heavens, according to the doctrine of Eratosthenes:
whereas both Marinus and Ptolomy allow but 500. only: os which we shall speak
more hereafter.

Let us now come to the lesser Circles which are described in the Globe. And
these are all Parallel to the Equator: as first of all the Tropickes, which
are Circles drawn through the points of the greatest declination of the
Ecliptic, on each side of the Equator. Of which, that which looks toward the
North The Tropic
Pole, is called the Tropicke of Cancer: and the other, bordering on the South,
the Tropicke of Capricorn. For the Sun, in his yearly motion through the
Ecliptic, arriving at these points, as his utmost bounds, r^turneth again
toward the Equator. This Retrocession is called by the Greeks (...), and the
Parallel Circles, drawn through the same points, are likewise called Tropickes.

PONT. The use of those tropickes is, First, to show when the Sun, in an
oblique Sphaere, is nearest the vertical point of any place, and so likewise
when the farthest off. Secondly, they show, when the Sun, in his Diurnall
motion, makes the longest or shortest days in the year. Thirdly, they are*
as it were, the limits and bounds, wherein the Sun finisheth his yearly course.
Fourthly, they distinguish the Torrid Zone in the heavens, from the two
temperate Zones.

The distance of the Tropicks from the Equator, is diversely altered, as it may
plainly appear, by comparing the observations of later times, with those of the
Ancients. For, not to speak any thing of Strabo, Proclus, and Leontius
Mechanicus, who all assigned the distance of either Tropicke from the Equator
to be 24. degree^ (for these seem to have handled the matterbut carelessely)
we may observe the same from the more accurate observations of the greatest
Artists. For Ptolomy found the distance of either Tropicke to be 23. gr. 51.
min. and * just as great, a^ Eratosthenes and Hipparchus had found it before
him: and therefore he conceived it to be immutable. Machomethes Aratensis
observed this distan to be 23. degrees, 35. minutes, right as Almamon King of
Arabia had done before him. Arz^l the Spaniard found it to be in his time, 23.
degees, 34. minutes. Almehon the Son of Albumasar, 23 degrees, 33. minutes, and
half a minute. Prophatius a Jew, 23. degrees, 32. minutes, Purbachius and
Regiomontanus, 25. degrees, 28. minutes Johan. Wernerus, 23 degrees, and 28.
minutes, and an half: and Copernicus found it in his time to be just as much.

PONT. This distance of the Tropickes from the Equator, is caused by the Suns
greatest declination, as the Astronomers call it. which greatest declination of
the Sun has been, at diverse times, found to be variable. For beginning as sar
backward, as possibly we can, and so driving it down by the Olympiads, and the
year of Christ, even to these present times, according to Tychoes calculation.
we find it to be thus, both in the degree and minute, as is here expressed in
this ensuing Table.

gr. m. 11. Aratus 24. 0. 0. Olympiad. Hipparchus 23. 51 124. Eratosthenes 127.
Ptolomaeus 23. 51. 20, An Christi 140. Albategnius 23. 35. 0. 749. Arzahel 23.
34. 0. 1070. Almeon 23. 33. 1140. Prophatius Judaeus 23. 32. 0. 1300.
Purbachius 23. 29. 30. 1458. Regiomontanus 23. 30. 0. 1490. Copernicus 23. 38
30. 1500. Tycho Brahe 23. 31.. 1592.

To which we may add these words out of Tychoes. 1. Book of new Star which
appeared An. 1572. p. 101. where he says, that by certain observations it has
been found, that both the Suns greatest declination, as also the other
Intermediat by the same reason are altered, as it is testified by the whole
current of the most skillful Artists, in a continual succession of time: so
that Ptolomies time, and some certain years before him, it was found to be 23.
gr* 51. but it does not appear by any certain testimony to have been ever
greater. Whence may be collected, that Aratus, whom we have set in the first
place, who assigns 24. gr. speaks with the largest, and as it were, at
random, and (as our learned Author has also observed of Strabo, Proclus and
Leontius Mechanicus) not so accurately as he should have.

There are also two other lesser circles described in an equal distance from
the Poles, to that of the Tropickes from the Equator? which circles take their
denomination from the Pole on which they border. So that one of The Arctique,
and Antarctique circles.
them is called the Arctick or North circle; and and the oppsite circle the
Antarctick or Southern. In these circles the Poles of the Ecliptique are
fixed, the Solsticiall Colure crossing them in the same place. Strabo, Proclus,
Cleomedes, all Greek Authors, and some of the Latins also, assign no certain
distance to these circles from the Poles: but make them various and mutable,
according to the diversity of elevation of the Pole, or diverse position of the
Sphaere: so that one of them must be conceived to be described round about that
Pole which is elevated, and to touch the very Horizon, and is therefore the
greatest of all the Parallels that are always in sight: and the other must be
imagined, as drawn in an equal distance from the opposite Pole; and this is
the greatest of those Parallels that are always hidden.

PONT. The Arctique, and Antarctique circles do show, 1. The Poles of the
Zodiaque and their distance from the Poles of the world, 2. They do
distinguish the frigid Zones from the Temperate, and with the Tropiques and
Equator they help to divide the whole Heaven into five parts or regions which
they call Zones.

Besides these circles expressed in the Globe, there are also some certain
other circles in familiar use with the Practical Astronomers, which they call
Vertical circles. These are The Vertical circles,
greater circles drawn from the Vertical point through the Horizon, in what
number you please: and they are called by the Arabians Azimuth, which
appellation is also in common use among our ordinary Astronomers. The office of
these circles is supplied by the help of a Quadrant of Altitude, which is a
thin plate of brass divided into 90. degrees. This Quadrant must be applied to
the vetrex of any place, when you desire to use it, so that the lowest end of
it, noted with the number of 90. may just touch the Horizon in every place.
This Quadrant is made moveable, that so it may be fastened to the vertical
point of any place.

PONT. Concerning the moveableness or mutability of the Arctique, and
Antarctique Circles, Joseph Scaliger reports himself to be the first that
observed it, out of the Ancient Greek Authors: as you may see in his
Comentaries upon Manilius, revised, and published by himself a little before
his death. Neither does he think that any ancient Latin Author within 400.
years after those Greek Writers, nor scarcely any before Sacrobosco's time,
can be found to have determined them to be immovable. But because there are
many excellent things to be met withal in that pssage of his, and that he sets
down the same by way of demonstration; I have thought it not impertinent,
seeing our Author has given a touch at it, to set down Scaliger's opin^n in
his own words: as you have them upon those verses of Monilius, lib. 1. Astron.

Circulus ad Borea^ fulgentem sustinet Arcton, Sexque fugit folidas a coeli
vertice parts.

He proceeds after this manner. Describantur circuli AEquinoctiali paralleli XC
etc. Let there be described (says he) 90. Parallel circles to the
AEquinoctiall, and these will be the same that Gaminus calls, (...), always
appearing. Now among all those, That which touches the Horizon in the point of
intersection of the Horizon and Meridian, will be (...), the greatest of those
that always appear, and so conseqvently, the Arctique Circle of that place:
now because the Horizons are moveable, the Arctique Circles must also be
moveable. So in the Climat wherein Cnidus lies, the elevation of the Pole being
thirty six degrees, Evdoxus determines the Artique Circle also to be so many
degrees from the Pole* in like manner in another Climate, it will be diverse,
according to the diversity of the elevation of the Pole. Thus Hipparchus (...).
At Athens (says he) the greatest of the Circle always appearing is distant
from the Pole thirty seven degrees: but that in Rhodes thirie six degrees: and
look how great the Altitude of the place is, the same must the distance
necessarily be, betwixi the Pole and that point, by which the Artique circle is
described. And therefore the Ancient Greeks always defined the Arctique
circle to be (...). Sive (...). The most Northern point that their Horizon, or
place of habitation had. So that the Artique circle is nothing else, but the
point of their habitation which touches the Horizon. For in describing, they
have both one common point. Only in this they differ, that the center of the
Arctique circle is the Pole of the world; but the center of the Horizon is the
Vertical circle, or Zenith of the place,



As for example. A. F. D. E. is the Horizon: A. G C. H. the Artique circle A.
D. the Meridian: A. the point of Intersection of the Horizon with the Meridian;
in which place also the Artique and Horizon in describing do mutually touch
each other. B. the Pole: C. the Zenith of the place. I. the opposite point of
the diameter of the Actique circle, Now if the elevation of the Pole be full
45. degrees, as it is at Vienna in France, then the point I. will be the same
with C that is to say, the opposite part of the Arctique cir^le will touch the
Zenith of the place. Ent if the elevation of the Pole be less then 45 degrees,
the Zenith will then fall without the circle: but if it be greater, it will
fall within. S^ that by this means it will come to pass, that the nearer we
are to the Equator, the lesser these circles will be: and contrariwise, the
farther we live off the Equator, the greater they are: But under the
AEquinoctiall it self, that is in a right position of Sphaere, there is no
Artique circle at all: Pytheas writes, that those that inhabit Thule, now call
Iseland, have a Tropic for their Arctique circle. Whether therefore this
Circle fall within or without the Tropicke, the distance of it from the poi^t,
l. Will be as great, as is the difference betwixt the elevation of the Pole,
and the elevation of the Equinoctial above the Horizon of the place. As for
Example: The elevation of the Pole at Rome is 41. degrees, therefore the
AEquinoctiall is elevated above the Horizon 48. gr. 20. m. and the difference
is 7. degrees 40* m. And therefore the Zenith, or vertical point of Rome,
falls 7. degrees, 40. m. without the circumference of its Arcticke circle. So
this distance which those that inhabit Iseland, is 43. gr. as having their
Pole elevated 66. degrees 30. m. So that the Trepick with them touches the
very point of intersection of the Meridian and Horizon. And therefore,
Martianus Cappella designs the Artick circle to be. Semper apparens, and
contingens confinia Finitoris, nunquam mersus assurgent. A circle that always
appears, and touches upon the skirts of the Horizon, yet never goes under
it. By these words Confinia Finitoris, he means the intersection of the
Horizon and Meridian (...), in the most Northerly point.

These grounds being thus laid, we see that as many habitations as there are,
so many Arctick circles there are also, and the same not (...), fixed and
unchangeable, but different according to the diversity of paces. So that, by
this we may plainly ^erceive the error of our modern Artificers, who, in
their Artificial Globes, describe this circle contrary to the doctrine and
practice of the Ancients, drawing it on the Poles of the Ecliptique above the
Pole of the world. Fur such an Arctick circle there cannot be, but only to
those that inhabit Syene by the Nile: for with them, the Pole is elevated 23.
gr. 30. m. These things considered, the Arctick circle ought not to have any
place in the Material Globe, unless it be made for the inclination of some
certain place: otherwise there can be no such Arcticke circle.

These things, when I first proposed in Aquitaine, where were many, both
learned and unlearned, Noble and Paedants, it cannot be imagined with with what
scorn and hissing they entertained them. And at length, when my constancy
would not give place to their stubborn ignorance; I thought I should have been
beaten among them. Yet at last, having nothing to defend themselves with, they
said, that, however it were, these circles were useful for the distinction of
the Zones. At which answer of theires, I had much ado to forbear laughing.
For this division of the world into Zones, is quite cashiered in these our
times, when as the whole world has at length been fully discovered by the
Navigations of the Portugals and Spaniards. And for this purpose, to confute
these Mathematicians, I alleged these words of Strabo, (...). Polybus
therefore did not, (says he) in making certain Zones, which are to be limited
by the Arcticke circles: two of which line under the said Arctiques, and other
terminated betwixt the Arctiques, and the Tropiques. For this is a Maxim: That
determinate things cannot be bound by uncertain and indeterminate limits. This
their Philosophy therefore is vain and frivelous. But yet their impudence ends
not so. For you shall hardly meet with any of those Mathematicians, that will
not presently conclude him madd, that should but dare to descend any whit from
the doctrine of John de Sacrobosco, in the point of these circles. Yet one of
them, not long since, being as it seems, advised thereto by the former edition
of Manilius, confesses by the way, and as it were unwillingly, that the
Ancients made other use of the Arcticke circle s; then we now do. And yet he
would not be thought to have learned this of me: notwithstanding these kind of
fellows are the most ignorant in matters of Antiquity, in the world. Who should
be the first broacher of this ridiculous conceit, I cannot guess, otherwise,
then that it must needs be some latin Writer, and thaet 400. years later
then any of the Greek Authors. And I know not whether any other taught this
doctrine before John de Sacrobosco: ceartainely he is the most ancient I can
readily think on. As therefore our men are in an error, in making the Arcticke
to be an Immutable circle, so likewise are the Ancients, and those among us
that follow them, to be blamed, for making this circle to be Parallel to the
other three: whereas the Parallel circles in a Sphaere have the same Pole with
the Sphere it self. But the Pole of the Arctique is the same always with the
Pole of the World: whereas the Pole of the other three alters, as do the
Tropicall, and Equinoctial points. For the AEquinoctiall and Tropicall points
do anticipate their places in the Zodiaque: insomuch, that in a certain term
of years, they are removed forward a degree. Now the AEquinoctiall, and
Tropicall circles, are no other then what are described by those points, which
in themselves are moveable. Therefore are their Poles also moveable. But we
shall suffer for these things too, I doubt not, until that length of time
shall have beaten this into the heads of such men, with whom strength of reason
is able to prevail nothing at all:

And this is the opinion of Scaliger, and the Ancients, concerning the Artique
circles: which Johanne^ Pincierus, a learned man, in his lib. 2^ cap. 13.
Parergor. Otij* Marpurg. has lately examined, and indeavonred to confute the
Arctique circle (says he) is thus described by Proclus. Arcticus circulus,
etc. The Arctique circle is the greatest of all those circles that are always
in sight, and it touches the Horizon in one point, and is seen also above the
earth. And the Antarctique he defines thus. The Antartique is a circle equal
and Parallel to the Arctique, and lies wholly hid under the earth. These circles
therefore, in the opinion of Proclus, are moveable, andare described by a point
that touches the Horizon about the Pole that is nearest to it: and they are
also changed, with the Horizon, as often as a man moves either Northward or
Southward. So that the nearer they are to the Pole, the lesser they are: and so
contrariwise, the farther off they are from the same, the^ are so much the
greater: and consequently it follows, because they have no fixed place, that
therefore they cannot be described upon a Sphaere or Globe.

But from hence there arises three inconveniences. First, that these
Arctiques described by Proclus, are not of any use in distinguishing the Frigid
Zone from the Temperate, by reason of their uncertain situation, and
mutability. The next is, that with those that inbabite within twenty three
degrees and an half of the Pole, (which is as much as the Suns greatest
declination from the Equator) the Arctique circle will be the same with the
Tropique of Cancer, and the Antartique with that of Capricorn. So that they
will have but two lesser circles or Parallels, which will make but three Zones
in all, two cold ones; and a torrid. For in this confusion of the circles,
there will be no distinction betwixt the cold, and the temperate Zones, And
which is more, they that dwell under the Equator. will have no Arctiques at
all. Lastly there are certain accidents proper to, certain Climates, which
cannot he assigned them, unless there be fixed and certain limets set to
distinguish the cold Zones from the temperate.

As for example, If it be enquired, what properties are incident to those that
inhabit betwixt the Tropique of Cancer and the Arctique circle: and what to
those under the Arctique circle it self: and lastly, what betwixt the Arctique
circle and the Pole of the World. To these questions there can be no answer
made without these fixed Arctique circles. Besides this, it would take away
much light and futhera^ce, both from Geographicall Maps, and Astronomicall
instruments, if these Arctique circles might not be described in them: Which
could not possibly be described in them, but that they might change evermore
with the Horizon.

These and the like inconveniences are easily avoided, by placeing the Arctique
circle, as usually it is, on the Poles of the Zodiaque. Neither am I any way
swayed with the Authority of Joseph Scaliger, adhering to Proclus his Doctrine
of the mutability of the Arctique Circle: although I am not ignorant, how rare
a thing it is* for such Judgment, matched with so great knowledge, to fall into
an error. And as for that testimony which they bring out of Strabo, lib. 2.
Geogr. that it is sufficient, if there be Arctique circles in the temperate
Climes, and that those that have any, have not all the same: this is (...) (to
use Straboes own words) nothing to the argument in hand, and concludes nothing.
For then they should be of no use at all. I cannot therefore assent to a man,
whose Tenent is dissonant both from the nature of the thing, and reason it self.

But to return at length to Proclus: who, seeing that he acknowledges that
there are five Zones: two of which are terminated betwixt the Poles, and the
Arctique and the Antarctique circles: and other two bordering upon the same,
which are the two temperate Zones, and are bounded on one side by the Arctique,
and the other, by the Tropickes: betwixt both which lies the Torrid Zone. he
himself seems tacitly to approve these Immovable Artiques, without which
there can be no set constant limits of the Frigid and temperate Zones.

Thus Scaliger and Pincierus. Now concerning the opinion that the Ancientes had
of those Zones, namely, that some of them were inhabited through extreme cold,
and some through parching heat; notwithstanding these are discovered at length
to be but vain dreams, by the late Seavoyages both of the Portugals and our
own Countrymen: yet can it not be denied, but that in each of them there are
certain special and peculiar Occurrences. So that, if, but for doctrine sake.
it were good that these circles should not be taken away, neither are we to
despise it, if by the industry of later times, any thing has been added to the
inventions of the Ancients, which may any whit be useful for the instruction
of learners, or may any way conduce so the clearing of things, in themselves
obscure and intricate.

CHAP. III. Of the three Positions of Sphaeres: Right, Parallel, and Oblique.
ACcording to the diverse habitude of the Equator to the Horizon, (which is
either Parrallel to it, or else cutteth it, and that either in Oblique, or else
in Right Angles,) there is a threefold Position or situation of Spheres. The
first is of those, that have etheir Pole for their Vertical point: for with
these, the Equator and Horizon are Parallel to each other, or indeed rather
but one circle betwixt them both. The 2d is of those whose Zenith is under the
Equator. The third agrees to all other places else. The first of these
situations is called, a Parallel Sphaere: the second a Right: and the third an
Oblique Sphaere. Of these several kinds of position, the two first are simple:
but the third is manifold and diverse, according to the diversity of latitude
of places. Each of these have their peculiar properties.



Those that in habit in a Parallel Sphere, see not the Sun or other Stars,
either rising or seting, or higher or lower, in the diurnall revolution.
Besides, seeing that the Sun in his yealy motion traverseth the whole Zodiaque,
which is divided by the Equator into 2. equal parts: one whereof lies toward
the North, and the other toward the South: by this means it comes to pass,
that while the Sun is in his course through those signs that are nearest their
vertical Pole, all this while he never sets, and so makes but one
continued Artificial day; which is about the space of six months. And so
contrariwise, while he runs over the other remoter signs, lying toward the
opposite Pole, he makes a long continual night of the like space of time, or
thereabout. Now at such time as the Sun iu his diurnall revolution shall come
to touch the very Equator, he is carried about in ^uch sort, as that he is
not wholly apparent above the Horizon, nor yet wholly hidden under it: but as
it were, half cut off.

The affections of a Right Sphere are these. All the Sarrs are observed to rise
and set in an equal space of time: and continue as long above the Horizon, as
they do under it. So that the day and night is always here of equal length.



PONT. That in a right Sphaere all the Stars do both rise and set that is, are
all generally seen above the Horizon, and in like manner do also all set by
turns; so likewise that boath the Poles, both Arctique and Ant^rctique may be
seen at once: has hitherto been the received opinion both of Geminus. And
Proclus, and generally, of all other Writers: whichour Author also here
follows. Yet if we do but examine the matter more nearely, we shall find
this to agree not so much with the Sensible, as with the Rational or
Intelligible Horizon. For as much as eve^ in a Right Sphaere, the fight can
hardly reach both the Poles, by reason of the extuberancy of the earth. Which
is also confirmed by the Testimony of Johannes Lerius a Burgonian, who in his
history of his voyage into the New world, whether thus. Non modo sub
AEquinoctiali polus uterque non apparet, etc. Under the AEquinoctiall (says
he) not only both the Poles are invisible, and do not appear, but neither one
nor other can be seen, till a man has passed on two degrees from the
Equator. But whether this assertion of his, or the contrary of some of our
Countrymen, who have also sailed through those parts, be to be accounted the
more accurate and trne, I leave to other to determine,

An Oblique Sphaere has these properties. Their days are sometimes longer
then the Nights, some times shorter, and sometimes of equal length. For when
the Sun is placed in the AEquinectiall points, which (as we have said)
happens twice in the year; the days and nights are then equal. But as he
draws nearer to the elevated Pole, the days are observed to increase, and
the nights to decrease; till such time as he comes to the Tropique, when as he
there makes the longest days and the shortest nights in the year. But when
he returns toward the Opposite Pole, the days the^ decrease, till he
touches the Tropique, that lies nearest the same Pole: at which time, the
nights are at the longest and the days shortest. In this position of Sphaere
also, so me Stars are never seen to set; such as are all those that lie within
the compass of a Circle described about the Elevated Pole, and touching the
Horizon: and some in like manner, are never observed to appear above the
Horizon: and these are all such Stars as are circumscribed within the like
circle drawn about the Opposite Pole. These Parallel circles (as we have said)
are those which the Greeks, and some of the Latins also, call the Artictique
and Antarctique circles, the one always appearing, and the other always lying
hid. All the other Stars, which are not comprehended within these two circles,
have their riseings and settings by course. Of which those that are placed
bebetween the Equator and this always apparent circles, continue a longer
space in the upper Hemisphaere, and a less while in the lower. So on the
contrary, those that are nearer to the Opposite circle, are longer under the
Horizon, and the lesser while above it Of all which affections this is the
Cause. The Sun being placed in the Equator, (or any other Starr) in his daily
revolution describes the AEquinoctiall circle: but being without the Equator,
he describes a greater, or lesser Parallel, according to the diversity of his
declination from the Equator. All which Parallels, together with the Equator
it self, are cut by the Horizon, in a Right Sphaere, to right angles. For when
the Poles lie both in the very Horizon, and the Zenith in the Equator: it must
needs follow, that the Horizon must cut the Equator in right angles, because
it passes through its Poles. Now because it cutteth the Equator at right
angles; it must also necessarily cut all other circles, that are Parrallel to
it, in right angles: and therefore it must needs divide them into two equal
parts. So that if half of all these Parallels, as also of the Equator, be
above the Horizon, and the other half lie hid under it; it must necessarily
follow, that the Sun and other Stars must be as long in passing through the
upper Hemisphaere, as though the lower. And so the days must be as long as the
nights, as all the Stars in like manner will be 12. hours above the Horizon,
and as many under it. But in an Oblique Sphaere, because one of the Poles is
elevated above the Horizon, and the other is depressed under it: all things
happen clean otherwise. For seeing that the Horizon does not pass through the
Poles of the Equator: it will not therefore cu^ the Parllaels in the same
manner, as it does the Equator: but those Parallels that are nearest to the
elevated Pole, will have the greatest portion of them above the Horizon, and
the least under. But those that are nearest the opposite Pole, will have the
least part of them seen, and the greatest part hid: only the Equator is still
divided into two equal parts, so that the conspicuous part is equal to that
which is not seen. And hence it is, that in all kinds of Obliquitie of Sphaere,
when the Sun is in the Equator, the day and night is always of equal length.
And as he approaches toward the elevated Pole, the days increase; because the
greater Arch, or portion of the Parrallels are seen. But when he is nearer the
hidden Pole, the nights are then the longest, because the greatest segiment of
those Parallels are under the Horizon. And by how much the higher, either Pole
is elevated above the Horizon of any place, by so much, the days are the
longer in Summer, and the nights in Winter.

PONT. The position or siauation of a Sphaere is rightly distinguished by our
Author, into three ^inds, to wit, Parallel, Right, and Oblique. Notwithstanding
Clavius, with Sacrobosco. acknowledge only two: and they are, Right, and
Oblique* For if it be demanded, (says Clavius) what manner of Sphaere they may
be said to have, that inhabit under the Poles: we must make answer, an
Oblique. But both Clavius, and Sacrobosco are herein deceived. For those that
have such a position of Sphaere, as that they dwell under the Pole, the
Equator with them does not make Oblique Angles with the Horizon: because the
Horizon and Equator there, make both but one circle. This kind of Sphaere
therefore may more rightly be called a Parallel, or Neutrall Sphaere: because
that it is Vertical point falls upon the Pole of the Sphaere. But Joseph
Scaliger has given it the aptest appellation of all, in his Notes, upon
Manilius. Astronom. lib. 3. upon these Verses.

Stantis erit coeli species, laterumque meatus Turbinis in morem recta
vertigine currit.

Where he says, that every Sphaere may be said, aut jacere, sedere, aut stare,
either to lie, sit, or stand. So that the first position of Sphaere is, as of
lying all along, which is that of a Right Sphaere, where the Horizon makes
right Angles with the AEquinoctiall. The seeond is of sitting, (...). The third
is of standing, (...) and is like a Mill. for in this Position, the
AEquinoctiall, supplying the office of the Horizon, and as it were, turned
round about, is just like a Handmill, both in habit, and manner of turning
about, But we cannot so properly call it a Right Sphaere because of the right
Angles that it makes with the AEquinoctiall, as passing through it is Poles:
because that that appellation seems to suit more fitly with a standing
Sphaere, in which the AEquinoctiall is the same with the Horizon and Arctique
circle. Lastly there is but one Right, or Lying Sphaere because there is but
one AEquinoctiall: and there are but two standing Sphaeres; because there be
but two Poles. But there is great variety and diversitis of Oblique; or sitting
Sphaeres, as may manifestly appear to any man; and as our Author has declared
at large,

CHAP. IIII. Of the Zones.
THe four lesser Circles, which are Parallel to the Equator, divide the whole
earth into five parts, called by the Greeks, Zones. Which appellation has
also been received, and is sti^ in use among all our Latin Writers:
notwithstanding they sometimes also use the Latin word, Pl^ga, in the same
signification. But the Greeks do sometimes apply the word Zona, to the Orbs
of the Planets, (in a different sense then is ever used by our Authors) as may
appear by that passage of Theon Alexandrinus, in his Commentaries upon Aratus,
(...). that is: There are also in the heavens seven Zones, which are not
contiguous to the Zodiaque: the first whereof is assigned to Saturn, the second
to Jupiter, etc.

Of these five Zones, three were accounted by the Ancient Philosophers and
Geographers to be inhabitable and intemperate. One of them by reason of the
Suns beams continually beating upon the same: and this they called the Torrid
Zone, and is terminated by the Tropiques on each side. And the other two by
reason of extreme cold, they thought could not be inhabited, as being so remote
from the heat of the Suns beams: whereof one was comprehended within the
Arctique circle, and the other within the Anta^ctique. But the other two were
accounted temperate, and therefore habitable, the one of them lying betwixt the
Arctique circle and the Tropique of Cancer; and the other betwixt the
Antarctique and the Tropique of Capricorn.

Neither did this opinion, (although in a manner generally received a mo^g the
Ancients) concerning the number and bounds of the Zones, even then want its
opposition. For Parmenides would have that Zone, which they call the Torrid, to
be extended far beyond the Tropiques: so that he made it almost as large
again, as it ought to have been: but is withal reprehended for it by
Posidonius, because he knew that about half of that space which is contained
betwixt our Summer Tropique and the Equator, was inhabited. So likewise
Aristotle terminated the torrid Zone betwixt the Tropiques, and the temperate
Zones, with the Tropiques, and the Arctique and Antarctique circle. But he also
is taxed by the same Posidonius, in that he appointes the Arctique circles,
which the Greeks will have to be mutable, to be the limits of the Zones.
Polyibus makes six Zones, by dividing the Torrid into two parts, and reckoning
one of them from the Winter Tropique to the AEquinoctiall, and the other from
thence to the Summer Tropique. Others following Eratosthenes, would have a
certain narrow Zone; which should be temperate and fit for habitation, under
the AEquinoctiall line: o^ which opinion was Avicen the Arabian. And some of
our Modern Winters, (Nicolaus Lyranus, Thomas Aquinas, and Campanus) I know not
upon what grounds, will have the terrestrial Paradise, spoken of in the
beginning of Genesis, to be placed under the AEquinoctiall line. And so
likewise Eratosthenes and Polybius, would have all that which they call the
Torrid Zone, to be temperate. In like manner Posidonius contradicted the
received opinion of the Ancient Philosophers, because he knew that both Syene,
which they place under the Tropique of Cancer, and also AEthiopia, which lies
more inward, and over whose heads the Sun lies longer, then it does upon
theirs under the Equator, are notwithstanding inhabited. Whence he concluded,
that the parts under the AEqinoctiall were not inhabitable, because he saw ^at
those under the Tropique wanted ^ot inhabitants. Yet Ptolomy in his 2d book ^d
sixth Chapter of his Almageste, conceives those things, which are prepared of
the temperateness under the line, to be rather conjecture then truth of story:
and yet in the last Chapter of his fifth book of his Geography, he describes
us a Country in AEthiopia, which he calls Agisymba, and places far beyond
the the AEquinoctiall: (notwithstanding some of our Modern Geographers stick
not to place it Northward from the Equator, contrary to Ptolomies mind.) This
inconstancy of Ptolomy has given occasion to some to suspect, that the
Almagest, and Cosmography were not the same Authors works.

Now as concerning these conceits of the Ancients, about the number of the
intemperate Zones, if they were not sufficiently proved to be vain and idle,
by the authority of Eratosthenes and Polybius: yet certainly it is very
evidently demonstrated by the Navigations both of the Portugalls, and also of
our own Countrymen, that not only that tract of land which the Ancients call
the Torrid Zone, is fully inhabited; but also that within the Ar^tique circle,
above 70 degrees from the Equator, all places are full of inhabitants. So that
now, no man needs to doubt any further of the truth of this; unless he had
rather err with Sacred and Venerable Antiquity, then be better informed by the
experience of Modern Ages, though never so strongly backed with undeniable
proofs and testimonies.

PONT. Whereas our Author accuses Ptolomy of inconstancy, in that in his
Almagest. cap. 6. lib. 2. he accounts it a fahle, rather then any true,
history whatsoever is reported of the in hahitants under the Equator: where as
in his Geography lib. 5. cap. ult. he seems to contradict the same: I think
that Pliny also is not free from the like fault. For whereas in his lib. 6.
cap. 22. having discoursed of the M^gnitude of the Isle Taprobane, (which is
now thought to be Sumatra, and lies directly under the line,) out of
Eratosthenes and Megasthenes: he presently adds, that besides the testimony of
the Ancients, the Romans had better knowledge of the same, in the time of the
Em^eror Claudiu^, there being Ambassadors sent from thence to Rome; who among
other things, should relate, that with them Gold, and Silver was in high
account, and that they had greater wealth then the Romans themselves; but yet
that the Romans had greater use of riches, then they. Which words of Pliny,
with many other there at large set down by him, if they be but compared with
what himself elsewhere writes, in his 2d book chap. 68. he will be found
manifestly to contradict himself. For disputing in this place, and inquireing,
how great a part of the earth is inhabited: Tres (says he) terrae parts
abstulisse nobis coelum, etc. Three parts of the world the Heaveus have robbed
us of; to wit, the Torrid, or middle Zone, ^bat is, whatsoever lies betwixt
the two Tropiques: and the two outmost or Frigid Zones: that is to say,
whatever ground lies betwixt either Pole, and the Arctique and Antarctique
circles. According to that which the Poet sung of old: Quarum quae media est,
non est habita bilis aestu.
Nix tegit alta duos.


In English thus. The midst of these is not inhabited,
Through heat: and two, with snow are covered.


For this is that which Pliny means: that those two outwardmost are not
habitable, by reason of extremity of ^old, nor the other, through too violent
heat. But that which is more to be wondered at in so great an Author, (who not
withstanding indifferently took up as well the common popular fables, as the
extravagant fixions of the Poets also) is that which he very confidently
relates out of Corlius Nepos, how that one Eudoxus, taking Ship in the Arabian
gulf, came as far as the Gades, two Isles upon the confines of Spain. Which
voyage if we should but thoroughly examine, will be found to be as much, (...)
that all the Fortugals, and our Countrymen at this day perform in their Sea
voyage to the East Ind^, when as touching upon the Cape of good hope, they
twice cross the line, and pass through the whole Torrid Zone. Not to speak
any thing of that which he writes in his first book, twenty third Chapter,
Namely, that there is never a year, that India does not suck out of the Roman
Empire, at the least 500000. Sestercies, by sending in such commodities, as
they sell to the Romans for an hundred times as much as they are worth in
India. And that there is yearly Traffic by Ship through the Red Sea,
betwixt them and the Romans, who are saine, for their safer passage, to defend
themselves from Pirates, by going provided with bands of Archers. And here, all
that can be said in Plinies defense, is, tha^those things which he relates in
this second book, were written by him long before the rest which followeh: and
that at that time, these Indian voyages were not so frequently undertaken, or
the passages so well known unto the Romans: especially, for that in the books
following, as namely the sixth book 17. and 23. Chapters he says, that the
whole course of the voyage from Egypt into India, began but then first to be
discovered, when as he was writing the same: and that Seneca having not long
before begun a description of India, reckoned up therein 60. great rivers, and
122. Nations, to be contained within the same.

The principal cause of the habitablenesse and fortility of the parts under
the Torrid Zone, i^, in that the Sun shines upon them but 12. hours: so that
the nights being always as long as the days, the coldness of the one does
very much attemperate the excessive heat of the other. In like manner, that
both the Frigid Zones are habitable, is to be attributed to the Sun, which in
his course, through the six Northern signs of the Zodiaque, never sets in six
months space so those that live under 84 degrees of latitude: so that by his
continual presene^ the extreme rigidity of the Clime i^ mitigated, and the
cold, by this means, dispelled.

CHAP. V. Of the Amphiseij, Hereroscij, and Periscij.
THe inhabitants of these Zones, in respect of the diversity of their
noonshadowes, are divided into three kinds, Amphis^ij, Heteroscij, and
Periscij. Those that inhabit betwixt the two Tropiqu^s are called Amphiscij,
because that their noon shadows are diversely cast, sometime toward the South,
as when the Sun is more Northward then their Vertical point: and sometimes
toward the North, as when the Sun declines Southwa^ from their Zenith.

Those that live betwix the Tropiques and A^ct que circles, are called
Heteroscij, because the shadows at noon are cast only one way, and that
^ither North or South. For the Sun never comes farther North, then our Summer
Tropic; nor more Southward, then the Winter Tropic. So that those that
inhabit Northward of the Summer Tropique, have their shadows cast always
toward the North: as in like manner those that dwell more Southward then the
Winter Tropic, have their Noon-shadows cast always coward the South. Those
that inhabit betwixt the Arctique or Antarctique circles, and the Poles, are
called Periscij: because that the Gnomons do cast their shadows circularly:
and the reason hereos it, for that the Sun is carried round about, above their
Horizon in his whole diurnall Revolution.

A figure of all these may here be seen:

PONT. The Heterosciall Zone is therefore two, fold either Northern or
Southern. The Northern is comprehended betwixt the Tropique of Cancer and the
Artik circle: and ^s called (...) Septentrionalis, because that in it the Sun
beams, at noon, are always cast to that part only that byoth toward the ^ole
Articks

The Southern Hetorosciall Zone, contains all that space of ground that lies
betwixt the Tropique of Capricorn, and u^e Antarctique circle, And it is called
(...) Meridonalis, because the Noon shadows are proje^ed toward the South Pole
only.

The properties of these several Zones are these that follow. First, they that
inhabit the midst of the Torrid Zone, are in a Right Sphaere: for with them,
both the Poles of the world lie in their Horizon: and their Zenith or Vertical
point falls in the AEquinoctiall Circle. So that their peculiar Accidents are
these. First, All the S^arres do rise and set in an equal space of time,
except the Arctique and Antarctique Poles: as we have demonstrated out of
Lerius, in our notes upon the third Chapter. Secondly, They have a perpetual
AEquinoxe. Thirdly, They have the Sun vertical unto them twice in a year,
namely, when he entered into and Fourthly, In the Suns periodicall motion
through the Zodiaque, look how much he goes Southward from their Zenith, in
his return he declines as far northward srom the same. Fi^thly, They have
sour Solstices; two when the Sun is in their Zenith and AEquinocti^ll points:
and two Collateral, when he is in the Solsticiall points. Sixthly, They have
two summers every year, when the Sun is in the AEquinoctioll points: and two,
as it were, Winters, when the Sun declineth to either Tropiqu'. Seventhly, They
have five different kinds of shadows: to wit, Eastward, Westward, Northward,
Southward, and Perpendicular. And therefore the Inhabitants of this Zone are
called Amphiscij, that is to say, having their shadows cast on both sides: The
properties os those that inhabit toward the utmost border of the Torrid Zone,
and being os the Northern Temperate, which have an Oblique Sphaere, (for the
Arctique Pole with them is elevated twenty three degrees and an half, and
their Zenith fall th on the Troqi^ue of Cancer,) are these following. First,
All those Stars that are comprehended within the compass of the Arctique
Circle, are always above the Horizon: and contrariwise, those within the
Circuit of the Acctique always lie hid. But if the intermediate Stars, those
that are Northward from the AEqnator, or a longer time above the Horizon, then
they are under it: in like manner, as the other that decline more Southward,
their Nocturnall Arch is greater then the Diurnall: only those in the line
itself, do rise and set in an equal space of time. Secondly, Their Artificial
days and nights are unequal. Thirdly, The Sun is in their Zenith but once in
the year, and that is in the beginning of Cancer: so that it never ascends
more Northward, but at all other times is Southward to them. Fourthly, They
have two Solstices: one, when the Sun is in the beginning of Cancer, which is
their Vertical point: and the other when the Sun enters into the beginning of
Capricorn, at which time the Sun has the least elevation. Fifthly, They have
also but one Summer and one Winter. They have four differences of shadows,
namely, Eastern, Western, Northern, and Perpendicular. And here is the
beginning of the Heteroscij.

They that dwell on the Oblique Sphaere, so that the Arctique Pole is elevated
with them above 23. degrees, an an half, but less then 66. degrees, and an
half: their Zenith or Vertical point always falls betwixt the Tropique of
Cancer, and the Arctique Circle: whence they have these properties. First, Very
many Stars with them are never observed to set: for the higher the Pole is
elevated, the more Stars there are which always appear; and so, in like
manner, there are as many in the opposite Haemisphaere that never rise.
Secondly, Their Artificial dates and nights are equal. Thirdly, The Sun is
never in their Vertical point: but is always at Noon Southward from them.
Fourthly, They have one Summer, and one Winter, and two Solstices. Fifthly,
They have also three different kinds of shadows, as namely, Eastward, Westward,
and Northward. Whence they are called Heteroscij.

Those that inhabit about the end of the Northern temperate Zone, have the Pole
Arctique elevated with them 66. degrees and an half: so that their Zenith
falls on the Arctique circle: whence they have these properties of Sphere. 1.
All the Stars that lie within the Tropique of Cancer, and the Pole Arctique
are of perpetual Apparition: and contrariwise, those that are comprehended
within the Opposite circle, are never seen to rise. 2. When the Sun is in the
beginning of Cancer, the Artificial day is with them twenty four hours in
length: and so likewise when the Sun enters into Capricorn; the nights are as
long. 3. The Sun, at noon, is always Southward to them: but when he is in the
beginning of Cancer, and is near the very Horizon, he then seems, in a manner,
to be Northward. 4. They have two Solstices, and one Summer, and one Winter. 5.
They have four differences of shadows: as namely, Eastern, Western, Southern
and Northern also, especially when the Sun enters into the beginning of
Cancer* About these parts the Heteroscij end, and the Periscij begin.

Those that inhabit about the middle of the Northern Frigid Zone, have a
Parallel or standing Sphaere: for the AEquinoctiall is their Horizon, whence
they have consequently these properties 1. No Stars either rise ar set at all:
but whatsoever are circumscribed within the AEquinoctiall circle and the very
Pole, are carried about in circles Parallel both to the AEquinoctiall and
Horizon. 2. For the space os 6. months they have one continued day, the Sun in
this space finishing his course through the Northern signs of the Zodiaque,
and so likewise while he is in the opposite meridionall signs, they have a
night of the same length. 3. They have but one Solstice, and that is, when the
Sun enters into the beginning of Cancer. 4. They have one Winter and one
Summer, or rather instead of a Summer they have some certain small remission of
the extremity of cold. 5. Their shadows are carried round about them in a
circle toward every part of the world: whence they are called Periscij, that is
to say, having their shadows carried round about in a circular form.

These are the properties of the Northern Zones; which if they be referred to
the opposite meridionall parts also, you have their properties likewise. For
whatsoever is said of one Hemisphaere, the same is also to be understood of the
other opposite Hemisphaere, only in a contrary sense. For when these that dwell
in the Septentrionall Hemisphaere, have their longest day, the opposite
inhabitants in the meridionall part of the world have their shortest: and when
they have their Summer, with those it is then winter, etc. And the same is also
to be understood of the other Accidents also, concerning their shadows, the
rising and setting of the Stars, and the li^e.

CHAP. VI. Of the Perioeci, Antoeci, and Antipodes:
THe Inhabitants of the temperate Zones have by the Ancient Geographers been
divided, in respect either of the same Meridian, or Parallel, or else equal
situation in respect of diverse parts of the Equator, in such sort, as that to
every habitation in these several parts, they have added three other different
in position, whose inhabitants they called, Perioeci, Antoeci, and Antipodes.

Perioeci, are those that live under the same Meridian, and the same Parallel
also, being equal distant from the Equator; but in two opposite points of the
same Parallel.

Antoeci, are such as have the same Meridian, but live in diverse Parallels,
yet equally distant from the Equator, though in diverse parts.

Antipodes, (which are called Antichthones) are such as inhabit under one
Meridian, but under two diverse Parallels, which are equally distant from the
Equator, and in opposite points of the same: or else we may define them to be
such, as inhabit two places of the earth, which are Diametrically opposite.

They therefore which are Perioeci in respect of us, are Antoeci to our
Antipodes: and those that are Antoeci to us, are Perioeci to our Antipodes: and
our Perioeci, are Antipodes to those which are Antoeci to us.



We have also many accidents common with our Perioeci. For we both inhabit the
same temperate Zone; and have Summer, Winter, increase and decrease of days
and nights, at the same time. Only this difference is betwixt us, that when it
is noon with us, it is midnight with them. Those Authors that have added this
differnce also, that when the Sun rises with us; it sets with those that
are our Perioecij, have betrayed their own ignorance. For if this were so, it
would then follow, that when the day is longest with us, it shall be at the
shortest with them: but this is most false. They have committed the like error
concerning our Antoeci also; when as they will have the Sun to rise with us,
and them at the same time. The ground of which their error perhaps may be, in
that they conceived us and our Antoeci to have the same Horizon, but that ours
was the uppermost Hemisphaere, and theirs the lower: the like they conceived of
our Perioeci. But this is an error unworthy of those that are but mean^ly
versed in Astronomy. We agree with our Antoeci in this, that we have midday,
and midnight both at the same time. But herein we differ, that the seasons of
the year are clean contrary. For when we have Summer, they have Winter: and
our longest day, is the shortest with them. We also inhabit temperate Zones
both of us, though different from each other in the time and seasons.

But with our Antipodes all things are quite contrary, both days and nights,
with their beginnings and endings, as also the seasons of the year. For at
what time we, through the benefit of the Sun, enjoy our Summer and the longest
day: then is it winter with them, and the days at the shortest. So likewise
when the Sun rises with us, it sets with them; and so contrary wise when it
sets with us, it rises with them. For we inhabit the upper Hemisphaere,
and they the lower, divided by the same Horizon.

CHAP. VII. Of Climates and Parallels.
ACcording to the different quantity of the longest days, Geographers have
divided the whole earth, on each side of the Equator to the Poles in Climates
and Parallels. A Climate they define to be a space of earth comprehended
betwixt any two places, whose longest days differ in quantity half an hour.
And a Parallel is a space, wherein the days increase in length a quarter of an
hour: so that every Climate contains two Parallels. Those Climates, as also
the Parallels themselves are not all of equal quantity. For the first Clime,
(as also the Parallel) beginning at the Equator, is larger th^n the second,
and the second is likewise greater th^n the third. Only herein, they all agree,
that they differ equally in the quantity of the longest day.

The Ancients reckoned but 7 Climates at the first; to which number were
afterward added two more, so that in the first of these numbers were
comprehended 14 Parallels, but in the later. 18. Ptolomy accounting the
Parallels by the difference of a quarter of an hour, reckons in all 24. by
whole hours difference 4 by whole months, 6 So that b^ides the Equator,
reckoning he whole number of Parallels on each side, they a mount to 38.

In the Meridian of a Material Globe, there are described nine Climates,
differing from each other by the quantity of half an hour. After these, there
are, other also set according to the difference of an whole hour: and last of
all those that differ in whole month^ are continued to the very Pole, each of
them expressed in their several latitudes. The distance of all, both Climates
and Parrallel^, together with, their latitudes from the Equator, and
differences of the quantity of the longest days, are here fully expressed it
this Table following.

Ampihscij. Climates. Parallels. The longest Summers day Hour. Scr. Latitude
and Elevation of Pole Hour. Scr. The breadth of the Climates. Degrees. Scrup. 0 0 12
0 0 0 4 18 1 12 15 4 18 1 (...) 12 30 8 34 8 25 (...) 12 45 1^ 43 2 4 13 0 16
43 7 50 5 13 15 20 33 3 6 13 30 23 10 7 3 7 13 45 27 36 Heteroscij. 4 8 14 0 30
47 6 9 (...) 14 15 33 45 5 10 14 30 30 30 5 17 11 14 45 39 2 6 12 15 0 41 22 4
30 13 15 15 43 32 7 14 15 30 45 29 3 48 15 15 45 47 20

Heteroscij. Climates. Parallels. The longest sumers day Hour. Scr. Latitude
and Elevation of the Pole. Degr. Scr The breadth of the Climates. Degr. Scr. 8
16 16 ^0 49 1 3 13 17 16 15 50 33 9 18 16 30 51 58 2 44 19 16 45 53 1^ 10 20 17
0 54 29 2 17 21 17 15 55 34 11 22 17 30 56 37 2 0 23 17 45 57 34 12 24 18 0 58
26 1 40 25 18 15 59 14 13 26 18 30 59 5^ 1 26 27 18 45 60 40 14 28 19 0 61 18 1
13 29 19 15 61 53 15 30 19 30 62 25 1 1 31 19 45 62 54 16 32 20 0 63 22 0 52 33
20 15 63 46 17 34 20 30 64 (...) 0 46 35 20 45 64 3^ 18 36 21 0 69 49 0 36 37
21 15 65 6 19 38 21 30 65 21 0 29 39 21 45 65 35 20 40 22 0 65 47 0 22 41 22 1^
65 57 21 42 22 30 66 6 0 17 43 22 45 66 14 22 44 23 0 66 20 0 11 45 23 15 66 25
23 46 23 30 66 ^8 0 5 47 23 45 66 ^0 24 48 24 0 66 31 0 0 Months. Periscij.
Here the Climates begin to be accoun^ ted by months, from 66 gr. 3^. (...).
where the day is 24 hours lon^ to the Pole it self, who^e it is 6. months in
length. 1 67 15 2 69 30 3 73 20 4 78 20 5 84 0 6 90 0

The second Part,
CHAP. I. Of such things as are proper to the Celestial Globe: and first of
the Planets.
HItherto, has our discourse been concerning those things which are common to
both Globes: We will now descend to speak of those that properly belongs to
each of them in particular. And first of those things that only concern the
Celestial Globe: as namely the Stars, with their several configurations.

The whole number of Stars has been divided, by the Ancient Astronomers, who
first applied themselves to the diligent observing of the same, into two kinds.
The first is of the Planets, or wandering Stars: the other of the fixed. The
first of which, they therefore called Planets or Wanderers because they observe
no constant distance or situation, neither in respect of each other, nor in
respect of those that are called fixed Stars. And these were so called,
because that they were observed always to keep the same situation and distance
from one another, as is at large proved Ptolomy, in his Almagest, lib. 7. cap.
1. out of his own observations, diligently compared with those delivered by
Hipparchus.

PONT. The Stars are divided into Planets, or wandering Stars, and fixed: not
as if these were indeed fixed in one certain place, and altogether without
motion, and the other only moveable and erraticall: but these appellations are
only given then comparatively; in which sense also they are to be understood.
For seeing that the fixed Stars were observed always to keep the same places
in the eighth Sphaere, and the same distance srom each other: notwithstanding
that they are always in continual motion, caused by the virtue of the first
Moveable, which carries them about in the space of twenty four hours. But the
Planets, besides this motion, have a proper motion of their own, so that they
keep neither their the same distance from the fixed Stars, nor yet the same
aspect to each other: for these reasons were the one called Fixed, and the
other Planets. For otherwise if the Planets be considered severally, each one
by himself, there is nothing more certain then their periodicall motion. So
that Tully, alluding hereto, would have the Planets to be called Errantes, by
Antiphrasis, quam minime errantes.

The Planets, (exceeding those two greater lights, the Sun and Moon) are five
in number. A^ which, beside the Diurnal motion, by which they are carried about
from East to West, by the Rapture of the first Moveable, have also a free
proper motion of their own, which finish from West to East, according to the
succession of the Signs, upon the Poles of the Zodiaque; each of them in a
several manner and space of time: Their order in the Heavens, and periods of
their motions being such as follows.

Saturn, called in Greek (...) or (...), (and by Julius Higinus, Stella Solis
the Star of the Sun) is the highest of all the Planets: and (...) about the
greatest (...): but does not therefore appear to be the least of all the
Planets, as Pliny hence conjectured. He finisheth his Periodical course in
twenty nine years, five months fifteen days, according to Alfraganus.

Jupiter, in Greek Zeus and (...), moves through the Zodiaque in the space of
eleven years, ten months, and almost 16. days.

Mars, (...) and (...), (which is also calcalled by some, Hercules his Star)
finisheth his course in two years.

Sol, the Sun in Greek (...), performs his course in a year, that is to say,
three hundred sixty five days, and almost six hours.

Venus, (...), (called by some June's Starr, by there is, Isis, and by others, The
Mother of the Gods:) when it goes before the Sun, it is called (...), the day
Star appearing like another (...) Sun, and as it were, matu^g the day. But when
it follows the Sun, in the Evening, p^otracting the light, after the Sun is
^er, and supplying the place of the Moon; it is then called (...), the Evening
Star. The names of which Star, Pythagoras Samius (...) first to have observed
about the thi^ ie 2d. Olympiad, as Pliny relates, lib. 2. cap. 8. It p^meth its
course in a years space, or thereabout: and is never distan^ from the Sun
above forty six degrees, according to Timaeus his computation. Notwithstancing,
our later Astronomers, herein much more (...) then h^, allow it two whole
signs, or 60 degrees, which is the utmost limit of its deviation from the Sun.

Mercury, in Greek (...), and (...), (called by some Appollo's Star) (...) his
course through the Zodiaque in a year also: And according to the opinion of
Timeus and Sosigenes, (...) ever distant from the Sun above 25. gr. or, (...)
our later writers will have it, not above a who^e, (...), or 30. degrees.

Luna. (...) the Moon, is the lowest of all the Planets, and finisheth her
course in twenty seven days, and almost eight hours. The various shapes and
appearances of which Planets, (seeming sometimes to be ^ned, sometimes equally
divided into two halfes, sometimes finished like an Imperfect circle, and
sometimes in a respect circular (...)) together with the other diversities of
this Star, were first of all observed by Endymion; as it is related by Pliny:
whence sprung that Poetical fiction, of his being in love with the M^on.

All the^e Planets are carried in Orbs, which are Eccentrical to the earth:
that is, which have not the same center with the earth. The Semidiameter of
which Orbs, compared to the Semidiameter of the earth, have this proportion,
as is here set down in this Table.

Of what parts the ^emidiameter of the Earth i. 1. Of the same the (...) ter of
the Orb of Luna 1. 48. 56 m. Mercury 116. 3 m. Venus 641. 45. m Sol 1165. 23.
m. Mars 5022. 4. m Jupiter 11611. 31. m. Saturn 17225. 16. m

The Eccentricities of the Orbs, compared to the Orbs themselves, have this
proportion.

Of whatparts the Semidiameter of the Deferent is 60. Of the same the
Eccentricity of. Luna 18 12. 28. m. 30 sec Maurolycus, out of Alphons. Mercury
2. 0. m. Venus 1. 8. m. Sol 2. 16. m 6. sec. Mars 6. 0 m. Jupiter 2. 45 m.
Saturn 3. 25 m.

The Eccentricities of some of the Planets, (especially of the Sun) are found
to have decreased and grown less since Ptolomyes ^ime. For Ptolomy sets down
the Eccentricity of the Moon to be 12. gr. 3^ m. but by Alphonsus it was found
to be but 13 gr. 28. m. and an half. Ptolomy assigned Eccentricity to Venus 1
gr 14. m Alphonsus 1. gr 8. m. Ptolomy found, by his own observations. and
also by those that Hipparchus had made, that the Eccentricity of the Sun was 2
gr. 30. m. Alphonsus observed it in his time to be but 2 gr. 16. m. and the
10th. part of a minute In the year of ou^ Lord 1312 it was found to be 2. gr.
2. m. 18. sec. Copernicus found it to be less yet then that. and to be but 1
gr. 56 m 11. sec. So, that without just cause, did the Illustrious Julius
Scaliger think Copernicus his writings, for this reason, to deserve the Sponge,
and the Author himself the Bastinado: he^ein dealing more hardly with
Copernicus, then he deserves.

PONT. Besides the Eccentricities of the Planets, it is worth our pains also
to observe their Magnitudes: And this consists especially in the knowledge of
their Diameters, and what proportion they bear to each other. For the Diameter
of a Planet, compared to the Diameters, of the Earth, is after this, manner
following.

The Diameter of Saturn Compared ^o the Diameter of the Earth is as 9 10 2
Jupiter 32 7 Mars 7 6 Sol 11 2 Venus 3 10 Mercury 1 28 Luna 5 17

The Diameter of the Sun compared to the Diameter of the Moon, bears the same
proportion, that is betwixt 187. and 10.

And now that which is said may be demonstrated by an example: let us suppose
the Diameter of the Sun, in proportion, to the Diameter of the Earth, to be (as
is already showed) as 11 to 2. The Cube therefore of the Sun is 11. and the
Cube of the Earth. 2. Now these Diameters being multiplied cubically and thae
greater Cube divided by the less, the difference of their severaell Globes
will appear. For if you multiply 11. by 11. there arises 121. which number
being multiplied again by 11. the whole will be 1331. So likewise multiply 2.
cubically, that is to say, by it self, and there rises 4. which being again
multiplied by 2- arises to 8. Now divide the greater Cube, 1331. by 8. and the
product will be 166. which is the difference of the Globes of the Sun and the
Earth.

And thus much may suffice us to have spoken of the Planets: and if any desire
a more copious Narration of the same, they may have recourse to Ptolomy,
Copernicus, and others, that have written the Theories of the Planets. For a
more large description of these things seams not ^o stand without purpose:
especially for that by reason of their Erraticall motion, they cannot be
expressed in a Globe. Let thus much therefore be spokn of them, as by the way
only,

CHAP. II. Of the fixed Stars, and their Constellations.
ANd here, in the next place, we intend to speak of the Fixed Stars, and their
Asterismes, or Constellations, which Pliny calls Signa and Sidera, signs.
Concerning the number of which Constellations, as also of their figure, names,
and number of the Stars they consist of, there is diversity of opinion among
Authors. For Pliny in his 2d book, 41. chap. reckons the whole number of the
signs to be 72. But Ptolomy Alfraganus, and those which follow them,
acknowledge but 48. for the most part: notwithstanding some have added to this
number one, or two more; as Berenices Hair, and Antinous. Germanicus Coesar,
and Festus Avienus Rufus, following Aratus, make the number less. Julius
Higinus will have them to be but 42. reckoneing the Serpent: and The man that
holds it, for one sign: and he omitteth the little Horse: and does not
number Libra among the signs: but he divides Scorpio into two signs, as many
others also do. Neither does he reckon the Crow, the Wolf, nor the South Crown
among his Constellations, but only names them by the way. The Bull also. which
was described to appear but half, by Hipparchus, and Ptolomy, and those that
follow them: the same is made to be wholly apparent, both by Vitruvius, and
Pliny, and also before them, by Nicander, if we may believe Theon, Aratus his
Scholiast: who also place the Pleiades in his back.

Concerning the number also of the Stars, that go to the making up of each
Constellation, Authors do uery much differ from Ptolomy, as namely, Julius
Higinus, the Commentator upon Germanicus, (whether it be Bassus as Philander
calls him: or whether those Commentaries were written by Germanicus himself,
as some desire to prove out of Lactantius) and sometimes also Theon, in his
Commentaries upon Aratus; and Alfraganus very often.

Now if you desire to know what other reason there is, why these Constellations
have been called by these names. save only, that the position of the Stars
does in some sort seem to express the forms of the things signified by the
same: you may read Bassus, and Julius Higinus, abundantly discoursing of this
argument out of the fables of the Greeks. Pliny assures us, (if at least we
may believe him) that Hipparchus was the man that first delivered to posterity
the Names, Magnitude, and Places of the Stars. But they were called by the same
names, before Hipparchus his time, by Timochares, Aratus, and Eudoxus. Neither
is Hipparchus ancienter then Aratus, as Theon would have him to be. For the one
flourished about the 420. year from the beginning of the Olympiads: as
appears plainly out of his life written by a Greek Author. But Hipparchus
lived above 600. year^s after the beginning of the Olympiads: as his
observations, delivered unto us by Ptolomy, do sufficiently testify. Besides
that, there are extant certain Commentaries upon the Phenomenon of Eudoxus and
Arratus, which go under Hipparchus his name: unless perhaps they were written
by Eratosthenes (as some rather think) who yet was before Hipparchus.

PONT. That which is written of Hipparchus, is not to be understood any
further, then touching the distinction of the Stars of the first, second, and
third magnitude. For so Servius in his Commentaries upon the 1. lib. Geogr
Hipparchus (inquit) scrip^it de signis, etc. Hipparchus (says he) wrote of the
Signs, and reckoned up how many bright Stars, how many of the second degree of
light, and how many obscure Stars there were in each constellation, For
otherwise, that the Stars were known by the same names 1000 years before
Hipparchtus, may be proved cut of Seneca, who in his 7. lib. Natural, Quest.
chap: 25 says thus Nondum sunt an^i, etc. It is not (says he) 1500. years
yet, since Greece first began to number the Stars, and to give them certain
Appellations, Now Seneca, we know, was put to death by the command of Nero, in
the 65. year after Christ, And Hipparchus lived not above 283. years before
Christ, in the time of Ptolomies Philadelphus. And Job also whom Philo Judaeus
reports to have married (...), Jacob's daughter, mentions these names,
Arcturus, Pleiades, and Orion, if we may trust St. Hierom's translation in
this case, cap. 9. verse. 9. Who makes (says he) Arcturus, Orion, and
Pleiades, and the Stars in the remo^st parts of the South. So likewise the
Prophet Am (...), chap 5 verse 8. Quaerite (inquiet) opificem Pleiadum and
Orionis, etc. Seek ye him that made the Pleiades and Orion, etc.

Now it is probable, that there were two kinds of men, that reduced the Stars
into constellations: and these might probably be Husbandmen, and Mariners. The
Husbandmen perhaps might make these, to wit: the Ram, the Bull, the E^e of
Corn in the Virgins hand, the young Kids, the Goat, the Waggoner, the little
Goat, the Wagon: all which, are names used also by Homer. Of the Mariners, the
Pleiades, the Hyades, the Whale, and the like names seem to have been invented,
according to that of Virgil, in the first of his Georgickes. Nav^ta tu^ Stellis
numeros and nomina fecit:
(...) des, Hyades, clarumque Lycaonis Ast^m.


Which is thus translated into English Verse by T. May. The Sailers number
then, and named* (...) Star:
The Pleiads, Hyads, and the Northern Carre.


And now to whom do those other new Constellations above the Antartick Pole, we
their now so well known names but to the Portugals, Hollander, and English
Seafaring men? Neither are those men at all to be regarded, that condemn
these usual names of the Stars, and Constellations, as unfit to be used by
Christian men. For seeing they are now used, without the least show of
superstirion, and that there is very great necessity of these Appellations, in
as much as without them there could be no agreement or accord in these Arts and
cience (for these very names are used all the world over, where ever the same
Arts are taught or professed) I see no reason but that we may lawfully use
these names, til such time as, the true names, wherewith the great Creator of
all things, at the first called every Star as David witnesses in the 146 Psalm
be made known unto us. As concerning the practice of the Arabians, who rejected
these humane figures, having substituted in their places the form of Beasts:
you may read Joseph Scaliger, in his Commentaries upon Manilius.

Pliny in his 2. Book, 41. chapter affirms, (though I know not upon whose
authority or credit) that there are reckoned 1600. fixed Stars, which are of
notable effect and virtue. Whereas Ptolomy reckons but 1022. in all,
accounting in those which they call Sporades, being scattered here and there,
and reduced to no Asterisme. All which, according to their degrees of light, he
has divided into 6. orders. So that of the first Magnitude he reckons 15. of
the second 45. of the third, 208. of of the fourth. 474. of the fifth, 217. of
the sixth, 49. to which we must add the 9. obscure ones, and 5. other. which
the Latins call Nebulosae, cloudy Stars. All which Stars, expressed in their
several Constellations, Magnitudes, and names, both Latin and Greek,) and
some also with the names by which they are called in Arabique) you may see
pescribed in the Globe.

PONT. Now as we have already showed, how by comparing the Diameters of the
Planets, with the Diameter of the Earth, their magnitude may be known: in like
manner also, may the magnitude of the fixed Sttarrs be found out: as may be
seen by this scheme.

The Diameter of a Starr of the 1 is to the Earths Diameter, as 119 to 4 2 269
60 3 25 6 4 19 5 5 19 36 6 21 8

More over concerning those other fixed Stars about the Southern Pole, which
were unknown to Ptolomy and the Ancients, and now of late years discovered by
the Portugals and Hollanders; we shall set down their names also in their due
place.

All these Constellations (together with their names in Arabique, as we find
them partly set down by Alfraganus, partly by Scaliger in his Commentaries upon
Manilius, and Grotius, his Notes upon Aratus his Asterismes, but especially as
Jacobus Christmannus has delivered them unto us out of the Arabique Epitome of
the Almagest) we will set down in their order. And if any desire a more copious
declination of the same, we must refer him to the 7. and 8. books of
Ptolomies Almagest, and Copernicus his Revolutions, and the Prutenicke Tables
digested by Erasmus Reinholt: where every one of these Stars is reckoned up,
with his due longitude, latitude, and magnitude annexed.

PONT. You may also see Christophorus Clavius in his Commentary upon Johan. de
Sacrobosco, cap. 1. And above all the rest Tycho Brahe: who in his book of the
New Stars that appeared in the year 1572. has proposed tables of the
longitude and latitude of all the fixed Stars that can conveniently be seen in
these Climates, according to his own most accurate observations: as you may
see in the aforenamed book, page 258. and so forward.

But here you are to observe by the way, Copernicus and Erosmus Reinholt do
reckon the longitude of all the Stars, from the first Star in Aries: but
Ptolomy from the very Intersection of the AEquinoctiall and Ecliptic. So that
Victorinus Strigelius was in an error. when he said, that Ptolomy also did
number the longitude of Stars from the first Star, the head of Aries.

CHAP. III. Of the Constellations of the Northern Hemisphaere.
THE first is called in Latin Ursa Minor, and in Arabique Dub Alasgar; that is
to say, the lesser Bear, and Alrucaba, which signifies a Wagon or Chariot: yet
this name is given also to the hindermost Starr in the tail, which, in our
time, is called the Pole Starr, because it is the nearest to the Pole of any
other. Those other two in the tail, are called by the Greeks (...), that it
to say, Saltatores, Dancers. The two br^ght Stars in the fore part of the
body, the Arabians call Alferkathan, as Alfraganus writes: who also reckons
up seven Stars in this Constellation, and one unformed near unto it. This
constellation is said to have been first invented by Thales, who called it the
Dog, as Theon upon Aratus affirms.

The second is Vrsa Major, the Great Bear: in Arabique, Dub Alacher. The first
Star in in the back of it, which is the 16 in number, is called Dub (...), and
that which is in the flank, being the 17 in number, is called Mirae, or
rather, as Scaliger would have it, Mizar, which signifies (says he) locum
praecinctionis, the girthing place. The first in the tail, which is the 25. in
number, is called by the Alfonsines, Aliare, and by Scaliger, Aliath. This
Asterisme is said to have been first invented by Nauplius, as Theon affirms.
It has in all 27. Stars: but as Theon rekoneth them, but 24 Both the Bears
are called by the Greeks, according to Aratus, (...), which signifies a Wagon
or Chariot. But this name does properly appertain to those seven bright Stars
in the great Bear, which do something resemble the form of a Wagon. These are
called by the Arabians, Beneth As; i. e. Filiae Feretri, as Christmanus
testifies. They are called by some, though corruptly, Benenas, and placed at
the end of the tail. some will rather read it Benethasch, which signifies
Filium Vrsae. The Grecians in their navigations were wont always to observe
the great Bear: whence Homer gives them the Epithete (...) as Theon observes:
for the Greeks call the great Bear (...). But the Phoenicians always observe
the lesser Bear, as Aratus affirms.

The third is called the Dragon, in Arabique Alanin, and it is often called
Aben: but Scaliger readethit Taben; whence he calls that Starr which is in
the Dragons head, and is the 5. in number, Rastaben, though it be vulgarly
written Rasaben. In this Constellation there are rekoned 31. Stars.

The fourth is Cepheus, in Arabique Aluedaf. To this Constellation, besides
those two unformed Sarrs, which are hard by his Tiara, they reckon in all, 11.
among which, that which is in number the 4. is called in Arabique Alderaimin,
which signifies, the right Arm. This Constellation is called by the
Phoenicians Phicares, which is interpreted Flammiger, which appellation,
peradventure they have borrowed from the Greek Word (...).

The fifth is Booses (...), which signifies in Greek an Heardsman, or one that
drives Oxen. But the Arabians mistaking the word, as if it had been written
(...) of (...), which signifies a Clamators, Crier, call it also Alhava, that
is to say Vociferator, one that makes a great noise or clamor: and Alsamech,
Alramech, that is the Launce-bearer. Betwixt the legs of this Constellation,
there stands an unformed Star of the first magnitude, which is called both in
Greek and Latin Arcturus, and in Arabique Alramech, or the ^ghtest Starr,
Somech haramach This Starr Theon places in the midst of Boots his belt or
girdle, The whole Constellation consists of 22. Stars.

PONT. There is mention made of Arcturus also in Job, cap. 9. verse. 9.
according both to Hieroms translation, and also the Greek translation of the
70. as we have noted already. But in the Hebrew text it self, it is called
Gnasch, or Asch, from the root Gnusch, which signifies Congregabit. Hesychius
in his Onomastic^n observes that Boots is also called sometimes Orion:
according to that of Manilius.

Arctos and Orion adversis frontibus ibant.

In Which signification H. Grotius in his notes upon Aratus his Asterismes,
thinks it is here to be taken. Sometimes also the whole Constellation of
Boots, or Arctophylax, is called Arcturus; from the Greek word (...), a Bear,
and (...), which is the same that (...), a Keeper: as Scaliger upon Manilius
observes. Now that the Hebrews call Arcturus by a word signifying a
congregating, or gathering together, the reason I take to be, because he has
the great Bear joined to him. For this Star stands behind the tail of the
great Bear, whence it seems to have it is name, quasi (...) the keeper of the
Bear, whence Pliny also, lib. 2. cap. 41. Boots sequitur Septentriones.

The sixth Constellation is Corona Borea, the North Crown, called by the
Arabians, Aclilaschemali, and that bright Star, which is placed where it
seems to be fastened together, and which is the first in number, is called in
Arabique Alpbecca, which signifies Solutio, an untying or unloosing. It is
also called Munic: but this name is common to all bright Stars. The whole
Constellation consists of eight Stars.

The seventh is Hercules, in Arabique, Alcheti hale rechabateb, that is one
falling upon knees, and sometimes absolutely Alcheti: for it resembles one
that is wearied with labor (as Aratus conceives) whence it is also called in
Latin Nisus, or Nixus; (which in Vitruvius is corrupted into Nesses:) and the
Greeks call it (...) that is to say, One on his knees. The Star which is first
in number in the head of this Constellation, is called in Arabique Rasacheti,
not Rasaben, as the Alfonsines corruptly have it: and the 4. Star is called,
Marsic, or rather Marsic, Reclinatorium, that part of the Arm on which we
lean. The eight Starr, which is the last of the three, in his Arm, is called
Mazim, or Maasim, which signifies Strength. This Constellation has eight
Stars, besides that which is in the end of his right foot, which is betwixt
him and Boots, and one unformed Starr at his right Arm.

The eight is the Harp, called in Latin Lvra, in Arabique Schalias, and
Alvakah. i. (...) Codens so Vulture, the Falling Vulture. It consists of 10.
Stars, according to Hipparchus and Ptolomy: but Tymochares attributed to it but
8. as Theon affirms: and Alfraganus 11. The bright Star, in this
Constellation, being the first in number, Alfonsus calls Vega.

The ninth is Gallina, or (...), the Hen, or Swan, and is called in Arabique
Aldigaga and Altayr, that is the flying Vulture. To this Asterisme they
attribute, besides those two, unformed, near the left wing. 17. Stars, the 5.
of which is called in Arabique Deneb Adigege, the tale of the Hen; and by a
peculiar name, Arided, which they interpret, quasi redolens li^um, smeiling as
it were of Lilies.

PONT. And here, in this place, it is worth our noting that there was a new
Star observed in the breast of the Swan, in the year one 1600 which set many
Mathematicians on work and among therest, besides Justus Byrgius Engineer to
the Emperor, Johannes Beierus, Maestline, and others: Johan. Kepler also, who
had some time been Tychoes Scholar, put forth a Mathematical Tract of it.
when it had now continued in the same place of that constellation for the space
of 6. years, being a Starr about the third Magnitude.

The 10th is Cassiopeia, in Arbiaque Dha^ Aleursi, the Lady in the Chair: and
it consists of 13. Stars: among which the 2d in number Alfonsus calls
Scheder, Scaliger Seder, which signifies a Breast.

PONT. There was another new Star also appared in Cassiopeia, being as great as
a Starr of the first Magnitude, in the year 1572. Novem. 11. th and it lasted
11. Months. Of which Star there were diverse opinions amongst Astronomers: yet
they all agreed in this, that it was placed in the seat of Cassiopeia in the
very Sky, and in Vialactea. and those that had observed it more accurately)
and among the rest, the noble Tycho Brahe, who also wrote a large Volume of the
same, full of most accurate observations did a^ of them unanmiously confess
that they could not perceive that it had any (...) at ^all, nor yet distinguish
any difference betwixt its True and Apparent place; and also added, that it
always kept the same situation in the Eight Sphaere whence they manifestly are
refuted, who deny that there has ever any new Starr risen in the heavens since
the first Creation: among which is Lambertu^ Danaeus, as may appear in his
Physic. Christian. Tract. 4. cap. 10. But he ought to have mentioned, not this
Star only, but also that other, which (as any testifies) was observed by
Hipparchus to have been generated in the very Sky it self in his time. For
where as the same Danaeus thinks, that the Star which appeared at our SAVIORS
Nativity, was either some Comet, or else some one of the Ordinary Stars,
whichr at that time kept an extraordinary course in its motion: the first of
these cannot be granted; because it is expressly called a star: neither is the
second of any force becaase, it is not probable, that the Magi, who were so
skillful in the knowledge of the Stars, should be so much deceived as to
mistake an old star that had only changed its place, for a new one. Neither yet
do we believe this to be the same that Hipparchus is said to have observed in
his time, or this other, which, as we have said. was seen Anno 1572. but rather
that it was a different star from both. For further satisfaction whereof, I
refer my reader to Tycho de Nova Stella page 3^9. etc.

The 11.th is Perseus, Chamil Ras Algol that is to say, Bearing the head of
Medus^: for that Star which is on the top of his left hand, is called in
Arabique Ras Algol, and in Hebrew Rosch hassatan, the Devils head. This
constellation has besides those three unformed, 26 other Stars: of which, that
which is (...) seventh in number, Alfonsus. alleth Alchcemb, for Alchenib, or
Algeneb, according to Scaliger, which signifies a side.

The 12th is Auriga, the Waggoner, in Arabique Roha, and Memassich Alhanam,
that is, One holding the raines of a bridle in his hand. This Astermisme has
14. Stars: of which that bright one in the left shoulder, which is also the
third in number, is called in Greek, (...) Capra, a Goat; and in Arabique
Alhaiok or, as Scalig^ says, Alatod, which signifies a He Goat: and the two
which are in his left head, and are the 8th and 9th are called (...), Hoedi
Kids; and in A abique, s Alfonsus has it, Saclateni, but according to
Scaliger, Sadateni, the ^inmost a^me. This Configuration of these Stars was
first observed by Cleostratus Tenedius, as Higixus reports.

The 13th Aquila Alhhakkab, the Eagle: the modern Astronomers call it, the
flying Vulture, in Arabique Altayr: but Alfraganus is of a contrary opinion,
for he calls the Swan by this name, as we have already said, they reckon in
this Alte^isme 9. Stars; besides 6. other unformed, which the Emperor Hadrian
caused to he call Antinous, in memory of Antinous, his Minion.

The 14th is the Dolphin, in Arabique Aldelphin, and it has in it 10. Stars.

The 15th is called in Latin Sagitta, or Telum, the Arrow or Dart, in Arabique
Alsoham: it is also called Istusc, which word Grotius thinks is derived from
the Greek ward (...) signisying an arrow. It contains 5. Stars in all.

The 16th is Serpentarius the Serpent bearer; in Arabique Alhava, and
Hasalangue. It consists of 24. Stars. and 5. other unformed. The first Star
of these is called in Arabique Rasalangue.

PONT. There was also discovered a new Starr in the foot of the Serpent.
bearer, Anno. 1605. which might have been reckoned among the Stars of the third
magnitude. It began first to appear about October, in the year aforesaid, and
about February, the year following, being 1606* it vanished out of fight.
Kepler wrote a Book of this Star also, unto whom you may have recourse for
further satisfaction.

The 17th is Serpens, the Serpent, in Arabique (...): it con^sts of 18. Stars.

The 18th is Equiculus, the little Horse, and in Arabique Kasam Alfar^, that is
in Greek (...), as (...) were the sure part of a Horse cut off. it consists
of 4. obscure Stars.

The 19th is Pegasus, the great Horse, in Arabique Aifaro^ Alath^m; and it Has
in it 10. Stars. The Star on the right shoulder, which is called Almenkeb, and
is the third in number, is also called Seat Alfras, Br^hium equi. And that
which is in the opening of his month, and is numbered the 17th is called in
Arabique Enif Alfaras, he Note of the Horse.

The 20th is (...), in Arabique Almara Al^sela, that is, the Chained Woman;
Alfraganus interpre^ it (...), quae non est experi^ (...) a Woman that has not
known a man. This Constellation concaineth in it 23. Stars: whereof that which
is the 12th in number, and is in the girdling place, is commonly called in
Arabique M^ach, or, according to Scaliger, Mizar: and that which is the 5th is
called Alamac, or rather Almaac. which signifies a socke or bu^kin.

The 21th is the Triangle in Arabique (...), and (...), which signifies
Triplici^. It consists of 4. Stars.

PONT. Among all these constellations in the Northern Hemisphaere, which are
in all 21. there are but three Stars only of the first Magnitude. The first of
which is that in the left shoulder of Erichthonius, or the Waggoner, called in
Latin Capella. The second is the bright Star in the Harp: and the third is
Arcturus, betwixt the legs of Boots. Now the whole number of Stars in this
part of the Heavens, reckoning in these also which are of the 2d 3d 4th 5th and
6th magnitude, with the obscure and cloudy ones also, arises to 360.

CHAP. VI. Of the Northern Signs of the Zodiaque.
THe first is Aries the Ram, in Arabique Alhamel: this Constellation has 13.
Stars, according to Ptolomies account; yet Alfraganus reckons but 12. besides
the other 5 unformed ones, that belong unto it.

The 2d is Taurus, the Bull, in Arabique Altor, or Ataur: in the eye of this
Constellation there is a very bright Starr, called by the Ancient Romans
Palilicium, and by the Arabians Aldebaram, which is to say, A very bright Star,
and also Hain Altor, that is, the Bulls eye. And those five Stars that are in
his forehead, and are called in Latin Suculae, the Grecians call (...)
because, as Theon, and Hero Mechanicus conceive, they represent the form of
the Latin. Y. although perhaps i^ is rather because they usually cause rain
and stormy weather. Thales Milesius said that there were two of these Hyades,
one in the Northern Hemisphaere, and the other in the South: Euripides will have
them to be 3. Achaeus 4. Hippias and Pherecides 7. Those other 6. or, rather 7
Stars, that appear on the back of the Bull the Greeks call Pletados, (perhaps
from their multitude) the Latins Vergiliae, the Arabians Atauria, quasi
Taurinae, belonging to the Bull. Nicander, and after him Vitruvius, and Pliny
place these Stars in the tail of the Bull: and Hipparchus quite out of the
Bull, in the left foot of Perseus. These Stars are reported by Pliny and
Solius to be never seen at all in the Isle Taprobana: but this is rid culous,
and fit to be reported by none, but such as Pliny and Solinus. For those that
inhabit that Isle, have them almost over their heads. This Constellation has
33. Stars in it, besides the unformed Stars belonging to it, which are 11. in
number.

PONT. Plinies words in that place do not seem to carry any such sense simply,
seeing that he adds the same also of the Bear. His words are these in his lib.
6. cap. 22. Where speaking of certain Ambassadors that came from the Isle
Taprobana to Rome, he says; Septentriones, Virgilia sque apud no^, veluti novo
caelo, mirabantur. They wondered to see the Bear. and the seven Stars withus,
(...) if they had b^ (...) in a new world. And ^tainely if Vap (...) be
situated under the very Li^e, this then, for that very reason we alleged
before on the 3. (...) par. (...) of Lerius, had been no such strange ^ter, is
it had been spoken of the Septentriones only. Neither had Pliny written any so
absurd ^on, if he had said thus. Septentriones (...) nos, veluti novo ^lo,
mirabantur.

In the mean time I could wish, that Authors would (...) nothing in their
books, without (...) examination: although I am not ignorant, that it is not
strange to find Pliny fa^ring, (...) and then, in these kind of things.

The third is Gemini, the Twinns, in Arabique Algeuze. These some will have to
be Castor and Pollux, and others, Ap^ and Her^: whence with the Arabians, the
one is called Apollar, for a Aphella^; and the other (...), for (...) Scaliger
(...). It contains in it, (besides the 7. ^formed,) 18, Stars, amongst which,
that which (...) their ^ad, is called in Arabique ^geazr.

The fourth is Cancer, the Crab, in Arabique (...), consisting of 9. Start,
beside 4. ^formed: of which that cloudy (...), which is in the (...), and is
the (...) of all, is called M^lles in Arabique, which, as Scaliger faith,
signifies thick or well compact.

The fifth is (...), the Lion, in Arabique Alosed; in the breast whereof there
is a very bright Star, being the (...) in number, and is called in Arabique
Cale Alased, the heart of the Lion, in Greek (...), because that these that are
borne under this Starr, have a Kingly Nativity, says Proclus. And that which
is in the end of the tail, and is the last of all in number, is named Deneb
Alased, that is to say, the tail of the Lion: Alfraganus calls it Asumpha.
This Constellation contains in it 27. Stars besides 8. unformed. Of the
unformed Stars which are betwixt the hinder parts of the Lion, and the Great
Bear. (according to Ptolomies account, although Theon following Aratus,
reckons the same as belonging to Virgo,) they have made a new Constellation,
which Conon the Mathematician, in favor of Ptolomy and Berenice, would have to
be called Berentces Hair: which story is also celebrated by the Poet
Call^achus in his Verses.

The sixth is Virgo, the Virgin, in Arabique Eladari: but it is more frequently
called Sunbale, which signifies an Ear of Corn: and that bright Star which
she has in her left hand, is called in Greek, (...), an Ear of Corn, and in
Arabique Hazimeth Al^acel, which signifies a handful of Corn. This Star is
wrongly placed by Vitruvius and Higinus in her right hand. The whole
Constellation consists of 26. Stars, beside the 6. unformed.

CHAP. V. Of the Constellations of the Southern Hemisphaere: and first of those
in the Zodiaque.
ANd first of Libra, which is the 7. in order of the Signs. that part of this
Constellation which is called the Southern Balance, the Arabians call Mizan
Aliemin, that is to say, Libra dextravel meridionalis, the Right Hand or
Southern balance. But Libra was not reckoned anciently among the Signs: till
that the later Astronomers robbing the Scorpion of his claws, translated the
same to Libra, and made up the number of the Signs: whence the Arabians call
the Northern ball^ Zubeneschi mali, that is in Greek, (...) the North Claw,
and the other part of it that looks Southward, they call Zubenalgenubi (...),
the South Claw. This Constellation contains in it 8. Stars, besides 9. other
unformed belonging to it.

The eight is Scorpio, the Scorpion, in Arabique commonly called Alatrab, but
more rightly Alacrab: whence the Starr in the breast of it, which is the 8. in
number, is called Kelebalacrab, that is, the heart of the Scorpion: and that in
the end of his tail, which is the second in number, they call Leschat, but
more truly Lesath, which signifies the sting of any venomous creature, and by
this word they understand the Scorpions sting. It is also called Schomlek,
which Scaliger thinks is read by transposition of the letters, for Mosclek,
which signifies the bending of the tail. This Constellation consists of 21.
Stars, besides 3. unformed.

The ninth is Sagitarius, the Archer, in Arabique Elcusu, or Elcausu, which
signifies a Bow; it has in it 31. Stars.

The tenth is Capricornus, the Goat, in Arabique Algecli. To this Constellation
they attribute 28. Stars, among which that which, is in number the 23. is
called in Arabique Denob Algedi, the tail of the Goat.

The eleventh is Aquarius, the Waterman, in Arabique Eldelis, which signifies
a Bucket to draw water. The 10. Star of this Constellation is called in
Arabique Seat, which signifies an Arm. It contains in all 42. Stars.

The twelfth is Pisces, the Fishes, in Arabique Alsemcha. It contains 34.
Stars, and 4. unformed.

PONT. Among all the Constellations reckoed up by the Author in this and the
precedent chapters, there are only found 5. Stars of the first Magnitude. The
first of which, is Oculus Tauri: the the second, Cor Leonis; the third, Cauda
Leonis: the fourth Spica Virginis: and the fifth and last, is a star about the
month of the south Fish. The rest are all either of the 2. 3. 4. 5. or 6.
Magnitude, beside some certain cloudy ones; which are reckoned in all to be 346.

CHAP VI. Of the Constellations of the Southern Hemisphaere, which are without
the Zodiac.
THE first is Cetus, the Whale, called in Arabique Elkaitos, consisting of 22.
Stars. That which is in number the second, is commonly called Menkar, but more
rightly; as Scaliger says, Monkar Elkaitos, the nose or snout of the Whale:
and the 14. Boten Elkaitos, the belly of the Whale: and the last of all save
one, Deneb Elkaitos, the tail of the Whale.

The secondis Orion, which the Arabians call sometimes Asugia, the madman;
which name is also applied to Hydra: and sometimes Elgeuze. Now Geuze
signifies a Wall-nut: and perhaps they allude herein to the Latin word
Jugula, by which name Festus calls Orion: because he is greater then any of
the other Constellations, as a Wall-nut is bigger then any other kind of Nut.
The name Elgeuze is also given to Gemini. This Constellation is also called in
Arabique Algibbar, which signifies a strong man, or Giant. It consists of 38.
Stars, among which that which is the second, and is placed in his right
shoulder, is called Ied Algeuze, that is, Orion's ^nda, as Christmannus
thinks: but more commonly Bed Elgeuze, and perhaps it should rather be Bet
Elgeuze, that is the bright Star in Orion. The third Star is called by the
Alfonsines Bellatrix, the Warrier. That which is in his left foot, and is the
35. in number, is called Rigel Algeuze, or Algibbar, that is to say, Orions
foot.

PONT. In the 9. cap. of Job. verse. 9. there is mention made of Orion, as we
said before. Now the word in the Original is Kesil, which signifies Madness;
Rage, and Instability: and it is so called perchance, because that when this
Constellation rises with the Sun, it causes great store of tempestuous
weather in all places: whence it is stled by the Poets, Nimbosus and Aquosus
Orion. Now we must note, that this word Kesil in Hebrew, (which is rendered
Orion by Hierome and others) does answer to the Arabique word Asugia, which
signifies likewise a Bold or Furious fellow as our Author says. In like
manner there is mention made of Orion again in the 38. Chapter of Job, verse
13. Nunquid cohibebis delicias Pleiadum, aut lora Orionis dissolves: Can thou
bind the sweet inflences of the Pleiades, or loose the bands of Orion?
notwithstanding, Interpreters do not all agree in rendering this plaee. Look
also in the Prophet Amos. cap. 5. ver. 8.

The third is Eridanus, in Arabique Alvahar, that is to say, the River: whence
Nar, the name of a River in Hetruria, is conceived, by some, to have been
contracted. It has in it 34. Stars: among which that which is the 19. is
commonly called in Arabique Angetener, but Scaliger rather thinks it should be
red Anchenetenar, which signifies the winding or crooking of a River. The 29
Star is also called Beemim, or rather Theemim, which signifies any two things
joined ^ther: so that it is to be doubted, whether o^ no, this name may not be
as well applied to any two Stars standing close by one another. And the the
last bright Starr in the end of it, is called Acharnahar, as if you should say,
Behind the River, or, in the end of the River and it is commonly called Acarnar.

PONT. Avienus calls this River Nilus, in these verses of his. -- Pharium pars
altera Nilum (amne.
Commemorat, largo s^getes quod nutriat


In English thus. The other part relates of fruitful Nile,
Whose swelling streams enrich the Pharian I Will.


And Plautus also has an elegant Periphrasis of the same in his Trinummus,
Scen. Huic ego. where be speaks thus: Ad caput amnis, quod de coelo (...) sub
solio lovis. relating it, as of a River that should spring out in the Heavens,
from under Jupiters Throne.

The forth is Lepus the Hare, in Arabique Al^bet: and it contains in all 12.
Stars.

The fifth is Canis the Dog, Alcheleb Alachbar in Arabique, the great Dog;
and Alsahare aliemalija, that is to say, the right hand or Southern Dog.
Which name, Alsabare, which is also sometime written Scera, Scaliger thinks is
derived from an Arabique word which signifies the same that (...) in Greek, a
disease that mad Dogs are troubled with, when as they cannot endure to come
near any water. Notwithstanding Grotius is in doubt, whether or no it should
not rather be Elseiri, and so derived from the Greek word (...), For by this
name is that notable bright Starr called, which is in the Dogs mouth, and is
called in Arabique Gabbir, or Ecber, and by corruption, Habor. This
Constellation has in it 11. Stars.

The sixth is the little Dog, called in Greek Procyon, and in Latin Antecanis,
because it rises before the great Dog. The Arabians call it Alcheleb Alasgar,
that is to say, the lesser Dog, and Alsahare alsemalija, and commonly, though
corruptly, Algomeiza, the left hand or Northern Dog. This asterisme consists
of two Stars only.

PONT. There is extant a noble witty Epigram in Ausonius of the Celestial,
Terestriall and Marine Dogs; which may have reference to this place also, if so
be that, it be presented in it is proper meaning after this manner. Trinacrij
quondam currentem in littoris ora
Antecanis seporem coeruleus rapuit. ((...):
At Lepus. In me omnis terrae, pelagique ruina,
Fo^i an and Doeli; si Canis astra tenet.


In English thus. At once a Hare came lightly tripping over
The sandy banks of the Trinacrian shore:
A Dog fish caught her. Where at she replies.
Land, Stars, and all are still mine enemies
Nor should (...) yet be more secure, I fear,
In heaven it self; if dogs they bar bour there,


In which place Antecanis Coeruleus, in the second verse, signifies a Sea-Dog.
Yet this place hitherto has commonly gone thus, Ante canes, lepo^m, etc.
without any sense at all. Now the Poet in this place uses this word Antecanis,
in ^ation of Tully, who first of all Latin Authors, rendered Procyon,
Antecanis: as manifestly appears out of his translation of Aratus into Latin
verse.

The seventh is Argo: the Ship in Arabique Alseph^a; now Seph^a signifies
ship. It is also called Merk^b, which signifies a Chariot: according as the
Poets (...) usually call it, (...) (...) if one should say, a Sea-chariot,
instead of a Ship. But the Alsonsines give this appellation to that (...) which
is the 6. in number. The whole Asterisme contains in it 45. Stars, of all
which that which is the last save one, is called in A abique Sohel, or Syhel,
which signifies Ponderous or weighty. Which Appellation they perhaps have
given it, for the same reason, that Bassus has another like it, which is,
Terrestris because it always appears to them very low, and near the earth.
The Greeks (...) this Star (...), the Hebrews Chesil, as Christmannus is of
opinion. Which if it be so, then Ar^as Montanus is in an error, in taking it
for Orion, in his (...) of the Itin^rary of Benjamin Tudelensis. The
Inhabitants, of A^ (...) called it an Horse, as Prolomy affirms, in his
Geogra. lib. 5. cap. 7.

The eighth is Hydra, in Arabique Alsugahh, or Asuta, which signifies Strong,
or Furious. The AEgyptinas called it Nilus, as Theon writes in his
Commentaries upon Aratus. It has in it, 25. Stars, besides two unformed: the
12. of which the Alphonsines call Alphart.

The ninth is Crater, the Cup, in Arabique Albatina, and Elkis, which
signifies a Goblet or standing cup. It has in it 7 Stars.

The tenth is Corvus, the Crow, Algorab in Arabique, consisting of 7. stars.

The eleventh is Centaurus, the Centaure, called by the same name in Arabique.
It contains 37. Stars: among which, those that are in his hinder feet, are
the Stars that make up the Cross, so much celebrated in the Spanish
Navigations.

The twelfth is Fera, the Wild beast, called in Arabique Asida, signifying a
Lioness, and Alsubahh, which also is taken for a Wolf; or other ravenous
beast. To this Constellation they reckon 19. Stars.

The thirteenth is Ara, or Thuribulum, the Altar, or Censer, in Arabique
Almugamra: Bassus called it Sacrarium. It contains 7. Stars.

The foureteenth is Corona Australis, the South Crown, in Arabique Alachil
Algenubi: it consists of 13. Stars making up a double wreath, according to
Alfraganus: yet Theon reckons but 12. in it.

The fifteenth is Piscis Austrinus, the South Fish, Ahaut algenubi in Arabique.
It containtaineth in it 12. Stars in Ptolomies account but 11 only according
to Alfraganus. Among which the bright one that is in his mouth, is called Phom
Ahut, that is to say, the mouth of the Fish, and commonly by corruption,
Fomahant.

There is also described in the Celestial Globe a certain broad Zone or
circle, of the color of milk, which represents that which appeare^h in the
Heaven^, and is commonly called Via Lactea, ^he milkev way. Which Zone or
circle is not drawn regularly or equally, either in respect of latitude, color
or frequency of (...) is differenc and various, b^th in ^rm and ^tion, in ^ome
places appearing but as (...) circle, and again in others seeming as it were
dividing in two parts. The delineation whe^eof, you may see in the Globe, and
the d^scription more largly set down by Ptolomy in his A^megest. lib. 8. cap. 2.

PONT. This part of the Heavens has in it 7, Stars of the first Magnitude,
whereof the first is in the right shoulder of Ori^n: the second, in his left
scot: the third, in the end of the River Eridanus; the fourth, in the mouth of
the great Dog, which they call Siriu^: the sifih, in the thigh of the Little
Dog, called Procyon: the sixth, is Canobus, in the ship Argo: and the seventh
is in the right foot of the C^ntaure. To which we may add of the second
magnitude. 18. of the third, 60. of the fourth, 168. of the fifth, 53. of the
sixth, 9, and one cloudy one. All which are in the general, 316.

Now the whole Firmament, reckoning in the Northern and Southern Hemi phaeres
together with th Zodiaque, contains in all 1022. Stars, which make up 48
Aste^ismes or Constellations. Neither did either Ptolomy, or Hipparchus before
him, know any more then these. Notwithstanding Pliny, as our Author has
advertised before in the second Chapter, made the number of Stars and
Constellations a great deal larger But of this we shall spe^k more in the end
of the next Chapter. And concerning those Constellations, which have been more
lately observed about the South Pole by the Portugals and Hollanders. and by
them named, we intend to speak something in the end of t^o Chapter following.

CHAP. VII. Of the Stars which are not expressed in the Globe.
BEsides these Stars which we have here reckoned up out of Ptolomy, there are
yet many other to be seen sometime, especially in the winter time, in a clear
night, when as there are both many more Stars to be seen, then at other imes,
and those that are seen, appear by much, greater. Now if you expect that we
should assign the cause of this: we might answer, that it is besides the
intention of our present purpose. Yet for your satisfaction, and because that
some Au^hors have very much erred from the right, in setting down the true
reason of the same: we do therefore the more willingly make this digression.
For some there are, who (out of the extraordinary knowledge they have in
Philosophy, and Optickes) would very willingly persuade us, that either we
conceive them to be more, then indeed they are, and that our sense only is
deceived: or else (which is altogether as ridiculous) that the air being in
winter more pure and thin, making them more conspicuous, which otherwise in the
Summer, when the air is more gross, do altogetherlye hid. And this is an
error which I do not so much blame in others as I wonder at i^, in Johannes de
Benedictis: that so great a Mathematician, as he is held to be, should be led
away with so gross an error. For the reason of this is altogether otherwise,
and clean contrary. For, for that very cause that the air is more gross and
thick, the Stars therefore do appear more, and greater. Which opinion of ours
is confirmed, both out of principalls of the Opti^s, and also by the sense of
it self, experience, and authority of learned writers.

For first, that the rays being refracted through a gross Medium, and
diffused, as it were, in certain Canales, do represent the image of the object
greater then indeed it is, is plainly affirmed (and that accordiong to the
doctine of the Optickes) by Strabo himself out o^ Posidonius. And that through
Perspicills o^ Sp^ctacles, things appear more, and (...) ^hen otherwise they
would, is a thing well known to the most Ignorant. Cleomodes also says, that
the Sun being seen by any in the bottom of a deep Well, s^emes gr^ater, then
when he is seen from above: and that by reason of ^he moistnes and (...) ^f the
air in the bottom of the Well. And if it were possible to see the Sun through
stone walls, or other solid bodies, (as the old Poets fabulously report of
Lynceus:) he would seem much bigger then he is, as Posidonius rightly teaches.
And hence is it, (says Strabo) that we see the Sun always gre^ter at his
rising and setting, especially to those that are at Sea. Yet we do not say
that he appears ten times greater then he is, as it is reported he does in
India, out of the Excerpts of Etesias his Indian H^stories: much less, that he
seems to be an hundred times greater then he is in other places, as he is
feighned by Artemidorus to be at his setting, to those that inhabit a
Promontory in the outmost parts of Spain, which he calls Promontorium Sacrum:
but is justly taxed for the same by Posidonius. Alsraganus would have the cause
of this to be, for that the vapors which are exhaled out of the earth, and
elevated into the air, and so interposed be twixt our sight and the Sun, at
his rising or setting, do make him appear greate^ then he is. The same is the
opinion of Strabo and Cleomedes also, out of Posid^nius: neither does this
differ much from the opinion of the best of our Opticall writers. But of this
enough.

There are also observed many Stars in the Southern parts of the world: which
because they could not be seen by our Artists in these parts of the World, we
have therefore no certain knowledge left us concerning the same. So in like
manner, among those which we have hitherto spoken of, many of them cannot be
seen by those that inhabit any whit near the North Pole. But concerning those
Stars that appear about the South Pole of the World, I will here set you down
a very admirable story, which Franciscus Patricius Senensis relates in the end
of his Nova Philosophia, out of the Navigations of Americus Vespuccius. And it
is thu^. Coelum decentissime exornatur, etc. The Heavens (says he, meaning
about the Antarctique Pole) is variously adorned with diverse Constellations,
which cannot be seen here with us: among which I do verywell remember that I
reckoned very near twenty, which were as fair and bright as Venus, and
Jupiter here with us, and a little after he says. I was certain therefore,
that these Stars were of greater magnitude, then any man can conceive: and
especially three Canobi, which I saw, and observed; two whereof were very
bright ones, but the third was somewhat obscure, and noth^g like the rest.

And a little after, he proceeds. But the Pole it self is encompassed about
with three Stars, which represent the figure of a right-angled Triangle: among
which, that which is in the midst, is in circumference, 9. gr. and a half: and
when these ^ise, there appears, on the left hand of them, another bright
Canobus of notable magn^tude.

And a little after, he says* After these there follow three other very fair
Stars, the middlemost of which has in Diameter 12. degrees and an half; and
in the midst among these, there is seen another Canobus. After this there
follows 6. other bright Stars which excel all the other Stars, in the eighth
Sphaere for brightness: the middlemost of them, having 32. gr. in Diameter.
These Stars are accompanied by another greater, but darker Canobus: all which
Stars are observed in the Milky way.

To this he adds, out of Corsalius, his that follows. Andreas Corsalius
also affirms, that there are two clouds, of a reasonable brightness,
appearing near the Pole; betwixt which there is a Star distant from the Pole,
about a 11 gr. over which, he says; there is seen a very admirable figure of a
Cross, standing in the midst of 5. Stars that compass it about, with some
certain others that move round about ^ith it, being distant from the Pole,
about 30. degrees: which are of so great brightness, as that no Sign in the
Heavens may be compared with them.

And now, that you have heard this so strange and admirable relation of the
Stars about the Antarctique Pole, Auditum admissi risum teneatis? For
Vespuccius has here forged three Canobi, whereas Ptolomy, and all the Ancient
Greeks never knew but one, and that is it which is placed in the stearne of the
ship Argo, And here it is very well worth our noting, that Patricius (as far as
I am able to gather out of his writings) out of Vespuccius his ill expressed
language, and by him worse understood, has very excellently framed to himself
a strange kind of Star, that has in apparent Diameter; 32. degrees: whereas
the Diameter of the Sun it self hardly attaineth to 32. minutes.

But those things which out of our own certain knowledge and experience in
above a years voyage on Sea, in the years, 1591. and 1592. we have observed
beyond the Equator, and about the Southern parts of the world, we will here
set down.

Now therefore, there are but three Stars of the first magnitude that I could
perceive, in all those parts, which are never seen here in England. All which,
notwithstanding, Ptolomy saw, in Alexandria in Egypt. The first of these is
that bright Star in the stearn of Argo, which they call Canobus. The second is
in the end of Eridanus. The third is in the right foot of the Centaure. To
which if you will add for a fourth, that which is fixed in the Centaures left
knee, I shall not much stand against it. But other Stars of the first
magnitude, then these which I have named, that part of the world cannot show us.
Neither is there to be found scarcely two or three at the most, of the second
magnitude, but what Ptolomy had seen* and indeed there is no part of the whole
Heavens, that has so few Stars in it, and those of so small light, as this
near about the Antarctique Pole. We had a sight also of those Clouds Andreas
Corsalius speaks of, the one of them being almost twice or thrice as big as
the other, and in color, something like the Via Lactea, and neither of them
very far distant from the Pole. Our Mariners use to call them Magellanes
Clouds. And we saw also that strange and admirable Cross which he talks of,
which the Spaniard call Crusero, and our Countriemen, the Crusiers. And the
Stars of which this Cross consists, were not unknown to Ptolomy also: for they
are no other, then the bright Stars which are in the Centaures feet. All which
things I did the more diligently and oftener observe, for that I remembered that
I had read in Cardan also, strange relations of the wonderful magnitude of the
Stars about the South Pole, not unlike the stories he have now alleged out of
Patricius.

PONT. The names of the Constellations of the Southern Hemisphaere as they
have been now lately observed, and named by the Portugals and others, are
these. The South Triangle: the Crane; the Phaenix; the Water Serpent; the
Dorado, or Gilthead fish, situated in the very Pole of the Ecliptique; the
Chamaeleon with the fly; the Flying Fish; the Bird of Paradise; the Peacock;
the naked Indian; the bird ^oucan, or Brasilian Pie. All which are accurate^y
portraited in the Globes set fourth by Hondius. Among all these there are no
Stars, of the first Magnitude, hut of the 2. seven: of the 3. six: of the 4.
thirty five: of the 5. fifty six; of the 6. eleven: with six unsormed, and two
clowdy Stars, besides the two clouds themselves. Now, the whole number of the
Stats in this Southern part, beside-the cloudy ones, is 121. which being added
to 1022. the whole sum will b^e 1143. Of which, 1022. were reckoned before, by
our ^uthor, out of Ptolomy only there is a scruple cast in our way by those
words of Pliny, in his lib. 2. cap. 41. Patrocina^ur vastitas coeli etc. And
this opinion (says he) is seconded also by the vast n^sse and immensity of the
Heavens which is distinguished into 72. Signs, all which are the resemblances
either of living creatures, or other things, according as they have been
reduced into method and order by the skillful in those Arts. Among which
Constellations. They have observed 1600. Stars, all which are not able either
in their effects or magnitude, Where we see that ^ee accounts the whole
number of the Stars to be 1600 whereas Ptolomy, after him acknawledged only
1022. So likewise he reckons the Signs or Ast^rismes to be be in all 72.
which yet in Hipparchus, Eud^xus, and Ptolomies account, are but 48.

Scalig^r in his Comentaries upon Manilius, page 67. that he might untie this
knot, reads these words of Pliny thus. Patrocinatur vastitas coeli, immensa
altitudine, discreta in duo de L: signa, etc. Where, for seventy two, he would
have it to be wanting two: which is 48. the j^st number reckoned by Ptolomy But
yet the same doubt still remains in the ensuing words, where he makes the
whole number of the Stars to be 1600.

I find also two other Signs added to the former Southern Constellati^ns,
which are Noah's Dove, and the Phoenicopter. The first of which contains in
it, 11. Stars: of which there are two in the back of it, of the second
magnitude, which they call the Good (...), or bri^gers of good news: and those
in the right wing are consecrated to the App^d Deity, and those in the lest to
the Retiring of the Waters in the time of the Deluge.

The Phoenicopter we may call the ^ittou. Of this bird, Mar^iall has an
Epigram, lib. 13. Dat mihi penna rubens nomen, sed lingua gu^osis
Nostra placet. Quid si garrula lingua foret?


The Spaniards call it Flamengo: and it is described with the wings spread
abroad and as it were striking with his bill at the South Fish, in that part
where he boweth himself. This Asterisme consists of 13 Stars ^nf which that
of the second magnitude in his head is called the Phoenic p^rs Eye: and it has
^wo other tars also of the same magnitu^e, one in his back and the other in his
l^twing. And those two which are in the middle of his neck. Paulus Merula in
his first book of his Cosmography, calls his Collar or Chain.

Lastly we are to take notice that the Indian^ call the south Pole, Dramasa:
for so Pliny testifies in his lib. 6. cap. 19. Austrinum Polum Indi Drammasa
vocant.

The third Part,
CHAP. I. Of the Geographicall description of the Terrestrial Globe; and the
parts of the world yet known.
Dionysius Afer, in the beginning of his Perigesis, says, that the whole Earth
may be said to be, as it were, a certain vast Island, encompassed about on
every side with ^e Ocean. The same was the opinion of Homer also before him,
and of Eratosthenes (whom Dionysius is observed by Eustathius, his Scholiast,
to follow in many things) as is witnessed by Strabo. The same is affirmed by
Mela also after him This vast Island of the whole Earth they would have to be
terminated on the North side, with the frozen Sea, which is called by Dionysius
Mare Saturninum, and M^rtuum: ^n the East, with the Eastern Sea, which is also
called Mare Se^: on the South, with the Red Sea, (which Ptolomy calls the
Indian Sea) and The AEthyopian: and on the West, with the Atlantic Ocean. Out
of this Ocean also, there are four particular gulfes (as the Ancient
Geographers conceived) which embosomed themselves into the maine land. Two of
which derived their course out of the Erythraean or Red Sea, to wit, the
Persian and Arabian gulfes. From the West, there is sent out of the Atlantic
Ocean a vast gulf, which is called the Mediterranean Sea. And out of the
North, they would have the Scythian Ocean to send in the Caspian Sea, which is
shut in, almost on every side, with high craggy rocks; from whence the streams
flow with such violence, that when they are come to the very fall, they cast
forth their water so far into the Sea, without so much as once touching upon
the shore, that the ground is left dry and passable for whole Armies, under the
banks: the streams in the mean time being carried over t^r head^s; as it is
reported by Eudoxus in Strabo. This Sea both Strabo, Pliny, Mela, and Solinus,
will have to come out of the Scythian Ocean, (as we have said) But this e^rour,
of theirs besides the experience of these later times, is manifestly convinced
by this one testimony of Antiquity: which is, that the water of this Sea is
found to be fre^h and sweet, as was first observed by Alexander the Great, and
afterward by Pompey, as M. Varro in Solinus t^stifieth, who at that ^ime
himself served under Ptompey in his Wars. And this is the chiefest reason
which Polycletus in Strabo ^lledged, for the proof of the same.

Now all this tract of land the Ancients divided at first into two parts only,
namely, Asia, and Europe: to which, succeeding times a^ded a third, which they
call Africa, and sometimes also Lybia. And of these, Asia is the greatest,
Africa the next, but Europe the last of all: according as Ptolomy determines
it, in the 7. book of his Geography.

Europe, is divided on the East from Asia by the AEgaean Sea (which is now
called the Archipelago) and the Euxine Sea, which was at first (as Strato in
Strabo tho^ght) encompassed about on all sides in manner of a great lake, till
at last by the great accession of other River^ and waters, it so far
increased, as that the banks being unable to contain it, it violently made
it is way into the Propontis and the Hellespont. The Euxine Sea, is now called
Mare Maggiore. It is also bounded on the same side, by the like of Maeotis (now
called Mare dellezahacche) the River Tanais, (commonly called Don) and the
Meridian, which extends it self from thence to the Scythian or Frozen Sea. On
all other sides it is encompassed with the Sea. For toward the South it is
divided from Africa, by the Straits of Gibraltar, and part of the Mediterranean
Sea. (The length of these (...) is according to Strabo, and Pliny 120.
fu^longs: and the breadth of it, according to the same Strabo, 70. surlongs. But
Mela would have it to be 10. miles, that is to say, 80. Furlongs. T. Livius,
and Cornelius Nep^s, make the latitude of it to be, in the broadest place, 10.
miles, or 80. furlongs; and where it is narrowest, 7. miles, or 56. furlongs.
But Turannius Graccula, who as Pliny reports, was borne about those parts,
accounted it to be from Mellaria, a town in Spain, unto that Premontory in
Africa, which is called Promontorium Album, but 5. miles in all, that is, 40.
Furlongs. Eratosthenes was of opinion, that Europe was sometime joined to the
Continent of Africa. and it is reported by Pliny* that the inhabitants of those
parts have a Tradition, that the Isthmus, or neck of the land by which Europe
and Africa were joined together, was cut through by Hercules.

Europe, is terminated on the West with the Atlantic Ocean: and on the North
with the British, Germane, and frozen Seas.

PONT. This Northern part of Europe began first to be discovered and known to
the world, in the reign, or rather through the means, and by the direction of
Augustus Caesar. For as Pliny says. lib. 2. cap. 76. Septentrionalis Oceanus,
majore ex part navigatus est, etc. The Northern Ocean for the greatest part
was first searched by Augustus Coesar, who sent forth a Navy, which passing all
along the Coasts of Germany, came so far as the Promontory of the Cimbrians,
and thence passing on through a vast Sea, which they h^d only heard of, before,
they went as far as the Coasts of Scythia. In which place, Pliny means those
Sea expeditions, performed by Tiberius, and Drusus Germanicus: but especially
that of Drusus, as may appear by those words of Tacitus, where he says thus.
Ipsum quin^tiam Oceanum illa tentavimu^, etc. We left not the Ocean
unattempted that way also, and it is a common fame, that Hercules Pillars are
yet remaining; whether it be true indeed, that H^rcules ever went so ^ar, or
else, that that ever Magnificent thing is any where to be found, we all
conspire un^nimusly to honor him therewith. Neither was there wanting courage
for the attempt to Drusus Germanicus: only the Ocean would not suffer it self,
nor Hercules, to be sarther inquired into. After this no man att^mpted it: and
is was thought a greater point of reverence and religion, to believe the
Actions of the gods, then to know (...). Thus he.

Now before this time, all this tract of land lying toward the North, the
Romans called Novus Orbis, Ignotus Orbis, the new and unknown world: as I
remember I have seen it, in a certain Elegy of Albinovus upon the death of the
same (...). And the Promontory of the Cimbria^s, which (...) speaks of, is now
called Scagen, and is the most northern point of Denmark.

And as concerning these Pillars of Hercules, mentioned by Tacitus; Hadrianus
Junius who sometimes saw these coasts, r^ferreth the same to that high rock or
Promontory in Scandinavia (Junius has it No^vegia, but not rightly) which is
at this day called Col, bath by the Natives, and our Mariners also. For in this
place they have a superstitious custom, that as Strabo reports of the Gad
taken Pilla^s, when any ships had arrived there, as if they had attained the end
of their labors and travail, they forthwith sacrificed to Hercules: in like
manner in this place they have a custom, that if they have fresh men that
never sailed tbose Northern Seas before, they have certain Ceremonies with
which they use to make them free of the Sea, (as I my self once saw done
sailing by this Promontory) for they ta^k and bind them to the Mast of the ship
and then taking the scoope, and filling it with Sea water, they make as it were
a Libation, pouring it upon their heads, which done, they are forthwith
expiated, and accounted free of the place. But whereas Junius would have the
word Col, to be only corrupted from Columna, I much doubt whether he will have
any more of his opinion But of this place, as also of all this Northern tract
of land, I shall have a more convenient opportunity to speak elsewhere.

Africa, is divided from Asia, according to Dionysius and Mela by the River
Nilus, and a Meridian drawn through it, to the Ethiopian Ocean. But Ptolomy,
would rather have its limets on this part to be the Arabian gulf, (which he
not so rightly calls the Red Sea, and a Meridian, which should be drawn from
thence to the Mediterranean Sea, over that neck of Land which lies betwixt the
two Se^s, and which joyneth Egypt to the Continent of Arabia and Iudaea,
Neither does he think it congruous, that Egypt should be divided into two
parts, one whereof should be reckoned to Afric, and the other to Asia: which
must needs be, if the River Nilus be set for the bounds of the same. Neither
does Strabo conceive this to by any whit improper, since that the length of
this Isthmus, which divides the two Seas, is not above 1000. furlongs. And he
seems to have said very rightly, that it is not above a 10^0. furlongs. For
however Posidonius reckons it to be very near 1500. furlongs: yet Pliny
would have it to be no more then 115. miles, that is to say, 920. forlongs. And
Strabo also reckons the distance betwixt Pelusium and the Heroes City, which
is situated close by the highest part of the Arabian Gulf, to be but 900.
Furlongs. But if we will give any credit to Plutarch, at the narrowest ^art of
the Isthmus, the two Seas will be found to be distant not above 300. furlongs.
And that, (when Anthony was overthrown by Augustus in a Sea fight, and all his
forces clean^ broken,) Cleopatra, seeking to avoid the servitude of the Romans,
went about to transport her Navy this way over the firm Land, that ^o she
might find some new place of habitation, as far remote from the Romans as she
might: as it is reported by the same Author, in the life of Anthony. But what
should move Copernicus, In his first Book, 3. Cap. to say that these two Seas
are scarcely 15. furlongs distant; I cannot conjecture; unless I should think
the place to be corrupted, through the negligence of the Transcribers, or
Printers. And yet I could wish, that this, (though it be a very great one,)
were all the erours that were to be found in the writings of that most
excellent man.

This Isthmus, as Eratosthenes conceived, was anciently covered all over with
waters, til such time as the Altantick Ocean had intercourse with the
Mediterranean: and some of the old Grammarian^* Scoliasts on Homer, do affirm,
(as Strabo testifies) that it was this way, that Menelans in Homer, sailed to
the AEthiopians. I will therefore here set down some few things, which may seem
to make for the confirmation of this relation, (whether you will call it an
History, or rather a Fable, or Conjecture) of Erat^sthenes:

First therefore that Egypt, (if not all of it) yet atleast that part of it,
which is situated beneath Delta, and is called Egyptus Inferior, the lower
Egypt, and is accounted to be the gift of Nilus (or rather the Sea) was made
by the aggestion and gathering together of mud and sand; was the conjecture of
Herodotus, long before Strabo. In like manner, that the Island Pharos, which in
Plinies time was joined to Alexandria by a bridge, as himself testifies, lib.
5. cap. 31. (and therefore, for this reason may seem to have been called a
Peninsula by Strabo) was ancien^ly distant from Egypt a whole day and nights
sail, is re^orted both by Pliny and Solinus, out of Homer. And this is the
reason as Strabo conjectures, that Homer, (whereas h^e ma^es often mention of
Thebes in Egypt) yet speaks not o^e word of Memphis: and that either because
at that time it was a very small place or else perhaps was not as yet in being,
the land being in Homers time covered all over with water, where Memphis was
afterward built. And this seems also to be confirmed by the great depression
and lowness of tho intermediate shore betwixt the two Stars; which is so
great, that when Sesostris first had an intent of cutting a channel betwixt
the two Seas, as was afterward intended also by Darius, and lastly, by Ptolomy;
they were all forced, for this reason, to desist from their enterprise. And
indeed Strabo reports that himself saw the Egyptian shore, in his time, all
overflowed, beyond the Mountain Casius. Besides, the great retireing of the
waters at an ebb, as well in the Arabian gulf, as in the Persian, seem
somewhat to confirm this conjecture of Eratosthenes. For the tides withdrew
themselves so far back in the Arabian gulf: that Julius Scaliger makes mention
of some Cavillers, that, for this very reason went about to derogate from the
miracu lous passage of the Children of Israel for the space of above 600. miles
through the red Sea: as if they had watched their time, when the tide gave way:
and that when it returned again, the Egyptians were overtaken therewith and all
drowned.

PONT. This Sea is always rendered by the Septuagint, Erythraeum; and by St.
H^erom, Rubrum: but the Hebrew text it self, unders^ding this gulf of the Sea
(which is called also by Ptolomy, Sinus Arabicus) calls it Mare Suph; which
is as much as to say, Mare algosum, seu caricosum, because it brings sorth
great store of Alga, and Sea weeds. Which is observed also by Pliny lib. 13.
cap. 25. where he says. Naseuntur and in ma^i frutices, etc. There are also
bred shrubs in the Sea, and in our Sea, little trees also. For the Red Sea, and
all the Eastern Ocean is full of trees. For no other Language has a proper
word to express that which the Greeks call (...) because that Alga is more
usually taken for the name of an herb, but in this place it signisieth a
shrub. Thus Pliny. You may also see Strabo, lib. 16. That place which the
Author cit^th out of Scalige^, is in his 35. Exercitation against Cardan. And I
think it not a miss to hear him speakeing in his own words, that so it may
appear what his judgment is of that which is objected by those Cavillers. His
words are these. In plaga Indica secnndum Gangis at que Ind^ fauces magnus est
aestus, etc. About the coast of India (says he) where the Rivers Ganges and
Indus, disburthen themselves into the Sea, there are very high tides: So
likewise in the Red Sea, they are so great, as that the contemners of Holy
Writers have impiously forged that Moses, when he led the Israelites out of
Egypt, took the opportunity of the Waters, retireing after the Tide. Which
notwithstanding could not possibly be, because that as far as Sues, which is
situated in the innermost corner of the gulf^, the Sea covers the very shore;
neither, when it ebbeth, does it ever leave the ground so bare, as that the
lower parts, through which the Israelites passed, should be free from passage
on foot.

And it is reported by Pliny, that Numenius, General to Antiochus; sig^ting
ag^st the Pe^sians, near the mouth of the Persian gulf, not far from the
Promontory called Macavum, got the victory of them twice in one day, first by a
Sea combat: and afterward (the waters having left the place dry) on horsback:
as it is related by him in his 6. book, 28. cap.

And thus much concerning Eratosthenes his conjecture. Let us now return to the
bounds of Africa. Which is divided (as we have already said) on the East from
Asia, by a Meridian drawn through the Arabian gulf to the Mediterranean Sea.
On all other sides it is encompassed about with the Sea: as on the West, with
the Alantick; on the South with the AEthtopian Ocean; and on the North, by the
Mediterranean, which is also the Southern bound of Europe,

Now as concerning Ptolomies ignorance of the Southern parts of Africa, making
it a continent and contiguous to Asia by a certain unknown Land, which he
would have to encompasse about the South side of the Indian Sea, and the
Ethiopian gulf: if it be not sufficiently evinced out of the relations of the
Ancients; as namely of Herodotus, who reports, that certain men were sent
forth by Darius by Sea, who sailed about all this tract: nor yet of Heraclides
Ponticus, who re^es a story of a certain Magician that came from Gelon, who
said that he had compassed about all those coasts: (because Posidonius
accounts not these relations of credit enough to conclude any thing against
Polybius: neither does he appove of that story of one Eudoxus Cyzicenus,
reported by Strabo, Pliny, and Mela, out of Cornelius Nepos, an Author of very
good esteem, (and that because Strabo thought this relation to deserve no more
credit, then those fabulons narrations of Pytheas, Evemerus, and Antiphanes:
nor lastly, those traditions of King Ju^a concerning the same matter, related
by Solinus: Howsoever, I say, that those Traditions of the Ancients do not
convince Ptolomy of ignorance: yet certainly the later Navigations of the
Portugals most evidently demonstrate the same, who touching upon the outmost
point of all Africa, which they now call, the Cape of good hope, pass on as
far as the East Indies. I shall not, in the mean time, need to speak at all of
that other story which Pliny has: how that at what time C. Caesar, Son to
Augustus, was Proconsul in Arabia, there were certain Ensigns found in the
Arabian gulf, which were known to be some of those, that were cast away in a
shipwreck of the Spanish Navy: and that Carthage at that time being in her
height of power, Hanno a Carthaginian sailed about from Gades, as far as
Arabia, who also afterward himself wrote the story of that n^vigation.

Asia, lies Eastward both from Europe, and Africa, and is divided from them,
by these bounds and limits which we have already set down. On all other parts
it is kept in by the Ocean: On the North by the Hyperborean or Frozen Sea: on
the East, by the Tartarian and Eastern Ocean: on the South, by the Indian and
Red Sea. But Ptolomy would have the Northern parts of Asia, as also of Europe,
to be encompassed, not with any Sea, but with a certain unknown Land: which is
still the opinion of some of our later writers, who think that Country, which
we call Grcenland, to be part of the Indian Continent. But we have very good
reason to suspect the truth of this their opinion; since that so many
Sea-voyages of our own countrymen, who have gone far within the Arctique
Circle, beyond the utmost part, of Norway, and into that cold frozen Channel,
that divides Nova Zemla from Russia: do sufficiently testify, that all those
parts are encompassed with the Sea. Not to speak any thing of that which Mela
alleges out of Cornelius Nepos, how that when Q. Matellus Caesar was
Proconsul in Gallia, there were presented him by the King of Suevia, certain
Indians, who having been severed by force of tempests form the Indian shore,
had been br^ught about by the violence of the winds as far as Germany. Neither
will I here mention that other relation of Patrocles, in Strabo: who affirmed,
that it was possible to sail to India, all along the Sea shore a great Ideal
more Northward then the Bactrians, Hircania, and the Caspian Sea: now Patrocles
was made governor of these place^. Nor lastly, that which Pliny himself
reports, how that all this Eastern coast, from India as far as to the
Caspian Sea, was sailed through by the Macedonian Armies, in the reign of
Seleuchus and Antiochus.

Concerning the quantity of the Earth, which was inhabited, there was great
diversity of opinions among the ancient. Ptolomy defined the longitude of it to
be, from West to East, beginning at the Meridian which passes through the
fortunate Islands, and ending at that which is drawn through the Metropolis of
the Sinae, or Chineans country. So that it should contain half the Equator,
which is 180 degrees, and 12. AEquinoctiall hours, or 90000. furlongs measured
by the Equator. And he determined the bounds of the Latitude to be, toward the
South, that Parrallel which lies 16. gr. 25. m. Southward of the Equator: and
the Northern limets he made that Parallel which passes through Thule or
Iseland, being distant from the AEquinoctiall 63. degrees. So that the whole
Latitude of it contains in all, 79. gr. 25. m. or 80. whole degrees, which is
near upon 40000. furlongs. The exent of it therefore from East to West, is
longer, then it is from North to South, under the AEquinoctiall, something then
more by half as much, and under the most Northen Parallel, almost by a
fiftieth part. Good reason therefore had the Ancient Geographers, as Ptolomy
conceives in his lib. 1. cap. 6. Geograph. to call the extent of it from West
to East, the Longitude of it; and from North to South, the Latitude. Strabo
also acknowledges the Latitude with Ptolomy, to be 180. degrees in the
Equator, as likewise Hipparchus does also: notwithstanding there is some
difference betwixt them, in the number of the furlongs. For these last have set
down the Longitude to be of 126000. surlongs under the Equator: herein
following Eratoshenes, who reckons 700. furlongs to a degree. But Strabo
makes a Latitude agreat deal less; that is, something less then 30000.
furlongs: and he bounded it on the South with the Parallel, drawn through
Cinnamomifera, which is distant. Northward from the Equator 8800. furlongs:
and on the North with that Parallel, which passes through these parts which
are 4000. furlongs, or thereabout, more Northward then Britain. And this
Parallel that passes through the Region called Cinamomifera, Strabo makes to
be more Southward then Taprobane, or at least, to pass through the most
Southern parts of the same. But herein he betrayeth his own notable ignorance;
for as much, as the most Southern part of this Island, is extended far beyond
the Equator; as both Ptolomy affirms in his Geography, lib. 7 cap. 4. and is
further confirmed by the late Navigations of the Portugals. But Dionysius Afer
is much farther out of the way then so: for he places Taproba^ under the
Tropic of Cancer.

And these were the bounds where with the Ancient Geographers terminated the
then in habited parts of the world. But in these riper times of ours, by the
industry at Sea, both of the Spaniards, English, and others, the Maritime
coasts of Africa have been more thoroughly discovered, to above 35. gr. of
Southern Latitude: and the Northern limits of Europe have now been searched
into, as far as the 73. degree of Northern Latitude, far within the Arctick
circle: besides all that which has at length been discovered in the New World,
beyond the hope or opinion of any of the Ancients, the name of it being not so
much as known to them.

America, which for it is spaciousness, may well be called, The other World,
extending it self beyond 52. gr. of Southern Latitude, is there bounded wi^h
the Straites of Mag^llane: and toward the North it runeth far within the
Arctique circle: on which side also that it is bounded by the Sea, the many
Navigatiors of our Countrymen into these parts, do give strong arguments of
hope I shall not here speak of those Sea coasts, which are beyond that Sea that
encompasseth about the most Northern parts of Europe and Asia; as having been
but only seen afarr off as yet, and not thoroughly discovered Nor yet those
other, which are more Southern, then the Indian and Red Sea: which as yet we
have not any experience to the contrary, but that we may believe to be one
continent with those other Southern Lands, that lie beyond the Straits of
Magellane.

Europe, (whether so called from Europa Tyria, daughter of Agenor, as some
think; or Phoenix, as Herodotus will have it; or else from Europa a Sea Nymph,
according to the opinion of Hippias in Eustathius; or else from Europus, as
Nicias in the same Eustathius would have it to be; contains in it these
principal regions: to wit, Spain, France, Italy, Germany, Bohemia, Prussia,
Rhaetia, Liuonia, Sclavonia, Greece, Hungary, Polonia, Moscovia. or Russia,
Norway, Sweden, and Denmark. To these we may add the principal Islands, as
namely, those of great Britain, the chief of which is England, and Scotland,
enobled chiefly by being united to the English Crown: as also Ireland, which
is, in like manner, subject to the same. Besides the Azores, and many other
Islands scattered up and down in the Mediterranean Sea, as Sicily, Sardinia,
Crete, etc.

PONT. In Europe these things are chiefly observable. 1. The most famous
Monarchies which are in it; as namely the Emperor of Germany, the Kings of
Spain, France, Great Britain, Denmark, Swethland, Polonia, and Moscovia. To
which we may add the Pope of Rome, who, though he usurp not the title of a
King, yet is his power no whit inferior to theirs: a^ also the great Turk,
who at this day possesses a great part of Europe also. 2. The principal
hills, which are the Alps, dividing Italy from Germany and France; and also the
Pyrenoean Hills, severing Spain s^om France. 3. The noteable Rivers, as the
Da^ow, the Rheine, the Elue, the Wetsell, Bortsthenes, and Tanais, now called
Don. To which we may add the River Tagus in Spain, the Rhene and Guar^nn: in
France, and Thames in England. Lastly, the principal commodities in Europe,
are Gold, Silver, Tin, Lead, Iron, Oil, all kind of grain, Flax, Wool, Salt,
etc.

Africa, (whether it be so called from Apher, one of Hercules his companions,
in his expedition against Gerion; according to Eustathius: or else from one
Iphricus, a certain King of the Arabians; whence also it is called in Arabic
Iphricia, as Johannes Leo testifies: or lasty from it is scorching heat, as if
it should be called (...) quasi sine frigore, as some are pleased to derive
it:) has in it these principal regions. First of all, next to the Straits of
Gibraltar, (anciently called Fretum Gaditanum) there lies Barbary. heretofore
called Mauritania; which contains in it the kingdoms of Morocco, Fez.
Algier, and Tunis. Next to Barbary lies Egypt, which also bordereth upon the
Mediterranean Sea. Now within Barbary toward the continent, there lies
Biledulgerid known to the Ancients by the name of Numidia. The 3d is that part
which is called by the Greeks and Latins Lybia: but the Arabians name it
Sarra. After this follows the country of the Negroes, so called because they
border upon the River Niger, or else from their color, This Country is now
usually called Senaga: and it has in it many petty Kingdoms, as namely,
Gualata, Guinea, Melli, Tombutum, Gagos, Gub^ris, Agades, Canos, Casena,
Zegz^ga, Zanfar^, Burnum, Gaoga, Nubia, etc. Next othese is the spacious
Territory of the King of the AEthtopian, (who is al^o called Pretegiani, and
corruptly Prester John) which Kingdom is famous for the long continuance of the
Christian Religion in it, which has been kept amongst them in a continual
succession, ever since the Apostles time. These Christian are commonly called
Abyssines, but more rightly Habassines, as Arias Montanus observes in the
Itinerary of Benyamine Tudelersis. I h^ dominion was anciently extended very
far through Asia also. These have bordering on the West some few obscure
kingdoms, as Manicongo, and D' Angola: and toward the East and South, Melinde,
Quiloa, Mozambique, and Benamatapa. The chief Islands that are situate near
it, are Madagascur, the Canary Islands, the Isles of Cape Verd; and S. Thomas
Island, lying directly under the Equator.

PONT. Africa, has these things in it considerable. 1. It is greater then
Europe but less then Asia, and less inhabited, and civiliz^d then either. 2,
It is b^unded with the Sea on all sides, sa^e only where it is is con terminat
with Asia, 3. The principali regions of it, are, Mauritania, Numidia, Libya,
Cyrenaica, Egypt, and AEthiopia. 4. The mast famous kingdoms are these,
Morocco, Fez, Algier, and also that of Prester John, or AEthiopia 5. The
greatest Mountains are, Atlas, and that other whence Nilus, springs 6. The
principal r^rs of Nigar, and Nilus, which is accounted to be the greatest in
the world, and as Diodorus Siculus affirms, encompasseth 700. Islands. 7* The
principal Merchandise of Afric, is Ivory, Civet, Gold Cotton Wool, Jewels,
and certain kinds of spices, as also Salt, Lions, Camels, etc.

Asia (so called from Asia, the mother of Prometheus, as the common received
opinion is; or else from a certain Hero of that mane a^ Hippias in Eustathius
will have it, at this day wholly in subjection to the great Turk, and the
Persian, as far as to the East Indies, the greatest part whereof is under the
Kings of China and Pegu. But the more Northern parts of Asia are possessed by
the Muscovites, Tartarians, and those that inhabit the region or Cathaia. The
principal Islands appertaining unto at, are Cyprus, and Rhodes in the
Mediterranean: and on the South side, Sumatra, Zeilam. Java, Major and Minor,
the Molucean and Philippine Islands, beside Borneo, and almost an infinite
company of others And on the East of it there lie the Japonian Islands.

PONT. That it ought to be written Sinae, not Chinae, as our Author in this
place, and commonly all other writers use to do, appears manifestly out of
Ptolomy, who always calls them Sinai. The eighth Table also of Asia in
Ptolomyes Geography, places the Scythians called Cathae, (which our Author
calls the region of Cathaia.) betw^xt the mountains Imavus and Emodus: and
the region of the Siaeans a part of it beyond the same Emodus and Ottoro cara,
which are hills in the Country of the Seres, and looking toward the South
East. So that I cannot but wonder that Matthaeue Riccius a Jesuit, in his
Sinaean expedition should take so much pains to prove, that the Kingdom of
Cathaia* and of the Sinaeans is all one. But it were easi^, by other, and those
more proper arguments and testimonies, (were this place convenient) to prove
the contrary to this his assertion.

Now as concerning Asia, these things occur n^it worth our observation. 1.
That it is twofold, Asia Minor, and Major. 2. Asia Minor, or the lesser Asia,
is bounded on the East by the Euxine Sea; on the South by the river Euphrates;
on the West by the Mediterranean, on the North by the AEgean Sea. 3. The
principal countries it contained anciently, were these: Cilicia, Pamphilia,
Caria, Lycia Jonia, Lydia, AE^lia, Mysia, Bithinia, Paphlaponia, Cappad* cia,
Galatia, Lycaonia, and Pisidia. 4. To the greater Asia th^se Regions
appertained: Syria, Armenia, Chaldaea, Arabia, Pe^a, Tartaria, Hircani^,
Parthia, and India. 5. In both of them there are settled at this day these
Empires; namely, the Turkish, Persian, Tartarian, Indian, and Sin^sian or
Chinean 6. The chiese hills of note in it, are Taurus, Caucasus, and Im^us. 7.
The principal Rivers, Euphrates Ganges, and Indus, 8. The chiefest traffic
is, Gold, Pearl, Jewels, all kind of Spices, Musk, Frankincense, Balsame,
Amber, Silks, Ivory, and Elephants.

America, (so called from Americus Vespuccius, who first discovering it, gave
it both name and bounds,) is terminated on the East side, (on which it lokes
toward Europe, and Africa) by the Atlantic Ocean: on the West with the Sea,
which they call, del Zur, or the South Sea: on the South it is bounded with the
Straits of Magellane. But as for the Northern parts of it, they are not yet
thoroughly discovered, or the Limets thereof known: notwithstanding the many
adventures by Sea of our Countrymen, M. Martin Frobisher, and M. John Davis,
having given strong arguments o^ hope, that it is on that side ^ounded by the
frozen Sea. It contains in it these principal regions. First, on the North,
that Country which the Spaniards call, Tierra de Labrador: after which
follows that which they call, Baccalearum Regio: then Nova Francia: after
this Virginia: then Floride: next to this Nova Hispania, famous especially for
the City Mexico and last of all the Kingdoms of Brasilia and Peru, which are
the most Southern parts of all. There are also many adjacent Islands: most of
which lie in the Bay of Mexico, Eastward from America: the most notable of
which are Cuba and Hispaniola, besides many other of les^e note.

There are also many other parts of the world, not yet thoroughly known or
discovered, as namely those southern coasts, wherein stands Nova Guinea lying
beyond the Indian Sea, which whether it be an Island, or else a part of the
m^ine Continent, i^ not yet discovered: and likewise, that the other tract of
the Southern known Continent, which is called Magellanica: as also these
Northern parts of Europe, Asia, and America which have bee^ but lately detected
by many of our English Navigators, but not as yet fully searched into.

CHAP II. Of the Circumference of the Earth or of a Greater Circle: and of the
Measure of a Degree.
IT remains now that we speak somewhat of the circumference of the Earth, or
of the greatest circle in it; the knowledge whereof is very necessary, both for
the study of Geography, as also for the easier attaining to the Art of
Navigation. And therefore, I hope, I shall not seem impertinent, if I insist
something the longer on this argument: especially seeing that there is great
diversity of opinion among the most learned Authors that are extant, concerning
this matter; in so much that it is not yet determined, which of them we are to
follow.

Aristotle in the end of his 2d ^ook de Coelo, affirm's (and that according to
the doctrine of the Mathematicians, as himself says) that the circumference of
the Earsh is 400000. in: longs Cleomedes lib. 1. reckons it to be 300000. for
he says that the Vertical Points of Lysimachia and Syene, were observed by
Sciotericall Instru ments, to be distant from each other the 15th. part of the
same Meridian. Now the distance between these two places he sets down to be
20000. furlongs: So that if 20000. be multiplied b^ 15. the whole will arise to
300000. Eratosthenes (if we may believe Strabo, Vitruvius, Pliny, and
Censorinus) would have the whole compass of the Earth to contain 252000.
furlongs. To which number Hipparchus, as Pliny testifies, added very near
25000. more. Yet Strabo as well in the end of his 2d book of his Geography, as
else where, affirms, that he used the some measure that Eratosthenes did:
where he says, that according to the opinionof Hipparchus, the whole quantity
of the Earth contains 252000. furlongs: which was the measure delivered also
by Eratosthenes. Which opinion of Eratosthenes is seconded also by that
fabulous relation of Dionysiodorus, recorded by Pliny. lib. 2. cap. ult. Where
he says, that there was found, in the Sepulcher of Dionysiodorus, an Epistle
written to the gods; wherein was testified, that the Semediameter of the Earth
contained 4200. furlongs. Which number being multiplied by 6. the Product will
be 252000.

Cleomedes relating the observations of Eratosthenes, and Posidonius, making it
to be somewhat less, and that according to the doctrine of Eratosthenes: to
wit, 250000. furlongs. For he places Syene and Alexandria under the same
Meridian, Now Syene being situate directly under the Tropic of Cancer, the Sun
being then in ^he Summer Solstice the Gnomons cast no shadow at all. For
confirmation of which, the experiment was made, by digging a deep Well, which,
at that time of the year, was wholly enlightened on every part: as it is
reported both by Pliny and also by Strabo before him. But at Alexandria, when
the Sun is in the Summer Tropic, the Gnomon is observed to cast a shadow to
the fiftieth part of the circumference, on which it is erected to right angles,
so that the top of the same, is the center of the circumference. Now the
distance betwixt Syene and Alexandria is commonly set down by Eratosthenes,
Pliny, and Strabo, to be 5000. furlongs. If therefore 5000. be multiplied by
50. the whole will arise to 250000. which is the number of furlongs (...) to
the circumference of the whole earth by Eratosthenes Posidonius, proceeding
after another method, though not unlike this, labors to prove the whole
circuit of the Earth to contain 240000. furlongs. And first he takes for
granted (which is also acknowledged by Ptolomy, lib. 5. c^p. 3. Almagest.) that
Rhodes and Alexandria are situate under the same Meridian. Now that bright Star
in the stern of Argo, (which they call Canobus, and which never appears in
Greece, which seems to be the reason why Aratus makes no mention of it:)
first begins to appear above the Horizon at Rhodes: but it does but
stringere Horizontem, just touch the Horizon, and so, upon the least
circumvolution of the heavens, setting again, or else, as Proclus says, is
very hardly seen, unless it be from some eminent place. But when you are at
Alexandria, you may see it very clear above the Horizon. For when it is in the
Meridian, that is, at the highest elevation above the Horizon: it is elevated
above the Horizon about the fourth part of (...) Sign: that is to say, the
fortieeighth part of the Meridian that passes through Rhodes and Alexandria.
The same is affirmed alo by Proclus* if you read him thus: Canobus in
Alexandria consp^eue cerni, quar^a (...) Signi portione supra Horizontem (...)
as i^ ought to be; and not as it is corruptly read, in Alexandria prorsus non
cerni. It is not seen at all: in stead of it, is seen very plainly: (...) being
crept into the text, perhaps in stead of (...) Now the distance betwixt Rhodes
and Alexandria is set down both by him and Pliny, to be 5000. furlongs: which
being multiplied by forty eight, the product will be 240000. the number of
furlongs, agreeing to the measure of the Earths circumterence, according to the
opinion of Posidonius.

Ptolomy, every where in his Geography, as also Marinus Tyrius before him, have
allowed but 500. furlongs, to a degree in the greatest circle on the earth, of
which the whole circumference contains 360 (...) that the wh^le compass of
the Earth, after this account, con^aineth 180000. furlongs. And yet Strabo
affirms in his lib. 2. Geograph. that this measure of the Earths circumference
set down by Ptolomy, was both receiv^d by the Ancients, and also approved by
Posidonius himself.

So great is the difference of opinions, concerning the compass of the Earth:
and yet is every one of these opinions grounded on the authority of great men.
In this so great diversity therefore, it is doubtful whom we should follow.
And if you should desire to know the cause of all these dissentions; even that
also is altogether as uncertain. Nonius, and Peucerus would persuade us, that
certainly the furlongs they used were not of the same quantity. Maurolycus, and
Philander conceive the difference of furlongs to rise out of the diverse
measure of Pases. And therefore Maurolycus takes great pains to reconcile
them; but in vain: for they seem not capable of any reconcilement. They t^ll
us of diverse kinds of Pases in use among the Ancients. It is true: we assent to
them herein: but withal desire to hear of some diversity of furlongs also, or
at least, of feet. The Greeks (as I conceive) measured not their furlongs by
Pases: but by feet, or rather (...) Now (...) is the measure of the extension
of both the hands, together with the breast betwixt, containing six feet,
which we commonly call a fadome, and is a measure in familiar use with our
Mariners, in sounding the depth of the Sea, or other waters. This word
notwithstanding is translated by many, a Pase: but how rightly, I leave it to
learned men to judge. Xylander in his translation of Strabo, always rendereth
it, an Ell. In like manner a furlong is defined by Herodotus, a very ancient
Greek Author, to consist of 600. feet: the same also is affirmed by Suidas, by
much later then he. Yet Hero Mechanicus (or at least his Scholiast) one, as I
conceive, of the lowest rank of Ancient Writers:) will have a surlong to
contain 100. fadomes; a fadam four Cubits: a Cubi a foot and a half, or
twenty four digits: But you will say perhaps, that Censorinus proposes three
several kinds of furlongs: the first of which is the Italian, consisting of
625. feet: which he would have us understand to be that which is commonly used
in measuring the Earth. The second is the Olympian: containing 600. feet: and
the third and last is the Pythean, consisting of 1000. feet. But to let pass
this later, if we do but look more nearly into the matter, we shall find the
Italian and Olympian furlongs, howsoever they differ in names, yet to be no
other but the self same thing. For the Italian furlong, which contains 625.
Roman feet, (according as Pliny testifies, in his second book and twenty
third Chapter) will be found to be equal to the Olympian, consisting of 600.
Grecian feet. For 600. Grecian feet, are equal to 625 Roman: for as much as
the Grecians foot exceeds the Roman by a twenty fourth part: as much as in the
difference betwixt 600. and 625.

Amongst these so great diversities of opinions, let us give our conjecture
^iso, both what may be the cause of so great disagreement, and also which of
them we may most safely follow. We will therefore pass by Aristotle, whose
assertion is only defended by a great name. And for Cleomedes his opinion, of
the Earths being in compass 200000. furlongs, we should scarce vouchsafe to
mention it, but that Archimedes also had taken notice of the same, as of a
portion not altogether disallowed in his time. Let us therefore examine
Eratosthenes, and Posidonius, whose opinions seem to be grounded on more
certain foundations. The cause therefore of their disagreement I conceive to
be in that neither of them had measured exactly the distance of those places
which they laid down to work on, but took them upon trust, from the common
reducing received of Travailers: save only, that of the two, Posidonius is the
more extravagant. Whereas on the contrary Ptolomy grounded his opinion on the
distances of places exactly measured, as himself affirms; when he says: That
the latitude of the known parts of the world is 79, degrees, and 45. minutes.
Or supposing it to be full 80. degrees; it will then contain 10000. furlongs,
allowing for every degree sieve hundred furlongs: as by measuring the distance
of places exactly, we have found it to be

But Eratosthenes is much taxed by Hipparchus, for his strange mistakes and
gross ignorance in setting down the distance of plac^s: as Strabo testifies
in his first book. For he reckons betwixt Alexandria and Carthage above 13000.
furlongs, whereas (says Strabo) it is not above 9000. So likewise Posidonius
is to be blamed, for setting down the distance betwixt Rhodes and Alexandria
to be 5000. furlongs, and that from the relation of Mariners, whereas some of
them would have it to be but 4000. and others 5000. as Eratosthenes confesses
in Strabo: but adds moreover, that he himself had found by Sciotericall
instruments, that it was but 3750. And Strabo would have it to be something
less then that, namely 3640. furlongs. So that hence, ^e may safely conclude,
that Ptolomies opinion, being grounded upon the more exact and accurate
dimensions of distances, (as bimself professes (must necessarily come nearer
the truth then the rest.

But Franciscus Maurolycus, Abbot of Messava, whiles he goes about to defend
Posidonius against Ptolomy, is overtaken himself in an error, before he is
aware. For ^e suspecteth the truth of Ptolomies assignement of the latitude of
Rhodes, which he sets down to be thirty six degrees* And he advertiseth us,
that certainly the number in his Geographicall tables are corrupted: which, we
confess, is most certain. But in the mean time let us see how he proves them
to be so, in this Latitude of Rhodes Posidonius (says he) out of his own
observations, sets down the Latitude of it to be thirty eight degrees, and
an half: unless that Ptolomy be out also in designing the Latitude of
Alexandria; which Maurolycus thinks cannot possibly be. But we affirm on the
contrary side, that Ptolomy himself is against this Latitude, not only in his
Geographicall books, but also in diverse places throughout the Almagest also,
and especialy in the lib. 2. cap. 6. where he sets down the same latitude for
Rhodes, that he has in this Geography: adding moreover the quantity of the
longest day, and also what manner of shadows the Gnomonos cast, both when the
Sun is in the AEquinoctiall, as also in the Tropicks: all which do plainly
prove the some He also very often has the same lat^tude of it in his
Planisphaere: unless you will say, that either Masses the Arabian, in
translating it into Arabic, or else Rodulphus Brugensis, who translated the
some again out of Arabic into Latin, have (...) us. Hitherto therefore we
stand on equal terms. But he proceeds, and says, that this opinion of
Posidonius is favored also by Proclus, and the observ^tions of Eudoxus
Cnidius, delivered by Strabo Let us therefore see what all this is. P^sidonius
(says Strabo) reports, that himself being sometimes in a City distant from the
Gaditane Straits 400. furlongs, saw from the top of an high house a certain
Starr, which he took to be Canobus: and those that went thence more South
ward from Spain, confess that they saw it also plainly. Now the Tower Cnidus,
out of which Eudoxus is said to have seen Canobus, is not much higher then the
other buildings. But Cnidus is in the same Climat with Rhodes, as is also the
Gades, with the Sea coasts adjoining. Thus Strabo. But what does he conclude
hence against Ptolomy? That Canobus may be seen in Cnidus? We deny it not. Or
that Cnidus is in the Rhodian Climate? Ptolomy acknowledges as much: for he
makes it to have not above 36. gr. 15. m. of Latitude, in the fifth book of his
Geography. But is not Ptolomy out also in assigning the Latitude of Cnidus?
That the Latitude of Rhodes is no greater then Ptolomy has set it, may be
proved even out of Proclus himself: for he makes the longest day at Rhodes to
be 14. hours and an half. And Ptolomy will have the same to be equal both at
Rhodes, and Cnidus. And to this assenteth Strabo likewise, save only that in
one place he sets it down to be but 14. hours bare: so that by this reckoning
it should have less Latitude. Now Proclus his words are these, In the Horizon
of Rhodes (says he) the Summer tropique is divided by the Horizon in such
sort, as that if the whole circle be divided into forty eight parts, twenty
nine of the same do appear above the Horizon, and 19. lie hid under the Earth
Out of which division it follows, that the longest day at Rhodes must be 14.
AEquinoctiall hours and an half, and the shortest night, 9. and an half, Thus
he, I do not deny, but that Posidonius his setting down of the quantity of the
portion of the Meridian intercepted betwixt the vertical point o^ Rhodes and
Alexandria, might deceive Pliny, Proclus, and others. Yet Alfraganus draws
his second Climate through Cyprus and Rhodes, and makes it to have the longest
day of 14. hours and an half, and in latitude 36. gr. two thirds. So that
there is but very small difference betwixt him and Ptolomy. And even
Maeurolycus himself. when in his Cosmographical D^alogues he numbereth up the
Parallels, h^ makes that which passes through Rhodes to have 36 gr. and a
twelfth of Latitude: herein differing, something with the most, ^om Posidonius.
Eratosthenes his observations also do very much contradict Posidonius. For
Eratosthenes says, that he found by Sciotericall Gnomons, that the distance
betwixt Rhodes and Alexandria was 3750. furlongs. But let us examine this a
little better. The difference of Latitude betwixt these two places he found
Scioterically, after his manner, to be something more than 5. degrees. And to
this difference, (according to his assumed measure of the compass of the
Earth, wherein he allows 700. furlongs to a degree) he attributes 3650.
furlongs. Neither is there any other way of working by Sciotericall instruments
(that I know) in finding out the distance of furlongs betwixt two places;
unless we first know the number of furlongs agreeing either to the whole
circumference of the Earth, or else to the part of it assigned. Let us now see
if we can prove, out of the observations of Eratosthenes himself, that neither
Posidonius his opinion concerning the measure of the Earths circumference, much
less Eratosthenes his own can be defended. And here we shall not examine his
observation of the difference of Latitude betwixt Alexandria and Syene, that so
we might prove out of his own assumptions, that the whole compass of the Earth
cannot be above 241 620. furlongs: as it it demonstrated by Petrus Nonius, in
his lib. 2. cap. 18. De Nauigatione. Neither do we enquire, how truly he
has set down the distance of these two places to be 5000. furlongs: whereas
Solinus reckons not from the very Ocean to Meroe above 620. miles, which are
but 4960. furlongs. Now Merce is a a great deal farther then Syene. Neither
will we question him at all, concerning the small difference that is betwixt
him and Pliny, who reckons from the Island Elephantina (which is 3. miles below
the last Cataract, and 16. miles above Syene) to Alexandria but 486. miles so
that by this reckoning, betwixt Syene and Alexandria, there will not be above
4560. furlongs. But we will proceed a contrary way to prove our assertion. This
one thing therefore we require to be granted us; Which is: that look how great
a space the Suns Diameter takes up in his Orb; for the like space on the
Terrestrial Globe shall the Gnomons be without any shadow at all, while the
Sun is in their Zenich. Which if it be granted, (as it is freely confessed by
Posidonius in Cleomedes,) we have then gotten the victory.

Now it is assimed by Eratosthenes, that the Sun being in the beginning of
Cancer, and so directly in the Vertical point at Syene; both there, and for
(...). furlongs round about, the Gnomons cast no shadow at all. Let us now
therefore see, how great a part of this Orb the Sunns Diameter does subrend.
For by this means, if this position of Eratosthenes, which we have now set
down, be true, we may easily find o^, by it, the whole circuit of the Earth.
Firmicus Maternus makes the Diameter both of the Sun and Moon to be, no less
then a whole degree. But he is too far from the truth: and assigns a greater
quantity, either then he ought, or we desire. The Egyptians sound by
Hydroscopicall instruments, that the Diameter of the Sun takes up the Seven
hundred and fifty parts of his Orb. So that if 3^0. furlongs on Earth answer
to the seven hundred and fiftieth part of the whole circumference of the same:
the whole circuit of it then will be but 225000. furlongs. The fabric and
use of this instrument is set down by Proclus in his cap 3. Designation.
Astronomi. And Theon also speaks much of it in his Commentaries upon the 5.
lib. Almagest. Ptolomy. as also does Maurolicus in his third Dialog.
Cosmograph. But these kinds of observations are not approved of by Ptolomy And
Theon also, and Proclus de^race them to be obnoxious to much error. And
therefore we examine the matter yet a little further.

Aristarchus Samius, (as he is cited by Archimedes) affirmed that the Sun^
apparent Diameter takes up the seven hundred and fiftieth part of the Zodiac,
that is to say, 30. minutes; and is equal to the apparent Diameter of the Moon:
as he has it (as I remember) in the 7. and 8. Propositions of his book De
magnitud, and distant. Solis and Luna. The same was the opinion also of
Archimedes himself. But, in the mean time, I cannot free my self of a certain
soruple cast in my way* by another supposition of the same Aristarchus, in the
very same book, where he would have the Diameter of the Moon to be 2. deg^es.
Archimedes also, out of his own observations, by Dioptricall instruments, has
defined the Suns Diameter to be greater then the 200th part of a right angle,
that is to say, 27. minutes: yet less then the 164th part of a right angle,
which is 33. minutes. But he himself confesses, that there is not so great
credit to be given to such like observations, as are made by these Dioptricall
instruments, as by them to be able exactly to find out the Diameter of the Sun
or Moon: seeing that neither the sight, nor the han^, nor yet the instruments
themselves, by which the observations are to be made, can be every way so exact
and sure, as not to fail. Ptolomy by the same Dioptricall instruments, as also
by the manner of Eclipses, sound the Diameter of the Sun to contain 30. m. 20.
sec. and to be equal to the apparent Diameter of the Moon, when she is at
the greatest distance from the earth, which is, at the full Moon, and in
Conjunction with the Sunn. Now whereas he would have this magnitude to be
constantly the same, and invariable: Proclus approves not of him herein, as
appears in his 3. cap. Designation. Astronom. being hereto induced by the
Authority of Sosigenes a Peripateticke: who in those books of his, which he
intituleth, Derevolutionibus, has observed, that in the Eclipses of the Sun,
there is sometimes a certain little ring or circle of the Sun to be perceived
enlightened, and appearing plainly on all sides round about the body of the
Moon. Which if it be true, it is impossible then, that the apparent magnitude
of the Sunn shall be, at all times, equal to that of the Moon in their
Conjunctions and oppositions. And this is the cause perhaps, that those that
have come after Ptolomy, have endeavored to examine these things more
accurately. And first of all Albateni found the Diameter of the Sun, when he
was in the Apogaeum of his Eccentrick, to be 31. m. 20. sec. which is the same
which Ptolomies observation: but in the Perigaum, to be 33. m. 40. sec. But
Copernicus went yet further, and found the Diameter of the Sun, when he was in
his greatest distance from the Earth, to be 31. m. 48. sec. and when he is
nearest of all, to be 33. m. 54. sec. Now therefore if we work upon this
ground here laid before us, and take the Diameter to be 32. in, it will then
follow, that if 300 furlongs answer to 32. minutes, the whole circuit of the
Earth will be but 202500. furlongs: which falls short of that measure which
Posidonius has set down, but much more of that which Eratosthenes has
delivered. And thus much have woe thought good to say (with all ^e reverence to
the judgments of learned Authors) in examination of those things, which have
been delivered by the Greeks, concerning the measure of the Earths
circumference.

The way of measuring, used here with us, is by Miles, and Latitudes: of the
former whereof 60. and of the later 20. answering to a degree. So that the
circumference of the Earth. contains 21600. English Miles: which also agrees
exactly with that of Ptolomy For we find our English foot to be just equal
with (...) Grecian, by comparing it with the Grecian foot. which Agricola, and
others have delivered unto us, out of their monuments of antiquity. Now one of
our Miles contains 5000. feet of our English measure: and a furlong 600.
Grecian feet. Now if you multiply the (...) of a furlong by 500. (for so many
furlongs does Ptolomy allot to a degree) and so likewise the measure of a Mile,
which is 5000. feet, by 60. (which is also the number of miles that we reckon
for a degree,) they will both produce the same number of feet, viz. 300000. So
that from these grounds we may certainly conclude, that the common computation
received among our Mariners, does agree most exactly with that of Ptolomy.

The Italians also make 60. miles to be the measure of a degree: but their
measure is something less then Ptolomies. The Grecians reckon 15. miles to a
degree: one of their miles containing 4. Italian: so that this reckoning of
theirs falls ^ust as much short of Ptolomyes, as the Italian does. For
according to their computation, a degree contains not above 480. furlongs,
every Italian Miles consisting but of 8. furlongs: (unless perhaps you rather
approve of Polibius his opinion, who,) as he is cited by Strabo (over and above
8. furlongs, will have 2. Plethra, which is the thid part of a furlong, to be
added to every mile: which is the just measure of our English mile.) Yet Appian
says that 15. Germane miles, are as much, as 60. Itslian: and 60. Italian
miles contain 480. furlongs: which is less then Ptolomies measure by 20.
furlongs, which make up two Italian miles, and an half.

The Spaniards reckon to a degree, some of them 16. leagues and two third
parts: and some seventeen and an half. But how their measure stands, compared
with the Grecian furlongs, or with the English, Italian, or Germane miles, I
have not yet certainly learned. Yet Nonius seems to equal the Spanish league
with the Schoenus, or Parasanga: which if it be so, then those that allow 16.
leagues and 2. thirds to a degree, have the same measure that Ptolomy has
delivered: but those that allow 17. and an half, make it somewhat too large.

It only now remains to see, what is the doctrine of the Arabians concerning
this matter. Of which the most ancient have assigned to the whole circumference
of the Earth, 2400. Miles, or 8000. Parasangae: so that after this computation,
a Degree must contain 66. Miles, with two third parts. And this measure is used
by Alhazenus, in the end of his book, De Crepusclis. Alfraganus, and some of
the later Arabic writers, since Almamons time, do generally account 20400.
Miles to be the just measure of the Terrestrial Globe: So that one degree
contains, by this reckoning, 56, Miles and a third part. And it is reported
by Abilfedea, in the beginning of his Geography, how that, by the command of
Almanon, King of the Arabians. or Caliph of Babylon there were certain men
employed, who should observe in the plain field of Singar and the adjoining
Sea coasts, (meaning the places in a direct linetoward the Pole, (how many
Miles answered to a degree: and that they found, by just computation, that in
going the space of one degree, there were spent full 56. Miles without any
fractions, and sometime 56. Miles, and a third part which make up 1333. cubits,
with two (...). But now what proportion the Arabian Mile bears to ours, or
the Italian, or Germane Mile, is not so easy to determine. Ye^ conjecture it
cannot be loss than te^ Furlongs. The Parasanga (as Jacobus Christmannus ^ils
us, out of Abilfedea, that great Arabian Geographer) contains three Arabian
Miles, according to the doctrine both of the Ancient, and Modern Writers among
them. Now a Parasanga (as it appears plainly out of Herodotus Xenophon, and
others) contains thirty furlongs: so that, by this account, every mile must
comprehend ten furlongs. And for confirmation of this, we may observe, that,
among the Greeks, there were two kinds of Cubits in use; the one, the common
or ordinary Cubit, which contained two foot and an half of Grecian measure, or
twenty four digitt, of which sixteen went to a foot. The other was the Kings
Cubit, in use among the Persians: which was greater than the common Cubit by
three fingers breadth. Now Alfraganus affirms that the Arabian mile contained
4000. Cubits, according to the ordinary measure. So that if this Cubit be
equal to the Grecian Cubit, one of their miles will then contain 6000. Grecian
feet, which makes up ten furlongs. Now whereas the Parasanga is reckoned by
some to contain 40. furlongs, and by others 60. yet no body allows to it
less then 30. with which later account if we should; with Herodotus,
Xenophon, and others, rest our selves contented (neither indeed is it our
intention to stand long in disputing, whether or no in diverse places, the
measure of the Parasanga were also different, as Strabo seems to think, who
observed the very same difference in the Egyptians Schoenus, when as being
conveyed on the River Nilus from one City to another, he observed that the
Egyptians in diverse places, used diverse measures of their Schoenus:) I say,
if we should rest upon their determination, who assign but 30, furlongs to a
Parasanga; then one of the Arabian miles will contain tenn furlongs at the
least. Which conjectures, if ^hey be true, we cannot then assent to those
learned men, P. Nonius, and Jacobus Christmannus, who will have the Arabian
Mile to be all one with the Italian,

In this so great diversity of opinions, conceruing the true measure of the
Earths circumference, let it be free for every man to follow whomsoever he
please. Yet were it not that the later Arabians do counterm^nd us, by proposing
to us their Positions, which they aver to have been grounded upon most
certain and exact mensurations of the distances of places: we should not doubt
to prefer Ptolomies opinion, I will here propose unto your view a list of all
those opinions, which carry in them any show of probability.

AUTHORS FURLONGS The circuit of the whole earth contains according to
Strabo, and Hipperchus, 252000. Eratosthenes 250000. Posidonus and the Ancient
Arabians, 240000. Ptolomy and our Englishmen. 180000. The modern Arabians,
204000 The Italians and Germans, 172800.

AUTHORS FURLONGS. The measure of a Degree according to Strabo, and Hipparchus
700. Eratosthenes 694 Posidomus and the Ancient Arabians, 666 Ptolomy and our
English men. 500 The later Arabians, 566 Italians and Germans. 480.

MILES. FURIONGS. The Italian contains 8. English 8 Arabian 10 Germane 32

PONT. For the finding out of the circumference or circuit of the Terrestrial
Globe, these Hypotheses are first to be laid down for a ground (...) That the
greatest circle in the Earth, as well as in the Heavens, is to be divided into
360. parts, or degrees, 2. That one of these degrees does contain 500. furlongs
or 62500 Roman pases, and 60. English miles 3. That 8. furlong, and a third
part make an English Mile.

These things being presupposed, we must multiply 360. degrees by 60 miles,
which done, the product will be 21 600. English miles. Or if you multiply 360.
degrees, by 500. furlongs; the whole will be 180000 furlongs, which is the
measure of the circumference of the Earth.

So likewise if 360. be multiplied by 15. the whole will be 5400. Germane
miles: and if the number of the degrees be multiplied by 25. there well arise
9000. French miles. All which may be thus expressed.

A degree contains. 15. Germane Miles, each of which contain severally. 4000.
Pa^s. 60. Italian 1000. 60. English 1000. 25 French 17. Spanish 2400

In like manner the Circumferance of the Earth mayas easily be found out by
any of the fixed Stars, as the Virgins Spike, or the like. For if we take any
two places which are situated under the same Meridian, and the distances in a
right line exactly known, so that in both places the Meridian Altitude of the
same Star be certainly known also: the difference of it is Altitude will be the
number of degrees of distance betwixt the same places, Wherefore seeing it is
certainly known, as we have already said, how many miles answer to a degree, it
is very easy then to gather how many miles the circumference of the whole
Earth is also As for example: suppose London and Edenburg in Scotland to be
under the same Meridian, and the Elevation of the Pole at London to be 52.
degrees, and at Edinburgh 56. gr. 20. m. Now if you substract the lesser
number, which is 52. from the greater, 56. gr. 20. m. the difference will be, 4.
gr. 20. m. which being resolved into minutes, it will be found to be the 260.
distance of miles betwixt London and Edinburgh. Therefore we must now say, that
as 4. gr. 20. m. is to 260. miles: so is 360. degrees to 21600. English miles.

The fourth Part,
CHAP. I. Of the Use of Globes.
HItherto we have spoken of the Globe it self, together with it is dimensions,
circles, and other instruments necessarily belonging there to. It remains now
that we come to the practice of it, and declare it is several uses And first of
all, it is very necessary for the practice both of Astronomy, Geography, and
also the Art of Navigation. For by it there is an easy and ready way laid
down, for the finding out both of the place of the Sun, the Longitudes,
Latitudes, and Positions of places, the length of days and hours; as also for
the finding of the Longest Latitude, Declination, Ascension both Right and
Oblique, the Amplitude of the rising and setting of the Sun and Stars,
together with almost an infinite number of the like things. Of the chief of
all which we indeed here briefly to discourse, omitting the enumeration of
them all, as being tedious and not suitable to the brevity we intend Now that
all these things may be performed far more accurately, by the help of numbers,
and the doctrines of Triangles, Plains, and Sphaericall bodies, is a thing very
well known to those that are acquainted with the Mathematics, But this way of
proceeding, besides that it is very tedious and prolix, so likewise does it
require great practice in the Mathematics. But the same things may be found
out readily and easily, by the help of the Globe, with little or no knowledge of
the Mathematics at all.

PONT. For the better understanding of those things which shall be spoken
hereafter, there are two things especially to be promised: the first whereof
is, concerning the position of the Globe, and the other Climates. Now touching
the position of the Globe, you are, first of all, to take care that it be pla^
perpendicularly to the true Horizon: 2. That the distinction of the winds
answer directly to the winds of the real Horizon, that so the East on your
material Globe, may look directly toward the true East of the World. For which
purpose especially there is usually placed a Nauticall Compass in the bottom
of the frame. When you have thus placed your Globe, so that it may be turned
about any way at pleasure, yet so that the base or foot be not moved out of
its place, the next thing that is to be enquired after, is the Latitude of the
place Wherein you live: which according as it is greater, or lesser, you must
elevate the Pole of your Globe above the Horizon proportionally. As for
example, if the Latitude be 50. 51. or 52. grad. or less Northward, then must
you elevate the Arctick Pole just so many degrees above the Horizon. And so
likewise if the latitude be Southern, you must do^ the like by the Antartick or
South Pole. But under the Equator, where there is no latitude at all, both the
Poles must be placed in the very Horizon, at opposite points.

2. A Climate is a space of the habitable parts of the Earth, comprehended
betwixt two circles Parallel to the Equator, in which space there is half an
hours difference in the longest day. Now those that inhabit under the Equator
have a perpetual AEquinoxe, for the day with them is always twelve hours
longer, and the night as much. But as their situation is removed from the
AEquinoctiall nearer to either Pole, the further they are from the
AEquinoctiall, the greater is the the inequality of the Artificial day and
night: out of which variation of Artificial days, the diversity of Climates
also is takon and distiuguished. For wheresoever this difference amounts to
half an hour, there presently begins another Climate. Now the ancient
Geographers constitutede in every Clime, three Parallels, (...) which the two
outwardmost, namely the first and the third, do comprehend and terminate every
Climate: and the second divides it in the midst. So that the proportion
betwixt the Clime and the Parallels was Duple; for the Climes, as we have
said, were distant from each other half an hours space in the length of the
day, but the Parallols were distinguished by quarters of an hour.

Now as concerning the number of Climates, The Ancients, at first, reckoned but
seven, but Ptolomy in his Tables of Ascensions, in the 2. lib. May.
Construction. acknowledges nine: all of which derived their names from some
eminent place, either hill or river, situate in the midst of the said Climate.
The first Clime to ward the Arctick Pole, beginning from the Equator, they
called Diameroes, because the midst of this Clime runs through Meroe, which
is an Island in Afric encompassed about with the river Nilus, where the
longest day is thirteen hours: in the beginning therefore of this Clime it must
be 12 hours long. On the opposite part of the Equator the first Southern
Climate may in^ manner be called, Antidiameroes. But these other Climes were
not constituted neither by Prolomy, nor any of the ancient Geographers. Yet by
the like reason that part of the world also may as well be deseribed into
Climate, reserving the same names that the Northern Climes are known by, and
only adding to them the preposition (...) which signifies as much as,
Opposite, or over against. And the^ the Scheme, of them all will be thus,
Northern Climates. Southern Climates. 1. Diameroes. 1. Antidiameroes. 2.
Diasyenes. 2. Antidiasyenes. 3. Dialexandrias. 3. Antidialexandrias. 4.
Diarhodu. 4. Antidiarhodu. 5. Diarhomes. 5. Anididiarhomes. 6. Diapontu. 6.
Antidiapontu. 7. Diaboristhenes. 7. Antidiaboristhenes. 8. Diabritanias. 8.
Antidiabritanias. 9. Diatanaidos. 9. Antidiatanaidos.

Yet some there are that do not approve of this distinction of Climates, among
whom is John Gigas. in his lib. 24 System. Geograph. cap. 2. probl. 12. And the
reasons they alledg are these. 1. Because of their great in equality, in so
much that the latitude of the first is above 570. English miles, whereas the
last of all is scarce a mile. 2. Because that the increase of hours is but a
weak ground to build upon, and of no great use: seeing it is as easy to
enquire out the length of the day, as the number of the Climate. And therefore
he thinks, it were far better, that every Hemisphaere were equally
distinguished by tenn degrees into nine Climates. So that the first Climate
should begin at the AEquinoctiall, and end where the Elevation of the Pole is
tenn gr. which might be called the Ethiopian Climate. The second should reach
to the 20. gr. and should be named the Arabian Clime: because that part of
Arabia Foelix is situated therein. The third should reach to the 30 gr. and be
called the Egyptian. The fourth the Syrian, ending at the 40. gr. The fifth
the Italian, to the 50. gr. The 6. the English, or Germane, extending to the
60. gr. The seventh the Suecian, or Lapland Climate, reaching to the 70. gr.
The eighth, the Frozen Climate, ending at the 80. gr. And the Ninth and last,
the Polar Climate, reaching to the Pole it self.

So likewise the same Method might be observed on the oaths side of the
AEquinoctiall: and then by this means each Hemisphaere should have nine
Climates: whereof seven would be convenient for habitation, and the Parallels
might pass through every fifth degree. And the situation of any place might be
known by the number of degrees of the Poles elevation. So Rome, because it has
above 40. gr. of latitude, is in the fourth; Westphalia in the fifth; Sicily in
the third; Calecur, the chief City in India, in the second; Zeilan in the
first; and so of the rest.

CHAP. I. How to find the Longitude, Latitude, Distance, and Angle of Position,
or situation of any place expressed in the Terrestrial Globe.
THe Ancient Geographers from Ptolomies time downward, reckon the longitude of
places from the Meridian which passes through the Fortunate Islands: which are
the same that are now called the Canary Islands. as the most men do generally
believe, but how ^ightly? I will not here stand to examine. I shall ^nely here
advertise the reader, by the way, that the latitude assigned by Ptolomy to the
Fortunate Islands falls something of the widest of the Canary Islands, and
agrees a great deal nearer with the Latitude of those islands which are known
by the name of Cabo Verde For Ptolomy placed all the Fortunate Islands within
the 10 gr. 30. m. and the 16. gr. of Northern latitude. But the Canary Islands
are found to be distant from the Equator at the least 27 degrees. The
Arabians began to reckon their Longitude, at that place where the Atlantic
Ocean drives farthest into the maine land: which place is tenn degrees distant
Eastward from the Fortunate Islands: as Jacobus Christmannus, has observed out
of Abilfedea. Our Modern Geographers, for the most part, beginn to reckon the
Longitude of places from these Canary Islands: yet some beginn at those Islands
which they call Azores: and from these bounds, are the Longitude of places to
be reckoned in these Globes whereof we speak.

Now the Longitude of any place, is defined to be, an Arch, or portion of the
Equator intercepted betwixt the Meridian of any place assigned, and the
Meridian that passes through Saint Michales Island (which is one of the
Azores) or of any other place, from whence the Longitude of places is wont to
be determined.

Now if you desire to know the Longitude of any place expressed in the Globe:
you must apply the same place to the Meridian and observe at what place the
Meridian cutteth the Equator, reckon the degree of the Equator from the
Meridian of Saint Michaels Island to that place: for so many are the degrees of
longitude of the place you look for.

In the same manner may you measure the distance of longitude betwixt any other
two places that are described in the Globe. For the difference of Longitude is
nothing else, but an Arch of the Equator intercepted betwixt the Meridian of
the same places. Which difference of Longitude, many have endeavored to set
down diverss ways how to find by observation. But the most certain way of all
for this purpose, is confessed by all learned Writers to be, by the Eclipses of
the Moon. But now these Eclipses happen but seldom, but are more seldom seen,
yet most seldom and, in very few places, observed by the skillful Artists in
this Science, So that there are but few Longitudes of places designed out by
this means. Oro^us Fin^us, and Johannes Wernerus before him, conceived that
the difference of Longitude might be assigned, by the known (as they presuppose
it) motion of the Moon, and the passing of the same through the Meridian of any
place. But this is an uncertain and ticklish way, and subject to many
difficulties. Others have gone other ways to work: as namely, by observing the
space of the AEquinoctiall hours betwixt the Meridians of two places: which
they conceive may be taken by the help of Sun Dials, or Clocks, or Houreglasses
either with water or sand, or the like. But all these conceits, long since
de^ed, having been more strictly and accurately examined, have been disallowed
and rejected by all learned men, (at least those of riper judgments) as being
altogether unable to perform that which is required of them. But yet for all
this, there are a kind of trifling Impostors, that make public sale of these
toys or worse, and that with great ostentation and boasting; to the great
abuse and expense of some men of good note and quality, who are perhaps better
stored with money, then either learning or judgment. But I shall not stand here
to discover the errors and uncertainties of these instruments. Only I admonish
these men by the way, that they beware of these fellows; least when their noses
are wiped as we say) of their money, they too Iate repent them of their
illbought bargains. Away with all such trisling cheating rascals.

PONT. If you would know how to find out the longitude of any place by the
Eclipse of the Moon, you must first go to some Ephemerides, as the (...)
Tables, or of any other learned Mathematicians calculation; and see, what hour
such an Eclipse of the Moon shall happen at that place, for which the said
Tables or Ephemerides were made. Then afterward you must observe the same
Eclipse in that place, whose longitude you desire to know, Now if the time of
the Eclipse agree with that other, for which the Tables were made, then you may
conclude that both places have the same latitude, and are situate under the
same Meridian. But is the number of the hours be more, then the place you are
in, is suuate more Eastward, you must therefore substract the less number out
of the greater, and the remainder must be converted into degrees and minutes,
multiplying the hours by fifteen and deviding the minutes of hours (if there be
any) by four; for so will the number of degrees arise: and if there remain any
minutes after the division, they must be multiplied again by fifteen, and so
will the number of the minutes of degrees arise, by which these places are
distant from each other: which distance is called the difference of longitude.
This difference must be added to the Longitude of that place for which the
Tables were calculated, if the other place be more Eastward: otherwise if it
be more Westward, it is to be subtracted from the longitude of the other. An
example hereof is thus proposed by Adrianus Metius in his Doctrina Sphaerica. I
find (says he) out of the Prutenick Tables, by exact calculation, that there
will be an Eclipse of the Moon in the year 1598. upon the eleventh day of
February, at four of the Clock and sixteen minutes, in the morning, and that
at Regiomont, a City in Borussia, whose longitude or distance from the Canary
Islands, is 41. gr. 16. m. For this Longitude where these Tables calculated.
Now I set my self to observe this same Eclipse at Marpurg, and find it to
happen at three of the Clock and twelve minutes, on the same day of February.
Now because the number of hours here is less, it appears that Marpurg is more
Westward then Regiomont. Therefore I take away a less number from the greater,
that is. 3. h. 12. m. from 4. h. 16. m. and the remainder is 1 h. 4. minutes:
which shows the difference of longitude in hours, which makes up sixteen
degrees. Therefore I again substract these degrees of difference from the
longitude of Regiomont, as being more Eastward then Marpurge; and so I find the
Latitude of Marpurge from the Canary Island, to be 25. gr. 16. minutes.

CHAP II. How to find the Latitude of any place.
THe latitude of a place, is the distance of the Zenith, or the vertical point
thereof from the Equator. Now if you desire to find out the latitude of any
place expressed in the Globe, you must apply the same to the Meridian, and
reckon the number of the degrees that it is distant from the Equator: For so
much is the Latitude of that place. And this also you may observe, that the
Latitude of every place is always equal to the elevation of the same place.
For look how many degrees the vertical point of any place is distant from the
Equator, just so many is the Pole elevated above the Horizon: as you may prove
by the Globe, if you so order it, as that the Zenith of the place be 90.
degrees distant every way from the Horizon,

PONT. Seeing that the Latitude of every place is always equal to the
elevation of the Pole: It will not be amiss to show, how the elevation of the
Pole, or the Latitude of any region may be found out, by the observing of the
same fixed Star in the Heavens, which is so near the Pole, a^ that it never
sets in that region: which to do you must work thus. You must observe both the
least and also the greatest altitude of the sad Star; both which must
necessarily happen in the Meridian: the least whereof will be beneath the Pole,
and the greatest above it. Which done, you must add the least altitude of it
to the greatest; and so the half of the degrees thus numbered together, will
be the latitude of the Pole, and latitude of that plaee. An example whereof
may be this. The first Star of the three in the tail of the great Bear is in
his least altitude observed at London to be about 11. gr. and the greatest
altitude of the same, when it is above the Pole, is found to be near upon 92.
degrees. Both which numbers being added together, do make up 103. half of
which Sum, namely 51. is the true elevation and Latitude of London.

CHAP. III. How to find the distance of two places, and angle of position, or
situation.
IF you set your Globe in such sort, as that the Zenith of one of the places
be 90. gr. distant every way from the Horizon, and then fasten the Quadrant of
Altitude to the Vertical point, and so move it up and down, until it pass
through the Vertex of the other place: the number of degres intercepted in the
Quadrant betwixt the two places, being resolved into furlongs, miles, or
leagues, (as you please) will show the true distance of the places assigned.
And the other end of the Quadrant, that touches upon the Horizon, will show on
what wind or quarter of the World the one place is, in respect of the other,
and what Angle of Position (as they call it) it has. For the Angle of Position
is that, which is comprehended betwixt the Meridian of any place, and a greater
circle passing through the Zeniths of any two places assigned: and the quantity
of it, is to be numbered in the Horizon.

As for example. The Longitude of London is twenty six degrees, and it has in
Northern latitude 51. degrees, and an half. Now if it be demanded, what
distance and angle of position it bears to Saint Michaels Island, which is
one of the Azores: we must proceed thus to find it. First, let the Northern
Pole be elevated 51, degrees: which is the latitude of London. Then fastening
the Quadrant of Altitude to the Zenith of it, that is to say, fifty one degrees
and an half Northward from the Equator, we must turn it about, till it
pass through Saint Michaels Island: and we shall find the distance
intercepted betwixt these two places to be 11. gr. 40. m. or thereabout: which
is 280, of our leagues. And if we observe, in what part of the Horizon the end
of the Quadrant (...), we shall find the Angle of Position ^o sall near upon
50. gr. betwixt Southwest and by-west, And this is the situation of this (...)
in respect of London

PONT. The (...) of places ^ring only in latitude may be found after this
manner First you must substract the lesser Latitude from the greater, resolving
a degree in minutes, if the substraction cannot be done otherwise conveniently.
Then multiply the degrees by 15. and divide the minutes by 4. and the sum
produced will be the distance of those two places in common Germane miles, one
whereof contains four of our English miles. As for example: Basile in
Germany and Geneva have both the same longitude. but differ in Latitude, which
at Basile is 47. gr. 30. m. and at Geneva 45. gr. 45. m. Therefore substracting
the lesser from the greater, the remainder will be 1. gr. 45. m. which being
reduced into Germane miles, will amount to 26. and a quarter or a mile. which
is the distance of these two places assigned.

Now if the place proposed be in diverse Hemispheres, then the degrees and
minutes of Latitude must first be added together, and so the whole resolved
into miles, as formerly has been said. As for example: The Cape of good hope
in Africa, and Constantinople are almost situate under the same meridian, but
in diverse Hemisphaeres. Now the elevation of the Pole Articke at
Constantinople is 43. gr. or thereabout: and at the Cape of good hope, the
Antarctick Pole is elovated above 35. gr. the whole sum therefore is 73.
degrees. that is to say 1170. Germane miles.

The distance of places differing only in longitude, is found thus. First
substract the less number from the greater: then look in the Table here under
written, how many miles answer to a degree (...) every Parallel, seeking for
the degree of Latitude in the first column descending, and the number of miles
over against it. Then lastly let the difference of longitude be multiplied into
miles and minutes: and you have your desire. As for example; Naples and Ilium
or Troy, are in the same latitude of forty one gr. where eleven Germane miles,
and nineteen minutes answer to a degree of that Parallel: but these places
differ in longitude, which at Naples is 39. gr. 30 m but at Troy. 55. gr. 50.
m. Naw the difference betwixt them is 16 gr. 20. m. which is as much as 184.
Germane miles, and fifty scruples: the just distance betwixt these two places.

A Table of Miles answering to a Degree in each several Latitude.
Miles. Degres. German. Scrup. English. Scrup. 1 41 59 59 59 2 14 59 59 58 3 14
58 59 51 4 14 58 59 51 5 14 56 59 46 6 14 55 59 40 7 14 53 59 33 8 14 51 59 25
9 14 48 59 16 10 14 16 19 5 11 14 43 58 54 12 14 40 58 41 13 14 37 58 8 14 14
33 58 13 15 14 29 57 57 16 14 25 57 41 17 14 21 57 23 18 14 16 57 4 19 14 11 56
44 20 14 6 56 23 21 14 0 56 1 22 14 54 55 38 23 13 48 55 14 24 13 42 54 49 25
13 36 54 23 26 13 29 54 56 27 13 22 53 28 28 13 ^5 52 59 29 13 (...) 52 29 30
1^ ^9 51 18 31 1^ ^2 51 26 3 12 43 50 53 33 12 35 50 19 3^ 1^ 2^ 49 45 3^ 1^ 17
49 9 36 12 3^ ^8 32 3^ 11 59 47 55 38 11 49 47 1^ 39 11 39 46 38 40 11 29 45 5^
41 ^1 19 45 1^ 42 11 9 44 35 41 10 5 43 53 44 10 47 43 10 45 10 36 42 26 4^ 10
^5 41 41 47 10 14 40 55 48 10 2 40 9 49 9 50 39 22 50 9 38 38 34 51 9 36 37 46
52 9 14 36 56 53 9 2 36 7 54 8 49 35 16 55 8 36 34 25 56 8 23 3^ 33 57 8 10 32
41 58 (...) 57 31 48 59 7 43 3^ 54 60 7 30 30 0 61 7 16 29 5 6^ (...) 2 28 10
6^ 6 48 27 ^4 64 6 34 2^ ^8 65 6 ^0 2^ 21 6^ 5 6 24 24 6^ 5 52 23 27 68 (...)
37 2^ 29 6^ 5 23 21 ^0 70 5 8 20 31 71 4 53 19 ^2 72 4 38 18 32 73 4 23 17 33
74 4 8 16 32 75 3 ^3 15 32 76 3 38 14 31 77 3 22 13 30 78 3 7 12 28 79 2 52 11
27 80 2 36 10 25 81 2 ^1 9 23 82 2 5 8 21 83 1 50 7 19 84 1 34 6 16 85 1 18 5
14 86 1 3 4 11 87 0 47 31 8 88 0 31 2 5 89 0 10 1 3 90 0 0 0 0

The Longitude or Latitude, of any place or City being known, either by
observation, as has already been showed, or else out of some Geographicall
Table, the situation os the same in the Globe may also be found out by this
same means. You must first reckon the Longitude of your place, among the
circles of Longitude which are described upon the Globe beginning at that which
is drawn through the Fortunate Islands: and observe the circle where you end
your reckoning. Then if the Latitude of your place be Northern: you must reckon
that also among the Parallels toward the Arctick Pole, begnining from the
Equator: but if it have Southern Latitude you must then proceed in like
manner, but reckon toward the Antarctique* And the intersection, or point where
these two circles cut each other, shows the situation of your place. But if
these circles of Long^ude be expressed in your Globe, then must you place that
degree of the AEquinoctiall, that answers to the Longitude of your place,
under the Meridian, and so reckon the Latitude of your place among the degrees
of the Meridian, toward either Pole: and you have the situation of the place
you look after.

A Table of Longitudes and Latitudes of some certain Cities of note.
Longit. Latti. Alexandria 60 30 13. 42. Amsterdam ^1. 43 ^2 30. Antw^rp 20.
16. 51. ^8. Athens 52. 45 ^7. 15 Bruxells 20. 4^ 51. 0 Bremen 35. 16 53. 40
Bamberg 28. 10. 4^. 56. B^sell 24. 22. 4^. (...). Bononia 32. 5 43. 54.
Constantin. 56. 0 42. 5 Cassell 26. 36. 51. 43. Colen 33. 20. 51 0 Corinth 31.
15. 3^. 5^. D^sden 38. 5 51. 6 Dover 28. 10. 51. 0 D^ntzik 39. 2 5^. (...).
Dublin 16. 40 53. 10. Erf^d 28. 40. 51. 10 Estinga 26. 36 48. 39 Francford ad
M^n. 25. 38 50. 12. Jer^acia ^2 1^. 44. 23 Gen^a (...). (...) 13. 50. Gant 19.
8 51. 24 Graeningen 22. 54. 53. 16 Heidelberg 25. 38. 49. 35 Jena 29. 2 51. 8
Lub^k 28. ^0 54. 48 Leiden 20. 47. 52. 10 Regius Mos 46. 45 54. 21 Boruss.
London 25. (...). 51. 3^ Marpurg 25. 16. 5^. 0 Millaine 38. 20 45. (...)
Norimberg 20. 20 49. 24 Naples 30 10. 41 0 Orleans 15 3^ 47. 16 Oxford 24. 0
52. 0 Prage 32. 0. ^0 6 Paris 29 25. 48 30 Ratisbane 29. 50. 4^. 56 Rostock 30.
14 54. 36 Spier 35. 29. 49. 20 ^ubing 20. 23. 48. 38 ^ienna 34 36. 47 44 ^orke
23. 30. 54. 30

CHAP. IV. To find the Altitude of the Sun, or other Stars.
THe Altitude of the Sun, or other Star, is the distance of the same, reckoned
in a greater Circle, passing the Zenith of any place and the body of the Sun,
or Star. Now that the manner of observing the same is to be performed either by
the Cross Staff, Quadrant, or other like Instrument, is a thing so well known,
as that it were vain to report it. Gemma Frisius teaches a way, how to
observe the Altitude of the Sun by a Sphaericall Gnomon. But this way of
proceeding is not so well liked, as being subject to many difficulties and
errors: as, whosoever proves it shall easily find.

CHAP. V. To find the place and Declination of the Sun, for any day given.
HAving first learned the day of the Month, you must look for the same in the
Calendar described in the Horizon of your Globe. Over against which in the same
Horizon, you shall find the Sign of the Zodiaque, and the degree of the same,
that the Sun is in, at that time. But if it be Leap-yeare, then for the next
day after the 28th of February you must take that degree of the sign, which is
a scribed to the day follwing it. As for example, if you desire to know, what
degree of the Zodiac the Sun is in, 29th of February, you must take that
degree which is assigned for the first of March and for the first of March,
take the degree of the second; and so forward. Yet I should rather counsel, if
the piace of the Sun be accurately to be known, that you would have recourse
to some Ephemrides, where you may have the place of the Sun exactly calculated
for every day of the year. Neither indeed can the practice by the Globe, in
this case be so accurate, as often times it is required to be.

Now when you have found the place of the Sun, apply the same to the
Meridian, and reckon thereon how many degrees the Sun is distante from the
Equator, for somany will the degrees be to the Suns declination for the day
assigned. For the Declination of the Sun, or of any other Star, is nothing
else but the distance of the same from the Equator, reckoned on the Meridian.
But the Suns Declination may be much more exactly found, out of those Tables
which Mariners use, in which the Meridian Altitude, or Declination of the Sun
for every day in the year, and the quantity of it is expressed. One thing I
shall give you notice of by the way; and that is that you make use of those
that are latest made, as nere as you can. For all of them, after some certain
spaces of time, will have their errors. And I give this advertisement the
rather, for that I have seen some, that having some of these Tables, that were
very ancient, and written out with great care and diligence, (which
notwithstanding would differ from the later Tables, and indeed from the truth
it self, often times at least 10. m. and sometimes more) yet would they always
use them very constantly and with a kind of religion. But these men take a
great deal of pains and care to bring upon themselves no small errors.

PONT You also find out the Suns greatest Declination, by his greatest and
least Altitude both in Summer and Winter, by substracting the least out of the
greatest. For then half that which remains, will be the declination you seek
for So Regiomontanus at Vienna found the Meridian Altitude of the Sun, at the
Summer Solstice to be 65. gr. 30. m. and the least Altitude of it, on the
Winter Solstice, to be 18. gr. 30. m. when therefore; he had deducted the least
number, 18. gr. 30. m. out of 65. gr. 30. m. be found the remainder to be 47.
gr. 0. m. the half of which was the Suns greatest declination, namely 23. gr.
30. m. which is the number of degrees now commonly received: notwithstanding it
has been since observed by some in our time to be somewhat less.

Now to know the Longitude of the Sun for any time, that is to say, in what
degree of the Zodiaque he is, you must do thus. Seek in the limb of the
Horizon for the day of the Month, for which you would know the Longitude of
the Sun: which found, you shall see, over against it, among the Signs of the
Zodiaque, described also upon the Horizon, the degree of the Sign that exactly
answers to it, and which is the place of the Sun for that day and Month.
But if it be Leap year, you must remember after the 28th. of February, to
add one day more still as you go, as if you should look for the place of the
Sun on the 13th. March, you must take that degree which is set for the 14th
of March: which is the 3 gr. of V.

CHAP. VI. How to find the Latitude of any place, by observing the Meridian
Altitude of the Sun, or other Star.
OBserve the Meridian Altitude of the Sun with the Cross staff, Quadrant, or
other like instrument, and having also found the place of the Sun in the
Eclipticke, apply the same to the Meridian, and so move the Meridian up and
down through the notches it stands in, until the place of the Sun be
elevated so many degrees above the Horizon, as the Suns Altititude is. And
the Globe standing in this position, the Elevation of either of the Poles, will
show the Latitude of the place wherein you are. An example whereof may be this.

On the 12th of June, according to the old Julian account, the Sun is in the
first degree of Cancer, and has his greatest declination 23^ degrees. And on
the same day, suppose the Meridian Altitude of the Sun to be 50. degrees. We
enquire therefore now, what is the Latitude of the place where this observation
was made. And this we find out, after this manner. We apply the first degree
of Cancer to the Meridian, which w^ move up and down, till the same degree be
elevated above the Horizon 50 degrees: which is the Meridian Altitude of the
Sun observed. Now in this position of the Globe, we find the North Pole to
be elevated 63 gr. and an half: So that we conclude this to be the Latitude of
the place, where our observation was made.

The like way of proceeding do Mariners also use, for the finding out of the
Latitude of places by the Meridian Altitude of the Sun, and their Tables of
Declinations: But I shall not here speak any further of this, as well for that,
the explication hereof does not so properly concern our present intention: as
also because it is so well known to every body, as that the handling of it in
this place would be needless and superfluous.

The like effect may bewrought in observing the Meridian altitude of any other
Star expressed in the Globe. For if you set your Globe so, as that the Star
you mean to observe, be so much elevated above the Horizon, as the Meridian
Altitude of it is observed to be: the elevation of the Pole above the Horizon
will show the latitude of the place. But here I should advise, that the
latitude of places be rather enquired after, by the Meridian Altitude of the
Sun, then of the fixed Stars: because the declinations, as we have already
showed, are very much changed, unless they be restored to their proper places
by later observations.

Some there are that undertake to perform the same, not only by the Meridian
Altitude of the Sun or Star, but also by observing it at two several times,
and knowing the space of time or Horizontall distance betwixt the two
observations. But the practice hereof is prolixe and doubtful: besides that by
reason of the multitude of observations that must be made, it is also subject
to many errors and difficulties. Notwithstanding the easiest way of
proceeding, that I know, in this kind, is this that follows.

To find out the Latitude of any place, by knowing the place of the Sun, or
other Star, and observing the Altitude of it two several times with the
space of time betwixt the two Observations.
FIrst having taken with your Compasses the complement of the Altitude of your
first Observation, (now the complement of the Altitude is nothing else, but the
difference of degrees by which the altitude is found to be less then 90
degrees,) you must set one of the fee^ of your Compasses in that degree of the
Ecliptique that the Sun is in, at that time: and with the other describe a
circle upon the superficies of the Globe, tending somewhat toward the West, if
the observation be taken before noone, but toward the East, if ibe made in the
afternoon. Then having made your second observation, and observed the space of
time betwixt it and the former, apply the place of the Sun to the Meridian,
turning the Globe toward the East, until that so many degrees of the Equator
have passed by the Meridian, a^answer to the space of time that passed betwixt
your observations, allowing for every hour fifteen degrees in the Equator,
and marking the place in the Parallel of the Suns declination that the Meridian
crosses after this turning about of the Globe. And then setting he foot of
your Compasses in the very Intersection, describe an Arch of a circle with the
other foot of the Compass extended to the complement of the second
observation, which Arch must cut the former circle. And the common Intersection
of these two circles, will show the vertical point of the place wherein you are:
so that having reckoned the distance of it from the Equator, you shall
presently have the latitude of the same.

The same may be effected, if you take any Star, and work by it, after the
same manner: or it you describe two circles mutually crossing each other, to
the complements of any two Stars.

PONT. The Meridian altitude of the Sun, being found by the help of of the
Meridian circle, it will be very easy to find out the latitude of the place or
elevation of the Pole, in any region whatsoever. For seeing the Zenith or
Vertex of every place is distant aquarter of a circle that is 90. degrees from
the Horizon: if then, the Sun being in either of the AEquinoctiall points, the
Meridian altitude be subtracted from 90 degrees; the remainder will be the
distance betwixt the Zenith of the place and the AEquinoctiall circle: which
will be the latitude of the same place. And the reason also of this deduction
is manifest, because that the AEquinoctiall Altitude of the Sun, is nothing
else, but the Elevation of the Equator, the complement whereof is always
equali to the elevation of the Pole. But this will appear more plain by an
example, which shall be thus. The AEquinoctiall altitude of the Sun at Rome
is 40. degrees: which being subtracted from 90 gr. the remainder, which is 42.
gr. is the elevation of the Pole, and the latitude of Rome. So likewise here at
London in the Meridian altitude of the Sun, when he is in the AEquinoctiall,
is found to be 38 degrees and an half: which being deducted out of 90 gr.
which is the Quadrant of a circle, there w^ll remain 15 gr. which is the
latitude of London, and the elevation of the Pole.

The same also may be done, by observing any one of the fixed Sarres, which is
is so near the Pole, as that it never sets in that Country, whose latitude you
seek. For you must observe both the greatest and least altitude of the same
Star; both which will happen in the Meridian: the least of them beneath the
Pole, and the greatest above it. Which done, you must add the least altitude
to the greatest, and so dividing the whole into two parts, the half will be the
altitude of the Pole. As has been showed before.

CHAP. VII. How to find the Right and Oblique Ascension of the Sun and
Stars, for any Latitude of place, and time assigned.
THe Ascension of the Sun or Stars, is the degree of the Equator that rises
with the same above the Horizon. And the Descension of of it, is the degree of
the Equator, that goes under the Horizon with the same. Both these is either
Right, or Oblique. The Right Ascension or Descension is the degree of the
Equator that ascends or descends with the Sun, or other Star in a
Right Sphaere: and the Oblique is the degree that ascends, or descends with
the same in an Oblique. The forms of these is simple and of one kind only:
because there can be but one position of a Right Sphaere. But the later is
various and manifold, according to the diverse Inclination of the same.

Now if you desire to know the Right Ascension or Descension of any Star, for
any time and place assigned apply the same star to the Meridian of your Globe:
and that degree of the Equator that the Meridian crosses at that situation of
the Globe, will show the Right Ascension and Descension of the same, and also
divides each Hemisphaere in the midst at the same time with it.

And if you would know the Oblique Ascension or Descension of any Starr, you
must first set the Globe to the latitude of the place, and then place the
Star at the Eastern part of the Horizon: and the Horizon will show in the
Equator the degree of Oblique Ascension. And if you turn it about to the Well
side of the Horizon, the same will also show in the Equator the Oblique
Descension of that Star. In like manner you may find out the Oblique Ascension
of the Sun^ or any degree of the Eclipticke, having first found ou, in the
manner we have formerly showed the place of the Sun. And hence also may be
found the difference of the Right and Oblique Ascension, whence arises the
diverse length of days.

As for example. The Sun enters into Capricorn on the eleventh day of
December, according to the old account. I would now therefore know the Right
and Oblique Ascension of this degree of the Ecliptic, for the latitude of
fifty two degrees. First therefore, I apply the first degree of Capricorn to
the Meridian: where I find the same to cut the Equator at 270. gr. which is
the degree of the Right Ascension. But if you set the Globe to the Latitude of
fifty two degrees, and apply the same degree of Capricorn to the Horizon; you
shall find the 303 gr. 50. m. to rise with the same. So that the difference of
the Right Ascension 270. and the Oblique 303. gr. 50. m. will be found to be
33. gr. 50. minutes.

PONT. This Ascension and descension is also called the Astro nomicall rising
and setting of the Stars: and that inrespect of the Arches and parts of the Ecl
ptick, or Stars, either above or beneath the Horizon. Now an Arch of the
Ecliptic or Zodiac is tobe understood two manner of ways namely Continued,
or Discrete. A continued Arch, is when it is reckoned in the Equator in a
continued Series from the beginning of Aries, and so forward into the
consequent signs. A Discrete Arch is so called because it is not reckoned from
the first degree of Aries, but from any other point in the Equator: as if you
should say, an Arch from the 14. gr. of Gemini to the 14. gr. of Taurus.

Beside, this Right Ascension is called also the greater Ascension, because
that in it, a greater Arch of the Equator rises above the Horizon, then of
the Zodiac: and it is called Right, because that in this, the Angle which is
made by the Horizon and Eclipticke, is nearer to a Right Angle, then that that
is made by any other part of the Eclipticke with the same. And that is said to
be a greater Arch or portion of the Equator, which is more than 30. degrees
in the Ascension or Descension: and that is called a lesser Arch, which falls
short of thirty, degrees in rising or setting.

In a Right Sphaere four signs only ascend Rightly, which are Gemini, Cancer,
Sagittarius and Capricornus: all the rest ascend Obliquely.

In an Oblique Sphaere six signs rise Rightly and the other six Obliquely. The
right are these, Cancer, Leo, Virgo, Libra, Scorpius, Sagittarius: and all the
rest Obliquely.

Oblique ascension, is when a less Arch or portion of the Equator rises,
then of the Zodiaque: or else, that Star may be said to rise Obliquely, with
whom a less portion of the Equator ascends above the Horizon. And so the
Oblique descention or setting of a Star is, where a less portion of the
Equator descends with it. As for example. At Rome with the Arch of Libra,
which contains 30. gr. in the Zodiaque, there rises an arch of the
AEquinoctiall of 37 gr So that this sign is said there to rise rightly: Because
that a greater Arch of the Equator ascends with it, then of the Zodiaque,
But then, at the same place, with the Arch of Aries, there arise only 17. gr.
of the Equator. Whence it follows that Aries rises Obliquely at Rome. In
our position of Sphaere also here at London, which is Oblique, like as that at
Rome with Libra there arises an Arch of the AEquinoctial concoutaining about
41. gr. but with the Arch of Aries there arises not above 13 degrees.
Therefore in our Sphaere Libra ascends or rises rightly, but Aries Obliquely.

Certain Rules, for the Astronomicall rising in a right Sphaere.
THe Rules of Astronomicall rising in a right Sphaere are these. 1. The whole
Quadrants or quarters of the Zodiaque and AEquinoctiall rise and set in an
equal space of time. 2. But the the parts of the Quadrants rise and set
unequally. 3. Those signs that are equally distant from any of those points,
have also equal ascensions: as Gemini and Cancer. 4. The Ascension of a sign
is always equal to the Descension of the same. 5. Four signs only rise
rightly, namely Gemini, Cancer, Sagittarius, and Capricornus: and all the rest
Obliquely.

Rules for the Astronomicall rising in an Oblique Sphaere.
IN an Oblique Sphaere, the two halfes that begin at the two AEquinoctiall
points, do rise together. 2. The parts of these halfes do rise unequally. 3.
Those signs that rise rightly, descend Obliquely, and so contrarily. 4. The
Ascension of any sign is equal to the Descention of the same. 5. The
Ascensionall Arches of the Northern signs are less in a right sphoere, but in
the Southern signs they are greater. 6. The Ascension of Opposite signs in
an Oblique Sphaere, taken together, are equal to the Ascension of the same in
a right Sphaere. 7. Those signs that are equidistant from either of the
AEquinoctiall points, have equal Ascensions, because they decline equally from
the Equator.

CHAP. VIII. How to sinde out the Horizontall difference betwixt the Meridian
and the Vertical circle of the Sun, or any otheh Star, (which they call
the Azimuth,) for any time or place assigned.
HAving first observed the Altitude of the Sun or Star that you desire to
know, set your Globe to the Latitude of the place you are in: which done, turn
it about, till the place of the Sun, or Star which you have observed, be
elevated so much above the Horizon, as the Altitude of the same you before
observed. Now you shall find that you desire, if you take the Quadrant of
altitude, and fasten it to the Vertical point of the place you are in, and so
move it together with the place of the Sun or Star up and down, until it
fall upon that which you have set down in your instrument at your observation.
Now in this situation of the Quadrant, that end of it that touches the
Horizon, will show the distance of the Vertical circle, in which you have
observed the Sun or Star to be, from the Meridian. As for example.

In the Northern latitude of 51. gr. on the 11th. of March after the old
account, at what time the Sun enters into Arts, suppose the altitude of the
Sun before noone to be observed to be th^rtiegr above the Horizon. And it is
demanded, what is the Azamuth, or distance of the Sun from the Meridian. First
therefore having (...) the Globe to the Latitude of 51. gr. and fastening the
Quadrant of Altitude to the Zenith, I turn the Globe about, till I find the
first degree of Aries to be 30 gr. above the Horizon And then the Quadrant of
Altitude being also applied to the same degree of Aries, will show upon the
Horizon, the Azimuth of the Sun, or distance of it from the Meridian, to be
about forty five degrees.

CHAP. IX. How to find the hour of the day, as also the Amplitude of rising and
setting of the Sun and Stars, for any time or Latitude of place.
THe Sun, we see, does rise and set at several seasons of the year, in
diverse parts of the Horizon. But among the rest it has three more notable
places of rising and setting. The first whereof is in the Equator, and this is
called his AEquinoctiall rising and setting. The second is in the Summer
Solstice, when he is in the Tropique of Cancer: and the third is in the Winter
solstice, when he is in the Tropique of Capricorn. Now the AEquinoctiall
rising of the Sun is one and the same in every Climate. For the Equator
always cutteth the Horizon in the same points, which are always just 90 gr.
distant on each side from the Meridian. But the rest are variable and change
according to the diverse inclination of the sphaere: and therefore the hours
are unequal also.

PONT. And here you are to understand, that the Amplitude of the Suns rising
and setting, is an Arch of the Horizon intercepted betwixt the Equator, and
the place of the rising and setting of the Sun. And it is either Northern or
Southern. The Northern Amplitude, is when he sets and rises on this side of
the Equator, toward the North Pole: and the Southern when he sets or rises on
the contrary side. Now when the Sun is in the Equator, he has no amplitude at
all: but when he is in the Solsticall points, he has then the greatest
amplitude of all: of which that in the Tropique of Cancer is called the
AEstivall, or summer solsticiall amplitude; and the other the Brumall or Winter
solsticiall amplitude.

And here it is to be noted that in all places the Ortive amplitude of any
Star is equal to the Occidentall amplitude of the same. And likewise, that
two stars being equally distant from the Equator the one Northward, and the
other Southward, or both of them Northward or Southward, have equal amplitude
of rising and setting.

Now if you desire to know the hour, or distance of time, betwixt the rising
and setting of the Sun, when he is in either of the Solstices, or in any
other intermediate place, and that for any time or latitude of place: you shall
work thus. First, set your Globe to the latitude of your place; then having
found the place of of the sun, for the time assigned, apply the same to the
Meridian, and withal you must set the point of the Houre-Index at the figure
twelve in the Houre-circle. And having thus done, you must turn about the Globe
toward the East part, till the place of the sun touch the Horizon: which
done, you shall have the Amplitude of the sunns rising also in the Equator,
which you mustr eckon, as we have said, from the East point, or place of
intersection betwixt the Equator and Horizon. And then if you but turn the
Globe about to the West side of the Horizon, you shall in like manner have the
hour of his setting, and Occidental Amplitude.

And if at the same time, and for the same latitude of place, you desire to
know the hour and Amplitude of rising and setting, or the greatest elevation of
any other star expressed in the Globe: you must turn about the Globe, (the
Index remaning still in the same position, and situation of the Index as
before) till the said star come to the Horizon, either on the East or West:
and so shall you plainly have the hour and latitude that the star rises or
seteth in, in like manner as you had in the sun. And then if you apply the
same to the Meridian, you shall also have the Meridian Altitude of the same
star. An example of the Amplitude of the Suns rising and setting may be this.

When the Sun enters in to Taurus (which in our time happen^ about the
eleventh of April according to the Julian account) I desire to know, the hour
and Amplitude of the Sunns rising, for the Northernlatitude fifty one degrees.
Now to find out this, I set my Globe so, that the North Pole is elevated above
the Horizon fifty one degrees. Then I apply the first degree of Taurus to the
Meridian, and the Hour-Index to the twelfth hour in the Hour-circle. Which
done, I turn about the Globe toward the East, till that the first degree of
Taurus touch the Horizon: and then I find that this point touches the Horizon
about the twenty fifth degree Northward from the East point. Therefore I
conclude that to be the Amplitude of the Sun for that day. In the mean time,
the Index strikes upon half an hour after four: which I take to be the ^me of
the Suns rising.

CHAP. X. Of the threefold rising and setting of Stars.
BEsides the ordinary Emersion and Depression of the Stars in regard of the
Horizon, by reason of the circumvolution of the Heaven: there is also observed
a threefold rising and setting of the Stars. The first of these is called in
Latin, Ortus Matutinus, sive Cosmicus, the Morning, or Cosmicall rising, the
second Vespertinus, sive Achronicus, the Evening, or Acronicall: and the last
Heliachus, vel solaris, Heliacall or Solar. The Cosmical or morning rising of a
Star is, when as it rises above the Horizon together with the Sun. And the
Cosmicall or morning setting of a Star is, when it sets at the Opposite
part of heaven; when the Sun rises. The Acronychal or Evening rising of a
Star is, when it rises on the Opposite part, when the Sun sets. And the
Acronychall setting of a Star, is when it sets at the same time with the
Sun. The Heliacall rising of a star (which you may properly call the Emersion
of it) is, when a star that was bid before by the Sun beams begins now to
have recovered it self out of the same, and to appear. And so likewise the
setting of such a star (which mav also fitly be called the occultation of the
same) is, when the Sun by his own proper motion overtaketh any Star, so that
by reason of the brightness of his beams it can no more be seen.

PONT. Concerning the rising and setting of the Stars, which is considered in
respect of the Horizon and Equator, has been spoken already in the seventh
Chapter: where we also showed, that that kind of rising and setting of the
Stars was called astronomicall. But in this place the rising of the Stars
is considered in relation only to the Horizon and Suns aspect, but not of
the Equator; and therefore it is also commonly called, the Poetioall rising
and setting of the Stars.

Now as touching the last of these kinds, many Authors are of opinion that the
fixed Stars of the first magnitude do begin to show themselves after their
Emersion out of the Sunnebeames, when as they are yet in the upper Hemisphaere,
and the Sun is gone down twelve degrees under the Horizon. But these of the
second magnitude require that the Sun is depressed 13, gr. and those of the
third, require fourteen; and of the fourth, fifteen; of the fifth, sixteen; of
the sixth, seventeen, and the cloudy and obscure Stars require eighteen
degrees of the Suns depression. But Ptolomy has determined nothing at all in
this case: and withal very rightly gives this admonishment, and lib. 8. cap
ult Almag. that is a very hard matter to set down any determination thereof.
For as he there well notes, by reason of the unequal disposition of the air,
this distance also of the Sun, for the Occultation and Emersion of the
Stars, must needs be unequal. And one thing more we have to increase our
suspicion of the incertain^y of this received opinion, and that is, that
Vitellio requires nineteen degrees of the Suns depression under the Horizon,
before the Evening twilight be ended. Now that the obscure and cloudy Star,
should appear ever, before the twilight be down, I shall very hardly be
persuaded to believe. Notwithstanding however the truth of the matter be, we
will follow the common opinion.

Now therefore if you desire to know at what time of the year any Star rises
or (...) in the morning or the evening in any Climate whatsoever: you may find
it out thus. First, set your Globe to the latitude of the place you are in, and
then apply the Star you enquire after, to the Eastern part of the Horizon and
you shall have that degree of the Eclipticke; with which the said Star rises
Cosmically, and sets Acronychally: and on the opposite side, on the West,
the Horizon will show the degree of the Ecliptic, wih which the same Star
rises Acronychally, and sets Cosmically. For the Cosmicall rising, and
Achronicall setting and so likewise the Acronycall rising, and Cosmicall
setting of a Star are all one: according to those old verses, Cosmice
deseendit signum, quod Acronyche surgit.
Chronyche descendit signum, quod Cosmici surgit.


But these things are to be explained more fully. For a Star does not always
rise and set with the same degree of the Eclipticke. For the Southern Stars do
anticipate the degree with which they rise, at their setting: but the Northern
Stars come after it: that is, if the elevation be of the Articke ^ole.
Otherwise it is quite contrary, if the South Pole be elevated. Now having found
the degree of the Ecliptic with which the Star you enquire after, does rise
and set; if you seek for the same degree of the sign in the Horizon of your
Globe, you shall presently have the month and day expressed, wherein the Sun
comes to the same degree and sign.

And as for the Heliacall rising and setting of a star, you may find it thus.
Having set your Globe to the Latitude of your place, you must turn about the
star proposed to the West side of the Horizon, and withal on the opposite
East part observe what degree of the Ecliptic is elevated above the Horizon
12, 13, 14. or any other number of degrees, that the magnitude of your Star
shall require for distance from the Sun. And when the Sun shall be in the
Opposite degree to this, then that star will set Heliacally, that is to say,
it will be quite taken out of our sight by the brightness of the Sun
beams. Now, if on the other side, you apply the same star to the East, and
find out the Opposite degree in the Eclipticke on the West part; that is, the
same number of degrees above the Horizon: when the sun comes to this place,
the same star will rise Heliacally, or recover it self out of the suns
beams. And so, if you but find the same degrees of the Eclipticke among the
signs on the Horizon of your Globe, you have the Month and the day when the
Sun will be in those degrees. And the same also is the time of the Emersion
and Occultation of the Star you enquire after. But we will here propose an
example of the Occultation of some fixed Star of the first magnitude: which
done, the Emersion of the same is also found by the contrary way of working.

And the Star we propose, shall be, that bright Star in the mouth of the
Great Dog, which is called Sirius: whose Occultation we desire to know for the
Latitude of 51. gr. Northward. Now this Star, being of the first magnitude,
begins to be hid, whenas it touches the Horizon in the upper Hemisphaere, and
the Sun is at the same time depressed under the Horizon but 12. degrees. If
therefore you apply this Star to the West part of the Horizon (having first
set your Globe to the latitude of 51 degrees) and on the Opposite East side,
observe what degree of the Ecclipticke is just 12 degrees above the Horizon
(now this degree is very near the 11. gr. of Scorpius) when the Sun shall
come to the Opposite: degree in the Eclipticke, which is the 11. of Taurus, that
Star will set Heliacally, and be hid by the Sunbeams. But the Sun comes to
this degree of Taurus about the 22. of April: therefore we conclude that the
Dog Star sets Heliacally about that time. And if you work in the same
manner, applying the Star to the East part of the Horizon, you shall have the
time of it^ Heliacal rising or Emersion out o^ the Suns be^.

Not unlike this, is the manner of proceeding al^o in finding the b^ginning and
ending of the twilights: of which we shall speak in the next Chapter.

PONT. The use and benefit of this discourse concerning these kinds of rising
and setting of the Stars is principally seen, in reading of the ancient
Authors and Poets, especially those that have written of Husbandry, and the
several seasons of the year. For so Virgil. lib. 1. Georg. makes mention of
the Cosmicall rising of the Stars in these verses. Candidus auratis aperit
cum cornibus annum.
Taurus, and adverso cadens Canis occidit astro.


Which is thus Englished by T. May. When, with his golden horns bright, Taurus
opes,
The year: and downward the cross Dogstar stoope^.


In which place he means to intimate the month of April, when as the Snnne
is in the sign T^us and rises with it. And we have an example also of the
Cosmicall setting in the same place, where he says, At si triticeam in messem,
robustaque farra
Exercebi^ humum solisque instabis aristis.
An ^ibi Eoae Atlant^des abscondantur,
Gno^aque ardentis dec^dat stella coron^,
Deb^ta quam^ulcis co^mi^tas s^ina, quamque
Invitae properes anni spem credere terrae.
Mult(...)pere; sed illos
Expectata (...) vanis (...) venis.


Thus rendered by T. May. But if thou plough, to sow more solid grain,
A wheat or barley harvest to obtain:
First let the morning Pleiades be set,
And Ariadne's shining Coronet,
Ere thou commit thy seed to ground, and there
Dare trust the hope of all the fo^lowing year.
Some that before the fall 'oth Pleiades
Began to sow, deceaved in the increase,
Have reapt wild oats for wheat, etc.


Where he would have them to expect their sowing time, till that the
Alta^^ide, that is, the Pleiades, er seven Stars be hid in the East, that is,
in the Morning by the approach of the Sun, which is also called Occa^us
Cosmicus. At which time also the bright Star in the Northern Crown sets in
the Evening with the Sun, or Heliacally. and so the Poet, by a twofold kind
of setting of the Stars, describes the 28. and 29. of October.

An example of the Achronycall rising you have in Ovid. lib. 1; de Ponto Eleg.
9. where he decribeth the tediousness of his ex^le, from the Autumnall or
Vespertine rising of the Pleiades, in words. Ut careo vobis Sythicas detrusus
in oras:
Quatuor Autumnos Ple^as orta facit.


In English thus. Since of your joyful sight cold Scythia me deprived
The rising Pleiades four Autumes have revived.


And he also mentions the Achronicall setting, lib. 2. Fastor: where speaking
of the third of February, he does it by this Periphrasis, Quem modo celatum
stellis Delphina videbas,
Is fugiet visus no^te sequente tuos.


That is to say. The Dolphin erst with Stars you saw bedight,
The next night vanishes out of your sight.


An example of the Heliacall rising in February you have in the same Author, in
these words. Tertia nox veniet, custodem protinus ursae,
Aspicies geminos exeruisse pedes.


Which may be Englished thus. When now the third night comes, you shall perceive
Arctophylax will both his feet up heave.


And for the Heliacall setting, you had an instance above, out of Virgil.
Georg. 1. -- Et adverso cadens canis occidit astro.


In which place the Poet speaks of sowing millet and beans in the spring
time. To these we may also add these several kinds of Poetical rising and
setting of Stars expressed. Cosmicus est ortus, cum sol emergere quaerit.
Ipsius oppositum lapsus, ad ima gerit.
Chronicus est lapsus, cum sol in vespere tabet.
Ipsius oppositum Chronicus ortus habet.
Heliacus signo datur ortus sole remoto.
Illius occasum proximitate noto.


CHAP. XI. How to find the beginning and end of the Twilight, for any time and
Latitude of place.
THe Twilight is defined to be a kind of imperfect light betwixt the Day and
the Night, both after the setting; and before the rising of the Sun. Of which
the first is called the Evening Twilight, and the other the Morning. Now the
beginning of the one, and the ending of the other are perceived at the same
equal space of time from the rising and setting of the Sun: notwithstanding the
continuance of each of them is sometimes greater, and sometimes less. For in
Summer the Twilights are much longer then in the Winter. The measure of them
they commonly make to be, whenas the Sun is depressed 18 degrees under the
Horizon. But, as P. Nonius rightly observes, there cannot be any certain
Measure or Term assigned them by reason of the various disposition of the
air, and the elevation of the vapors that are exhaled out of the earth; which
the same Author says, he finds to be also diverse, sometimes higher, and
sometimes lower. Vitelio, and Alhazenus before him, would have it to be when
the Sun is depressed under the Horizon nineteen degrees. But how ever the truth
be, we shall follow the common rceived opinion herein. Now therefore, if you
desire to know upon these grounds here laid down, at what hour the Twilight
begins and ends, at any time or latitude of place; you must do thus. First,
set your Globe to the latitude of that place, and apply that degree of the
Ecliptic, wherein the Sun is at that time, to the Meridian, and withal
direct the point of the Index to twelve in the Hour-circle: Then marking the
degree of the Eclipticke, that is directly opposite to the place of the Sun,
turn about your Globe, till such time as the opposite degree of the Sun be
elevated eighteen gr. above the Horizon toward the West part of it: and
forthwith the Index will show in the Houre-circle the beginning of the Morning
Twilight. And if you turn about your Globe, in like manner, to the East, you
shall also have the hour when the Evening Twilight ends.

PONT. Our Northern regions have their (...), or Twilight, of above an hour
long. But those Countries, where the Tropickes are very far beneath their
Horizon, have in a manner no (...), no Twilight or break of day. And therefore
those that inhabit near the Equator, have not the beginning nor later part
of the night enlightened at all, neither is there any appearance of light,
before the Sun be risen. Whereas, on the contrary side, those that have the
Tropicke very near their Horizon, must necessarily have Twilight almost all the
night long in Summer. And therefore when the Romans came into Britain, and
perceived that, at the Summer Sostice, their nights were light almost all the
night long: they did not ac ount this Twilight to be night, but said, Minima
nocte contentos Britannos, that the Britains were contented with a very short
night.

Now this. (...), as it is defined by Joseph Scaliger upon Manilius, is nothing
else but (...), a kind of Antiperistasis, or Circumstipation (as we may call
it) of the light: which can be none at all, in those places, where the Tropicke
and Horizon, are far distant. For this (...), as Scaliger in that place
accurately observes, is only found under those signs which are near the
Solsticiall point, as Gemini and Cancer; and that in those Countries too, where
the night is somewhat larger, then it is under the Pole of the Ecliptic: as
for example. (to use Scaligers own words) those that have not the Tropicke for
their Articke circle, nor where it touches the North point of the Horizou;
with them the night is so long dark, as while the Tropicke comes to strike
upon the North point of the Horizon. As we know it happens an Scotland where
our Country men that were Soldiers there, could see to play at dice all night
long without any Candle, about the time that the days were at the longest. Now
the Tropic is distant from the Horzizon at Edenburge 9. gr. 17. m. or
thereabout. And therefore so much is the distance betwixt the Sun and their
Horizon at midnight in the Summer Solstice: so that necessarily the rest of the
night must be Twilight, and of 6. hours, 23. minutes, which is the length of
their night, not above 37 m. which is not much above half an hour, are quite
dark: and all the rest of the night is light. Whence you may perceive the
reason of the long continuance of the day in those regions, that have the
Tropicke near bordering on their Horizon. And therefore the Romans being not
well acquainted with this Antiperistasis of the light, thought that in those
parts they had had scarce any night at all. And hence it necessarily follows,
that by how much the Tropic is more remote from the Horizon, by so much are
the nights less enlightened: and those that inhabit near the AEquinoctiall
are so far from having their day extended farther, either before the Sun
rises, or after it sets, as that with them there is no appearance of light at
all, before the Sun is up. And there is scarcely any Twilight or dawning of the
Day at all in those regions that lie within ten, degrees of the
AEquinoctiall: for which there can b^ no other reason given, but only the
distance betwixt the Tropicke and their Horizon. And if they have no Twilight
in the Summer, how much less will there be any when the Sun is in the other
Tropicke. So that we have no reason to give any credit to Alosiyus Cadamustus,
who when he had occasion to write of this argument, gave this to be the reason
of it, because there are no mountains there to hinder, but that the Sun may be
seen at the instant of his rising. But this is a ridiculous reason, and not
worthy a consutation. Thus Scaliger.

CHAP. XII. How to find the length of the Artificial Day or Night, or quantity
of the Suns Parallel that remains above the Horizon, and that is hid beneath
it, for any Latitude of place and time assigned. As also to find the same of
any other Star.
THe Day we have already showed to to be twofold; either Natural, or
Artificial. The Natural Day is defined by the whole revolution of the
Equator, with that portion also of the same that answers to such an Arch of
the Eclipticke, which the Sun passes over in one day. Now the whole
revolution of the Equator (besides that portion which answers to the Suns
proper motion) is divided into twenty four equal parts, which they call
equal hours: because they are all of equal length, fifteen degrees of the
Equator rising, and as many setting every hours space. Now the beginning of
this Day being diverse, according to the diversity of Countries, (some
beginning i^ at Sunset, as the Athenians and Jews: so^e at midnight, as the
Egyptians and Romans; others at Sunrising, as the Chaldeans; or at Noon, as
the Umbrians, and commonly our Astronomers do at this day:) this being not a
thing suitable to our present purpose, I shall not proceed any further in the
explanation of the same.

The Artificial day is defined to be, that space of time that the Sun is in
our upper Hemisphaere: to which is opposed the Artificial Night, while the Sun
remains in the lower Hemisphaere. The Artificial day, as also the Night, are
divided each of them into 1^. parts, which they call unequal hours: because
that according to the different seasons of the year, they are greater or less,
and are never always of the same length.

The length of the Artificial day is thus sound out. The Globe being set to the
latitude of the place, you must find out the degree of the Ecliptic that the
Sun i^ in at that time, and apply the same to the Meridian, and direct the
Houre-Index to the number of 12. in the Circle. And then turning about the
Globe, till that the place of the Sun touch the Horizon at the Eastern part,
the Index will show the hour in the Circle of the rising of the Sun: and if
you but turn it about again to the West, you shall, in like manner, have the
hour of his setting, and so by this means find out the length of the
Artificial day. Now if you multiply the number of the hours by 15. (for so
many degrees, (as we have already often said) are allowed to one equal
AEquinoctiall hour) you shall presently have the number of degrees of the Suns
Parallel that appears above the Horizon: which if you substract out of 360. the
remainder will be the quantity of that part of the same Parallel, that always
is hid under the Horizon. Or else you may proceed the contrary way, and first
find out the quantity of the Diurnal Arch, and afterward by the same, you may
gather the number of the hours also. For the Globe being set to the latitude of
the place, and the degree of the Eclipticke that the Sun is in, being known,
you may find out, in the manner now set down, the difference of the Right and
Oblique Ascensions of the same degree of the Eclipticke, for the Latitude of
that place. For this difference will be the half of that, wherein the
Artificial day, for that time and place, is either deficient, or exceeds the
length of our AEquinoctiall day. And therefore you must add it, when the days
are longer then the nights, (which is from the 11th. of March, to the 12th. of
September:) but substract all other times of the year, when as the nights are
longer then the days.

As for example. On the 12 day of June, according to the old account, the Sun
enters into Cancer: the Right Ascension of which degree of the Ecliptic is 90.
degrees. But if in the latitude of 52 gr. the first degree of Cancer be
applied to the Horizon, we shall find the Oblique Ascension of it to be
fifty six gr. and about ten m So that the difference betwixt them is 33.
gr. 5^. m which if you add to nintie gr. the half of the AEquinoctiall day,
the length of the Artificial day will then be 123. gr. fifty m. and the
whole Diurnall Arch 247. gr. 40. m. which if you divide by fifteen, the
quotient will be sixteen and almost an half: which is the number of hours in
the Artificial day on the twelfth of June, for the latitude of fifty two
degrees:

And by this means, may you also find out the quantity of the longest, or
shortest, or any other intermediate day, together with the increase and
decrease of the same, for any time or latitude of place.

Cleomedes would have the quantity of the days to increase and diminish after
this manner: that the month immediately before and also after the AEquinox, the
days should increase and decrease the fourth part of the whole difference
betwixt the length of the longest and the shortest days of the whole year:
and the second month they should differ a sixth part; and the third a twelfth
part: that is, if the whole difference betwixt the longest and the shortest day
be six hours. So that the month going immediately before, and after the
AEquinoxe, the days increase and decrease an hour, and an half, that is to
say, the four (...) part of 6. hours: the second month an whole hour; and the
third month half an hour. But suppose we this to be exactly agreeable to some
certain determinate latitude; yet it is not generally so in all places. For
according to the diverse Inclination of the Sphaere, the days also are observed
to increase and decrease diversely. For seeing that the Parallels in every
several Latitude are cut by the Equator in a different manner, it must needs
follow, that the proportion of the increase and decrease of the days must be
also different.

I shall not here need to set down the manner, how to find the apparent Arch of
the Parallel of any Star: seeing that it is found out in the same manner, as
the Diurnall Arch of the Suns Parallel is.

CHAP. XIII. How to find out the hour of the Day and Night, both equal and
unequal, for any t^me and Latitude of place.
IF you desire to find out the equal hour of the Day, first set your Globe to
the latitude of the place you are in: and also observe the latitude of the Sun.
Which done, apply the place of the Sun, to the Meridian, and set the Index to
the twelfth hour in the Circle* and then turn about the Globe either to the
East, or West, as your observation shall require, until that the place of the
Sun be elevated so many degrees above the Horizon, as shall agree with your
observation: as has been already showed, in declaring how to find the Azimuth.
And the Globe standing in this situation, the Index will point out in the
Hour-circle the hour of the day, wherein your observation was made. After the
same manner also you may find the hour of the night, by observing the Altitude
of any known Star, that is expressed in the Globe. For the Index must stand ^il,
as it did before, when it was fitted to the place of the Sun: and the Globe
must be turned about, till the Star be observed to have the same Elevation
above the Horizon of the Globe, as it had in the Heavens, and then the Index
will show the hour of the Night.

Now the manner how to find out the unequal hour of the day, is this. First
you are to find out, as we have already showed, the quantity or number of the
hours of the Artificial day, and also the equal hour of the same: whence by
the Rule of Proportion, you may also come to the knowledge of the unequal
hour.

PONT. The unequal hours do answer to the Artificial day, which, as you have
heard before,) is defined to be the space of time that the Sun remains in the
uppper Hemisphoere: to which is opposed the Artificial night, comprehending
all that time, while the sun is hid from us. Which space of time, seeing that
it is always divided into 12. parts, (which they call unequal hours:) the day
it self being at diverse seasons of the year of different length, the hours it
contains must also be unequal. So likewise on the other side, the equal
hours do agree to the Natural day, which is defined by the whole and perfect
revolution of the Equator: And this also is divided into ^4. equal parts,
which are therefore called equal hours, because they are always of equal
length, fifteen degrees of the Equator rising and setting every hour. For the
whole Equator being divided into 24. parts, there are contained in the
revolution of it 15. parts of time, which is the measure of an hour so that an
equal hour is the 24th. part of the while AEquinoctiall circle.

In the latitude of 49. degrees, the longest day contains 16 hours, Now
therefore when it is 10 of the clock before Noon; or the sixth hour after
Sunrising on this day, (...) to know, what unequal hour of the day it is. I
therefore dispose my proportional terms thus, 16 give 6 therefore 12. (which
is the number of equal hours in every day or nigh.) give 4. and and an half.

And if we desire to know, how many degrees of the Equator do answer to one
unequal hour; we may do it thus: namely by dividing the whole number of
degrees of the (...) Arch by 12. As if the Artificial day (...) equal hours
in length, then the Arch of the Diurnall Parallel will be 240 degrees. Which if
we divide by 12 the quotient, which (...) will show the number of degrees in
the Equator, that answer to one unequal ^ou (...) like method also is to be
observed, in finding out the length of the unequal hour of the Night

CHAP. XIV. To find out the Longitude, Latitude, and Declination of any fixed
Star, as it is expressed in the Globe.
THe Longitude of a Star, is an Arch of Eclipticke intercepted betwixt two of
the greater Circles, which are drawn thorough the Poles of the Eclipticke, the
one of which passes through the intersection of the Equator and Ecliptic,
and the other through the Center of the star.

The Latitude of a Star, is the distance of it from the Eccliptick; which is
also to be reckoned in that circle which passes through the Center thereof.

Now if you desire to find out either of these you must take the Quadrant of
altitude, or any other Quadrant of a circle, that is but exactly divided into
90 parts: and lay one end of it on either Pole of the Ecliptic, either
Northern or Southern, as the Latitude of the Star shall require. Then let it
pass through the Center of the Star to the very Ecliptic, and there the
other end will show the degree of Longitude of the same, which you must reckon
from the beginning of Aries; and so that portion of the Quadrant that is
contained betwixt the Star it self and the Eclipticke, will also show the
Latitude of the Star.

PONT. The manner how to find the longitude and latitude of Stars, may be
showed by this example. First, let us propose the head of Medusa. which is
found in the Tables to be in the twenty one gr. 8. and it has in Northern
latitude twenty three degrees. Now therefore in the superficies of the Globe
we must look for the sign 8. and reckon 21. gr. from the beginning of the
same on the Eclipticke: And the circle that shall be drawn from the Pole of
the Ecliptic, through this degree, shall be called the the circle of longitude
of the head of Medusa. After this, reckon the latitude of the Star also in
the same circle among the Parallels of latitude, beginning from the Eclipticke,
and so forward toward the Articke Pole, (because the latitude of it is
Northern.) until you have accounted 23. gr. which is the number of the
degrees of latitude, and shows the place of that Star.

Now because that all the circles of Longitude, and latitudes neither are, nor
indeed can conveniently be expressed on the Globe: therefore the Quadrant of
altitude is to serve in stead of the same, for the finding out of the
longitudes and situations of the Stars that are set in the Globe: and that
after this manner. Let us take our former example of Medusa 's head: the
latitude of which being Northern, I apply the end of the Quadrant to the North
Pole of the Zodiac: (otherwise, had it been Southern, it must have been fitted
to the Southern Pole:) which do^e, I seek in the Eclipticks for the 21 gr. of
Taurus, which is the logitude of the Star; and having found it, I lay the
other end of my Quadrant over it. For by this means the Quadrant shall supply
the office of the circle of Longitude of Medusa's head. (...) therefore if I
reckon 23 degrees on the said Quadrant beginning from the Eclipticke, I shall
have the true situation of this Star in the Globe.

In like manner, may we find, by a Globe that has the Stars described on it,
the longitude and latitude of any Star in the Heavens. For if we fit the
Quadrant to the Northern Pole of the Zodiaque (if the Star have Northern
latitude) and then let it pass through the center of any Star: the degree of
the Ecliptic that the other end of it shall point out, will be the longitude
of the said Star: and the degrees that are contained betwixt the Ecliptic
and the Star, will show you the latitude of the same. A for example if the
Quadrant being first applied to the Northern Pole of the Zodiaque, be
afterward laid along over the the bright Star in the Crown; the other end of it
will fall on the 6. gr. m. which is the longitude of this Star. And then if
you reckon the number of degrees betwixt the Eclipticke and the same Star,
you shall find them to be 44. which is the Northern latitude of the same.

The Declination of a Star, is the distance of it from the Equator: which
distance must be reckoned on a greater circle, passing through the Poles of
the Equator. And therefore if you but apply any Star to the Meridian, you
shall presently have the Declination of it, if you account the degrees and
minutes of the Meridian (if there be any) that are contained betwixt the Center
of the Star and the Equator.

PONT. The Declination of Stars, as also their Right Ascension, may be known
by the Globe in this manner. The Star proposed must be applied to the Meridian,
and forthwith the same Meridian will discover, among the degrees of the
Equator, the Right Ascension of the same: and it will also give you the
Declination, if you reckon upon it the number of degrees that are comprehended
betwixt the AEquinoctiall and the Star proposed. And for an example of this,
let us propose the Great Dog, whose right Ascension and Declination we desire
to know. First, therefore we set the Star it self directly under the
Meridian, and find the Meridian to cut the AEquinoctiall at 97. gr. 15. min.
And this is the right Ascension of this Star. And then reckoning the number of
the degrees comprehended betwixt it and the AEquinoctiall Southward, we find
them to be 16 degrees, which we conclude to be the Southern latitude of the
Starr.

The same also may be demonstrated by the Sun, For when the Sun is in the 3.
gr. of Gemini, he is carried under the Meridian, which crosses the
AEquinoctiall about the 63. gr. reckoning from the first degree of Aries in the
Equator. And this is the Ascension of the Sun when he is in the (...). degree
of Gemini. Now the number of the degrees that are comprehended betwixt the
place the Sun and the Equator, being reckoned in the Meridian, are found to be
21 which is also the Suns Declination, and that Northward, because it falls
among the Northern signs.

The same may be performed also after another manner, as thus for example. The
right Ascension of the bright Star in the Crown is found in the Astronomicall
Tables to be 275. gr 31. m. and the declination of it Northward 38. gr. 26.
minutes. First therefore I reckon the degrees of Right Assention in the
AEquinoctiall, beginning at the first degree of Aries; and having found the
degree I apply it to the Meridian, in which I afterward reckon the Declination
assigned, beginning from AEquinoctiall, and proceeding toward the Arcticke
Pole, if the Declination of the Star be Northern, if otherwise, toward the
Antartick.

A Table representing the Longitude, Latitude, Right Ascension, and declination
of some certain Notable STARS.
The names of the Stars Longitude Degrees. Min. Latitude D. M. Nor. Sou. Right
Ascen. D. M. Declina. Dr M. Nor. Sou. The 1 Starr in the Rams Horn. 28 0 7 20
Nor. 20 0 18 0 Nor. The 1 horse in the wain The 3 horse 3 30 53 30 Nor. 188 10
57 27 Nor. 21 10 54 0 Nor. 202 2^ 51 5 Nor. The head of the Dragon. 21 0 75 ^0
Nor. 226 8 52 8 Nor Boots left shoulder Arcturus. 11 0 49 0 Nor. 212 50 40 0
Nor. 18 20 31 30 Nor. 109 17 2^ 53 Nor. The bright Star in the Crown. 6 0 44 3^
Nor. 229 0 38 25 Nor. The head of Hercules. 9 0 37 30 Nor. 252 51 1^ 36 Nor The
bright Star of Lybra. 8 40 62 0 Nor. 275 31 38 26 Nor. The tail of the Swan. 0
30 60 0 Nor. 307 30 44 15 Nor The Swanns bill. 25 50 49 20 Nor. 288 40 27 3^
Nor. Cassiopeia's b east. 2 10 46 45 Nor. 4 23 54 5^ Nor. The Goat. 16 20 22 30
Nor. 71 58 45 7 Nor. The right side of Perseus. 25 0 30 0 Nor. 43 0 18 0 Nor.
Medusa's head. 21 0 23 0 Nor. 41 0 30 0 Nor

The names of the Stars Longitude Degrees. Min. Latitude D. M. Nor. Sou. Right
Ascen. D. M. Declina. Dr M. Nor. Sou. Andro^das head. 16 40 24 30 Nor. (...)
(...) Nor The Star in the end o^ Pegasus wing 9 0 34 1^ Nor. 358 (...) 13 0
Nor. Pegasus shoulder. ^5 0 41 10 Nor. 341 (...) (...) 0 Nor. The Eagle ^ (...)
29 10 Nor. ^2 (...) (...) 57 Nor. The head of the Serpentbearer. ^6 10 38 0
Nor. 288 3 ^3 5 Nor. The bu^ (...) (...) 0 (...) 10 Nor. 6^ (...) 5 54 Nor.
Castor Pollux. 14 40 9 40 Nor. ^07 0 ^2 30 Nor. 18 0 6 15 Nor. 110 20 ^8 30
Nor. The Lions Heart (...) 50 0 10 Nor. 146 13 13 45 Nor. Spica Virginis. 1^ 0
2 0 South 195 46 (...) 55 South The South balance of (...). (...) 20 0 40
South 217 8 4 0 South The heart of the Scorpion (...) 34 4 38 South 241 41 25
30 South The tail of Capricorn. (...) 0 4 20 South (...) 1^ 8 5 South
Aquarius Thigh. 3 0 7 30 South 337 47 ^7 24 South The Whales Tail. 27 0 20 20
South 5 4 19 46 South The Whales Nostrils. 9 0 7 45 South 40 3 (...) 4^ South
The Right shouldrer of Orion. (...) 20 17 0 South 83 34 (...) 16 South The left
foot of Orion. ^0 30 31 ^0 South 73 1 (...) 10 South The less Dog. 20 30 16 0
South 109 4^ (...) 53 South The great Dog. (...) 0 9 0 South 9^ (...) 5 59
South

CHAP. XV. To find the variation of the Compass, for any Latitude of place.
THat the Needle touched with the Loadstone, does decline in diverse places
from the intersection of the Meridian and Horizon, is a thing most certain, and
confirmed by daily experience. Neither is this a mere forgery of Mariners,
intended by them for a cloak of their own errors: as P. De Medina, Grand
Pilot to the King of Spain was of opinion. Neither yet does it so come to
pass, by reason that the virtue of the Magnet, by long use and exercise is
weakened; as P. Nonius conceived: or else because it was not originally endued
with sufficient virtue: as some others coldly conjecture: but this motion
proceeds from its own natural inclination. The cause of this deflection,
although hitherto, in vain sought after by many, has yet been found by none.
In this as in all other of Natures hidden and abstruse mysteries, we are quite
(...). There have been some that have endeavored to prescribe some certain
Canon, or rule for this Deflection, as if it had been regular and governed by
some certain order: but all in vain. For that it is inordinate and irregular,
is testified by daily experience, not only such as is taken from the dull
conjecture of the common sort of Mariners, which ofttimes falls far wide of
the truth: but from the far more accurate observations of skillful Navigators.

At the Isles, which they call Azores, it declineth not at all from the true
Meridian: as the common opinion of Mariners is. And I dare be bold to affirm,
that at those more Western Islands also, it varieth very little or nothing at
all. But if you sail Eastward from those Islands, you shall observe that point
of the Needle that respects the North, to incline somewhat toward the East. At
An^werpe in Brabant it varieth about nine degrees: and near London it
declineth from, the true Meridian above eleven degrees. And if you sail
Westward from those Islands, the Needle also will incline toward the West.
About the Sea Coasts of America, in the Latitude of thirty five, or thirty
six degrees, it declineth above eleven gr. from the true Meridian. Beyond the
AEquatour it happens clean otherwise. Near the outwardmost Promontory of
Brasile, looking Eastward, which is commonly called, C. Frio, it varieth from
the true Meridian above twelve degrees. Within the most Eastward parts of the
Straites of Magellane it declineth five or six gr. And if you sail from that
Promontory, we now spoke of, toward Afric Estward, the variation still
increases, as far as to 17, or 18. degrees: which (as far as we can
conjecture) happen in a Meridian not far from that which passes through the
Azores. From thence the deflection decreaseth to nine or ten gr. which
happens near the Isle of Saint Helen, bearing somewhat toward the West. And
from hence they say it decreaseth, till you are past the Cape of good hope,
where they will have it to lie in the just situation of the true Meridian,
near to a certain river, which for this cause is called by the Portugalls, Rio
de las Agulias. And all this deviation is towad the East.

All this we have had certain proof and experience of, and that by as
accurate observations as those instruments, which are used in Navigation, would
afford, and the same examined and caculated according to the doctrine of
Sphaericall Triangles. So that we have just cause to suspect the truth of many
of these traditions, which are commonly delivered, concerning the deflection of
the Needle. And namely whereas they report, that under that Meridian which
passes through the Azores, it exactly respects the true Meridian: and that
about the Sea coasts of Brasilia the North point of the Needle declineth toward
the West, (as some affirm) we have found this to be false. And whereas they
report that at Newfound land it declineth toward the West above 22 degrees: we
very much suspect the truth hereof: because that this seems not at all to agree
with the observatio^ we have made concerning the variation about 11. degrees,
near upon the coasts of America: of the truth of which I am so confident, as of
nothing more. It therefore appears to be an idle fancy of theirs, who look to
find some certai^ point which the Needle should always respect: and that
either on the earth, (as namely some certain Magneticall mountains, not far
distant from the Arcticke Pole,) or else in the Heavens, as (namely the tail of
the little Bear, as Cardan thought:) or else that it is situate in that very
Meridian that passes through the Azores, and about sixteen degrees and an
half beyond the North Pole: as Mercator would have it. And therefore, there it
no heed to be taken to them, neither, who conceive that there might be some
certain way found out of calculating the longitudes of places by means of this
deflection of the Needle: which I could wish they were able to perform: and
indeed it might be done, were there any certain point that it should always
respect.

But to leave this discourse, let us now see, how the quantity of this
declination of the Needle may be found out by the use of the Globe, for any
place of known latitude, And first you must provide you of some instrument by
which you may observe the distance of the Suns Azimuth from the situation of a
Needle, Our Mariners commonly use a Nautical Compass, which is divided into
three hundred sixty degrees, having a thread placed crossewise over the center
of the Instrument to cast the shadows of the Sun upon the center of the same.
This Instrument is called by our Mariners, the Compass of variation: and this
seems to be a very convenient Instrument for the same use. But yet I could
wish that it were made with some more care and accuratenesse, then commonly it
is.

With this, or the like instrument, you must observe the distance of the Suns
Azimuth, for any time or place, from the projection of the Magnetical Needle.
Now we have before showed, how to find out, how much the vertical circle of
the Sun is distant from the Meridian. And the difference that there is betwixt
the distance of the Sun from the true Meridian, and from the situation of the
Needle, is the variation of the Compass. Besides, we have already showed how
the Amplitude of the rising and setting of the Sun may be found If therefore by
the help of this, or the like instrument, it be observed, (as we have said) how
many degrees the Sun rises or sets from those points in the Compass, that
answer to the East or West: you shall in like manner have the deviation of the
Needle from the true Meridian, if it have any at all.

PONT. At the end of this Chapter, I think it not amiss to set down, that
which Joseph Scaliger. sometime upon occasion offered, wrote unto David
Rivaldus, concerning the declination of the Magneticall Needle from the true
Meridian. This Epistle of his is extant among those Epistles that were set
forth at Paris with some other of his works, Anno 1610. Aad because that there
is something in the same that concerns the controversy of the Praecession of
the AEquinoctiall points; I will set down very near the whole Epistle: and thus
it is. Literas tuas cum maxima voluptate etc.

Your Letters I have receceived, and with very great satisfaction and delight:
wherein I perceived two things chiefly to be insisted upon: which were, the
Declination of the Magneticall Needle; and the Precession of the AEquinoctiall
points. In my former Letters I made mention indeed of the same, but with an
intention rather to discover the opinion of others, then to proclaim mine own.
For I only made a bare proposal of the matter, and no dogmaticall Position:
that so, i^ the said declination be to be examined by the Meridians, add the
Meridians, according to my Hypothesis, be moveable; that then our Astronomers
and Navigators should see, whether or no, there might not some cause and reason
of this so manifest disagreement be discovered, out of this Essay of mine. For
I would not have proposed it only, had I been certainly assured of it: but
would rather have endeavored to make it appear by demonstration. Whether
therefore, that be the cause of it, which I desire should be searched for out
of my Hypothesis; or whether it be some other it shall be all one to me. But
the investigation of the Meridians is not sufficient for this matter. For we
must first dispute concerning the nature of the Magnet, whether or no it be the
property of it, always to respect the North point: and if so, yet seeing that
it declines from the term proposed, so many degrees, we are next to enquire,
whence this Uariation proceeds: which certainly can be assigned to no other
thing, then to the Meridians. But that we may not urge this question any
farther: we must consult with those Authors that have written of the Magnet;
and especially with William Gilbert of Colchester, a Philosopher and
Practitioner of Physic in London, who about three years since put forth three
large books of the same subject: wherein he has discovered to me his own
learning rather, then the nature of the Magnet. For now I am more in doubt,
then before. The other part of your Letter is, concerning the Praecession of
the AEquinoctiall points. It was observed first of all by Hypparchus, out of
the observations of the fixed Stars of Aristarchus Saminus, Conon, and
Timocharcis, that the AEquinoctiall points were gone gone forward into the
precedent parts; because that he had found that the four points (AEquinoctiall
and Solsticiall) were farther off from the Stars assigned for the same, then
they were in the time of those Astronomers. Which when he saw, be doubted not
forthwith to affirm, that the AEquinostiall points were immovable, and that
the Sphaere of the fixed Stars was gone back into the sacceeding parts. And
he did not perswad^ himself only to this, but even Ptolomy also; and Ptolomy,
all that came after him, so great is the power of Prejudicate Authority. And he
also rectified the Globe, and made the tail of the little Bear to be distant
from the Pole twelve gr. twenty four min. choosing rather to believe it to be
so, then to consult with the Stars to see whether it were so indeed, or no.
Which thing I cannot sufficiently wonder at in him; seeing, that not only in
his time, but also two hunared and eighteen years before him, the tail of the
lesser Bear was no farther from the Pole of the world, then it is at this day:
as Eudoxus observed, Which I have most plainly demonstrated in my book of the
Praecession of the AEquinoctiall poin^. Besides, Eratosthenes also, who wrote
one hundred twenty eight years after Fudoxus, affirmed the same of the same
Star: and so did those that wrote in Augustus his time. If therefore two
hundred and eighteen years before Hipparchus time, that Star was where it is
now; how then can that position of Hipparchus stand, who placed it 12. gr. 24
min. of the Pole of the world? For if the Sphaere of the fixed Stars laid
more backward into the succeeding parts, (as he would have it) and that in his
time the Tail of the Cynosure was 12. gr. 24. min. distant from the Pole: it
necessarily follows, that in Eudoxus time it must have been farther distant
from the Pole, by 13. or 14. gr. For this is the proportion of degrees required
for that motion. But it was then no farther distant, then it is at this day:
and therefore Hipparchus has abused both himself, and all that have come
after him. And indeed I my self have made a collection out of him, of all the
risings and settings of the Stars; which no man shall ever be able to
understand, except he first make such a Globe, wherein the tail of the
Cynosure shall be 12. gr. 24. min. distant from the Pole. which thing when I
imparted to that great Astronomer Tycho Brahe, he was amused, and wondered very
much at the novelty and strangeness of the thing: and indeed not without cause.
For I did not speak a word to him of the construction of Hipparchus his Globe,
and the distance of the Cynosure from the Pole of it. And therefore we plainly
see, that for as much as this Star keeps the same distance from the Pole at
this day, that it did 1967. years since, there is no motion at all of the
eighth Sphaere into the succeding parts, but of the AEquinoctiall points into
the precedent. For of the motion there is no doubt at all to be made, for at
this time the AEquinoxe falls before the first Star in Aries above 28. gr.
which notwithstanding in Eudoxus his time happened at the very Star.

But now whether the Star has left the Sun behind it, or the Sun the Star, is
the principal matter in question. For it must be, that one of them must stand
still, and the other move: but we have already showed that the Stars are
immovable: and therefore the Sun and AEquinoctiall points are movable. And
indeed they have manifestly gone forward since Eudox's time 28. degrees.

This Copernicus (that great Scholar, and second Ptolomy of our age) perceived,
when he spoke these words. Vos putatis, etc. You think (says he) that the
eighth Sphaere moves into the consequent parts: but consider whether the
AEquinoctiall points do not rather move forward. Whence it appears, that this
never suffioiently commended man, concluded, that there was a praecession of
the AEquinoctiall points, and not a motion of the eighth Sphaere into the
subs^quent paerts. For one of these being granted, the other must necessarily
be taken away: for if the eighth Sphaere does not move backward, the
AEquinoctiall points must necessarily move forward. And therefore herein
Copernicus conjectured aright. But he omitted the chiefest matter of all,
either because perhaps he perceived it not, or else despaired of ever being
able to demonstrate it. For seeing that the AEquinoctiall points are Moveable,
it must needs follow, that a greater Circle described by the same must be
Moveable also, by the twenty Sphaeric. Element. And if the Circle be Moveable,
the Pole must also be Moveable. And therefore the Pole of the AEquinoctiall is
not the same with the Pole of the world: for this is Immovable, but the other
Moveable: for so consequently all the greater Circles passing through these
Poles, which are the Meridians, are also Moveable. So that Sunne-Dialls, and
all Sciotericall instruments, that are placed upon a Meridian Line, after some
certain term of years, must necessarily be defective: because the line it
self is removed from its former situation. Of which variableness we have
obse ved notable arguments in monuments of Antiquity. These things, it did
concern Copernicus either to have seen, or demonstrated, who was the first man
that ever rejected that fabulous and ridiculousmotionof the eighth Sphaere, and
withal proposed this opinion of the Praecession of the AEquinoctiall points:
who, had he but seen seen those things, which we have observed historically
out of the writings of the Ancient Astronomers, so great was the ingenuity of
the man, that he would have instantly consented, and demonstrated the matter
Mathematically; which certainly is no hard matter to do. For, is there any man
so void of all reason and judgment, as having granted the AEquinoctiall points
to be Moveable, to deny that a great Circle described by the same, must
necessarily be moveable also: and if so, that the Poles are also Moveable: and
again this (...) granted, that the Meridians are so too? He that shall deny
this, I cannot see, what it has profited bim to have studied the Mathematics.

But you will object, that the Meridians are not changed, because they pass
through the Poles of the world, which are Immutable.

But then you have forgotten our Hypothesis, which is, that the Poles of the
AEquinoctiall are not the same with the Poles of the world. For these are
immutable, but those other Mutable. And therefore we see the necessity of this
Argument; and withal, that these things being so, we are yet very far to seek
in many things necessary for the situation and construction of the Sphaere. For
by this reckoning it follows necessarily, that the AEquinoctiall Circle
should not be described directly Parallel to the Pole of the world: and many
other things of this nature, which might hence be concluded, I might willingly
omit, because I speak to a Mathematician, who might better teach in these
things. Wherefore I think I may boldly say, that none can be so impudent as to
deny these things which are so manifest, as that we can prove them not only
Historically, but also Apodictically, by certain demonstrations. And it behooves
you to see and examine more narrowly whatsoever has been written by
Mathematicians concerning this matter. For there is now no place left of deny
all, but rather to see, how these things may be better demonstrated, and this
done, the construction and position of the Sphaere corrected. But I do not
speak this to the common sort of Astrologers, who never have read any thing but
the Theories of the Planets, and never so much as saw any of the ancient
Writers: unto whom, although they should perhaps have recourse, they could not
understand.

Now as concerning the motion of Trepidation, it is long since exploded: and
for Copernicus his motion of Libration, which is also a very vain conceit, and
I shall speak more of it here, and show whence this so idle a dream should
possess so worthy a man: for it differs not much from that imposture of
Trepidation. And as the truth has at length got place, and removed that
fabulous motion of Trepidation, so we doubt not but necessity will at the last
send after it this motion of the eighth Sphaere also.

This therefore is the sum of our answer: that we desire, that the skillfull
Artists would consider, whether the knowledge of the variation of the
Magneticall Needle may be illustrated by those things which we have delivered
concerning the Mutability of the Meridians: That there is no motion of the
eighth Sphaere into the consequent parts: That we are the first that have
demonstrated the same: And that from thence must necessarily follow the
praecession of of the AEquinoctiall points. And this being granted, that then
the AEquinoctiall points, AEquinoctia Circles, and their Poles, and Meridians,
passing through them are also movable: and their Poles also different from the
Poles of the world. And that the situation of Sun Dialls does vary after some
term of years: and that we are the first that observed the History of this not
able piece of Antiquity; which also may be demonstrated out of the
Mathematics. This is my opinion, which I will ever defend. But do you consider
better of it: and in the mean time Farewell. Lug. Bat. 16. Kal. May. An. 1604.

And this is Scaliger's Epistle, in which whereas he speaks of three Books of
the Magnet, written by W. Gilbert, it seems to be a slip of his memory: for the
same Author wrote not three, but six Books de Magnete, which were Printed at
London by Peter Short, Anno 1600. the fourth and sifth books whereof do
especially handle the doctrine of the variation of the Compass. And whereas he
adds, that himself had plainly demonstrated in a certain book of his, that
the Tail of the Cynosure had the same situation anciently, that it bath at this
day; he means that book which bears title, Diatriba de AEquinoctiorum
Anticipatione, and was printed at Paris, Anno 1613. Which Book I understand
since, that Johannes Maginus a Paduan, and professor of the Mathematics in
Bononia, has undertaken to confute: as appears by the Catalogue of Books in
the year 1617. where there is mention made of the same confutation printed at
Rome, by Andrew (...); and at Colen, by Anthony Hierat, in quarto. In which
book the Author takes upon him to impugn certain new Tenets, concerning the
Polar Star, and the mutation of the AEquinoctiall points, and immobility of the
fixed Stars: with diverse Astronomicall matters, which the title promises:
notwithstanding it has not yet been my good hap, though I have made very
diligent enquiry, to meet with any of these books.

CHAP. XVI. How to make a Sun Dial by the Globe, for any Latitude of place.
WE do not here promise the whole Art of Dialling: as being a matter too
prolixe to be handled in this place, and not so properly concerning our present
business in hand. And therefore it shall suffice us to have touched lightly,
and as it were, pointed out only some few grounds of this Art: being such as
may very easily be understood by the use of the Globe.

And here in this place we shall show you only 2 the most common sorts of Dials:
one whereof is called an Horizontall Dial, because it is described on a plain
or flat, which is Parallel to the Horizon: and the other is called a Murall, as
being erected, for the most part, on a wall, perpendicular to the Horizon, and
looking directly either toward the North, or South. But both these may not
unfitly be called Horizontal; not in respect of the same place indeed, but of
diverse. And therefore whether it be a Flat Horizontall, or Erect, or else
inclining any way: there will be but one kind of artifice in making of the same.

Let us therefore now see in what manner a plain Horizontall Dial may be made
for any place. Having therefore first prepared your flat Dial Ground, Parallel
to the Horizon, draw a Meridian on it, as exactly North, and South as possibly
you can. Which done, draw another East and West, which must cross it at right
angles. The first of which lines will show twelve, and the other six of the
Clock, both morning and evening. Then making a Center in the intersection of
these two Lines, describe a circle on your Dial Ground, to what distance you
please: and then divide it, (as all other circles usually are) into 360. parts.
And it will not be amiss to subdivide each of these into lesser parts, if it may
conveniently be done. And now it only remains to find out the distances of
the hour lines in this circle, for any latitude of place. Which that we may do
by the use of the Globe, let it first be set to the latitude of the place
assigned. And then make choice of some of the greater circles in the Globe,
that pass through the Poles of the world; (as for example, the AEquinoctiall
Colure, if you please:) and apply the same to the Meridian: in which situation
it shows midday, or twelve of the Clock. Then turning about the Globe toward
the West, (if you will) till that fifteen degrees of the Equator have passed
through the Meridian: you must mark the degree of the Horizon that the same
Colure crosses in the Horizon. For that point will show the distance of the
first and eleventh hours from the Meridian. Both of which are distant an hours
space from the Meridian, or line of midday. Then turning again the Globe
forward, till other fifteen degrees are past the Meridian: the same Colure will
point out the distance of the tenth hour, which is two hours before Noon, and
of the second hour after noon. And in the same manner you may find out the
distances of all the rest in the Horizon, allotting to each of them fifteen
degrees in the Equator crossing the Meridian. But here you must take notice by
the way, that the beginning of this account of the distances, must be taken
from that part of the Horizon, on which the Pole is elevated: to wit, from the
North part of the Horizon, if the Arcticke Pole be elevate; and so likewise
from the South part, if the Antarctick be elevated.

These distances of the hours being thus noted in the Horizon of the Globe, you
must afterward translate them into your Plain, allotted for your Dial Ground,
reckoning in the circumference of it so many degrees to each hour, as are
answerable to those, pointed out by the Colure in the Horizon.

And lastly, having thus done, the Gnomon or Style must be erected. Where you
are to observe this one thing (which is indeed in a manner the chief and only
thing in this Art to be carefully looked unto) namely, that that edge or line
of the Gnomon, which is to show the hours by its shadow, in all kinds of Dials
must be set Parallel to the Axis of the world: that so it may make an Angle of
inclination with its plain ground, equal ^o that which the Axis of the world
makes with the Horizon. Now that the Style is to stand directly to the North
and South, or in the Meridian line, is a thing so commonly known, that it were
to no purpose to mention it. And this is the manner of making a Dial on a
plain Horizontall Ground.

Now if you would make a plain Erect Dial perpendicular to the Horizon (which
is commonly called a Murall) and respecting either the North or South: you must
remember this one thing: (the ignorance whereof has driven those that commonly
profess the Art of Dialling into many troubles and difficulties:) this one
thing, I say, is to be observed: that that which is an erect Dial in one
place, will be an Horizontall in another place, whose Zenith is distant from
that place 90. degrees, either Northward or Southward.

As for example: Let there be an Erect Dial made for any place whose latitude
is 25. gr. this is nothing else, but to make an Horizontall Dial for the
latitude of 38 degrees. And if there be an Erect Dial made for the latitude of
27. gr. the same will be an Horizontal Dial for the latitude of 63 degrees.
The same proportion is to be observed in the rest* And hence it manifestly
appears, that an Horizontal Dial and a Vertical are the same, at the
latitudes of 45 degrees.

And so likewise by this rule may be made any manner of inclining Dial, if so
be, that the quantity of the inclination be but known. As for example, if a
Dial be to be made on a plain ground, whose inclination is 10. degrees from
the Horizon Southward, and for a place whose latitude is 52. gr. Northward: you
must describe in that plain Horizontall Dial for the Latitude of 62. degrees
Northward. And if in the same latitude the Dial ground do incline toward the
North 16. gr. you must make an Horizontall Dial for the Northern latitude of
36. gr:

And thus much shall suffice to have been spoken of the making of Dialls by the
Globe.

The fifth and last Part. Of the Rumbes that are described in the Terrestrial
Globe, and their use.
THose lines which a Ship, following the direction of the Magneticall Needle,
describes on the surface of the Sea, Petrus Nonius calls in Latin, Rumbos,
borrowing the Apellation of his Countrymen the Portugals. Which word, since it
is now generally received by learned writers to express them by: we also will
use the same.

These Rumbes are described in the Globe, either by greater or lesser circles,
or by certain crooked winding liines. But Seamen are wont to express the same
in their Nauticall Charts by rights Lines. But this practice of theirs is clean
repugnant to the truth of the thing, neither can by any means be defended from
errors. The invention of Rumbes, and practice of describing the same upon the
Globe, is somewhat ancient. Petrus Nonius has written much concerning the use
of them, in two Books which he intituleth, de Navigand^ ratione. And Mercator
has also expressed them in his Globes. But the use of them is not, as yet, so
well known to every body: and therefore I think it not unfit, to be the more
large in the explication of the same.

Beginning therefore with the nature and original of them, we shall afterward
descend to the use, there is to be made of them in the Art of Navigation. And
first, we will begin with the original, and nature of the Nauticall Index, or
Compass: which is very well known to be of the fashion of a plain round Box,
the Circumference whereof is divided into 32. equal parts, distinguished by
certain right lines passing through the center thereof. One point of it, which
that end of the needle that is touched with the Magnet, always respects, is
directed toward the North; so that consequently the opposite point must
necessarily respect the South. And so likewise all the other parts in it have
respect unto some certain fixed points in the Horizon: (for the Compass must
always be placed Parallel to the Horizon.) Now I call these points fixed, only
for doctrine sake, not forgetting, in the mean time that the Magneticall
Needle, (besides that it does of it own nature decline in diverse places from
the situation of the true Meridian, (which is commonly called the variation of
the Compass) according to the custom of diverse Countries, is also placed after
a diverse manner in the Compass. For some there are that place it 5. gr. 37. m.
more Eastward then that point that answers to the North quarter of the world:
as do the Spaniards, and our Englishmen. Some place it 3. gr. and almost 18. m.
declining from the North: and some set it at 11. gr. 15. minutes distance from
that point. all which notwithstanding, let us suppose the Needle always to look
directly North and South. Now these lines thus expressed in the Mariners
Compass, as the common intersections of the Horizon, and Vertical Circles, or
rather Parallel to these. Among which, that wherein the Needle is situate, is
the common intersection of the Horizon and Meridian. And that which crosses
this at right Angles, is the common section of the Horizon, and a vertical
circle drawn through the Equinoctial East and West. And thus we have the 4
Cardinal winds or quarters of the World, and the whole Horizon divided into 4
equal parts, each of them containing 90. degrees. Now if you divide again each
of these into 8. parts, by 7. vertical circles, drawn on each side of the
Meridian, through the Zenith: the whole Horizon will be parted into 32 equal
sections: each of which shall contain 11. gr. 15. m. These are the several
quarters of the world observed by Mariners in their voyages: but as for any
lesser parts or divisions then these, they look not after them. And this is the
original of the Nautical Compass, by which Seamen are guided in their voyages.

Let us now in the next place consider, what manner of lines a Ship, following
the direction of the Compass, does describe in her course For the better
understanding whereof, I think it fit to praemise these few Propositions: which
being rightly and thoroughly considered, will make the whole business facile
and perspicuous.

1. All Meridians of all places do pass through both the Poles: and therefore
they cross the Equator, and all Circles Parallel to it, at right angles.

2 If we direct our course any other way then toward one of the Poles: we
change ever and anon both our Horizon and Meridian.

3. The needle being touched with the Loadstone, points out the common
Intersection of the Horizon and Meridian: and one end of it always respects
the North, in a manner, and the other, the South. And here I cannot but take
notice of a great error of Gemma Frisius, who in his Corollary to the
fifteenth Chapter of P. Appians Cosmography, affirms, that the Magnetical
Needle respects the North Pole on this side of the AEquinoctiall line, but on
the other side of the AEquinoctiall, it points to the South Pole. Which
opinion of his is contradicted, by the experience both of my self and others.
And therefore, I believe, his too much credulity deceived him, giving credit
perhaps to the fabulous relations of some vain heads. But howsoever it be, the
error is a ^owle one, and unworthy so great an Author. This frivolous conceit
has also been justly condemned before, by the Illustrious Jul, Scaliger,
instructed hereto out of the Navigations of Ludovicus Vertomannus, and
Ferdinand Magellane.

4 The same Rumbe cutteth all the Meridians of all places at equal Angles, and
respects the same quarters of the world in every Horizon.

5 A greater Circle drawn through the vertex of any place, that is any whit
distant from the Equator, cannot cut diverse Meridians at equal Angles. And
therefore I cannot assent to Pet. Nonius, who would have the Rumbes to consist
of portions of greater Circles. For seeing that the portion of a greater
Circle, being intercepted betwixt diverse Meridians, though never so little
distant from each other, makes unequal Angles with the same, a Rumbe cannot
consist of them, by the precedent proposition. but this in-equality of Angles
is not perceived (says he) by the sense, unless it be in Meridians somewhat
far remote from one another. Be it so. Notwithstanding the error of this
Position is discoverable by Art and demonstration. Neither does it become so
great a Mathematician, to examine rules of Art by the judgment of the sense.

6 A greater Circle drawn through the Vertical point of any place, and
inclining to the Meridian, makes greater Angles with all other Meridians, then
it does, with that from whence it was first drawn. It therefore behooveth, that
a line, which makes equal angles, with diverse Meridians, (as the Rumbes do)
be bowed and turn in, toward the Meridian. And hence it is, that when a Ship
saileth according to one and the same Rumbe, (except it be one of the four
Principal and Cardinal Rumbes) it makes a crooked Spiral Line, such as we see
expressed in the Terrestrial Globe.

7 The portions of the same Rumbe, intercepted betwixt any two Parallels, whose
difference of Latitude is the same, are also equal to each other. Therefore an
equal segment of the same Rumbe, equally changes the difference of Latitude
in all places. And therefore that common rule of Seamen is true: that in an
equal space passed in one and the same Rumb one of the Poles is equally
elevated, and the other depressed, So that Michael Coignet is found to be in an
error, who out of some certain ill grounded positions endeavored to prove the
contrary.

Out of the 4 Proposition there arise h this Consectary; namely, That Rumbes,
though continued never so far, do not pass through the Poles. For seeing that
the same Rumbe is equally inclined to all Meridians; and all Meridians do pass
through the Poles: it would then follow, that if a Rumbe should pass through
the Poles, the same line in the same point would cross infinite other lines:
which is impossible, because that a part of any Angle, cannot be equal to the
whole. Neither does that, which we delivered in the last Proposition make any
thing against this Consectary: to wit, that betwixt any two Parallels of equal
distance, equal portions of the same Rumbe may be intercepted; that so it
should thence follow, that the segment of any Rumbe intercepted betwixt the
Parallel of 80. gr. of Latitude and the Pole, is equal to a segment of the
same Rumbe intercepted betwixt the Equator and the Parallel of ten gr. of
Latitude: and the reason is, because the Pole is no Parallel. And therefore it
was a true Position of Nonius, That the Rumbes do not enter the Poles: although
it was not demonstrated with the like happy success. For he assumes
foundations contrary to the truth: as we said before. And Gemma Frisius also
was mistaken, when he affirmed, in his Appedix ad 15. Cap. Appian Cosmography.
that the Rumbes do concur in the Poles: which was the opinion also of some
others who are therefore justly taxed by Michael Coignet.

These things being well considered, it will be easy to understand, what
manner of lines a Ship, following the direction of the Magnet, does describe in
the Sea If the forepart of the Ship, be directed toward the North or South,
which are the quarters that the Magneticall Needle always points at: your
course will be always under the same Meridian: because, as we showed in our
third Proposition, the Needle always respects the Intersections of the
Horizon and Meridian, and is situate in the plain of the same Meridian. If the
fore part of the Ship be directed to that quarter that Fast and West Rumbo
points out: in your course you will then describe either the Equator, or a
Circle Parallel to it. For if at the beginning of your setting forth, your
Zenith be under the Equator, your ship will describe an Arch or segment of the
Equator. But if your Vertical point be distant from the Equator either
Northward or Southward; your course will then describe a Parallel, as far
distant from the Equator, as the Latitude of the place is whence you set
forward at first. As suppose our intended course to be from some place lying
under the Equator, by the Rumbe of the East and West: we shall go forward
still under the Equator. For by this means, as we go on, we always meet with a
new Meridian, which the Line of our course crosses at right Angles. Now no
other Line, besides the Equator, can do this: as appears manifestly out of the
Corollary of the first proposition. And therefore in this course our Ship must
describe a portion of the Equator. But if we steer our course, by the East
and West Rumbe, from any place that lies besides the Equator: we shall be
always under the same Parallel. For all Circles Parallel to the Equator, do
cut all the Meridians at right Angles, by the Corollary of the first
Proposition. And although the fore part of the Ship always respects the
AEquinoctiall East or West, or intersection of the Equator and Horizon; yet in
our progress we shall never come near the Equator, but shall keep always an
equal distance from it. Neither shall we come at all thither, whither the fore
part of our ship looks, but shall keep such a course, wherein we shall have,
ever and (...), a new Meridian arising, which we shall cross at equal Angles,
and so necessarily describe a Parallel. But if our voyage be to be made under
the Rumbe which inclines to the Meridian: our course will then be neither in a
greater nor lesser Circle, but we shall describe a kind of crooked spirall
Line. For if you draw any greater Circle through the Vertex of any place,
inclining to the Meridian, the same Circle will cross the next Meridian, at a
greater Angle, then it did the former: by the sixth proposition, And therefore
it cannot make my Rumbe: because the same Rumbe cut^h all Meridians at equal
Angles, by the fourth proposition. And all the Parallels, ^r lesser Circles, do
cross the Meridians (...) right Angles, by the Corollary of the first
proposition: and therefore they do not incline to the Meridian.

Concerning those lines which are made in Sea voyages by the direction of the
Compass and Magneticall Needle; Gemma Frisius in his appendix to the fifteen
Chapter of Appians Cosmography, part first, speaks thus. Verbum hoc obi^er
annotandum, etc. And (says he) I think it not amiss to note this by the way,
that the voyages on land do differ very much from those that are performed at
Sea, For those are understood to be performed by the greater circles of the
Sphaere, as it is rightly demonstrated by Wernerus, in his Commenearies upon
Ptolomy But the voyages by Sea, are for the most part crooked: because they are
seldom taken in a great circle, but sometimes under one of the Parallels; when
the Ship steers her course toward East or West: and sometime also in a greater
circle: as when it saileth from North to South, or contrariwise: or else under
the Equator, either direct East or West. But in all other kinds of Navigation,
the journeys are Crooked, although guided by the Magnet, and are neither like
to greater circles, nor yet to Parallels: nor indeed are circles at all, but
only a kind of crooked lines, all of them at length concurring in one of the
Poles. Thus he, and indeed very rightly in all the rest, save only that he will
have these lines to meet in the Pole: which as we have already proved, is
altogether repugnant to the nature of Rumbes.

Hitherto have we spoken of the original and nature of Rumbes: let us now see
what use there is of them in the Terrestrial Globe.

Of the use if Rumbes in the Terrestrial Globe.
IN the Art of Navigation, which teaches the way and manner how a Ship is to
be directed in sailing from one place to another, there are four things
especially to be considered. And these are the Longitudes of the places, the
Latitudes; or differences of the same Rumbe, and the space or distance betwixt
any two places, measured according to the practice used in Sea-voyages. For the
distances of the places are measured by the Geographer one way, and by the
Mariner another. For the former measures the distances of places always by
greater circles; as after Wernerus, Peucerus has also demonstrated in his
book, De Dimensione Terrae. But the Mariners course being made up sometimes of
portions of greater circles; and sometimes of lesser, but for the most part of
crooked lines: it is good reason that he should measure the distances also of
places by the same. Which, and how many of these are to be known before hand,
that the rest may be found out, come in the next place to be considered. Now
the places betwixt which our voyage is to be performed, do differ either in
Longitude only, or in Latitude only, or in both.

If they differ only in Latitude, they are both under the same Meridian: and
therefore it is the North or South Rumbe, that the course is to be directed by.
And there only then remains to know the difference of Latitude, and distance
betwixt these two places: One of which being known, the other is easily found
out. For if the difference of Latitude be given in degrees and minutes; as
Seamen are wont to do, the number of degrees and minutes, being multiplied by
60. (which is the number of English miles that we commonly allow to a degree,
and that according to Ptolomies opinion, as we have already demonstrated:) the
whole number of miles, made in the voyage betwixt these places, will appear.
And if you multiply the same number of degrees by seventeen and a half, you
have the same distance in Spanish leagues. And so contrariwise, if the distance
in miles or leagues be known, and you divide the same by 60 or seventeen and an
half, the quotient will show the number of degrees and minutes, that answer to
the difference of Latitude betwixt the two places assigned. As for example. If
a man were to sail from the Lizard (which is the outmost point of land in
Corn-wall) Southward, till he come to the promontory of Spain, which is called
C. Ortegall; the difference of Latitude of which places is 60 gr. 10. min. If
you desire to know the distance of miles betwixt these places, multiply six gr.
ten m. by 60. and the product will be 370. the number of English miles betwixt
the two places assigned. And this account may be much more truly and readily
made by our English miles, in as much as 60. of them are equivalent to a
degree, so that one mile answers to one minute: by which means, all tedious
and prolix computation by fractions is avoided.

In the next place, let us consider those places that differ only in Longitude:
which if they lie directly under the AEquinoctiall, the distance betwixt them
being known, the difference of Longitude will also be found: or contrariwise,
by multiplication or division, in like manner as the difference of Latitude is
found. But if they be situate without the Equator; we must then go another
way to work. For seeing that the Parallels are all of them less then the
Equator, all of them decreasing in quantity proportionably, till you come to
the Pole, where they are least of all: hence it coms to pass, that there can be
no one certain determinate measure assigned to all the Paralells. And therefore
the common sort of Mariners do greatly err, in attributing to each degree of
every Parallel, and equal measure with a degree of the Equator. By which
means, there have been very many errors committed in Navigation, and many whole
Countries also removed out of their own proper situation, and translated into
the places of others.

That therefore there might be provision made in this behalf, for those that
are not so well acquainted with the Mathematics: I have added a Table, which
shows, what proportion a degree in every Parallel bears to a degree in the
Equator: whence the proper measure of every Parallel may be found. In which
Table the first Collume proposes the several Parallels, each of them
differing from other one degree of Latitude. The second shows the minutes and
seconds of the Equator, that answer to a degree in each Parallel: which if you
convert into two miles, you shall know how many miles answer to a degree in
every Parallel.

M. S. 1 59 59 2 59 57 3 59 55 4 59 51 5 59 4^ 6 59 4^ 7 59 3^ 8 59 25 9 59 15
10 59 ^5 11 58 53 12 58 41 13 58 27 14 58 1^ 15 57 57 16 57 40 17 57 22 18 57 3
19 56 43 20 56 20 21 56 0 22 55 37 23 55 13 24 54 48 25 54 22 26 53 55 27 53 27
28 52 58 29 52 28 30 51 57 31 51 25 32 50 52 33 50 18 34 49 44 35 49 8 36 48 32
37 47 55 38 47 17 39 46 38 40 ^5 58 41 45 17 42 44 35 43 43 52 4^ 43 8 45 42 24
46 41 40 47 40 55 48 0 9 49 39 22 50 38 34 51 37 46 52 36 56 53 36 6 54 35 16
55 34 24 56 33 31 57 32 40 58 31 47 59 30 53 60 29 59 61 9 5 62 8 10 63 27 14
64 26 18 65 25 22 66 24 24 67 23 26 68 22 28 69 21 3^ 70 20 31 71 19 31 72 18
31 73 17 31 74 16 31 75 15 30 76 14 28 77 13 26 78 12 24 79 11 22 80 10 20 81 9
18 82 8 16 83 7 14 84 6 12 85 5 10 86 4 8 87 3 6 88 2 4 89 1 2 90 0 0

By the use of this Table, if a Ship have sailed under any Parallel, and the
space be known how far this Ship has gone, the difference of Longitude may be
found by the rule of proportion: and so contrariwise, if the difference of
Longitude be given, the distance will in like manner be known. As for example.
Suppose a Ship to have set forth from C. Dalguer, (which is a Promontory on the
West part of Africa) and failed Westward, 200. English Leagues, that is to say,
600 mile. We desire now to know the difference of Longitude betwixt these two
places. That promontory has in Northern Latitude 30. degrees. Now to one
degree in that Parallel answer. 51. m. 57. sec. that is to say, 51 miles, and
fifty seven sixtieth parts of a mile. Thus therefore we dispose our
proportional terms, for the finding of the difference of Longitude. 51.
miles, 57. min. (or suppose 52. full miles, because the difference is so small)
give one degree: therefore 600. give 11 28/51 gr. which is the difference of
Longitude betwixt the place whence the Ship set for^h, and that where it arived
But the terms are to be invert^d, if the difference of Longitude be given, and
the distance be to be sought. But this is not so congruous. For we never use by
the known Longitude to seek the distance: but the contrary. Neither indeed have
we as yet any certain way of observing the difference of Longitudes: however
some great boasters make us large promises of the same. But, Expectata seges
vanis deludet avenis.


It remains now to speak of those places that differ both in Longitude and
Latitude: wherein there is great variety, and many kinds of differences. Of all
which there are four (as we have already said) especially to be considered: and
these are the differences of Longitude, and of Latitude, and the distance, and
Rumbe, by which the voyage is performed. Two of which being known, the rest may
readily be found out. Now the transmutation of the things to be granted for
known; and to be enquired after in these four terms, may be proposed six
manner of ways, as follows,

The diffe rence of Longitude and Latitude being known: The Rumbe and Distance
may also be found. The difference of Longitude and the Rumbe being known: The
Difference of Latitude and Distance may be found. The difference of Longitude
and Distance being known: The Difference of Latitude and Rumbe may be found The
difference of Latitude and Rumbe being known: The Difference of Longitude and
Distance may be found The difference of Latitude and Distance being known: The
Rumbe and Difference of Longitude. may be found. The Rumbe and Distance being
known: the difference of Longitude and Latitude may be found

Thus you see that any two of these being known, the other two may also be
found out. Now most of these (yea all of them, that are of any useat all) may
be performed by the Globe And let it suffice to have here given this general
advertisement once for all.

Now besides these things here already to be known: it is also necessary that
we know the Latitude of the place whence we set forth, and the quarter of the
world that our course is directed unto: for otherwise we shall never be able
rightly to satisfy these demands. And the reason is, because that the
difference of Longitude and Latitude always wont to be reckoned unto the two
parts of the world: some of them to the North and South, and the rest to the
East and West. And especially, because that from all parts of the Meridian, and
from each side thereof, there are Rumbes drawn that are all of equal angles or
inclinations. So that unless the quarter of the world be known, whereto our
course tends, there can be no certainty at all in our conclusions. As if the
difference of Latitude be to be enquired after: the same may indeed be found
out; but yet we cannot determine, to which quarter of the world it is to be
reckoned, whether North or South. And if we seek for the difference of
Longitude: this may be found: but in the mean time we shall not know, whether
it be to be reckoned toward the East or West. And so likewise when the Rumbe
is sought for, we may perhaps find what declination it has to this Meridian:
but yet we cannot give it its true denomination, except we know toward what
quarter of the world one place is distant from the other. For from each
particular part of the Meridian, the Rumbs have equal inclinations. These
grounds being thus laid, let us now proceed to the examination of each
particular.

I. The difference of Longitude and Latitude of two places being known, how to
find out the Rumbe and Distance of the same.
TUrn about the Globe until that some Rumbe or other do cross the Meridian, at
the Latitude of the place whence you set forth. Then again turn about either
toward the East or West, as the matter shall require, until that an equal
number of degrees in the Equator to the difference of Longitude of the two
places do pass the Meridian. Then afterward look whether or no the aforefaid
Rumb do cross the Meridian at the Latitude of the place, where you are: for if
it do so, you may then conclude, that it is the Rumbe you have gone by: but if
otherwise, you must take another, and try it in like manner, till you light
upon one that will do it.

As for example. Serra Liona is a Promontory of Africa, having in Latitude 15.
gr. 20. m. and in Northern Latitude 7. gr. 30. m. suppose that we are to sail
to the Isle of Saint Helen, which has in Longitude 24 gr. 30 and in Southern
Latitude 15. gr. 30. m. I now demand what Rumbe we are to sail by: and this we
find in this manner. I first apply to the Meridian the 356 gr. 40 m. of
Longitude: and withal observe what Rumbe the Meridian does cross at the
Latitude Northern of 7 gr. 30. m. (which is the Latitude of the place whence we
are to set forth:) and I find it to be the North norwest, and South southeast
Rumbe. Then I turn about the Globe toward the West, (because Saint Helens is
more Eastward then Serra Liona) until that 9 gr. 10. m. in the Equator (which
is the difference of Longitude betwixt these two places) do cross the Meridian.
And in this position of the Globe, I find that the same Rumbe is crossed by the
Meridian in the Southern Latitude of 15. gr. 30. m. which is the Latitude of
Saint Helens Isle. Therefore I con clude, that this is the Rumbe that we are to
go by, from Serra Liona to Saint Helens. And in this manner you may find the
Rumbe betwixt any two places, either expressed in the Globe, or otherwise: so
that the difference of Longitude and Latitude be but known.

If the places be expressed in the Globe, betwixt which you seek the Rumbe; you
must then with your Compasses take the distance betwixt the two places
assigned, and apply the same to any Rumbe that you please (but only in those
places where they cross the parallels of Latitude of the said places,) till you
find a Rumbe, whose portion intercepted betwixt the Parallels of the two
places, shall agree to the distance intercepted by the Compasses. As for
example. If you would know what a Rumbe leads us from C. Cantin, a Promontony
in the West part of Africa; having in Latitude 32. gr. 20. m. to the Canary
Islands, which are in the 28. gr. of Latitude. First, you must apply the
distance intercepted betwixt the two places to any Rumbe, that lies betwixt
the 28 and 32. gr. 30. m. of Latitude, which are the Latitudes of the places
assigned: and you shall find that this distance being applied to the South
South-west Rumbe, so that one foot of the Compasses be set in the latitude of
32 gr. 20. m. the other will fall on the 28 gr. of Latitude in the same Rumbe.
Whence you may conclude, that you must sail from C. Cantin to the Canary
Islands by the South South-west Rumbe. There are some that affirm, that if this
distance intercepted betwixt two places, be applied to any Rumbe where they all
m^t together at the Equator, the same may be performed. But these men have
delivered unto us their own errors, in stead of certain rules. For suppose it
be granted, that the portions of the same Rumbe intercepted betwixt two
Parallels equidistant from each other, are also equal in any part of the
Globe; yet notwithstanding they are not to be measured by such a manner of
extension For the Rumbes that lie near the Equator, differ but little from
greater circles: but as they are farther distant from it, so they are still
more crooked, and inclining to the Meridian.

The Rumbe being found, we are next to seek the distance betwixt the two
places. Nomus teaches a way to do this, in any Rumbe, by taking with your
Compasses the space of 10 leagues, or half a degree. Others take 20. leagues,
or an whole degree. But I approve of neither of these, nor yet reject either.
Only I g^ve this advertisement by the way: that according to the greater or
less distance of the places from the Equator, a greater or less measure may be
taken. For near the Equator, where (as we have said) the Rumbes are little
different from greater circles; you may take a greater measure to go by. But
when you are far from the Equator you must then take as small a distance as
you can: because that here the Rumbes are very crooked. And yet the distance of
places may be much more accurately measured, so that the Rumbe and difference
of Latitude of the same be but known) by this Table here set down: which is
thus.

Rumbes Degr. Min. Sec. In the First 1 1 10 Answer to a degree in the Equator,
or Meridian. Second 1 4 56 Third 1 12 9 Fourth 1 24 51 Fifth 1 47 59 Sixth 2 36
47 Seventh 5 7 33

In this Table you have here ^et down how many degrees, minutes, and seconds in
every Rumbe, do answer to a degree in the Meridian or ^qinoctiall. Now a degree
(as we have often said,) contains 60 Miles: so that each Mile answers to a
minute, and the sixtieth part of a mile, or seventeen paces, to every second.
So that by the help of this Table, and the rule of proportion, the distance of
any two places in any Rumbe assigned (if so be that their Latitudes be known)
may easily be measured: and so on the contrary, if the distance be known, the
difference of Latitude may be found. As for example. If a Ship have sailed from
C. Verde in Africa, lying in the 14 gr. 30. m. of Northern latitude, to C.
Saint Augustine in Brasile, having in Southern Latitude 8. gr. 30 m. by the
Rumbe of South-west and by South: and if it be demanded what is the distance or
space betwixt these two places. For the finding of this, we dispose our terms
of proportion after this manner. 1. gr. of Latitude in this Rumbe, (which is
the third from the Meridian) has 1. gr. 12. m. 9. sec. that is to say, 72 9/80
miles: therefore 23 gr. (which is the difference of Latitude betwixt C. Verde
and C. Saint Augustine) require 1659. miles and almost an half, or something
more then 553. English leagues. So that this is the distance betwixt C. Verde
and C. Saint Augustine, being measured in the third Rumbe from the Meridian.

II. The Rumbe being known, and difference of Longitude; how to find the
difference of Latitude and distance.
TO find out this, you must turn the Globe, till you meet with some places,
where the said Rumbe crosses the Meridian at the same Latitude that the place
is of, where you set forth. And then turning the Globe either Eastward or
Westward, as you see cause, until that so many degrees of the Equator have
passed the Meridian, as are answerable to the difference of Longitude betwixt
the two places; you must mark what degree in the Meridian the same Rumbe
c^tteth. For that degree shows the Latitude of the place, you are arived.

As for example. The Isle of Saint Helen has in Longitude 24. gr. 20. m. and
in Southern Latitude 15. gr 30. m. Suppose therefore a Ship to have sailed West
North-west, to some place that lies West from it 24 degrees. We demand what is
the Latitude of this place. First, therefore we set the Globe in such soit, as
that this Rumbe may cr^ss the Meridian at the 50. gr. 30. m. of Southern
Latitude, which is the Latitude of Saint Helens: and this will happen to be so,
if you apply the 37. gr. of the Longitude to the Meridian. Then we turn about
the Globe Eastward, till that 24 gr. of Equator have passed under the
Meridian. And then marking the degree of the Meridian, that the same Rumbe
crosses, we find it to be about the 5. gr. 30. m. of Southern Latitude. This
therefore we conclude to be the Latitude of the place where we are arived.

And by this means also the distance may easily be found, if the Rumbe and
difference of Latitude be first known.

III. The difference of Longitude and distance being given; how to find the
Rumbe, and difference of Latitude.
THere is not any thing in all this Art more difficult and hard to be found,
then the Rumbe, out of the distance and difference of Longitude given. Neither
can it be done upon the Globe, without long and tedious practice, and many
repetitions and mensurations. The practice hereof being therefore so prolixe,
and requiring so much labor: it is the less necessary, or indeed rather of no
use at all. And the reason is, because the difference of Longitude, as we have
already showed, is so hard to be found out. The invention whereof I could wish
our great boasters would at length perform: that so we might expect from them
something else, besides bare words, vain promises, and empty hope.

Some of these conclusions also which we have here set down, are, I confess,
of no great use or necessity, out of the like supposition of the difference of
Latitude. Notwithstanding, for as much as the practice of them is easy and
facile, I have willingly taken the pains, for exercise sake onelv, to propose
them.

IV The difference of Latitude and Rumbe being given, how to find the
difference of Longitude and distance.
FIrst set your Globe so, as that the Rumbe assigned may cross the Meridian at
the same Latitude that the place is of, whence you set forth. And then turn
about the Globe toward the East or west, as need shall require, till that the
same Rumbe shall cross the Meridian at the equal Latitude of that place whither
you have come. And so marking both places, reckon the number of degrees in the
Equator, intercepted betwixt both their Meridians. And this shall be the
difference of Longitude betwixt the same places. As for example. C. D'alguer in
Africa has about 30 gr. of Northern Latitude. From whence suppose a Ship to
have sailed North-west and by West, to the thirty eight gr. of Northern
Latitude also. Now we demand, what is the difference of Longitude betwixt these
two places? Turning therefore the Globe till the Meridian cross the said Rumbe
at the thirtieth gr. of Northern Latitude, (which will be, when the seventh gr.
of Longitude touches the Meridian,) I turn it again toward the East, until
such time as the Meridian crosses the same Rumbe in the thirty eight gr. of
Northern latitude: which will happen, when the three hundred fifty second gr.
of Longitude comes to the Meridian. Whence we conclude, that the place where
the Ship is arived, is Westward from C. D'alguer about fifteen degrees. And the
Meridian of that place passes through the Eastern part of Saint Michael's
Island, one of the Azores. Now, how the distance may be found, the Rumbe and
difference of Latitude being known, has been declared already in the first
proposition.

V. The difference of Latitude, and distance being given, the Rumbe and
difference of Longitude may be found.
THe Rumbe may easily be found out, by the Table which we have before set
down. But an example will make the matter more clear. If a Ship have sailed
from the most Western point of Africa, commonly called C. Blanco, (which lies
in the 10. gr. 30. m. of Northern Latitude) betwixt North and West, for the
space of 1080. miles, and to the 20. gr. 30 m. of Northern Latitude also: and
it be demandid, by what Rumbe this course was directed: for answer hereof, we
proceed thus. The difference of Latitude is 10. gr. and the distance betwixt
these places 1080. miles. We therefore dispose our terms thus, 10. gr. contain
1080. miles: therefore 1. gr. contains 108. miles. Which if we divide by 60.
we shall find in the quotient 1. gr. 48. m, which number if you seek in the
Table, you shall find it answering the fifth Rumbe. Neither is the difference
betwixt that number in the Table, and this here of ours above one second
scruple. So that we may safely pronounce, that this voyage was performed by the
fifth Rumbe from the Meridian, which is North-west and by west. Now the Rumbe
being found, and the difference of Latitude known, you may find out the
difference of Longitude by the second proposition.

VI. The Rumbe and distance being given, the difference of Longitude and
Latitude may also be found.
THis also may easily be performed, by the help of the former Table. And
therefore we will only show an example how it is to be done. From the Cape of
good Hope, which is the most Southernly point of Africa, and has in Southern
Latitud about 35. degrees, a Ship is supposed to have sailed North, North-west,
(which is the second Rumbe from the Meridian) above 64^. miles, or if you will,
let it be full 650. Now we demand the difference of Latitude betwixt these two
places: and this is found ^ter this manner. First, we take the degree and
minutes that answer to a degree of Latitude in the second Rumbe, and turn them
into miles. And then we find the number of these to be 64 miles, 56 minutes,
for which let us take full 65 miles. Now therefore our terms are thus to be
disposed: 65. miles answer to 1. degree of Latitude: therefore 650. will be
equivalent to ten degrees of Latitude. Which if you substract from 34. which is
the Latitude of the place, whence the Ship set forth) because the course tends
toward the Equator: the remainder will be 25. gr. of Southern Latitude: which
is the Latitude of the place, where the Ship is arived.

Now the Rumbe being known, and the difference of Latitude also found; the
difference of Longitude must be found out by the second proposition.

FINIS.
Imprimatur.

Tho. Wykes R. P. Epis.

Land. Capel. Domest.

Maii. 110 1638.


