A Hew and Cry after Blood and Murder: OR AN ELEGY ON The most barbarous
Murder of Thomas Thinn, Esquire With some thankful Ejaculations to Heaven, for the
Miraculous Escape of his Grace the Duke of Monmouth from the Hands of the
Bloody Ruffians
Whilst with hot Scent, the Popish-Tory Crew
A Presbiterian Sham-plot do pursue,
Behold a New and true Plot of their own,
Against a worthy persons Life made known.
Blood after blood for God's fresh Vengeance Calls,
Now Monmouth's friend a second Victim falls,
The bloody Villains Skilled in the Murtherous sin,
Sr. Godfrys Murder new Act over ag'in:
And now the shammers must together Plot,
To make, the world think Thynn himself has shot.
What was his Crime that thus they fought his Life?
Was it because deceived by a wife?
Or was it because that he was Monmouth's friend,
He found so fatal and so sad an end?
In former times such Murders Scarce were Known,
Are we Barbarians or fierce Scythians grown?
What Impious Acts are minted in our Age?
What tragic sceens are brought upon the stage?
What e're the Heathen did we now can do,
And tho we'are Christians called Surpass them too.
In the last end of the Iron Age we live,
A Brother will not a Brother now forgive:
But for some slight affront or weak offense,
With Sword or Pistol he is hurried hence.
These Murtherous Arts by Jesuits hither brought,
With their Religion they in secret taught:
For Murders they have their Commission given,
And Killing is one Gate that leads to Heaven
We may believe it, as we do our Creed,
None but some hired Papists did this deed.
A deed so horrid barbarous and Vile,
That it will leave a blot upon our Isle,
Which will a spot for our whole Age remain,
Unless Strict Vengeance wipe away the stain,
Th'Embassador whom we Barbarian call,
When to his Barbarous Prince return he shall,
Amongst our Crimes with horror will relate,
This Murder Acted near the Palace Gate,
And to his Prince Maliciously will say,
Christians can Murders Act as well as they.
Hard was the Fate of this most worthy Man,
Whom first a wicked woman did Trepan.
And now more hard, if that he lost his Life,
By Murtherous means of his disloyal Wife.
But God that sees, and knows the Hearts of all,
Will soon on guilty Heads let Vengeance fall.
And those black Instruments now laid in hold,
Shall all the Truth of this black Deed unfold.
Where Justice Runs down like an unstop'd Flood,
It soon will wash away the stains of Blood.
The Murther'd's Friends therefore on Justice cry,
And to its sacred Throne together fly;
That Vengeance may both great and small pursue,
Over take the Hirers and the hired too;
Both those who the damned hire for Blood receive,
And those who to be damned their money give:
For if strict Vengeance on such be not taken,
Our Laws for Murder will be made in Vain;
So impious and so vile now Men are grown,
As never in our Age before was known;
Who cannot but go or Ride the Streets in fear,
When we have Bravo's and Banditti here?
Tories who here have shown their Murtherous Skill,
And know the way as well as they to kill.
Under our English Cloth Men must wear Buff,
A Coat of Mail, or Armor Pistol-Proof;
For fear of some revenge from Jilting drabs,
Or else for Friendship or Religion stabs;
Poison, or Bullet, fraud, or Force they take.
Both for reveng and for Religion's sake,
Justice will Visit when the Murther's past,
And overtake the Criminals at fast.
And such black deeds ly open to God,s sight,
Who will the Murtherous Plots bring forth to light,
Then worthy Thyn we shall more surely know,
Who was thy Barbarous Bloody secret foe,
When to the Bottom of this Plot we see,
And if the Villains only aimed at thee.
Rest now thy soul in peace, whilst our good King
Your bloody Murderers to Justice bring,
Whilst the Scared People on thy death debate,
And all thy Friends bevvail thy sudden Fate:
Whilst the good Duke bevvails with Tears his friend
Afflicted to behold his sudden end.
But let all Loyal Hearts to Heaven pay,
Their Thanks that Monmouth did no longer stay,
That Providence who over him takes Care
Had him diverted then from being there.
Who Knovvs what bloody Ruffians did intend,
They might Perhaps have yet a further end,
Revenge might reach both to the Duke and's friend,
But Heaven will hear for him the Peoples prayer,
And of that Noble Prince his Life take care
That he may still secure and safely go,
And all the plots of Papists overthrow.
May Heaven preserve the King that he may run
A Long long race, and for his sake his Son,
May the Almighty Keep the good Dukes Life
From Hellish Plots, from Popish Gun or Knife.
And let himself vvarn'd, now more vvatchful be
Left that he fall into like Jeopardie
O Heaven preserve him from a bloody end,
And let him take a warning by his Friend.
LONDON: Printed for L. Curtiss 1681.


