THE DIFFERENCE Of that call of God to the MINISTRY: Which is by the power of
his own gift, and measure of life, revealed. And of that, which is received of
man, and taught by man.

As is manifest by these two several calls, herein declared; with several
Principals relating to this second call, Answered.

By RICHARD HUBBERTHORN.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Simmons, at the Bull and Mouth near Aldersgate,
1659.

TO THE READER.
IT being of the Lord so ordered, that a public dispute was appointed betwixt
Thomas Dance Priest in Sandwich in Kent, and those called Quakers, which was
upon the twelfth and thirteenth days of the second month, in which many
weighty things, concerning Religion was discoursed of; in which it was first
proved by us, according to the Scripture, that Christ Jesus the true light,
has enlightened every one that comes into the World, John, 1. 9. and John,
12. and another weighty matter, concerning Religion, discoursed upon was, the
righteousness by which man is justified before God, which by us was witnessed
and proved, to be only by the righteousness that was in Christ Jesus, being
also made manifest in us, the everlasting righteousness, being brought in,
according to Dan. 9. 24. again upon the tenth day the discourse was, whether
the Scriptures were the word of God; the Answer was, that the Scriptures were
writings, and the writings was not the word, but the thing written of was the
word of God; unto which the Priests also consented: Another thing was
concerning the call to the Ministry, whether theirs or ours was according to
the Apostles, and according to the Scriptures, the heads of both which calls,
is declared as follows, that all people may judge according to their measure
of the gift of Christ, whether of them is according to Scripture Testimony.

A Call to the Minstery according to the Scriptures, held forth in these few
words following; Contrary to that Call which is of man, and by man.
THat by which the Apostles were called into the work of the Ministry, having
gifts differing according to the measure of the manifestation of Christ, by the
same am I called: which is also according to the Scriptures, as Ephesians. 4. Unto
every one of us is given grace according to the measure of the gifts of Christ,
by which gift according to the measure of it, were they made; Some Apostles,
some Prophets, some Evangelists, some Pastors and Teachers, etc. And this was
by the Power, Virtue and Operation of the gift of Christ in them: and as then,
so now; for there is not another way to be called into the Ministry by,
neither does any profit the people at all, but they who minister from the
power, and moving of that gift which they have received from the Father, by
Jesus Christ; by which gift was I called out of the World, and separated for
the work of the Gospel; by which gift I saw that which had corrupted the earth,
and by it was moved, to minister against it; which gift is that, which has the
power in it, both to convince and convert unto God, according as the Apostle
Peter (who was unlearned in the Letter) wa^ made a Minister by the gift of the
Spirit of Christ; and says, 1 Pet. 4 10. As every one has received the gift,
even so let him minister the same one to another, as good stewards of the
manifold Grace of God; (And) If any man speak, let him speak as the Oracle of
God, (and) if any man Minister, let him do it, as of the ability which God
gives, that God in all things may be glorified. So that that Ministry by
which God is glorified and people converted, is that, which proceeds from the
operation and power of his own gifts in them; which is that Ministry which
perfecteth the Saints, edifies the body of Christ; Brings into the unity of the
Faith, unto the knowledge of the Son of God, and unto a perfect man, and unto
the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ. But they which gather
Scriptures together in their earthly wisdom, and from that which they have
gathered, minister unto others; this ministry does not perfect the Saints, nor
edify the body of Christ, nor bring to the unity of the Faith (but into strife
and divisions) not to the knowledge of the Son of God, but leads from his
knowledge; not unto a perfect man, but pleads against perfection; not into the
measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ; (no) not unto the measure of
the least Saint, so that Ministry is to be ceased from, which proceeds not
from the measure of the Fathers gift; and that only continued unto the end of
the World which his gift calls into, and carries on in; So I, by the measure
of his free Spirit, being called and made a Minister of it unto others (^ot of
the Letter, but of the Spirit) in which in all ages the true Ministry stood;
having not received it of man, neither was I taught it, but by the revelation
and manifestation of the life of Christ in me. Which Spirit in me according to
its measure is as true and as infallible as it was in them, which by it were
made Apostles, Evangelists, Prophets and Teachers formerly, being the same in
power, virtue and operation as it was, as able to reveal and make manifest, to
teach, edify and perfect as it was, and to beget people out of the World into
the Covenant of Light and Life; and all who are Ministers of Christ, for the
gathering of his seed from the ends of the earth, into the Kingdom of his dear
Son, must from the same Spirit witness their Call and separation to that work;
and all other calls, are false, and their ministry profits not, which does not
singly proceed from the measure of that gift: but all, who do abide in the
measure of his gift, and from it minister, by it, they are manifest to be of
God; and in that Ministry they commend themselves unto every man's Conscience
in the sight of God, and this is the calling and Ministry, in which as every
one abide, they glorify God. And this is the Ministry of reconciliation,
which was committed unto the Apostles, and is unto his Ministers now; by the
power of which, the Devils works comes to be destroyed, and then all things
reconciled in one, things in heaven and things in earth but that ministry
which is received from man and taught by man, never reconciles any thing unto
God, but does separate from God, and beget into enemy; but that which proceeds
from the measure of the gift of God, brings every one to know the truth in
their own particular; which truth as they abide in it, sets them free from sin,
and this Ministry has the power in it, in all them that have received it, to
save them that preach it, and them that hear it and obey it; and no other
Ministry does profit the people at all, but that which from the gift of God is
ministered; so that this Call and Ministry here declared, is one with, and
according to the Apostles, and the Scriptures.

RICHARD HUBBERTHORN.

The Heads of Priest Dance, his Professed Call to the Ministry, as follows.
Pr. If I should speak nonsense (as others do) then I might say, that I am
made a Minister by the measure of the gift of Grace, and then I should be
accounted a Minister, as well as they, etc.

But I do not pretend unto any infallibility in my Ministry, but as these Act.
6. 6. Which when the Apostles had prayed, laid their hands upon them; although
(says he) that laying on of hands, is not of such necessity, but that a man
may be a Minister without it; and as Timothy, although he had some
extraordinary gifts, yet he was not infallible, 1 Timothy 4. 14. And (says he) I
desire the office of a Bishop; which he that desires, desires a good work,
according to 1 Timothy 3. 1. And as for his qualifications they are such as
whereby he might have advantaged himself, more abundantly in the World, as to
outward means, and might have been clothed in scarlet, etc. But did rather
choose, and incline himself, to be a Minister of the Gospel, and that the
outward means, was not his end in choosing to be a Minister; but if that he
could be satisfied, or see that there did not want Laborers in the Lords work,
he could freely leave off, etc. And further, he said, That God had made his
preaching effectual for the converting of many, and that there were many,
though not in that place, yet some in that place, of whom he could say, as the
Apostles said, that they were the seal of his Ministry, etc. These being the
Heads of the Particulars.

Objections against this Call.
WHereas thou say, That it is nonsense to say that a man is made a Minister
by the gift of Grace.

Answ. Then the Apostles spoke nonsense, when they witnessed forth their Call
to the Ministry; for to every one of them was given Grace, according to the
measure of the gift of Christ, from which Grace they did Minister, Ephesians. 4. But
the Apostles spoke sensible truth; therefore he that contradicts it speaks;
nonsense and ignorance, as will further appear in saying, that he pretends
unto no infallibility in his Ministry.

Answ. Then he pretends to nothing of the Spirit of God; much less, to be a
Minister of the Spirit, as Paul was, 2 Cor. 3. 6. For every measure of the
Spirit is infallible, or undeceiveable; but that which is fallible is
deceiveable, and whosoever is taught by that Spirit, is deceived; and Thomas
Dance pretends to have no other Spirit, but that which is deceiveable and
fallible, so that it is time to turn away from such.

Again, he charge Timothy, that he was not infallible, which is a false
charge; for wherein was he fallible, or deceiveable, but he was so infallible,
that he not neglecting the gift of God that was in him, he by it, was able to
save himself, and those that heard him, 1 Timothy 4. 16. And he Ministered from the
gift of God in him, which he had received by Prophecy; and so not from a
fallible spirit, but from the infallible; and so is accused falsely by T. Dance.

Again, Tho. Dance says, That he desires the Office of a Bishop, etc.

Answ. But consider what such a one must be (which is) blameless, vigilant,
sober, not rude and scornful; but of good behavior, apt to teach, not apt to
laugh and jear, and cause the people to be light and vain, must he not be given
to wine, no striker, not greedy of filthy lucre; but patient, not a brawler,
not covetous (as it does appear those Priests are guilty of, which have nothing
to preach from but the fallible spirit, which does always deceive people) but
one that rules his own house well, having his children in subjection with all
gravity for if a man know not how to rule his own house will, how shall he take
care of the Church of God? but it is manifest that Thomas Dance ruled not his
own Church, or people well, but rather provoked them to wantonness, rudeness,
and laughter, which is madness; Not a novice, least being lifted up with
pride, he fall into the condemnation of the Devil; but T. D. was so lifted up
in the pride of his heart, that he gave two meanings to one place of Scripture,
and so falls into the condemnation of the Devil.

Pr. And whereas, Thomas Dance says; That his qualification is such, that he
might have been clothed in scarlet, etc.

Answ. What might thou have been; A Lawyer or Doctor, as one of thy brethren
said? which if thou had, by that the Nation is deceived, though not in so high
a measure, as by professing the ministry, but that is taken up as the most
profitable trade, to get means, and live in pride; What if thou had been
clothed in Scarlet, in Velvet, in Purple, or any other gorgeous apparel? and
in that apparel which thou art already clothed with, will thou be condemned,
when thou comes to know any measure of the gift, of the true Ministry to be thy
guide.

Pr. Again whereas; Thou take the people to be a seal of thy Ministry.

An. All the people that were in place, and some more may seal it, to be
fallible and deceiveable, as thou have confessed it to be; but there is not one
that can set to their seal, that it has brought them to a perfect man; nor to
the knowledge of the Son of God, nor to the measure of the stature of the
fullness of Christ and so it has not effected any of the work of the true
Ministry; but when thou comes to be searched narrowly, filthy lucre will be
found to be the end, for which thou Ministers, without which, thou would be
silent.

And now further to manifest that, he pretends not to any thing of the
infallible spirit in his Ministry, these his principles or doctrines, declare
as follows, with the answer of truth to them.

Pr. That every individual man was not enlightened by Christ.

Answ. Which doctrine is contrary to John. 1. 9. which says, That was the true
light, which enlighteneth every one that comes into the World; and to pervert
the Scripture, he gave two meanings, that the people might take whether they
would, so that they would but deny the form of sound words, and the plain
Scripture; the first was this, That Christ enlightened every man that is
enlightened or else Secondly, that he enlighteneth some in every Nation: Now
let people consider how that this can be the meaning of the Holy Ghost, as he
said it was, seeing, that here is two meanings, and it is either the one or the
other, but he knows not which, does plainly manifest, that he has not the
mind of the spirit, which is but one, and speaks as it means, but the
Scriptures cannot be broken by such meanings, which says, That every man is
enlightened with the true Light.

Pr. That the whole body of the Gentiles was not enlightened.

Answ. Then by what shall those Gentiles be condemned, who are not enlightened,
seeing that Christ was given for a light to the Gentiles, as the Prophet Isaiah
says, but he does not say to some of the Gentiles, and not to the whole body,
and though the Gentiles, were once darkness, Ephesians 5. yet the light shined in
the darkness, and the Apostle turned them unto that light which shined in the
darkness, that the eye which was blinded might be opened; he did not come to
give them eyes, but to open the blind eyes, not to give them light, but to turn
them to the light that was in them, as Acts, 26. 18.

Pr. That the Gospel is an external Light, and not invisible, and that it is
not the light within.

Answ. Which is contrary to the Apostles doctrine, which says, the Gospel is
the power of God, Romans 1. which is not external nor visible, but invisible, and
shined in their hearts, 2 Cor. 4. 6. and it was hid unto those that were lost,
but that, which was visible, they could see and hear, with the visible eyes and
ears; but both the Gospel which is the power of God, and the eye that sees, are
invisible.

Pr. That Christ being the propitiation for the sins of the whole world, as
John said, 1 John 2 2, Is meant only the world of believers.

Answ. In this he would break the Scriptures, and contradict the Apostle, which
says, he is the propitiation for our sins, and not for our sins only, (who
were the believers) but for the sins of the whole World, which whole World,
John said, lies in wickedness, but the whole World of believers lies not in
wickedness, but is of God.

Pr. That they must reconcile the Scriptures.

Answ. The Scriptures cannot be broken, John. 10. 35. but is reconciled, and at
unity in themselves, and in all those that know them, but he that gives two
contrary meanings to one Scripture, he does not go about to reconcile, but
rather to pervert them, and to take away the plain testimony of truth, (which
they give) from peoples understandings; but the key of knowledge is found
again, which opens the Scriptures in the mystery of them, and herein is the
ignorance of teachers and people, in saying the Scriptures are not reconciled;
It is they that are not reconciled to God, nor the Scriptures, and so they
utter forth their blindness, ignorance, and error.

Pr. That the Law of the Spirit of life in Christ, was not the Law of the
spirit in the Saints; but that they were two Laws. etc.

Answer, This is a false distinction, for God has said that he will write his
law in their hearts, and put his spirit in their inward parts, and the same law
of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus, being in the Apostles hearts, had set
him free from the Law of sin and death, Romans 8. 2 so it was not two laws, but
one Law.

Pr. That there are two righteousnesses of Christ, the one without the Saints,
to justify them, and the other within the Saints, that did sanctify them.

Answ. Christ's righteousness is but one, and that by which they were both
sanctified and justified was but one thing, even the Spirit of our God, 1 Cor.
6. 11. and Christ in them, was Gods righteousness, and the hope of Glory, who
was made unto them righteousness; and if Christ was in them, then his
righteousness was in them or else he, and his righteousness is divided, as
this Priests doctrine, would make them.

Pr. The said Priest denied, that the Saints were justified by that Christ that
was in them, (when he was questioned about it.)

Answ. If they were not justified by that Christ that was in them, then by
another Christ, which is no less then to Preach two Christ's, and so he has
preached another Gospel, then the Apostles preached, which whosoever does, is
accursed.

Pr. That David, when he was guilty of adultery, and murder, was not in a
condemned state but in a justified state.

Answ. Here he would make God a justifier of the wicked in his wickedness, but
in that state David was condemned of the Lord, and suffered his anger, and
terrors, when his iniquities went over his head, and were too heavy for him to
bear, and he was not justified, until that through judgment, he was redeemed
from the guilt of murder and adultery, and other sins which came over his
head; so such teachers as he, who would have God account them just, who are
unjust, and them holy, who are unholy and unrighteous, are as the false
Prophets, who put no difference between the holy and profane, and spoke peace
to the wicked, where there was no peace, counting them good, who did evil,
saying they that do evil are good in the sight of the Lord, Mal. 3. 15. as the
Priests now say, though they be sinners, yet they are righteous in Gods
account, so they would make God a liar, accounting men to be that which they
are not, and to be in Christ, when they are in sin, in the Devils work.

Pr. And concerning them in Heb. 12. who were come unto the spirits of just men
made perfect, he said it was meant, that they were in Heaven and not upon Earth.

Answ. Thus by his false meanings, he has often perverted the Scriptures,
calling his false meanings, the meanings of the Holy Ghost; but these mentioned
in Heb 12 were them the Apostle wrote unto upon earth, for he did not write to
men after they were deceased, and these that he wrote unto, were come unto the
innumerable company of Angels, and to the city of the living God, and to the
spirits of just men made perfect.

Pr. That any creature that holds that principle of being justified by a
righteousness within, living and dying in that principle, cannot come to
heaven.

Ans Christ is the justifier of them that believe in him, and his doctrine is,
I in them and they in me so Christ and his righteousness is in the Saints, and
God has brought in the everlasting righteousness, which justifies, which is
not at a distance, separate from the Saints, as these false teachers have
Imagined. And the Apostles doctrine and principle is Christ's in you, which
whosoever lives and dies in this, comes to heaven but on the contrary
whosoever has not Christ, and his righteousness in them to justify them,
cannot come to heaven.

Pr. That, that which fitted, man for the inheritance (among the Saints) did
not entitle to the inheritance, or not give them a part in the inheritance.

Answ. This is contrary to the Apostles doctrine; for he thanks God the Father
who made them meet to be partakers of the inheritance with the Saints in light,
Col, 1. ^^. for he both fitted them for the inheritance, and did entitle, and
give them a part in the inheritance, translating them into the Kingdom of his
dear Son, verse 13.

Pr. That we cannot contain an Infinite righteousness in us.

Ans Then you cannot contain the righteousness of God, for it is infinite, and
everlasting, as in Daniel 9 24 and then you cannot contain Christ in you, who
is Gods righteousness, and who is infinite, and so by this doctrine, he makes
all reprobates, as all are who know not Christ in them; for they who did not
retain God in their knowledge, were given up to a reprobate sense.

Pr. That it was false doctrine to say that a man must first partake of the
Righteousness which justifies before it can be imputed to him as his.

A. He has here counted that false doctrine, which the Saints witnessed
fulfilled in them, for the righteousness of God was imputed to the Saints in
the true belief, whereby they did partake of Gods righteousness through faith,
before ^t could be accounted theirs; except that this Priest in his false
meanings, would count that to be a man's which he has no right to, nor part in;
for the faith wherein Abraham did partake of Gods righteousness, was reckoned
to him for righteousness, and he unto whom God imputes righteousness, in his
spirit, there is no guile, though these Priests would impute righteousness to
the wicked as theirs, who are full of guile, and sin, having no life, nor right
in Gods righteousness, while they live quite out of it.

Pr. That God offers salvation to all men, but he intends it but to a few.

Answ. There he would frustrate the grace of God, and his salvation, which is
free for all, and so he would make the Offers of Gods salvation to many
thousands to no purpose, as if God proferred that to many which he never
intended to give them, was there ever such a belying of God as this? for what
is it less then to make God a respecter of persons? If all men by nature be in
wickedness, and liable to condemnation, as this Priest confessed, and yet
salvation is intended but for a few, (though offered to all) How is God no
respecter of persons? and how is Christ given to be his salvation to the ends
of the earth, and a light into the world that all men through him might
believe? and whosoever believes in Christ shall not perish, but have
everlasting life; so that all may freely come, and be saved according to the
love and will of God, who does not intend that any shall perish, except they
reject his way, and the offers of his grace, which has appeared to all men.

Pr. That a Minister of the Gospel does not know who are elected.

An. There he has belyed the Ministers of the Gospel, for they could discern
the elect from the world, as it is written, ye shall discern between him that
serves God, and him that serves him not; and Paul and Peter wrote to the
elect; so these teachers who know not the elect, and yet exhorts, all their
hearers to believe, and lay hold on Christ, their preaching is in vain; for if
God have but intended a certain number to be saved, and the rest to be
condemned, then they set their hearers a work in vain, and many to expect that
which they are never like to have; so these people are in a miserable state;
and note that these Priests though they take sums of money, and tithes of their
hearers in many parishes in this Nation, yet they know not who are elected
among them according to this man's words.

Pr. That the Sword of the Spirit is ineffectual without the Letter.

Answ. The Sword of the Spirit is the Word of God; which was effectual before
the Letter was, to Enoch, to Isaac, to Jacob, to Abraham, and others; and from
the Word was the Letter given forth, and the Letter is not effectual without it.

Pr. That there was no Scripture written, but what is extant, and in the Bible.

Answ. Yes, against that shall the Scripture bear witness; the book of Nathan
the Prophet, the book of Ahaijah, the book of Iddo, 2 Chr. 9. 29. the book of
Shemaia, 2 Chr. 20. 15. the book of Gad, 1 Chro. 29. 29. the book of Jehu, 2
Chro. 20. 3^. the book of Jasher, 2 Samuel 1. 18. the Prophecy of Enoch, Jud. ^.
one Epistle of the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 3. 9. one Epistle to the Ephesians, Ephesians.
3. 3. one Epistle to the Laodiceans. Col. 4. All these Scriptures were given
forth from the same Spirit, and to the same end and use, as those are, which
are bound up in the Scriptures, although these be left out.

Pr. That there was no Scripture nor writings appointed of God to be a Rule of
Faith and manners, but what is bound up in the Bible.

Answ. Those Scriptures which are not bound up in the Bible* was given forth
from the same Spirit, and by the motion of the Holy Ghost; and so for the same
ends and uses that the other Scripture was given forth for, and as he appointed
the one, so the other.

Pr. That the Letter does antecede, and go before the Spirit in all that walked
in the Spirit.

Answ. This is false, for the Spirit did antecede the Letter, in all that
walked in the Spirit, who gave forth the Letter from the Spirit.

Pr. That the works of Christ in some respect are not perfect.

Answ. That is false, for every gift of God is perfect and every work of Christ
is perfect in all his children; but that spirit in thee which is fallible makes
nothing perfect, and therefore judges all things, yea, Christ and his works to
be fallible and deceiveable, like it self.

Pr. That the Law requires more strict and exact obedience then the Gospel.

Answ. Nay, the Law says, Thou shall not commit adultery, but the Gospel
says, Thou shall not lust; the Law says, Thou shall n^^ kill, but the Gospel
says, Thou shall not be angry; the Law says, Thou shall not forswear thy
self, but the Gospel says, Swear not at all, Mat. 5. And so the Gospel
requires more exact obedience then the Law, contrary to this affirmation.

P. That Christ chose a Devil to be one of his Ministers in choosing Judas; and
his proof for it is this, That the Divine nature did not see it good to
communicate the knowledge of all things unto the humane nature, and therefore,
although he was a Devil when he chose him, yet he knew it not.

Answ. This is a charging of Christ with Ignorance, contrary unto John 2. 24.
25. which says, That Jesus did not commit himself unto them, because he knew
all men* and needed not that any should testify of man, for he knew what was
in man; and though Judas by transgression became a Devil, and the Devil abode
not in the truth; Does it therefore follow that he was never in the truth? But
Christ speaks of him and to him, as well as to the rest, that they had power to
cast out unclean spirits, Mat. 10. 1. And that the Spirit of the Father spoke
in them, Mat. 10. 20. So that there was no difference, while the Spirit of the
Father led him, and taught, till the Devil entered into his heart to betray
that Lord of Life; so that is a false charge, to say, that Christ sent out a
Devil to Minister the Gospel.

Pr. That the Spirit of God may accompany a Ministry, and the Minister not
have the Spirit.

Answ. This is another doctrine then ever the Prophets or Apostles preached;
for I never read in the Scriptures that ever any did Minister for God, which
had not the Spirit, nor that ever any was converted unto God, by such a
Minister as had not the Spirit. Therefore prove this assertion to the people,
where, or when the Spirit of God did accompany that Ministry, when the
Minister had not the Spirit; so that thou may as well, as thou have said, not
pretend unto any infallibility (nor unto any truth in thy Ministry for if thou
did, people would see that thou did pretend unto that, which thou art far
from; so that if thou would not pretend to Minister neither, no more then to
have the Spirit, it were better for thee.

Pr. That the ^^wer that went forth in the Apostles Ministry, was in God and
not in them, but as they have it communicated to them, by the exercise of Faith.

Answ. Here thou have confounded thy self; for if they had it communicated to
them, by their exercise of faith, then it was in them; for the exercise of
Faith is within, in the pure Conscience, and so the power was in them, from
which they Ministered, and they did not abuse their power, but from the power
Ministered forth their gift as they had received it.

Thomas Rumsay, said, That we preach a doctrine of Devils, in saying, That men
may be free from sin in this life.

Answ. Then the Apostle Paul preached a doctrine of Devils; for he said, Romans
6. 2. How shall we that are dead to sin, live any longer therein; and in the
seventh verse, says, He that is dead is free from sin; and in the eighteenth
verse, he says to the Believers, being then made freefrom sin, Ye became the
servants o^ Righteousness; and in the two and twentieth verse, he again tells
them, That now being made free from sin, and become servants to God, you have
four fruits unto holiness, and the end, Everlasting Life; and this was spoken
to the Romans while they were in this life, and it was not a doctrine of
Devils, but the Doctrine of the Gospel; and Christ preached the Doctrine of
perfection in this life, Mat. 5 48. saying, Be ye perfect as your Father which
is in Heaven is perfect; and also it is written, Be ye Holy, for I am Holy, 1
Pet. ^. 16* And this is not a doctrine of Devils, but of Christ the Son of God;
and Paul preached Wisdom among thos^ that were perfect* Cor. 2. 6. and David
preached the Doctrine of perfection in this life, saying, Mark the (...)ct man,
and behold the u^^ight* for the end of that man is peace Psalm. 37. 37. Now
David did not bid them, mark such a man as there was not; so the Doctrine of
perfe(...), is that Doctrine which both the Prophets, Christ and Apostles
preached, and so not the doctrine of Devils, if we preach the same; but all
those that preach up sin, and that men must live in it, and that they cannot be
free from it, while upon earth, these are messengers of Sacan, and preach the
doctrine of Devils; and people needs not that doctrine, for they are willing
enough to live in sin, without having it preached up, and being strengthened in
it; and that makes them so willing to pay the Priests such wages, for calling
the proud, happy; and those that work wickedness, Saints, and Justified
persons; for without such wages, not a Priest in England would preach peace to
them in their sins, but they would all be silent; for if people come once to
know Christ their Teacher, and he in them, the Hope of Glory, who saves his
people from their sins, then no man will buy their merchandise any more; but
will come all to hear and learn of the Father, and come to witness his
Covenant, and his Teachings, and shall not need that one teach another, saying,
know the Lord; For all shall know him, from the least to the greatest, Heb. 8.
11. and this shall all come to witness, that come to be Translated into the
Kingdom of the dear Son of God; and then shall they come to witness his Words,
which is, the Lord from Heaven; who says, Be ye perfect, as your Father which
is in Heaven is perfect, and be ye Holy, for I am Holy. And this is the voice
from Heaven.

THE END.

