Pilula ad expurgandam Hypocrisin. A PILL to Purge FORMALITY. Wherein is
discovered the sad and woeful condition of all formal professors in Religion;
Also the glory and excellency of those that walk in the power of godliness,
with several notes of trial, whereby men may know, whether they have only a
Form of godliness, or the power thereof. Also several directions, how men may
come to the knowledge of their present estate, whether leading to hell and
damnation, or to life and glory.

By THO. HUBBERT Esquire;

(...).

1 Timothy 3.16. (...).

1 Timothy 4.8. But godliness is profitable unto all things, having the promise of
the life that now is, and of that which is to come.

Job 5.27. Lo this, we have searched it, so it is, hear it and know thou it for
thy good.

London Printed by Robert White, for Lodowick Lloyd, and Henry Cripps, and are
to be sold at their Shops in Popes head Alley next to Lumbard-street. 1650.

To the Right Honorable John Bradshaw, Lord President, And the rest of the
Right Honorable the Council of STATE.
Right Honorable,
THough I conceive Euripides speaks at as high a rate as any of the sons of
Nature can do, (...) (he that lays his leg upon a Velvet Cushion all the day
long, shall not meet with those sharp flints, those pricking thorns, and
scratching briers, that will be another portion, who walking abroad, sees, and
is not sinfully silent to the practical errors that as a leprosy overspread
the conversations of men) yet I conceive a Christian finds such wages in Gods
work, that he would not (...) withdraw his foot from his service to dip it in
oil elsewhere.

I am not without some experiences (in which God give me an heart to rejoice
more) that it is much better in respect of the outward man to sing Hosannah to
the practical or opinionative errors of men, then (with the great hazard that
attends such endeavors) to engage against them: many a man has come off with a
scratcht face in appearing for truth; yet since I have meditated upon Eternity,
I dare say (with Luther) Mallem ego cum Christo ruere, quam stare cum Caesare:
I am not so great a stranger to the practices of this present generation, that
I should not expect many an open Sepulcher in the mouths of men, threatening to
bury my name and reputation, as the reward of my present endeavors: yet is it
not in this respect that I have taken the boldness to my self to take Sanctuary
under your Honors protection: No (my Lords) I have in this particular, a God to
go to, who shall hide me in the secret of his presence, and keep me secretly in
a pavillion from the strife of tongues.

This small Treatise kisseth your Honors hands upon other terms: There is in it
(at least) a design to hold forth some beams and rays of the power of
godliness, which has hitherto found but little entertainment in the Courts of
Princes, been owned by a very few great ones of the world: greatness and
goodness rarely kissing each other: Not many wise, not many noble are called,
(...): Right Honorable, the eyes of good men are upon you, and they expect
(under God) the fruits of your Council (both to the people of God, and
Inhabitants of this Land) mediocrem (...): and the more our eyes are upon you,
the more wicked men watch for your haltings: If there be a root of covetousness
springing up in the midst of you, if any ulcerous bile of malice, if a swelling
of pride, if a base itch of lust, if (in a word) you be (...), will not your
enemies say, the pictures in the hangings, and your Lorships, are Christians of
the same complexion? You have but a form of godliness, you deny the power
thereof: But I hope better things of you, that the place where you are
assembled, will be (not as of old in name only) White Hall and your selves
still Right Honorable, accounting it your greatest honor, to honor the Son (by
whose name you are called Christians) in the power of godliness; that it may
never be said of you, as Melancthon (descanting upon his name) of Hosius. (...)
minime sanctus.

This Treatise consulted with in your spare (but serious) hours, will (in the
strength of God) prove (as to the forementioned diseases) (...): You will not
find in it (...), such Lenten discourses as were wont to drop from the silken
lips of Court-Chaplins.

The work is not (...), penned for ostentation, but for the glory of JESUS
CHRIST, to whom, as your Councellor (that you may not (...)) he commends you
all, and that he in whose hands all the Councels of men are, would dwell upon
you, direct you for his Glory, with the Good and Peace of this Poor wearied
Land, is, and shall be the continual prayer of

Your Honors most devoted servant in and for Christ, Tho. Hubbert.

To the Right Worshipful, the Justices of Peace of the City of London, and
County of Middlesex; The Author wishes Grace, Mercy and Peace in this life,
and an Eternal weight of Glory in that which is to come.
Right Worshipful,
WHen I considered the excellency, glory and beauty of the true power of
godliness on the one hand, and the few friends it had on the other hand, though
it might justly challenge love, respect, embraces, and protection even from the
greatest Princes in the world; 1 Timothy 4.8.
forasmuch as godliness has the promise of this life, and that which is to
come; yet by woeful experience we find that its daily persecuted on the one
hand by open enemies, though not as such; as Christ was not crucified as
Christ, but as a deceiver; so godliness is persecuted as factious and
Schismatical hypocrisy, and as an enemy to the State, etc. so on the other
hand its betrayed, disgraced and undermined by its pretended friends, and at
this time being almost out of fashion, seeing in general true religion is
turned into notion, and the power of godliness into a form, shadow and outside,
so that now piety suffers exceedingly; Then give me leave to plead on its
behalf, even to you to whom God has given the sword in these parts, so that
true godliness might be promoted and protected by you, and all irreligion and
profaneness discountenanced, and punished; seeing the Magistrate does not, or
should not bear the sword in vain, and he to whom its committed, ought to be a
terror to evil doers, and a praise to them that do well: and though not many
wise, 1 Cor. 1.26.
not many mighty men after the flesh, not many noble are called; not many
Justices of the Peace are guilty of being acquainted with this power of
godliness (its a very rare thing to find greatness and goodness go together)
yet some there are who are found to be chosen, and faithful. God has not left
himself without witness, 1 Timothy 1.11.
even among these: whose love, affections, and zeal are manifested to the
glorious Gospel of the blessed God (a continual supply of such godly Patriots,
the Lord grant and prosper unto us) which is far dearer to every gracious heart
then its dearest blood, or what ever is desirable under the Sun, or to be
admired by the sons of men; and according to men's gifts, and greatness of
place, is the excellency of good, or excess of evil; men in authority have the
greatest opportunities of doing good or evil, and as they are improved, so is
the ruin or happiness of a state; therefore we may heartily wish that all men
in eminency of place, who are enemies to Jesus Christ, might be fools and
dunces, that they might not be able to manage their malice and power with such
depths and dexterity, to the more dangerous undermining of the power of
godliness; great men are more subject to temptation then others, yet God chose
himself a David, a Moses, a Jehosaphat, a Josias, etc. to be very excellent
instruments for his glory; and if God does expect most from them to whom he
has given most, and the greatest Harvest where he has sown most seed; then
dreadful will their account be, who cannot answer God one for a thousand, who
have not employed their gifts, talents, and power to the glory of that God who
has so liberally bestowed them on them: for God will not have the sword of
Magistracy locked up in the scabbard unto a wicked offender, nor maliciously
drawn against the just.

(...) (...), Romans 13.3.
For rulers are not a terror to good works, but to evil (that is, they should
not be a terror to good works) how then have many rulers mis-exercised their
power in punishing virtue, and countenancing vice? how have the fair and tender
locks of Jesus Christ, in the profession of the power of godliness, been
cropped and singed, and the black ruffled hair of the whore of Babylon decked,
crisped and curled to the view of the world, to the sensible grief and woe of
many thousands in this Kingdom? how has formality been advanced, and reality
depressed? how has truth suffered and error reigned? how has the sword been
turned against the faithful in the Land, and they made the only Butt against
whom all the arrows of malice have been directed? and I am confident that no
Nation under heaven have been greater or more bitter enemies to the power of
Godliness, then some in this Nation have been, and still are and would be; yet
they themselves profess the same faith, the same Christ, the same God, and the
same baptism, but the deeper will their wound of conscience be, and the heavier
their damnation. Indeed, as he is not a Jew, that is one outwardly, even so he
is not a Christian, that is one in show, that has only an outside in Religion,
that is, he is only so nomine, non re, in name, but not in truth: Yet we see
that all that are baptized, they appropriate the name of Christians unto
themselves; in word they profess they know God, Tit. 1.16.
but in works they deny him, being to every good work reprobate; for to God
they are abominable, and disobedient to all the commands of God and of Jesus
Christ; yea how many thousands in this Nation are there, that are so far from
the power of godliness, that they hate the very form; yea shall I say more?
they are without humanity it self: O how Atheistically barbarous and profane
do men live! These are they who are without God in the world, Ephesians. 2.12.2, 3.
they only are lead by the power of the prince of darkness; the God of this
world has blinded their eyes, hardened their hearts; yea and they are sealed up
unto everlasting condemnation, and yet know it not, and yet these must pass for
Christians: O let these know that it will be easier for Turks and Indians in
the day of Judgment then for them.

Now the scope of what I shall in this small Treatise humbly present unto your
serious meditations, is to set forth the sad condition of all them that content
themselves with a form of godliness and deny the power thereof; as also the
excellency and happiness of those that can make it out to their own hearts that
the power of godliness dwells in their spirits, having also laid down several
marks of both, whereby every serious inquisitive soul may know how its
condition stands with God; they are the meditations and endeavors of some spare
hours from other Employments which I have made use of. O let not the humility
of the style, or any prejudicated thoughts of the insufficiency of the author
be a scandal or impediment to your perusal of his labors, or to make you say
with Antipater King of Macedonia when there was a book concerning man's
happiness presented to him; (...), I have no leisure; but read and Judge by the
rule of the Spirit of love, which is the strongest obligation; Quis legem det
amantibus? major Lex amor est sibi: Love is at once a freedom from all Law, and
yet a law of the greatest necessity.

My desire is (and God say Amen to it) that this plain Pill (though naked and
altogether without the guildings of Rhetoric, and therefore the more
consentaneous to true Gospel Physic) might be very effectual both to City and
County, which indeed it will be to all that take it down into their hearts: O
that God would be pleased by it to purge us from all filthiness of flesh and
spirit, and make us live up to every mercy we enjoy, giving the glory of all
grace to the God of glory and power, who only can make all means effectual by
the working of his own spirit in the hearts of the sons of men: he can as well
bless weak means as strong; Jer. 37.10.
wounded men shall take the City if he command them; pezants shall be more
potent then Princes, if they have Gods commission: so its in the power of the
Almighty to make these few gleanings as copious in fruitfulness as the fullest
sheaves of harvest, and these weak and unsinewed meditations as effectual as
the high and strong parts of others, which I shall leave in the hand of him who
is all sufficient to do abundantly more then we can ask or think; humbly
desiring your candid acceptance of these my slender endeavors: and I shall
desire at the hand of the Lord your daily increase in faith in Jesus Christ,
for that is that potent and princely grace (that is) that victorious grace
attended with all her glorious train, reading down triumphantly before you all
vain pomp and transitory glory, that she may hold still fresh and flourishing
in your eyes the immortality and bliss of a never-fading crown, and shine fair
and fruitful in your souls until it set you down safe in the midst of a most
glorious and ever-induring kingdom of heaven, and having finished her blessed
task, resign you up, and leave you for ever in the bosom of Christ, the Author
and finisher of your course, there to remain everlastingly blessed in the
enjoyment of fullness of joy and pleasures at his right hand even to all
Eternity.

Your hearty welwisher in Christ, Tho. Hubbert.

To the READER.
Christian Reader,
I Fear I may take up that complaint of the Prophet Isaiah in his time, Isa.
53.1.
Who has believed our report? and to whom is the arm of the Lord revealed? If
this Prophet had cause to complain in his days, O what cause have Christians
to complain in these days, wherein error and profaneness shake hands together,
and are at union, and band themselves against the truth of the Gospel of Jesus
Christ? Who is sufficient for this complaint? What deep contentions about
Trifles, Forms, and Shadows, when precious Things, and real Truths are
accounted circumstantial and of no value? So that the life of Christ, the power
of godliness and communion with God (the Summum bonum of mortal man) is
generally neglected, if not made a scorn and reproach: and how many men which
heretofore have made large professions of the Gospel of Christ, do now by their
base looseness on the one hand, and by their gross errors on the other, bid
defiance to the very face of Christ, and so become a shame to Religion, and as
so many goades and thorns to the Saints, and all real professors of it!
Certainly I may say of these men, as a Heathen Philosopher said of his gods,
Deos non naturae ratione, sed honoris causa nominamus; we call them gods, not
that they are so by nature, but for honors sake; so these men are called
Christians, not that they are so by nature, but its a name of honor that they
take upon them, which will do them no good, nor stand them in any stead another
day; (...).
for though Christ be the end of the Law to his Saints, yet these men without
Repentance shall find Christ the terror of the Law to them: most men in these
erroneous days make Religion to be like a nose of Wax, they can turn it which
way it may serve their own turn best, that is called truth that corresponds
best with private gain and advantage: what profession soever it be that answers
not the gaping mouth of profit, is cried down for erroneous and unsound; now
adays the objects of most men's choice are according to the dictates of their
covetous hearts, it is not godliness but gain that sways their affections:
These things I having seen and felt in my spirit, did consider with my self,
whether that Scripture was not now fulfilled, 2 Timothy 3.1, 2, 3, 4, 5. I
concluded on the affirmative, and he that runs may read it, for its most
clear, that a form of Religion is now in fashion, and all the other sins in the
first four Verses bound up in it: Christ in his days on earth, cried out, Woe
unto you Hypocrites; but we have just cause to ingeminate this cry, Woe, woe, woe,
for our age is overgrown with a kind of profane hypocrisy; our Religion is
become formal and extrinsecal, when the intrinsecal part thereof (to wit, the
power and life of it) is not regarded: O there was never more strife,
contention, and disputes about Opinions, yea mere circumstantials (not
deserving the least consumption of precious time) nor ever was there less
practice in the truth of the Gospel of Jesus Christ; the sense whereof deeply
affecting my spirits, caused me (in discharge of my conscience) to publish this
ensuing Treatise; the scope whereof is not here intended to be delivered (but
having respect unto the welfare of thy soul) that thou may more fully
discover it, read, and ruminate upon it at thy convenient times, I have caused
it to be more amply set forth and published in this following Book: Which if
thou will but read, thoroughly read, love and practice, it may be to the
conducement of thy good here, and eternal happiness hereafter; Read it not with
a censorious eye, let not a supercilious brow be cast upon it; but let love,
sobriety, patience, wisdom, and willingness to be instructed, be thy Guides and
Schoolmasters to teach thee to read and peruse it; and the blessing of the
eternal Spirit of Grace (the grand Schoolmaster, and edifier of thy soul) rest
upon thee, directing thee, humbling thee, and thoroughly instructing thee in the
right and constant practice and performance of it, till it has conducted thee
unto the full end and enjoyment of thy hopes, eternal life and glory; the
accomplishment whereof unto thy soul, Is the Prayer and delight of

Thy Soul-pittying Friend, Tho. Hubbert.
From my House in More-Fields this 6th. of June, 1649.
Pilula.
REcipe tantum verae fidei, quantum Christum tenaeciter comprehendat, cujus
fructus cor mundificat; tantum amoris, quantum te ad fingulis Christi mandatis
obediendum cogat; tantum resipiscentiae, quantum te ab operibus carnalibus
resuscitet, and in te timorem Domini viventis figat: tantum vitae integritatis,
quantum te Deum ipsum de amoris tui simplicitate approbanda audacter appellare
faciat, tantum sinceritatis quantum cum eo in sancta communione te integram
agere vitam provocet: Haec componantur in massam pietatis, and tantum capiaes
quolibet mane, quantum animam tuam ab omni impuritate tum carnis tum spiritus
intactam reddat conservetque: and haec Pilula per Jesum Christum Dominum
nostrum usque ad vitam aeternam te salvum custodiet.

Probatum est. Si Deus pro nobis, quis contra nos?

The Pill.
TAke as much true Faith as will lay sted fast hold upon Christ, the fruits of
which purify the heart; as much love as may constrain thee to obedience to all
the commands of Christ, as much Repentance as will raise thee from dead works,
and make thee fear the living God; as much Sincerity as may make thee boldly
appeal to God for the truth of thy love unto him; as much Uprightness, as may
make thee walk perfectly with him in holy communion all thy days: Make these up
into a mass of godliness; and every morning take as much as may keep thy soul
from the infection of all filthiness of Flesh and Spirit; And this Pill shall
preserve thee to eternal life, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

If thou will read nothing but what was intended by the Author, amend these
misprintings: The rest are but small.
PAge 2. In the Margent, pro (...). r. (...). p. 13. l. 8. r. most. p. 18 l.
22. r. God. p. 22. in the Mar. r. devenerunt. p. ibid. l. 12. r. Spirit. p. 52.
l. 17. r. O self sanctity! p. 60. l. 9. r. commune. p. ibid. l. 23. r. eating.
p 67. l. 16. r. low. p. 77. l. 13. dele [will.] p. 84. l. 11. r. he is
incomprehensible. p. 97. l. 2. dele [of] p. 108. l. 11. dele [and] p. ibid. l.
20. r. continue. p. 111. l. 22. r. alive. p. 131. l. 21. r. the poor in spirit.
p. 139. l. 10. r. walks. p. 140. l. 18. r. the. p. 143. l. 26. r. got. p. 143.
l. 26. r. especial. p. 147. l. 3. r. own. p. 180. l. 6. r. adultery. p. 189. l.
8. r. your. p. 196. l. 7. r. and. p. 212. l. 21. r. it. p. 213. l. 3. r.
suffered. p. 224. l. 21. r. wicked. p. 233. l. 28. r. Tables. p. 234. l. 1. r.
not.

Pilula ad expurgandam Hypocrisin. A PILL to Purge FORMALITY.
2 Timothy 3.5. (...).

Habentes formam pictatis, sed qui vim ejus abnegarint: Istos igitur (vel etiam
istos) aversare.

Having a form of godliness, but denying the power thereof, from such turn
away.


THis glorious Apostle of the Gentiles, by the Spirit of prophecy foreseeing
those evils that would abound in the last times, writes unto Timothy that it
might be made known to the Churches as a warning piece to future ages.

A Catalogue of sinners.
In the last days shall be perilous times: soul-dangering, and soul-damning
times, souls shall be in peril of being lost, and lost eternally, not lost to
be found but found to be lost.

(...).
Self-love is soul-hatred, he that will come to Christ, must first deny
himself, condemn himself, yea hate himself; self-seeking stands in opposition
to soul-saving, in a lofty self-admiring soul, dwells no love of God.





These things by way of explication premised, we shall return unto the words,
which as they stand in reference unto the precedent, are the Epitome of the
ninteenth abomination, and though they are the last in number, yet not the
least in nature.

(...).
Having a form of godliness.

these enumerated by the Apostle, viz. Pride, blasphemy, covetousness,
disobedience to parents, traitors, heady, high minded, etc? and yet at this
time when they lie under the guilt of these soul-destroying abominations, even
then are they said to have a form of godliness.

Absalom when he was a traitor to his fathers crown, and sought his fathers
life, even then he craved leave of the King to pay his vow unto the Lord in
Hebron.

And Absalom said unto the King, 2 Samuel 15.7, 8.
I pray thee let me go and pay my vow which I have vowed unto the Lord in
Hebron.

For thy servant vowed a vow while he abode in Geshur in Sira, saying, if the
Lord shall bring me indeed to Jerusalem, then I will serve the Lord. In the
next words observe how he sent spies through out all Israel saying, When ye hear
the trumpets blow, then say that Absalom reigns in Hebron; You may see his
pretense was to serve the Lord, but his intent was to serve himself by
depriving his father of his Crown and life, 2 Samuel 17 1, 2.
for when Ahitophell said that he would go out against David with twelve
thousand men, and smite the King, this saying pleased Absalom well. O bloody
Absalom, that under show of paying a vow to the Lord, would kill his own
father, one that loved him as his own life!

Thus the Jews sent forth some, faining themselves to be just men, Luke 20.20.
that they might entrap Christ himself: And they sent forth spies which should
feign themselves to be just men, that they might take hold of his words and
deliver him to the Governor. O wicked form of godliness that would betray the
Lord of life! you see traitors can insinuate and feign themselves to be
Saints. Judas betrays Christ with a kiss: Luke 23.48.
Judas betrayest thou the Son of man with a kiss? Yet how smoothly and seeming
innocently did he carry it all the time that he walked with the Disciples, in
so much that none did suspect him? for when Christ said One of you shall betray
me, Mark. 14 19. (...);
every one began to question and search into his own heart, questioning amongst
themselves (Is it I? is it I?) so that they did more suspect themselves then
Judas: here was a glorious form when he went to sell and destroy the power and
glory of Heaven and earth; this was a white seeming Saint, Romans 2.20, 21, 22,
23. (...);
but a black devil, see says Paul (Thou art confident that thou art a teacher
of babes, an instructor of the foolish, who have a form of knowledge of the
law: thou that preachest a man should not steal, do thou steal? Thou that
teach a man should not committ adultery, do thou commit adultery? Thou
that art a Minister in a parish, that teach men should not be proud, art
thou proud? thou that teach a man should not be covetous, art thou covetous?
thou that teach that men should be of peaceable, humble, meek and lowly
spirits, art thou a kindle-coal and an incendiary? art thou he that studies
mischief? art thou he that teach men should walk in love, and will thou make
division? do thou teach that men should follow their own callings, and will thou entermeddle with State affairs, and labor to fire a Kingdom? thou that
would not that any should bear rule and Lordship over thy conscience, and
yet will thou lord it over the conscience of thy brother, and have all men
undone that see not with thy eyes, though otherwise godly? O what a shame is
this? This is the mere form of godliness; but I must take heed of raking too
deep into this dunghill, least I meet with some ominous Basiliske. I shall
therefore lay aside this coal, and with another pencil show you what is meant
by these words, forma, etc.

The next thing is to inquire what is here meant by the words (forma and
pietas) form and godliness: (...).
the word form signifies the shape, the outside, the fashion the beauty, the
likeness or manner of any thing: the bark of the tree cannot be properly called
the tree, the shadow of a man in the Sun is not the real man, so the habit or
form of godliness is not godliness indeed; but you must know that though there
may be a form of godliness without the power, yet there cannot be the power
without the form, I mean not a bare, speculative and seeming form, such as is
spoken of before; but a practical and active form represented in the whole
life and conversation: a man cannot carry coals in his bosom and not be burnt;
So no man can carry grace in his heart, but it will spread forth and appear in
his life, its in vain for that man to say, I have a good and upright heart,
whose life and conversation is altogether loose and licentious, the tree must
first be made good, and then its fruit will be good; let there be soundness in
thy heart, and there will be no rottenness in thy life, thy conversation will
be suitable to thy heart; and thy heart correspondent to thy conversation: let
the fountain be pure and the streams will issue pure: The other word is
(Godliness.)

2 Gal. 20. 2 Cor. 4.^1.
Godliness, is sometimes called the life of God, the Image of God, the new
creature, a man born again; Its godliness for a man to have a good conscience
and love toward God and man, and to be void of offense, 2 Cor. 5.17. John 3.5.
(...). Its spoken Metonymically.
in such a man dwells godliness. Godliness is in that soul where God acts so,
as it unites the soul to God, as by his power it lives to God, it walks with
God, it has God communicating himself to it in Christ: where the soul by a
reflex act gives out it self to God, it acts as God acts, it follows the
footsteps of God; this is true godliness in the soul: of which more anon.

(Habentes formam Pietatis) Having a form of godliness.



And that generally they do upon this account.

Jehoash did that which was right in the sight of the Lord all the days of
Jehojadah the Priest: what is the reason? 2 Reg. 12.2.
was it not for that Jehojadah had saved his life and made him King when all
his brethren were slain by Athaliah the Queen? 2 Reg 11.1.
for she arose and destroyed all the seed Royal. So Absalom would draw his
father into a belief that he was very godly, and made conscience in paying of
his vows, and that at Hebron: he knew this would please his father well.

(...). Romans 2.14 15.
I mean of a natural conscience: for by nature men will be worshipping in one
kind or other (All men having the law written in their hearts; their
consciences also bearing them witness, and their thoughts the mean while
excusing or accusing one another) that made Saul to offer a burnt offering in
Samuels absence; the text says he forced himself to offer a burnt offering,
because he had not made supplication to the Lord, for the Philistines were
drawing near: but Samuel tells him he had done foolishly in what he had done. 1 Samuel 13.12.


Judas by his form carried the bag, and the text says he was a thief: thus
grew he into credit and trust by a notional and colorable form of Religion;
yea how many in these days purchase unto themselves vast estates out of formal
professions to Religion, Religion not the cause of sin, but the want of Religion
whereby they profess nothing more then the delusion, cozenage and
overreaching of others who are simply and really godly: which Hypocritical
actions the prying and curious worldling glories to bewray, and thereby takes
occasion (though scandalously) to inveigh against Religion it self in the
purity of its profession. Surely such men in their abundance have want, and in
their want abundance; that is, they in the midst of their abundance of their
outward and formal performances, have the absence and want of the soul-solacing
testimony of an upright and sincere conscience toward God, and the inward
consciousness of this want, will at length work in the soul abundance of horror
and confusion of spirit; whereby their souls without the infinite mercy of God
are swallowed up into the abyss of despair, and then woe will be the lot of
such by whom offenses shall come, such men may deceive poor weak infant
Christians, but alas their deceit will retort into their own bosoms, and heavy
and sad will be their condition.

of the times, whether it be Ecclesiastical or Civil.



Proteus that can assume variety of forms, and no wonder if his servants
affect the same; You know the devil could plead Scripture again and again to
Christ himself, a form does not oppose the devils Kingdom, when the power beats
it down, a man in a form may go on long enough, the devil will not disturb
him, he knows he has him fast enough; this man, says Satan, will do us no
hurt, we are sure of him, he will not disrellish any thing, all things are
alike with him; if any be unsavory or distastful, it will be the good: he can
swallow down any thing, do as men will have him do, he will make no disturbance
in the parish where he lives, nor question or scruple any false or ceremonious
dispensation of ordinances, but wormwood will be as sweet to his unsound palate
as honey; he will do as the most do, his suffrage shall be ecchoed forth after
the general vote; the major conformity shall be the rule for his life, he will
be fair to them that will be fair to him, his affections are steered by
popularity: he will keep none in his family that shall out of tenderness of
conscience start disputations concerning matters of Religion, nay there must be
no reasonings, no disputings, no fightings nor contendings for the truth; but
as much as you will for the maintenance and defense of outward and formal
Ceremonies; this man is resolved to love quietness and ease, he will not break
his sleep nor trouble his thoughts with the mystery of the power of godliness:
yet let such as these know that this is a damnable security, and that they will
drop into hell before they are aware.

etc. mentioned in the former Verses, are such sons of the Giant, that the
garment of hypocrisy (though it be to the heels) will hardly hide or cover
them from the eyes of men: how then can these great sins stand with a form of
Religion?

Isai. 1.16.18.
its a crimson sin, and double died, Woe unto you Hypocrites.



and never so many, yet this will keep all close from his eyes, yea it will
make a man believe he is in a good condition, and walking in a good way, when
there is no such matter, those wounds and sores which are fairly filmed over,
and have specious and visible appearances of sound and perfect cures, are must
desperate and incurable: alas, within they are full of festering and poisonous
putrifections which will secretly exulcerate the flesh, and corrode and eat
into the bones, and cause and precipitate a lingering death.

Luke 6.41.
the Hypocrite in Lukes Gospel had two eyes to spy the Mote that was in his
brothers eye, but had not one eye to discern the Beam in his own eye; they
always lay heavy burdens on others, Mat. 23.4.
but will not touch them themselves with one of their fingers.

all other damned sinners, Hypocritae pierumque severissimi sunt eorum
exactores quae ipsi maxim negligunt. 1 Timothy 5.24. (...).
only the ones sins go before to Judgment, and the others follow after; but
the end of both is destruction, and condemnation is their portion: therefore he
that is an hypocrite is not to be looked on to be in a better condition then
open profane persons, but in a worse, for he that seems to others to be sound,
and yet within is nothing but rottenness, eternal wretchedness will be his end:
so that these men are not only guilty of all those gre^^ abominations before
mentioned, but they take up this form to cover all their other sins withal, so
that they are both guilty of profaneness and hypocrisy; for at the same time
when the Apostle says, they are guilty of these sins, he joins this to the
rest, and that in the Present Tense (Having a form of godliness) they being
guilty of that sin as of the former. A form of godliness without the power of
it, may well be called the Devels Sin-Mould, wherein he does cast many sins at
once; do but read the former Verses, and besides those, the other sins that
they are guilty of are innumerable.

harbor a Traitor within your breast; if thy heart be deceitful, all thy actions
wherein thou pretendest godliness, will be so; can ye expect good fruit of an
evil Tree? do men use to gather Grapes of Thorns, or Lillies of Thistles? can
ye expect crystal Streams from impure and muddy Fountains? a good heart
produces a good conversation, and a bad heart an evil conversation, there is
nothing sooner discovers the heart then the life; it is not that which goes
into the man defiles the man, but that which comes from within; For out of
the heart comes blasphemies. etc. If thy heart be wicked, so will all thy
duties be, thy Prayers, thy Reading, thy Conference about heavenly things, all
thy duties whatsoever to God and man will be abominable, defiled, corrupted and
sinful.

in him; thus does this leaven in the heart sour and imbitter all good things
to the soul.



Ezekiel. 36.26.
( A new heart also will I give you, and a new spirit also I put within you,
and I will take away the stony heart out of your flesh, and I put my Spirit
within you, and cause you to walk in my Statutes, etc)

and turn the soul, and sink it into the bottomless Ocean of hell; such a man
as this is in a far worse condition then he that is openly profane, and makes
not the least show of Religion, for

Sooner conviction.
is sooner convinced of his wickedness, he has no Fig Leaves to cover his
nakedness, he has no painting to set off his conversation, he is bad, yea,
very bad, and seems to be so, he is one and the same, both within and without,
he carries not two faces under one hood, he will not curse with his heart, and
bless with his tongue, his heart and lips shall both go together; his mouth
shall be black with swearing, lying, and cursing; his eyes red with drinking,
his throat an open sepulcher to all profaneness, nay, he will be so far from
dawbing over the rottenness of his heart with a Saint-like life, that he will
be always boasting, and taking glory in the spreading forth of his own
infirmities, and private and sinful actions, this man will be known in his
colors, and will go for a wicked man in the heart and eyes of all men, yea of
them that are as bad as himself; this man does not steal to hell in a mist, for
he bids open defiance against Heaven, God, Christ, Gospel, Saints, and every
thing that has but a show of good; but now how soon is this man convinced if
Conscience be awakened I he has not one word to say for himself, but will cry,
Guilty, Guilty.

More like to come to the knowledge of sin.
He is more likely to come to the knowledge of his sin, every man will be ready
to reprove him who is notorious and openly wicked, whereby he shall become
sensible of the commission of sin, and is informed of such and such wicked and
ungodly actions, when as the hypocrite walks blameless and irreproveable in
the eyes of men, and therefore not taken notice of, nor reproved for sin, An
hypocrite more hard to convince.
but lies bound up in the fetters of his own private deceitful heart unto all
eternity; this man will be always finding somewhat to say for himself, as,
That all men are sinners, its the frailty, of the flesh, its the violence of
temptation that makes him commit such and such an evil, Gods knows its quite
contrary to his will, to his desire, yea, to his affections to do so wickedly;
he allows not himself in any way of sin, he constantly prays against sin, he
keeps his own Parish, and is a frequent hearer of the Word; he performs duties
in his Family sometimes, he has the good word of many godly men, he is
acquainted with the Scriptures, yea, he can go for a Saint where he is not much
known, and he will make it appear that there are worse men in the world then he.

Not probable to come to the knowledge of sin.
his form is a false glass that deludes his soul, it vainly persuades the soul
of its loveliness and integrity, when indeed it is nothing but deformity; his
form is that which balances all that men can say against him, yea, it blindes
his own eyes, stops the mouth of his conscience, which is every moment ready to
fly in his face, he is upheld by his friends, by the world, he is not opposed
by the flesh, the devil or wicked men, yea no man can speak so confidently
against this man as against the former, for he goes to hell in a mist, slily
and smoothly, he is not so openly manifested to be wicked as the public
profane person, yet his condition is far more desperate and dangerous, the one
shall have cause to bless God that brought him to a sight of his sin, when the
other shall have cause for ever to curse the devil and his deceitful heart that
deluded him with a counterfeit sight and show of his own holiness, and hid and
kept back from him the true sight of his sin.

Matthew says, they are the pure in heart that shall see God, then the unclean
in heart must never see him; Mat. 5.8.
they are so much enamored upon, or in love with the fictitious rays of their
own holiness; that the true beauty of holiness is totally hid from their eyes.
They shall never see God unless it be when they come to Judgment, then they
shall see him and hear him to their cost. I may say of these men as it was said
of Judas, It had been good for them that they had never been born; that they
had never seen the light, never heard a Sermon, neverheard of Christ, never had
a form of godliness, never mentioned Religion. O it had been good for them they
had never heard of Judgments, of mercies, of Gods patience, his long suffering
his gentleness; all these and many more shall rise up in Judgment against
them, yea every Sermon they have heard, every prayer they have been at, and
every Chapter they have read, shall plead against them, yea their very
knowledge in Religion, their form of godliness, all shall come against them at
the last day, and shall rise up as so many witnesses against them, that God
whom they professed to serve, will be their enemy, Christ will not own them, no
angel dares speak for them, no Saint will come near them; the devil whom they
have inwardly served stands ready to receive them, and pay them their wages,
when that heavy sentence is pronounced against them, Go ye cursed wretches into
everlasting condemnation, etc.

Having a Form of Godliness.

We shall observe further,



When the Son of man comes, Luke 18.8.
shall he find faith on the earth?

It will be a rare thing to find faith, Religion will be swallowed up of form:
And if the Apostle could say in his time, 1 Cor. 10.11.
We are they upon whom the ends of the world are come: In quos sines seculorum
deveverunt.
certainly we may now say, we are they who live in the last times, yea in the
last of times: I could wish that this point were not fulfilled in our eyes.



that they must have all men come to their bow, Here I intend the temporizing
Clergy who are like the Maypoles, neither root nor Branch only a weather cock
on the top thereof.
they must be honored and reverenced with high respects; they must be looked on
as men of an infallible spirit: all that they do is done Jure divino; when
indeed being well examined, it proves very hardly jure humano^ yet they are the
only men whose lips must preserve knowledge and at whose mouth you must seek
the Law, all they say is Gospel, and all they decree is to be obeyed, to
question any thing that they propound is faction, and to contradict them is
heresy, they look on themselves as the absolute pattern; if you go before
them, then you go too fast, if you come after them, then you go too slowly: if
you speak against them, it is Blasphemy; nor will their pride suffer them to
walk cheek by jole; and yet these men's Religion is Parliamentary; If the
Parliament decree Popery, then they are for that, if Episcopacy, then for that,
if Presbytery or any other, then for that: they have such excellent skill, that
they are like the Philosophers stone, that turns all things into Gold: so can
these men make any government (Jus divinum) As do but consider that story of
those that in King Edward the sixth time had preached mightily against Popery,
and were very zealous for Reformation and the advancement of the Protestant
Religion: how soon did they conform to the Sacrament of the Altar and to all
manner of Popery; in Queen Mary's time? yea did not they in their convocation
house at their first meeting subscribe to all those Popish Articles (but very
few excepted.) And of that generation how many ^ave we in this Kingdom, nay of
a more sudden mutability then the former, who at one time were very fiery and
zealous for the maintenance of Episcopacy, and were esteemed learned Preachers
and much followed! Yet out of the abundance of their learning (or rather
superstition) could bow and cringe before the Altar, and read Service there as
well as any Popish Priest in Rome; and yet almost in the same punct of time, or
a very little space intervening, were and still are mighty and earnest
acclamators of Presbytery; and if you will demand the reason, it is only this;
Because Presbytery was the next in fashion, and being in fashion they are
resolved never to be out, unless another government succeed and take place:
they are so much obliged to form, that they will make any Government whatsoever
Jus divinum. They have their consciences made of retching leather, and their
hearts of wax, the one can be made as large as you will, and the other can
receive what impression soever, provided that it be a State Seal, wherein
authority, pride, and covetousness may shelter it self; when Episcopacy was in
fashion, then they could worship toward the East, now Presbytery is in fashion
they worship toward the North; they are so skilful in turning, and resolved to
play so sure a game that they will never be out, they will not swim against the
stream, they have not been used to any such labor, nay, they are not only
mutable but violent, how would these men have persecuted their brethren to
death it self, had not God put it into the mind of the Parliament to retain
the power in their own hands, yea, we should have had Boner, Gardner,
Harpsfield, Succedunt alii homines, non alii mores.
Watson, and the rest of them risen up in this Kingdom; for though these men
are dead, yet their spirits live in too many men. They will deceive the very
Elect if it were possible. O whited walls! O painted Sepulchers! O form of
godliness, where is thy power? Reader, do but consider what enemies such as
these have been to Christ's Kingdom, and to Saints in all Ages; See but their
carriage to Christ himself; how did the Scribes, Pharisees and High Priests
combine themselves together that they might entrap him, ensnare him, entangle
him, yea put him to death? which design they never deserted till they had
accomplished: Look into all Ages, Times, Kingdoms, and Nations; Read but the
Ecclesiastical Histories; yea, do but consider the great and woeful miseries of
Germany, and examine whether those that go under the notion of Clergy men, have
not been the introducers of all differences and distractions; yea, they have
been so, are so, and will be so as long as any State, Kingdom, or Nation will
commit the reins into their hands; they do so much affect Sovereignty, that
they will break Kingdoms, States, and Nations to pieces before they will be
abridged of any of their honors, or preferments, their pride or covetousness,
it is bred in the bone, and will never out of the flesh; and no marvel, for the
most part they are men endued with admirable gifts and parts of natural
Knowledge and Learning, which indeed are the outward gifts of God, yet not being
spiritualized and sanctified serve only to the elation and puffing up of the
heart, whereby nothing but Self is admired, upheld, and maintained: whatsoever
they do (though indeed tending to their own ends) must be done under a form of
godliness, as the Jews did under the keeping of the Sabbath, washing of Cups
and Platters, etc.

O generation of Vipers, who shall deliver you from that wrath that is to come;
its not your learning, your parts, your high looks, your crying up Jus Divinum,
nor your form of godliness that can do it, nay, rather all these shall be
aggravators and pleaders against you; you were born and bred the brats of
Babel, Amos 2.4.
and confusion will be your end, unless God turn your hearts in time unto
himself: I may well say of England, Isai. 3.12.
as the Prophet Isaiah said of Israel, O England, they that pretend to be thy
Teachers, are they that have caused thee to err, yea, and they shall be
destroyed that are led by them; Offenses will come, but woe to them by whom they
do come.

Consider again that saying of the Prophet Micah, The Priests teach for hire,
Micah. 3.11.
the Prophets divine for money, and yet they lean upon the Lord, and say, Is
not the Lord among us? Can men say now more then they said then, What, to lean
on the Lord, to rest on the most High, to say that the Lord was among them,
yea, and at that very time when they preached for hire, and prophesied for
money, and did all manner of wickedness: and is not this thy condition, O
England? they are for thy money, for thy tithes, for thy fleece, they are
always crying, What will you give, what will you give? though they have two or
three Livings apiece, the more they have, the more they desire, and there is no
end of their covetousness, and yet they are not ashamed to say, The Lord is
among us: what is this but a mere form of godliness? so they may but thrive and
eat of the fatlings of the people, they care not how the word of grace thrives
in their hearts, so they may be possessed of temporal means, they care not how
little the people be possessed of spiritual, it is their own private gain they
aim at for their preaching, and not the inward gain of any soul by their
preaching; O what a miserable condition are poor souls brought unto, that shall
pay so dear a price for that which Christ Jesus has so freely purchased, and
go without it! And yet here I do not intend to muzzle the mouth of the Ox that
treads out the corn, to bind a conscientious godly powerful Ministry to
their performance of their duty of laboring in the Word and Doctrine, and free
their Hearers that are taught by them from communicating to those that teach
them, Freely you have received, freely give; look as well to those to whom the
Word is dispensed, as to the dispensers of it, and that man will hardly evidence
himself to have more then a form of godliness, that holds his hand from this.



Hypocrita cupit videri Justus.
I will at lest personate their ways and actions, I will be accounted just,
lest all men contemn me, and say, there goes an Athiest, there goes a wicked
wretch, there is a man in whose thoughts is neither heaven nor hell, God, nor
devil; with such a man have not to do in commerce or trust; thus for some
oblique and sinister ends, does this man outwardly act the life of godliness,
and for these reasons does he place his content and delight in a form of
godliness.

smooth way, let it lead whether it will, they hope, nay, they will be
confident that their way (though it be Via latissima) leads to the gates of
eternal life.





as the power does, forms give more liberty to the flesh, can more easily
submit to any injunction, and lie under any command without reluctance of
conscience, or opposition of spirit, when the power can nor will do neither, so
that they that have only a form, may live easier and have their Religion at a
cheaper rate then others, being less obnoxious to the times, for they shall
pass for very quiet, honest, harmless men, when others shall be stigmatized
with the reproachful name of common distrubers, and factious persons, etc.

Having a form of godliness, but denying the power thereof: We shall look but
this once upon these words;



We shall not hear show you what the Power of Godliness is, but shall leave it
to its proper place to be handled.

The consideration both of our former and later Times, will evidence and make
good this; You cannot be ignorant of the Nicknames and Reproaches that have
been cast upon the truly godly, both Ministers and People: Read but the History
of the Church, and you shall find that they which were most strict and severe
in their outward performances of Religion, were the greatest vilifiers,
scorners, and abusers of those that were carried forth in the strength and
power of godliness. It is Storied of one that was Praefectus Castrorum, Provost
Marshall general.
that having gathered diverse Harlots together, made them say, that they were
Christians once, but they perceiving such lascivious acts to be perpetrated and
committed by the Christians on the Sundays when they met together, Eusebius. Lib.
8. c. 3, 4, 5.
that they could no longer endure it, which scandalous report was sent to the
Emperor Maximinus; yea, they said that the Christians did eat man's flesh, and
that they were the cause of any plague, misery, war, famine or destruction that
came upon the Nation among whom they lived. Yea, they were so impudently wicked
that they set up an Ass his head, and said, that that was the God of the
Christians, and that the Christians were so lewd, that their meetings were
only for uncleanness: yet these men had a kind of worship, they offered
sacrifice. But let us look back upon our own times, and see how many there are
that challenge to themselves the name of Christians, and yet notwithstanding
how have they, and how do they, to this very day, reproach, vilify, and abuse
the truly Religious, to whom the truly conscientious and godly man is a common
byword, and an hissing, as calling them Puritans, and Precisians; yea, if any
one that did countenance or make show of Religion, did but fall into a
temptation, and was overcome by it, how should all professors be concluded
under the same, or a worse guilt, and scandalized for the slip of one: how have
they formerly been despised, and accounted disturbers of the Church in the time
of the Bishops; nay, are they not still called Roundheads, Sectaries,
Schismatics, and what not? even by those that profess themselves to be
Christians: such as these are the devils proper factors, instead of bearing
with the infirmities of one another, they will impose the heavy burden thereof
upon all the Rest, if they can but find or hear of a godly man (as they
conceive) making but a proffer to the Kingdom of Satan; they presently would
entitle all others unto the same Interest. And what is this but a plain
opposition of the form of godliness against the true power of it? for do not
these revilers themselves profess the same Gospel, look to be saved by the same
Christ, as they will acknowledge, and yet how do they hate the ways of Christ,
by despising and contemning those that show forth the power of Religion in
their conversations! Yea, I am confident no Nation under heaven ever had the
Gospel so powerfully and plentifully preached as England has: and yet no
greater persecutors of the professors of it, then England has been, and is to
this very day; and that is it that will speak very sad things against us: yet,
Isai. 3.10, 11.
Say to the righteous, it shall go well with him, but woe to the wicked, for he
shall have the reward of his own doings; Now these men do namely embrace the
form of godliness, though at the same time they deny, contemn and abhor the
power of it.



and preserve, and hug as their dearest darlings: those sins that the truly
godly tremble but to mention, the same will the formalist gloriously, and
rejoycingly perpetrate in the sight of men.

This may inform us by way of caution, to take heed how we regulate, and pitch
our thoughts concerning the profession of Religion, that we always seriously
try before we choose, lest we take all for gold that glisters, and shadows for
substances; these times wherein we live do require discerning judgments: never
was godliness more counterfeited and abused then now, and never was wickedness
more fairly glossed and varnished over then now it is; but let all fair
appearing hypocrites know, that a small boat may serve to Wherry them over the
Thames, but it will not carry them to the East Indies; their form may serve
their turn here, but it will never convey them unto heaven; no, there is a leak
in their vessel which will by the way insensibly sink them into the black ocean
of hell; Christ will never be the Pilat to conduct a rotten bark into the
harbor of rest and safety: thou who live only upon a form of godliness,
Christ will never own thee for any of his; Yea, though thou should preach in
his name, and cast out devils in his name, yea though thou do many great
works in his name, yet Christ will say, (...). Mat 7.22, 23. Zech 7.5, 6. Isai.
58.4.
Verily I know thee not, depart from me, thou worker of iniquity.

When ye mourned and fasted, was it to me, even to me, says the Lord, did you
it not for your selves? Yea, was it not for strife, debate, and contention, to
smite with the fist of wickedness?

So will Christ say to all formalists, Did you preach for me, was it not for
your selves? was it not that you might grow into esteem among the people, and
that you might engross good benefices by it? Episcopal Clergy when they were in
their power and some other since.
did you fast to me? was it not for your selves? was it not for fear your own
Kingdom and power was going down? was it not for fear of the diminution of your
esteem and applause amongst men? O how zealous have men been against those
things that have but seemed to lessen their glory! O what cries have they made
against error, but what little care have they taken for suppression of vice and
profaneness, either in City or Country; Enquire whether the Assembly did ever
Petition the Parliament against profaneness.
with what vehemence have they followed the Parliament for keeping down error (
Provided that it be error the they cry out against.
Wherein they have done well) but on the other side, how silent have they been,
and key-cold in the work of rooting out all open sin and profaneness; and what
is the reason? certainly it is this, Prophanness strikes not so directly at
them, as that which they call Error, does: yea there are some men to mine own
knowledge that are very bitter against any that shall oppose them in opinion or
judgment, though convinced they are otherwise godly; yea, who would not allow
that benefit to them as they do to a Bawdy house or houses in this particular.
I speak nothing but upon knowledge, for I have importuned some, that such houses
might be punished and put down; but they have, yea do, to this very day suffer
them, though they have power in their hands to suppress them, yea and could
have done it with a word from their mouths, or line from their hands; how far
off from the true efficacy of godliness are such as these? I am certain where
the power of godliness rules, it will make a man as zealous against every sin
as any sin: but for a man to be zealous only against such sins as strike at
himself in point of profit, credit, or esteem, such a man's zeal is not for God,
but for himself: so that we may well say, sin is not punished because it is
sin, but because such and such men fear that they shall suffer by it: as for a
Minister to be very forward in punishing the sin of drunkenness, in such of his
parishoners as desert their own parish Church on the Lords day, and go to
Islington or elsewhere to hear, and yet is conscious of the same vice in many
others of his parish which constantly hear him, who shall go free and
unquestioned; this is not so much for their being drunk, as for their going
from their own parish; in like manner there be some that be very ready to
inflict punishment on those that resort not unto public meetings at their own
parish Church, but frequent private meetings; yet they can observe and know of
many that spend the Lords days in carousing, and revelling, both at home and in
the Alehouses, and yet can salve up such prophanesses, and pass them by
unpunished: this is not to punish sin because it is sinful, but that it may be
serviceable and advantageous to some sinister end or other; for were the
punishment out of a conscientious detestation of the sin, then would it not be
partial, or particular, but universal, without respect of persons or place;
Again, those that would have them punished for meeting in private at any time
to confer about matters of Religion, therefore accounting them broachers and
fomenters of error, can at other times wink at, and be privy unto the profane
meetings of swearers, drunkards, and blasphemers of the most high God, and of
treacherous and bloody conspirators, both against the Church and State; nay, it
may be they themselves the principal agents in such desperate and unwarrantable
designs: this is not the true way to punish the sin of Error as they pretend,
for if it were, then drunkenness, swearing, blasphemy, Teason and conspiracy,
being all as great, nay greater errors, should have a share, if not a larger
proportion of punishment. Such as these are not much unlike the Bishops, that
would strip men of their livings, turn them, their wives and children out of
house and home, for not reading the Common Prayer Book, or not wearing a
Surplice, or for nonconformity in this or that point, though never so godly and
painful Preachers: but had a man been but comformable unto their injunctions,
were he never so common a drunkard, swearer, whoremonger, or wicked person, nay
were he never so ignorant, or sottish, this was the man immovable, he should
have been fastened upon such a rock of conformity, that all the winds, storms,
or blustering noise and accusation of his lewd-led life, should never have been
able to have prevailed against him: nay his people should have been punished if
they had but moved a complaint against him, or had refused to come to hear him:
now the reason why such a wicked man goes scotfree, and unpunished, and the
innocent-godly suffer tribulation: it is because the wicked profane Priest was
a prop to the Bishops Kingdom, he was a faithful servant, they had him sure
enough, he would do them no harm: say what you could against him, this cured
all, He is conformable, O then do so no more and farewell: yea and I am
confident had our Parliament given as much power to the Clergy now, as some
would have had, that so they might have had every man under their government
and censure; you might have complained long enough either against minister or
people, without a redress, had they but said, We are for Presbytery, it had
been as full an answer, as formerly to have said, We are conformable, That is,
such a Presbytery as some of our Clergy would have had. Witness those loose,
ignorant, irreligious and scandalous Elders, which are chosen and stand
approved in their respective Classes to this day: though some of them have
protested they know no Government, nor will acknowledge any like to Episcopacy,
and I believe some Triers also must confess that before their approbation they
have been informed thus.

content in a form of godliness; O vanity of vanities! O fading joy! O bitter
sweet! O fond conceit! this their bliss will be their bane and vexation of
spirit; this was the condition of the five foolish Virgins, who had their lamp
trimmed and made as glorious a show as the wise did, and went altogether to
meet the Bridegroom: Mat. 25.2, 3, 4, 5, etc.
but the five foolish had no oil in their lamps, that is, they had no grace in
their hearts; but went to seek for it when it was too late, for the Bridegroom
came in the interim, and the door was shut against them, and then they cried,
Lord open unto us: but observe Christ's answer, Verily I say unto you I know you
not; Christ knows never a formalist in the world, Christ never had or will have
any acquaintance with them, though they pretend to have never so much
acquaintance with him; let them hug themselves in their own conceit, let them
go on in their seeming content, all their hopes at length will be blasted, and
they shall have no more comfort then their own conceit can afford them; how
woeful and miserable will their end be, whose expectation perishes? Christ
says, Son give me thy heart, but they never give Christ their hearts in all
their lives: they give the form unto Christ, and the heart unto their lusts;
but the nearer that these draw to Christ, the more will their form of godliness
vanish, as the foolish Virgins did in the 8. verse of the 25. of Matthew: Verse
8. Job 8.13.
where it is said, that their lamps went out, when they looked for most benefit
they found most deceit, for the hope of the hypocrite shall perish; Nam
expectatio Hypocritae perit.
so then, know thou that art but a mere outside in Religion, who accompaniest
thy self with the godly, and wilt be seen to be as one of them, yet know, that
when thy Gold shall come unto the Touchstone, it will be found adulterate and
counterfeit: it is not thy company can shadow or protect thy superficial
profession from the discerning eye of God; when thou shall make thy approaches
unto Christ, then, even then shall thy paint appear and be discovered, like the
paintings of an harlot before the heat: that which passes for solidity in the
eyes of man, will be found vanity in the sight of God, for though men judge
according to the outward appearance, yet Christ judges according to what is
within; so that, though thou may carry things close and covered for a time,
yet a discovering time will come, when Christ will say, Mat. 25.29.
Go take from him that has not, even that he has, that is, that he seems to
have; O then thy godliness will prove but a form, Revel. 3.17. (...).
thy riches poverty, thy glorious garments nakedness, thy conceit of wanting
nothing will be the want of all things! Yea thou will be poor, blind, and
naked, wretched and miserable. O you that have been professors of the Gospel
these twenty, thirty or forty years, who have followed Sermons as much as any,
who have performed duties in your families, yea in your closets! tell me, did
you ever meet with Christ in a Sermon, in a family, or closet-duty: have you
not gone on in a formal way, resting upon duties done? what are you reformed in
your families, or in your persons? are you not as covetous now as twenty years
since, as uncharitable, as proud, as lukwarme, as self-seeking? yea and have
thou not taken content, and blessed thy self in this condition? O be now
informed, that all this time thy Religion is but a form of godliness, thou art
but a rotten hypocritical professor, one that have all this time lived upon thy
self, thy duties, thy parts, thy gifts, but to this day never upon Christ never
had one hours sweet communion with God; never seen the rays of his love in the
face of Christ, never been with God in the mount, never been ravished with his
presence nor seen his glory: yea heaven and earth shall witness against thee
this day, that thou have only a form of godliness, thou take that for Gold
that is but dross and tin, it will not pass for current coin another day; your
garment will be moth-eaten, your nakedness will appear, your faith will prove
but historical and temporary, you have spent your time to small purpose, you
are like the horse in the mill, you are now where you were twenty years ago,
not one step nearer heaven; you have not had one glimpse of glory from above,
not one supper with Christ, nor one Feast of fat things to this very day: thou
have spun a fair thread, but not a sure one, thy glass has run for vanity, not
for eternity; thou shall have the full aim of thy performances accomplished
into thy bosom, the applause and pleasing of men; thou may expire thy last
breath in the praise and admiration of man, thy name may be had in continual
remembrance for thy good deeds and Saint like conversation with them, which
indeed was the sum of thy expectation: but in stead of thy approbation before
God, thou shall receive a curse, and the dismal and woeful doom of horror and
destruction unto all eternity, in that lake which burns for ever, where thy
good works before men shall be thy accusers and tormenters before God for thy
trusting to them for life and salvation.

Judas, how did he oppose truth, yea the Lord of truth? but how soon did the
power of truth convince his spirit, Mat. 27.5.
and caused such a horror of conscience within him, that he went out and hanged
himself? how soon tumbled he into hell? what damnable hypocrisy is it for a
man to profess to love that which he hates? in words to profess he knows God,
and in works to deny him? Tit. 1.16.
to love the body, and hate the soul of godliness? O know, that the time is at
hand that thy own conscience will fly in thy face, thy own profession will
witness against thee, that thou did but palliate and counterfeit the
sincerity of Religion: and how thou did abhor in thy heart the purity of that
godliness, that thou pretendedst with thy mouth and actions: O this is a
soul-damning sin indeed, this is to be in the power of darkness: Joh. 3.19.
Light is come into the world, Zach. 2.8. Qui enim tangit vos tangit pupillum
oculi sui. Heb. 12.29.
but these men love darkness more then light, and it is because their deeds are
evil: These men fight against God, yea cast dirt in the very face of God; that
man that opposes the truth of God, opposes God himself; he that strikes and
stands in opposition against the power of godliness, strikes at the Saints of
God, and he that touches them, touches the apple of Gods eye: He that
despises you, despises me, and he that despises me despises him that sent
me: little does a man know what, and whom he opposes when he opposes truth.

(...). Isai. 40.15.
Is a dry reed able to stand against a consuming fire? surely no: yet this God
whom thou opposest is a consuming fire; is a Worm able to overcome a Lion? thou
art much less able to fight with God; who can contend with the Almighty, unto
whom all the Nations of the earth are but as one drop of a bucket, and all the
world but as the dust of the balance: God is so infinite in himself, as that
he weighs the Mountains in a balance, and takes up the Isles as a very small
thing: Job 38.2.
O what art thou that darkness counsel by words without knowledge, did ever any
man oppose God and prosper? lo this is the condition of them that oppose the
power of godliness.

Jer. 17.10. Ego Jehovah scrutator cords probator renum, etc.
and tries the reins, and knows poor sinful man's thoughts afar of; whatsoever
designs thou plottest and projectest against the Truth, and so against God
himself, though they be never so covert, yet they shall be manifested and made
known, for none can hide from his presence, if thou soarest as high as heaven,
God is there, if thou descendest as low as hell, God is even there also, if
thou take the wings of the morning, and flyest to the utmost parts of the
earth, there shall Gods right hand lead thee, yea, there shall he find thee
out: do thou startle at this, Christian? and does thy soul propound the
question?

Quest. 1.
If it be so dangerous a thing for a man to content himself with a form of
godliness, and to oppose the power of it; How then may I know whether I content
my self with the bare form of godliness, or my profession be formal or real?

The Book of men's consciences shall be opened. Revel. 20.12.
and search thoroughly into thine own heart, upon what grounds and terms thou
tookest up thy profession, Was it to please thy friends? or for that it was in
fashion and credit in the world? or for that form was not so subject to
persecution as the power was? do thou frequent the hearing of the Word for
company sake? or because thou would not be taken notice of for absenting thy
self? or for any other sinister end or base respect whatsoever? if so, then
know that all thy Religion is merely superficial, and thy power formal.

As the proud Pharisee said, Lord, I thank thee I am not as other men, I pay
tithe of all that I have, etc.
Prayer in thy Family or Closer, give full content to thy Spirit, though thou
never did meet Christ in any Ordinance or Duty? do thou boast thy self of
thy Charity, or account thy self blessed for thy Almesdeeds? does thy soul look
for no further rest and satisfaction but from thy performances? O then know,
that all this while thou have contented thy self in but a form of godliness.
Its observeable in those men that now contend for the participation of the
Ordinance of the Lords Supper, and would through might and main rush upon, and
intrude unto the receiving of it, that they have not the power of godliness at
all in them; nay, I believe, there are very few of them that have so much as
the form, for they are either ignorant, superstitious, or profane persons; they
may be reduced unto these three sorts, yea, take the best of them in those
Parishes where they live, and screw them up unto the highest pitch, and give
them all the advantage that possible may be, and if they can be brought up but
to a form of godliness, that's very fair, it is the utmost extent of these men's
Religion, Its Christ in the Ordinance that benefits the soul, but the Ordinance
without Christ is as water spilt on the ground.
and what is the reason they so press and dote upon the Ordinances? its because
they are carried on with a blind zeal, and fervent conceit they shall be
carried unto heaven upon the wings of Ordinances; who living and dying in this
fond hope, fail of their expectation and never come there.

does them great injury, if now he will not save them, if now he will not
accept of them and their performances? Isai. 58.3.
Wherefore have we fasted, say they, and thou see us not? wherefore have we
afflicted our souls, and thou take no knowledge of us? these men think that
Duties oblige God to acceptance, and Gods disapprobation of them is a mighty
wrong unto them; they think that their actions and prayers, their services and
hearings will be as so many Chariots to convey them to heaven; but O poor
souls, there is Self sticks in the wheels, and retards and clogs their passage,
so that their glass of Time will be run out before they attain their journeys
end; O here is Self-deceit, and Soul-damning deceit, this is not Self-denial,
but Self-seeking, not the power, but the form of godliness, upon this Form they
may ever be sitting without proficiency in the School of Christ, never removing
till they be sinking into eternal perdition.

yet abroad in a remote place where they are not known, they can change their
habit of strickness into a habit of looseness and profaneness, they can whore,
drink, carouse, and spend whole nights in rioting and chambering, and make
their tongues as black as hell with all manner of cursings and blasphemies: In
like manner there be others that act the Devils part in their Families, by
violently assaulting, cursing, and railing against wife, He that has the power
of godliness is universally for God, in all places, and at all times in the
general course of his life.
children and servants, so as his Family is as a hell upon earth; but take them
from home, what Saint-like expressions and discourses shall you hear flow from
them? what fair and amiable carriages and behaviors shall you meet withal from
them: O Self-sanctified! O glorious hypocrisy! O damnable form of godliness?

Christians will not take Chaff for Wheat.
though far more excellent and profitable, they look not so much after their
Edification by the means, as their confined observation and frequenting to the
means; nay, they will plead it to be a sin in that man that shall sometimes
forbear to come unto the dispensation of the means in his own Parish, be it
never so fruitless and unprofitable, and will evil entreat such a man, and
prosecute all rigorous ways for his undeserved punishment; they will never
question nor search into the Doctrines of their Parish Priest, nor bring them
to the touchstone of the Scriptures, but all he says, Probatum est, all is
Gospel that he delivers.





they are amongst the ungodly can say as they say, do as they do, then all
their zeal for God will be turned into cursings, swearings, and blasphemings;
they are for God whilst they are with Gods; for the devils when they are with
the devils; take them at home, there you shall find them flat, dead and cold
to all good words or works; they never in their Closets found any zeal, they
never sent up cries or groans to heaven unless it be in the hearing of others;
in truth these men did never yet send up any cry to heaven, but did content
themselves with the mere form of godliness.

Non progedi est regredi.

The rule is, that men ought to grow in grace and the knowledge of God and
Christ.


as much knowledge then as now, as much faith, zeal for God, patience, humility,
then as now; nay, now less then before, for he that is no Progredient, must
needs be a Retrogredient; well may such as these be marching forward to the end
of their days, but never to enjoy the end of their hopes, that will never set
one step forward in the ways of godliness: do but ask them of their progress
in Religion, and they can give you no account, 2 Pet. 3.18.
but still they hope well, they do what they can, and more they cannot do.

Grace does cast out lust, and overcome sin.
that are no more brought unto conformity to Christ or his Word, then before;
let these profess or think of themselves what they will, they are in a false
tract, they are going the rode way to perdition, all the power of their Faith
or Religion cannot drive them out.



why not a little pride? why not a little idleness? why not a little slumber to
the eyelids, and folding of the hands to sleep; this will be their lesson, this
their plea; these reasonings will never out of their mouths, until they be
digested into actions and customs of sinning: thus they cannot approve of a
strict and close walking with God, but will be upbraiding and condemning those
that either endeavor it, or plead for it, they will seek to cloud and
extinguish the light of Grace in any who outshine their form of godliness.

Not that men should leave their Callings and presently turn Ministers who are
unfit for such Mysteries. Act. 17.11.
or to inter-meddle with other men's Callings, and yet the Exhortation is to all
to search the Scriptures; and it was the high commendation of the Bereans, that
they searched the Scriptures, to see whether those things were true that Paul
spoke, yea or no; yea though the Scriptures are able to make the man of God
perfect, and thoroughly furnished to every good work, yet these men like it not,
that any man (but Ministers) should labor in the Word, and the reason is, for
that a Formalist that opposes the power of godliness, is not able to dispute
or argue with those that employ themselves in the matters of eternal life, and
are acquainted with the mind of Christ in the Scriptures: It was not for
nothing that our Savior said, Blessed is he that is not offended with me; now
whosoever is offended with the searching or exercising the Scriptures, Joh. 5.3.
he is offended with Christ, for they are they that testify of me, says
Christ*

Israelites that longed for the Onions and Garlike of Egypt, more then for the
Land of Canaan; they are so far from standing fast, as they will not receive,
nay, hardly hear of the Liberty wherewith Christ has made us free.

congregation holy? are they not all members of one and the same body? shall
any be barred of the Sacraments? yea they would have all men partake of the
Lords Supper, though they eat and drink their own damnation, 1 Cor. 11.29.
not discerning the Lords body, though the prohibition be. that with drunkards,
fornicators, covetous persons, idolators, 1 Cor. 5.11.
and railers, we should not eat: and an express command from Christ himself,
that we should not cast Pearls before Swine nor holy things unto Dogs, Mat. 7.6.
which all wicked men are called in Scripture phrase. And Paul would know what
communion there can be between Christ and Belial, light and darkness, the
temple of God and Idols: What part has a believer with an Infidel? 2 Cor. 6.27.
yet they that partake of one bread, are one body, Shall we take the members of
Christ, and join them to an harlot? God forbid. Wherefore come out from among
them, and touch no unclean thing, says the Lord Almighty, and you shall be my
sons and daughters and I will receive you. Here we must remove two objections
which lie in the way.

Cor. 5.11. that there by eating is not to be understood of the Lords Supper,
but of common eating, and common society with men of the world.

Cor. 6.17. coming out there, was not meant from the Communion with Christians,
but to come out from Heathens and Infidels.

Corinthans, etc. And this agrees with that of the Apostle in the 2 Thessalonians.
3.6. 2 Thessalonians. 3.6.
We command you, brethren, in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ, that you
withdraw your selves from every brother that walks disorderly, and so in the
14. verse, verse 14.
not to keep company with him, if he obey not our Epistle, but note him that he
may be ashamed, yet admonish him as a brother. Now if any man shall say, then
it was eating at their love Feasts, or among themselves at their own tables.

To this I answer, That civil eating either among themselves or with Infidels,
was yet never prohibited.

Christ and his disciples did commonly eat with Publicans and sinners, Christ's
example.
and at this you know the Jews were offended, that is the Scribes and
Pharisees.

sake, 1 Cor. 10.27.
for the earth is the Lords, and the fullness thereof: so that is clear that a
Saint may eat with an Infidel, 1 Cor. 5.11.
a believer with an unbeleever; yea and have commerce and dealings with men of
the world, or else they must go out of the world: so that of necessity
believers and unbelievers must dwell and trade together while they are in this
world, yea they may buy, sell, eat, drink, conmune, or do any lawful business
as accasion is offered. This world is a common Inn for the entertainment as
well of denizens as aliens, freeborn as strangers, and they are guests
promiscuously accommodated one with the other; nothing here does separate,
nothing impede their lawful association: it is that purchased City, whose
Franchises and glorious immunities, are only appropriated unto the free
denizens (the Saints of God) that excludes their society and neighbor-hood.

But now, put the case that the Apostle had included civil eating, Who dares
say, that eaten Sacramentally, had been excluded? take but this one Argument,
If it be unlawful to eat with wicked, profane and ungodly persons at our common
tables, surely it must needs be much more unlawful to eat and partake with such
at Christ's table; and if Christ would have us take heed of being defiled with
sinners at our own tables, how much more heed would he have his people to take
of such company when they come to his table, which is holy, where he himself is
present, communicating himself unto his people under the forms of Bread and
Wine? 1 Cor. 10.21, 22.
And as the Apostle says, Can you partake of the table of the Lord and the
table of devils? so you cannot drink the Cup of the Lord and the Cup of devils:
can you have communion with Christ and with devils at his Supper? what
fellowship can there be between light and darkness? Will Christ take this well
at the hand of any man that professes an interest in, and an union with
Christ: nay will not this be an interposition betwixt Christ and such a soul;
and an eclipsing and shadowing of the shinings of grace in a godly soul,
whereby it may be made in some sort guilty of an unworthy receiving of the body
and blood of Christ.

Judas to partake of the Sacrament of his last Supper with himself and his
Disciples? Luke 20.21. Answ. 1 John 13.30.
Behold the hand of him that betrayeth me is with me on the table.

See that of John, who testifies that Christ gave a Sop to Judas, and after the
giving of the Sop, Satan entered, and immediately he went out: Now all men
agree that this Sop must be given at the eating of the Passover. If so and
that he went out immediately, then was he absent when Christ's Supper was
instituted.

Secondly, Christ took the Cup, and gave thanks and gave it to them saying,
Drink ye all of it; Mat. 26.27, 28.
and in the next verse it is said, for this is my blood of the New Testament,
which is shed for many for the remission of sins. Now if Judas had drunk of it,
then had it been to him but a lying sign of the remission of sins.

Again, Christ's blood was really shed for his Saints, and not for the world, of
which Judas was one; for if Christ would not pray for the world, certainly
muchless would he die for the world: We will not say, but the price of Christ's
blood was sufficient for the redemption of ten thousand worlds; but yet we will
say it was only intended and shed for his Elect ones.

But if we should grant that Judas did receive the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper, will that any ways prove it lawful, that openly wicked, profane, and
ungodly men may receive it? Surely no.

Judas was an hypocrite and carried his sin closely, so that the Disciples
could not discover him till at the last.

cast out, and so had a memberal right unto it; yea and by that might claim it
as his due, he being called into that society by Christ himself; So that we
cannot nor are not to look into the hearts of men, but into their lives and
conversations.

Judas did receive the Sacrament, Christ knew Judas heart, and that it was he
that should betray him from the beginning, and therefore if wicked men ought
not to receive it, why was it given to him?

Judas as he was God blessed for ever; again you know what Paul says, 1 Cor.
11.29.
He that eats and drinks unworthily eats and drinks his own damnation,
not discerning the Lords body.

Now can any rational man think that Christ would give that holy ordinance unto
Judas, of which he would not have wicked men to participate, if he had
dispensed it to him as he was God?

lately instanced in many Ministers in this City, who in stead of being
propagators of peace (which is their proper function) were instigators to war;
proclamators of new engagments against that Army, which have been procurators
(under God) of their tranquillity: and in such invective manner as if they had
been the only enemies of the Kingdom, yea of God, of Christ, and of the
Gospel: if Paul were conscious to himself of a woe if he did not Preach the
Gospel; how many woes may they justly expect, that Preach nothing but division,
dissension, incitations, and provokings to new wars and bloody designs; and
only grounded upon humane prescript and authority: These men are good at
turning and can do it by art, yet they cannot dance so in the dark, but men may
see them if they are not blind or Priest-ridden.
yea to mine own knowledge some of them did in a manner promise the ingagers
victory: again how many of the people did underwrite great sums of money, and
lay out all their endeavors for a fresh engagement to war! well may the people
be seduced that are led by such spirits: and yet of a sudden, how did this
slowing stream abate? and upon how dead and low water did the spirit of these
men move? behold how your furious Jehus assumed new spirits, or at least seemed
so to do, what preparations, what goings out to meet that Army in a seeming
kiss of love; whom ere while they were plotting to destroy: how did they seem
to congratulate with presents, those that so lately they did abominate and
detest! O damnable design! O hellish hypocrisy! But I shall not show more of
the nakedness of these men to the public eye, I shall only advise the Reader,
not to suffer this sort of men to delude him any longer under any specious
pretense whatsoever, for though the Saints count godliness gain, yet these men
count gain godliness, yea they fear men more then God, and so are opposers of
godliness while they hold out the form thereof.

The English Proverb is, None too old to learn.
must a man that has lived forty or fifty years in a parish, always
receiving the Sacrament freely, now have his faith called into question? must
he now be catechized as boys are, before he can be admitted? O this goes
against the grain, this cannot be endured, yet in this thou opposest godliness.

an everlasting Kingdom, yea for heaven it self: such as these are of the same
mind that Theotimus was, Theotimus saying, Vale Lumen amicum.
who being told by his physicians, unless he would leave his uncleanness, he
must look to lose his eyes, his answer was, then farewell sweet light: so is it
with these men, they are resolved to have their lust, though it cost them the
loss of the most precious light, and the love and favor of Christ; yea what mad
men are these to do what in them lies to damn their souls for the embraces of
a momentany lust, which they must forgo when they come to die!

of the godly, whereby dirt is thrown in the very face of God himself, and yet
this man at the same time professing God to be his father: but God loathes the
owning of such children, for they are of their father the devil, and his works
they do.

James 2.2. Its not Religion that this man applauds but the man.
this clearly shows that its not Religion this man loves, but the persons of
men are only had in admiration with him, yea I must say that civility in a
great personage, is reputed to be an high form in Religion, when true godliness
is vilified in a man of a love condition, yea and among them that a man dares
not say but that they look heavenward. O this is sad indeed! for even these
oppose Religion in the power and purity of it.

John had seen many heavenly visions in the three first Chapters of his
Revelation, yet it is said in the first verse of the fourth, That he looked and
saw a door opened in heaven, etc. and the truth is, the more true Gospel and
spiritual light that any man has, the more darkness he sees in himself, and
the more light he desires; and the reason why men do so much despise Gospel
light, is, because they themselves are in darkness, and have never had their
souls ravished with the beams of the glory of God, shining in the face of Jesus
Christ unto them; for let a man but taste of this glimpse of glory, he is never
at rest till he can have a further enjoyment of it. Not that hereby I may seem
to ^ustifie any vain fantasies or whimsies in men that will labor to bring the
Gospel to their light* and not their light to, or from the Scripture, that will
forsake fundamentals in Religion, and tell us there is another way to heaven
for men of years, besides that of Faith and repentance, which is the old and
sure way: but so far forth as new light keeps close to sound fundamentals, so
far let the Saints own and embrace it as true saving light, with all
thankfulness.

Christ out of envy, and some of good will, and some to add afflictions to the
Saints bonds; so some profess Christ of envy, some of good will, and others
that they might spy out the Saints liberty, and heap up the measure of their
sufferings; had not Judas been privy to Christ and his Disciples meetings in
the garden, he could not so readily have known where to have found him, when he
came with the high priest officers to apprehend him, for the Holy Ghost says,
he knew the place.

Now the reason why the power of godliness has so many secret enemies, is, for
that it fights and contends against every secret and bosom sin; what
irksomness and reluctancie of spirit will there be in every godly soul, against
the lest temptation of sin? and this inward disturbance, and disquietness of
spirit, the hypocrites, and men of the world cannot bear: Is not Zoar a little
one, and my soul shall live; what, cannot I give a little liberty to the flesh,
make use of a small lust? what not a little liberty for company keeping, for
covetousness, for pride, revenge, for wrongs done me, must I keep so close and
exact to the rule? O this makes men's actions speak, that they are no friends to
the power of godliness, though in words they will not confess it for shame: the
truth is that in all ages there have been underminers of the power of godliness
in a secret way, pretending to truth and godliness, when their intents were
quite contrary; witness the high Commission Court of late years, yea witness
all the faction of the conformable Clergy; yea and thousands of professors at
this very day, and especially those that so much vindicate and plead for forms
in the Worship of God; also those loud outcries against all men that side not
with nor approve of Zion-Colledg-Presbytery, being not content with what the
Parliament appoints, but are grasping, and thirsting after more power, that it
might be in their own hands, to tyrannize over men's consciences, more then in
truth either the Bishops or their Courts did ever exercise; for they generally
assented to conformity to such Ceremonies as made for the establishing of their
pomp and glory; and in those days a man for a little money might make means and
friends to enjoy the liberty of his conscience, but now nothing will serve but
submission or exile, as some Presbyterians have said to my face, that such
ought to be the condition of all those that were of a contrary judgment, and
that after admonition would not submit; they were not fit to live in a Kingdom,
though at the same time they have confessed that they have been honest men,
setting their judgments aside; O this is unexpressible madness for men to
subjugate Christians consciences unto a formal government; their very words
argue them formalists, and their inward malice, and predomination over tender
consciences, demonstrates the want of the power of godliness: therefore take
this for a rule, that whosoever, in all his discourses or actions, shall so
contend for any form whatsoever in matters of Religion, more then power, such a
man denies the strength and power of godliness, for godliness is of a more
excellent nature, it tyeth a man to a strictness of life, wherein power will
appear as well as form: the heart is the thing that God requires, for he will
be sainctified of all them that draw near unto him; and he will be worshipped
in spirit and truth, and not in outward forms only.

Do men that profess the form of godliness, oppose the power of it? O then, it
does highly concern men to look into their own ways and examine their own
hearts; do thou profess Religion, because the laws of the Land enjoin thee to
it: or is it from a principle of thine own, or by the power of Jesus Christ? O
know, whatsoever flows from man, as he is man, is carnal, earthly, and
sensual; therefore as the cause is, such is the effect; as the principle, such
the act; art thou guided and principled by the Spirit of God in thy profession?
is the word of God the pattern and rubric of thy life? does thy conversation
speak thee Christian, and spiritual? does thy blossom sprout from the tree of
life? art thou rudimented and disciplined from thy Schoolmaster, Christ? then
thou may without prejudice conclude thy qualifications to be truly
sanctified, and thy profession truly godly; it is not the outward profession,
but the inward intention, and cordial affection, that God accepts; My son,
says God, give me thy heart, walk before me, and be thou upright and perfect;
it is the close and inward walking of the heart with God, that God accounts
uprightness and perfection: its impossible for a man to be upright with God,
unless his heart be for him; there can be no soundness in Religion springing
from a rotten heart; away then with these outside services, abandon all thy
goodly flourishes; cease to seem, learn to be: let not thy profession be
superficial, but supernatural: be less glorious in the eyes of men, and more of
God; sore not too high with thy artificial plumes, lest the vigorous heat of
the Sun of righteousness scorch thy wings, and thy soul, and body be
precipitated into the infernal lake. Take heed then unto thy heart, labor for
integrity in that, and thy conversation will be godly; it is the madness of
many men, when they are reproved for their sinful lives, to reply and say, Why?
what man is there that lives, and sins not? though I sometimes fall into
error, and sin against God, yet my heart is good, my wishes are to and for God.
O foolish men, who has bewitched you! is it possible for virtue and vice to
co-inhabite? for a bad life to issue from a good heart? can spirit and flesh,
can light and darkness, can Christ and Belial be co-inthroned? O vain
conceptions! O foolish imaginations! A good and sincere heart makes an
identity and conformity in the whole man, it spiritualizeth his understanding,
will and affections.

It puts a spirit of illumination into the Understanding and Judgment of that
man whose heart is truly sanctified and upright toward God, whereby he is able
to discern and judge of things that differ, between things that are good and
evil.

choice of the best things, it makes it aspire after heaven and heavenly
things, it will labor and act after nothing but Christ and him crucified.

Col. 3.1.
If you be risen with Christ, seek those things which are above, where Christ
your Head is: Set not your affections on things of the earth, for you are dead,
and your life is hid with Christ in God; that is, you are, or ought to be dead
in your affections to the things of this world: O let your conversation be
where your life is hid. Now to draw a period to this Point, and to wind up this
Particular, on which I have dwelt something long.

Is it so, that men that content themselves with a form of godliness, do
thereby deny the power of it, and so contract unto their souls the guilt of an
heinous sin? Yet let me offer one word of comfort unto such men, and not leave
them as men without hope, though indeed their case be very miserable as they
stand at defiance with heaven; yet I will not seal them up to condemnation, nor
give them all for lost; let me yet set the Gospel before their eyes. If yet you
can believe you shall be saved; If yet you return, Though your sins be as
crimson, they shall be made as white as snow, though they be as scarlet, they
shall be as wool; there is efficacy enough in the blood of Christ to wash you
from all your filthiness; add not then impenitency and unbelief to the rest of
your abominations, take heed of that soul-damning sin, look upon the blood of
Christ, as that Fountain that stands open for Judah and Jerusalem to wash in,
for sin, and for uncleaness; remember that Christ came not to call the
righteous, but sinners to repentance; O this is a true saying, and worthy of
all acceptance (says Paul) that Christ came into the world to save sinners,
whereof I am chief: Thou that have sinned against free Grace, against the
tenders of Love and Mercy, against the very bowels of Christ, yea against the
blood of the Covenant, know that thou have cause to bless God that yet thou art
not in Hell, that yet thou art not quite without hope; its possible yet for the
breath of Life to be breathed into thy soul, thy salvation is yet attainable,
if God do but yet inspire his Grace and Power into thy soul, to make use of
present means and opportunities of mercy; O remember that God is in Christ
reconciling the world unto himself, yea the world indefinitely; why may not
thou that have been a formal professor all thy days, that have been an opposer
of the power of godliness, have a part in that great mercy of reconciliation?
God, he entreats thee to be reconciled; 2 Cor. 5.20.
hear what Paul says, We are Ambassadors for Christ, as though God did beseech
you by us, we pray you in Christ's stead that you would be reconciled to God,
for he has made him to be sin for us, which knew no sin, that we might be made
the righteousness of God in him: In which places of Scripture you may take
notice, that there is nothing required on thy part, but to be willing to
receive a pardon, and to be reconciled to God, yea, and God himself will work
both the will and the deed: tell me, thou desperate sinner, will thou be saved
or no? art thou willing to be made partaker of the death and resurrection of
Jesus Christ? art thou willing to be transplanted out of the wilderness of the
world into the Eden of God? art thou willing to be snatched from a Dunghill unto
a Paradise? to be cured of a loathsome Leprosy, and to enjoy perfection of
health and beauty? what sinner so impudent? what sinner so vile as to deny a
consent and willingness to this? yet to lay open a little further the rich
Treasury of the Mercies of God unto any such obdurate soul, that will harden
his heart, and refuse to be willing to receive pardon; let him know, that
Christ will save him whether he will or no, if he belong to the election of
Grace, God will will not lose any of his Elect ones, nor suffer any to pluck
them from him; long may Satan bear rule and sway in the soul of a chosen Vessel
of God from all eternity, and such a one may seem in the eyes of the Saints to
be a reprobate, and lost creature, to be a vessel of wrath, destined for
destruction, yet may God at length come with the tender whisperings and
breathings of his Spirit (which breaths and blows when and where it
lists) upon such a miserable soul, and calm the storms thereof, and pour in
fresh oil into its wounds, and put in marrow, strength and vigor into its dry
bones, and say to such a soul, Come out of thy blood and live, for he has
given a greater price for the redemption of his people, then heaven or earth,
then Angels or men, for he has given his own blood for his Church, Acts 20.28.
and for his Elect; and why may not thou then be one of them? for as great
sinners as ever thou were have been saved. Where sin abounds, there Grace
abounds much more (yet sin not, that Grace may abound, take heed of that)
there is an absit, a God forbid, put to that. But now, though a man has sinned
with never so high an hand, and never so high a nature against God (the
commission of the sin against the holy Ghost excepted) yet for such a man to
receive pardon of his sin, and to be made holy through the righteousness of
Christ, this shows an abundance of Grace and infinite Mercy, yea, it makes for
the greater exaltation of the glory and riches of free Grace, to pardon the
greatest sinners; it sets forth more the glory of Gods rich Grace to pardon a
Mary Magdalen, to be reconciled to a persecuting Saul, to free a Thief from the
guilt of his misled life, and carry him immediately from a Cross (the deserved
end of his wretched life) unto an everlasting crown, to snatch him from the
power of sin, and bring him unto the freedom and fellowship of Saints, to
receive him into his own bosom, whom the world loathed and spued out; O the
height and depth of the Love of God in Christ! There is more advancement of
the Glory of God in this, then in the saving of an Abraham, an Isaac, or a
Jacob, who were never guilty of such sins as they were; Its a greater honor for
a Prince to pardon one that has been a Traitor against his Crown, Dignity, and
Life, then to pardon one for stealing a trifle, or for picking a pocket; and so
more honor redounds unto the Lord in his being reconciled to an old sinner, to
one that has stood out against him all his days, who has been a Traitor
against God, and Christ, the Gospel, and the Saints; then in his pardoning one
that has only sinned against him of infirmity; now there cannot be a worse
Traitor against God, then that man that has only a form of godliness, and
opposes the power thereof; yet let not this man, nor any other in the like
condition cast away the strong Anchor of Hope, so long as he breathes on this
side Hell, for there is salvation purchased for such, as well as for lesser
sinners, if they will but lay hold of the proffers of Mercy in the Gospel, let
them look upon Christ as a full Object of salvation for the greatest sinners;
and is not this encouragement enough for the vilest sinners to come in to God,
and to Christ? nay, especially when Christ will do all their works in them, and
for them, and reaches forth such strong and free invitations, as so many
cables for the supportation of any sinking soul, when he calls in general unto
every one that thirsts, Isai. 55.1.
To come and buy Wine and Milk without money, and without price; Come unto me
all ye that labor and are heavy laden, Matthew. 11.28, 29.
and I will give you rest, and you shall find rest unto your souls. Joh. 7.37.
Jesus stood and cried, saying, If any man be athirst let him come to me and
drink of the waters of Life freely: So again in the Revelation of John, Revel.
22.27.
The Spirit and the Bride said come, and let him that hears say come, and let
him that is athirst say come, and whosoever will, let him take the water of
Life freely.

Many more places of Scripture might be instanced and brought for this purpose,
but these are sufficient to set forth the free invitation of all sinnners, both
by God, by Christ, and the Spirit of Grace; the Lord looks for nothing at thy
hand, but to receive pardon, and to be reconciled unto himself, therefore why
will you perish, O sons of men? your condemnation is of your selves; Let this
then take off those that do refrain to come unto Christ, because they have
nothing to come withal, such a soul is best welcome unto Christ, that is
emptiest in himself; thy approaches and addresses unto Christ, are not to be
measured with those unto great Personages here on earth, there needs no rich
presentations to usher in, or plead thy acceptance, nor purchasing of Mediators
by clandestine and close-fisted bribes; the dearest and highest Saint in heaven
cannot so soon procure thy access unto, and acceptance with Jesus Christ in
heaven, as the fauning Parasite, and Saint-seeming Devil can with man on earth;
nor does Christ accept of any creature, or worthiness in creature, either in
heaven or earth, on the behalf of a poor soul, to ingratiate it into his favor
and embraces, but of his own breathings in a contrite spirit: O then if sin be
a burden to thee, come unto Christ, and he will take it off, he will deliver
thee from that weight; God he has laid help upon one that is mighty, by his
Stripes we are healed, by his Merits saved, by his Wounds cured, and by his
Power preserved unto everlasting life; and to press more home unto the souls of
poor sinners, the consideration of the free offer of Grace and Salvation of
Christ, let them but read the ingeminated invitation of the Spirit of God in
that one Text before cited, Revel. 22.17.
Come, come, come, The free Word Come, is no less then three times reiterated
in that one Verse: O then do not wilfully refuse and cast off the free offers
of Life, Grace, and Salvation, for know it is tendered as freely to thee, as
ever it was to any creature under heaven, and know that to reject this mercy,
is to reject the greatest mercy that ever was tendered to any soul upon the
face of the earth; it is to reject not only thine own good, thine own life,
thine own salvation, and thy sweet communion with, and enjoyment of Christ and
the blessed Saints for ever hereafter, but also of the free Love of God and
Christ; the loss whereof is worse then ten thousand hells, yea, it shall be an
aggravation of all thy sins that ever thou did commit in thy whole life: for
he that will not believe, is damned already, there is no hope of such a man;
take heed therefore of Unbelief, for it is worse then Hell it self, as being
the cause of all miseries that a soul can be afflicted with.



against all worldly and spiritual conflicts? who would not get this wing to
elevate and mount his soul into the Heaven of Heavens, where the act of faith
shall cease? then shall believers live no more by faith, but by sight: there
expectation shall be swallowed up of fruition, invisible things become visible,
glimmerings of light, become flames, and ravishments of glory. Saints here can
better tell what God is not, then what he is, we can here say, he
incomprehensible, and immutable, but then we shall see God in his essence, in
his nature and excellency, as he is a spirit, so far as a soul can be made
capable of so glorious an object. O then of what happiness and bliss do
unbeleevers deprive themselves, that will not believe, though everlasting life
depends upon it! O sinners, remember how often has the Gospel been preached
unto you? how often have you been invited unto the marriage Feast, and you
would not come? How often have you preferred the wedding of your souls unto the
profits and lusts of this world, rather then unto Christ? Consider, Christ has
invited you, your own wicked wills have refused to comply with his call; he
would have gathered you together under his wings, but ye would be dispersed and
separated from him, certaintly it shall be easier for Sodom and Gomorrah in the
day of Judgment, then for you: and thus I have dispatched the first branch
(Having a form of godliness.)

2 Timothy 3.5. (...),
Sed qui vim ejus abnegarint.
But denying the power thereof.

THe Apostle still continues his complaint of what should come to pass in the
last and evil times, which are accomplished in these days wherein we live,
which we have showed you in the precedent part of this Treatise: these men in
the text retain the form of godliness, at the same time when they deny the
power of it; things of least value most set by, and those of the greatest
concernment most slighted, contemned, and despised, darkness before light,
vanity before verity, shadows before substance, weakness before power; here you
may see men acting much outwardly, and intending nothing less inwardly, men
contending for, and satisfying themselves in types and forms, and denegating
substance and reality; types and representations are good, if the power and
body typified and represented be joined with them: but when there comes a
disjunctive particle (but) between form and power, then all is lost, Religion
lost, profession lost, and the professor also; the fabric of that soul being
built upon such a formal and sandy foundation must needs perish and fall to
ruin.

Having a form of godliness, but denying the power thereof.

This monosyllable (but) includes many syllables of truth and high concernment;
(...), sed.
it is very authoritative and significant, and though it be but short in it
self, yet often times it reaches as far as hell it self, as here in this place,
where it parts the power of godliness from the form you know that it is many
times said of the Kings of Israel, that they reigned such and such a time, and
did such and such acts, but they did evil in the sight of the Lord; now this
(but) spoils all, all seems well until this exception or reservation comes
in: its a common thing for men to say, such a man is a good Preacher, endued
with admirable gifts, but he is covetous, but he is proud, but he will be
conformable to the times, this interpositive (but) eclipseth the brightness and
glory that men's actions did before seem to carry with them: it is such a
separative, that it divorceth the pre-reputation of all thy actions, and
brings in, and entailes a lasting disreputation and dishonor upon thee and
thy actions; how inconsistent is sin with goodness! read of all the failings of
the Saints, and you shall never read that a godly man was a covetous man at one
and the same time, for of all sins, this has a black brand of hell set upon
it, he that loves the world, is an enemy to God, that man has not the love of
God dwelling in him; the truth is, that grace and covetousness are
inconsistent; they are light and darkness; you know though it be never so dark,
yet if light appear, the darkness is expelled, so the absence of light causes
darkness: so when grace comes into the soul, covetousness vanishes. Wherefore
whosoever delights in covetousness, and makes money his chiefest aim; let
this man profess what he will, he is an Idolater, a denyer of the power and
life of godliness, and remains in the gall of bitterness, and bond of iniquity.
So others will say, such a man is a good Christian, but he will defraud and
overreach his neighbors, but he will tell a lie for his own advantage: they
might as well have said, he is an honest man, but he is a very knave, but he is
a cheater and a liar; so such a man bears the outward cognizance of a
Christian, his profession is very specious and Saint like, but his heart is
hypocricall and diabolical: he has no faculty or power of profession, but fair
symptoms and shows, he bids fair for heaven, he outstrips many a godly man in
the eye of the world, but at length his vanishing prop will fall him, and he
inevitably drop into hell.

( Denying, or having denied) that is, (...), qui abnegarint.
earnestly and stiffly to reject, to refuse, forsake or turn the back upon, to
cast off, or gainsay* its the same word with that to Titus 2.12. Tit. 2.12.
teaching us, that denying ungodliness, so 2 Pet. 2.1. 2 Pet. 2.1.
Even denying the Lord that bought them; so in that fourth of Jude, even
denying the only Lord God, and our Lord Jesus Christ; thus you have the
explication and signification of the word denying, thus they are said to deny
the power of godliness, who do make but a bare profession of it.

The next word is power, (...). Vis, potestas, sufficientia.
and it signifies strength, authority, ability or sufficiency of godliness,
and this shows the excellency of it, which is not looked upon, nor apprehended
by the men of the world, which makes it to be so vilified and contemned: Thus
much for the etymology of the words.

But denying the power thereof.

Acquaint us with this truth; That when godliness comes into the soul, it comes
with power and life; in its operation its very powerful; its like a violent
rushing wind, that carries all before it, or a devouring flame that consums
all combustible matters; its like the piercing Sun in the Element, that with
its radiant beams at noon day, does dimm and dead the hottest fire, and
dissipate the foggy mists of the earth: so does godliness in the soul allay and
extinguish the heat of lust, and banisheth and dispels the noisome mists of
corruption; where it comes, it overcomes, like an irresistible torrent that
depels and drives back every opposing thing; yet it has its degrees and diverse
effects of operation: in some more, in some less, according to the measure of
grace received, yet very powerful in all: thus it came to the Jailor in that
Acts 16.29. Act. 16.29.
Then he called for a light, and sprang in among them, and came trembling, and
fell down before Paul and Silas, saying, What must I do to be saved? It did so
powerfully seize on him, that it made him to tremble and quake, it rowsed him
out of his security, it enlivened and raised up his dead and benumbed
affections, it quickened his faculties, and enlightened his understanding, it
made him now to enquire, that ere while was without sense, it made him look
after salvation, that before never thought of it, neither knew what it meant;
he that a little before did imprison the Saints, and put them in the stocks (
verse 24. Verse. 24.
) O now who more ready to act for the Saints liberty then he? now he leads them
out, now he falls down before them, ready to be their servant, that was before
their tyrant. O wonderful change! O invincible power of grace! His eyes were
now opened, his understanding enlightened, his Judgment informed, his affections
turned another way, he is not now the man he was; a little before an Infidel,
now a Believer; even now a captive, now leading captivity captive: late bound
up in the fetters of darkness, and now translated into the marvailous light;
heretofore a persecutor of Paul and Silas and all the Saints, and now a
refresher and comforter of them (quantum mutatus ab illo!) O happy conviction!
O blessed change! Again, do but consider that of Paul in the act of his
conversion, how he was beaten from his horse to the ground, the text says he
fell to the earth, and he trembled, and was astonished, and said, Lord, Acts
9.3, 4, 5, 6.
what will thou have me to do? yea, and he was struck with blindness, and
continued so for three days and nights; yea and they that were with him were
speechless; now could any thing be more powerful then this? the Lord was
working a great work upon Paul, and he works like himself, he comes with power
and authority: he darts his grace into the soul, like his thunderbolts into the
world, that cleave asunder, divide and shake the very frame and condition of
created Beings: and so in the Acts 2.2. Act. 2.2.
And suddenly there came a sound from heaven as of a rushing mighty wind, and
it filled all the house where they were sitting; What was this but the Spirit
of God that fell upon the Apostles, and gave them other tongues to declare the
mysteries of the Gospel to the Sons of men? it came from heaven, (...).
and it came with power, yea strengthened with all might to work powerfully, and
prevailingly upon the hearts of men: and that's the reason why Christ compares
the new birth to a wind that blows, John. 3.8.
and blows where it lists, and no man knows whence it comes, nor whether it
goes: now what is more powerful, yet what is more invisible then the wind? even
such is the working of the Spirit on them that God calls home to himself; this
is that white stone that no man knows, Rev. 2.18.
but he that receives it; I will give him a white stone (says God) and in the
stone a new name, that no man knows but he that receives it; its thought that
the Holy Ghost alludes here unto the custom of the Grecians in their Courts of
Judicature, when they were to condemn a man to death, then the Judge sent him a
black stone, if he were to be freed and delivered, then he sent him a white
stone; but yet it was so made up, that he that carried it knew not what it was,
none but the Judge and the man that received it had knowledge of it; so none but
Christ and the soul that receives him, knows of the manner of conveyance, or
of the gift of eternal life.

There are two things in this point to be unfolded.





We have spoken somewhat of the first in the former part, in the explicating of
the words; and now we will somewhat enlarge upon it.

Godliness is the right exercising and acting of those graces which the soul
has received of the Spirit of God, Godliness what it is.
both to the glory of God, and good of man, or the bringing forth of the fruits
of grace in holiness of life and conversation; that is, when a man improves all
his graces given unto him to the advantage of his Master Christ, to be glad of
every occasion whereby he may advance the glory of that God, that has advanced
him by the glory of his grace: as God is pleased to show the glory of his grace
to a soul, and that to the utmost, so godliness in that soul desires to improve
and actuate all that grace and mercy to its utmost power, to and for God,
Christ, the Gospel, and the Saints; And this is the very life and soul of
godliness, and this is the continual course that godliness acts, this is its
full scope and aim; the perfection of this, is that which it does aspire
after: for this is the souls breathings from the time that the soul received
it, unto the end of life, and so godliness becomes the souls witness here, and
hereafter, 1 Timothy 4.8.
for it has the promise of this life, and that which is to come.

I will pour out my spirit upon all flesh, Joel. 2.28. Act. 2.16. Isa. 44.3.
Math. 13.11.
etc. Unto you it is given to know the mysteries of the Kingdom, etc. Yea,
Christ communicates himself unto his people, and makes them partake of his
fullness freely, its not attained by skill, art, wisdom, learning, riches, or
any created power whatsoever, yea all the created power in heaven or earth, is
not able to attain unto one scruple or grain of godliness, its not from men,
nor from the word of God, or dispensation of the Ordinances in themselves, but
from Heaven, and that by the breathings of the Spirit of Jesus Christ; I shall
but only touch upon this point in this place.

We have now seen, that godliness where it comes, it comes, freely and comes
with power; the next thing to be considered, is, how it comes to pass that
godliness comes with so much power into the soul.

life be inspired in him from a principle and fountain of life: Thus the
Almighty being infinite in power, causes those things which come from himself
to be very full of power.

Now that God is powerful, is clear by those names given to him in Scripture;
Nomen Elohim est personaru^, (...).
He is called Elohim; Elohim signifies the mighty Judges, its a Word of the
Plural Number, and expresses the Trinity of Persons in Unity of Essence; so
Jehovah, which signifies the eternal Being of himself: then (I am) Exodus 3.14.
(I am that I am) I will be what I will be, a most significant expression of the
absolute and uncontrollable power of God; yea, this name is attributed to
Christ, I am Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the ending: (...).
Then he is called Lord, and so a Lord, that he is absolute of himself, and can
do whatever he pleases in heaven and earth; then he is called God, which
commonly signifies a burning fire, one that runs through all things. Again, He
is called the strong God, (...) Heb. 12 29. (...). Esai 40.17.
Shaddai, the Almighty God, all which denotate and set forth the Almighty power
of God; and so in his Works, For he is the God that weighs the Mountains in a
Balance, and takes up the Isles as a very little thing, yea, that counts all
things less then nothing; what an expression is this, what Sovereignty, what
Omnipotency is this? what debasement of of all power in competition with his?
If it were the thoughts of Solomon, an earthly King, after his fruition of all
sublunary pleasure and power, to account them but vanity, nay, less then
vanity, well may then the Solomon of Salomons, the King of Kings, estimate the
greatest things in the world, nay, the power of the whole world, to be nothing,
yea less then nothing; who of nothing raised the world, and all created Beings
therein, and to the same nothing can reduce them at his will and pleasure: This
I say is that God which sends godliness with a power into the soul of his
Saints.

The next thing that we must consider, is, The ends why God sends godliness
into the souls of his people with such power; By the way taking notice of
godliness as it is observable in its Cause and Effect; for godliness in this
place is Metonimically spoken, the Effect for the Cause, now Grace is the cause
of godliness, and godliness is the effect of Grace, for Grace is that which
makes a man a godly man, and its Grace that comes with power into the soul,
whereby the life of man is acted and carried on in the ways of godliness;
These things thus premised, we shall proceed to the aforesaid Ends or Reasons.



Satan's plea.
Men and Angels, and makes this or the like plea for himself; This soul is
mine, it was born mine ( We were by nature the children of wrath, Ephesians. 2.2 3.
etc.) yea, it has lived mine, I have had the possession of it these twenty or
thirty years, yea, it may be forty or fifty years, what power now shall snatch
him out of my hands? he is my bounden servant, he is my ancient soldier, he
has covenanted to fight under my banner, he is a loyal subject of my Kingdom,
he is true to his trust, he will oppose my opposers, he will defend my right
and interest, he will not have me lose any footing, he will rather perish then
have me dispossessed, why then should not I actuate all my power and force for
him, to keep him still my faithful servant? rather die then part with him.

Now Christ he comes and lays claim to this soul, and says, This soul is
mine, Christ's plea.
and it was given me of my Father, yea, Joh. 17.6.9.29 24.
I have loved him more then mine own life, I have shed my precious blood for
him that I might redeem him out of the jaws of hell, and deliver him from the
power of Satan; I am the Captain of his deliverance, yea, Heb. 2.10.
I have bought him at a dear rate, and paid more for him then heaven and earth
it self, yea, 1 Pet. 1.18.
then all the createed power in both, and I will have him: and Christ enters
this Fort, binds the strong man, and does cast him out by the strength of those
weapons which are not carnal but spiritual, yea mighty through God to cast down
strong holds, this is that (...), that Savior, that can, that will ransom, and
deliver his People, maugre all oppositions whatsoever; this is that (...), that
Anointed one, Ephesians. 4.8.
that victorious King of Kings, that leads captivity captive, and gives gifts
to men, of whose power the Saints receive power, 1 John 2.13.
and grace for grace, whereby they are enabled to wrestle against pincipalities
and powers, Ephesians. 6.12.
against the Rulers of the darkness of this world, yea, against spiritual
wickednesses in high places.

1 John 2.16.
the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life, the first and strong invaders of
our first Parents, that did invade and overcome, that laid siege unto, and took
possession of the strong-fortified, and enabled-to-resist faculties of the soul
of Adam, and in him do still smite his loins, and ensnare and seize upon the
power and strength of all his seed, they plead a right and possession by
antiquity, and they will keep their hold until they be evinced and cast out by
the power of Grace, which is the only weapon we have to ward off the assaults
of these spiritual wickednesses, 1 John 5.4. Rev. 15.2.
and this is the victory that overcomes the world, even our faith, and by the
power that God put into those glorious Martyrs, they overcame the world in all
its persecutions, imprisonments, yea, and death it self

Paul say, I beat down my body, I club it down, 1 Cor 9.27. (...). Vi subjicio
corpus meum.
I beat it black and blue, as the Original word signifies, and all yet all was
little enough, for (Naturam expellas furca licet usque recurrit) there are such
imperfections in the perfectest Christians; such relics of Nature that there
will be still continual buffetings and conflicts between the Spirit and the
Flesh, though the Spirit does oppose, and sometimes get ground, yet the Flesh
will be returning and getting head again; so long as we are in the body little
does the world know what ado Grace has with the Flesh and Spirit of the
Saints, there will be such reluctances, such combats, such heavy burdens upon
the soul, that often times it makes the Saints go very heavy and sad most part of
their days. And therefore the Apostle exhorts us To cleanse our selves from
all filthiness of flesh and spirit, 2 Cor. 7.1. Romans 7.23, 24.
and this makes him cry out, Who shall deliver me from the body of this death?
well, I thank God through Jesus Christ our Lord; that is, by that power of
Christ that he sends into his soul, he was delivered, and by that power alone
are all the Saints delivered from these three great capital Enemies.

Stand fast (says Paul) in the liberty wherewith Christ has made you free:
Gal. 5.1. 1 Cor. 16.13.15.57.
Watch you, stand fast in the faith, and quit you like men, and be strong; for
God, he has given us the victory through Jesus Christ our Lord, and ye are
kept by the power of God through faith to eternal salvation: 1 Pet. 1.5.
Now the reason why the Saints do so often fall and slip, is, because they
trust to their own strength, and rest not on this power which they receive from
Jesus Christ; for he that has this power in his soul, and does make use of it
by Faith, it may contend against Sin, Corruption, Death, and Hell it self, yea,
and overcome all, as the Apostle says, I am able to do all things through
Christ that strengthens me, In him we are more then conquerors; and
certainly, did we but know what comforts we lose, and what foiles we receive in
not making use of this power, it would put us upon our Watch and Guard, and
make us careful to keep Sentinel by this power in our souls: Had David, and
others made use of this power, and stood upon their Watch, he had not committed
Adultery, Peter had not denied his Master, Jacob got the Blessing by a lie,
Abraham denied his wife for fear of Pharaoh; and so diverse others which I could
wish might be as Landmarks unto us, whilst we sail through the sea of this
world.

Caleb, Because he had another spirit with him, therefore he shall see the
Land, yea, I will bring him into it, and his seed shall possess it; Yea, he
followed me fully, says the Text: now this Spirit was nothing else but the
Spirit of Faith: so he fulfilled after me, as the Hebrew Word signifies, that
is, He was constant in obedience to Me, or to my Commands; Certainly, where
Grace raigns in the soul, sin does not only decay, but die, the man is become
another man: as Paul when he was converted, he was another man then he was
before, he was of a new mould, a new temper; before he persecuted the Saints,
but now he embraces them, and preaches to them; before he knew not who Christ
was. Who art thou Lord? but now he does not only know Christ, Ego non sum ego.
but preaches Christ, and suffers for him, yea, now he is willing to die for
him; yea, the Saints know this by experience, that there is a certain vis, a
power infused into the soul from God, which was not before in them, otherwise
they could never have had any dominion oversin, never have been made new
creatures, but should have still remained under the power of darkness, and in
their natural estate, they should never have known any difference betwixt
themselves and the wickedest man on the earth, but should have committed the
same abominations with them, they should never have been translated from death
to life; neither should their spot have been differenced or known from the spot
of the wicked; had not God made them experimentally to know and feel a mighty
overawing, and sin-conquering power, sent, and let in unto their souls, from
the Almighty Spirit of God, which does divide between the marrow and the bone,
between the Flesh and the Spirit.

Son who is the glory of the father; these souls put to their seals that God is
true; such a soul gives a testimony unto the world that whatsoever God has
said of his Son in the word, is the very truth of God, yea it can freely
adventure all, and lay all upon Christ for life and salvation, yea had it ten
thousand souls it would cast them all into Christ's arms, its resolved there to
live, and there to die, its faith is surely fixed that the gates of hell cannot
prevail against it, come what will come he is confident, that neither life nor
death, principalities nor powers, shall be able to separate him from the love
of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord: thus is the soul sustained and
upheld by the power of grace, and acts courageously to and for Christ and the
exaltation of his glory.

and communicative, to and for God, and as it has received mercies, so it will
be always returning praises, whereunto it would be altogether dead (for by
nature we are dead to every good work) had it not first been enlivened and
quickened with a power from above; for we cannot stir nor move for God until he
stirs and moves in us; we are altogether senseless, till made sensible by him,
it is in him we live, we move, and have our being, we could not love God, had not
he loved us first, nor could we give out our selves unto Christ, did not Christ
first breathe into our souls the spirit and power of grace: and therefore we
may well say that none can hold communion with Christ, but those and those
only to whom Christ sends the power of godliness.

That as sin has reigned unto death; Romans 5.21.
even so might grace reign through righteousness unto eternal life through
Jesus Christ our Lord; so that as sin has mastered and over-powred all the
faculties of the soul, and members of the body in bringing of them in
subjection to Satan, so now godliness sitting upon the throne exercises them
for Christ, and brings them into subjection unto him; now grace and godliness
stand Sentinel in the soul, and command all, so that when any cavalering lust
or corruption appears, it may take them off, or if they should prevail through
frequent assailings, that then the soul may flee to Christ for more forces to
encounter and cast them out: for Christ, he has promised to assist his people
against all their enemies, who by the power of his death will bury all his and
his Saints enemies in his grave, so as they shall never prevail against them
here nor hereafter.

the best regenerate, for the flesh is still warring against the spirit, and
the spirit against the flesh, for there was ever a strong antipathy between
these two. Now Christ who is the Captain of our Salvation make his graces
powerful in his Saints, that so they may not give ground, but stand fast in
that condition whereunto he has called them; for the Saints are kept through
faith unto salvation, by that power of grace which is given unto them of God
the Father and and our Lord Jesus Christ; otherwise were it not powerful, all
the grace the Saints had received was but in vain, and so Christ's death and
resurrection had been to little purpose, for one end of Christ's death was to
kill sin, and so of his resurrection, to raise us up to newness of life, and so
to keep us there, that we should never be surprised, and conquered by the old
man, but contiue in the new, and walk as a people ransomed by the Lord.

for had not the graces of the Spirit of Christ come into the soul with power,
the soul could never have performed any duty acceptable to God, for God accepts
of nothing unless it come first from his Spirit; for its the voice of his own
spirit whereby the Saints cry, Abba Father; for as on the one hand every good
and perfect gift comes from God who is the Father of lights; so on the other
hand, no man of himself without this power is able to think a good thought or
speak a good word, much less do any good action; man through his lost ability
in Adam is spiritually dead, but carnally living; nothing that he can own or
lay claim unto as his act, but sin; but when godliness comes into a soul with
power, O then the faculties of the soul are resuscitated and made alive again,
and the members of the body are regulated and brought into conformity unto the
spirit, and made by it to act for God, who before acted against God, that
before were the weapons of unrighteousness unto sin, are now become the weapons
of righteousness unto the glory of that God, who by his power cast into the
soul did change that vile and sinful body, and made it glorious and
instrumental for his praise; hereby the understanding is unvailed, its now
brought unto new discoveries, its carnal foolishness is sanctified wisdom, it is
now able to discern and know the wonderful mysteries of godliness; this power
of godliness is the Eye Salve of the soul which takes off the condense film of
ignorance, and works a sensible illumination in that faculty of the
understanding, also this is the restorer of the will, it brings it from nature
to grace, from willing the things of the flesh, to will the things of God: it
disingageth the affections, it stops their pursuit after the world, and causes
them to run after God and the things of God: nay further, this power of God is
a new Heaven, created in the soul, its the new birth, its the regneration, its
the new nature, its the death of the first, and the life of the second Adam;
its the extirpation of nature and sin, and the renovation and transplanting of
grace and life in the soul, hereby the eyes can see for God, the ears hear for
God, the tongue speak for God, and the feet walk for God; in a word the whole
man by virtue of this power, is made serviceable for God, which it could never
have been, had not this godliness come into the soul with power.

Phil. 1.29.
for its not only given to Saints to believe, but also to suffer for his names
sake.

The Saints they are Christ's witnesses on earth against the world: Act. 5.32.
Rev. 11.3.
how have the people of God stood as a wall of brass in witnessing for the
truth of Christ in the times of those ten persecutions, what wicked, cruel, and
barbarous dealing did they find, and receive from this world! was not all
manner of cruelty exercised against them that hell and men could invent? and yet
by this power of godliness they were enabled to endure all, yea, and with
rejoicing also, that they were counted worthy to suffer for the name of Christ.
O ineffable support! O glorious conquest! the sense of pain was swallowed up of
the sense of joy; the torments of hell vanquished and slighted by the thoughts
of Heaven; whilst burning burnishing, while extinguishing reviving, whilst
crucifying enjoying Paradise. Do but look into the book of Martyrs, and see,
what sawing asunder, roasting ailve, putting into boiling oil, eyes burning
out, and what not? and yet by this power God made them stand strong, and oppose
his and their enemies, to their own shame and confusion, so that the Saints
slaughterings, at length became their persecutors sufferings, they were wearyed
and tired out with afflicting and butchering of the Saints: and as God by his
Power did then make them courageously to stand, so is he still the same God,
nor is his hand shortened that he cannot help, but still will continue this
power unto his people, that they shall stand for Christ, and undergo any kind
of suffering with joy; for we fight against principalities and powers, yea
against spiritual wickedness in high places; and this is another end why
godliness comes into the soul with power.

Pecuniam, quae permaneat ac continuo duret, gloriam, quae semper floreat.
Basil.
and the real and permanent glory thereof; to be enamored of the ravishing
beauties of God the King of that glory, that so the temptations and allurements
of the world being slighted, and the glory and excellency thereof counted as
dirt and dung; the eternal glory of God may be advanced and only aimed at in
that soul, for it is the glory of the Church here to have the Sun upon her
head, and to be crowned with a crown of twelve Stars, and to have the Moon
under her feet (that is) the earth and the glory thereof in its most glorious
Robes must be stamped upon by Saints, even as Samuel stamped upon Agag the King
of the Amalekites: 1 Samuel 15.
when a temptation comes and offers it self to Saints, they ought to be higer
minded then to embrace it; In this point Saints should be like unto
Themistocles, (...).
who having gotten a great victory by war, would not stoop to take the spoil,
it would not stand with his state and honor to do it, and when others did it,
his answer was, you may, you are not Themistocles: for when the world (having
received a foil by this power of godliness) offers its glory and pomp to such a
soul, (which indeed is but the spoil of grace) that soul should refuse them,
and leave them to be taken up of the worldlings, and say, Such as you may
entertain and hug the embraces of the world, but for my part, I am born higher,
I am of a nobler blood then to mind such off all, such contemptible things;
Saints should be like Antipater, (...).
King of Macedon, who being offered a book to read, said, I have no leisure: so
when the Saints have the glorious book of the whole world, and the pleasures
thereof laid open unto their eyes, and tendered to them to be read, they should
answer, we have no leisure to contemplate upon such follies, nor to receive
such vanishing delights, our spirits soar aloft, we must follow our Fathers
business which is in heaven, it must be our delight, and our meat and drink to
do our Fathers will, for he has taught us that we are crucified to the world,
and the world to us.

And as Saints by this power live above the world in its glory and pomp, so
they must live above the world in its scorns, reproachings and persecutions,
and say in plain terms, Quo tendit, non quid passura sit cogitat.
World and Devil do your worst, for true Virtue does not so much consider what
it suffers, but whether it tends, whether its going, and what is its end; Virtus
dum patitur vincit, Virtues sufferings are its overcomings, the world and all
its reproaches are thereby conquered so that Saints should not look what share
they have in the Whip, Noli attendere quam poenam habeas in stagello, sed quem
locum in Testamento.
but what portion they have in the Word of God, what interest they have in
Christ Jesus, what crown of glory is laid up for all them that love the
appearing of Jesus Christ, who shall change our vile bodies, and make them like
his glorious body, For when Christ who is our light shall appear, then shall we
appear with him in glory, then shall all tears be wiped from our eyes; then
shall the worlds scoffs be turned to our glory, the worlds despite to our
rejoicing, the worlds cursings to our Hallelujahs and praising of that God that
did so powerfully deliver us from them, and has now clothed our despicable
and loathed bodies with immortality, and our souls with the Robes of Jesus
Christ.

by this the soul desires to decrease, that Christ may increase.

Ye are kept by the power of God through faith to salvation; 1 Pet. 1.5.
O how soon would Saints turn their backs upon Christ, and go back to embrace
their former sins, lusts, and corruptions, and quite fall away from what they
do now profess, were it not that God did hold them in the hollow of his hand! O
whither was David going, whither was Peter going, and Lot, Noah and diverse
other of the Saints, had not God by a mighty power given a turn to their
spirits! its his Promise to his Saints, that when they go astray, they shall be
made to hear a voice behind them, saying, This is the way, walk in it; thus God
by this power of Grace does carry his Saints from grace to grace, till he
brings them to life and glory; were it not for this, they would with Demas
forsake Christ, and embrace this present world; the strongest Saint on earth
left to himself, would quickly fall and miscarry in his way to salvation; its
impossible for any man to be saved if he should be left to stand upon his own
legs; what infinite need then do we stand in of this preserving power! it is
not the beginning but the end that crowns the work, Finis coronat opus. Luke
9.62.
No man having put his hand to the Plough, and looking back, is fit for the
Kingdom of God; it was the complaint of God against the Church of Ephesus,
Revel. 2.4.
That she had left her first Love in Revel. 2.4. Therefore he says again in
Verse 7. To him that overcomes will I give to eat of the Tree of Life which is
in the midst of the Paradise of God: And again, in Revel. 21.7. He that
overcomes shall inherit all things, and I will be his God, etc. Rev. 21.7.
If then perseverance obtain the Crown, and only he that overcomes shall
inherit eternal Life, What will become of poor miserable creatures that are not
able to stand one moment, nor to resist the least temptation, if the merciful
power of an Almighty God does not aid them, and carry them on through this
boisterous and troublesome world, and conduct them safe unto the Haven of Rest!
had it not been for this, 2 Timothy 4.7, 8.
Paul could never have said, I have fought a good fight, I have finished my
course, I have kept the faith, henceforth is laid up for me a crown of
righteousness, etc. It is therefore by the power of grace that we are kept and
preserved faithful unto the end.

what manner, or what are the footsteps of it?

Answ.
You may call to mind how I told you, that the words were Metonymical, the
Effect is here put for the Cause: Godliness in its highest excellency is but
the fruit of Grace, the improvement or exercise of Grace; Grace is the cause of
Godliness, as fire is the cause of heat, and yet as the cause is, such is the
effect, for powerful causes make powerful effects, that's an undeniable truth in
Philosophy, and that's the very reason why godliness is so powerful in the souls
of men: Now would thou know the working of Grace, or of the Graces of the
Spirit of God in the soul?





To show how they are wrought, and their footsteps in the souls of Believers;
And first to begin with Faith; not to trouble you with that which is
Historical, Temporary or Legal, but to speak of that True, Evangelical, Saving,
and Justifying Faith.

Faith then is a certain grace wrought in the soul by the Spirit of God, Fides
est actus intellectus.
and by the Word preached, and its an act of the Understanding also; now I put
the Word and the Spirit together, as they ordinarily are appointed to work
together to make a man a Believer, for I dare boldly say, that the Word of it
self never yet to this day wrought faith in any man without the Spirit of God
working with it; but I am confident that the Spirit may and does, where the
Word preached is not to be had, work this faith in the souls of the Elect; 1
Cor. 3.6.
Paul may plant, and Apollo may water, but it is God that gives the increase;
a man may live all days of his life under a powerful Ministry, and stand by
Christ, and hear the joyful sound of the Gospel, and yet never the nearer, they
shall count it but as thunder, as those did in John 12.29. Joh. 12.29.
unless the Spirit of God boreth the ears, and sanctifies their hearts to
understand and believe the things of God, and though Faith be the gift of God,
yet as God puts forth an hand in giving of Faith, so he gives a hand to his
Elect to receive Faith, otherwise they could never have it: thus God
illuminates the Understanding, whereby it comes to know, that there is such a
thing as Christ is, Christ the object of Faith.
and then he convinces the Judgment, that this Christ is very excellent, and
that of necessity he must be had, or else the soul is undone; then comes the
Will, saying, If Christ be so good, and that of necessity I must have him, O
then I will receive him; thus at length is faith begotten in the soul: yet we
must take heed of attributing any thing to man in this, for all this is Gods
own work and none of man's.

Now the other three graces may be styled Faiths subsequents or concomitants,
Faiths companions, or the fruits of Faith, yet I shall speak a word to each of
them: and first to Repentance, I say, of the working of this grace in the souls
of Gods Elect, as I have said of Faith; and in this work of Repentance we must
note these four steps or degrees. True Repentance.










sin in its own nature and proper colors; now sins vail begins to be plucked
off; before sin was pleasurable and delightful, now it is odious and loathsome,
now the soul discovers sin to be a Scorpion, a Serpent, whose sting would have
caused eternal death; that which seemed to be the pleasantest and
delightfullest companion, is now the ugliest, basest, and contemptiblest thing
that ever the soul beheld since it had a being; that which formerly was
embraced and hugged as a Dalilah, is now thrown out of the windows as a
Jezabel: Gods enemy.
now the soul looks on sin as Gods greatest enemy, yea, as that whereby the
soul has cast dirt in the very face of God, and has grieved, and done
despite unto his holy Spirit, and crucified the Lord of life and glory: Again,
The souls greatest enemy.
the soul looks upon it as its own greatest enemy, it did unparadise it, it
has ever since blindfolded it, and fettered it up amongst a legion of devils,
and has made a separation between God and it, it has made it at emnity with
God, and has brought it into a state of condemnation, and was able to sink it
into the very bottom of hell.

Romans 3.19.
there to answer the breach of all the Laws of God, James 2.10.
Moral, and Evangelical, yea, and that this guilt lies so heavy on the soul,
that its able to press it down into destruction, 2 Thessalonians. 1.8.
and to banish it from the presence of the Lord, and the glory of his power for
ever; sin now is become a burden to purpose, yea, such a burden as David
complains of in Psalm 38 4. Psalm. 38.4.
says he there, Mine iniquities are gone over my head as an heavy burden, they
are too heavy for me; that which once was so light, that the soul could not
feel it, O now it is so heavy that its like to break the very heart of it; now
conscience is wakened, and sin stands as a brazen wall in its order before the
soul; I will set his sin in order before him, Psalm. 50.21.
there is a Scripture to that purpose in the Psalmist.

Joseph, Genesis 39.9.
How can I do this great wickedness and sin against God? Now the soul is
sensible of its indignity to God, now it can grieve and rent its very heart for
its unkind dealing with God, who has dealt so kindly with it, and by this
means the soul is brought into contrition and godly sorrow, never to be
repented of.

Solomon said of the Harlot, Pro 5.4, 5.
Her end is bitter as Wormwood, sharp as a two edged sword, her feet go down to
death, and her steps take hold on hell: thus the soul by the power of grace
being made acquainted with the loathsomness and bitterness of sin, begins to be
weaned from its breast, and forsakes its embraces; let God or man say what can
be said of sin, in respect of the vileness of it, the soul can give its free
assent and consent unto it, yea, its so hateful to the soul, that it hates the
very name of any thing that does but tend to sin, yea, it hates it in its most
glorious robes of pleasures, profits, honors, credits, or what ever the world
can afford, it will shake them off, as Paul did the Viper from his hand; it
knows sin to be viperous, infective, and stinging, it looks upon it as its
bane, its poison, its undoing, yea, in the souls apprehension its worse then
hell, then the devil, or all, or any thing that can be thought upon.

The next thing is Self-denial, that's a soul that has no Self, no will when
any thing comes in competition with God, with Christ, it owns its being from
God, it renounceth any self-existency, its naked till clothed from above, its
barren, till made fruitful by Christ; it stands in need of all things till
supplied by that Fountain, that opens his hand, and fills all things with
his blessing; this Grace subjecteth the soul, and makes it lie down at Christ's
feet, its always lying under the droppings of Grace, that it might receive
replenishings from the Spirit, this causes the soul to look out of it self,
and to be carried out with an expectation, hungering and thirsting after Christ
and his righteousness; this makes the soul to decrease that Christ may
increase, it debaseth it self that it might advance Christ, its willing to part
with all, that Christ may be all in all; it does not only make the soul to see
emptiness in it self, but to see emptiness in every thing besides: In a word,
Its a soul-denying, and a Christ-advancing Grace, in whatever it does, it will
not suffer the soul to aim at any thing which may tend to sinister ends, it
does willingly cast off ease, profit, pleasure, honor, or what ever can be
thought on before God and Christ shall lose their glory; this Grace brings the
soul into a right temper; where this Grace has its true working, the bias of
the soul runs from the world, and runs heavenward, Godward, and Christ-ward.

Self-denial, as its Faiths concomitant, so it works with Faith in purifying
the heart, in mortifying of sin, Matthew. 12.37, 39.
and in following of Christ, For he that will follow me (says Christ) must
first deny himself, not regarding profits, pleasures, afflictions, or what ever
else lies in the way to life and glory, For he that loves any thing, whether
it be father, or mother, more then Christ, is not worthy of Christ; and he that
will find his life shall lose it, but he that loses his life for Christ's
sake, shall find it.

1 John 4.8.3.14.
the children of God from the children of the devil; its a sign that you are
departed from death to life, because you love the brethren; he that loves not
his brother is not born of God, neither does he know him; to her much is
forgiven because she loved much. Love is of such an excellent nature that it
transcends the tongues of men, and Angels, it excells the gifts of prophecy,
all mysteries, 1 Cor. 13.1, 2.
all knowledge, nay all faith, it is of an enduring nature (as Paul says) in
the 1 Cor. 13.8. Charity never fails, it outlives faith and hope, 1 Cor. 13.8.
for they shall cease, but love shall be perfected and endure for ever,



the Judgment rectified, the will turned to that which is good, the affections
run after the right object, conversion is not in part but in whole; the feet
cannot be washed alone, but the hands and other members must be also cleansed,
for so said Christ unto Simon Peter one of his Disciples, when he said unto
him, Lord wash not only my feet, Joh. 13.9, 10.
but also my hands and my head: Jesus answering said unto him, he that is
washed needs not save to wash his feet, but is clean every whit, etc.
intimating that he that is washed by the blood of Jesus Christ is not only
cleansed from one sin but from all, not only purified in one member of his
body but in all, he is sanctified throughout both in soul and body; but though
this grace of sanctification or godliness be thus thoroughly operative in it
self; yet often times its not so to the souls apprehension: that's in Gods
ordinary way of working: now to open unto you in a word how to man's
apprehension this great work of conversion, grace and godliness, is wrought.

First, God by the preaching of his word together with the working of his
spirit gives a touch to the conscience of an elect vessel, which the Scripture
calls a prick in the heart, that's in the ministry of the word; as those in the
Acts were pricked in their hearts, saying, Men and brethren, what shall we do
to be saved? Act. 2.37.
God does here discover a man's condition to himself, whereby he comes to see
himself.







the hand, and says, Is there no deliverer for thee? I will deliver thee, I
have satisfied divine justice, I am thy surety and the propitiation for thy sin.



Matthew, Lydia and others.

Peter's Sermon; Act. 2.37.
the Jailor, the woman that washed Christ's feet with her tears, and many
others, as David, Peter, etc. Look upon that to the Romans, where the Apostle
says, ye have not received the spirit of bondage again to fear; Romans 8.15
which shows clearly that once they had received it before they came to Christ
in their preparation to conversion.

And again Christ comes to call sinners to repentance, yea those that find sin
to be a burden to them, and such as are weary and heavy laden, and pressed down
to hell in their own apprehensions by reason of their sins that they are guilty
of; The whole needs not the Physician, but such as are sick (says Christ)
such as are sick at the heart, of sin, as are sensible of the pain and horror
of sin.

I am somewhat the larger in this point, because there is a generation of men
in these days, that deny the use of the moral law, to be any means of driving
the soul to Christ; yea or so much as the use of it in any sense to the Saints
that are brought to Christ; let these remember, that the Apostle says, the Law
is a Schoolmaster to bring us to Christ, not only the Law Ceremonial but moral
also, See Romans 3.31.

Do we make void the Law? behold we establish the Law. Romans 3.31.
And I suppose none dares say, but he speaks there of the moral Law; and again
the Law is Just, holy, and good: what then, is there no use to be made of that
which is just, holy and good, by believers under the Gospel? surely yes: and
then Christ himself justifies and maintains the Law moral in that of Matthew,
Mat. 5.17, 18, 19.
Think not that I am come to destroy the Law, no, no, I am come to fulfill it.
Therefore whosoever shall break one of the least of these commandments and
teach men to do so, shall be called the least in the Kingdom of heaven.



The Holy Ghost works and makes faith effectual by these three acts.

power and authority in the Law, whereby it makes a man poor in spirit; Now
blessed are poor in spirit; What Is the reason? Mat. 5.
O it makes the soul in a fit temper to receive Jesus Christ in the Gospel
preached, for the spirit of bondage does make the law effectual, as the spirit
of adoption makes the Gospel.

Gods love in Christ to poor creatures, yea here he shows what is the hope of
his calling and the glorious inheritance of the Saints, and what is the
exceeding greatness of his power to them that believe, certainly the Saints of
God need the Spirit of God to show these glorious mysteries.



But I would not here be mistaken, I do not say that the spirit of bondage
works alike upon and in all that come to Christ, but in some more, and in some
less, neither dare I limit the Holy one of Israel, who is tied to no means or
ways to call home his Saints to himself. But this I say, that first, its Gods
ordinary way of working in and with his Saints. Secondly, its a safe way for
the Saints to know their estates by: it being that way in which the Saints have
been called home to Christ in general.

Mat. 6.19.
nor thieves break through and steal? How few come to have a taste, or to meddle
with the Saints joy, which is communicable to none but them in Christ! Where is
the Wise, 1 Cor. 1.20, 21, 22, 26.
where is the Scribe, where is the Disputer of this world? Not many wise men
after the flesh, not many noble, not many mighty are called: has not God made
foolish the wisdom of this world? Christ gives thanks to his Father, That he
has hid these things from the wise and prudent of the world, and has revealed
them unto babes; and this Christ gives as a reason, Because it was thy good
pleasure; It was Gods good pleasure to put godliness into the souls of the poor
and despised ones of this world, and to pass by so many great and mighty ones;
Grace is free, and God gives it to whom he will: O this speaks very sad tidings
to men of the world: what, for a man who was made so excellent, to have his
portion here in this life, to be not differenced from the bruit beasts! how
miserable is this man's condition, whose happiness is terminated in this life!
now the Saints condition is far better, they have their bitter-sweet, but the
wicked have their sweet-bitter, their glory, pomp and greatness, their heaven,
kingdom and paradise are in this world only, but their woe, misery and torment,
Job 5.3.
is in that which is to come; whereas the godly may here endure heaviness and
sorrow for a night, and enjoy future bliss and happiness to all eternity.

Jude, ve. 3.
when they see them so earnest to contend for the faith which was once given to
the Saints, yea, when they contend for Christ, the ways of God, and follow the
Gospel of Salvation so earnestly; here they may see the reason of it, they have
a certain power given them within that puts them upon it, that excites their
affections, and kindles a holy zeal in their heart, and carries them on with
strength to wrestle with the strongest oppositions, Psalm. 39.3.
My heart was hot within me, while I was musing the fire burned, says the
Psalmist; there is an inward heat in the breast of the godly, which makes them
lively and acting for the faith of the Gospel, they must act, will they nill
they; the power that is in godliness puts them upon it, the Love of God, that
constrains them to do it; what made David to dance before the Ark of the Lord
when he was despised in the eyes of his own wife, but this power of godliness?
what made the three children so resolute and careless in answering the King,
when he threatened them, that unless they would fall down, and worship the
golden Image, they should be immediately cast into the fiery Furnace: observe
their answer, Say they, Dan. 3.17, 18.
That God whom we serve is able to deliver us out of thy hand, O King, and he
will deliver us: but if not, know, we are not careful to answer thee in this
matter, for be it known to thee, O King, we will not fall down before thy gods,
nor worship the golden Image that thou have set up: now did not the standers by
look on these men as mad men, and wonder at their peremptory answer, and blame
them for their folly, in not yielding to what the King had commanded, certainly
they looked on them as men, mere men, little dreaming that there was any other
power in them then was in themselves, but you see how they were deceived, for
these men had on the armor of proof that the Apostle speaks of, they had this
power of godliness in their souls, that did maintain their courage, and
fortify their hearts against what could assay them, it was not the fear of the
King could shake the loyalty of their hearts to the King of Kings; it was not
the fire of the Furnace could affright their thoughts, or any way dimm, or
outburn the glowing rays of the light of the Sun of Righteousness within them;
so now in these days when carnal men see a man so mighty and zealous for a
godly Minister, or to take much pains in the hearing of the Word Preached, that
he will go through thick and thin, wet and dry, and spare no endeavors that he
may enjoy or meet with Christ in an Ordinance, when profit cannot tempt him,
pleasures draw him aside, and threatenings divert him from his course, they
stand and wonder, and are as it were at a loss to see a man so industious in
such a way; O now this will give you (carnal wretches) a full account, this man
has a power in his soul which does uphold him, put him on, and carry him
through in spite of all gainsayers; he can say, as Paul said, I can do all
things through Christ that strengthens me: Christ bears sway here, godliness
is predominant, and the man is now led by another power then he brought into
the world with him, the man is carried captive by the Spirit of Christ, and
power of Grace, so that he is not now as other men are, who have not this power
in them: Cast but your eyes on men of the world, and you shall see them given
to several vices, sins, and lusts; one who is given to company-keeping, that
man is never himself but when he is in a Tavern or Alehouse, there is his
delight, that is the end of his thoughts, let all other business sink or swim,
let his wife or children pine and languish at home with thirst and hunger; nay,
let their tears and silent mournings pierce the hearts of their pitying
neighbors, yet they shall never reach his, his care and pity are drowned in
carowsing bowls, and Bacchus alone shall be his god: another addicted unto
whoring, whose own wife, though never so honest, never so well pleasing, and
good conditioned, can be (as she ought to be) the sole subject of his content,
but his sinful and venereous thoughts must carry him on, and prompt him unto
adulterous actions, contaminating his body with lewd and lothsom Harlots,
satifying and quenching his sulphurous lust in dirty puddles, and refusing
clearer and pleasanter streams of his own, sporting himself in the arms and
bosom of a prostituted Strumpet, and rejecting and defiling the sweet embraces
of a chaste wife: this man sacrifices unto Venus, and she is the Goddess of his
heart. And another he is possessed with voluptuousness and pleasure, and is never
well but when he is swimming in that stream, he is presently taken with that
temptation of Satan's, Matt. 4.8, 9.
who does but show him the kingdoms of the world, and the glory of them, and
promises to give him all those things, to worship him, and do him service: O
this is a welcome prize to him, what more delightful, what more sought after by
him then the pleasures and glory of this life? the devil may buy his soul for a
Poppit-shew, so that his outward man be but pampered and satisfied with a
moment any pleasure; let his soul perish in eternal wrath and burnings, what
cares he? the devil is his god, a voluptuous life the consummation and
perfection of his hopes: now let a moral civil man cast but his eye on this
company-keeper, and he admires at his course, and looks upon him under the
notion of a mad man; take a chaste man, that beholds the way that an unclean
person walk in, and he stands amazed at him, preferring the brutish beast
before such a man, thinking surely the devil is in him, and he does not take
his mark much amiss, as you shall hear by and by: And so for the Swearer, or
any other that is given unto, or lead away with any notorious vice, men
contrary minded wonder what it is that sets this man or that man to follow such
and such courses.

Now I shall tell you, that as the power of godliness in the Saints carries
them on after the ways of God, Christ, and the Gospel, so the power of the
devil, sin, and corruption, carries wicked men on in the several ways of all
manner of lewdness which the devil can suggest unto them; one he tempts unto
one manner of sin, another to another, a third to a third kind of
profaneness, for Satan, who is the Prince of this world, Ephe. 2.2.
by his spirit rules in the children of disobedience, they are his Vassals and
Slaves, and must do his pleasure upon force; therefore a man may safely
conclude, when he sees a man is given up to such abominations, certainly the
devil is in that man, he carries him on to the consuming of all, or most part
of his precious time in company-keeping, haunting of Taverns and Alehouses
continually; and so for a Whoremonger, who is like a Dog that follows every
Bitch, he is plunged into the sink of lust, and his eye follows the dictates of
his Concupiscence; and so for other vices that several men are addicted to:
Alas, poor creatures, for a while may they graze upon the pleasant Pastures,
and feed upon the Mountains of pleasure, until they be fatted, as he Ox for
the slaughter, and the Sheep to the Shambles: O senseless, bestial creatures,
whose ruin comes upon them unawares, and whose destruction is inevitable! O
that these silly wretches did but take notice of, or know the cunning Sophistry
of Satan, or could but perceive the subtle twinings of this Spiders web, which
is so slily wrought for the intrapping of poor souls: O this Soul-catching
Spider, who is always sucking the precious blood of poor souls, and yet silly
wretches, they remain insensible! this vigilant Fox waits for opportunities,
and suddenly takes his advantages from men's several inclinations; if a man be
given to company-keeping, then will he be sure to cast in one opportunity or
another into his hand, whereby his design shall take, and the man be brought to
enjoyment of his desires, he will be sure to fit him with companions and
suitable invitations, he will persuade him it shall be for his profit to go to
the Tavern or Alehouse, it will be for the advancement of his employment in his
Calling, and for the ingratiating of him into the acquaintance of such and such
men that may hereafter make him, or at least better him in his estate: And thus
Satan having insinuated himself into the thoughts of the poor man, and having
gotten him into company, O how sweet and delightful will he make his company to
be unto him! satiating his Genius with the beautiful and sparkling looks of the
wine, causing him to drink so long until he be inflamed, and until he has
brought him under the woe of Solomon's Wine-bibbers, then he knows he has made
him fit to attempt and commit any sin, then no sin can come amiss unto him, be
it what it will be; and so if a man be propense, and inclined to uncleanness,
the devil will match his humor, he will fit his temper, he has varieties of
satisfactions for such a soul, no opportunity shall be wanting for the feeding
of his lust; the devil will either bring him unto the wantons bosom, or bring
her to his; one way or other shall be so wrought, that his lust shall be fed to
the height, and his unbridled affections satisfied; O the incredible workings
of Satan, the undiscerned plots of this machiavilian! the lechers desires shall
be accomplished even against and beyond his own expectation, the wanton woman
shall be embraced before thought of; so the lascivious man shall be brought
unto the enjoyments of an alluring damsel at unawares, such is the policy, such
are the contriving endeavors of Satan for the bringing about of his own ends,
and the captivating of poor souls, and so is for any other sin or wickedness
that men are and can be given unto, they need not to fear the carrying on of
their sinful designs, there is a cunning artificer whom they little dream of,
will carry them on for them with a witness far beyond their expectation, he
will be sure to be at the beginning and end of all, he will be at every turn
until his work be finished, even the perdition of such sinful souls.

But here let us take heed that we do not belly the devil, and charge him too
deep, and lay the burden of the blame only upon his shoulders, for many men
are apt when they have done any wickedness, presently to post it off, and to
lay it unto the devils charge; but let such men know, had they not the tinder
in their own box, the fire would never take; for fire could never burn without
something that is combustible; so the devil could never draw men to sin were
there not something within them for him to work upon; as namely lusts, and
corruptions, and the seeds of all manner of sin; these does he breathe upon, and
kindle into a flame; he presently takes an advantage, and seizes upon the
magazine of the soul, and keeps it for his own service, for if he could but see
a man standing on his guard to prevent his assailments, he would forbear,
concluding with himself, here is no good to be done: so long as our first
parents stood upon their watch, the devil could take no advantage, but no
sooner did they slight their guard, and hearken unto Satan's parley, but they
embraced his temptation and were overcome, and he suddenly not his will of
them; so might we say of David, Solomon, Peter, and diverse others, so long as
they stood upon their watch, they stood sure, but when once they gave way to
their corruptions, then he had his desire, then he played his part, then he
fulfilled his will; let the devil have no advantage from within, then the man
is secure, these domestic and inbred enemies are the worst, treachery is first
wrought within, and then woeful will be that spoil; when the rich Jewel within
is surprised and taken, what avails the cabinet? let the inward guard be
strongly fortified, and then let the devil do his worst.

Romans 8.13, 14.
its a matter of high co^cernment and great difficulty, for a man to
spiritualize all his actions, yea by this power of godliness a man ought to
make a spiritual use of all his thoughts, words and actions, yea of all his
objects, discourses, readings, and meditations whatsoever, as to the pure all
things should be pure, so to the spiritual man all things should be spiritual;
if a man read the book of the creatures, and behold all those varieties in
nature, certainly if he would make a right use of them, he must see God through
them, and admire God in them, as for a man to reason with himself, If the
creature be so excellent, O how excellent is the Creator! if the creature be so
sweet, O how good, how sweet is that God that gave it that sweetness! as the
creature is very glorious in its several colors and objects, as in flowers,
etc. O then how much more glorious is that God that gave it that beauty! as the
succession of creature comforts makes them mercies indeed, so Gods various
dispensations to the sons of men, but especially to his Saints, O how excellent
are they, O how sweet and glorious are they that come into the souls of his
Saints! Now you know if a man should always eat and drink, always lie in bed,
always be walking up and down, if man's life should have no vicissitudes, but
be spun out in one perpetual act; O what a misery would this be! it would bring
man's days to a sudden end; therefore God gives in several refreshments in the
neck of one another, which makes them mercies indeed to man; and so it is in
things spiritual, should a man always be hearing of the word, receiving
Sacraments, or be always at prayer or conference, a man would quickly faint
under these frequent performances, and come to nothing; the great God knows,
that the Saints have bodies as well as souls, therefore you see he is pleased to
give six days to provide for them, and only one, namely the first day of the
week, to serve and worship him publicly, and yet not so tied up, but that we
may even then take creature comforts for our refreshment: so that you see when
we are to draw near to God on his day, he is pleased even then to give that
liberty to his Saints, as that they may call it a delight, for he gives us our
delights in drawing near to himself in public worship, in family duties, in
closet meditations and ejaculations, and in the use of all creature enjoyments
with moderation, so far as they may fit us for our public and private duties.

the flesh: the spirit striveth against the flesh, and the flesh against the
spirit, and these two are contrary one to the other, there will be continual
conflicts and engagements one against the other, there is a deadly feud between
the flesh and the spirit, and not only for a moment, for a day, or for a year,
but for the whole term of natural life.

Now its no easy employment for a man day and night to act the part of a
soldier without any intermission of relief, for as first, he ought to be well
armed; so secondly, he ought to have skill to use weapons, otherwise his enemy
will circumvent him, and foil him at his own weapons, and so put his life in
hazard; now this is the condition of all them who have received the power of
godliness into their souls, they are most obnoxious to the enemy, oftenest
assailed, invaded and besieged with the most ingenious and crafty subtilties
and insinuations of Satan; none so encountered, none so narrowly watched, no
failings so soon discerned, no weakness with so sudden advantage taken hold
of: them therefore and them in an especially manner it behooveth strictly to
stand upon their watch, and to maintain their guard, and still to be armed with
these excellent weapons, the Holy Ghost has given unto the Saints to fight
with, Ephesians. 6.13, 14, 15, 16, 17.
against principalities and powers, and spiritual wickedness in high places,
namely the whole armor of God, which he exhorts us to take and put on, least we
be taken unprovided, and the enemy prevail against us: yet this enemy is not
only flesh, but flesh and spirit, world and devil, which by us must be
opposed; wherefore seeing a Saints life is no idle life, be informed and
exhorted, not only to know, but to do your duties, to stand fast, and keep your
watches and live as wise and valiant soldiers, always fighting the good fight
of faith, until you have finished your course, and received the Crown of
Glory, which Jesus Christ the Captain of your Salvation will give unto you in
that day, Rev. 15.16.
when you shall be crowned with victory, and have Palms in your hands in token
thereof.

declaring the excellency and powerfulness of the gift: its free grace poured
out into those souls who were ordained for vessels of mercy from all eternity,
its Christ that first makes his Saints temples, and then he will dwell in them,
and needs must that building be pure, holy and strong, whose builder, maker and
inhabiter is God; its an infinite God manifesting himself, to and in a nothing
creature, its mighty power working freely in an empty vessel, its the old of
days nourishing a new creature; its an increated power strengthing the feeble
loins of a created Being, its fullness comprehending emptiness: in a word its
the Almighty Creator, overshadowing and over-powering the poor creature,
without the influence of whose grace and mercy it would instantly perish and be
reduced to nothing. O you Saints of the most high, the majesty of Heaven, God,
Christ and the spirit of his grace, are all your friends, the Father he has
loved you from everlasting, and made choice of you to be of his Family, in
infinite love and mercy, and because he loved you, he sent his dear Son into
this world to die for you, yea and to rise again that you should not perish;
and Christ he came freely out of the bosom of his Father, that he might
manifest his love unto you in laying down his precious life, and shedding his
precious blood for your sakes; then the Spirit of God is sent unto you, that he
might lead you into all truth, and give you an inheritance among them that are
sanctified by faith in Christ. Act. 16.18.
O therefore, poor creatures, know that you have nothing but what you have
received, of his fullness have ye received, and grace for grace; O then see that
your glory and happiness lies not in doing, but in receiving: in the Law men
did bear their own charges, as we may say, but now in the Gospel Christ bears
the Saints charges to Heaven at his own proper cost; our condition of our
selves is worse then the meanest beggars condition in the world, for he can put
forth his hand to receive an alms; but when God offers a man grace, let him
offer it never so freely, never so long, if he give him not withal a power,
and an hand to receive it, he will go without it for ever, and this hand that
God does extend and give out unto the soul, to receive, and take hold of his
gracious offers, is lively faith, whereby Christ, the promises and the Gospel
are made over and enjoyed by that soul; so empty in himself is man, that he is
not able to think a good thought, or to speak a good word, muchless to perform
any good action. O then what cause has poor man to admire free grace, and to
look into and consider his one nothingness, and to make his addresses unto the
fullness, and all sufficiency that is Christ Jesus! then should a man behold
Christ in the riches of his grace, love, bounty, and tender mercy; then would
the soul be ravished with the glory of his presence, and be taken with that
sweetness which is so incomparably excellent, and delightful; there may he lie
down and consolate his soul on a bed of Roses, and refresh his fainting spirit,
with spices and rich perfumes. O then by one glimpse of Christ's glory, would a
soul be made to see it self as it is in it self altogether ugly, defiled, and
loathsome, then shall it see it self in its blood and foul deformity, to the
loathing of its spirit, even as a man that comes into a dark room with a candle
in his hand, sees things amiss and out of order, which were not discovered when
they lay in the dark, so is it with the soul when Christ shines into it, then
only are the thick mists of darkness dispelled, and the noisome corners of the
soul purified and made clean; he is the bright morning Star, he is the Sun of
righteousness, he is given for a light to the Gentiles, that though they were
in the very shadow of death, yet when he came among them, they presently saw a
great light, wheresoever Christ comes he brings a light with him, yea glory,
wisdom, and all excellencies attend him, for its he that is made to his Saints,
Wisdom, 1 Cor. 1.30.
righteousness, sanctification and redemption, he that is the tree of life in
the midst of the paradise of God, Rev. 22.2.
whose very leaves are for the healing of the Nations; and therefore its our
duties to apply our selves only to Christ, resting on him, and not on any
created power or excellency whatsoever; for man the chief of all the creation
of God (Angels excepted) in his most settled estate is altogether vanity: give
him all the advantages you can, as he is man, truly he is miserable to purpose;
and therefore its clear that there is nothing in man, nor any other creature
under heaven, that can help man to the least dram of the power of godliness:
Romans 6.23.
its true That the wages of sin, that is death, but the gift of God is eternal
life through Jesus Christ our Lord.

did but men know the worth of it, then the professors and practisers of it
would be more accounted of: had the woman of Samaria known who it was that
asked her water, she would never have made a denial, or had she but known
Christ the gift of God, John 4.9, 10.
she would have asked of him, and he could have given to her water of life;
every creature is for its element, stones cannot have their habitation in the
air, no more then Stars dwell upon the earth; fishes cannot live in flames, nor
moles in clouds; its beyond the sphere of the men of this world to be
conversant in the affairs of the world to come, they can look no further then
after the things of this world: their knowledgment is bounded here; they are
aliens and strangers to any thing beyond their own center, they are of the
earth, and so earthly-minded, their knowledge, study, and endeavors tend
earthward, there is their complacency and delight; the natural man discerns not
the things that are of the spirit of God, and what is the reason? its because
they are spiritually discerned: his light, his knowledge, his discerning is all
carnal, tell him of the workings of the Spirit of God, of conversion from an
estate of nature to an estate of grace, of meeting with God in a duty, of
having communion with Christ, of the Saints union with him their head, of
resting on God, where reason and means fail, etc. these are strange things to
him, they are mere riddles to him: but now speak to a Merchant or Shopkeeper,
of buying, selling, or trading, either here or beyond the Seas; or to a country
Farmer, of Corn, Cattle, Plowing, Sowing, or any thing in matter of Husbandry;
herein now they are expert, here they know what you mean, now you deal with
them in their own element; herein they are only wise, cunning, and skilful
Merchants, masters of their science, none shall overreach them, they will not
oversee or let slip the advancement of a bargain, for want of experience, here
and only here they are their own crafts-masters; so that the truth is these
men come into this world and so go out: they make not their returns to Heaven
so good and beneficial, as their returns from Sea to Land; indeed the whole
scope and tendency of their life is circumscribed within the earth and the
confines thereof; they never knew of any other end for which they came into the
world; nor never will look after or expect any further knowledge or Interest,
but in and unto this present being, and so remain securely wise, until they
drop into hell and see their own misery, and their neglect and want of true
knowledge: O that men would fear the Lord and consider the operation of his
hands, especially the dealing of God with his Saints, in and through Jesus
Christ; if to know God and Jesus Christ whom he has sent into the world, be
life eternal, O then, not to know God nor Jesus Christ whom he has sent into
the world, is eternal death; men think that Ignorance shall Advocate and speak
for them another day, that want of Knowledge shall be the means of their
absolution; O vain thoughts! O insufficient plea! nay, rather, sufficient to
destroy their own souls; their main matter of excuse will be the sole matter of
accusing them before Almighty God; what they build upon for extenuation of
their guilt, Joh. 3.19.
will prove the greatest aggravation, For, This is the condemnation, that light
is come into the world, and men love darkness rather then light; though the
Papists style Ignorance the Mother of Devotion, I am sure it is the mother of
Perdition; its the devils Vizor, its his muffler with which he hood-winks the
men of this world, its his Livery the which he gives unto his own subjects to
hold them in bondage, and keep them in blindness unto destruction; Do but read,
and well weigh that Scripture, that says, 2 Thessalonians. 1.8.9.
Christ will come in flaming fire rendering vengeance on them that know him
not, and upon them that obey not the Gospel of Jesus Christ, who shall be
punished with everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord, and the
glory of his power: Its in vain for men and women to say, I am not
Book-learned, I believe as well as I can, I will do what I can to go to heaven,
and God, I hope, will do the rest: O this shows their ignorance, and speaks
downright damnation! O know you poor wretches, that Christ always gives
wisdom and knowledge to all men and women which are called into fellowship with
himself, which shall live in life and glory with him: there is no room in
heaven for ignorant souls, for they that come there must be conformable to
Christ, and to his Will, who is unto all his, Wisdom and Righteousness, etc. As
Christ never sends Fools on his Errand, so he never takes Fools for his
Companions; Wisdom teaches all her sons to know God and Christ, and then by
the power of free Grace, they come to have fellowship with God, and with Jesus
Christ; Will a Prince make a Fool his companion? surely no, Mad men and Fools
are no companions for Princes; Achish the King of Gath, could say of David when
he feigned himself mad, of like a fool; What, 1 Samuel 21.13.
have I need of mad men that you bring this fellow into my presence? shall he
come into my house? O then, how think you will Christ endure that ignorant
persons shall have communion with him? for they are no better then fools or mad
men, for madness and solly are concomitants, they dwell together in ignorant
souls; therefore know, that until God take away the scales of ignorance from
the eyes of men, they shall never see, nor be in love with the power of
godliness; you know, if a man should cast the finest gold, and the most
precious stones in the world before Swine, and at the same time cast some dung,
or stinking carrion, the Swine would pass regardless of the gold and precious
stones, and would see no worth in them, but would run unto, and seize upon the
noisome carrion, as most delightful and consentaneous to their nature, nor do
they see any excellency in the one, but they know what to do with the other;
the carrion is their food and delight, the gold their wonder and disregard,
they know not what to do with that, their sensuality cannot fancy it: Even such
is the condition of all the men of the world, for they are but swine; the dung
and filth of the earth is their treasury, on it they dote and pore, and feed,
that is their Summum bonum, there is their conversation, their contemplation
and study, their eyes are downward, fast fixed on this Treasury, here they gaze,
here they employ their knowledge, their skill, and their all, disrespecting
casting off, and contemning the treasures of life, and pleasures for evermore;
unto the attaining whereof they did never once so much as lift up an eye, or
breathe forth a desire, solacing and satisfying themselves in the mere knowledge
of Nature: show but these men heaven, and heavenly things, though it be Christ
in an Ordinance (so far as worldly men can see him) they can discern or taste
no sweetness or excellency in him; There is no form or beauty in him, Isai.
53.3.
that we should desire him, he is despised, rejected of men, he is a man of
sorrows, he brings troubles with him, which the world is not able to bear, and
therefore they are offended at him, and his ways, and cast his Laws behind
their back, and will not that he should reign over them; though to the Saints
he is the sweetest of ten thousand, and his ways are the ways of pleasantness
and peace, and his Statutes are their delight, to them His yoke is easy, and
his burden light: men of the world look on Christ at a distance, and then upon
his outside too, as the Jews did, Is not this the Capenters son? but the Saints
they hug him in their bosoms, they see an excellency in Christ's poverty, they
see nothing contemptible in him, for by his poverty they are made rich, by his
low estate they are exalted; yea, by his very stripes and reproaches are they
healed.





hereditary, Ephesians. 2.2.
for all men by nature are the children of wrath.

Revel. 5.
wherein he is pleased to make himself known to the sons of men.





First then, If the power of godliness dwell in thee, thou art changed from an
estate of nature to an estate of grace, thou art delivered from the power of
Satan, and translated into the Kingdom of Christ, yea, This man has the
witness of the Spirit of God in himself.
and thou know it, and art convinced of it in thine own conscience, for its
not with thee as with a young Christian that is only in the nonage of his
conversion; for he that has the power of godliness dwelling in him, is one of
a high Form in the School of Christ, yea his condition is such, that he can
appeal to Christ and Conscience, that this power dwells in him, and is daily
acted by him.

He that is born of God cannot sin, that is, so as other men sin, with consent
of the Will, with the least allowance of any sin, no, though thou might gain
a Kingdom to tell a lie, yet thou would not do it, yea, though thou might
be made the greatest Prince in the world, if thou would but swear by thy
faith and troth, yea, thou would tremble at it, and refuse it, esteeming
godliness to be the best gain; and the reason is, first, because the Love of
God constrains thee so to do; secondly, for that the fear and dread of the
great God of heaven and earth lies deep upon thy spirit; and for the truth of
this, thou can appeal unto God, who is the searcher of the hearts and reins
of his people.

Adam reigned unto death, so grace by Jesus Christ might reign to eternal life;
so that when a temtation comes, and is offered unto thee, thou can say, as
Joseph to his Mistress, How shall I do this great wickedness and sin against
God? how shall I sin against that God, who has been so gracious, so
tenderhearted, and loving unto me? who pitied me, cleansed me, and took me
into his bosom, when I lay in my blood and filthiness? O how shall I, how dare
I, how can I attempt to sin against the God of all my mercies, and so wound the
peace of mine own conscience and eclipse the enjoyment of that sweet communion
with God, which I prize and value more then heaven and earth, yea, then all
that can be thought upon.

is an holy and sanctified man in all manner of conversation, in his thoughts,
words, and actions, he walks up to his profession, his head, heart, hands, and
feet, yea, all the faculties of the soul, and members of the body are for God,
and for Christ: David says, Psalm. 119.6.
I have respect unto all thy Commandments; the man does not pick and choose,
what to obey, and what not, he pleads no exemption of any, he leaves not some
and takes others, his eye is upon them all, his Will is for the performance of
all, his obedience is not partial but total; all Gods Commandments are his
delight and meditation day and night, the whole bent of his desires runs after
the Laws of God its sufficient to him that God commands it, he is as willing,
yea, as ready to obey, as God is to command.

Genesis 22.3.
though it be to offer up his dearest Isaac, as Abraham, when he was commanded
to offer up his son, the Text says, He did rise very early in the morning, he
deferred no time; and when Zacheus saw Christ, Luke 19.5, 6.
He came down hastily, to receive him joyfully.

Zacheus received Christ joyfully; David rejoiced to run the ways of Gods
Commandments; Psalm. 119.16.
yea, and Christ rejoiced to do the Will of his Father, for God loves a
cheerful doer, If ye be willing and obedient, then ye shall eat the good things
of the Land, but if ye refuse and be rebellious, ye shall be devoured with the
Sword, for the month of the Lord has spoken it: So you see its required to be
willing to obey, whatever God commands.

Heb. 11.6. Psa. 119.4.
and is a duty commanded, so much more in things spiritual; the diligent
inquisitive soul after God and godliness, is a thirsting soul, it stores up
grace and comfort against the time of need; its like the Ant in the Proverbs,
that provideth in the Summer against the Winter: The power of godliness puts a
man upon diligence in hearing the Word, in prayer, in meditation; it makes a
man to make his often addresses unto the throne of Grace, and watchful after
every opportunity to manifest his love to God, to Christ, and to the Saints,
and to be very active in doing what God commands.

the truly godly man cannot serve God and Mammon, God will not be served by
fits and starts, he will admit of no interpositions or mixtures. God is a
perfect God, and requires perfect obedience, it must be a continued act from
the first hour that the power of godliness entered into the soul, even unto the
expiration of its last breath, it must be the souls whole desire to be
continually active for God in the general course of its life.

Basil with death, if he would not forsake his Interest in God; His answer was,
Death is a benefit to me, it will send me sooner to God, to whom I live, and to
whom I desire to hasten: yea, such a man prefers an hours communion with God
before ten thousand worlds; were they offered unto him, he would slight and
contemn them, and count them as dung in comparison of God and Jesus Christ, in
whom his soul sees so much excellency and sweetness: Now this communion is
public and private, public in the Congregation of the Saints, which indeed
may be called the greatest witness; where the Saints have fellowship with
Christ, and one with another, where their graces are communicable, and their
sweet enjoyments free and common one with another, where they jointly gather
honey out of one Comb, where they refreshed their thirsty spirits out of one
Fountain; where the members are sweetly compacted and joined together to their
head, where they greet each other with reciprocal kisses, where Christ is all
in all, and fully gives out himself unto his members; this is a glorious
communion, the other is a private communion that the soul has with Christ in
its closet, which is the best evidence when no eyes see, where no ear hears
what converse the soul has with Christ her head, what breathings of the Spirit
she receives from him who is invisible and for all manner of excellencies
beyond expression; there the soul engrosseth Christ to its self, there are
private salutations each to other, interchangeable embraces, sweet fellowship,
ineffable communion, superlative joys and refreshments, ravishing
familiarities, infinite soul-satisfying communities; if the soul want power to
kill any sin, strength to withstand any corruption, understanding in the
mysteries of the Gospel; supplies of grace, resolutions in doubtings, here she
may have all in her Christ, all is to be found in him, in whom all fullness
dwells, Isa. 45.11.
the soul can no sooner speak but speed; nay, with an holy reverence, may
command and have, for there is no good thing that he will withold from them
that are in him; It is not with Christ as with earthly Parents who give
portions but once unto their children, and then cut them off from any other
afterward; here you cannot be welcome, you cannot be heard if you come the
second or third time; but now the oftener you come to your Father, to your elder
Brother, the better you are welcome, the repetition of requests is most
acceptable with Christ, the more you ask the more he gives, his Fountain is
inexhaustible, it is always open for you to wash in, for you to replenish your
empty buckets, if you wait at this Pool, you shall be sure to be replenished,
come as often as you will, if thou come for Understanding to day, for more
Knowledge to morrow, for Wisdom the third day, for Meekness, Patience,
Temperance, and what other grace soever thou stand in need of, thou shall
not only be welcome, but shall certainly be supplied, if these things thou
ask be for thy good, Psalm. 84.11, 12.
For he will give grace and glory, and all other good things to them that walk
uprightly; yea, he will be a Sun and a shield, that's the sum of all comforts
whatsoever, for Christ is the Sun of Righteousness, Mal. 4 2.
then he will defend his servants from all dangers he will carry them on his
wings as the Eagle does her young ones, far above the reach of malice, or all
revengeful thoughts whatsoever, for the Wings of Gods Protection do not only
bear up his Saints, but cover them, and preserve them from danger; they cover
them like a shield in the day of battle; what injury is done unto the Saints,
God takes it as done unto himself, and he will be their Avenger, if they strike
them, they strike them as it were through God himself, for he has made known,
That they that touch them, Zech. 2 8.
touch the apple of his Eye; Its no small matter to strike at the eye of a
Prince, but that man that strikes at the Saints, strikes at the eye of the
King of Kings, and shall be sure to answer it another day in another place,
though for a while he may escape unpunished; though God be now silent, he will
not be always so; you know what Christ says, Woe to him that offends one of
these little ones, it were better that a millstone were hanged about his neck,
and he cast into the sea; thus you may see, as the Saints do prize God, so God
does prize the Saints.

Romans 4.19, 20, 21.
Thus did Abraham when he was promised a son, he believed above Reason, yea,
the text says, Above Hope; Secondly, against the deadness of his own body, he
being one hundred years old; Thirdly, against the deadness of Sarahs womb, it
was only Faith, and the power of godliness that carried him up far above all
doubts, being fully persuaded, that he which had promised was able to perform
it: Again, you know that the promise to Abraham, was, that in Isaac his seed
should be called, and yet in obedience to Gods Command, he goes to offer up
Isaac his only son, to cut up the root from whence this fruit should grow, to
destroy the groundwork on which this Fabric should be built, Heb. 11.19.
and to blast the hopes of any further seed; which in all reason should have
made void the promise, yet above all he believed that he being dead, God was
able to raise him up from the dead, from whence he received him in a figure;
thus the three children believed beyond all reason, that God would deliver them
from the fiery furnace, and Daniel from the den of Lions, and diverse others. O
this is that which makes a man cast himself into the arms of God, in the midst
of the fire, or what affliction can possibly come unto him: he can enter into
his chamber until the indignation be over-past (that is) into Christ who is a
hiding place, for, and to his Saints at all times.

And as it makes the soul rest upon God in general, so more especially for life
and Salvation; such a soul can freely venture it self upon a promise, with as
much confidence as if it did enjoy the performance; it can as really live upon
any word of God, as a natural man can live upon his appointed food: O, says
the soul, has God said it? its enough for me, I desire no more, you know what
Christ said, Man lives not by bread only, but by every word that proceeds out
of the mouth of God; it throws it self into the arms of Christ on whom it is
fixed, there it is unremoveable, there it lives, and there it dies.

Witness the late London Remonstrance.
but if he escape either of these, either for want of Law, or Power, then say
they, Let us Petition that he may have no place of public trust, yea let us do
what we can to weary him out of the Parish where he dwells; if he be a Minister,
he shall not come into the Pulpit to Preach, though known not only to be godly,
but sound in the faith, and of long standing, yea though it be for the
fulfilling of the desire of the dead, it shall not be granted, but pleaded
against even by them, which formerly thought all that he said to be Gospel: yea
and yet these bitter spirits must be looked upon as professors of the Gospel of
Christ, as if the word of God, and his Spirit, were of contrary meanings. O
know that such a spirit as this is none of the spirit of Christ, certainly
these men have not obeyed that exhortation of the Apostle to the Ephesians,
Ephesians. 4.31, 32.
Let all bitterness, and wrath, and anger, and clamor, and evil speaking, be
put away from you, with all malice, And be kind one to another,
tenderhearted, forgiving one another even as God for Christ's sake has
forgiven you: and walk in love even as Christ has loved us and given himself
for us; O its very sad to consider what a spirit of bitterness is gone out over
this Kingdom, yea in this City of London especially: and if a man ask them the
reason, they are to seek for an answer, but truly its because they hear with
other men's ears, and see with other men's That is, with the eyes of the Clergy,
at least many of them, for I at a morning Lecture heard one of them who is
famous for railing, say, that those rebels, meaning the Army, had now got all
the strong holds of the Kingdom into their hands with an intent to cut our
throats; now they send forth their Ministers to Preach to us a Sermon of
brotherly love. And then he said, that it was a mark of a deceiver to preach of
brotherly love, the Spirit of meekness and peace, etc. but that honest piece
called the Pulpit-incendiary has Characterized them and him. I shall not stain
my pen with his nomination.
eyes, but at last let them know they must answer for themselves another day,
and I am confident when these men come to die, they shall have as little peace
and comfort from this spirit of bitterness, as the malefactor has from the
hangman when he comes to the Gallows: wherefore remember this, that wheresoever
godliness dwells, there dwells a spirit of love, meekness, gentleness,
long-suffering and forbearance, there dwells tender-heartedness, and bowels of
compassion each to the other; and therefore never believe men's professions, but
look on their practices and carriages each to others, for the Spirit of Christ
is a spirit of love and of a sound mind: I have heard of one that has said he
has trembled to think of giving way to a godly Minister in this City that he
should come into his Pulpit, and yet I am confident he that spoke the words was
not worthy to carry the others book after him, neither for godliness, nor
learning: Was not this man of that mind that Jeroboam was, who would not let
Israel go up to worship at Jerusalem, under this pretense, because it was too
far; but the truth was, it was for fear it would weaken his Kingdom, and so his
greatness might have been eclipsed: so did not this man tremble, not for fear
of error, but for fear he should steal away the hearts of the people? its good
for men to know their own hearts; certainly this is far from the spirit of
Love, which is the Spirit of Christ.

David says, Thy Word is sweeter then the honey, Psalm. 119.
and the honey comb, thy Word is better then thousands of gold and silver; As
the Heart pants after the rivers of water, so pants my soul after thee, O
God, and, I rejoiced in thy Word, as one that finds great spoil, Its a
lanthorn to my feet, and a light unto my paths, etc. O with what an eager
pursuit will the soul follow after the Ordinances of Christ, it will force
through all contrary engagements and oppositions to meet with Christ, it has
always an eye fixed upon the loveliness and beauty of Christ, it breathes after
the reflections of his glory, its restless thoughts travel with pain until
they be eased and lodged in the bosom of Christ, until when they shall never
enjoy their chief delight and comfort; all its study is for communion with
Christ, and for the enjoyment of his glory, wherever it is, whatever its
about, its always harping upon eternity, the further enjoyment of grace here,
and glory hereafter: Come to a soul who has tasted of the sweetness of Christ,
and knows what it is to enjoy communion with God, who has tasted of the
flagons of his love; ask such a soul, What would thou have? O, says the
soul, this I would have, that I might never sin against God more, that I might
be as instrume^tal for the glory of God as ever any man was upon the earth,
then I am sure I should enjoy more of God then now I do; When David had tasted
how good the Lord was, he was ravished with his sweetness, and he would have
others taste also: O come and taste and see how gracious the Lord is; O here is
the godly man's delight, My delight is in thy Law, and I will meditate thereon
day and night; In this he finds all excellencies, Psas 1.
here he finds profits and pleasures, preferments, riches, honors, and
whatever his soul can desire; what joy, what consolation can a man have greater
then this, to find in the book of God, that his name is written in the book of
life, which the Saints do find, and that often in the Scriptures. O what
pleasure can a man be capable of more then to enjoy life and health, nay an
Eternal life free from cares, sorrows or sickness, a life as durable as the
life of God, and enjoyed with and in God, full of glory, full of sweetness,
full of delight, where nothing but pleasures are for evermore. Now others see
no excellency in things of this nature, ask them what they would have to
complete their delight, their answer will be, gold, silver, riches, lands,
honors, esteem in the world, and things of that nature that afford seeming joy,
and contentment to their carnal sense, these are their Jewels, these are the
objects of their happiness; it can never enter into their thoughts, much less
can they perceive that there is such delight and sweetness in the ways of God,
as in the enjoyment of these sublinary treasures; they are persuaded that the
sweetness that men talk of that is found in the practices of godliness, are but
mere notions and conceits in men's brains: of such as these the Lord complains
by the Prophet Hosea, saying, I have wrote to them the things concerning the
weighty matters of my Law, but they were accounted as strange things, they have
no skill in them, they are things that they never heard, neither has it ever
entered into their hearts to conceive them: it is as impossible for them to
understand those hidden mysteries, as for a blind man to Judge of colors; an
excellency in any thing that tends heavenward, or savors of the Spirit of
grace, is not at all to be discerned by the blind and carnal eye of the world.

Sheba saw the excellency of that wisdom that was in Solomon, the text says,
that there was no more spirit left in her, 1 Kings 10.5.
O then how much more is that soul that looks and meditates on the glorious
wisdom, beauty, righteousness, excellency, and sweetness that is in God and
Christ, swallowed up, lost, confounded, and utterly undone in it self! its
beholding Gods fullness, makes it come to see its own emptiness, and to say of
God, O Lord, thou art Almighty, thou art all-sufficient; but I am frail and
weak, I am nothing, yea less then nothing; O therefore, blessing, honor, glory,
and power be unto him that sits upon the throne, and to the Lamb for ever and
ever. Its reported of one that had much communion with God, as he was sitting
at meat with his friends, he was rapt with such a sudden ecstasy of spirit,
that he, to the amazement of his friends, broke out into these words, saying, O
for ever, and ever, and ever, blessed be the great and glorious God, and this
was his deportment for half an hour together: certainly we may well say this
man was ravished and swallowed up with that fullness he saw in God and in Jesus
Christ our Lord; now such a man sees nothing in himself, nor in any creature
whatsoever, for the brightness of the glory of the Lord makes all ^^ings in
the world to appear as they are, mere emptiness and vanity, yea every man in
his best estate is altogether vanity, that is, in his most settled estate,
wherein he thinks he stands, but let him take heed lest he fall.

But here men must beware of that error of the Antinomians, who deny the
performance of all duties to God: Certainly these men do not only deny the
Law, but the Gospel too; for though duties before faith are abominable, yet
when they flow as the fruits of faith, they are not only accepted and required
of the Saints, 2 Jam 18. Note, that as says justifies the person, so works
justify his faith.
but they are faiths witnesses also: Show me thy faith without works; I will
show thee my faith by my works, for faith without works is a dead faith which
works are a man's duties to God, and which God himself commands; how is it
possible for a man to manifest to another that he has grace, when there are no
fruits of grace appear? how can a tree be said to have life, without the
budding and sprouting of its branches? O its a sad thing for men to boast that
Christ dwells in them, and yet they always do the devils service; because they
cannot merit heaven by their duties, therefore God shall have none from them,
but be robbed of his glory: but a soul truly gracious, will tell you, that the
love of Christ constrains it, it cannot choose, but it must draw near to God in
holy duties; there is its life, it can find no communion, no refreshment, no
subsistence without its addressing unto Christ in holy duties: Now when men by
their profession say, that they enjoy Christ and free grace in a plentiful
manner, and yet walk loosely, carnally, and vainly in their conversations,
saying, They trust all unto Christ, vainly believing that he will do all their
works for them, that he will not be only their Mediator, but their Actor, they
lying in sin, alas how short come these of evidencing their Justification, and
their Interest in Christ by their Sanctification: these are no fruits of
Christ's dwelling in a soul: O therefore you that the devil and your own fleshly
corruption has so far blinded, as to persuade you that free grace and Christ
coming into the soul, gives liberty to all licentiousness, no, no, where the
Law says, thou shall not do, the Gospel says, thou shall not will, no not
think: He that lusts after a woman in his heart has committed adultered
already, says the Gospel; know therefore that such a loose doctrine as this,
is damnable, and not fit to be owned by any, who would go for Christians. O
Christians, your conversations must be suitable to your profession; you must
not only profess Christ, but act Christ; you must now live as that you may
honor that great and glorious name of Christ. 1 Pet. 15.16.
O be you holy, for the Lord your God is holy: Now this holiness must extend to
all manner of conversation toward God and man: I shall freely grant that
duties Justify not, and to rest in them is sin, yea the best that ever man did
perform, was full of imperfection; and when we have done all that we can, we
are but unprofitable servants, for the best of Saints while they are in the
Body, are clothed with all manner of infirmities, but the way to destroy them is
to be often with God in the Mount; If now thou can appeal to God, that thou
have found these nine particulars in thee, and that they are sixed in thy
heart, and that thou have the witness of Gods Spirit with thy spirit, for the
truth thereof, then thou may safely conclude, that godliness dwells in thee,
and thy estate to be good, and that thou art walking in the way to Eternal
life. O give God the glory of the riches of his grace and mercy in his Son for
ever; but on the contrary, if none of these be found in thee, but rather their
contraries, then there can be no godliness dwelling in thee; and so thou
remaining in a miserable estate and condition.

John. 3.3. Verse 5.
Except a man be born again, he cannot see the Kingdom of God; now what birth
is this, but the new birth of the water, and of the spirit (...); (...).
we must understand the water of Regeneration, and the Spirit working
effectually in us for our conversion: as water does cleanse the filth of men's
bodies, so the water of regeneration the souls of men from sin; now the Spirit
of God is that whereby we live to God through grace: 1 Cor. 15.4, 5.
The first Adam was made a living soul, but the last (which was Christ) was
made a quickening Spirit; that is, such a man that is regenerate, lives
supernaturally, above the sphere of nature, that is, another manner of life then
a natural man can live; now this word Spirit, (...), Spiro ut spiritus a
spirando. 2 Cor. 13.5.
both in the Greek and Latin, properly signifies Breath, and therefore Christ
compares the working of the Spirit to the Wind, That blows where it
lists, no man knows whence it comes, nor whither it goes, so is every one
which is born of the Spirit, Joh. 3.8. Again, Know you not, if Christ be not in
you, ye are reprobates? now Christ lives in no soul but where godliness dwells;
if Christ be in a soul, there will be a conversation suitable to Jesus Christ,
now no natural man can know or partake of Christ or of his Spirit, Romans 8.
For he that has not the Spirit of Christ, is none of his.

art still in the gall of bitterness and bond of iniquity.









the world for ever, with all that it can afford, and in thy thoughts could
wish that all things in the world were at thy command, and that thou would
willingly take them for thy heaven, and for thy portion, that thou had rather
have thy Tabernacle here on earth, then to enjoy the mansions of heaven; that
thou had rather associate and hold fellowship with the men of this world,
then be a companion to, and with the blessed Saints and Angels in heaven; O
this speaks thee carnal; this renders thee worldly: if men would but examine
their hearts, and awake their benumbed consciences, it would be found to be the
condition of millions of men and women in this world; and it is for that they
are of the earth, and have nothing to do with any acquaintance or familiarity
with God, or the things of God, For the natural man knows not the things of
God, for they are spiritually discerned.

speak pure world: The first thing wherewith thy mind is agitated in the night
when thou awakest, and in the morning when thou arisest, is, What must I do
this day? where shall I first pitch upon my employment? where shall I light
upon a good bargain? how shall I put off such and such a bad commodity? what
wile shall I use? what stratagem shall I invent? what way shall I go to work,
to pull a thorn out of my own foot, and put it into my neighbors? to advantage
my self, and overreach my friends? to ease my self, and burden others? such as
these will be thy Soliloquies, these will be thy reasonings and machinations;
and having through these night-studies accomplished thine ends; O how will thy
heart rejoice! O what a perfect man art thou in thine own wisdom! thy only joy
is in the increase of thy Corn, Wine, and Oil; but as for God, Christ, and his
ways, and for the graces of his Spirit, they are not at all in thy thoughts: O
this is a lamentable sign that thy portion is in this world, and that thou have
no part of that Inheritance which is given to the Saints.

sin; could thou wish that the Scriptures were all compliances to thy will?
would thou that God himself were not so holy, as in his Word he is held forth
to be, and that there were less preaching and more recreation then now there is
on the Lords Day, and other days? would one Sermon in a day, yea in month
please thee better, if thou might have but Common Prayer with it? well, know
that these things demonstrate a deadness to grace and godliness in the soul.

as good as you, that were of the same lump with you, and had not God took more
pity on your souls, then he did on theirs, you had been in the same condition
with them: well may thou say, What was my soul, that thou were so mindful of
it? that thou would love it so? yea when it lay in its blood, even then thou
did say unto it, Live; O what a mercy is this! Let it not be said of you as
it was of King Hezekiah, that he returned not thanks according to the mercies
he received; O let none have cause to say of you, that you walk out of the
redeemeds path: as you have received mercy above others, so let your graces
shine in your conversation and walking toward God, and toward men above
others; as you have received much, so act much, that others seeing your godly
conversation, may give glory, honor, and praise to the God of your mercies:
has God selected you to be his people, and put his graces into your souls?
has God taken you for his inheritance? O then, do you take God to be your
portion, yea be content with him alone, for he is God all-sufficient, O then
walk before him, and be you perfect and upright; O Christians, what have you to
do with this world? your employment is above, your treasure is in heaven, your
glory, your excellency, your All is in your God, and in your Christ; O know
that you do mightily dishonor your God, your selves, your calling, to be
tumbling and turmoiling your selves about things here below: O arise and
depart, for this is not your rest; How dishonorable a thing would it be to see
a Prince raking in the dunghill, and keeping dunghill rakers company, taking them
for his associates? certainly men would say, that this man did mightily forget
himself, and did not mind his Crown, his dignity and glory; O then you who are
of a noble stock, who are of the root of Jesse, who are all the children of the
most High, of the King of Kings; Rev. 1.7.
yea you who are Kings yourselves; has not Christ washed you in his own blood,
and made you Kings, and Priests to God? yea are not you the heirs of Salvation?
are not Angels appointed to attend your persons? has not Christ taken you for
his companions, and redeemed you from the earth? O how dishonorable a thing is
this to you, that your affections, and your conversations are so earthly, are
so low, and base! seeing you are born to so much dignity, stand upon your
terms, elevate your spirits, be proud of your birthright* mind heavenly
things, live where you should, and use the things of this world, as if you used
them not; and has God poured out himself to you in the face of his Son? have
the very bowels of heaven been rolled together, and turned toward you? O then
pour out your souls to God, live upon that fountain of love and sweetness, cast
you selves into that bosom of loves, which is altogether lovely, who is the
chiefest often thousands, who only can fill your spirits, and satisfy your
souls at all times, even Jesus Christ the Lord of life and glory.

thy to be compared to the great and exceeding weight of glory which is laid up
for you in heaven: O remember its not only given to the Saints to believe, but
also to suffer; so that sufferings are as really the gifts of God, as faith:
and therefore you ought to rejoice in sufferings as in beleevings, for its
given you of your Father, in which you ought to rejoice, seeing he has also
given you faith and patience to carry you through your sufferings; O remember,
God might have called you unto sufferings, and not have given you faith nor
patience to endure; but seeing he has fitted you with supporting power for
such a condition, rejoice and clap your hands for joy, for herein is your
Father glorified, that you are obedient children to his will, and that you
maintain his cause and truth against his enemies.

of beauties, holiness and sanctity of life: you know, when David had tasted of
that sweetness and excellency that was in God, and in his ways; observe his
tender invitation, O, says he, come taste and see how gracious the Lord is, O
see what the Lord has done for my soul: true godliness is communicative, a
godly man is no Ingrosser, no Patentee, no close fisted Miser, he is always
free, his Treasure is open, his Riches are distributive, he will not let his
gold to rust, but will be always calling, and alluring others to come and
taste, and participate of what he has received; he will not Monopolize his
graces, he will always be teaching, instructing, and imparting his Knowledge
unto others, he is not born for himself, but to do his Country good, that is,
his poor brethren, and fellow members: now therefore examine your selves, do
you in your Families, among your associates, yea, and to the whole world,
declare by all means that possibly you can, by your words and actions, what
excellency there is in godliness, that so your carriages to others may make
them to enquire after it, to be in love with it, to desire to know it, and to
be acquainted with it? O be sure to carry your self so, as that you give no
offense to Jew or Gentile, nor to the Church of God; but let your carriage be
such, as that all men may be in love, or at lest convinced, that the way you
walk in, is just, holy, and good.

Romans 11.16.
whose root is Jesus Christ; stretch forth your helping hand to save poor
sinners; let your prayers be incessant for them; O entreat and beseech them to
be reconciled to God; O let them know from you, that there is sufficiency in
the blood of Jesus Christ to save their precious souls, persuade them to come
in to Christ, and tell them what sweetness you have found in the ways of God,
let them know, that when you were in their condition, that you thought your
selves in a good condition, but now God having opened your eyes, you can tell
them the error of your thoughts, for you were going to the pit of destruction,
and knew it not; O put them upon the consideration of Eternity, let them know
that their precious souls must shortly launch into the ocean of Eternity, and
if there be not provision made for them, if they have not Christ Jesus for
their Pilot to steer their course for them, they must certainly sink and
perish, and be cut off for ever from the presence of the Lord, and the glory of
his Power, and do all that possibly you can in all your addresses to them, to
persuade them, that what you say to them is out of that love, and entire
affection that you bear to their poor souls; Jude, ver. 23.
And others save with fear, pulling them out of the fire, hating even the
garment spotted by the flesh; as you ought to use all means to persuade and
draw men by the Spirit of Love, to forsake their evil ways, and to enquire
after Jesus Christ; so if that will not prevail, you may, yea you ought to
thunder against them, and to rouse them out of their security in denouncing the
Judgments of God by the terrors of the Law, that you may do as much as in you
lies, to terrify and affright them out of their miserable condition, so that,
if it be possible, you may be instrumental to deliver them from eternal fire,
and from the wrath of an infinite God: hereby shall you gain glory to God, and
testify to the world your lothing and detestation of sinful ways, and
discover unto such leprous souls, that those spots wherewith sin has defiled
them, are not the spots of Gods people, for this the Lord says of sinners,
Deuteronomy. 32.5.
who walk in the imagination of their own hearts, Their spot is not the spot of
my people.

God in holiness of life, and all manner of godly conversation; this the
consideration of your deliverance from your spiritual enemies, sin, death, and
hell, should be a strong engagement upon your spirits, to serve the Lord in
righteousness, and holiness all the days of your lives; Luke 1.74.75.
for you owe your selves to Christ; remember you are bought with a price, be
not any longer the servants of sin and Satan; live not to please men, for if
you be men-pleasers, you cannot be the servants of Christ. O dedicate your
souls, spirits and bodies to Jesus Christ, yea and offer them up to God a
living sacrifice, for this is that Worship that is required at Saints hands by
the word of God. Romans 12.1
O know there can be no greater manifestation of your thankfulness to God, then
your universal obedience to all Gods commands; let this be done in the whole
course of your lives hereby shall you evidence unto the world that you are
those in whom dwells the power of godliness, and by this you may draw others to
be in love with the ways of holiness, and stop the mouths of all gainsayers,
and opposers of it.

Now there are several motives to incite you Saints, to this great duty of
thankfulness.

1. Praedestino. (...). Romans 8.29. praecognovit.
First, From the consideration of your predestination: why should God preordain
that you should be to the praise of the glory of his grace from all Eternity?
yea to appoint you to be his adopted children in Christ Jesus? Yea, you are
those whom God acknowledged before, nd therefore he was pleased to predestinate
you to life and glory; O now that God was pleased to appoint you for his
people, and pass by so many thousands of the same lump, and extend his mercy to
you, will not this raise up your hearts to thankfulness? shall not this be the
theme and subject of your everlasting praises?

2. Electio. (...).
From the consideration of your Election: why should God choose you out of that
common mass of mankind, to make you heirs of life and glory? yea coheirs with
his Son Jesus Christ: even as a Potter of a rude mass of clay, makes one
vessel to honor, and another to dishonor, its the Apostles allusion, Romans 9.
Why were not thou whom he has made a vessel to life and glory, made a vessel
of wrath and confusion? Why were not thou passed by from all Eternity? and
numbered amongst the children of perdition? it was only free grace that made
the difference, it was the good pleasure of the Lord, to elect you to
Salvation, and pass by others, leaving them under the curse of sin; O remember
it was God that chose thee, thou did, nor could not choose him; O that an
incomprehensible God should be comprehended by a poor wretched creature! that
he should bestow himself upon him, and give him the riches of his grace; O let
the Saints for ever breath out thanks and praise, to this gracious God, and
begin that work on earth, which shall be their work for ever in the highest
Heavens.

From the consideration of your redemption, 3. Redemptio (...).
which is no less then a glorious redemption, as being bought with a glorious
price, not with corruptible things, as silver and gold, but with the precious
blood of Jesus Christ, of more worth and excellency, then all the created
powers in heaven and earth.



First, From the curse of the Law. Secondly, From the wrath of an infinite God.
Thirdly, From the power of sin. Fourthly, From a vain conversation. Fifthly,
from the second death. Sixthly, Out of the jaws of Satan, that great red
dragon, even from hell and condemnation.



First, To be in an estate of Sonship, to be the Sons of God. Secondly, To be
heirs, and joint heirs with Jesus Christ. Thirdly, To have a sweet communion
with God, Christ, and the Spirit of grace. Fourthly, To have communion with
Saints. Fifthly, To enjoy life and glory for ever, where you shall sin no more,
and where all tears shall be wiped from your eyes, where you shall reign with
God, Christ, Saints and Angels to all Eternity; O this calls for thankfulness,
render unto him therefore the praises due unto his name. 4. Justificatio (...).
Est propria ipsa judicis de innocente reo pronunciatio, significatione nimirum
activa.


The consideration of your justification, which is done by the merits of
Christ: that is, to be fully acquitted of all sin, as if a man had never
sinned, to stand right and just in the sight of God, Christ having paid the
debt to Divine Justice, and blotted out the handwriting against you; so as now
its with the Saints, as if they had never been defiled with sin: you, and only
you, are they which stand justified in his sight, in that fifth to the Romans,
are these three words used (viz.) Justifying, Justification, Justice, and they
are thus distinguished.

The first, Signifies the merit of Christ's Justice, whereby the Saints are
Justified.

The second, The action it self of Justification, whereby Christ's Justice is
communicated to the Saints.

The third the Justice it self, which is imparted and communicated to the
Saints; you know by sin every man is bound over to the Judgment Seat, there to
answer before God, for all things done against him in the flesh, and to pay
that debt that the Law requires: now Christ is the Saints surety, and in their
behalf, has taken this debt upon himself, and has paid the utmost farthing
that can be exacted by the Law, he has loosed the chains of darkness, and
broken the strong holds, and has enlarged and set free the Saints in the sight
of God, so that neither the Law, sin, nor the devil can lay any charge or
accusation against them, they have their pardon written on their breast,
declaring there is no condemnation unto us, because we are in Christ Jesus; let
the Saints therefore never cease to magnify and praise the name of the God of
their Salvation.

From the consideration of your vocation, 5. Vocatio (...).
your calling out of darkness into the mavelous light, whereby you can
rejoice in God your Savior, whereby your soul enjoyes the manifestation of all
its comforts, yea of its communion with God and Christ while its in the body;
God might have called his Saints at the last hour of their departure out of
this life, and so they might have lived without God in this world, as every man
does before his calling, and so without comfort and joy in the Holy Ghost; now
then if one hours communion with God, be more worth then thousands of worlds, O
how are the Saints bound to bless God for so great a mercy, as their enjoyment
of communion with him, here in this life, for many days and years after they
are called! praise God therefore for your Vocation.

6. Sanctificatio. (...)
From the consideration of your Sanctification and holiness: a godly man ought
to be as truly and really thankful, that his sins are purged, as that his sins
are pardoned; it is one of the greatest mercies that a soul can partake of, to
be purified, washed, and cleansed from all filthiness of flesh and spirit, to
receive of Christ's communicated holiness, and to be imputed holy for Christ's
sake; so that he who has this robe of righteousness, is made pure, yea so pure
and holy as if he had never sinned, the blood of Christ cleanses from all sin;
and this holiness and purity of spirit is a soul invested with by virtue of the
blood of Christ, flowing to it in the Covenant of Grace; O this must needs be a
strong motive to enlarge your hearts with gratitudes for so inestimable a
mercy, to be made pure as Christ is pure, and holy as he is holy: and for that
this your holiness, and Sanctification, is not only universal, but its perfect
in its parts, in every part of soul and body, God does not sanctify one part
now, and another part at another time, but he sanctifies the soul thoroughly at
one and the same time; Therefore know that if thy heart be sanctified, then thy
judgment, thy will, thy understanding, thy affections; yea all the members of
thy body, and all the faculties of thy soul are sanctified also. Yet you must
know likewise that no man is perfect in the degrees of holiness on this side
heaven; yet bless God who ever thou art who know that sanctifying grace does
rest upon thy spirit here, for though now it be in part, yet it shall be made
perfect in heaven for ever.

eternally, thou shall never miscarry concerning thy eternal being, thy trips
and slidings shall but set thee forwarder on thy journey; God will be thy God
for evermore, thou art safe for eternity, and thy soul lies in the bosom of
Christ, thou art given to Christ of the Father, and those the Father has given
him, he has promised that none shall take them from him; O bless the God of
Gods, whose mercy endures for ever; whose love is permanent, whose purpose
immutable, and whose power All-sufficient to preserve thy soul and body unto
eternal life.

By this they may know they are of their Father the Devil, for his children
they are to whom they obey; they fight for his Kingdom, and are the subjects
thereof: O tell me you sinners, what will become of your souls another day?
your end of days hastens on, and the day of account is at hand, when you must
stand at the Bar of Jesus Christ, to answer for things done in the flesh, what
answer will you make? what plea can you have: 1 Pet. 4.18.
If the righteous shall scarcely be saved, who then dares plead your cause? And
this will not only be the condition of notorious wicked, and ungodly sinners,
but of all such as have not the power of godliness wrought in their hearts; let
them carry themselves never so upright and holy in the eyes of men: O the civil
honest man, though never so well qualified and gifted with natural endowments,
with Moral virtues, with loving and affable carriages; this man is in that
condition which will prove woeful to his own soul for ever, for where no power
of godliness is, there is no Christ, and where there is no Christ, there must
needs be a devil; do but consider, you must shortly come to lie on, your
deathbeds, thou do not know how soon; O then it may be thou art tormented in
thy body, in thy spirit, and in thy conscience; thy conscience then comes to be
awakened, which in thy prosperity was asleep and stupefied, now it opens her
mouth wide, which before was dumb, now it flashes the very flames of hell into
thy face, now thy sins come into thy mind, which thou have committed twenty,
thirty, nay forty years ago, now they stand in array before thee, now they
strike horror and amazement into thy wounded soul, there is no cessation of
Assaults, no parle to be admitted, there is none come to thy relief, thy
friends forsake thee, thy God forsakes thee (that is) thy unrighteous Mammon,
thy riches, thy gold, thy silver, thy lands, nay thy wife, thy children, and
all things in the world cannot administer one drop of comfort unto thee; but on
the contrary, they are as fuel to thy torments, thy sight of the want of help
in them aggravates thy woes; at length thou sendest for Physicians to prolong
thy days, well, they come to thee, and tell thee, there is no hope, thou art a
dead man, all the means in the world are inavaileable; what sad tidings is
this? what duplication of thy pain is here? well may thou truly say, My sins
are become a burden too heavy for me to bear, and cry out, Was ever sorrow
like unto my sorrows? what, must I die? O that I had never been born; O that I
had been abortive from the Womb, that I had never drawn the first breath of
life; now thy soul sits on thy trembling lips, ready to take her flight for
Eternity, then comes the devil to claim his Interest, Give me thy soul, I am
sent for thee, thou art mine; thus he sets upon thee like an armed man, he will
weary thee like a mastive Dog, and will not leave thee whilst thou have
breath; do but consider what a woeful time this will be whilst thou art here,
and do but weigh these several aggravations.



for their forwardness in Religion, and following the means of grace, calling
them Fools, Sectaries, and Separatists; O how will thou be amazed, astonished,
and confounded? how will this terrify thy soul when thou shall see them
united, and joined to Christ their Savior, and accompanied with holy and
blessed Spirits, and thou separated and cast out into utter darkness amongst
the devil and his cursed angels!

Ahab said of Elijah, Have thou found me O mine enemy? O this will heighten thy
misery, this will heap coals of fire upon thy head.

heart so to have done, as those that stand before thee did, thou might have
been as happy as any of them, thou might have enjoyed the like sweetness of
God, and excellency of Jesus Christ with them; but when it shall be said unto
thee, thou enjoyedst thy good things in this world, thou rejectedst the
proffers of grace, thou would none of the counsels of God, but did cast his
Laws behind thy back, therefore art thou punished and they blessed, now do thy
repentings come too late, now are thy thoughts fruitless: O into what a gulf of
horrors will this plunge thy soul!

London; now why may not Christ say, in a place where my word was as powerfully
preached as in any place of the world, where the Sunshine of the Gospel, shined
as bright as any where under heaven, where my mercy was extended as largely, my
goodness flowed as abundantly, as in no place more? what at London? and thou a
whoremaster, a swearer, a drunkard, a profane person? what at London? and yet
in thy natuall estate, not one dram of Grace, not one grain of godliness? I
tell thee it shall be easier for Sodom, and Gomorrah, in the day of Judgment,
then for such a man as thou art; tell me, O sinner, what thou have to say for
thy self? O thou will be like that man at the Feast which had not on the
wedding garment, the Text says, He was speechless, he had not one word to say
for himself, no more shall thou: O thy condition will be woeful, thy estate most
miserable; if thou look before thee, the dreadful Judge is ready to pronounce
the irrevocable sentence against thee: if on the Judges right hand, there the
Saints are to join with Christ in thy Sentence; if on his left hand, there are
a company of wicked wretches in the same condition with thy self; if thou
look behind thee, there is Hell and Satan ready to receive thee as soon as
Judgment is given: O then thou shall be banished from the presence of the Lord,
and the glory of his power, and that for ever: Remember these things, all you
that forget God, lest he tear you in pieces, and there be none to deliver you;
O what do you think of a soul in this estate, that is thus cast eternally into
the sea of the wrath of God? every man will say, this is a lost soul indeed,
its undone for ever. Now what aggravations of misery will be multiplied upon
thy soul by these subsequent considerations.



Secondly, Thy torments shall be such, as no tongue can express: If the wrath
of God against Christ only, when sin was but imputed, was so heavy, that it
made him to sweat clods of blood, (...).
as the Original word signifies; what do thou think will be the wrath of God
to thee, who have acted sin, and that all thy life time, who have done nothing
else but sinned, and thrown dirt in the very face of a pure God, giving God the
lie by thine unbelief? O if the Saints did apprehend the displeasure of God to
be so terrible, as Job, when he complained that the poison of Gods arrows did
drink up his spirits; Job 6.4. Psalm. 38.2.
and David that his arrows did stick fast in him, so that there was no
soundness in his flesh, nor rest in his bones; O what will thy complaint be,
thou undone soul!

That he will laugh at their destruction, Pro. 2.24.
and mock when their fear comes upon them; Angels and Saints, they shall not
regard thee, the father shall not pity the son, nor the son the father, the
husband the wife, nor the wife the husband, nor the mother him that drew her
breast, all relations shall be forgotten, and all pity banished.

may be thou thoughtest thou were going to heaven, and now thou art dropped into
hell; thou expectedst mercy and reapest fury, thou expectedst reward and
gatherest revenge; this is the condition of most men in the world; they would
take it as a mighty injury, and disgrace unto them, if you do but question them
of their latter end, and if they were certain of the place whither they should
go: if a man should deal plainly with them, and tell them they were going to
hell and condemnation, O they would be ready to fly in such a man's face, and
brand him for a censorious person, and an uncharitable man; so that men in this
condition lose their expectation, and so become out of measure miserable.

what inexpressible mournings would this cause in a poor soul?



If it be the highest happiness of man in heaven, and the glory of the Angels
to behold the presence of the Lord, and to partake of the beams of his glory, O
then it must needs be the depth of all misery to be deprived of such excellency
and glory by being banished from the presence of the Lord; 2. Sam. 14.32.
Absolon thought if worse then death to be kept from the presence of his
Father, when he had killed his brother Ammon; you know its said, Matt. 5.8.
Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God, O then cursed are the
defiled and wicked in heart, for they shall not see him, For without holiness
no man shall see God, says the Apostle, but there is no holiness in hell,
therefore none in hell shall see the Lord.

Lastly, That as thy torments are unexpressible, so they are endless: when a
man has suftred ten thousand years in hell, under the stroke of divine
Justice, then is he as far from deliverance as at the first hour; for there
must thou be to all eternity, where the worm never dies, and the fire never
goes out. O Reader, weigh all these things together, lay them to thy heart,
and consider how the estate stands between God and thy own soul, and do it
speedily before it be too late, for from hell there is no redemption, after
this life no repentance that will do a man any good, nor yet any cries that God
will hear, no lamentation that can avail thee any thing; Act the actings of
Faith and Repentance here in this life, where they are only to be employed,
and thou shall reap the fruits of them in the life to come, glory, and
immortality, and eternal rest and peace unto thy soul; And so we are come to
the third and last part of the words;

And from such turn away, etc.

(...).
Istos igitur aversare,
And from such turn away.
THus having presented unto your view the Canaan of life, and the Region of
death, we are now arrived unto a discovery of means to divert your steps out of
the paths of death, and to guide them into the ways of life (to wit) by the
aversion and turning away from the society and wicked deeds of the ungodly.

These words are the Apostles dehortation to Timothy, and in him to all
Christians, declaring, how that Saints ought not to make wicked and ungodly
men, their companions; yea though they made a show, and had a form of
godliness, as these have in the precedent words: there is nothing difficult in
the words, only we give you the Etymology and meaning of this turning away:
(...). aversor.
what manner of turning is here meant; the word signifies not only to turn
away, but to disdain, to refuse, to despise, to detest, and to have such
persons in abomination, to shun their company, and that not now and then by
fits, but in the general course of our lives; that as these men are Gods
enemies, so we should account them as our enemies.

And from such turn away.

Whence note, I Obser.
That its the duty of the Saints to shun and avoid the society, and company of
all wicked and ungodly men, yea though they have a form of Religion: 1 Cor. 5.9
I wrote to you (says Paul) in an Epistle, not to keep company with
fornicators (verse 11.) yea though he be a brother, that is in the fellowship of
the Gospel: yet if such a man of that near relation, be a Fornicator, a
Drunkard, an Idolater, or an Extortioner, with such a man have no society, keep
not company; (...).
the Original is, be not mingled with him, have not such familiarity as a man
has with his friend: so in that 2 Thessalonians. 3.14. have no company with him, be
not mingled together: so David says, Psalm. 119.93.
I am a companion of all them that fear thee; that is, of all those that fear
the Lord: then by good consequence he is no companion of them that fear him
not: you have the account of this point in these six particulars.



You know the Lord prohibits Israel from keeping company with the Heathen which
were cast out; least they should learn theit manners and walk in their ways; so
that no good can be expected from their company and society, but the contrary:
you know that David says, a liar shall not come into my house, nor dwell in my
habitation for ever: Now all wicked men are liars; there is none that does
good, no not one, the way of truth they have not known.

thing for a man to be as a stumbling block to make others fall into
condemnation, there is woe denounced against such a one, so that hereby thou
may be an occasion of hardening the wicked in their sinful courses:



2 Thessalonians. 3.14.
that they might be ashamed, yea may be a means to convince them of their evil,
to call them out of that condition, or at least to make their consciences check
them for their ungodly courses, yea and put them upon the inquiry after better
things: for God is not tied which way or by what means he will work, to draw
any home unto himself.

Solomon's fools, and he that keeps company with such fools, Pro. 13.20
shall be destroyed: He that walks with wise men, shall be wise, but a
companion of fools shall be destroyed, for they walk in the way to destruction,
and their paths lead to the Chambers of death, there is no way of life that
they will take knowledge of; for the wicked desire not the knowledge of the
Lord, nor to understand his ways; for as Job says, they say, Depart from us,
for we desire not the knowledge of thy ways.

Romans 7.
John 17. That his Saints are not of the world, but he has redeemed them out
of the world, therefore that man that is a friend to the world, is an enemy to
God: O therefore come out from amongst them, and keep at distance with the men
of the world, remember that old verse, Os, orare, vale, conviva, mensa, negatur;
With the secluded, neither confer nor pray,
Salute, nor Feast, nor eat with, day by day.
Thus you see the point confirmed by Scripture and reason; now for the better
unfolding of it, these three things are required. First, What is meant by
Saints. Secondly, What Is meant by wicked men. Thirdly, What Is meant by keeping
company. We shall dispatch them with all brevity, that we may proceed.



By Saints then we are to understand holy men, that is, men who are sanctified
by faith in Christ Jesus, Saints by calling, such as the blessed Apostle Paul
writes of to the Romans, To them which are sanctified in Christ Jesus, called
to be Saints; Romans 1.7. 1 Cor. 1.2.
such as walk in the ways of holiness, whose conversation is in heaven where
Christ their head is, such as profess and obey the Gospel of Christ, and are
justified, and acquitted from all sin by Jesus Christ, their peace; and of the
Saints Christ has thousands in this world, a people contemptible in the eyes
of the world, hated and counted the off-scowring of this world.

Paul, Romans 7.23. And in a word, whosoever is not made righteous by Jesus
Christ, is a wicked man, and that made Paul say, when he considered of his
miserable estate by nature, and then knew who was his deliverer; I thank God
(says he) through Jesus Christ our Lord, so that by Christ only we are
delivered.

society, we are to understand, not to be united unto them, and incorporated
into their fellowship; and here might abundance of time be spent, if we should
reiterate, or fall again upon communion in receiving the Lords Supper, or
communion in Church Fellowship, but having formerly touched upon them, and
conceiving that this Text does not properly intend such a non-communion, or
non-company-keeping, I shall pass that by, and unfold my thoughts with much
brevity concerning the intention of the Holy Ghost in these words (from such
turn away:)



Timothy by the Apostle Paul; I will not say but a man may buy and sell, eat
and drink as occasion shall be offered sometimes, but chiefly take heed that
these men be not thy familiar acquaintance, nor thy intimate conversants; such
must not be thy companions, such must not be of thy counsel; thou art advanced
to a correspondence with heaven, and will thou join thy self with earth, yea
defiled earth? O shun and avoid such company as the lothing and abhorring of
thy heart.

Is it so, That its the duty of the Saints not to keep company with wicked and
ungodly men? O then Christians, learn your duties, and be informed, that God
requires at your hands, that you should make choice of your company, take heed
of joining with polluted hands; Similis simili gaudet.
you know the Proverb, Evil company corrupts good manners, And that Birds of a
feather flock together; you shall not find Doves to fly with the birds of
prey: different natures, different affections, diversity of Judgments,
diversity of assemblings: habituated sinners never break company, drunkards
with drunkards, swearers with swearers, whoremongers with their like; and so
through the whole course of sin, every sinner with his confederate, but Saints
are of a more pure metal, their dross is now become fine gold, their polluted
streams are clarified, and flow from the Fountain and wellspring of Life, they
must admit of no mixtures; their association must be separated from the wicked,
they must be an unleavened lump, pure and entire of themselves, Saints must not
do as the wicked do, they have learned better things, they profess to walk by
another principle: if thou should see a Lamb upon the mountains walking in
the midst of a company of Woolves, would thou not conclude, certainly this
Lamb will shortly become a prey unto them? even so when thou art in the company
of profane and ungodly men, think with thy self, O I am now in the midst of
Woolves, certainly I shall be a prey to them and their sin, for as the Woolves
may fawn upon the Lamb, not out of any love they bear unto it, so may the
wicked upon the godly, yet the righteous is abomination to the wicked, and he
seeks to ensnare, entrap, and circumvent him every moment.

Psalm. 9.16, 11.16.
and that if Gods judgments fall down on their head, when thou art present with
them, thou must look to partake of the same common jugdment even with them; for
upon the wicked, Psalm. 37.32.
God shall rain snares, fire, brimstone, and an horrible tempest shall be their
cup.

Verse. 12.
Secondly, The wicked watches the righteous and seeks to slay him, yea the
wicked plot against the Just, and gnasheth upon him with his teeth. Let a Lion
put on a Lambs skin, yet he is a Lion still, yea and the more dangerous; so
though the wicked may carry themselves Saint-like, yet they are wicked men
still, and the more dangerous is it for Saints to have to do with them.

Ps. 97.10.
God preserves the righteous, and delivers him out of the hand of the
wicked: what, has God delivered you, who are his Saints out of the snare of
the wicked, so that your soul has escaped as a bird out of the snare, and will
you run into them again? O take heed of abusing so great a mercy, as to return
unto that world out of which the Lord has once chosen you, lest he utterly
gives you over into their hands again.

David, he professes, Psalm. 101.4, 7.
That he that tells lies, shall not come into his sight, that he will not
know a wicked person, that is, he will not be acquainted with ungodly men.

which he was shortly to bring to Judgment, for their rebellions against him,
and had put forth a Proclamation, that his faithful subjects should not keep
company with these traitors, yet after this being made known, some of his own
Family take some of these men for their companions, and enter into familiarity
with them: do you think that the Prince would take this well at their hands?
surely no, know then that Jesus Christ is a great Prince, the King of Kings,
and all wicked men he has made known to be traitors and rebels to his Crown
and Dignity; and he has commanded his subjects (his Saints) not to keep
company with them; O then consider with your selves, how ill Christ will take
this at your hands, who dare to keep company with wicked and ungodly men, with
traitors and rebels, for so is every profane person, every swearer, drunkard,
sabbath-breaker, and company-keeper that does ordinarily frequent Taverns and
Alehouses to abuse the creatures and themselves; yea Christ calls them dogs and
swine; what, you that profess your selves to be washed from your filthiness in
the blood of Jesus Christ; will you defile your garments with such company as
these? what is the blood of Christ had in no higher esteem in your eyes, then
thus to be trampled under feet in the company of Christ's enemies.

all that you can hope for is but heaven, which they look to enjoy as well as
you, without any such strictness; so that they will endeavor to turn thee out
of the good way, that leads unto life and glory, that thou may walk with
them in the way to woe and misery; and remember that God may justly leave thee
to their snare and net, to be entangled by them, which if he do, thou will
find it will cost thee dear to recover thy self again, yea it may be many a
tear, many a groan, many a sigh, and heart-aking: O, know that God may justly
hide his face from thee, and give thee over to the counsel of the ungodly, for
thy apostasy from him, and the ways of his commandments; O thou that have let
out thy heart to vanity, remember its not in thy power to call it home again at
thy pleasure: O remember that Peter had been quite lost by being in evil
company, had not Christ recovered him by a look; you know the story, how he
went among that cursed rabble that carried Christ away to the high Priests
Hall, and there he being asked of Christ, entangled himself among that cursed
crew, and falls to denying of Christ, the first, second, and third time, yea,
to curse, and to swear that he knew him not, who but a little before would die
with him, now when Christ looked back on him, its said, That he went out and
wept bitterly; O it cost him many a bitter tear, and made him cautious of his
company for ever after; and know that if Peter who was so strengthened with
grace were so dangerously overcome with wicked company; what then do thou
think will be thy condition?

guilty of, that keep company and are familiar with ungodly men, especially in
their Tavern and Alehouse meetings.

Lastly, again remember Christ says, Blessed shall that servant be whom his
Lord shall find well doing at his coming: now tell me, Could thou be
contented that Christ should come and find thee in a Tavern or Alehouse,
carousing, and drinking, in the company of ungodly men? may not Christ say to
thee, What do thou here? is this thy course of life? is this thy way to
heaven? what reply can thou return unto Christ? will not thy conscience fly
in thy face, and tie up thy tongue? I fear that sad and grievous will be thy
condition, and horror and amazement will take hold on thy soul.

1 Cor. 10.27.
then if an unbeliever desire me to go with him to drink at the Tavern or
Alehouse, its no more, if so much, as to feast with an unbeliever.

some just occasion thou may go and drink with an unbeliever, and yet not
infringe our position: The point that we insist upon is, that thou make not
profane unbelievers thy associates, thy familiars, thy companions, that thou
should not make a common custom to drink and mispend thy time in such
companies, to the dishonoring of God, and wounding, thine own conscience. I
tell thee thou may go to feast with an unbeliever, and not dishonor God,
thou may drink with a friend and not sin against Christ, but it must be upon
important occasion; but this must not be done ordinarily, nor frequently, nor
any ways approving or consenting unto their wicked actions or designs, nor so
far forth as to make them lie in thy bosom: that never came near the heart of
Christ.

you know that there are many moral men which hate vice and profaneness, as
the civil honest man, and many of the Heathens, as Plato, Socrates, Fabritius,
Cato, with others, etc.





Belial? as I have formerly showed you in this Treatise, and need not now speak
any more of it in this place.

But secondly, if you speak concerning the word preached, and thy mixing with
such in the administration thereof; thou must know that the preaching of the
word is a general duty, and its the right of all men to come thither both good
and bad; and therefore the commission is, Go, and preach the word to every
creature, yea those who are cast out of the Church have a common right to it;
and it were cruelty to keep them from it, for its the means of conversion, and
the power of God to salvation to all men that believe; and faith comes by
hearing the word preached, and if thou come there never so often into and among
such company, thou may plead Christ's own commission for thy warrant; And
this I say further, that for all Ordinances, so long as men may enjoy them in
public, in their power, purity and glory, its their duty there to partake of
them, and not to separate from them; for God will be praised in the great
Congregation: Psalm. 35.18.
I will praise thee among much people (says David.) Certainly you cannot but
conceive its that which will bring more glory to God, then to meet where there
are but few; Deuteronomy. 16.16.
therefore all the males of Israel were bound to meet the Lord in the place
that he shall choose three times every year, yea though they lived never so many
hundred miles distance, 2 Chro. 8.13.
which must needs make a very great Congregation wherein God did delight to
dwell, and you know it was Christ's own practice to go publicly into the
temple: but I think this point is so clear and granted of all, that we need not
use any further arguments to persuade any to it; always provided that men may
there meet so as to receive and partake: for if a man shall think he is bound
to come to a public Congregation, it being so great that he can no ways
partake of what is delivered, then he must, yea ought to go where he can. I put
this caution in, for that some men live in such places where they can no ways
come near to hear what is delivered.

ot men deceive themselves, for certainly they are such as their company is, a
man may read these men's Religion by their company: Judge you, that say you are
Saints, how unsuitable a thing it is for you to be the companions of devils; O,
Is it fit that the members of Christ should be joined with the members of
Satan? O how do such persons dishonor Jesus Christ, and disgrace that
profession they make of the Gospel? I have read, that wicked men have much
desired the company of the godly when they have been upon their death beds, but
never that godly men have desired the company of the wicked at that time.





Their light should so shine before men, that they seeing their good works,
might glorify their father which is in heaven; but in keeping company with
evil men, they give evil examples, and so harden others in their sins.



Lastly, Consider, whether those hours that thou spendest in Taverns or
Alehouses, with company suitable to such places, would not be better spent in
prayer; reading the Scriptures, self-examination, godly conference, and ^ther
holy duties, would it not bring more glory to God, and peace to thy soul when
thou come to die; do but make trial one week in spending thy time in holy
duties, and then compare that with the hours spent in profane company, and if
thou have any spark of grace glowing in thee, to thy own apprehension, or any
working of conscience remaining, then see and judge impartially which time is
best spent; thou will certainly conclude, and say with David, One day in thy
Courts, is better then a thousand in the tents of the ungodly; one hours
communion with Christ in public, in family, or in closer duties, is better
spent then ten thousand hours in any other places, though it may seem to the
flesh to be never so profitable, or never so pleasurable. Now that God that
dwells in heaven, so rule in, and dwell upon the spirits of all his Saints on
earth, and make then so wise, that they may keep such company on earth as are
fit for heaven, or at least that look heavenward.

Now one word or two to those which no man (that has any spark of
spirituality) dares calls Saints, who say, that they would not keep company
with profane men, nor lie at the Tavern or Alehouse as they do, could they well
avoid it; it is not the greedy desire of the wine or the beer, but the company
that is there that causes them to come to those houses, and when they are
called by such company they cannot withstand it.

From such turn away; but they read it, But to such we will turn; O its a
fearful thing to dally with the Almighty, and to fall into the hands of the
living God, who is a consuming fire; O, dare you provoke God to his face, and
by your practice plainly tell him you will not obey his Word? I say to all
such, that the time is at hand, that God will make you know that his Word shall
not return unto him void, but it shall accomplish that whereunto he sent it: O
thou bold sinner, do thou dare thus to affront the great God of heaven and
earth, before whom thou must sportly come to give an account of things done in
the flesh? I say, think with thy self how thou shall be able to answer these
Scriptures, O read them, and lay them to heart.

And it shall be when he hears the words of this oath that he bless himself
in his heart, Deuteronomy. 29.19, 20.
saying, I shall have peace though I walk in the imaginations of my heart to
add the drunken to the thirsty: the Lord will not spare him, but then the anger
of the Lord, and his jealousy shall smoke against that man, and every curse
that is written in this book shall lie upon him, and the Lord will blot out has
name from under the heavens: do but read the former part of this Chapter, and
consider what thy condition is, and remember that this curse does extend to
every breach of the Law of God, Gal. 3.10.
for cursed is he that continues not in every point of the Law, to do it, or
in all things of the Law to do them; O you that imagine to your selves peace,
and prosperity in a way of evil, in your ways of company keeping; the Chaldee
renders such imagination but a conceit and that's all that's in it: you do either
conceit that God does not regard your sinful course of life, or that
Scripture-prohibitions are but conceits: but the time is coming wherein you
shall know that these conceits of yours do but add your drunkenness to your
thirst; that is, your sins of ignorance, to your sins of presumption; O know,
that if you refuse, and be rebellious, you shall be destroyed, for the mouth of
the Lord has spoken it, Isaiah 1.20.

Isa. 66.4.
Secondly, That of Isaiah 66.4. They have chosen their own ways, and their
souls delight in their own abominations, I also will choose their delusions,
and will bring their fears upon them, because when I called, none would answer,
when I spoke they did not hear, but they did evil before mine eyes, and chose
that wherein I delighted not: O sinners, you will choose your own companions,
though the Lord has prohibited you, yea, though he calls upon you to turn away
from them; now you have your choice, now you have that which your soul
delights in; the next thing unto you, is, That God will make a choice for you
also, but it shall be for your woe and misery.

Thirdly, Pro. 1.25.
But you have set at naught all my Counsels, and would none of my reproof; I
also will laugh at your destruction, and mock when your fear comes upon you.



God is as just as merciful, that he is a repaier of the wicked, as well as a
pardoner, and know further, that if ever thou have thy sins forgiven thee, thy
pardon must be as well sealed in the Court of Justice, as in the Court of
Mercy, as thou have sinned, so know that Justice must be satisfied, yea, and
that for thee if ever thou art pardoned: But for you that think to go to heaven
with Lord have mercy upon you in your mouths; Do but well consider the sad
story that I shall relate: There was a man that was a notorious Swearer, a
wicked Company-keeper, and being oft-times reproved for his sin, His answer
always was, Tush, God is merciful; Upon a time (as the story relates) he being
on horseback, riding over a Bridge that crossed an arm of the Thames, part of
the bridge fell in, and as he was going, he was heard to say, Horse and man and
all to the Devil, as his Companions testified: O here you see, though he might
have gone to hell with Lord have mercy upon me in his mouth, yet God would not
suffer him so much as to take his Name into his mouth. O then let this one
example make ungodly sinners tremble, and not to dare to harbor a thought or
conceit within them, that so many words at the last hour shall do them any
good, or redeem their souls from eternal burnings, and carry them into the
bosom of everlasting Loves; but admit they were sure to have Lord have mercy on
me in their mouths at the last gasp, yet it may be just with God to give them a
denial: O know that every one that says, Lord, Lord, shall not enter into the
Kingdom of God, but Christ shall say, Depart from me you workers of iniquity, I
know you not; and remember what the Lord says to such a man as this, Psalm.
50.16.
What have thou to do to take my word into thy mouth, and hate to be reformed?

2 Thessalonians. 1.7, 8, 9.
2 Thessalonians. 1.7, 8, 9. When the Lord Jesus shall be revealed from heaven with his
mighty Angels in flaming fire, taking vengeance on them that know not God, and
that obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, who shall be punished with
everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord, and from the glory of
his power.

Read also these Scriptures, Jer. 3.7. the 7.24. the 9.14. the 11.8. the 16.12.
the 18.12. the 23.17. Heb. 12.25. 2 Pet. 3.10, 11, 12. Revel. 20.12. the 22.15.
etc. O lay these Scriptures to heart, and then consider how thy estate stands
with God, and what thou shall be able to say another day, when God shall call
thee to an account: now when thou have taken a serious view of these
Scriptures, and have considered of what has been formerly said against thy
company-keeping, and thy disobedience, certainly if thy natural conscience has
but its eyes opened, thou will confess thy estate to be very sad.



It was Belshazars sin, that he knew, but did not reform. Dan. 5.23.
For if thy conscience condemn thee, God is greater then thy conscience, and he
will condemn thee; Conscience is Gods Vicegerent here on earth, its all in a
natural man that takes Gods part: O does thy conscience fly in thy face here?
what do thou think it will do hereafter, when thou shall stand at the Bar of
Jesus Christ, when it shall bring all its Items before God there registered
against thee? As

Item, Such a day so many hours spent in such an Alehouse, so many hours spent
in such a Tavern. Item, So much wine spent that might have been well spared,
and given to the necessity of the Saints. Item, Such a day spent so much in
such a place, when thy wife and children were in want at home. Item, Such a day
thou were the occasion of such and such a man's keeping company, wherein so many
oaths were sworn against God, and both Families neglected, both for soul and
body; O how ever thou think of it now, let me tell thee, that when thou
shall come to give answer to these Items, it will be a dismal and woeful time
unto thee, thou will wish the mountains to fall on thee, and the hills to cover
thee, to hide thee from the face of the Lamb, and his wrath.



To this I answer according to the Proverb, Though true Repenntace be never too
late, yet late Repentance is seldom true; O its a dangerous thing for a man to
defer and put off his returning from the evil of his ways.



to pluck it up but cannot, and says, that he will stay two or three years
longer before he will attempt to root it up again; certainly all men will judge
this man to be void of Reason, to attempt the harder, and let slip the easier,
so will thou find it in the case of sin.

Soul take thy ease, there are goods laid up for thee for many years, but with
what an unexpected answer did he meet withal? This night shall thy soul be
taken from thee, and then whose goods shall these be? O this may be thy case,
and know that Eternity depends upon this short moment of time in this world; if
thou return not now, thou shall never return; O, its just with God, that that
man which abuses his time, should be deprived of time, and cut short of his
hopes.

O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, if thou had known in this thy day, those things that
did belong to thy peace, but now they are hid from thine eyes; God, he hangs
forth a flag of mercy to the sons of men, in which time is their day, if in
that time they come in and return to him, and make their peace, then is he
exorable, and to be found of them, but if not then is displaied the red Flag of
his Justice, which is Gods day; O then thy day is gone, Gods Day is come and
thou art undone for ever, and who knows but his Day may be accomplished this
very night? and upon this thy Eternity depends; how mad then is that man that
will enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season, though he lose his soul for ever!
Men say, Its bad jesting with edge Tools, but this is the maddest jesting in
the world, for a man to dally with his soul, to hazard the loss of a Jewel for
the enjoyment of a Pebble; should God call unto thee this very hour, and say,
What provision have thou made for Eternity? now art thou lanching into that
Ocean; how is thy soul rigged and trimmed for that Voyage? are thy Sails full
blown with the gales of the spirit of Grace? then may thou safely sail unto
that Haven of eternal Life and Rest: O how many men would the consideration of
this astonish! and yet no man knows how neeer that hour is, and yet regards it
not: O turn you from your evil ways, Why will you die, O house of Israel? why
will you die eternally ye sons of men?

wait upon thee, as he testifies, my spirit shall not always strive with man,
for that he is flesh: no, God may come in an hour when thou think not of it,
and cut thee off in a moment, in the midst of thy security, and then thou shall
receive the fruit of thy own doings; O consider this all you that forget God,
that walk, and will walk in the by-pathes of sin, lest he tear you in pieces,
and there be none to deliver you out of his hand, but you must undergo his
wrath to all eternity. I have now a word or two more to you, that will still
keep profane, wicked, and ungodly company, and that shall be by way of advice
and counsel.



First, meditate upon Eternity in the morning when thou do awake after this
manner; Lord, I am now one day nearer to Eternity then I was yesterday, O how
stands the case with my soul? am I a day nearer heaven, or a day nearer hell?
Conscience speak; am I the same man walking in my sinful courses as formerly I
have been? O then certainly I am nearer destruction, nearer the stroke of
divine Justice then I was yesterday, nearer my coming to give an account for my
sin and wickedness then ever I was; my glass is nearer run, my soul is nearer
leaving this sinful body then ever it was; be sure to spend some time in the
morning upon such thoughts as these, yea, say to thy soul, O remember Eternity.

When thou art going out of thy doors, think with thy self, whether am I now
going? every step I take this day is toward Eternity: what, am I going to my
companions to the Tavern or Alehouse? O certainly these paths lead to the
chambers of death? what am I going to poison my soul yet more and more, to
bring more guilt upon my spirit, to wound my conscience yet more? O this is not
the way to take off that guilt that lies upon my spirit, this is not the way to
give thanks to God who has kept me this night from danger, who has yet saved
my soul from hell; O thus far natural men may easily go, who have not one dram
of grace; then covenant with thy self, and say, Well, is it so? I will not keep
company this day, I am resolved to gainsay all occasions to draw me to it; This
resolution being taken and kept for two days, then for three days, for a
week, then for a month, so by degrees thou may get the victory. Then at
night examine thy self; Have I more peace now I keep not these sinful societies
or no? certainly if thy conscience be not dead, and if the devil has not
blinded thy judgment, thou will say thou have more peace in turning from a way
of sin, then in walking in it: thus I say compare a day spent in the company of
sinful men in a way of profaneness, with a day wherein thou do forbear and
cast off such sinful companions and I am confident thou will have peace in the
one, but none in the other: Romans 2.14, 15, 16.
see that Romans 2.14, 15, 16. etc. For when the Gentiles which have not the Law,
do by nature the things contained by the Law, these having not the Law are a
Law unto themselves, which shows the Law written in their hearts, their
consciences also bearing witness, and their thoughts the mean while, accusing,
or else excusing one another: so by this thou may see if thou are not worse
then a Heathen, and if thy conscience be not seared with an hot Iron, it will
do its office in excusing thee when thou do well, and accusing thee when thou
do evil. I wish thee well, and my desire is that thou might think of these
things, and what ever else may do thee good, and follow and embrace them, that
so thou may be one not having a form of godliness, and denying the power
thereof, but having the power of godliness, professing and evidencing the same
in thy life and conversation; turning thy back upon the counsels and fellowship
of the ungodly; and thirsting after, and delighting in the Law of the Lord, and
in the company of the Saints.

FINIS.

