A SERMON Preached at Stanton-Harcourt Church, In the County of Oxford; At the
FUNERAL Of the Honorable the LADY ANN HARCOVRT, Who Deceased Aug. 23. 1664
Together with Her Funeral Speech.

OXFORD, Printed by A. and L. Lichfield, Printers to the University, Anno Dom.
1664.

To the Right Worshipful Sr PHILIP HARCOVRT Knight. Of Stanton-Harcourt, in the
County of Oxford.
SIR
IN obedience to Your Commands (for such to me are your requests) and that I
might give a public testimony of my gratitude for all your Favors, and bounty
toward me, I have Pressed the ensuing Sermon for Your Service, and prefixed
Your Name, as having the greatest right thereto.

It Is the first Sermon, of this kind, that ever I made, and I hope 'twill be the
last on so sad an occasion. I acknowledge that not long before, at the entreaty
and tears of two poor Orphans, and the importunity of their Friends, I (having,
God is my witness, no other end then charity, to save the distressed Orphans
charges, and Bury their dead Father decently) Preached at his Funeral, a Sermon
made long before upon another occasion. This innocent act, some have
endeavored to asperse, pretending (as you have heard) that some Men of worth
and note, have highly censured me for it. Which I cannot believe; it is below
their worth to wrong open innocence. Indeed we read of a man of a great Name (
Alexander) that wronged St Paul; but of no worth, he was a Copper-smith. I
cannot think men of worth, let their names be never so great, will take up here
the Tinkers office, it is too smutty for them.

Sir, the Coare lies here; Your pitching upon so worthless and inconsiderable
a person as my self, for such honorable employment as this, has begot a
heart-burning in some narrow breasted persons, which breaks out into such kind
of groundless aspersions: as if I affected popularity, and Pharisee like
desired to be seen and heard in public: whereas (the Lord knows) I no more
delight in it, then the deformed Cripple, to be seen on a Theater. Had I sought
this honor, so much grudged me, I acknowledge I had justly deserved the
censure of being arrogant: had I denied you, who, that knows my obligations,
could accuse me of less then high ingratitude? I am confident, persons of
far higher worth were invited first to this noble task, and it is our
unhappyness we enjoyed them not; their high parts would far better have
become this Scene: but, but let me say, none could have more pathetically
performed the part of a mourner then my self. Many might have done it with
greater skill and parts, but none with stronger affection.

Sir what I here have brought, is so mean, that with grief and blushing I
present it. I know your goodness will bate it something, upon the score of
grief, that stupefyes, and at that time I was overwhelmed with. You must expect
nothing that is florid either in Sermon or ensuing Speech.

Non est conveniens luctibus ille color.

I presume you will find truth plain and pertinent in them both. The last is
justly culpable, non in regard of what is, but what is not (that ought to be)
said: All there is generally known to be truth; but that All, amounts not to
Half of what is due to Her you justly loved so dearly. However, knowing that your
modesty had rather I erred on this, then the other extreme; and presuming your
generosity will courteously accept of weak things well meant; I humbly put my
self at your feet, and this poor thing into your hand, and beg nothing but
your pardon for it: Do Your Self, and it that right, in reading it as to
agnoscere quod Dei est, and vouchsafe the Author the favor as to ignoscere
quod hominis est, so will you eternally oblige

Sir Your most humbly devoted Servant E. Hall.

Ezekiel 24. v. 16. Son of man, behold, I take away the desire of thine eyes
with a stroke.
THis Sable Scene bespeaks our sorrow and has drawn us hither, as you see, to
tread the mournful stage this day in a drooping stateliness, whether we are
come to pay the last kisses of an honorable farewell, in a tribute of tears,
justly due to the Hearse of the Lady ANN HARCOVRT.

For this end, I have chosen this apposite Text, which when I have repeated, I
may close my book, sit down in sorrow, and in tears take up our Saviors words
and say, this day is this Scripture fullfilled in your eyes.

It sounds like thunder in all our ears, and like a thunder bolt thrown from
the hand of the Almighty, seems to shiver that soul of her nearest relation,
who erst while was giving it up to her, that She might live.

But that must not be, Heaven's decree must be as well obeyed as feared, which
speaks this day, as it did to this holy man of God here in my text; Son of man
behold I take away the desire of thine eyes with a stroke.

The Text is a sorrowful and unexpected, but peremptory message from God to
the Prophet.

In it we may observe, the Agent, and the Patients. The Agent, God. The
Patients are, 1 the Prophet the looser, and the Person lost his Wife. But we
shall take the words as they fall, wherein there are these Five things
observable. 1. The Title given to the Prophet Son of man. 2. His duty enjoined
him, implied in the word behold. 3. The Author of this, l. 4. The sad message
expressed take away the desire of thine eyes. 5. The manner how, with a stroke.
Of these I shall briefly touch in their order.

1. Of the Title given to this eminent servant of God, Son of man, in the
Hebrew it is ben Adam. Adam, was the name of the first man, the father of
mankind, and he had his name from red earth, out of which he was formed. This
Name, though it be common to his posterity, yet since the fall, the Scripture
uses thereby to denote the weakness or the wickedness of man, as Job 25.6.
Bildad styles ben Adam, a worm, i. e. a weak inconsiderable creature, non
solum quia sicut vermis ex corruptione nascitur; sed quia abibit tandem in
vermes. Pineda ex Philip. A creature of no continuance, or stability, worms
meat. In 1 Samuel 26.19. there, ben Adam, signifies a wicked man: If they be
Children of men that have stirred thee up against me, Cursed be they: there been
Adam signifies wicked men, the incendiaries of a King against his loyal
subjects are wicked men, and deserve to be accursed. Likewise in Ps. 57.4. my
soul is amongst Lions, even the sons of men, i. e. wicked men.

The Hebrew language wants not words to set forth a man of worth; they style
him ish, from esh, Fire, importing Life, Spirit, and Vigor inhi Ps. 49.2. We
find both here mean men, and men of worth set down under a various expression:
gam been Adam gam been ish; which our English for want of fit words have in our
language rendered both high and low, but learned Tremelius more aptly in the
Latin, tum nati plebeo homine, tum nati praestanti viro. After the same manner
the Grecians distinguish of men; they call the vulgar men by the name (...)
which comes (...) a suspiciendo sursum. i. e. he looks upward for help, being
helpless in himself, but men of worth and quality, they called (...) because
(...) vitruous. We find both these in Herodotus speaking thus, (...). There are
(says he) many men, but few virtuous magnanimous men in the world.

But can there no better title be found for Ezekiel, then ben Adam, which is a
diminitive title at the best? His Name, Birth, worth, and Parts be speak him
great; his Name, says Origin and Hierom, signifies Dei imperium, seu
fortitudinem Dei, and such as his name was, such was he, strengthened by God,
and mighty with him; his Birth was Honorable, and his Parts, and Piety
answerable to his birth; St. Hierom on Ezekiel. c. 47. calls him for his profound
parts, Scripturarum Oceanum and mysteriorum Labyrinthum, and in another place,
sui seculi portentum. Epiphanius and Adricomius say he was an eminent Martyr:
Certainly with men, he was great; but now God comes to speak to him, he will make
him know that he is but ben Adam, a poor, weak, helpless, inconsiderable
creature, full of sin, and imperfection.

Obs. 1. When God comes to deal with men of high degree, and eminent parts,
He Will make them know they are but low, worthless, mean and helpless creatures.

Great men in Learning, are apt to idolize their gifts and indowments; they,
for the most part, sit without the gunshot of control; few dare say to them,
what do thou? they have more flatterers then friends, who, as suitors for
their favor, by their flattering applauses, stand like magnifying glasses
before them, and make them seem bigger then they are. Thus Herod's eloquence
must be extold to the skies, and he deified. A Scholar that by his parts has
got the popular applause, how strangely, often times, may we observe him to be
puffed up, how he states it, and struts it in his fancy, thinking the heads of
his betters, scarce ground good enough for him to put the sole of his foot
upon. It Is not only so, with men of great gifts, but graces also; which made
our learned and religious Fox say, he got hurt by his graces, and good by his
sins, His graces puffed him up.

Thus also it is with men of great Wealth, as Solomon observes, the rich man's
wealth is his strong city, which he opposes to any right or reason; it exalts
them in their thoughts and words; might, and power, and honor, and majesty, is
the common dialect they discourse in. Dan. 4.30. Is not this great Babylon that
I have built by the might of my power, and for the honor of my majesty. Hence
it comes to pass, that they quite forget themselves; and now God comes as their
remembrancer.

Job was a man eminent in gifts and graces, and so highly confident he was of
them, that in the end of his last defense Job 31. he challenges God to come
forth against him: and in c. 38. God comes forth to cool the courage and pull
down the confidence of Job; now you find Job chap. 24.6. altered of a sudden.
He that shone in his integrity before, like the Sun; when devine brightness
appears, now goes out, he shrivels himself now to nothing, and creeps into the
dust again from whence he came. Nihil me facio^ Chrisost. Verbum originale
significat nauseare, reprobare, cum fastidio abjicere. Pined. in loc.
I abhor my self in dust and ashes.

Thus does God, when he comes to deal with men of great power and wealth, he
humbles them, he makes them know themselves. So he dealt with that lofty King
Nebuchadnezar, he made him know that all his honor and wealth and power, was
not in his own keeping, and he makes him confess it.

St Hierom observes in his Hebrew questions on 2 Chronicles. 24.17. that King Ioash
being exalted to the Throne, Adoraverunt eum ut Deum, and acquievit eorum
obsequiis delinitus, ut se ut Deum coli permitteret. Hierom.
became so proud, that he permitted himself to be worshipped as God. And Cassian
observes, that God punished him with such loathsome diseases that all his
friends forsook him, and God did it, says he, Instit. lib. 16. cap. 21. Ut
carnis ignominiosa contagio patefaceret immunditiam cordis ejus occultam, quam
superbiae mal^ contraxerat, ac manifesta pollutione corporis probaretur
impurus, qu^ elatione spiritus factum se non sentiebat immundum; that the
ignominious contagion of his flesh, might open the secret uncleaness of his
heart, which by the evil of pride he had gotten, and by the manifest polution
of his body, he mihgt be proved impure, who by the pride of his heart did not
perceive himself to be capable of polution. When great men will make themselves
Gods, God will make them know they are but a lie, they are been Adam, gods of
red earth, and unto that their godships must return: And when God comes to sit
amongst these gods, he will make them know so much. Psalm. 82. I have said ye are
Gods, but ye shall dye like men.

This should teach men of great gifts and graces, and those of high place and
eminency, to carry themselves humbly, remembering always that there is one higher
than They, that always eyes them. He is no respector of persons, he hates pride
in great men as much as in men of low degree, and when he comes to deal with
the Mighty Monarchs of the earth, he will make them confess as Nebuchadnezar did,
that those that walk proudly, he is able to debase them; He Will not spare any be
they never so near or dear to him. The blessed Virgin herself the Mother of
our Lord, if She meddle with things to high for her, though Christ as man be
her Obedient Son, yet as God he will sharply rebuke her, 2 Ioh. 4. Woman what
have I to do with thee? these words (what ever the Papists and some other say)
are acknowledged by the Fathers to be a sharp rebuke. It Is v^x indignationis
says Athanasius and Chrysostom. it is vox reprehensionis, Athan. Sermon. 4. adv.
Arian. Chrysostom. Hom. 4. in l^c. Aug. l. 2 de Symb. c. 6. Irenae. l. 3. cap. 18*
says Augustine: it is vox repulsae, says Irenaeus. I conclude this then with
the words of the Psalmist, blessed is he that fears always; It Is the safest
way for great men in gifts and eminency to walk in a reverential fear, and
holy awe of him who is higher than they.

I pass from the title given to the Prophet to the duty enjoined him.

2. Behold, (...) hinne God was now about to bring the dreadfullest National
judgment that ever befell Judah. The Temple of Solomon, the Arc of the
Covenant, together with the City and its glory, are now to be taken away from
them, which was the delight of their eyes, and the crown of their glory. And as
a certain and infallible sign of this, God will by a sudden and heart cutting
stroke upon the Prophets family make that the type of it; and therefore the
Lord injoynes the Prophet here to behold it.

Behold. It implies attention joined with trembling and wonder. And then,
behold, so as certainly to be assured of what I am about to do: so much the
word in Scripture carries in it.

2, Obs. God's severe judgments upon a family or nation call for our most
serious attention. This is that God looks for from his people when he afflicts
them, Isay. 22.12, 13: at such a time the Lord by his afflictions calls for
weeping and mourning and guirding with sackcloath. This the Saints have
practiced, Ps. 119.120, my flesh trembles for fear of thee, and I am afraid of
thy judgments. If the Lion roar the beasts of the forest tremble, and shall
not the creature tremble when the Creator thunders out with his judgments upon
them?

It Is senseless stupidity, madness, and folly to be smitten by God in our
Persons, relations, or families and not to feel it, not to grieve for it, nor
bewail it.

He that thinks to gain the name of valiant by a sturdy outfacing his grief
under the afflicting hand of God, is quite mistaken, for he shall but gain
amongst the wise the name of frantic and fool hardy madman; so says St.
Augustine, Gloriatur de viribus propria voluntatis tanquam de stupore morbi,
non de robore sanitatis, insania often ista gloriatio, non est patientiae sed
dementiae, August. de patient. cap. 23. Hear how the Prophet Jeremiah complain^
of such, cap. 5. verse. 3. Thou have smitten them but they have not sorrowed,
they have made their faces harder than a stone, there is no stone so hard but
the hammer will break it, but God's hammer of affliction did not break them*
Moses smote the rock and it gushed out water; but God smits the hard hearted
sinners in their relations, estates, and no penitential waters flow from them;
these are such desperate sinners, that they seem to be past hope of recovery;
there is as much hope of a clod of earth to be made rational as these to be
reclaimed, and the same Prophet insinuates as much, 22. Ier. 30: when he leves
senseless sinners and cries out, o earth, earth, earth, hear the word of the
Lord, what is the word? why write this man childless, a man that shall not
prosper; he is rather an inanimate clod, than a man hat takes not to heart such
judgments; yet such stocks there are that are twice dead, the^r consciences
being feared with hot irons of hell; mark the doom of such desperate
contemners of God's judgments; since God intended them as instruments of their
convertion, and they abuse them, 22 Isay 13; instead of mourning and weeping
there was joy and gladness, slaying of Oxen, and killing of sheep, eating flesh
and drinking wine, let us eat and drink for to morrow we shall dye. Surely
this iniquity shall not be purged from you till ye dye; after contempt of
God's judgments upon us comes death.

Oh beloved take heed how you carry your selves under the hand of God
afflicting you. Behold it with such serious meditation of the goodness and
severity of God, as that it may raise up suitable affections in you, Romans 11.22.
Eye his severity with submission, fear and trembling; eye his goodness with
adoration and thankfulness. Behold them so as to bewail them, chiefly the
cause of them. Though fools may make light of such doleful dispensations, yet
the prudent will lay them to heart, Amos 3.6.

But what is it, the Prophet is enjoined to behold?

This leads me to the Third thing observable in the Text; which is the object
matter of the injunction, which is:

The Judgment expressed, with the Author and the Manner of it: we cannot separate
them.

The Agent, is the Lord, I, the Sovereign of the universe: The Judgment
expressed, is, take away the desire of thine eyes: The manner how, with a
stroke.

The desire of thine eyes. I Will omit the various readings of the phrase, since
they all agree in the sense* The desire of thine eyes, is thy Wife, a wife
being to every virtuous man the delight of his eyes, the only amiable and
delightful object God in the world has given him; nihil enim (says Hierom on
the place) vire, vxore bona amabilius, quae a Deo homini providetur.

She might be the desire of his eyes, as a beautiful person; and without sin,
since by instinct of nature all men owe a kind of homage to it; beauty being
the gift of God, as heathens and Christians grant; Forma dei donum, Ovid. de
Am. Aug. de civ. Dei l. 15. cap. 28. Turtul. de cultu Foem.
hac tua sunt, domine, bona sunt, quia tu bonus ista creasti. It Is the
bountiful advantage of divine creation says Tertullian, and the comely ornament
of the Soul; it is to the gracious Soul as a rich enamel to a choice jewel.

As she was (which in charity we may judge, being a Prophets wife) a gracious
Woman, she might be the desire of his eye, and joy of his heart. Or merely as
she was his Wife, she might justly be the desire of his eyes, 1 Cor. 11.7. St.
Paul says, the Woman is the glory of the man. How his glory? That he should be
the head of a creature equal to him, in understanding, will, liberty, and in
all other divine privileges, as wisdom, grace and glory, of which she is
capable. To be the head of so excellent divine a creature, is the top of his
glory. She is (says Salmeron) in^^gne viri ornaementum. So that she might well
be, as his Wife, the desire of his eyes.

Well, be she so to him, however, God is now about to take her away, but how?
by a stroke, morte repentina, suddenly, some think by the plague, but that's
uncertain, the word being of general use for all the Plagues in Egypt. However
it was suddenly, for verse. 18; he preached in the morning to the people, and she
dyed in the afer-noone.

Now lay all this together, and what a sad face of sorrow will here appear?
That she who was his Wife, and the bosom Friend, the Cabinet of his heart,
where he safely laid up all his secrets, his Comforter in sorrow, his Physician
in sickness, his loving and pleasant Friend in prosperity, and his sure and
trusty Friend in adversity: That she should suddenly, unexpectedly, be taken
from him; That she who last night laid her lovely face in his bosom, and with
her loving arms embraced him, should this night lay them in the grave; What
can we gather hence? Will fruit be found upon such thorns as these? Yes, from
these thorns we may gather these grapes.

3. Obs. That the choicest comforts and the dearest employments of this life
are uncertain and mutable.

And then for the circumstantial aggravation of this affliction, it is on a
sudden, and the Prophet is called upon to attend. Who would not have gladly shut
his eyes, and stopped his ears at this? but it is otherwise, the Prophet is
called as 'twere to stand at the block while the fatal blow is struck, he must
behold it; the good man nearest concerned, must be the chief spectator.

4. Obs. That God often times exercises his choice and eminent Servants with
most sharp and sore temporal losses and afflictions.

Lastly, As this affliction was a type of future judgments to come upon the
nation observe.

5. Obs. That many times sharp afflictions on the godly are certain presages of
the wickeds judgment at hand. we return to the 3d Obs.

3. Obs. That the choicest Saints of God can call none of these earthly
enjoyments certain good things: God can take them away by a stroke, they are
mutable. Riches are God's blessings, but they make them selves wings and fly
away as well from Saints as Sinners, as well from Job as Nebuchadnezar. He that
to day had his table spread with dainties, that could wash his footsteps in
butter, to morrow may have none to put in his belly. This word, take away,
spoils all. If God the great houskeeper of the world say, take away, before we
have half satisfied our selves, the full table is presently voided, and then
(as Hugo Victor, in Psalm. 24.) dum gustu appetitum provocant, transitu
desiderium fraudant. Whiles they provoke the appetite to taste of them, they
deceive the desire in their sudden departure.

A good wife is a great blessing and gift of God, but they we see are
uncertain to.

Faithful Abraham's Sara the wife of his bosom dies away from him. And holy
Jacob's Rachel, beautiful, and best beloved Rachel, fruitful Rachel, this
fruitful tree is cut down in the time of fruit bearing.

A good name is the greatest of temporal blessings; Christ had it most
deservingly, yet he could not keep it; they counted him a wine-bibber, a friend
to Publicans and Sinners. They laid to his charge two of the higest crimes
against first and second table; blasphemy, and usurpation. They accounted of
him but as a Magician, on that wrought by the Devils help.

Our time of living here, it is the choicest tallent that we have, upon it
depends our eternal woe or welfare. Life, it is that which gives the main
enjoyment to all the comforts we possess. Who can define it? he best defined it
that did not define it, that said, 'twas nescio quid, a certain sweet thing I
know not what, it is beyond all parallel; yet see what the Scripture says of its
uncertainty; it is compared to grass, to the flower of the field, that is
subject to be eaten up by Cattle, or trodden down, or gathered by the
Passenger. If it outstand these, ere long it blossoms, withers, and dies; such
is our life, in our best estate we are altogether vanity, because uncertain and
mutable, Psalm. 39.5: therefore Solomon in Prove. 31.8. calls the Sons of men,
been haloph children of chang.

Job compares our life to a Post, a Ship, and an Eagle hasting to her prey.
Observe the climax: a Post makes have, stays not, rides night and day; but he
will at last tire, and then he must ly down: therefore he takes up a stronger
comparison, and compares our life to a Ship sailing, that tyres not: but wind
and tide may fail and then she stands still; therefore he compares our life to
an Eagle, sharp set in pursuing her prey. An Eagle is the swiftest and
strongest of long winged Hawks, what flies stronger and swifter than she? Such
is our time here, it flies away upon a swift wing, and death when it makes a
stoop at us maks no canceleire.

Well then, since all our earthly enjoyments are of no certain continuance,
lets learn hence these three lessons.

Be not vainly confident in the possessing of them; it is a vanity in a great
Person to build strong presumptions upon worldly props that are tottering and
weak; the Psalmist excellently turns their hearts outward, Ps. 49.11 that the
posterities to come may decline that vanity; he speaks of worldly rich men, and
tells you their purposes, thoughts and designs; God has blessed them with estates
and prosperity; and now their inward thought is that their houses shall
continue for ever; do they think to live for ever? no, but they intend their
posterity shall live for ever, and keep up the state and grandeur of the
family, therefore they call their houses after their name, says he; they think,
now God has blessed them with a numerous offspring, that nodosa quadam
aeternitate, their name shall be kept up for ever: but what says the Psalmist,
this their way i. e. their contrivance, is their folly, verse. 13: to build such
high presumptions on such rotten props is their folly: and they find it so, for
in the next words, says he, they go down to hell like sheep, and death feeds
on them: How like sheep? why, like as silly sheep in a fat pasture, feed and
play, and fear nothing, though the Butcher come and fetch away, now one, then
an other; which startles them for the present, but that being over, they fall
to feed and play again, until the Butcher by little and little fetch them all
away at last. So do these worldly Confident men, who are fed to the full, and
have enough to keep up greatness to posterity, who securely, wantonly and
haughtily, vant it in their thoughts that they shall continue for ever; find
death like a Slaughterman ever and aanon come amongst them, now taking a
daughter, then a son, anon a wife, 'till at last all the props they trusted in
be taken quite away. How often do we see it come thus to pass, that many great
families are quite taken away from their great estates (like sheep out of a fat
pasture) and the estate passes into an other name and family. I will conclude
this with that wise King's counsel, Pr. 27.1. Boast not thy self of to morrow,
for thou know not what a day may bring forth. The word halal signifying to
boast, signifies also to be madd. q. d. it is madness and folly in men of wealth
and greatness, to think to build their nests among the Stars, when they are not
sure of enjoying any thing they have a whole day. The family of Eli, which was
the greatest in Israel in the morning, its props were cut down ere night, and
the rest destined to perpetual beggary; And Job lived to see himself in one
day stripped of all that he could call good in this world. The Chaldee therefore
reads the text thus, for thou know not what this day may bring forth. That
day that Belshazar was priding himself in his greatness, he fell. Let me speak
then to you rich and great men in the Apostles word, Charge the rich in this
world that they be not high minded* nor trust in uncertain riches. The more
confident you are, the less secure, especially if you belong to God, qualibet
elatio tanto citius rumpitur, quanto amplius inflatur. Greg. Ep.

2. Moderate your affections to the world, and the things of the world. You are
certain of nothing but this, that you have not long time in them. We are no
freeholders here, at most but tenants at will. You that are great Lords of
Lands you may set for three lives: but you your selves have but one in your
estates, and that a short uncertain one. Observe the inference, Paul draws
from this, the time is short, 1 Cor. 7.29. What then? not, Let us eat and
drink, for to morrow we shall dye; but, Let them that have Wives be as if they
had none, and they that weep, as if they wept not, and they that rejoice, as if
they rejoiced not, and they that buy, as if they possessed not, and they that
use this world as not abusing it, for the fashion of this world passes away.

The time is short, for so much as remains of it to be folded up; so learned
Beza and Pareus read it, making no comma in the words, (...). Beza so reads it
from the authority of many ancient copies. Paraeus says, the Apostle uses
here a metaphor taken from sails ( quae cum navis prope portam est, contrahi
solent. When the Ship comes near her port, the Saylors take in the main
sails, leave only one small one abroad then.) So that the meaning seems to be
this, that time which has for 5000 years been furling up, is now drawn into a
narrow compass, the end is at hand, we are entering the haven of eternity: if
time be short, then all the things that depend upon it are short: if time it
self shall be no more, after a few days, then all these things we enjoy must
be no more: Then it is high time to moderate your affections toward houses,
lands, children, wives, and every thing you possess, for they are not to be
yours after a few days; use the world as a Pilgrim his Inn, says Augustine
tract. 40. In Johan. Utere mundo quemadmodum viator in stabulo; utitur mensa,
calice, urceo dimissurus non permansurus: and the Argument in the close of the
Apostles words is cogent; For the fashion of this world passes away, (...)*
the pageantry, the show, the things of this world are but mere outside things;
like a pageant, gold without and pastboard within; and then, they pass by as a
show that goes along the streets: its soon gone* The heathen could say of
worldly things, hoc unum scio omnia mortalium opera mortalitate damnata: inter
peritura, vivimus: Sen. Ep. 91. Oh beloved, think often with your selves what it
is you so dote on, you so love, so insatiably thirst after; why it is that that
is vanity, and of no continuance. Who would venture his life, for the gathering
a flower that he knows will soon wither in his hand? Tertullian wonders at the
Romans, that they should endure such hardship, and run such hazards, to gain a
Consulship, which was but for a year; 'twas but, says he, unius anni volaticum
gaudium; may not we much more wonder at Christians, who spend all their time,
wits, strength and spirits, to enjoy that which for ought they know, is but
unius horae volaticum gaudium; for ought they know, God may say, this night
shall all be taken from thee.

2. Since the choicest of our earthly enjoyments are perishing, mutable and
uncertain: Let this teach us to put a true estimate on those things that are
eternal, that are perminent. Had the Young Man in the Gospel, but considered,
what was promised him, if he would sell all, he would, no doubt have cheerfully
performed what Christ required. It Was Treasure in Heaven was promised him. The
least treasure of heaven is worth all the worlds possession, because eternal:
had the young man put eternal into the Scale with his great possessions, they
would have seemed no more great in his eye; But this curse of the young man's,
is that which falls upon us; men are like bruit beasts, wholely taken up with
sensuality, and devoted to temporal things; but the things which are not seen,
which are eternal, are contemned and slighted and laughed at; their carnal
minds are enemies to such things, they are foolishness to them: the reason is,
because they see no farther then what they sensually apprehend, they cannot see
(as St. Peter says) a far off; and therefore men affect, what they sensually
apprehend, which can go no higher then sensual things, things which are seen,
which are temporal.

Pray therefore, again and again, that God would inlighten your minds, by
Faith, to see the excellency of things that are eternal; nothing but this,
will lessen the world to you; what are great possessions, honors, crowns, to
eternity? to be made a King for a day, and ever after a beggar; what comfort
can this be? but he that has an interest in Christ, is made a King for ever;
what is it to have an hour, or two's pleasure, and ever after live in a
dungeon? these profits, pleasures, honors, riches, are but for a moment, and
leave a sting behind them, but the pleasures, profits, honors, of heaven are
eternal; life eternal, Joys and pleasures at his righ hand for ever more,
Crowns incorruptible, and many such Scripturall expressions. This made Moses
throw away his honors, titles, court favors. Heb. 11.24. Aegypts treasures:
and what did he exchange these things for? he exchanged these things for
suffering, v. 25. for reproaches, for the wrath of the King. Reason would think
the man madd. Indeed had this been all he had exchanged for, he had been of all
men most foolish and miserable; no, Moses could see that Aegypts greatness,
power, dignity, was uncertain; had he been invested in it all, it could not
long have continued: that would have gone from ^im, or he from that. But he, v.
27. saw him that is invisible, by faith he looked to an eternal reward, to the
favor of an eternal King. How little do Wives, Houses, Honors, seem to that
soul, that by faith, sees an eternal Bridgroom, a House eternal in the
heavens, and an eternal Crown fitted for his head; they seem no more then Mole
hills to mighty Mountains.

From the circumstantial aggravations of the affliction to this holy Prophet,
as the nearness, and dearness of the person taken from him, the suddenness of
it, with a stroke, and the certainty of it, God himself says it, and who can
reverse? and the Prophet that was nearest concerned, must be the first informed
of it, and the chief spectator of this dreadful blow.

Obs. 4. That God oftimes exercises his choicest servants with sharpest
afflictions, with heart cutting lashes of providence, and that suddenly,
unexpectedly,, and very heavily.

In handling this (which I chiefly intended) I Will do these Three things: 1.
Show that it is so, 2. Why it is so, 3. Apply it.

1. That it is so, Scripture examples prove it. Examples of this, are as old as
the world. So soon as God set up a School, a Church, in the world, we find a
severe rod in it; 'twas signed with the Cross in its infancy. We may begin
with Adam and Eve (the true servants of God we believe:) When God had blessed
them with an offspring, the greatest of temporal blessings, therein sweetning
their sorrows with the pleasure of society; no sooner are the two Sons (the
Crown of their Parents glory, and the ground of their future hope) grown to be
useful to their Parents, but they are both in a moment taken from them; the
one by murder, the other, by banishment: Thus their Sun sets at noone: Abel the
delight of their eyes, is become the mornfull object of their tears; probably
this their dear son, was one of the first ghastly sights of death that they had
seen, which must needs be irksome: the Son of their joy, is become the subject
of their sorrow, their Cro^n of glory, is quickly turned into a Crown of thorns.

Abraham a faithful servant of God, a choice one, yet we find him loaded also
with the Cross, has he rich kindred, and great and fair possessions, richly
seated? he must leave them all, and turn Pilgrim: has he a beautiful and
beloved Sarah, the wife of his bosom, the desire of his eyes, the one half of
himself? we find Genesis 12.1 to 10. his fear to be such (amongst Barbarians not
groundless) that he sacrifices this half of himself to their lusts, to keep his
other half secure: this must need be a heart cutting act: how hard was his
condition that whiles, think you, that was enforced upon such inconveniences
to seek his bread.

Trace him on in the passage of his life, and every step he treads, almost, is
upon a thorn. Pregnant Hagar, from whom he hoped to have issue, must be turned
out of doors; no fruitful tree must stand in his Orchard long: Lot his kinsman
and companion, grows to great to stay with him, they must part to prevent
further mischief. Hagar's received again, she brings forth an Ishmael, Abraham's
joy; but of a sudden root and branch muh be plucked up, and thown away, they
must go into perpetual banishment. But now the heart peircing affliction of
all coms upon him; Isaac the son of the promise, the prop of his future hopes,
the delight of Abraham; and Sarah's eye, the joy of their lives, and the very
marrow of their souls, must now by the command of God be sacrificed, and who
must cut his throat, but the Father that begat him.

Job the Servant of God, none like him for piety, nor any like him for
sufferings. He that was so rich in outward good things, was in a day bereftof
all, and made poor even to a Proverb. But the soul peircing affliction was, the
taking away his seven Sons and three Daughters with a sudden stroke; the staff
and comfort of his old age was broken in a moment. Reflect a little, you that
are Parents, upon this affliction. Would it not be think you, a sad sight to
see one of your godly neighbors following ten of his childrens herses to the
grave at once? Jobs case is yet worse, for he must first pull his childerns
torn limbs out of the jaws of this cruel Lion, he must repleive them out of
deaths hold, before he could lay them in natures bed, the grave: he must go
forth now to stare on grisly death dressed in its most ghastly shapes: Here he
must pluck out one dear child in his gore blood, there another with his limbs
broken and mangled, here a Daughter ded in her Brothers arms, there another,
but which he knows not, her wounds have so disfigured her; perhaps another, or
two anon he finds gasping out their last, and then expiring for want of timely
succor* are not these things probable: but throw away these black surmises,
and at the best, judge how sad would it be for a man to have Ten children all
alive and lusty in thee morning, and all of these to be laid dead at his feet
before night! this was holy Jobs case This to our purpose is observable as an
aggravation of all his afflictions, they are brought in with a kind of behold,
to the good man; one still is let escape, to bring the unwellcome news to him.
read Job 1.

David a man after Gods own heart, designed for greatness from his youth: he
had as fair a stock to begin with, as ever man had, he was both honored and
beloved at once of all the people, the city and the country, the army and the
court, all they cry up David for the only Worthy, and high deserving man, they
all put the garland upon his victorious brow, the King gives him his Daughter
to Wife. Who in his condition would have dreamed of crosses? But alas! his rise
is intended for his ruin. Saul intended to make a halter of his garland; the
Court had like to have been David's charnall house; David's fingers did not play
there so quick upon his Harp-strings, as Saul's envy played upon David's
Heart Strings. On a sudden the desire of his eyes, his new betrothed wife is
taken from him, he banished the Court, and enforced to fly for his life; he
that was yesterday the Kings son in law, is to day proclaimed Traitor. Thus
it is evident, that God has exercised his choicest servants, with sore and
unexpected crosses and afflictions.

Reas. The second thing to be inquired into, is, Why God thus exercises them?

To give a reason of the various dispensations of his providence to men here
below, is so grand a mystery that reason cannot find it out. This Job
excellently cleares. C. 28. v. 12. he propounds the question, and in the
following verses answers it, that it is not by humane invention to be found out,
the depth says it is not in me, and the sea says it is not in me, neither can
gold or precious stones purchase this knowledge. That it should go well with
the wicked, and ill with the Godly, has not only staggered the Heathens, but
has made sometimes the Saints in a pett to quarrel at it. Psalm. 73. v. 2. to
13. it made David repiningly say, I have cleansed my heart in vain, for all the
day long have I been plagued; and when he seeks to know the reason of this, v.
16. he confesses 'twas to hard for him. What does he do in this case? v. 17.
he went into the sanctuary of God. So let us, to find a reason of these things,
and there we shall find that the alwise and gracious Father, sees affliction
necessary for his choicest servants, in order to their good. Nulla causa (says
August.) probabiliter occurrit, cur justi homines in hac vita laborant, nisi
quia hoc iis expedit. It Is needful for them to be afflicted.

There Is a twofold good, Privative, and Positive that God aims at in afflicting
his servants.

1 In order to their privative good, a necessity of afflicting them arises
from two evils that the best of Saints are infested with in this life: Sin
within, and Temptations without.

1. Sin with in them: Original sin is still an inmate in the regenerate;
though it be pardoned and mortified that it shall not reign in them. They
attain (says Aug.) to a ne regnet, yet they do not (as he says) attain to a
ne sit of s^n: The relics of the old man still remain in us, it came with us
from the womb, and 'twill bear us company to the grave, till death part us.
Though the tree be cut down, the root remains, and will without diligent
watching sprout, and bring forth bitter fruit to our sorrow: as it did in David
and Pe^er, and other Saints.

God whose spiritual eye looks through and through us, sees in the best of us
many secret enormous lusts, as pride, covetousness, luxury, spiritual sloth,
hypocricy, security and the like, which we in our prosperity discern not; that
lie in our breasts secretly and hiddenly, like Toads and noisome vermin in dark
sinks and sells, which we walk over unconcerned, because we see them not. Now
God calls to Saints in their prosperity by his providence, (for they have a
voice) and by the ministry, to cleanse these hearts and cast out these vermin,
that are a provocation to the pure eyes of his holiness. How often has God by
his word called to us, Love not the world, nor the things of the world; Let no
corrupt communication proceed out of your mouths, No unclean person shall
enter into the kingdom of heaven, Remember thou and all thy family to keep
holy the Sabbath, Pray more constantly, Be more fervent in prayer: God calls
but we turn the deaf ear, and slight these calls of God, and God observes it.
Ier. 22.21. I spoke to thee in thy prosperity, and thou saidest, I will not
hear: Now God in mercy for prevention is enforced to take his rod into his hand.

2. God is necessitated to afflict his people for the prevention of evil that
would arise from temptations without us; for Saints are not free from
temptation neminem prorsus Dei gratia facit intentabilem, says Gratian.

There are two Tempters, the Divil and the World, without us.

1. The Devil, 1. Pet. 5.8. He goes about like a roaring Lion seeking whom he
may devour, like a Lion he is greedy, subtle, active, and powerful, he lies
always at the catch for us; but because he has not immediate power over us, he
uses, as his bait,

2. The World, the other temptation, which holds out, as a rich Merchant its
gilded ware, the lust of the eye, the lust of the flesh, and the pride of
life; this holds out the bait, that lays the snare: the Devil baits his hook
with that he thinks our constitutions will soonest bite at, and so catches us:
So he caught David with the lust of the eye, so he caught Solomon with the
pride of life, and lust of the flesh.

These pleasures, and profits, and honors of the world, are usually the Saints
greatest tempters; for the concomitants of ease and plenty, are luxury, carnal
confidence, security, which draw off the heart from God, dull their appetite to
spiritual things, take off their hunger after a Sacrament, and make them
neglect coming to it, cool their affections, and allay that ardency which
should be in prayer. As the best ground brings forth the rankest weeds in the
heat of summer, when the Plow is still and comes not over it; so many times,
does the warmth of prosperity, cause many lusts to break forth in the lives of
the Saints. Raw fruit breeds worms in healthy persons: so do worldly pleasures
excite lusts in the best Saints many times, as loosnesse, wantonness, and
pride; let David have but a little ease, and his molehill presently grows, in
his proud fancy, to be a mountain. I said in my prosperity I shall never be
moved; what rank blood, did a little prosperity breed in this holy man? his
success in war, and strength of allies raised in him presumption, that
nourished lust, lust stole his ardency of affection from God, and that
intercepted his confidence; and now his mountain has stole his heart from God,
was it not time for God to set his mountain on fire about his ears, in
raising Absalom against him, that he might fly back to the rock of his
salvation. You see God is necessitated from the evils that are within the
Saints, and from the tempters without them, to afflict them for their good
privatively.

Now from Gods afflicting the Saints, there arises a threefold privative good.

1. God by afflicting them, redresses sin in them, it makes them feel what an
evil and a bitter thing it is to sin against the Lord, it makes the Saint to
search his ways and turn unto the Lord; so it wrought upon David, before I was
afflicted I went a stray, but now I have learned thy word; afflictions like
hard weather kill those sins, that the warmth of prosperity nourished.

The Devil by pleasures and profits invites us, as Absalom did the Kings
sons to his banquet, purposely to murder Ammon: So he invites us to our ruin
in the gluttonns language, eat, drink, and be merry, thou have enough, wealth
enough, time enough, opportunity enough, rejoice o young man and let thy heart
cheer thee: Now God in mercy to us, when he finds we are sat down to banquet,
riot, and frolic it in the world, he by a rousing affliction unexpectedly
comes amongst us, as Absoloms murderers came in, when their hearts were merry,
and made all the Kings sons fly to the King their Father to Jerusalem; so God
sends afflictions to drive us from our Lusts and deceitful pleasures, unto
him, oculos quos peccatum claudit, poena aperit,

2. Another privative good that comes by Gods afflicting of the Saints, is,
hereby sin is prevented, he like a merciful Father and most wise Physician
knows our tempers, and what our spiritual diseases are, better then our
selves, and therefore to prevent them he bloods them in the right vein; when a
Saint immoderately loves any earthly enjoyment, so that God sees it draws his
affections from heaven and glory; and from himself (which he takes grievously)
then God in wisdom and mercy takes away that earthly comfort that his
affections may turn into the right channel again; hereby God shows us the
mutability, inconstancy and vanity of these things, and that there is no safe
footing for our affections upon them. God many times dashes our designs all in
pieces, to prevent that security and carnal confidence, which he wisely
foresees would follow, if they should take. God in mercy provides a thorn for
Paul to prick the tympany of Pride, if it should rise in him. 'Twas an
excellent pious speech of our King Henry the Sixth, I thank God, says he, that
has given me a weak, and infirm body, that it might not be a lustful body.
A Saint has as much cause to bless God for his afflictions, as for his
ordinances, we shall never be able to understand the one half of our privative
mercyes which afflictions have been the cause of, till we come to heaven to
account them there, to the praise of his grace and wisdom that mercifully did
inflict them: Lord whether would our lusts have carried us, had not thou by
thy corrections called us back.

3 By afflictions God prevents our damnation 1 Cor 11 32 We are chastned of the
Lord, that we may not be condemned with the world: God hates the men of the
world, and therefore chastens them not here so often as his children; he
throws the reigns in their necks, and bids them fill up the measure of their
iniquity: which is the greatest curse that can befall them; in this sense that
saying is true, tum Deus irascitur cum non irascitur. The Heathen could say,
nothing is more unhappy to a man, then to be free from affliction, nihil mihi
videtur infoelicius eo, cui nihil unquam evenit adversi, Senec. de Provid. Here
it is true, there can no greater evil befall a man, then to have his heaven
here. Son remember that thou receivedst thy good things in this life (says
Abraham to Dives in hell) and Laza^rus evil: now thou art tormented and he is
comforted. God gives his Saints their hell here, but their heaven hereafter;
purposely casts them into the furnace of affliction here, that he may keep them
out of the fiery furnace of hell hereafter. A Saint may take this for his Motto,
Periissem nisi Periissem, had I not been undone in this world, I had been
undone to eternity: The Prodigals poverty brought him back to his Fathers
family.

Thus you see a necessity for the best Saints afflictions in order to their
good privatively.

2. God exercises his Saints with smart afflictions, in order to their
Positive good, and that, these three ways.

1. As they are isntrumental to the turning them to God. 2. As they are
exercises of their graces. 3. As they are the means of increasing grace.

1. God uses them as a means to call home and convert the Elect to him. I do
not say they Physically operate, for many men are the worse for affliction: but
they by the gacious ordination of a divine hand, have a morrall influence upon
men to their conversion. Acts 16.26, 27, 30. by an earthquake on a sudden that
shook the foundations of the prison, and threw open the prison doors, and
knocked off all the prisoners fetters; the keeper at first apprehension of this
astonishing providence would have killed himself, his conscience was so
overborn with fear, but when his Judgment had got the throne, he considers
this could be no other but the mighty hand of God, and in the full conviction
of this his will is resolved to fall down to the command of God, and now with
trembling he asks what he shall he do to be saved. Oh blessed earthquake,
might the jailer say, that wrought such a heart-quake in him as to make him
turn to God.

Thus Saul Acts 9.3, 4. by a sudden stroke from heaven, which struck him to the
ground, v. 6. and filled him full of trembling and astonishment, it was the
instrument of his conviction: hereby conscience being filled with fear, made
the mind serious, and being under full conviction, it in an instant raised his
will to a resolution, and that resolved, now commands all the affections to
attend its motion, and now he cries Lord what will thou have me to do? Thus
afflictions, they are like a gun discharged amongst wild fowls, it startles
all but it makes some fall into the fowlers hands, into Christ's, that by these
afflictions brings them to his hand. God by sudden and unexpected afflictions
comes upon a soul, as Samuel came upon the Bethlehemites, 1 Samuel 16.4. he makes
them tremble at his coming, but he makes a King in the family ere he depart.

2. God hereby tryes and exercises his Saints graces. Although God does never
afflict any, but where sin is, yet he has other ends besides afflicting them
for sin; therefore Genesis 22.1. God tempted or tried Abraham, it is not said he
corrected Abraham, when he said offer up thy Son Isaac. So God permitted all
those afflictions to come upon Job, for the trial of his graces and the
exercise of them: you have heard of the patience of Job, says the Apostle, had
not God exercised him with such great afflictions, we had never heard of such
an eminent Saint, he would have stole to his grave without being taken notice
of. Therefore Peter says (1 Ep. c. 1.7.) to the afflicted Saints, ye are now
in heaviness for a time throw manyfold temptations, for what purpose? that the
trial of your faith might be found to praise, and honor, and glory; the
Saints that shall hear and see your heavenly, meek, self-denying frame of heart
under all your afflictions shall praise you, and praise God for you, you shall
honor the gospel, the cause you suffer for, and God shall be glorified by
you, and in you. As Mutius Scaevola got more renown and glory to the Romans by
his Sufferings then by his Actions. So does a Saint to the cause of the
gospel. A Saint by sufferings seems to say to all the world, as he, tam vile
est corpus gloriam spectantibus. So contemptible are all those terrene things
to us, who seek after eternal glory. If God should not thus try a Christians
graces, we should never come to know half their worth, nor they their own.
Senecae counts him an unhappy man that never was in affliction; because neither
he nor any other could know his worth. Miserum te judico quod nunqua^ fuisti
miser, transiisti sine adversario vitam; nemo scit quid potueris, ne tu quidem
ipse. As sharp incounters prove who are valiant, who cowards; so do
afflictions, who are sound, who rotten, who are built upon the sands, who on
the rock. A Saint has cause, as to praise God for bestowing grace, so for
sending him afflictions to try the truth of his grace, for this brings him in
unspeakable comfort that he is sincere. If the heathen could say, egi gratias
fortunae quod experiri voluisset quanti aestimarem fidem, I thank fortune that
she would try me, how much I esteemed honesty; this I ought (says Seneca) to
prize at a high rate, non debet mihi parvo res tanta constare; if he a heathen
could say thus, how much more ought we to praise God, that has been pleased by
his trials of us to manifest to our own consciences and the world, that our
faith and patience and self denial is sincere; a tried Christian is a happy
Christian, and God by afflictions tryes them.

3. God exercises his choice Servants with great afflictions for the increase
of their graces. As strong and great winds and storms make trees fruitful, so
do sharp afflictions make Christians. Every branch in Christ must bring forth
fruit, and God by afflictions will prune them that they may bring forth more
fruit.

Christians that have grace in the habit, St. Bazil compares to the earth,
which though in its nature it be fruitful, yet unless the Plow and harrow
break and tear it, it will not only not be fruitful, but it will bring forth
briars and thorns: so will Christians, unless God exercise them with
afflictions grow secure, lazy and sensual. This made Chrysostom say, that
affliction is the mother of Christian virtues, because it exerts the habit into
act.

Christians that have grace in the habit, are like an Organ that is well in
tune; but for want of bellows to blow, and an hand to play, they make no
music. Therefore God raises his east wind of affliction to blow, and lays
his hand upon them, and then they are melodious. As Birds sing sweetest in wet
weather, so do the Saints sing most melodiously amidst the storms and showers
of afflictions.

Sharp sauces do best quicken the appetite, Heb. 12.11: noe chastisements seem
for the present to be joyous, but grievous, nevertheless afterward it yeildeth
the peaceable fruits of righteousness unto them that are exercised therewith;
like soil that's unpleasant in the carrying forth, yet returns a fruitful crop.

By affliction a Saint gets this farther advantage of increase, that not only
the habit of grace is excited into act; but by those frequent acts the habit
also is enlarged. What St. Hierom says of the Cedar (may be said of the Saint)
that for every branch it suits out above, it sends forth a root beneath, and
this advantage it has from the strong winds which by shaking the body, loosens
the earth and makes way for the root to spread.

So that by one storm it gathers strength to stand against the next. Thus it is
with the Saint in the valley of Bacor, he grows from strength to strength;
afflictions make him increase both in the habit and acts of grace; he grows
downward in the habit as well as upward in the acts of grace by affliction.

Thus God sees afflictions good for his Saints both privatively and
possitively; give me leave briefly to add this one more.

3. God sees afflictions necessary for his Saints in order to their eternal
good, and that upon a twofold account.

1. By afflictions he fits and prepares them for glory, and that by drawing up
their hearts and affections where their treasure is; should not God imbitter
Egypt to us by heavy burdens, we should never long for, nor prepare to go into
the promised land, God makes our good things here mutable and fading, that we
may set our affections on things above, which are permanent and unchangable.

2. Afflictions sweeten and the more indear glory to come: the sharper our
sorrows here, the sweeter our glory hereafter, 2 Cor. 4.17. Our light
afflictions work for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory.

Since we find this doctrine to be an evident truth, and this vast congregation
are sealing it with their tears; God has taken away an eminent Servant of his
by a stroke, a stroke to the rich, and a stroke to the poor, a stroke and a
heavy one to Stanton Harcourt; but especially to the family of the Harcourts,
what should this teach us? let not me, but the Apostles exhort you, Heb. 12.5;
My Son despise not thou the chastning of the Lord, nor faint when thou art
rebuked of him. This exhortation branche it self into two heads. 1: despise
not, 2: faint not: the first you may think needless, and at this time I may
think so to; but such is the deceitfulness of our hearts, and the hardness of
them, that though they now drop tears like rocks in a sudden storm, yet when
the storm is over, they are soon dry again, and as hard as ever; therefore the
first branch is not unseasonable: despise not, (...), ne parvi facito. (...),
is as if you should say, (...), parvam curam habere, to slight and never mind a
thing, to make light of it, as Servants do of their Masters chiding: they
stand demurely and look sadly for the present; but when the Masters back is
turned, they laugh and make light of it. Of all things beware of this; God has
a farther end in such dreadful strokes as these, than to make us hang down our
heads for a week or two, and then forget all; this is indeed to make light of
God's correcting hand upon us. There are a sort of Epicureans in this age, that
professedly against all sense and reason, endeavor to deface what of man they
have in them, natural affection; like the brutish Stoic that made no more of
the death of his Son, than of the breaking of a Jugg; heri vidi fragilem
frangi, hodie vidi mortalem mori; they contemn God and his providence, they
say all things come alike to all, and sooner or later we must all dye, and what
should we sorrow for that we cannot remedy. Upon such men's foreheads you may
write fool (if the rule hold true) without injuring them; for consideration,
and fools are always contraries. Well let us in the fear of God learn this
wisdom, not to despise or disregard God's judgments and chastisements upon us.

Then a Christian may be said not to despise God's Corrections, when he learnes
those lessons God points him to by the chastisement; as 1: seriously to search
after the cause why God afflicts us, 3 Lam. 39.40: this the Holy Ghost points
us to, why does living man complain, i. e. repiningly, man for the punishment
of his sin? while it is for his sin that he is punished; it is but just that
he should be punished: lets therefore search our ways and turn unto the Lord
our God; that's the lesson punishment should teach us: so in the 7th Josh. 6. Up
says God to Joshua, search for the sin that has caused me to smite you; thus
a Christian should search when God's hand is on him; what personal sins, what
relation, what family sins, as a husband, master or father he is guilty of, and
stone those Achans, that so God may graciously return in his favors again to
us.

2. In a humble submission to vindicate God's justice in all that befalls us,
and with the Church to say, thou have smitten us less than our deservings, and
o Lord thou art righteous in all that is come upon us, Isay 9.13.

3. Patiently to submit to the hand of God upon us. I was dumb (says David)
and opened not my mouth, because it was thy doing, 10 Levit. 3. When God took
away two of Aron's near relations, his Sons, with a dreadful stroke the text
says, Aron held his peace; proprobably Aron was faulty in not restraining his
Sons presumption, and therefore think it but meet and just, that he that had
been sinfully silent under Gods dishonor, should now be submissively silent
under his displeasure.

4. To buckle on our Armor, and to stand always prepared to encounter
afflictions; Through many tribulations we must enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven, not through two or three but many, God knows what our next trial will
be; lets therefore by this affliction, be so Armed with faith and love, and
patience, and selfe-denyal, that we may be able with more facility to stand
against the next: Job now finding the world to ring none but changes, and sad
ones too, in his ears, has learned to wait all the days of his appointed
time, 'til his chang come.

5. Often and seriously to reflect upon our souls, what privative or positive
good they have got by afflictions; for they make us better, or leave us worse.

These are some of the lessons God sets us to learn by our afflictions; which
who so learns may truly be said, not to despise the chastisements of God.

2. The last clause of the exhortation speaks to us thus [ nor faint when
thou art corrected of him] this is the other extreme we must avoid. Extremes
are dangerous, fly not one so as to fall into the other, this nature condemns
as folly, Stulti dum vitant vitia in contraria currunt, says Horace. Aristotle
defines virtue to be (...), the middle of two evils; nature teaches us to
grieve, let not the sensual facultes swallow up the rational; Let not the
Servant overtop his Master. It Is a wise man's character, that as he sees
farther into evils than other men, so he can better command his passions than
others: hence Aristostle l. 4. c. 3; (...), he says that (...) cannot be
(...); a magnanimous man cannot be overcome with sorrow and passion, because
the rational faculties keep the sensitive within their bounds. Should I go
about to stop your eyes for so great a loss; I should but endeavor contra
torrentem brachia: but let me persuade you to mourn as Christians: though the
chastning be grievous, yet it is no worse than what God's Saints and Prophets of
old have undergon. Are we better than they? or have we deserved better than
they? lets comfort our selves in the text, that God owns us for Sons under all
our afflictions, and intends our good by them; let us then take courage that
God is our Father still, and though death like a Lion has come amongst us and
devoured our glory; yet out of this eater there will come forth meat, and out
of the strong sweet; if we by faith and patience can wait upon the Lord, in
this his way and method of dealing with us.

A Funeral speech.
ANd is this Scripture fulfilled this day in our eyes? is the Crown of our
glory, the Lady Anne Harcourt, that curious piece of grace and nature taken
from us by a stroke? And must her virtues be closed up with her eyes? must they
be coffined up with her corpse in the silent grave? Was not her name as precious
ointment? and must it not be powered forth to give a fragrancy to posterity?
shall we let her go unmention'd, unlamented? it may not, it cannot be; The
Country and the City too, yield praficae abundant, to ring aloud in all men's
ears her funeral knel in doleful threanes: besides, each sad face in this
doleful assembly, seems to bespeak it self, should I be silent, her funeral
Orator. It Is pity we have not here an Eloquent Ambrose to perform so lofty an
undertaking. I am sorry I have not skill answerable to my affections; but must,
when I have done my utmost, leave her, as that Painter left Antigonus, drawn,
Imagine lusca, with a half face. I must acknowledge with the Comedian, de illa
non possum ita magnifice loqui, id virtus quin superat sua, so that you that
knew her, will have just cause to say, much like that of the Queen of Sheba
concerning Solomon, the one half has not been told us of what we know; to
which I can only thus reply in the Poets words; Quod si digna tua minus est mea
pagina laud.
at voluisse sat est. --
In order to what I have to say, I must go one step retrograde; For when I
consider what two glorious luminaries have successively rose in this noble and
ancient Family of the Harcourts, and how suddenly, and unexpectedly they have
set, I cannot but adore the goodness, and tremble at the severity of God
toward it; I am at a stand with Valor: Max: on the death of Cornelias husband,
whether to say, it was more happy in the once enjoying of them, or unhappy in
the loss of them.

The first was a Daughter of the right honorable family of the Pagets, and wife
to the Famous Soldier Sr. Simon Harcourt (to whose Tutelary sword the
Protestants in Jreland owe much) she set at high noon, in the prime of her age,
and left only one Son as the inheritor of both their virtues and honors.

This last (being the Wife of the now sorrowful Sr. Philip Harcourt) she set in
the morning of her youth, before she had completed twenty years, and has
likewise left one Son behind her, God make him the inheritor of her virtues.
Both of these Ladies for beauty, breeding, parts, prudence, and piety, were
eminently known to be as honorable and Princely Dames as have trod the Stage
of English earth for many ages; each of their goodness which made them great,
was as high as their extract, which made them honorable. This last was in all
probability like to outshine the first, from whose raise she received her first
light and heat. Her natural and moral indowments of body and mind were both
amiable, and admirable; what is said of King David's Darling, 2 Samuel 14.25: was
the voge of all who e're had seen her; that in all the Land there was not one
to be so much praised for beauty as she; from the sole of her foot to the crown
of her head there was no blemish in her.

And as her Person, such were her parts: her deportment was courteous, humble,
and affable, yet with all, majestic; she was skild in every thing that became
so high a Lady; she was knowing in History, in Physic, in Music, in what not,
she was more full of spirit and life than language; yet was her discourse for
the most part weighty and witty: she perfectly hated idleness; she was all the
day time either retired in her closet at her devotions, or else writing, or
reading, or playing on some musical instrument, or ordering the affairs of her
house, or busied in making medicines for the poor that had no helper: Her
apprehension was so quick, that a worthy gentlewoman her neighbor, with whom
she much conversed, told me that she admired her above all persons for her
exact knowledge in all domestic affairs; There was nothing within or without
doors that concerned a family, but she had an insight in it. But oh! this
heart cutting word (she is dead) has shipwrackt all our hopes, and filled us full
of deep despondency; like a new rigged ship richly freighted, no sooner is she
lanched forth into the world, but sinks with all her store; she had but newly
shaken hands with childhood, and now, behold! grisly death like a churlish and
(may we say) unwelcome Sargeant arrests her, and she must forthwith shake hands
with husband, child, kindred, and bid us, and all the world eternally farewell.
What heart relents not here? it is worse than marble if it do not: marble it
self will weep at change of weather, and shall not we at such a change?
especially we that knew how sweet her disposition, how gracious her
conversation was among us. Wonder not then if I your Orator make tears my
fluentest Rhetoric at this funeral; broken sentences, and inconsistencies may
pass, at this time excus^ble, if not commendable, from him, whose eyes make up
the paragoge. The Person that here lies in state before us, and is thus become
the sad object of our sorrow, was of no low extract, she was the daughter of
the honorable Sr. William Waller. On the Mothers side, she descended of the
Right honorable family of the Finches, the Earls of Winchelsie. But these
things she counted but membrana dignitatis, she no more valued the gaudy
pageantry of the world, than her body now minds this her pompous funeral, being
dead, and herein she showed her self, like that honorable Lady and St.
Marcella (of whom St. Hierom thus speaks) quod facta est contempta nobilitate
nobilior, that she did the more innoble her self in disregarding her noble
birth. That which she most delighted, with a holy kind of boasting, to triumph
in, was the truly noble and religious education she received from her Mother in
law, (for her own Mother dyed in her infancy) of whose excellent virtues she
never thought she could spoke enough; I have often heard her most devoutly bless
God for that Mother in law: like Alexander the great that praised his
Instructor beyond him that got him. It Is highly probable she was the instrument
of instilling grace into her heart in her tender years, which made her, so
heartily praise the God of grace for her; nor was there any love lost betwixt
them; for so highly did the Mother in law prize this her Daughter in law, that
she bestowed the chiefest jewel she had in the World upon her, her only Son; as
conceiving her Son could be in none more happy, than in this Person: she really
being for sweetness of nature, amiablenesse of Person, quickness of wit,
solidity of judgment, nobleness of Spirit, innocence of life, and
heavenlinesse of affection, the crown and glory of her age and Sex. What single
excellencies made other Ladies eminent, as this for wit, that for beauty, one
for modesty, the other for affability, you might have found them all concentred
in this single Person, and shining there in their full luster. Take her in any,
in every of her relations, as a Daughter, Sister, Wife, Mistress, Friend, she
filled up each of these to the top. I must but touch on these. As a Daughter how
full of duty and affection? who can come forth and tell the time that ever she
willingly displeased either her Father or Mother in all her life time? As a
Sister from the nurses breasts to natures bed, the grave, she lived and dyed
top-full of hearty love and tender respect to them, their tears for the loss
of her, sufficiently testify to the world this truth. As a Wife she was so full
of respect, tenderness and overflowing love to her Dear, (as she called her
husband) that you would have deemd their whole life to have been but one
wedding day. There was no ebb to be seen in the tide of her affections, 'twas
always high, they seemd always ravished in each others love, she was to her
Husband as the pleasant hynd, the desire of his eyes, and the joy of his heart.
I may truly say of them, as David said of Jonathan and Saul, they were lovely
and pleasant in their lives, and I may add this too, in their deaths they were
not divided, for at her departure, his soul as unwilling to stay, now strugled
in a tide of tears to launch out after her. This current runs still too
strong, which calls rather for our pity than our blame, and of the two
extremes, this is the more alowable, as bespeaking the Person, generous and
noble hearted; for none but fools, and sordid Cowards are hard-hearted.
Therefore Homer describes his valiant men, his Heroes, to be, (...), tender
hearted compassionate men, men full of tears: but what need excuses here? she
was his Wife, the one half of him self, the comfort of his life, the crown of
his glory; how many losses are comprehended in this one? the loss of a good
and gracious Wife? none can tell but they that feel it. As a Governesse of a
family, her prudence and piety was eminent, she had such a provident and
diligent inspection into every thing, that she seemed to be every body in it:
and with such facility and sedatenesse she ordered all things, as if she had
been no body in it. I know many great families, but never yet did I see any
that was governed with so little noise or tumult, and so free from disorders;
no oaths, no drunkenness, no railing or dissentions to be heard or seen
amongst any. It Is true, the family was extraordinary happy in a stock of civil,
knowing, faithful, and religious Servants; and 'twas her goodness made them
so. Such was her pious care of her family, that she desired that all her
Servants might be the Lords; and therefore twice a day she commanded every one
(all business laid aside) to be present in her chapel at prayers, and the
hearing of God's word read; and once a week every servant from the chiefest to
the meanest, she had chatechized in the principles of religion by her Chaplain
in the open Chapel. On the Lord's day her care was, that she and her house
might serve the Lord, therefore she strictly commanded all that possibly could,
to attend her to the public ordinances, whether she constantly resorted to
hear the word of God; and if any Servant were negligent or tardie, I have heard
them sharply rebuked. After the public ordinances were over she commanded all
her Maid Servants into her chamber, where she examined them all what they
remembered of the Sermon, and would encourage the diligent hearers. After this
she would repeat the Sermon for the help of their memoryes, and then She would
conclude with prayer. Thus this Princely Lady, to her eternal honor,
disdained not (as too many great Ladies do) to become the handmaids of the
Lord in using all good means to save others souls as well as her own.

As a Neighbor, she was so familiar, humble, courteous and compassionate, that
you need not wonder to see Stanton Harcourt so full of tears for the loss of
her. Such was her charity to any in distress, especially to those that were
religeous, (and therefore modest,) that when she heard or supposed they were in
distress, she would send privately to them, not pence, but pounds. Such was
her privasy in it, that nothing, but the gratitude of the receivers, since her
death has informed me of this truth. By this we may guess at her enlarged
noble heart; we shall never hear all her good deeds of this nature, till God
call her out and reward her openly.

That of her public charity, you that hear me of this parish can witness, and
my eyes have seen, that there was not a day in the week, but several hungry
bellyes were filled from her Kitchen* once a week there was purposely made
provision for them, and once a year Six of the poor of the parish were new
clothed by her, so that we may aply Iobes words to her, the blessing of those
that were ready to perish came upon her. How often has she sent and come to your
houses when you have been sick to visit, succor and comfort you? what good
office did she ever neglect amongst you? she was as eyes to the blind, feet to
the lame, a physician to the sick, and a mother to the poor. I may apply St
Hieroms words of Nepotian to this Lady, ita curam gessit pauperum quasi ab eos
genuisset, ita servivit quasi ab iis geni^a fuisset; she wasso tender of the
poor as if she had been their mother, so serviceable, as if their daughter.

As a private Christian, she was (by report of her Chaplain and others most
intimate with her) one of a thousand, her discourse would be so spiritual and
heavenly, that the Godly hearers have professed themselves even ravished with
it. She was much in fasting and prayer, in reading, meditation, and searching
her heart. I might here insert all which that learned Oratorin his funeral
speech has said of the Mother in law, so exactly did she tread in that holy
Lady's steps.

She kept in her Cabinet a large paper book, so privately that none, no not
her husband knew of it; since her death I have seen it, and only seen it. It Was
a book, I perceived, designed to be her souls looking-glas, or rather her souls
recreatory, both; In this book (I perceived by the several heads in it) she
laid up het spiritual Cordials, to refresh her soul in time of need: Here she
had set down Gods gracious and remarkable providence to her and her family, to
excite her soul to thankfulness: Here she laid up spiritual directions how to
order her life. One paper being loose I obtein'd it, I will give it you word
for word, and by this you may guess at the rest.

April 14, 1664. I have this day upon serious examination of my heart, found
this to be my condition. 1. That I do desire to love God, and to love him for
himself above all things. 2. That I am (if my heart deceive me not* extremely
more in love with the ways of God then ever. 3. That I find my heart
unfainedly sorry for all my frailtyes and sins committed, and duties omitted,
and I do here in the presence of God promise, and engage to strive against all
my beloved sins, and serve him more constantly then I have done, and I hope
through Gods grace, that as he has begun that good work in me, so he will
according to his promises perfect it in me. Thus I have given you a glimps of
this young Saints Closet works; she was not perfuming her self with essences,
painting her face, or trying where a black patch would set with most advantage,
and best ensnare the eye of the wanton; but she was tyreing her soul for her
Lord the Bridegroomes coming. Oh thou blessed Soul! he whom thou have served
so secretly, will one day reward thee openly.

I cannot omit one remarkable thing, which happened a little before God called
this young Saint to her sick bed: I received it since her death from a Person
of good credit, who heard her tell it: She had a dream that an Angel came to
her, and told her she must suddenly dye, whereat she was afraid and trembled,
but the Angel told her, she need not fear, she should go to heaven to Christ,
who would welcome her there, whereat she was filled with joy.

Now though I lay little stresse upon dreams, as knowing it to be dangerous,
it being hard to discern them from Diabolical delusions; the Papists
ridiculously impose upon the world their Friars dreams, to prove their
fopperies, and erroneous opinions, as if with the Heathen, we were to believe.
(...) every dream came from God, whe^eas the Devil many times is the Author
of them: A wicked man may dream he shall go to heaven, Caesar a little before
his death, may dream he shall go to the immortal God, but no wicked man, shall
ever go thither. Yet for all this it must not be denied, but that God does
many times foretell to his Saints their deaths in dreams: Polycarp that Saint
and Martyr (you may find him in the book of Martyrs) had his death foretold
him, and the kind of it* He dreamt that his bed was on fire under him; and St.
Cyprian foresaw in a dream the Pro-Consul writing his sentence to be beheaded,
Pont. Diaco. in vit. Cyp.
whereupon he desired him to set his house in order, and it was granted him; and
just so it fell out as he had dreamed. We might instance in many more if it
needed. For my part I believe this dream of this holy Ladys, was a favor
extraordinary from God to such a precious young Saint. And I the rather think
so, because it so fell out as she had dreamed; for soon after this, she
unexpectedly fell sick of a violent fever, which was the forerunner of death
at hand. And although she did not dye of that fever, yet before she had
recovered her strength she lost by it, God in his wise providence (resolving to
exercise her graces before she went hence) called her back again to her sick
bed, which at last proved her death bed. In this Sickness God exercised her
with more tormentive pangs, both in her back and bowels then before; which
enforced most bitter groans and sighs from her, to the peircing of the hearts
of those about her: yet under all those heavy pressures she did not charge God
foolishly, though she groaned, yet she did not murmur or repine, but in the
midst of those pangs she still lifted up her hand and eyes to the God of her
salvation: That time of ease God gave her between her fits, she was careful to
redeem by prayer, and other holy exercises with her Chaplain, whom she highly
prized in her health, for his singular good parts and piety. Some few days
before her death, when her excessive pangs had so devoured her strength, that
they left her speechless, and the company gave her up for a dying, departing
person, I came to her bed side, and perceiving her to move her head and her
eyes, which was more then she had done for some hours before, I asked her
Ladyship whether she were capable of discourse, and she answered me, yes, but
let it be good, let it be heavenly: So careful was she to redeem her sick bed
time; you may guess where her treasure was by her heart. The day before her
death was (to all our joy and admiration) the most refreshing day she had had
in all her sickness. Sic Phoebi j^mj^m cadentis dulcius esse solet lumen: As a
fair day often rears exhalations into a cloud, which next day returns in
showers upon us, so did this pleasant Monday return its dark clouds of sorrow
and showers of tears on Tuesday; for then her disease seizing her head took
away her speech, and so deprived us, no doubt, of many gracious speeches which
would have fallen from her dying lips. Yet what she could not do in words, she
did in signs. She some hours before her death took her woman by the hand, and
shook it, to let her know she was heartily reconciled to her notwithstanding
some tart words, that had some days before passed betwixt them. In the
afternoon of Aug. 23. 1664. God was pleased graciously to release her of all
her pangs: Her soul willingly and joyfully departed, and has left behind, what
of mortality it had for us to lay up in the house of all the living.

And now, what can alleviate our sorrows for so great a loss? But, is she
lost? no, the loss is ours, she is the great gainer. As L. Florus says of the
City Alba, it was pulled down, to be set up in Rome to its higher honor and
advantage: this Lady is but taken down here, to be set up in heaven to her
unspeakeable honor and advanceme^t. Let us not then too deeply lay ^o heart
this blessed Saints Translation; could we but still our sorrows a little while,
and lend an ear to listen what the Saints on the otherside the lake of death do
say, it would not be the voice of those that cry for being overcome, but the
voice of those that sing, the voice of those that shout for victory, that we
should hear.

Do we believe the person that is departed was a true servant of God? I think
you do: and we may as confidently say of her, a St. Hierome does of Nepotian,
Scimus Nepatianum nostrum esse cum Christo; we verily believe she is with
Christ. Why then do you so immoderately grieve? Cur doleas (says Tertullian)
si periisse non credis, cur impatienter feras subductum interim quem credis
reuersurum esse? So say I, why do we so take on for her who we know is not
gone to be lost, but only with drawn for a time, and we believe will return
again? did the Church mourn when Peter was delivered out of Prison, and his
shackles knocked off? A Saint at death is freed from prison, and all his
fetters are then knocked off. Did Mordicai weep and grieve, or had he cause,
when the Emperor of the world took his Niece from him out of love he bare
her, to advance her above all other weomen, and make her Queen? This This is
the case (only the former parallel is too short) the great Creator of the world
in great compassion and tender love to this young Lady, has taken her betimes
from the dirty country to prefer her at Court, he has called her early from
this beggarly low earth, to advance her amongst the mighty in the heavens.

The Heathen Menander could say (...), whom God loves best he ^akes soonest.
Her soul being fledged betimes, took wing for heaven, and this curious robe of
mortality, which she put off at her departure, we now are carrying with all
solemnity into the suburbs of heaven after her; for Saints graves are no
otherwise, they are next door to heaven. They are the Saints sleeping Chambers
for a little while, till God call them up again. The silence of the grave is
but a kind of Pythagorean (...), a restraint only for a time, and that but a
little time, the time is short. Death the last enemy, shall reign but a little
longer; he must resign his keys ere long. When the trumpet sounds, death
triumphs cease, till then the Saints bodies in the grave are in the safe
custody of Christ, as their Souls in heaven, and Christ at his coming will as
certainly unite them and clothe them with immortality and glory. Wherefore let
us comfort one another upon this sad occasion with these meditations.

One living relict of this Lady, now with God, remains still with us, (her
Son) and is her lively picture; for whom I pray, as Eloquent St Ambros at the
death of Theodosius, the Emperor, (only changing one Article) Tu solus domine,
invocandus, tu rogandus es, ut eam infilio repraesentes. That he may resemble
her in soul, as well as in countenance. God make him virtuous, as she, in this
life, and let the glory of his famous Ancestors rest upon him. That he may keep
up religion in the family (which is the crown of its glory and the true
innobling of it) as his Mother, his Grand Mother and other his ancestors have
done before him: that so after a happy and holy life here, he may go with
honor, to them, who are now with Christ, God blessed for ever, in unspeakable
glory.

ERRATA.
Page 1. l. 15 r. the. p. 13. l. 25. r. enjoyments. p. 15. l. 22. r name. p.
32. l. 16. r. he. p. 34. l. 26. r. Here. p. 35. l. 28. r. shook.

FINIS.

