TRUTH CLEARED AND THE DECEIT MADE MANIFEST OR, An Answer to a Printed Paper,
wherein are certain Untruths and false Aspersions, cast upon a People, called
QUAKERS, by some Members of the Church of WREXHAM in WALES*

With some QUESTIONS answered: with other False Accusations cast upon us, by
one whose name is subscribed in Print, Mr. VAVASOR POWEL, who is one of the
chief Priests in WALES, being in the Generation of the Scribes and Pharisees.
Let him that reads understand and be shall see it so.

And likewise an ANSWER to other slanders and false Reports upon the same
people, whom reproachfully they call Quakers, but we rather choose to suffer
reproaches, slanders, and false reports with the people of God, then to deny
the power of God made manifest in us.

By his Servant who seeks the Freedom of Isreal's children, after the spirit,
whom the world calls. RICH. HUBBERTHORN.

ALSO, An Answer to the false aspersions cast upon the truth by William Spencer
a Member of the abovesaid Church of WREXHAM.

By John Lawson a Prisoner in bonds at West-Chester, for the Testimony of the
truth.

LONDON, Printed in the year. 1654.

TRUTH CLEARED, And the DECEIT made manifest.
HAving received a Narration in print, in a Book called Several proceedings of
the Parliament, which is full of lies and slanders, upon a people, whom the
world calls Quakers, but that name we own, else we should deny the holy men of
God, as Moses, David, Job, Hab Daniel, Paul, and the rest; and lest any weak
minds should stumble at the truth, and believe lies, here they are answered.

1 You say, those Quakers would rent and divide the blessed Church of Wrexham.

Rep. Silence, flesh, what a Church is that which Hab. 2. 20 Zech. 2. 13 Mark
3. 24, 25
can be rent? And what blessing is to you? Here you have divided it from the
Church of God, which is the ground and pillar of truth, that is blessed, but
yours is cursed, which is full of lies, as hereafter I shall make it appear
from your own words.

1 You say their main design and practices appear to the opposing of all
Ministers, and public Ministry.

Rep. I charge you to be liars, who gave forth this paper, as to say we oppose
all Ministers, and public Ephesians. ^. 1
Ministry; for the Ministers that are made by the will of God, we own: and
here I charge you to be liars, who publish forth these lies in this paper, and
set your hands to it.

2 You say by breaking and dividing of Congregations in censuring of all Saints.

Rep. The Saints of the most high God we censure not: the Congregation of
Saints we own, and do not Ephesians. 4. 3* 4
divide, there you are liars: but the Congregation of the world, we do deny,
and they must be broken, and the Saints of God we own, but hypocrites we do
deny, for Saints cannot own hypopocrits, Matthew. 23. 13 Jo. 8 42, 44 2 Cor. 4, 2
nor hypocrites own Saints, but here you show your selves both to be liars and
hypocrites: In the presence of God I speak it, which you shall eternally witness,
for to that in every one of your consciences I speak.

3 The total overthrowing of the works of faith and holiness in Saints.

Rep. Here I speak, and charge you in the presence of God to be in the
generation of slanderers: for the work of faith, we own, and holiness we own
in Saints. 1 These. 3. 13. Romans 6 19, 22. Heb. 12. 14.

4 The bringing them again into bondage.

Rep. The Saints freedom we stand for, which is the keeping out of your minds,
and the bringing out of bondage Romans 15. 21
into freedom with Christ; and saints you know not, nor mount Sinai, and you
show your selves to be fallen from grace, walking despightfully against the
Spirit of truth, turning the grace of God into wantonness: which grace has
appeared to all men, which grace teaches us Titus 2* 12
to deny all ungodliness and worldly lusts, and such liars as you are.

5 And as touching universal redemption.

Rep. He that is the Savior of the one is the condemner of the other.

6. And as touching free will.

Rep. Of his free will has he begotten us, and the light Jam. 1, 18.
that he has enlightened every one that comes into the world has he
enlightened us withal; and the measure Hab. 1, 9.
has he given to every one according to their ability, Matthew. 25. 15
the cross is to the will of man. If you can read me you may, which are
without on the left hand in your own Gal. 5 4.
wills, who knows nothing of universal Redemption, (as you call it) but are
the generation that stands in your own wills, out of the will of God, in the
fallen estate from grace; if ye were redeemed, and stood in the will of God, and
dwelt in the grace of God, you durst not utter forth your lies.

7 You say, These men hold that every one has a pure seed in him.

Rep. I say, Christ has enlightened every one that comes into the world, he
that hates the light, is enlightened, one he loves it, and the other he hates
it, and it lets him see his deeds are evil, which shall be his condemnation:
here you have cleared your selves to be in the Generation of the Pharisees, who
say, and does not Joh. 12.
own this light which has enlightened every one that comes into the world.

8. You say, They boast of a gift of discerning.

Rep. Here you have cleared your selves from the spirit of discerning, that the
Scripture speaks of, and has showed forth your nakedness and folly, for to
some was given a spirit of discerning, which now is witnessed with some, but
not with you.

Again, they who call themselves of the blessed 1 Cor. 12* 10
Church of Wrexham in Wales, have cast more lies and slanders upon the Truth,
and upon the servants of the Lord, by the name of one whose name is subscribed
in print, Mr. Vavasor Powel, but Christ commanded his to call no man Master,
and be not called Masters; but the Scribes and Pharisees love to be called of
men Master; and here thou have made thy self plainly manifest to be in the
Generation, who has published thy name in print, Mr. Vavasor Powel: and herein
is his lies and false aspersions answered.

1 You say Mr. Vavasor Powel preaching at Church, the chief Quaker with his
hat on, stood up, and said, thou speak of a power thou have not in thee.

Rep. Here thou have added thy own inventions and lies, for those words were
not spoken as thou speak them, for the said Powel was declaring to the
people that those who are sent to preach the Gospel, they preached it in the
power of the spirit; and this was that which he was asked, with what power he
preached the Gospel, or what power of the Gospel that people could witness
from his preaching unto them?

Powel answered, some are convinced and some converted.

Then I was moved of the Lord to speak to the people, and ask them, which of
them could witness they were convinced or converted by his preaching unto them,
and who had forsaken their sins; but none there could witness any such thing,
but pleaded for sin, and that they could not be free from sin, and it was
plainly made manifest in the Congregation to all those whose understandings was
enlightened, that thou wast one who ministered for Satan, and pleaded for sin,
to keep people in their sins, and one of them whom the Apostle speaks 2 Timothy 3*
6, 7
of, who keeps them ever learning, and never able to come to the knowledge of
the truth; and whereas thou accusest me for standing up before the Priest with
my hat on.

Rep. Here thou make thy folly manifest, and that thou would have something
to accuse; for where do thou read in the Scripture, that ever those who were
sent of the Lord to cry against the hireling Priests, and Matthew. 23
those who were called of men Master, as thou art, who stand praying in the
Synagogues, have the chiefest place in the assemblies and greetings in the
markets, that ever they were accused for speaking against their deceits with
their hat on: thou read that Paul as his Acts 17. 2
manner was* went into the Synagogue of the Jews three Sabbath days, and
reasoned with them out of the Scriptures, but thou do not read that he put
off his hat, Acts 25. 13
nor that he was accused for keeping it on. He appeared before Agrippa and
Festus to answer the accusations laid against him, but thou do not read that
they commanded him to put off his hat, nor did accuse him for it, as the
Magistrates and Priests of England do.

Again, thou bringst scripture to plead for sin, that thou may live in thy
wickedness, and keep the people in their sins; and thou said Paul said, he
was not perfect. Phil. 3. 12. and Solomon in the 7. Eccles. 20. and Jam. 3. 2.
and 1 John 1. 8.

Rep. Thou enemy of Christ, and of all righteousness; All those who gave forth
these scriptures, do declare against such as thou art, and thou know nothing
of their conditions; Paul knew Jesus Christ, and the power of his resurrection,
and fellowship of his suffering, and Phil. 3. 10 1 Cor. 27. 6, 7 Phil. 3. 15
Col. 1. 28 Col. 4. 12.
was made conformable to his death: and he preached wisdom among those that
were perfect, even the hidden wisdom of God, which is a mystery to thee thou
man of sin; and he said, let as many as are perfect be thus minded, and said
his preaching was to present every man perfect in Christ Jesus, that they might
be perfect and entire, wanting nothing, but thy spirit is contrary to Paul's,
for thou preachest to maintain sin, and to keep people in their sins.

Again, thou said, thy way O man cannot be right, for thou censurest all the
godly Preachers and Saints that are not of thy opinion.

Rep. Here thou utterest forth thy lies, who art in the generation of liars:
the godly Preachers and Saints I censure not, but such as thou, who plead for
sin and ungodliness, and says, men cannot be perfect while they are here* and
opinions I deny, and all who are Saints deny opinions and conceivings, which
thou live in.

Priest-Powel's QUERIES ANSWERED.
Quest. 1. WHether Jesus Christ which died upon moun^ Calvary by Jerusalem is
now in that very body of flesh and blood in heaven?
Rep. Flesh and blood enters not into the Kingdom of heaven, but he that
descended, is the same also that ascended far above all heavens, that he might
fulfill all Ephesians. 4, 10 1 Cor. 2* 14 Ephesians. 5. 30
things, and Christ is spiritual, but thou natural man know him not, nor his
body, which is spiritual, which we witness, who are members of his body, of
his flesh, and of his bone. If thou can read me, thou may, who art without,
who have shut out thy self from Christ, and know him not* but art disputing
about the body of Christ, as the devil did about the body of Moses, Jude 9.
And this Jesus we witness, who is the Son of God, who suffered upon the Mount
Calvery, and was tempted Luke 23. 33
of the chief Priests, and the same Christ suffers now by the chief Priests,
and is tempted as he was by such (as thou) who have the chiefest place in the
Assembly, stand Matthew 23
praying in the Synagogues, is called of men Master, and there thou art among
them whom Christ cried woe against.

Quest. 2. Whether the Bible or the word of God written by the Prophets and
Apostles is the rule to try men, there doctrine and actions by?
Rep. Here thou show plainly thou art no Minister of Christ, and know not
the word of God, which have nothing to try men, there doctrine and actions by*
but the letter which thou call the Bible, or written word, which is natural
and carnal; and art a Minister of the letter, not of the spirit, and thou go
about to try the living By the dead, the spirit by the letter; but they who are
Ministers of God have the spirit of God by them: thou art tried to be no
Minister of God, and thy doctrine and actions are tried to be the traditions of
men the Saints witnessed the spirit of discerning, whereby they tried the
spirits whether they were of God, and we do witness the same spirit by which
this spirit is tried to be of Antichrist, who has nothing to try by but the
letter, which is carnal.

Quest. 3. Whether art thou the Christ that suffered by Jerusalem?
Rep. Do thou believe it? Thou tempter, who art in the same generation, who
said, we do adjure thee by Mat. 26* 63 1 John 5. 20 Tit. 1. 15 Revel* 21 8
the living God to tell us whether thou be the Christ, the Son of God, who art
an enemy to Christ, and to all who confess Christ come in the flesh; for we
witness the Son of God is come, and has given us an understanding to know him
who is true, but thou who know not Christ, there is no answer of God to
thee, who art an unbeliever, but thy portion is with hypocrites and unbelievers,
turned out from the presence of God into the lake of fire.

Quest. 4. Do thou believe the Scriptures, as Isaiah says? To the law, and
to the Testimony. And as Paul says, the Scriptures are able to make the man of
God perfect. And to this Question thou say the Quakers refused to answer.
Rep. Here thou art uttering forth more lies, for I answered thee, and thy
confusion was laid open and made manifest in the congregation; for before thou
said none could be perfect, and here thou take the words of Paul in thy
mouth, and out of thy own mouth Luke 19. 22
thou art judged and found in confusion; and Paul whose words thou take in
thy mouth, shall condemn thee, and all who live in sin, and plead for it, for
he was the Minister of God, and did not say that men must continue in sin so
long as they are upon earth, as thou do, but labored to present every man
without sin and blameless.

Quest. 5. Where do thou find that any of the Prophet, Apostles, or Saints,
did ever quake and tremble in their bodies, and yell, and howl, and roar, to
the scaring and amazing of men and beasts, as you do?
Rep. Here thou make thy self plainly manifest to be ignorant of the power
of God, and of the Saints conditions, and ignorant of the letter, for the
Prophets, Apostles, and Saints did witness trembling and quaking, and did
yell, howl and roar. David he roared because of the disquietness of his
heart, and he Psalm. 38. 6. 8 Psalm. 22 1, 2 Job 3. 24 Jer. 47. 2 Hab. 3. 16
Jer. 4. 12* 20
cried in the day time, and in the night season, and was not silent. Job*s
roarings was poured out like water. The Inhabitants of the land shall howl
says the Lord Habakuck his belly trembled. Jeremiah cried out in his howels,
that he was pained at the very heart, and that his heart made a noise within
him, and these things did the Saints witness, and we witness the same; and it
is to that scaring and amazing of such men and beasts as thou art, who abides
not in the truth, but reviles and speaks evil of the power of God where it is
made manifest in his people. There shall be a voice of howlings Zech. 11. 3
Amos 8. 3
of the shepherds* the Lord has spoken it, and it is thy portion* and in that
day thou shall know howling* trembling and quaking.

Priest Powel said, I read in Hab. 3. 16. Also in Job, David, Jeremiah and
Ezekiel, that trembled, but not as thou and thy companions do, for either they
did it when they had visions of God, or at the sight of sin, or the dreadful
judgments of God approaching, but thou and thy companions do it not so.

Rep. Here thou art uttering forth more lies and false accusations, for we do
witness the same power of God now as they did then, and we do witness the
promise of the Father, and the pouring down of the spirit, old men dream
dreams, and young men see visions; and upon his servants and handmaids has
he poured forth his spirit, and this we witness, and he has let us see sin,
and by his grace which has appeared to us do we deny sin, and all
ungodliness, and the dreadful judgments of God. We witness against sin, but
thou and thy generation of Priests deny visions and revelations, and say they
are ceased, for to thee there is no vision thou man of sin, and so denies Jesus
Christ the Son of God, for none knows the Father, but the Son, Luke 10. 22.
and he to whom the Son reveals him: and sin thou see not, but pleadst for
it; and the dreadful judgment of God thou know not, for if thou did, thou
durst not despise and speak evil of the power of God manifested in his people,
which witness these things, nor utter forth thy lies as thou do.

Priest Powell said, you say ye have no sin, and thou teach this to be
necessary: where can thou find such an instance or example?

Rep. Thou blind Pharisee, did not all the Ministers of God teach this to be
necessary to deny all ungodliness Titus 2. 12 Romans 6, 2 Romans 8. 1, Numb. 23. 21
Zeph. 3. 13
and worldly lusts? and they said, how could they that were dead to sin live
any longer therein? and they walked in the spirit, and did not fulfill the lusts
of the flesh: and God beheld no sin Jacob, nor perverseness in Israel; and God
said, the remnant of Israel (...) do no iniquity, nor speak lies, neither shall
a deceitful tongue be found in their mouths; and this do we witness, John 3 8
who are taught by the grace of God, and do deny such as thou art, who are
ministers for Satan, and to uphold sin and the works of the devil, which Christ
came to destroy, and we witness them destroyed by Christ, and do deny the
Antichrist.

Again, thou say Mr. Powell did propound to him, whether he would ask him
any questions: whereupon as thou say, the Quaker asked him, how he could
prove that any of the Ministers of God did stand in the highest place of the
Synagogue over the people?

Rep. Here thou art adding lie unto lie, the question was, where can thou
prove that they who were sent forth by Jesus Christ, who were Ministers of the
Matthew 23
Gospel, did stand praying in the Synagogues, had the chiefest place in the
assemblies, were called of men Master, as thou art?

Priest Powel answered, Ezra stood in a pulpit of wood above the people and
prayed.

Rep. Here thou shewst plainly that Christ never sent thee, for they whom
Christ sent forth to preach the Gospel, never pleaded for a pulpit of wood to
stand in to be above the people as Ezra did, who was a Scribe of the law, and
thou who pretendst to be a Minister of the Gospel, and go back to the law to
Ezra for this example, thou may offer the blood of Bulls 1 John 4 3
and Goats, and Lambs, and go to the Priests of the law for thy example, and
so deny Jesus Christ come in the fresh as thou do.

Again, thou say Mr. Powel gave answer to the satisfaction of the whole
congregation, yea, to some of the seduced brethren, in so much that the whole
congregation did wonderfully with one voice glorify God at the discovery and
conviction which the Lord made that time of them.

Rep. Thou liar and false accuser, who have published forth thy lies in print,
that all you who have set your hands to it, who call your selves Members of the
Church of Wrexham, all who read your lying libell may see you to be in the
generation of liars, and of your Father the Devil, who was a liar from the
beginning, and when he speaks a lie, he speaks it of John 8 44
himself, for he is a liar, and the father of it. For there was many in that
Congregation whom thou have laid heavy burdens upon by thy false Ministry, and
thou have left them without satisfaction, both by thy Ministry, by thy
questions and answers; and there was but few in the Congregation that uttered
forth their voices to vindicate thee in thy deceit and sin which thou
pleadedst for, but some whom thou have seduced and drawn into the same height
of deceit with thy self, and most especially one drunken Priest, who for his
drunkenness, gluttony, pride and deceit, that his 1 Cor. 6 10
outward practices was seen so vile and abominable to the people, that he was
cast out as a profane person, and he was the chief in that Congregation to
plead for sin with thee against the truth, when the word of the Lord was
declared against your false ministry, and ungodly practices, which is seen by
all those who live in the life of godliness, to them you are Ezekiel. 13 3
seen to be deceivers and lying Prophets. And there is a people which was in
that Congregation, whom the Lord is raising a light in their hearts, whereby
thou and thy doctrine is discovered, and denied as of Antichrist, and they do
glorify God, on this behalf that thou art discovered, who have so long
deceived them, who under thy Ministry have been kept ever learning, and never
come to the knowledge 2 Timothy 3 13
of the truth; but now the Lord is making himself Isa. 23 22 Isa. 54 13
manifest in his people, and we do witness the Lord to be our Teacher, who
has discovered all false teachers, hirelings and deceivers to us* Praises,
eternal praises to him for ever.

A Servant of the Lord, who is not greater then his Master, but in obedience as
a Servant, must suffer under the same reproaches, temptations, slanders, and
lying accusations by the Chief Priests, Scribes, and Pharisees, Hyppocrites
and Liars, Professors of the Church of WREXHAM.; but my Lord and Master Jesus
Christ has left me a good example, and as he is, so are we in this present
world his followers. Whose name after the flesh, is Richard Hubberthorn.

AN ANSWER TO Certain Lies and false aspersions cast upon the truth, and the
Servants of JESUS CHRIST, BY One whose Name is subscribed William Spencer, and
a Member of the Church of WREXHAM in WALES.
1. THou said thou wast a follower of these people called Quakers for several
months together, and that thou quaked thy self in the sight of many people,
and that thou lay the three nights last past with one of them, and that thou
heard (as it were) the noise of an humble-Bee, buzzing about the head of the
stranger, which made thee terribly afraid, and would have risen out of bed, but
thee stranger b^d the lie still.

Rep. Thou liar and false accuser, thou have published thy lies so openly, and
made them so plainly manifest, that they who are enlightened in the least
measure by the light of God, may discern and see thee given over to hardness of
heart, and to speak lies, and publish them abroad. In thy first lying paper
which was written from thy mouth, thou say thou wast for a weeks space a
follower of those thou callst Quakers, and here thou have added more lies, and
put them in print, and say for several months together, which is a lie, and
that thou quaked thy self in the sight of many people: that power which made
thee to quake and tremble, I do witness to be the power of the Lord, and to
that in thy conscience which is of God, which did affright and terrify thee
thou man of sin, and made thee to quake, I am made manifest unto, which shall
eternally witness me, and condemn thee, who now go about to speak evil of
the power of God, and call it the power of the devil; but thou shall know
it was the power of God, which shall plague and torment thee for utter in*
forth thy lies, and blasphemies against the Lord and his power. And whereas
thou said thou was terribly affrighted with something like the noise of an
humble-bee, thou can fear* where there is no fear; for I do testify from the
Lord against thee that there was no such thing, but the deceit being got up in
thy mind, and thou speakst from the vain imaginations of thy heart, uttering
forth such things whereby thou would render the truth odious by thy lies.

2 And thou said thou would have risen out of bed, but the stranger bad
thee lie still.

Rep. My exhortation was to the keeping thy mind out of the vain imaginations
which the deceit had drawn thee into; but the deceit being strong in thee, and
thou yielding obedience to it, it would not let thee rest; and this was thy
excuse as thou say in bed to me, that thou wast diseased with an infirmity in
thy body, and thou felt thy self not well, telling me thou would get up, and
when I wished thee not to disturb the man's family which was in their beds, thou
replyedst again to me, and said, the disease had used formerly to take thee,
and would hold thee for the space of a week or longer sometimes; and thou
said to me, thou would go to thy friends, for if thou staid till morning
the Disease might increase more, and so disable thee from going home, which was
about four miles from that place, as thou told me; and under this pretense thou
arose, and now the deceit the which thou art servant unto, has made thee to
change thy lies. And now.

3. Thou say the Quaker laid his head upon thy shoulder, and did blow hard
like the hissing of a Goose or Gander, (as thou have reported it) several times
toward thy face or month, which made thee leap out of bed (as thou say) in
thy shirt in much fear and agony.

Rep. O thou Prince of darkness, who have hatched a multitude of Lies in thy
dark imaginations, which arise out of the bottomless pit to make the truth of
the Gospel odious, and the servants of Jesus Christ contemptible liars; but the
Gospel and servants of Jesus Christ trample upon all such as then thou
scornfully caldst me a Quaker; that name I own, else should I deny the Holy men
of God, as Meses, David, Daniel, and the rest, but thou show thy self
plainly to be of that generation which always scorned the holy men of God; as
Jannes and Jambres withstood Moses, so thou who art of the same generation,
seek by thy filthy lies and false reports to oppose the generation of the
righteous seed who are coming out of bondage; but shall perish in thy
gain-sayings.

And whereas thou say there was a great and terrible wind, and that the
woman and children of the house was in great fear:

Rep. Here thou have uttered forth more of thy lies, for the man and woman of
the house do bear witness against thee; and when thou arose and went out of
the house, thou toldst the man of the house the same thing as thou declaredst
to me, which is formerly mentioned, which was contrary to these lies which here
thou declarest and publishest abroad* for which lies thou must give an account
before the Lord, who will judge thee in righteousness, and will not clear the
guilty to pass unpunished.

And again thou say, Thou testifiedst the next day publicly to my face the
particulars before mentioned, and I could not deny, but thereupon deserted the
meeting.

Rep. I charge thee in the presence of God here with another lie, for I did
deny thy lies before all that people, and thou wentst forth of the meeting
house before me: and here thou boasts thy self to do mischief, and show thy
self to be of the same Generation which said to David, Fie on thee, fie on
thee, did we not see it?

And thou who have published this lying Paper, say, That the said Spencer
ever since has taken all opportunities publicly and privately, as at Wrexham,
Oswalstrey, and elsewhere, to publish the same to the satisfying and confirming
many in the truth of Christ against their Errors.

Rep. Be silent thou Flesh before the Lord, and take not the name of Christ in
thy mouth, who art satisfied and confirmed in those lies, and call them the
truth of Christ, which is the deceit* and lying spirit speaking from one who is
departed from the Truth, and neglects no opportunity, public nor private, to
speak forth his lies, and goes about to confirm others in the same Deceit with
himself to speak evil of the truth, and such cause the way of Truth to be evil
spoken of; but thou art discovered, and thy lies are made manifest, and all who
are satisfied and confirmed in the Truth, cannot be deceived by thee nor thy
Errors, but to them thou art seen and discovered to be fallen from Grace, and
art servant to the Devil, whom thou servest, who is the father of Liars.

Blessed are ye when men shall revile you and persecute you, and shall say all
manner of evil against you falsely for my sake. Rejoice and be exceeding glad,
for great is your reward in heaven, for so persecuted they the Prophets which
were before you.

This Scripture I witness to be fulfilled, who am a Prisoner in outward bonds
for the testimony of the Truth at West-Chester, whose name after the Flesh is

JOHN LAWSON.

FINIS.

