Antichristianism REPROVED, And the Doctrine of Christ and his Apostles
justified against SWEARING. IN Answer to John Tombe's six Propositions for the
lawfulness of Swearing: All which Propositions are both against Christ and his
Apostles Doctrine, as is here proved according to the Scriptures: For the
satisfaction of all tender Consciences. By Richard Hubberthorn.

Because of Oaths, the Land mourns, Hos. 4. And, ( as said the Prophet)
everyone that swears, shall be cut off, Zach. 5.3. LONDON Printed, and are to
be sold at the sign of the Black-Spread- Eagle, at the West End of Paul's. 1660.

The Epistle.
John Tombs,
IS it not a shame for thee, who art ealled a Baptist, thus to manifest thy
sel^, and divide thy self from thy own people? Have thou not taught people to
swear, first one way, and then another? Did ever any of the Apostles so in the
Primitive times? But on the contrary, that people should not swear at all. And
why do thou bring the Scripture that was spoken to the Jews, and apply it to
the Christians? And why do thou bring the Scripture where the Angel swear,
but brings not the Scripture which says, All Angels must worship the Son who
says, Swear not at all? So is not this like Antichrist, and Anti-Apostle,
that preaches up that which Christ and the Apostles denied, as in Matthew. 5. and
James 5. And whereas thou say in thy Epistle, that thy writing is short and
indigested, in that thou have said truly; for how can they that fear God digest
it, seeing it is so contrary unto Christ and the Apo^tles Doctrine? And so both
thou and it are become an ill savor to God and them that love him; but thou
shall be rewarded according to thy work But God has made thee manifest, who
has so long been hiding thy self under so many false coverings, but now art
discov^red, that thou should no more deceive the Nation.

R. H.

An Answer to John Tombs his Six Propositions, in which he asserts Swearing to
be lawful. But on the contrary, from the Scripture it is proved, that the
Believers and Christians are not to Swear at all, Therefore to them that are in
Christ Jesus no Oath is lawful.
WE read in the Scriptures of truth, Mat. 5.19. That whosoever breaks the
least Commandmen and teaches men so he shall be least, (or not at all) in the
Kingdom of God.)

But we do find some men especially John Tombs breaking the commands of Christ,
and teaching men so, therefore he is guilty of that judgment: but to the first
proposion which is this.

That some swearing is Lawful.

His proofs are these.

That which is not de toto genere, in its whole kind evil, may be Lawful, but
swearing is not de toto genere, or in its whole kind evil, therefore some
swearing may be Lawful.

Answ. This argument is thus disproved

To break any of Christ's commands or to deny the Apostles Doctrine is de toto
genere, in its whole kind, but to swear at all by any Oath is to break the
command of Christ, and to deny the Apostles Doctrine, as Mat. 5.35, 35, 36, 37.
and, Jam. ^.12 Therefore to swear at all is not lawful, but evil, according to
Christ and the Apostles Doctrine and in the state of condemnation, Jam. 5.

Again John Tombs concluding that his major is manifest of it self, goes.

To prove this minor thus.

That is not wholly evil about the use of which some Directions are given by
God; but God gives directions about the use of swearing, as Ier. 4.2. And thou
shall swear the Lord lives in truth and judgment and in righteousness, ergo

Answ. By the same argument, may it as well be proved that the Christians and
believers in Christ; may be circumcised, offer innocence, burnt offerings and
sacrifices, because for the use of it God gave some directions, and therefore
it is lawful, but as circumcision, innocence, burnt offerings and sacrifices
of the Law is ended in Christ, so is the Oaths which was among the Jews in him
ended also to the believers, and by him forbidden: for as it was said in old
time thou shall swear, and shall perform thy oath to the Lord; but Christ in
the 5 of Mat. making mention of the Jews oath which God gave once directions
for, yet says he swear not at all; here Christ puts an end not only to
frivolous and vain oaths, but to the true oaths which the Jews was once
commanded of God to swear, for these oaths are they which Christ's words has
relation to, for he came to end the Jews worships and oaths, who is the oath
of God, Christ the truth and righteousness of God says swear not at all,
which ends the Jews which was to swear in truth and righteousness.

2. Argument.

That which is approved by God is lawful, but some swearing is approved by God,
Psalm. 63.11. every one that swears by God shall glory, ergo,

Answ. That Scripture Psalm. 63.11. says thus, but the King shall rejoice in
God, every one that swears by him shall glory but the mouth of them that
speak lies shall be stopped. This was spoken of David the Anointed of God who
was in that covenant of the Law, wherein he might swear in truth and
righteousness, that oath as the Lord lives, and as my soul lives; but there
was some in that time, which if they used that Oath, the Lord lives, surely,
they swear falsely, Ier. 5.2.

But what is that to the Christians under the new covenant who are under
Christ's command, who says swear not at all, neither by that oath which David
and the Jews swore by, nor any other oath, but if upon any occasion they were
required to testify their obedience whether they would be subject to such, or
such things; their answer was to be yea or nay, and to keep there words, which
is more then the hypocrites and hirelings Priests in these times has done by
there oaths, for this we have had good experience of, that such as do now plead
to swear for a thing, has sworn against the same thing and do now preach
against that which they have preached for, so that they will preach, pray, or
swear any thing for their belly, and for filthy Lucre; and the oath which
David was to swear in truth and righteousness who called Christ Lord, he that
was David's Lord and glory says swear not at all, who has all power and glory.

Again whereas John Tombs instanceth Abraham, Isack David, Solomon, Elijah,
Mica, Elisha, the women of Shunem, and Itai, Vria, and Samuel etc. their
swearing and entering into covenant to be examples for swearing.

Ans. All these were under the first covenant, and was in that which Christ
called the old time, Mat. 5. and proves nothing that Christians in the new
covenant should swear, for although Abraham swore, and Solomon swore, yet
Christ which was before Abraham and greater then Solomon, says swear not at
all, and al. though David swore yet he was David's Lord which said swear not at
all, and though the Angels swore by him that lives for ever, yet Christ unto
whom all the Angels shall bow and worship, says swear not at all, so that all
these arguments and Scriptures does not prove that it is lawful for the
believers and Christians to swear at all, but it is Tombs ignorance in his
applying Scripture in disobeying Christ's command.

Again to prove swearing lawful, John Tombs says that Paul put an oath on the
Thessolonians, 1. These. 5.27. which words are these, I charge you by the Lord
that this Epistle be read unto all the holy brethren: Now says Tombs the
Greek word translated I charge you by the Lord, is I put the Lords oath on you,
or swear you that this Epistle be read to all the holy brethren, alike charge
are 1. Tim. 6.13. 2. Tim.. 4.1. etc.

Answ. This is the long and thick mist of darkness which has been long kept
over the understandings of people, that when the plain Scripture will not prove
their ends and intents, then they tell people it is otherwise in the Greek, or
Hebrew, did not the translator of the Bible understand Greek as well as John
Tombs? or are we not to believe the Scripture as it speaks till again it be
translated by him? but least be should be wise in his own eyes, as it is in the
Greek is here set down, that all that can read and understand it may judge
whether Paul did put an oath upon them, or did swear them to read that Epistle
to the brethren.

As 1 These. 5.27 (...) That is, I oblige or charge you in the presence of God
etc. Not I put the Lords oath upon you, or swear you as John Tombs says, for
if they did read the Epistle among the brethren, then his obligation or charge
to them was fulfilled; but seeing John Tombs says he swore them, he might have
declared in what manner they were sworn, seeing Paul was at Athens when he
wrote to Thessolonicae.

Again he says the like charge is in 1. Ti^. 6.13. which acding to the Greek
he would make an oath, the words are these (...) that is I in oyn or command
thee before God, not a putting an oath upon them, or causing them to swear as
John Tombs says.

Again he says there is the like charge (or oath) put upon them in 2. Tim 4.1.
which in the Greek is thus (...). that is, I charge thee in the presence of
God, etc. Not that he took him sworn, or put an oath upon bim, or take him
sworn that he should preach the word, but did charge him to be instant in
season and out of season in his ministry.

Again John Tombs says in the times of the Gospel Paul used this oath, 2. Cor.
1.8. But as God is true etc.

Answ. Now those that minds this Scripture may see that Paul does only
justify Christ's words in keeping to yea and nay, saying that with him it was
not yea and nay, for says he verse 18. but as God is true, our word toward
you was not yea and nay, and verse 19. for the Son of God, Jesus Christ, who
was preached among you by us, even by me and Silvanus, and Timothius, was not
yea and nay, for all the promises of God in him are yea and in him, Amen.

So that this Scripture is so far from bringing people to oaths and swearing
that he labors to bring them all to yea and nay in all things, and so to
Christ the substance in whom all the promises of God are yea; so that the
Apostle might well use these words that as God was true etc See also were they
true to their yea and nay the end of all oaths; other Scripture, Tombs brings
to prove the Apostles did swear, as Romans 1.9. and 9.1. Gal. 1.20. Phil. 1.8.

Answ. As to the first, Romans 19. where the Apostle says, for God is my witness
whom I serve with my spirit in the Gospel of his Son, that without ceasing I
make mention of you always in my prayers; is this a proof for men to swear and
take oaths either for men or against men, has not the man hear lost the
understanding of a man? thus to compare and call this the Apostles oath when he
takes God to witness that he prays for the Saints continually, and his saying
in Rom 9.^. I speak the truth in Christ, I lie not, my conscience also bearing
me witness in the holy Ghost, that I have great heaviness, and continual sorrow
in my heart etc. and Gal. 1.20. where the Apostle says, now the things that I
write unto you, behold before God I lie not, is this an oath to testify the
truth of his writings against lies; indeed this we desire that John Tombs and
the rest of the Priests in this Nation would write nothing, but what God would
witness unto the truth of, and that they would speak truth before God and not
lie, then they would not thus abuse the Apostles words, and plead for swearing
from them, when as the Apostles intend no such thing in their words here
asserted; and where as it is again said that the Apostle took an oath, Phil.
1.8. where he says for God is my record how greatly I long after you in the
bowels of Jesus Christ. Now let all honest and sober hearted men consider
whether the truth of God and the Apostles that speak it forth be not abused,
that from a novice that is lifted up in pride, and that would do or say any
thing for his hire should bring those Scripture to plead for swearing and that
lawfulness of oaths, in all which the Apostle took God to witness his love to
the Saints and labor in the work of his ministry, signifiing to all that
understand how that he spoke the truth and did not lie, and kept to his yea and
nay according to Christ's doctrine (and did not swear at all).

Now further to prove swearing Lawful John Tombs brings

This fifth argument.

That which has a necessary use for the benefit of humane society is not
unlawful, but some swearing has a necessary use for the benefit of humane
society, ergo,

Answ. This argument is thus disproved, and both the major and minor, to be
false.

For to break any command of Christ is of no necessary use for humane society,
but to swear any oath is to break his command, ergo, For Godliness is
profitable unto all men, in all their societies, but he that swears goes from
Godliness into ungodliness and transgrssion, which transgression is of no use
nor service amongst Christians, so that John Tombs might as well have thus
stated his Argument, that to break Christ's commend is of benefit to humane
society, therefore to break Christ's command is lawful etc. and might thus have
proved it, that except we break Christ's command, we cannot preach for hire nor
sue men at the Law for tithes; nor live in pride, ease, and vanity, nor keep
our places of profits, and benefits, which is necessary for our society (of
Priests,) ergo,

But we whose eyes God has opened, do see that all his book tends to the
persuading of people to swear, when Christ has said swear not at all, and that
which he now would swear for again would swear against for the same advantage
and profits which he has in his eye, yea or he would persuade all men not to
swear and bring Scripture to prove it upon the same account, so that what he
does in this kind is because of advantage: for two years since he did not
preach this doctrine nor write those arguments.

Now it being proved that the followers of Christ, and believers in him are not
to swear at all, then all those promissory oaths upon which John Tombs has
grounded his other propositions is not to be taken: But again to prove an oath
of supremacy to King Caesar, he brings the example and rule of Christ, and
argues thus, if the Lord Christ in the days of his flesh did accowledge Caesar
as supreme Governor in his dominions, and did subject himself to his
jurisdiction in answering before the Roman Deputy and was obedient to his
parants real or supposed, then all Christians even the highest Ecclesiastical
Prelate should be subject to the King as supreme Governor in his Dominions; and
for proof of this brings Mat. 22.21. when the Pharisees showed Jesus the Tribute
money, Christ bid them give unto Caesar that which was Caesar's, and unto God
the things that are Gods, so then it was the tribute money that was due to
Caesar: but does this prove that Christ did swear, or was any example of
swearing to Caesar, or account Caesar the head of the Church and Ruler in
Ecclesiastical things, so that this Scripture proves the contrary then for that
which thou brings it, for those Pharisees that brought the money to Christ,
said they knew that he respected no man's person, but taught the way of God in
Truth; so then if Christ be our example and rule in this, then to the supreme
King or Kings we must not respect their persons but give them their due, which
is that tribute which has their own superscription upon it, and we must teach
the way of God in Truth, and give unto God the things which are Gods, which is
all honor, glory, and rule in spiritual matters, and give to Christ alone the
pre-eminence, which is head of his body which is his Church, and we must not
swear at all, neither for nor against any man, for Christ did not swear neither
for nor against Caesar, and we must live peaceably with all men, not envy nor
fight for nor against any man, and this is quite contrary to what Jo. Tombs
would persuade people, or to what he understands from the Scripture, which
would make people believe that Christ was an example of the oath of supremacy
to Caesar, so that people may well be blind and ignorant who has such Teachers.

But we also shall follow the example of Christ, as 1 Timothy 6.13. who did
witness a good confession before Pontius Pilate, and this is a good confession
before any King or Ruler now, to say that we have obeyed the Truth from our
heart, and have not broken the Commands of Christ by swearing, for, nor against
any; neither have we transgrest the example of Christ in respecting any man's
person, neither do we in our hearts envy any man, King, Ruler, nor people, but
has love even to our enemies, and can do good to them that hate us, and can
pray for them that persecute us, and do desire and daily labor that all men
might come to the knowledge of the Truth, that they might be saved, And this
good Confession we can witness before the King, or any in Authority, and say
that God is our witness, and our Conscience also bears us witness in the
sight of God, as the Apostle did, and we can say also that we speak the Truth
before God, and lie not, for our eyes is not blinded with gifts and rewards,
neither have we taken Oaths, Covenants, nor Protestations for Parties, Powers,
or Religions, but since we knew the way of Christ we have walked in it, and
kept to his Commandment and Oath, which is yea and nay in all things, and so
have not entered into condemnation with those that are given to change, but the
unchangeable Priest, the unchangeable Covenant, and unchangeable Law has been
our Rule, and of this we need not be ashamed, but in Gods power and Authority
can we hold up our heads, when others do bow down their backs always
(crouching under every power and change of Government) as David's enemies did,
Psalm. 69.23. for that is their place and condition, as the Apostle does
wi^nesse, Romans 11.10.

Again Jo. Tombs says, that Paul a Saint was subject to the judgment of
Caesar and appealed to him, then he acknowledged him supreme, etc. ergo

Ans. Paul was a prisoner for the word of God and testimony of Jesus, and
appealed to Caesar for justice, because he was unjustly accused, and had not
done any thing worthy of bonds or of death, therefore according to their Law he
ought to be set free, but Paul did not call Caesar the supreme head of the
Church, and chief Ruler in Ecclesiastical things, for if Caesar had been the
supreme head of the Church of which Paul was a member, he would but have needed
little appealing unto for setting of him at liberty; but in such Arguments as
Tombs has used, is manifest the ignorance of foolish men, wherein their folly
appears to all men, as the Scripture says, 2 Timothy 3.9.

And whereas thou say that there is holy and harmless Christians, and many
upright souls whose Consciences are very tender, and many godly persons that
have excepted against that Oath, and the lawfulness of taking of it, as
fearing it may take away the liberty of their Consciences, which is dearer to
them then their lives.

Ans. These that are so are in a better condition then thy self, and to such
thy ministry if received would beget them from their holy and harmless state,
into transgression of Christ's command, and from the tenderness of Conscience
into hardness of heart; and now to answer their objections, thou tells them
that it was imposed for excluding of the Popes jurisdiction, etc. if so, why
do thou preach it up to be imposed upon the holy, harmless, godly
Christians, who are redeemed from the Popes power and jurisdiction, and is come
into the doctrine of Christ, and into the life of Christ, which is out of all
such Oaths.

Thou art a miserable Comforter to tender Consciences, but thy end is seen, and
therefore thou cannot deceive many, but for those that thou have before
mentioned, who are holy, harmless, upright, and godly, which are tender of an
Oath; they ought to be thy Teachers who thy self art far from righteousness or
tenderness of Conscience, therefore for thee it is a shame to be an imposer of
Oaths upon tender Consciences, who professes thy self a Minister of Christ,
who did forbid all swearing, and his Minister did preach against it, and said
above all things swear not at all, lest they fall into condemnation, but it is
manifest that thy Ministry is to bring people into condemnation, and not into
the obedience to Christ's command, therefore they that fear God will turn away
from such, 2 Timothy 3.5.

Now says Jo. Tombs, the grand objection against swearing is our Saviors
words, Mat. 5.34, 35, 36, 37. and Jam. 5.12. which words says he does seem
expressly and fully to forbid any swearing at all, excluding some sorts of Oaths
by name, and the rest by general terms, that our Communication should be yea,
yea, nay, nay, and what is more comes of evil, or of the evil One; yet says
he, we must of necessity find out a limitation of the speeches as we do, and
the limitation is this, that is, frequent, vain, light, profane, unnecessary,
customary, passionate swearing or in secular matters of no importance, which in
these Scriptures are forbidden.

Ans. Indeed it does plainly appear, that thou must of necessity either
disprove Christ's words, or else deny thy own, seeing they are contrary the one
to the other; so therefore thou say that it was those Oaths above mentioned
that was forbidden by Christ and the Apostles, And I shall show it plainly that
thou have no necessity to limit Christ's words to vain and profane swearing,
(out only that thou would have thy words true and his false) for Christ's words
in Mat. 5. does not intend such Oaths, for he speaks of the true Oaths which
was used amongst the Jews, and such Oaths as Christ told them they were to
perform; for it was not said in old time, that they should perform vain, light,
profane, unnecess^ry, customary, and passionate Oaths, but such as they were
to perform betwixt the Lord and them, and the solemn vows and Covenants which
they made in old time, to their Kings, and one unto another, the Christians now
by the command of Christ was not to swear these Oaths, neither any Oath true
nor false, so that Christ is not to be limited to intend vain Oaths, when as
for instance Christ mentions the Jews swearing, who was in the Commandment,
who did deny all vain, customary, false, and passionate swearing, so that Jo.
Tombs limitation is taken away, and Christ's meaning must be as large as his
words, which is not to swear at all by any Oath, but to keep to yea and nay in
all promises, professions, and engagements upon all occasions, and so to keep
out of the condemnation, whereby all peoples Consciences may be kept clean to
the Lord in all things, and they brought to the exercise of a good Conscience,
for the Lord is now teaching his people himself, and bringing them to obey the
doctrine of his Son, in which they may find peace for their souls, and not to
be in bondage unto such Teachers as are given to change with every Government,
who preach as the false Prophets did for handfuls of barley, and pieces of
bread, and such are they who preach the lawfulness of swearing (or sinning)
against Christ's command, but the Lord has made them manifest, and is redeeming
his elect and chosen from amongst such who have made a prey upon people, and
fed upon their sins, but not upon the life which the Saints was in.

A true Testimony of the Jews swearing under the Law, mentioned in 113.
Scriptures, with a distinction also of the Apostate Christians swearing,
without either Law or Gospel for example in their oaths. And also the
Christians state under the gospel ministration and new Covenant, how they are
by Christ commanded not to swear at all, plainly made manifest from the
Scripture.
THe Jews swear, the Apostate Christians swear, but the true Christians who are
redeemed out of the Apostasy, that sees Christ Jesus, that was before the Jews
and Apostates cannot swear at all, in whom we see that the doctrine of the Jews
was to swear, the doctrine of the Apostates is to swear, the doctrine of Christ
and his Apostles was not to swear at all, the Jews swear by the living God, but
the Apostates by the book, which is not comparable to the Jews swearing.

Here is a list of the Scriptures which was spoken to them of the old time, and
the Law and first Covenant, who swore and was to swear, and perform their oaths
to the Lord, which Christ ends, who says swear not at all, but in all your
Communications let your yea be yea, and your nay nay, for whatsoever is more
comes of evil, and this said be, to whom all power in heaven and earth was
given, who put down swearing in the Law, first Covenant, and old time, which
were true Oaths, not frivolous; for the frivolous was judged by them of the
Law, first Covenant, and old time, for that Oath which Christ puts down was
that which was sworn to the Lord, and was to be performed in the state of the
Law, first Covenant, and the old time, since man was drove from God into the
earth, which Law, first Covenant, (Christ ends) and Oath, and redeems man out
of the earth, and makes all things new, who says swear not at all; now as
follows are the Scriptures which was spoken to the Jews, and them of the old
time that swore.

Abimelech and his Captain, and Abraham swear, Genesis 21.23, 24, 31. Christ which
was before Abraham was, said swear not at all, that is the Covenant that ends
Abraham's and Abimelechs Covenant, and says they must keep to yea and nay in
their communications.

And the Lord swear unto Abraham, Genesis 24.7. that unto his seed he would give
the land; and that Oath was performed, and Christ being come, who was before
Abraham, who says swear not at all.

And Abraham's servant swore to Abraham, Genesis 2.4.9.37.

And Esau swear to Jacob and sold his birthright, Genesis 25.33. and Joseph swear
by the life of Pharaoh, Genesis 42.15. but Christ reigns over the house of Joseph
and Jacob, which says swear not at all, and the house of Esau must be as
stubble.

And chap. 26.3. the Lord said he would perform his oath to Abraham, which he
swear, that his seed should be as the stars of heaven; this was before Christ
was come in the flesh, who was before Abraham, who says, swear not at all.

And Isaac and Abimelechs Captain swear, and an oath was betwixt them, and this
was in the old time, and in Isaac was the seed called, Christ Jesus, who said,
swear not at all, Gen 26.30.31. chap. 31.53. Jacob swear by the fear of his
father Isaac, in whom as I said before, the seed should be called, who reigns
over the house of Jacob, who said swear not at all, but in all your
communications let your yea be yea, and your nay nay, this was in the new time,
the other was in the old.

And Joseph swear unto Jacob in Egypt in the old time, but Christ as I said
before, reigns over the house of Joseph and Jacob, says swear not at all, for
by the oath he was to be carried our of Egypt, and so by Christ the oath of
God, that ends ^he oaths, are all to be carried out of spiritual Egypt, Genesis
47.31. chap. 50.5, 6. and Exodus 13.5. where the Lord swear to the Fathers
concerning the Jews, who had the covenant and promise, which Christ the
Covenant performs the oath of God, and his promise and covenant, who says
swear not at all.

And Exodus 6.8 God swear he would give the land to the children of Israel,
which he had sworn to Abraham, but Christ who was before Abraham, said they
should not swear, that redeems out of the earth, and treads upon the earthly
Canaan.

And the Lord said to Moses, go to the land which I swear to Abraham, Isaac*
and Jacob, so the oath of the Lord brought them to this land the outward land
of Canaan, but Christ who was before Abraham, that reigns over the house of
Joseph and Jacob, that ends the oaths brings to God, and the land of the
Living, where is the everl^sting rest above Canaan, Exodus 33 1.

The Lord swear in the wilderness that he would bring the people into the land,
and the Lord said they should see the land which he swear to their fathers, but
they that provoked him should not see it, and they should not come into the
land which he swear, save Caleb, etc. who had provoked the Lord, and these did
not abide in the oath which brought into the land; as the Christians do not
abide in Christ that brings into the land of the Living, that says swear not
at all; as they did not abide in the oath which would have brought them into
the land of Canaan, Number 14.16, 23, 30.

I set the land before you says the Lord, which I swear to Abraham your
Father, and Isaac, and Jacob, and to their seed after them, Deuteronomy. 1.8. chapter 8.1.
ye shall possess the land if ye do all things I command you, which I swore to
your Fathers, and ye shall prolong your days in the land which I swore to
your Fathers, and the days of your children which the Lord swore to your
fathers should be multiplied, chapter 11.9.21. And the Lord swore that Moses
should not go over Jordan, the Lord forg^t not his covenant to the Fathers
which he swore to them, chapter 4.2^1.31. And the Lord brought thee into the land
which he svaare to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, chapter 6.10.13, 18. thou shall
possess the land which the Lord swore to the Fathers, ye shall keep covenant
and mercy, which the Lord swore to your Fathers to give thee the land, chapter
7.12, 13. chapter 8 18. so you may see here how the oath of the Lord being kept,
which brought to the land; and the oath being not kept, but the Lord was
provoked and turned against them, and he swore they should not enter into the
land; so Christ who ends the oath, who abides in him, he brings them into
rest, but who does not abide in him, the light turns against them, and he
condemns them; and so they come not into rest, chap. 9.5.

And the Lord perform his word which he swear to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, chapter
2.8.11. and the Lord will make thee fruitful in the land which he swear to give
thee, as he kept the Law he kept the oath, and so they bare fruit as they do
which abide in Christ, who ends the oath.

Chap. 30.20. as they loved and obeyed his voice, he was their life, and the
length of their days, that they might dwell in the land which he swear to
their Fathers, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, so in obedience to the Law the oath
was performed, but he that ends the law ends the oath, who was before days
was, who is the life Christ, chap. 26.3.

They shall tell the Priest that they are come to the land which the Lord gave
them, Jos. 1.6. be strong and of good courage, ye shall inherit the land which
the Lord swear, Deuteronomy. 30.20.23. when the Lord had brought them into the land
which he swear, they were to keep covenant, this was spoken to the Jews, else
the oath turned against them, which oath and covenant Christ ends, Jos. 5.6.

And the Prince of the congregation swear, chapter 9.15, 20. but Christ the Prince
of peace ends these Princes among the Jews, their authority and oaths, chapter 14.9.

And Moses swear, chap. 21.43, 44. and the Lord gave the people rest, as he
swear to their Fathers, now this was spoken to the Jews, and Moses the servant
which swear, Christ the Son who is greater then the servant Moses, that ends
the Law, and redeems out of the earth says swear not at all, who is Gods
covenant everlasting.

Judge. 2.1. the Lord said he had brought them into the land which he swear, and
he would not break covenant with them, and this was spoken to the Jews that had
the outward covenant, and the land, and the oath spoken to them (and not the
Christians) which Christ ends.

1 Samuel 19.6. and Saul swear who was a King, and Jonathan swear to David in the
time of his sufferings, but Christ the King of Kings says swear not at all,
there is the top and corner stone laid, that destroys the Devil the author of
sufferings, in whom is peace, chap. 20.3.17. David swear, chap. 24.21 22. David
swear unto Saul, chapter 28.10. Saul swear to the witch, but Christ Jesus that
David called Lord says swear not at all; though David and Saul were Kings, yet
Christ who has all power in heaven and earth, who is king of kings, whose
dominion is larger th^n Saul's or David's, who says swear not at all.

2 Samuel 3.35. and David swear he would not eat till the Sun went down,
Bathsheba said to David, O king, did not thou swear to thy handmaid that
Solomon should reign, and she said thou swaredst by the Lord thy God that
Solomon should reign, 1 King. 17.29, 30. and David swear as his soul lived, and
God who had redeemed it out of all adversity, that Solomon should reign, and
Adoniah would have had Solomon swear that he would not slay him, ver. 51. and
David swear he would not slay Shim^i if he went not out of Jerusalem, and
Shimei swear to the king and broke his oath, 1 King. 28.42. and Solomon said to
him, did I make thee to swear, and Joab said to David he swear by the Lord, 2 Samuel 19.1, 2, 3. and Solomon said 1 Kin. 8.31. 2 Chronicles. 6.22. when a man
trespasses against his neighbor, and they lay upon him an oath, to cause him
to swear, and the swearer shall come before the Altar in this house, and
Solomon said it was alike to him that swears and him that fears an oath,
Eccl. 9.2. and the young man that came out of Egypt bid David swear by the Lord
that he would not kill him, nor deliver him into the hands of his Master, 1 Samuel 30.15^ now here was swearing, and this was among the Jews, and though
these are proofs for their swearing, yet Christ a greater then Solomon, who was
greater then David and Solomon, who were kings, says swear not at all, he
which has all power in heaven given to him.

And here they were to swear before the Altar in the house of God, as said king
Solomon, but this is nothing to the Christians that they should swear, but
Christ that ends the oath ends the Altar, and the Temple, and said it should be
thrown down; so Solomon was made by an oath, for David swear to his Mother that
Solomon should reign, so according to the oath he was, so Christ who ends the
oaths, that is a greater then Solomon, that redeems from the earth, makes kings
to reign upon the earth which are not to swear, and says swear not at all.

And you may see Gedaliah swear 2 Kin. 25.24. Jer. 40.9. and said, be ye
Servants to the Caldees, and Sampson made the children of Judah swear that they
would not kill him, Judge. 1.5.12. and the spies swear to Rahab that they would
not open the matter, and if she uttered the matter they were quit of the oath,
Jos. 2.12 20. and Zedekiah rebelled against Nebuchadnezar, which had caused him
to swear by God, 2 Chronicles. 36.13. And the children of Israel swear together to
serve the Lord, and rejoiced at the oath they had sworn with their hearts, 2
Chr. 15.14, 15. now as these Scriptures is to prove that these swear, but all
who came to the joy which remains in Christ Jesus, they come to him which ends
the swearing, and ends the oaths, and then they joy in the oath, Christ Jesus
who is of the tribe of Judah, who ends the swearing, who is a greater then
Sampson, and none of these Scriptures prove that the true Christians swear
after Christ forbade them.

Moses said to the Lord remember Abraham, Isaac, and Israel, to whom thou swear
by thy self, I will multiply thy seed, and give you this land; here you may see
this was to the Jews who had the land, which when Christ came among them, him
they was to hear, who ended the oaths, and said they should not swear, they
persecuted him, Exodus 32.13^ thou shall serve the Lord and cleave to him and
swear by his name, Deuteronomy. 10.11. and thou shall swear the Lord lives in
righteousness, and truth, and in judgment, Jer. 4 2. and he that swears in
the earth shall swear by the true God, Isa. 65.16. now here is the oath that
was to be performed to the Lord, and Christ the righteousness of God and truth
ends the oath, that was to be sworn in righteousness, and says swear not at
all, to whom every knee must bow.

And the Lord said he had sworn by himself, his word was gone out in
righteousness, every knee should bow, and every tongue should swear to him,
this was the true oath and the house of Jacob swear by the name of the Lord,
but not in truth and righteousness, these was the vain oaths which the Prophet
forbade, and was forbidden by the Jews, Isa. 45.23. chap. 48.1. and the true
oath was that which was sworn by the Lord, and then the Jews bowed to him, but
God says this is my beloved Son, hear him, who says swear not at all, and
they that be true Christians do the thing that he commands, John 5.

And Israel swear not in truth and righteousness, though they said the Lord
lived, yet they swear falsely, amongst them that seek not the truth, nor execute
true judgment, Jer. 5, 2. the Lord says I swear by my self, that this house
shall be wasted, if they would not hear the words of God, Jer. 22.5. and the
Lord swore unto the Fathers that he would give them the land that flowed with
milk and honey; now mind, this oath brought them into the land that had the
types, and figures, and shadows, which when Christ comes he ends this oath, and
types, and figures, and shadows.

King David said, Psalm. 63.11. the king shall rejoice in God, and all that
swear by him shall rejoice in him, this was a true oath; and David swear to the
Lord, and vowed to the mighty God, Ps. 132.2. and David said unto the Lord,
where are thy former mercies which thou swear unto thy servant in truth, Psalm.
89.49. he honors him that swears to his own hurt and changes not, shall
not be removed, Psalm. 15 4. now this is to prove swearing to them that were
under the Law, and to the Jews, and that King David swear, and the Prophets
swear, which Christ the end of the Prophets, and David says swear not at all,
him that David calls Lord, and this is my beloved Son whose voice is to be
heard says God.

Whosoever voweth a vow to the Lord, or swears an oath to bind himself by a
bond, he shall not break it, here they were to perform their oaths to the Lord,
Number. 30.2. Deuteronomy. 26.15. when the children of Israel walked in the law of God,
they should possess the land which he swear unto them, so they possessed the
oath as a true Christian possesses Christ, who forbids that oath, and walks in
the light, and so he possesses the word which is the honey, and the milk, as
the Jews possessed the land that flowed with milk and honey, that kept the
Lords oath and his law, but they departed from it; but the new Covenant being
witnessed and the law written in the heart and mind that possess it, they shall
not depart from the Lord.

Ezra caused the chief Priests and all Israel to swear, and that they would do
according to the law, now these were the Jews in the law which Christ ends, Ez
10.5.

Isa. 3.7. in the time of confusion the man shall swear he will not be a
healer, this was in the time when they had transgressed the oath of God and his
Law, chapter 19.18. Egypt shall speak the land of Canaan, and shall swear by the
Lord, and they were not to swear falsely, Lev. 6.3.5. and the Jews was not to
swear to pronounce with their lips to do evil, and if he did it ignorantly he
was to confess it. cha. 5.4. and they should not swear by the Name of the Lord
faslly, chap. 19.20. and swearing faslly was forbidden by the Prophet to the
Jews, Jer. 7.9. And Jeremiah cried out, the Land was full of Adultry and Oaths,
Chap. 2, 3.10 These was not the oaths that Christ said they should perform to
the Lord.

And by swearing and killing and lying, blood touches blood, Hos. 4.2. these
were the rebukable oaths, and while they were in that state, playing the
harlot, they were not to swear the Lord lives, when they were in the
rebellious state, then they were rebukable and could not swear the true oath,
but went to the false oaths, and Hosea told the Jews they swear faslly, so the
Prophet judged the false oaths, but Christ ended the true, Hos. 10.4.

And Malaci told the Jews the Lord would rise a witness against the false
swearers, Mal. 3.5. did not Christ cry woe unto the Jews and Pharisees that said
it was nothing to swear by the Temple, and told them they that swear by the
Temple and the Gold of the Temple offended, these were the Jews that he told of
swearing by the Altar, and the offering, and swear by all things that was on
the Altar, and he that swear by the Temple, swear by him that dwelt in the
Temple, and he that swear by Heaven, swear by the Throne of God and him that
sat thereon; Christ spoke these things to the Jews he cried woe against, who was
not believers, Mat. 23.16. to the 22, this was spoken to the Jews and Pharisees
(that knew not Christ) that that was in the swearing, against which he cried
woe, who saw not the substance of the Altar and Temple, that they swear by, and
the things thereon, who says swear not at all, Mat. 5.

Peter cursed and swear. Mat. 26.74. Mat. 14.71.72^ but after he repented, the
Jews oath was to swear by the Lord, and the Christians was to keep to yea and
nay in their communications, and not to swear at all, Mat. 5. Jam. 5. and the
Jews was not to swear by the Books of Moses, nor the Prophets, as the Apostate
Christians who swore by the contents of the Books, but their oath was to swear
by the Lord, and the Jews was not to swear by the Gods of the Heathen, for Amos
told them that swear by the sin of Samaria, should fall and never rise again,
Amos 8.14. And the Lord swore to the children of Israel that they should not
make mention of the names of their Gods nor swear by them, for the Heathen
swear by their Gods, but the Jews were to swear by the Living God, and perform
their oaths to the Lord, Jos, 23.7. which Christ ends.

And the Jews when they were under transgression, they swear by the Gold and by
the Altar, and by the Temple, and the Christians that are apostatized from the
Apostles have sworn by the Epistles and the Evangelists, for which they have no
example from Christ nor Scriptures, which said they might not swear by Heaven,
for it was Gods Throne, for he that swear by the Throne, swear by him that sat
thereon, nor they should not swear by the Earth, nor the head; And James that
followed the Doctrine of Christ, one of his Disciples said, swear not at all.

And Zachary says in his prophecy, every one that swears shall be cut off
Zac. 5.3. the Lord would cut off the swearer, that swears by the Lord and
swears by Malcham, Zeph. 1.5. So the King swear secretly to Jeremiah, as the
Lord lives Jer. 38.16. and the Jews was to learn the ways of the Lord, and
swear by the Name of the Lord that lives, as they had taught the people to
swear by Baall, so there was the false oath judged by the Prophet, Jer. 12, 16.
but Christ who ends the Prophets, and the Jews outward, ends the oath, and
says swear not at all.

And the Lord swear in his wrath to the Jews that they should not enter into
his rest, Psalm, 95.11. the Apostle says, Heb. 3.10, 11 they entered not because
of unbelief, therefore he swear in his wrath, for they erred in their hearts
from the oath which would have brought them in that turned against them. And he
says verily men swear by the greater, chap 6.13.16. how God swear by himself
because he could not swear by a greater, and how men swear by the greater, and
their oath was to end the strife in the Law, but this is made by an oath,
Christ Jesus, the Lord has sworn, and will not repent, thou art a Priest for
ever after the order of Melchisedeck; the Apostle does not bring that to the
Hebrews that they should swear, but as a similitude, the substance of which is
Christ, and that men swear by a greater then themselves, and because God could
not find a greater, be swear by himself, and the oath in the Law ended the
strife among men, and made the peace, but Christ Jesus that ends the Law, ends
the oath, and destroys the Divil the Author of strife, and reconciles man to
God in peace, he through death destroying him who had the power of death the
Devil, Heb. 2.14. chap. 7.2.1. and Zhecharias when he Prophesied, saw the oath
which God swear to Abraham, Luke 1.71. and none of these places in the new
Testament, does prove that the Christians did swear, for they had the oath of
God performed, that enjoyed Christ Jesus, and who enjoys the oath of God
performed, the end of the Prophets, he says unto them they must not swear at
all.

Now if you say the Angel swear in the Revelations, and in Daniel by him that
lived for ever and ever, this was a true oath, Dan. 12.7, Rev. 10.6. who swear
concerning the mystery of God being finished, which God swear to the Prophets
his Servants, which comes to enjoy the mystery of God Christ Jesus, they have
the end of the Prophets and servants the mystery, to him the Angels must bow; I
bring forth my only begotten Son into the World, let all the Angels worship
him, who says, swear not at all.

And Christ said unto the Jews and to his Disciples, how men had sworn in the
old time, and was to perform their oath to the Lord, and that was the true
oath, and Christ says I say unto you now, swear not at all, and let them see
that men should not forswear themselves, but perform their oaths to the Lord,
and so he distinguished between the true and the false, and then bid them they
should not swear at all (mark) not at all, neither by Heaven nor by Earth, nor
by their head, nor by Jerusalem, for he gives them the reason, but tells them
what they must say, and what they must do, that takes away all swearing, let
your communication be yea yea, nay nay, whatsoever is more then these comes of
evil, Mat. 5.33, 34, 35, 36, 37. And this is the Doctrine of Christ that faith,
swear not at all, who was the oath of God performed. And James one of the
Disciples and Apostles of Christ Jesus, that abode in his Doctrine, said, above
all things my brethren, swear not at all, neither by Heaven, nor by Earth, nor
by any other oath; and then the Apostle taught people what they should do, and
said, let your yea be yea and your nay nay, least you fall into condemnation;
And so Christ and the Apostle did not say they were to swear by the Lord and
told them these were frivolous oaths, they denied, but told them they was not
to swear at all, not by any oath, for if they did, they fell into condemnation.

So the Doctrine of Christ and the Apostles who ended oaths, denied swearing,
and all oaths, said they were to keep to yea and nay, and their yea was to be
yea, and nay nay, which keept them out of condemnation, and who lives in this
are redeemed out of the Apostasy since the Apostles days, to Christ and the
Apostles Doctrine, that knows the oath performed, and Law, and first Covenant,
and Moses, and a greater then Solomon, before Abraham was, though these swore,
yet he says, swear not at all, and this is my beloved Son, hear him, and there
is the top stone laid, and Christ reigns, Mat. 5.

All these Scriptures, which are in all, 113. are brought to oppose Christ's
Doctrine by the Apostates, which prove nothing that the Christians should swear.

The oath of God his Law being kept, his promise was performed, which brought
the Jews into the outward Land of Canaan, which had the types and figures and
shaddows which Christ ends, the oath, Law and first Covenant, and types and
figures and shaddows, and redeems out of the Earthly Canaan, and from the Earth
to God, and so brings into the Land of the Living.

THE END.

