apostasa ntichristo: OR, A Scriptural Discourse of the Apostasy and the
Antichrist, by way of Comment, upon the twelve first Verses of 2 Thessalonians. 2.
Under which are opened many of the dark Prophecies of the Old TESTAMENT, which
relate to the calling of the JEWS, and the glorious things to be effected at
the seventh Trumpet through the World. Together With a discourse of slaying the
Witnesses, and the immediate effects thereof. Written For the consolation of
the Catholic Church, especially the Churches of England, Scotland, and
Ireland. By E. H.

REVEL. 16. 15. Behold, I come as a Thief: Blessed is he that watches, and
keeps his garments clean.

He which testifies these things, says, I come quickly.

Printed, Anno Dom. 1653.

TO THE RIGHT REVEREND AND Profound Prophetic Text*men of ENGLAND.
Most Reverend Fathers,
THe Author of this short-leg'd Treatise, does humbly submit, and submissively
present these his mean endeavors to you, whether his presumption in writing
it, or presenting it, be the greater he knows not; upon second thoughts he
bl^sheth at both, and for both craves pardon of you. His designs in it are
honest, and may plead his excuse; hereby he would publicly acquit himself of
the two great sins of this age, Vain glory, and Heresy; for though it may
plausibly pass in the world amongst ordinary capacities, yet you are able to
discern such failings in it, as may for ever keep him humble: And Heretics
seldom or never submit their opinions to the learned; his main design is to
provoke you to this honorable employment, for since he as a single spy,
walking along these goodly Prophesies has made such a comfortable discovery,
his hopes are, that you as so many Joshuah's will enter in, and by removing
those obscurities, and false glosses, which (as so many Sons of Anack) stand in
our way, give us peaceably to possess the length and the breadth of those rich
and fruitful Prophesies. For his own part, he professes, he has been in the
midst of these mellifluous Texts, but as a little Be fallen into an Ocean of
Honey, which (after much delightful dabling and much ado to get out) by that
little be has brought away, discovers the Ocean he has left behind.

So far has the Author been from pressing any Texts to serve him, that they
have pressed him in their service; he thought to have gone but one mile with
them, and they made him go with them twain.

These Texts found him as David found the Amelekites servant, faint, and sick,
and hungry, and ready to die, but by their Spiritual revivings, they put
strength and life into him, to make discovery of those accursed Amalekites, who
have totally devoured Ziglag the Kings and the Churches inheritance.

This weak Tract beggs of you (most reverend Fathers) as that fainting
Egyptian did of David, that you will not kill it, nor deliver it into the
hands of these Amalekires. It lies at your mercy, and without your mercy, at
the merciless cruelty of brutish, and unnatural men: it is as Lot without
doors, in the midst of Sodom, unless you prove its guardian Angels, and pluck
it within the do^res of your protection. It is without you a fatherless,
friendlesse, harb^urlesse stranger, in a strange Common wealth: it was brought
forth in the Dog days of the Church, whiles the Author labored under the
(...) Feavor of the States displeasure in a Prison, and now it is abroad, (far
worse then the Foxes or the fo^ls of the times) it has not where to put its
^ead. It has trod (like constant Ruth) in the weary steps of its beloved
Mother the Church, though as a Widow she sit alone and have changed her name to
Marah. And (as that virtuous Daughter) it has sought amongst the Learned for a
benevolent Kinsman, but, unlike to her, it has returned from their embraces,
as Abishag from the royal bed untouched.

The subject of the Treatise is unquestionably excellent, it is of the
Apostasy and the Antichrist, and of the finishing and final conclusion of
both at the seventh Trumpet. Oh the glorious things that are to be done at the
sounding of the seventh Trumpet! the meditations whereof revive the soul as
another Sacrament. Augustine wished in a misselanious mood* 1. Videre Christum
in carne conversantem, 2. cernere Romam in flore ac pristino imperii splendore
triumphantem. 3. Audire Paulum in Cathedra fulminantem, Might I have my wish in
this world it should be auscultare septimam tubam clangentem, Then shall the
witnesses be established, the twelve Tribes converted and restored to be a
Monarchy again, great Babylon shall fall, and the Nations of the world shall
bow to Christ's Scepter, the Dragon, the Beast and the false-Prophet shall be
cast into the lake that burns with Fire and Brimstone. These great things are
foretold both by the Prophets of the Old and New Testament.

The Author (as an humble and diligent handmaid) having laid himself down at
the royal feet of these bigg-bellied Prophecies, from thence arises, and
hasts to you the skillful and expert Midwives, to assure you that they groan,
and travel in pain together, longing to be delivered of what the Churches
expectation waits for, (viz.) the glorious kind of manifestation of the Son of
God at the seventh Trumpet.

He humbly craves pardon for his hasty coming in an unready dress into your
presence, his have from them to you, is, that you may make the greater have to
them; a high esteem both of you and them, has put him on beyond his natural
boldness, to what he has done, in all he has done, or whatsoever he shall do
or suffer, he desires to express himself

An obedient Son and Servant to the Church and State of ENGLAND. H.

The Authors Preface to the Reader.
IT may justly be thought a high presumption, for so low a person to undertake,
in such a learned age, so lofty a task; had the Author only weighed his own
weakness, the fear alone of falling under the weight of so great an Argument,
would have taught his humble thoughts to have pitched upon a lower subject.

In it self the Subject is most comfortable, necessary, and profitable, and to
speak in Gregory Nazianzens words, (...), most suitable to the present season.

Though we owe an equal respect to truth in general, yet some particular Truths
at some times call for our more necessary defense; therefore Peter advises us
to be established, (...), in 2 Pet. 1. 12.
the present truth. It Is the part of a true Soldier, and of a true Christian
too, to repair to that guard against which the enemy makes his nearest
approaches.

It Is needless to tell the Church, how these Prophetic Texts have their
beautiful faces beaten black and blue by the polluted fists of presumptuous
I^iots; they lie openly wound^d, and bleeding, and miserably stripped of their
proper V^stments, whiles learned Cowards like the merciless Levite, pass them
by.

The Author, not only by the Rabins Laws, by reason of his years, but by the
Laws of God and conscience, might better (by reason of his disabilities) be
excused from this high undertaking then any. (...), For it is not he that cannot
do these things (says Nazianzen) that shall be brought to judgment, but he
that can and will not, shall bear the punishment.

Zeal rather then ability provoked the Author to this Work; for how can any
Christian endure to see and hear such ignominious things spoken and done
against the City of our God, without vexation? If natural bowels caused Moses
to pity that faulty Princess his Sister, when her face was leprous; how much
more ought the bowels of grace in us to cause us to mourn for our innocent
mother the Church, which is stripped of all her wealth and children, and with
Job, sits full of botches and boiles upon the dunghill of Anarchy, without a
comforter?

Vindication of a private innocent person upon a Civil account is honorable;
much more the vindication of a Church and State upon a Religious account. This
work properly belongs to the Sword and the Gown: the Gown dir^cts the Sword,
and the Sword protects the Gown, and b^th together protect the Church and State
from injuries: when b^th by usurpation are exempted, that Church and State lies
open to all manner of Antichristian injuries; and in such a case it is the duty
of a true born son of the Church, to vindicate (wherein he may) the Church and
State whereof he is a member.

There are foul aspersions cast upon the Church and State this day, by the
Papists and Apostates of this Age* both which within these seven years were
(like the dogs in Egypt when Israel passed out) dumb, not daring to bark (as
now they do blasphemously against a Reformation: then these Philistimes cried,
as they in Samuel, Woe unto us, who shall deliver us out of the hands of these 2 Samuel 4. 7, 8.
mighty Gods? But since, by the success of War they have taken the Ark they so
much feared, and broke the neck of Eli in the place of Judgment, I mean the
Prince and the Priest (for Eli was both) they now subject the Ark of God to
their cursed Dagon, and where is he that fears the Lord, and is not much
affected with grief herat! Who cannot now read Ichabod upon the face of every
thing?

Apostates, those Vipers within the belly of the Church, have gnawed their way
out through the bowels of it, and they proclaim it impudently, that the
Reformed Protestant Religion is Antichristianism; which is as much as to say,
except you utterly renounce it, you will undoubtedly be damned by it: this our
quondam brethren, and fellow Professors of the same Religion with us, say
against us and our Religion, from which they have Apostatized.

The Papists insult over us and our Religion, to their great advantage and our
shame; for what say they? Who would be of that Religion that leads men to
Rebellion, Murder, Perjury, Blasphemy, Heresy, and all manner of heathenish
practices? whereas, we old Roman Catholics are firm to the principles of our
Religion, we are where we were hundreds of years ago. Those and such like
aspersions on the true Religion, together with the innumerable swarms of
Romish Popish Seminaries dispersing their doctrines and books together into
every corner of the nation, have brought of late very many fishes to their
nets; which so encourages them, that they have dared to attempt the Seduction
of many eminent and solid protestants

Some persons of honor, they have (on our knowledge) drawn lately from the
Protestant Religion, by their impetuous urging of the late monstrous actings of
the English Protestants.

Thus do these two parties (or rather one party in two shapes) like a pair of
sheers in the Devils hand, cut the Protestant cause in pieces.

To the first of these our treatise answers, describing the Antichrist and his
followers from many texts, especially from 1 John As the bead of the g^and
Apostasy arose out of the purest Church, Rome; so the Antichrist arises out
of the purest Churches at that time when they go about to shake off the
Apostasy: for it is at that time when the Witnesses have finished their
testimony.
2. 16, 22. 1. They went out from us, [us] i. e. The Ministry; they forsook the
Assembly of Saints. 2. They are not of us, i. e. they are false brethren, that
once in outward profession were of the Church; but when they saw their time,
(...) the Church by a separation from the Church Assemblies, and the or^ined
Ministers of those Assemblies; this is the disposition of the Antichrist and
his followers. And then there is the si^ which formally makes Antichrist, in
v. 22. and that chiefly lies in two things, 1. In denying Jesus to be the
Christ; Now he that denies the anointed offices of Jesus, denies Jesus to be
the Christ. The anointed offices, are the Kingly office, and the Priestly
office; which whosoever resists, rebelleth against, or revolteth from, is
said to deny. So Romans 13. 2. He that resists the lawful Magistrate, is said
to resist the ordinance of God; and so far as he resists Gods ordinance, he
resists God; for man can make-no other visible resistance of God.

2. The second thing which makes Antichrist formally to be the Antichrist, is;
he denies the Father and (...) (...). This can^ be interpreted but of the
offices of Christ: F^r if it (...) a li^ral meaning, there are millions of
Antichrists in the world, and the generality of them out of the Church, which
is absurd, and erroneous to affirm. But that we may unlock this mystery of
John's with his Masters Key, let us turn to Luke 10. 16. and Matthew. 10. 40. And
we shall plainly see what is meant by denying the Father and the Son: in plain
terms, it is the rejecting and despising of the Ministers the Ambassadors of
Christ: mark the words, He that despises you, despises me, Says Christ to
his Apostles, by whom were represented the Ministers of Christ in the
succeeding ages; and he that despises me i. e. the Son, despises him that
sent me i. e. the Father. So that he that despises a Minister of the Gospel,
or any of the anointed offices of Jesus, despises the Father and the Son:
what then does he do that destroys these offices? Thus you have a spiritual
description of the Antichrist, in vindication of the Church of England from
Apostates in it, and Tyrants and usurpers over it: More you may find in the
ensuing discourse.

But to the last (the Papist) though not the least enemy of the Protestant
Church, though less violent, yet not less subtle nor malicious then the
former: Whereas they say, our religion leads us to heresy, murder, rebellion,
blaspemy, and Profaneness: we that are protestants deny it, by affirming,

1. That there is not one principle in the Protestant Religion, that tollerates
heresy, murder, rebellion, or blasphemy. 2. That the general consent of the
Protestant Churches are against heresy, rebellion, murder, and blasphemy; and
have publicly protested against it. 3. Those that have by their pens, or
public acts pleaded for, or practiced murder, rebellion, heresy, or
blasphemy; are such as have made an open Apostasy from their former
professions and practices, or such as have concealed from the public view,
their opinions tending that way. 4. Those that practice such abominations, are
gone out from us, whereby they have manifested to the world, they were not of
us.
Now for the Papists hence to insult and say, where is your English Church?
wh^ts become of the Protestant Religion? it is a false Religion and a false
Church. We Answer, that the Church of England stands upon its old foundations
(viz) upon the Apostles and Prophets: from which the Church of Rome is
miserably fallen, both in doctrine and discipline. That there are apostates
from the Protestant Religion in this nation, is manifestly true; but this makes
not the Church of England the less a true Church. We cannot say* that a
figtree, because it has much rot^en fruit fallen from it, is therefore a
thorn: The Spirit speaks expressly, that in the 1. Tim. 4. 12
later times some shall depart from the Faith, giving heed to seducing spirits,
and doctrines of Devils, speaking lies in hypocrisy, having their consciences
seared with an hot iron. Observe here, that where the true Church is, there
shall be Apostates, Seducers, Blasphemers, Liars, Murderers, Hypocrites:
Therefore It Is a sign, where these are, the true Church is, as by the Eagles
gathering together you may find the carcass; and by the swarms of wasps and
flies the honey; not because they make it, but devour it.

The Church indeed is by these locusts much d^faced and debased, but not
nullified; for these herds of swine being violently rushed into the Temple, do
only pollute it, not destroy it. To argue, that the Church of England is no
true Church, because there are many seducers, apostates and blasphemers amongst
them, is so absurd, that the contrary Conclusion is most solid and true: for if
it were not a true Church, the Devil would not thus furiously war against it:
there would not be such traps and snares devised to catch men's souls in as
there are. No man (much less the Devil, that spiritual Fouler, that great
spider of hell) will lay snares to catch tame birds that he has in a cage
already. As Christ by his spiritual fishermen catches souls in the Devils
ponds and feeds them in his own: so the Devil always goes about with his
unlawful nets and poisonous baits to catch men in Christ's pond, the Church, and
carry them into the black sea of eternal misery* Where the spiritual seed is
sown, there the birds of hell will be picking, and plucking of it up. The
notablest Cheaters usually frequent the greatest Fairs: we speak in reference
to that Refermation begun in England: to which the Romish Cheaters did resort.
The purest Church is most commonly pestered with the vilest Heretics, as the
fairest fountain with the foulest toads.

Since these Philistims the Papists are thus upon us, it is very necessary that
we play the part of Christian men, that whether we live or dye, we may have the
hellish blot of Antichristianism wiped off from our names; which we can no
better do, then by freeing our Religion from that aspersion which the Papists
cast upon it. I^ Queen Maryes days the Martyrs dyed under the aspersion of
Hreticks; in these days they are like to suffer by the Spanish Popish Faction,
as Antichristian men and womon; it is therefore not impertinent to the thing in
hand, to tell in a word, how we came to separate from the Church of Rome.

The Church of Rome (you must know) was once a pure Church, and it continued so
the longest of any Church; for when the Eastern, Asian, and Affrican Churches
most foully fell into many desperate Errors, especially that of the Arian
Heresy, she kept her garments clean, and became a shelter to Orthodox
Fugitives: all this while there was not the least ground for any Orthodox
national Church to separate from her, as on all sides it is granted; we mean for
near four hundred years after Christ; for until after the year of Christ 350.
we find not any of the Roman Bishops any other then such as became the Angels
of the Church, and faithful Overseers of Gods flock The first that we find
polluted with the Arian Heresy, was Liberius, who soon recollecteth himself,
shakes off the Heresy, and dies a Confessor. As for the Fopp^ries fathered
upon these Primitive Bishops of Rome by Ciaconius, and Lambertus, Geuterus,
Isodorus* Mercator, and several other of the Popish Writers, they are in no
wise to be credited, such acts being scarce possible, much less probable to be
acted by the Bishops of Rome in such times of persecution under the Pagan
Empire.

After Constantine had cast down the Pagan Emperors, and made Romes Imperial
Scepter to bow to Christ's Cross, the Clergy became the greatest
Court-Favourites; hereupon they grew in a short time great in power and wealth,
being totally freed from the iron rod of the Heathen Emperors.

Wealth and ease (not simply, but by accident) begat security, and security
(the foundation of all Church mischief) begat Pride, Luxury, and Heresy, which
by little and little excluded that Primitive Purity once to be found in the
Church of Rome. Now bebegan Monks ( quatenus Monks) to be in great esteem, and
then Tapers were brought into the Church, and then that trisagium (pretended to
be taught by Angels) Sancte Deus, Sancte fortis, Sancte and immortalis; then
they brought in adoring^ of Churches, and the opinion of Purgatery, with a
fained pretense, that the Bishop of Greg. Mor. 4. cap. 40.
Rome had power to chastise stubborn souls there: Then began the Bishops of
Rome, or Patriarchs, to shoulder with the Emperors, and ex^mmunicate them for
not giving the sup^riority to Bishops. Hormisd. Excommunic. of Anastasius the
Emperor. A^n. 510.
and to ^mmunicate Bishops of other Dioc^sses where they had nothing to do;
then was the Chan^l divided from the Church, and extreme unction to be
ministered to dying men; and soon after Pelagius began to claim a Supremacy from
Christ himself. Thus did the Angel of the Church of Rome become a S^ar fallen
from heaven to earth (Revel. 9. 1, 2.) who set open the bottomless pit, whose
smoke soon darkened the Sun and the air.

After Gregory the great and Sabinianus, succeeded Boniface the third, about
the year of Christ 605. he obtained of Phocas the usurping Emperor (who got to
the Throne by the murder of his Master) that usurped title of Supremacy, that
the Church of Rome Herein the Antichrist the son resembles the Pope his Father.
should be called the supreme head of all other Churches. Here the Star fallen
from heaven became the Beast of the Sea (as learned Prideaux observes) with
seven heads and ten horns, at leastwise began to appear so, Revel. 13 1.

Soon after this, Churches became Sanctuaries for Thieves and Murderers, by the
Popes order; Lay-Monks were made equal with Ordained Ministers in the execution
of their Office: Witnesses at the Font were forbid to marry each other:
Churches were superstitiously decked: Holy Days appointed, and superstitiously
enjoined; Priests strictly forbidden to marry, and enjoined to shave 1 Timothy 4.
1, 2, 3
their heads; Latin Service introduced by Popish injunction into other
Churches; upon which the Popes daily inchroached by the usurpation of their
Faction in other Nations: Christian Burial was prohibited to those persons, be
they never so great, that should deny the Popes Supremacy; the Liturgy of the
Church augmented and put into tune to be sung; the Paxe enjoined to be kissed,
the usurped Title of the Vicar of Christ given to Popes, and the Roman Emperors
Authority contemned by them; they making their liege Masters to kiss their
feet: Images were brought into the Church, and Emperors not permitted to pull
them down: Rebellion against Emperors was taught upon this account, so that the
Emperors for withstanding Images, lost the Roman Throne. Sacrifices and Prayers
were enjoined to be made for the dead: Kings of foreign Kingdoms, were by the
Popes Usurpation, dethroned; Bishoprics, as it were by a Conquest, subjected
daily to the Sea of Rome: Bastards, Bribers, Rebels, beastly Fellows, Atheists,
and Magicians, for the most part, possessed the Episcopal Chair of Rome; which
makes Bellarmine call these times, Saeculum insoelix.

The Sun and the Air were miserably darkened by these hellish locusts; these
times were full of ignorance and profaneness, whereby the Church was miserably
eclipsed and deformed through the prevailing Factions of the scandalous Roman
Clergy usurping the Roman Throne, as well as the Pontifick Seat; yet was not
the Roman Church utterly defaced or unchurched hereby, for notwithstanding the
prevailing Faction in Rome gave themselves to such abominable wickedness, and
persisted in it; so that one in his Learned History of the Roman Bishops,
says, They proceeded from usurping Nimrods, to luxurious Sodomites; and from
luxurious Sodomites, to Egyptian Magicians; and from Egyptian Magicians, to
devouring Abaddons; and from devouring Abaddons to incurable Babylonians: yet
it is most probable that in Rome it self there were to be found Godly Ministers
and people, that were none of the time servers, as it is manifest there were in
other Churches where the Popes and their Faction usurped a Power.

This is most certain, that in Rome it self, until the Pope and his Faction
became incurable Babylonians, men might with freeness profess and practice the
principles of true religion: The Apostles Creed, the ten Commandments, and the
Lords Prayer, the sum of a Christians Faith, Worship and Obedience, were
always in profession maintained in the Roman Church, though violently opposed
by the wicked practices of the Pontifick Professors.

So that there was no absolute necessity for other Churches to renounce the
Church of Rome, but only the Vices, and Corruptions, and Heresies of a
prevailing Faction in the Church of Rome, which both the Kings and the Clergy
of England (since William the Norman, Successor to the Saxons) have in every
Age manifestly done; and not only England, but other Churches also: for when
they (as we said) came to be incurable Babylonians, the Churches in Germany,
and France, and England cried out aloud of them: Guicciardine, M^ntuan,
Sanavarola, and Machiavel, all of them laid out to public view the villainy of
the Papacy. Machiavel was a discoverer of the hellish policy used by the Pope
and his creatures, not an allower or practitioner of that black Art he
discovered. And in Leo the Tenths time Budeus, Mirandula, Erasmus, Stapulensis,
and others both learned and grave, publicly derided and reproved the Roman
Apostasy and corruption. So far did Erasmus leave the Roman Church, and cleave
to the reformation beginning in Germany, that a witty Popeling thus plays upon
his name.

Si sit [eras] verbum [mus] nomen, quid sit Erasmus? Participium. -- -- --
Signifying, that he took part with the Chuch of Rome, and part with the
Protestants, (so called a little afterward) as a Participle does part of a
Verb, and part of a Nown.

The German Churches gave no less then Centum gravamina In fascicul. rerum
expetendarum.
to the Legate of Adrian 6. desiring a speedy redress of them; and the secular
Estates (both of the higher and lower sort) of the Empire, did beseech his
Holiness to remove those grievances, or else they themselves would. This Pope
ingenuously confesses, that the Chair of Rome was very filthy; in hac sede
sancta (says he) aliquot jam annis multa abominanda fuisse. This stirring of
the German States revived Luther, who stomacking the Dominican pardon-seller
Tercelius, had w^it against that sinful trade in Leos time; and now in Adrians
time* finding more friends then he expected, he designs the abolishing of the
Mass, and the framing of a new Liturgy.

The Pope and his faction fearing to what this of Luthers might come, writ to
the Emperor and the German Princes to suppress Luthers doctrines. Thereupon,
a general council was desired as the means of reconciliation, which was at last
granted, and called to sit at Trent. They had three several meetings at Trent.
In the third Session of the first meeting, they, i. e. the Popes packt party,
decreed, that the old Latin translation should only be used and authentic in
Schools and Churches. In the fourth Session they decreed, that original sin was
so taken away in Baptism, that the concupiscence which remains after Baptism,
is not to be accounted a sin until we consent thereto: and farther they
decreed as truth, that the Mother of Christ was not conceived in original sin.

In the fifth Session they decreed, that since the fall, there remains a
freedom in man's will to good, which being excited, concurrs with Gods grace.

In the seventh Session, seven Sacraments were decreed; after this, the Pope
removes the Council to Bononia, which discontents the Emperor, which puts an
end to the Council for that time.

At the second meeting of the Bishops in the council of Trent, the King of
France declared (as the Queen of England before had done) that neither he nor
his Subjects were bound to obey a Convention of Bishops, whose design was
merely thereby to advantage the private interest of the Pope, to the general
disprofit of the Church.

At the second Session, the doctrine of Transubstantiation was established.

At the third Session, that penance and extreme unction were new Testament
Sacraments. At this Session the Protestants would, but were not permitted to
bring in their confession of faith, the Popes Legate withstanding them. The
wars then breaking out in Germany, the council was dismissed.

Nine years after, they met again the third time. At the fifth Session whereof,
they decreed, that it was in the power of the Pope to dispose of the
Sacramentary elements as he saw expedient for the good of the people, provided
that the substance were kept. Thus denying the cup in the Communion to the
people.

At the sixth Session 'twas concluded, that the whole Mass was a propitiatory
sacrifice for quick and dead, and whoever should say otherwise, should be
accursed.

At the eight Session, they pronounce him accursed who shall deny that the
Church has power to dispense with Gods Law, Lev. 18. in giving liberty to
incestuous matches against the word, and forbidding lawful matches according to
the word.

At their last Session, they confirmed the doctrine of Purgatory, Invocation of
Saints, bowing to images, giving of indulgences, and preserving of relics;
and with an excommunication of all heretics in general, they dissolved the
counsel.

By excommunication of all heretics, they meant all those that should
withstand any of their cannons which they had decreed. Here the Church of Rome
and the Protestants parted; and if it be seriously viewed on both sides by a
clear and impartial eye, it is manifest that the Church (if you will call a faction
so) of Rome left us. Pope Adrian 6. acknowledged, that the Church and chair of
Rome was at that time in many things abominable.

The German, English, and French Churches desired that those abominations might
be purged out; for this end a general council was desired, and under pretense
of granting it, a party of men were packed to oppose this end, and carry on a
contrary design, to the ruin of those who desired a reformation; and in stead
of removing those grievances, established them: Which now of these two parties
is in the right? They that kept their faces Zion ward in the reformation of a
Church generally acknowledged to be corrupted; or they that hardened their
necks in a resolved obstinacy to persist in that corruption, and added much
more abominable corruption to it, and established it by a law, and made those
that departed from their abominations, to become a prey to them.

This is the true case betwixt us and Rome: The faction of Rome pretended with
us (whose hearts were set upon a reformation) to reform; but in stead thereof
established those very grievances the Church complained of; hereby it is
manifest, that they starting aside like a deceitful bow, left us in the high
way of a reformation. If we have left them, it is because they have left the
truth; whiles error was in a private faction in Rome, though 'twere damnable,
yet we left not that Church; but when that private faction so prevailed as to
establish damnable heresy by a Law, and excommunicated all that would not
drink of the same poisonous Cup with them, then 'twas high time to leave their
Communion, notwithstanding they usurp the name of the Catholic Church.

The Church of England left not the Church of Rome because governed by Bishops,
but because those Bishops were become Stars fallen from heaven to earth,
apostatized toto coelo, from their primitive institution. The Sea of Rome is
become the beast of the Sea, with seven heads and ten horns, and upon it is
heads the names of blasphemy: The inhabitants of the earth have been made drunk
with the wine of Romes fornication, therefore we come out from Rome: and herein
we have obeyed the voice of our Lord Jesus, Revel. 18. 4. We never held
Bishops, quatenus Bishops, Antichristian* though many Schismatics and ignorant
zelots have builded high upon that stramenous foundation; which since, the
Jesuits by their Gunpowder plots, have neatly fired about their ears.

It is true indeed, the German, French and British reformers that left Rome, or
rather, were left of Rome, could never attain to that reformation was
requisite, and they desired; and the reason thereof is generally known: For
Rome with her Allies was always so potent against them, that it is rather to
be admired they have a being, then to be complained of that they have attained
to no better a being. The Churches beyond the Seas, both in Germany and France,
by reason of their innumerable number of potent enemies, were constrained to do
what they might, not what they would: happy they that they may eat the Manna of
true Doctrine, though under the tents of an incomplete and insollid government.
Those Churches are like the wounded man betwixt Jericho and Jerusalem, they
have met with a friend that has powered oil into their wounds, and brought them
to an Inn; but that Inn of government is not (I think) their proper home;
however, happy they, they are got safe out of the bloody hands of Romish
thieves, unto that Inn; God send them from thence safe home. Let Us be thankful
for pure Doctrine, that the Ark; but lets not rest till we have lodged it
within the Temple of right Government.

I have often thought, that the white linen of the Saints, signifies the right
Government of the Church, which is the Churches upper garment: if so, then let
them wait with patience; for this white linen they shall not wear until the
Witnesses are risen: the Witnesses are yet in sackcloth, or actually slain;
when they are restored, this white Vesture of Church Government shall be
restored to the Church in splendour. Let us not censure, but pity and pray for
those Churches that have not on this white garment: confident I am, that it is
not for want of will, but power, that all this while many reformed Churches
have it not on. I cannot forget Bergermannus's words in the Assembly of Dort
(as I have them from a good hand) to the Bishop of Landaff; who, when he had
declared to him how the cause of the German divisions was for want of right
Discipline, he makes this affectionate reply in the midst of that Assembly,
Domine, nos non sumus adeo f^lices.

The Churches that protested against the Babylonish abominations established by
the Popish faction at the council of Trent, have ever since born the name and
title of the Reformed churches; not that all or any of them are perfectly
reformed; for many of them are corrupt in several doctrinal points, and the
most of them deficient as to the pattern of primitive government, or as the
sacred Rule requires.

Amongst these reformed churches, England has always been esteemed the
purest, as being most conformable to primitive purity and the word, both in
Doctrine and Discipline. This appears even from the pens of the Heads of other
Reformed churches; such as Calvin, Camerarius, Melancton, Bucer, Beza, Zanchie,
Molinens, Causabon, Fergevil, Saravia, and others, who many of them confess in
plain words, and all by consequence conclude, That the church of England, of
any church in the world, comes the nearest to the Apostolic rule.

Yet for all this, what by reason of the Popish pollutions on one hand, and
schismatical Separatists on the other hand, the church of England could never
put on that white garment of pure Discipline she so much endeavored: for
though the Temple of Doctrine was purged, and the walls of Discipline raised to
a comely height, under which the church flourished in Queen Elizabeth's and
King James his days; yet the Romish foxes in sheeps clothing crept up the wall
of Discipline in King Charles his time, and laid the church open (as it is this
day) to the bloody cruelty of the Babylonians. The popish Prelates (or rather
the Spanish Faction, then and ever since prevailing, informing them) knew the
way to popish Doctrine was first to bring in popish Discipline; which produced
a double effect tending to their end: For hereby cities and counties ( non
ignota loquor) were filled with superstition and profaneness, having liberty
from the Prelates to profane the Lords day: and we all know how great enemies
superstition and profaneness have in all ages been to a powerful and orthodox
Ministry. Which Ministry was hereby not only exposed to the scorn and hatred
of the people, but also made liable to the Prelates persecution; for did they
but withstand their popish Innovations, or but a little swerve from their
rigorous injunctions, immediately followed bitter persecutions: thereby many
eminently learned and godly Ministers (as you may read in Mr. Clarks Lives, an
impartial Writer) were silenced, suspended, vexed, discouraged, sequestered,
imprisoned, and some enforced to leave the Kingdom: Mean while, superstitious,
scandalous, popish and profane persons were admitted into Orders, countenanced,
encouraged, and preferred: Thus did the prevailing Faction of popish Prelates
(for all were not so) prove like those Angels Revel. 7. 1. holding the wind of
the Gospel from blowing on the Church of England. Nor was this all; but needs
must these Popish Reformers go to Scotland, an ancient Reformed Church, that
was no enemy to the ancient primitive Government of Bishops, and kept the
Doctrine of Christ pure, though God, for her security and profaneness had many
things against her, of which this rod was a special warning.

The Church of Scotland rejecting the usurpation of the English Prelates, who
did (...), in going about to exercise an unknown Jurisdiction over them; these
revengefull Prelates putting off all humanity and Christianity, to satisfy
their hellish lusts, thought it more fit, that their Sovereign the Lords
Anointed should hazard his own life and the lives of his Nobles, together
with the loss of the blood of innocent Protestants, the Kings faithful
Subjects on both sides, in an unnatural War, to the reproach of Religion, the
endangering of both Kingdoms, and the infinite expense of treasure, then they
be crossed in carrying on their designs against the innocent Church of
Scotland.

This War begun by them, was the beginning of the British Wars, which Wars
have ruined the British Royal Family, the British Nobles, with many of their
Families, the ancient British Laws, and the British reformed Church, and all
begun by a brutish Clergy in that Church: Cursed be their wrath, for it is
cruel. These firebrarnds of State made the Bishops odious to the Gentry and
Commonalty of both the Nations; insomuch that when a Parliament was called,
which they were accidentally the cause of, a certain party of the Commons of
the Parliament, animated by the preposterous Petitions of the over-zealous
people, and ('it is more then probable) encouraged by some of the covetous
Nobility, who thereby intended to make purchase of their Lands, resolved to be
satisfied with nothing but the utter extirpation of Episcopacy. Here a fallacy
was put upon the honest hearted Protestants in the Kingdom; for the subtle
Lawyers of the House of Commons, whose Speeches were always most prevalent in
that House, envying the wealth and dignity of the Clergy, vehemently pressed,
that in stead of questioning the guilty, they would accuse all the Bishops; and
in stead of questioning their persons, they would pull down their Order,
purposely to take away the Jurisdiction. This was carried on by a private
faction of Politicians in the House, who drew in many honester then themselves
into the Design; which, although not then, yet since has been discovered.

The Prelates (it mainly concerning them) at that time clearly discovered the
Design, and thereupon were most firmly united. Whereas, had it been for a
personal reformation amongst them, (which the grave and moderate Members
desired) or removing Innovations brought in by the Popish Faction amongst them,
they would many of them have hung more loose, if not altogether sided with the
Parliament against the upholders of any Doctrines or Discipline against the
true Reformed Religion: especially since the King declared himself at this time
for a reformation of abuses crept into the Church, and having respect unto
tender consciences. But here lies such a mystery of iniquity, that the wisest
and most scruti^ous in States mysteries cannot discover. On whom to charge the
overthrow of Episcopacy, and the Church Government, of a long time continued in
their hands, in the general we know: but on whom to charge the designs
against the Protestant Religion in their overthrow, we know not; or at least
wise, nunc non est narrandi locus.

It is true, the Primate of England with the insolent faction at Court, became
odious to the Nobility and Gentry about the Court; and those of his faction
elsewhere stepping up into civil Offices in the State, made them odious to the
Lawyers of the Kingdom, whose Offices they usurped.

The schismatic Separatists made it one of the chief principles of their
Religion to oppose them; concluding that man to have true illumination to
salvation, that had his eyes opened to see Episcopacy to be Antichristian.

The generality of the sincere Professors of the Gospel were much grieved at
the barbarous rigor of their Discipline, in suspending, silencing, and
molesting learned, godly, orthodox Ministers, because they would not wear a
Surplice, sign with the Cross, stand at the Creed, kneel at the Sacrament,
observe a superstitious holi-day: but most of all they were grieved that such
persecution should befall them for refusing to read the book of Sports to their
people; a most abominable book, giving liberty to people to profane the Lords
day.

The people also generally disliked their rigor in citing them to their Courts
for working on Holi-dayes, or marrying without a License, or upon a groundless
suspicion of inchastitie: Many such poor pretenses, merely to drain the peoples
purses, did their Officers make.

Thus had the Prelatick party drawn the odium of the Nobility, Gentry, and
Commonalty upon them; and now a Parliament being called, and in that Parliament
several Members of both Houses, professed enemies to their Degree; and not
only to their degree in the Church as Bishops, but to their Office (as since
they profess) as Ministers, upon what design may easily be conjectured. These
members also being popular, took the opportunity of lifting these Protestant
Churches off their hinges, whiles the eyes of all men were on them for a
Reformation: Here, I say, was the fallacy, that whiles they pretended to root
out Popish pollution, they struck at the very root of Primitive purity: whiles
they pretended to reform Episcopacy, they struck at the very Office of the
Ministry, as now that wound being searched to the bottom, discovers to us.

The King and his party saw to the bottom of this wound many years since: Those
Remonstrances now seem full of Prophecies, which we have seen fulfilled.

But lest we should seem to throw dirt upon the Parliament, and the Purliaments
cause, we must distinguish of a threefold party which sat in the house; in
plain truth, the Parliaments covenant distinguishes them. There was a Popish
party, a Protestant party, and a Schismatic party; the Protestant party made
this covenant against the other two parties. This Protestant party maintained
the Protestant cause against all other parties.

No Protestant can be ignorant, how much those Worthies that maintained the
protestant cause, are by a brutish rabble of degenerate protestants slandered
and reproached: and how much the cause of God suffers hereby, to the causing of
many a good Christian to stumble and fall; dark providence, are as dangerous
as deep questions to a weak Christian; both make him to stagger. Prosperous
apostates, and successful predominant hypocrites are like land-markes removed,
that shipwreck the ignorant mariner that steeres toward them.

In good truth, our landmarks are removed, and few Pilots this day are to be
found, to steer us into the harbor of truth and peace. Some say lo here is
Christ; and others, lo there is Christ: Some say, lo here is Antichrist; and
others, lo there is Antichrist; and hereby (if 'twere possible) they would
deceive the very Elect.

Those called the Presbiterians are decryd by all opposite parties, as the
Antichristian party; and they wittily quibble on one part, and say their
covenant which they made for the maintaining of Religion in doctrine and
discipline against Popery on one hand, and Schism on the other; together with
the preservation of the Kings person, and the fundamental laws, has just 666
words in it, the number of the beast; and thence they conclude, the Protestant
Religion, the King, and the Fundamental Laws to be Antichristian.

Others, who seem more rational, lay it to their charge as unwarrantable, 1. In
taking up Arms against the King, and inciting the People thereto. 2. in making
a Covenant contrary to Law, and imposing it on the Kings Subjects against his
pleasure. 3. In robbing of the Church of it is lands. 4. In not establishing the
King according to their former remonstrances, when it was in their power.

Two things are here to be premised before we proceed.

1. That Parliaments are of as great antiquity in a national Church, as Monarks
over that Church: here is the difference; the one is an humane Institution
approved of God; the other, the Monark, is a divine Institution, immediately
ordained of God to be the Ruler of his people. This is clear in Moses, and the
70 under him, chosen by him, and afterward approved by God. 2. To our purpose:
The Parliament of England was called by the King, chosen freely by the people,
assembled at Westminster, and established by the King; where they sat freely,
and voted freely.
Here they became formally our Rulers: and Of the Rulers of the people we are
not to speak evil. Charity hops all things, and is not easily provoked.

As to the Parliaments taking up of Arms, the Question is, whether they did it
legally? That a Parliament may leavie an Army in the absence of the King, is
out of doubt legal; for Commune periculum, commune auxilium petit. But to
levy it against the King, was absolutely illegal. Now the Parliament in their
Remonstrances, Petitions and Applications to the King, acquitted themselves of
any such rebellious attempts, making their War but merely Defensive. Now
whether this were legal in the Parliament, is very questionable; many good men
are divided about the question: For say these of the Negative part, when those
of the Affirmative plead a necessity for what they did, making Salum populi
suprem^m esse Legem: say they, There can be no necessity pleaded against a
moral precept; neither in the reallity of the thing was there any necessity;
only and at the most, probability of evil to ensue, if the King should come
without resistance with an Army to London: Nor by the rule of Charity, was
there so much as a probability; for the King declared, that he would preserve
the Laws, the Religion, and the Parliament of England as carefully as his own
Family; and why might not he be believed as well, if not more and before the
Parliament? Further, say they, The Parliament as Subjects, ought to keep to the
Rule, to act within their Spheere, leaving the success to God: The King called
them not thither to dispute his Authority, nor could the people that chose them
give them any such Commission: Let the guilt of blood, or Injustice, or
Tyranny, lie upon the King; there was a righteous God would call him one day to
a severe account for such actions, when they as loyal Subjects, suffering by
him, would be vindicated and justified in the eyes of all the people

On the other side, say they of the Affirmative part, The Case is far
otherwise: for the Parliament kept to the rule; they legally attached those
persons of Treason, who had endeavored to overthrow the Magna Char^a of the
Kingdom, and to overthrow the Protestant Religion; these guilty persons fled
from a legal trial, prevailed with the King to remove himself from his
Parliament, that so he might be a Sanctuary to them: The Parliament in their
legal proceedings against them found resistance, and perceived that these
guilty persons (under a false pretense of defending the Kings Person) bandied
themselves against their legal Judges, and gathered great numbers of armed
men, in a rebellious manner to oppose those two supreme Courts from whom they
fled. To suppress and apprehend these persons, the Parliament might command
aid from the Kings Subjects; otherwise we shall deny that privilege to the
Parliament, which the law in such a case allows a petty Constable: For the King
to protect such armed men, is contrary to Law; et quicquid contra legem fit,
pro infecto habetur, say the most learned in our Laws: in such a case the Kings
Commission is invalid; for Nihil potest Rex quam quod de jure potest, says
Comines. Who should protect the Magna Charta of England in the absence of the
King, but the Parliament of England? and who should defend the Courts of
Judicature in the absence of the King, against those of their prisoners that
were broke from them, and now making head against them, but the Parliament? and
how should they defend them against men in arms, but in raising men in arms
against them? Whereas it is objected, They raised men against the King; They
answer negatively, and bid us read their Declarations, their Remonstrances,
their Commissions to their Generals, their Protestations, and their Covenant
which they solemnly swore to God, with their hands lifted up to him, to
preserve the Kings Person, Honor and Estate.

2. As to that of the ill^gality of the Covenant, in making it without the
King, and imposing it on his Subjects against his* will.

They answer, that they did it, to declare to his Majesty and the world, how
sincerely they were knit in loyal affection to his Person and Dignity; that
without any compulsion they would solemnly swear to God, when they could not to
him, that they had no intention to diminish his just rights: and that they
never ordered that any should take that Covenant, but such as entered into
their service, or were conversant with them; that so all their servants might
be the Kings true Subjects* however some presumptuous Committees (without any
order from them) and several other pragmatick fellows made it a snare to
tender consciences of the Kings party, by pressing it upon them, and oppressing
those that refused it: This was doubtless a gross sin, but it cannot
properly be laid to their charge, as if they thereby intended to make a party
for themselves against the King; but to make all within their Garrisons and
Commands, both Ministers and People, true Subjects to the King, to the Laws,
and the Protestant Religion. Whiles this was strictly observed in the
Parliaments Quarters, Jesuits and Popish Priests were not so frequent, nor so
bold, as since they have been amongst us.

3. As to that of throwing down of Bishops, a double scandal is taken, if not
given thereby: 1. In their manner of proceeding without and against the King;
which in it self was absolute usurpation; for though they did send to the King
to pass it, yet they resolved upon his denial, to proceed: which was an
absolute denial of his Negative voice, in which implicitly they denied him to
be their Sovereign.

2. In throwing down the ancient Government of the Church by Bishops; which
Government has continued in the Church since the Apostles time unquestioned,
until within these hundred years; and then the Orthodox only questioned their
Persons, not their Office; only the Anabaptists cried down the Office as
Antichristian.

Now for the Parliament (under pretense of Reformation of Religion) to cast off
that primitive Government (universally received in the Churches) without and
against the consent of the King, and solemnly engage others in the same thing,
seems to be a most rash and inc^nsiderate act, done out of blind mislead
zeal; or an ungodly act, done wilfully to bring to ruin the Protestant Church
of England, to rob the Church of its Maintenance, and ruin the learned Clergy
of the Nation.

Here we must answer, le^t both innocent persons and a good Cause suffer.

1. The Parliament intended not* by throwing down the English Hierarchy, to
throw down any Worship, Discipline, or Government according to the word of God;
for then their second Article would clash with the first in the Covenant: so
that their meaning is, they will extirpate so much of Prelacy as shall be found
contrary to the word of God, and the Example of the best reformed Churches: I
suppose by Churches, they meant the purest Primitive Churches; for all these
late Reformed Protestant Churches did, before we thought of a Reformation,
yield, that we were better reformed then they. We hold the Calvinists the best
reformen Churches: but says learned Beza, to the praise of the English
Protestant Bishops, Let the Church of England enjoy this singular Fru^tur sane
i sta Dei singulari beneficentia, quae utiuam illi sit perp^tua. Ep. ad Sarav.
Calv. de neces. ref. Buc^r de Reg. Chr. Melanc. Ep. Lu^h. Luth. Smalc. Ar^. 10.
bounty of God, which I wish may be hers for ever. So far was he from thinking
it a piece of Reformation to pull them down.

Calvin, Bucer, Luther, Melancton, Z^nchy, Chamier, are all of them no enemies
to Bishops, though professed enemies to the Superstitious, Idolatrous Practices
of Bishops in that Age. Every solid Protestant is so far from thinking the
Office of a Bishop to be Antichristian, that he rather thinks it a high degree
of Antichristianism to oppose that Office; this is (as we have showed) to deny
the Father and the Son; for he that denies an Apostle, or the Successo^s of an
Apostle, in the Office of the Ministry, denies Christ, and he that denies
Christ, denies God that sent him. Charity therefore makes me hope, that the
sincere Protestants (what ever other subtle Foxes designed) intended no
otherwise by that second Article in the Covenant, then to reduce the Church of
England to a Primitive Purity, by removing Popish Prelates, and all those
humane Institutions depending on the English Hierarchy: if through Error they
were misled from the right means to this end, the discovery of that Error may
seasonably reduce them into a right way; for wise men never think it a shame to
repent.

It is most certain, that the intent of the sincere Covenanters was to re^ine,
not ruin the Ministry: by pulling down the English Hierachy* they struck not
at the order of the Ministry, but at the degree of Episcopacy; they struck at
the Discipline of the English Church therein, more then at the Ministry; for
they pulled down Bishops as they were Superintendants over their brethren, not
as Ministers; so that they took away their degree above their brethren, but
left them standing in their order as Ministers. Bishops lost not their Order by
the Covenant, but their Degree; for though they are in a distinct degree above
the Presbyters, which have ever been allowed them in the purest Churches since
Christ time, yet they never were a distinct order from the Presbyters, neither
the Scripture nor the Fathers make them so; so that Aerius an ancient Writer,
in that says truth; a Bishop and a Presbyter are joined in the same
Commission; the Bishop imposes hands, so does the Presbyter; the Bishop
administers the Sacraments, and dispenses the Ordinances, so does the
Presbyter; so that essentially there is no difference betwixt them, what is, is
only gradual.

Now here lies the great question, Whence they had this degree above their
fellow Ministers in the Church? If they had this from Apostolical Institution,
then without all doubt it was a grieveous sin in any Civil Power to pull it
down, and they that convenanted so to do, did unadvisedly and foolishly: But if
this degree of Episcopacy be but an Ecclesiastical Institution, though of great
Antiquity, the case is altered, there cannot be an absolute necessity of its
immutability: Mere humane Institutions In ^oto orb de^ ^st, ut unus de
Presbyteri^ electus, superponeretur caeteris, ut schismatum semina tollerentur.
Hierom.
admit of alterations. Hierom and Epiphanius say, They were set up as a remedy
against Schism and Heresy, long after Presbytery.

But (to come to the thing) suppose this degree to be (as probably it is) an
Apostolical Institution, which continued unquestionable in the Church for many
hundred years. Yet here the question will still be? Whether since the grand
Apostasy that Paul prophesies of, there has not been an Apostasy from this
Institution? whether this Institution in the Apostasy did not contract much
corruption? This is granted by all the Protestant English Bishops, especially
by the late Lord Primate of England, B. Laud in his Conference with Fisher;
Bishop Jewel and Bishop Downam; hence these two latter B. Jewel. B. D^wnam de
Antichrist^.
conclude, That the Hierarchy of Rome is so corrupted and apostatized from its
Primitive Institution, that it is become the Antichristian State; nay, more
then that, they call it the Antichrist.

That question then which concerns us, is, Whether the Hierarchy of England
were so exactly conformable to the Primitive Institutution, as that it needed
no alteration? These two things are granted:

1. That the persons in that Hierarchy needed to be reformed; for some of them
were prof^ssed Papists, and the most of them bitter enemies to a powerful and a
painful Orthodox Ministry.

2. That whatsoever is built upon an humane foundation, may upon humane or
divine considerations be taken down again: if so, then those Titles, Offices
and Dignities conferred merely by men, may be taken away: but the title of Lord
- Bishop, Dean, Archdeacon, Chancellor, Vicar - General, Commissary,
Official, Surrogate, Register, Promoter etc. Of which our English Hierarchical
polity was compacted, were merely humane titles and offices* as appears upon
record. In 16 of Rich. 2. Chap. 1. we find the English Bishops first putting on
the title of Spiritual Lords, Case of Tenures 35.
though as Barons long before (in William of Normandy's time, who conferred
that temporal honor on them) they claimed a place in the house of Peers.
These acts of grace conferred by the Kings of England on their Clergy, argued
their piety and true affection to religion. Nor did those honors they
conferred on the Clergy make those persons, much less their office, as some
foolishly affirm, Antichristian; only thus much, it argues them mutable; that
civil power that changes them, so far, changes not a divine institution.

So far therefore as the alteration that the Parliament of England made in
the Hierarchy of England, was not against the primitive institution; so far,
for the matter of it, it was lawful: but as for their manner of proceeding in
it, without and against the Kings consent, let him that has skill vindicate
them. I am sure none that know the duties of the second Table, and are
sincerely pious, will dare to applaud it, or once open their mouth to plead for
it.

My aim is only to vindicate the Parliaments Cause from that fowl aspersion of
Antichristianisme cast upon it: as for many of their particular acts, they are
inexcusable.

4. Another great Scandal taken and given, is, that the Parliament not only
took away the dignities of the Clergy, but the estates of the Clergy.

What shall we make for an answer to this monstrous Crime? Before we say any
thing to this, we will make a step back to former times.

We shall find the house of Commons alm^st as full of envy, as of age, against
the Clergies wealth. In the ninth of Hen. 4th, We shall find the lower House
exhibited a bill against the riches of the Clergy; wherein they signify to
the King, that he may possess so much of the temporal possessions of the
Clergy, as will maintain One hundred and fifty Earls, One thousand five
hundred Knights, six thousand two hundred Esquires, and One hundred Hospitals:
had the King been as covetous as the Commons were base, the Clergy had not been
lef^ a prey to his successors.

In Henry the Eighth his reign, the Lords and Commons fell upon the Clergy for
their fleece; took from them (as says Cambden) in England and Wales, Six
hundred forty five Monasteries; they dissolved ninety Colleges, and of
Chanteries and fire Chapels two thousand three hundred seventy four, of
Hospitals One hundred and ten; The yearly value being 161100l. Besides the
stocks of Cattle which the poor men and their families possessed, which they
took and sold. Also the timber, lead, bells, the plate, and other rich
Ornaments of the Church; which they robbed and spoiled the Church of.

And in the Reign of King Charles, the last Parliament that that King called:
which was the gladding of the hearts of all the people of the Kingdom, whose
eyes were fixed upon them, in hopes of enjoying some eminent good from them:
these alone, without and against the consent of the King, fell upon the
Clergies Estates, and swept all that away which King Henry left.

What shall we say here? That we may not condemn the righteous with the wicked,
we answer,

1. They never pretended at the first to any such thing; Ab initio non ^uit
sic: they convenanted no such thing: and the most of those that were secluded
and imprisoned, were professed enemies to the alienating of the Church Lands
from the Church* and always so declared themselves. Lands given to the Church
are sacred things, and he that al^enates them, steals from God: Indeed, it is
the part of the Civil Magistrate to restore to the widow, the fatherless, and
the oppressed, those Lands that the Clergy fraudulently got from them, though
they have long possessed them: And also to restore that Land they have got^en
from the Crown: But to take away by force the lawful rights and possessions of
the Church, under pret^nce of Reformation, is both gross Hypocrisy, and
abominable Sacriledg. For my own part, I really believe, That God is this day
punishing the Royal Family for that sin of their Forefathers: Henry the
Eighth's sins are not yet forgot, chiefly that of Sacriledg; God will punish to
the third and fourth generation, except we repent of those sins by endeavoring
a reformation. And as for the Church-robbers of this age, wait but a while, and
without their repentance, you shall see misery and shame upon them; God will
find them out: It has been ^bserved, that scarce any prospered an age with the
alienated Lands of the Church.

In Henry the Eighth's time, many, who before they griped it, lived well; after
they got it, decayed and were brought to beggary and great want: That sacred
flesh stolen from the Altar, had a cole in it, which burnt up their nests
where their other store lay. God grant the guilty of this age repentance for
this crying sin; otherwise, let David's deprecation be fulfilled upon them,
Psalm 83. 11, 12. Make them like Oreb and Zeeb, as Zeba and Zalmunna, who said,
Let us take to our selves the houses of God in possession, etc.

As to that scandal, That when the Parliament had an opportunity to declare to
the world, that all their Remonstrances, Declarations, Vows, Protestations, and
Covenants, proceeded from a sincere heart, by establishing the King, when they
had drove evil Counsel from about him; that then, directly Contrary to those
declarations and vows, they began upon new terms with him, they must have the
sword put into their hands, else they could not trust him; and necessity and
self preservation put them upon it: The self same arguments that were used (as
a just judgment upon them) in their overthrow, which soon followed.

To this there is a double answer by diverse persons; a witty one, and a pious
one.

Some say, that the King desired, for the Satisfaction of all parties, a treaty
with his Parliament: before he came to be reestablished, and that upon the
surest grounds of reason and policy, it was on both sides thought most fit for
to have it: yet it had been most Religious in the Parliament, and more for the
honor of their cause, if not for the safety of it, to have kept to their
former Declarations, and performed their word and public promises made therein.

Others more piously say, and those formerly of the House, God in justice has
overthrown our policy with others sinful policy. God shows us our own sins in
their lively pictu^e, acted by others against us. God Punishes our foregoing
sins with these present sins; as they dealt with others, so others dealt with
them; they would not trust their superior, and their inferiors would not trust
them. Thus have we wafted over a rough Sea, wherein we have discov^red the sad
Shipwreck of a good cause, which went ^ut and returned like Solomon's Ships for
gold. The King and the Parliament at their first s^ting out promised fair, and
good grounds of great hopes ^f much good both to Church and*State appeared; but
soon was the King, (whether drawn, or driven, or both) d^parted from the right
way. He took the sword, and sadly per^shed by the sword: the Lords and Commons
made vows and protestations to God and man, and in the breach of them were
broken. Each of these with the Emperor Mauritius, might justly say, Jusius es
Domine, and justa sunt tua judicia, in all that has befal^en them. Yet in
these dreadful frowns of his upon the Reformers, we may see Gods gracious
smiles upon their intended reformation: whiles the clouds of Gods just
displeasure overs^adowed the Reformers, a bright beam of his Providence shined
on that cause they all professed; for the King, Lords and Commons that began in
a good cause, but afterward were divided upon different self-interests, at the
very last of all met again, consulted, agreed, and finished (all three
together) their testimony concerning this cause; and then ((...), Revel. 11.
7.) God snatched both that from them, and them from us, unworthy of both, who
contemning the golden yoke of Christ's government, are justly liable to the iron
^oke of Antichrists tyranny.

However, let the Parliaments cause in the eyes of the wise be magnified,
though the underta^ers of it be (for ends best known to God) debased: let God
and his cause be true, though every man be found a liar before him.

Let not therefore the professed friends of Zion in this day of Gods dark and
dreadful providence amongst us* stumble and fall, as the most of professors
do from their first principles: let not the reproaches of ^apists, and open
profane persons on one hand, nor of Sectarian^ on the other hand, make us lose
our steadfastness: let our ^ffections and prayers be the same for our
Reformation and our Reformers, as formerly: let not their failings in the
cause, cause us to fall from the cause* Angels, not men, are able to carry on a
Reform^tion without faults: where shall we find a Reformaion ^arried on
without great miscarriages?

At the first National Reformation in the world, we find Moses the Churches
Monarch in the Mount with God, and Aaron, the Seventie, and the people, his
^riest, his (...), and his subjects in the valley that while with the Devil,
yet their ^ellish sm^ke below did not eclipse Gods light above, that day was a
glorious day of Reformation, notwithstanding in the eyes of all the people: the
two Tables were br^ke by Moses* their (...), the Lords anointed: in Nehemiahs
time, how many (...) were g^t into that box, purposely so pollute the ointment
of a Reformation; oppressors and supplanters and Schismatics had shrewdly
(...) blown that Reformation, yet 'twas carried on at last. God can carry on a
cause by men's miscarriages: David, a man after Gods one heart began^s
Reformation, he stumbled in limine, for he should have brought home the Arc,
Deuteronomy. 10. 8. according to Moses prescription, upon the Priests shoulders; but
he follows the Philistines fashion, and fetches it home upon a Cart. Here the
King and his Parliament (I mean his Nobles) and the Priests all stumbled; and
by this stumble the (...) was shaken, and Uzzah smitten; yet the Ark was the
same, and so (...) the n^erer its appointed place We mention this to the shame
of those (...) th^se days, who pretend to follow the (...), but startle and
start aside (...), because th^se beasts that were employed to draw it, have
stum^ and (...) it. Oh Christians, take heed of apostatizing from Gods ca^se,
when persecuted: God takes that from Christians most grievously. If God smote
to the grave Uzzah for touching the Ark when it shock, will he not smi^e to
hell those Apostates that kick their heel at the Ark, now it is shaken?

There were never such a number of brazen-faced Apostates seen in the World
together, as in these days, England, and Scotland have produced. These worms
which bred in the belly of the Church, made it sick, and miscarry of a
Reformation; since they are voided, the Church, though for the present weak, I
hope, ^s near to her recovery.

Let those then that long and lo^k for her recovery, take off their hearts from
murmuring at the cause, and turn all their complaints against themselves: o
that the spirit of supplication might pass through the Protestant Churches
this day; o that all the families that fear the Lord, might (...): before the
Lord this day; that each might see how they have in their places fallen short
of the glory of God. Oh that the families of the house of David, of Nathan, of
Levi, and Shimei, i. e. of the Royal blood, and Priestly function, might mourn
this day before the Lord for their own si^s, and the sins of their
forefathers; o that we might all know in th^s our day of visitation the things
that concern our peace.

The sacred prophicies tell us, (if we mistake them not) that the Churches
deliverance is nigh at hand, that time when the Witnesses shall rise, the
everlasting Gospel shall be preached to all people, and the twelve Tribes
converted; and also the time when the Devil, the beast, and the false Prophet
shall be cast into the lake that burns with fire and brimstone: now, as
Daniel (Chap 9) finding out the expi^ation of the 70 years captivity, did
thereupon betake himself to fast and pray, and confess the sins of Judah,
Jerusalem, and all Israel, with the sins of their Kings, Princes, and
forefathers: so ought we, that look after the public weal of the Church,
(finding by the prophecies, that the Apostasy is well nigh finished, and the
Antichrist appears, which is the immediate forerunner of Christ's glorious
coming (as we show in the ensuing Tract) to raise the Witnesses, and restore
the Jews) to bet^ke ourselves to solemn humiliation fasting and prayer, making
confession of the sins of our Kings, of our Nobles, of our Ministers, and of
our people, taking to ourselves Daniels words, Chap 9. 16. For our sins, and
the iniquity of our forefathers, Jerusalem is become a reproach, o Lord, to all
that dwell about it; now therefore cause thy face to shine upon thy Sanctuary
that is desolate, for the Lords sake: o Lord, incline thine ear to hear, open
thine eyes, and behold our desolations.

Oh that we would all turn Priests, and come quickly, bringing this holy
^incense with us into the Congregation, that so atonement might be made for the
Churches of God, against which great wrath from the Lord is gone out this day,
and sore plagues are upon them.

Gods ears are not heavy nor is his hand shortened, that he cannot save us;
but our pride, security, hardness, unbelief, impenitencie and murmuring have
kept back good things from us Why are we in bondage to a generation that curse
their father, and bless not their mother? P or 30. 11 14, 27.
to a generation that are pure in their own eyes, yet not washed from their
filthiness? a generation, o how lofty are their eyes! and their eyelids are
lifted up; a generation, whose teeth are swords, and their jaw-teeth knives to
devour the poor from off the earth, and the needy from amongst men; a
generation of L^custs (the wonder of Solomon; who having no King, go forth, all
of them by bands! Would we but incline our cares to Gods counsels, and turn
our feet into his paths, he would soon subdue our enemies, and turn^ his hand
against our adversaries: the haters of the Lord should have submitted
themselves, but that we were disobedient to the Commanaments of the Lord. Why
is the Diadem fallen from our head, but because (woe unto us) we have sinned?
Why do flattering lips, proud tongues, and double hearts prevail against us
to the oppression of the poor, and the making of the needy sigh? Why do the
wicked walk on every side, when the vilest of the sons of men are exalted?
but because wear sinful, our Cities, and our Countries, and our families of
all ranks and degrees have sinned. Go forth therefore, ye sons and daughters
of the Church, weeping; gird your selves in sack cloth, and put ashes on your
head; take to you words of lamentation, and bewail the sins of your Kings, of
your Princes, of your Nobles, of your Ministers before the Lord. Let the
Trumpet be blown in Zion, let a Fast be sanctified, and a solemn Assembly
called, gather the people, assemble the Elders, let the Bridegroom go forth of
his chamber, and the Bride out of her closet; let the Ministers of the Lord
weep between the Porch and the altar, and let them say, Spare thy people, o
Lord, and give not thine heritage to reproach, that Heathens should thus rule
over us. So soon as the people of God are thus framed, God will be jealous for
the land, and pity his people.

The Churches tears usually go before the black Funeral of their enemies:
their tears ascend like exhalations insensibly, but return in thundering and
lightning storms upon their enemies. We shall find the Churches mourning, and
the enemies ruin to be ( Zach. 12. 3, 4, 10.) a Gospel-connexion; and what
himself has joined, we cannot pull asunder.

Since therefore preces and lachrymae are our best weapons against our enemies;
let us take to our selves this spiritual armor, and let us thus go forth for
the cause of God with much affection, rejoicing as a Bridegroom comes forth
of his chamber, and as a strong man rejoices to run a race; let us rejoice,
that we are counted worthy to be in arms for so great a King, let us with a
holy scorn disdain the enemies of our Lord the King, let us defy that power
and strength they bring against him Let the Counter-motions of cross
providence, which make it evening by the Apostates clock, put forward the hand
of your faith, to make it the morning of deliverance; does the Antichrist tread
down all before him, and oppress the Church of God exceedingly, be of good
cheer, for thus it is written that Antichrist must do, and the Witnesses must
suffer; and also it is written, that then he is near to his ruin; and the
Church near to a glorious and exceeding great deliverance, which is the subject
of one main part of the ensuing Discourse.

Be not then, o ye Saints of the most High! either afraid or ashamed of your
afflictions; Can you choose a better Master? Can you fight under a more royal
Standard then Christ's? or can you find a baser enemy, or more accursed then
the Antichrist? gird on then your spiritual armor with the girdle of
sincerity; be steadfast in your resolutions: why do the latchets of the shoes of
patience hang so loose? Why do you f^et and startle at the news of suffering?
as if the fiery trial, which is to try you, were the fire of hell to damn you:
sincerity rejoices in the trial: how will you be known from loose
professeurs, if your sincerity be not tried by afflictions? afflictions endured
with patience for Christ are the seals of sincerity; this was one of Paul's
seals, which passed him for current among the Saints. [Paul, a prisoner of
Jesus Christ.] Sufferings for Christ are an evident taken of perdition to your
enemies, but to you of salvation, and that of God. Faith is the evidence of our
salvation, and sufferings are the evidence of our faith; Rejoice therefore,
inasmuch as year made partakers of the sufferings of Christ, for when his
glory shall be revealed, ye shall be glad also with exceeding joy; your
reproaches for Christ render you happy, inasmuch as thereby the Spirit of glory
rests on you: though on your enemies part Christ is blasphemed; yet on your
part he is glorified.

We have endeavored to clear the Church of England, and to clear the
reformation beg^n, and at last fi^ished by the King, Lords, and Commons, as
Christ's Church and Christ's cause, notwithstanding all those reproaches cast
upon it: let us then all of us that own the Church of England for a true
Church, and the reformation of that Church for a good cause, prepare for
sufferings, and let us count them as so many scars of honor got in the field,
where the Royal Standard of our Lord, the King is pitched, which we shall wear
forever, our bodies shall lie down in the grave in the honor of them, and at
the Resurrection rise in the majesty of them.

Let love to Christ, and love to the Church of Christ constrain us to
constancy; let us stop our ears against all the charms of the Devil, the
world, or the flesh: let us look to our Redeemer, who when he was tempted upon
the salvation of the chief Priests and Elders, and upon the vindication of the
Godhead to come down from the Cross, (this seems to me to be the deepest
temptation of hels forging, for to destroy the work of Redemption; for had
Christ come down before he had died, our Redemption had not been finished, and
we must all have been damned) yet he continued in his shameful and grievous
torments under all these blasphemons roproaches until the work of our
Redemption was finished; look up then to this great Captain of our salvation,
and as you have seen him do, so do ye; you must, if you be Christ's, be made
conformable to Christ your head by sufferings. The faithful Christians of the
three Kingdoms have suffered much, o let them not come down from the cross,
until the work be finished! it is supposed that there are sharper sufferings yet
to come, yet let us not ^aint, for there are more with us then are against us,
we have (as that great person said) A good Cause, and a gracious God, and so we
have all the Angels and Saints on our sine, we have the Trinity to trust to,
who is a strong h^ld in time of trouble, and knows every soul that trusts
in him.

Let love to the Church whereof you are members, let love to the generations
yet unborn, who are to be members of the Church, provoke you to constancy.

That they when they shall blush to read of the shameful Apostasy of many
eminent Professors, may rejoice and be encouraged by your patience, pray,
^aith, and constancy to maintain those truths you leave them sealed with your
bl^ud, with Christian courage in the greatest storms of persecution, and give
glory to God on your behalf, in imitation of your singular virtues; wherefore
stand fast, and in your deepest troubles lift up your head for your Redemption
draws nigh: it is but waiting a little while, and then he that comes, will
come, and will not tarry: when he will come over the mountains, an unexpected way,
and will appear to you on th^se Mountains like a pleasant Roe, but he will come as
a thief upon your enemies, that is, suddenly, unexpectedly, terribly, bloudily,
with his sword drawn in his hand, spoiling them in a moment, when your enemies
are fol^ed together as thorns, and whiles they are drunken as drunkards, they
shall be devoured as stubble fully dry; but on Mount Zion shall be deliverance:
That thou (Christian Reader) may be found on Mount Zion, in this great and
terrible day of the Lord, which by all Scripture-signes is near at hand, that
thou may be one of those that keep their garments clean, and wait for the
coming of our Lord, that thou may not be found amongst the number of
Christ's enemies when he comes, but may disc^rn the times and the seasons, so
as thereby beforewarned to fly from the wrath to come.

I have with much labor and diligence, presented with all the affection of a
sincere Christian this ensuing Treatise to thy view; if thou be a gainer by
it for thy souls good, give glory to God, the Authors design is fully
accomplished.

Farewell.
In the first page of the Preface for (...), read (...), and for (...), read
(...).

Of the APOSTASY. The First Part.
CHAP. 1.
THis Chapter is a part of the second Epistle of Paul, which he wrote to the
Thessalonians; I call it the second Epistle in regard of its posteriority to
the first: in the order of place it is in all the Greek Copies the last or
second Epistle; yet Learned Doctor Estius and Grotius do conceive this second
in the order of time to be the first, as being written by Paul first: their
grounds for this I shall not meddle with, it not lying within my circle at this
time to enquire when and where Paul writ this Epistle; yet I doubt not ere I
leave this Subject but to make it manifest that this Epistle is Paul's second
Epistle in time, as well as place, to the Thessalonians.

That Paul was the Author of this Epistle, is on all hands granted; the only
thing then that we shall enquire after before we come to the Text, is, who this
Paul was? Here it will not be impertinent to give a word or two; 1. Of his
Birth: 2. His Breeding: 3. His Conversion: 4. His Name.

1. Paul was born at Tarsus jus municipale a Romany consecuta est: ita ut
Tarsenses censerentur cives Romani, and civium Romanorum Privilegiis
frucrentur: Ius hoc adepti sunt Tarsenses a Julio Caesare, and ab Augusto, eo
quo^ utriusque parts, in bellis civilibus str^nue adjuvissent. Hinc Tarsus
Iuliopolis dicta. Dio Cassius lib. 47.
Tarsus, the Metropolitan City of Cilicia Acts 21. 39. The son of a Pharisee,
an Hebrew of the Hebrews, Philip. 3. 4. 5. A man that for Natural
Birth-right-Priviledges, Paulus fuit nobili Iudaorum prosapi^ orius. Hier. de
Script. Eccles. cap. 15.
could have boasted with the proudest Jew; he was of the Tribe of Benjamin, out
of which Tribe God gave the twelve Tribes their first King, after whose name he
was called; these two Saul's fulfilled the dark side of that Prophecy, Genesis 49.
27. being monstrous Mystice impletum est in Paulo vaticinium Iacobi, Genesis 49.
Wolves against Christ's Sheep and Shepherds.

2. Paul's Breeding o^ Education was under Gamaliel, Act. 22. 3. who was a man
of great Authority and Learning amongst the Jews, he was a member of the great
(...) which sat at Jerusalem, and had the sole power of judging of a Prophet;
he was a Doctor of the Law, of great repute among all the people, Act 5. 34.
who by his eloquence and wisdom in one Dilemma, put to silence the High Priest
and all the Doctors, or rather (I may say) he made them, like Subjects, fall to
his opinion. This Learned Doctor was Paul's Tutor. Now how to reconcile Act. 18.
3. with what I have writ, or rather, what the Holy Ghost discovers in the
forementioned Texts of Paul's Education, I do not know; for it is generally
concluded from this Text, that Paul was a Tent-maker by Trade; now that Paul
should be a Pharifee and a Tent-maker, was as absurd amongst the Jews, as it
is amongst Orthodox Christians, to say a man is a Minister, and a also a Cobbler
or a Tinker, unless Paul were (as by his wild Zeal he should seem to be) a
Tub-Pharisee: indeed, the Jewish Church was at that time exceedingly
degenerated from its primitive Purity, and that very Sect declared so much; for
a Pharisee was but an hypocritical Sectarian Separatist: And Drusius tells us,
that they ^an Division to seven: there was the Praise-seeking Pharisee, and the
Self-justiciaty, and the Self-afflicting Pharisee, that wounded his head, and
scratched his body with thorns; the Slavishly-fearful Pharisee, the virtuous
Pharisee, the covetous Pharisee; and lastly, the down-look'd devoted Pharisee,
who wore a thing like a Mortar on his head to hinder his looking upward. But I
find another distinction more grave, but whether more Authentic, I leave to
the Jewish Antiquaries to determine; there are two sorts of Pharisees, namely,
Porashim and Parushim, as the Hebrews term them, that is, Docentes and
Separati, Teaching Pharise^s, and Laik Pharisees: now this distinction is
brought by Antiquaries purposely to salve that Text Luke 18. 12. where the
Pharisees boast that they paid Tithe of Mynt and Cummin. Now if they paid
Tithes (says the Disputant) how were they Churchmen? To this it is answered,
The Teaching Pharisees paid not Tithes, But received them, but the Laick
Pharisees paid it. But this distinction is not satisfactory; for if none but
Laics paid Tithes, then we may as well conclude, that all the Levites were
Laics, because the Levits paid Tithes to the Priests. I humbly conceive the
answer ^would be sound and true thus, That it does not follow, that of absolute
necessity, the Pharisees that paid Tithes must be Laics; for why might not
they, being Churchmen, pay Tithes to the Priests at the Temple, as well as the
Levites who receive Tithes pay the Tithe of their Tithes to the Priests, Numb.
18. 28, 29. But the Priests were Levites, and the Levites called Priests, Ezekiel.
44. 15. Heb. 7. 5. But we need none of these distinctions or answers to solve
this question about Paul, for we do affirm (from Act. 26. 4, 5.) that Paul
before (...), i. Diligentissimam, religiofissimam.
his Conversion was no Tent-maker; for Paul declares before King Agrippa, that
all the Jews knew, that from his youth he had lived after the strictest Sect
of Judaism a Pharisee: now no body believes that the strictest Sect of
Pharisees were Trades men, much less Tent-makers.

Likewise Act. 22. 3. proves Paul was never bound to that Trade of Tent-making,
for he was brought up at the feet of Gamaliel: now all men know that Gamaliel
was no Laick Pharisee, he was no Tent-maker, but a Doctor of the Law, who
taught Paul not Tent-making, but as the Text tells us, the perfect manner of
the Law of the Fathers. Tertullian and Hierom affirm Tertul. contra Marcion.
lib. 5. Ideo dicitur Paulus vas electionis, qu^alegis and S. Scripturarum erat
armartum. Hieron. ad Paulinum. Chrysostom. Hom. 3 1 Cor.
that he was incomparably wise in the knowledge of the Scriptures.

Moreover Paul's Learning, Eloquence and practices, tell us, that he never
learnt before his Conversion, nor ever practiced the Trade of Tent-making; he
had a far worse Trade, which he followed too hard, to be of that; in stead of
making Tents for men, he pulled down and destroyed the Tabernacles of God, the
bodies of the Sainrs. Such was his humane Learning, that (says Chrysostom) it
was a great question amongst the Heathens, Whether he were not more Learned
then Plato?

3. Next let us view Paul's Conversion.

This Paul, that Lion that devoured the Saints, that brier that scratched and
wounded all that came near him, or he could come near; that son of the Devil,
that imprisoned the Saints, dragging them from Prison to the place of
execution; that Quam mirum fuit in Paulo, Deum hominem turbin^bus co^ cu*
piscentiae in barathrum ruentem praecipitem sistere? Ejus amores and aestus
inhibere, immo in contrarium reflectere? Ad Christum, quem pessime oderat,
trahere, Christo unire and vincer^? Corn. Lap.
Rock that could stand and see them murdered without relenting: behold this
Lion that devoured Gods Sacrifices, now lying down amongst them, and eating
straw (food formerly against his palate) with them: This Wolf is now found
feeding, not upon, but meekly with the Lambs: This Brier of the Wilderness that
formerly drew blood, is now become a fruitful Vine in the garden of God, and
yields not only pleasant fruit, but like the Apple Tree in the Forest, yields
pleasant shade unto the Church scorched with afflictions, For the Church had
rest round about: This Rock in the Desert of Zin (as I may call him) is now
become a pleasant River to multitudes of thirsty souls: This Paul that was the
Son of the Devil in the morning, and ready mounted on his message, and more
then three parts of his journey toward the place where he was to execute his
Warrants, is made the Son of God at noon: This Mount Etna* we find removed into
the midst of the Sea, and all his fiery flames put out. This Cedar of Libanus
is not only shaken, but falls at this sudden Thunder of God: This Jordan, that
was swiftly running into the dead sea, is driven back at his rebuke.

Adam was not more strangely disfigured by his fall, then this man gloriously
transformed by his fall: His fall was his promotion, his blindness a giving
sight. Paul met with a better Tutor now then Gamaliel; Gamaliel only (and
scarce that) taught him Law; but this new Master teaches him Gospel: he learnt
more in one hour now, then ever he learnt in all his life before; he now
learned the true knowledge of the Lord of life; and no marvel (though he were
miraculously taught) for he was (...), taught by the Lord of life. It is most
probable that this was the time that he was rapt into the third Heaven; I mean,
the time of his three days ecstasy at Damascus.

Here Christ not only made him a Saint, but created him an Apostle: The other
Apostles had the favor to see Christ after his Resurrection, but he had the
honor to see him and hear him speak (...), ineffable words, which were not
lawful for man to utter, after his Ascension; which few, besides John in
Patmos, could ever boast of.

After he was thus baptized with fire in heaven by Christ, and with water on
earth by Ananias; you may behold this Christian Champion, (the true Hercules)
passing Vere dicere possumus Christum cum Paulo titulos and munia sua
divicisse: Christus enim orbis est Redemptor and Doctor; Paulus vero Praeco est
and Doctor orbis omniuque gentium. a Lapide.
through his twelve fold Labors with mighty success: insomuch that never any
man before or after him can be compared to him. The Trophies of his Conquests
still remain in Europe, Asia, and other parts of the world: The weapons of his
warfare were spiritual, therefore Amplius dico: Paulus Doctor fuit Petri,
Doctor Apostolorum, immo Doctor Angelorum.
the more noble; and the enemies with which he grapled and encountered, were not
carnal, but spiritual; he had to deal* with principalities, It was the truest
Article in Turtullus his Charge, though the basest expression, That he found
Paul to be (...), the prime of the Heresy of the Nazarites, meaning the Gospel.
and powers, and spiritual wickednesses in high places, therefore his Conquests
are the more glorious. See how he conquered that roaring Lion Sergius Paulus
proconsul of Paphus, and made him lie fawning at his foot: See him again
crushing the head of that See pent Elymas Barjesus. How many wild Boars did he
came, which wasted and destroyed the Church? It would be too tedious to relate
either the Conquests that he got, or the Scarrs of honor that he bore for
Christ. He that thinks he can hyperbolize in his Encomiums of Paul, we will take
up that Proverb on Paul's behalf (as once on Hercules's against Juno) against
him. P^stra Paulum.

Indeed, he was mortal as other men, but went to his grave with more honor
then other Conquerors after all their Victories do; he died in the field, and
yet the weapons with which he conquered are immortal, which he has left to
succeeding Ages. And we find in his fourteen Epistles, which (like the Tower
of David, builded for an Armory) have hanging in them a thousand bucklers, all
the shields of mighty men. There is no weapon that the Church, or any member of
the Church wants at any time, in any case, against any Enemy but he may be
ready furnished in Paul's Armory against him: His Epistles are another Paradise
full of fruit and flowers.

Thus out of Paul the man-eater came out meat for man. This barren wilderness
became a spiritual Canaan to the Christian Church, flowing with spiritual milk
and honey.

Q. Why do you call him Paul, when his name is Saul?

A. I call him as he calls himself in all his Epistles, except that to the
Hebrews. But since it falls in my way to discourse of his name, and the changing
of his name; I shall not baulk it, but briefly touch of it, and pass
immediately from the Author, to the Subject; from the name to the thing.

Some think Paul had two names given him, as an honor to him: if so, then the
question will be, who bestowed that Title of honor upon him; who gave him that
name of Paul? Truly the answer will be uncouth, yet very true; not his
Godfathers nor Godmothers (I mean the Church or Company present) at his
Baptism; nor the Minister that baptized him; For they all after his baptism
called him Saul, Brother Saul. Indeed, the correlate title [ Brother] was
Paul's greatest title of Honor; for however the world contemns it, it is not
only a title of great honor, but of exceeding great and unconceivable profit
to be a true brother of the Church militant; for they have undoubted Title to
an everlasting Crown and Kingdom, which Usurpers cannot dispossess them of.

Now if the Church gave not Saul the name of Paul in honor to him; certainly
the enemies of the Church would not do it: then it must be concluded as most
probable, that Saul gave himself the name of Paul: and so that opinion will
fall to the ground; for it is not to be imagined that he would give himself a
Title of honor: Self-created Titles are false and ridiculous, and rather
defame the person as a proud Usurper, then speak him a person of merit, to whom
truly belongs honor.

But if we seriously view this new name of Paul, we shall find the person
owning the name to be probably the Author of it, and the name in no wise to be
a Title of honor, but of true Christian debasement.

Erasmus takes the name (...) to be a Greek name, which comes of (...), which
signifies ceasing, because as soon as he ceased from persecution, he changed
his name. Others think, that Paulus is a Latin name, and signifies as much as
paucus, mean and little; he so esteeming himself, when his conscience had an
eye opened to reflect upon his former actions. Others say, Paulus signifies as
much as pusillus, that is, vise or base; for so Paul esteemed himself after his
Conversion; and the Greek word (...) seems to import as much. Others again
think, that he had his name from his person, which they say was little: He was
a little man, and therefore was called Paul, which signifies little, both in
Greek and Latin, it being an ancient custom both amongst the Greeks and
Latins, from such accidents to give names, as Caesar was so called a caes^is
oculis, from his gray eyes; and Plato so called from (...), broad, because he
had broad shoulders.

I humbly conceive that Saul took this name of Paul to himself after God had
converted him: He took it as a garment of Penance upon him, he thought the
other name of Saul too good for so vile a person, for (...) Shaul, in Hebrew
signifies Petitus, i. one wished for, or much desired: though Saint Ambrose
thinks Saulus comes of (...), because he was a great disturber of the peace of
the Church: but I rather incline to the Hebrew Interpreter, Saul being not a
Greek name: and (with submission to the Learned) I conceive Paul did change his
name from one Hebrew name to another, not from a Hebrew to a Greek or Latin
name, for the difference between Saul and Paul in the Hebrew is only in the
first letter; take away the Hebrew letter (...), and add the letter (...)* and
the name Shaul becomes Paul, and then his Hebrew name probably comes from [
Pau] which signifies Hissing, as much as to say, I am so far from being a man
to be desired in the world, that I deserve to be hissed out of the world, and
to be made the scorn and derision of all the men in the world. It was an
ancient custom among the Hebrews, when they would express their passions, to
change their name, and so make it suitable to their sad condition; so Nahomi in
Ruth changes her name to Marah. True repentance works a self-abhorrencie, and
raises a holy indignation in the soul against it self for sin. Paul little
thought he had persecuted the God of that Law which he was so zealous for, when
he went to bring Christians from Damascus to Jerusalem on purpose to punish
them: 'Twas a dreadful speech in Saul's ears, Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou
me? I believe this voice caused as great an heart-quake in Saul, as the hand on
the wall wrought an handquake on the Babylonish King. What! that Paul the great
Zealot for God, should now by the voice of God be questioned for persecuting
God! This was a little day of Judgment with Paul, happy man that it was not
Doomes-day with him; that God that struck him to the earth, might justly have
struck him down to Hell; certainly this gracious dealing of Christ with Paul,
considering what a bloody enemy Paul had been against him, so overcame him that
he ever after loathed himself; therefore he calls himself, The least of the
Apostles, not worthy to be called an Apostle, a man born out of due time, a
wretched man, or a man carrying (...) in his heart; these expressions agree
with his mean name which he chose for himself; and possibly after his
conversion, with this new name he might take the new Trade of Tentmaking up,
especially in Arabia where Tents were used, and where after his Conversion he
continued three years to preach the Lord Jesus: nor was this employment
unbefitting Paul, Gal. 1. 18.
who desired now to be as conformable to his Master in all things as might be;
for if his Master the great Carpenter (with reverence be it mentioned) of the
mighty Fabric of the Universe, did not disdain to be, when he was on earth in
the flesh a Carpentar, much less ought Paul to disdain to be a Tent-maker.

Thus I have briefly touched of Paul's Name, his Conversion, Education and
Birth, that the Reader may be justly informed of the Author of this Subject I
am now entering upon; and the rather I have writ all this, because I find some
from Act. 18. 3. undervaluing Paul before his Conversion too much, and others
elevating him much above himself, from Act. 13. 1. where (misreading the Text)
they would make him a man of Princely Education, pretending him to be some
great Officer in this time of Perscution, whereas I scarce believe he was above
a Solicitor General; I am confident, and I believe most men believe, that he
could not be so high as an Attorney General in the height of his Persecution:
and therefore let no man favor himself in so gross and disorderly a mistake,
as to put a Lord Presidents Gown upon a Pursuiants back: for though Paul before
his Conversion had a heart as full of venom and malice against the Saints, as
the highest of them, yet his power extended no farther then to bring them to
the High-Court, he could not pass sentence upon them; he could only accuse
them, and rail upon them, and desire them to execute the Saints, that was all.

But we have no more to do with him as an enemy, but as a friend, and the
greatest friend of all the Apostles to us Gentiles, for whom he was designed.
This Paul did, as it were, pass the great Gulf betwixt Dives and Lazarus,
and wa^ (almost according to Dives's vvish) taken from amongst the D^mned, and
sent from them to us Gentiles, the Sons of the Devil, and so* the brethren of
Dives, to forevvarn us that we repent and believe, least we also come into
that place of torment: This is the drift of all his Epistles, and of all his
Labors and perils; and this is the main end of his Writing and Preaching to
the Thessalonians.

CHAP. II.
THis second Epistle is partly Consolatory, partly Prophetical, Pars
Consolatoria, 1o Capite. Pars Prophetica. 2o Capite. Pars Paraenetica 3o Capite.
partly Exhortatory.

The Prophetic part of this Epistle lies in the twelve first Verses of this
second Chapter, which is my designed task.

This part of the Chapter has been for above these hundred years past, the
common Theater whereon the learned Christians of the Europan Churches have met,
and fiercely incountred each other. Paul was not more tossed in his Voyage from
Jerusalem to Rome, then Paul's Text has been tossed amongst Christians since
the name of Protestant and Papist has been heard of in the world. They both
throw dirt in each others faces, and then set this Prophecy of Paul's before
each other as a glass of Infamy. My care shall be to avoid those that cause
Division, my Design being to follow truth and peace, and thereby (if possibly I
can) to unite those that love it.

The very Title of this Subject may justly cause me to relinquish it; for as
the Sun is too glorious an object for a sore eye to look on, and the Rocks too
hard for foundered feet to go upon; so is this Prophetic Subject too high and
mysterious for such a weak head as mine to comprehend, especially since the
Ancients conclude, this prophecy is not to be fulfilled until toward the end
of the world, so that we in this Age must look Certius and fine periculo est
expectare usque ad impletionem Prophetiae, quam temere divinare. Irenaeus l. 5.
c. 21.
for the fulfilling of it: And in good manners I might take that Greek Fathers
grave Counsel, rather patiently to wait on God for the fulfilling of
Prophesies, then rashly to determine of future events.

But, if I may, I shall plead my excuse for this my boldness to the Reader in
the Preface.

I am now (though long first) come to the Text.

This Chapter is divided as many several ways as the Levites wife was sent: I
shall divide only so much as I intend to handle, avoiding all affectation of
Noveltie or Singularity.

These twelve first Verses divide themselves into two General parts: 1. A
Doctrinal Part: 2. A Prophetical part. Which Pars (...)
distinction Critics will go near to say is without a difference; for what is
Prophetical but Doctrinal? only it is in a cloud more mysterious.

But by the Doctrinal part here, we mean, that Thesis which lies implicitly
in the two first Verses, and part of the third, That the day of Judgment is
not at hand: This I call the Doctrinal part; and then from ver. 3. to ver. 1^.
you have the Reason confirming this Doctrine, and that I call the Prophetic
part.

First then of the Doctrinal part in the two first Verses.

Ver. 1. Now we beseech you, brethren, by the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ,
and our gathering together to him,

2. That ye be not soon shaken in mind, or be troubled, neither by Spirit, nor
by word, nor by letter, as from us, as that the day of Christ is at hand.

We must first see to the true reading of these words before we can come to
divide them aright.

Though there be a harmony in the Original Greek Copies, yet there is jar^ing
in the translating of them. The greatest difference which is material in the
first verse, is about the translating of the Preposition (...), the most
translate it [ Pe^] others with the Preposition [ D^] which changes the sense
of the words: now the question is, Who are in the right? That is now our part
to enquire; Learned men are on either side, some take in both as probable, but
incline more to one then another.

The words in the Greek are these, (...), which the old Latin Version, ^ Beza,
Tremelius* and several other learned Aug. d^ Civit. *Dei, l. 20. c. 19.
Expositors, both Protestant and Popish translate thus, per adventu^, by the
coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, conceiving the words to carry in them the
force of an oath, or vehement obtestation. The Authority that they bring for
the translating it so* is from an Plato, Theophrastes, and Homer himself use
often, if not altogether, (...), for Super; the commo^ness whereof caused the
Latins to take super from the word (...), both signifying the same, where
(...) governs a (...) (...)*
humane Author, and that but a single proof out of Homers ^aas* and that scarce
a proof; where Mercury pleading or inte^ding in the behalf of Achillis,
expresses himself thus, (...) --.i. by his father and by his mother. If this
be all that can be said why (...) should be translated, per, by, I believe more
will be said, why it should be translated De, of, or concerning,

First from the Authors themselves, who translate it per adventum* Aut
Praepositio (...) sign^ficat materiam, seu rem de qua agitur, and si* posset
exponi, [de adventu;] quasi dicat, quantum autem ad articulum apud vos
controversum, nemp^ de adventu Domini attinet, moneo vos ne putetis cum jamjam
imminer^. Zanch. in locum. (...) hic est positum pro (...). G^otius. Suborta
^pinio, par^im* ex verbis quibusdam (...) prioris, (...) adventu^ Domini brevi
futurum. Estius in locum. Iuxta nostram versio ^m hic repetenda ess^t d^ctio
adventum, a quo reguntur Genitivi nostrae congregationis; sed sine dubio
incommo^us est talis s^rmo. ^st.
Zanchie says, it may signify the matter or the thing it self about which the
Controversy was, and so it may be expounded, [ We beseech you, concerning the
coming of Christ] as if he should say, but as to the controversal point among
you, viz. concerning the coming of Christ* ^dmonish you not to think that it is
at hand. This seems to be the true sense and scope of the Text, for the tumult
that was raised in the minds of the Thessalonians was about the day of Judgment
being near, which opinion the Learned conceive was raised by false brethren,
who abused and mis-interpreted these words of Paul, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 15, 17. thence
persw^ding them that they should all be caught up into the clouds* this was a
startling Doctrine to new planted Christians, which caused such a Church-quake
amongst them, and therefore P^ comes in seasonably, I beseech you brethren,
concerning the coming of Christ, and your being gathered together, that ye be
not troubled.

Estius confesses, that it may be so translated, De adventu: The Sy^ck reads
it, Ob adventum, which directly falls in to the foregoing sense: It is not fit
so material a difference in the reading should be passed over lightly,
especially since the most (as I conceive) translate it to the most improper
sense; which as Estius observes, is repugnant to the Greek Copy also; for
according to the reading, per adventum, the Genitive Cases are all governed of
adventum, and then it yields us this sense (or rather* nonsense) [ By the
coming of our Lord Jesus* and by the coming of our gathering together to him.]
For (says Estius) it is requisite, according to the Vulgar Translation, to
repeat adventum, which is most improper, as himself confesses, though against
the received and adored Roman Translation.

Now for the avoiding this discommodious sense, Learned men, such as Hierom and
Beza, that they might make (...) govern both adventus and congregatio, they
read congregatio in the Accusative Case, clipping the Greek Copy to make
current their own. Hieron cp. 152 (...) in ^um. Vatable.
But leaving both these, and reading (...) in the Genitive Case, as it is in
the Greek, our English Translation will afford us this sense, [ But we besee^
you br^thren, of the coming of our Lord Jesus, and of our gathering to him] you
shall see a parallel Text for this, not out of Homer's, Plate's, or
Theophrastus's Greek phrases, but out of Paul's own Copy, in Phil. 3. 13. For it
is God that works in us both to will and to do (...). Phil. 3. 13.
of his good pleasure. I presume hereupon, that it will be granted, that so
reading the Text in English, is nearer to Paul's phrase in other Texts, and the
nearest to his own Greek Copy here, and therefore I shall take the boldness so
to read it. There being no material difference that I find in the reading of
the rest of the two verses, we shall omit the sifting of them until we come to
explain them.

The Doctrinal part may be summed up in this negative Proposition:

The day of Judgment is not presently to come. In the General we are led to
take notice of Paul's modus procedendi, his wise and orderly dealing with these
affrighted Thessalonians; where there is first the Subject matter; and secondly
the introduction to this matter. The Introduction is Rhetorical: the Subject
matter in the form of it is Logical, and may be reduced to this Syllogism,

You are shaken and troubled in mind because the day of Christ is at hand: But
the day of Christ is not at hand: Ergo, you need not be troubled or shaken in
mind. CHAP. III.
IN his Rhetorical Introduction, we have 1. His form of delivery: 2. his terms
of expression.

1. His form of delivery is not mandatory, but supplicatory: he does not say,
mandamus, but rogamus: 2. His terms of expression he gives them, are not harsh,
but mild, and full of affection: he does not say, vos Thessalonicenses, or vos
amici, but vos frates.

Ver. 1. (...), But we beseech you, brethren. Though Humane Authors (as the
Learned observe) seldom use this word in a Petitionary way, yet the holy
Apostles use it often so in the Scriptures: The word is (like Solomon's (...).
Chariot) paved with love, it comes from a word signifying love; So that the
word seems to carry all this honey in its loins, We lovingly beseech you. He
that by his Apostolical Authority might have come with a rod of correction
and sharp conviction, becomes a Petitioner in love and meekness: we lovingly
beseech you, brethren; (...), brethren; a significant word, full of bowels and
natural affection; as much as to say, You that are uterini, of the same womb
with me, that sucked one and the same milk with me.

Herein the wisdom of that Lamb-like Lion (as I may call him) Paul does much
appear. Paul perceived how the design of the Seducers was to undermine his new
planted Church at Thessalonica, by disquieting their souls with terrifying
Doctrines, as that Doomes-day would be within a year; and for proof hereof they
quoted Paul. Wonder not then if the new planted Church of Thessalonica, which
were all but tender Lambs, were much tossed and perplexed in their minds at
the hearing of this strange Doctrine; for if Felix that lion was made to
tremble but at the hearing of that day, well might these Lambs who daily
expected to see it. This tender Church was to be fed with milk, and not with
such strong (to say truth) poisoned meat. They were begotten by Paul to the
true faith; but not to that height of evidentiall faith, as not to be moved,
to hear that on a sudden they, their wives and children should be brought to
judgment.

These boisterous winds of false Doctrine raised by these incarnate Devils,
the false teachers, and beating so impetuously upon the fluctuant passions of
these new planted Christians, raised so great a storm against that holy house
and household, that had it not been built upon the rock, it had doubtless
fallen, and great had been the fall thereof. To allay this storm, it seems to
me a harder task for Paul at land, then for Christ at sea to effect. Christ
first rebuked the wind, and then commanded the water to be still, and they were
so; but contrariwise, Paul begins first to allay the waves, as the only means
to dispell the wind: Paul like a wise Physician lays his finger on the right
pulse, he there began the cure where the enemy began the wound: their passions
had made them enraged; distractions caused through sudden fear, had made them
as it were mad; and therefore Paul comes in good season with his heavenly
melodious charm to allay them: [ We lovingly beseech you, brethren.] Thus Paul
(like another Orpheus, or rather, like David) with the well-tuned harp of
Rhetoric, persuades these brain-stung Thessalonians to take a cure. He has
half done the cure upon the judgment, that has but allayed the timorous
distempered affections of a seduced soul.

Paul comes in the same method here to the Thessalonians, that Christ came to
his disciples in, after his Resurrection: the first word is peace; it was a
word in season from the Prince of peace to his poor disconsolate and disquieted
servants: He that would settle Truth, must first make Peace. The first word of
Command is Peace, which being made, is commonly the introduction to Obedience.

Behold here also the vehement desire of Paul, and the exceeding earnestness
of his spirit to repair the ru^nes that this sudden Church-quake had caused in
Thess^lonica. What, must a King put off his Crown to his subjects? Must he
become petitioner, that ought to be petitioned? Indeed, in reason and
conscience it ought not. But Paul voluntarily falls upon his face, to set them
(fallen) upon their feet. Paul saw the dangerous consequences that would
follow; and therefore (as In rebus magni momenti solet Apostolus adhibere
obtestatio nem. Aretius.
Aretius observes) Paul uses these supplicatory terms, as a prudent Ambassador
of Christ, who knew the times and seasons, the time when to embrace, and when
to refrain from embracing; when to come with a rod, and when to come in love.
Thus you have Paul's Exordium.

2. The second thing observable in the doctrinal part, is the Matter it self;
which though in its form it be Supplicatory, yet in its quality it is
Dehortatory.

In the Supplicatory dehortation may I beg leave to call it Opinione magis quam
re laboravere.
os) the Apostle dehorts the Thessalonians from three things, (in which
(leaving their Affections) he comes home to their Judgments by most plain
conviction.) 1. He dehorts them from the matter of their present fear, as if
the day of Judgment were at hand; It Is no such matter, says Paul. Wherein 2.
He dehorts them from the intrinsecall causes of this fear; viz. instability in
the Truth through forgetfulness of it, and groundless credulity, in receiving
every new fangle of false Teachers, without searching the Scriptures; so
intangling themselves to their own trouble, making themselves Ne fis miser ante
tempus; qu^dam nos magis torquent quam debeant; quaedam ante torquent quam
debeant; quaedam torquent, cum omnino non debeant. Sen.
miserable before their time, without any ground; A sin against Philosophy. 3.
He dehorts them from the external causes of their trouble and those are
Seducers; be sure so long as their hearts were a Magazeen of powder, these
firebrarnds would never cease until they had blowed them up, by the sparks of
false Doctrine cast in amongst them: therefore the Apostle dehorts them from
crediting such persons, whom he describes by their subtle practices, commonly
putting on one of these three cloaks when they went a cheating: 1. Either
fained revelations: 2 Or fained words: 3. Or fained Epistles.

Of the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, and of our gathering together to him]
(for so we read the Text.) The whole verse runs thus, We beseech you, brethren,
of, or [ concerning] the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, and our gathering
together to him:] This verse is imperfect in its sense without the other,
therefore this of the next must be comprehended, That ye be not troubled, as
that the day of Christ is at hand.

Of the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ]. The general opinion of Authors is,
that this is meant of the coming of Christ to Judgment, as is manifest by the
scope of the Text. But herein those Learned men, diverse of them, do, in my
opinion, too much imprison the word (...), in that they allow it no other sense
in the Scripture but Christ's visible appearance in the flesh: it is granted,
that the word in this Text may be translated, [ concerning Quoties (...), de
Domino nostro Jesus usurpatur, visibilem ejus adventum notat. Zan.
the (...) appearing of Christ:] But that it should be always so interpreted,
excluding any other coming of Christ, I shall never yield unto; though very
Learned men affirm it.

Some Learned men observe a threefold coming, some a four fold coming of
Christ. There is (as a Learned Author observes) a threefold coming of Christ
mentioned in Scripture; Unus in carne^, unus in spiritu, unus in carne. Hugo de
S. Victore. Adventu^ Domini quadruplex, primus in carnem, 1 Cor. 15. Hag. 2.
Secundus in mentem, Joh. 14. tertius in morte, Apoc. 3. quartus in judicio, Jam
5. Gorhanus in loc.
The one when he came in the flesh* when he himself became bone of our bone,
and flesh of our flesh; the other when he enters into a heart of stone, and
makes it flesh; this is by the influence of his grace: the third is, when he
shall come to raise up and judge all flesh: and to these I may lawfully add a
fourth coming of Christ mentioned in Scripture Prophecies, and that is, when he
shall come to call the I^wes, to raise the witnesses, and to ruin Antichrist:
though this truly falls under that of the coming of Christ by the especial
almighty influence of his Spirit, yet I mention it, because I believe in
Scripture this word (...), is used to set forth this special coming of Christ.
But more of this in its due place.

And of our gathering together unto him:] So the Vulgar Latin Translation
reads it. The addition of this clause determines the controversy against those
that say the Apostle means not here the day of Judgment; for to 1 Thessalonians 4. 15,
16, 17. the Apostle alludes, where he had delivered the comfortable Doctrine of
the Resurrection of all the Saints, and of their glorious gathering together,
and their being caught up with Christ at the day of Judgment: Out of this
chapter, most probably, the Seducers took their Text; and therefore Paul both
repeats his own words, and their false glosses upon them in this Text I treat
on, and the second verse, as we shall show in order as we open the ensuing
words. The Seducers (it seems) repeated Paul's words, they said, thus says
Paul; now in comes Paul as the fittest and best interpreter of his own words,
openly professing and acknowledging that he had delivered such a doctrine as
that of Christ's coming, and the Saints being gathered unto him, but flatly
denies that ever he writ or spoke any thing of the suddenness of that great
day, as if it were near at hand, as men account neerness, viz. within a year,
or an age: and further he denies, that ever he preached or writ it for to
distract or trouble the Church, or drive them from the truth, but to comfort
and settle them; this you may find in the Texts being compared together.

Thus Paul (in the Text) having repeated the matter of their fear, proceeds now
to the causes of this their trouble, which in the general are two, extrinsecal
and intrinsecal: one cause of this their trouble and fear, was from within
themselves; the other was from without them, and that was false doctrine
brought in by false Teachers. (...). Sunt tres affectus erroris istius. A*
retius in loc.


The inward causes (which Aretius calls the effects of error) are expressed in
three words [ shaking of mind, trouble, and being deceived.]

Ver. 2. That ye be not soon shaken in mind, or be troubled.

I should be tedious should I be never so brief in relating all the several
senses of several Authors upon these words, therefore I Will contract them for
brevity sake. Many of them vary in their reading, as they vary in their sense.
Ne cito commov^amini in vestris mentibus Tremel. Ne cito a mente dimoveamini.
Beza.


Tremelius reads it thus, That ye be not soon troubled in your minds.

Beza reads it thus, That ye be not (or lest ye be) soon removed from mind,
omitting the emphatical Particle (...) in the Translation.

The old Latin Version reads it, That ye be not moved from your sense. Ne cito
moveamini a vestr^ sensu. Vulg. Lat. ita Chrysostom. (...), vox ab arena maris
sumpta, quae in Syrtibus congeritur a fluctibus ut montes appareant, sed mox
dissipentur ut ne vestigia quidem appareant. Aretius.


That ye be not soon shaken in mind, so reads our English Translation.

The variance of interpretors lies in [(...)] for as for (...), the Learned do
all agree, that it properly signifies to toss or shake this way, and that way;
this is the usual signification of it in Scripture, as Matthew. 11. 7. What went
ye out for to see? a reed (a ventis (...)) shaken of the wind? and why is John
called a reed shaken of the wind, but because he began to doubt whether Jesus
were the Christ, and therefore for the more certainty sends one of his
Disciples to know from his own mouth whether he were the Christ, or whether he
must look for another? A strange distemper in John's faith, that he that had
heard the voice from heaven at his Baptism, and had certain knowledge of his
miracles, should now begin to doubt, and think to have it resolved by a word
from his mouth. In this sense the Septuagint use the word, and few use it in
any other sense then to signify a violent concussion or a disordered
distracting fear: which violently assaulting the soul, makes it drive from its
station, like a ship in a storm, whose Anchor has no other fastening then the
mud of the Sea, which is not able in a storm to keep the Ship from driving;
and such are seduced Christians, their hope is like a fleeting Anchor, which
whiles they hope for heaven, are driven by the winds and tempests of Seducers
from the fairer Haven of Truth, yet still drag this groundless Anchor of hope
after them.

(...), to a word, From the mind. Some Learned men understand it simply of the
rational faculty of the soul called the mind; to note, that commonly they that
are seduced by such impostors, are usually drawn into mad and Ita enim
significat Apostolus homines istorum impostorum fraudibus ad furorem and
insaniam rapi. Bez^. Oriens crassissimis Ma^umetis impesturis deceptus,
idololatria a Pontifice Romano in occidentem invecta, Anabaptistarum,
Libertinorum, Davidistarum furiae satis super que ostendunt; communi etiam
sensu privatos esse, qui a vero Christianismo deficiunt. Beza.
unreasonable practices and opinions, as Beza observes, bringing for an
instance, the madness and unreasonableness of the Eastern people seduced to
Mahometism: and of the Western Christians under the Papacy, together with the
ragings of Anabaptists, Libertines, Davidists, and others; which do evidently
declare to the world that these Apostates have lost their common reason;
therefore Paul advises these Thessalonians, that these Seducers rob them not
of their reason; that they do not remove them a mente, from their mind; the
Latin word [ mens] (which here the Translators use) comes, as the Learned
observe, from a Greek word which signifies the Moon, to note the various
dispositions Men's (...),.i. a Luna.
of the mind. Paul's Doctrine was the Sun, and the Thessalonick Church was the
Moon, which by those heavenly rays was enlightened; now in came these Seducers
(as the gross body of the earth betwixt the Sun and the Moon) and caused a
great Eclipse in the minds of the Thessalonians: They that Paul left confirmed
in the Truth, are now shaken off from the Truth: This Moon that was as white as
snow in the truth, is now turning into blood, and darkened through the deceits
of these impostors. Hoodwink a Church with error or mis-belief, and in that
(...)
mopish fit it is apt to be led any way by Seducers. The Scholiasts
interpretation on this Text is notable: That ye be not shaken in mind, i. e. to
be troubled or terrified out of ignorance of mind and servility of^t, in
prostituting it to the lusts of Seducers: There is no way to lead a Religious
mind, but by darkning it, and terrifying it. Other Learned Interpreters, by
mind here understand the faith, conceiving mind to be put by a Metonimy of the
Subject, for the faith, it being the seat of faith; and in this sense they
understand it, who read the words, a vestro sensu, that is (say they) from the
truth I Paul taught you concerning the day of Judgment, and the great Apostasy
of the Gospel Church before that day, which you by faith embraced.

Others conceive that Paul speaks here of the Regenerate mind, whereby they did
apprehend the truths of the Gospel; as if he should say, after once you have
been brought Forsan loquitur de mente renat a, qua apprehenderint veritatem
Evangelii; quasi dicat, postquam semel animo percepistis and amplexi estis
sanam fidei doctrinam, ne a boua ista mente dimoveamini. Zancbeus. Ne facile
dimoveamini ab illa sententia, nempe quam me docente imbibistis. Grotius.
to know aright, and embrace the saving Doctrine of faith, suffer not your
selves to be removed from this saving knowledge.

Grotius expounds (...), a sentence or Doctrine delivered.

Since these various and Learned opinions do circle the Truth, I will not give
the precedence to any; but as Augustine in such a like case said, so shall I,
and I suppose it best becomes Religio^ius me arbitror dicere, cur non utrumque
potius, si utrumque verum est? Aug. in Praef. Confess.
me to say, Why may not all these interpretations be taken in, since there is
so much probability of truth in all, and so little clashing betwixt any.
Loquitur de timore indiscreto, non de timore cauto. Gorhan. (...) from (...).
Piscat. in locum. Ne terrefiatis strepitu and clamore tumultuantium. Zanch. in
locum. (...) significat turbationem illam quae ex verbis enasci solet. (...)
enim est proprie (...)* loqui. Aretius.


Nor be troubled. The Greek word comes from a word (say the Critics) which
signifies the clamor or noise of those that make a tumult. To this Zanchie
agrees, Therefore Nor be troubled, he thus expounds, Be not ye terrified with
the clamor and noise of those Incendiaries, those false Alarmers of the Church,
which (as Aretius observes from the word) with their mouthing terrible words of
deceit and lies, went about to raise a storm in a quiet Haven, to the intent to
shipwreck the Church. An Army sometimes is more easily overthrown by a false
Alarm in the night, then by a pitched Battle in the day: this was the way that
these Seducers went, first they went to make it night in their understandings
by leading them from the truth, and then they intended to give them a false
Alarm to distract them, fear them, and disorder them: As Gideon by his
Rams*horns sounding, his Pitchers chinking, and his new and sudden light
appearing, ruined that strong and mighty Army; so did these Seducers intend by
the chinking of their Pitchers, producing of their new and unexpected light,
and crying the word of the Lord, and the word of Paul, intend to rent and ruin
the Church of Thessalonica: Now Paul, that he might prevent the mischief,
endeavors to remove the cause; which lay more in the weak minds and timorous
hearts of the Thessalonians, then in any thing else; for had they held fast to
Paul's Truth (which it seems by ver. 5. they had forgot) and not been terrified,
these Seducers had been utterly disappointed of their ends; for they came into
this Church but as Pick-pockets into a Fair, making an uproar on purpose
thereby with more ease to beguile the people; therefore the Apostle says to
this effect, O ye Thessalonians, Non solum non moveamini quoad intellectum, sed
neque terreamini quoad affectum, Gorhanus. Having thus discovered the inward
causes of this Church-commotion, he proceeds to discover (by way of dehortation
from) the extrinsick causes of this Church-quake.

CHAP. IV.
NEither by Spirit, nor by word, nor by letter, as from us.

Christ when he plucked up the pale of his only ( quondam) Royal Park, the
Jewish Church: He chose the Gentiles for his Forest, and Paul that had been
the Devils Huntsman heretofore, is now made Christ's Ranger of this Forest; he
with his commission from Christ goes (^like another Orpheus with an harp from
Apollo) and makes such melodious Music upon that heavenly harp the Gospel,
that by the Almighty power of him that sent him, he made multitudes of people
like woods to follow him; he made the trees of the Forest to bud and bring
forth fruit to God: He tamed the wild Beasts, and turned stones to living
creatures, which became the sons and daughters of Abraham: In this Forest
there were many night-walkers, who did hunt with unlawful nets, and went about
to destroy Christ's Spiritual Game, they had many baits and snares about every
Borough, especially this at Thessalonica: Now that Paul might spoil their
unlawful Game, he breaks their nets and spoils their baits; which he does by
discovering them, for these Seducers (like cunning Fishers) had mudded and
troubled the waters, that so their nets might not be discovered; they raised a
storm in that Church, and then (like Sirens) sang their deceitful tunes in that
storm. Spiritus hic dupliciter accipitur, vel pro Spiritu maligno apparente in
specie boni Angeli, 2 Cor. 11. vel pro Spiritu Sancto, i. e. pro revelatione,
quam aliquis dicat a Spiritu Sancto fact a. Gorhan. in ^oc. Per Spiritum,.i.
commentiti^ revelationes, quas cuthusiastae jactant, se a Spiritu Dei accepisse
Zanc. in loc. (...). Occum. in locum


Neither by Spirit. Some conceive that Paul uses the word Spirit (...),
mimically, in an holy scoff at those Spirit-mongers, who came with their
empty, vain dreams and opinions, pretending them to be revelations of the
Spirit; therefore says John, Believe not every Spirit, 1 Ioh. 4. 1. i. e.
every fellow that pretends to have the Spirit.

Primasius conceives by Spirit is meant the strange signs that Seducers shall
show, pretending them to be done by the Spirit: such Juglers there were
doubtless in those days, as well as those we live in.

Spirit (say others) by a Metonimy is here put for the revelation of the
Spirit, because the Spirit is the Efficient cause of revelation, these false
Teachers came and fained revelations (as Zanchie has it) and then fathered it
on the Spirit, as Oecumenius has it, although those false Prophets themselves
were the Authors of it.

Some conceive that by Spirit here is meant Prophecy; and not unlike, for the
Spirit of Prophecy was then one special gift of the Holy Ghost, and that which
Christians were to give much heed unto, and to try them by the Rule, i. e. of
the old Testament Prophesies, as well as by the new delivered by the Apostles.
Now this being the likeliest way to deceive the people, in came these Seducers
at this golden gate Hence Theophylact expounds it, Prophecy; (...) Theophil.
because (as he conceives) certain men did counterfeit a Prophecy, as that the
day of Judgment was at hand. If I should quote Beza, Aretius, Piscator, and
many more Commentators, it would but inform us, that they vary only in
expression, scarce any thing in sense: Therefore I leave the Reader to follow
whom he pleases. Per sermore^,] Supple nostru^, vel a nobis dictum: Hoc enim
intelligendum esse arguunt sequentia in Graco. C. a Lap. in locum.


Nor by word.] Here must be added [ As from us:] and probably, [ as from us]
has relation both to Spirit, Word, and Epistle; and so the Apostles meaning
may be, We had no such revelation from the Spirit, we never delivered any such
thing in any Sermon, nor did we ever write any Epistle that expressed any such
Doctrine.

The word (...) (as the Learned observe) is here put for a specious pretense;
So it is used in Coloss. 2. 23. which things (...), have a show of wisdom, a
specious pretense of high Divinity.

Others (as Hyperius and Zanchy) conceive the word imports (...).
as much as (...), which signifies a perswasory speech, (...). A word that Paul
uses Col. 2. 4. Lest any one beguile you with enticing words, or probability
of speech.

(...) is an adapted perswasory speech to make that Oration ad persuadendu^
comparata, quo etiam proprie spectat verbum (...) Beza. (...). Sic Scholia.
which is spoken (be it true or false) seem to be a real, clear, and undobted
truth. It is in Logic called a Paralogisme, which (says Aretius) the false
Apostles here made; drawing their false conclusions from 1 Thessalonians. 4. 15, 17.
Thus they might argue from these words, Then we which remain alive shall be
caught up together with them in the clouds, and so shall we ever be with the
Lord. Now if Paul reckon himself and the present Saints of Thessalonica amongst
the number of them that shall be alive to be caught up with Christ; then the
day of Judgment must be near; for Paul is well stricken in years, and many of
the Saints of Thessalonica are old, and ready to go to their graves: But (say
they) Paul expressly says, We that are alive shall be caught up together with
him. Ergo, The day of Judgment is near at hand. Per se^monem, scil. Dialecticae
fallaciae, vel Rhetoricae suasionis* Primas.


Such kind of Sophisme, Zuinglius, Primasius, Hyperius and Aretius conceive the
Apostle means.

Cornelius a Lapide and Estius, by word, understand the word or sermon of Paul;
as if Paul should say any such thing, that the day of Judgment was at hand; for
(says Estius) the false Apostles affirmed, se ex ore Pauli audivisse, that
they heard Paul speak it, That the day of Judgment was at hand: from believing
which, the Apostle dehorts them, flatly denying that any such word ever
proceeded out of his mouth.

Nor by letter, as from us.] This is to a Neque per Epistolam, tanquam nobis
authoribus. Oecumenius, H^enius, Erasmus. Tanquam per nos scriptam. Beza. Vel
fingebant in nomine Pauli, vel alludit ad superiorem Epistolam, in qua de die
Domini disseruit. Zanch. in locum. Epistolas fabricabant sub Apostolorum
nomine. Grotius. Caeterum suggerit nobilissimus hic locus lucul^ntissimum
methodum tractandi de haereti^is; quorum historiam quisquis novi^, fa^ebitur
nec verius, nec brevius, nec planius quicquam de iis dici potuisse: cum in ^a
tempora inciderimus, quibus non jam sit divinandum in quem (...) ista
competant, sed aperiendi duntaxat oculi, ut quae futura praedixit Apostolus,
praesentiacernamus. Bez. in locum.
word according to the Vulgar Translation, which reads it so from the Greek
Copy.

It Is generally conceived, that those false Apostles did either forge Epistles
in Paul's name, or set false glosses upon those he writ: Therefore says
Theophylact, these Seducers (...), They fained Epistles, as if they had been
written and sent forth by Paul: and Zanchy (as others) conceives, that either
they did forge Epistles in Paul's name; or else Paul alludes to the former
Epistle, where he had treated of this day of Judgment. Beza has a notable
saying upon these words, very fit to be applied to our times, alluding to the
heretics of those times he lived in. If Beza, which saw those monsters but in
their babieclouts, did conceive this Text to be fulfilled in his time; what
would he have said if he were now alive in England to see these monsters in
their full strength and power? But I leave this.

As that the day of Christ is at hand] or instantly to be. Some conceive (...)
signifies here the time past, and so the false doctrine here they make to be
the same with that in 2 Timothy 2. 17, 18. of Hymeneus and Philetus, who affirmed
that the Resurrection (...) hic dicitur de re prasenti. Grot.
was already past: but there is no word in the Greek Copy in all this Text, to
draw any such Interpretation from (...): But we have parallel texts to prove
that the word signifies the present Quasi instet dies.] Repetit Apostolus per
Memisin verba seductorum, Ecce instet dies Domini. Zanc
time, whether the present year, or the present generation, it is indifferent;
but it signifies present: 1 Cor. 3. 22. (...), either things present.

Some conceive possibly, the Apostle here repeats the words in derision of the
false Apostles, who made it all their cry, The day of Christ is coming upon us,
It Is close at hand, it is close at hand.

Zuinglius affirms, that the Apostle took occasion to write this dehortation
from a certain book that was writ Anno 24. which had this false doctrine of the
day of Judgment's being at hand. This may have some probability, if Zuinglius
mean the 24 year after Christ's Ascension. But I can neither fully believe him,
nor clearly disprove him.

But the most learned conceive, that the Apostle grounds his Dehortation upon
certain false teachers Doctrine, that of mere envy took upon them the
profession of Christianity (possibly they were crafty Jews of that City) on
purpose to overthrow it when they saw an opportunity: and Paul being absent,
they thought the fittest time to do mischief was Error autem istorum, quorsum
tendebat? 'Nempe, ut cum fideles viderent diem Domini ultra praescriptum tempus
differi, vel impatientia deficerent, vel omnia duc^rent pro fabulis. Interim
vero fictiliis is it is revelationibus mirum ni pseudoprophetae magnam sibi
compara^ant sapientiae opinionem ad alios spargendos errores. Beza in locum.
then. Now the mischef they intended was twofold: 1. To bring Paul, and
Silvanus, and Timotheus into the greatest disgrace that might be, by defaming
them as Seducers, false prophets, Baals priests, Antichristian Ministers, etc.
for if the day of Judgment did not fall out at their false set time, Paul and
Silvanus and Timotheus should be in all the blame; these false teachers would
have seriously professed that they were misled by those false prophets, Paul,
and Silvanus and Timotheus; but now their eyes were opened to perceive plainly
that they were seducers, and for their part, they would no longer follow them,
nor their Doctrine, which was so evidently false. Such an engine in that age
(as well as this) might have blowed up a whole Church at once, and have made
professors turn Apostates, and hate their Ministers. 2. By this Doctrine they
intended to bring the Christian Religion into public disgrace; not only Ideo
Paulus nolebat ut illi crederent eis, a quibus audiebant instare diem Domini,
ne forte cum transire^ tempus, quo cum cr^diderant esse venturum, et venisse
non cernerent; etiam caetera fallaciter sibi promitti arbitrantes de ipsa
mercede fidei (...). Bed. in loc. Tempus aliquod definitum, et certum, ut diem,
horam, mensem annum, saeculum significare affirmabant. Rolloc.
to cast out Paul, but Paul's doctrine out of all esteem; for could they have
possessed the people, that the day of Judgment would certainly be that present
year (for it is conceived that that was their design) the Christians that
believed it, would have neither sowed their seed, nor dressed their vineyards,
nor provided for their families, for to what purpose (...) had been, when they
daily expected fire from heaven to consume all? Now what a hardening would this
have been, both to the heathens on one hand, and to the Jews (who had there a
Synagogue) on the other hand, when they should have seen these poor Christians
and their Families in extreme want of family necessaries, merely through the
delusions of their Religion? what shame and reproach would it be to Christians?
and how would the Christian Religion have been cried down as a most false
deceitful Religion? and what a door had here been opened for weak Christians
to have apostatized to their former Atheism? Many hundred years after, our
Ecclesiastical histories tell us, that the Devil by such a cheat drew away
many Professors to become Atheists, when they saw the day of Judgment
(according to their Seducers Predictions) came not to pass.

Ver. 3. Let no man deceive you by any means.] The Apostle proceeds from
entreating to commanding; and that negatively, that it might be the more
obligatory at all times to their consciences; Let no man deceive you by any
means.] (...) (as noble Leigh that famous Critic observes) signifies such a
deceit which a false thief uses to a traveller, offering himself a Par on Romans
16. 18.
guide to direct him a better way to his journeys end, and so leading him to
some dismal place that he may rob him.

By any means.] (...), to a word it is thus, By any version; and so the meaning
most probably is this, Let no one deceive you by any misinterpretation, or
subtle kind of false glosses upon any Sermon I preached, or Epistle that I
writ to you, or any other of the Churches; and so this negative precept is
brought in as a vehement reiteration of his dehortatory Petition, which
mightily confirms his Doctrine, that the general day of Judgment is not at
hand. This doctrine he confirms in the ten next Verses. Thus I have done with
the Doctrinal part.

The Second Part. Of the general Apostasy from the true Profession of
Christianity, and of the Antichrist.
Ver. 3. FOr that day shall not come, except there come a falling away first,
and that man of sin be revealed, the son of perdition,

4. Who opposes and exalts himself above all that is called God, or that is
worshipped; so that he as God, sits in the temple of God, showing himself
that he is God.

5. Remember ye not that when I was yet with you, I told you these things?

6. And now ye know what withholds, that he might be revealed in his time.

7. For the mystery of iniquity does already work; only he who now leteth, will
let, until he be taken out of the way.

8. And then shall that wicked be revealed, whom the Lord will consume with the
Spirit of his mouth, and shall destroy with the brightness of his coming.

9. Even he whose coming is after the working of Satan, with all power, and
signs, and lying wonders,

10. And with all deceivableness of unrighteousness in them that perish,
because they received not the love of the truth that they might be saved.

11. And for this cause God shall send them strong delusions, that they should
believe a lie:

12. That they all might be damned who believed not the truth, but had pleasure
in unrighteousness.

CHAP. I.
THis portion of Scripture stands amongst Paul's Epistles like the Tower of
Ophel upon the wall of Jerusalem, clouded and shadowed with sacred Mysteries;
it may well be put amongst his (...), hard places of Scripture to be understood,
which not only the unlearned, but some Learned have wrested (for ought I know)
to their own and others destruction. Here we may truly take up the Rabins
saying, meeting with a hard place of Scripture, Opus^st hi^ quadringentis
Camelis onust is commentariis rationem reddere: We had need of four hundred
Camels loads of Commentaries to give us light into this Prophecy.

The Prophecy in general is of the great Apostasy in the Gentile Gospel
Church, and of the Antichrist.

Now such, and so numerous are the various opinions of Learned men about
Antichrist, that it gives occasion to many men who regard not the times or the
seasons, scoffingly to give out, that Antichrist is some ignis fatuus, that is
now in this Kingdom, now in that, anon no where, and presently again every
where; some make him a Devil, some a State, some a particular man, a King, a
General. Others give out, that Antichrist is like the Philosophers Stone, much
talked on, but never seen yet, or known: But all these Scoffers do not one jot
diminish the truth of the sacred Word concerning Antichrist; for as for
example, there are many Ignoramuses this day in States affairs (amongst whom my
self is one) that do not distinctly know who are the Custodes Libertatis
Angliae: some say, the General Council of the Army; some say, the House of
Commons, as now modelled; others, the Council of State; others, the Keepers of
the Great Seal; and others, the Judges of the Land: now because we through our
ignorance, do not know them, will it therefore follow, that there are no
Custodes Libertatis Angliae? this would prove in the end but a bad conclusion;
for my part, I draw no such conclusions, but my prayer to God and my hope is,
that he will speedily dispel all fogs and mists of ignorance from deceived
people, that at last they may eminently and clearly perceive who are the Very
Custodes Libertatis Angliae. But to our purpose.

That there have been, and are many Antichrists, and that there is to be
eminently the Antichrist in the world before the day of Judgment, none can
deny that do confess the truth of the Scriptures. In 1 Ioh. 2. 18. 22 there you
have (...), the petty Antichrists, and twice, (...), the great Antichrist,
eminently Antichrist. Of this Antichrist there are various opinions, which
arise many of them from the very word: as (say some) Antichrist must be one
that pretends to be for Christ, but is the great enemy to Christ and his
Saints; and this they draw from the Preposition (...), which our Grammers tell
us, signifies both for and against; in opposition it is put for [ for] and so
both Humane Antichristus significat Aemulum, seu vicarium Christi.
Authors and the Scripture frequently inform us; as Ioh. 1. 16. (...), and
Grace for Grace. But Critics who give this gloss, do affirm that both in
opposition and composition it signifies [ for] and [ against]; but I suppose it
seldom signifies [ for] in composition, but [ against] and so generally Authors
understand the word (...), for one that opposes Christ: So says Hillary, it
is the property of the name of Antichrist, Dicitur (...), quia in cunctis
contrarius est Christo and ipsius Evangelio; hoc enim significat vox (...).
Danaeus.
to be contrary to Christ, Nominis Antichristi propriet as est, esse Christo
contrarium; and so say other Authors.

But if we will have the full signification of this compound word we must look
as well to the signification of the word (...), as (...) comes from (...),
which signifies to anoint* and so the word (...) signifies against the
Anointed: who the Anointed are, Rev. 11. 4, 5, 6. compared with Zach. 4. 3,
11, 14. tell us. In the Church under the Ceremonial Law, the King and the
Priests only were anointed; indeed Prophets were anointed sometimes, but that
was extraordinary, not by Ceremonial constitution, but immediate command. These
two Sacred functions are not destroyed, but refined under the Gospel: so that
probably the (...), is he that slaies the Witnesses, for his proper name is the
Opposer of the Lords Anointed, the enemy that makes war with, and overcomes
the sons of Oil, the Witnesses, the two Olive trees.

This is that Antichrist which Paul in this place characterizeth. Some Learned
men take this Prophecy of Paul's to be so clear a description of Antichrist,
that they say it is a Commentary on John who has writ the Mystery of
Antichrist.

Without all doubt Paul does say much of Antichrist in this place, if we were
able to dive into the bottom of his profound mysteries, but the well is deep and
the cords of our abilities are but short, so that we cannot go so deep as he
has dug in this sacred Fountain.

But of all learned sayings to this purpose, give me that eminent Typice
adumbravit Daniel, topice planius deliniavit Paulus, before Johannes in cap.
13. and 17. Antichristum descripsit.
Prideaux, I mean Prideaux the Divine, who says thus, ' Daniel 'hath discussed
Antichrist Typically, Paul more clearly has 'drawn him out Topically, and John
in Rev. chap, 13. and 17. has 'described him more fully.

I am very confident, that Rev. 13. and 17. do set forth the Antichrist
(together with this Prophecy of Paul's) more fully then any other Chapters in
the whole Bible:

In the touching upon this Prophecy, we shall first endeavor to show Paul's
method, and then his meaning.

This following is Paul' s Analysis of the Antichrist.

In this prophecy is foretold the great things that shall be visible in the
gosp. Church before the day of Judgment: which are in general two.
1. The general Apostasy is (...)* ver. 3. 2. The manifestation of the Man of
sin, the Antichrist, who is described by a threefold Character. 1. By his
nature, and that 2 ways. 2. By the time of his appearing in the world, which
is demonstrated 3 ways. 3. By his actions when he does appear: which are set
forth by their 1. By his names given to him; which are five. 2. By his
qualities (ver. 4.) which are four. 1. (...) 2. (...). 3. (...). ver. 4. 4.
(...). ver. 8. 5. (...). ver. 11.
1 He is a self-seeker. 2 A rebel against Magistracy and Ministry. 3 He is a
specious hypocrite 4 An usurper over the people of God.

1. By a demonstration a priori, ver. 5, 6. they had been taught it before. 2.
By an ocular demonstration, a praesenti, ver. 7. from the mystery of iniquity
then working; viz. to overthrow the Church. From the likeness of that present
to the mystery to come the Apostle argues. 3. A causa impediente, from the
impediments that kept down this man of Sin, he argues to the time of his
appearing. ver. 8.
1. Kind, diabolical; with power, signs, and lying wonders, and all
deceivableness, ver. 9. 10. 2. Effects, which are to seduce professors, loose
and hypocritical professors. v. 11. 3. Issue and end: viz. the everlasting
damnation of himself and followers. v. 12. whose followers are characterized,
etc.


CHAP. II.
NOw we come to show the meaning of these words, which that we may, we will
endeavor to read them right.

Ver. 3. Let no man deceive you by any means, for that day shall not come
except there come a falling away first, and that man of sin be revealed, that
son of perdition. So our English Translation (...), which is translated thus,
Non enim adve*nit dies Christi quin venerit defectio prius. Beza.

Nam non prius id futurum est quam venerit defectio. Sebast. Castalion.

Quo^iam nifi venerit prius rebellio. Interpret. Syriac. sic Tremel. and Vulg.
Lect. Grotius in loc. (...).

Bazi^ius in Psalm. 7.

Ibi de hac figur^ Sermonis disscrit. Camerar.


reads it, and to this sense do all or the most of the Latin Translations read
it: yet all of them acknowledge that there is not one Iota of that clause, [
That day shall not come] in the Greek Copy.

Those that take not in this supply of words make the sense go lame, as the
Syrack Interpreter, Tremelius, and the Vulgar Translation.

And how to add these words to the Copy, I know not; I confess I know what the
Learned^ say in defense of it.

They say [(...)] it is an (...), that is, when one, through vehemence, cutteth
off some part of a sentence, yet so as that the whole may be understood; so
that the Apostles words import as much as this, (...); this brings it just to
our English Translation; and for confirmation of this manner of reading the
Text, they affirm that this figure of speech is commonly found among the Greek
Writers. But I much question whether all this will give a man sufficient
warrant to add these words in a Translation, I confess they would do well in a
Paraphrase: I am sure it is the safest and best way for a Translator to keep to
the Copy as near as he can, to a word, and therefore I shall beg leave to seek
out some other English reading nearer to the word.

The great stumble is made at [(...)] which being not looked on as an Hebraism,
may be one cause of not discerning the Apostles emphatical expression therein:
it is true indeed that (...) is a casual conjunction, and so it is usually
found both in Humane and Divine Authors; but in this place I humbly conceive
that it is neither particula causativa, nor illativa, but affirmativa, and so
the Learned tell us, that (...) est particula affirmantis, and also that it is
used asseverandi causa: so veryemphatically the Particle (...) is used in 1
Ioh. 3. 20. For if our hearts condemn us, (...), verily God is greater then our
hearts; and (with submission) I conceive, that (...) in John. 8. 24 should be
translated verily, (...), Verily ye shall dye in your sins; like unto this is
that (...) in Matthew. 7. 23. Verily, I never knew you; it is used by way of
asseveration. And then the next Particle (...). it is translated in several
places of Scripture [ but] as Matthew 26 42. Father, if this cup may not pass,
(...), But I must drink it; and in Galat. 2. 16. A man is not justified, (...),
-- but by faith. And it is Learnedly observed by one, that (...), to which
(...) is answerable, is translated by the Septuagint, (...), [ but] Genesis 24.
38. Beza translates it [ quin] in the Text: so that we may read it to a word,
thus, [ Verily, but there shall come the Apostasy first, and that man of sin
shall be revealed:] So that this seems to be the sense, You Thessalonians, by
false Teachers that pretend to have revelation, are taught, that the day of
Judgment is near at hand; but we that have the true spirit of Prophecy, do
assuredly know the contrary; it is no such matter; but verily there must come
the Apostasy first, and the man of sin must be revealed before that day come.
There is more to do for the Church then to pass presently from Egypt to
Canaan; they shall find a barren wilderness to pass through, and there
Serpents shall bite them, and enemies shall annoy them, and thirst shall
afflict them. The Church the Spouse must be conformable while she is militant,
to Christ her Husband when he was militant. Now Christ before (in his Humane
Nature) he became actually ( quod ad nos) triumphant, he was drove into Egypt,
he was carried into the Wilderness, where he was extraordinarily afflicted
forty days, and then he was assaulted by the old Dragon the Devil, and after
that forsaken of all, betrayed by a bosome-friend, and murdered by hypocrital
Professors, but plain Apostates; who reproached him more then the Heathens that
knew not God: even so must the Gospel Church in the representative body, viz.
in her lawful Magistracy and Ministry, be drove into the Wilderness, bitten
by Heretics, Rebels and Apostates, and at last slain by hypocritical
Professors, as Revel. 11. informs us, together with this prophecy of Paul's.
Thus Paul in the general gives the Churches of Christ to know, that their
passage from earth to heaven in all ages, shall be rough and craggie; through
many afflictions we must enter into the kingdom of heaven. We may say of the
Church, as Christ said of himself, Ought not the Son of man to suffer these
things, and to ascend into glory? He first debased his head to drink of the
torrent of afflictions here, before he lifted up his head unto glory. So ought
not the Eastern Churches defection, Mahumetan idolatry, and Popish blasphemy,
and Apostasy, to drive the Church into the wilderness? and ought not the
Antichrist to slay the Witnesses, before there be a glorious resurrection of
the Church? yes, doubtless there is a necessity for it, for the holy Ghost
has foretold it; and she must be conformable to her head, who was made perfect
by sufferings. Psalm. 110. He shall drink of the brook in the way. It Is not his
way, but [the way] and [the brook] to note, that that way, and that brook, is
the general road wherein the Church must follow Christ; that brook they must
wade through. The way, and the brook remain still, though the deadly poison of
the brook be totally taken away, and the fatal precipi^es in that way be
levelled by Christ; he has sanctified the way, in going before us in it. There
is the wrath of men and devils in this way still, but there is not one dram of
the wrath of God in this way, nor in this brook: The deadly poison Christ
drank, which killed him; since which, it has no power on us. But to the work
intended, Explication.

(...) Agustin translates it for (...), refuga, a Aug. de (...). Dei, (...).
20. (...). 19.
lawless runagate person: whether his translation misled him in the
interpretation; or his mistake in his interpretation (a common error) caused
him to translate it to his purpose, I cannot tell; but both Theodoretus,
Irenaeus and Augustine conceive, that it is to be understood of the Antichrist;
yet not properly, but by a figure, they say, by a Metonymie. Antichrist is
called the Apostacy, because he is the cause of an universal Apostasy: such
a strange kind of mistake is that which makes the Popedom the Man of Sin. But
observe, what inconsiderate things follow this opinion; for if by the Apostasy
be meant Antichrist, then the Apostasy is to be but three years and a half,
and at the end of three years and a half, or within few days after, the day of
Judgment comes, by these men's own confessions, if we take but a larger view of
their opinions concerning Antichrist, and so the Prophesies of the witnesses in
sackcloth, and the Church in the Wilderness, and the witnesses slaying, and
the day of Judgment, must be all included within the compass of three years and
a half, for they say Antichrist must reign but three years and a half; and then
comes the day of Judgment, when he and all his followers shall be destroyed:
now such necessary consequences do both contradict their own writings, and
Chrysostom. in 1 Cor. 14* Homil. 36.
many of the Fathers who complaine^ of the Apostasy in their days: but my
intent is not to confute opinions, for that were endless on this Subject.

Tertullian reads abscessio, a departing away, this is near to the Copy. The
Syriack reads rebellio, a rebellion, and so say the most Interpreters the word
signifies.

Mariana shoots three arrows at this Mark; he says, that by the Apostasy here
is meant 1. Either the Rebellion against Nero the Roman Emperor; or 2. The
Rebellion of the Jews against Florus; or 3. It is meant of the ruin of the
Roman Vel de terreno Romano Imperio, vel de spirituali Imperio Romanae
Ecclefia* vel de fide, vel de Antichristo. Hugo de S. V.
Monarchy: Hugo, the better Archer of the two at this mark, says, it may be
understood either of the civil Empire, or of the Ecclesiastic Empire of Rome,
or of Antichrist, or of the Apostasy from the faith.

Lyra, a Learned Christian Jew, conceives, that Paul speaks occultly of the
Ruin of the Roman Empire, or of the Spiritual Government of the Church, or of
the departure from the faith.

Montanus, Fab. Paulutius, Estius, Hugo Cardin, Salmeron, Pererius, Primasius,
Anselm, Piscator, Calvin, and very many others do say, that by the Apostasy is
meant the general Apostasy from the faith.

Calvin wonders that ever Learned men should have such an Miror tam multos
Scriptores, alioqui dooto^ and acutos* in re tam falsa hallucina^os esse, nifi
quod quum errasset unus, turmati^ alii five judicio secuti sunt. Calvin.
erroneous judgment, as to think it is meant of the Apostasy from the Roman
Emperor.

Aquinas treating on this Subject, and viewing the opinions of the Fathers,
especially Augustine, who from the Image ( Dan. 2.) typifying four Kingdoms or
Monarchies, the last of which being the Roman Monarchy, at the end of which
Antichrist would come and ruin it, and then Christ would come to Judgment and
ruin him; and this Augustine makes the signum conveniens, because the Roman
Monarchy was standing firm, and under its power the Gospel should in
probability be preached to all the world, And then the end (says Christ)
comes.

But (says Aquinas) how can this be true of the Roman Empire, when the Nations
have long since revolted Sed quomodo est hoc? qui jam-din gentes recesserunt a
Romano Imperio, and tamen nec-dum venit Antichristus? dicendum est quod nondum
cessavit; sed est commutatum de temporali in Spirituale; ut dicit Leo Papa in
S^rmone de Apostolis; and ideo dicendum est quod discessio a Romano Imperio
debet intelligi non solum a Temporali, sed a Spirituali, scilicet a fide
Catholica Romanae Ecclesiae; Est autem hoc conveniens signum, quod Christus
venit quum sicut Romanum Imperium omnibus dominabatur; ita e converso, signum
Antichristi est discessio ab eo. Aquinas in locum.
from it, and yet neither Antichrist is come, nor Christ to Judgment? seeking
therefore for a more convenient sign, he makes use of Pope Leo his Sermon upon
the Apostles, who affirms, that Rome is changed from a Temporal to a
Spiritual Kingdom, and so the departure from the Roman Empire, is to be
understood of the Apostasy from the Spiritual, that is, from the Roman
Catholic faith; and he makes this the signum conveniens of Antichrists coming,
viz. the general Apostasy, by an Argument taken from the rule of contraries;
for as Christ came when the Roman Empire ruled over all, so Antichrist shall
come when there is a general defection from it, viz. the faith of Christ
professed in the Roman Church, which he calls the Spiritual Empire.

In the application of this Text, we find the Papists and Protestants clashing
against each other: the Papists say, this Apostasy is that of the Protestants
from the Roman Church; and the Protestants say, that this Apostasy is that of
the Roman Church from the purity of Doctrine and Discipline which was once to
be found in the Roman Church; and herein the Protestants utterly overthrow the
Papists, proving the Apostasy of the Roman Church so clearly, that there is
none can stand against them, or gainsay them with any color of truth.

Grotius conceives, the Holy Ghost points here at Caius Caligula, the Successor
of Tiberius in the Roman Empire, who made a great apostasy from the good deeds
of Augustus and Tiberius (his Predecessors) which they did to the Jews, and to
their Religion: what they did to please the Jews, this did undo to displease
and disprofit the Jews. After this manner he makes him run parallel with the
other part of the Prophecy; but this is rather Iusus then allusio; rather a
sporting with, then expounding of Scripture. He shows us how foolish a
Commentator man's fancy is of Scripture, be the man never so learned; and how
easily a man may be deluded by the strength of his fantasy to believe a lie,
when it is so byased with its own parallels, as to melt sacred Texts into its own
mould, and shape it to its own liking. What is it but transitus a genere in
genus, to make historical notions in humanity, to beget the conclusions of
Divinity? like that high-strung Musician Aristoxenus, who would out of the
principles of Music, determine the nature of a humane soul; and what usually
is the end of such men's violent labors, but only, Praxitiles-like, to make
beguiled minds bow down to the painted Strumpet of their fancies?

The reason why so many learned men have (like drunken men) reeled, and
rambled, and stumbled, and fell in their Treatises upon Prophetic Texts, is
because they ^ipple themselves first with the brainsick wine of their own
fancies drawing. This has been, and to this day is, I am confident, the cause
of those gross mistakes concerning the pouring out of the vials, making all the
vials almost of Gods wrath to be poured out upon Rome and her adherents; when,
if we look into Scripture soberly, and into History with an unbyassed judgment,
we shall find not one vial as yet to be poured out. I know this opinion is
vinegar and smoke to some, but I presume, not to sober men well read in these
mysteries: humane Histories at the best are but the worst Interpreters of the
Scripture: The body of the Scripture is like Solomon's Temple, which a wiser
then Solomon has builded for the Church of God; every stone is fitted before
it come hither for its fellow, here window answers to window, and pillar to
pillar; no noise of axe or hammer is heard throughout it: The Scripture is like
Jerusalem, compact and at unity in it self; it is (as Strabo says of that
City) (...), well watered within it self; so that we need not go any farther
then the threshold of the Sanctuary, we need not go over it to quench our
thirsty desires of understanding it: There is no Doctrinal truth for the
feeding of the Church, nor any Prophetic truth for the comforting of the
Church, but it is established (2 Cor. 13. 1.) in the mouth of two or three
witnesses: the fault is only in our selves, we are weak sighted, and cannot
perceive them, nor distinguish them: Let not the Reader think I cry down either
the searching into, or the applying of humane History to divine Texts, but only
the riotous fancies of those who in their writings set up History against
Scripture, and (I had almost said) reason it self: I will willingly give as
much worship to History in the Divinity School, as the Schoolmen give to Images
in the Church, that is, cultum respectivum, but not so much worship as the
Papists give to Images this day,.i. cultum conjunctum.

My task therefore shall be to search after that testimony which the Scriptures
give concerning the Apostasy, and that testimony (though but single) will
carry it against all others.

I shall only first mention the reason that they give (that hold Paul means the
ruin of the Roman Empire in this place) why Paul did not speak plainly and
openly of it: To this the Greek and Latin Fathers answer, viz. Chrysostom,
Oecumenius, Ambrose, Hierom, Tertullian, and several later Writers, as Cajetan,
and Aretius, etc. ' Paul (say they) in prudence kept covert this truth, 'lest
hereby the Christians and the Christian Religion should 'suffer as enemies to
the Empire of Rome. Indeed I have read of Saint Basil, and it is spoken in his
commendation, as a grave prudential act of his, that considering the season,
and the predominancy of Heretics, pro temporis ratione, and Haereticorum
principatu, Nazianz. Orat. 20.
he did refrain from some sound expressions concerning the Deity of the Holy
Ghost, which others of a lower degree in the Church, did boldly and frequently
use. Without all doubt, there is a season for all things, a time to speak and a
time to be silent; and a word spoken in due season, how pleasant is it? But all
this shall never make me believe, that Paul would, for fear of Humane or
Diabolical power or cruelty, put Gods candle of Truth under a bushel; he spoke
as the Spirit gave him utterance, neither adding to, nor detracting from any
thing imparted to him by the Holy Ghost; he delivered the whole mind of God to
them: Paul had none of that baseness in him, which is so frequently found in
the Ministers of this Age, to baulk Truths for fear of persecution. The least
Truth of God is worth all the Churches in the world: yea, set me say it, were
the least Divine truth put in the scales against all the souls in the world, it
would outweigh them. Better all those souls should eternally miscarry, then
that truth should perish. Though the pretended Saints of God in this age, think
a little of the world to be worth a great deal of Gods Truth; yet those that
are truly sanctified and enlightened, think far otherwise. Truth, it is of the
Essence of God, for God is truth; and he that will withold any thing of God
for a carnal end, will easily be drawn to let go all of God in the end; and
therefore this their reason I hold to be as unsound, as Non recte, sed valde
improprie ipsam Apostasiam Antichristum vocari. C. a Lap. in loc.
their opinion who think Paul prophesied here of the destruction of the Roman
Monarchy by peoples falling away from it.

Some, and those not a few, make the Apostafie and the Antichrist to be all
one; directly contrary to the light of the Text, as also other prophetic Texts
which run parallel with this. As Patres omnes de diversis rebu^ interpretantur.
Salmeron in locum. Ita Aquinas.
it is a sin to separate what God has joined together; so it is no less an
error on the other hand to join in one that which God has distinctly made two.

Cornelius a Lapide, to whom the Christian world in this latter Age is
beholding for his learned Labors, (saving his errors on the Bible) says on
this prophetic Text, that there are two Po^it hic duo signa praevia judicio
Apostolus; primum, hanc universalem defectionem: secundum, ipsum Antichristum,
qui hanc defe (...) statim subseq^etur. Corn. a Lap.
great signs which fore*goe the day of Judgment, which the Apostle in this
Prophecy holds out: 1* This universal Apostasy, and then the Antichrist
himself, which treads upon the heels of the apostasy, and immediately follows
it. Oecumenius seems to point at the Idolatry of the Church of Rome: for (says
he) the deceit of Idols shall cease, and then the Man of sin shall be revealed.
He makes them distinct.

This truth of the Scripture had need to be more then ordinarily insisted upon;
not in regard of its obscurity, for I know not any truth cleerer in Scripture
then this; but in regard of its (...). Oecum* in locum.
opposition, and that by many learned and pious Protestants.

We do affirm, that the general apostasy, and the manifestation of the Man of
sin (that Antichrist) are two distinct things: and this we prove from their
opinions that affirm the contrary* for they themselves affirm these particular
points: 1. That this apostasy is a falling away from Christ, from the Doctrine
and Discipline of the Church of Christ. 2. That they are Professors of the
Gospel that make this apostasy; for it must be a forsaking of that they did
once profess, how else can it be said an Apostasy? 3. They say, this
Apostasy must be an universal and general Apostasy of all the world, that
is, of every Church in the world; for otherwise, they say* the Apostle would
have limited his speech, and not spoken indefinitely* as he does: now put this
with their opinion of Antichrist together; If the Apostasy be universal
thoughou^ every Church, and this Apostasy and Antichrist are all one, then
Antichrist must be an Ubiquitary, he must be in Europe, Asia and Africa at
once; for the Europan Churches, Affrican Churches, and Asian Churches are all
apostatized from the Doctrine and the Discipline of the Primitive times: All
Protestants grant it: so that by making Antichrist one with the Apostasy, we
shall grant (that are Protestants) more to the body of Antichrist, then we will
allow the Papists to grant to the body of Christ; for we make it to be every
where at one and the same time. It is granted from S. John's words, that the
spirit of antichrist was long since in the world; and S. Paul here says, the
Mystery of iniquity did work then; but he tells us, that Antichrist was not
then, but after that to be revealed. It cannot be denied, but that the spirit
of antichrist went forth with the apostasy; and therefore S* John 1 Ioh. 2.
18. minding the Churches of the prophecy of antichrist to come in the last
times, tells them that there were many Antichrists already abroad: i. e. that
had apostatizing, proud, aspiring, malicious, traiterous thoughts and
endeavors to supplant the Gospel Ordinances, and Gospel Officers; but he
clearly distinguishes the antichristian spirit from the Antichrist in the self
same verse, and in the 22d: and so does Paul twice in this 2 Thessalonians. 2.
distinguish betwixt the Apostasy and the Antichrist: In ver. 3. he calls it,
the falling away first; and then the Man of sins manifestation; which will not
be until the end of the apostasy: and ver. 7, 8. there the apostasy is
called the mystery of iniquity which then began, and but began. It Is a Text
parallel with that forecited 1 I^h. 2. 18. [ Now there are many Antichrists]
The mystery of iniquity began to work in S. Paul's time; but not to that height
as to carry all before it; no, there were lets, there were the Sons of Oil
which did curb it, and would, until they were slain; and then, Mark [ ^hen]
the Adverb of time clearly distinguishes betwixt the Apostasy and the
Antichrist: (...) is there a discretive particle, and also points us to the set
time of the Antichrists appearing. But more of this in its due place.

But it may be said that though they are distinct, yet they are as the body and
the soul; so united, as that they appear together and va^ish (...); though they
may be distinguished, yet they cannot be divided asunder. There is some head
and Ringleader in this (...) (says Ia^kson on this Text) and that must needs
be the (...) who shall be discovered: and a little after he says, that this
apostasy is to be a general and universal departure of the whole Christian
world; then it must follow, that the Antichrist must be the head of all the
Churches in the world; if so, then the Pope cannot be the Antichrist, though he
bid as fair as he can for it; for he is not head of the Eastern apostates; and
therefore we so frequently hear learned and reverend Divines pray for the ruin
of the Eastern antichrist and the Western antichrist, the Turkish antichrist
and the Popish antichrist; by which expressions of theirs they make it evident
to me, that they believe neither the Pope nor the Turk to be the Antichrist
which John or Paul single out with the Greek article [^.] Possibly they may
mean by the Western antichrist the chiefest cause and support of the Western
apostasy, which Rev. 13. is called the Beast with seven heads and ten horns;
and without all doubt, that is the Popedom, the head of which being
apostatized from a spiritual Pastor to a proud Usurper in Temporal affairs, is
called the Star which fell from heaven to earth: Ministers are called Stars,
therefore by Star his Office ( Revel. 9. 1.) is set forth: by falling from
heaven to earth is meant his eminent and shameful apostasy: Hence he is called
( Rev. 13. 1.) the beast arising out of the sea, Sea being put in opposition to
Earth, to note that he arises not out of the Civil but Ecclesiastic State; he
is a Churchman, not a Layman. And then he is crowned and horned, to note his
greatness in Temporal affairs, he is one of the Roman Emperors in power. But
all this does not make him the Man of sin, nor the Antichrist here spoken of;
nor such an antichrist as some describe him. How many learned Scholars, both
Protestants and Papists, set up a Jack-a-lent of their fancies framing, and
then hoot at it for Antichrist? Peradventure many will take me for one of these
Fantasticks. The safest way is to say so much of Antichrist as the Scriptures
say, and no more; where the Scriptures distinguish concerning the Antichrist
and the Apostasy, let us distinguish; where they are silent, let us be silent:
Most men say the self same that I do, highly extolling Scripture, and truly
acknowledging (what the Mythologists sabulously report of their Goddess
Pandora) that it is Gods treasure on earth, filled with all manner of heavenly
riches; and yet mean while, either through ignorance or wilful wickedness,
there are many, too many of these in this age, that open Scripture as
Epimetheus Hesiod. oper. 1
opened Pandora's Box, not as the alabaster box of Spikenard which sent forth
an odoriferous smell, but on purpose to infect the minds of people with false
Opinions, Heresies* Rebellion and Blasphemies. I confess, the best Interpreters
may take up that saying of themselves, What man is there that lives and
sins not? What Interpreter is he that writes and erreth not? Those of the
highest form have confessed of themselves so much. Errare possum (says one)
Haeretious esse non possum: This was a confident high speech, for no man knows
his own nature; thus much they know, that it is exceedingly prone to be
Heretical. This therefore I say, and intend to follow it, That it is a safe way
to interpret Scripture by Scripture, and to make the Interpretation conformable
to the rules of Interpreters: with this resolution I return again to the Text,
where we shall endeavor to clear those premised Scruples concerning the
Apostasy and the Antichrist.

CHAP. III
(...), the Apostasie] It Is concluded on all hands, that it is a general
Apostasy both of the Eastern and Western Churches: By the Eastern Churches, I
mean the Greek and Asian, Churches which must necessarily be included in this
Apostasy, for it was prophesied amongst them over and over; and therefore of
them as well as other Churches: if so, then the Apostasy must not, cannot be
until after Constantine, for not till after his Reign began the general
Apostasy of the Eastern, and Western Churches. It is not denied but that there
were great Heretics in the Church before, as 1 Cor. 15. those that denied the
Resurrection: and the Nicolaitan Doctrine, Apoc. 2. of which read Clem. Alex.
Strom. 3. Act. 6. And Eusebius tells us lib. 3. cap. 27. of the Ebionites; and
Martionites lib. 4. cap. 14. But these and many others, though they spotted the
Church and infested it, yet they drew no^ the Church into a general Apostasy,
which Paul and John foretell. Two Texts ( Rev. 7. 1. and Rev. 13. 1) seem to
point out the heads of this Apostasy; the Texts seem to run parallel with each
other: The opening of the sixth Seal, Rev. 6. 12. to 17. is that which
immediately precedes Revel. 7. 1. Now the sixth Seals opening, say the soundest
and best that ever writ, is the overthrow of the Heathen Empire by Constantine.
The Pagan Emperors were the grand enemies before the Apostasy; for I take
John's Prophesies to be put under four periods of time: the first under the
Roman Heathen Emperors until Constantine: the next under the grand Apostasy
under the four Angels, and the Beast of the Sea; the third under the
Antichrist; and the fourth under the general restoration of Jews and Gentiles
under the Government of Jesus Christ by the Witnesses; to each of which the
Holy Ghost prefixeth a time, a certain time: The third, viz. that of the
Apostasy, may be included in the second.

Two of these periods fall within my compass at this time to discourse of, viz.
that of the Apostasy, and that of the Antichrist; now this Apostasy being
acknowledged by all, or the most Protestants, to be, 1. An Apostasy of Gospel
Churches from the faith: 2. and this Apostasy to be a general Apostasy* these
two things must follow, 1. That one person cannot well be the head or
ringleader of this general Apostasy. I know what may be said against this* yet
the utmost of it makes not my consequence invalid* 2. It will follow, That the
Ring-leader^ of this Apostasy must be men that profess Christianity, as well
as those that they lead into Apostasy: for as for the Turks (prophesied of
Rev. 9. 15, 16, 17) they were rather the punishers of the apostate Churches,
then the Ringleaders of the Churches in (...) East into Apostasy; this all
men (that know any thing in Church-Historie)* know, espcially they that read
wisely the Revelations; for as the four Angels ( Revel. 7. 1.) had by their
Apostasy (which is gradually set forth Revel. 8.) destroyed a third part of
the trees, and a third part of the Sea, of the creatures therein, and the Ships
thereupon; and the third part of the Rivers, and a third part of the Sun, and
of the Moon* and of the Stars, which are said to be smitten: all these
expressions setting forth the gradations of the Apostasy, both in corrupting
of the Doctrine of Religion, and also the Falling away of all sorts and degrees
of Professors unto those corrupt Doctrines; and all this effected by the four
Angels ( Revel. 7. 1.) standing on the four corners of the earth, for no other
end but this, then to hold the four winds of the earth, that they should not
blow on the earth, nor on the sea, nor on any tree; even so the four Angels
that were bound in the great River Euphrates (Revel. 9. 14, 15.) are now loosed
to slay the third part of men; that is, to subdue and punish, and inslave, and
utterly ruin those Apostates. The Turks were raised up as a scourge to the
apostate Christian world, hundreds of years after the Apostasy began, and
therefore their Mahomet cannot properly be said to be the head of the
Apostasy, he being no professor of Christianity.

The great question then will be, Who are those four Angels who are accounted
the heads of the Apostasy? If I knew how, I would here baulk this question,
for the avoiding of Novelty and contention; but if I am mistaken, it is but a
weak man's opinion, and so (amongst many others) it may harmelesly pass.

By these four Angels, I conceive, are meant the four Patriarchies of Rome,
Constantinople, Alexandria and Jerusalem; these were designed for the four
quarters of the Christian earth: indeed they were designed for the propagating
of the Gospel; but we very well know, that at last those very Patriarchs by
turning from the truth, corrupted the Church, and turned the whole world after
Arianism, as one of the Fathers complains: Nothing Hi^ronymus.
in History runs parallel with this Text like this of the Patriarchs, who being
eminent Professors, made an eminent Apostasy from the Truth; and led infinite
numbers of people after them; every Author, even the Romish Historians that
have writ latest* give us plentiful examples of this Apostasy.

Object But where is your Scripture to prove these four Angels the four
Patriarchs? you make fair promises of holding forth nothing as credible, but
what you bring Scripture for.

Answ. I confess, it is a hard task to prove this positively by any Text; only
in a word, as near as I can, thus, From their denomination, as they are called
Angels, the Holy Ghost calls the Bishops of the several Churches (where this
Defection afterward In Apocalypsi Angeli dicuntur, qui Asiaticis Ecclesiis
praeerant. Bezain 1 Cor. 11. 10.
was made.) Angels: Revel. 2. To the Angel of the Church of Ephesus, and to the
Angel of the Church of Smyrna, and to the Angel of the Church in Pergamus; that
is, to the Bishop of Ephesus, Smyrna, and Pergamus: So that we see the Holy
Ghost styles the heads of the Church, who have the Pastoral charge of it,
Angels; upon this account therefore are these four heads of the Church called
Angels, because they were the designed heads of the Church in their several
Divisions; and therefore on the four corners of the earth, because they divided
the Christian world amongst them. The grand Apostasy began in the heads of the
several Churches; they grew proud* and covetous, and idle, and whiles they thus
slept, the enemy sowed the tares of Heresy in their hearts* Profaneness in a
Churchman is the high Road to Heresy and Apostasy. Such was their
profaneness (says Nazianzen) that those that took upon them Pastoral charges,
brought no other Ornament then that of long hair with them; which gross
absurdity (for he calls it, (...)) they most delighted in, and cared for: he
calls them Dogs, yea, worse then Dogs, (...). They neither remained Dogs, nor
became Pastors, except to devour others labors. I will forbear here to insert
History, partly for brevity sake, and principally because the History in the
fourth and fifth Century is so easy to be read and understood of every one
that can but read English, especially of those that can but understand the
Latin and Greek tongue, and have leisure to read the Councels in those
Centuries: So now my intended inference from all, is this, That the Bishop,
Head, or Pastor of the Church of Rome, is one of the Ring leaders, or general
Heads of this Apostasy. Now Jesus Christ foreseeing the height of Apostasy
that the Roman Church would rise unto (if I may pass with my expression) my
meaning is, to what a height of wickedness in this grand Apostasy the Church
of Rome in her Ecclesiastic Head or Polity would rise, sets it forth in
several and various expressions to John: as first, you have him but as one of
the four Angels standing on the Western corner of the earth, the Patriarch of
Rome, and no more, though much more then ever Christ by his approving
providence (I mean, by his revealed will in his Word) allowed him; though how
large a power the Councels in Christian prudence may grant unto a single
Churchman, and how far that grant does oblige the Church in obedience to that
single person, I will not dispute. These Patriarchs, as Prideaux well observes,
were entering into intolerable* and inexcusable Apostasy. Next you have the
Polity or Head of the Roman Church, set forth as a Star not falling, or ready
to fall, but fallen at that present from Heaven to Earth. During the time of
the heat of the Arian and Eutichian Heresies, whiles the Eastern Angels kept
the wind of sound Doctrine from blowing on Christ's Garden the Church, the
Western Angel, the Bishop of Rome, was tolerable, ye^, commendable; for Rome
was a shelter to the Orthodox Christians at that time; but soon after you find
the Angel now as a (...) that falls from Heaven to Earth: The Pastors of the
Church ((...) we have showed already) are called Stars: Christ ( Rev. 1. 16.)
held seven Stars in his hand, which ver. 20. tells us, are the seven Angels (or
Ambassadors of Christ) of the seven Churches; so that the Star there is the
chief Pastor of the Church of Rome, which apostatiseth as far from Christ's Rule
and Ordinance as Heaven is from Earth. How great an Apostasy is that in a
Minister, to usurp a power above an Emperor, to usurp a power over all
Churches; to take the Title of the Prince of Princes, and to make it his whole
design to Inthrone himself in all Civil and Ecclesiastic Power, besides the
Apostasy from the purity of Doctrine and Discipline?

The third sight John has of him, is in Revel. 13. 1. there John has a sight
of this great apostate Bishop in his full growth, he is now a Beast risen out
of the sea, having seven heads, and ten horns, and upon his horns ten Crowns,
and upon his heads the names of Blasphemy; the Context of this Text, and of
that Revel. 7. 1. of the four Angels, give much light into each other: in
Revel. 6. 12, 13, 14. When the sixth Seal was opened, there was an earthquake,
the Sun became black, and the Moon became as blood, and the Stars fell, and
heaven departed as a scrole, and every mountain was moved; it is parallel with
Rev. 12. 7, 8, 9. which both signify one and the same thing, viz. the
overthrow of the Heathen persecuting Emperors. The first is parallel in the
phrase with Isai. 34. 4. which expresses the great fall of the Idumaeans, and
nothing of the general day of Judgment.

This kind of expression is usual, when God will set forth the overthrow of the
heads of Government, as in Isa. 13. 10. that is a prophecy of the ruin of the
Babylonish heads of Government by the M^des and Persians, as ver. 17, 18, 19,
20. expound it: yet there God ^aith, The Sun shall be darkened* and the Moon
shall not cause her light to shine; and ver. 13. He will shake the heaven^, i.
^. the Thrones of Kings; and so Revel. 6. 12, 13, 14. signifies the fall of the
Pagan Emperors, the heads of the Romish Throne and Government, which were
thrown down by Constantine the Christian Emperor: the self same thing is set
forth in Revel. 12. where you have the Church in her Primitive purity, ver. 1,
2. groaning to be delivered from under the bloody Tyranny of the red Dragon,
ver. 3. that is, the bloody state of Pagan Emperors; it is parallel with cap.
6. v. 10. where under that Tyranny the Church cries, How long, O Lord, holy and
true! do thou no^ judge and avenge our death on those that dwell upon the
earth? Next, you have in cap. 12. 5. the Lord delivering the Church from under
the Pagan Emperors, by raising up of a Christian Monarch* Constantine* who is
the man-child brought forth in the Church, to rule the Nations with a rod of
iron; that is, to subdue them by Conquest* (as he did) and be their Emperial
head upon that lawful Title: as for those that say, this is meant of the birth
of Christ, his Incarnation, Death and Resurrection, they do not only mistake
the phrase of the Text, but the whole Prophecy; for in Revel* 1. 1. The
Revelation is not of known things that were past (for that's not properly
Revelation, but of things which must shortly come to pass; but the Incarnation
of Christ was not to come to pass, it being past. As for that expression, He
was caught up unto God and to his Throne, it is that which stands in direct
opposition to that afterward, ver. 8. of the Devils being cast out of heaven;
so that he that will enforce that sense upon ver. 5. as that it is meant
Christ's Throne in heaven, to which he ascended after his Resurrection, must be
enforced to grant, that until Christ's Ascension the Devil was in Heaven, which
is Blasphemy; and therefore we must understand the war betwixt Michael and his
Angels, and the Dragon and his Angels, as meant of the Christians war against
the Pagans and Idolatrous heathens; and therefore the casting of Satan and his
Angels out of Heaven, is meant the casting them out of the Imperial Throne,
from their Lordly power and Dominion, and the seating of Constantine, that holy
Christian Emperor in the Throne: 1. He was caught up unto God; that is, he was
converted unto God; and 2. He was placed in his Throne, whether [ His] has
relation to the Emperor or to God, is questionable, but it holds good in either
sense, for it was Constantines Throne by Conquest; but it is most probable that
[ His] has relation to God; for though the Roman Throne were, whiles the Pagan
Emperors sat in it, the Devils; yet now a Christian Emperor possessing the
Throne, it is justly called Gods Throne, for Gods Vicegerent sat in it. In
this sense the two Witnesses ascend up to heaven, Rev. 11. 12. that is, to that
Supremacy from which Antichrist had thrown them. No wonder that the throne is
called heaven, when those that sit in that throne are called Sun, Moon and
Stars. Genesis 37. 10. it signifies in this place the whole royal Family, as Jacob
expounds it.

The like phrase of Scripture to the same sense we find in Isa. 14. 12. where
you see the Church insulting over Babylon when she comes to ruin: amongst
others, this is one expression, How art thou fallen from heaven, O Lucifer?
Here Lucifer is put for the Prince, the brightest Star in their Orizon; and
heaven is put for his Imperial seat from whence he is fallen: and such a phrase
sets forth the fall of the Kingdom of Judah under the Conquest of the King of
Babylon, Lam. 2. 1. How has the Lord covered the daughter of Zion with a cloud
in his anger, and cast down from heaven unto the earth the beauty of Israel?
The beauty of Israel was their Monarch in the Throne; but this beauty was cast
from heaven to earth: Either he means the good King Josiah, who was violently
snatched from the Throne by death in the war; or the carrying away of the Royal
Family from the Throne to Babylon. To our purpose is that, Luke 10. 18. where
Satan falls like lightning from heaven; i. e. from his throne where he rules;
and where is that, but in the hearts of men? It Is usual to call a Throne
Heaven.

Very many Scriptures more there are of the like signification and expression;
as Isa. 34. 4. Joel 2. 10. and 3. 16. Hag. 2. 6. which by their expressions
make it probable to us, that Rev. 6. 12, 13, 14. and Rev. 12. 8 9. do both set
forth the overthrow of the Pagan Empire by Constantine the Christian Emperor.
And thus you see the first period of the Churches afflictions in John's Vision
to be finished. The second follows, which is that of the Apostasy.

After Satan was cast down from persecuting Christians by the Pagan Emperors,
he was not then bound, observe that; but ( Rev. 12. 14, 15, 16, 17.) drives the
Woman into the wilderness: (by the Woman is meant the Church) where she has a
place provided for her, ver 6. which is called her place, ver. 14. that is, a
place peculiar to her, where she shall be visible: This runs parallel with Rev.
7. 2, 4* 5. where Gods providence is set forth by sealing up his Elect in this
time of apostasy, which is but for a certain season. The Church shall fly upon
the two wings of the Eagle, i. e. Magistracy and Ministry (who shall be in
sackcloth) into the wilderness, and there be fed 1260 days, ver. 6. and 14.
God shall be a pavilion to them, he will feed them and protect them, they shall
be under his seal. But observe how the apostasy goes on in this 12th Chapter,
ver. 12. there is a woe to the inhabitants of the earth, and of the sea: and in
Rev. 8. under the four Trumpets, (which was the eminent time of the four angels
doing mischief) you have the effects of this woe both upon the earth and sea;
i. e. Church and State. The cause of this woe we have it expressed in Rev. 12.
15. The Serpent cast out of his mouth water as a flood after the Woman, that he
might cause her to be carried away of the flood. The streams of this flood were
the Arian and Eutichian Heresies, with the rest of those wicked opinions then
raised: These streams were like the fountain; the Devils mouth was the
fountain, and the mouths of the inhabitants of the earth were the sea to
swallow up those streams; therefore woe to the Inhabitants of the earth, earthly
professors, that professed themselves Christians, but lived in, and loved the
world more then their own souls, or Gods glory, (such as the most of our
Professors are) these drank down Heresies as the pure water of Orthodoxal
Truths. Now all this while the Bishop of Rome was but as one of the four Angels
of the Church, and he (though leading into apostasy exceeding fast, yet) in
that way of Heresy the least hurtful; nay, he was so far from being hurtful,
that he was a succourer, for some years, of the orthodox Christians who opposed
Arianism: yet in regard of the aspiring, insolent pride and covetousness in
the Patriarchal Chair of Rome, it might well be denominated one of the four
hurtful Angels: for (as we showed already) soon was this Star in heaven fallen
to the earth, the Chair of Rome was apostatized from its primitive purity, as
much as a Star^ is removed when it f^lls from heaven to earth. The Dragon (
Rev. 12. 17.) when he saw that by the flood of Heresy he could not touch the
Church, because that under the wings of the Eagle, that is, of the Roman
Magistracy and Ministry, she was protected; the Devil faceth about like a
valiant and cunning Warrior, and falls upon his strongest enemies that stood
out against him, which are called the remnant of the woman's seed, which keep
the commandments of God. The Angel of the Western Church had under his
jurisdiction many faithful, orthodox Divines, which maintained Truth: against
these now the Devil wageth war, a spiritual war against their souls. So many
and various are the deceits, and wiles, and strategems of the Devil* that no
Mathematician can draw lines so fast, as the Devil can devise wicked ways and
subtle snares to entrap the Church of Christ in.

This war seems to be especially made against those of the (...). Nazianz.
Orat. 28.
Roman Church, where the remnant of the faithful Oxthodox Christians lay,
which fled from the Arian persecution. And what is the Devils Stratagem now?
Observe in the next verse, Rev. 13. 1. there you have the ground he chooses to
stand upon, [ And he stood upon the sand of the sea.] Some read (but amiss) [
and I stood] conceiving that John stood there: No, it was the Devil, [ He
stood.] Sea and Earth often signify in the Revelation (say learned men) Church
and State. Here the Devil stood upon the Sea sand; probably it is meant Church
government and Governors; for as the sea is tied with a rope of sand, that so
far it shall pass, and no further; so Governors and Government in a Church do
curb the insolent surges of the peoples raging passions and vain fantasies,
that they break not in upon the Church to its overthrow. By this Stratagem the
Devil carries all before him; for^ soon does he make the Governors and
Government of the Church of Rome his own: and the next thing that John sees, is
a Beast arising out of the sea; this is the Popedom of Rome: The head of the
Church of Rome was called one of the four Angels, then a Star fallen from
heaven to earth; and now in this place you have the Head of the same Roman
Church called a Beast that does rise out of the Sea, having seven heads and ten
horns. Now is the Apostasy come to the height.

He is a Beast: It alludes to Daniel's four beasts; to note, that he usurpeth
the throne of a Monarch; he is got to that independent Greatness, to be an
uncontrolled Potentate, therefore a beast: Then he is a beast of the Sea; his
rise is from the Clergy: from the Chair of the Church he claims his right to
the Throne of universal, uncontrollable Monarchy; therefore Revel. 9. 1. he is
called a Star fallen from heaven to earth, from God to the world. And then his
seven heads and ten horn^ tell us plainly, that this evil Angel, fallen Star,
and Beast of the sea, is that Head or Polity over the Church in Rome; for the
City with seven heads, and ten horns (which, through the bloody cruelty and
persecution of this Apostate Government, and the supporters of it, becomes
drunk with the blood of the Saints) is by both Protestants and Papists
confessed to be the City of Rome, Rev. 17.

Thus have I gone over a large and an uncommon circuit in this survey of the
Apostasy, and the heads thereof, being willing to say as much as I find the
Scripture to say of it, and no more.

CHAP. IV.
I Have but one word more to write concerning this Apostasy, and then I have
done with it, and shall pass to the description of the Antichrist, and that is,
concerning the time of the Apostasy; wherein (by the assisting power of the
Holy Ghost) we doubt not but to make this Apostasy more manifestly distinct
from the Antichrist, then as yet it has been; there are five Texts give light
into this Apostasy, as Revel. 11. 1, 2. Romans 11. 25. Luke 21. 24. Deuteronomy. 32.
Dan. 12. 6, 7, 9* very briefly of each. Of Revel. 11. 2. I shall do little more
at this time then repeat the words.

Here John is commanded to measure with a reed the Temple of God, the Altar and
they that worship therein: But the Court which is without the Temple, leave
out, and measure it not, for it is given unto the Gentiles, and the holy City
shall they tread under foot forty and two months.

This Text may well be put amongst those (...) in the Revelations, for it is
exceeding hard to be understood. John measures the Temple, and the Altar in the
Temple, and they that worship in the Temple; that is, the Jewish Religion, and
those obstinate unbelieving Jews who professed that Religion* all these John
measures. Now what the meaning of this measuring is, I profess I do not know;
this I have learnt from the Jewish Antiquaries, that the reed went as well to
Mount Golgotha as to Amos. 7. 7, 8.
Mount Olivet, it was to ruin as well as to rear up; it was sometimes used to
pull down, and sometimes used to build up; and for which of these ends John is
commanded to use his reed like a rod I cannot tell; but if it be meant for
ruin, as most probable it is, notwithstanding others contrary opinions, then
it must be meant of the ruin of the Jewish Religion, that Temple which they
bragged of, * saying, The Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord; this
Temple of the Lord must now be meted out to destruction, and the Altar, and
those that worship therein must be measured with the rod of destruction, so
that (according to Christ's words) not one stone should be left upon another,
and they should be led captive into all Nations: I know nothing prophesied of
their dissipation by the Romans in all the Revelation, but this. Herein Jacobs
Prophecy is fulfilled, Genesis 49* 10. The Scepter shall not depart from Judah,
until Shiloh come; i. e. there shall be a Church and State of the Jews until
Christ come, and then for their Rebellion against Christ, they should be both
un-Churched and un-Stated; and that the definite Particle [ until] imports:
what ever others say, my weak capacity knows not how to make sense of this
Prophecy, or truth of their sense other ways.

And the court which is without the Temple, leave out, and measure it not, i.
e. (according to the former Exposition) do not ruin the Gospel Church of the
Gentiles with the Jews, for it is given to the Gentiles, and they shall tread
under foot the holy Ci^y forty and two months: that is, the Gentile Church
which worship God through Christ according to the Gospel, they shall be
exercised with affliction under the Gentile Apostasy. As the Church and State
of the Jews by John's measuring line were dissolved and ruined, and the Nation
dissipated, so the true Believers under the Gospel, shall be persecuted and
drove into the Wilderness by the Gentile Apostasy; that is, (say some learned
Papists) by Antichrist; who shall be a Gentile: but I rather affirm it to be by
the four Angels that were Gentiles; and the by Star fallen from heaven to
earth, who is a Gentile; and by the Beast of the Sea with ten horns and seven
heads, who is the Pope of Rome, a Gentile* to these Apostate Gentiles the
Church was to be given, and they were to tread the holy City under foot forty
and two months; not to measure it with a reed to the destruction of the Church,
as the Jews. By the holy City is meant the Church of God, ( Revel. 21. 2.) in
*its state of holy conformity to Christ her Head, maintaining his Truths in
uprightness and sincerity: this holy City was to be trodden under foot by
Apostate Gentiles for forty and two months; and this is more evidenced by ver.
3. which tells us that for the space of One thousand two hundred and sixty
days (which is just forty two months) the two witnesses shall prophecy in
sackcloth, poor clothing for such worthy persons, and high Officers as Monarchy
and Ministry; this is but to show the sad condition of the true Church under
the Apostasy of the Gentiles; for if it fare thus with the Pastors, how ill
must it needs go with the Sheep. There is one verse from Christ's mouth that
seems fully to comprehend all that John has said both of the Jews
dissipation, and the Gentile Gospel Churches affliction in the three verses of
Revel. 11. and that is in Luke 21. 24. There shall be wrath upon this people
(meaning the Jews) and they shall fall by the edge of the sword, and they
shall be led away captive into all Nations; here is John's measuring reed, like
a rod indeed, passing over the Church and State of the Jews to their ruin;
and mark what follows, And Jerusalem shall be trodden down of the Gentiles
until the times of the Gentiles be fulfilled. This Prophecy is given in John's
phrase and method: by Jerusalem is meant the Church of God, worshipping him
according to the Gospel rule: and by treading down, is signified the great
devastation that by the Gentile Apostates shall be made upon the true Church:
and until the time of the Gentiles be fulfilled, signi^ies the set time of the
Apostate Gentiles reign and tyranny, which Revel. 11. 2. tells us, is forty and
two months; never were Texts fitter matched for expression, matter, and method
in the whole Bible then these.

To these let us add but one or two parallel Texts more, and so we have done
with the grand Apostasy; in Romans 11. 25. this Text directly with the rest, 1.
Points us out the Jews misery by the expression of blindness or hardness,
which is the blackest side of misery. 2. It points out the Gentile Apostasy,
and some thing more, for^it seems to lay the greatest part of it upon the
Church of Rome: And 3. It gives us to know the length of the Affliction both to
the Jews and Gentiles; for this I observe, that the Jews destruction, and the
Gentiles Churches persecution by the Apostasy, were not many years distant in
the Histories, and therefore it is that we find them joined together in the
Prophesies; now as their afflictions began near one time, so they shall
terminate near about one time, ^s the Temple, the Altar, and those that worship
thereat, i. e. the Jews were unchurched near about that time when the Court
without and the holy City, that is, the Gospel Church of the Gentiles began to
be trodden under foot by the four Angels Apostasy, which were Gentiles; so the
rechurching of the Jews, and the returning of the Gentile Church out of its
Apostasy by the raising of the slain Witnesses and slaying of Antichrist,
shall be near about one time, and this Text does make it clear. This Text, in
my opinion, is the comfortablest Text to the Jews in all the Bible; it
prophesies plainly, that the Jews shall be converted and restored when the
fullness of the Gentiles is come in, that is (says Luke) until the times of the
Gentiles be* fulfilled, which time (says John, Revel. 11. 2.) is to be
fulfilled in forty and two months, which forty and two months, makes One
thousand two hundred and sixty days (the time of the Witnesses prophesying in
sackcloth) which being expired, the Witnesses about the end of this time being
slain, shall rise again, and put off their dirty sackcloth, and be clothed
in white, and then the Sealed Jews and the innumerable number of the Gentiles
shall be joined in one faith to worship the Lamb, Rev. 7.

This Text of Paul's, gives us light to the discovery of the time when this
Gentile Apostasy shall have an end.

Paul in this Romans 11. dehorts the Roman Church from insulting over the
rejected Jews, foreseeing, doubtless, the pride that that Church would grow
unto. Now to curb this pride of that Gentile-Church*

1. He shows the Church of Rome, how that all of them are not gone into that
Spiritual Captivity; no, he himself being a Jew, could testify the contrary,
and the twelve Apostles, who were Jews could testify as much, and the
seventie Disciples could testify as much, who are to the Gentiles under the
bondage of sin (as the twelve heads of the Tribes, and the seventy Elders to
Israel in the wilderness) their Rulers and Instructors.

2. The Gentiles had no cause to insult, because the casting of them off, was
the receiving of the Gentiles into favor: Had the Jews, the invited Guests,
come into the supper, for ought I know, the Gentiles had remained by the hedges
and highways still, or else had only licked up the crumbs that had fallen
from Christ's Spiritual table, as dogs at a Feast; and therefore the Romish
Church has no cause to insult over the Jews, but rather with a holy fear to
adore the infinite freeness of Gods grace, that should reject the Tents of Sem,
to dwell in the Tents of Iapheth; that the first fruits should be thrown away,
and the Tares and cockle received into Gods garner, ver. 8, 16.

3. The Romish Gentiles have no cause to insult, for they were by nature but
the wild Olive, till upon free grace they were transplanted into the Jews
stock, the Church; and through pride, infidelity and disobedience, they may as
soon be cut off, and the Jews again grafted in, as the Jews for the self-same
sins were cut off when they were taken in; this Paul seems to tell the Romish
Churches from the Spirit of Prophecy within him, ver. 22. He tells the Church
of Rome that she shall be cut off if she walk not answerable to such rich grace
received. O what may the Church of Rome from this Text expect for her shameful
Apostasy! And Paul in the next verse by the same spirit ( v. 23.) tells the
Jews, that they shall be grafted in again, that is, gathered to be a glorious
Church again, if they will believe the Gospel.

4. The Romish Gentile Church has no cause to insult over the unbelieving
Jews, because they for their Pride, Tyranny, and disobedience shall be
rejected, and fall into the same condemnation, when at that time the Jews
shall be restored; and this is employed and expressed in ver. 25. For I would
not, brethren, that ye should be ignorant of this mystery (lest ye should Ne
sitis sapientes, id est, superbi: sapientia enim parit superbiam. Loquitur
Apostolus Gentibus fidelibus, ne de sua fide, sapientia et prudentia superbiant
and insolescant contra Iudaeos, in sua incredulitate et caecitate manentes. a
Lap. in loc.
be wise in your own conceits) that blindness in part is happened to Israel,
until the fullness of the Gentiles be come in. This verse is the concluding
Argument against the insulting pride of the Gentile Church over the poor
rejected Jews, and every word in it, is of great importance, from the causal
Particle (...), to the last word in it. [ For I would not, brethren] that is,
you of the Church of Rome: That ye should be ignorant of this mystery, that is,
he would by all means have them acquainted with it; of all Churches, he would
have the Church of Rome to understand this mystery; and why that Church
acquainted with it more then any other? The Apostle gives the reason, Lest they
should be wise in their own conceits: Lest they should be proud in their own
conceits (says a Learned Jesuit) supposing that Paul uses a Metalepsis here,
putting one word for another. Great privileges puff, not only persons, but
Churches, up above what is meet. Paul then by the eye of prophecy saw what we
and all the world see in the Church of Rome now; viz. excessive pride,
apostasy and insultation. Now, to pull down this pride, he would have them
acquainted with this Mystery.

Now the question is, Where lies the mystery?

Some learned and holy men affirm, that the mystery lies in the rejection of
the Jews, and the taking in of the Gentiles to the Gospel: But this cannot be
it; for though the coming of Christ had been to the world a mystery, yet this
mystery was revealed to the world, especially to the Roman Church by Paul's
preaching. This therefore, though it be in it self a mystery, and the deepest
of mysteries, yet it is not the mystery that Paul here would not have them
ignorant of; for they were so far from being ignorant of the Jews rejection,
and their own reception, that they insulted and boasted thereupon: therefore
that cannot be the mystery that Paul importunes them of all mysteries not to be
ignorant of it.

But the mystery (as learned Cajetan observes) lies principally Hoc est
mysterium [donec plenitudo Gentium intret] completo hoc tempore.
in these words, [ Until the fullness of the Gentiles shall come in*] That the
Jews were a people cast off for their unbelief, is a thing known to all the
Churches in the world: but to know that the twelve Tribes shall after this sad
captivity be brought to Christ, and their own Land again, and to know how long
this their rejection and dissipation shall continue, until they be brought
into favor again, and restored to be a Church, this is a mystery to all the
Churches in the world this day. And blessed is he that reads and
understands this mystery.

This mystery of all mysteries the holy Ghost would have this Church to take
notice of; therefore it is ushered in with this double guard, [(...), this the
mystery,] the chiefest of mysteries amongst prophetic Texts: Well it may be
termed so, if we search into it; there lies a mystery in every word of that
sentence wherein this mystery lies. 1. In the Adverb of time, [(...),] which
is the same as (...) is, or (...) gnad in Hebrew: It defines that space of time
( a part post) wherein the Jews shall continue in their unbeleeving, or
unrestored, or unchurched condition; and this is a mystery so great, that to
this day none can (though never so learned) peremptorily define. Then there is
[(...):] this mystery (if I am not grossly mistaken in my parallels) has been,
and is as much mistaken as any Text in the Bible amongst the Leared; for it is
generally conceived, that this fullness of the Gentiles coming in, is meant the
fullness of their coming in to the Gospel; as much as to say, when the Gentiles
are fully brought in to God, then the Jews shall be converted; but this has
been confuted as an opinion directly contrary to Paul's own sense in ver. 12.
of the same chapter; for the greatest work of grace is to be exercised among
the Gentiles when the Jews shall be restored: for if the diminishing of them be
the riches of the Gentiles, how much more their fullness? Now if the great work
of grace amongst the Gentiles must be accomplished before the Jews shall be
converted, how will those words be true? and those many Prophecies of the
innumerable number of Gentiles that shall flock in to the Gospel with the Jews?
It Is expressed in that prophecy, that ten Gentiles shall in the day of the
Jews conversion, come in to God for one Jew: Zach. 8. 23. In those days ten
men shall take hold (out of all Languages of the Nations) even shall take hold
of the skirt of a Jew, saying, We will go with you, for we have heard that God
is with you. And in that day (Isa. 19. 23, 24, 25.) the Lord of hosts shall
bless, saying, Blessed be Egypt my people, and Assyria the work of my hands,
and Israel mine inheritance. Those three verses with the precedent matter, run
parallel with Zach. 14. 8, 9, 10, -- 16, 17, -- 20, 21. We might multiply Texts
to prove, that when the Jews shall be converted, there shall be a glorious
coming in of the Gentiles unto Jesus Christ with them.

But as for this opinion which passes so current amongst the Learned, without
the least control of any, only the variation of some, who say, By the
fullness of the Gentiles is meant the preaching of the Gospel to all the world.
I profess (for my part) I know no ground they have so to interpret it; they
have not one parallel Scripture, that I know, in all the Bible for it.
Therefore I humbly take the boldness to put that (...) est res arcana, qua^
homines nisi Deo dante scire nequeant, Grotius.
gloss upon it that other Texts put upon it; viz Luke 21. 24. Revel. 11. 1.
Until the fullness of the gentile Apostasy be come in. This is the Mystery
which Paul calls [ that the Mystery.] Mysteries are so called, because (says
one) (...), because it is meet they be shut up within, as those sacred things
within the Ark: or as Contzenus.
others say, (...), from sealing up of the mouth: Indeed, a mystery in
Scripture lies as the tongue sealed up within the sacred lips of hard
expressions; which he that can unseal, shall hear that mystery (like a tongue)
declaring Gods mind therein. Such is the Text I am about, which I humbly
conceive, has been sealed up betwixt those two sacred Texts that I have
endeavored to open, and that in Dan. 12. 6, 7, 9. which we shall open in the
close of all.

Now since the mystery lies in these words, [ Until the fullness of the
Gentiles be come in,] that we may not leave the Reader in the dark, we will see
to what it leads us in other Texts.

CHAP. V.
THis Mystery leads us to two Texts more, Rev. 10. 7. and 17. 5, 7. which lead
us to the end of the Mystery. For the next great Question will be, If the Jews
must be converted when the fullness of the Gentiles is come in, and herein
lies the mystery, Then when shall this Mystery be fulfilled? Rev. 10. 7.
answers it; But in the days of the voice of the seventh Angel, when he shall
begin to sound, the mystery of God shall be finished: that is, the great
mystery, [ that the Mystery:] this answers to the particle (...), until.

But how shall this mystery be finished?

Rev. 17. 5, 7. seems to answer this, together with Revel. 11. 7. In Rev. 17.
you have (as it is generally acknowledged) Rome going to ruin; and in what
dress is she in now she is going to ruin? she is arrayed in purple, and
scarlet color, and decked with gold, and precious stones, and pearls, having a
golden cup in her hand, full of abominations and filthiness of her
fornication, (that is, Heresies, presented in the golden cup of profound
Truths, and glorious new Light) and upon her forehead was a name written,
Mystery, Babylon the Great, the Mother of Harlots and Abominations of the
earth. This is spoken not of the bare City Rome, but of the Head and Polity of
that City, which is the Popedom: when the Popedom came to be the Beast with
seven Heads and ten horns, then came he to be the general Head of the
Apostasy; and now Rome comes to be near her ruin, upon her forehead this
Mystery is written, this Mystery (which as Chrysostom says) (...), has much
of a Paradox in it, is legible on her forehead, i. e. the mystery hidden from
the Ages past is now revealed openly to all the world; for that is the meaning
of Mystery Babylon upon her forehead; and this is the last vision John has of
the Polity or or Government of Rome: Romes Government and Magnificence seems to
be greatest at last: I think (I hope I am not mistaken) she has her last suit
of Apparelon.

But to make this Text answer the question, How this mystery is finished? We
answer, 1. The mystery is finished, when to all the world it is revealed. When
the head of the Gentile Apostasy comes to ruin, then the mystery is finished,
but in Rev. 17. 1. The judgment of the great whore; that is, the Polity of that
City, which now is got to be the general head of the grand Apostasy, the ruin
of this head is showed to John in this Chapter, and the mystery that formerly
was a mystery, is now written upon her forehead, v. 5. i. e. published: then
does a thing cease to be a Mystery, when to all the world it is laid open.

But when shall this mystery be finished? Paul tells us it shall last but until
the fullness of the Gentiles be come in; that is, says Luke 21. 24. until the
time of the Gentiles be fulfilled; that is (says John) the space of forty and
two months, Rev. 11. 2. which is. ( v. 3.) so long as the Witnesses remain in
sackcloth, which is, One thousand two hundred and sixty days: Now when these
shall be at an end, Rev. 10. 7. tells us, viz. when the seventh Angel shall
begin to sound, and until then we must not expect the mystery of God to be
finished, i. e. the finishing of the Gentile Apostasy and Tyranny, and the
raising up of the Witnesses to the Throne.

That this Apostasy is for an appointed time, none doubt it; but many
question, how long it shall be? Very many Learned men have endeavored to limit
it by setting out its farthest bounds, and they have gone the right way to work
by endeavoring to demonstrate the year of its beginning; but mistaking their
time, they have been (like very many women this last year) big bellyed of a
false Conception, so deceiving themselves and others: Could the beginning of
this grand Apostasy be sound out, it were the more easy to find out the end
thereof: but I think the head of N^lus is easier to be found, then the day or
year of the rise of this Apostasy. I know what others have said, and I partly
know what may be said as to the rise of this Apostasy; but because its
greatest prop is History, from whence only probability can be inferred, I shall
omit that way of search, and go a surer way to work, and that is, to find out
the end of this Apostasy, a thing glanced at in one of the forecited Texts:
now that we may not straggle from the forecited Text, Rev. 10. there we shall
see in v. 5 6, 7. the Angel lifting up his hand, and swearing by him that lives
for ever, that time should be no longer, that is, the time of this Apostasy
(which is the great Mystery) should be no longer; bu^ when the seventh Angel
shall begi^ to sound, the mystery of God (that is, the great mystery of this
Apostasy, and of the Jews and Gospel Gentiles sore affictions) shall be
finished* as he has declared to his servants the Prophets: If to the Prophets
the finishing of this mystery be declared, then to the Prophets let us go to
seek for the declaring of this Mystery; no better, no surer way to find out the
finishing of this mystery: and surely amongst the Prophets none greater then
Moses. We might begin with Balaam's Prophecy, cited by Meses, Numb. 24. 21,
22. 23, 24, 25. which gives us a general view of the finishing of this mystery,
though the man had no more of grace when he prophesied, then his Ass had of
reason, though he spoke: Prophecy, though it bean extraordinary gift, yet it
is but a common grace, common both to Elect and Reprobate, to Judas as well as
to Peter, to Ananias as well as to Simeon.

This Balaam looking on the Kenites habitation, prophesies thus, Strong is thy
dwelling place, and thou put thy nest in a rock, nevertheless the Kenite
shall be wasted until Ashur carry thee away captive: These Kenites were not
those Genesis 15. 18, 19. for they were an Antiquated Nation, whose possessions
were promised to Abraham; but they were those descended from Moses's father in
law, Judges 4. 11. These Kenites were friends to the Jews, when all the world
were their enemies besides, 1 Samuel 15. 6. for which Saul showed them kindness
in an evil day: These Kenites dwelt always near to the Hebrews, and became
(...), worshipping the same God that Israel did; therefore, says Balaam,
Strong is thy dwelling place, and thou putest thy nest in a rock: The Rock of
Ages was the Kenites nest, and therefore strong was their dwelling place:
Nevertheless the Kenites shall be wasted until Ashur shall carry thee away
captive; that is, in the carrying away of Judah into Babylon (for near to that
Tribe they then dwelt) they should by the King of Babylon be carried away
captive with them. The Kenites doubtless, (as well as Judah) wandered from their
nest the rock of Ages, and the Eastern birds of prey made a prey of them.

This is Balaams vision of the Babylonish Tyranny in the Jewish captivity, when
the Kenites were carried away: now follows his vision of the Romish Tyranny and
success which is ushered in with an Alas, Who shall live when God does this!
Parallel with which is Joel 2. 11. if we look near that Text, and strictly
compare it with its precedent and consequent matter, the people, ver. 2. are
the Romans, and the Army is the Roman Army, ver. 11. which is very terribl^*
who can abide it? Belike he saw the Roman Monarchy, as Daniel saw it, Dan. 7 7.
Dreadful and terrible. And Ships shall come from the coast of Shittim, and shall
affict Ashur, and shall afflict Eber; that is, shall overcome the Assyrians,
and those Eastern Potentates: And shall afflict Ebe^, that is, the Hebrews, the
Jews. Now this cannot be meant of the Persian Monarchy, for Cyrus was the
restorer of the Jews to their own Country; neither can it be meant of the
Grecian Monarchy, for Alexander was loving to the Jews above all other
Nations; nor of the short (though sharp) scourges of Antiochus, for he
destroyed not Ashur. But it is meant of the Romans, who destroyed Jerusalem,
slew infinite numbers of Jews, and captivated the rest, and subdued the
Eastern Assyrian Kings: But what is the issue? and he also shall perish for
ever; i. e. the Romish Monarchy (which now stands upon its last legs) shall be
ruined, in the ruin whereof, the grand head of this Apostasy must fall, which
is the Popedom, being the head of Rome, for this Prophecy is yet to be
fulfilled upon Rome, Joel 2. 20. The Northern Army shall be destroyed, and the
front or van of the Army shall be driven to the desolate places of the East,
and the rear or hinder part toward the utmost sea; he shall be utterly routed
and perish with infamy.

But to come to Moses, that Prophet to whose Prophecy I believe Rev. 10. 5, 6,
7. points directly; for in this Text John sees an Angel lifting up his hand to
heaven, and swearing by him that lives for ever; and in Deuteronomy. 32. 40. there is
he (the Lord Christ) lifting up his hand to heaven, and saying, I live for
ever: But that we may make good our assertion by evident demonstration, we must
go back as far as Deuteronomy. 28. where Moses begins his farewell Sermon to Israel,
and continues it to the end of cap. 32. A method that holy Paul, that other
Moses, follows in Act. 20. 25. -- 30. when he knew his time was come that he
should see the Macedonian Church no more, after he had laid the foundation of
the Church, and builded them upon that foundation, he strives to establish
them, precautioning them of the danger that would come upon them when he was
departed; even so does Moses here as it were on Mount Pisgah foresee the future
sins of the twelve Tribes, and the peculiar punishments inflicted on them for
those sins: Now because we will go no higher then needs must, in Deuteronomy. 28. 48.
Moses shows them their captivity under the Roman Empire: God shall put a yoke
of iron upon their neck until he have destroyed them, i. e. the yoke of the
fourth beast in Dan. 2. which is made of iron; that is, the Roman Monarchy: and
this is made more clear to be the Roman Monarchy in the next verse, The Lord
shall send a Nation against thee from far, from the ends of the earth, as the
Eagle flies; that is, the Roman Eagle shall come from the Western part of the
world against them; they shall ( ver. 52.) besiege the Cities of Judah, and take
them, and distress the people with sore famine. Christ in his Prophecy ( Mat.
24. Luke 21. Mark 13) points to this Prophecy, when he says, Famines, and
pestilences, and wars, and rumors of wars, and distress of Nations, and their
scattering among many Nations shall come upon them; This is so clear by the
comparing of Moses and Christ's prophecies, that there needs no more be said of
it: So eminent shall be the plagues upon the Land of Judah, that ( Deuteronomy. 29.
22, 23, 24.) all Nations in the world shall ask, Why the Lord has made it a
barren wilderness, bringing forth nothing for the good of man, but even like
Sodom and Gomorrah? Now this is the very question this day; in our ears this
Scripture is fulfilled, and the answer this day is like that in the Text,
Because they forlook Jesus Christ the God of their Fathers, and clave to the
Temple, Ark, and Altar, which in comparison of Christ were but stocks and
stones, and in opposition to Christ were abominable, filthy and detestable
idols.

CHAP. VI.
THat these Blessings and cursings are a Prophecy, Deuteronomy. 30. 1 puts it out of
doubt, And it shall come to pass when all these things are come upon thee, the
blessing and the curse; Benedictio and maledictio haec (as Tremelius reads it)
that is, the eminent blessings they enjoyed under Kings, and the eminent curses
that fell upon them under the Babylonish Tyranny, but the dreadfullest of all
under the Roman Monarchy; yet when under this heavy curse Israel shall bethink
themselves, and return to the Gospel, The Lord will turn their captivity, and
have compassion upon them, and will return, and gather them from all the
Nations whether the Lord has seattered them, ver 3. 4. And the Lord will bring
them into the Land which their fathers possessed, and they shall possess it.
This is a promise of the restoring of the Tribes to their own Land after they
have been captivated by the Roman Monarchy, and driven into all Nations and
parts of the world.

I might draw an Argument from Deuteronomy. 29. 29. to prove this, If these revealed
things belong to the Jews, and to their children for ever; if the revealed
curses under the Babylonish and Roman Monarchy belongs to the Jews and to
their children, then the revealed blessings belong to them, and to their
children for ever; for surely Gods bowels under the Gospel are not more shut
up, then under the Law, but when the set time under the Law for their
captivities accomplishment was fulfilled, then God restored them from under the
Babylonish yoke; and is his arm shortened, that he cannot, or his bowels shut up
that he will not redeem his captives from under the Romish iron yoke? God
forbid any Christian should be so sinfully, and obstinately uncharitable as to
think so. This Prophecy of Moses cleares it to us, that the Jews shall be
both converted to the Gospel, and restored to their ancient possessions:
observe what Gospel promises are made to them, ver. 6 God will circumcise thine
heart, and the heart of thy seed to loves Lord; and ver. 7. there is a curse
upon the Roman Monarchy which persecuted, hated and afflicted the Jews, and to
this day hates them; All the curses that are now on the Jews shall fall on the
Romish Monarchy: This curse has in its eye principally the Roman Monarchy; for
the promise is this to Israel, ver. 8. They shall return, and obey the voice of
the Lord, and do all his Commandments: Now the nature of these Commandments
evidenceth to us, that this promise is a promise made under the Gospel; and if
so, then the curse must needs be upon the Roman Monarchy; for since the Gospel
none have been their enemies comparable to the Roman Monarchy: Who laid waste
their Kingdom, destroyed their City, Temple, Magistracy, Government, and sold
the people into Egypt, and all other parts of the world for slaves, but the
Roman Monarchy? The nature of these commands, for which God Quis s^and is
coelos and Meschicho deduxit? quis descendit in abyssam inferorum and ^duxit
Mischicho exmertuis? Syriac. Lectio in Romans 10. 6. Ne dixeris, i. e. ne
incredibil is tibi videatur Incarnatio, and Resurrectio Christi, Chrysostom.
Pererius, Toletus, Cajtanus, and (...) docti, dicunt Mosem ad litteram lequi de
Christo et Christi justitia^ in Evangelio.
will circumcise the heart of his people to obey them, they are expressed in
ver. 11, 12, 13, 14. which verses two of the greatest Prophets that ever were
in the world, expound; Christ and Paul: Christ in Luke 17. 21. and Paul in Romans
10. 6.

Says Moses, The Commandments which I command thee this day, it is not hidden
from thee, neither is it far off, it is not in heaven that thou should say,
who shall go up for us to heaven and bring it unto us? neither is it beyond the
sea, that thou should say, who shall go over the sea for us, and bring it to
us, that we may hear it, and do it? This (says Saint Paul Romans 10. 6.) is a
description of the righteousness of faith: and what is that? from Moses his
words Paul tells us, it is the embracing of the truth of Christ's descension from
heaven, in his Incarnation and Sufferings, and of his Resurrection and
Ascension; this is Moses commandment, and this Paul in ver. 9. plainly tells
us, it is the commandment of faith which he and the other Apostles taught, That
if thou shall confess with thy Oris f^it mentionem quia os nominatur a Mose;
alioqui (...) omnes parts corporis intelligit. Grotias.
mouth the Lord Jesus, and shall believe in thine heart that God raised him
from the dead, thou shall be saved; so that Moses commandment to the Jews, was
Paul's Doctrine to the Romans, therein discovering the Jews error in point of
Righteousness from Moses's words in which they believed.

And hither does Christ send the Pharisees to learn when the Kingdom of God
should come, Luke 17. 20, 21. The Kingdom of God comes not with outward show,
neither shall they say, Lo here, or lo there; for behold, the Kingdom of God is
within you, i. e. as Moses says, in thy mouth, and in thy heart. Christ is a
Spiritual King, and the soul of man is his Kingdom: now that soul that subjects
it self to Christ by believing, becomes a little Kingdom wherein Christ raigns:
then is Christ's Kingdom come, when the soul believes: so that Christ seems to
tell the Pharisees, that when the Jews believed, the Kingdom should be
restored.

From all which (for I am too tedious) it appears manifestly, that Moses's
command, (for to obey which, God will circumcise their heart, and upon
obedience will restore them to their own fathers possessions, and bring their
curse (which now lies upon them) upon their enemies) is a Gospel command, and
was delivered in a Prophetic precept for the Jews to listen unto and obey,
when God intends to restore them, and ruin the Roman Monarchy: for since the
Doctrine of the Resurrection and Ascension of Christ has been preached to the
would, the Roman Monarchy has been the grand enemy of the Jews.

That we may make it more evident, that this Prophecy of Moses's extends to
the state of the Jews and Gentiles under the Gospel, we will look into Moses
his Song, which ( cap. 31. 29.) tells us, is a Song concerning the evil that
will befall the Jews in the later days; which song ( v. 21.) is to be a
Prophetic testimony against the Jews when all the foretold evils shall come
upon them.

In Deuteronomy. 32. Moses reckons up in his Song the great blessings that God
bestowed upon Israel, and the ignoble and injurious returns they made to God;
they kicked the heel against God, cast him off, followed their own lusts, and
obstinately persisted in their hardness, and unbelief, so that God was
provoked to jealousy by their high contempt, and paid them in their own coin:
As the great King of Babylon dealt with his proud Queen Vasti, so God dealt
with those insolent Jews, he kicked them out of the Royal Bed the Church, and
took in poor bondslaves, captived Gentiles. This of the Jews rejection, and
the Gentiles taking in to be a Church, is clearly held out in ver. 21 which
Paul expounds Romans 10. 19, 20. Says Paul, Did not Israel know? that is, had
they no knowledge of Christ when they heard the sound of him went into all the
In omnem terram, scilices Romany Subjectam, exivit praedicati^ Evangelii.
(...) for (...) Evangelii (ut Ambrosius dicit) ad omnes ge^tes olim pervenerit,
licet non praedicatio nec fundatio Ecclesiarum. Omnino audivit Israel
Evangelium, omnino cognovit; sed sua pertinacia and obstinatione non vult illi
credere, nec obedire. Chrysostom. Sensus.
earth?

Paul answers in Moses his words, Ad salutem per Evangelium homines viles
vocabo, quos ne gentis quidem appellatione dignamini, ^ Iudaei; unde vos
verecundati ad imitationem eorum provocemini, si sa^i and sapientes s^is; sin
minus, ad aemulationem and indignationem concitemini, uti reipsa futurum
praevideo et praedico. Hieron, ad Fab. Tra. 42 de mansionibus Hebr.
I will provoke you to jealousy by them that are no people, and by a foolish
Nation will I anger you: and then he answers it in Isaiahs words, Isai. 65. 1,
2. I was found of them that sought me not, I was made manifest to them that
asked not after me; this Isaiah says of the Gentile Church; But to Israel he
says, All the day long have I stretched out my hands to a disobedient and
gainsaying people; so that for their obstinacy, hardness and unbelief God cast
them out, and took in the Gentiles. I am confident none can deny, but that by
these Texts, as Paul expounds them, the rejection of the Jews from being a
Church, is signified, and the taking in of the Gentiles to be a Church; which
could be in no age of the world but under the Gospel; so that Moses his
Prophecy extends to the rejection of the Jews under the Gospel: and now
follows the sad effects of their rejecting of the Gospel, Deuteronomy. 32. ver. 22. to
ver. 26. Famine, and pestilence, and bitter destruction, the teeth of beasts,
poison of Serpents, the sword without, and terrors within, and scattering of
them into corners; The same which Christ prophesied Mat. 24. and Luke 21.
Indeed this song of Moses is, as it were, another Mount Tabor, wherein we find
Christ, and Moses, and Paul, and John communing together of the same thing, I
mean of the Jews rejection, and the Gentiles reception; of the Jews
restoration after their affliction under the Roman Monarchy, and of the Roman
Monarchies ruin in their restoration.

I confess I could heartily wish my self well out of this sacred thicker,
wherein I find not so much as the track of any late Authors, to lead me this
way through it, and confident I am, I shall be scratched with the briars of
Censure for my labor; yet this I can say to my own encouragement, that I have
Christ, and his beloved Disciple John, and his Apostle Paul, to lead me through
this old, but unbeaten way.

I will therefore do no more, or very little more then show the method, and
give the parallel Texts.

1. In Deuteronomy. 23. from ver. 22. to ver. 31. there is the Jews captivity after
they were provoked to anger by a foolish Nation, that is (says Hierom) by the
Gentiles, who until then, did follow their vain and foolish minds, in
worshipping of Idols: Such, in the esteem of the Jews, were as bruits and
dogs: these foolish Gentiles should provoke them to anget by believing in the
Gospel, and Gods judgments shall follow on the Jews. So that these must be
their afflictions under the Gospel; and per consequentem, the very afflictions
that to this day they lie under. Parallel with this of Moses is that of Matthew.
24. from ver. 15. to ver. 21. and that of Luke 21. 23, 24. Says Luke, These
are the days of vengeance, that all things which are written may be fulfilled.
And what are those things written, but even those of Moses, which even word for
word as it were, answer to Luke's expressions of ^engeance, distress, wrath,
falling by the edg of the sword, leading away captive into all Nations, and the
treading down of Jerusalem until the times of the Gentiles be fulfilled; i. e.
until the time of the Gentiles tyranny be fulfilled.

2. In Deuteronomy. 32. 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34. you have the mystery of the Jews
conversion, and the Gentile Roman Apostasy described: in ver. 34. it is said
to be hidden and sealed amongst Absconditum et figillatum. Montanus.
Gods treasures; noting the greatness of this Mystery. Now in that Moses
says, Is not this laid up in secret? it has relation either to the
restoration of Judah, which is employed in ver. 29. Oh that they were wise, and
understood this! i. e. the cause of their punishment: that they would consider
their latter end; the mercies laid up for penitent believing Jews in the later
days; for ( ver. 30) for the Jews sins God forsook them; and the Romans made
a prey of them: but if they would return in their later end to their Rock,
which they had set lightly by and forsook, Deuteronomy. 29. 15, 18. then God ( ver.
31.) would be a stronger Rock to them in the sight of all the world, then to
the boasting Romans, who are Apostates now, and a corrupt vine: and so it
relates as well to the Roman Apostasy from the Gospel, which is expressed in
ver. 32, 33. Their Vine is worse then the Vine of Sodom, and of the fields of
Gomorrah, their grapes are grapes of gall, their clusters are bitter their wine
is the poison of Dragons, and the cruel venom of Asp^. Of these words I shall
g^ve no other exposition then what I fetch from Scripture. Observing this
first, before we proceed, that Vine cannot in this place relate to the Jews
(as some would have it) but to those their enemies, that shall then oppress
them: for (if you please to observe it) their Rock] in ver. 31. and their Vine]
ver. 32. relate to each other, and both stand in opposition to [ our Rock] ver.
31. But it is concluded on all hands, that [ Our] there implies the whole
Nation of the Jews, who had God for their Rock, and by their profession owned
him so to be. It Is granted by our opposites, that ver. 37, 38. are, or at least
wise may be meant of the Gentiles their enemies: if so, it will easily follow,
that ver. 32, 33. must also be meant of the Gentiles; for there is no
disjunctive to be found betwixt them; so that their Vine must either mean the
Turkish or the Roman Polity: but I rather incline here to the Romish Tyranny,
which was most inhumane.

Vine signifies both the Head of a Church, and the Church it self: both these
you have in one expression, Psalm 80. 8. this Vine signifies the Church of God,
brought out of Egypt into Canaan, before whom the Heathens fell: and this also
signifies CHRIST, who was brought out of Egypt after the death of Herod; he
being Head of the Church, who has overcome the world, and subdued all the
powers therein to be subservient to his glory and his Churches good. Now there
is Gods Vine, and the Devils Vine; there is the Vine that Gods own right hand
has planted, and there is the Vine of Sodom which is of the Devils planting,
which grows in the fields of Gomorrah; both these Vines have grapes, and
clusters, and yield wine: there is in Gods clusters red wine, wine which makes
glad the hearts of the sons of God: but there is in the Devils Vine bitter
clusters, and poisonous wine, the wine of Dragons* and no wonder here Moses his
Vine yields the wine of Dragons, for Revel. 13. 2. the vine is of the Dragons
planting; He gave him his Power, and Seat, and great Authority. Here we take
Vine for the Head of the Church, i. e. of the Apostate Church of Rome; and so
the Pope is this Vine of the Devils planting, as the next significant word
expresses; for Moses by Vine of Sodom hints to us the place where this Vine
shall be set, and that is Rome; for Rome is called Sodom (say the Learned) from
Revel. 11. 8. where (when the Witnesses are slain) it is said, they lay in the
street of the great City which spiritually is called Sodom: i. e. in one of
the Kingdoms (not all the Kingdoms) subject to Rome, which is this Sodom. So
that by Vine of Sodom is meant the head of the Church of Rome. It Is questioned
whether Sodom relate to the Street or City? If to the Street, then how comes
the place where the Witnesses are slain to be a Sodom? It Is answered,
Antichrist and his followers make it a Sodom; and from such accidents it is
usual in Scripture to change the names; as 2 King. 23. 13. There Mount Olivet,
whose proper name is Har Hammishcha, Mount of Unction, is by reason of the
Idols Chemosh and Molech set on that hill, called Har Hammashchith, the Mount
of corruption.

3. Or, Vine of Sodom] as it signifies a Church, so it may signify the great
apostasy and general defection that that Church has made. The Vine, and
Grapes, and Clusters, and Wine and all are mortal and deadly poison. The wild
Vine (2 King. 4.) is rank poison; and such is the Church of Rome this day; it
is become the degenerate plant of a strange Vine. Moses sets the Roman Church
forth (as John) under the representation of a Vine, as in Revel. 14. which Vine
the Angels pray the Lord Christ to cutdown; which ver. 18, 19. he does with
great fury: and in Revel. 17. where it is Romes great Vintage time, then when
she is near her ruin, there she comes with a golden cup, which she holds out
to all: and what is in it but the juice of her own grapes, full of the
filthiness of her fornication? This Revel. 18. 3. is that wine of fornication
which she has made the Kings of the earth drunk with.

So that by the wine of Dragons, and the venom of Asps, is meant the
Blasphemies, Idolatries, Heresies and Abominations of that degenerate Vine the
Church of Rome: for of the Roman Monarchy near its ruin Moses prophesies, as
we shall make out: and now it only stands upheld by the Papal polity, which
every sober, judicious Christian knows, is the most idolatrous, blasphemous,
heretical, venomous Government and Power against the true Church, both in its
Head and Members: And of this does Moses prophecy the destruction, when the
Jews shall be converted to the Lord Jesus, and united into one body with the
true Church of Gentile gospellers.

Thus have you Moses in this prophetic Song of his setting forth

1. The Jews rejection of the Gospel, and their captivity under the Romans as a
punishment for their Apostasy. 2. The mystery of the Jews conversion to the
Gospel in the latter end, and of the Roman Churches Apostasy from the Gospel.
3. Now follows in the third place the signs of the grand Apostasies finishing,
and the Jews conversion; for the ending of one i^ the beginning of the other;
the ending of the Apostasy is at the beginning of the Jews Conversion, ver.
36, 37, 38. Ver. 37 and 38 I take to be blasphemy of the Antichrist (as in Dan.
7. 25.) [ And he shall say:] I cannot see how this can be meant of God, (as some
would) but Antichrists boasts, Where are your Gods? i. e. your Magistrates:
What Is become of your Cause, your Covenant, your fasting and praying? where is
that God in whom ye trusted? At this blasphemy of Antichrist, in the next
verse, ver. 39. God rises up as one jealous of his honor, and says in answer
to Antichrists boasting, Behold now, I, even I am he, etc. 4. There Is the
coming of Christ to ruin Antichrist, finish this Apostasy, and convert the
Jews: ver. 39, 40, 41, 42. 5. An Hallelujah throughout the Gentile Churches,
with and for the Jews conversion, ver. 43. the reign of Antichrist, and the
finishing the Apostasy; parallel with Rev. 19. and Romans 15. 10. where Paul
tells us plainly, that there is a day to come when the Jews and Gentiles shall
rejoice together; which is not yet come.
In ver. 36, 37, 38. there are two signs of the Jews conversion; the Gentile
Churches resurrection, and the ruin of Antichrist and the Apostasy, which is
called. Rev. 19. 4, 20. the casting of the beast and the false Prophet into the
lake, and the chaining of the Dragon; for these are all together: the ruin of
these later is the establishing of the two former.

The reason why the Prophets oft-times join the true Gentile gospellers and
the Jews together, in their prophecies which respect these times, are (as I
conceive) for these reasons: 1. Because they come out of tribulation together.
2. Because they shall be united in one Faith together: There shall be no
distinction in Religion betwixt Jew and Gentile; and therefore for the most
part, the prophecies that look to the sounding of the seventh Trumpet, join
both Jew and Gentile together; as in this of Moses, and Isa. 27. 13 Mat. 24.
Luke 21. Mar. 13.

In ver. 36. there is one sign of the seventh Trumpet's being ready to sound;
and that is, the Jews and gospel Churches low condition, When their power is
gone, and there is none shut up or left: when the true Churches (for they are
Gods servants) power is gone, when their Armies are overthrown in the field,
and when all the true Churches Garrisons are won, that there is none shut up
against a day of need, nor any left; i. e. unconquered; this is the time, even
the set time for God to come to ruin his enemies, and restore his Church: then
will God judge for his people righteous judgment; for ( Dan. 7. 26.) The
Judgment shall sit, and repent himself for his peoples long and sore
affliction. Yet how may we take up Isaiahs lamentation this day, Who has
believed this report? or to whom is this Arm of the Lord revealed? The
unbelief, the timorousness, the profaneness, and the most abominable
Apostasy and Antichristian compliance of Christians at this day, in this
Kingdom, under these dispensations, makes me believe that God has yet some
more dreadful stroke against all sorts of Professors; so that few Nobles, and
few Ministers, and few of the Professors shall live to see these glorious
Gospel days that are approaching.

Where can we find a soul that lives this day upon this Prophetic promise, so
much as to raise his hopes, but even sinks by despondencie under the sad
dispensations of God upon his Church, or else feeds his hopes with the husks of
humane helps, as if Armies or Navies could bring about these things, as if
Christ stood in need of Belial in the accomplishing of his glorious Prophetic
promises: but the Scripture must be fulfilled, Luke 18. When the Son of man
comes, shall he find faith on the earth? Scarce such a strong faith as to
believe the Resurrection of the Church, in such a state as now it is.

The other sign of the approaching of Antichrists ruin and the finishing of
the mystery, is the blasphemy of Antichrist, in ver. 37, 38. where the
Antichrist mocks at the Magistracy and the Ministry, and the fasting and
prayers, and the religious engagements of the Church; parallel with Dan. 7. 8.
where the Antichrist speaks great words, but we shall leave them till we come
to touch of the Antichrist.

The fourth special thing observable in this Prophetic Song of Moses, is the
coming of Christ the Lord, to ruin Antichrist, finish the grand Apostasy and
the heads thereof, and convert the twelve Tribes to the Gospel, from ver. 29.
to v. 43.

When Antichrist had bereaft the true Church of all its outward visible
strength, so that their Field power, and Fort power was taken away, and none
was left to own the Churches cause, but they were all subdued by Antichrists
prevailing Armies, ver. 36. then in ver. 37, 38. does Antichrist boast and
insult in a blasphemous way over the heads of the Church and their cause; and
now ( ver. 39.) does Christ appear to be the mighty Prince of all the earth,
who declares himself, as Rev. 19. 16. The King of Kings, and Lord of Lords,
fulfilling the Prophetic promises in restoring the Church out of its low
condition, and bringing its enemies down to hell; therefore Dan. 12. 1, 2. (a
parallel Text with Moses) sets forth this day of wounding and healing, ( i. e.
of wounding the enemy and healing the Church) as a little day of Judgment, by
Christ coming to deliver the poor Jews, and to bring trouble upon their
enemies. It Is resembled to the Resurrection; so Ezekiel. 37. the Holy Ghost sets
forth the Jews restoration after the Roman captivity, under the resemblance
of raising bones that have long lain in the grave, taking flesh upon them, and
living, and becoming mighty and terrible: and no wonder the Prophet compares
the Jews conversion to the Gospel, and their restoration, to the
Resurrection; for Paul (Romans 11. 19) says, What shall the receiving of them
be* but life from the dead? and therefore in Rev. 20. 4 (which is a
continuation of the parallal Text Revel. 19. 16.) this day is called the living
and reigning of those that were beheaded, i. e. the Witnesses, who Revel. 11.
11. are said to have a Spirit of life enter into them, and to stand upon their
feet, as a man rising out of his grave; thence it is that this is called (
Revel. 20. 5.) the time of the first Resurrection, which he is blessed that
has a part in it; that is, which is undefiled, keeps himself a Virgin, and
follows the Lamb wheresoever he goes, Revel. 14. 4. Keeps his mouth from
guile, and his person innocent, ver. 5. That worships not the Beast, nor his
Image, nor receives his mark in his forehead nor his hand, v. 9. But watches,
and keeps his garments clean, Revel. 16. 15. These, whether they live, they
shall live unto the Lord, or whether they dye, they shall dye unto the Lord;
whether they live or dye, they shall be the Lords, for on such the second death
has no power.

CHAP. VII.
BUT the great question is, When shall these things be? When shall Christ draw
forth his sword to wound his enemies, and heal and deliver the Jews, and the
distressed Church Parallel with this text is, that Mich. 5. from ver 6. to ver.
15. The scope of the whole Chapter being a Prophecy, foretelling the glorious
effects of the seventh Trumpet.
amongst the Gentiles?

Moses seems to answer in the next words, v. 40. For I life up my hand to
heaven, and say, I live for ever: to this verse add the three following, and
with them compare Revel. 10. 5, 6, 7. (the Text that sent us to this Chapter,
and now concurrs with its parallel) and also Dan. 12. 6, 7, 9. observe here,
Daniel proposes one question, How long it shall be to the end of these
wonders, ( viz) of ruining the little horn, and of restoring the Jews?
hereupon, ver. 7. Daniel sees him whom Moses and John by the eye and ear of
Prophecy saw and heard, 1. Lifting up his hand to heaven: 2. Swearing by him
that lives for ever, that it shall be for a time, times, and the dividing of
time; and when he shall have accomplished to scatter the holy people, all these
things shall be finished: ver. 9. And he said, Go thy way Daniel, for the words
are closed up. Romans 11. 25. speaking of a mystery, and the end of that mystery
in the Particle [ until] sent us to Revel. 10. 7. which Text telling us this
mystery, and the finishing it is revealed to the Prophets, it sent us to Moses,
where Diut. 32. we have found the mystery, which Moses so calls ver. 34. and
the finishing of this mystery, in ver. 40. 41, 42, 43, which have sent us to
Daniel 12. 7, 9. where there is the same expression and the same matter; in
ver. 9. it is closed and sealed up, and thence comes the word mystery; in ver.
7. you have the mystery it self, and that is the accomplishment of the
scattering of the power of the holy people: By holy people (I conceive) is
meant the true Believers that follow the Lamb in the Wilderness, and also the
Jews which in Daniels time were the holy people, the only Nation that God set
his heart upon; now the accomplishment of this scattering implies the ruin of
their enemies; and this shall be, says Daniels Angel, but for a time, times,
and half, and then all these things shall be finished; now though we know not
well how to begin this time, nor how to count it, yet we know when it ends, and
the effects of its end: The time when it ends is Revel. 10 7. At the sounding
of the seventh Trumpet, about which time ver. 3. compared with Hos. 11. 10, 11.
Ephraim, i. e. the ten Tribes, shall trembling run from the west, and as a
bird out of Egypt, and as a dove out of Assyria (as Doves to their windows)
shall they come from the South, West, and North, and be planted in their own
Land: and when is this? Rev. 10. 3. with Hos. 11. 10. tells us, it shall be
when the mighty Angel cries with a loud voice, as when a Lion roareth; or as
Hosea has it, When He shall roar like a Lion: [He] i. e. eminently he, the
Lord, the Messiah, the Savior of all that trust in him, shall spiritually roar
in the consciences of the Elect, and dreadfully roar upon his implacable
enemies, as Joel 3. 16. expresses, and Matthew. 24. 29, 30 comprehends:
[(...)] as Critics observe, signifies the roaring of a she Lion, a Lioness,
Rev. 10. 3. to which Hosea alludes cap. 11. 10. in his metaphorical expression,
as when the Lioness roars, the young ones her Whelps come running to her both
for safety and for food: so shall the Church when God at the second
woe-Trumpet's passing, and the thirds coming shall utter his loud voices, then
those filii maris, as Hierom and Tremelius translate, or filii aquarum, as the
Septuagint translate it; we translate it, the children from the west, because
the Mediterrane Sea was west from the Prophet; but it may signify Gods Elect
people in the Islands of the Sea, shall fly to their rock, and take safe
Sanctuary in Christ. But so much by the way on the Text: We proceed.

The effects of the end of this mystery, are the finishing of the Gentiles
Tyranny over the holy City and holy people, Dan. 12. Rev. 11. Romans 11. Deuteronomy.
32. and the raising up of the distressed Jews, together with the raising and
establishing of the Witnesses, and the repairing and enlarging of the Gentile
Church: Therefore Moses concludes this Prophecy as Paul and John conclude
theirs, with an Hallelujah to God, ver. 43. Rejoice O ye Nations with his
people, for he will avenge the blood of his servants and will render vengeance
to his adversaries, and will be merciful unto his land, and to his people; with
such an Hallelujah does John conclude his Prophecy for the downfall of Rome,
the head of the Apostasy, and the raising up of the Witnesses to the Throne;
in cap. 19. there are five times Hallelujahs sung in the Church, and for this
that Antichrist was dethroned, and the grand Apostasy with Rome the head of
it, ruined; and that now Christ had recovered the Throne again: In Rev. 12.
Constantine threw the Devil out of the Roman Throne, and it being possessed by
Christian Emperors became Gods Throne; but then came the Beast with the seven
heads and ten horns, which rose out of the sea, Revel. 13. 1. and dispossessed
Christ and his Officers, and drove them into the wilderness; but now comes
Christ and ruins the Popedom and Antichrist, that is his main prop, and then
Christ by setting up of his dethroned Witnesses, is said to reign. This
dethroning of the Popedom of Rome, and destruction of Antichrist, are by Jesus
Christ in his Prophecy Mat. 24. set forth in the same expressions as the fall
of the Pagan Emperors is by Constantine, for as it is said, Revel. 6 12, 13.
The Sun became black, and the Moon as blood, and the Stars of heaven fell in
that grand and glorious revolution of the Polity of Rome by Constantine, in
casting down those red Dragons from the Throne, which is called heaven: So in
Mat. 24. 29. this last grand and glorious revolution of the Polity of Rome in
the ruin of the Popedom, is called the darkning of the Sun, and the eclipsing
of the Moon, and the falling of the Stars from heaven; and then shall appear
the sign of the Son of man, and then the Tribes of the earth (i. e. the Jews)
shall mourn, i. e. over him whom they have pierced; for Luke 21. 28. This is the
time of their redemption: And so far as I can find in Scripture, and from this
verse of Luke, the great sign that the Jews shall have whereby to know that
their Redemption is near, is the downfall of the Antichrist, the ruin of the
Polity of Rome the head of the grand Apostasy, and the raising up of that, or
those three national Gentile Churches out of their sad and low condition by the
raising up of the two Witnesses which by Antichrist were slain: The slaying of
the Witnesses must be a thing published through the world, and truly I believe
the sound of it is gone throughout the world already. But no more of this in
this place, since it falls rather under the discourse of the Antichrist, which
is the next thing to be treated on: So much of the grand Apostasy, its
beginning, rising, continuance and ending.

Of the ANTICHRIST, The third Part.
CHAP. I.
THere are four grand Controversall Prophetic points, which are as yet
unresolved amongst the learned of the church: that of the grand Apostasy; that
of the being, slaying, and rising of the Witnesses; that of the Antichrist; and
that of the Conversion of the Jews.

1 From that of the grand Apostasy there arise many doubts, as whether there
be any one particular head of it, or more then one? Who that head or heads are?
When the Apostasy begins? What this grand Apostasy is? And when it ends?

The most of these we have in our touch upon the grand Apostasy hinted*

2 The scruples that arise about the Jews Conversion, are: Whether it shall be?
When it shall be? How it shall be? Whether they (...) be restored to their own
Land, and ancient Civil Go^? Whether all the Tribes or only Judah shall be
converted? ^ cannot tell whether these questions will come within my l^ttle
^ircle at this time.

3 That of the Witnesses, which affords us these doubts: Who they are? Where
they are? What is meant by their slaying? When they shall be slain? Who shall
slay them? What their rising is? And what shall be the Consequents of it?
Whether their rising be at the seventh Trumpet, or the Earthquake which slayes
the 7000, be that Earthquake which slayes the Antichrist and puts an end to the
Apostasy? Some of these will fall within my compass.

4 From that of the Antichrist, Questions may be raised ad infinitum: chiefly
these* 1 When he is to arise and appear? Whether (as Brightman says) as soon as
the Pagan Emperors were dethroned, and Constantine possessed the throne, or
(as Bellarmine says) when the Roman Monarchy is to be ruined? 2 Where or in
what part of the World must the Antichrist appear? Whether (as Downam and
Brightman say) in Rome, or in Jerusalem, as the Papists say? 3 Whether
Antichrist be past, as Brightman says, or yet to come as Bellarmine says? 4
Whether he be the seventh head of Rome? 5 Whether he be one single person, or a
Kingdom, as some affirm? Whether he be the head of the general Astasie, as
Calvin says, or whether he be the Apostasy it self, as others affirm? So many
of these Questions as fall within the reach of the texts I am to handle, I
shall endeavor to resolve.

These nine following Verses of Paul's, are a large and full discovery Haec est
revelatio Pauli de adventu Antichrist^. Jac. Fabrus Stapul^nsis in Locum.
of the Antichrist, as the most Interpreters acknowledge.

Quest. It may be asked, why Paul should say so little of the Apostasy, and so
much of the Antichrist?

This question only I will answer, and then proceed to the words in the text.

Answ. I answer, Paul here follows the method of all the holy Prophets that
Prophecy of the Antichrist. For Daniel in the seventh and eleventh Chapters,
makes a larger description of Antichrist that rises in the end of the Roman
Monarchy, then of the Roman Monarchy it self, and Christ himself in his
Prophecies, Matthew 24. speaks more of the time of Antichrist's appearing then
any other, and so John in the 11th Revel. and 13th and 17th describes
Antichrist more largely then the Apostasy: and the reason (as I conceive) is
because the Holy Ghost knew the Apostasy would be obvious to the sense of
every Christian, as what is more clear then this of the Apostasy of the
Eastern and Western Churches. But now the Antichrist, by reason of his subtilty
and successes, and goodly pious pretenses would not be so easily discerned:
therefore it is so much is said of him.

2 The appearing and the destruction of Antichrist in the Church, is the great
ensign that God hangs out to the World, that the day of the Jews redemption,
and the Gospel-Churches deliverance draws nigh. Then the grand Apostasy is
drawing to an end, and the mystery of God is ready to be finished, then is
Christ at the door coming forth on his white horse, Revel. 19. to clothe all
his Saints in white, and to take off from off the back of his two Witnesses the
filthy garments, their sackcloth; and to put Priestly robes on his Joshua, and
to set his slain Witnesses in the ^ach. 3. 3, 4, 5.
throne, Revel. 11. and Revel. 20. and Da^. 7, 27. to give the dominion to the
Saints. Then is Christ coming on the white cloud ( Revel. 14. 14.) with a
sharp sicle in his hand, to reap the vine of the earth. Then do the horns
appear in his hand, and the mystery of his power is then revealed: then shall
the Vision, (that is for an appointed time to be silent,) speak to them that
wait for it, for it will speak peace, and salvation; and to the enemies of the
Church eternal ruin: then is that one day come, which is known to the Lord,
Zach. 14. 7 the evening of which day shall be light assuredly to the Church of
God, and ruin to her enemies.

Then is the Lord* coming to smite with his sore, great, and strong sword
Leviathan, the Serpent crossing like a bar ( i. e. Antichrist) and slay the
Dragon in the Sea ( i. e. the Popedom, the beast of the Sea) say 27. 1, 2. and
then shall the Church have Joel 3. 14, 15, 16, 17, 18.
a Song of the Vineyard of red Wine sung unto her. Then is God ready to darken
the Sun, and eclipse the Moon, and cast the Stars from Heaven, and shake the
powers of Heaven, Matthew. 24. 29. that is, ruin the Roman Monarchy; and then
will the Lord Christ gloriously manifest himself to the twelve Tribes, that he
is their Messiah, and they shall weep and mourn for that they have crucified
him; in that day the Vision shall be writ so plain, that he chat runs may read
it. That which was a Mystery before is now made plain, it seems to me to be
parallel with Revel. 17. 5, 7, there the Mystery is writ on the Woman's
forehead, so plain and open, that every body might read it. At this time (says
Habakkuk Habak. 3. 4. Habak. 2. 2, 3.
2. 4.) The just shall live by faith. i. e. the Jews that look for salvation
and justification, shall come in unto the Gospel, and no longer seek for
righteousness by the Law, but by faith in Jesus Christ. This text Paul quotes,
Heb. 10. 37, 38. Paul tells the Hebrews, that Habakkuk's Vision is yet for a
little while concealed, i. e. Christ their* Messiah hides himself from them,
but he will come, and they shall live on him by faith: this Vision of
Habakkuk's sealed is the great Mystery of God to be finished. And therefore o
ye Noble and ancient people of Israel, look about you this day, look into your
own Prophets, in whom you say you believe; and see whether their words are not
fulfilling in your eyes and ears this day; you have negligently lost one
glorious day, for which you have lost your Nation, Government, and Temple* you
would not hear your Messiah voice, but hardened your hearts against him in
that day. Yet comfort your selves, and let me comfort you blinded, as that
blind man was comforted when Christ passed by him, Be of good comfort* his
bowels that have been long shut up, are yerning after you; he is coming this
day to you, and he calls for you by name, Luke 21. 28. and when these things
begin to come to pass when ye see the Antichrist to appear in the World, (the
sign of whose appearing is that his great and prodigious act of slaying the
Witnesses) whose destruction will be suddenly after his appearing thus; then
look up, and lift up your head, look up with faith, and lift up your head with
hope, for your redemption draws nigh Be not faithless, but believe: Behold,
he comes with Clouds, and every eye shall see him, and they also that
pierced him; you o Jews, that pierced him, shall by the eye of faith see him,
and all the kindreds of the earth; i. e. all the families of you, wheresoever
scattered upon the earth, shall wail with a godly penitential heart (as your
Prophet Zachary 12. 10, 11. has foretold) because you have dealt so unkindly
with your Lord and gracious King: even so, Amen. But that we may give you good
ground for your hope that your redemption (which I hunger after, and more
earnestly desire of God then my life) draws nigh; we shall proceed to set
forth the great foregoing sign of Christ's coming to this glorious work, and
that is the appearing and con^ounding of Antichrist. Now he does appear, but
men doubt now whether it be the very Antichrist or not (though every mark is
written in his forehead, that is written in the Word;) but when Christ comes to
destroy him, then, 2 These. 2. 8. the world shall know by Christ's dreadful
taking vengeance on him, that that is he; Then shall that wicked one be
revealed, whom the Lord shall consume with the breath of his mouth; then the
world shall be enforced to know by Gods dreadful hand on him and his followers,
that that is the very Antichrist whom the World adored for a Saint, and wondered
after him for his great Successes: he is to be known above all*others in the
world, by his prodigious acts of sin.

[ And that man of sin be revealed.] to a word it is, [ And that (...).
man of the sin be revealed.] to note the notorious sinfulness of his sin, as
a singular character of the Antichrist. A sin peculiar to the Antichrist, by
which sin he shall be known when he comes into the world; that sin is set down
in Revel 11. 7. and when they have finished their testimony, the beast that
ascends out of the bottomless pit; note the time when the Antichrist (for
this is he) is to appear in the Church: it is at the end of the Apostasy, when
the Witnesses have finished their testimony in sackcloth: then does Antichrist
arise, make war with, overcome and kill the Witnesses; this is his sin, which
Daniel explains (as I may say) in Dan. 7. 24, 25. 1 He is (says Daniel) one
that arises after the ten Kings belonging to the fourth Kingdom, the Roman
Monarchy, which must necessarily be about the end of the Apostasy. The sin of
Antichrist what?


Secondly, Daniel tells us, He shall be diverse from the ten Kings, that is, the
grand enemy of Kingly Majesty and authority, he shall be diverse from these
first before him, in his rising and in his ruling; or else it may be read, He
shall be greater then the first, that is, in his Successes, in his tyranny, and
absolute lawless power, Et alius consurget post eos, and ipse major erit
prioribus, and tres reges humiliabit. A. Montanus.
then any of the other. Therefore he is said in Dan. 11. 36. to prosper in his
blasphemy and illegality, until the indignation be accomplished* And Paul calls
him the lawless one; from hence,

Thirdly, Daniel tells us he shall subdue three Kings; this is dubiously
interpreted, if it mean three Kings in person that he shall pull to the ground,
my soul trembles to think of the State of the third only to be humbled, (for I
like not that translation [subdued] because it implies a subjection of the
three Kings. Therefore I rather choose to read it with Montanus [he shall
humble,] Tres Reges deprimet. Trem.
or with Tremelius [he shall depresse])

Alas! dear son! ^ he is now that sacred mark that this Antichrist prepares his
arrows against ^ How is he on the Stage, me thinks already falling as a prey
into the monstrous jaws of this cruel beast, who cunningly has set n^s to
catch his royal feet in! nets which are not yet discerned, but will shortly
manifestly appear, it is to be feared to his^ overthrow. But I trust God has
chained Antichrist in a shorter chain.

By three Kings may be meant three Kingdoms, and then o ye Witnesses of the
Lord, that bear the royal Ensign of the Lion of the Tribe of Judah, the Lord
Jesus, the mighty Monarch of the World, against Antichrist, in the midst of
this your bloody combat, look up with boldness and courage, and lift up your
eyes, for your redemption draws nigh: stand fast, quit your selves like men,
receive not the mark of the beast, no^ his name, nor the number of his name;
behold, the Lord is at hand, whose glorious coming shall be to the sudden and
final ruin of Antichrist.

Fourthly, this Antichrist (says Daniel) shall speak great words against the
most High, and wear out the Saints of the most High; by which it is evident
that Antichrist tyrannizeth in those 3 Kingdoms, where the Saints of the most
High have possession; and which those are, I leave the Reader to judge. From
these observations of Daniel I draw this conclusion, That the sin of the
Antichrist (which is one individual person) is the humbling of three Kings, and
usurping a lawless, arbitrary, tyrannical power over the Saints of God, in
going about to ruin them (as Montanus reads it) in destroying the fundamentals
of Government in Church and State, and blaspheming against the Statutes Et
Sanctos altissimorum abole^it. Montan.
of God and his Ordinances, and promoting and upholding desperate blasphemers
against the Lord: therefore, Revel. 17. 3. he is full of names of blasphemy.
And thus you have the man and the sin, that Paul mentions, described in Daniel,
which I verily believe upon good grounds, is a true exposition of Paul's words.
Sicut Christus omnis justitiae homo, ita ille (Antichristus) totius peccati
homo. Bruno C^rthus. Gloss. Aquinas, cum multitaliis. Sicut Christus melior
omnibus sanctis, ita Antichristus pejor omnibus malis. Aquinas. Invadet
Imperium Antichristus ac dominabitur titulo justae possessionis, ac verae
pietatis, sed ubi revelari eoeperit public, his notis ornabitur quas Apostolu^
hic ei tribuit (viz.) homo peccati, filius perditionis. Aret. Homo peccati, i.
e. totaliter peccatis deditus, ex peccato and scelere constatus. Aquinas.
Zanchius. Peccator ille sceleratissimus. Tirinus.


Bruno Carthus^anus conceives, that he is called the man of Sin, in opposition
to Christ; because, as Christ is that man of all righteousness, so is
Antichrist here the man of all unrighteousness; in this he brooks his name.

Aretius on this place, seems to me to write his History; he tells us, that he
is called the man of sin, because he is the protector and patron of gross sins,
he tolerates idolatry and rebellion, he invades Kingdoms, and under pretense
of setting up piety, and promoting Saintship; he takes possession of the
throne; none so great a Saint as he, if you will believe his words, or the
flattering titles of his followers, who adorn him with goodly titles: but when
he shall begin to appear publicly ( i. e. be revealed, as the Apostle says,)
he shall have no other ornaments to put on, but what the Apostles allow him (
viz.) the man of sin, the son of perdition.

He is (says Gorran) therefore called the man of sin; because he is the whole
servant of sin, he does, as it were, homage to sin. He lays his groundwork in
sin, and all his superstructures are by sin; his tongue and his hands and his
heart are eminently sinful: he leads into sin all that follow him, and
punishes the Saints for not sinning.

Diverse of the Fathers conceive, that he is called the man of sin, Quia and
ipse plurimum peccabit, and alios ad peccandum coget: Because he is a notorious
sinner himself, and constrains others to sin in the same abominable villainies
with him.

Thus you have the multivarious expressions rather then opinions of the sin,
wherefore Antichrist is called the man of sin. But before we proceed we must
say something of the man, because there lies the great difference betwixt the
Protestants and the Papists, and betwixt Protestants and Protestants.

It is the opinion of all, that this man of sin is the Antichrist; Est
multitudo aliqua, and diversi sibi invicem succede^tes, qui unum quodammodo
Antichristi vastum corpus efficerent. Hyperius.
but what this Antichrist is, is that which is much controverted.

Very many of the Protestants do hold, that Antichrist is not one single
person; but a certain Polity or Kingdom, wherein there is a succession of
persons governing: Brightman says, the Antichrist must be understood of a
wicked Kingdom. Calvin says, that the Antichrist is the head of the Apostasy,
Ergo no one single man; but we deny his Antecedent, for it will never be proved
from History or Scripture, that ever any one Government, City, or Polity was
the Head of all the Churches that apostatized. Neither does the Scripture say
any such thing of the Antichrist, but the contrary, as we shall show hereafter.
We only give this as a true and full answer to his argument, that there is not
a word of Scripture in all the Bible, to prove that the Antichrist is the head
of the grand and general apostasy; but for brevity sake, we will only give you
Brightman's strange opinions of the Antichrist: for him do the most Protestants
follow. I have briefly collected them thus. 1 Antichrist (says he) immediately
after the ruin of the Roman Empire, appeared in the Roman Throne, and Very
much of this we may find in learned B Down^m de Antichristo.
made that his seat. 2 That Antichrist is a wicked Kingdom, and no single
person. 3 That the time of his coming is past, and not to come. 4 That the
Antichrist is to reign no where but in the City of Rome. 5 That the Antichrist
is the seventh head of the beast which reigns after the Emperors in Rome.

A man needs go no farther then his own arguments to fetch fire enough, to turn
into vapor and smoke each of these gross mistakes which have no Scripture for
their bottom; for the present, this shall be all the confutation (which is
enough to that ingenuous Reader, who peruseth him seriously) that we shall
give, because we have work of more consequence to follow, which will reach him
fully.

The Protestants (both Lutherans and Calvinists) affirm that Paul speaks of the
Antichrist in 2 These. 2. 4. which exalts himself above all that is called God,
and that he as god sits in the Temple of God, showing himself that he is god.
This say they, is the Pope. By the Temple of God they acknowledge (as all men
must) that it is the Church of God. Observe now how Bellarmine (...) this with
an argument ad hominem, thus:

Arg. If the Pope of Rom^ sitting in the Church of Christ be Si (...) (...) nus
sit A^christus (...) in Ecclesia Christi, t^c Lutherani and Calvinist^, and
(...) ab Ecclesia q^e Papa est (...) sunt, extra veram Ecclesiam Christi ver
santur; nam Ecclesia Christi una tantum esse potest, sicut Christus unus est.
Confirmant autem Lutherani and Calvinistae Papam Romanum esse Antichristum;
Ergo. Bellarmin. de Romans Pontif.
Antichrist* then the Calvinists and the Lutherans, and as many as have
forsaken the Church under the Pope, are out of the true Church of Christ, for
the Church of Christ can be but only one as Christ is one* But the Calvinists
and the Lutherans do affirm the Pope to be Antichrist: Ergo they have left the
true Church.

If this text be meant of the Pope of Rome, then do I not see how Bellarmines
Argument can be answered. This Argument of his is to this day not clearly
answered, notwithstanding several answers I have read of Brightmans and B.
Downams, two learned Protestants.

This is an undeniable truth, that the Antichrist shall arise in the midst of
the purest Church in the world, even when it remains pure, therefore ( Dan. 7.)
it is said, He shall wear out the Saints, and change their customs and laws;
by which it appears, it is the true Church in which he appears; and that Church
(by their customs and laws) is a National Church; where should the two
Witnesses be but in the true Church? and where then should he arise that slayes
them but in the true Church? look not for Antichrist any where but in the midst
of the true Church, and at that time (and not before) when the Witnesses have
finished their testimony; in that place, at that time, look for the Antichrist.
But that time is not immediately after the overthrow of the Roman Pagan
Emperors, n^r ^ the City of Rome* as is evident from Revel. 12. let not the
Reader think I plead any thing for the Pope or the Church of Rome, because I do
confidently ^ffirm that the Popedom is not the Antichrist, nor Rome the seat
of Antichrist, as learned B. Downam would make it, lib. 10. de Antichristo,
cap. 3, 4. I do fully agree with him, that Rome is mystical Babylon, and the
Popedom the whore of Babylon; but all this makes not the Popedom the
Antichrist, nor mystical Babylon the seat of the Antichrist which slayes the
Witnesses, as he would have it, lib. 1. cap. 6. it makes the Popedom the beast
with seven heads and ten horns, Revel. 13. 1. but not the beast of the earth,
Verse, 12. nor the beast of the bottomless pit, Revel. 11. 7. which is the
Antichrist Paul here describes. We will not do the Church of Rome that honor,
to make it the Church where Antichrist usurps and tyrannizeth; for that Church,
where Antichrist is revealed, is the purest Church; it is the true Church that
has good laws and customs, else Antichrist would not think to change them:
we say, and can prove it, that the Church of Rome is an apostate, degenerate
Church, full of all manner of abominations and filthiness, the mother of
Harlots; all this the Scripture says of it, Vide Dounam de (...) de (...) and
de (...) Romanae Ecclesiae, lib. 5 cap. 2, 3, 4. 5.
and much more. And we do affirm this of the Pope and Popedom, that the Pope
is that Star of the Roman Church fallen from heaven to earth, i. e. as eminent
an Apostate Churchman as ever can be in the World, and by his hellish,
bottomless pitpolicie is got to be the beast of the Sea with seven heads and
ten horns, full of Blasphemy. We will grant him the greatness of being that
monstrous head of the Western Apostasy, and this the Scripture says of him;
but to affirm, that the Pope or Popedom is the Antichrist that shall arise
when the Witnesses have finished their testimony, and shall slay the Witnesses,
or the little horn in Daniel, rising after the ten horns, or the man of sin
sitting in the Temple of God, then to be revealed, when that which did let is
removed, all the learned men in the world shall never make me believe; and
therefore let not the Papists think their Champion has won the day of the
Protestants, because he grounds an argument upon their mistakes; no, for we
deny that the Pope is the Antichrist that slayes the Witnesses, and yet we do
affirm, that the Popedom of Rome, and those that have possessed that usurped
charge make the beast with seven heads and ten horns, which drove the Witnesses
into sackcloth, and into the wilderness, they drove the woman, the true
Church into the wilderness, into her place, and what place is that? but where
the Witnesses finish their testimony, and are slain by the Antichrist, who
reigns only so long, as the Witnesses lie dead, which is but three years and
the half of three years in that dominion, where he slew the Witnesses.

There is much difference amongst the learned about this man of sin in the
Text; Hierome, and Beda, and Damascen, l. 4. c. 28. do affirm, that this man of
sin is a Devil; but the most learned confute this, affirming that he is a man
acted by the Devil, not a real Devil, that he is one single person, not only
the restrictive articles to each of his names do evidence, but the things
attributed to him, as also the time of his continuance do convince us, that the
Antichrist is one single person.

He is a little horn, says Daniel, speaking great words against God, and
wearing out the Saints for a time, times: and the dividing of that time, which,
according to Daniels interpretation, can be but four years and a half in
probability at the most; the like does Revel. 11. say of the Antichrist.

Several of the Papists make two Antichrists; the one apparent Jacobus Fabrus
Stapulensis in Locum.
in the world, that is, Mahumetans; the other to come in the end of the Roman
Monarchy, who (they say) shall slay Enoch and Elias, that is, the two
witnesses, and reign three years and a half, and then he shall be destroyed by
Christ's coming to Judgment*

CHAP. II.
THe greatest scruple about Antichrist arises from 1 John 2. 22. Who is a liar
but he that denies that Jesus is the Christ? he is the Antichrist that denies
the Father and the Son.

Now (say many) Antichrist, when he comes he shall be known Object.
above all others to be that notorious liar in denying Jesus to be the Christ,
and denying the Father and the Son: But he, whom some call the Antichrist in
this age, acknowledges the Father and the Son, and confesses and professes
that Jesus is the Christ: Therefore he cannot be the Antichrist.

I will but open this Text, let others apply it; in the Text you Sol.
have the Antichrists title, he is the liar, (...). Therefore he is called the
false prophet, Revel. 19. and Revel. 13. 14. he is said to deceive the
inhabitants of the earth by his signs, which Matthew 24. expounds lying
wonders. The Antichrist is the great liar, which implies two things. 1 That he
is one that apostatizeth from the truth, and fights against that truth he
professes. He is an apostate professor (as I may say,) to lie, is to go
against the conscience; mentiri est contra mentem ire. He speaks that with his
tongue that his heart is an enemy unto; Therefore Antichrist, Revel. 13. 11.
speaks as a Dragon, i. e. as the Dragon spoke to Eve in Paradise, every word
against his conscience, not one true word, though every word full of flattery
and false promises and pretenses. 2 It implies that he is the great
Covenant-breaker. For (...) (as Piscator observes) is fidem datam violare. Thus
you have Antichrist by his title [ the liar] the eminent, hypocritical
Christian-professing apostate who violates his faith and allegiance.

2 Here is his sin, the great lie that he tells to the World, and that is, He
denies Jesus to be the Christ.

Observe the Apostles style, in setting out the Antichrist in this place, who
is (...), but (...), say the learned, signifies fidem authoritatemque
detrahere: in Matthew. 10. 33. and Act. 3. 13, 14. and Matthew. 27. 28. it
signifies a treacherous, rebellious, unnatural revolt from ones lawful
Prince, accompanied with such malice against his person, that they rest not
satisfied but in his blood and utter destruction* Thus the Jews are said to
deny Christ: and in Heb. 11. 24. it is used after such a sense, Moses (...), he
refused to be called the Son of Pharaohs daughter. He cast off his mother, he
scormed to be called the son of an uncircumcised Egyptian, he would be no
longer her son, nor would he do homage to her as a mother. In this sense the
word in this place is to be taken; thus the liar is the denier of Jesus to be
the Christ. These words carry more in the sense then every man perceives; the
most men understand it of denying the Lord Jesus to be the true Messiah. But if
this be the Character of the Antichrist, then there are ten thousand thousand
Antichrists in the World; all the Turks and the Jews are the Antichrist: and
therefore we must look for some further meaning in these words.

He denies that Jesus is the Christ, (...), the anointed. He (as much as in
him lies) rebels against, and destroys Christ, that destroys the Offices of
Christ; but the Prophetical, Sacerdotall He that resists the Ordinances of
God, resists God, R^m. 13. 1, 2. and from the Lord shall receive his
judgment.
and Kingly Office, which makes Jesus, (...), the anointed, this Antichrist
denies, i. e. treacherously, rebelliously, unnaturally, and maliciously
destroys; Ergo he is the liar, i. e. the false prophet that deceives, and that
great hypocritical professor, but malicious apostate, the Antichrist, who, by
his denying of the anointed Offices which represent the Deity on earth, is
said to deny the Deity, both the Father and the Son, all Supremacy.

Herein he speaks great words, (says Daniel) against the God ^f gods. So that
that which gives the esse forma^e to the Antichri^t (...). (...).
is the s^aying of the Witnesses, and exa^ting himself above them; as these
with other Texts make it manifest. Or thus (in Christ's own words) the
Antichrist denies the Father and the Son, in separating from the Ministry of
Christ, 1 John 2. 19. That Is the great mark of Antichrists followers, who in
despising the Ministers sent by Christ, despise both the Father and the Son,
and in rejecting of them reject the Father and the Son, Matthew. 10. 40. Luke 10.
16. He that despises you, despises me; and he that despises me, despises
him that sent me, i. e. both Father and Son.

And thus you have him set forth under the title of the man of the sin, in
plain terms, the murderer of the Witnesses.

The second name given to him [ the son of the perdition] (...)* In this title
there is (say the learned) an Hebraisme, whereby is meant: 1 Passively, one
destinated to destruction, as Matthew. 23. 5. 2 Actively, one that is a destroyer
of others.

Take what others say of this son of the perdition. Perditus est quia a Christo
deficit, and perdit, quia alios a Christo abstrahit. Gualther. (...). Ex
Oecumenii and Arethae Expositionibus collectis, p. 732. Ita Aretius in locum.

Homo peccati, filius perditionis prius peccati deinde perditionis aptissime,
peccatum enim perditionis causa. Estius in locum.




He is passively so (says Gualther) because he apostatizeth from Christ. And
he is actively the son of perdition, because he causes others to apostatize
from Christ. The self-same sense and expression the Scholiasts have upon the
same words.

Estius observes upon both the expressions [ the man of sin* the son of
perdition.] First, he is the man of the sin; and then, the son of perdition:
his sin assuredly brings his ruin.

But why the son of perdition? the learned answer, that it is an Hebraisme, and
signifies as much as perditissimus, and perditioni natus ac devotus: aliorum
que pernicies, pestis and exitium. Zanch. But possibly, he may be called the
son of the perdition, in regard of his nature and quality; as also in regard of
the time of his appearing; he is the son, this correlate term implies a
father; now we shall find his father, if we look but out of what womb he
came, Revel. 11. 7. he came out of the bottomless pit; and who has the power or
key of the bottomless pit, but the Star fallen from heaven? Revel. 9. 1. and that
is generally by the learned Protestants concluded to be the Popedom, who
after it had opened the bottomless pit, and let out all its locusts, those
monsters that poisened Nations, and caused the Western Church so foully to
apostatize, (for that is the meaning of the 10 first verses of Revel. 9.) the
last that appears is ( v. 11^) a King, whose name is in Hebrew Abaddon, and in
Greek Apollyon, that is to say, a destroyer. This King most probably is the
Antichrist, the son of perdition: and my grounds are for it, because (as I said
before) his original is one and the same that Antichrists is, his end is the
same, his titles are the same, and the time of his appearing is at one and the
same time: a word on each. 1 His original is the same; in Revel. 11. 7. he is
the beast of the bottomless pit. 2 His titles are the same; for here he is also
called King, and so ( Revel. 11. 7.) [ beast] implies, as Revel. 17. 8. there
the same beast which arises out of the bottomless pit is called the eighth,
(that is, King, say the learned) so that his titles are the same. 3 His time of
appearing is the same* for here he appears the last viper of the Popedom of
Romes hatching; and so he appears in Revel 11. 7. after the witnesses have
finished their testimony: and in Revel. 13. after the beast of the Sea has
tyrannized in his day: and in Revel. 17. he is called the eighth beast, bearing
up Rome, when she is going to ruin; and Daniel 7. calls him the little horn,
the last which rises up after the ten. It is supposed by some, upon very good
grounds, that that King Apollyon, Revel, 9. 11. is brought in abruptly there,
or should be within a Parenthesis, as not relating to the next following verse,
but set down in the end of the Vision of the Roman Apostasy, to note, that
this King Apollyon is to appear in the latter end of the Apostasy, being the
Antichrist that slays the Witnesses, therefore Apollyon: and the eighth King,
Revel. 17. therefore King Apollyon; and he is to go to perdition at the great
battle, Revel. 19. therefore Abaddon. 4 His end is the same, for in Revel. 17.
8, 11. there twice he is said to go to perdition; and twice mention is made in
Dan. 7. of the destruction of the little horn, which is the same beast; now if
this King be the Antichrist, then Paul's son of perdition has the Pope for his
father: and hence peradventure he is called the son. This son of perdition may
well be called the son of the Pope, if we look to the resemblance that is
betwixt the father and the son.

The Pope, the father, pretends to exceeding much piety and godliness; and so
does the Antichrist, the son; therefore the Antichrist is called the false
prophet, and Paul (2 Thessalonians. 2. 9.) calls him, that person that comes with
power, and lying wonders, and signs, and all deceivablenesse of
unrighteousness; insomuch, that if it were possible, the very Elect would be
deceived by him* and his followers: and then in his tyranny over the Saints he
much resembles his father the Pope; for the Popedom drove the true Church out
of Rome, which was once the purest Church, and the famousest in the World, and
drove it into the Wilderness, and caused the Witnesses to sit in sackcloth,
that is, in the poorest, lowest, vildest, and most abject state. The Popedom
secluded the Emperors of Rome from their right of Dominion in Rome, and has
made them sit in sackcloth: mistake me not; for by the Emperors of Rome I do
not mean the Emperors of Germany, no; they are as excentrick and as unlawful
in their constitution, as the Pope himself, who is Pope by the election of his
own creatures; there will be found in the world one day one that has a lawful
title to the Empire by succession, whose predecessors had their title founded
upon a lawful Conquest. Now, as the Pope the father (together with the Eastern
Apostasy) drives the successors of the lawful Emperor of Rome into the
wilderness, which is the true Churches place (observe that Revel. 12. 14.) so
in that place the Antichrist slayes the witnesses; that is, the lawful anointed
ones of God, who finish their testimony to the truth against the grand
apostasy and usurpation of Rome: and after he has slain them, usurps their
power and authority: just like the Pope, when he had drove the Emperor out of
Rome, seated himself in his throne and authority, and trampled under feet the
Ministry of Rome, that neither Synods nor Censures of the Ministry were of
any force, except such as were of the Usurpers faction, and cried him up for a
Saint and a petty god. Herein the Antichrist, the son, is also like the Pope,
his father. Hence from the resemblance of their tyranny in Revel 13. 12. the
beast of the earth, (which is the son of perdition Paul here mentions) is said
to ex^rcise the power of the first beast before him.

Or he may be called the son; because, as a son is born to be a support to his
father in his old age; so is this son of perdition destinated to bear up Rome
in her old age, when she is near her grave, going down to destruction Hence the
Antichrist is seen to carry Rome, (Revel. 17. 7.) the woman with seven heads
and ten horns: when ( v. 1.) her judgment is seen in a vision; whence I
conclude, the Antichrist rises long after the ^ope, and does at that same time
appear in the world, when the Judgment of Rome is near at hand, Non solum
omnium Patrum sensus, sed ^otius Ecclesie consensus.
and this is the opinion of the most of the Fathers; for John in Revel. 11. 7.
sees not this bettomless pit beast until the Witnesses had finished their
testimony, nor does he see the beast of the earth (which is the same beast of
the bottomless pit) until ( Revel. 13. 10, 11.) the beast of the Sea, which
had led captivity, was going into captivity, and then appears the beast of the
earth, and up comes his new Government and Tyranny.

Nor is the beast of the bottomless pit ( Revel. 17. 8. which is the eighth (
Verse 11.) seen carrying the woman with seven heads and ten horns, until the
judgment of the great Whore is seen, Verse 1. so that there is great ground to
believe that this son of perdition arises after the Apostasy, and appears in
the World about the time when the Apostasy shall be ended, that is, when God
shall throw down those usurpers in the Churches, and usurpers in those States
which have bin the cause of the Apostasy, when God shall ruin all those
irregular Orders (as I may justly call them) in the European Churches; and a^l
those tyrannical and false Governments, which are got into those States which
profess Christianity, and shall raise up his Witnesses, which shall promote
the truth of the Gospel both for doctrine and worship; about this time shall
the Antichrist appear, i. e. immediately before this time. But we leave this
sense.

We come nearer to the literal and general sense, and (as it is conceived) to
that which the Holy Ghost alludes unto. The Antichrist is called the son of
perdition, by way of allusion to Judas, who is Grotius.
called the son of perdition, John 17. 12. which gives us this notion, that as
there arose a son of perdition to betray Christ the lawful Monarch of the Jews,
and hereby brought a dreadful curse upon the Church and State of the Jews, so
as that the Gospel departed from them and went to the Geneiles; so there shall
about that time (when God will cause the Gospel to go forth to the Jews)
another son of perdition arise, which shall betray to death the only true
Christian Monarch in the World, that so the Romish Gentiles Epha may be full,
and God may bring upon them the judgments written, and restore again in their
ruin the twelve Tribes, to their ancient possessions. This son of the
perdition is he that slayes the Witnesses. Therefore, says Ambrose Catharinus,
he is like Judas, Eximio namque mo^o talis erit, qui tantum audebit: he is
exactly like Judas in his sin, in his eminent profession of religion, and his
prodigious ends, malicious, covetous, sacrilegious, treacherous attempts, and
hypocritical politic practices in the accomplishing of those ends To conclude,
let the words explain themselves: The man of the sin, is the son of the
perdition. i. e. he that commits the sin of sins in the Gentile Church, is the
son of the perdition, (that is, actively) of the slaying of the Witnesses. So
that the person gives us the knowledge of the sin, and the sin gives us
eminently to know the person, and this shall be the making naked, manifesting,
or laying open to all the world the man of the sin, the son of the perdition.

CHAP. III.
WHo opposes and exalts himself above all that is called God, or that is
worshipped; so that he as God sus in the Temple of God, showing himself that he
is God.

This verse gives us a description of those actions which give the esse formale
to the Antichrist; for it is not the person, but the sin makes the Antichrist
formally so to be. This text is Antichrist's looking-glass, wherein he may see
himself face to face.

His prodigious sin is the slaying of the Witnesses, and this is the sin which
the text sets forth.

In the words there are three general parts. 1 Antichrist's acts. 2 The object
of these actions. 3 The end of his acts.

1 His acts are set forth under two names or titles given to him. 1 He
opposes. 2 He exalts himself.

2 The objects of these actions are, 1 All that is called god. 2 Or that is
worshipped.

3 In the end of his actions we have, 1 The ambitious aims of the Antichrist
laid open, it is to make himself supreme. [ So that he as God] there is his
Supremacy. 2 We have the place where Antichrist makes himself King and
Supreme, and that is in the Temple of God, in the true Church of God [ Sits in
the Temple of God.]

3 We have also his kind of title to all this greatness, described [shewing
himself that he is God] it is a self-created title that he has to his
Supremacy: he shows himself, he displayes his own colors: the meaning is, he
is an Usurper, he has no title, but what he gives himself.

[ Who opposes and exalts himself,] so our Translation renders it, (...).
Beza translates it [ sese opponens] the Vulgar, [ qui adversatur] the Syriack,
[ qui adversarius] the particle [^] This adversary ( Isai. 27. 1.) is called
the Serpentine-Bar^e; or the Serpent crossing like a bar; because it is he that
shu^ out laws and justice, and lawful Magistracy from their Seats in the
State, and Government and Piety in the Church; this is most probably, a
prophecy of Antichrists ruin; for both the precedent and subsequent matter
prove that this coming of the Lords with his sword is at that time, when God
will call the twelve Tribes to the Gospel; parallel with this Text, is Revel.
^9 10, 11, to 15 16, ^7. and 14. 14. The learned observe the kind of
expressions used by the Apostle [(...)] which both sound passively, yet in the
sense they are actively understood, as Beza and Grotius observe. Servanda is it
vis conjuga^ion is Niphal reciproc^. And see the Greek Scholiasts expound it,
(...), i. e. he shall oppose, he shall extol. Hujus ordinis Deus est author, ut
qui sunt rebe^es (...) sese cum Deo ipso bellum gerer^. Beza.
is restrictive in this place; and therefore the expression is to be considered
absolutely, [that person opposing, or the adverse person.] The word comes from
(...) and (...), that is, contra jaceo; it alludes to soldiers lying in siege
against a Castle, who lie close in their trenches against it; so does the
Antichrist lay a siege against the Witnesses, watching for an opportunity, to
surprise them, and bereave them of their power and glory. The word answers
(says Grotius, Zanchie, and Beza) to the word Satan in Hebrew, which signifies
an adversary, as they prove. This turns us to a text which gives us a view of
the Antichrist, ( Zach. 3 3, 4) and the Witnesses in filthy garments, and the
Lord rebuking Antichrist, who is there twice called the adversary* in the
rebuking of whom there is a fair Miter put upon Joshua the high Priests head,
that is, the Witnesses are called up to the Throne; but this text will require
much time to clear, and therefore at this time I pass it by.

We will take it as it is biased the other way by Commentators, and so the
expression, (as that next before it) alludes to Judas: says Chist, Have not I
chosen twelve, and one of you is a Devil? and why a Devil? but because he
proved a traitor to his own Master, and an hypocritical cunning traitor
against him; so does Antichrist against his Liege Sovereign.

To conclude, he is most probably called the adversary, because he is the
opposer of the Lords anointed ones; hence the learned call him the Antichrist,
because Christo ex diametro oppositus.

[ And exalts himself,] these two expressions turn us to two texts, which
two texts describe the Antichrist (say the most of the most learned)
Commentators) in Dan. 11. 35. Revel. 11. 7.

In Revel. 11. 7. he makes war with the Witnesses, and overcomes them; here in
opposing them, he makes war with them; and in overcoming them he exalts himself
above them; and in Dan. 11 35. you have Paul's words, He shall exalt himself
above every god, (i e* says Brightman) above every Magistrate; in Romans 13. 2.
he resists God, that rebels against Magistracy: Oh this is Antichrist, 1
Ioh. 2. 19. 22.

Thus you have the Antichrist's actions described, he opposes and exalts,
that is, he makes war and overcomes.

Now you have in the next place the objects of his actions, or the parties whom
he does oppose and exalt himself above.

Above every one that is called God. Some Greek copies have it, [(...)] supra
omnem, above every man that is called god: other copies read it [(...)] supra
omne, above every thing that is called god; the Syriack Interpreter reads [
supra omnem] Beza ^ide Dounam lib. 4. de Antichristo.
says, utrovis modo legas, you may read it either way.

Grotius reads (...). Here the Papists and the Protestants fall foul upon each
other; the Protestants say, this is meant of the Popes usurpation in his
trampling upon Kings and Emperors, and trampling upon Gods Law, and usurping a
power even above Christ in his indulgencies and pardons.

On the contrary, say the Papists this cannot be; for (say they) Antichrist
must deny Christ: oppose God and Christ, and be accounted and worshipped as God
and Christ: But the Pope will not be worshipped as Christ, for he believes in
Christ and worships Christ: so far is he from denying Christ: Therefore he is
not the Antichrist. But if this were all the defense the Papists could make,
for ought I know the Pope will still remain Antichrist. For there was never any
professor of Christ ever lifted up his head so high against the Lord and his
Christ as the Popes have done, except the Antichrist. But to answer their
Argument, we utterly deny that the Scripture holds out any such thing, as that
Antichrist in open words denies the Deity, or that he requires divine worship
as a god, or that the Jews shall worship him as their Messiah. There is no such
thing as they affirm of Antichrist to be found in Scripture: the two main
Scriptures which are brought to prove it, are the Text we are upon, and that of
1 John 2. ^2. The last we have already opened; this Text in hand we shall open
by Scripture, and clear its sense from all those aspersions call upon it.

[ Against every one who is called god.] Grotius well observes on this Text,
that Paul would not have us believe that those Paulus ne qui^ ill^ de quibus
hic ag^ ^os esse ^rederet, ca^ion is ergo addidit (...). Grotius in Locum. Non
dicit s^pra omnem qui est; nam qui est, unicus est, nec de illo [omnis] di^ur,
sed unus. Dounam lib. 4. cap. 1. de Antichristo Non super Deum extoll^tur
Antichristus, sed super eos qui dicunt^r. I enaeus lib. 3. cap. 6*
a^ gods of whom he speaks; therefore he adds (says he) the word [ called]

That it cannot be meant of the Deity in the letter, is past question; for who
can exalt himself above him? nor can it be meant of his endeavors to exalt
himself above God, so as to assume the worship of a god; for it is contrary to
that Text (which many learned Divines hold is literally meant of Antichrist)
Dan 11. 38. (and the most understand it of Antichrist in the Type) where the
Antichrist is said to worship the god of forces, or the god Mauzzim. Now how
can this agree together, that he should exalt himself above every god, assume
divine worship as a god, and yet in this state worship Antichristus* (...)
public so^us col^ vol^ ut deus, privation (...) co^et ^uum D^monem, quem nunc
up^bit deum Maozim, i. e. fortitudinum and munitionum; quia ej^ open,
fortitudine and patentia, omnia sibi saviiciet Antichristus. Com. a Lapide.
Deus dicitur aliquis quatuor modis, pri^o natutae proprietate, ^xod. 20. Deus
unus. Secundo fa^a nuncupation^, omnes dis gentium D^monia. ^ertio ^ratuita
adoptione, Ego dixi dii estis. Qua^to, deteg^ta potestate, Exodus 7. Constitui te
deum (...)* su^er (...) extellit se Antichristus, (...). Vide D^unam de
Antichristo, lib. 4. c. 1. Sect 3. They are call (...), nun^. (...), (...)
(...) (...) (...). (...) (...) D (...) cont^a M^r.
a god? A quick-fighted Father of the Roman Church, seeing into what
absurdities this foolish opinion would bring him, endeavors to salve it thus;
says he, Antichrist although he would be worshipped as a god publicly yet
privately he worships the Devil his god Mauzzim, because by his help and
strength he obtained all his victories. It may be that this answer may satisfy
those of the Roman Church, which live by an implicit faith; but it can never
satisfy any rational Protestant, for these two reasons. 1 Because he has not
an iota of Scripture for his opinion. 2 He has not so much as probability in
his assertion; therefore I leave him, and pass to the other extreme of the
Protestants, who make this one of their arguments to prove the Pope the
Antichrist. But that this cannot be meant of the Popedom, or Pope will be
sufficiently clear to every unbiassed Reader, as I doubt not, but in part
already it is, by what has been writ to this effect in this Treatise.

He against whom the Antichrist opposes himself, and exalts himself above, is
the Supreme Magistrate, Supremacy in the State, or the Monarch, and those
authorized by him; in the Government these he opposes.

These are (Psalm 82. 1, 6) called gods, and in Exodus 4. 16. and 7. 1. Moses the
first Monarch of the Commonwealth of the Hebrews is called a god* See I have
ma^e thee a god unto Pharaoh, and unto Aaron thou shall be a god. This is
spoken of Moses; and here the title God is given to those whom the Antichrist
opposes; what does this tell us but that it is one of the sons of Oil, one of
the Witnesses, which Revel 11. 6. have power like Moses to turn water into
blood I need say no more in confirmation of it, it is the sense of several
Learned Expositors.

[ Or that is worshipped] (...), Erasmus, Beza and Vatablus translate it [
numen] divine power, others [ cultum.]

The Sy^tack, Jerome, and Tertullian, read [religio.]

The Vulgar (which our Translators follow) renders it [ quod colitur.]

The word comes from (...), which signifies to reverence religiously; the word
is a comprehensive word*

It Is by very learned men conceived to come from (...), which comprehends those
things in Religion, to whom reverence and worship is due, so that it not only
comprehends (...), ( Acts 17. 23.) the forms of Worship in the Church, which
every devout Christian reverenceth; but the Administrators and Dispensers of
those forms which are the Ministers of Christ: Ita (...) significa^ omne id
quod religionis causa homines vener^ntur.
which the Apostle enjoins, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 13. To have in double honor for their
works sake, for Religions sake, for the Gospels sake; so that the object of
Antichrists actions are not only Magistracy in the State, but Ministry in the
Church. He not only opposes and exalts himself above and against the
Civil, but the Ecclesiastic Power and Government; he not only changes the
times and laws of the one, but of the other also; and what is this but the
slaying of the Witnesses? the two Witnesses: this makes him the man of the sin,
the son of the p^rdition.

Next we have the end of his acts. 3


[ So that he, as god, sits in the Temple of God, here is also the place where
he acts these things, it is in the Temple of God, that is, the Church of God,
the true Church of God, where the Gospel Ordinances and Gospel-Officers are of
Christ's ordeining, there does this Antichrist (when he has pulled down the
supreme Monarch, and all those Magistrates that depended upon his Supremacy,
and where he has opposed and exalted himself above and against all forms of
worship, and right Dispensers of those forms) seat himself as god, that is, as
supreme Head and Monarch Quidam dicunt quod nunquam H^e: usalem ^ec templum
reaedificabi^ur, sed usque ad finem perseverabit desolatio, and hoc aliqui
Judaei credunt: ideo exponitur in templo Dei, i. e. in Ecclesia, qu a mult^ in
Ecclesia eum ^ecipient Aquinas in lo^um. In templo Dei, i. e. in (...) Dei qua
est templum Dei. G^rranu is lo^um.
over all those Countries and places where he has thus made war, and overcome;
and this the Holy Ghost tells us is in the Church of God, which he calls the
Temple of God: so that the Reader, if he will, may easily find in what place
of the world the Antichrist is to arise that slayes the Witnesses.

[(...) so far forth] This adve^b is very Emphaticall, implying that the drift
of his prodigious acts in slaying the Witnesses, is that he may make himself
the Lord possessour of their power and greatness, of their estates and
revenues.

[(...), in the Temple of God] it is very absurd, to say that this Tempse (as
the Papists affirm) is the Temple of Jerusalem, for the Temple is destroyed at
Jerusalem, never to be builded again; and the Papists confess that the time of
this Antichrists appearing in the world, and sitting in the Temple of Jerusalem
must be in the end of the Roman Monarchy

We must therefore expound [ Temple of God] as the Apostate expounds it in
other places, the Church of God; and s^ the most judicious of the Papists
expound it: and generally all the Protestants so expound it, fetching their
warrant not only from the Fathers, but from the Scriptures.

(...) comes from (...), because this is Gods habitation, he (...). (...). p.
333. (...) (...). Sed^t in Ecclesi^ Dei, quasi Deu^, quia magna part Ecclesiae
ei adhaerebit. Gorian. and Aquinas. In templo Dei s^deat, i. e. principetur and
domine^ur tanquam ipse cum suis nuntiis sit templum Dei, sicut Christus cum
suis:
dwells there, so that the Antichrists seat cannot be Rome, that apostate
Church, but that Church where God in an especial manner dwells in the purity of
his Gospel Ordinances.

(...) sits as God: here [(...)] is very Emphaticall, implying thus much, that
he is but an usurper, he is not really nor rightfully the supreme head, he is
but a would-be-King, and an insolent usurper of what he possesses: he sits as
God, God is here to be expounded as before, he opposes and exalts himself
above every god, that is, Magistrate, and here he sits as God, that is, as
supreme Head, Governor, or Monarch in the room of them he threw down: and all
this in the midst of the Church, the truest and purest Church.

Augustine has a prophetic gloss upon this text, he conceives by sitting in
the Temple of God, is meant, his domineering and insulting in a Church Way, as
if he and his followers were the only true Church, the only Saints, and all
others but in the dark, foolish professors, and far short of him and his
followers in point of Saint-ship.

Some Books for (...), they read (...), the people of God; so that he, as God,
sits upon the people of God; for (...), to a word* is in populum; this reading
does neither contradict the precedent, nor the following sense, but rather
confirms it, showing that the Antichrist shall sit as Monarch over and against
the people of God: therefore Dan. 7. 25. he is said to wear out the Saints of
the most High, and to change their times and laws; and they are said to be
given into his hands: i. e. to be delivered up to his Tyranny for three years,
and the half of three, in which time he shows himself, as if he were the sole
Monarch of those Kingdoms, which the true Professors of the Gospel do
possess.

[ Showing himself that he is God] (...); the vulgar renders it ostendens, so
our Translators render it in English; Erasmus reads it ost^ntans, boasting or
bragging. Beza reads prae se ferens, pretending, (I may so translate it.) The
Greek word answering to (...), Mor^h, which in English is, making himself to
appear [that he is God] that is, that he is in the power and authority of them
whom he did subdue, which are called gods* the supreme Governors; he sets
himself out to be the Supreme: it is a sel^created title and power that he has;
none in lawful authority gave him any such great authority, but he takes it to
himself; so in Dan. 11. 36* he exalts himself and magnifies himself; it is the
Kingdom that he seeks for himself; self-promotion is his end, that he may be
mighty in the eyes of the world; he makes himself god, i. e Monarch.

Some read* [ tanquam sit deus] as if he were god, that is, demonstrating to
the world by his imperious acts, that he is no less then an absolute Monarch,
he is no whit inferior to a King in power, therefore he is as a King; and this
he makes the World to know by his actions; therefore (says (...)) Paul does
(...) (...). (...) locum.
not say, saying, but endeavoring to make it app^ar that he is supreme; his
actions shall tell the World what he is, not his words, for his words are
smoother then oil, therein he is like the Pope, the first beast before him,
Revel 13. 12.

CHAP. IV.
REmember ye not, that when I was yet with you, I told you th^se Verse 5.
things?

The most of Expositors pass by this Verse, as being plain and easy to be
understood; and so it is: therefore it should be observed.

There is nothing difficult in the Copies, or the Translators of them

Za^chie says no more of it then this, which is just nothing; Hic ver^us nihil
habet obscuritatis. In the like manner do the rest ride p^st over it.

This Text is like a two-edged sword in the hand of Paul, that spiritual
hampion, whereby he divides asunder betwixt the seducers and the seduced.

A man would take this Text, prim^ intuit^, to be very abruptly brought in;
that in the very middle of a prophec^e of such mighty importance, he should
bring in such a parenth^sis, se^ms harsh; but o the wisdom and prudence of
this mighty man! or rather of the mighty Spirit of God in this Apostle!

There is that vis (...), or kind of formative virtue here in Paul's words,
whereby each faculty of the soul (that by Heretics had been alarumed and
routed) is rallied again, and put into a stronger posture thenever, to
withstand the enemy.

This Text confirms the truth of his Doctrine, confutes their sluggish,
ignoble demeanure in not searching the Scriptures, like the Bereans their
neighbors, and re-establisheth them in the truth, by putting them in mind how
that it was nothing but that which he had taught them, and they had received
for truth before: Hereby Paul confounds the Heretics and Seducers. Thus comes
Paul, as the Sun, which at once dispelleth darkness, and administers heat,
light, and refreshment.

Remember ye not? Interrogatio haec, quandam reprehensionis speciem prae se
fert, says loyal Bradshaw the Divine upon this Text.

Remember ye not, that when I was yet with you I told you these things?

All errors and heresies in a person or a constituted Church, (such as that of
Th^ssalonica) arise either from wilful wickedness, or ignorance; and that
ignorance arises either through careless negligence or forgetfulness; either
from neglect of learning and understanding truth or through forgetfulness of
those t^uths they had been taught: this was the Th^ssalonians fault, the Devil
had picked the jewel of truth out of the Cabinet of their memory; that now any
shining stone was embraced as precious, never regarding whether it were true or
false.

At this great loss comes Paul with the lost Jewel, and restores it to its
former Cabinet; he returns it again cum paterna exprobratione l^niter eos
cast^gans [Remember ye not?] Old truths forgot presage much (...) to ensue upon
the peccant Churches or persons: it is like slipping Anchor in a dangerous sea;
this Church rode safe at Anchor against all the winds and storms of heretical
doctrines whiles they kept in memory Paul's truths; but having cut that golden
Cable, on a sudden that Church was dangerously driven amongst the Rocks, and
now in this storm comes Paul like another Savior, walking upon this troubled
Sea, ch^ding these winds, and bidding them be still; he brings them once again
unto an Anchor, by remembering them of what truths they had forgot: happy
Thessalonica that had such a Pilot in such a stresse. This Text is the
sheat-Anchor, which staid the driving ship of the Church of Thessalonica: they
had heard Paul in person preach of the grand Apostasy, and the coming of
Antichrist, and of the great let until the time of Antichrists appearing; and
how all these must be fulfilled before the day of Judgment; but they had
forgot all this, until Paul had remembered them: it is certainly an excellent
piece of divine policy, in a time when a Church has ^lipt the anchor of old
truths, and is tossed to and fro with heresies, to mind them of old truths;
for all error in the Church (as we said) is either caused through
forgetfulness or wilfulness: as for wilful Apostates they are past cure,
without infinite mercy, and an extraordinary divine arm stretched out, they
are miserably ship-wracked to eternity: but as for forgetful apostates, what
better remedy can be brought for their recovery then bringing to their
remembrance ancient truths from which they have swerved? What makes so many
eminent professors in these our days turn Apostates, but only
forgetfulness? their fear and care of their persons, families, and estates,
has made them forget their Baptismall, Sacramental, National, Personal
Engagements. This sin of forgetfulness caused some (who went to prison
triumphing like Martyrs) to return from prison sneaking like Malefactors; they
forgot Solomon's words, Prove. 4. 6. and a greater then Solomon's, in Matthew 16.
25* 26. and 19. 28. and Revel. 21. 7, 8. and 2. 7, 17, 26. and 3. 5, 11, 12. In
truth, such was their forgetfulness, through fear, that they forgot their own
Epistles. Poor souls, I pity them, and pray that either they may remember
themselves, or others may quite forget them: let their shameful acts never be
published in Gath. Mark 8. 18. Do ye not remember?

The Apostle proves the truth of his Doctrine both from an ocular and auricular
demonstration: they had seen him in person mainteining it, and with their ears
received it formerl^ ^or a truth; so that the Apostle drove them to this
Dilemma, either to be quiet, and establish themselves in the truth, by
rejecting those seducers, and their doctrines; or to proclaim to the World,
that they were Apostates, in forsaking the Light and the Truth which they once
embraced.

CHAP. V.
ANd now ye know what withholds, that he might be revealed in Verse 6.
his time.

This Text is neither plain to be read, nor easy to be understood.

Some of the Fathers have only this dark Comment upon it, that they understand
it not. Hereupon some as darkly say of this Text, that Paul's intention was not
to be understood by any but the Thessalonians. Venerable Beda, and Dr. Estius
ingeniously Quoniam s^irre illos dixit, ap^te but dicere n^luit; and id^o nos
qui nesci^us quod illi sciebant, pervenire cum labor ad id quod sensit
Apostolus, cupi^us nec valemus. Beda.
confess they understand it not; and several others, (though not in words) in
their works profess as much; I pray God I be not one of them* I am the
likeliest of all men; If I am, it is not for want of search; For Hagar, I think,
did not search more for a Fountain then I have done for a Stream naturally
flowing from this profound Well, yet am still exceeding thirsty.

The Text it self is an inference drawn from a double reason in the premises:
The inference is, that now they knew what hindered the appearing of Antichrist,
and the grounds of his inference are from v. 3, 4, 5.

1 There shall be a general Apostasy, v. 3. before the man of sin be
revealed. 2 That man of sin before he comes to be formally the man of sin, must
( v. 4) stay the Witnesses: and this was no strange or new doctrine; for v. 5.
he had preached it to them before: so that from this double Demonstration, he
in this Text concludes with a confutation of their former preposterous
conclusions; for the form of the Apostles speech is Elenchicall; Est Elenchus
Syllogismus cum contradictione conclusionis. Arist.
they concluded that the day of Judgment was at hand; No such matter, says
Paul, for the general Apostasy must continue a certain space first, and then
must come the man of sin in the end of that, and he must slay the Witnesses;
and this you may remember I taught you; therefore now certainly you cannot but
know what lets the Antichrists appearing since you have been double taught it;
( viz.) that of the general Apostasy, which God by his revealed decree has
ordered first to be; and then the slaying of the Witnesses, the overcomming and
suppressing of that Magistracy and Ministry which upheld Gods holy Ordinances
in their purity * for the Apostasy did but drive the Witnesses into the
wilderness, where the Antichrist in the end of the Apostasy finds them and
slayes them. He opposes and exalts himself above all that is called God, i.
e. Magistracy; or that for Religions sake is reverenced, (for so much the
Greek word imports) that is the Ministry, which for their works sake are to be
had in double honor.

The Apostle draws an argument a (...) impedimenti, that the great let must be
the two Witnesses; for they are the mountain which stand in the Antichrists
way, all his war is with them, and all his Tyranny is over them, and their
Subjects. I cannot find in all the Scr^pture what should be the great let but
the two Witnesses; it is they that have fire in their mouths to devour their
enemies; they have power to shut heaven, and power over waters to turn them to
blood; these all (...)* 11.
are but expressions of their prevalencie with God against their enemies, those
Antichristian enemies, which persecute them into the Wilderness; and hence it
is that Antichrist, Revel. 11. 7. makes war with them: by which it is clear,
it is a National Church under a lawful Magistracy and Ministry, which are in
a capacity of levying war against the Antichrist; that by the way, chiefly
observing this, that they are the Antichrists let. And v. 10. They that dwell
on the earth, i. e. Antichrists followers, they rejoice and make merry, and
send gifts one to another; and what is the matter? because those two Prophets
tormented them that dwell on the earth, that is, those Antichristian factions;
they, i. e. the Witnesses kept down Antichrist with his followers; therefore
these rejoice for their slaying.

I very well know the diversity of opinions on this Text:

Some and those of the Eastern Churches conceive the great let is the Spirit of
God, whose powerful influence in the Gospel kept Antichrist under. This in
some sense is true, yet not in opposition, but confirmation of that opinion of
the Witnesses being the great let; for what Mediators does the Spirit make use
of betwixt his Majesty and men but only the Witnesses? Moses and Aaron were
thus his Mediators. Others say, the great let is the decree of God: this in
some sense (though not in theirs) is true; for there are no events but what
fall under Gods decree: but we speak (and so does the Apostle) of the second,
not of the first causes. Others say, the doctrine of the Gospel, was that great
let which kept Antichrist from appearing. This opinion is not totally to be
rejected, as contrary to that opinion of the Witnesses; for the doctrine of the
Gospel going forth of the mouths of the Ministry, and guarded, backed and
defended by the sword of the Magistracy, is that that would have kept
Antichrist from rising; but here is the mischief, Antichrist by his policy
divides Magistracy and Magistrates, and Ministry and Ministers: and thereby
ruins both. And this is one sign of Antichrists coming; for he divides a
Kingdom against it self, and friends and families he divides asunder. But I
digress.

Others say, the let was the Paganism of the Roman Emperors, which until
removed hindered Antichrist from getting into the Throne. It Is true indeed,
Antichrist must be one that professes Christ, not a Heathen, nor professed
Atheist, as the Papists say: but Paganism could not be the let; for the
Antichrist is not tied to the Roman Throne, nor was Atheism to possess the
Roman Throne, until Antichrist came. The general opinion of Expositors is, that
the Roman Empire is the let: this is the opinion of the Fathers, (...), say the
Scholiasts, and they speak best and truest; and to this many learned and pious
Protestants consent. I do not love to stretch out contra torrentem brachia, as
here I must in contradicting this opinion: if they mean the Heathen Roman
Empire, it cannot be; for that was long since ruined, and then Antichrist must
by all the Fathers opinion be long since ruined also, he being to continue in
his tyranny but three years and an half, as they say, if they mean the Roman,
Christian Empire (as Carthus. Bruno affirms) in some sense it is true; for the
Christian Magistracy of Rome did doubtless hinder much of the Antichristian
pride from rising. Yet this cannot be true in any sense, unless we will grant
(which I think may lawfully be granted) that the lawful Emperor of Rome by the
Apostasy was drove ( Revel. 12.) into the Wilderness, where he did in
sackcloth, i. e. in a clouded, obscure, remote place and state continue, and in
that state kept the Antichrist from rising. Upon the overcomming and depressing
of whom the Antichrist arose: if this be granted, it falls into the lap of that
opinion of the Witnesses, being the let of the Antichrist, and in all
probability we can then point at the place and person both of the Witnesses,
and the person that slayes them, and where; but we forbear, it being not to do.

Others say, the grand Apostasy did let and hinder the Antichrist from
appearing. This also in some sense is true; for the grand Apostasy is to
precede the Antichrist, and so Antichrist was not to be until toward the end
of this Apostasy: but this Apostasy in its own nature did no more hinder the
Antichrist, then the father hinders or lets the birth of the son, because he is
ordained to be before him; or then the horses let or hinder the Chariots
appearing, because they go before it, and it comes after: the grand Apostasy
is the begetter and the drawer on of the Antichrist, not the hinderer of it;
and therefore that (as v. 7. clears) cannot be the great let of Antichrist; but
(as we have said) the great let must necessarily be (as in verse 4.) him whom
the Antichrist does oppose, and exalt himself above; and those, ( Revel. 11. 7.
and 10.) which he overcomes and kills, and they rejoice that the old tormentors
are removed which did oppress them and keep them under; therein keeping
Antichrist from rising.

There is one opinion, which I forgot, I find it but in one B adshaw.
Author, and besides himself I think it scarce ever entered into the heart of
any Expositor: he holds, that Paul by the let here does not mean that which
hindered Antichrists, but Christ's appearing. This opinion is distant toto Coelo
from all other; but that neither makes it truer or falser, only stranger. But
to this opinon we answer, that it is not to be received, because it is contrary
to the scope of Paul's words, and to the method; it is contrary to the scope of
the matter, which in verse 4. and verse 7. treats of Antichrists rising,
revealing, and reigning, and that which hinders him; so that [ he] in verse 6
has relation to [ he] in verse 4. as [ that wicked] in verse 8. has relation
to [ he] in verse 4. also.

We will once more touch upon this Text, to see what may (by Gods grace) be
drawn from the method and the words.

The Text (as we said) is Paul's inference from what he had laid down in the
premises. In this inference we have the repetition of Oste^dit c^s habere
(...) causam. Aqu^as.
his Argument laid down in verse 3, 4. In verse 4. there is the let, which is
all that is called God, or is religiously reverenced: and in verse ^. the man
of sin to be revealed in his time, viz. after the apostasy. Now, says Paul,
ye know the let that keeps Antichrist from rising before his time; before he
appear in the world, the Witnesses must be 1260 days in the Wilderness; and
they keep Antichrist that while from appearing in the World. He shall not
appear until the Witnesses have finished their testimony; this Paul clearly
holds out in this Text to us; and then he arises, and opposes, and exal^eth
himself, or makes war, and overcomes them: nothing more clear then this.
Therefore Paul in verse 3* and John in Revel. 11. puts the Antichrist after the
grand apostasy, which argues the same truth; for so long as the apostasy
continues* so long are the Witnesses in sackcloth, Revel. 11. 1, ^, 3.- So
that Antichrist's being placed after the apostasy, is as much as his rising
when the Witnesses have finished their testimony: it is all one.

(...): some learned men say it is put for (...), which signifies to let or
hinder, and in this sense Ambrose, Aquinas, Ans^lme, Cajetan, Aretius, and very
many others interpret the word. Others say, (...), is as much in signification
as (...), which is the obteining of the desire. Others translate (...),
Benedict. justin.
tenere, so Paul uses it, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 21. (...), Keep or hold fast that which
is good But the word properly signifies a powerful and over-prevailing force
in withholding that which would otherwise prevail; so the Witnesses by their
government and discipline (whiles united) kept Antichrist from rising, that is,
from acting his rebellion, and treason, and blasphemy.

CHAP. VI.
(...), that he might be revealed. The Syriack (...) i e. q^o (...) pa^fiat.
Beza.
renders it, quin reveletur.

This word (...) Jerome thinks is a new coined word, taken out of the
Septuagint mint, who did frequently coin new words to set out such rare
mysteries as they found in the Scripture; his reason is, because he finds not
such a word amongst all the Heathen Authors.

The word signifies to unvail a hidden thing: therefore the Revelation (in
Greek (...)) is so called, because there the mystery of ruining the Pagan
Empire, and the mystery of the grand apostasy, and the mystery of the
Antichrist, and the mystery of Christ's coming to raise up the Witnesses, ^uine
the Antichrist, Rome, and the Devil, and convert the twelve Tribes to the
Gospel, is all revealed to John therein.

But this word seems to me to import something more, viz the revelation of some
choice secret, which the world shall be ignorant of; it shall be hid from them,
and only reveal^d to some peculiar ones, as a choice mystery. So you have the
word in Luke 10. 22. No man has known who the Son is, but the Father; and who
the Father is, but the Son, (...) and he to whom the Son will reveal him: that
choice and beloved soul to whom Christ will communicate this ^are secret; it is
not to every one, nor to many, but only to some few choice peculiar ones; so
you have the same word, Matthew 11. 25 there Christ gives thanks to his Father,
that he had hid the mystery of the Gospel from the wise and learned, and
revealed it to babes and sucklings; to some few weak despised ones in the
World. So when Antichrist comes, the World shall not know him to be Antichrist:
for they shall wonder after him, and wonder at those that call a person of such
successes, and such goodly pretenses, Antichrist; he shall be known to be the
Antichrist but by a few; it shall be a special blessing, and peculiar favor
of God to know Antichrist; very few shall know him, and those that do know him,
it shall be revealed to them; he shall deceive, if it were possible, the very
elect, so far shall he be from being known to all men to be the Antichrist; and
therefore let no man vainly dream, that Antichrist, when he is in the height of
his tyranny, shall then be generally known to be the Antichrist. No, he shall
be cried up of the loose, hypocritical, and apostate professors for an eminent
Saint, and the destroyer of Antichrist.

Take this as a general note of Antichrist, that few in the world shall know
him to be Antichrist, only those few peculiar choice ones, to whom he shall be
revealed. It shall be a special gift given as a choice Cabinet-secret from
God, to know the Antichrist when he comes. As few knew Christ, when he came and
appeared in the flesh; so few shall know the Antichrist to shun him. The word
(...) is limited with (...), as in Matthew. 11. 25. to signify, that this
revelation is a mystery only unfolded and made known to some few persons, but
hidden from the world. The generality of men in the world know it not; they
have eyes, and (...).
see not; that is, these mysteries; other things they see and know, but not
this: this must be revealed to them that shall understand it. Thou bast hid
these things from the wise and prudent, and revealed them to babes.

In his time, (...), to a word, in that his time; t^ese words are very
emphaticall and significant.

[ in that his time] it denotes, that the Antichrist has a peculiar time
distinct from other enemies, and proper only to himself to appear in; it is
called [ that his time] in a double respect. 1 In regard of the season, when he
appears. 2 In regard of the measure of that time, how long he continues when he
appears. Paul does not say, (...), but (...), in that his articulate
determinate time, his time and season of accomplishing all his villainie, his
mature time; so the word signifies, Mark 11. 13. when Christ came to the leaved
fig tree, he found nothing but leaves, (...), for it was not the time of figs,
so we translate it; if it should be understood of time in general, that it was
not a time to expect figs, we shall justify the wicked servants words, who
called Christ an austere man, reaping before the time of bringing forth; so
that this tree might justly have said to Christ, as the Devils, Why art thou
come to curse me before my time? but (...) is here restrictive, and only
respects the opportunity of bringing forth figs; it was the time of bringing
forth figs with other trees, but this tree had lost the season, the opportune
time; and so (with humble submission) I conceive this hard Text is to be
unfolded: but this by the way. Yet so as it informs us, that (...) at large
comprehends the person, place and time: it signifies the appointed fit season,
whether days, months or years. There is a certain articulate time, a prefixed
time when Antichrist must appear: this time is (say the Fathers) toward the
end of the Roman Monarchy; and, say the Scriptures, when the Witnesses have
finished their Testimony.

And secondly, it is called that his time, in respect of the length Usque ad
tempus, and tempora particulamque temporis. Tremel. in Dan. 7. 25.
of it; that his time, of a time, times and the dividing of times, Dan. 7. 25.
or that his time, of a time, times, and a particle of time, which is the time
of his tyrannizing over the Church, during the time of the slain Witnesses
lying dead: for these two things are observable. 1 That so long as the
Witnesses are in sackcloth, so long the Roman Apostafie continues; and 2 So
long as the two Witnesses lie slain, so long the Antichrist tyrannizeth over
the Church, both which are manifest in Revel. 11. and Dan. 7. 25.

Mistake me not; for I do not mean that Antichrists time is finished when the
Witnesses arise, and his 7000 names of men are slain by a great Commotion,
which we read Earthquake. For in Revel. 11. I find not one word spoken of the
slaying of the Antichrist at the great Earthquake, verse 13. Where by the way
you must observe, that this Earthquake is not the same with that great
Earthquake, Revel. 16. 18. for that in Revel. 11. 13. is the finishing of the
second woe, and that in Revel. 16. 18. is the finishing of the third woe, which
is called the seventh Trumpet, Revel. 11. 15. which is the last wo-trumpet,
clearly expressed both in Revel. 11. 15. and Revel. 16. 17.

What then is the difference betwixt the Earthquake at the rising Quest.
of the Witnesses which fulfils the second woe, and that in Revel. 16. 18, and
Revel. 11. 15. which is the finishing of the third woe?

I shall only make that difference which the Scripture makes in Answ.
Revel. 11. 15. that hour that the Winesses rose, the tenth part of the City
fell by a great Earthquake, in which Earthquake were slain of men 7000. The
Greek word (...) does not properly signify Per synecdohen generis spei^er ^d
sigifi^andum terae motum usuratur. Piscator ^ Luc. 21. 11.
an Earthquake, as Piscator well observes; it signifies a Concussion or
quaking, says Scapula. The word is not tied down to the earth, it may signify
a heart-quake, or a head-quake, or a Common-wealth-quake, as well as an
Earthquake. The same word, says Master Leigh in his Critics signifies (
Nahum 3. 2.) the noise of the Chariots, which Commotion in the war is full of
terror; but more pat to our text is that other, in Ezekiel 38. 19. Surely in
that day there shall be a great shaking in the land of Israel. I do not
parallel the prophecy of Ezekiels with that of John's I now am upon; though the
fulfilling of it be to be in the time of the seventh trumpet when it shall
sound: but I produce it as a phrase of the same importance with this in the
text. It signifying (says the same Author) a great commotion of mind by
reason of terror. So that I think we may read the text, [ and in the great
Commotion were slain of men.] In the Greek it is (...), Beza renders it, capita
hominum, the Chiefs of men, the Chieftains, 7000. I think a man can hardly
find a better Interpreter, For certain these names of men do signify the
followers of the Antichrist, his accomplices, and so names of men here may have
respect to names of blasphemy, Revel. 17. 3. for there the Antichrist which
bears up the Romish Spanish faction against the true Church, is called the
Scarlet beast, full of names of blasphemy. Sometimes the word is used for fame
or renown amongst Greek Xenoph. paed. 4 Thu^yd. lib. 5.
Authors.

In holy writ we find those rebels against the Lords anointed Moses, to be
called men of renown in the Congregation, Numb 16. 2, 3. the ring leaders of
the wrong-lead people: against Moses there were but two hundred and* fifty, but
here is seven thousand of them bandied together against the two Witnesses; but
here is the comfort; if they were 77000, they mnst suddenly be slain by this
great Commotion. But what is this to the question? How does this show the
difference betwixt the two great Earthquakes? For answer therefore, it is
manifest that there are three wo-trumpets spoken of in the Revelation, the
first brings in the Roman Bishops apostasy, and the sad effects thereof,
Revel. 9. The second woe began, verse 13, 14. when the Turks arose and punished
the apostate Christians, and this continues until the Antichrist appear and
slay the Witnesses, Revel. 11. and until these Witnesses arise, and that hour
the great Commotion or Shaking ( verse 13.) throw down the tenth part of the
City, that is, that part of dominion where the Witnesses were slain; for there
they are said to arise, there their enemies see them, and there the 7000
Chieftains of men are slain. By the fall of the City is meant the fall of it
from the Antichrist: it becomes no more a den for such thieves and murderers;
but the Witnesses arise and possess the throne.

And this is the finishing of the second woe, v. 14. and 15. immeately follows
the seventh trumpet, which is the third woe: here then is the difference as in
time (the one Earthquake or Commotion being at the finishing of the second woe,
the other at the beginning of the third) so in place and measure they differ,
for here no more then the tenth part of the City falls, and the 7000 heads of
men (but at the third woe, verse 15. all the Kingdoms in the World fall, that
is, from the Dragon, the Beast, and the false Prophet; to become the Kingdoms
of our Lord and his Christ's, that he may reign for ever and ever. This last,
Revel. 16. 18. compared with Dan. 12. 1. tell us it is such an Earthquake or
Commotion as never was before on earth.

Again, at the Earthquake, which accomplisheth the second woe, though we find
the followers of the Antichrist to be destroyed, and those Kingdoms where he
slew the Witnesses, fallen from him, and restored again to the Witnesses; yet
we find not a word of the slaying of the Antichrist; for certain, he escapes
to plot further mischief, that he may come to greater ruin at the third woe:
for in Revel. 16 13. we find him with the dragon and the beast plotting to
draw forces against the Church, to bring them to the great battle of God
Almighty; he is called the false prophet, because Revel. 13. 13, 14. he does
wonders like a true Prophet, but his tricks are false signs and false
miracles, on purpose to deceive the people; therefore he is a false prophet:
now that beast of the earth is the Antichrist; therefore the false prophet is
the Antichrist, who, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 9, 10. is said to come after the working of
Satan with lying wonders, and all deceivablenesse.

To conclude, this last Commotion or Earthquake, which is at the third woe, is
super-abundantly surpassing that Earthquake at the finishing of the second woe;
for, as we said, Revel. 11. 15. The Kingdoms of this world become his; so in
like manner in Revel. 16. 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21. compared with Revel. 19. 19.
we find Gods judgments in a far larger measure to be poured out upon the three
general enemies of the Church of Christ; for that Earthquake at the rising of
the Witnesses only throws down one tenth of the City; but this divides the
City into three parts, and causes the Cities of the Nations to fall, and gives
Babylon the cup of the wine of the fierceness of Gods wrath; this makes the
Islands fly, and the mountains to obscure themselves; this Commotion brings
hailstones from heaven; each stone a talent-weight, and makes the enemies
blaspheme.

That Earthquake, Revel. 11. 13. destroys not one of the three general heads
of Gods implacable enemies: but this in Revel. 16. destroys them all three;
for in verse. 14. those three go forth to the Kings of the earth to gather them
to the battle of the great day of God Almighty; and in v. 16. they are gathered
together: and now at what time John (Revel. 19. 19.) sees them gathered
together to make war against Christ: in the next verse, at the same time, he
sees the beast taken, and with him the false prophet which wrought miracles
before him, (as in Revel. 13. 12, 13, 14.) and deceived them that worship his
image; and two verses after (though unhappily divided by those that made it a
Chapter) you have the dragon bound a thousand years, and cast into hell, with
the beast and the false prophet: and this is the meaning of [ It is done,
Revel. 16. 17.] and in Revel. 10. 6. [ Time shall be no longer;] i. e. either
for the Dragon, the beast, or the false prophet, to infest or trouble the
Church: for then is the day of vengeance in Gods heart, and the year of his
redeemed is come, Isa. 63. 4. if we would know that day, compare we the three
foregoing verses with Revel. 19. 1^, to v. 21. and it will appear, that the
great year of Gods redeemed ones is come, when Christ treads the enemies of his
Church alone in his anger, and makes his garments red in their blood* that is,
in the blood of the armies of the beast, and the false prophet.

CHAP. VII.
FOr the mystery of iniquity does already work, only he who now lets, Verse
7.
will let, until he be taken cut of the way.

The Verse before being a peremptory conclusion, not so much Logical as
Rhetorical, thereby the more to enforce them to the knowledge and remembrance
of what they had forgot; this next Verse is brought in as an illustration, or
clear ground of such a conclusion, it being (with the next following) a plain
exegesis, or explication of verse. 3, 4.

The text is neither easy to be translated, (...).

Nam mysterium jam operatur iniquitatis, tantum ut qui tenet nunc, teneat donec
de medio fiat. Vulg.

Iam enim agit mysterium illud istius abolitionis legis: tantum qui nunc
retin^t retinebit, usqe dum e medio fiat. Beza.

Mysterium enim iniqui illius jam incepit sedul^ agere, dummodo id quod nunc
detinet, tollatur e medio. Syriac.

Mysterium enim iniqui jam incipit efficax esse, tantummod^ si quod nunc
detinet tolleretur e medio. Tremel.


nor plain to be interpreted; as we shall see by the various readings and
expositions upon it.

There is scarce any Translator that renders it word for word from the Greek
Copy, except Cajetan, who finds fault with the vulgar translation in having
two words too much [ ut] and [ teneat] in it, and a Colon misplaced in putting
it at [ iniquitatis] when it should be at [ tantum] he reads it thus, nam
mysterium jam operatur iniquitatis tantum; qui tenet nunc, donec de medio fiat.
This Translation is nearest to the copy in words, but how far from it in
sense, I cannot tell: it passes my skiil to make it current sense in English.

Grotius says, that in the Text there is a defect, which seems to be not in
the words, nor in the sense; but in the misplacing of the words, which marres
the sense; he construes [(...)] thus, (...); i. e. until what lets now be
done out of the way.

So that from Beza's Cajetan's, and Grotius his reading, we may read it in
English very near to the Greek Copy thus.

For the mystery of that illegality now works only, until he who lets be
taken out of the way.

Which signifies thus much, that the great apostasy alone without the
revealing of Antichrist is to continue until the two Witnesses be removed, for
(as we have showed) by the mystery of iniquity is principally meant the Roman
apostasy, and generally it is meant of the universal apostasy, which is to be
active in the world until the Witnesses be removed, and then Antichrist shall
appear in the world. This Text agrees with v. ^. where first there is the
apostasy, and next the revelation of the man of sin: but more clearly with
Revel. 11. 7. where, when the Witnesses have finished their testimony, that is,
when the grand apostasy is near to an end, (for the treading down of the holy
City, and the Witnesses, sackcloth-condition is of one identity of time) then
the beast out of the bottomless pit arises, and removes the Witnesses out of
the way; so [that the mystery] of iniquity works alone, until the letting,
or that which lets or hinders be removed out of the way. This grand
apostasy is called [that the mystery] in Romans 11. 25. and what is that? it is
the fullness of the Gentiles coming in, or as Luke 21. until the time of the
Gentiles be fulfilled, i. e. the Gentile apostasy; so that the mystery of
iniquity is the Gentile Gospellers apostasy, with its manner of working, and
time of duration; it is said in Revel. 11. 2. to tread under foot the holy City,
the Church 42 months, i. e. make the woman, the Church fly into the
Wilderness, ( Revel. 12. 6.) after the Roman Monarchy, ( v. 5.) became
Christian: this is part of the great wonder, v. ^. and why a wonder? but
because it is beyond the ordinary reach of the intellect, which is as much as a
mystery. Herein I do not abound in my own, but the Scriptures sense, which I
humbly conceive do inform us, that the mystery of iniquity is in general the
Apostasy, but specially the Roman Church-apostasie. Pass we now to what
others say, and think of A Nero^e inceptum est, qui ze^o idolorum Apostolos
interfecis. Ambros. Chrysostom. Hugo Cardinali^, Beda, August. Ambros. Cath.
the mystery of iniquity.

Theophilact, Ans^lme, and (if I miscount not) more then ten several
Expositors concur in this opinion, that the mystery of iniquity was begun by
Nero.

Other learned men are no whit ashamed (as they have no cause simply) to
profess their ignorance in the meaning of it. Illa quae addidit, (says Beda
on v 6. speaking of this verse) hunc sensum faciunt obscurior^m* So that he
makes this text like Rachels garment, which not only hid her own nakedness,
but concealed her fathers gods.

It would be tedious to repeat the several opinions that I have Est status
Romanus, cuj^s ^bscessio in de^ reges dispersa Antichristum superd^cet. Ter^ul.
l. 24. d^ Resur.
read of this mystery of iniquity.

Says Theodoretus, it is heresies: no, says Mariana, it is the destruction of
Jerusalem: had he said of Rome, I should have sooner believed him. Benedict
Iustine understands it of all wicked men. Cajetan, of that hidden measure of
the Roman abominations which then was working, and by degrees coming to
perfection, which, when it was fulfilled, the Roman Empire should be destroyed.
Estius, of some hidden secret sin, which in aftertimes is to be revealed, and
made apparent to the world. Is it not that of the slaying of the Witnesses?

The Roman Glossary says, it is such a secret and mysterious sin Iniquitas
arc^na and mystica, id est, aut pietatis, aut legitimo dominii (...) palliata.
Gl^ss. Ord. in ^ocum. This by Cornelius a Lapide is confirmed. Occult e enim in
impiis hypocritis and haereticis operatur, quae sen^im proserpic and crescit,
donec per Antichristum in publicam iniquitatem prosiliat. (...), Slader.
Brigh^man. Per mysterium iniquitat^s non (...) Antichristum, sed praecursor^s
Antichrist^.
as goes under the cloak of godliness, or the lawful title of possessing the
Throne: Could they possibly look asquint at the Papacy of Rome, and say this?

Bishop Jewel applies it to Diotrephes, whose design was to make himself
Primate of all the Churches. The Protestants generally apply it to the Pope,
and the secret workings of the Papacy.

Cornelius a Lapide understands it not of the Antichrist, but of the
Antichristian factions, which go before the Antichrist.

Aquinas has two senses upon this mystery of iniquity; he says, this word
mysterium, may either be the nominative or the accusative case; if the
nominative, then the sense is this. [I tell you, the Antichrist shall be
revealed in his time, because the mystery works now occultly amongst a company
of hypocrites, who pretend to be Saints, but are devils rather, having a show
of piety, but hate the power thereof.] In his other sense he thus understands
it with reference to the foregoing verse, [for the Devil, in whose power
Antichrist shall come, now begins to work his wickedness secretly by Tyrants
and Seducers; for the persecutions of this age are types of the great
persecution against all good men

Terinus by the mystery of iniquity, he understands Sim^n Magus and his
followers, and Claudius Nero, with such like Tyrants, Infidels, and Heretics,
and this he says he has from Hierome, Ambrose, Chrysostom and Augustine* and
to these he might have joined Theodoretus, (...). Oecumen.
and Oecumenius, who are very near in opinion.

Some there are which make this mystery Mysterium and mulier illa, (...). 17.
suotemp^re revelandum est, non interm (...); cum autem praesens and revelatus
su^rit (...), tu^c palam, and public, and (...) (...) ope^abitur. F^br.
Paul^ius. Vide Cornelius a Lap de.
and that (in Revel. 17.) of the woman, to be one in resemblance and kind. If
so, then by the mystery of iniquity must necessarily be meant principally the
Roman Church-apostasie; a type whereof was to be seen in the Heretics and
Tyrants in and over the Church in this Apostles days.

The Magistrates were Tyrants, and Ministers began to be Apostates, Heretics
and Seducers.

Zanchie understands, by mystery of iniquity, Antichristianisme N^s per
mysterium iniquitatis, ipsum antichristianissimum ^urtim and clam serpentem,
una cum ^aeresibus, ei viam ste^nentibus, intelliga^. Zanchius.
privily creeping into the Church, together with heresies, which made way for
it.

The mystery of iniquity (say the last learned Notes upon the Bible) is opposed
to the mystery of godliness, 1 Timothy 3. 16.

But to read it to a word from the Greek Copy, it is not to be read [mystery
of iniquity,] but, [the mystery of the Illegality.] Beza reads it, mysterium
illud istius abolitionis legis] that mystery of the abolition of the law; so
that that which stands in opposition to it, is the plain and known path of God
and Natures law; for Retinenda ^uit vis articuli indicant^s hic agi non tam de
simplici qu^piam transgressione egis, sed de ipsa quas^ totius cultus Dei
abolitione, quasi illegalitatem dicas. Beza.
what is opposite to a mystery but plainness and open clearness? and what
stands in opposition to illegality, but Gods, natures, and man's laws? so that
this mystery of iniquity, or illegality is a sly and cunning revolting from
Gods laws, natures laws, man's laws, which they do that r^bell against, and
withdraw their allegiance from the higher powers in the State, and the higher
powers in the Church; now this the Church of Rome has done, in casting off the
Supremacy of the Emperor, and setting up an usurping Tyrant in opposition
both to Magistracy and Ministry, debarring both of the exercise of their just
power.

Now, whereas the Greek Copy, by both the Articles points to some special and
peculiar mystery of illegality, wherein Magistracy and Ministry shall be
eminently rebelled against; it is manifest, that it points at the slaying of
the Witnesses, at the time of Antichrists appearing: and this is clear from the
subsequent sense: for this mystery of iniquity shall have a stop, curb, or let,
and shall be enforced to cloak its illegalities in a mystery, until it can
remove that which lies in the way: now, the two witnesses are the let which
vexes and tormenteth the promoters of this illegality; and hence it is, that
the followers of the Antichrist, (who slay the two Witnesses, and remove the
let) do rejoice, Revel. 11. 10.
and make merry, and send gifts one to another, because these two Prophets
tormented them that dwelt on the earth; they curbed the promoters of the
illegality in their Career, and so tor mented them: but when they two are
removed, then is the Exlex or Generaliss^mo of this illegality revealed; and
then is the mystery no more a mystery, but Revel. 17. 5. written upon the
woman's forehead, the Church of Rome's forehead.

Thus much, I humbly conceive, upon Sc^ripture grounds the mystery of iniquity
in this place imports.

Now works (...), how did this mystery of illegality work in the Apostles
time? Beza and several other learned men answer in John's words, 1 John 2. 18.
[Now are there many Antichrists] the mystery of illegality was begun by many
Antichrists, but it shall be finished by the Antichrist and his followers, who
are called false Christ's, and false prophets, Matthew. 24. But Paul had just
cause to declare so much from the very doctrine of those seducers, which in the
beginning of the Chapter he refutes: for the design of the seducers was
principally to defame Paul as a Preacher of false doctrine, and so to cast him*
out of the affections of the Church of Thessalonica. Here, though mysteriously,
the seducers struck at the two great Offices of Magistracy and Ministry in
the Church, in striking at Paul; for Paul as an Apostle was both Magistrate and
Minister in the Church. The Apostles were extraordinary Officers, they had
something of all the three Offices of Christ resplendent in them: hence it was,
(as some learned amongst the Ancients think) that, during the continuation of
their extraordinary Office on earth, that Majesticall rite of anointing whom
they pleased with oil, continued: it was a badge of their power which was
communicated to them by the Holy Ghost from the great High Priest that had made
a general, and universal, and all-sufficient atonement by the mighty
sacrifice of his slain body upon the Cross, and afte^ that ascended into the
holy of holies, the heaven of heavens; from whence he sent his Spirit to invest
his twelve Apostles with power befitting the companions of such a mighty King,
Priest, and Prophet: so that anointing with oil (after Christ's ascension) in
the Church, was a badge of honor and power in the persons anointing, they were
the sons of oil; so that he that struck at an Apostle, struck at all the three
offices of Christ; and therefore these seducers in going to undermine the
Apostle, and supplant him, struck at Gods, man's, and natures law; for if they
could any way have proved the Apostles doctrine to be false, his office had
fallen to the ground; so that the mystery of the illegality began in these
seducers subtle practices to work then. Estius conceives that (...) is to be
expounded passively, [now it begins to be acted] now the Devils Play was begun,
his Histrio's were now entered upon the Stage, and begun to act their several
parts: here he was but in his first Act, but now he has brought it usque ad
quintum Actum; by which I guess his Play is almost at an end.

CHAP. VIII.
FOr the mystery of iniquity now works only, until what lets be taken out
of the way.] The meaning is, as I conceive, that the great Apostasy works
alone without the appearing of the Antichrist, until the slaying of the
Witnesses, so he said before in verse 3. Before the day of judgment there
shall come the grand Apostasy, and then the revelation of the man of sin;
first, the apostasy, and then the Antichrist after that [ until what lets
be taken out of the way.] Here is the exact precise time prefixed of the
Antichrists appearing, and the slaying of the Witnesses, together with the
finishing of Apostasy.

Parallel with this text is that in Revel. 11. 7. When they have finished their
testimony, the beast that ascends out of the bottomless pit, shall make war
against them, and overcome thom; this text [ when] and the other text [ until]
are parallel; for in this the mystery of the illegality, which verse 3. he
calls the apostasy, is to work alone until what lets be removed: and in
Revel 11. the Church was to be under foot by the same Gentile apostasy, until
the Witnesses had finished their testimony.

This [ until] is also parallel with that [ until] in Romans 11. 25. where
mention is made of the Jews unbelief under the Roman Monarchy until the fullness
of the Gentiles be come in, and so Israel shall be saved. Where observe the
time of the Witnesses slaying and rising again, is the time when the Jews
shall be converted, the same [untill] we find in Luke 21. 24. which tells us,
how long the Jews dissipation and the Gentile Churches affliction shall by the
Gentile Apostasy be inflicted, even [ until] the times of the Gentiles be
fulfilled.

Parallel also with the Texts [ until] is that [ when] Revel. 10. 7. In the
days of the seventh Angel, [when] he shall begin to sound, the mystery of God,
or the great mystery, the mystery of mysteries shall be finished: then there
shall be time (for the apostasy) no longer.

Until what lets be removed out of the way.

Of this let we have in the former Verse touched already, showing the various
opinions of the learned upon it. Some say, this let was divine grace, which
kept back the darkness of Antichrist from overshadowing the world. Calvin
says, it is the doctrine of the Gospel; otheres say, Gods decree. Others, the
Pagan Idolatry seated in the Roman Throne.

Others say, the Roman Empire; the Hoc moratur Antichristum, ut qui nunc tenet
Christianum Imperium, and unitatem fidei teneat hoc tam diu donec iniquitas
quae modo est, in mysterio fiat de medio, id est, de communitate, ut sicut modo
fides est in communi, iniquitas in occulto: sic in tempore Antichristi, fides
sit in occulto, iniquitas in commum; quia membra ejus non plus erubescent actum
impietatis quam pietatis, and qui fidem habent paucissimi erunt. Carth. Bruno.
These words seem to be prophesied of these times.

Qui tenet, i. e. qui fidem tenet ante Antichristi adventum, [teneat] i. e. ne
moveatur cito, [donec de medio fiat] i. e. donec moriatur. Fabr. Paulutius in
locum.

Qui tenet, teneat religionem, donec de medio Ecclesiae fiat apostasia. Estius.


Papists say, it is Romanum Imperium; the Protestants affirm, the let is Romani
Imperatores; some affirming the Pagans to be it; others, the Christian
Emperors; and others, both.

Aretius, and many others affirm, the let to be the prevailing progress of the
Gospel; for the Gospel must be first preached to all the world, and then,
Matthew. 24.

Beda, Augustine, Anselme, Estius, and Fabritius Paulutius do turn the sense of
the words quite another way.

Thus they translate the words, [ He who holds, let him hold, until the
mystery of iniquity do go out from the midst of the Church] they conceive the
Apostle here exhorts the faithful, that they would persevere in the faith
which they did profess, until the mystery of iniquity were removed.

This interpretation (says learned Beza) is not only absurd, but altogether
Haec interpretatio non modo est absurda: sed Graecis etiam nullo modo
respondet. Beza. Romanus Pontifex qui tenet nunc Ecclesias teneat illas, donec
de medio fiat, id est, ab ipsa Romana Ecclesia* quae est Medium and cor
Ecclesiarum, fiat iniquitas, ob quam multae ab ea discedant Ecclesiae. Anselme.
disagreeing with the Greek Copy.

But as the text may be translated nearer to the Copy (as I have endeavored)
leaving out (...), which the most add to the copy, (to supply the sense) so
there is an interpretation nearer the Sicut carbo ignis inter ligna occulte vim
suam exerit, and vicina adurit, sensimque proserpit donec in flammam and
incendium manifestum erumpat: sic iniquitas a Daemone accensa, occulte in
impiis vim suam exerit, serpitque donec in publicam omnium scelerum flammam sub
Antichristo erumpat. Cornel* a Lapide.
mind of the holy Ghost, then is commonly given. I humbly take the boldness
to translate the Text thus: For the mystery of the illegality now works only,
until that that lets be done out of the way.

In a word, the meaning is, that the grand Apostasy only shall go on to eat
out the Saints of God, and the true Church of Christ occultly and in a mystery,
until the Antichrist arise and slay the Witnesses, and then it shall break out
into open view: hence it is, Cornelius a Lapide compares the Apostasy to a
coal amongst wood, which works it self more and more into it, until it have
set it of a bright flame; which flame he compares to the time of the appearing
of the Antichrist: so that the meaning of that clause, [ until that that
withholds be removed] is to be understood, either of the vvith-holding of
the Antichrist from appearing; and so it is meant of the Magistracy and
Ministry of that Kingdom, which keep Antichrist from getting up either into
the Civil, or Ecclesiastic power.

Or thus, [ until that that reigns or possesses the Throne be removed] for
Zanchie says, (...) signifies, to hold, to detein, to possess, (...) multa
significat; tenere, retinere, detinere, impedire, possidere, occupare,
imperare, rerum potiri: exempla passim halemus. Zanchius.
to rule, etc. -- and then the meaning is, until the Witnesses which keep
possession of the Throne be removed out of the way; it is meant* the Throne of
that Kingdom where the Antichrist is to arise: for ( verse. 4.) it is the
Antichrists work to oppose and exalt himself above them, above all that is
called God. i. e. the Magistracy; or for Religions sake is reverenced, that is
the Ministry: and ( v. 8.) the Antichrist is at that very time revealed, when
the two Witnesses are removed. So that the whole Text imports thus much, that
the Apostasy shall by little and little grow and spread in the Churches
throughout the world, from Paul's time, to the time of the revealing of the
Antichrist, which Antichrist shall be known by slaying those two Witnesses
which stood in his way of preferment and exaltation, and did keep him from
tyrannizing. Herein I do not abound in the Scriptures sense, the same truth
being made plain in the parallels already laid before the Reader in the
foregoing page.

Observe this by the way, if the slaying of the two Witnesses Note.
be that grand prodigious act, which makes Antichrist formally the Antichrist,
distinct from all other persons; then the mark, (which he causes all (who
expect his protection) to give with their right hand) must of necessity be such
a subscription as gives an assent to, and approbation of that prodigious act;
and therefore the great God awaken all those that have this mark upon them,
that they may speedily repent; for otherwise* they shall assuredly drink of the
wine of the wrath of God, which is poured out without mixture into the cup of
his indignation, and he shall be tormented with fire and brimstone in the
presence of the holy Angels, and in the presence of the Lamb: for the mouth of
the Lord has spoken it, Revel. 14 10. and on the other side, Let them rejoice
and be strong in the Lord, who suffer this day grievous persecution, because
they dare not receive the mark of the beast: they shall stand on mount Sion
with the Lamb, Revel. 14. 1. and sing the song of Moses and the Lamb, Revel.
15. 3. they shall ride upon triumphant horses, in triumphant apparel, with
their Triumphant General, whose eyes are as a flame of fire, on whose head are
many crowns, whose vestments are dipped in blood, whose Word is a sharp sword
smiting the Nations, and treading them as in a Wine Press, who wears on his
victorious thigh a Name written, The KING OF KINGS, AND LORD OF LORDS. This is
your beloved, and this is your friend, o ye daughters of Jerusalem; and
therefore be of good comfort and courage this day; for your Lord who comes,
will come, and will not tarry.

CHAP. IX.
ANd then shall that wicked be revealed, whom the Lord will consume Verse 8.
with the spirit of his mouth, and shall destroy with the brightness of his
coming.

There is no material difference that I can perceive either betwixt the Greek
Copies, or the Translators of them.

In the words we have two general parts, 1 The reign of the Antichrist. 2 The
ruin of the Antichrist.

1 In his reign there are these three things considerable. 1 The time of his
reign. 2 The title given to the person reigning. 3 The Apostles manner of
expressing his reign.

2 In his ruin we have three things considerable. 1 The person who ruins him.
2 The manner of his ruin. 3 The time of his ruin. This opinion may seem to
oppose the general opinion of the Protestants; such as Beza, Bishop Jewel,
Downam, Whitaker, Willet. Brightman, and several others, who conclude the Pope
is Antichrist. For my part, I grant as much from Scripture against the Pope as
they, as that he is the Head of the Western Apostasy, sitting in pomp in Rome,
making peoples and Nations drunk with spiritual filthiness, and that State that
has drove the Witnesses into Sackcloth, that the Popedom is the State with the
seven heads and ten horns; but all this makes him not in the least the
Antichrist that denies the Father and the Son, 1 John 2. 21. nor the beast of
the earth, Revel. 13. 12, 13. nor he that slayes the Witnesses, Revel. 11. 7.
nor he that lifts himself up in the ruin of three Kings, Dan. 7. nor he that
is the son of perdition, 2 Thessalonians. 2. Who is not to be revealed until he have
removed the two Witnesses out of the way. This is the Antichrist the Fathers
both Greek and Latin make mention of.


1 Here is the time of Antichrists reign expressed emphatically in these two
little words [(...)] And then] this copulative Conjunction [(...)] and the
Adverb [(...)] betokening the present tense tell us thus much, that even at
that present time when the two Witnesses are removed out of the way; or as
other texts have it, slain, then the Antichrist shall appear in the World; look
not for the Antichrist until the Witnesses be slain, that very act makes him
Antichrist: therefore he is said, Revel. 11. 7. then at that present time to
arise out of the bottomless pit when he slayes the Witnesses; he was doubtless
in being as a man, as one single person, before that time; but he was not the
Antichrist before he actually made war with, and overcame the Witnesses: the
foundation of the Antichrists Kingdom is laid upon the slain bodies of the
Witnesses, which so soon as they rise must needs tumble down again; their night
is his noon. When they are at the very lowest, then is he at the very highest.
Be confident of this, that the Antichrist is one single person, destinated
eminently to this one single act of slaying the Witnesses; from which act he
takes the name of Antichrist; and therefore before that time he is not to be
expected to be revealed in and to the world.

2 Here is another of Antichrists titles [(...)] the Syriack translate it [
iniquus ille] and our best English reads that wicked, so the same words is
translated, Act. 2. 23. (...), by wicked hands, by illegal hands in the Greek:
another reads it [ the man of sin] Beza reads it most properly, [ exlex ille]
and other learned men acknowledge that it should be so read, though they render
it otherwise, conceiving that Antichrist is so called Cornel us a Lapide.
Antonomastice, by putting one name for another, as lawless, for impious. We
find the word to signify the same that Peshang in Isa. 53, 12. signifies, for
the same word in Luke 22. 37. is this in the Text, [(...)] and he was numbered
amongst the lawless persons; or it may be translated outlawed persons,
persons so notoriously sinful and abominable in their wickedness, that the
law has cast them out, condemned them, and sentenced them; such a one is
Antichrist, he is so notorious a transgressour against all law, both Gods and
man's, that they both condemn him: and hence, Daniel 7. 25. he is said to change
the laws and the customs of the Saints; he changes them by breaking them,
and setting up his new image against them, Revel. 13. 14, 15, 16. which new
image is ( Dan. 11. 38.) his god Mauzim, or god of forces; his sword-power.

He is, (says Estius) called [the lawless one] (...), quia jus omne divinum
atque humanum conciliat: in some sense it may well be applied to him that
slayes the Witnesses; because neither Gods laws nor man's laws are valued a
jot by him, but all must pass Exlex est, quia nullis legibu^ subiicitur: omnes
aut^m leges contemnet and conculcabit. Zanchius. Antichristus manifest
revelabitur fontem esse totius iniquitatis, qui nec modo in membris suis, nec
tunc in s^ipso timendus. Anselmus. Retegetur autem sic, ut aperte conspiciatur
in impio suo regno, and dominatu: and cognescatur esse (...) iste and Anti
b^stus. Zanchius. Aper^e dominabitur. P^ator.
for law and divinity that he says or does.

Indeed many learned men take notice of the Emphasis in the article [(...)]
thence not only observing (as the most do) that he is one single person, but
that person singularly wicked [ ille iniquus] quia singulariter iniquus, says
Aquinas.

3 (...), shall be revealed: here you have the rearm, or the Apostles manner of
expressing Antichrists reign; he shall be revealed, that is, (says Zanchie)
he shall be so discovered that he may be plainly seen and known in his wicked
reign to be the Antichrist; and so Tirinus understands [ revelabitur] i. e. in
lucem prodibit iniquus ille Antichristus, quem post tres cum dimidio annos
Dominus Jesus interficiet.

The word is very significant, and adds this to our discovery of Antichrist
when he comes: 1 That when the Witnesses are slain the prodigiousnesse of the
act shall make the person that slayes them eminently noted and observed in the
World: I mean that person who in their ruin exalts himself, and rules, and
tyrannizeth by his Sword-power. Therefore it is said, Revel. 13. 16. he causes
all, both small and great to submit to his new government; so that small and
great shall know, and feelingly know the person when he reigns; they shall
know him by his new government, which much like that of Caesar's, verse. 12. and
by his successes and prosperous attempts against his enemies; and by his manner
of enforcing men to subscribe to his new government; but though the World know
him thus, yet they shall not by this know him to be the Antichrist. For as when
Christ came in the flesh, the Elders, and Scribes and Pharisees, and Herod, and
Pontius Pilate saw him, and heard of his miracles, yet did not know him, nor
believe in him as the Son of God; because it was hidden from these wise and
learned men: they had eyes to see him, and the miracles that he did; and ears
to hear him, and the gracious words that he uttered; but they did not see nor
hear so as they ought; viz. to believe in him as the Messiah: what! said they,
is not this the Carpenter? and the son of a Carpenter? even so shall Antichrist
of the apostate Gentiles be seen, and felt, and heard, but not understood to be
the Antichrist; they shall not know him when he comes; for he shall deceive
them, ( Revel. 13. 14.) that dwell on the earth; yea, says Christ, If it were
possible, the very elect; but it is impossible, for God shall reveal this
lawless one to them to be the Antichrist. The word imports the revelation of a
mystery, which is revealed only to some peculiar choice familiar friends, but
remains a mystery to the vulgar world notwithstanding: this secret is revealed
only to such as fear the Lord: Antichrist shall not be known to be the
Antichrist, though the prodigious acts of Antichrist shall be known to the
generality of men in the world: I mean, that part of the world, where
Antichrist usurpes a dominion.

CHAP. X.
WHom the Lord will destroy with the spirit of his mouth] Here we have the
ruin of the Antichrist, which is expressed in these two words (...), and
(...): the person that ruins this man of sin is (...); and then the manner
how, or the Instrument wherewith, (...), with the spirit of his mouth.

Observe this from the connection of the reign and ruin of Note.
the Antichrist, that his reign and his ruin are near together; soon after he
is revealed to be the Antichrist, shall the Lord Christ ruin him.

This Text, I am confident, is generally the most mistaken of any Text in all
the Bible, principally in this, that they make this coming of Christ to slay
the Antichrist, to be the day of Judgment, whereby all hope of the Jews
conversion to the Gospel is totally taken away; for the prophecies make it
clear, that the Jews general flocking in to the Gospel is after the ruin of
the Antichrist. I trust therefore, through the influence of the Holy Ghosts
light in the Scripture, in opening the Text to clear it, that the day of
Christ's coming here to destroy Antichrist, cannot in any wise be the day of
Judgment.

[ Whom the Lord] By Lord here is concluded on all sides, is meant the Lord
Jesus: and so Lord for the most part signifies in the Old Testament, especially
where you find it joined with [God] there you may ever conclude it signifies
Jesus Christ.

[ Shall destroy] or consume, or dissolve to nothing, or kill; for so, (as the
learned observe) it signifies.

[ With the breath of his mouth] or the spirit of his mouth] About this
Interpreters differ; the most say, that by spirit of his mouth is meant the
preaching of the Gospel, by which Antichrist shall be by little and little
consumed, and brought to nothing; if this be a true interpretation of these
words, then the Lords destruction of Antichrist is not, nor cannot be at the
day of Judgment; for then the Ministry of the Word shall cease.

But Cornelius a Lapide confutes this opinion by one good argument, Spiritus
oris non significat praedicationem verbi Dei, quia haec non interficiet
Antichristum, imo i^sam tollet, cum Eliam and Enoch occidet.
It cannot (says he) be meant the preaching of the Word; for Antichrist shall
remove that by slaying the two Witnesses: o Cornelius, I fear thou will prove a
true Prophet. Antichrist will forbid all Preachers upon the greatest penalties
to let alone his usurped, tyrannical, bloody government. Neither (says he) is
the preaching of the Word able to kill Antichrist. Alas, Antichrist is
Sermon-proof. All the reason and Religion in the World shall not take him off
from his purposes, all the thundering Cannons of the Church affright him, no
more then a paper-pellet from a potgun; Nil prodest ratio aut religio ubi vis
imperat. Spiritus oris Christi non est p^aedicatio, sed potius sententia, and
judicium condemnationis.
he is shot-free in this holy War: he is that Leviathan which counts these
darts as stubble, and laugheth at the shaking of these spiritual spears.
Therefore (says my Author) Christ when he comes to destroy him, shall not come
ad praeliandum, but ad judicandum. Hence he, and with him, Aquinas, Oecumenius,
Andreas Scaynus, Fab. Paulutius, and Goranus conclude, that by the spirit of
his mouth is meant his Imperial command, his Majestic sentence.

Aquinas has another tolerable exposition of these words; he parallels these
words with that in Isaiah 11. where it is said, The zeal of the Lord of boasts
shall do this; that is, the zeal of his justice, wherewith he is zealous (out
of love) for the good of his Church. Indeed, zeal, it is flamma amoris: and as
the Noble Husband (otherwise mild and gentle) cannot but furiously arise
against those that offer injury to his beloved wife, which flame of Zelus
justitiae faciet qui est* amor. Spiritus enim Christi est amor Christi, and hic
zelus est Spiritus Sancti, quem habet ad Ecclesiam. Aquinas in Locum.
fury arises from the fire of love: even such is Christ's against the enemies
of his Spouse the Church, especially against the Antichrist, the greatest and
worst of enemies to the Spouse of Christ.

Grotius by these expressions of the Apostle understands the facility of the
work in Christ's hands. He can as easily confound Antichrist as the wind before
the smoke away, and as the Sun causes the dew to vanish: it is but speaking the
word and it is done, as Antiochus (Dan: 8. 25. a type of the Antichrist) was
destroyed without hands; so shall the Antichrist without hands, by the breath
of Christ's mouth be destroyed. In Psalm. 10. 5. there we find the wicked
succesful Tyrant puffing at his enemies; he overthrows them by his might, as
easily as a man blows out a Candle; it is an expression full of disdain to his
enemies; even so here Christ in disdein to the Antichrists might and power,
shall with the breath of his mouth confound him. As Antichrist puffed at the
Saints of God, disdeining all their force and power, and easily vanquished and
overthrew them: so the Lord Jesus when he comes, he will puff at Antichrist and
easily vanquish him, and therefore Christ in disdein to him and all his power,
that he brings against him, Rev. 19. 17, 18. sends his messenger to invite the
fowls of the air to a supper, that he would give them made of the carcases of
those Kings and Captains, and mighty men, so much does he disdein the armies of
his enemies, and so little does he doubt of the success of the day, that before
he fights he promises the fowls a supper at night of these mighty men that
set themselves in array against him that day; the breath of Christ's mouth
against his enemies, is that that shall overthrow them in the height of their
strength. Therefore, Isaiah 59 19. When the enemy shall come in like a flood,
the Spirit of the Lord shall by blowing against sin, make him to fly; the
Spirit of Christ's mouth shall vanquish the adversary, the Antichrist.

The Scope of this Text being to set forth the destruction of the Antichrist by
the Lord Jesus his immediate power and command; I conceive the expressions in
the Text are such as run parallel with the Old and New Testament-texts, that
prophecy also of this great day of Antichrists destruction.

For the finding out of those parallel Texts, we must take in both expressions,
[whom the Lord shall destroy with the breath of his Et spiritu lab^orum suorum
morte affici^t improbum. Tre^. (...). Septuagint. i. e. to a wonder, and in the
spirit by by the lips he shall slay the wicked one.
mouth, and consume with the brightness of his coming;] it is but a doubling
of the same expression, (as Grotius observes) after the manner of the Hebrews,
when they intend either to express a thing elegantly, or vehemently, or
certainly: both these expressions tends (says Grotius) to one thing.

For the first expression we shall find some Texts only parallel with the
matter; some both with the marter and the phrase, [ whom the Lord shall destroy
with the breath of his mouth.] Parallel both with the phrase and matter are
those two Texts, Isa. 11. 4. and Revel. 19. 15.

Isa. 11. 4. And he shall smite the earth with the rod of his mouth, and with
the breath of his lips shall he slay the wicked one. This Text (says Cornelius
a Lapide) Paul alludes unto, vel potius citat, or rather cites it. It is
manifest both from the Hebrew Translators, and also from the Greek
Translatours, that the Texts in the phrase are alike: one thing more is
observable in the reading of the Text, that (...) Scebet which we translate
[rod] signifies Scepter: so that He shall smite the earth with the Scepter of
his mouth; this Scepter of his mouth, Revel. 19. 15. is called the sword of his
mouth, wherewith he smites the Gentiles; here he smites the Gentiles, there the
earth; both which Lukes copy (of the same prophecy from Christ's (...).
mouth) expresses, Luke 21. 25. there the earth shall be distressed, and in
great anxiety, and the Gentiles at their wits end.

CHAP. XI.
IN the prophecies, there are two great days spoken of, wherein Christ comes
with sore punishments upon the Roman Gentiles, before both which times he is
seen upon his white horse.

In Revel. 6. he goes forth conquering on his white horse; but [Conficiet
Spiritu oris] est Periphrasis verbi D^i and virtutis ejus; nam verb^m breve and
consummatum facie^ Dominus super terram. Zuinglius.
the Roman Gentiles yield not; whereupon the great day of the Lambs wrath fell
upon the Roman Emperors, that they were not able to stand against Constantine,
but were utterly overthrown, and cast from heaven, the Imperial Throne, Revel.
12.

The next great day of battle against the Roman Gentiles is against the
apostate Antichristian Gentiles, Revel. 19. where we find Christ again
appearing on his white horse utterly to ruin the heads of the Romish
Apostasy, and the Antichrist, which are both set forth under these two titles,
the beast and the false Prophet. Now, as at the first great overthrow of the
Romish Pagan Gentiles the Jews were driven out of their own Country, and
scattered throughout the World; so at (or about) this great day of Christ's
coming to plague the Antichristian Gentiles, the Jews shall be both converted
to the Gospel, and called again to be a Nation, and therefore we have (both in
the Old Testament and the New) these prophecies joined together; for the great
sign of the Jews conversion to the Gospel shall be the ruin of Antichrists
followers by a great Commotion, Revel. 11. 13. and the calling up of the
Witnesses to heaven, i. e. to their imperial Seat and Throne. This we shall
find to be the scope of several prophecies, both in the Old and New
Testament; and this is the scope of this forecited Text in Isa. which when we
look nearer to it, we find both the manner of expression and the matter
contained in it exactly matching Paul's expression and prophecy; for in it (as
in Paul's) we find an ingemination of the thing, and the denomination of the
person; for Paul calls him the wicked one, and Isaiah calls him the wicked one;
Paul says, he will destroy him with the spirit of his mouth; and Isaiah says,
he will destroy him with the Scepter of his mouth; and John in Revel. 19. with
the sword of his mouth; which sword is called, Isa. 27. 1. the Lords great and
strong sword.

Now, in that he says, he will smite the earth; I humbly conceive in this
place he means the Antichristian earth; and by the wicked one is meant the
Antichrist* which Paul (in the Text we are upon) calls the wicked one;
therefore, now in that he says, He will smite the Antichrist with the Scepter
of his mouth; it gives us to understand, that Antichrist shall not be destroyed
by humane power, but by the immediate power of the Lord Jesus Christ, who shall
gloriously manifest his justice therein, and therefore in that Type of the
Witnesses in sackcloth, Zach. 3. under the representation of Iehoshua the
Priest in filthy garments, and of their state of rising, again under the type
of Crowns being put on their heads, and their garments changed, and Ioshuah and
Zerubbabel standing like golden Candlesticks of the Temple, and Olive Trees
supplying them. The Prophet wondering how this should be brought about in such
an afflicted state as the Church was then in; the answer is, Not by humane help
or power, but by my Spirit, says the Lord of hosts, Zach 4. 6. the mighty
power of the Spirit shall make that mountain a plain before his Zerubbabel.

Out of Christ's mouth goes a sharp sword, wherewith he smites the Gentiles.
The sword in his mouth is his imperial command: the word of an absolute
Monarch is a sword, against whom none can stand: there lies the majesty of a
Monarch in his absolute commands, which commands are the spirit of his mouth,
or the Scepter of his mouth, or the sword of his mouth: how much more is it so
in the King of kings, and Lord of lords.

If the Word of Christ from the mouths of weak Ambassadors be sharper then a
two-edged sword, what is it immediately from heaven? the voice of the Lord
breaks the Cedars in Lebanon, it brings mighty things to pass; the voice is
the spirit of the mouth; this voice is that which calls the Witnesses from
death to life; from their low and sad state up to heaven, Revel. 11. 12. and
the same hour causes an Earthquake or Commotion to overthrow the Chieftains
of men, who were by their sword-power the upholders of the Antichrist, v. 13.
and this voice causes all the Kingdoms in the world to flock in unto the
Gospel and Scepter of Christ; and what power in heaven or earth can effect such
glorious things, but only the spirit of his mouth who breaths the life of all
souls into them? Out of his mouth goes a sharp sword, whereby he smites the
Nations, Revel. 19. 15.

That which from all this we may gather is, that neither the rising Note.
of the Witnesses, nor the ruin of Antichrist shall be by mere humane help or
power, but by the mighty imperial power of Christ. Hence it is, that when
Christ comes to accomplish this great work, ( Luke 18. 8.) he shall scarce
find faith on the earth; and why? but only because he will come to raise the
Witnesses, when there is no visible power in the world to own them, ( Deuteronomy. 32.
36. Isa. 59. 16, 17, 18, 19.) and when the enemies are in their might and
strength irresistible. When the adversary shall come in like a flood, the
Spirit of the Lord shall blow him to flight; and this shall be ( v 16.) when
there is no man to help or save his Church; as in that of Moses before cited,
when there is none shut up, nor left; and all their power is gone; then God
arises to judge for his people against their proud insulting enemies. These
three verses comprehend the forecited Texts which run parallel with Paul's. In
v. 16. you have Christ clothing himself in armor to come against this enemy,
as in Revel 19. and v. 19. he destroys the adversary by blowing upon him; it is
as much as to say, the Lord shall destroy him with the spirit of his mouth.

But when shall this Text of Isaiahs be fulfilled? compare v. 20 with Romans 11.
25, 26. it tells you when it shall be fulfilled, when the fullness of the
Gentiles is come in, i. e. when the Gentile Apostasy is come to the full; i e.
when the Antichrist appears with his great successes against the true Church,
which Isaiah in v. 18. seems to tell us shall be situated in the Islands
toward the Evening-Sun, v. 19. for as the Gospel in its first glorious day
came from the East, and shone into the West; so in the second glorious day of
the Gospel; this day ( Isaiah tells us) it shall go from the West to the East;
for then all Israel (the Eastern people) shall be saved, i e. converted to the
faith, and restored to their own land, as it is written, There shall come out
of Sion a deliverer and turn ungodliness from Jacob: I Will appeal to all sober
men in this world whether ever this Text that Paul quotes, since Paul's time
has been fulfilled; if not, then probably it is to be fulfilled when the
apostasy of the Gentiles is fulfilled, when the Antichrist the Popedom, and
the Dragon are cast into utter darkness, and by Christ destroyed.

As for that Text, Isa. 11. 4. we take the boldness to affirm that it is
literally meant of the destruction of the Antichrist, as Paul's Text is: Paul
taking this prophecy from Isaiah; that so the Jews in time to come might
believe Paul as well as their own Prophets to be sent of God. My reasons why I
take this Text to be prophesied of the Antichrist, are,

1 Because of the stupendous change which shall then be wrought, v. 6, 7, 8.
there shall be a blessed* cordial, and charitable union wrought betwixt Jew and
Gentile: this (say the learned) was partly begun by the twelve Apostles, but it
shall be completed after Antichrists ruin by the prosperous success of the
two Witnesses: so that the glorious effect of Christ's appearing to ruin
Antichrist is to be accomplished.

2 Because of the gracious promises then to be fulfilled, which to this day
have not been fulfilled, v 9, 10. There shall be no killing nor destroying in
all Gods holy mountain, or in the mountain of holiness, i. e. all wars shall
cease amongst Christians; The mountain of the Lord shall be on the top of all
the mountains; that is, the Church shall prevail, as Christianity did in
Constantines days, and much more abundant, and the Gentiles shall flock in
unto it; hereby their union shall be wrought, which shall produce a general
peace in the Church. Now to this day, this has not been accompilshed;
therefore it is to be, say many learned men; yea the Rabbis themselves in a
manner affirm as much, that it is to be, when the Lord shall come to destroy
Antichrist; for, they say, it shall be accomplished, when their Messiah comes,
which they say will be in the end of the Roman Monarchy, which they call their
last redemption, being exceeding angry at the Christians (would they had not
just cause) for extending many of their most ample and glorious prophecies no
further then the second Temple. Vide Rab. Solomon on Ier. 31. 40. and then the
promise is, that the earth shall be filled with the knowledge of the Lord, as
the waters cover the Sea; i. e. there shall be an universal knowledge of Christ
in the world, which never yet has been: and then (in v. 10.) it shall be in
that day that Christ's rest shall be glory, or exceeding glorious: by rest is
here meant either the peace and tranquillity of the Church, which he calls [his
rest] or the place of Christ's residence, which signifies his Church. So that
either way the Text has not been yet fulfilled: for the Church has had little
rest since Christ's time; for the general Apostasy hindered its glory: but
when the Apostasy shall be taken away, then the rest of the Church shall be
glorious: therefore this smiting the wicked one in the Text, is most probably
the smiting of Antichrist.

3 From v. 11, 12, 13, 14. we argue, for this smiting of the wicked one shall
be in that day when God will recover the remnant of his people the second time
from Assyria and Egypt, and Pathros and Cush: this must be meant of some
recovery of them after their carrying Captive into Babylon by the Assyrians;
for they were never set down in Scripture to be delivered above once from
Assyria, and that was when they were restored by Cyrus. But now here is a
second restoring again of the Jews, which must be understood of their restoring
under the Gospel, which yet has not been; for their recovery, ( v. 12.) shall
be from the four corners of the earth, from whence they were never yet
redeemed, but are to be, Matthew 24. 30, 31. compared with Ezechiel 37. 9, to
28.

And Revel. 1. 7. when Christ comes in the clouds; that is, sits on the white
cloud, Revel 14. with a Sickle in his hand to cut down the vine of the earth, i
e. the beast of the earth, the Antichrist. In Isaiah Christ sets up an Ensign,
and in Matthew. 24. there is the sign of the Son of man, by that, in both the
dispersed Jews are gathered from the four corners of the earth.

And that which most of all confirms it, that this conversion and redemption
of them is to be in these latter days, is ( v. 13.) for Ephraims and Iudahs
enemies shall be cut off; and both Ephraim and Judah (i. e. the ten Tribes and
the two Tribes, never since Solomon's time united) shall be now at peace, and
firmly united; but this has never yet been; therefore (say very many) this
promise is to be fulfilled.

From all this I argue, If the great Gospel-effect in uniting Jew and Gentile
together, of universal peace in the Churches of Christ, of universal
knowledge of Christ in the earth, of the recovering of the Hebrews from the
four corners of the earth, and uniting them, being recovered, be to be in that
day, when Christ shall smite the earth with the rod of his power, and with the
breath of his mouth slay the wicked one; then this day is yet to come; and, in
all probability, this smiting is the smiting of the Antichrist, after whose
ruin these glorious things are to be effected: as very many of the Ancients,
and of the pious learned Recents affirm, besides many clear Texts which make it
apparent. The destruction of the Antichrist is only ascribed to the Lord
Jesus, and to none else: hence it is that in Deuteronomy. 32. 39, 40, 41, 42. we find
Christ in fighting against him, speaking of himself at least eleven times in
the singular number, I, even I am he, -- I kill, I make alive, I wound, I heal,
I lift up my hand, I live for ever; if I whet my sword, -- I will render
vengeance, I will make mine arrows drunk with blood: Christ in the first
person singular, he alone will have the honor of Antichrists destruction; and
hence it is, that thrice in Daniel 7. we have the little horn (the last upstart
under the Roman Monarchy) his ruin set out like the day of Judgment; though
the horn be little, yet his ruin is great, in v. 9. he is ruined by the
Ancient of days, who did sit; this is the Lord Jesus, who is Alpha and Omega,
who in the ruin of this little horn sets up, v. 14. his own Kingdom, which
is an universal Kingdom, and a perpetual Kingdom, that is, until the end
of the World. In v. 21, 22. there you have the Antichrist, and the quality of
those over whom he tyrannizeth, they are Saints: which gives us by the way to
know, that Antichrist must tyrannize within the purest Church; in that Church
where are visible Saints. And you have the Ancient of days again appearing;
many take this to be the day of Judgment, because here is mention made of the
Ancient of days coming, which is only to be understood of the coming of
Christ to ruin Antichrist, and to call the elect of Jews and Gentiles unto the
profession of the Gospel; the same you have again in v. 25, 26. and in Dan. 11.
45. and 12. 1. when the Antichrist shall come to his end (after he has
prevailed so far against the Saints, as to pitch his tents in the mountain of
holiness) at that time Michael shall stand up to bring trouble upon the
enemies of the Church, and deliverance to his distressed people; this Michael
is none other but the Lord Jesus Christ, who by his immediate providence in
making bare his Arm, making naked his Bow, and appearing with the sickle in
his hand (all Scripture-expressions of his immediate power) terribly and
utterly confounds Antichrist, and all Antichristian powers. Hence also it is
that Joel calls this great day of the destruction of the Antichrist, the day of
the Lord, Joel 3. 14. and what is this day of the Lord? in the verse before,
it is the time of his putting in his sickle to reap the great harvest of
Antichrists ruin, as it is expounded, Revel. 14. 15. the place is called the
valley of decision: and why of decision? not that this alludes to the harvest,
but to the place where this harvest shall be, which is Mount Olivet, alluding
to that great rent that the Antichrist shall make there, Zach. 14. 4. the great
division shall be made betwixt Antichrist and the true Church: by Mount Olivet
cannot be meant otherwise then some eminent National Church of Unity within it
self; out of which Church Antichrist and his apostate company arise against
it; and this makes Mount Olivet to cleave in sunder; so that now that place is
become the valley of decision: and then the next verse after the Text, v. 15.
tells us this day of the Lord is to be, when the Jews redemption draws nigh,
Luke 21. and (as Matthew. 24. has it) when the sign of the Son of man appears
in heaven; for the Sun shall be darkened, and the Moon shall withdraw her
light, as it is in all the Evangelists except John; and the immediate effect of
it is (as in the following verses) a glorious day of Church-reformation:
likewise in Obadiah 15, 16. this day of Antichrists destruction is called the
day of the Lord upon the Gentiles: what Gentiles?

1 The Gentiles that have drank the blood of the Church, they were those
Gentiles that had drank blood upon the holy Mountain: therefore, as these
Heathens had done to the Church, so the Lord would now do to them. Revel. 18.
16. is a parallel Comment on this Text.

2 They are those Gentiles that shall be destinated to destruction, when the
Gospel Church shall have a glorious deliverance; and the Jews, both the ten
Tribes and two Tribes (for these are the sons of Jacob) shall possess their
possessions, verse* 17. by which it seems most probable that this day of the
Lord must be that day when God destroys Antichrist, who gathers great strength
( Revel. 19. 19.) against the Lord Jesus, that is, against his true Church, and
this war is called a war with the Lamb, i e. with the true Church; for it is
impossible they should make war with the Lord Jesus any otherwise, then by
ruining his Offices and his Ordinances, and blaspheming his Name, and denying
his Godhead, and -- which so nearly concerns his honor, that he will by his
immediate power and might arise and ruin the Antichrist and his Polyarchie. To
these we might add many more texts, Zach. 14. 1, 3, 5. parallel with Jude 14.
and Revel. 14. 1.

CHAP. XII.
ANd shall destroy with the brightness of his comming*]

(...); this is that other expression of the manner of Antichrists ruin. It is
a word (say the Learned) rarely found amongst other Authors, but familiarly in
Paul's writings; it is a word setting out the utter ruin of the Antichrist: as
Antichrist by his appearing made the power of the two Witnesses, and all their
pious endeavors of none effect; he brought it to nothing by laying their
honor and majesty in the dust; so Christ by his appearing shall bring down and
destroy the government, and strength, and power of Antichrist; he shall render
all that he has done as vain, Christ shall overturn his Babel-strength and
ambition, Christ shall make all his successes to come at last to nothing; and
all his wealth and conceited honor, to vanish away. He thinks by his
prosperous successes to be some body, and to raise himself a sure pillar; but
Christ shall make all this useless to him, and of none effect: he will not leave
one stone of his Government standing upon another. Hence, ( Daniel 7. 26. a
Text parallel with this, both in phrase and sense) it is there said, The
Judgment shall fit, and they shall take away his dominion, to consume and
destroy him unto the end. The like expression to the same end we have, Revel.
14. 19. of casting the vine of the earth into the great wine press of the
wrath of God, that is, crushing him to nothing, grinding him as small as the
dust, making him lighter then vanity, useless and vanishing as the smoke.
Concurring in sense with these, is that Text, Revel. 19. 20. where the
Antichrist is taken and cast alive into the lake that burns with fire and
brimstone; which notes first, the dreadfulnesse of the destruction, He is cast
alive: and secondly, theirr ecoverableness of his ruin, He perishes for ever;
for out of hell there is no redemption: and thirdly, it notes the Author of
this ruin, The Lord Jesus: for none can cast into hell but he; none has the
power of heaven and hell but he; he has the key of David, and none but he.
Once again let us view the word, and it denotes the quality of the person as
well as the manner of his ruin; I think we may stretch the sense so far
without cracking any golden string of divine Truth. Observe then, there are two
enemies that Paul says Christ (...), shall destroy. This in the Text John (in
Revel. 20. 5. compared with Revel. 19. 20.) tells us, shall be at the first
resurrection; the other enemy Paul tells us, 1 Cor. 15. 26. at the last and
general resurrection (...), shall be destroyed; there is the same word expressed
of death, which is called (...), the last enemy of the general resurrection, to
note, that the greatest and worst of enemies to be destroyed at the first
resurrection of Jews and Gentiles to Christ, is this, (...): and the last and
worst of enemies at the second, is death.

[ With the brightness of his comming] (...); August. Ambros.
to a word, in the appearing of his presence. (...) signifies an appearance
with glory and splendour.

Against my South-winde here arises the Euroclydon; I am fallen into a place
where three Seas meet.

Some say, by this coming of Christ is meant the coming of Christ to
Judgment: some say no, but it is meant Christ's coming to reign personally
upon earth amongst his Saints: Say a third, neither, but Christ's coming is to
destroy Antichrist by his glorious power in raising up the Witnesses. This last
opinion is the truest, and (like truth) has the fewest followers.

That opinion that this is meant of the coming of Christ to Judgment is most
embraced and followed, and their reason for it is the same that the Chiliasts
use to maintein their absurd, and little less then blasphemous opinion of
Christ's personal reign upon the earth amongst his Saints militant, before the
day of Judgment. They say, that (...) (when used about Christ) signifies his
personal appearance always in Scripture; but (say they) Christ shall not
personally appear until the day of Judgment; Ergo the destruction of
Antichrist shall not be until the day of Judgment. Cold comfort for the
Church Militant, (which by this opinion is like to lie under the frozen Zone of
Antichristian persecution until Doomes-day,) that all the world be on a fire:
and colder comfort for the twelve Tribes, who are like to lie in the dungeon of
darkness, impenitencie and unbelief, until the day of Judgment come upon
them, and damn them: they (by this opinion) shall never see Christ, till he
come to damn them; their consciences shall be fast asleep until hellfire
awake them; their faith in Christ shall be no other then that of the devils, to
believe and be damned. Thus making void both the gracious purposes and promises
of God toward them, both in the Old and New Testament. It is really so, for it
is a general received truth amongst the learned Expositors, that the Jews
general conversion to the Gospel shall not be until Antichrist be destroyed,
and it is a clear truth in Scripture. But if Antichrist be not destroyed until
the day of Judgment, farewell the Jews conversion and salvation for ever.

Some of the learned, who hold this opinion, and fearing (as justly they may)
this undeniable argument, grounded on so many known prophetic promises, have
allowed the Jews, (or rather the prophetic promises) about seven weeks time to
accomplish Ante diem judicii ^ccidetur Antichristus, nam post ^jus mortem
minimum dabuntur hominibus quad^aginta quiuque dies poe^tentiae, ut patet. Dan.
12. 12. Cornel us d. Lapide, and alii docti.
their great work; they say, betwixt the destruction of Antichrist and the day
of Judgment there shall be the space of five and forty days, which is the
time allotted for the Jews to repent in, and believe, and embrace the Gospel.
Here Is a little charity, but blessed Jews, that Gods charity is not measured to
you by the Papists scant yard. Miserable comforters are they which bring you
here the best news from this groundless opinion: which we shall answer two
ways. The first, by way of supposition. Secondly, Plainly and positively; both
to the word [(...)]

I Suppose it should be granted, that (...) did always signify Christ's
personal presence; yet is their Argument never the less questionable, as
falsely grounded; for we say (...) here Multorum opinio est, inter Antichristi
mortem Dominique adventum spatium aliquod temporis fore medium, qu^ pace
aliquantula f^uatur Ecclesia. Estius in locum
belongs not to Christ, but to Antichrist, for (...) in probabiltie relates to
the Antichrist: for it is usual, (say the learned in that language) to have
the relative refer not to the proximate, but to the remote antecedent, after
the manner of the Hebrews, which we find frequent in Scriptures: so that the
meaning of the text possibly is this: God will destroy Antichrist, when he
shall appear in his outward splendour and pomp to the World; when he is at the
full, God shall by a sudden change bring him into the wane, until he have
utterly consumed: in a day when he thinks not of Christ, and an hour when he is
not aware of him, he will come upon him, and cast him alive into the lake that
burns with fire and brimstone.

The next words seem to confirm this opinion, especially as the Syriack
Interpreter reads them [ Adventus enim illius est* etc.] where [ enim] seems to
be put causally. So that the sense seems to be this, [the Lord shall destroy
him in the brightness of his coming, because his coming is according to the
working of Satan,] if this be a true Exposition (as for ought I know it is)
then are their arguments, which are grounded on this Text, quite overthrown.
Fat^or quidem (...) voce sae^e illum iudicii adventum significari* sed id
perpetuum non est. Leigh. Critic. Sac. Haec verba non duntaxat de ultimo
adventu Christi intelligenda sunt, sed quotidiano adventu verbi Christi in
corda fidelium. Zuinglius. Incertum est an loquatu^ de ultima Christi
apparitione cum judex e coelis patefiet. Calvin. in locum. Adventus Domini
extense and secundum quandam latitudinem est intelligendus, ut sub eo
comprehendatur etiam adventus and praedicatio praecursorum. Estius in locum.


But we will not adhere to this opinion, and therefore answer positively to the
word, that (...) signifies not always the personal appearing of Christ; it is
not denied, but that the word properly signifies presence, essential presence*
and oft-times signifies the coming of Christ to Judgment, but not always. See
what our noble English Greek Critic says; he allows it a saepe, but not a
semper; it is oftentimes put for the personal appearance of Christ, but not
always: so says Grotius upon this Text, and so say some other learned
Protestants. Calvin bends this way, putting an incertum est upon the general
received opinion of Christ's coming to Judgment here. Besides all this we have
many clear Texts which prove that (...) does not always signify Christ's
personal appearance, as 2 Pet. 1. 16. we made known unto you the power and
coming of our Lord Jesus, that is, his powerful coming by his Spirit in the
ministry of the Gospel, to convert souls to God. Such a phrase Christ himself
uses of himself in this sense, Matthew. 16. 28. There be some here which shall
not taste of death, until they see the Son of man come in his Kingdom, that
is, sending the Holy Ghost to propagate the Gospel by signs and miracles; so
say the last Annotations on the Bible, or else (say those Notes) Christ's
coming in power by execution of Judgments upon the Jews to the utter
overthrow of that Nation, Matthew. 24. 3, 30. this Text is rightly quoted, but I
conceive not rightly expounded: had the Exposition been quite contrary, it had
been more consonant to the Disciples question, and Christ's answer to it; for
Christ's coming, Matthew 24 is to save the Jews, to restore them both to be a
Church and State again. The question that here the Disciples ask, is the same
that they ask of Christ after his passion, Acts 1. 6. Will thou at this time
restore the Kingdom to Israel? to which question (as to the matter of it)
Christ gives no negative, but rather an affirmative answer; as much as to say,
that time is to be; but it is in the fathers hands; this is laid up in store
with God, and sealed amongst his treasures, Deuteronomy. 32. 34. it is the great
mystery which was not for them to know. This appearing of God to build up Sion,
(Psalm. 10^. 16, 17, 18.) that is, to restore the twelve Tribes, it is written
for the Generations to come; it is a mystery to be unlocked to the latter ages
of the World. About this Kingdom the Pharisees discourse with Christ, Luke 17.
20. demanding of him when it should be? it seems they had faith enough to
believe, that there would be some glorious restoration of the Kingdom to
Israel; and this Christ does not deny, but shows to the end of that Chapter the
signs foregoing the coming of this Kingdom; the restoring of which (in the
next Chapter, Luke 18. 8.) Christ calls the coming of the Son of man, and in
Matthew. 24. 30. the coming of Christ in the clouds, and Revel. 1. 7. which must
necessarily be meant of the Jews wailing with penitential convictions and
fiducial imbracings of Christ; for were it meant of the damned Jews howles at
the day of Judgment, John would never conclude it with an [ Even so, Amen.]
With this Text compare diligently Matthew. 24. 30. and Luke 21. 27, 28. and it
will manifestly appear, that the coming of Christ in clouds is his powerful
and glorious coming by the power of the Holy Ghost in the efficacious working
of the Gospel to convert the Jews, working in them godly sorrow and faith,
which present time is that which Luke says, is the time of the Jews redemption
drawing nigh, not of their final damnation.

In this sense, Matthew. 23. 39. is th be understood, [ Ye shall not see me
henceforth, till ye shall say, Blessed is he that comes in the Name of the
Lord.] Look back to the Context, and it tells us that the Church and state of
Judea should be desolate until that time that they welcomed the messengers of
the Gospel whom now they despised [Ye shall not see me] i. e. know me: it is an
intellectual sight of him by faith; ye shall not believe in me until the day
that your heart be inclined according to Isaiah's prophecy, to say, How
beautiful are the feet of them that bring the glad tidings of peace? until
then, the vail should be over the eyes of their mind, as Paul expresses it;
but when the time is fulfilled, then they shall look on him whom they have
pierced, i. e. by faith look on him, Zach. 12. 10.

Primatius sends us to Matthew. 24. to learn the meaning of Paul in the Text,
which Texts have the word (...) frequently, yet do not thereby set forth the
personal coming of Christ to Judgment, but the powerful and extraordinary
actings of his Providence See the learned Annotations on Matthew. 24.
in raising up the two Witnesses, ruining the Antichrist and his followers, and
converting the twelve Tribes to the Gospel; this Paul calls [ the brightness
of his comming] or the splendour of his coming; and Matthow calls it, Chap. 24.
v. 30. the Son of man coming in clouds with power and great glory. And in
Revel. 14. 14. it is expressed by the appearing of the Son of man on a white
cloud with a golden crown on his head, there is his splendour and glory; and a
sharp sicle in his hand, there is his power.

There may three reasons be given, why and one the same polity, person or
action are diversely described in the New Testament. 1. That they may comprehend
all the Old Testament-prophecies of the seventh Trumpet. 2 To make us to look
higher then a literal sense, or to think that there are any crowns, or
garments, or white horses, or swords, but only Imperial Majesty and power with
Christ in heaven; and that his coming is not in person but in power. 3 For
cleerer information, as the general head of the Western apostasy is gradually
described, 1 As one of the four Angels, Revel. 7. 1. Next, a Star fallen, Chap.
9. 1. Next, the beast of the Sea with seven heads and ten horns, Chap. 13. 1.
And at last, the whore of Babylon, Chap. 17. So the Antichrist, 1 He is the
beast of the bottomless pit, Revel. 11 7. 2 The beast of the earth, deceiving
people, Revel. 13. 14. 3 The skarlet-coloured beast full of names of blasphemy,
Revel. 17. 3. the eighth King ( v. 11.) that goes to perdition, and therefore
the son of perdition. And lastly, the false Prophet cast into hell, Revel. 19.
20. But all this by the way: we now proceed. In Habakkuks song upon the
stringed Instruments, i e. a prophetic song, (for stringed Instruments were
Instruments of prophecy, 1 Chronicles. 25. 3. Psalm. 49. 4.) we find Chap. ^. 3, 4.
a parallel Text setting forth (in all probability) the self-same coming of
Christ; for the whole song in the matter of it is parallel with Revel. 14. 1,
2. which is all one with that Revel. 19. where Christ and his army appear in
glorious array at the time of Antichrists ruin; and one with Zach. 14. 5. The
Lord my God shall come, and all the Saints with thee* In v. 3. God came from
Teman, and the holy One from Mount Paran, Selah: this is to me a note upon
Sigionoth, for I understand it not; only let us wade as far as we can by the
hand of the Scriptures guidance; a parallel Text for this we have in Deuteronomy. 33.
2. which here is styled Moses blessing* wherewith he blessed the children of
Israel; and he said, The Lord came from Sinai, and rose up from Seir unto them,
and he came with ten thousand Saints, etc. This Text I may call a typical
Comment of that in Habakkuk; for, as Gods coming unto Mount Sinai (for so the
Text may be read) was the forming of the house of Jacob into a
Church Government and right way of worship; and as from Mount Paran he blessed
the Civil Government, in endowing the Elders of Israel with a large measure of
his Spirit: thus establishing their Church and State-Government after their
glorious deliverance out of the cruel bondage of Egypt; so God shall come to
deliver the house of Israel from under the long and sore captivity of the Roman
Monarchy, by converting them to the Gospel, and restoring them to their own
land, so forming them to be a Church and State again. Thus God shall come from
Teman, (this is the coming of Christ) and the holy One from Mount Paran. Teman
and Paran were two Wildernesses, in which the Church of God wandered; and where
they had these glorious apparitions of Gods favor, to note, that the Church
under the Gospel shall be, Revel. 11. and 12. in the Wilderness, when God
speaks thus comfortably to her, Selah being a note of music; for the elevation
of the voice is very Emphaticall here; for when God shall restore the Jews from
captivity, Jacob ( Psalm. 53. 8.) shall rejoice, and Israel shall* be glad:
therefore John hears ( Reve. 19. after the Roman Monarchy was ruined) a great
voice of much people, saying, Hallelujah: the highest song deserves the highest
note: the note was so high set, v. 6. that it was as the voice of mighty
thunderings, saying, Allelujah. But how is this coming parallel with that of
Paul's, and Matthews and John's? this is exactly parallel with them: for as here
he is said to come, so he is said to come with great splendour and glory; and
with great power; his glory covered the heavens, and the earth was full of his
praise; and his brightness was as the light: here is the brighnesse of Christ's
coming; and then he had horns coming out of his hand, there is the coming
of Christ in power, there was the hiding of his power, or the mystery of his
power; by which it appears, this coming of Christ in glory and power to
destroy Antichrist, and convert the Jews is a mystery, as Paul, Romans 11.
John, Revelat. 10. and Moses, Deuteron. 32. call it.

This coming of Christ is glorious and powerful, in regard of I^ may be
called* the coming and appearing of Christ, when he comes and appears in his
Vicegerents his two anointed Offices, Magistracy and Ministry, but at the
raising of the Witnesses, he eminently appears in these two Offices, therefore
it is called Christ's coming and appearing.
the effects of it; it is powerful in regard of the powerful enemies it
overcomes; for it overthrows the Devil, the beast, and the false prophet: and
then Christ's coming is glorious; because it gathers the twelve dispersed
Tribes together, it brings in to the royal fold of Christ infinite numbers of
Gentiles from all quarters of the World, it makes all the Kingdoms of this
World to become the Lords and his Christ's. How am I in the midst of these texts
like a little Be drowned in an Ocean of honey! I am not able to count the
texts that illustrate this glorious and powerful coming of Christ: neither am
I able to marshal them in such good method as may make its matter both plain
and delightful to the Reader, much less to expand the breadth and the length of
those glorious truths which are involved in those texts: but if in magnis
voluisse sat est, I am well enough. I have done my endeavor.

I should now proceed to show the error of those Millenaries, who on the other
extreme would from the frozen Zone of affliction bring the Church militant into
the torrid Zone of terene triumph* where it shall have no night of sorrow, but
shall have Christ personally present in the midst of them: hereby utterly
making void that text which is unlimited until the day of judgment: Through
many tribulations we must enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. And All that will
live godly in this life must suffer per^ecetion: nay, worse then this, it
disgraceth Christ, and debaseth his dignity so infinitely, that when I consider
the Majesty of Christ's presence, as he appeared to John after his Assumption,
Revel. 1. 13, 14. with his eyes like a flame of fire, his voice like the sound
of many waters, from his mouth a sharp two-edged sword proceeding, and his
countenance bright as the Sun shining in his strength: and when I meditate of
that glorious place, into which with the humane nature he ascended; I do so
much abhor the thoughts of my Lord the King of Heaven and Earths debasing
himself again to dwell with men before their bodies are changed, and have put
off corruption, to be seen with these mortal sinful eyes, and touched with
these polluted hands here, that I cannot but cry out aloud against the opinion
as blasphemous; and therefore I pass it by as not worthy the mentioning of a
solid Christian: it needs not the confuting; for the learned and most
moderate of them ( Mead) contradicts himself in one and the same page about
this opinion: and so do all of them that either print or prattle of it most
ridiculously and absurdly.

Of the ANTICHRIST, The Fourth Part.
CHAP. I.
WHose coming is after the working of Satan, with all power, and Verse 9.
signs, and lying wonders.

In verse 8. we had a general view of Antichrists reign and Antichrists
ruin; now in the four following verses the Holy Ghost descends to a more
special and peculiar description of Antichrists appearing when he comes to be
formally Antichrist, i. e. to dis-possesse the lawful Magistracy and
Ministry, the two anointed ones; and to set himself and his Image or
government above them.

The Holy Ghost describes him (that the Church may know him above all others
when he comes) 1 By his manner of appearing in the world. 2 By his followers or
subjects.

His manner of appearing is described in

General, to be after the working of Satan. Special, to be, 1 With power. 2
With signs. 3 With lying wonders. 4 With all deceivablenesse of
unrighteousness.
[ Whose comming] Coming, or appearance, or presenee, is here put for the full
possession that Antichrist has of the throne he usurpes; his appearing
formally to be Antichrist; and how is this appearance? the Text answers,
[(...)] according to the working of Satan.

Some learned men conceive that by Satan is not here meant the Devil, but such
an enemy and adversary of the Lords Anointed, as Judas was; their ground for
this is partly from the word (...), which signifies not an infernal spirit, or
reprobated Angel, but an adversary or spightfull enemy. If this be the meaning
of the Text, then it must run parallel with that, Revel. 13. 12. he exercises
all the power of the first beast before him, or in the presence of him; that
first beast is the Pope, so that as the beast of the Sea with seven heads and
ten horns got up to his usurped greatness by supplanting his Sovereign; so by
the same rounds of policy does the Antichrist climb up to his usurped
greatness: and thus he may be said to come after the working of the adversary
the Pope, who is the grand adversary of the true Christian Church, and of the
Jews conversion; but I cannot adhere to this opinion: for Satan here (as for
the most part every where) is one of the black attributes of the Devil,
appropriated only to him.

It would scarce be worth while, unless to satisfy the curious, to repeat the
wild opinions of some learned men on this expression. Theodoretus. Hypolitus
de Consummatione S^culi. Rabanus de Antichristo.
Some think he is a Devil incarnate, who endeavors to imitate Christ, and to
persuade the people that he is Christ: they think he shall be of the Tribe of
Dan, and after this manner deceive the Jews. They think he will pretend to come
of a Virgin as Christ did.

Others, that he shall not be a Devil, but a man begot by the Devil of a
Virgin.

Hierome on Isaiah 16. thinks that the Devil is the father of Antichrist: this
in some sense is tolerable; but for the other opinions I find not the least
ground in Scripture for them, and therefore leave them. Neither can I so
heartily embrace the opinion of learned Swarez, and those other Romish Doctors
of his opinion, who hold, that Antichrist shall be filled with the evil
qualities of the Devil from his cradle. Yea the Devil (say they) shall so
shape him to his mould, when he is in the womb of his mother, ut temperamentum
and complexio ejus fiat propensissima ad omnia vitia; these things may be true,
but it is very uncertain to me; I desire to sail by the Compass of the Word,
and the wind of the Holy Ghost in the Scripture as near as I can, and that (if
any Operatio Satanae and omnis conatus ejus in hoc homine situs ^rit. Ant.
Scaynus. In ipso, cum ipso, and per ipsum operabitur Satanas. Tirinus. In
Antichristo est Diabolus. ^uggerens, ^icut dicitur de Juda, Jo. 13. Introivit
in eum Satanas, scilicet instigando. Aquinas. Ita Gorranus.
thing) will bring me to the desired fair heaven of truth. Anton. Scaynus,
Hemingius, and Bened* Justin, have very good glosses upon these words; the
nearest to truth of any of these I have repeated.

I most concur with Zanchie upon this Text; his coming is according to the
working of Satan, i e. the Devil, who has, ( John 8. 44.) two Epithites given
him by the Holy Ghost, even by Christ himself, he is a liar and a murderer:
now according to this efficacy of Satan Antichrist comes; these ars, (as
Zanchie calls them) Antichristi arma, the weapons of Antichrist; in this sense
we find a parallel Text, Revel. 13. 11. the beast of the earth spoke like the
Dragon, and how did the Dragon speak? Genesis 3. 1, 3, 5. he speaks flattering
lies, and teaches abominable rebellion. He taught to pluck the forbidden fruit;
so Antichrist flatters his followers with fair promises of liberty; but they
are lies, and teaches to pluck the forbidden fruit; you know there is one
sacred tree in the world, which man is forbidden to touch, yea the Heretics
and Apostates of these times confess it; some of the eminentest of them have
acknowledged that it is as sacred corn, only to be reaped by the hand of God;
now this forbidden fruit, this sacred tree he cutteth down; and herein he
comes according to the efficacy of Satan, i. e. as a liar and a murderer
and a cheater. The Devil put on a painted skin when he vented his most
pernicious poison: so does Antichrist, he puts on the speckled skin of fair
pretenses. Nothing but liberty, the Gospel, and the promotion of piety and
Saintship is in his mouth, but his heart and practices and designs are
diametrally against it.

CHAP. II.
THus you have a general description of the appearing of Antichrist: now
follows the particular symptoms of his appearing.

In this Chapter are the signs and marks of Antichrist, which No^e.
are proper only to the Antichrist, and to none else; for (as our English
Chrysostom in his learned and holy Treatise of grace, p. 42. Mr. Ant. Burges
says) though it may fall out that some other besides the Antichrist may have
some of those marks belonging to him, yet none have them all cumulatively and
collectively, but the true Antichrist. So I conceive there are some peculiar
signs and marks of the Antichrist which none can have but he, such as relate
to the time, the place, and the manner of slaying the Witnesses.

(...), cum omni potentia, Beza In omni virtute, so both the Vulgar and the
Syriack.

Some learned Protestants (conceiving the Pope ^o be the Antichrist) understand
by [all power] the secular and Ecclesiastic power which the Pope usurpes.

Others think, It is to be referred to the power of doing prodigious things in
showing signs and wonders: so Beza and Zanchie Hot modo decipiat Antichristus;
primo per potentiam Secularem. Secundo, per virtutem miraculorum. Quantum ad
primum, dicit in omni virtute scilicet Seculari, Dan. 11. Dominabitur
thesaurorum auri and argenti. Aquinas.
think. Aquinas on these words says, that Antichrist shall deceive people
after this manner. 1 By his secular power. 2 By the power of miracles. He
conceives that Paul by [all power] means secular power, such as Antichrist is
said to have, Dan. 11. where he is said to rule over the treasures of gold and
silver, and to honor the god of forces, i. e. bless his sword-power which
has exalted him. I humbly conceive that this is the meaning of Paul; for
having before showed us that he arises out of the midst of the true Church,
and sets himself in the throne of the true Church by supplanting the
lawful possessours of it. The means by which he must accomplish this, must be
by extraordinary policy, which the Apostle tells us is by the efficacy of
Satan: the policy of hell promotes him to this power; by flatteries and fair
pretenses he winds himself into power and strength, and then he murders and
supplants those that stand in his way by the strength of that power, which by
flatteries and fair pretenses he got the possession of. Thus, according to the
working of the Devil, (...) Copi^ militares dicuatur, non solum in sermon
sacro, sed etiam apud autores profanos, Leigh.
by lying and murdering he gets into power, and then appears with all power,
[(...) (say the learned Critics) signifies an army or host, so (...) is best
interpreted the Lord of hosts. Our learned Critic Leigh proves that the word
is used for military power, both amongst humane and divine Authors.
Theodoretus, Nazianzen, and others so use the word; so that when Antichrist
appears to be formally Antichrist, he appears clothed with all power, he is
Commander in chief of forces and power.

They that read the Text [ in omni virtute] so understand it, they Potestaccipi
pro divitiis, and vi armorum. Ant. Scaynus.
oppose it to infirmity and imbecility, and not to vice. Says Scaynus, it may
be understood of army, or great wealth, or powers; and to this do other
learned men consent, who say, the Greek word is answerable to the Hebrew word,
(...) Chajil, which signifies power or armies, or that wherein power and might
consists, whether wealth and riches, or strong confederates; so does Nazianzen
describe Antichrist to be a beast full of poison and mischief, (...). Nazian.
Jamb. 15. 2. 2.
a man of great power and might, a wealthy man.

Hence it is we have the Antichrist, Daniel 7. Daniel 11. and Revel. 11. and
17. plucking up three of the ten Kingdoms subject to Rome, and making war with
and overcomming and wearing out the Saints; and in another place doing what he
pleases, and so successful with his power or forces, that he pitcheth his
tents in the holy mountain betwixt the Seas, and makes war with the two
Witnesses, overcomes them, and kills them, and makes war with the Lamb; and
all this he does by his power, his hosts, and armies, over whom he has the
chief command. All these expressions are but to set forth the manner of the
Antichrists appearing, it is with armed power against the Church: for no
otherwise can he make war with the Lamb, then by assaulting the true Church,
the Lambs bride.

CHAP. III.
-- and signs, [(...)] the word (...) amongst humane Authors signifies a
prognostic sign, and sometimes an argument, but commonly a sign: there are
natural, civil, and diabolical signs; and there are divine real signs:
the word in Scripture is used to express them all.

Judas, (Matthew. 26. 48.) gave his soldiers (of whom for a time he was
Conductor General) a sign whereby to know Christ. This was a distinguishing
sign to his soldiers, a destructive sign to Christ, a deceitful sign to
the betrayed Church, the eleven Apostles. Such a sign shall the Antichrist use
in the slaying of the Witnesses, he shall kiss those with fair promises, whom
he intends to bettray and kill; his signs shall be designed signs to his
followers, destructive signs to the Lords anointed, and deceitful signs to
the deluded, betrayed Churches, under the wing of the Lords anointed.

The Apostle uses here two words, (...) and (...).

(...) signifies properly a prodigy, or an extraordinary act beyond the
ordinary course of nature. And so oft-times does (...): yet seldom when they
are both found (as here) together, then (as now) their proper distinct
significatio^s are to be regarded.

The learned distinguish betwixt (...) and (...) thus; Signa sunt quaedam mi^a
etiam p^rva; prodigia vero magna quae aliquemprodig^osum ostendunt, quasi ^ocul
a digit^. Aquinas.
signs are those things which are done in an extraordinary manner; but not
beyond or against nature; as to heal the sick, to cure a leaper, to restore a
lame man to his limbs: but prodigies are extraordinary acts, or productions
beyond the course of nature, as to raise the dead, or give sight to one totally
blind; this cannot be done by nature or art; for total privations admit of no
regresse. In what sense signs are here to be taken, is questionable; but it is
out of question, that these signs are one grand Character or great letter of
the Antichrist.

That miracles are called signs in Scripture, is most frequent and certain;
and the learned give reasons for it, which reasons Miracula dicuntur (...),
quia signa sunt praesentiae divinae, atque eorum proprius usu^ est ut
confirmetur fides nostra. Leigh e Camera. Miracula vocantur signa Synecdochice*
quia mi^acula, signa, and testimonia sunt divinae ad dicendum vocationis, and
veritatis (...).
are deduced from Scripture, Mark 16. 20. He confirmed the Word with miracles
and signs: the miracles and signs that accompanied the Apostles, were to
confirm the doctrine of the Apostles, and their extraordinary divine call and
anointing unto that work. This usually accompanied the Prophets before Christ,
when they were made Apostles, and had a word put in their mouths, usually a
sign went along with their word of prophecy. Therefore when Christ was cried
up of the people for a Prophet, the Pharisees come, and require a sign from
beaven, Matthew. 16. 1. that was to confirm his extraordinary mission, and the
new doctrines that he taught.

As Christ by signs and miracles confirmed his Anointing as only Head, Priest,
and Prophet as man, and so anointed above his fellows, above all that ever
were, he was David's Lord, the King of Kings, Priest of Priests, and Prophet of
Prophets, as he, I say* confirms his unction and his new government by signs
and miracles. So the Antichrist when he comes, he shall come in the spirit or
energy of the Devil, and with lying signs and wonders endeavor to confirm his
usurpation, by pretending to an extraordinary mission; he goes to prove his
title to what he usurps by the false sign of providence, of Saintship, of
immediate revelations and such like ways.

This observe as a general truth, that that man, or Church, or Note*
State, since the establishing of the Gospel Church upon the Bible, that have
no better title then the present signs and miracles they bring with them to
uphold it, do build upon an Antichristian foundation. For you may be sure their
title is not good by the law of Christ in his sacred records, who fly from
that to feigned signs and miracles of their own.

I cannot say particularly what these signs are; but sure I am from the text,
they are deceitful signs and prodigious signs. What prodigies and signs,
Europe* yea, the World has had these four years past, I leave the judicious of
the World to judge. I pass on to the Scriptures that are cogent with the text.
I Revel. 13. 13. there the Antichrist does (...), make great signs* and upon
what designs? but to cheat the men of the earth to a subjection to his new
government, as you may see in the afterwords of that Chapter.

Another parallel text we have in Matthew. 24 24. -- where the Antichrist is set
forth by his followers, those that comply with him, and promote him by dividing
and corrupting and over-toping the true Church by those factions of Apostates,
which they draw out of the Church against it. They are called false Christ's and
false Prophets, who (...); though this be not spoken of the person of
Antichrist, yet it is spoken of the followers of Antichrist, who appear in the
Church with the Antichrist, and are the instruments of broaching those false
signs, which in the other texts are attributed to the Antichrist, he being the
head and patronizer of them: for it is not to be imagined that ^e alone does
these signs, but he has fit instruments designed by him for the work. The
Frogs out of the Dragons mouth, the three unclean spirits help him.

I am loath to enter upon Revel. 16. it being a Chapter so full of unrevealed
revelations, there being much more difficulty in it then commonly Expositors
conceive: yet if I did affirm that Revel. 16. 16. ran parallel with Paul's
prophecy in the description of Antichrists ruin, verse 8. whereby the breath
of Gods mouth, as in Revel. 19. 15. and the brightness of his coming (as verse
12, 16. manifests) he is destroyed with his fellows, verse 20. that is,
brought to Armageddon, Revel. 16. 16. I think I could easily prove it, and upon
better grounds then as yet I see by former Authors of other opinions refuted:
but I must return to a harder task, and that is to prove that Matthew. 24. 24. is
a prophecy of the Antichrist and his followers. For proof hereof we must
borrow the method of him who wrote the last Annotations upon this Chapter:
Annotations on the Bible.
Here are (says he) three questions propounded. 1 Of the ruin of the Temple
and of Jerusalem. 2 Of Christ's coming to restore the Jews. 3 Of his coming to
judge the World. As for that end spoken of, v. 14. it is not meant the end of
the World, but the end of the Jewish Church and State-government, the Temple
and the Throne should be ruined.

Now to these three questions Christ distinctly answers, denying none as false,
nor reproving them as needless. To the first question you have an answer which
extends to v. 22. To the second question, viz. when Christ shall come to
convert the Jews, and restore the Kingdom to Judah, that is, unite the twelve
Tribes again in one Religion under one King, as it was under David and Solomon.
The Disciples were questionless right in the question, for otherwise Christ
would have showed them their error and mistake: but that Christ does not,
neither in this Chapter nor in Act. 1. 6. where they ask this question, Will thou at this time restore* the Kingdom to Israel? i. e. unite Judah and
Ephraim the two sticks in Gods hand. They had this opinion not only by
tradition from their fathers, but they had it from their prophecies, the
written received Word, from Moses and all the Prophets. See what answer Christ
makes to them, It is not for you to know the times and the seasons that the
Father has put into his hands, but ye shall receive power; -- the Spirit of
Revelation after his ascension; should reveal this to them, as it was to the
beloved Disciple John, and to all them who by the Spirit afterward understood
Christ's prophecies in Matthew. 24. and Luke 21. So that Christ positively
affirms, that such a restoration of the Kingdom to Israel there should be,
and they should have in due time a more full discovery of that truth: in the
mean time 'twas reserved in the Fathers hands. He that wrencheth the scope of
Christ's words to a contrary sense, in my judgment offers exceeding much
violence to the Text. Likewise in Luke 17. 20. when the Pharisees that grounded
this question of the coming of the Kingdom of God upon the Old
Testament-prophecies, which are clear in the thing: Christ denies not the
question, but answers to it in Moses words, from whence they raised the
question. So that it is manifest, the Disciples were found in the question
about Christ's coming to call home the twelve Tribes; to which he answers from
v. 23. to v. 35. where he gives the Symptoms immediately going before his
coming, and that is, ^ Antichrist and his followers should be busy: where? in
the Church: about what? about dividing Christ, making factions in the Church,
saying, Here is Christ, and there is Christ; behold, he is in the desert,
behold, he is in the secret chamber: thus Antichrists followers by factions
raised in the Church, and by their false signs and false wonders, in
successes, providence, pretenses of sanctity and such like falsities, shall
prevail so exceedingly, that generally all loose professors shall be drawn to
a defection, or a cursed neutrality, or to a malicious apostasy from the
Church, yea, they shall stagger many of the elect* and (were it possible) make
them also finally to fall into the same delusions, impenitencie, and
irrecoverable apostasy. Now ( v. 27.) comes Christ like the lightening, i. e*
suddenly, terribly: when is that? v. 28. when the ravenous birds of prey, the
Romish Eagles are feasting and rejoicing at the dead carcases of the Witnesses:
then follows, v. 29. the vials pouring out on the apostasy and the
Antichrist; and then appears the sign of the Son of man in heaven, and then
shall all the Tribes of the earth mourn: what? all the Tribes? yes, all: for v.
31. the Angels with sound of Trumpet, Isa. 27. 13. (that is, at John's seventh
Trumpets sounding) shall call all the Tribes from the four ends of the earth.
Oh blessed day* the Lord hasten it: but is this at the day of Judgment? no;
but at the time of Antichrists ruin, for the Generation of the Jews shall not
perish until all this be fulfilled; now after this Christ treats of the day of
Judgment in that Chapter.

CHAP. IV.
[ And lying wonders] (...). The Syriack renders it, and with false prodigies:
Beza reads, lying prodigies. Et prodigiis falsis. Sir. Et prodigiis mendacibus.
Beza.


I dare not alter any thing, and therefore may not find fault. They say the
expression is an Hebraisme equipollent to (...), which they translate for the
Text.

It is observable, that all the New Testament-prophecies are full of
Hebraismes: sure the Holy Ghost has some holy design in it; either to inform
the Hebrews, that the same Spirit that inspired the Old Testament-Prophets,
inspired also the New: and that the only way to understand either is to
believe both, and compare them one with another: thus I understand that of
seeing eye to eye, as Esaias has it.

Or else, it is, to humble us Gentiles in the remembrance of our stock. We are
by nature wild Olives; and all the light we have received for salvation it
has come from the Hebrews. To them were committed the Oracles of the Gospel,
and they ( viz.) the twelve Apostles, and Paul, all Hebrews did dispense those
Oracles to the world, which are to this day, and will be the standing rule to
all the Churches to the end of the world. Hereby all boasting is excluded from
the Gentiles.

Or rather to point us to the Old Testament, there to search for a parallel
Comment on a prophetic Text in the New Testament, It may be all these designs
are included in the phrase and manner of expression. [(...)] this is a degree
beyond signs, Quae causam habent occultam alicui, and non simpliciter,
dicuntur quidem* mira and non miracula simpliciter; sed quae simpliciter caus^m
occultam habe^t, sunt proprie miracula. Aqui. Miraculum est quod ^it super
omnem naturae vim; quodque omnium naturalium causarum, and creaturarum vires
excedit and transcendit. Cornelius a Lapide. Zanchius.
that Antichrist goes: for signs are but things acted within the Sphere of
nature; but wonders, beyond and above the reach of nature. Hence some conceive
(...) to be all one with (...), which comes (...), which signifies to terrify;
for wonders being things done beyond the course of common causes, amaze and
terrify the beholders, so that they stand at a gaze, filled with admiration
and wonder, which is nothing else but the surplus of expectation. Antichrists
slaying of the Witnesses, changing the times and laws of that State where he
slayes them, Dan. 7. 25. pitching his tents in the Holy Mountain, Dan. 11. ult.
dividing Mount Olivet, Zach. 14. stripping the Church of all her strength and
power which she made against him, Deuteronomy. 32. 36. setting up his new strange
government in the stead of the government of the slain Witnesses, Revel. 13.
12, 13, 14. these are such great things beyond the expectation of the people
that are not acquainted with the signs and marks of Antichrists appearing,
that they wonder at his successes and are cheated by the Antichrist by the
great signs ( v. 13.) especially that of Religion and Saintship; for
Antichrist shall do all these unexpected things under the cloak of Religion; as
Solomon appeared in the sight of all the men of Israel to be that King, whom
God had made choice of to build him an house, and that that house God chose
beyond all others to be his house by the coming down of fire from heaven in
the sight of Israel, at which sight they being filled with holy wonder, bowed
down their heads, and worshipped, believing; even so Antichrist shall by his
cunning designs which he cloaks with external forms of high devotion, make
the people believe that he is the man designed to pull down Antichrist, and to
lay the top-stone of Church-Reformation, and make the times glorious times: you
may know Antichrist by the Livery that he gives to his black Guard: in 2 Timothy
3. 2, 3, 4 we find 18 of his company, and all in one Livery, v. 5. having a
form of godliness, self-lovers or selfish men in the cloak of the form of
godliness; covetous men in the form of godliness, boasters in the form of
godliness, proud persons in the form of godliness, blasphemers in the form of
godliness, disobedient to parents, unthankful, unholy, without natural
affection, truce breakers, false accusers, incontinent, fierce, despisers of
those that are good, traitors, headie, high-minded, lovers of pleasures more
then lovers of God; all these the Apostle tells us in the last days (meaning
the days of Antichrists appearing) shall be cloaked in a form of godliness.
All these Devils in these days arise and walk in Samuels mantle. So that I may
use St. John's words to the dispersed, despised, and distressed Churches in this
age, 1 John 2. 18. Little childeren, it is the last time; and as ye have heard
that Antichrist shall come, even now are there many Antichrists, whereby we
know that it is the last time: they went out from us, but they were not of us.
These are the followers of Antichrist, and these are the chiefs of men to be
destroyed when the Witnesses rise; which Miraculum mendax dicitur vel quia
deficit a vera ratione sacti, vel a vera ratione miraculi, vel a debito fine
miraculi. Aquinas.
day God of his abundant mercy hasten. I believe it is near at hand.

Antichrist and his followers by their prodigious acts under the cloak of
Religion may make the World wonder, but they do no no wonders; for the Holy
Ghost tells us, they are lying wonders, wonders that only cheat the men of the
earth, or earthly-minded men to a subjection, to bow down to their image, and
receive the mark of the beast.

Antichrists miracles are lies, respectu omnium causarum, says Cornelius a
Lapide, in respect of the material, efficient, formal, and final cause.

The end of his miracles is to cheat the people into a compliance with his
false ways; whereas the end of true miracles was to confirm the truth.

The original of these miracles is the Devil; Antichrist is helped by
Sorcerers and Witches that pretend Revelations, and come with all manner of
cunning to cheat and deceive souls.

The matter of them are mere deceits; for dive into the bottom of them, and
you shall find the fire he pretends came from heaven, is fire of his own
making, to delude the people.

Ant. Scaynus conceives his lying wonders are such as Iannes and Iambres
wrought before Pharaoh, which were mere delusions and no true miracles; yet
served the turn to harden Pharaohs heart against the true Church, and to divert
the people from believing and obeying the truth, to their utter ruin; and
thither tends the miracles of Antichrist.

Some learned men say, Antichrist shall be a great Magician or Cyrillus Catech.
15.
Sorcerer; to this I could add a very strange story, which I received from a
person of honor; but to avoid all occasions of offense, I forbear it.

The miracles of Antichrist are also formally lies, for they are performed
merely by cunning. He may pretend that miraculous Non su^t vera miracula vim
naturae super anti^, sed praestigiae diabolicae, vel certe vi and potentia^
naturali patrata. Tyrinus ex Cyrillo and Theod. Utitur Antichristus ad
fallendum sapiene^tia verbo^um, simulatione virtutum, testimonio Scripturarum,
operation^ mir^culorum, promissione divitiarum, terrore persecutionum* Goran.
in Locum.
providence from heaven does all. Herein he most desperately blasphemes, for he
makes God the Author of his sins, by entitling God to all those prodigious
villainies, that he himself, and by his cunning Instruments perpetrates.

I Will conclude this verse with that of Goranus; Antichrist (says he) that he
may deceive the people, makes use of the choicest and wisest language, (talks
like a Saint) dissembles much virtue (in his conversation) makes use of
Scripture-testimonies, pretends to work miracles, makes large promises of
promotion to those that adhere unto him, and others he frights into a
compliance by the threats of persecution.

I hope I shall be pardoned for not mentioning the opinion of Methodius in his
Revelations about Antichrist, nor of Hyppolitus, nor Ephrem in their Tracts of
the end of the World; where they make as if he should counterfeit Christ's
miracles, as to give sight to the blind, restore the lame to their limbs,
cast out Devils, turn the Sun to darkness, seemingly also make mountains to
move, himself to fly in the air, and such like miracles, which are only
fancies of their brains, there being not a word in Scripture whereon to ground
any such opinion. Verse 10.


And with all deceivablenesse of unrighteousness in them that perish, (...)
seems by the most of Translators rather to be interpreted and expounded then
translated; Mr. Leigh.
for as it is observed, the word is compounded of the primative [a] and (...),
which signifies a path or highway; and therefore I choose to follow him who
translates it [out-path] in every out-path of unrighteousness.

(...) is either opposed to truth, as 1 Cor. 13. 6. and so it is put for deceit
or falsehood; or else (as Alstedius says) it signifies that oppression and
Tyranny which one man exercises over another: In both these senses it may well
be understood of the Antichrist. For he is not only a cheater, and a false
perjured person, but also a monstrous oppressor, and a bloody persecutor of
the innocent lambs of Christ's flock. He is a Tyrant, who walks in all the
bypath of iniquity, His crooked feet can keep no straight paths; he must have
by-ways to bad ends. Cornelius a Lapide shows us six of his bypath, wherein
he walks. 1 With much civility and courtesy to all, thereby to ingratiate
himself into their favors* 2 By a feigned holiness,- and so (as Goranus,
whose words we have quoted) he proceeds to discover his several ways. Magna
comitace and gratia se insinuandi captandique hominum gatia^, and sanctimonia
simulata utetur Antichristu^ ad illiciendum homines.


Thus you have the seducer (viz.) the Antichrist: his manner of seducing in
general and in special: and now we come to the parties seduced.

CHAP. V.
IN them that perish] (...).

Observe the Apostles correlate terms in this discourse, in v. 3. the
Antichrist, the seducer is called (...), and they that are seduced, (...); as
the blind lead the blind, and both fall into the ditch; so the grand seducer
leads the seduced, until they both tumble down into hell. You may read their
dreadful ends in their names, perditition is their name, and destruction is
their end; be their profession what it will. The son of perdition, when he
comes, will draw the subjects of perdition after Describit jam subditos hujus
regni: eoque^olatur pios, ut ne metuant Antichristi potentiam quippe limitibus
certis definitam.
him to damnation: this is the general Character of Antichrists subjects; they
are lost men, ruined men; they shall be slain Revel. 11. 13.

Here we have the full length of Antichrists chain (as Zanchie observes) to the
comfort of the Saints; for though Antichrist arise in the midst of the Church;
and appear with his armed forces to terrify some, and with his cheats, and
deceits, and miracles to draw away others; yet he shall not be able to deceive
the meanest Saint of God. This is exceeding great comfort to the Saints, and
glory to Christ, who rules hereby in the midst of his enemies. A true Saint is
never more visible then when the true visible Church is most obscured and
darkened with Heretics and Seducers.

Then was Athanasius in the full when the visible Chruch was (...)* Chrysostom.
in the wane. Chrysostom comforts his hearers, from this Text; after he had
preached to them of the cunning fraud, subtilty, and malice of the Antichrist.
Fear you not, (says he) my beloved? but hearken unto him who has said, that
he shall prevail only over them that perish: if it were possible, he shall
cheat the elect, but it is impossible: he may make them stumble, but never
totally fall. No, in that pit his own feet shall be for ever captivated with
the multitude of Apostate professors, his zealous followers. The elect shall
be kept in all their ways, that they never dash their foot against that stone.
They may be afflicted even unto death, both shameful and cruel by Antichrists
tyranny, but they shall never perish by Antichrists temptation. He may
tyrannize over the true Saints, but he shall never make them his subjects nor
followers: they (though conquered) yet are conquerours over the image and mark
of the beast, Ergo adhaerebunt Antichristo s^li (...), says Zanchie. Only
those that are designed of God unto destruction shall be the subjects and
followers of Antichrist.

[Because they received not the love of the truth, that they might be saved*]

Here we have a general Character of those Reprobates, who are the followers of
Antichrist. They are formal Christians, having no love at all of the truth
which they profess. The Apostle intends it (says Aquinas) as a demonstration
of their deception, and the particle (...) seems very much to confirm it.

They would mock God with a mock Religion, and God returns their mocks upon
them again, by suffering others to mock them with a mock Religion, turning
Solomon's proverb into a prophecy, and fulfilling it: The back-slider in heart
shall be filled with his own ways, he shall have enough on it.

An hypocrite puts on Jacobs smooth skin of profession to cover the Esau's
hands and face of his villainie, as Jacob put on Esau's counterfeit skin,
merely to deceive. He intended to wear it no longer then until he has thereby
accomplished his design. He loves Religion no more then Judas loved charity.
Though he carried the bag of charity and the tongue of charity, yet he was a
hard-hearted thief that robbed the Church, by converting the Church-stock to
his own private use. Such are Antichrists followers, who receive Religion in
the form and external show of it, but not in the love and power of it: they
receive it into their arms, but not into their hearts; they embrace Religion,
as Amnon did his beautiful sister, not to be tied in Nuptial bonds of unity
and love, but to satisfy his lust, and after that disgracefully to shut her
out of doors. They love Religion in the truth no more then Absalom loved
Justice, only in pretense to some greater end to depose the King and get the
Crown. Now as they think to cheat men by their pretenses and hypocritical
delusions; so God in Justice leaves them in the hardness of their heart, and
blindness of their mind, to be cheated by the Devil and Antichrist to their
own damnation. Whiles they cheat men under the cloak of religion of their
honors and estates, the Devil that whiles cheats them of their souls. It may
be truly said of every formal hypocritical professor, Perditio tua ex te, Thy
destruction is of thy self. But I crave pardon for my sauciness in going here
before my betters, let us see what the learned say.

[ They received not] (...). Some learned men conceive that this is (...)* or
an extenuation, a diminutive expression, the full meaning being this [they
pertinaciously refused]

[(...)] the love of the truth. Some by love of the (...). Chrysostom.
truth, understand Christ, who is both truth and love. Charit^tem exhibuit, and
veritatem ostendit, says Goran. So that the meaning is, they received not
Christ, that is, truth; for he that receives not truth in the love of it,
receives not Christ. Dicit [charitatem veritatis] qui^isi formata^ides per
charitatem nibil est. Aquinas. Hic sensu^ sacilior est and planior, maglsque
connexu^ versui sequenti: opponitur enim amor veritatis errori, sive amori and
amp^exui erroris. ^ Lapid. ex V^tab. In ^ fundamentum non est Christus, ^ui
caetera praepo^untur. Aug. de Civit l. 21. c. 26. ^* Note.


Some others conceive it is meant of the deficiencie of charity in Antichrists
followers, they have knowledge and gifts and faith, but no charity, which
profits nothing, 1 Cor. 13.

Probably, truth is here put for the whole doctrine of the Gospel in opposition
to all other false Religions, so that the Character of Antichrists followers is
this: They are professors of the Gospel of true Religion, but they are
hypocritical professors and temporary; professors: for, 1 They receive not the
truth into their hearts; they love not what they profess. 2 Neither do they
profess Religion with a design to be saved by it.

Religion is not a Jacobs ladder for them to climb to heaven by, but a blind
zeal, under which without suspicion they carry on their hellish designs: all
the heaven they look at, is the wealth and greatness and pleasure of the
world. They receive not the love of the truth, that they might be saved by it;
but the outward profession of the truth, that they may be preferred by it.

Hence observe, that the Antichrist is so far from an open denial of Christ,
that he is a great professor of Christ, who prefers all his followers upon the
account of religious men and Saints, men that profess religion: but what says
the Text? it is in hypocrisy. It Is true, they fast and pray, but it is not out
of love to that solemn duty, that they may be saved by it; but that they may
thereby advantage their carnal Interests; as a reverend Divine said wittily
once, eying some men's designs, They have (says he) humbled themselves into
the Throne, and fasted and prayed, that which they accounted Achans wedge, and
the Babylonish garment into their possession; fasted fine clothes upon their
backs, and self-denyingly wound themselves into all the great and profitable
offices. This is all the heaven that Antichrists followers aim at by all their
eminent professions; they receive not the truth to the mortifying of their
lusts, but for the palliating of their lusts. It Is a good place, not grace; a
Kingdom here, not a Kingdom hereafter, that their profession chiefly pursues
and closely hunts after.

Shall I say any more? I will not, I need not; Reader, I leave thee wisely to
Comment upon this too-too easy Text in this present age, vid^as, fugias.

But the Holy Ghost, as I humbly conceive, by the restrictive articles, and the
Scope of the prophecy intends some eminent truth at this time opposed by
Antichrist, upon the rejecting of which truth they become Antichrists subjects,
as Antichrist by opposing it becomes formally Antichrist: but of this we shall
touch in the last verse.

CHAP. VI.
AND for this cause God shall send them strong delusion, that they should Verse
11.
believe a lie.

In the former verse (as Aquinas observes) there is only the sin set down.
In this verse there is both their sin and punishment; their being deluded is
both their sin and their punishment.

In the following verse there is only their punishment set down, which is
damnation; the end of all their Apostasy, a just reward for such iniquity.

In the words there are these particulars: 1 The Judgment denounced [
delusion.] 2 The Author inflicting it [ God.] 3 The persons on whom it is
inflicted [ them*] those that received not the love of the truth to be saved by
it. 4 The specification of it by its effects [ that they should believe a lie.]

In the Judgment or punishment denounced we must observe the Apostles manner
of delivery, which is potent in the Causall Conjunction Copulative, for I
cannot call [(...)] any thing else; and in the adjunct, (...)*

And for this cause, i. e. for rejecting the love of the truth, and not making
it the means of their salvation; for this cause it is.

So that [(...)] imports two things. 1 A false professors damnation is from
himself, not from God. He is the cause of it, for 1 He loves not what he
professes; and would you have a man for ever tied to what he loves not?
Religion is an hypocrites purgatory, through which he wades with much regret of
soul in hope at last to reap some profit. He loves the truths of Christ no more
then a Merchant loves the Sea; he longs to be over it at his goald; he intends
not to dwell at Sea in any wise* As a true Christian loves this present world,
so a false Christian loves Religion; he cares not how soon he is rid out, so he
may obtein his desired ends. So that as a true Christian counts it his hell,
and will in no U^ volunt Deo, ut fruantur mundo. Aug. de Civit Dei, lib. 15. c.
7.
wise be tied for ever to the world; so an hypocritical professor counts it
his hell, and will in no wise be tied for ever to the everlasting Gospel. If a
man would commune with an hypocrites heart, it would tell him that he looked
not at communion with Christ, nor expected any robes of righteousness from
him, he neither loves Christ nor his truth, nor intends a Spiritual Crown, but
earthly advantages by his profession. He loves not the Gospel after such a
manner as to glorify God, and be saved by it: and is not such a man the cause
of his own damnation? God will save no man against his will. He will have all
his servants Volunteers; he ties none by fatal necessity or absolute
determination to obedience* but all by free choice; hence our state in the
first Adam was mutable, because God would be served by a voluntary choice.
Since our restoration God gives us a will to choose him, and stability in that
will to continue with him. And this is the Magna Charta of a Christian, that
God will give him a will, that he shall never depart from him. But these
followers of Antichrist, they are unwilling to receive truth unto
sanctification, only to outward washing, for some carnal end they will
receive truth, but no further; and therefore as Nazianzen well observes) (...),
it is not their cannots, but their will nots that will damn them; they would not
receive the truth to be saved by it.

2 It imports thus much that a formal hypocritical professor will easily
become an heretic and an apostate, in time of temptation he will fall away.
For this cause God shall send them strong delusions. For this cause Ierusalems
house is left (unto this day) unto her desolate; for this cause they had eyes
to see, and saw not; and ears to hear, and heard not; and hearts to understand,
and understood not. For this cause we have this day so many apostates and
heretics, and fearful and unbelieving persons even at the mouth of hell. They
were formerly eminent professors, but their eminency was only in externals,
in formalities; there was no inward heart-imbracing of the truth with an inward
purpose and resolution to be saved by it; and hence it is, they are so soon
departed to another Gospel, or rather bewitched to embrace the doctrines of
Devils; strong delusions.

(...), the efficacy of delusion, so reads the Syriack; (...) signifies
error, and such gross error (say the learned) as leads a man from the way of
nature, even to sin against the light of nature, against convictions of
natural conscience. But as if this were not high enough, the Apostle
underlayes it with this word (...), to raise it above superlative; to note,
that Antichrists followers who are described to be eminent professors, shall
be given up to the excess of errors, even against the light of nature;
Covenant Breaking, Treachery, Apostasy, lying with a purpose to deceive,
adultery and murder are all sins against the light of nature, and these gross
sins shall professors be grossly guilty of in that time when Antichrist shall
be revealed.

There is yet something more in the phrase; for the efficacy of delusion lies
chiefly in this, that all these prodigious sins should be committed by
Christians, and Christians bearing the name and title of Saints, and they so
far from shame and reluctancie in the committing of them, that they vaunt,
insult, rejoice, boast and triumph* openly in the committing of them, as if
they had done God and the Church some special service: here lies the efficacy
of delusion, that ever professors should be thus given up to a reprobate mind
to commit such abominable sins against the light of nature with delight and
greediness. This is the grand Character of Antichrists followers.

But it is said, that God sends these strong delusions: if so, then is not God
the Author of their sin and damnation?

To this the general answer is, that God sends not this delusion effective,
but permissive; he is not the efficient of it, but the permitter of it. He
permits it by letting loose the rains to Satan, and to Antichrist, and his
Instruments. God does not positively send them delusions. There cannot greater
blasphemy be thought of then to affirm God to be the Author of evil. God sends
not any thing for that end to make men believe a lie, neither does he permit it
for any* such end, though in the consequents by accident it effects the same.
The Judge fore-warnes his servant of theft, and then tries him by laying money
in his way; he steals it; the Judge in punishing him is not the cause of his
sin, but the Author of his punishment. God permits nothing Object.
unwillingly: permission stands not in opposition to the will; for permitting a
thing is in some sort willing a thing: and besides, it cannot be supposed that
God is an idle Spectator of events; for he is the Governor of all things, and
directs all things according to the counsel of his will, and therefore by
permitting of th^se delusions to beguile souls to their damnation, he wills
them.

To this we answer, that God does will these things; but neither Answ.
as a means, nor as an end tending to evil; he wills them as actions simply
considered, which are not evil, but are made so by accident, through the
defects of evil men. Or thus, God wills Vide Bazil. Tom. 1. Homil.
them as punishments to the wicked, and so they are good, as being destinated
to a good end. He sends seducers amongst hypocritical professors, as a King
sends fireships which he takes from his enemies; and guiding their sterns,
sends them into the midst of his enemies Navy, whereby he fires and destroys
his enemies. God may be justly said to will these things, as punishments; but
not as sins. One and the same thing may be both a sin, and a punishment of sin,
as Augustine instanceth in many particulars; Aug. contra Julianum, l. 5. c 3.
a sin both in the seducer and the seduced, and a punishment, as by the wise
providence of God ordered to both their destructions.

As a Judge makes one thief to entrap and destroy another, so God destroys one
sin by another. Peccata praecedentia punit peccatis sequentibus. God here makes
their after-sins to punish their former: since they would not embrace truth to
their salvation, they shall embrace errors and lies to their damnation; God,
as the supreme Author of his own righteous vengeance, can take up what weapons
he will against his enemies. Now what fitter Instrument can you find to punish
Apostates in heart with, then to fill them with their own ways: a false tongue
is most fit for an itching ear. These blind hypocrites God lets them take
hands, and lead each other in their newfound paths of delight, until they
both irrecoverably fall into the ditch. These followers of Antichrist despise
truth tendered by Gods messengers, and God thereupon justly with-drawes his
grace tendered to them; and so Deus mi^tet, quia Deus* diacolum ista facere
per^et. Aug. de Civit. l. 20. c. 19.
they are as wandering sheep in a wilderness, a prey to those beasts of prey,
to that roaring lion who daily goes about seeking for such souls to devour
them. God infuseth no evil qualities either into seducers or the seduced, but
only leaves them (who first left him) to the evil of their own hearts. They
heap to themselves Teachers after their own hearts; a false heart will choose a
false Teacher; and God lets them both alone: Ephraim is joined to Idols, let
him alone: this is all the sending which God is said to send. Seducers shall
one day know that God never sent them: They ran, and I have not sent them. God
will one day say to both the seducers and seduced, Who required these things at
your hands? when men make gods with their hands, God leaves them to worship
those gods. They would not receive the truth; well, says God, they shall not
receive the truth, but shall be hardened in their sin, until they die. Since
they refused counsel and knowledge and the fear of God; they shall have none
of it; I will refuse them, says the Lord; they shall be given up to strong
delusion to believe a lie. Since they would not feed on Angels food at Christ's
Table, they shall feed on the Devils excrements amongst the swinish herds of
heretitcks destinated to damnation. As Christ by his gracious wisdom did save
an adulterous woman from the judgment of adulterous men, by causing the
shameful sin of the condemned to fly upon the guilty consciences of the
condemners: So God in his glorious wisdom brings to damnation hypocrites, by
letting seducers baits catch those seduced souls, that so greedily catch at
them; whereby they shamefully (like those accusers of the woman) go away and
leave Christ, his Ministers and his Ordinances. In all this God is true, though
every one of them be liars.

[ That they should believe a lie] so Beza renders it and the Syriack. To a
word [ that they should believe that lie] (...), the lie; Opponit Apostolus
veritatem Christi non mendacio, sed iniquitati Antichristi. Cornell. a Lapide.
Ita Scholi^.
what lie? Mr. Leigh answers, Antichrist. Since they would not embrace Christ,
the truth, they shall be given up to blindness and hardness to embrace
Antichrist, the lie. A lie is falsehood appearing in the cloak of truth, and so
is Antichrist, which these Apostates shall embrace. They rejected and revolted
from Gods anointed ones, which were the Cedars of God, and chose to themselves
the bramble, and under this scratching thorn those goats shall sit till a fire
come forth from the Lord, and devour both it and them. They heap to themselves
ignorant and unlearned Teachers, perverting the Word to their damnation, such
as Jerome Docent Scripturas quas non intelligunt, p^ius imperitorum magistri,
quam (...) ip^. Hieron. Epist.
speaks of.

The very name Antichrist imports a lie; for he is one against the truth,
against Christ, who is the way and the truth. If [ love of the truth] be meant
Christ, as Chrysostom, Oecumenius, Theodoretus and several other learned
Authors affirm, then most probably the embracing a lie is here meant, the
subjecting to and closing with Antichrist, or (as very probably) truth is put
for the anointed offices, the two Witnesses, which these Apostates reject, and
embrace the Antichrist, who in opposition to them is called a lie; usurpation
is a lie, the great usurper is the Antichrist, who supplants the Witnesses, and
therefore called in the abstract the lie.

He is called in 1 John 2. 22. (...), the liar, who is the Antichrist, Us^patio
est usu capio^ interruptio in j^. Civil.
who denies the Father and the Son, that is, the constituted offices in the
Church, Luke 10. 16. for he that denies them, denies Christ; and he that
denies Christ, denies God.

CHAP. VII.
THat they all might be damned, who believed not the truth, but had Verse 12.
pleasure in unrighteousness.

This Verse winds up Paul's prophecy of the Antichrist and his followers.

It has two parts in it. The first shows us the last of Antichrist and his
subjects, viz. their final damnation. The last part is an exegefis of the two
foregoing verses.

(...), that they might be damned. (...) is here used for (...), the word
properly signifies to judge; but in the worser sense it is often in the New
Testament put for to condemn, as Luke 19. 22. Out of thy mouth, (...). I
condemn thee; and (...). Scholia. Ita Beza. Aquinas.
so generally Expositors understand it, that their judging here shall be, cum
judicio damnationis, with the judgment of damnation* Here we have the
dreadful Catastrophe of Antichrist, but especially his companions, his men of
name: and something more me thinks I see as matter of comfort in the Text, viz.
the time when he shall be thus with his followers damned, or cast into hell, as
Revel. 19. 20. expresses it. Compare it with 2 Timothy 3. 8, 9. and it informs
us, that they shall proceed no further then to oppose the Witnesses, as Iannes
and Iambres did Moses and Aaron, when they have resisted the truth, i e. the
Witnesses maintaining the truth in opposition to the lie Antichrist; when they
have corrupted their own and others minds with heresies and blasphemises, and
when they have showed themselves reprobates concerning the faith, then they
shall proceed no further: they shall then receive the wages of their work,
damnation. These that Paul prophesies of to Timothy, are the same that here he
prophesies of to the Thessalonians, for they are all professors of Religion,
all in one livery, practicing the same devilish things, and being alike
corrupted and depraved. We find Antichrist and his followers in Revel. 11. and
Chap. 13. proceeding no farther then the slaying of the Witnesses, and
triumphantly insulting over them, and their authority for three days and an
half; and then on a sudden unexpectedly a cloud is seen, and a loud voice is
heard, the Witnesses rise, the 7000 names of men are slain by a great Schism,
Commotion, or Earthquake, which finisheth the second woe; and then follows
presently the third woe, or seventh trumpet, and then the Dragon, the beast, and
the false Prophet are cast into hell: and Hallelujahs and praises throughout,
the Church are thundered, and no more of Antichrist appears for ever.

So that I will say to the true Church, as Christ in Matthew. 24. When ye see
these things begin to come to pass, know that the time of Antichrists
damnation is nigh at hand, even at the door.

[ Who believed not the truth] (...). The Holy Ghost seems to point at some
peculiar eminent truth, which these hypocrites and Apostates did reject and
would not believe; for it is not to be imagined that they rejected all truth,
and turned Infidels and Heathens, for then they must necessarily cast off the
profession of Christianity, which they that follow Antichrist do not do; and
therefore I conceive it is some eminent truth, which God permits to be opposed,
purposely to try the knowledge, faith, love, sincerity, Christianity and
courage of his people, and to discover* the rottenness, hypocrisy, and
backsliding of formal professors; this God usually does in every age: some
eminent truths or other he permits to be opposed, and calls out eminent
professors to witness unto blood on their behalf. There Is never an Article
in the Creed, but at one time or other has been thus victoriously in blood
defended; all being delivered to us sealed with our holy Ancestors blood;
Thereby teaching us our duty in a time when truth's opposed. God permits
certain truths in several ages to be opposed in Queen Mary's days: the
doctrine of the Sacraments was opposed, and the true way of external worship;
and then God first sealed his truths with his Martyrs blood; and then delivered
them to us, their posterity. Now in the time of Antichrists appearing the great
truth, which shall be called in question, to the trial of the Saints, and the
discovery of hypocrites and formal professors who shall reject this, is the
two great Offices originally Christ's, derivatively those whom he anoints, or
designs thereunto, ( viz.) to the Kingly Office, and to the Sacerdotall or
Ministerial Office. (Blessed is that Nation that enjoyes them both together.)
These two Offices Antichrist shall (as we have already showed) oppose and
depose: and this makes him formally Antichrist. Now to this Antichrists
followers (even against their former protestations and open professions) shall
consent, and in the ruining of the Offices shall concur; and thus they shall
rebel against the truth, and become the followers of Antichrist. This only is
signified, Revel. 13. by giving the mark to the beast, and receiving the mark
of the beast; that is, engaging against the anointed Offices to be a subject to
the government of Antichrist in direct opposition to it.

[ Truth] is here put in opposition to [ lie] in the foregoing verse, which is
there to be understood of the Antichrist; they could put confidence and trust
in the lie, the Antichrist, the usurper; but in the truth, the Ordinances
established by God they could repose no trust, but rejected them: therefore (
Jude the 11.) these followers of Antichrist are said to perish in the
gainsaying of Core, who rejected the two great anointed Offices of Magistracy
and Ministry, Moses and Aaron: and in 2 Timothy 3. 8. There the truth that these
Rebels resist, is specified, it is that of Magistracy and Ministry; such a
resistance as Iannes and Iambres made against Moses and Aaron, in vilifying
them, their commission and authority.

CHAP. VIII.
BUt had pleasure (or delighted) in the iniquity.] This is a Rhetorical
Antithesis to the words immediately preceding them*

[(...), but] is an adversative particle, and put here oppositively; as much as
to say, they distrusted and fled from the truth, but they would throw
themselves into the arms of unrighteousnes: they rebelled against Gods
instituted Ordinances, but willingly with all their heart submitted to an
usurper, the injustice, that is, (says Goranus) the Antichrist, who before is
called the man of the sin, and the lawless one; and here in the abstract,
unrighteousness. Because both his rising, reigning, and manner of being is
unrighteous. He works unrighteousness, and receives the wages of
unrighteousness with these his followers, who are Gravius est dilig^e ^eccatum
quam ^accre. Greg.
all justly damned for the same. It Is the highest aggravation of sin and
provocative of wrath to take delight in sin.

(...) is by the learned distinguished from (...); this comprehending the sins
against God in the first Table; that comprehending all sins against our
neighbor in the second Table of the law of God: so that [ taking pleasure in
iniquity] may be interpreted, delighting in rebellion, murder, supplanting,
robbery, treason, slandering, oppression, adultery, false witnesse-bearing and
covetousness. These are sins of the second Table: sometimes, as here in the
Text, we find the word opposed to (...), so 1 Cor. 13. 6. there the Apostle
(using a method much cried down by the hypocrites and apostates of these times,
viz. that of discovering true grace by signs) having discoursed of the
excellency of love, gives the signs of true love, which these hypocrites who
are the followers of Antichrist, of whom w^treat, have not: and observe how
this sign of true love meets with them [rejoyceth not in iniquity, but
rejoices in the truth] this is true charity and love. But now the followers of
Antichrist who are high-flowen professors, and prate much of love and charity,
and tenderness, and bowels, and cry out against bitterness and rigid spirits;
do notwithstanding* walk the Antipodes to this Text. If we compare this in the
Corinthians with this we are now upon in the Thessalonians: in the one you have
the true real Saint rejoicing, not in iniquity, (...), there is the same word,
he rejoices not in iniquity: but now the hypocrites, who are the followers of
Antichrist* you find them here in the Text, (...), taking pleasure in
iniquity; and what is the reason? it has been given already in v. 10. because
they loved not the truth they did profess. And this is also the reason why
they embrace a lie, because they want true love: for true love rejoices in the
truth, but hypocrisy rejoices in a lie. So that as the word is opposed to the
truth, it gives us to understand thus much, that Antichrists followers are a
company of heretics, that oppose both first and second Table-truths: they
kiss truth, as Ioab did his brother General, only with an intent to stab it,
and destroy it: as Christ ( I^h. 7. 18.) is truth, and no unrighteousness is
in him, and as all his followers love truth, and hate all unrighteousness: so
in Antichrist there is all unrighteousness to be found, and no truth; and all
his followers are such as reject truth, and love unrighteousness. This is not
only the comparison that many of the Ancients make, but the Scripture it self
makes it, as we have seen.

(...) is a word of large extent. But here I humbly conceive it is restrained to
the thing in hand, and that is, (as we said before) to the Antichrist, who is
in the same prophecy called the man of the sin, and the son of the perdition,
and the exalter and opposer of the Ordinances of God, Magistracy and Ministry,
and so the opposer of the truth; and then the lawless one* in opposition to
truth established by law, Gods law, and man's law, and natures law. These are
titles setting forth the effects of his power against those that oppose him:
after this follows from v 9. to v. 12. the manner of exercising of his power
over his followers; those that subject unto him. His power is in signs and
lying wonders, and all manner of unrighteousness; the effects of this his
power is (...) proprie sig^t a^cui facer^ injuriam, aliquem per vim opprime^e.
Alsted.
the seduction of those that follow him; from which the Holy Ghost gives him
two other titles, or rather, marks of infamy, [ the lie] and [ the
unrighteousnesse] the grand usurper, and the great transgressour of the second
Table; the changer, i. e. the breaker of the Saints laws and times. In the
exposition of words, we must look to the scope of the matter or prophecy in
hand: and what in that place the word or phrase imports, not what it may*
signify in another place upon a different subject. In this place, not I, but
others take it to be meant of the Antichrist; whose followers, as they are said
to reject the truth, i e. the truth which Antichrist opposed, and threw down
viz. the Ordinances of God, the Romans 12.
mediate pillars of truth, the two Witnesses: so they are said* to sit down
with great content, and propension of mind under the government of the
Antichrist. They are not forced to it as someare; but they are Volunteers; they
cry him up, applaud him, approve of him with full consent, and delight in him;
and so much (...) imports, it is not amiss translated.

[ Take pleasure in the unrighteousness.] The followers of the Amtichrist,
they love him with the love of complacency; it is a kind of death to them to be
dissuaded, there they are resolved to love, there to live, there to die, and
there to be damned, which the Holy Ghost tells us is their certain doom,
notwithstanding all their flourishes and feigned shows of sanctity.

As it is impossible to pluck a real Saint from Christ, because he is elected;
so it is impossible to pluck one of these mook-Saints from Antichrist, because
they are destinated to be damned; the foregoing signs of whose damnation is
their rejection of the the truth, cleaving to the lie, and taking pleasure in
the unrighteousness.

All therefore that I have to say to the Churches in general, and to every
particular Saint from what I have said, is, tollete, legete, take up the Bible
and read; take up Moses and read him; take up the rest of the Prophets, and
read them; take up Christ's prophecies of the Antichrist, and Paul's, and Peter's,
and Iudes, and John's, and see what they say. What read thou? what find ye
there? find ye not that the ends of the world are come upon ye? find ye not
this day those Scriptures fulfilling in your eyes? Learn from them to know the
times and the seasons, that so the great and terrible day of the Lord, which is
near upon all the Gentiles, may not come upon you unawares: be sober, and watch
unto prayer; gird up the loins of your mind; stand fast in the faith; quit*
your selves like men, your enemies on all hands are great and furious. The
Devil is now exceeding wrath, knowing he has but a little while, a short
reign. Let Us therefore be encouraged to patience, and let me write one word of
comfort from my prison, to those Saints of God that seem to be prisoners to the
Devil, that are held in the dreadful black chains of desertion, that groan out
their souls in dolesul complaints* Let them be comforted with this, Behold, the
day of the Lord draws nigh, your chains are dreadful, but not eternal. Lift
up your heads, for the time of your redemption draws nigh; Satan that has
chained you, shall anon be chained and sealed in hell; he has often assaulted
you, but he shall assault you no more to deceive you.

Maintain the combat with constancy, patience, and faith; help is at hand,
hope in the Lord yet a little while, and he that comes will come, and will not
tarry: he will come to your aid and comfort, and salvation* who manfully resist
the Devils blaspemous injections; when he will come to the damnation of those who
willingly embrace, and joyfully entertain all his temptations, leaping and
laughing, and triumphing in the Devils chains, as with bleeding hearts we hear
of them and see the^ every day. These are of the night, of the black night,
reserved for chains of darkness; but ye, who are children of the light, though
for the present in darkness: keep on in duty and in a way of obedience, though
you find no comfort in it, God may have most glory when you have least
comfort, and you therein express most grace, most obedience; Faith and
patience, though in the storm you see it not, your acts of faith may be tossed,
but the habit abides firm, that seed of God shall never suffer Shipwreck in
the greatest storm; the Mariners skill is seen then most, when he saves the
ship in a stormy night, when he has neither Sun, nor Moon, nor Stars to direct
or comfort him. Keep at the helm of Ordinances, let not Ministers, nor the
Communion of Saints be grievous or irksome to you: let the oars of duty be
played. Pray for the day stars appearing, long for the coming of Christ to
destroy the beast and the false Prophet, and the Dragon, according to his
prophetic promises: for certain, that great day is near; and doubtless, that
day will bring great comfort to distressed and deserted souls, as well as
others; therefore long and pray, and groan for this coming of Christ, which
will raise the Witnesses, refresh his afflicted Saints, and convert the twelve
Tribes, and chain up the old Dragon. Even so, Come Lord Jesus Christ, Come
quickly,

AMEN.
FINIS.
THE POSTSCRIPT.
AFter I had put an end to what I have writ upon the foregoing subject, an
eminently learned Text-man (having viewed my papers) sent to me this ensuing
note.

Sir, If I mistake not, you and I differ much concerning the time of the
destruction of Antichrist; for there are two great battles to be
distinguished, the one of the Resurrection of the witnesses, Revel. 11. which
is called a great Earthquake, tending to the fall of the tenth part of the
City, the other the field Armageddon, Revel. 16. Such an Earthquake as was
not since men were upon the Earth, so mighty, and so great, v. 18. then the
great City and the great enemies fall together; also I am of opinion that we
are under the sixth Vial.

These words in themselves (as also in their effects upon me) are as Apples of
Gold in pictures of Silver, i. e. of ten times greater value, then they promise
to the outward view. Nothing could come more opportunely to me, for hereby I
have an occasion given me, to gather up those sacred mysterious fragments in
the Revelations, which I only left behind, because I thought Paul's basket (I
mean the 12. verses I treated on) would not well hold them all.

The things then to be discoursed of from this happy occasion are, first, of
the two great battles, the one Revel. 11. the other Revel. 16. under this, the
time of the destruction of Antichrist, falls to be largely and clearly
discussed. Secondly, of the time of the pouring out of the Vialls.

For the first, I am so far from questioning it, that I fully consent to the
truth thereof, and rather then detract, I will add a third battle to be
distinguished amongst the rest, or at least wise make it questionable. The
first, Revel. 11. 1^, 13. when the witnesses rise, and the Earthquake shall
beat down the tenth part of the City.

The second battle, Revel. 14. 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20. when the Vine of the
Earth, i. e. the Mahumetan Church is destroyed.

The third battle, Revel. 16. 16, 17, 18. compared with Revel. 19. 18, 19, 20.
when* the Dragon, the Beast, and the false Prophet are destroyed. Now to
question much whether these two latter are not one, but of that in its order we
shall discuss, if we have room. As for that Battle, Rev. 11. (though I
improperly call it a Battle) it is clearly distinct from that in Revel. 14. 16,
17, 18, 19. and that Revel. 19. 19.

I cannot well call this in Revel. 11. a Battle, because in the raising of the
witnesses, the fall of the tenth part of the City, and the slaying of the seven
thousand heads of men we find not so much as a sword unsheathed, nor a battle
fought for it. But verse 11. the Spirit of life from God entering into the
witnesses, has this double contrary effect, it sets the slain witnesses on
their feet, and makes their lively merry enemies tremble The shaking of Heaven
and Earth in the Scripture-sense is the overthrowing the Throne of Kingdoms,
and the strength of the Kingdom's of the Heathen. Hag. 2. 22.
with fear. The great voice ( ver. 1^.) which calls the witnesses to the
Throne, cast the enemies from the Throne; for the same hour that the witnesses
ascend to Heaven in the Throne, the same hour there was a great
State-Commotion (for so (...) may be translated) which caused this double
effect, first, it restored the tenth part of the City to the witnesses, (for by
the fall of the tenth part is meant the falling away of that Kingdom or the
domimon of the Beast of the bottomless pit, to the witnesses, who were ( ver.
7.) by the Wars and Conquests of that Beast cast out of that Throne and seat
of Athority.) Secondly, this great Earthquake or Commotion, slew 7000. heads
of men, so Beza renders it; it is probably meant the ringleaders of those that
slew the witnesses, these by a great Commotion shall be slain by some grand
division, or intestine War amongst themselves. Such a schism Ezekiel
Prophesies, Cap. 38. 11, 12. which is to be about the same time of the seventh
trumpet.

Let not then the hearts of those that keep their garments clean, and walk with
the Lamb, be afraid, but let them when they see these things begin to come to
pass (Luke 21. 28.) look up and lift up their heads, for their redemption
draws nigh. It Is not in the power of Arms, or Navies to raise the witnesses,
neither must they do it, but it is the spirit of life from God. Zach. 4. 6, 7. a
cogent text to our purpose, Not by Might or Army, nor by Power, but by my
Spirit says the Lord of Hosts. There is a time when the witnesses strength is
to sit still, God will make that Mountain that stands in the way of his
Zerubbabel to become a plain, and he shall bring forth the head-stone with
shoutings, Grace, Grace unto it. The hands of that Zerubbabel that laid the
foundation of a Church, and State reformation, his hands shall also finish it:
It Is a Prophetic promise, extending it self to these last times. But to our
purpose, whether we call it a great battle, or a great Earthquake, we affirm
and prove it that it is distinct from that great battle or Earthquake, Revel.
16. and Revel. 19. and Revel. 14. 16. -- for this in Revel. 11. is under the
second woetrumpet, those in Revel. 14. 16. and 16. 16. and 19. 19. are under
the third woe-trumpet, as appears by Revel. 11. 1^. compared with Rev. 14. 15.
and Chap. 16. 18. all which prove that the Earthquake, voices and thunders are
not until the temple be opened in Heaven, and the Angel came out from thence
crying with a loud voice; the loud voices of the seventh trumpet are made by
the Angels coming out of the Temple, but the Temple is not open until the
seventh Trumpet sound, Revel. 11. 15. 19. therefore these voices, thunders, and
the great Earthquake are under the seventh Trumpet.

Again, that Earthquake, Revelations 11. under the second woe, only throws
down the tenth part of the City, and slayes 7000. heads of men, but that
Revelations 16. and 19. 19. slayes the three grand enemies of the Devil, the
Note*
Beast and the false Prophet, and that great Earthquake rends the City in
three parts, what in particular it means I know not, but in general it
signifies the utter ruin of it. Observe this from Revel. (...) that when the
witnesses rise, and the tenth part of the City falls, and the 7000. names of
men are slain, we read not a word of the slaying of the Beast of the
bottomless pit; No, though his followers be destroyed, yet he escapes, he is
not destroyed until the great battle under the seventh trumpet, which Revel.
(...). ^4. comes quickly and suddenly after the second is past. This Beast of
the bottomless p^t is the Antichrist, who is so called, Revel. 17. 8. and he
goes into perdition, therefore Paul calls him the Son of perdition; in Dan. 7.
8. 24, 25. he is called a little horn, diverse from any of the Princes or
Monarchs under the Roman Empire, the signs whereby to know him are, he plucks
up three Horns or Kingdoms by the root, that's expounded, in ver. 24. he
subdues three Kings, and ver. 25. tells us what Kings; they are Kings that
defend the sacred attributes of God, for in their ruin comes up a tolleration
of Blasphemy, it is in the text laid to his personal charge, because he is the
great supporter of Blasphemers. Secondly, they are three Kings that protected
the Saints of God, for in their subversion the Saints are worn out; when
Blasphemy is tolerated, the Saints must not think to thrive. Thirdly, they
are three Kingdoms, which had good Laws and Customs, else Antichrist would
not change them. This little horn (says Hierome, Theodoretus, Aquinas, and
several others both of the Greek and Latin Fathers) is the Antichrist, and
considering the forecited Symptoms in the text with what immediately follows,
I cannot see how we can conjecture him to be any body else, especially when
these texts agree so fully with Rev. 11. 7. but that which cleares it most of
all is, ver. 26, 27. which compared with Revel. 11. 15. evidence it clearly,
that this little horn is the Antichrist, and that this Antichrist is to be
slain at the sounding of the seventh Trumpet. And upon this very ground I
conceive you have a fuller description of this little horn, Dan. 11. 36, 37,
38. -- 45. whom the Fathers call the Antichrist; for when he shall proceed so
far against the Church, as to pitch his Tents in the Mountain of holiness,
and for all that shall surely come to his end, at that time, Dan. 12. 1.
Michael, i. e. Christ shall stand up, and there shall be a time of trouble,
such as never was since there was a Nation; it is the same with Revel. 18. 16.
Daniel calls it a time of trouble, John calls it a great Commotion, the
Evangelists allude to this of Daniel, when they speak of Christ's coming in
the clouds with glory and great power, which is at the seventh Trumpet. The
Holy Ghost, that we might know Antichrist when he comes, has both in Daniel
and the Revelations given full and ample descriptions of him. Revel. 11. 7. is
parallel with Dan. 7. 24. and Revel. 13. 11, 12, 13, 14, 15. -- is parallel
with Dan. 11 36, 37, 38. -- in the former you have the description of that
sin, that makes him formally the Antichrist, which is the slaying of the
witnesses: in the latter you have the plat-forme or Model of his government,
which he sets up after he has slain the witnesses; from both you have him a
third time twice again mentioned, whereby you may assuredly know him, in
Revel. 17. 8. respecting Revel. 11. 7. and in Revel. 19. 20. where he is called
the false Prophet, in relation to his cheating signs and false wonders, Rev.
13. 14. and also to his government wherein he pretends to imitate Moses the
great Prophet, he is a mock- Moses, and therefore a false Prophet. Thus by the
way something out of my way, yet much conducing to the purpose, have I given
you a description of Antichrist, in laying before you the texts that make
mention of Antichrist; I now return, only be pleased to observe thus much to
our purpose, from this which we have said by the way of the Antichrist, that
the Antichrist which is a false Prophet is not destroyed until the seventh
Trumpet sound for that battle, Revel. 16. unto which the Kings of the earth and
the whole world ( ver. 14.) are solicited to send aid, and that Revel. 16. 19.
are both under the seventh Trumpet, at both which (which are both one) the
false Prophet appears.

Obj. But if we are now under the sixth Vial (as many learned and pious
Divines affirm, and as this worthy and eminent Divine my informer supposes)
then is this great battle to be fought before the third woe-trumpet sound, and
all the enemies of the newly converted Jews, and the refined Gospell-Gentiles
are to be destroyed before the seventh Trumpet sound: the Judgment shall sit,
Dan. 7. ^6* compared with Rev. 20. 4. the blessed time of 1335. days, Dan. 12.
12. which is a great effect of the first Resurrection, Rev. 20. 5. there it is
positively said, that the ruin of those grand enemies (immediately before
spoken of) at the great battle, and thereupon the establishing of the true
Church in great power and Authority ( Dan. 7. 26. Rev. 20. 45.) this is the
first Resurrection, and so Revel. 11. 11.) the deliverance of the Gentile
Gospell-Church is termed: and to this is the redemption of the believing Jews
resembled, Ezekiel. 37. 5, 6, 7, 9, 12, 13. and Dan. 12. 12. all which comes to
pass under the sixth Vial, which is to be under the second woe; now if these
things come to pass before the seventh Trumpet sound, there is a gross
mistake in the Calculation.

Sol. For answer hereunto we lay down these two general propositions, viz. 1.
That none of the seven last Plagues or Vials are poured out under the second
woe. Secondly, that there is a threefold time, in the clearing of these things,
to be distinguished, viz. First, the present time of the passing of the second
woe, and the things at that present time to be acted. Secondly, the
intervenient time betwixt the passing of the second woe, and the coming of the
third, and the things in that intervall of time to be acted. Thirdly, the
sounding of the seventh Trumpet, or the coming of the third woe, and the effect
of it.

We affirm that none of the seven Vialls are to be poured 1. Proposition.
out under the second woe-trumpet.

The conclusion we intend from the proving of this proposition is, that we at
this time are not under the sixth Vial; in drawing to this Conclusion, we
shall prove two things which confirm the Proposition. First, that none of the
seven last plagues come until the second woe be past. Secondly, that as yet,
the second woe is not past, these being put into a Syllogism, the Conclusion
follows. Ergo, we are not under the sixth Vial, the first position I thus
prove.

Arg. If none of the seven Vialls be poured out until the third woe or the
seventh Trumpet sound, then none of the seven Vialls are poured out under the
second woe or sixth Trumpet, for ( Rev. 11. 4.) the sixth Trumpet or second woe
is past, before the seventh Trumpet or third woe comes.

But none of the Vialls are poured out until the seventh trumpet sound. Ergo,
none are as yet poured out, the minor I thus prove.

If the seven Vialls are not poured out (as they are not) until the seven
Angels that pour them out ( Rev. 15. 5, 6.) come out of the Temple, and that
Temple be not open for them to come forth, (as it is not, Revel. 11. ^9.)
until after the seventh Trumpet have sounded, then no Vialls are as yet poured
out, because the third woe is not yet come; and the third woe cannot yet come,
because the second is not yet past; this leads me to the proof of the second
position, viz. that the second woe is not as yet past. Thus we prove it.

Arg. The second woe is not past until the witnesses have finished their
Testimony, be killed, lie dead three days and an half ( i. e. three days,
and the half of three days) and rise again and ascend unto Heaven, and
until the Earthquake, which throws down the tenth part of the City come,
and the 7000. names of men be slain: but the witnesses have not yet lain dead
three days, and the half of three days, i. e. four days and a half, nor
are they risen, nor is the tenth part of the City fallen by the Earthquake,
nor are the 7000. chiefs of men as yet destroyed, therefore Rev. 11. 7. -- ^4.
the second woe is not yet past, This leads us to the second proposition.

There is a threefold division of time to be considered in the 2. Proposition.
more full handling and clearing of this matter, within each of which
divisions, distinct and various things and actions are limited, as first at
the present time of the finishing of the second woe, we see what eminent things
concur in Revel. 11. 1, 1^, 1^. as but even now we have showed. For the
clearing of the thing in hand, let me premise a word or two of the three woes:
Know then that there are but three woes mentioned in this Prophecy, the first
woe falls upon the Western Churches, caused through the foul and horrible
apostacy of the heads of the Church of Rome, the Papacy, which is called a
Star fallen from Heaven, Revel. 9. verse 1. to verse 11.

The second woe falls upon the Eastern Churches, Rev. 9. 13. 21. the
Instruments of which woe are the Turks, the Mahumetan brutish Tyrants, who
have not only defaced the Christian Churches in the Eastern part of the
world, but also keep the Jews from possessing freely their own promised Lands
and possessions.

Now at the end or finishing of this second woe, God begins to visit his Church
under her long Sackcloth, state and condition, and to raise up his slain
witnesses, and take away one tenth from the grand enemies, and at the same time
to slay a great number of notable enemies of the Church; and after this in a
very short time, comes the third woe, which falls dreadfully upon all the
enemies of the Church that oppose it, throughout the world, both the Turks and
the Papacy, who have brought such woes upon the Western and Eastern Churches.

Now after the second ^oe is past, when the witnesses are raised, and the tenth
part of the City is fallen, and the 7000. are slain, betwixt the second woe
passing, and the third woe coming, there is an intervall of time which is
diligently to be observed.

That which John sees in this intervall of time, is in Revel. 14. 15. (for
Revel. 12. 13. the next following the eleventh, are a vision of the Churches
state under the Arrian persecution, under the Papacy and under the Antichrist,
and his new government, Revel. 33. 12. 18.)

In Cap. 14. we have a vision of the comfortable and successful presence of
Christ in his Church, that Church where the witnesses rise, it is they that are
redeemed from the Beast of the Earth, which sing the new song upon the harp to
God, verse 1, 2, 3, and verse 6. now the witnesses are risen, great preparation
is made for the promulgation of the Gospel, the Ministry, fly swiftly
through the world, to call both Jews and Gentiles from the four corners of
the Earth, to bring them to the knowledge of God in Jesus Christ.

And verse 8. you have the courage, faith and zeal of the ministry raised to
such a height, that they confidently preach the certain and speedy downfall of
Babylon, because of her filthy blasphemous Idolatry, wherewith she has made
all Nations, i. e. Christian Nations drunk.

And in verse 9, 10. (compared with Revel. 13. 15, 16.) the Ministers of that
Church which ( verse 1.) bears the name of Christ in his forehead, which ( ver.
4.) is a Virgin Church, which follows the lamb. The Holy Ghost sets this
Church out under the notion of peculiar selected persons, to note that it shall
not be the generallity of professors of the Orthodoxe faith, that shall thus
carry on Gods work against the three grand enemies of the truth, but some
particular faithful ones in those dominions where the witnesses were slain:
in that Church after the witnesses are risen, do the Ministers ( verse 9, 10,
11.) boldly denounce damnation, and the eternal vengeance of God against those
that adhere to the Antichrist.

Now this must be in the intervall of time, betwixt the passing of the second,
and the coming of the third woe, for it cannot be after the third woe, because
at the third woe, Revel. 19. and Revel. 16. all the enemies are destroyed, and
it is not to be thought that they will worship the Beast, or receive his mark
after that he is caught alive and cast into Hell. And then this bold preaching,
it is not before the second woe be past, viz. that the witnesses are risen, and
the power that upheld the Antichrist be overthrown and slain, (which is to be
at the passing of the second woe, Rev. 11. 11. 14.) exempla probant; for I take
this bold preaching to be one eminent effect of the rising of the Witnesses;
and if this be one effect of the spirit of life from God entering into them, you
may safely swear upon the Sacred Bible they lie now dead, they have no spirit
in them against the Antichrist, the feculent matter of predominent fear has so
stupefied them that they are speechless, like Pliny's (...), they are
mouthless men, I only mean, in not pleading for the great truth against the
great lie, in not vindicating the great truth opposed, by declaring openly
against the great lie that does prevail against it; it is an infamous and
irreligious piece of cowardice to quit a persecuted truth that cries aloud,
come help me; and strenuously to defend a truth which persecutors shake hands
with; is this thank worthy? No, (it is to use a Heathens words) not only (...):
it is not only an ungodly, but an unmanly act. Here Is then one effect of the
Witnesses rising, that they dare boldly speak against the Antichrist and his
government, and those that are the followers of him, whereas before they durst
not open their mouths; therefore I conceive this intervenes betwixt the second
and third woe: and now by way of prevention of other objections from what we
have seen in Rev. 14. we observe.

1. That the great preparations for an Universal Reformation, and Observe.
(...) Septuagint.
Gospel Promulgation proceed principally from that Church where the Witnesses
rise, Zech. ^0. 11. God will first pass through the narrow Sea. So we may
translate the Septuagint.

2. That after the witnesses are risen, though the Church shall prosper and
prevail, yet until the third woe come, the Church must not look to sit down
in peace without molestation, the patience of the Saints and their integrity
will be still tried, even to the death, as the two next verses seem to tell
us, Rev. 14. 1^, 13. for though at the passing of the second woe, the chief of
the Antichrists followers, who supported his usurpation in the tenth part of
the City be slain, yet the Antichrist himself is not slain, nor all his
adherents; for the first vial falls upon the remainder of Antichrists
adherents, Rev. 16. 2. and he himself is plotting, Rev. 16. 13. with the
Dragon and the Beast again to overthrow the Church and the risen Witnesses:
this vision of the plotting of the Dragon, the Beast, and the false Prophet, is
another of those things which are to be placed in this intervall of time,
betwixt the second and the third woe, I mean the passing of the second and the
coming of the third, for though Rev. 16. 13, 14, 15, 16. be placed as if it
were an effect of the 6. vial, yet he that seriously views it will see it a
distinct vision of it self, giving us the immediate foregoing symtomes of
Christ's unexpected coming to pour out the vialls. At this battle Christ comes
like a thief, i. e. suddenly, terribly, unexpectedly, in the midnight of
supine security; but how will he come? Rev. 19. 11. he comes on his white
Horse, signifying victory and triumph, taking vengeance on his enemies,
therefore his garment ver. 13. is dipped in blood, and ver. 17. he comes in the
greatness of his might, bidding such defiance to his enemies that he sends a
messenger before he fights his battle, to invite the fowls of the air to
feast upon the slain enemies which he intends to give them to supper; ('it is
safe being on such a Generals side) and what flesh is it that he gives them?
ver. 18. it is the flesh of Kings, and the flesh of Captains, and the flesh of
mighty men; but the Beast, and the false Prophet (ver. 10.) he, by the sword of
his mouth, i. e. by his mandatory power, casts them alive into the lake that
burns with fire and brimstone; they die not the common death of all men,
dreadful and irrecoverable, ruin is their undoubted portion, for the sword of
the Lord shall effect it, Rev. 19. 21. Now what is all this but the immediate
effects of the 7. Trumpet? and what are the effects of the 7. Trumpet, but the
sending forth the Angels out of the Temple to pour out the seven last plagues
of God upon the earth? If this great battle should be any thing distinct after
the vialls, then the vialls cannot be the seven last plagues, Rev. 15. 1. nor
is all done, Rev. 16. 17. when the last vial is poured out, because this great
battle which is greater then the greatest plague, is still to come; and this
would lead us to the third Epecha, or distance of time by us in the second
proposition distinguished, viz. the coming of the woe, or the sounding of the
seventh Trumpet, but we must not so leave where we (...) Rev. 14. for at ver.
14. to the end of the chap. there is another vision which may raise doubts, but
this vision being under the seventh Trumpet we shall pass it, only to take in
the 4. first verses of cap. 15. parallel with the 4. first verses of Rev. 14.
here John had a sight of the seven Angels, with the last plagues; who, or what
these Angels are I cannot tell, but if v. 2. be any way exegeticall of it, I am
of opinion that these Angels come out of that Church where Antichrist had set
up his usurped government, and by the great commotion ( Rev. 11.) was thrown
down; for I take Sea of glass to signify a refined Church, and these that
stand upon it the Witnesses, which in the downfall of Antichrists power, Rev.
11. ascended to the Throne, to Heaven; this I take to be the mount Sion (Rev.
14. 1.) on which those that openly and purely confessed Christ stood, there
they stand on mount Zihon, there they stand on a sea of glass mingled with
fire, i. e. a pure and a zealous Church. These are said to get the victory over
the Beast, and over his Image, and over his mark, and over the number of his
name: this clearly points out to us that Church which of all the nations in the
Christian world shall be first purged and refined, and freed from Antichristian
bondage, and that is that Church where the beast of the earth set up his new
government.

These 3. verses in Rev. 15* set forth the happy progress in a reformation
which the witnesses wholly risen from under the Antichrists cruel Tyranny have
made, they became more pure and more zealous after their great deliverance,
which they thankfully publish to the world, in hope that God will do great
things against his enemies for the further propagating of the Gospel. These are
the visions which we find to fall betwixt the passing of the second woe to the
coming of the third: I shall only add this, and then pass to the third, and
add by way of Quaere, Whether that space of time Dan. 12. 11, 12. be not the
space of time betwixt the passing of the second woe and the full accomplishment
of the third, I say full accomplishment, becuse the vialls I conceive do set
forth Gods graduall proceeding against the enemies of the Church under the
third woe trumpet, all things under the third woe are not accomplished in a day,
either for the good of the Church, or the ruin of the enemies. Now at the end
of that 1290. days, the time of the Jews persecution and dissipation shall be
at an end, and they shall begin to flock in to Christ, but the day of their
establishment in their own land, that blessed day, is not to be until the
1335. day, but this we leave.

I proceed now to the last Epoch of time which lies within our circle, and
that is of the time of the third woe, and the effects thereof, which leads us
to the second thing in the little note of my noble friend to be discussed, viz,
of the great battle distinct from that in Rev. 11.

We shall find, if I mistake not, the seventh trumpet mentioned but twice in
the Revelation, Rev. 10. 7. and Rev. 11. 15. in chap. 10. 7. when the seventh
Angel shall begin to sound, the mystery of God shall be finished, that is the
time of the Gentiles tyranny over the Jews, and Gospel Gentiles shall be
accomplished, and the twelve Tribes shall be converted, Romans 11. 25. compared
with Isa. 23. 13. and Luke 21. 24. as we have already showed in the foregoing
treatise.

The other Scripture Rev. 11. 15. mentioning the seventh Trumpet shows the
effects or consequents of it, which is the opening of Gods mystery to be
finished at this time; and you have two sides of this cloud, the dark and the
bright side; the bright side is the bringing in of the twelve Tribes to the
Gospel, and the drawing of the Gentiles after them, Zach. 8. 3. Romans 11. 12. to
the same faith and worship, where it is said that the Kingdoms of this world
are become the Lords and his Christ's, and he shall reign for evermore: and
then here is the dark side of this mystery, which is wrath, ver. 18. and
eternal ruin on the enemies of the Church; we find this mystery thus
finished, Dan. 7. 26, ^7. and Dan. 12. 1, ^, 3. there the fulfilling of the
word of God, or the finishing of the mystery of God is resembled to the day of
judgment, and so it is Revel. 19. 20, and 20. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. it is doomes day,
the day of damnation to the wicked, to the Dragon, the Beast, and the false
Prophet; and it is the resurrection day to the believing Jews, and sincere
gospel-Gentiles, ver. 5. this is the first resurrection; what is the first
resurrection? see ver. 4. the establishing of the witnesses in the Throne, and
giving them power to reign over the world, and to purge the earth. At the
passing at the second woe the witnesses rise, but at the coming of the third
woe the witnesses are fully established in their power; they will have then a
large power, and a lasting power. You knew where he was born that by his
Christian piety and courage turned the heathenish world from Idols to serve the
living God, he made Rome Heathen to become Rome Christian, he threw down the
heathenish potentates: from the same place look for a Monarch by his Christian
courage, and magnanimous endeavors to throw down Rome Antichristian, and
carry on a glorious Church and State-reformation in Europe; sanctified
affections fit a noble Christian for great understandings. Then are afflictions
sanctified, when they drive to repent for our forefathers sins, our own, and
the nations sins, and make us look only to Christ for mercy. David by Gods
providence was brought so low as to beg his bread of a rigid surly clown
Naball before he cast his shoe over Edom, and made Philistia glad on any
terms to accept him. Cross providence shall make me admire the unsearchable
wisdom of God, but never make me dispondingly to call in question the
faithfulness of God: that which most men this day make the ground of their
diffidence, I make the argument of my confidence, and I build my arguments on
that which I am sure is more stable then Heaven and Earth, viz. the prophetique
promises of that God, who is both a Sun and Shield to all that believe in them:
a Sun to give light, heat, and comfort to them; a Shield to safeguard and
protect them.

The seventh Trumpet produces these two general effects, the ruining of the
enemies of the Church throughout the world, and the redeeming of the Jews from
all parts of the world, and the sending out of the Gospel to the reforming of
the nations of the world. Of these effects of this Trumpet do both the Old and
New Testament Prophets prophecy, as also of the signs immediately foregoing
the seventh Trumpet, which are the prodigious things done against the
professors of the Gospel, and Gods rising up by his eminent judgments against
the grand enemies of the Gospel to their utter overthrow: this I take to be the
appearance of the sign of the Son of Man, Mat. 24. 30. Chrysostom. in Hom. 72. on
Mat. 24. speaking of these days immediately preceding the seventh Trumpet,
calls them the days of Antichrist; and so far he is right, but me thinks he
quite mistakes the signs, and the time of this sign, for both he and Hierome
take the sign to be the sign of the Cross, and the time when the sign shall
appear the day of Judgment; but I humbly conceive it is the time of the
coming of Christ at the seventh Trumpet, which 2 These. 2. 8. is called the
brightness of his coming, because when Antichrist with his fellows are
destroyed, all the world shall conclude that the hand of Christ destroyed them:
Luke bids us to take this for the sign, Luke 21. 28. When these things begin
to come to pass, look up, and lift up your heads, for your redemption draws
nigh: When what things begin to come? ver. 25. when the signs in the Sun and
Moon come, and ver. 27. when the Son of Man comes in a Cloud. See 3. parallel
Texts which expound these two verses: by Cloud is meant the white cloud Rev.
14. 14. wherein Christ appears with a Crown on his head, there is his great
glory; with a Sickle in his hand, there is his power; his horns in his hand is
the secret of his power: Matthew calls this the sign of the Son of Man in
Heaven, coming in the Clouds of Heaven with power and great glory, Mat. 24.
30. and John in Rev. 19. 11, 12, 13, 15. calls it the opening of Heaven, and
the appearance of Christ on a white Horse, that is an Emblem of his victorious
power, [and on his head many Crownes] there is his glory: his Vesture dipped in
blood signifies his revenging power, and his sharp sword going out of his mouth
signifies his majestic power, and his Motto [King of Kings, etc.] signifies
his great Glory. This glory and great power has respect to a double contrary
effect of his coming, viz. to the downfall of his enemies, ver. 29. and to the
conversion of the twelve Tribes, ver. 31. both which are under the seventh
Trumpet, as is clear, if we compare with ver. 29. Joel 3. 13. 15. and with it
Revelat. 14. 14. and with ver. 31. Isa. 27. 13.

In Mat. 24. 29. immediately after the tribulation of those days i. e, those
days of Rebellion against lawful Magistracy, the days of Heresy, of
Blasphemy, of Truce-breaking, of Murder, of Treason, and great Apostasy of
professors, as the former verses imply, and as 2 Timothy 3. 2, 3, 4. tells us, the
meaning is, after the witnesses are slain, then comes the judgment on their
enemies, the greatest of their enemies; the Sun shall be darkened, and the Moon
shall not give her light, and the Stars shall fall from Heaven, and the
powers of the Heaven shall be shaken, i. e. the grand enemies of the Church
that possess the imperial Thrones of the world whereby the progress of the
Gospel is hindered: these the Protestants rightly call the Popedom, and the
Turkish Empire, and the grand upholders of both: the one keeps the two
witnesses from their lawful rights and dominions, the other keeps the Jews out
of their possessions: now when God shall remove these, both Jews and Gentiles
under the Gospel shall be restored. By darkning Sun and Moon is meant that
which is expressed Revel. 19. 18. the destroying of Kings, and Captains, and
mighty men; and so is that in Ezekiel. 32. 7. to be understood, viz. of the
overthrow of the King of Egypt, and of his Princes and Priests, and destroying
of that dynastie. The very words of Christ are fetched from the Prophet Ioell
c. 3. 15. the day of the Lord in the valley of decision is near, the Sun and
the Moon shall be darkened, and the Stars shall withdraw their shining:
there are the same words with the same in Matthew, and we prove them one and the
same Prophecy; in a word, 1. Compare Act. 2. 17. with Joel 2. 27, 28, 29. and
it will evidently appear that from that to the end of the prophecy (which is
but one Vision) is prophesied of those things which were to be fulfilled in the
Gospel-day. This granted (which cannot be denied) I prove that this prophecy
falls under the seventh Trumpet, for in cap. 3. ver. 1. [in those days and in
that time] in those days, i. e. Gospel-dayes, there you have the time in
general, [and in that time, what time? the time when I will bring again the
captivity of Judah, and Ierusalem] here is the time of that day: before you had
the day, i. e. the Gospel-day, in which this is to be effected. Now you have
the time of that day when it shall be effected, it is (whether at the noone or
evening of the Gospelday I know not which to call it) when the captivity of
Judah and Jerusalem is to be brought again, which the Prophets and Apostles
call the last days, i. e. of reformation until the day of judgment come.
That part of the prophecy which Peter expounds belongs to the morning of the
Gospel-day, but this to the afternoon; for the twelve Tribes are not to be
restored until the time of the seventh Trumpet, as is every where in the
Prophecies plain, nor are they to this day restored. Now in that we have
proved this Prophecy to be under the Gospel, it is easy to prove it to be
fulfilled under the seventh Trumpet: in a word, thus I prove it, That which in
substance and matter does sunchronize with the things contained in other
prophecies which are under the seventh Trumpet, must also it self be under the
seventh Trumpet; but this of Ioels and that of John's in Revel. 14. 15, 16. and
Rev. 16. 18. 21. and 11. 15. 18. and 19. 11. to 21. all being under the seventh
Trumpet, point at one and the same thing, and which materially agrees with that
of Ioels; let us compare the Texts, and then the Matter in Rev. 14. 15. an Angel
comes out of the Temple crying with a loud voice to him that sat on the Cloud,
thrust in thy Sickle and reap; every word of this proves it to be under the
seventh Trumpet, for no Angel (as we have proved) comes out of the Temple
until the seventh Trumpet sound, nor can you find two loud voices but what
are at, or under the seventh Trumpet; nor does Christ appear on the Cloud
until the seventh Trumpet: therefore this is under the seventh Trumpet that
this Angel cries put in thy Sickle, in Joel 3. 13. you have the same words, put
ye in the Sickle, and the same reason of the words, for the Harvest is ripe;
observe how materially they agree in Joel 3. 2. 14. the multitude of Gentiles
coming together against the converted Jews and Gentiles, is called the
gathering of the nations to bring them into the valley of Iehosephat, ver. 2.
and ver. 14. that gathering together is called the day of the Lord, and in
Revel. 16. 12. when preparation was made for the Kings of the East to pass,
the enemies were gathered together, ver. 16. to Armagedon, ver. 14. their
gathering together is called the battle of the great day of God Almighty. Look
we farther into Joel 3. 15. The Sun and the Moon shall be darkened, and the
Stars shall withdraw their shining, i. e. the Roman and Turkish policy shall
be thrown down. This is an effect of that day of the Lord, and the same effect
we shall find from the battle of the great day of God, Rev. 16. for ver. 19.
the great City was divided into three, their usurped Supremacy fell, the Sun in
that Horizon was darkened, and the Cities of the nations fell, and great Babylon
came to the block, and every Island fled away, and the Mountains were not
found, though the expressions in this and that differ, yet they materially
agree in this to set forth the incredible and terrible prodigious things which
shall befall the enemies of the Church at the seventh Trumpet, as in Rev. 14.
18, 19, 20. (that Vine of the Earth may be meant the Turkish Monarchy) in Rev.
19. 18. the flesh of Kings, and Captains, and mighty Men shall in that day be
Dogs meat and Crows meat; for if it be done thus to the green tree, what shall
be done to the dry? if Judgment begin at the house of God, and the righteous
can scarcely escape, where shall the ungodly and sinners appear? what great
things may we look for to be effected in these latter times from these
prophetique Texts? Be wise now therefore O ye Kings, be instructed ye Judges of
the Earth, Seek the Lord with fear, and rejoice with trembling; kiss the Son
lest he be angry. --

One thing more we have in Joel to prove that this prophecy of his is to be
fulfilled under the seventh Trumpet, Joel 3. 7. it is to be fulfilled after the
time that the Jews are sold to the Graecians, to the Sons of the Graecians,
i. e. into Europe; their seventy years captivity was fulfilled in Asia under
the African Monarchy; but this captivity of the Jews is to be under the Roman
Monarchy in the Europian part of the world: we know Titus Vespatian sold them
for slaves into Greece and other parts of the world, and they after that
suffered grievous and bloody conflicts under the Roman Emperors: now their
redemption from under their last and longest captivity under the Romans and the
Turks* is not to be until the sound of the seventh Trumpet, Mat. 24. 31. And
he shall send his Angels with a great sound of a Trumpet, and they shall gather
together his Elect from the four winds, from one end of heaven to the other.
Matthew calls it the great sound of a Trumpet, and Isaiah calls it the great
Trumpet, Isa. 27. 12, 13. when God shall gather his Elect one by one, it shall
come to pass in that day that the great Trumpet shall be blown, and they shall
come which were ready to perish in the Land of Assyria, and the outcasts in
the Land of Egypt: at the seventh Trumpet the twelve Tribes shall be redeemed
from all the quarters of the world. This alludes to the sounding of the Trumpet
which proclaimed the year of Jubilee, which was to sound aloud throughout the
whole Land, that all the poor captives might hear and rejoice thereat; for
then they were to be set free and restored to their own possessions, Levit. 25.
even so at the sounding of the seventh Trumpet shall the Jews be restored to
their ancient possessions, from which they have so long time been driven out,
as those many clear texts which we have quoted do evince.

Thus have I humbly presented my opinion of the two battles, and how they are
to be distinguished and not confounded, they being as distinct as the first and
second woe. I have also given my reason why I think we are not undr the 6.
vial: the reason why I have said so* little of the vialls is because time to
come will be their best Expositer, as men have made time past their worst. I
will not fly reproachfully upon any that have writ upon the vialls, for their
fancy once had drawn me fully to their opinion: but since I searched more into
it, I cannot find it is either obvious to sense (I do not say fancy) or
apparent to reason, or agreeable at all with Scripture to say that any of the
vialls are as yet poured out upon Rome; it is absolutely, as far as I see,
contrary to Scripture, for Revel. 17. at that time when she is come to
judgment, ver. 1. ver. 15. the Whore ( i. e. the last policy or government in
Rome) rules over peoples, and multitudes, and nations, and tongues; the
Prophecy mentions not only the extent but the efficacy of his power in
blasphemy, and murder, and seducements. The policy of Rome prevails so much (
Revelat. 18. 7, 8.) in those Kingdoms and States formerly under, or now
subject unto its spiritual whoredoms, that in its pride it says (like an
audacious, proud, and secure Whore) I sit a Queen, and am no Widow, and shall
see no sorrow; therefore shall her plagues come in one day, that day that she
thus vaunts it and boasts of prosperity and success (seeing I suppose the
Witnesses lie dead) that day shall death, and mourning, and famine, and
consuming fire fall upon her: and what is all this but the effects of the
vialls, which in one day come upon her? I cannot tell whether this one day be
put for one year or one age, but it is put, I presume, to signify the speedy
end, that God will make with Rome when he begins to pour out the vialls, so
speedy as that the Kings of the Earth, her confederates, beholding with
astonishment, fear, and wonder, such sudden and unexpected judgments on Rome,
call this day one hour; it is, I suppose, an hyperbolicall speech coming from
the mouths of men amazed and terrified with such dreadful judgments, coming
so suddenly and unexpectedly upon that mighty City: all is to tell us that
when the vialls are poured out, they are poured out orderly, but not leisurely,
there will not be hundreds of years, nor months betwixt Vial and Vial, I
scarce believe days: For God when he begins to judge the Whore, he will make a
speedy end with her. At the seventh Trumpet this mystery of God shall be
finished.

I Will conclude my Discourse of the seventh Trumpet with setting down in
figures, not in words, that part of John's Prophecy, which properly falls under
the seventh Trumpet, viz. Rev. 11. 15. to the end of the Chapter. Rev. 14. 14.
to the end of the Chapter. Rev. 15, 16, 17. all for the most part a preparatory
vision of the seventh Trumpet. The 15. Chapter tells us who shall execute the
wrath of the seventh Trumpet, and whence they come. The 16. Chapter shows the
manner and matter of the seventh Trumpet. The 17. Chapter shows the two grand
Enemies of the Church, on whom the wrath and woe of the seventh Trumpet falls.
These are the great Whore, ver. 1. and the Beast of the bottomless pit, ver. 8.
that carries her, ver. 7. From hence it is clear that the Beast of the bottomless
pit and the Pope are distinct persons; for if by Whore of Babylon be meant the
Pope (as the most learned Protestants truly affirm) then the Beast of the
bottomless pit which bears the Pope cannot be Pope himself. My inference
hence is this, Ergo, The Pope is not the Antichrist, for he that slayes the
Witnesses is the Antichrist, but the Beast of the bottomless pit slayes the
Witnesses: Ergo, the Pope is not the Antichrist, being distinct from the Beast
of the bottomless pit. I do not disprove that the Pope is not an Antichrist,
but not the Antichrist whose reign over the slain Witnesses is to continue but
three days, and the half of three days at the utmost: as there are many
Witnesses, and have been in all ages, yet they are quite distinct from the two
Witnesses; so there have been and are many Antichrists, which, notwithstanding
are distinct from that Antichrist, the Fathers and the after Churches have from
John to Paul desciphered. In the end of the Chapter we have a vision of the
Instruments of inflicting the wrath of the seventh Trumpet, which are called
ten horns, who (v. 17.) gave (...), their Kingdom, it is not Kingdoms, but
Kingdom, by which it appears that it is that Poliarchy or supreme authority in
those dominions under one supreme head where Antichrist slew the Witnesses that
shall destroy Rome, that government or that policy which through their
oversight put all their power into the Antichrists hands: these when the
Witnesses rise shall also arise; indeed their rising from under the Antichrists
Tyranny is a great part of the Witnesses rising; though these are profound
Texts I touch upon, yet my doubts are not greater then my hopes of great things
and glorious for the Church of England, Ireland, and Scotland's good from them,
and that speedily.

In Revelations 18. is the Vision of the effect of the seventh Trumpet upon the
great Babylon, that is Rome, say many Papists, and all the Protestants.

And ver. 9. The great lamentation of the Kings of the Earth for her ruin;
these Kings which committed Fornication with her, i. e. were of the same Popish
Idolatrous Religion with Rome, the Romish Catholic Princes. Observe here, not
the Popish Kings of Europe eat the Whores flesh and burn her with fire, for
they weep and wail for her: I am very prone to believe that the ten horns which
destroy Antichrist are those Peers or Princes who in those dominions where the
Witnesses are slain, arise from under the Tyranny of Antichrist after the great
Commotion, Revelations 11. 12, 13. and ( Revelations 17. 16.) shall destroy
Rome: for (I beseech thee Reader observe) the ten horns that Antichrist gets on
his head, Revelations 17. 12. they are not ten Kingdoms, nor no where so
called, but ten Kings, i. e. a certain company assuming Kingly power (would
that were all) but have no Kingdom, but receive power as Kings one hour with
the Beast who set them up in the slaying of the Witnesses. These usurpers are
overcome in a battle with the Lamb, ver. 14. and after that ver. 16. that
lawful power which Antichrist threw down (yet pretended to set up, purify, and
establish, therefore called the ten hones on the Beast) shall arise and destroy
the Whore. It Is clear, that both the ten horns here mentioned are those that
are within the power and dominon of the Antichrist, he getting power from the
ten horns, ver. 17. to invest those other ten horns, ver. 12. of his faction
with power to make war with the Lamb: sure I am this is a clearer exposition of
these Texts then that which makes the ten horns ten Kings of Europe, who being
Papists shall turn, they say, from the Pope, and destroy him: I wish it may be
so, but I can find no ground for it in Scripture. In the next Chapter the quite
contrary is most true. In chap. 19. and chap. 20. we have the white side of
this Trumpet, the rejoicing of the Church for Gods glorious deliverance of it,
and after the final overthrow of the three grand enemies which is parallel
with Rev. 14, 4. 20. the Church has a large respite of rest from all its both
secret and open enemies from Gog and Magog, and the Witnesses are firmly seated
in the Throne, and the 12. Tribes restored to their own land.

Thus have I, as I could, endeavored to remove all Objections to clear those
Doubts and Obscurities which I find obnoxious to the mind, in finding out
truth, or embracing that which from the written Word is laid before it. There
are two other Questions arise from this Discourse: the one is, 1. Whether the
Antichrist in person shall be at the great battle at Armagedon? and whether
Turks and Papists shall join together to resist the Jews Restoration, and the
true Christian Reformation, the Antichrist being a chief leader in this battle
against them? 2. Whether Rev. 21. and 22. be meant of the state of the reformed
Church under the seventh Trumpet, or it be a resemblance of that state of bliss
which the Saints are made partakers of in the life to come? To this last much
may be said against what is confidently by some asserted, but I wave it, lest I
be accounted both bold and tedious; both which I disaffect in others, and hate
in my self.

Whether this Reverend Person whose Paper has drawn all this from me -- will
take it well or ill, I know not: but with humble thanks I do acknowledge his
favor (as the first that ever I received of this kind) in showing and
correcting of my Errors, for which I shall ever subscribe my self his
Disciple, humbly submitting whatsoever I have writ to his, and such like
learned prophetic Text-mens Censures.

FINIS.

