THE TRIUMPHS OF ROME OVER DESPISED PROTESTANCIE:

SATIS EST prostrasse.

Vincere praeclarum est, supra modum vincere invidiosum.

LONDON, Printed Anno Dom. 1655.

TO THE VICTORIOUS Roman Catholic Knight, That foyld the Vicar, and won the
Lady.
Unknown Sir,
YOu cannot marvel if the same of your late exploit have drawn a stranger to
celebrate your victory with these Triumphs, which he hopes may receive the
favor of an acceptance from you, as presuming that the prosperous success of
your noble achievement has not so over-elevated you, as to scorit so mean a
present from an obscure hand, which can no otherwise commend it self to you,
then by the good int^ndment of the Author, the variety of the subject, and the
unusual manner of tractation; somewhat inclining to unseriousness, as aiming
no less at your delight then satisfaction. If therefore you have not
over-laught your self at the silly impertinencies of the Vicars wife, be
pleased to bestow some gentle smiles upon this wel-merited gratulation; the
fashion whereof cannot choose but like you, since it is but an imitation of
your own pattern; although indeed, I could, in your silence, have learned it of
better Masters; from the rule of Solomon, Prove. 26.5. and from the example of
Elijah, in the entertainment of his Baalites, 1 Kings 18.27. Ridiculum acri
fortius. Farewell, great Sir, and enjoy your happy winnings, without the envy
of

Your truly Catholic wel-willer, Faithful Will-bee Vicar of Non-such.

The Introduction.
COME Brethren, come; for shame let us at last return into that bosom which we
have unkindely forsaken. Is it not our Mother that recalls us? Our Mother sure
enough, both as Catholic and as Roman: If any of you have so little grace as
to doubt it, tell me I pray you, was it not her Eleutherius Venerunt Eleutherio
mittente praedicatores duo in Britanniam viri sanctiff. Phaganus ac Deruvianus
Malmesb. vid. H. Spelman. Conc.
that helped our King Lucius and his Brittons to their Christendom? Was it not
her Gregory that sent the holy Monk Austen, with his forty associates to
convert our Saxons? What though this Summo tempore Tiberii Caesaris. Gildas
sup. ibid. scil. anno 5 v^l 6 post Christi resurrectionem.
Island had the Gospel planted in her as soon or sooner then Rome it self
(within five or six years after our Saviors passion) as Gildas and Niceph. l.
2. c. 40. eandem doctrinam etiam ad occideata^em oceanum, and Insulas
B^itannicas perfert Simon Zelotes.
Nicephorus? What if immediately upon S^ephens death, and the forced dispersion
of the Jews, Joseph of Gildas Albanicus histor. Aurelii Ambrosi^
Arimathea, Gallia in Britan, missum a Philippo Apost. Joseph. and cit. a F^xio
and Spel.
with his twelve holy accomplices, landing here out of France, here preached and
here dyed, as Baron. 1. tom. an. 35
Baronius himself, out of an old Record in the Vatican Library, tells us? What
if the first fabric of a Christian Church, that was in all the world, was
erected in our Glastenbury thirty one years after our Saviors death; yea, what
if St. Paul himself preached the Gospel here ere he could preach it at Homil. 4.
de cur. Graec. assect. l. 9. ser. 9. vid. Spelm. ibid.
Rome, as Theodoret and Sophronius? yet we must still believe she is our
Mother. What if upon the cruel persecution of Dioclesian and Maximinianus this
Nation yielded many noble Christian Clarissimos Lampades sanctorum martyrum
nobis accendit, Gild. Alb. s. 8.
Martyrs, Albanus, Julius, Aaron, with others; the first whereof was attended
by a thousand Bed. l. 1. c. 7. cit. H. Spelm. cum mill viris sicco ingrediens
pede.
partakers through the dried channel of the Thames, as Albanum egregium
foecunda Britannia profert. ex Fortunato presbyter Beda ibid.
Beda, out of Gildas, tells us? What if this Illico Siccato aliceo, ibid.
Island had three Archbishops and twenty eight Bishops governing this Church in
a Christian manner; and one and twenty hundred religious persons devoutly
serving God and maintaining themselves with the labor of their hands, living
together in a blessed society at Bangor, under the presidency of the famous and
learned Dinothus, In quo tantus fertur fuisse numerus monachorum ut cum in
septem portiones esset divisum, nulla horum portio minus quam 300 homines
haberet qui omnes de labor manum suarum vivere soleant, Bed.
before ever the Monk Augustine set foot upon the Kentish shore, yet we must
still believe she is our Mother. What if those honest and pious British
Bishops in several Synods stood out and protested against the Roman Authority,
pressed by those new Emissaries, and stiffly maintained their due subjection to
their own Archbishop, then of St. David's, with defiance of any other, refusing
to yield so much as to those three tolerable propositions made to them by the
new pretended (but usurping) Archbishop Austen, viz. first, to keep Easter on
the same day with the Roman Church; secondly, to receive their ceremonies in
Baptism; thirdly, to join with them in preaching to the Anglo-Saxons? What if
these British Christians all this while, both before and after Austen's time,
keep themselves close to the fashions of the Greek Church, with a peremptory
rejection of the Roman? yet we must still believe she is our Mother.

But was it not a brotherly kindness in those our Roman Godfathers, out of a
cruel revenge of the peevish frowardness (as was conceived) of the un-yeelding
Brittons, to stir up (as the suspicion runs strong) King Edilbert to a bloody
Extinctos in ea pugna ferunt de his qui ad orandum venerunt viros circiter
mill ducentos, ibid.
war, and therein to the slaughter of twelve hundred of those religious
Christians, who only fought on their knees with the weapons of their prayers.

Tantae stragis erat Romanum temnere morem. But why should we be guilty of so
much wrong as not to give the Devil his due, much more a Saint? why should we
be so ungrateful as to smother courtesies? Pope Gregory (whom the world is
wont to style the last of the good Bishops and first of the bad) was our good
friend and worthy benefactor, and merits an eternal memory for the care and
pains that he took toward the conversion of our wild beathenish Saxons, and
employing and encouraging his Abbot Augustine and his Monks and Clergy in the
hard service of this uncouth Plantation; for the advancing whereof he freely
bestirred his brain and his pen, writing to no fewer then fifteen or sixteen
several Bishops and Princes for their aid in so holy a work; and affording his
grave directions to his new-created Metropolitan of England, who was zealously
and studious, I know not whether more to advance the faith of Christ, or the
honor, government, and ceremonies of the Roman See. In the mean while the
British Bishops still held their own, not lying open to any taxation or blame
but their refusal of subjection to the Roman authority, mantaining their
constant adherence to their own Archbishop, till after the Norman Conquest;
when Henry the first subduing the Principality of Wales, forced them to stoop
unto his Canterbury.

How much then we and our fore fathers are beholden to Rome we see, and shall
be to blame if we acknowledge not; And why is not this abundantly enough reason
to enslave our faith ever since, to their inerrable judgment, and to pin our
souls upon their sleeves for ever? What though they have departed from
themselves, yet it is not for us (in way of gratitude) to depart from them. If
our mother will mix poison to us belike we must drink it, for we may not
disobey.

But did we stand in no relation at all to the Church of Rome, were we mere
strangers to her, yet so transcendent advantages has she above all other
Churches, that he should be very hard-hearted and a back-friend to his own
preferment, that would not strive to be first in her lap. Who is so bl^nde as
he that will not see these whole dozen of supereminent excellencies for which
she is conspicuous to all the World?

She and her Religion is 1 more gay and glorius; 2ly More pleasant and joviall;
3ly More pure and holy; 4ly More powerful and mighty; 5ly More pious and
devout; 6ly More easy and plausible; 7ly more sure and certain; 8ly More free
and bountiful; 9ly More gainful and commodious; 10ly More wise and witty;
11ly More merciful; and 12ly More unanimous then any rival under heaven. Can
you have the patience to go along with me through all these notorius
privileges, I shall promise you a full conviction.

CHAPTER I. The triumph of Glory.
AND first whiles you see other Churches either naked or like some sorry
drudges, either sluttishly or raggedly clad in their homespun russet, and at
their best, without welt or guard, behold her like a Queen mounted on her gaudy
choppines, curiously dressed, all to be jewelled, be spangled, powdered,
painted, perfumed. What talk you of the simplicity of the Gospel, and whisper
that the Kings Daughter is all glorious within? so let her be: but give me a
Church that is all glorious without too; such is she, such is none but she!
Other Churches have but one head, (and that is in heaven) but the Church of
Rome, and she alone (thanks to the good Emperor Phocas) has two heads, one in
heaven the other on earth; both glorious: If fools talk of monstrosity, let
them learn that this point is de fide; and matters of faith must not be scanned
by reason: See what an head she has here below, as much above Kings as Kings
are above their Subjects; as much bigger then the Emperors as the Sun is bigger
then the Earth: For howsoever the honest Abbot Planum est Apostolis
interdicitur dominatus, I ergo tu and tibi usurpare aude aut dominans
Apostolatum, aut Apostolicus dominatum, Bern. de Consid. ad Eugen. l. 2. c. 6.
Bernard (good soul) could tell his old friend Pope Eugenius, that he could nor
be capable at once of Sovereignty and Apostolicisme; yet he was quite out upon
the matter, and must know and learn from our later Doctors ( Antonius Ant.
Sanctarellus de Societ. Jesu Tract. de Haeresi and potestate summi Pont. anno
1625. approba a primorib. Jesuitis.
Sanctarellus for one) that the Pope has full power over all temporals, and as
Alvares roundly, in all, through all, above all; that his sublimity is such (as
In omnia, per omnia, super omnia. Hujus summi Pontificis tanta est sublimitas
tanta immensitas and nullus mortalius comprehendere queat, Cassen. ex Zoderico.
Casseneus) that it cannot be comprehended: who can doubt of this, when Pope
Bonifacius 8. non Galliae modo, sed mundi dominum se praedicavit. Popyr. Mass.
v. Bonif. 8.
Boniface the eight himself (that could not err) tells us that he is no less
then Lord of the World? and not without reason: how can he go less, as Vicar
general, to the great King of heaven? by virtue whereof both his Jurisdiction
is boundless, as universal Quid tu Christo universalis Ecclesiae capiti in
extremo judicio dicturus es examine, etc. Greg. de Epis. Constantinopol. l. 4.
Epist. 38.
Bishop of the Church on earth (in spite of Pope Gregory himself, who
unwisely cried down that style as insolent and pompaticall, professing that it
had been tendered to himself by the Council of Superbi and pompatici, etc. per
venerandam Synodum Chalced. Romano Pontifici oblatum est, sed nullus unquam
^orum hoc singularitatis nomen assumpsit, Greg. l. 4. Ep. 32. Mauritio.
Chalcedon, but he had refused it as utterly unlawful, proud, injurious, and
precursorie to Antichrist himself) and his Dominion also is paramount to all
Kingly and Imperial power. Time was indeed when the Popes flew a lower pitch,
dating their letters by the reign of their Lords the Emperors; when Pope
Gregory the Great could come with his cap in his hand to Emperor Mauritius with
Gregor. ubi supra.
Vobis obedientiam praebere desidero, I desire to yield you obedience, and were
so far from claiming to have a finger in the Emperors Crown, that they were
content the Emperor should have an hand in their Mitre: so Pope Adrian, anno
796, gave, with all due submission, power to Charles the Great to choose the
Popes, his Successors: and Pope Gregory the fourth confirmed the same, anno
830; and Pope Leo the ninth yielded the same to Emperor Otho, anno 961: after
whom Pope Alexander the second, being chosen without the Emperors consent,
repenting him of that wrong, was (as he was well served) deposed by busy Pope
Hildebrand: At and after which time their Vide in quantum licentiae tum
processit Romans Eccles. ut se intromittere inciperet de Ecclesiis vacantibus
solebant aliquando Imperatores de Romana disponere Ecclesia, etc. K^^ntius
Metrop. l. 7. c. 45.
Holiness has been better advised, strongly wrestling with, and giving sound
falls to their contesting Caesar's; Gregory the seventh to Henry the fourth;
Pashcall the second to Henry the fifth; Innocent the third to Philip; Innocent
the fourth to Frederick and Conrade; John the two and twentie^h and Benedict
the eighth to Ludovic. Bavar. legem tulit ne in posterum Pontifices Romani
absentes esse liceret ultra tres menses, nec ultra 20 miliaria ab urbe
progredi, Papyr. Mass.
Lewis of Bavaria; although this last gave a Cornish hug to his unequal
match, making a Law that the Pope should not be absent above three months in a
year, and not above twenty miles from Rome, satis pro Postmedo Jea^. 21. veneno
extinctus in Eucharistia, Krant. Metrop. l. 9. c. 6.
Imperio: But the wind stood not long in that door: the case is altered quoth
Ployden: Now, of a long time, the Emperor Postea Imperator si praesens est,
stupham equi Papalis tenet, et dein ducit equum per fraenum aliquantulum. Lib.
Sacr. cerem.
knows his duty, that is, to hold his Holiness his stirrup, and to lead his
horse by the bridle; the ignorance or forgetfulness of which point of his
office had like to have cost Frederic ^. il en cuida perdre sa corone pour 'n
avoir pas tenu bien etc. audit tenu estrien ganctru a Adrian. 4.

Revis. conc. du Trent.


Frederik the second his Crown, which he might justly have forfeited for taking
hold of the wrong side; at least a tedious delay till he had learnt better
manners: well done brave Countryman; this was our English Adrian: Or if his
Holiness be rather pleased to be carried in his Si Pontifex sella vehatu r. 4.
majores principes, etiam Imperator in honorem Servatoris sellam ipsam cum
Pontifice humeris suis aliquantulum portare debet.

Lib. Sacr. Cerem.


chair, it shall be the Emperors office with three other Kings or Princes to
put their shoulders to his happy load: Or perhaps upon further favor Caesar's
mightiness may be preferred from a Groom or Escuier of the stable, to be his
Holiness his Chaplain; for though Licet Imperator aut alius princeps etc. non
habet ordinem; tamen officium subdiaconatus potest Episcopo ministranti
exercere.

Cassen. Nor. mund. 5. part.


Emperors or Kings be not admitted to holy Orders, yet nothing hinders but
that they may be allowed when his Holiness officiates, to supply the place of
his Sigismundus Rex in urbe Constantia, Papa primam missam celebrante Diaconi
habitu indutus legit Evangelium alta voce, Exiit edictum.

Bin. In notis Concilii Constantiensis.


Deacons, or Subdeacons: as King Sigismund in the City of Constantine, when the
Pope said his first Mass, being formally attired in the habit of a Deacon, did
with a a loud voice read the Gospel of the day out of Luke 3. Exiit edictum.

Yet further, if the Emperor will be a white boy and please his Holiness
well, he may be advanced to be a Canon in the Church of Lateran; Imperator
recipitur in Canonicum and fratrem Ecclesiae Lateranensis. Lib. Sacr. Cerem.
whiles his great Patron the Pope sits stately in his Pontificalibus to be
adored by the Grandees of the Earth with the kiss of his toe: An homage which
I confess Lipsius himself spits at as base, and more then servile, Turpe ac
plus quam servile Lips. not. in Sen. 1.2. De Benef. Elect. l. 2.
and such as if a Caius Caesar or Dioclesian (who affected divine honor)
required of their vassals, yet the elder Maximinus abhorred, with a (Dii
prohibeant) The gods forbid, Dii prohibeant ut quisquam ingenuo rum pedibus
meis oscula sigat. Lips. ib.
that any ingenuous man should kiss a foot of mine. How well methinks it
becomes the house, that this odious guise which practiced by the proudest
Heathen, Senec. de Benef. l. 2. c. 12.
drew from Seneca the exclamation of O superbias magnae fortunae, Oh the pride
of a great fortune, should be taken up by a Christian prelate, the professed
successor of an humble fisherman. If a fair Ladies kiss of Pope Leo his hand
over erecting him suddenly in a lustful passion (out of a revenge whereof, he
is said to have cut off that guilty hand, which yet they say was mercifully
restored by the blessed Virgin) were the occasion of this hateful change from
the hand to the foot, the World has reason to beshrew her lips; Quid
contumeliosum est socculum auro and margaritis distinctum, nullam partem
corporis electurus quem purius oscularer. r.
But let that pass, and to say the truth, what so great harm is it to kiss a
cleanly and precious Carbunole? Onwards you do in the mean time sufficiently
see the incomparable Majesty of that glorious Prelate.

Maximil. Imp. scribit ad Baronum de Lichtensterne, etc.
Can any man marvel now that Maximilian the Emperor had an ambition of being
Pope, and offering so fair for it by Baron Lichtensterne as three hundred
thousand Ducats, Hoc scriptum suit a Maximiano, Anno. 1511. 6. Septembris, ut
Waremundus de Erenberg, in verisimil.

Vide monita Politica. p. 33.

Luther. sermon. Conv. p. 302.


the pawning of four precious chests, with his rich Investural Robe for the
purchase of it? and if the bargain could have been driven, would have had a
good match of it too. But it is no wonder at all that Pope Julius the second
would be Emperor, and in that right challenged both Swords, Temporal and
Spiritual; though the Temporal of it self is indeed but lead to the steel of
the Spiritual.

Now then what a saucy word was that of John Gerson Chancellor of Paris, Papa
est frater noster, alioqui deberet dicere Pater meus vel Pater mi. Jo. Gerson.
An liceat in causis fidei a Papa appellare. Papa stupor mundi, non Deus, non
homo, sed utrumque. Gloss. in proemio Clem. Moscan De Romans Pont. l. 1. c. 11.
who durst say. The Pope is our Brother, else he could not say Our Father; when
he might know how the old style came, Nec Deus est nec homo: he is neither God
nor man, but neither and betwixt both. Some spightful detractors will be ready
to talk of Luciferian pride, and Worldly pomp; and to say they fear his
Holiness has forgot what his Master of Ceremonies said at his Inauguration,
Cum exicrit P. Capellam St. Gregorii ceremoniarius stuppae ignem mittit, ac
genuflexus ait, Sie Pater, etc.

Lib.Cerem.


when he burnt the towe before him at his coming out of St. Gregory's Chapel,
Sancte Pater, sic transit gloria mundi; Holy father, thus passes the glory of
the World; and that of his Petrach, The life of man is short, of Kings shorter,
Hominum vita brevis, regum brevior, pontificum brevissima Petrarch de Remed. l.
1.
of Popes shortest of all: as (welfare all good tokens) he might have seen
eight Popes in the space of twelve years. These malevolent fools will be apt
to put him in mind of what that merry Miller Plautus said of old; Qui quaerit
alta, i^ malum videtur quaerere Plaut. Pseudolo.
Qui quaerit alta, etc. he that looks too high, seeks his own mischief, and
can tell him that the highest is not always the best: as for example, the
chimny is the highest piece of the house, but the foulest. But it matters not
what they say, unless they were wiser; their eyes are bleared with envy at
this resplendent glory. Iwis Chrysostom was deceived when he could say, Illis
qui vehementer excellunt nemo inviderit. Excellentiae quippe cedunt omnia.
Chrysostom. Homil. 3. in Epist. ad Philip. etc.
No man envies a transcendent excellency; rather contrarily, the higher, the
greater invidence; but all is one, his Holiness wots well, and better then
themselves what belongs to pride; Non video quomodo qui altum hunc locum tenet,
salvari possit.
and knows right well what one of his Predecessors (I meene Marcellus the
second) said of old; who after a long silent dump, broke out at the Table into
these words; I do not see how he that holds this high place can be saved; but
withal he knows what that mouthful of words did cost the speaker, who lived but
twenty days after them. It was time to be rid of such an ominous bird; In vita
Bellarmin.
whether on the same grounds Cardinal Bellarmine had wont to pray to God that
he might never be Pope, I leave it to the scanning of deeper judgments; but
let that pass; Return we to our more pleasing thoughts. Did you but see the
state of his Holiness at the Feast of his Coronation, Primum serculum portavit
nobilior princeps sive, Imperator sive Rex. Lib. Sacr. Cerem.
you could not but wonder at that magnificence: To say no more, there should
you see him served with Princes, the Emperor (if present) carrying up the
first dish to his Table, Kings holding the Basin and Towell for the washing of
his holy hands, as the King of Denmark did to Sixtus the fourth; and so often as
it pleased his Holiness to drink, Papa cum biberit, omnes flectunt genua
praeter Episcopos. Ibid.
you might see all the beholders humbly cast down upon their knees. Surely the
majesty of his single Holiness, whom you shall behold with his Triple-crown on
his head, with his rich Crosier in his hand, with the glorious Robes of his
Pontificality on his back, is enough to dazzle your eyes; but when you shall see
him in his Conclave, assessed with all his glittering Cardinals about him, you
cannot but be transported with a reverentiall admiration of him, and those his
Princely Senators. I tell you one of those red Hats are more worth then all the
blew and black Bonnets of their maligners; so as any man might justly wonder at
Ferdinand of Toledo, Ferdinandus e Toletana familia post triduum remittit
Cubicularium Papae been remuneratum cum pileo quem attulit, indignum se
professus tanto munere. Petramell. vita Cardin. page 252.
who after three days entertainment sent back (not unrewarded) his Holinesse's
Chamberlain, and that glorious Cap of better maintenance, with a cold
complement, refusing that honor which others bought so dear, For do we not
know (what ever they were once) that they are now Princes fellows, yea in some
sort their betters? for at the solemnity of his Holiness his Coronation, Regi
seeds nulla paratur in Convivio, quia seder in mensa post primum Cardinalem.
Sacr. Cerem.
the greatest King must not take his place before the first Cardinal. And good
reason: for they make up one body with the Pope, says Jacobatius; and by
virtue thereof, says Casseneus, Unum corpus cum Papa constituunt. Jacobit. de
Council.


they judge all men, and can be judged of none. If you cast your eyes down
lower to the meaner Clergy, Cardinales post Papam judicant omnes and a nemine
judicantur Cassen, Glor. mund. part 4. nu. 8.


wherefore do you think their Priests have their crowns shaven, but to show
(as the Council of Ravenna tells you) that they are of a royal kind? Coronam
portent condecentem Sacerdotes per quam designantur regalis esse generis. Co^c.
Raven. 3. Rubr. 10.


And what mavelous port do we see in the intermediate dignities! I lie (says
St. Bernard) if I have not seen an Abbot ride with threescore horse and men.
Mentior si non vidi Abbatem 60. equos and eo amplius in suo comicatu ducere.
Apol. ad Gulielm. Abbatem.


And how then? Ah poor Bernard; how narrow were thy thoughts, who (though an
Abbot, and that a famous one too,) could say, Cannot one man serve both to
wait at his board, An non posset unus minister jumentum ligare, and ad mensam
servire, and Lectum praeparare. Idem.


and to make his bed, and to dress his beast? how truly do thou herein
verify the old word, Bernard sees not all things? there is yet more pomp and
state then thine eyes ever reached to; Videmus hodie equitantes super mulas,
secundas Abbatias, secundos Episcopatur: Gallice deux crosses and deux mitres:
and adhuc non sunt contenti. Menot. Feria 6. Sabbat. post dominic. 2. fol. 8.


We see at this day, says the zealous Menot, two Crosses and two Mitres, two
Abbacies and two Bishoprics on one Mules back. And it was thought worthy the
care of a Council to enact that an Archbishop when he visits should be content
to take up with forty or fifty horse, Archiepiscopi visitantes 40. vel 50.
equis sint contenti, etc. Bin. notis in Council. Lateranens. ex Matthew Paris.
Tyrannus sacerdotum vocatus.


a Bishop with twenty or thirty, an Archdeacon with five or six: a poor retinue
to our VVolsees, or that proud Prelate of Ely, who in the time of his Viceroy
deputation was attended with no less then a thousand. O base Protestancy when
we behold this superabundant superfluity of State and glory.

From their persons, cast your eyes upon their Churches, Chapels, Oratories:
see how sumptuously they are built, how richly furnished, how gorgeously decked;
Ferdinand, Mendes de pinto Histor. Chines, ubique.
although I am afraid the Chinoese and Indian Temples erected to their hellish
Pagodi are yet much fairer and wealthier then they. Look upon their Altars, and
see how gaylie they are set out. Look to their Images, and see how trimly they
are dressed with variety of Robes, lighter and cooler for Summer, warmer and
weightier for Winter. If some carping Erasmus will not stick to say that they
suit our Lady so unfitly, as that both the fashion and stuff were more proper
for the Stews then the Church; and if some of our jeering companions shall
scornfully ask what difference there is Effigies inter vestras statuamque
Bathulli? and shall tell us that all blocks are alike; they are easily choked
with this answer, That if our infidelity cannot distinguish, their faith can.

Now upon all this, let me make your selves the Judges, whether poor pelting
Protestancy can stand in any comparison with the Gayetie of the Roman
profession; yea, whether the one be not as mean, as the other glorious! Alas,
we have not a Lady to dress, nor a Saint to worship, nor a toe to kiss, nor
an Oracle to consult, nor a Vice-God to rule, nor one that can pretend to so
much honor as to be thought capable of the suspicion of being Antichrist. My
first task then is done; only two rules lie in my way, which if I cannot
remove, some stronger hand may. First, I confess my dullness cannot apprehend
how these should stand together; that outward splendour should be the mark of
the true Church, and an argument of Gods special favor; and yet the great
merit and proof and praise of Sanctity should consist in wilful poverty: If
perfection of holiness be found in bravery, how is not St. Francis a fool? a
true Fatuellus indeed, as himself confesses. He whom they make one of the
prime Saints in Heaven, goes woolward, barelegg'd, skrubbing in Hairecloth, and
lousy rags, measuring the greater sanctimony of his minors and minimes, by the
multitude of their patches, Humilis Franciscus debet in sede Luciferi sedere.
Lib. conformitate, Franc. Foecundatur.
and is therefore advanced to the void Throne of Lucifer himself, because no
rogue upon earth was so poor as he: whilst that man whose Title is Holiness
it self, challenges to have no Peer under Heaven, and rides on the neck of
Princes; Aread me this Riddle who can. Secondly, I am much scrupled to find
the reason why no Pope since that prime Apostle (whom they claim to succeed)
ever chose to call himself by the name of Peter. Yea they all purposely shun
it; there have been those who were christened by that name at the Font, but have
changed it when they come to the chair, as Petrus de Tarantasia would be
Innocent the fourth, Petrus Carafa would be Paul the fifth; and Sergius the
third was once a Peter; which howsoever Baronius would seem to impute to their
modesty, and great reverence to their first founder, yet that is but a mere
shuffle: for had they not as much reason to reverence the name of St. Paul as
St. Peter? since both are confessed to be their joynt-founders; and Paul
professes that he was not inferior to the chief Apostles; yet we see Carafa
cast off Peter and take up Paul. Besides, do we not see it ordinary for men to
wear those names without scruple, which are worthy of higher reverence then
that of Peter? One calls himself Frater Archangelus, another Raphael, another
Michael, another Gabriel, another Thomas de Jesu, another Johannes de Jesu
Maria, another de Dieu, and many other the like: No no; I do much fear this
proceeds from the conscience of their guiltiness; as justly doubting, lest
this name would plainly upbraid them with their palpable dissimilitude to that
their first pattern, whiles every one that hears it would be ready to say, How
like is this Peter the Pope to Peter the Apostle? were the old Fisherman alive,
would he not say, Can this be my successor? Had not Raphael Vrbin, the famous
Painter, just reason (when he was challengd for laying too much color on the
faces of Peter and Paul) to say that he did it purposely to represent them
blushing in heaven to see the Church swayed by such Successors? Successors (to
contradict the old Gloss) rather to Augustus the Emperor, then Peter the
Fisher; And what do we think the head of the Church above, will say of her head
below? What my Vicar and thus gay and pompous? was this my garb whiles I was
on the earth? What a perfect copy is here of my meekness and humility? was I
lackied and congyed by great Princes? was my toe ever reached out to be kissed
by the great Potentates of the earth? Did not I when I stood despicably to be
judged by Pilate, say, My Kingdom is not of this World? John 18.36.
Did not I say to my Disciples, Vos non sic, It shall not be so with you. Here
I confess I stick; but some of the learned society will easily take me off.

Perhaps some malevolents will be apt to lay in our dish the example of
Heraclius the Emperor, Adricomius de Terra Sancta.
who having got a piece of our Saviors Cross would have carried it in
princely state through the High Street of Jerusalem; and being bravely mounted,
was entering through the gilded gate with that intention; but being met by the
grave Patriarch Zacharias, and admonished how little that pomp would agree to
the precedent of his crucified Savior, who in no less humility then disgrace,
walked sadly with his cross on his shoulders, through those streets toward
his Calvarie; presently alighted, disrobed himself, passed mournfully on foot
along that very way which his Savior had trodden before him; as holding it more
meet to imitate the lowly dejectedness of his blessed Redeemer, then to
Triumph in the joy of so precious a Relic. But, Tush, we live by rules, not
by examples; Ywis, these men know a better way then so, finding it far sweeter
to enjoy the munificence of their Savior in so lavish a prosperity, then to
imitate him in his poverty and suffering; and upon this account, can laugh at
the impotent enviers of their greatness, and applaud themselves in the glad
sense of their outward felicity, as a Church beforehand Triumphant here,
whosoever shall prove to be so in heaven.

CHAP. II. The triumph of Pleasure.
HOw far more gaysome and glorious the Religion of our Grandmother Rome is then
all her emulous corrivalls, you have fully seen; see now how far more jolly,
more pleasant and joviall; a consideration worthy of your thoughts; for who
would care for a profession that has no life in it? for a gloomy and dull
Religion that has no more Sun in it then Jordanus Bishop of Ravenna out of
Strabo reports of our Britain; Chronic. de Origin Gothorum.
which he says is always overcast with perpetual fogges and thick mists;
blessed little less with the light of that glorious Planet by night then by
day. A cheareful and sprightly Devotion for my money; although I perceive even
the very Turks themselves are so far from a melancholy dumpishness, Blunts
relat. of this Travels.
that there is scarce one of them that has not his fiddle with two or three
strings hanging at his girdle to cheer him up: But sure a little mirth is more
worth then a great deal of sorrow; and if our mortified Votaries had not
thought so, they would never have endured that their Friar Juniper should go
away (which I blush and tremble to write) with the title of Joculator Christi.
Frater Juniperus Joculator Christi: Liber Conform. p. 106.


What a merry World it is then with those under the Roman obedience, who is so
blind that sees not? For first as it was said of Athens long since, that that
City alone had more Feasts then all Greece beside; so may we say of Rome and
her appurtenants, that she has, and makes, and keeps more Festivals, then all
the rest of Christendom put together; Tertullian could say of old, that only
those fifty Holidayes, betwixt Easter and Whitsontide (which the ancient Church
kept with so cheerful regard, that in that space no man did so much as de
geniculis adorare) were more then the superstitious Heathen kept all the whole
year thorough; What would that witty African say if he now lived to see the
multitude of Play-dayes which are enacted and solemnly observed by our Roman
Lawgivers?

If you know not, they have their double, and half double Festivals; Vide
Gavantum de Festis Sanctorum. 7.10.
the double both greater and lesser; In the clementine recognition of the
Breviarie distinguished into four ranks, of all which if need were I could give
you a perfect Calender, all in red letters. Let it be sufficient to know that
the half-double Festivals with the Sundays exceed the numder of 130. as their
Gavantus has punctually reckoned; and that the Double Festivals of Saints,
besides those (not a few) of Christ and his blessed Mother in the Roman
Calendar are 64. where note by the way, that the Lords-dayes are but
half-double Festivals, whereas many Saints days are (Duplicia majora) the
greater kind of Double Festivals, and their observations after High Mass is
accordingly. Good reason that the waiters should be set and served before their
Masters, the Saints above their Maker: Now if we put all these together, see
what a merry life they lead who live under the Roman obedience above all Geuses
and Hugvenois, who are all the while droiling, and snoiling at their labor,
whiles these other like Gentlemen (or as the Saxon term was of old, Idle men)
take their pleasure in ease and disport. Teriullian might have been wiser then
to say even in those days when Holidayes were more thin sown, Tertull.
Apologetico.
Dies festi minuendi; Holidays would be abated: The Church is since grown more
free and liberal, and has ordained, that if there be not Holidayes enough, it
may be in the power of the Bishop within his Diocese to make more; though
indeed curtall'd to the half; with this caution too, that he must call the
people together beforehand, and know of them, whether such his grant may be for
their case; for it may be some narrow-hearted fellows may be apt to take up
that snudging complaint which Petrus de Aliaco the Cardinal of Cambray made in
his discourse of the Reformation of the Church, Dies operabiles vix sufficient
pauperibus virae necessaria procuranda. Petr. de Aliaco. de Reform. Eccles.
jussu Sigismund Imperatoris Scrip.
Dies operabiles, etc. The work-dayes (says he) all the year thorough are
scarce sufficient for poor men to get necessaries to keep life and soul
together; It is no matter; Let them ply it the harder while they are at it.

But the having of Holidayes is not all; all is in the keeping them. And as the
Romans of old had their Flamines, Macrob. Saturn. l. 1. c. 16.
whose care it was to see that those Festival days were duly observed; so
have their Successors, still their Consistorialls with their busse Flies under
them, which will be sure to fetch up, and plague those, who shall dare to
defile any Holiday with a stitch of work: But now, what manner of keeping is
this we talk of? Somewhere they keep some few (though somewhere none) in a
poor dull fashion, only in going to Church and doing nothing; as if they were
mere Vacunalia and no more; Only our Frolic Catholics, know how to keep
them like themselves, in Feasting, Dancing, Reveling, in Beare-baitings, and
all other sportful Games; in so much, as our froward Countyman Bromiard could
say, that the Devil had more and better service done him that day, then all the
week beside. Tertullian was too scrupulous when he stood upon Cast agitandi;
as if those days were to be soberly spent, and especially devoted to piety.
Pope Gregory was yet more indulgent, whiles he allows that the Pagan Feasts
should be so turned to Christian, as that there should be some kind of
observation of such fashions and pastimes, as might be pleasingly suitable to
their former guise; of each whereof every man will take the counsel of
Thierrick Vallicolor to Cardinal Antherus.

Hoc celebri festo solito jucundior esto.
Upon the day of this celebrios Feast
More mirthful be then upon all the rest.
They have their Jovial (which some sour Cynick would call licentious)
Carneval, wherein every man cries Sciolto, letting himself loose to the maddest
of merriments, marching wildly up and down in all forms of disguises; each man
striving to out-go other in strange prancks of humorous debauchednesse, in
which even those of the holy Order are wont to be allowed their share; for
howsoever it was by some sullen authority forbidden to Clerks and Votaries of
any kind to go masked and misguised in those seemingly abusive Solemnities,
Bononiae autem ubi ipsimet Laici clerico ad hoc incitant atque invitant,
Dicentes (licet falso) larvarum usum maxim propter clericos esse inventum;
nullum est scandalum atque ideo non nisi veniale peccatum Alphons. Vivald.
Candel. Aur. de Vsu larvarum.
yet more favorable construction has offered to make them believe that it was
chiefly for their sakes for the refreshment of their sadder and more restrained
spirits, that this free and lawless Festivity was taken up; In comparison
whereof some rigid censurer would say the Roman and Grecian Bacchanals were
sober pastime; Add to these their pleasant Plays, and lively Pageants,
wherewith they celebrate the great Festivals of the Nativity, Passion, and
Resurrection of our blessed Savior: There might you see the Gospel upon the
Stage: There might you see Christ acted (all but his real dying) to the life;
There might your eyes have met with Judas that betrayed him, in all his
activity, save only not hanging himself: There also with bold Peter that
would have rescued his Master, but without an ear slasht off, there with blind
Longinus that pierced him, there you should have seen him bleeding, and
expiring; and might perhaps smile at the causeless tears of some passionate
women, that deeply feel the tor^ and pain of that counterfeit crucifixion:
There should you see him gently let down by the honest Arimamat ^ean from the
Cross for fear of hurting; shortly, there you might see the sequel of that
holy story very finely mocked with a feigned and too-scenical representation.

Or if you desire to feed your cares no less then your eyes; do but hear the
ravishing harmony of their sweet Music, both at their Mass and Vespers; I dare
say, the Spheres of Heaven make none such.

These delights are Universal; but besides them, there are specialties of
pleasure proper to places and persons without number. B^ccius the pleasant
Monk, when he was asked by Pope Paul the third which was the merriest day at
Rome, could answer him, Papyr. Masson. Paulo. 3.
that wherein the Pope dies, and that wherein his Successor is chosen; and
indeed the former of these is most outrageously lawless, the other most
comfortable in their renewed hopes. The old saying is, that a Dog has his day;
but for all his jesting, the life of their holy father affords them many gaudy
days: In the beneficial visits of Emperor and Kings, in the Feasts and
Munificent entertainments of their Cardinals, and especially that solemn day
wherein his Holiness bounseth at St. Peter's Church door. What merry work it was
here in the days of our Holy Fathers (and I know not whether in some places it
may not be so still) that upon Saint Nicholas, St. Katherine, St. Clement, and
holy Innocent day, children were wont to be arrayed in Chimers, Rochets,
Surplices, to counterfeit Bishops and Priests, and to be led with Songs and
Dances from house to house, blessing the people who stood girning in the way to
expect that ridiculous benediction: Yea that boys in that holy sport were wont
to sing Masses, and to climb into the Pulpit to preach (no doubt learnedly and
edifyingly) to the simple Auditory. And this was so really done, that in the
Cathedral Church of Salsbury (unless it be lately defaced) there is a perfect
monument of one of these Boy Bishops (who dyed in the time of his young
Pontificality) accoutred in his Episcopal Robes, still to be seen; A fashion
that lasted until the latter times of King Henry the eight, who in the 33. year
of his Reign, Anno Domini 1541. by his solemn Proclamation, Printed by Thomas
Bertler the Kings Printer, cum privilegio, straightly forbad the practice.

And that you may not think this sporting foolery peculiarly confined to our
Island, know that it was taken up in other Countries also. The Council of
Saltzburgh, very bluntly tells you in the year 1274. Lude quidam noxii; There
are say they, certain harmeful sports, which the Vulgar calls [Eptus puor] that
is, Episcopatus Puerorum, used in some Churches so insolently, that many times
great errors and grievous offenses ensue upon them; Hos ludos in Ecclesiis and
a person is Ecclisiasticis de caetero fieri prohibemus.
These sports (say they severely enough) we forbid hereafter to be used in
Churches, and of Ecclesiastical persons: But withal, Nisi forte parvi sedecim
annorum et infra fuerint qui hujusmod; Ludos exercent, Council. Saltezburgh,
Anno Domini 12* 4 Bin.
those fathers gravely add (nisi forte) and unless perhaps they be used by
children of sixteen years old or under: then belike they might be allowed to
play the fools with good li^^ing.

Neither had the boys only leave to play thus, but the men, yea even Clerks
themselves took leave to be so prodigal of their mirth, that they gave
themselves liberty to go up and down the Country, and make themselves Jesters
and Buffons in great men's houses; in so much, as the second Council of
Saltzburgh thought it requisite to mar their mirth, unkindly restraining them
by so strict a Law, that whosoever should practice that (as they pleased to
call it) ignominious Art, Clerici qui se Jocula tores seu Galiardos fecere aut
Buffones, si per annum exercuerint illam iguominiosam artem, ipso jure, etc.
Council. Saltzburg. 2. Anno 1310.
for a whole year together should ipso jure remain under the deepest censure;
but if a shorter time, being thrice admonished, he repented not, he was to be
stripped, of all clerical privileges: And as the Clerks were notoriously
active in these mirthful disorders, so they were no less passive in some
other. When a young Priest was to say his first Mass, Missae novae convivia,
Ludi, chor^ae tollantur. Ex. Prove. 2. Gavantus. V. Missae.
what a costly height of merry entertainment was he wont to be put to, what
Meat, what Wine what Music was sufficient for this gratulation? And if a
Soldier were to be honored with a Military Girdle, how were all the neighbor
Parsonages filled with the chargeable entertainment of that jolly and reveling
retinue?

What pleasure through his Holinesses indulgence do his white sons of Spain
find in their Juogo de Toros, In regnis Hispaniae praedictae paenae sunt
revocatae (scil taurorum and ferarum agitatoribus) his condicionibus, ne fiant
dicbus feslis, and ita ut non possit mors sequi, Iniisdem regnis eadem
concessit Clemens 8. adhortans ne hac benignitare abutantur. Anno 1596. Gavant.
V. Torneamentum.
which though it were not long since for the great inconveniences (which were
found in it) loudly bellowed down by a Bull from Rome; yet now lately upon some
cautious terms is let as loose as the Bull that is hunted, and even Clerks and
religious Pesons not inhibited from being spectators.

What should I speak of our merry Wakes, and May-games, and Christmas triumphs,
which you have once seen here, and may see still in those under the Roman
dition; In all which put together, you may well say, No Greek can be merrier
then they. Now on the other side, in opposition to these jollities, what I pray
you, has Protestancy to lay in the scales, that might weigh down, or but sway
the Balance to an equilibration? yea what is there here but a sad, serious,
sportlesse Devotion? All they can say or do, is (as their preachers inculcate
to them for their cold comfort) that of St. James, If ye be merry, sing
Psalms; and that of St. Paul, In Psalms and Hymns and Spiritual Songs,
singing with a grace in your hearts unto the Lord; and to labor for that
inward joy of the Holy Ghost, which may make them truly and secretly happy; as
for outward recreations, they allow them gladly, but only such forsooth, as
whereby the body may be better, and the soul no worse; and higher they will not
go. Alas, we have either no Holidayes, or no sport in them, no Jubilees, no
Carnevals, no Pageants, no musical Vespers, no Bishops now (as it falls out)
either Boys of Men; no baiting of Bulls, but with Dogs to observe a Statute,
no Wakes, no May-games, no Christmas Lords; shortly like weak Melancholicks we
boast of no pleasure, but honest, sober, modest, and such as might not
mis-become an Heremite, nor shame a Saint.

CHAP. III. The trinmgh of Holiness.
WHiles we profess to lament the impurity of the lives of too many of ours,
confessing it incapable of either denial or concealment, our Good mother of
Rome boasts still of her holiness, and we may believe her. Only it has been
her unhappy lot to meet with unkind sons, which have not stuck to blazon her
as shamefully foul, both in life and doctrine; and her mishap has been yet
the harder, that the honester men have been still the more clamorous. It was
but a gentle word of Cassander when he said, Non inficior Romanam Ecclesiam a
prisco suo decore and splendore non parum diversam. Cassand, de offic. boni.
viri.

Status insuper Ecclesiae nonne factus est totus quasi brutalis and monstrosus.
Gers. Sermon. in die Circumcisionis. Inquirite si quae hodie claustra Monialium
facta sunt sicut prostibula meretricun; siquae Consecrata Canonicorum
Monasteria siant quasi fora and diversoria, etc, Joh. Gers. declaratio defectum.


he denied not but that the Church of Rome had not a little departed from her
wonted beauty and splendour: But who would believe that so pious a man as John
Gerson, Chancellor of Paris should so slander his mother as to say, The state
of the Church is grown altogether brutish and monstrous; and should give an
Item to the overseers to inquire whether the Cloisters of Nuns be not become
the Stews of Harlots, and the Monasteries of Canons be not grown to be Innes
and Marketplaces; and whether their Cathedral Churches be not made the Dens
of Thieves and Robbers; And that another no less godly then he, should say,
that the Church is grown to that pass, that it is not worthy to be governed by
any but by Reprobates. Libido s^upri, gulae, coeterique indecoris non minor
incesserat Adolescentes Pati muliebria, sacerdotes sacere virilia, vestales
pudicitiam in propatulo, habere, etc.

Nam quicunque impudicus adulter and ganeo, anu, pene, ventre bona patria
Lancinaverat, Romam velut in Asylum se recipiebat Orat. praemonitoria Caesaris
Branchedauriae ad Imper. etc.


Who would think that so wise a man as Caesarius Branchedorus could so far
overreach as to say, that the lusts of whoredom and gluttony, and other
shameful enormities had gotten such an head, that young men did Pati muliebria,
and Priests did facere virilia; that their Nuns did as it were openly
profess unchastity: and at last, that whosoever was noted to be a shameless
Adulterer, or a wild Ruffian that had lavisht out all his Patrimony anu, pene,
ventre, was sure to betake himself to the Court of Rome as his Sanctuary; Yea
who would think that such a Saint as Bernard should not stick to say of some
places under the Roman obedience, Si auderem dicere' daemonum magis quam ovium
pascua haec. Bern. Consid. l. 4. c. 2.

Dico tamen in nostris Episcopatibus, jus, ^as, honestas, religio perierunt.
Bern. in persona Episcopi, Treverensis Epist. 177.

Vertant (aiebant majores) uxores in sorores, ac. haec aeras vertit in
scortilla, amiculas and metetriculas, and consequenter liberos legitimos in
mamzeres, nothos and spurios.

Espenc. Appendice Deus abstulit nobis filios, Diabolus dedit nepotes. Alexand.
Papa, Idem. citante Espencoeo: ibid.

Non huc adducam quanta sit turba Monasteriorum, in quibus adeo nulla viget
disciplina pletatis ut prae his lup^nacia si^t and magis sobria and magis
pudica. Erasm. Epist. Grunnio.

Deteriores profecto non Gentilibus, verum etiam Daemonibus. Nic. Clemangis de
lapsu and repar. Justitiae.

Albert. Argentinus in Chronic. Revis. de Conc. de Trente.


that they were not pastures of Sheep, but (if he durst say so) of Devils; and
could cry out that in their Bishoprics, Justice, Right, Honesty, Religion,
were utterly lost. Who could have looked for such language to fall from so grave
a father as Espencaeus, that our Ancestors wished that Clerks should turn their
Wives into their Sisters; but now our Age turns them into Lemmans and Whores,
and Harlots, and consequently their lawful issue into Bastards; And again, God
has taken away our Sons, and the Devil has given us Nephews. Who could
imagine that so learned and ingenuous a man as Erasmus, would so far wrong his
Neighbors as to say, (turba monasteriorum,) a number of Monasteries are so
degenerated, that the Stews are more chaste, and sober, and modest then they.
That so honest a man as Nicol de Clemangis should cry out of these sacrilegious
profaners of the Church, as worse, not then Heathens only, but then very
Devils. And what shall we say to that holy Bishop who told, Benedict the 12.
then newly elected Pope, that he had had a Vision wherein that face of his was
clearly represented to him, and withal, that therein, also there was shown to
him a beastly dirty stable with a white Marble coffer in the midst of it, very
fair but empty, adding this Commentary upon his said Vision to his new
Holiness: You are that white coffer, the Church is that stable; it beho^es you
to purge the Court and See Apostolic which is at this day in a soul and
beastly condition All this while these men speak not of those professedly
debauched wretches, that make a trade of filthiness, whereof yet St. Thomas
Aquinas makes a cleanly comparison, Id facit in mundo meretrix qoud sentina in
navi, in palatio cloaca. Toll baec and omnia ^aetore replebis. Thom. de Reg.
Princ. l. 4.
and in a sort a plea for their toleration; That a Whore in the World is as the
pumpe in the Ship, or a privy in a Palace; Take these away, and you shall fill
them with stench and annoyance: Surely (by the way) upon this account Rome must
needs be very sweet, when in that City alone in the year 1565. as it said,
there were reckoned no fewer then 2800. Rivet. iu Petri Sanct.
Curtisans; whereof if any should be coy and pretend to a repentant modesty,
Cogi possunt ad patiendum, se cognosci. Anton. Schappius in Lib. de Jure non
scripto. Vivald. Cand. 4. part. c. 3.
some grave Authors of theirs have taught that they may be compelled to their
fornication, though the shamefaced Casuist Covarruvids blush at the motion: but
what speak I of Fornication, Fornication is but mere chastity in comparison of
what their own Casuists confess to be usually acted in their (...); I will
favor chaste eyes in concealing it. Athenaus and Aelianus.
It was a strange Devotion in the Heathen Corinthians, that they prayed for an
increase of their Whores, and thought to please their gods with vows of
bringing in more supply of Curtisans. I never heard that Venice it self ever
did so much: Ywis, there is no need of any such Devotion, there are store of
such cattle everywhere. Supplicat of Beggars. Vid. Fox. Monum. and Acts.
The supplication of Beggars tendered to King Henry the eight, assured him that
by virtue of the sacred Votaries, there were 100000. Whores in this our Nation;
not all such sure by open profession (as what and how many acts make up that
trade) which some measure only by scores, Truly they do nothing but apply
themselves in all things how they may have every man's Wife, every man's
Daughter, and every man's Maid. Vbi supra.
others by thousands (I leave to their Vivaldus, and Mosconius to determine)
but by secret constupration; for they instance in men's Wives and Daughters, and
Maidservants thus foulely debauched; though no doubt many a one of them the
while, wipt their mouths and made fair weather of it, Luther. Sermones
Gonvivales.
pretending chastity, and therein resembling a foul close-stoole with a gilt
cover: Neither was it otherwise elsewhere; whereupon it was that Dr. Staupitius
told the Bishop of Magdeburgh that he was the greatest whore-master in Germany;
for whereas other masters of the trade had but fifty Florens yearly, the
Bishop had no less for his rent of them then 500. l. Did these odious crimes
shroud their heads in Brothel-houses only, the shame were less; Although the
very Abassines could teach us to bar these filthes out of our Cities, and as
our fore fathers were wont to disgrace them with peculiar habits of infamy; But
that the reproach of such foul guiltiness should be cast upon holy Orders,
upon persons professing strict mortification, Quidam sacerdotes cum propriis
sororibus concum bentes Filios exeis generarunt, omnes ergo foeminae
excludantur. Council. Moguntin. sub Stephano. c. 10. Providendum est quantum
possumus ne mali sacerdotes sint; etiamsi boni multi esse non possumus. Salm.
Tract. Christum. esse in Euchar. adorand. Domini Eccles. non damnetis animas
vestras habetis maintenant filos virgins. Habetis aves cantantes de nocte quae
sunt a la cage vos been intelligitis me; Ponatis eas extra. Menot. Feria a post
Dominic. 40. fol. 129.

Omnia bona Ecclesia sticorum transe^ntper eroismots de I. Ave Marie. Primo
benedicta tu, Ce sont les grandes pompes, grandes bragances, and. Menot. Feria.
6. Sab. post Dominic. 40. fol. 8.

Certe videtur quod praelati sint per modum flagelli missi a Deo, vel potius
dati a Diabolo ad destruendum and depopulandum ecclesiam. Idem. Menot. fol. 81.
Quidam dicunt que le corones des Prestres seront pavees des cues de enfer.
Menot. fol. 63.


the slander is intolerable: Were the fathers of the Council of Mentz well
advised when they could say, Quidam sacerdotes, etc. some Priests lie with
their own Sisters, and beget children of them? Was Salmeron sober when he said,
we must provide what we may that our Priests may not be bad men, though many of
us cannot be good? Was the zealous Preacher Friar Menotein in his right wits
when in the Pulpit he played so boldly upon the Clergy; Ye, my Masters of the
Church, do not damn your souls; ye have now Birds in a Cage that chirp to you
by night; ye know my meaning; put them away. Did he not rave when he told them
that all the goods of their Churchmen pass away upon three words of the Ave
Marie; First Benedicta tu, in their great pompes and braveries; The second, in
mulieribus, their Gossips and Lemmans; The third Fructus ventris, in their
Banquets and Belly-cheere? But was he not stark staring mad when he siad,
Verily it seems that our Prelates were sent of God by way of a scourge to us,
or rather given by the Devil to destroy and ruin the Church; and other where,
they say that the streets of hell are paved with our Priests crowns; yea, not
to mention Dominicus a Soto; which confesses the multitude of concubinaries,
and adulterers, in their Clergy; Sacerdos quidam rediens a focaria sua, etc.
Brom, Sum. predunt V. Luxuria.
Was not out Bromiard worthy of a sharp censure for that shrewd tale which he
tells of a Priest returning from his Lemman somewhat late, who hearing a
lamentable noise of a ghost not far from him, asked what or who he was? the
ghost replied, who art thou that ask? A Priest said the man: A Priest? said
the ghost, A Priest? and being asked why he redoubled the word with such a
vehemence, answer was made by the ghost, that there came daily such store of
Priests to hell, Mali praelati animas tradunt custodiendas daemonibus 1. malis
curatis qui eas plus quam daemones destruunt. Brom. ibid. V. Praelatus.

Quia daemones non tot committerant luxurias, etc.


that he had thought there had been none left alive upon earth: And elsewhere,
Mali Praelati, etc. Ill Prelates says he, commit souls to the Devils to keep,
that is, to lewd Curates which destroy them more then the Devils themselves;
for the very Devils would not commit such riotous outrages, nor give so many
wicked examples as they: Not to make any reckoning of our Jeffry Chaucer or
their Friar Mantuan, whose tongues shall pass for no slander. Horror enim est
audire quam multa perperam per 28. ferme Episcopos sint admissa.

Naucler. vel 2. Generat. 31.


What shall we say to their own Chronicler Nauclerus who has presumptuously
dared to say Horror est, etc? What foul things were done by twenty eight Popes
on a row, it is horrible to tell. In the mean time it is welll for the fathers
of the Society that they are stanche; for that their holy founder St. Ignatius
Loiota prayed for them, Alphons. Vargas Relat. Stratagem Jesuit.
as Alphonsus Vargas tells us, that none of that fellowship for an 100. years
after the rule received might fall into any deadly sin; so as all is cock-sure
for them, however their Tussonius, and Reihnigius, and Coprevicius are
slandered with no small faults; and many false tales are told of them by their
Hassenmullerus, and our secular Priests, and Robinson, and Waddesworth, with
other malevolents. As for the holy Sisterhood, however it have been in times of
yore that scarce any one of them could be found that was not furnished with her
Devotus Carnalis, as Alvarez Pelagius enformes us; yet now there is order taken
with them to be chaste enough (except you would stand upon the overstrict terms
of the rule of St. Columbanus, Quid prodest virgo corpore, si non est mente?
Columb. Regal.

Fenestra qua S. Eucharistiae elevatio prospiciatur altius ne pateat duobus
cubitis and unciis 2. ne sacerdos ex altar possit videre moniales Pro. 1.
Gavant. V. Monialium Eccles.

Caminus privatis cellis ne permittatur; and ubi est obstruatur. Pro. 4. Gavant.


Quid prodest, etc. what availes it to be a Virgin in body, if not in mind
too?) There were never poor maids hampered with so straight laws as they; not
so much as the Priest at Mass shall be allowed to have but a glint of them:
The Bishop himself, when their persons, yet shall not visit their faces. Not
to instance in more; Not a chimny shall be suffered to be made in their private
Cells, or if any be made, it shall be stopped up, lest some Amorous Jupiter
should descend down that way in a golden shower; and all this perhaps little
enough; Ask the Sisters at Lisbon else: Poor souls, Inclusa quaedam
sanctissime vrpecat, etc. Brom. sun. V. Confessio.
what will be come of them trow we, if our Bromiard say true, who tells us of
an holy Recluse which had been long meured up in her chaste Cell; at last
espying a fair handsome stripling through the keyhole, having more then a
months mind to him, and soon after dying, appeared to her Sisters in a woeful
posture and told them, that for that one glance of her eye, and that one wanton
wish she was damned.

Thus are those godly Governors careful to prevent evils; and when they are
discovered, are as ready to punish them, having ordained many sharp laws for
the correction of heinous offenders; As for example, the Council of Lateran,
Anno 1179. enacted, that if any Clerk were taken in that incontinency which is
against nature, he should be excommunicated and cast out of the Clergy; which
yet perhaps some Draco-like Lawgivers would have punished with death it self.
Other severe Penances have they laid upon Adulteries and such other lighter
sins, as they call them, which we shall meet with in their due places.

So as after all these scandalous aspersions cast enviously upon our holy
Mother, who sees not that she surmounts in purity of conversation all her
competitors; who whiles they tax her, are willing enough to forget their own
guiltiness. Just as the Parthians who in fight with the Romans, having slain
one Rustius a Roman Soldier, Such as the cursed Monk Dan Constunter has
written in his Book of Coitu Chaucer Merchants Tale.
and finding in his pocket a ribaldish pamphlet called Mil^sii (as bad belike
as the cursed Monk Dan. Constantine wrote De coitu) cried out upon the beastly
humor of these men which could bring bawdy papers into the field with them,
whiles themselves who were thus clamorous had brought along with them no fewer
then a thousand Harlots to follow their Camps. Clodius accusat maechos.

And as for purity of Doctrine, who can make doubt of their sensible advantage?
What though they preach up the lawfulness of the public Stews, of a delusive
equivocation, of the murder of heretical Kings, and determine of the horrid
sacrilege of a mouse that eats her maker, the equality of Traditions to the
written word of God, the inerrablenesse of a sinful and wicked man; an equal
adoration to the stock and to the Saint, and a thousand such seeming
heterodoxies? yet we must know that if the Church have defined them so, they
are de fide, and must be believed by us to be no less true then the Gospel.
Fond Heretics will not know the Latitude of the power of the Church; but they
must be taught that what point soever she shall determine, though it be but
that Toby had a Dog, and that dog had a tail, it must in that name go current
for fundamental. Heu, Fides and Christianitas crescunt hodie sicut Lunaplena,
and equus coccus. Brom. V. Fides.
Upon which weighty considerations it was (for one) that our Bromiard could
say, that Faith and Christianity increase and thrive amongst them, like a full
Moon, or a blind Horse.

Now on the contrary, if you look to the lives of the Opposites, you shall
find their very Leaders foulely scandalous, and infamously branded; Martin
Luther, if he were begot by an Incubus, yet he was an honest Friar, Luther.
S^rm. Conviv.
as he could say of himself for 15. years together; then, as the World knows,
turned Apostate: What though Erasmus and all other his adversaries confess he
was (setting his marriage with Katherine Bora aside, which in a Cloister they
looked upon as no less then sacrilege) of an inoffensive conversation; for
although the wit of an hyperbolical Balzac can play upon him, and say he
vomited as many times as he spoke; yet he should have much ado to find that
(though a German) he was once drunk in his life, or guilty of any excess: Yet
if a clean life, he had a foul mouth, as both the Pope and King Henry can
witness, and which alone blazons him sufficiently, was taught by the Devil to
cry down the Mass. What if he seriously and plainly confess, that the Devil
taking advantage of his former superstition urged upon him those arguments
purposely to have driven him to despair for his guiltiness of that Idolatrous
service? that is all one, we must believe it was done by that foul spirit in a
way of hellish familiarity, and not in any hostile fashion; and though there be
never so many proofs of his dying in a composed and Christian manner, yet we
must be content to be faced down that he was violently killed by the Devil whom
he had served. For John Calvin, it is well enough known that the World rings of
him as stigmatized and foulely criminous; howsoever Geneva magnifies him for
Exemplary and Saint-like holiness, and all men admire him for his incredible
painfulnesse in his Station, Rivet. in Petr. sanct.
having for 23. years together preached daily; besides his doubled Sunday
labors, and his weekly Divinity Lecture in the Schools, and all this not
perfunctorily performed; howsoever then any wise man might well think how
utterly inconsistent such assiduous toil can be with basely-lascivious
thoughts and actions [Otia si tollas, is the old and true word] And however the
State of Geneva by authentical Testimony under their public seal have fully
cleared him from that malicious aspersion; yet it is enough that a Balsec, his
professed enemy an infamous Apostate, has said it; he cannot be innocent whom
such a Saint accuses, though fifteen years after death. As for another of
their good Leaders Huldricus Zuinglius, did it not become him well, of a
preacher of peace to turn firebrand of war, to change his Gown into a
Corselet, and in stead of his quiet bed to die in the field? What, if it appear
that he was importunately pressed by those of his charge to yield them his
presence amids their Troops, not as a Soldier, but as a Pastor (though armed
for more security) what if he were unhappily slain amongst other his good
neighbors (as it was the lot of that incomparable Chamier at Montalban) and
after burnt by the Tigurines to ashes? And what if (for a mavelous Testimony
of his honest intentions) his heart alone was three days after such his
combustion found in that heap of ashes entire and untouched? yet how can it be
other then a foul slur to his reputation, that a professed Preacher should be
found thus dead, and wrapped not in lead but in iron? Whatever liberty latter
times have taken, neither the Ancient Councils abroad, nor our Octobone Canons
at home, would have endured it; and we know who sending the coat armor of a
consecrated person taken captive to the Pope, could say, Vide an haec sit
tunica filii tui; See if this be your sons coat.

To let pass their guides, if we cast down our eyes upon their followers in
general, Cardinal Bellarmine has passed their doom roundly and soundly. As
for the people (says he) there are indeed in the Catholic Church many bad
men, but of the Heretics there is not one good; Ipse dixit; and if the
Cardinals make up but one body with the Pope, by virtue of that union he can no
more err in his sentence then his Holiness himself; and so actum est de
haereticis; the sum of all is, The Church of Rome after all slanders is holy;
the opposite Churches after all Apologies are equally impure as she is holy.

CHAP. IV. The triumph of Power.
AS in Glory, Pleasure, and Purity, so much more in Power does our foresaid
Mother of Rome exceed all her Rivals. Lest you doubt it, her power is clearly
seen in her mighty Jurisdiction, and in her miraculous operations. For first,
what is it that her ministerial head wants of omnipotency? Supra jus, contra
jus, etc. Moscon. de Majest. Eccl. milit. l. 1. De summo. Pont.
Ask Mosconius, and he can assure you that the Pope is above law, against law,
without law, and therefore can do all things; he can open and shut Heaven,
Hell, In omni promissorio juramento Potestas Papae excipitur. Reg. Cas. Jo.
Bacon in 4. Did. 25. q. 14.
and Purgatory; He can dispense with vows and oaths; insomuch as in every
promissory oath that a man swears, the Popes power is tacitly fore-excepted;
He can increase the number of the Books of the holy Scripture; He can Canonize
Saints, Revis. du Council. de Trente.
Depose and dethrone Kings, Dispose of all earthly Dominions; So as it was
acutely distinguished by Jacobus de Terano, that when our Savior gave charge to
render unto Caesar the things that are Caesar's, he meant it for a continuance
but only for the present until the time of his crucifixion, telling us that
when he shall be lifted up, he will draw all to him; that is (says he) he will
take away all the Kingdoms of the Earth from Temporal Princes, and bestow them
upon his holy Vicar the Pope, Rodrigoez Cas. Conscient.
by virtue whereof he can mould and frame Kings to his own pleasure; For
example, he can command a King to take such a wife as he shall recommend to
him; he can dethrone and depose the proudest Monarch. Yea what do I speak so
narrowly and mincingly of his power? he is Rex Regum, Moscon. Ubi supra.
and Dominus Dominantium, the King of Kings, Omnis rationalis creatura Papae
imperio subjacer. Ibid.

Papae unum Tribnal cum Deo. Ibid.


and Lord of Lords; every rational creature is subject to his rule and command:
and in short he has one and the same Tribunal with God himself; So as it was
but his meet Title, that was in our time given to Pope Paul the fifth; Paulo
Quinto Vice-Deo; Gul. Sruther. Spec. Princip.
which after some agitation in the consistory, was resolved upon by his
Holiness to be a Style not unfit for himself to own. Genesius Sepulveda would
seem to tell us no less, Ponti^^ces pro Deo habemus, we account of the Pope
as instead of God himself; Quicunque desiderat primatum in terra, inveniet
confusionem in coelo. Chrysostom. in Matthew. hom. 43. Ibid Moscon.
Papae: this height is for wonder, not for emulation. Now, what if a Saint
Chrysostom shall say, He that affects a Primacy on Earth, shall find
confusion in Heaven; That wind shakes no corn; certainly he were much too
blame, that having the keys of Heaven hanging at his girdle, would not let in
himself.

If you think fit to look down to the subordinate Clergy, their power will be
found no less then stupendous: As no Prelate but has power to excommunicate,
so their excommunication is dreadfully powerful. The Abbey of Fusniack was
horribly infested with flies; Vita Bernardi.
Excommunico eas, said the holy Abbot of Clarevall; on the next morning those
noisome guests are found all dead in the floor: A. Roberto Grosthead Ep.
Lincoln. Vivaldus, Excom. est jumentum Diaboli.

Ossa tacta a Rob. Brook excom. per Thomam Becket canes noluerunt comedere.
Florileg. Anno 1170.


A white loaf upon the words of excommunication passed turns as black as a
coal; absolved, turns to the former hew. Robert Brook being excommunicate,
(and by virtue thereof become jumentum Diaboli) the very Dogs refused to take
the bones from his hands, which he offered unto them; and as readily snatched
away being tendered by others; Mr. Clovet in his motives to conversion.
They can give up whom they list to the power of the Devil, and rid whom they
please from that evil spirit by their mighty exorcismes. Leo African. def^r.
Affricaae

Diabolo possidenti quendam, dicit Franc. Faciam Fratrem Iuniperum venire
contra te, nisi recedas, and Demon subito recedebat. Lib. Conform. Francisc.
Foecundatur fructu. 8.


And if but a piece of a Versicle of Despauterius his Grammar be but muttered
over the Demoniack, Carbasus hic, etc. the foul spirit dares not abide by it:
But if it be some stiff Fiend such as the African conjurers of Fez were wont
to style Aerie spirits, let but St. Francis threaten to send Friar Juniper to
him, he dares not stand the encounter; so as it was a word of unjust
disparagment which Chrysostom could cast upon their Exorcists, Nos miseri, Nos
miseri and calamitofi qui neque culices expellere possumus; nedam Daemones.
Chrysostom. in illa Qui credit in me majora faciet.
etc. miserable and woeful creatures that we are, we cannot so much as expel
fleas, much less Devils. But it is yet a far higher power which every Priest
by virtue of his office can and dares challenge to exercise, even no less then
to create his maker. Casseneus can tell you, Licet Angelus; Licet Angelus
possit unum coelum movere. etc.

Cassen. Glor. Mundi. 4. number. 6.


although (says he) one Angel can move one heaven, yet he cannot bring down
one of those heavens to the earth: But a Priest can speedily and suddenly
fetch the true body of Christ from Heaven to the Altar, even in so short a
space as the Sun can diffuse his beams of light; Yea herein a Priest says the
Author exceeds the power of the Archangels: Imo vero superat potestatem
Archangelorum, ubi supra.
And I hope we shall not need to strive to go higher; and let this be the
beginning of her miraculous operations, though ordinarily and constantly
wrought: There is a world beside of extraordinary and occasional miracles
whereby her Religion is not a little honored and confirmed. Ywis, our
Reformers must confess themselves here to seek: Can they boast of a St.
Briget, St. Brigida panem datum cani adulanti, quod restituitur in caldario;
vita Brigid^ Kildurensis a Cogitoso ejus nepote scripta.

Os infantis nuperrime nati, etc.


that having given a piece of Bacon to a fawning Curre, yet after he had eaten
it found it again restored in her kettle? That but signing a newborn Infant
with a cross, caused it to disclaim the wrongfully imputed father and to name
the true; and was not the child (trow we) as miraculous as the Saint, Pater
meus on est Episcopus Broen, sed homo ille vila qui in populo ultimus sedet.
Jo. Capgrave in vita Brigid^.

Tangens lignum altaris, in testimonium virginitatis, statim viride factum est,
vita Brig. p. 206. Ova fracta pauperculae signo crucis reparavit. ^lorileg. St.
Brendanus Paschalem solemnitatem supra monstrosam maris belluam per septennii
spatium celebravit.

Gerald. Camtr. trues de mirac. c. 10.

Post longos and indefatigabiles labores desideratissima Paradisi terrestris
visione, etc. Idem ibid.


that he could know his own father? That for a proof of her Virginity, did but
touch the seare-wormeaten wood of the Altar, and turn it fresh and green. Can
they brag of a Saint Swithine that by making the sign of the Cross made whole
the poor woman's eggs that were all unhappily broken in her basket?

Can they show us a St. Brendais that for seven years together celebrated his
Easter upon a Whales back, mistaken at first for an Island; but when it was
perceived, St. Machu^es (as happy was) by his prayers fixed that Sea Monster
for starting; so as after that, the same Saint traveled so far as to the
earthly Paradise, and as good luck was, returned safely home: But whether that
Whale lay there lieger for the whole seven years together, or whether it came
kindly every Easter to seek and find out St. Brendan, and to offer the service
of his back to so holy a purpose (because the earth could not afford room
enough for that business) truly I cannot show you.

Libro de sanctis Hibernicis nuper Latin. edit.
Can they produce us such a Saint as St. Fingare, who sailing from Ireland upon
a broad leaf into Cornwall, in the disappointment of her shipping, being
martyred by the Tyrant, carried her head in her arms (just as the great French
Saint did) up to an hill not far off, with intention to bury it there; but
hearing some unquiet Gossips scolding there, brought it down into the valley,
and washing it in a Well that sprang up there, purposely in the place quietly
buried it and her self? Now in my mind, Dr. Picard^^ of Paris the late
ill-advised Editor of those uncouth relations of the Irish Saints, with so
great gravity and authority, was much too blame to give the Heretics such free
leave to laugh at those too-admirable Stories, Rideant sane si volunt segreges
hodierni. Picard. praefat.
which otherwise they might have perhaps passed over without any great change
of countenance, or at least with an easy smile; whereas now they cannot but
laugh a good at his so prodigal indulgence and prodigious faith.

Can you brag of a Saint Clare that stood still from holy Thursday in the
afternoon till the Saturday Vespers in one place [nihil perpendendo] thinking
of nothing? St. Clara sterit a die Jovis sancto post vesperam usque ad Sabathi
sancti horam tertiam nihil perpendendo. Lib. conform. fol. 105. Lib. de sanctis
Hibern. praecitat.
wherein yet she had not so much patience as her Sister-Saint in Ireland, who
putting her hand out of her window, had a Thrastle came and laid her eggs in
her hand; where the good woman stood stock still till those eggs were hatched,
and in all likelihood stirred not till the pretty Birds were fledge, that she
might not lose the fruit of so great a mercy. In the mean time we must think
the place was no less sweet, Wilhelm^s Abbot Willariensis jussit oeconomum
bovem suum, etc. Spec. exempt. ex. Tho. Canterprat.
then was the music of that grateful Bird.

Can they show us such a merciful Saint as the good Abbot of Willar, who to
save a poor big-bellied woman's longing, killed his Ox, and gave the poor soul
a good piece of beef thereof, which yet was the next morning found alive
soundly grazing in his pasture? Can they tell us of such a Saint as the holy
Bishop Everm^^dus of Raceburgh, Everm. Raceburg. Episcopus Chirothecas
deposuit; inventae sunt in aere penpentes.

Lib. de sanct. tribun. Fr. Conradus qui suscitavit quinque mortuos. Lib.
Conform. page 199.


who thinking to lay his Mittins upon a spirgat on the wall, left them hanging
upon the Sunbeams; right, so as St. Bridget (alike mistaking) hanged her wet
cloak. Can they show us such a Thaumaturgus as Friar Conrade; who raised five
men from the dead? or such a powerful Orator as Friar Antony of Padua; who
finding his labor lost in converting the Heretics, went to the Sea side and
called the Fishes together both small and great, Ingens multitudo piscium
accessit and caput exerebant extra mare. Confor. Franc. Foecundatur.
which in whole shoales assembled themselves, and lifting up their heads above
the water, listened very attentively to his forcible persuasions, and no doubt
could not but be turned Catholics, as they plainly testified in their
silence: The success whereof could not but stir envy in the peevish Heretics,
who bidding the holy man to supper, set before him a great ugly Toad, Unde
Bufonem ingentem etc. ecce corpus caponis calidissimum and olens, etc. Ibid.
urging him with that charge in the Gospel [VVhatsoever shall be set before
you, eate] but he did only make the sign of the Cross over it, and it was
suddenly turned into a goodly fat Capon, piping hot from the spit, Fr. Bened.
de Aretio multum devotus Danieli. Prophetae, affectavit ejus sepulchrum, etc.
Lib. Conform. fol. 73.
Can they name us such a Favorite as Friar Benedict of Aretium, who having
been much devoted to the blessed memory of the Prophet Daniel, had a great
mind to visit his Tomb in Babylon; but being disheartened with the length of
the Journey, and the fear of the Dragon that keeps it, one day as it happily
fell out, an huge great Dragon appeared to him, and enwrapping him in the
windings of his long-sweeping tail flew away with him roundly to Babylon (was
not his heart at his mouth, think we, the while?) and set him down fair and
softly close by the Tomb aforesaid; where he viewing that sacred Corpse, made
so bold out of his deep devotion to borrow a finger of it to keep for a
precious Relic: When straightwayes up was he snatched again by that friendly
Dragon, and carried gently and safely to his old Cell. Dionys Carthusiuanus de
4, Novisse. Part. 3. cic. a Kelleto numero in Miscellan.
Can they speak of such a Saint as Christina, who dying in her childehood was
kindly welcomed into Heaven, but was withal offered the choice whether of
staying still there in happiness, or returning to the Earth again for her
greater merits in delivering poor souls out of their Purgatory torments? she
like a most charitable Saint chooses the latter: Down therefore she comes to
this lower World; where yet she so lives as not abiding the stench of the
sins of men, she makes her residence on high, perching on the tops of the
tallest Trees, and the loftiest Pinacles, and satisfies her hunger with the
milk of her own breasts: And why might not her Virginity afford her milk enough
out of her own store? Ask Dionysius the Carthusian else. Vexillifer Christi.


Lib. Conform. l. 1. Fructu. 10. page 140. Ovem sibi oblatam sic instruxit ut
cum Fratres in Ecclesia cantarent, ipsa ingrederetur, ut sine alicujus
informatione genua flecteret, vocem balatus emmittens.

Lib. Confor. p. 191. Franciscus dicendo missam in calice araneam invenit quam
nolens pro^jcere, bibit cum sanguine, etc. fol. 72. Aquam de Petra bibendam
dedit oratione sua cuida cujus asino vectabatur. Conform. 187. Capilli B.
Francisci immissi muro fracturam redintegrarunt. Conf. fol. 193.

Nihil Christus fecit quod Franciscus non fecit, immo plura fecit quam
Christus. L. Confor. fol. 1149.

Fontem aquae mutavit in vinum in Marchia Page 147. Christus semel aquam in
vinum mutavit, Franciscus ^er. Christus semel transfiguratus est, Franc.
vigesies.


But not to instance in thousands: Can they sample us with such a pattern of
powerful Sanctity as blessed St. Francis Christ's Standard Bearer, as they style
him, and Jesus typical; Heaven and Earth are filled with astonishment at his
wonders: What should I talk of the petty miracles of the reclaiming of his
Brother Wolf, and instructing of his Sister Sheep; the obedience and homage
done to him by the Fowls of the Air, Fishes of the Sea, and the Ants of the
Earth; or the Spider which he willingly swallowed down his throat at Mass,
creeping whole out of his thigh; or water fetched out of the Rock to satisfy
the thirst of that honest man which had lent him his Ass; or a lock of his
hair laid in the crack of a riven Wall, making up the breach without mortar,
and a world of the like feats; the History of his wonderful Conformities to
Christ published lately with great authority by Bartolomaeus de Pesis, doubts
not to tell you, that as he was conformed to Christ in his wounds, so he
transcended Christ in his miracles: If our blessed Savior turned some vessels
of water into wine, Francis turned a whole fountain so; if our Savior raised
some few from the dead, he and his then-present retinue raised up no less then
a thousand: After his death, by his merits he freed 1000. souls out of
Purgatory, Franciscus and fratres sui supra millenos mortuos ad vitam
revocarunt, plus mill Deabolos ejecerunt, Mar^. Luther in proefat. Germanic.
libro prefixa.

Demon Baroni cuidam moranti in Alpibus juxta Eugublu narrat mortem Francis.
and ^it, da^ae sunt ei animae plusquam mill pro suo comitatu, quas suis
meritis liberavit. Lib. Conf. p. 318. Obviam venerunt ei ad coelum ascendenti,
Christus, matter ejus, Angeli coetus Apostolorum. Fol. 324.

In supremo omnium ordinum, 1. Seraphico locata est anima Francisci. Ibid.

Domus Lauret. ter mota loco ab Angelis, 1. per miliaria 2000. Tursell. in
Priaef. hist.


as the Devil told a certain Baron living in the Alp^s; and with that train
his soul was seen by Bernardus de Quinta Valle in the form of a bright Star
ascending into Heaven, and was triumphantly met in the way by Christ and his
blessed Mother, the Angels, the Apostles, Martyrs, and holy Doctors, and placed
in a throne of the highest order of Seraphins, the formerly vacant seat of
Lucifer. Lastly, for it were easy to be endless; Can they tell us of any holy
building that travailed through the Air (God knows why, and when, and whence)
two thousand miles at once, as our Lady of Lorettoes Chapel did? Have they any
such strange and faithful records as the Golden Legend, John Capgrave, Speculum
exemplorum, and such other famous Monuments? which perhaps the Heretics, and
some ill advised friends may slander as lies; calling them Miraculorum monstra,
as Melchior Canus did, and stick not to say, that if the Saints in Heaven could
know what is written of them, and could be capable of Humane affections in that
Region of impassibility, they would surely blush for shame, to see such
prodigious tales fained concerning them; How many lies does this young man tell
of me?
and as they say, Socrates when he read Plato's Dialogismes could say, Quam
multa de me mentitur adolescens? so doubtless would they say; How many gross
lies do these idle Cloiste ers raise of us? Yet for all that, honest
Catholics do as verily believe that St. Patrick raised not only Fota from
the grave after he had lain there ten years; but also the great Giant Glass,
a man of an 120. foot long, Jo. Capgrave de vita St. Patricii. Sextus Rex
Edward. in mensa sedens Westmonast. risit and dixit septem dormientes in monte
Celio requiescere jam 200. annis in dextro Latere, jam vertisse latus. Anonym.
Continuat. Hist. de best. Angl^y.
the Irish Kings Hogheard, an hundred years after his burial, and christened
him, and freed him from his old torments? And that the seven Sleepers in Mount
Celius after two hundred years lying on the right side, did on the sudden
for more ease turn them to the left; as fools abroad do believe, that all the
posterity of the Persecutors of St. Thomas Becket are at this day borne with
long hairy Tails dangling down behind them.

No, no, all other pretended Churches may go whistle for Miracles; whereas
Lipsius can tell you of the two Ladies that have done hundreds, and every story
can inform you how frequently the retired Cells of holy Hermites have been
visited by celestial guests: Diabolus in forma Christi apparere praesumpsit
multoties Ruffino. Lib. confor. Conf. 7.
Only the spite is, the holy Book of conformities it self tells us that the
Devil himself has not seldom appeared to Friar Ruffin and others of his
Fraternity in the garb and form of Christ, and in such illusions has so
cunningly demeaned himself, that he has dangerously deceived the beholders; 2
Cor. 11.14.
and we know who told us that Satan himself is often transformed into an Angel
of light: now all the craft is to discern the counterfeit Angel from the real
Devil. Luther it seems, would pretend to some such skill; Luther. Sermon,
Convivial.
for when a Neighbor of his, a Maid lying on the bed of her sickness, had
represented to her a very glorious apparition, which both she and her friends
thought no other then heavenly, they sending for Luther to behold that radiant
spectacle, he straight resolved it was an evil spirit; charging the Maid to
defy it in that name, and to spit at it; which with much ado she at last
yielded unto: whereupon that glittering Angelical apparition suddenly turned
it self into an ugly Serpent; and crawling upon the bed of the sick person,
bit her by the ear, and having drawn blood of her vanished: Some eyes are more
piercing then other; howsoever therefore advantage is hereupon by incredulous
men to doubt, whether an ignorant Friar can be more likely to discern which is
the true Devil, Jo. Gerson.
then the wisest man was able to know (in a schism of some fifty years
continuance, when two or three Popes were tugging together by the ears for
Peter's Chair) which was the true Pope! Yet we must take it for a sure rule,
that the Devil may appear in all colors but while, and so long as he has not
a cloven foot, all is safe. In the mean time, the Miracles of Rome remain
unshaken by all froward infidelity. The fond Heretics are ready to choke us
with Vespasians cure of a blind man, and of a lame man too; Vespas. Sputo
curavit coecum, contactu pedum restituit claudum.
and of the great Cures that were done by Pyrrhus his great Toe, yet neither of
these were Saints; and to color and excuse their impotency, can tell us of
John Baptist, who did no miracles; Nota quod Multi non sancti faciunt miracula;
ant vi verborum, ut consecratio Eucharistiae, aut vi parentelae ut Rex
Franciae, vel illi de domo S. Pauli, aut art magica. Dominic. Felin. in Cap.
Venerab. de Test.
and think to stop our mouths with the profession of our Felinus; Multi non
sancti etc. Note, says he, that many who are not Saints, yet do work miracles
either by force of the words, as in the consecration of the Eucharist, or by
virtue of their place or family, as the French King, and those of the house of
Saint Paul, or by Art Magic; and are apt to strengthen their conceit with that
resolution of our famous Postiller John Ferus; who tells us that new
Revelations will indeed stand in need of new Miracles: Novae revelationes egent
novis Miraculis; Vetus autem doctrina sive de Lege sive de Evangelio non
indiget novis miraculis, etc. Jo. Ferus in lib. Judicum.
But the old Doctrine whether of the Law or Gospel, needs no new or further
Miracles, since it is so sufficiently confirmed already, that if an Angel from
Heaven should teach otherwise, and confirm his Doctrine by Miracles, he were
justly worthy to be accursed: But let them enjoy their own dull inefficacy, and
rest content with their own confessed disability; we see in the mean time how
just reason the Church of Rome has to truimph in the visible power of her
unlimited Jurisdiction, and of her (if not incredible) yet unparallelable
Miracles.

CHAP. V. The truimph of Piety or Devotion.
A Professed purity of life without true piety in the heart, is no better then
gilded Hypocrisy; Sincerity of Devotion is the maine ingredient to a Saint:
And herein, if it may appear that our said Mother of Rome does as far exceed
all other Churches, as her seven hills (where she sat of old) do overlook the
Martian Valley (where she now resides) the day and the cause is clearly ours.
Now then, what do we account Devotion, but fasting and praying, and all other
acts of Religious worship? In all which, who dares offer to compare with the
great Metropolis of Christendom? First of all her Fasts, and her Feasts, do as
it were divide the year betwixt them; and are not those Fasts as solemnly and
severely kept, as if all men from the cradle had taken example of St. Nicholas,
who (they say) when he was an Infant, did two days in the week (Wednesdayes
and Fridayes) content himself with sucking but once a day. As for wine and
sweet meats, they break no square how plenteously soever poured down; It is
flesh that breeds the quarrel. In the great Deluge, the Sea escaped the curse;
only the Earth and her store contracted impurity; Let the mawe be crammed
never so full with the most delicious and proritative fish or viandes, and let
them swim in the most inflaming liquor, here is no Fast violated: The
Lollards are strangely mistaken; it is not abstinence but change of diet that
makes an holy Fast; And what a vain brag it is of their great Champion, Chamur.
Nostrae compotaiones sunt modestiores vestris jejuniis.

Vinum Theologicum and Tortae Jacobitarum in proverbium abierunt. Jo. Gerson.

Alex. Alensis. Pleno laudant jejunia ventre.


Nostrae compotationes, etc. Our compotations are more sober then your Fasts;
And full unjustly does John Gerson check our holy Masters with the Proverb of
the Theological Wine, and the Jacobites Cakes: Neither is he worth his ears
that has not learned to distinguish betwixt Jejunium Jejuni, and Jejunium
Jejunantis; and that cannot both commend, and brag of fasting with a full
panch: But to speak ingenuously, it is not a mere not eating that is so
pleasing to God; for then Apollonia Schriera who received no food into her body
for ten years space, Gulielm. Fabricii Observat Medic. Cent. 5. Domino
Brederodio.
should pass for a Saint of greater merit then any History ever before
recorded; and Efgenvougen End the maid of Meurs should go beyond her no less in
reputation of sanctity, who abstained sixteen years from any bodily
sustenance; but therefore only is fasting acceptable to God, for that it gets
us a stomach to our Devotion; Chrysolog. Sermon. 4^
So as Chrysologus had reason to say, Jejunium sine pietate jejunat; A Fast
without Piety may fast for any acceptance, Now if you will measure Piety by
tale of prayers, what Church under Heaven is not over-matcht by the Roman? Tell
me where else ye can find the perpetuity of a forty-hours Letany, upon all
public occasions of Drought, Rain, Famine, War, Pestilence? where so solemn
Processions? where such thraves and lasts of private Oraisons, which without
the well-devised helps of stringed calculation, could never keep even
reekoning? where such a world of new-multiplied Rosaries? where such Masses and
Dirges, and funeral Obsequies for both alive and dead? Show me elsewhere
another Egidius Albornotious, Genesius Sepulveda in vita Albornotii Cardinalis.
that by his last Will and Testament took order for fifty thousand Masses to be
sung for his soul: show me where so many thousand Torches are flaming at a
Cardinals Funeral, Lib. Ceremon. Sacr. Tit de Cardinal.
that the wax amounts usually to no less then six thousand, or eight
thousand pounds: And no marvel; for whiles some other Religions rest piously
contended with the care of pleasing one Mediator, the Roman abounds with as
many Mediators as there are Saints and Angels in Heaven. They have learned
better manners then to rush in rudely to the presence, and to press to the
chair of State; and to blurt out their bold petitions to the King of glory:
Nobis non opus est At^ien^bus etc.
They are taught (whatever Chrysostom says to the contrary) to make their
humble addresses to some friendly Courtiers; and speed in their suit
thereafter; And for this purpose, how happy are they in the variety of their
celestial Patrons; what dolts were the Pagans of old, to adore such mean
ill-chosen Deities! Xenoph de expedit. Cy^i.
The Thurians, if the North wind do but bluster a little upon the threatening
Navy of their enemy Dionystus, clattering the ships one against another,
straightwaies are ready to sacrifice to that propitious deity; and now who but
Boreas? And the Romans erected Temples to the Green sickness and Ague, Pallori
et Febri fana fecerunt August de Consensu Evang. l. 1. c. 17.
for want of wit and better Grace; But these Christian Devotionists know where
to meet with their Beautified and Canonized Patrons at all seasons, and upon
all occurrences; On St. John's day they can implore that Saint especially for a
benediction upon their Wine, on St. Stepens day for their Pastures, on St.
Marks for their Corn, on the Assumption of the blessed Virgin for their
Herbs, Plants, Roots, and Fruit, etc. As for the Marinary deities, they have
plenty, for fear least some of them should not be at leisure, or otherwise
employed in the vast element; St. Andrew, St. Clement, Haytoni Passagiun ^crrae
sanctae.
St. Barbara, St. Nicholus, and St. Michael the Archangel, whose Grecian
Promon^ory Malea, when they pass by, they are glad to ply him with their best
devotions, that he would hold still his wings, from resting too hard upon their
sails, and how can they miscarry under such Tutelage?

Add to these the settled course of their Canonical hours, which either no
secular occasions may intermit; or (if a necessity intervene) must be as
necessarily (redeemed with all speed, lest the suppliant should dye in Gods
debt: Yesterdayes task therefore may be done to day, this day's to morrow;
however the grumbling votary (weary of the burden) is ready to say, Sufficient
to the day is the evil thereof; In this therefore Luther when he was a Friar
approved himself a true paymaster, Luther Sermon. Conviu.
that on the Saturday still locked up himself close to defray the debt of his
omitted devotions all the week long: In the performance whereof, so that the
number be kept up, Non est de ratione orationis ut cogitet orans de ipsa
locutione and Suarez. de Orat. l 3. c. 4.
it matters little what the intention of the thoughts be: So that the Beads
knack, and keep just reckoning, let the eyes rove, and the ears listen, and
the feet walk, and the heart ramble, the work is both done and accepted.

Now for the better fixing of the thoughts which are apt to wander upon all
occasions, and for the heightening of devotion, they have their sacred Images,
before which they are lowly Prostrate, adoring not the statue or picture if
self as such, which even the heathen Idolaters professed to abhor; but the
Saint represented by it. And what if their St. Thomas his determination be that
the resemblance is to be entertained with the same act of worship with the
Prototype; Sacram Imaginem Di Jes. Christi aequo honor cum libro Sanctorum
Evangeliorum adorari decernimus Council Oecum. Constable. 8. Can. 3.
which is more then the Fathers of Constantinople required to be done to the
Image of Christ himself (the respect whereunto they only equalized to the
Veneration of the Book of the holy Gospel) yet they are under a sufficient
guard of distinctions to free them from the imputation of any but a
mis-interpretative Idolatry; and what though it be confessed that the
subtiltyes of those intricate distinctions is such, Spalat. part. 3.
that plain unlettred Laics, not understanding them, do commonly misbestow
divine worship upon those stocks and stones; and though Pope Gregory himself,
professedly forbad their adoration; yet we have learnt of Gregory de Valentia,
that whiles the holy Apostle Peter, tells us of some abominable Idolatries,
(...).
he plainly intimates that there are Idolatries, not abominable, such as these
now used under the Gospel in spite of all sacrilegious Iconoolasts, not as
Laymens books for history only, but as the sensible helps of pure devotion
Furthermore, who can be ignorant of those sweet ditties, and Angelical Hymes,
(far beyond some of Marianaes Canticles) wherewith their devotion is not a
little elevated, in the severalties of their hoy Offices; so exactly revised of
late, by their only Poetical Pope Urban the 8th. that there are no fewer then
900 false quantityes (if we may credit Gavantus) corrected in them; although
the sleering Heretics will be apt to wish that his holiness had rather
bestowed his pains in correcting the faulty sense of the prose, complaining
that in their late corrections, they have (like untrusty Tinkers) pretending to
stop one hole, made two: For example; let Pope Innocent himself be heard
speak, Tertio loco Tua Fraternitas requisivit quare fuerit mutatum etc.

Innocent. P. de Celebratione Missae Cap. cum Martha; etiam cit. Jo. de Neapoli
qu. 41. ad finem.


your Brotherhood (says he) requires to know, why and how it comes to pass
that whereas in the secret service of St. Leo according to the old Copies it
was wont to be read, Grant Lord we beseech thee that this our prayer may be
available to the soul of thy servant Leo; now in our late missals it runs thus
Grant we beseech thee O Lord that by the intercession of St. Leo this prayer
may be available to us; which (says the said Innocent) must be so understood,
that our prayer should sue to be available in this regard, that the Saint above
may be more and more glorified by the faithful on earth. Thus cunningly is the
cat turned in the pan; and instead of our well-wishing to Leo, Leo is become an
Intercessor for us; and the improvement of our devotion must be, that the
Saints in Heaven may more palpably rob God of his honor. But this is but the
Heretics gloss of Bordeaux which mars the Text; and so let it pass.

As for the particular exercises of devotion which consists in the Benediction
of things, consecration of places and persons, solemnization of times,
canonization of Saints, hallowing of Bells, Election of Divine Patrons of
Cities and Churches, exorcization of Devils, honoring and transporting of
Relics, where shall you find them so much as mentioned but in the Sea
Apostolic? where did you hear ever of a sword, or a rose blessed on a
Christmas day, or upon the Sunday of laetare Jerusalem, and sent to the great
Potentates of the earth by any save Peter's successor as Pius the second to
James the second of Scotland, Sixtus the fifth to the Prince of Parma; where of
any flagg? or Banner, blessed with the sure promises of victory, as in 88?
where, of holy keys sent from the bodies of Peter and Paul? Shortly, I would
fain see any Religion under Heaven yield such a benediction of holy water, as
his Holiness uses, over that parcel, which serves for the making up of his
Agnus Dei: wherein he prays to God Vt ea quae etc. Ut ea quae in hoc aquae
vasculo praeparata ad nominis tui gloriam infundere decrevimus es Lib. Sacr,
Gerem
That thou would be pleased so to bless these things which we have purposed
to infuse into this vessel prepared to the glory of thy name, as that by the
veneration and honor which is done them, we thy servants may have all our
crimes done away, the blots of our sins wiped off, pardon obtained, and graces
conferred, that at the last together with thy Saints, and Elect ones, we may
merit to attain everlasting life.

The ignorant Protestant now is ready to ask his Holiness for his Quo
Warranto; what ground of warrant he has to make so bold a Petition? when God
has made any promise to grant a request of so high a nature? who might as well
quarrel with all the Energetical prayers of the Church; all which hang upon the
same string: As those which are used for the exorcisation of Rue, Hypericon,
Aristolochia, and other holy Ingredients for a powerful fumigation against
Devils, for the blessing of clouts in the way of cure of Diseases, the
hallowing of the Cornerstone in buildings; of Palls, Vestments and
Altar-cloathes, of Beads, Grains, Bracelets, of Chalices, Bells, and all
other holy Utensils, and a world of the like implorations; not considering that
the word is Univeral, Quicquid petieritis; and that besides, both the Church
and his Holiness being freed from the danger of error, may safely say; Quod
volumus sanctum est, What we will is holy.

Now upon all these occasions I cannot but bless my self to see the reverent
scrupulosity that is used in meddling with these holy things. That in an holy
Procession on Corpus Christi day, Non e fenestris inspiciant laici. Gavant.
Prove. 4.
no Lay person may so much as look out of their windows: That on that day no
Relic of any Saint may be carried; That on other days no Image of the
blessed Virgin, or any Saint may be carried about, save only those which are
pictured in silk or woven work: Corporale non debet tangi a Lucis, nec a
sacratis faeminis. Act. Mediolan. Eccles. c. Sacrat.

Post primam Lotionem potest tangi and reparari. Ex. Syl. V. Corporale.

Unde non placet Sanchez qui eos tangi a faeminis concedit. Can tit. Agnus;
neque laici eos tangant, neque forcipe, neque chirothecis, sed clerici in
sacris. Enchirid. Epor. Gavant. Tit. Agu.


That the Corporal cloth may not be touched either of any Layman, or any of the
holiest Sisters, till after the first washing: That the Altar-cloathes must
have their peculiar Brushes; That no gloves be worn in a Quire; That no gilt
chalice may be used; That no Agnus Dei may be touched by a woman; the liberty
whereof given by Sanchez the Jesuit is shrewdly checked; and a thousand the
like Curiosities which do sufficiently argue the awful respcts which they bear
to the very circumstances of their Devotions: But what shall we say to the
substance of their highest act of Piety? If some villainous heretical mouse
shall have unhappily light upon a consecrated host; let Peter Lombard the great
Master of sentences be ask't, Quid sumit mus? What does the mouse eat? He will
answer you, Deus novit: God knows, and it is his wisest way to do so: For, if
he shall say, A wafer, it is Heresy; for consecration is past; the bread is
transubstantiate into the body of Christ. If he shall say, The body of Christ;
how odious it sounds to seek a Savior in a mouses belly? Hold thine own Peter;
there is no safety but in silence; neither can we be too chary in the
management of such sacred matters: For example, So it was, that in a certain
Town wherein the Pestilence raged greivously, a poor hosteler lay infected on a
pad of straw in his stable; sends for the Curate of the place to give him the
Sacrament; the Priest being (as he had just cause) fearful to come over near
to the contagious person, got a long stick, and in the cleft thereof puts the
consecrated host, and so offers it to the si^l^ man; the cleft being somewhat
too wide, the host slips out, and falls upon the ground; there being then (as
it fell out) diverse Goslings in the room, they straight run and gobble up that
sacred morsel; yet so, as that by reason of their likeness to one another, the
amazed Curate could not distinguish which of them it was that was guilty of
that horrible sacrilege; the distressed man pitifully bewailes that woeful,
mishap; order is taken (besides his own penance) that the whole gaggle of those
Goslings must be burnt to ashes, and those ashes laid up in the Sacrary; so the
ill-bestowed deity is sure to be met withal somewhere. The Relation I had from
sure hands; which, or the like accident might occasion that Act of the Church
of Milaine, Eucharistia in peste non debet ministrari cum instrumento. Act.
Mediol. Eccles. de cura post. c. 15.

Alii concedunt cum Cochleari argenteo. Vener. in Exam. Epor.


forbidding absolutely in a time of Pestilence to gve the Sacrament cum
instrumento; whiles yet others allow it to be given in a Silver-spoone, where
is not the like danger of miscarriage.

But I must needs take leave to wonder how this care can consist with the
relation which I had made to me by Dr. Tilenus, a man both famously learned,
and undoubtedly creditable; who told me, that coming through France hitherward,
lodging in the City of Roan, there fell out that night a dangerous fire not far
from his Inn; which being at last happily quenched, moved much matter of talk
to the neighbor inhabitants; amongst the rest, the next morning he heard an
old woman and a blacksmith discoursing of that business; Had not I (said the
woman) obtained of the Curate to cast the body of our Lord into the flame, that
fire would not so soon have been quenched; Tush, said the Smith (who perhaps
might have some tincture of Huguenotisme) had not I procured the next houses to
be suddenly pulled down, your devise and the Curates had not saved the whole
Street from burning. Was there ever heard of such a receipt for fire? That a
Christian should burn that which he adores? Let that old woman by my consent
pass for a Witch, that made no bones of offering this tort to a Savior whom
she had formerly abjured, rather then so foul should be practicable: Yet those
Catholics bear a fairer respect to the Sacrament then so; Non adhibeatur In
valvis ecclesiae contra Grandinem, benedicendo aerem. Prove. 3. Gav. V. Euthar.

Eorum cera adoleatur ad suffumigationem contra Tempestates.

Non suspendantur in ramis arborum, etc. Enchyr. Ep. Tit. Agnus.


who were wont to hang it on the Church door for blessing of the Air, for
preservation against Hailstones; A practice which yet is forbidden by a
Provincial Synod, seeming indeed very improperly to incroach upon the Office of
the Agnus Dei, whose best and well allowed use is (not to be hanged up on trees
to procure fruit, or to be cast into the field to mend the soil) but that the
wax of it be burnt for a suffumigation against Storms and Tempests: Neither
can it be denied that the Prelates of the Church under the Roman ^dition are
worthy of great commendation for their care in providing for the honor and and
safety of the Eucharist; ordaining that every eight day the holy parcels be
renewed; and that every careless Curate which shall suffer the holy parcels to
putrify in the Pixe, Putrefactis hostile (quod absit) in Pixide, custos earum.
30. diebus ponitea^. Ex. Sylvio. Euchar. 2. q. 9.

Ante Eucharistiam semper ardeat lampas. Ex. Prove. 1.


shall pay thirty days severe penance for his neglect: which lest it should
fall out for want of light, it is ordered that a Lamp shall hang always
burning before the Eucharist; neither is it fit that a Divine power should
dwell in darkness. But amongst all their acts of Piety, none is more eminent
then those that concern the Saints, whether in their Canonizations, or the
Adoration of them and their Relics. As for the first, I cannot wonder enough
why his Holiness when he goes about that act of his Apotheosis, should need
publicly to protest, Papa facit protestationem, etc. Lib. Sacr. Cer.
that he intends not to do any thing that may be prejudicial to the Faith, or
to the Catholic Church, or the honor of God; doubtless he were very
hard-hearted that should not believe him without any such passionate
asseveration: But I perceive there is somewhat in the wind; For besides the
many counterfeits that there are in the World, which are ambitious of Saintship
(as the holy woman in Bressia, whereof Gerson speaks; who professed to read al
men's sins in their foreheads, and that she could every day deliver three souls
out of hell; And that other extatical Damosel, which pretended an union with
God, above all humanity; or Magdalene de la Croix, or the holy maid of Kent, or
the military Pucelle of France) It seems (as I learn from the book of Holy
Ceremonies) that his Holiness was once compelled to Canonize a Saint against
his will; and so, had need to cry, Domine vim patior; But, if that were all,
why does he now, that he is free from all constraint, so often and earnestly call
on the people to pray, Saepe in Canonizatione Sanct. monet omnes precentur ne
permittat Deus ecclesiam suam errare. Lib. Sacr. Curam.
that God would not suffer his holy Church to err in that act he goes about;
Now you may be sure the Heretics will not stick to say; If his holiness were
conscious of his own indefectibility, in this service, he would save his breath
for another purpose.

Canonizatio et miracula probare est una de majoribus causis quae inter
Christianos proponi possunt, et quaestio est de fide, ut ait Glossa in. sedis
Vivald. candel part 3 a 13.

Si unus Sanctus vocatur in dubium, etiam ceteri vocari possunt etc.

Ibid. Vivaldus ex Ambr. Catharino.


It is true, and they take it from learned Vivaldus (for which he cites the
gloss also) that Canonization of Saints, and probation of miracles is one of
the greatest and weightiest businesses, that can be proposed among Christians,
and is no less then de fide; For, as the same Author out of Ambrosius
Catharinus truly observes; If one Saint may be doubted of, why not another? and
so the Heretics should be in the right, whiles they teach it to be a matter
of much hazard to call upon the Saints; which were horrible to affirm. When
therefore they shall look into the Calender, and shall find some Saints that
were not so much as men, and more that were not so much as honest, how can they
choose but say as the Psalmist did of the Idols, they that make them are like
unto them, and rather incline (as Erasmus professes) to say Sancte Socrates ora
pro me.

But the best is, the World is out of fear of too much over-lashing in this
kind; for that it is taken for a fatal rule that the Pope commonly survives
not this act of Divine state, Pere Matthew. instanceth in Clem. 4. and Adrian. 6.
above one year after he has performed it; which Pere Matthiev instances in
some formidable particulars; And I see no reason why his Holiness should be of
the mind of his St. Francis, to say, Fr^admonitus a medico mortem
appropinquare, Been veniat (inquit) soror mea mors. Lib. Conf. p. 315.
Been veniat soror mea mors; Welcome good Sister death.

As for the old and true Saints, the very Heretics themselves perhaps are not
so destitute of grace, as to deny them any honor, under divine; especially the
blessed Virgin; as she well deserves to be high in their books, above others;
but they are too strait-laced in standing upon the same terms, with St.
Bernard, At valde veneranda est matter Dei. Been mones; sed honor reginae
deligit justitiam. Et in super Virgo Regia falso non indiget honoris titulo:

Bern. ad Canon. Lugdumens. de festo conceptionis St. virg.


the Devout Abbot of Clarevall; who in opposition to the new erection of the
feast of her conception when it was suggested, that men could not easily offend
in giving too much respect to that blessed one; could answer, Honor Reginae
diligit justitiam, The Queens honor loves Justice.

But as for the Saints of the new Edition, they carry no more credit with them,
then the new Gospel of the Franciscans and Benedictines, which under the name
of the Evangelium a^ernum, mentioned in the Revelation, they would have foisted
upon the world, for which they are justly branded by our Chaucer.

Now, if the Saint be a nullity, what is the adoration? I cannot but be
sensible of that secret envy, wherewith malignant eyes look upon the honor
that is done to these Beatified souls, and much more to the Canonized; Their
Holidayes, Vigils, Octaves: their Temples, Altars, Thurifications, their
Invocations, Oblations, Nuncupations of vows, their Elections to the public
Patronage of Cities and Countries, the Pilgrimages to their shrines, the
decantation of their miracles, the Veneration of their Relics: And if it have
fallen out that there has been a discovery of any pious frauds in any of
these, as for example, if there have been any frequent resort of Pilgrims to
his Golden Lupa within two Miles of Wurtzburgh, Luther Sermon. conviv. Also
Herman nus the founder of the wicked heresy of the Fratritelli was honored
for a Saint twenty years after his death; after his body was taken up, and
burned, Prateolus. v. Hermanus.
which after proved to be but a Bitch which a lewd Churchman had interred
there, as Luther tells us, what sport do the Heretics make with this
mis-taken piece of Devotion; whereas they might if their lips did not hang in
their light, see many notable monuments of both ancient and modern Saints, and
many precious Relics worth the wiping of their eyes to behold; as St. Joseph's
Breeches (and if you will, Lipsius his, offered to our Lady to boot) St. Annes
Comb, Judas his Lantern, and a thousand such: But amongst all the rest, who
would not be eager to see those Immortal Relics; The feather of the
Archangel, which the Pardoner (had it not been purloined) would have showed to
the admiring multudes; Mr. Cloves, his Motives.
And the red Velvet Buckler now still reserved in a Castle of Normandy, which
the Archangel Michael made use of when he combated the Dragon. Howsoever, I do
not apprehend so much miracle in the preservation of those Monuments, as in
their supernatural multiplication; that the Cross which once Simon of Cyrene
bore on his back, should now be able to load a Ship; That whereas John Baptist
lost but one head, now there are two sensibly to be seen; Upon Matthew. 14.
one at Amiens in France (as our Rhemists affirm) the other in St. Sylvesters
Abbey in Rome; besides the scattered parcells of it in several places.

Now in all these respective circumstances of Veneration, well may the Roman
Catholic (I trow) say, of all theirs (according to that of the Psalmist) Such
Honor have all his Saints: But in the mean time, what becomes of the most
eminent and best deserving professor of Protestancy? What, Ywis, but this? He
dies and is tumbled into an hole, mortuus est sine lux, sine, crux, Erasm.
sine clango; and his memory dies, and lies buried with him, without any
Epitaph, but dead and forgotten; yet his obstinacy talks confidently of a
blessed Triumph in Heaven, far surpassing all the pompous commemorations upon
earth; and pleases himself with that of Solomon in spite of all malice;
Memoria justi in benedictionibus.

CHAP. VI. The triumph of Ease.
THere are excellencies which are so hard in atchieving, that they scarce
requite the cost of purchasing; like to some sweet kernel which lies enclosed
in so thick a shell that it is hardly worth the cracking: Give me those
contentments which besides their value and pleasure in their enjoyment, are
justly commended by the ease of attaining them: Such is the Roman profession;
The dignity whereof is equally matched with the facility: Perhaps our holy
Mother will give me little thanks for this praise; as affecting rather a
stern austerity and deep mortification in the practice of her Religion;
boasting of the harsh discipline and exact rigor of her Clients; showing with
much gloriation their stinging Haire-clothes, their bloody Whips, their knotted
Girdles, their rough and patched Garments, their barefoot Walks, their uneasy
Lodgings, their broken Sleeps, their purposely-disguised Habits; rejoicing in
the ambitious contestation betwixt her St. Francis and her St. Clare, And St.
Clares was found the courser. Lib. Confor.
whethers Coat should be more course and beggarly; upbraiding the Heretics
with their apparent Delicacie, the nice curation of their Skin, the softness
and cost of their Attire, the curiosity of their fastidious Mawes, their
sinking in their Down-beds, the perpetual Frolicks of their Feastings, and the
pleasures of their continual Disports: And surely, as to the former of these,
the plea cannot be denied to be just, and incapable of contradiction. What
Heremites, or Recluses can the Protestant Churches boast of? What woolward
penanes, what weary pilgrimages, what bleeding backs? Only they pretend for
themselves thus; If the body of Piety be yours, the soul of Piety is ours; If
the Roman Catholic have the sowrer face, the English Catholic has the sadder
heart; if the one profess more mortification of the flesh, the other more deep
and lively stirrings of the spirit.

But let not our holy Mother stand too stiffly upon the terms of her outward
rigidities; Her Opposites will be ready to clap her in the teeth with St. Paul's
check, That bodily exercise profits little; and to put her in mind of what
her dearest Son St. Francis said once when it was too late; That it repented
him he had used his Brother Body so hardly; and what another that had more wit,
and no less holiness then he, even St. Bernard himself said; who lamentably
complaining of the wrong that he had done to himself by his undue austerities,
whereby he had disabled himself to the public services of his holy Devotions,
Cavendum est ne dumnimis flagellare cupimus, salutem perdamus; and dum hostem
subigere quaerimus, civem occidamus. Bern. de Septem grad. Confess.
has left this caveat behind him for all posterity, Cavendum est, etc. Heed
must be taken says he, lest whiles we whip too much [Salutem perdamus] we
destroy our health, and whiles we seek to subdue an enemy, we kill not a
Subject.

Rather, notwithstanding the ostentation of these outward penalties, let not
our holy Mother suffer her self to lose the praise of the facility of her
Religion; For as for these bodily penances whether voluntary or imposed, the
Opposites make light to be outdone by them; and are ready to say, that if the
sin of the soul could be done away with a little smart of the body, they would
think it a very easy condition; avowing that the inward acts of true
mortification (which they practice) are Scorpions in comparison of those
Flea-bitings: They can twit her with ill patterns of bodily sufferings not
inferior to hers; The Mattarii amongst the Manichees, lay as hard as her
Votaries: Mattarii quidam Manichaei qui in mattis dormiunt, etc. August. contra
Faustum. L. 5.
The Baalites spared their flesh less then her cruellest whip-stocks; The
Charinzarri can keep as strict a Fast as theirs if but for Arzibur their
Sergius his Dog: The Turks can keep a more abstinent Fast till they can see a
Star; the Mahumetan Dervises, the Bonzes of China, the Menegreros of Pegu, and
Bramaa, and other the Votaries of the Indian Pagodes, Vid. Fernand. Mendor. de
Pinto.
put themselves to more pain then the most selfe-afflicting Capuchine, yet
never the better; And can tell her withal, that she with all these shall for a
cold thanks for their labor, hear from the mouth of God, Quis requisivit? Who
required this at your hands? Let her therefore (if I might be worthy to advise
her) stand upon those easy taskes of Piety and Religion, wherein she goes
far beyond all her Corrivals. For, whereas the fond Protestant professes with
Luther, Exemplo meo didici difficillimum esse opus, Orare. Luther in Psalm. 51.
that he finds it a very hard work to pray; for as much as the heart being
forestalled with worldly thoughts, is not easily reduced to a praying
condition; and the mind of a man is still apt in the holiest action to be
volatile, and lies exposed to a world of distractions, and much struggling there
must needs be to work that froward piece in our bosom to a meet apprehension
of that infinite Majesty whom we speak unto, and to those holy affections and
divine ravishments of spirit which are requisite in that man, who desires to
pour out his soul to God with sensible comfort; the more favorable Oracles of
Rome teach us, that there needs none of all this; Vt quid perditio haec? It is
not necessary says her acute Suarez, Non est de ratione orationis, etc. Supra.
cit. Ex. Suraez de Orat.
in prayer to think of the thing signified by the words; neither is it
essential to prayer for a man to think of the speech it self; it is sufficient
to think of God to whom he speaks; He that wants Devotion (says Jacobus
Graphius) sins not; Sufficit de deo cogitare, ibid.

Sicut Verba incantantis vim habet, etc.


As the words of a Charmer (says learned Salmeron) have their force and
efficacy though they be not understood of him that utters them; So Divine words
spoken with a good and simple intention, have force and virtue to dispel all
the power of the Devil: To what purpose then should any man rack his thoughts
to bring and hold them in a due fixednesse upon the matter of his prayer, when
the very sound of the words will do the feat without the concurrence of the
heart? And this Antoninus illustrates by a witty example; Respondit Sace dos,
Sicut lapis preciosus aeque valet in manu imperiti; sic preces, etc. Autonin.
Sum. Part. 3. Tit. 23.
One propounded this Question to a learned Priest, whether the prayer which he
understood not were equally effectual with those which he spoke with
understanding; and received this answer: As a precious stone says he, is of no
less worth when it is in the hand of an unskilful man, then when in the hand
of an expert Jeweller; so are good prayers. Magis fore ad aedificationem
Eclcesiae ut preces vulgari lingua concipe rentur. Cajet. resp. ad Artic. pacis.
Cardinal Cajetan therefore was foulely overseene, when he flatly determined
that it would be more to the edification of men's souls that prayers should be
made in their own Mother tongue; Fishers Confer. with Dr. White.
wherein it is some marvel to see him seconded by Fisher the Jesuit in
asserting of that, which his fellow Ledesma terms no better then a profane
recitation.

What Latinity there is in Opus operatum it matters not, I am sure there is
much ease; Well fare St. Dominick, therefore who (they say) by Revelation
brought up that order of the set number of our Paters and Aves, (which costs us
no pains but Lip-labor) although it seems he fell somewhat too short in his
reckning; allotting but 63. Aves to the Corone of our Lady, in remembrance of
her so many years, that she is said to have lived upon earth; whereas now more
accurate search has found them to be 73. I am sure there is no fervent prayer
raised out of a recollected and well wrought heart which requires not more true
labor then an hundred formal Rosaries.

And whereas the Protestant and all religious Christians in all other Churches
think it concerns them highly to meditate in the word of God day and night,
and to labor earnestly to inform themselves in all points necessary to
salvation; Our holy Mother bids us save that labor also; not only forbearing
to encourage Lay persons (as St. Chrysostom did of old) to read the Sacred
Scriptures, but absolutely forbidding the use of them in their native
Languages, Biblia vulgari lingua edita non possunt legi neque retineri

Clem. 8. in Indice libr. prohib.


upon no small penalty: and if any passage thereof be allowed to be publicly
read in the Church it is in Latin, no less familiar to the poor ignorant
Auditories then Greek and Hebrew, lest they should understand and trouble their
heads about it. Indeed what should unlettred Laics do with Scripture, more
then children with edge-tooles? It is not necessary to salvation (says
Cardinal Bellarmine) to believe that there are any divine Scriptures. Dan.
Tilen. de verbo non Scripto. l. 4. c. 8.
And perhaps it had been better for the Church says Cardinal Hosius, if no
Scriptures had been written; It is abundantly enough for Lay people to cast
their souls upon the trust of the Church, which cannot err; and to think
themselves safe and rich enough, if they be furnished with the Colliers faith,
without any curious and explicit inquisition into the Articles of belief.

And whereas the heaviest load that can be upon the heart of a Christian is his
sin, which cannot but breed a perpetual unquietness to the soul; Lutherus non
absque magna animi concussione, etc. Roffens art. 10. contra Lutherum.
as that which according to Luthers determination, is attended with great
concussion of spirit: the gentle Casuists of our holy Mother Rome speak better
things, and like kind and cunning Physicians, give present ease to the
troubled Conscience. Contritio una etc. Contritio una vel remissa potest delere
quodcunque peccatum quamvis gravissimum. Tollet. Instruct. Sacr. l. 3.

Ad perfectionem paenitentiae requiritur tenuis quidam dolor animi internus.
Maldon. sum. q 16. art. 1.

Non est necessarium dolere magis de uno peccato quam de alio.

Quia sufficit ad contritionem dolor in universali de omnibus peccatis; et
talis dolor non est intensior respectu unius peccati quam alterius. Franc. de
victoria De Contritione.


One act of contrition though never so little, is enough to blot out the
greatest sin, faith Card. Tollet. To the perfection of penitence there is only
required an outward grief of heart, if never so small says Maldonat. Nay there
needs not a full contrition, an attrition is enough, says Franciscus Victoria:
It is not necessary to sorrow for one sin more then another since a general
sorrow for all our sins in common is sufficient to Contrition, and such a sorrow
as this is not more intense for one sin then for another says the same Author.
Courage, therefore, say the comfortable Casuists; the most sins are venial,
these break not the peace betwixt God and the soul; As for the mortal, at the
worst, they are blown away by the breath of Confession: Yea, which is yet
more, some sins by custom (which our simplicity would have thought had rather
aggravated them) lose their malignant nature, and become no sins.

For example. If a man (says the Casuist Rodriguez) have a custom of
swearing, Rodriguez Cas. Constable.
Let him have once done his penance for it, although he afterward swears still,
not considering what he says, he does not therein sin; because to swear thus
is not an humane voluntary act; Thus he, for which he cites Medina also. But if
Custom do not abate a sin, it is no more but confess and be free: And though
it prove too true, which that great Tell-troth Gerson observes, that there is
scarce any full and sincere confession now a days to be had, yet that blame is
not to be imputed to the Ordinance, but to the man, who having swallowed the
poison, sticks at the Antidote whereby he might be cured: Our Bromiard can tell
us of a close sinner, Brom. sum. v. Confessio.
of whom the Devil could say confidently, Tush, let that man alone, I have his
Tongue fast in my purse; who having afterward unloaded his Conscience, by a
penitent confession, and turned over a new leaf; the same Devil, being
expostulated with concerning him, could answer; I said indeed that I had his
Tongue in my purse, and so had, but his Confessarie has picked my purse, and
got it out; The moral whereof is, no other then that of wise Solomon; Prove.
28.13.
He that covers his sin shall not prosper, but he that confesses his sin
shall find mercy. Though I perceive already the Heretics are here ready to
take me short, and to pull me by the sleeve, and tell me, that I have forgot
the principal verb; for Solomon says, He that confesses [and forsakes his
sin] shall find mercy: But it is no matter for that; whiles our learned
Casuists assure us, Fr. Victoria ubi supra.
that not a full and absolute act of the will, but a mere velleity to leave a
sin, is ground enough for a perfect pardon and clear absolution, which I hope
is an easier way, then is proposed by the crabbed opposites, who stand
peremptorily upon the necessity of an hearty sorrow and deep compunction of the
soul, with an earnest loathing and detestation of the sin, to the obtaining of
remission.

I like not these severe and cruel Taskmasters, which make the way to Heaven
more strait and difficult then it is. Give me those plausible and indiligent
Doctors, that profess by the very act of Sacramental penance to change the
eternal punishments of hell, into the Temporal of Purgatory; and to buy off the
temporal torments of Purgatory with the purchase of Indulgences; so as now hell
is quit, Purgatory discharged, and Heaven opened; and, Hey then, up go we; and
is not this a more easy and pleasing way to glory, trow we, then striving to
resist our sins unto blood, to offer an holy violence to our souls, in
mortifying our evil and corrupt affections? to curb and restrain our sensual
desires? to labor hard in bringing our rebellious hearts to the obedience of
faith, to crucify the old man, and to sail to Heaven in a flood of tears?

CHAP. VII. The triumph of Assurance.
Let the way be never so smooth and fair, yet if we be not sure it leads us
aright, we walk with diffident steps, and know not whether it were not better
to repent us of every pace that we measure in that progression: But when we are
assured of the directnesse of our paths, we pass on cherfully, though in a
more unpleasing ^^ck. It is therefore a further praise of the Roman faith that
in all her Tenets of Religion, it is not more easy and plausible to uncertain
any, then sure to hold; How should it be otherwise, since it is one of the main
Principles of her faith, that her head cannot err? and surely, let her
undertake for her head, (wherein the Loco-motive faculty lies) I dare for the
body: As a man, as a private Doctor, as Innocentius, he may chance to err, but
as Pope Innocentius he cannot; now, some blunt undistinguishing German would be
ready to ask (as one of them did in the like case) if the man, the Doctor, the
Innocentius should go to hell, what would become of the Pope? but these cavils
are for want of wit and grace, to know the infallibility feoffed upon St.
Peter's chair, whosoever he be that fits in it.

For did no our Savior say; to that Prime Apostle, I have prayed for thee that
thy faith fail not; which (though the Heretics would make us believe, that
it respected only the personal faith of Peter, which Satan would speedily
endeavor to shake by that tempting cribration) yet (according to the rule of
Favores Ampliandi) we must know is to be extended to all that should pretend
ever after to be his successors whether right, or wrong? And when he said
Literally, Thou art Peter, he said in effect, Thou art Innocentius (for his
successor and he are all one) and upon thee will I build my Church; which
doubtless is no other then the Church of Rome; though the peremptory Opposites
say, Rome was not then thought of for a Church, nor many a fair year after; so
as (being then and of a long time after perfectly Pagan) she was somewhat
likely for that present to stand out againsts the Gates of hell; upon these
sure grounds, by a miraculous traduction of Grace, whosoever does but sit down
in the Chair, wherein St. Peter once sat at Rome (for Antioch is not worth
talking of, though there he sat sure enough) is as certainly free from error in
faith, as if he were transformed into the blessed Apostle himself; what though
he be no good or holy man, (as their Papyrius Massonus truly professes that no
man now a days requires any holiness of a Pope; Quamquam nemo hodie in
Pontificibus sanctitatem requirit; optimi putantur si vel leviter boni sint,
vel minus mali quam caeteri mortales esse soleant. Pap. Masson. Initio. 3.
since they are held to be the best Popes that are less ill then other men use
to be: Yea let him be an arrant Conjurer, as more then one have been
acknowledged to be; Let him be as proud and arrogant as Boniface the eight, who
styled himself the Lord of the World; Let him be as perjured an impostor and
as shamelesly incestuous as Alexander the sixth: Let him be as violent an
intruder as Llamasus the third; Let him be as abominably criminous as John 22
was convinced by a general Council to be; Yea what do I nibbling at
particulars? let it be granted that 150. of them were Apotactical, and
Apostatical miscreants, as Genebrard himself confesses, yet they can no more
err in the Chair, then their flatterers could say true. Their Biographer
Massonus notes it for a singular providence that no Pope ever sat in that
Chair, which was blind, lame, crookbacked, or otherwise deformed in body, but
the Heretics are ready to tell him, they could rather have wished he could
justly have acquitted them from lewd lives, deformed souls, and crooked
conditions; But let them have been Devils incarnate elsewhere, yet if they be
once set in the holy Chair, no error in judgment of faith dare offer to
fasten upon them.

Yet perhaps it may be possible to find some men, whose lives may be impure,
yet their Doctrine sound, as on the contrary Bernard could say of Arnoldus of
Briria that his conversation was honey, Arnoldus, cujus conversatio mel,
doctrina venenum^
but his Doctrine poison; it is yet the greater wonder, that let a very boy, or
an ignorant body be preferred to the blessed Chair once, he is instantly
priveledged from error; we have no reason to grant that any such incapable
person has ever been suffered to disparage that sacred sent. But the Opposites
are ready to choke us with a pretty Pope of nine years old; with a Boniface
the ninth, a tall stripling which was as high in the Schole as his Grammar, and
could hardly write or sing, raised to the Papal dignity: And cast us in the
teeth with that irref^agable word of our own Alphonsus de Castro; since it is
apparent (says he) that many Popes have been so utterly unlearned, that they
have not attained to so much as the knowledge of the Grammar, how shall we
think they can be fit men to give us meet Interpretations of Scripture? But the
more unlikely the event is, the greater is the miracle; Cum consset multos
Papas adeo illiteratos esse ut Grammatican penitus ignorent; quomodo fit ut
sacras literas inter pretari possinit Alpos Castro l. 1. de Hares.
so as Florilegus need not now to mak^ so great a wonder of Joachim, who of a
Laick unlettred man, was on the sudden become an Altilogu^ Theologus, since
it appears this is no news at Rome, The example whereof cannot but have had a
very wholesome influence upon the subordinate, Clergy, for the priveledge both
of their age, and ignorance.

Rogerus Eborac. Archiepiscopus titula vitimberbes, et qousdam etiam agentes
sub ferula aptos magis aedificare casas et plastella adjungere muris, Iudere
par impar, equitare in arundine longa quam personas, gerere in Concilio
magnatum.
So we find, that Roger Archbishop of York admitted beardlesse boys from under
the ferule to Ecclesiastical promotions; yea children more fit to drive a top,
the^ weild a Crosier: grave Espencaeus speaking of Nazianzens censure of some
abuses in that holy station; lets fall these bitter terms Quid diceret etc.
What would that father say (says he) if he saw instead of reverend fathers in
Christ, boys irreverent against Christ? And as for the ignorant prelacy of
Rome, Marforius plays the Jack sufficiently in Pasquils suite to Eugenius the
fourth.

Pasquillus marmoreus. Optime Pontifex, Galerum Pasquillo huic tribuas roganti.
Si imbelle sum atque rude marmor; Complures quoque etiam episcopos ipso me mage
saxeos videmus. Paq. Mass. Eugenio
Good Pope be pleased to bestow
An hat on Pasquil: for although
A marble rude and base he be,
Yet many Bishops made we see
More senseless every way then he.
But the best is, this business is now upon the mending hand; Cum ind^gnum sit
beneficia ecclesiastica conferri illiteratis ignotis, insufficientibus ^iet
indignis, statu mus, et districtius prohibemus ne parochialis ecclesia de
caetero detur sive conferatur nisi tali qui competente sciat legere et cantare
er divinum
for I find that in a due care of reforming this abuse of admitting young
Novices and unlearned persons to Ecclesiastical Benefices, it is enacted by the
Council of Ravenne, that no Parish Church shall be conferred upon any but such
a one as can competently read, and sing, and say his service. Neither shall any
possess a Canonship in a Cathedral Church but he that can read, and sing, Nec
Canonicatum misi qui sciat legere, cantar^ et competenter construere, et 15.
annum attigerit. Council. Raven 16.
and competently construe also; and one that has attained to the age of
fifteen year; nor a Prebend in a Collegiat Church, except he can competently
read, and be twelve years old; Nec canonicatum vel praebendam in ecclesia
Collegiata nisi sciat competenter legere, et duodecimum annum compleverit; nec
rurale Beneficium alicui

prorsus iliterato, sed qui sciat aliqualiter legere. ibid.

Nullus initiatus 1. a Tonsura ante 14. um annum possit obtinere beneficium
simplex. Gav. Tit. Beneficium ex Tridentinae Sess. 21. Sufficit annus 14 us
inceptus tui. ibid.


nor any rural Benefice, if he be altogether unlettred, and cannot in some sort
read; And the Concilium Sabinense to the same purpose, that no Clerk shall be
admitted to holy Orders, Nisi liter aliter sciat loqui; neither does the holy
Council of Trent now of late deviate much from the wary steps of their
predecessors, having ordered that no simple Benefice shall be bestowed upon any
under the age of fourteen years; adding withal that if the 14th year be begun,
it is sufficient: So as now there can be no fear but that those great Sees will
be learnedly furnished.

More then all this, what if the man be in no Orders at all, a mere Lajck,
what then? Yet if he be elected to the Papacy, he is ipso facto, infallible:
For example, Constantinus Pap^a accusatus in synod Lateranensi quod nullis
sacris initiatus. etc.

Navclen vel 2. Generat. 26.


Pope Constantine the fourth being challenged and accused by the Council of
Lateran, that being not initiated into holy Orders, he presumed to hold the Sea
Apostolic, and to do such acts as pertain to that sacred Function (a
disorder which is sufficient to make a man perpetually irregular) at the first
hearing lowly louted and cried Peccavi, craving pardon for his offense;
pleading that the honor was forced upon him by the impetousity of the people:
But by that time he had slept upon it, the next morning he was in another tune,
and now stood stiffly upon his right; alleging strongly the example of some of
his allowed Predecessors in some other Sees; As Sergius Bishop of Ravenna, and
Stephen Bishop of Naples. And surely since the virtue is in the place, and not
in the man; why should not he challenge an equal privilege of infallibility
with the best? And I hope Dame Joan English, whiles she sat upon that Throne,
played her part as laudably as the gravest of their learned Doctors; and all
because she sat in the same chair of Papal Office, though not in the Marble
chair, Tanquam in stercoraria, as all her Successors since that time have ever
done. Sedet in porphyretica tanquam in stercoraria. Lib. Sacr. cerem.
Indeed I do not hear of any Saint she Canonized, nor of any Council she
called, neither are those Acts essential to that sacred Function, since the
latter have been wont to be done by Emperors: and the former is (not without
great pretense of Reason) judged by Marsilius Patavinus to be an act more meet
for a General Council, Marsilius Patavinus censet authoritatem canonizand soli
Concilio Generali commitrendam. L. 10. q. defensor pacis inscribitur part. a.
Hospinianus de Canonizat.

Multi sunt in consortio sanctorum qui nou sunt in Catalog.


who can best judge of the qualification of persons fit for that superlative
honor; and if it were not at all done by either of them, it is a true word of
Erasmus, Multi sunt, etc. Many are in the company of the Saints which are not
in their Catalogue; But for the ordinary transactions of the Consistory and
Conclave, she left not (for ought I can hear) any blurre upon her judgment,
though she left some blurre upon her honesty, and some monument of her Sex in
the open Street.

Now the envious Malignants I confess put us somewhat hard to it, whiles they
lay in our dish some sad instance of humane frailty in some of St. Peter's
Successors: whiles they tell us of Pope Marcellinus, that out of fear yielded
to cast some grains of Incense into the Idols fire, as himself minceth the
act, for which he underwent a willing penance; Or Liberius the Pope subscribing
to the Arrian Heresy, Siffrid l. 2. Epitom sua scribit Joanni quem 18. vocat
pe peram quendam Librum scripsit Bint. in notis de Joanne 19. vulgo 21.
as is undeniably contested by Athanasius and Jerome of Pope John 18. (as he is
reckoned) who as Siffridus tells us, wrote a wicked and heretical Book which he
meant to have published to the World, had he not been happily prevented by the
fall of his house on his head. Of Pope Celestine the third, Celestinus 3 us
erravit de dissolvendo matrimonio conjugum, si alter in haeresin inciderit
Licitumque esse parti Catholicae conrahere matrimonium.
who erroneously (though Cathedra) defined the dessolution of the Marriage
contracted with an Heretic; and the lawfulness of the second marriage of the
Orthodoxe person after such dissolution; which though now obliterated for shame
of the World, yet Alphonsus de Castro professes to have seen it recorded in
the ancient Decretals: Neither can we deny but they may make our ears glow
with shameful examples of this kind; what need we to particularize, Multi
Pontifices in errores et haereses lapsi esse leguntur, Council. Basil in Ep.
Synodica.
when the Council of Basil speaks with a full mo^th? Many Popes are read to
have fallen into Errors and Heresies; but that wherewith I find my self in
greatest peril of confusion, is thar horrible testimony of John Picus Earl of
Mirandula, who tells us, Sed and alium, Sed et alium meminimus Pontificem
creditum et ordinatum, quem tamen prastantes viri putarunt nec Ponficem esse
nec esse posse, utpote qui nullum deum credens etc. Jo. Pic. Mirand. Theorem.
4. de fide p. 177.
etc. I remember another who was believed to be Pope, and so ordained; whom yet
some worthy persons think that he neither was truly a Pope, nor indeed could
be; who in believing that there is no God, exceeded the highest pitch of
Infidelity; confessing to some of his Domestics, that even whiles he held the
Papal See, in that very time he believed there was no God at all: And how could
this man (think we) err in the Faith, whiles he was in so good a mind?

Aliumque familiari suo cuidam apperuerat apud sell animarum immortalitatem
minime creditam. ibid.
Again (says he) I remember another Pope which told a familiar friend of his
that the immortality of the soul was not believed by him; who dying afterward
appeared to that friend lamentably acknowledging that he now found his soul to
be immortal, to his infinite loss and perpetual torment: Oh miserable Pastor
of soul that dinied the very being of that charge which he professed to feed.
What then shall we say to this? Perhaps that learned and noble person might be
misinformed, by some spightful slanderer, who affained such dreadful blasphemy
upon their Holiness; O miserum affectatorem tor Pontificum qui nihil ex aula
praeter inopiam et canitiem horrendam attulerit. Mass. Nical. 50.
Some cast Courtier, who had with Poggius worn out his time in the vain hopes
of preferment, and now at last carrying away nothing thence but gray hairs and
beggary devised (it may be) those hellish Calumnies to the blemish of his
regardlesse master: Or if the suggestion were true, why do we not rather what
those worthy men whom he mentions say? these monsters of infidelity were no
more Popes, then Comets are Stars, or Devils Angels of light, because they do
but appear in that likeness: And, that had they been true Popes, they had
never been suffered to fall into so prodigious and detestable opinions; since
by virtue of their station (as has been sufficiently shown) their faith is
inviolable, their decisions infallible.

Neither is it any small favor of the Almighty that he has left to his Church
such an inerrable Judge of controversies, to whom it may resort upon all
occasions for full satisfaction, and therein find rest to the soul; whereas
the obstinate Protestant is still to seek in all his doubts, and has nothing
in his mouth but Scripture, Scripture, which he also construes according to his
own private spirit; not considering that the true sense of it (which lies not
in the skin, but the marrow of it) must be fetched from the living Oracle of
the Church; and that it is the Church alone which gives authority to the
Scripture, if not primarily in it self, yet secondarily to us: The
misconstruction whereof is that which vainly puffes them up in an high conceit
of their own erroneous opinions; although let an indifferent eye look upon
them, it will easily find them to be no friends to Rome. Luther tells us of
one of the Electors, Luther sermon. Conviv.
the Archbishop of Men^s, who by chance had light upon a Bible, and for four
hours space read in it very seriously; one of his Counsel seeing him, ask't
his Highness what he did with that book? to whom he is said to have answered,
I know not what Book it is; but sure I am, that what I find written in it is
against us. Ibid. Luther.
Much to the like purpose was that conference which we find reported, betwixt
Wiliima Duke of Bavaria, and Doctor Eckius; The Duke asked the Dr. Sir, may we
not overthrow this new Doctrine of the Heretics by the Scripture? No said the
Doctor, by Scripture we cannot, but by the Fathers we may.

The Malignants cannot forbear to smile at the decision; and say the Doctor
spoke the truth without racking: But though Fathers and Councils be all ours,
as Campian triumphantly vaunteth, yet this is not that we build upon: It is the
unfailable sentence of Peter's unerring Successor that we do with all confident
assurance rely upon in all matters of faith; whose judgment we do with that
eloquent Bishop of Bitonto prefer before hundreds of Augustines, Hieromes,
Chrysostomes, and the rest of those learned and godly Fathers; Let the
Heretics hug their Scriptures in their bosom, as the only guides and
grounds of their faith; Let us pitch securely upon that firm rock of the
Church whereon the fond refractaries will needs wilfully split themselves.

CHAP. VIII. The Triumph of Bounty.
AS no Church under Heaven is said to be so rich as our holy Mother the Church
of Rome, so none is equally free and bountiful; Thus it is, and should be with
all ingenuous natures. The earth sends up vapors, and receives showers back
again; Oh the liberality of the holy See: The sons of that Mother have sucked
bounty from her breasts; Nihil ^uiqam negavit, quandoque duobus idem annuerit.
Anno. 1294. Bin. in notis.
Celestine the fifth (good soul) was so free, that he would deny nothing to any
suitor; yea that he would grant the same boon to two or three several
petitioners. Alexander the fifth was of the same soft Metal, Episcopus dives,
pauper, Cardinalis Papa mendicus.
who professed to have been a rich Bishop, a poor Cardinal, but a beggarly
Pope: So had he laid about him, that what enriched all others, had impoverisht
him: And the praise that St. Bernard gives to Gilbert Bishop of London, is,
that in a rich Bishopric he was yet poor not only in his estimation through
humility according to the old Greek verse (...) but in the estimation of others
through his liberality; (...):
So Innocentius 8th. was by Lionel Bishop of Concordia in his funeral oration
styled vir ditissimae paupertatis; So John (surnamed the Eleemosynarie, Joan.
Eleemosynarius Patr. Heirosot. croper ta rium preciosum vendidit. etc. Brom. v.
Eleemos. Sanctus Germanus extra Mediolanum veniens etc. Brom. ibid.
or Almoner sold the rich Coverled that had been given him, and distributed the
price among the poor; So Saint German is said to have chid his man, that having
three Florens in his purse, he had given but two of them to a poor indigent: So
the Heremite kissed the thieves hand that had stolen his victuals, for helping
him so much the sooner into Heaven. But above all those thousands that might be
instanced in this kind, St. Francis is worthy to bear away the Bell, who to a
poor man that craved his alms gave all his Clothes, Lib. Conform.
and stood naked the while till he could be recruited with some other rags; and
to a poor woman likewise begging of him, finding by the information of one of
his Disciples that they had nothing left but the book of the holy Gospels, out
of which they were to read the lessons of divine service, could say, Da huic
sorori nostrae librum Evangelii: Give this our Sister the book of the Gospel,
so parting with that at last which (as he conceived) had bidden him to give all
away. Neither would he admit of any man into the Society of his Order, but such
a one as was of his own diet, totaliter expropriatus, willingly stripped of all,
in an holy bounty, and contempt of the world; Lib. Conform. 2^ Fructu. 4. page
218.
In so much as when one of his Brotherhood earnestly sued to him that he would
allow him to have but a Psalter to read on, and being denied, he renewed his
request more vehemently; St. Francis being overcome with his importunity,
yielded so far as to refer him to his servants judgment in the point; but
after his second thoughts, meeting with this bookish brother, where was it
(said he) that I told you I referred you to your servants judgment concerning
the Psalter desired by you? when the place was showed him, St. Francis falls
down there on his knees, before his young brother, and cried (as is used in
confession) Mea culpa, frater, mea culpa, It was my fault, brother, it was my
fault to yield so far: For whosoever will be a Friar minorite; must not be
allowed to have any more then his two coats, his chord, and his breeches; and
if necessity urge, Conform. l. 2. Fruct. 4. page 218.
his shoes. And what a foul penance he enjoined to one of his poor Fraternity
for hiding a piece of coin, I shall in good manners forbear to relate.

How strictly and curiously this rule of his is observed, by his followers, the
world can well witness; let Krantzius speak for the rest; who tells us that
these men may take up St. Paul's words in a contrary sense, as having nothing
yet possessing all things (2 Cor. 3.10.) Meet sons for so bountiful a Mother;
of whose munificence there are no bounds: Who can express the numbers and
extent of her Indulgences, and gracious concessions of all kinds; which how
free they are, the Taxa Camera Apostolica can fully testify: As for the
pardons of Course granted for sins of ordinary incursion, De adulteriis et
aliis peccatis qua minora sunt.
put case for Adulteries and other less crimes, as Alexander the third styles
them, they are more common then the stones in the street, so numerous, that
they cannot come under any account; and those no less free, then frequent;
though it is fit and reasonable that they which partake of so great a benefit,
should porrigore manus adjutrices; One good turn requires another; and a
little ease to the soul, is worth a good lining of the purse.

But the height of spiritual bounty is in the extraordinary exercises of Papal
beneficence, such as are the Grants of his Diplomata confessionalia; Dictae
sunt Bullae pro peccatis ad huc committendis quibus scilicet data est potestas
eligendi confessorem etc. Vid-Chemni^ Exam. de Indulgentiis.
Bulls of special Grace, which may have a relation to sins that are to be
committed in the future. For example, a well disposed man has a mind to
commit some pleasing sin whether of lust or revenge, and yet save his soul
harmless; what now is to be done? Let him purchase one of these powerful
Bulls, by virtue whereof he shall be enabled to choose a Confessary for his own
tooth: To whom faculty is thereby granted to absolve him, and to gratify him
with a plenary Indulgence in what case soever shall be propounded; which was
according to the old Doctrine that Tetzel the great Pardon-monger, Luthers good
friend taught, and wrote; Luth. Sermon. Conviv.
that the Popes Indulgences could remit and pardon those sins which a man
intended to commit in time to come: Now if any crafty chapman shall have made
such ill use of this wholesome Doctrine, as to drive the bargain with a
well-meaning Penitentiary, for pardon of a concealed sin, purposed to be done
by him, and shall thereby mean (as the Tale goes) his robbing of the
Pardon-monger himself, and easing him of his carriage; for my part I shall hold
him worthy of no less punishment, then to be cursed with Bell, Book and Candle.

Another improvement of the free hand of our holy Mother, much of kind to the
former, is the large dispensations, granted by his holiness, upon all weighty
occasions; which some quea^y stomachs (such as Gersom and Erasmuses) do not
well digest, mistaking the term, and calling them dissipations; Well fare yet
the zeal of a learned Spaniard, Mart. Alph. Vivaldus Candel. Aureo.
Martin Alphonsus Vivaldus who flies fiercely in in the face of one of their
greatest Bishops, for making question of the lavish exercise of the Popes power
in this kind, Piis auribus etc. It is offensive to pious ears (says he)
which is spoken by a most reverend Bishop of Spain a Dominican by profession;
who handling the question whether the Pope may err; I would to God (says he)
that any doubt could be made of this conclusion; but we see daily come from the
Court of Rome such large, yea loose dipensations that the world cannot bear
them any longer; whereupon the zealous Doctor beats his Candlestick about the
ears of this Censorious Prelate, twitting him with the contrary judgment of
their common Mother, the University of Salamanca: Whereas other Catholics
take too tamely the heavy censures which pass daily upon his holiness in this
behalf: It is a stark shame to see, Defense of the Apol. 3. part. p. 371.
That when Bishop Jewel so long ago has so clamorously laid open such a
rabble of gross and intolerable flatteries (as he proclaims them) fallen from
the pens of some Roman Parasites, both Divines, and Canonists, Vide citationes
authoris apud Juellum loco praedicto.
concerning the prodigiously-exorbitant powers and practice of Papal
dispensations (such as any modest man would blush to hear) as that the Pope may
dispense (says one) against Paul's Epistles; against the new Testament, says
another; against both Old and New Testament, says a third; against the Law of
God, says a fourth; above the Law says a fifth; of wrong he can make right,
of nothing something, says a sixth: Yea to shut up all) sin only excepted he
can [quas^ omnia facere, quae Deus potest] do in a sort all that God can do;
Yet Nec quisquam ex agmine tanto
Audet a dire virum.
Not one in all that great and boastful rout
Dares come to graple with that Champion stout.


No one Catholic pen has ever wagg'd against him, for either Apology, or
excuse: Neither yet after so many and bitter complaints made in, and to the
Council of Trent concerning the horrible abuse of this practice is the case
thought meet to be any whit altered: but, Intranti nummo quasi quodam principe
summo
Exiliunt valuae, nihil auditur nisi salve.
When money enters like some mighty Lord,
The gates fly open; God save you is the word.


As Cardinal Cusanus could say in his time, It is no more, but deferunt a^^um
et argentum, et reportant chartas, Men bring in Silver and Gold, and carry out
papers.

Yet a third piece of Papal bounty is the granting of extraordinarily high
priveledges to Princes and States far better then a Golden Rose upon Dominica
Laetare (though daubed over with the preciousest Balsome, and perfumed with
Musk, and blessed with holy water) which are feoffed not upon their persons
only, but their successors: Yet not so, but upon misdemeanure they may be
reversed; and upon the necessity or greater avail of the Church, infringed.
The rule is Papa nunquam ligat sibi manus, The Pope never ties his own hands;
those are still left at liberty, to tie or untie at pleasure. So we have known
more then once, that notwithstanding his engaging himself by his free
concessions, yet that he makes bold to take the freedom of doing what he
lists, as the Gravamina Germaniae would make us believe: And here in England,
(when time was) the Parliament, and especially the Peers complained to, and of
Pope Innocentius, in the first Council of Lions, that Martin his legate, had
injuriously violated the privilege granted specially to the King of this
Realm, by the Sea Apostolic, That no person should execute the Office of a
Legate in this Land, unless he were especially requested thereunto, by his
Majesty; which wrong they do so sharply resent, that they speak big words (if
not saucy) to his holiness; Non possumus aequanimiter tolerare, nec per dei
gratiam amplius tolerabimus; we neither can, nor by Gods grace will suffer it
to be done any more. Binius ex Matthaeo Paris. Anno 1345.
And the bold French Lawyers, the spawne of that refractarie Sorbone, have got
a distinction by the end of Privilegia remuneratoria; differencing the
privileges that are yielded upon considerations, from those that are merely
free and voluntary; standing upon it, that if the privilege were granted in
way of remuneration and upon a mutual concordate it is not the power of his
holiness to reverse or violate it.

Let them argue the case, whom it concerns. But, certainly, in this last and
worst age of the world, the great Kings of the earth grow resty, and
headstrong, having learnt at last, to know their own strength; and now having
got the bit between their teeth, their rider is best to sit sure for fear of a
fall.

In the mean time, hitherto, as some Popes have given out themselves for the
Lords of the world (usurping the speech of him that said, All the Kingdoms of
the earth are mine, and to whomsoever I will, Luke 4.6.
I deliver them) so there have not wanted great Princes which have been content
to receive the grant, and confirmation of new Kingdoms from their hands (cum
privilegio ad possidendum solum) and have nothing to plead for the propriety of
their right, in those large territories, snatched from their heathen owners, but
a sheeps skin sub Sigillo piscatoris; So as these Beneficiaries cannot but
acknowledge our Rome the mistress of the world, not more great then bountiful.

As for other Churches, what have they to give? were it not well with them, if
they could but hold their own? If (as the world goes) they can maintain but a
bare subsistence upon earth, although, in the mean time, they are confident of
a large portion in heaven?

CHAP. IX. The triumph of Gain.
BOunty cannot live, and hold out, unless it be fed, and supplied with incomes
of profit, It will easily therefore be granted, that the holy Mother, being so
beneficent, must needs be recruited with large accession of gainful emoluments:
As no Church under Heaven is so free, so none is equally rich; when his
holiness enters upon his Apostolical charge, Pontifex aceipit de gremio
Camerarii sui pecuniam. Ubi nihil tamen est auri vel argenti, spargensque in
pop. dicit. Aurum and argentum non habeo; quod autem habeo hoc tibi do. Lib.
sacr. Ceremon.

Thomae Aquinati accedenti ad Innocentium 4. cum magna vis pecuniae
numeraretur, vides Thoma Ecclesiam non amplius dicere posse, Aurum and argentum
non habeo Cum doctor Angelicus resp. urbane and modeste, Nec modo quod tunc,
claudo imperare ut surgat and ambulet Bapt. Gillius. Acad. Flor. Dial. 3.


he only scatters brass among the people, and borrows the words of St. Peter;
Silver and Gold have I none; but by that time he is warm in his seat, he is in
another tune so as when Thomas Aquinas came to Innocent the fourth (whom he
found surrounded with great heaps of Gold) Lo Thomas, said the Pope, the Church
cannot now say, as of old, Silver and Gold have I none; No, said the surly
Doctor, neither can she say to the lame man, Arise and walk.

It was a strange thing to see a Pope Celestine 5th. to be still an Anachorite
in Peter's Chair, and to meet him in the street riding on an Ass; or to hear
of a Pope Clement 4th. who having two daughters, bestowed a whole three hundred
pounds upon one of them for a marriage portion, and gave thirty pound with the
other to place her in a Nunnery; and from his nephew (perhaps his son) that had
three Prebends, took two away, in his bountiful liberality. Or to hear an
Alexander 5th. a beggar in the Episcopal Throne; These may pass for prodigies
of a pusillaminous mortification; the kindly successors of Peter bewray other
manner of spirits, and keep another kind of estate; whether by the munificent
Legacies of Emperors, Kings, Princes, and other Potentates, or by virtue of
their invaluably rich offices, and vailes. As for those of the first kind, we
cannot easily be beaten off from the just maintenance of those two great
Donations of Constantine; the one, of the place of Lateran, and City of Rome,
the other of the Territories of Rome, Italy, and other the Western Countries
therein mentioned; though, Otho Frisingensis, Platina, Papyr. Mass. in vita.
Confer of Heart and Reynolds.
Krantzius, Cusanus, Laurentius Valla, and Pius himself give up the latter of
them as supposititious, and though, for the former, it be apparent, that the
Emperor possessed Rome still, for 400. years after the pretended grant.

But it is needless to enquire thus late, quo jure; we are sure his holiness
holds them now fast enough; Besides the addition of other rich Principalities
derived since upon the Church by the munificence of pious Benefactors. Oh the
inexhaustible bounty of those holy Souls of our Ancestors! What was it that
those Religious heroes thought too good to accumulate upon the Church? How
happy did they think themselves in making the Church their heir? Regna magis
quam caenobia vir sanctus posteris reliquit etc. non tam pauperibus hospitium
quam clericis and sacerdotibus otium atque luxuriam pariturus, Volateran.
If but to one order of St. Benedict, Tertullus a Patrician of Rome could give
his large patrimony, leaving to posterity regna magis quam caenobia, kingdoms
rather then Monasteries, as Volateran tells us; what shall we think of the
universal indowments of the Sea Apostolic? Besides these voluntary Donations,
the Imposed sums ftom all Christian nations must needs make up a very large and
scarce computable revenue; Take the account, as it is given in from France, by
the sure and faithful hand of Nicholaus Clemangis, Taxa vacantiarum secundum
quod describitur in libris Camerae Apostolica de Ecclesiiis Cathedral. et
Abbatiis Galliarum taxatis ascendit ad sexenta nonaginta septem millia
septingenta quinquaginta Erancorum sine praelaturis etc. Nic. Clem. de Annatis
non solvendes p. 100.
who tells us that the Tax of the vacancies of Cathedral Churches and Abbacies
in France, as it is set down in the books of the Chamber Apostolic, arises to
six hundred ninety seven thousand seven hundred and fifty Franks, besides
Prelacies, and other inferior Dignities and Benefices; which amount to near as
much more. To which, he adds that if in other nations the like rate should be
received, The sum would arise to no less then six millions, nine hundred
seventy seven thousand and five hundred Florences. And if greater authority be
yet required The Archbishop of Lions in the Council of Basil told the fathers
assembled in the year 1436. that in the time of Pope Martin, Archiepiscopus
Lugduni in Concilio Basil, narravit Anno Dom. 1436. quod tempore Martini Papae
ad Curiam Romans ex sola Francia venerunt novem milliones aurii, computati ab
Episcopis and Praelaturis absque illis qui de parvi^ clericis sumebanr^. Hen.
Tok. Legate. Archiepiscopi Magdeburg etc.

Nec dubium quin omnibus certis and accidentariis computatis, Papa singuli^
annis december milliones coronatorum undequaque corraserit. ibid. Henr.

Epist. Anglorum ad Innocentium.

Italici percipientes in Anglia sexaginta millia Marcarum and co amplius etc.


there came to the Court of Rome out of France above nine millions of Gold,
being accounted from the Bishops and prelates, besides those sums which are
raised from smaller Benefices: Neither is there any doubt to be made that the
Pope by all both set, and accidentary incomes takes up ten millions of crowns
yearly into his coffers. And that I may not trifle the reckonings of other
nations, hear what our English Parliament in the days of Henry the 3d.
complains to, and of Pope Innocent: The Italians (say they) receive out of
England six hundred thousand marks and more, every year, besides diverse other
sums; So as they carry out of the Kingdom more profits, of mere rents, then the
King himself (who is the Tutor of the Church, and Governor of the Kingdom)
receives: Thus they: subscribed, magnates et universitas regni Angliae: The
Peers and Commons of the Kingdom of England.

Besides the set and fixed revenues, many casual windfalls of no small value
contribute much to the craming of his Holiness coffers.

The Prelates of that universal See know their heir, beforehand, even Peter's
successor: What share soever some secular Bishops are allowed in some
Countries, Potest Episcopus donare in vita non causa mortis. Ex Barbos. Gav.
to have in disposing their estates, those which are Regulars, cannot look to
make any other will of their goods or Lands, Episcopus Regularis neque de
Patrimonialibus, nec de acquisitis potest testari. Idem.

In infirmitate non potest quilibet Episcopus immoderatas facere Eleemosyna.
Ibid.

Bona Episcopi titularis acquiruntur Papae. Idem.


whether patrimonial, or acquisite; and the rest toward their end may not be
too free of their alms; what should I mention the months reserved, the
Annates, Advousons, Expectatives, and other perquisites of Rectories and other
lower dignities? And if an Archbishopric fall void, there is the price of a
Pall, coming flush in; which is no small one; Luth sermon. Conviv.
The Archbishop of Ments paid belike for his, six and twenty thousand Crowns;
and the rest in the like proportion. So as St. Peter's successor needs not fish
for unlawful emoluments, such as Symoniacal contracts (to the penalty whereof
his Holiness is not liable) or such as Pope Leo is charged withal, who is said
to have been bribed with 8000. ^uth. Conviv. sermon.
Ducats by the Capuchines to balk their visitation; Perhaps it may have been
with him, as was said of Galba, that himself did no injuries to men, but his
servants might verify that of the Poet, Venalesque manus, ibi fas ubi plurima
meroes.
Sale hands, and that is most right that brings most gain.
himself surely would scorn so sordid a contract, seeing so strong a current of
coin flowing in daily into his mint by justifiable ways. O the not more
admired, then envied treasures of his Holiness! Even in our time, Pope Sixtus
Quintus, (sife-cinque) (as some idle gamesters mis^named him) of an hog-heard,
as it is said, becomne an holy Franciscan, Post annos 5. habebat in aerario. 5.
milliones aureorum, ut testatur Ciracella in ejus vita.
(who by his vow must not meddle with money) in the first year of his Popedom
added unto the Treasury a whole million of Crowns; and after five years had
five millions in stock; Nicol. Clemangi^ ubi supra.
And not to instance in any more, John the 22d. as Nicholaus Clemangis assures
us, had a million, and seven hundred thousand florences of Gold laid up in
several places; Whereto also the same author adds that the College of
Cardinals, were supposed to have half so much for their share laid up also. It
is well yet, that, by his saying, this wealth runns not in one channel; and
that his Holiness can abide, that this precious ointment should run down, from
his beard, to the skirts of his garment too. How rich therefore do we think the
Clergy of his immediate subordination must needs be (Dignum patella opercu'um)
when John Gerson can cry out enviously enough I warrant you: Quae utique
abominatio etc. Quae utique abominatio quod unus tener ducenta, alter trecenta
beneficia Ecclesiastica. Gerson Declar. defectuum vir. Eccles.
What an abomination is this (says he) that one man should hold two hundred,
another three hundred Ecclesiastical Benefices in his hand; But above all, what
a super-excessively rich Court is that of Rome? wherein his Holiness, and his
potent factors, strive who shall more overlay each other with weight of Gold;
what Court under heaven does so swarm with varieties of Officers, both for
state, and profit? many whereof are so vendible, that we are acquainted with
the price beforehand; To give you a taste; Not to speak of the Master of the
Palace, The Court of Rome with the Government, Officers, and value of their
Offices, published in Italian, and translated by Mr. Henry Cogan, set forth 1654.
the secret Chamberlain, The Secretary of state; the 24 Secretaries of Breives,
the Generals both of the Guards, and of the holy Church; places of not more
honor, then profit. The Vice-chancelorship is of the value of fifteen or
sixteen thousand crowns by the year; The Officers of the Apostolical Chancery;
both the Regent and the twelve Prelates, the Abbreviators, so rich that the
Regentship is sold for two and twenty thousand crowns; the rest, every
Abbreviatorship, for twelve thousand crowns.

The Cardinal Chamberlain worth twelve or fourteen thousand crowns yearly; The
Master of the Brieves worth thirteen thousand; The prefect of the Brieves
twelve thousand; The Lord Treasurer Generals place worth seventy thousand
crowns; The Auditors of the Chamber sold for seventy thousand crowns; The
office of the Lead bought for three thousand crowns; Four Officers of the
Register, called Ministers of the Register of supplication, sold for four
thousand crowns a piece; The Pronotaries participant, whereof thee are twelve
Prelates, each place bought for seven thousand crowns.

I could easily weary you, if I listed to transcribe the Catalogue of the
Offices of the Palace, as the writers of the Penitentiarie, the writers of
Brieves, Apostolical Squires, Knight of St. Peter and St. Paul; Knights of the
Flowerdeluce Lauretan Knights, and God knows how many more rich places (both
of dignity and employment) all which are confessedly so bought and sold, that
(as it may fall) both parties may make a good market.

Now all this magnificence, and wealth, could not hold up, if Rome were not the
Ocean, into which all the rivers of the world run to pay their tribute,
especially in the case of Dispensation, and of Absolutions from Cases Reserved;
these alone (if the world had no quarrels that might draw on Appeals) were
enough to make Tyber overflow his banks.

Upon these occasions, Oh what flocking there is to this Metropolis from all
the regions of Christendom? In so much, as the view of this general resort
drew from the envious tongue of him whom the world has long styled Venerable,
Venerabilis Beda.
the willing misconstruction of those well known Letters S. P. Q. R. as
importing, Senatus, populusque Romanus.
Stultus populus quaerit Romam; All flock hither, none empty handed; but (as
happy is) none go away overloaded, (except it be with grief for what they left
behind them, and what they cannot but carry with them) For I perceive it is a
stale proverb at Rome, Tritum Romae adagium, e Curia tria reportari Inane mar
supium conscientiam malam, stomachum malum.
as Massonus himself tells us, that men do ordinarily carry away from the Court
of Rome an empty purse, an ill conscience, and a bad stomach.

Thus invaluably rich is the Roman Church; and why may she not make it an
argument of Gods special favor to her, as well as some prosperous usurpers in
all times have made success the proof of a good cause? Now, what wealth can
the Protestant and pretendedly Reformed Church boast of to the World? Surely,
they are abounding, but it is with wants; full, but of sorrows and afflictions;
loaded, but with heavy pressures, with contempt and disgraces: He is wilfully
blind then, that will not see where to pitch his choice: The one says,
Babylon. Esaias 47.8. Revel. 18.7.
I sit as a Queen, and am no widow, and shall see no sorrow: Of the other God
says, Come down O daughter Sion, and sit in the Dust. The one is high mounted,
and sits gorgeously arrayed in purple and scarlet, decked with Gold and
pearls, and precious stones; with a golden cup in her hand, and a glorious
title in her forehead: The other lies grovelling on the earth, arrayed in
Sackcloth, covered with ashes, drenched in tears, miserable for the time, and
only in hope happy and glorious.

CHAP. X. The Triumph of Wisdom.
IF thou be wise, be wise for thy self, Prove. 19.12.
is the counsel of the wisest King; which if ever any Church under Heaven
have carefully taken, it is the Roman: so cunningly is the frame of her
government contrived, that her witty and dear son, that has written de
regimine Principis, could not devise how to mend it: neither is the
ministration and management of it any way unanswerable to the platform. For, to
begin with matter of caution: Whereas it has always been found dangerous to
let the Vulgar know too much; since knowledge is an edge-toole, which
unskilful hands cannot tell how to rule, but are rather apt to wound
themselves therewith; and (as the old axiom runs) ignorance is the mother of
devotion; it has therefore been the wisdom of our holy mother to keep the
common people blindfold; and to cause them to take up with an implicit faith,
without enquiring into the mysteries of faith; and informing themselves of the
special points of Religion; as suspecting, that, upon more light of
understanding, they would grow scrupulous, censorious, refractory; Indeed, as
Luther said, what should a cow do with nutmegs? And because if the Laity
should be allowed to read the Scriptures in a language which they understand,
it is feared they would easily find (that which the Archbishop of Mentz in a
former passage professed to see) that those holy pages are no friends to Rome;
Biblia vulgari lingua edita non possunt legi; neque Episcopi, neque
Inquisitores, neque Regularum superiores dare queunt licentiam. Clem. 8. in
Indie. lib. prohibit.

Neque compendium historiae Bibliorum, Ibid.


therefore our holy father Clement 8. has found it the wisest way, strictly to
forbid both the reading and retaining of any Bible, or any part of it, in the
mother tongue of any Nation under heaven, inhibiting also any abridgement of
the history thereof under great penalty, restraining the power that any
Bishop in former times might have used in giving License upon good caution to
some confiding persons to read the same. And lest some other heretical books
should poison the minds of unwary readers to the great prejudice of the Roman
faith; what curious remedy, has that wise Church provided, for both the
prevention of that danger where it may happen, and the redress where it is.

Order is first taken for the prohibiting and suppressing of all books that are
apparently contagious; so as they are smothered ere they come to the light of
the world; as for others, that amongst much wholesome matter, have some
interspersions of suspicious or unsafe passages, they are soundly purged, and
corrected, and taught to speak true Roman; yea though it be one of the ancient
Fathers, though Augustine himself, St. Augustine speaking of eating the flesh,
and drinking the blood of Christ; has, Facinus vel flagitium videtur Jubere;
figura ergo est, etc.

Addit. Inquis. dicet, haereticus, verba Augustini sunt, lib. de doctrina
Christianae. l. 5. c. 16.


if his pen have lasht out in the opinion of a solicitous supervisor, he shall
be fetched in, with a dicet Haereticus: as for the careful courses that are
taken for the safety of all reimpressions, the wit of man can rather admire,
then sample them; And lest conference and conversation should infect any
sou;le, it is enacted by Pope Gregory 15. Anno 1622. that no heretical person
whatsoever, on what ever pretext, Cabant. v. Haeresis.
shall hire an house, or dwell within the territories of Jtaly, and the Jsles
adjoining; Ibid.
As also that no Jtalian shall dare to dwell in any region of the heretics
where there is not a Catholic Priest to support him; Ibid.
that he shall not make use of an heretical Physician, except in the utter want
of a Catholic Doctor; Ibid.
That no man shall be sent to the places of heretics upon the businefs of
Merchandise, Ibid.
except he be 25 years old; That it shall not satisfy the Inquisition, that he
who has heretical books, do burn them privately (there may be fraud in that
pretense) unless he bring them to the superior. Cabant. de Monialibus.


As for due caution for avoiding of scandal, how singular and exemplary it is:
No tall trees may be suffered near to a Monastery of holy Sisters: No chimney
may be allowed to their private Cells: Caminus non admittatur cellis privatis.
ibid.
The Regulars may not buy or procure any closes, or gardens near to the
Nunnerie: Ibid.
The window which looks into the Quire must be but two Cubits, and twelve
inches high; the probationers may not go forth to visit their parents; Ibid.
None of them may walk forth but by couples; Ibid.
Their nearest cousins may not be admitted to visit them, Ibid.
when they are sick, no not in the case of death; Their Confessary may not go
in to hallow the house on holy Saturday, Ibid.
nor may accompany the physicians or workmen; Lastly, they may not have License
to go abroad, unless it be for alms; and only those, which are forty years
old, and not fair; Though for this last clause, I take care how it will be
construed, whether in relation to their own opinion or others; If to their own,
I doubt they must all keep house perpetually.

Ibid.
For extreme unction and the sacred viaticum which is to be delivered to dying
persons, how wisely is it instituted that these sacramental acts shall not be
performed to any one, by him that is the Confessarie of the sick person; lest
there may have been unmeet secrecies smothered between them, and each of them
be unjustly indulgent to other in the parting.

Ibid.
For exorcisations, in the practice whereof there has been of old a just
suspicion of juggling, what can be better advised then that they shall be done
in the church openly, neither before the Sunrising, nor after the Sun setting,
and that when very few are allowed to be present.

The like curiosities of heedfulnesse may be easily observed in all the
comportments of these prudent governors; which some uncharitable censurers
will perhaps interpret the wrong way, and be apt to say Self-guiltinesse is
causer of suspicion.

For my part, I cannot but praise their wit, as in this wariness, so in their
winning plausibility, and fine ways to hook in and gratify the great ones:
Besides the Golden Roses, and hallowed swords, and Banner, wherewith they
please more Boys, they can ennoble them with high Titles. France has, The
most Christian King; Spain, the Catholic King; England, the Defender of the
Faith; Scotland had, the Defender of the Church; the Helvetian, Defenders of
the liberties of the Church.

Sunt and hic Priamo sua praemia laudi: Neither is the care to please more then
the tender fear to offend the mighty: Bulla coenae excommunicat imponentes
nova pedagia sive gavellas subditis.
Was it not wisely turned off, when the Bulla caenae had excommunicated a^^ that
lay new imposts and gavels upon their subjects, (which the learned Casuist
shrugs at, as Casus difficilis principibus, periculosus scribentibus) to
resolve, That this hard censure is only for those great persons that
acknowledge to have superiors over them, Mart. Vival. de Bulla coenae.
as Dukes, Marquesses, Earls, Barons; but as for those temporal Lords that
have no superiors in Temporalities, as the Emperor, King of Spain, and King
of France, it concerns not them at all; They may crush their Subjects with what
load of Taxes they please.

Ne dum rex Christianissimus ab aliis excommunicari non potest, immo ipse alios
saltem, Laicos saltem, Laicos ex justa causa potest excommunicare. Degrassat.
l. 2. Jure 9.

Rex Franciae duos habet bonos Angelos etc.


And what shall we say to that bold plea which is connived at, for the King of
France, that the said king cannot be Excommunicated by any man? Yea, so far
is it from that, as that the same king has power to excommunicate others,
especially Lay persons, as Degrassalius shames not to profess, adding withal,
that the king of France has two Angels, whereas other men have but one; And
though it seem to sound harsh, that where the Lord is declared an heretic,
there the Vassals are bound to deny him any obedience, yet the matter is so
well qualified with temperate and safe exceptions, that there is no great cause
of fear in that scarrecrow.

For matters of profit, what a wary hand does his Holiness hold over his
Subjects; Sal exterum in terris Ecclesiae ne ematur. Gregor. 13. Gavat. Bulla.
c.
How wisely has he enacted that no foreign Salt shall be b^^ught within all the
Territories pertaining to the Church?

Piratae excommunicantur (non omnes sed) discurrentes mare nostrum, praecipuae
a monte Argentario usque ad Terracinam, and omnes eorum sautores et receptores.
Bulla coenae a Clem. 8. anno 1600. Excom. impedientes victualia deferenda ad
usum Romoe curiae. ibid.
How prudently has he provided for the free and safe traffic in his own
Harbors, by his Bulla coenae, excommunicating all Pirates that shall presume
to infest his own Seas, especially from the mount Argentarius to Terracina, and
all the favorers, and receivers of them? as for his neighbor Princes, let
them look to themselves, Non omnibus dormit Innocentius; How justly and
discreetly does he excommunicate all those which shall any way hinder the
bringing of provision and victuals for the use of the Court of Rome? And if he
do on Holy-Thursday pronounce that deadly sentence against all those that
withhold the Isle of Sicily, and other Dominions, being the Patrimony of the
Church, from the hands of the owner, let the guilty Potentates of the earth
look how (whiles this Capitolin Jupiter thunders, and lightens so fearfully)
they can shroud their heads under some safe Laurel to escape blasting.

What a laudably thrifty law is that, In infirmitate etc. ut supra. Gavant.
Tit. Epis.
which ordaines that no Bishop toward his end shall be too liberal of his
Alms, for fear of cheating his Holiness of his hopes? That the goods of a
Titular Bishop shall come clear in to his Holiness his coffers without
diminution. Indeed, whither should they go else? His wife and children lie all
in a little compass; being all covered under one purple gown of his Holiness:
which is given out, as one main reason to enforce a Celibate upon their
Ecclesiastiques, lest this stream should be diverted into other channels.

Lastly, Archiepiscopus sepeliri debet cum pallio in previncia sua circa
humeros, extra vero eo plicato sub capite. Gavant. tit. Archiepis.
what advantageous rules of holy frugality do we meet with in their wise
constitutions? As, that an Archbishop must be buried with his Pall; either upon
his body if he be interred at home; or wrapped up under his head, if buried
abroad; that ware is too costly to be either forborne, or to be left to a
Successor. It was in the old negligent times that Papyrio tells us, these
Prelates were wont to consecrate each other without relation to a Roman Pall;
the world is now grown wiser then to lose such a collop.

Gavant. e Borbos. v. Forum Epicopale.
In matter of Testament, if the heir do neglect to perform the will of the
dead within a year, the Bishop shall turn Executor.

However, under the Law the price of an whore, Meretrix non repellenda fundare
volens Jus patronatus. Navan. Miser.
no more then of a dog, could be allowed to be brought into the Sanctuary; yet
now it is better advised, that if a Curtizan out of the cleanly earnings of her
honest trade shall be so charitable as to found the patronage of a Church, it
shall be accepted. And if a Will prove to be faulty, as vitiated by some
corrupt hand, Vitiato testamento, non tolluntur Legata ad pios usus. Sylv. v.
Legata. Ad pios usus valet Testam. coram duobus Testibus, etiam mulieres sint.
Slyv. v. Testam. Ibid. Gavant.
yet the Legacies bequeathed in it to pious uses must hold good.

That to make good a Testament to pious uses, the witness of two persons
only, (though they be women) shall be sufficient.

That though an Institution made by a dumb man be of no force, yet his gifts to
pious purposes shall be always valid.

Ibid.
That a condemned, malefactor, if he be allowed to retain his goods till his
death, may bequeath them to pious uses.

Ibid.
That though the church may not take ought from the hands of an impenitent
malefactor, yet an excommunicate person may dispose of his goods to pious uses.

That if a Testator shall say I leave all my goods to the disposing of Titius,
Ibid.
Titius is bound to distribute them to pious uses.

That if a Challice be given by Will, Ibid.
it is to be supposed to be of silver.

That in all Legacies to Churches within the Diocese the Bishop must have his
Canonical portion. Ibid.


It were easy to tire the reader with a view of the large list of such
wholesome and right Lesinante Laws of holy Church, which though looking right
forward at piety, yet squint a little aside at profit, if I listed to be
tedious; but these are enough, to let him see, that St. Bernards words were more
modest then true, when he said, We are not more wise then our forefathers; It
must indeed be confessed, that some no less wise then holy Institutions we
received from the hands of our Immemoriall ancestors, whereof the Church makes
singular use at this day; and especially, that of auricular confession, then
which nothing could be ever devised more avaylable both to the full knowledge
of the state of the Church, in all parts of the Christian world, as also to the
retayning of men in their due obedience, and the reformation of their manners;
whereof the heretics (though they bite it in) cannot choose but secretly think
(according to that of the Comedian) Tum demum etc. Then do we begin to know the
worth of our own goods when we have lost them. Tum demum nostra intelligimus
bona, cum quae in potestate habuimus ea amisimus. Plaut, Captivi.
But there is one main point of wisdom, wherein the present Church far
transcends their most prudent predecessors; The fashion was of old, that upon
all occasions of weight, Councels were called straight, whether provincial, or
Ecumenical, there all businesses were agitated, there determined, with so
great authority, as that it was the received doctrine of the times that the
Session of a General Synod was the highest Tribunal, Council. Basil.
from which there was no appeal; and to which, his holiness himself was bound
to be subject; But now the world has learned another Lesson: Both his
holiness, and all the crew of his Doctors (the good old Sorbone excepted) have
fully and peremptorily determined, that the Pope is above a General Council;
that he alone can and shall manage all the affairs of the Church, decide all
controversies of Religion, Papa sententialiter excommunicat appellantes ad
Concilium, quia ipse solus potest quamcunque rem etiam determinare and
definire. Vivald. in Cass. Bullae. n. 8.
define of all matters of faith; that appeals lie from the most general
Synod to the Papal throne; that the appellants to a General Council are
liable to excommunication; that the Popes tribunal (being one and the same with
Gods) the only Lawful appeal is to his Holiness better informed; So as now,
the large fist of his Holiness has so grasped all the affairs of
Christendom, that none can fall beside it; and how safe may we well think them
in those hands, that are not subject to error.

Some querulous spirits are apt to complain of the miscarriages of matters of
public administration, at the toleration of foul abuses in the Church
Catholic; but it is for want of knowledge of these principles, which our holy
Mother does precisely go upon; one whereof most deservedly is, Viderit
utilitas; very poorly therefore does the Chancellor of Paris salve up that
sore, which was even then complained of; Talia tolerantur in Ecclesia in
peregrinationibus certis, in cultu imaginum etc. Fateor abnegare non possum
multa inter Christianos simplices sub specie religionis introducta esse quorum
sanctior esset omissio. Tolerantur tamen quia non possunt funditus erui. Jo.
Gers. de ero ribus circa artem magicam.
Talia tolerantur etc. such things (says he) are tolerated in the Church, in
certain pilgrimages, in worshipping of Images, in holy waters, in exorcismes,
and the like; which are brought in under a show of religion that were much
better to be omitted; but they are therefore tolerated [quia non possunt
funditus erui] because they can not be utterly rid, and abandoned.

Whereas the true reason (if he could have hit on it) is that of Geminianus.
Error utilis toleratur, A profitable error is meet to be suffered; This alone
is the ground of all those gainful chaffers, that are made at Rome, for a world
of Indulgences, and dispensations, and drives the rich trade of that inversed
Alchymie, of changing Gold into Lead; Honorius 3. in literis ad Clerum
Anglicanum fatetur. scandalum Romanae curiae, etc: Matthew. Westmonast. l. 2.
Anno 1226.
this teaches them to make advantages even of complaints; In which kind that
or Honorius 3d. is very eminent; who receiving from the Clergy of England sad
exclamations, against the avarice and oppressions of the Court of Rome, in his
crafty answer, confesses, those complaints to be too just and true, but withal
tells them that all this mischief arises from the poverty of their holy Mother;
for the remedy whereof, he requires of them the further supply of two prebends
in every Cathedral, and in every Covent the yearly stipend of one Monk; so the
complaynants are eased, as Plutarks mule was, which being laded with salt, and
finding ease by lying down in the water, by the melting of his burden; was the
next time Loaded with wool, which by being drenched doubled the weight.

Shortly then; whether we regard the marvelous care and vigilance for the
preventing of evils, or the rare and singular artifices of acquiring,
preserving, increasing the honors, and profits of the present world, mother
Rome is more fit for wonder then emulation:

As for our silly Reformers, how enviously do they (I warrant you) look upon
the unmatchable glory, wealth, policy of this great mistress of the world? All
dogs will be still ready to fly upon that Curre that runs away with the bone:
But where are their cunning contrivances, and subtle devices, to eschew their
own dangers or to work mischief to their opposites, to advance their own
estate, and suppress their enemies? what slye shifts, and visor-like pretenses
have they to cozen the world withal? what do they affect but a plain,
right-downe, honest simplicity? as those that pretend to wit enough, when they
are stricken on the one cheek, to turn the other; and to say with him in the
Satyrist, Tu pulsas, ego vapulo tantum; and as the Prophet said of their great
Lord and Master, Sicut ovis ad occisionem; As a sheep to the slaughter; rather
suffering themselves to pocket two wrongs, then to offer one; caring more to be
honestly poor, then injuriously rich; in a word, affecting so too much of the
Dove, that they have too little of the serpent.

CHAP. XI. The Triumph of Mercy.
THere is no one thing wherein the Opposites think to find so much advantage of
exception against the Apostolic Sea, as for her unmercifulness, and extreme
cruelty; which, as it is an inhumane, and (in that regard) odious, so a much
more unChristian disposition; but, Est justitia parcena est misericordia
puniens. August.
in the mean time they little consider, that, as there is a cruel mercy in
sparing, so there is a merciful security in punishing great offenders. And
what offense can be greater, then heresy? which alone is of so heinous a
nature, Haeresis est crimen quod nec confessio celat.
that (according to the old and well known verse) it may not though under the
sacred seal of Confession, be concealed; Well then, what though Luther
profess, that he believes verily that Rome has slain an hundred thousand
Martyrs; Luther. sermon. conv.
wherein I hope his meaning is to take in Old heathen Rome into the number!
What though Erasmus after his jeering fashion brings in Charon the Ferry-man of
Hell, Erasm. Charon queritur sylvas omnes in Elysiis campis ita succisas esse
comburendis haereticorum umbris, ut non suppetat lignum cymbae suae
resarciendae. Coll. v. Charon.
complaining that his black Barge was now leaky and ready to sink for want of
mending; and that there was no wood left in the Elysian grove to repair it,
for that it was all spent in the burning of heretics! What though there be
much noise of many horrible murders, and massacres of harmless Christians, of
the Waldenses in many Regions of Christendom, of Merindol and Cabriere; and
tell of that Tragical slaughter in France, and the Valtoline! what though the
world rings of that bloody butchery of the Inquisition? and the ugly Devils
painted on their San-benitos (...), (...).
etc. Who can stay the clack of ill tongues? But in the mean time these busy
talkers, whiles they exaggerate these pretended immanities, are willing to
forget that part of the wallet that hangs behind them; and to pass over those
horrid persecutions, which the innocent Roman Catholics have suffered under
their tyranny in the time of Qu Elizabeth; whose bloody reign one of our Poets
celebrated then, in a sad Elegy beginning with Ergone sanctorum nondum saciata
cruore? and having compared her with Busiris and Phalaris, shutts up, What? not
yet sated with the blood of Saints.

All Tyrannes rage yields to Elizabeth.


with Omnis Teddariae cedat furor Elizabethae.

But belike she speeds thereafter; For father David at Ypre, out of his Pulpit,
Dr. Merlin reports it, who was testis auritus.
told the people; That he had been a dozen years exorcising a devil, whom
(says he) I never found one day missing till such a day this week; the reason
whereof when I demanded of him, answer was given, that he was indeed that day
absent, Bombinus in vita Campiani.
as being commanded to attend Queen Elizabeth to hell: And since that time many
holy Priests, and fathers of the Society, have saluted Tyburne in a worse
fashion then Father Campian did, when with Father Parsons he passed by that
sacred Cross. I know their ill-willers will be ready to say, they suffered not
for religion, but for treason; and indeed it is true, they might have kept
their soul within their teeth long enough, for any violence would have been
offered them, if they had only held all the supernumerarie articles of the
Roman faith, without the acting of those things, which by the Law were declared
treasonable (for never any man of them suffered for mere conscience) but if
they will be nibling at allegiance, and wilfully fall upon those practices,
which carry in them a forfeiture of life; now the State thinks it may justly
say to them, Perditio tua ex te, Thy destruction is from thy self: but let
every tub stand on his own bottom: As for our holy mother, grant that she has
been the death of so many heretics, yet this is to be said for her, that she
has killed them in love: love to her self, that she may not be troubled with
them; love to the Church, that it may not be embroyled by them; love to the
world, that it may not be infected by them; love to their souls, that their
sufferings in the other world may be the less, by how much the time of their
sinning is shorter. And who then can blame her for her so holy intention? As it
is wont to be said, that not the death, but the cause, makes the martyr; so the
same rate holds in the inferring of death; the mere killing is not that which
deserves either blame or approbation; all is in the cause that merits it, and
the mind that inflicts it. Levi lost the blessing by the sword, and by the
sword recovered a greater blessing; Phineas his bloody zeal won both
forbearance to Israel, favor to his person, and honor to his posterity. In
some cases there goes but a pair of sheares betwixt justice and rigor: And
mercy and severity may well lodge under the roof of one breast.

For example: St. Francis was a man to whom we may well attribute the title of
Moses in his time (mitissimus super terram) the mildest man on the earth, as
might be proved by many instances; now this holy man was in hand to preach to a
great auditory assembled for that purpose, and offering to lean his back
against an oak to that end, he espied a number of Ants or Pismires creeping
thereabouts, in compassion of whom, he spoke to the people to give way to his
sisters the Ants a while, that they might depart in safety; as he charged them
also to do they obeyed, and he strait fell to his work; but whiles he was
zealously preaching, there comes a woman with a Cymball in her hand, ringing it
so loud that the voice could not but be drowned with the sound, St. Francis
being much troubled with that interruption, charged her to hold her hand, and
keep silence, she still goes on with her unseasonable Music, he charged her
the second time to hold still, she still persists, the third time he required
her silence; when that would not prevayle, he straight says, Toll Diabole
quod tuum est, Devil take thy own; Up goes the woman instantly, being suddenly
snatched into the air, and for ought we know carried quick to hell; Now you
will perhaps think it strange that so much mercy to the Ants should stand
together with so much cruelty to the woman, and will be ready to say Tantaene
etc. Is there so fierce choler in a Saint? But we must learn to know a
difference betwixt the rage of an holy zeal, and a sinful revenge; and
believe, that Saints have thoughts, and ways of their own, which we may
neither follow nor judge of.

Diodor. sicul. l. 4. c, 1
But as for any direct acts of Cruelty, such, as those of the Priests of Meroe,
who could send to their Kings to murder themselves at pleasure; such as
Ravillac and our powder-plotters were, notoriously guilty of, our holy mother
abhorres them; I dare say, sufficiently, albeit Father Garnet, be upon that
account, Beatified: Some passages of cruelty may perhaps be found in some
guilty Covents, as Erasmus tells an abominable story from the mouth of Matthew
Cardinalis Sedunensis, who (that Counsel might be the better kept) related it
to a whole Tablefull; of Dominicans burying a man quick in their cloister; and
Henry Stephen in his Apology for Herodotus can easily furnish us with such
tales, terrible to be told, and the heads and bones of infants found in the
walls and ponds of old Cloisters speak too much to be denied, or concealed; But
these are personal crimes, not therefore justly imputable to a community;
although the malevolent will be apt enough to say they may thank our holy
mother for her ill-advised Laws of enforced celibate.

But notwithstanding these calumnious imputations, whosoever shall seriously
view all the carriages of our holy mother, whether in her Constitutions, or
practices; shall find store of mercy in them all.

It shall not repent us, Council. Toleran. tempore innocentii 6.

Quod constitutiones praedictae obligent non ad culpam, sed ad poenam tantum.

Tho. Aquinas asserit Benedictum statuisse profiteri suos monachos regulam non
observare. Hospin. in reg. Bened.

De adulteriis and aliis criminibus quae minora sunt potest Episcopus cum suis
clericis dispensare post peractam poenitentiam ut in suis ordinibus deserviant.
Alex. 3. Episc. Sabernitan. Venialia peccata ut gratia hominem non privant, ita
sine confessione remitti possunt. Greg. va^. l, 1. de missa.

A veniali potest absolvere quicunque sacerdos simplex in soro Sacramentali,
Imo per quemcumque alium secularem extra sacramentalem confessionem cum
deprecatione Miseratur rui omnipotens deus posse deleri tangunt omnes infra,
and express tenet Victoria in summa sacram.

Vi vald. de Erasm. Desunctus in loco sacro sepultus (scilicet excommunicatus)
non debet exhumari ut Hagelletur, sufficit flagellare sepulchrum. Nava^. c. 23.
nu. 32. Steph. Avil. c. 7. dub. 2 Adulteros morie mulctari debere docere, non
modo notoriam injustitiam, verum etiam haereticam doctrinam esse. Biniua in
notis ad Council. Veneticum.

Quae dormiendo violata fuit aut dum ebria erat, non amittit virginitatem, nisi
tali animo ad dormiendum decubuerit. Candel. aureum Vivaldi Pa^^. 2. de
electione Abbatissae c 3.

A fortiori non violat Ecclesiam pollurio quam confessarius invitus patitur
audiendo confessionem. Steph. D. Avila de censuris. Tit de violat. Eccles.
Respondetur 2. Appellatione carnium lardum non includit, nec contra.

Cand. Vivald. de quadregisimali jejunio. c. 11.

Potest Episcopus punire Mendicantes habentes plures campanas, cum debeant esse
contenti una. Barbos. allegat, 105. Gavant, Regular jura.


to instance in some particulars, for a taste of the rest.

And first, what a merciful act was that of the Council of Toledo in the time
of Innocent. 6. That those Laws and Statutes which are made for the well
ordering of Ecclesiastique persons shall not bind ad culpam, but ad poenam
only; somewhat of Kin to that favorable construction of Aquinas, that the
Monks are bound only to profess, not to keep the rules of Benedict.

What a kind law is that of Alexander the 3d. that for adulteries, and such
other sleighter crimes the Bishop may dispense with his Clerks, that they may
still, after their penance is done, serve in their former stations; How
favorable is that determination, that as for venial sins, we need not
trouble our selves in confession with them, for that they are wipt off
otherwise? How mild is that sentence that English Catholics sin not in
conversing ordinarily with the heretics though excommunicate? for that though
those be notorious heretics, yet they are not denounced by name. Not to be
endless, what beams of mercy shine forth in all these ensuing determinations;
That from a venial sin, not only a simple Priest in Confession, but a mere
Laick out of confession may absolve a man with the prayer of misereatur; Yea
the Lords prayer or a little aspersion of holy water is sufficient; That an
excommunicate person if he burried in holy ground shall not be taken up again,
and be whipped; it shall suffice that his grave only be whipped; That those clerks
which are married men, if they be not bigami may be buried in holy ground in
the time of Interdict; That to hold adultery ought to be punished with death,
is not only unjust but heretical; That a maid which is vitiated whiles she
is a sleep, or dead-drunck does not hereby lose her virginity, unless she laid
her self down to sleep with such an intent: That a Penitentiary suffering an
involuntary pollution in some cases of Confession, sins not. Jo. Gerson.

That in some parts it shall be lawful to eat eggs and whit meat on Frydayes,
and the head feet and inwards of beasts on Saturday. That Bacon shall accounted
no flesh; That beggars which are ready to affamish for want, may in Lent-time
eat what they can get.

That every several Order of Mendicants shall content themselves with one
Bell: That a Bishop may dispense with all irregularities incurred by any secret
crime (except murder) but this faculty is denied to all those Bishops which
live in the countries where the Council of Trent is not received.

That manslaughter (if altogether casual) shall induce no irregularity; and
yet so tender is our holy mother of the effusion of blood, Clericus in sacris
secando venam ad emittendum sanguinem si moriatur aeger, sit irregularis.
Gavant. v. Irregularis.
as that she has ordained that if any Clerk that is in holy orders, shall
open a vein, and the patient shall dye upon that phlebotomy, the unhappy
Chirurgian is thereby made irregular; And which is yet a greater proof of her
tender-heartedness, the holy Confraternity of the blood of Christ, which are
employed to attend the execution of condemned heretics, may not be suffered to
lend light from their Tapers to those Torches wherewith the fire is to be
kindled.

By all which and much more, that might be said, it sufficiently appears, how
graciously indulgent our said holy mother is, to all her children, how
gently-severe to small offenses, how carefully provident for the supply of
their necessities, how averse from the shedding of blood.

As for her opposites, they give her the hearing in all this plea, Brom. sum.
praedic. v. executor.
but they are ready withal to tell us Bromiards Apologue of the Birds, and the
Fouler: The Fouler in a cold morning caught good store of them, and still nipt
them in the head, and put them up; his eyes in the mean time watering with the
sharpness of the air; see, said one of the Fowls how the man pitties us, he
weeps to see us taken: Ah, said the other, look not to his eyes, but look to
his fingers; there you shall see what pity we find from him. And put us in
mind of St. Chrysostomes sure way of discerning a wolf from a sheep; It is
possible (says he) for the wolf to clothe himself with the sheep skin, so
as that cannot descry him; and to imitate the sheeps voice, so as that shall
not bewray him; but look to his chaps, and they cannot deceive you. You shall
not find either grass in the wolves mouth, or blood in the sheeps. So then,
without more words, let all the world judge betwixt us, at whose door soever
lies the most store of blood spilt for mere Religion, Let him pass for
wolvishly cruel and unmercifull.

In the mean time there is one main challenge of unmercifulness which they
have got by the end, having learned it, as I suppose from the pious Chancellor
of Paris, which I confess I can neither conceal nor answer; that mortified
Pilgrim (as his name signifies) would needs be practizing; and in those
strained numbers has let fall these lines: Arbitrio Papa proprio si clavibus
uti
Jo. Gerson. versu supra materiam Indulgentiarum.
Possit, our sinit ut paena pios cruciet?
Cur non evacuat loca purgandis animabus Tradita.
If then the Pope can of his own free will
Dispose the Keys! why does he suffer still
poor pious souls in lingering pain to lie?
And in those direful flames un pitied fry?
Why does he not quite void that horrid cell,
Where souls are purged with fire next that of hell?


Thus that pitiful Doctor; Answer him who can. I confess this Nut is too hard
for me to crack; I leave it to some of the learned Fathers of the Society,
which have stronger chaps.

CHAP. XII. The triumph of Peace and Unanimity.
AS all these foregoing privileges of our holy mother are apparent enough to
observing eyes, so this of unanimity is most clearly conspicuous, so as all the
rest of the world cannot choose but see and wonder, and envy; whiles other
professions, like to drops of water spilt in the dust, lose themselves in their
divided singularity; the judgments of her Governour^ and Doctors hold
together, and bear forward, like a strong torrent, whose force abides no
resistance. Look upon the Protestant Churches, you shall find them in their
miserable spoliaries, wallowing in dust and blood; Jeslerius Scaphusensis de
bello Eucharistico.
six several wars have passed between them in the Eucharisticall quarrels; and
with what furious bitterness they fall still upon each other the world sees
and smiles; neither can it wish better music then to hear a fierce Lutheran
say, Prolaeus praefar. F^sc culi etc. From the Calvinian Fraternity good Lord
deliver us,
Libera nos Domine: Look upon the strange variety of sects which swarm amongst
them; whereof, if some be slight, others are prodigious: as, Anabaptists,
Libertines, Shakers, Antinomians, Socinians, Anti-Scripturists, Adamites,
Ranters, and a world of such Bedlam-birds as these. These mischiefs of error
and division are the unavoydable attendants of their Apostasy from their
Catholic mother; whose peaceable sons hold close together, like the scales
of Leviathan, inseparable, impenetrable.

It were indeed an hard case, if they had nothing to plead for themselves; I
confess they are not to seek for an answer; both of Apology and Recrimination;
it were a desperate cause that could find no Advocate; even losers may have
leave to talk, though to little purpose.

And first, for the Division of the Evangelicall Churches following their
different guides, they would make us believe that neither Luther nor Calvin is
any Saint whom they worship: that they hate to say, I am Paul's, and I am
Apollo's ^: that they scorn to be called other then Christian for a name, and
Catholic for a surname; that they justly respect those Worthies as brethren;
but should not, without much indignation hear them called their Fathers or
masters.

That for the divisions of Reuben there are great thoughts of heart; that they
can lament those breaches which they cannot make up.

That their prayers and tears shall not want for the perfect union of all
honest and faithful hearts; and we may believe them if we list. But in the
mean time, they would face us out, that those quarrels are not deadly in
themselves, though over hainously misconstrued; that words are more guilty of
this spiritual affray then substance of matter; that none of those litigious
points touch upon the foundations of faith; so as they may well hope,
notwithstanding those petty differences, to meet with other in heaven, and can
say to the most rigid opponents, as Optatus said of the Donatists, Collegae
eritis si vultis; fratres eritis si non vultis.
Ye may choose whether you will be our Companions, but ye shall be our brethren.

As for those other wild Sectaries, they profess to hold them as no other then
so many mad men broken out of Bedlam; and tell us that the Church of England
makes account of no other interest in them, then a man makes of those Vermin
which breed out of his excrementitious sweat, or those Ascarides which are apt
to grow in his most uncleanly parts; and it were well if they shifted off so.
But these frantic whimsies, could be and their crazed authors will not be
shaken off with so much ease.

Besides, they tell us there may be a peace not worthy to be boasted of:
Faciuut pacen^ commercia culpae. Combinations in mischief makes robbers and
rebels too firmly unanimous; That there is not more peace at Rome then in Hell
it self; even that kingdom of darkness, if it were divided in it self (as
our Savior tells us) could not stand: And on earth the wildest beasts, as
Bears, Lions, Tigers, agree well with those of their own kind: And on the
contrary there may be good music in discords. The Prince of peace had never
professed to come down with a desire to send fire and sword upon the earth, if
those were not in some cases both necessary and useful. If in the secret
commonwealth of a man's own bosom there be not an intestine war, there can
never be a true and firm peace. And the old rule is, Better a just war, then
an unjust peace.

Further, they tell us it is no news to find divisions and quarrels in the
Church of God; for when (say they) was it ever otherwise since the two first
brethren til this present hour? Y wis there needs no heathenish fancy of
Praeadamites, to maintain the broyls of the first world; from the same loins
was that hostility raised, which so much infested the holy seed. It was a
fiction in the Heathen Poet, that Discord took it ill she was not called to the
banquet of the Gods: so as only in heaven she is not to be found; but to the
banquet of men she will be sure to come unsent for; and to press in so
forceably, that it is not truth of Religion that can shut her out: when God had
but one visible Church upon earth, thither she crowded in, and would be
entertayn'd (malgri) in the unhappy division of the Ten tribes from the two;
Immediately before our Savior, she thrusts into the families of Sammai and
Hillel, the two great Masters of Jsrael, and there raised no less then eighteen
quarrels, and that not without blood; In the time of Christ's being on the
earth, she prevailed so far, as forceing her self upon the Jewish Church,
she set five several Sects by the ears amongst them; After our blessed
Saviors resurrection she shouldered into the Christian Church, raising therein
threescore heresies before ever Constantine blessed it with a General
Council; although (as happy was) it pleased God so to order it, that by
provincial Synodes, in the mean time, she was thrust out by head and
shoulders; And since that time, how overwell she has sped, the world is too
lucualent a witness: Neither was she less busye in the Heathen world; So as
Themistius justly pleaded to the Emperor (objecting the differences maintained
amongst the Christians) that their number was not considerable in comparison of
several sects of Philosophers (the Divines of those Pagans) and their opposite
opinions: And wise Seneca could justly say, that the Clocks would sooner agree
then the (Philosophers: So as they are not alone in this jarring condition. Nay
they are so bold, as to tell us by way of recrimination, that they fear, it
will prove that their Roman Censurers are somewhat like to Barbers, which can
with ease cut other men's hair, but cannot polle themselves; and to this
purpose, they tell us two shrewd tales; but we may choose whether we will
believe them; The best of it is, they are no points of faith: The one is, that
the Romanists halt on their own sore, being themselves guilty of what they tax
in others: The other, that the Courses they take to hold up their pretended
agreement are such, as make their hollow concord not worth boasting of.

For the first, they say (whereas we twit them with our Quakers and Ranters)
That they have been themselves infested with as wild cattle as ever the
Protestant Church was; For instance, they tell us of the Fratricelli
Frierlings, Prateolus Catal. haeres. v. Fratricelli.
or Eratres de paupere vita, as they were called, which had their beginning in
the parts of Italy, in the time of Pope Benedict the eleventh; and, Albert the
first, Emperor whose doctrine and practice was to allow, and use promiscuous
beastliness; The manner whereof was, that they drew together such handsome
women whom they had seduced, both widows and virgins into some secret rooms
for the purpose; which done, their Priests and Clerks barring the doors, for a
fair color of their villainy, began to sing holy hymns; after which, about
midnight, their Priests with a loud voice admonisht them to go two and two
together, a man and a woman, and invoking the holy spirit to fall into carnal
copulation; which was no sooner said then the candles were put out, and every
man took that woman which was next him; and if it fell out so, that a woman
upon that coupling, conceived; the infant when it was borne, was brought into
the room; and so long posted over from one hand to another of their Priests,
till it should expire; and he in whose hands it dyed, was to be accounted their
high Priest. These abominable practices were accompanied with no less wicked
opinions against propriety of goods, against Christian Magistrates, against the
souls vision of God till the day of judgment, and diverse other of the like;
Neither were these monsters of men and opinions pent up in a Corner, but (as is
confessed by Pope John 22. in his extravagant) were spread far about, both in
Italy and the Island of Sicily and other places, [sub habitu novae religionis]
as is there confessed; the founder of which odious sect was one Hermannus an
Italian, by the same token, Prateol. de Haeres. Hermannus.
that having been solemnly buried in Ferrara, and honored devoutly for a
Saint, he was twenty years after, by the command of Boniface the eight taken
up and turned (what remained of him) to ashes.

Gregorii 10. tempore sc. anno 1275. emerserunt ex Italia Flagellantes
haeretici incerto authore qui per Germaniam and Galliam vagantes se
Flagellarunt.

Tenebant neminem salvari nisi sanguine prop^io flagellis excusso baptizaretur,
etc. Binius ex Sterone: Prateol. Tit. Flagellantis.


They tell us of the sect of the Flagellants, or whippers, which arising in
Italy, diffused themselves into France and Germany in the time of Gregory the
tenth, Anno 1273. Many whereof (as Carrion tells us) about the year 1343. came
to Spires, on the day of their public diet, making great ostentation of
sanctimony, (much after the Anabaptists way as Prateolus describes them) who
under their red crosses and bloody skins hid black hearts; which appears by
their wicked tongues in crying down baptism of water, as utterly annulled and
changed into a baptism of blood; In decrying the holy Gospel, as upon the
coming in of their sect, useless, and utterly frustrated. Lastly, in admitting
of the free license, and non-obligation of oaths, according to the damnable
rule of the Priscillianists, Jura, perjura, secretum prodere noli.
Swear and forswear, say and unsay,
Thy secret never do bewray.


They tell us of a worse sect then both these, Prateol. Haeres. Tit. Templarii.
the Templars; who, as Prateolus tells us out of the history of William
Archbishop of Tire being as few in number, as holy and charitable in profession
(as being (under the three vows) in the nature of Canons regular) grew after to
be great and numerous; three hundred Knights in that Covent richly endowed in
all parts of the Christian world; but being over pampered, with prosperity (as
Moses says of his Jesurun) they waxed fat, and kicked; Deuteronomy. 32.15.
and forgot God that made them, and slightly esteemed the rock of their
salvation. I abhor and tremble to speak or think of those flagitious acts, and
those hellish heresies, wherewith they were charged by Pope Clement the fifth,
There are some authors who think they were unjustly proceeded with in such
rigor. But Papa Clemens 5. in Bulla condemnatoria ordinis edicit clausulam.
Quanquam de jure non possumus, tamen ex plenitudine potestatis dictum ordinem,
reprobamus. Bin. ex Thoma Walsingham.
by whose decree, together with the sentence of the General Council at Vienna,
consisting of 400 Bishops in the year 1311. at the earnest instigation of
Philip the fair, King of France, they were condemned to be burnt, and their
whole Order, (after it had stood 200 years) utterly extinguished for ever.

Yet, as if it were possible for ought under heaven to be more vile then the
forementioned enormities they tell us they could present us with more dangerous
and more pestilent sects then these; namely, the authors and abettors of that
everlasting Gospel which was set on foot by the Benedictines and Franciscans,
about the year 1255. whereof our Chaucer thus: For they through wicked
invention, Geffr. Caucer in the Romans of the Rose sol. 163.

In the year of the Incarnation
A thousand and two hundred year,
Five and fifty, further ne near,
Broughten a book with sorry grace,
To your ensample in common place,
That said thus; though it were fable,
This is the Gospel perdurable
That from the Holy Ghost was sent;
Well were it worthy to be brent.


This Gospel (which was so far from everlasting, that it was now long since
buried in silence, for shame of the world) was the damnable doctrine of that
cursed Calabrian Abbot, Prateolus de Haeres. Tit. Joachim.
Joachim (a monk of the order of Saint Benedict) which Prateolus in favor of
the Author (as willing to smother) minces with the name of fables only: but
such fables they were, as professed to destroy all Christianity; disparaging
the blessed Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, and his sacred person no less;
some particulars whereof were no other then these following: That the
everlasting Gospel excels the doctrine of Christ; That the new Testament is to
be annulled. The Rejoinder of P. Singe to Malconi ex Henric. Erphurd. Chronico
et Eymeric. Director. Inquisit.
That the Gospel of Christ brings no man to a perfect state; That another
Gospel, and another Priesthood was to succeed the Gospel and Priesthood of
Christ; the whole drift of it being to advance the contemplative, that is the
Monkish life instituted by Benedict, above the active set forth by Christ and
his Apostles. Prateolus. Haeres. Bernard. Luxenbury.

Council. Latteran. 2. sub Innocentio. Can. 2. actor.


Not to meddle with the heretical doctrine of this unchristian Abbot
concerning the Trinity, in opposition to the Orthodoxy of Peter Lombard; it
shall suffice for the shutting up of this odious point, to tell you from
Alphonsus a Castro of the three states of men fancied by this Joachim;
Alphonsus a Castro l. 3. advers. heraes. l. 3.
the first, the state of the flesh, from Adam to Christ; the second, a middle
state, betwixt flesh and spirit; from Christ to St. Benedict: the third, which
is all spirit, from St. Benedict to the end of the world; and this is that
state of perfection which himself with the Monks of that Order set forth to the
world; This is too foul you must needs confess; but the opposites will yet
tell you the worst part of the tale is still behind; and will needs persuade
you that this Atheous and blasphemous whimsey did not content it self to
creep into the obscure cells of Monks and Friars, but presumed to climb up to
St. Peter's chair, and there to find both harbor, and protection; for when
the Divines of Paris justly resenting the shame, and peril of those divelish
conceits, did seasonably bend their pens against them with a zeal meet for
Christians, the provoked Monks fly to the refuge of Pope Alexander the
fourth, from whom they found such favor, that he in an extravagant of his
flies fiercely upon the French Divines, deeply censuring their Book, as
pernicious and detestable; defending and praising his well-minded votaries; and
yet more, advancing them to the honor of Inquisitors of haereticall pravity;
damning by his Bull Gulielm. de sancto Amore for his invectives against those
holy Orders.

Dat veniam corvis, vexat censura columbas. The ravens escape, the Doves must
pay for all.

Moreover they say they could tell us of the Illuminati of Aragon, of Thomas
Campanella, of Maria de Valentianos, lastly of Poza, and Antonius Sanctarellus
of late (if we may believe Alph. Vargus) strongly abetted, the one by the great
ones of Spain, and both by Jesuits in their foul and highly-prejudiciall
opinions; In all which and more of the like kind, (which they say, if need
were they could produce) they doubt not to find a meet parallel to the worst
of their Quakers, and Antinomians; And for their more sober disconcordants,
whose number and quality is over aggravated (they say) by their adversaries,
they think to match them at least, if not to exceed them far, in the score of
Roman divisions; for which purpose, they send us to Cornelius Mus the famous
Bishop of Bitonto; who speaking of the sensible degeneration of their Divines,
Cornel. Mus. in Romans 6.
adds Hinc sexcentae, etc. Hereupon (says he) have risen up six hundred
sects, Thomists, Scotists, Occhamists, Albertists, Egidians, Alexandrists, etc.
Or if this will seem to be but a phrase of Oratory; they stick not to tell us
of three hundred several contradictions of opinions amongst their Divines
confessed, and reckoned up, on several occasions, by Cardinal Bellarmine
himself in the specialties of the Controversies handled by him; whereof not a
few are of very high importance; which may perhaps be one reason why those
volumes of his, are not so vendible at Rome, as in Paul's Churchyard; Neither
is there any one point of difference betwixt us and them, wherein they do not
differ amongst themselves: Only herein (they say) is the difference; The
Romanists have had the care and opportunity to quench that fire in the gleeds,
which our neglect or other diversions of authority, has sufferd to grow into a
flame. Besides these doctrinall quarrels amongst the members, they tell us of
the real quarrels betwixt the pretended heads of the Romish Church; naming (if
need be) the several schisms that have fallen out amongst them (sometimes two,
sometimes three Popes at once) contiuning for 40 or 50 years together; So as
scarce any man, unless by revelation (as Gerson himself professes) could say,
This is Peter's successor.

But (say they in the second place) yield we that there is calmer weather, and
more visible peace at Rome then in other regions of the world, this argues no
whit at all the better state of their cause; since it proceeds only from the
unjust prnciples of their Tyranny. For first, to be sure to keep their people
from fighting, they keep them always blindfold, not suffering them to have any
glympse of light either from Scriptures, or conferences, or their own authors;
Luther. sermon. Conviv
Andrew Carolostadius was a doctor of eight years standing ere he read the
Bible; and what courses are taken to restrain Layicks from reading of that
perilous book, has been in part intimated already: Under no less penalty are
they kept from agitating any controversy of Religion in private discourse,
even though they be learned, ir Edw. Sands his elation.
and able to rule those edge-tooles; and upon the same account those Catholic
authors, which do but relate the opinions and arguments of Protestants (though
with the strongest confutation) are not suffered to be exposed to public
sale; on the same ground also it is, that all Translations of the Council of
Trent into French, and other languages are absolutely forbidden.

Congregat. Council. 2 Junii 1629. Gavant. Tit. Conc. Trid.
Secondly, the extreme cruelty of the Inquisition is such as inforces silence
amongst all those that live under the Roman subjection; and makes them
according to the Counsel which Alberto Scipioni an old Roman Courtier gave to
Sr. Henry Wotton, to keep Gli pensieri stretti, Sir H. Wottons letter to
Anonymus.
which is ingenuously Confessed by the Archbishop of Spalata; telling Suarez,
that diverse sects of the Romanists would fly out, (nisi illos ignis et securis
in officio detinerent) if fire, and the axe did not keep them in compass; It is
not therefore out of pure good will, but out of stark fear that Rome is
unanimous; since we upon sure intelligence know that there are many thousands
both in Spain and in Rome it self, that dare only with Nicodemus come to
Christ by night, whose hearts are Evangelicall whiles their faces are
Pontifician.

Lastly, They would feign bear us down, that if there be lamentable breaches in
the Church of God, we may thank them for it: for would ye (say they) have
yielded (when there was just complaint of the abuses and errors crept into the
Church, and the store of tares sown in Gods field while the Husbandmen slept)
to have had timely remedies applied, by a free and General Council, the whole
Christian world had been happily unanimous; whereas now, by your guilty
aversness from that sovereign means of cure, out of a stomachfull, and proud
unwillingness to forget any jot of your ill-acquired usurpation, the several
Limbs of the Church are miserably torn from each other, and all (if their
challenge could be made good) torn from the head; wherein we shall not need to
appeal to any other judgment, then that of honest Cassander, whom two Emperors
thought a meet arbiter of the differences of the Church, Neque unquam credo
etc. Neither had there I verily believe (says he) been any controversy amongst
us, concerning the external unity of the Church, unless the Popes of Rome had
abused this authority to a certain kind of domination, and out of their own
covetousness, and ambition, had raised it up beyond the bounds prescribed by
Christ and his Church; Thus he ingenuously, as being bribed on neither part; so
as it plainly appears the Rabbets skin had comne off clearly, and smoothly,
if it had not stuck at the head.

Thus they plead colourably for themselves, As it is a strange cloth that will
take no dye; But when all is done, the successors both of Peter and Mahomet
have peace in their territories; Cantie. 6.13.
As for the Protestant Church, there is nothing to be said to or for her, but
Return O Shulamite, return, return; and, What will ye see in the Shulamite? as
it were the company of two armies.

FINIS.
REader, it is rare to see Books come forth without Errata, This has been very
unhappy, in the margin especially. These are quickly found, and easily
corrected.
IN the Introduction, marg. Presbyter, read Presbytero. p. 7. marg. et nullus
mortalius, read ut nullus mortalium. p. 11. marg. read papa est frater noster,
alioqui deberet dicere pater meus, vel pater mi. p. 14. marg. Episcopatur,
Episcopatus. p. 16. Conformitate, Conformitatum. p. 24. marg. Clerico,
Clericos. p. 30. marg. defectum, defectuum. p. 35. Loyota, Loyola. p. 36. marg.
utperat vixerat. p. 37. dan Constanter, Constantine. p. 45, nedam, nedum. p.
49. read Carthusianus de 4. noviss. cit. a Kelleto nostro. p. 62. read ex lib.
sacr. Cerem. p. 76. sacedos, sacerdos. p. 86. Competente, competenter. p. 87.
misi, nisi. p. 94. Cropertarium, coopertarium. p 104. Apostolica, Apostolicae.
p. 106. Eleemosyna, Eleemosynas. p. 113. Cabant, Gavantus. p. 117. previncia,
provincia. p. 129. Sabernitan, Salerniran.


