AN HVMBLE PETITION AND REMONSTRANCE PRESENTED Unto both the High and
Honorable Houses OF PARLIAMENT.

CONCERNING The insupportable grievance of the Transportation of Leather.



Printed in the year, 1641.

TO THE HONORABLE Assembly of the House of Commons now assembled in Parliament.
The humble Petition and Remonstrance of many thousands, whose names are here
subscribed, of the City of London, Middlesex, Southwarke, and other places of
the Kingdom, in behalf of themselves and of the Subject in general.

Shows, that amongst other the grievances of this Kingdom, the insupportable
burden of the inhanced prices of all sorts of Commodities which are made of
Leather is exceeding great, and does daily increase, so that the whole Nation
is much oppressed and impoverished thereby, especially the poorer sort of your
Petitioners, who are not any longer able to undergo the same.

That the same is caused by reason of the exportation thereof beyond the Seas,
and of the grossers and forestallers of Markets, Tanners, Curriers, Shoemakers,
and other ill affected persons, who buy up and ingrosse great quantities to
export, and inhance the prices of the rest.

That under pretense of exporting of small skins, all sorts of Leather is sent
away, whereby Roots, Shoes, and all Commodities that are made of Leather, is
within these two or three years inhanced in the prices above eight shillings
in the pound.

That the Patentees and others, as your Petitioners are informed, endeavor to
procure an Act for the tolerating of their transportation of Leather, which if
effected, will be a perpetual damage to the King and Kingdom, and the utter
ruin of many hundred thousands.

That the said oppression is heavier upon the Subject then any project
whatsoever, or the insupportable burden of Ship Money. All which more at large
may appear in your Petitioners humble Remonstrance.

Wherefore your Petitioners most humbly implore the just favor of this great
and Honorable Assembly, to give speedy redress to this inconceiveable
Grievance: And in the mean time that the transportation of all sorts of skins
and Leather may be forthwith sequestered. And your Petitioners, together with
the general of the Kingdom, shall ever pray, etc.

Above twelve thousand hands subscribed to this Petition.

An Humble Remonstrance touching the Grievances of Leather.
IT is a maxim in Philosophy that all things in nature tend to perfection by
rules of order and degrees of goodness, so in a commonwealth all things should
be for its advancement by the rules of policy and experience, and whatsoever
apeares to the contrary, that thing is to be abolished, and the Projectors
punished.

Now amongst the sufferings of this Kingdom, the Insupportable burden of the
inhanced prices of such commodities as are made of Leather is exceeding great,
and does daily increase, so that the whole nation is oppressed and impoverished
thereby, especially the poor, who are not able any longer to undergo so great
a misery.

Which grievance the petitioners do here humbly remonstrate and present unto
the great judgment of this honorable assembly, wherein may be considered, 1.
the greatness of the evil, 2. the causers thereof,


Together with answers to some frivolous allegations which have or may be made
therein.

For the greatness of the evil.
It is the greatest oppression that ever has been upon the subject, beyond
all projects or monopolies that ever was set on foot in England, Soap, Starch,
Tobacco, etc. but petty things to this, for many an able country man lost not
above six pence or twelve pence in a year by one of these, and the poorer sort
nothing at all, for they seldom bought any: But all sorts of people from the
rich to the wandering beggar, are sharers in this misery of inhanced prices of
Leather.

It is a grievance beyond the insupportable burden of shipmony, as may plainly
appear by descending to some comparative particulars of several 1. Parishes
in and about London, and 2. Towns and Hamlets in the country.


For Parishes, Saint Olaves Southwarke has in it above 3600. families, whereof
2800. are not able to pay subsidies or shipmony, and there is not a poor
family that can be excused under ten shillings a year or more, which the
charges of shoes and other things of Leather stands them in more then it did
two or three years since, which amounts to above 1400. pound a year that the
poor of this parish are put unto in the expense of an inhanced commodity.

St. Brides in Fleetstreet, a Parish in the heart of London in respect of
trade, yet there is above 700. poor families that was never within the list of
Ship-mony, which after the same proportion is above 350. pound per annum, which
is exhausted from these poor, who are most of them ready for relief of the
Parish.

St. Sepulchers, has in it almost 2000. poor families, St. Giles Cripplegate
as many, which after the same proportion is 1000. pound per annum, which the
poor of each several Parish lose, enough to make many of them turn rogues
and beggars, and thus we might instance in other Parishes. Besides, it is
conceived every Parish has in it as many lodgers as there are families, which
suffer in the prices of shoes that never paid Ship-mony.

So for Towns and Country Villages, some husbandmen are assessed for subsidy,
or shipmony, at two or three shillings a year, but in the inhanced prices of
Leather, what for boots and shoes for himself, and family and calveskins to
cloth himself and children, and Leather for sadles, cartsadles, horse
collers, and other accomodations about husbandry will amount to above five
times as much as he paid for Ship-mony.

And which is most miserable, a poor man that has nothing but what he gets by
his day labor, and is so far from paying Ship-mony that he is ready for
releife from the parish, what for clothes for himself and family, and for
calves leather to cloth himself, and children, to broyle in the woods
hedging, and other servile work, is almost five times as much per annum as the
husbandmans part of Ship money.

A poor man is now compelled for every pair of shoes that he buys for
himself, to work three of four days more then he formerly used to do, and
in the mean time his wife and children want bread at home, for shoes are
dearer by twelve pence in a pair then formerly.

There is not a poor servant that sends his shoes to a Cobbler but it costs a
penny in three pence more then formerly, nor a beggar that wanders from door
to door but is oppressed, although he has nothing but what he begs or steals.

And it is an unanswerable rule, that to inhance the prices of any commodities
that are useful for supply of a Kingdom, is the increasing of thieves and
beggars.

The rich escape not, although better able to bear it, for there is not a
family of any rank that can be excused in the inhanced prices of boots and
shoes under thirty or forty shillings per Annum, besides the leather of a
Coach, and harness for four horses is dearer by six pound then it was two or
three years since; not a sadle, the headstall and ranes of a bridle,
stirrup-leathers, nor a ring-halter for a cart horse, but is dearer by
threepence in the shilling then formerly.

If this misery befell but some particular men, it was an evil not to be
permitted, but when all suffer, in all places, in the North the last year, the
soldiers could scarcely get shoes for money, many went barefoot which the King
graciously commiserated, commanded his Attorney general to enquire the causes,
which was found to be transportation.

Whereupon the Lords of his privy Council in October last, by an Order from
the Board, stopped the transporting thereof, and in twelve days Leather fell
5. s. in 20. And afterward when liberty was obtained to transport the pieces
of Leather, did in as short a time rise as much.

The second thing to Remonstrate is the Causes of this Evil, and they are the
Transporters, their Agents and Instruments.
The transporters, such as by tolleration and pretense of Law, carry away great
quantities, which are Merchants and others that take license from the Patentee;
or such as in packs of Cloth, and other indirect means, convey away great
quantities, which never com^s to be customed.

The Agents or Instruments of this Evil are diverse.

The 1 Factors. 2 Tanners. 3 Curriers. 4 Shoomakers. 5 Packers.


How Factors abuse the Kingdom.
The Factors being the Merchants Agents, forestall the Markets, go to Tanners
yards, and buy up great quantities of large skins for the transporters, which
otherwise would be brought to the Market.

How Tanners abuse the Kingdom.
The first abuse is, the Tanners in Yorkshire are permitted every year to
carry 4000. raw rides by water, borne from London to Hull, a fit place for
transportation; but whether they come at Hull when they are upon the seas, is a
question. And the pretense is to supply the West Riding in Yorkshire with sole
Leather.

And whether the people of the West Riding want Leather, appears not, for they
complain not, it is only the Tanners pretense; nor does it appear wherefore
that part of Yorkshire should want Leather more then any other part, or then
the Bishopric of Durham, Lancaster, Lincolneshire, Northumberland, etc. save
only Hull is a fit place for transportation, and under pretense of 4000.
hides, it is conceived they send away 40000. hides. And the truth is, about all
the Port towns in England, Leather is exceeding dear, by reason of the
transportation from them.

The second abuse is, the Tanners about London and other places, buy up and
ingrosse great quantities of hides, and when they are tanned, secretly sell
them to the transporters or Curriers, who buy them for the transporters.

The third abuse is, not tanning their Leather according to the Statute, in
their fats, which they through covetousness sell forth to supply the Merchant
before it be well tanned.

How Curriers abuse the Kingdom.
These, whose office is only to dress Leather, and by Law ought not to buy
it, comply with the Tanners, and forestall the Markets, ingrosse great
quantities into their own hands; and when it is dressed, retaile part at
inhanced rates to poor Tradesmen, and secretly conveigh the rest to be
transported.

How Shoemakers abuse the Kingdom.
These instruments of evil are secret enemies to the State and to their own
trade; for many of them weekly buy great quantities of leather and spend
little, but either for the transporter, or to cut into unwrought wares to be
sent beyond seas in barrells or packs of cloth, to deceive the searcher and
the Kingdom: So that many shoomakers that painfully work for their livings,
and almost twenty trades more, can scarce get leather for money; whereby all the
wares which these several trades do make, are inhanced to the subject.

How Packers abuse the Kingdom.
The Packers are sworn Officers, and should see that none but calfe skins be
sent away, who for their own profit being paid per dozen, and it may be
somewhat largely too, permit skins of 16. s. and 18. s. a skin to be
transported under the name of calfe skins.

To this which has been said, some frivolous Allegations have or may be made.
Alleg. 1. The Legality of the Patent for transporting of Leather, has been
questioned, and not excepted against.

Ans. The lawfulness of the Patent is not the thing, but that it is a
grievance to the Kingdom.

Alleg. 2. However it is not comparable to Shipmony, which might have been
raised ad infinitum, so Leather is not like to be.

Ans. We speak not what Shipmony might have been, nor of the illegality nor
hainousnes of the offense, but as it was a grievance, and so Leather is many
degrees beyond it.

And in the burden of Shipmony, the poor was excluded: but this grieveance of
Leather falls heaviest upon the poor, besides Shipmony every year decreased
in its proportion, and Leather is every day dearer.

Alleg. 3. To stop transporting of Leather is against the Kings profit, he will
lose the benefit of customs.

Ans. His customs will be greater, for then perfect wares will be made and
exported, which will bring more customs to the King, for great quantities of
Leather is secretly sent away, which never comes to be customed.

Besides, it is against the rule of trade and of policy, to transport any
native material unwrought, thereby the subject loses the benefit of
manufacture, and puts it into the hands of strangers.

Ed. 3. was renowned for bringing the manufacture of clothing from Gaunt into
England.

James the first of Scotland, says Buchanan, sent for the best Artificers he
could get in all Europe, and gave them great rewards to instruct his people.

Selym the first Turkish Emperor, says Valerius, procured 10000. Artificers
to be brought to Constantinople.

What need such great Princes have been at such care and cost, had it not been
for the good of their Kingdoms, when they might with the poor Irish, have
sent away their materials, and beggered their Nations?

All. 4. Other Nations besides Ireland send away their materials, for we have
brought into England store of cotton wool, Russia leather, silk and flax, in
great abundance, and we send out but only one poor commodity of leather.

Ans. It is the greater advantage to this Kingdom, and damage to those from
whence it comes, to send away their materials.

Besides we must take things with their circumstances, Cotton wool is a
planted commodity that grows upon the ground, so does not Leather, and it is
sent from our own Islands who have scarce people enough to plant it, much
less to make it a manufacture, and Russia Leather is a trash commodity little
worth, yet we are compelled nolens volens to buy it, or go barefoote, and it
is dearer to us then our own good Leather would be, if it were not
transported: so silk is wrought in such abundance, that the people are not
able to make it into a manufacture.

And flax, the Country from whence it comes cannot spend all that grows,
besides if they sent us not of their flax, then we should speed better, and put
those former Statutes in force for sowing of Line seed, but whether it be a
material or a manufacture, it is not fit to be transported, and the Kingome
want it.

All. 5. To inhance the prices of exportable wares is a great enriching to any
Kingdom.

Ans. There is difference between wares ready wrought and unwrought materials;
besides, the proposition holds not; for inhance the prices of exportable wares
to other nations, and they will Lex talionis inhance importable wares to us
again, so we shall pluck beggary upon the Kingdom with both hands.

All. 6. That it is better to export Calves skins then to lose them, for
otherwise they must be cast to the dunghill, the Kingdom is not able to spend
them.

Ans. The Kingdom cannot spend them, because they cannot get them to spend,
they are all sent away, so that lawless necessity compells us to make use of
Russia Leather, although it is stubborn and spungie, not half so good as our
worst calve skins; and this passes through several hands, and paies several
customs before it comes to be cut; and of this trash and dear Leather this
Kingdom is forced to use for boots etc. which will do little service.

Besides, the want of Calves skins are so great, and the prices so dear, that
poor laboring men cannot get them to cloth themseves and children withal,
to broyle in the woods and do other servile work.

All. 7. To stop transportation of Leather will be a loss to the Landlord,
Grasier, Butcher, Tanner etc. for the Tanner cannot sell his Leather so dear,
nor the Butcher his meat and hides, nor the Grasier his live cattle, nor the
Landlord set his ground so dear.

Ans. These are not gainers, all things consider^^ for what they get by these,
they lose five times more (...) raising the prices of Leather raises the prices
of all co^^modities that are made of Leather, which comes (...) the hands of
near twenty trades to cut; nay it rais^^ other commodities, and provision; for
it is observab^^ raise any one commodity and it draws up the prices (...)
others after it, all which damages the Kingdom, (...) ruins the poor.

FINIS.

