The Humble ADDRESS OF THE CORPORATION OF TRINITY-HOUSE.
Windsor, May 15. 1681.
This day the Right Honorable George Earl of Berkeley, Master of the
Corporation of the Trinity-House of Deptford-Strond; in company with the
Wardens, Assistants, and Elder-Brethren of the said Corporation, attended His
MAJESTY here, with an ADDRESS, Introduced by his Lordship, with a Speech to the
Effect following.

May it please Your Majesty,
WE Your MAJESTY'S most Loyal and Dutiful Subjects, do in all Humility
acknowledge, that Your Majesty has been most Gracious to all Your Subjects;
very particularly to Traders, and to those who have had the Honor to be
employed in Your Maritime affairs. None of Your Predecessors ( SIR,) have ever
been pleased to give us so much Countenance and Encouragement as Your Majesty
has done; and therefore we hope, you will please to pardon us, if we put some
value upon our selves for having received such Signal marks of Your Grace and
Favor to us.

SIR,

Your great Goodness gives us the presumption of making this Humble Address to
Your Majesty; which we beg may be now Read.

The Address was by His Majesty's Command accordingly Read, in the Terms
following, viz.

To the King's most Excellent MAJESTY. THE HUMBLE ADDRESS OF THE Master,
Wardens, Assistants and Elder Brethren of the Corporation of the Trinity-House
of Deptford-Strond,
SHOWS,
THAT We Your Majesty's most Loyal and Dutiful Subjects, the Body Corporate of
the Seamen and Mariners of this Your Kingdom of England, having taken into
serious consideration Your Majesty's most Gracious Declaration, wherein You
have been lately pleased to give to all Your good Subjects an assurance of Your
Royal Purposes of calling frequent Parliaments, and employing Your utmost
Endeavors (both in and out of Parliament) toward the Extirpation of Popery,
Redressing and Prevention of Grievances, and Governing in all things according
to the Laws of this Your Kingdom; Do with all Humility return Our most humble
Thanks to Your most Sacred Majesty, for this Your so Gracious Condescension to
the just and ample satisfaction of all Your Loyal Subjects; acknowledging it
likewise the especial Duty of this Corporation, to declare to the World Your
Majesty's Royal and unwearied Care, both in the general promotion of all
Matters conducing to the Prosperity and Improvement of the Navigation and Trade
of this Your Kingdom; and in the particular instance lately given thereof by
Your Majesty, in Your Royal Endeavors for the preservation of Your City and
Port of TANGIER, in the midst of so many Difficulties, and at so great Expense.

AND We do most Humbly beseech Your Majesty to accept of the Assurances which
we here in all Duty tender You, of the utmost Effects of Our constant and
sincere Allegiance to Your Majesty, under Your most Gracious Government, both
in Church and State, as it is now by Law Established: Adding in all Humility,
That as it has already been the Honor of very many Your Faithful Subjects,
Members of this Corporation, to have hazarded their Lives in Your Majesty's
Service on the Seas, so do we (according to Our Oaths) unanimously Tender to
Your most Excellent Majesty (as to the best of PRINCES) the future Command of
Our Lives and Fortunes, in the defense of Your most Sacred Majesty, Your Heirs
and Successors; Zealously praying to Almighty God, to grant Your Majesty a Long
and Prosperous Reign over Us, with a Lasting, Peaceable and Right Succession to
Your Royal Throne, according to Law.

His Majesty was pleased to express His Gracious acceptance thereof to this
effect. My LORD,
I Thank you kindly and heartily for This Address, and shall not be wanting to
perform My part. And as I have always been a Friend to the Navigation and
Seamen of England, you may assure your selves I shall ever be so.



LONDON, Printed for Rich. Royston, Bookseller to His Most Sacred Majesty. 1681.


