THE HUMBLE PETITION OF DIVERSE BARRONETS, KNIGHTS, Esquires, Gentlemen,
Ministers, Freeholders, and others of the County of Derbie, to the number of
seven thousand seventy and seven. PRESENTED, TO THE HONORABLE, THE Knights,
Citisens, and Burgesses of the House of Commons, by Gods goodness assembled,
and his gracious good providence hitherto preserved in PARLIAMENT.

As it was presented by Sir John Curzon, Knight, and Barronet, who serves for
that County.

March 14, 1642.

Hen. Elseing, Cler. Parl. D. Com.

LONDON, Printed by Barnard Alsop, 1642.

THE HUMBLE PETITION OF Diverse Barronets, Knights, Esquires, Gentlemen,
Ministers, Freeholders, and others of the County of Derby, to the number of
seven thousand seventy and seven.
Humbly Shows,
THat when we have seriously considered that unexpressible danger, this
Kingdom was in, at the time of your election, to that great and honorable
burden, which for the Glory of God, and good of this Church and Commonwealth,
you have now a long time with patience undergone, together with the manifold
Grievances, which then did, and some whereof still do disquiet the peace and
happiness of the Kings Majesty, and this Kingdom, and the great opposition,
the blessed work of Reformation has met with, by those who are illaffected to
the State, and when we call to mind not withstanding all this emnity the many
and great works, which God has bin pleased already to effect, by the wisdom,
pains, and unwearied diligence of this Honorable Parliament, God sometimes
turning even the plots and practices of the adverse party to the furtherance of
his own work; we cannot but give God the glory of his free grace in Christ to
this Kingdom, and withal due thankfulness commemorate your industrious labors
to perfect the great design of this Kingdoms happiness, so judiciously begun,
and accordingly prosecuted: and which we hope by the continued mercy of God,
your accustomed Co-operations, and the willing agreement of your gracious
Sovereign, will in Gods due time arise to a sweet perfection, to the joy of us
and our prosperities; and yet although we live far off, we cannot but hear of
those many late obstructions, and malevolent hindrances, with which this good
work has bin opposed, by means of the malignant party, who by evil Councels,
and other strange and formerly unheard of courses, have indeavored to infringe
the lawful power and liberties of Parliament, to continue Popish Innovations
to oppress our Consciences with, unnecessary Ceremonies, and to destroy the
lawful Rights of the Subject: All which we conceive are contrary to that happy
PROTESTATION, so providently commended unto us by this Honorable House;
Besides the cursed Plots that have bin invented, against our beloved Friends of
SCOTLAND, and our poor distressed Brethren in Ireland.

Whose lamentable Condition, our souls bleed within us to remember, and other
sensible Grievances at large declared in your late and faithful Remonstrance
of the State of this Kingdom.

In tender consideration whereof, and for that many thousand, of poor people
amongst us do already feel the heavy pressures of those long delais, in
settling the State of this Kingdom, and we do give humble thanks to Almighty
God, the Kings most excellent Majesty, and this high and ever to be honored
Parliament, both the House of Peers and Commons, for that happy agreement in
those good and wholesome Laws, already Voted by you both, and Enacted, for the
welfare of Church and Commonwealth, and especially the late Acts for freeing
the Bishops and Clergy from their distractions, by temporal affairs, and that
hopeful beginning of provision for relief of Ireland; so we do willingly join
with the many thousands of our Brethren, and fellow petitioners in and about
the Honorable City of London, and other several Counties of this Kingdom,
humbly to supplicate this honorable Assembly, still earnestly to mediate with
his Majesty, and the House of Peers for their concurrance with you (and by the
power of Christ) go on cheerfully with what speed you may, to the perfecting of
those good endeavors so worthily begun, and to find out, prosecute, and punish
all notorious Offenders in Church and Commonwealth, That the Popish Lords may
all be removed from having votes in Parliament, Papists fully disarmed and
confined, Church-papists discovered, and the evil Counsels of the Popish and
malignant party disappointed, and for the time to come wisely prevented,
speedily and fully according to your good beginning to succor poor Ireland; and
that by a quiet execution of your late agreeing. Votes, England may be armed
with a present care of defense, by a posture of War, That all power and places
of strength may under God confide in, that the power and privileges of
Parliament may be confirmed, and for future time predefended, that all
Congregations may by your Religious wisdom be provided of fit and able
Ministers, and that the Doctrine and Discipline of Christ may be vindicated
from all corruptions and by Gods blessing we shall make good our aforesaid
Protestation to the uttermost, That England may still continue one of Christ's
golden Candlesticks, the Ministers stars in his right hand, the whole Kingdom
and people in Covenant with God, and in the blessed peace of the Gospel, we
may sit every man under his own Vine and Figtree, and enjoy a happy peace to
us, and prosperity to the worlds end,

Thus shall your Petitioners be bound daily to pray.
This Petition was presented by Sir John Curzon, Knight and Barronet who serves
for that County, and after it was read, was thankfully accepted by the house,
and special Order given for the recording of it, with the Petitions of
several other Counties.

Hen. Elseing. Cler. Parl. D. Com.

FINIS.

