blazon of the City of London blazon of the City of London
The Humble ADDRESS OF THE Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Commons of the City of
London in Common Council Assembled.
At a Common Council held the 13th day of March, 1682. Upon a Petition
presented by the Inhabitants in and about Smithfield, taking notice that his
Majesty (upon Application from the Court of Aldermen in behalf of this City)
had been pleased to order a stop to an intended Patent for a Market near
Albemarle-House, which (if it had passed) would greatly have redounded to the
Cities prejudice; And upon Consideration had of his Majesty's Grace and Favor
therein vouchsafed to this his City, a Committee was appointed immediately to
withdraw and prepare an Address to be presented to his Majesty from that Court,
who were Sir William Turner, Sir James Edwards, Sir John Moore, Aldermen; Sir
Benjamin Newland, Deputy Ayleworth, Deputy Hawes, Deputy Langham, Mr.
Charleton, Mr. Vernon, Commoners, with Mr. Common Sergeant, who withdrawing and
having prepared an Address, accordingly brought in the same to the Common
Council; which being there read was unanimously approved of, and ordered to be
forthwith presented to his Majesty at Newmarket by the same Committee who had
prepared it: The Tenor whereof is as follows;

To the Kings most Excellent Majesty.
May it please your Sacred Majesty,
WE the Mayor, Aldermen, and Commons of Your City of LONDON in Common Council
Assembled, being highly sensible of the Happiness We enjoy under Your MAJESTY's
most Wise, Benign, and Merciful Government, and of the many Privileges and
Immunities by Your ROYAL Self and Progenitors granted to this Your Imperial
Chamber, Most humbly Prostrating Our selves at Your Feet, Return Our unfeigned
Thanks and Acknowledgments, Begging Your Sacred MAJESTY to believe, That as
none of Our Fellow Subjects have received Larger Bounties from the Crown, so
none shall be more ready to sacrifice their Lives and Fortunes in the Service
thereof, in the Defense of Your Sacred Person (whom God long Preserve) Your
Lawful Heirs and Successors, and the Government as now by Law Established in
Church and State, than We Your Obedient and Dutiful Subjects of Your Loyal City
of London: And as We have lately Received an Expression of Your ROYAL Grace and
Favor to Us, in Your MAJESTY's being pleased to Order a Stop to be put (until
farther Hearing) to a Patent for the Grant of a Fair and Weekly-Market for Live
Cattle in Conduit-Mead, which would be greatly Prejudicial to the Inhabitants
in and about Smithfield, Your Hospital of St. Bartholomews, and Your City of
LONDON in General; so we could do no less than humbly Returning Our Thanks,
Implore Your Continuance of Your ROYAL Grace and Favor. And

Your Petitioners shall ever Pray, etc.
LONDON, Printed by Samuel Roycroft, Printer to this Honorable City, 1682.


