Two SERMONS: BY GEO. HALL.

Late Fellow of Kings Coledge in Cambridge.

LONDON: Printed by J. O. for Anth. Hall, and are to be sold at his shop in St.
Dunstans Churchyard. 1641.

GENESIS 3.19. In the sweat of thy face shall thou eat thy bread, till thou
return to the earth.


GOD Almighty, the great and sole Builder of heaven and earth, in those six
days, in which his goodness did first reconcile the odds between being and
not being, calling the possible world into act, made these, and but these two
natures, the necessary and the voluntary; to the former, as being void of
reason, and therefore not capable of any positive Law, he gave no precept, he
set Nature to them a rule, and furnished them with faculties determined, and (if
there be no impediment in second causes) necessitated to such or such actions,
tending to such or such ends. To the latter, as being endowed with freedom,
and a power indifferent to both extremes, to do or not to do, to do this or
that good or ill, He expressly gave in charge, what (if he tendered his life)
he should not do; and therefore he had no sooner pronounced him Lord of the
whole earth, but knowing how proper it is for happiness to forget her self,
and how safe for Monarchs to remember, that they are dependantly and
subordinately great, in the proper tone of a Lawgiver (Legum enim authoritas
ratione suasoria vile est) tells him flatly, Of the fruit of the tree which is
in the midst of the garden, thou shall not eat: The tree is now forbidden,
and that by the Lord and Maker of it: from henceforth for Adam to taste it,
shall be disobedience, shall be intemperance, shall be injustice; the least
of which shall not dwell in Paradise, they make too great a stir in the soul,
and are too turbulent to reside in him, whom God created as a City at unity
in it self, there was no insurrection of the sensitive appetite against the
will, no deformity between the will and reason, the intellect directed, the
will commanded, the members executed: In a word, there was a neat and
harmonious consent of all the faculties with reason, and of reason with God;
thus was man at peace with God, and with himself. But like as from the
quietness of the air the Philosopher suspects an earthquake, me thinks the
man that had not read this book, should have read so much in the book of
Nature, taken so much from politic rules, as to foresee a declension of things
at perfection, to fear most a rebellion in a State most composed: such was the
state of Adam, and with such success, in the same day were his affections
quiet and tumultuous; his will, which that day had well given up her name,
revolted from the regiment of reason, judge you how voluntarily fallen, in that
the left her leader, and yet her self blind. I ask not whence this desertion,
who permitting, who instigating? This is enough for me, this will bring me to
my text, if I tell how the evil of sin lets in the evil of pain, and that I
find in the sacred History, that our first parents did eat, and this probable
in the school, that they were both created, both stood, and both fell, and
both in one day. Let both these two great lights on earth answer to those two
in heaven, and then behold the eclipse, that Hesychius Milesius speaks of,
(...), The Sun was darkened, and the Moon withdrew her light: but happy you
superior lights, whose eclipses are not sins, the defects and anomies of
humane actions are scanned at the bar of justice, and bearing a guilt upon the
offendent, will not be expiated but by suffering; for let the man but taste of
the prohibited fruit, and he shall hear a voice from heaven, that voice which
breaks the Cedars of Libanus, thundering out wrath, and this sad doom, In the
sweat of thy face, etc.

The generals in the text are three: first, the sufferer, thou; secondly, his
sufferings, to eat his bread in the sweat of his face; thirdly, the term of
his sufferings, till thou return to the earth.

Since there is so necessary dependancie of moral acts upon intention, it is a
good rule which the Philosopher gives in the first of his Rhetoric, (...), Not
to look so much to the letter of the Law, as the mind of the Lawgiver: The
express prohibition of eating was to one, but intended for all; one man, our
first father did eat, and sin; the sin ran down to his sons, and to the sons
of their sons, and to those that did descend from them, to all nations, sexes,
conditions, times, and ages of the world, to the man that shall last see the
Sun set. In the day that thou shall eat, thou shall dye the death, as it says
more kinds of death than one, so more that should dye than one; and to dust
thou shall return, was more than a personal sentence, for all men were dead
in one, and were gathered to their fathers, as to a living sepulcher, larger,
and more common than that which Abraham bought of Ephron the son of Zoar, which
was but for him and for his house; so that it seems to have a great deal of
mind that which the Jews so talk of, that Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob were
buried in the same cave with Adam.

Now if posterity dyed with him, then it sinned with him, and then shall
suffer and labor with him; Sane hoc iniquum videtur (says Bodinus) parentum
culpam in liberos derivari: Does not Sylla hear ill for the sons of
Proscripts? Can a man be guilty of that which was done before he was? Ask the
School, Is it not the nature of sin to be voluntary? Does it not require
knowledge, counsel, consent, election? If not, why then is not the Wolf
called unjust that devoures the Lamb? Why is not he cited to Areopagus as well
as Mars? Why do not Princes promulgate their Laws in the Deserts, and compel
the affections of the wild Ass to a mean, as well as ours? But (...), Arist.
Moral, lib. 3. The Lawgiver has an eye to what is voluntary and
unvoluntarie; to the former by the rule of distributive justice, he sets out
rewards and punishments; to the latter, neither reward nor punishment: How then
does God punish the sin of the first man in his posterity, that personally had
done neither good nor ill? How could they conceive, and bring forth sin, who
yet themselves were not conceived, or call it a sin; shall it be a mortal sin?
(...), Who blames a man for being borne blind? That does the Judge of the great
Court of heaven and earth: and surely the Almighty does not pervert justice,
it is not with him as with those Roman Praetors, Jus dicunt, cum iniqua
decernunt: For like, as by a political union, many families become one body
civil, so by participation of the same specificall nature, were all men as one
man; and like as the acts of any part of the body, as theft, or murder done by
the hand, do not ascribe it to that part, but as it is moved by that first and
universal motive principle, the will; so is not that first sin laid to us, as
several persons, but as persons and individuals meeting in the same universal
nature, totally at once by one man depraved.

It is not, I confess, the nature of positive Laws to bind where they are not
known or published, so that if Cain had eaten of the forbidden fruit, Enoch his
son had not therefore been borne a sinner; but it pleased God, by a peculiar
will, to wrap up all men in one Adam, whose will should be reputed as the will
of all to come, whose innocence should be our innocence, whose sin our sin,
though his repentance not our repentance. Let not dust and ashes wrangle and
dispute, how just this is, how much safer is it to rest in his decree, at whose
right hand, with the testimony of the Gentiles, we proclaim that justice sits
enthroned, and in the infancy of time did sit, when he examined nature in a
true balance, and weighed out to all things their being, their properties,
their places, their figures, with most exact conformity to their exemplarie
cause.

So then you have seen how many came within the precincts of this prohibition,
Thou shall not eat, so many are guilty of the breach of it, and so many are
sufferers. Now I proceed to the sufferings: Democritus and the Epicure, whether
flattering corrupt manners with promise of impunitie, or trembling to join
wrath with omnipotency, gave out, that God was not angry at all, but that he
sat in Heaven a Dispenser of good things only: The Poet sang of an age that
knew not whether Jove could thunder or no, and we have heard of an age, when
God as yet had not entered into judgment with the sons of men, when death had
no more name, than it has real nature, when man's labor was his pleasure, his
life contemplation, and his dwelling Paradise. But oh, (...), The very name of
Troy is doleful, how much more of Paradise, it adds to our misery, since we
have lost the thing, to keep the name, which at this day sounds no better, than
to the Mariner some unhappy place in the sea, famous of old for the notorious
wrack of some goodly vessel.

Well, we are now unparadised, turned out of our pleasant walks, and must fall
to our work, we must eat our bread in the sweat of our face, this is our
sentence, wherein consider, first the act, eating of bread; secondly, the
qualification of this act, in sweat of thy face. Man in his innocence had not
a body intrinsecally immortal, but a natural and elementary body, composed of
the same principles with ours, and using for the reparation of nature food,
though not using the very same with us; he was to eat, though not to eat in
sweat: And though he was not (as Suarez says) in a literal sense to eat
bread, by reason of the toil in tillage, in sowing, in reaping, in grinding,
yet was he, as the word is meant in my text, to eat bread, it being taken here
for all manner of sustenance: and here I cannot pass by that ridiculous
conceit of some Rabbis, who from this very word bread, do gather that God
condemned all men to jog after the plow, a thing which could not stand either
with the nature of man, or with the wisdom of God.

I declare it thus: The light of nature, a beam of that intelligible and
eternal Son, was not set our by the fall of man, this lighted men out of caves
and rocks into societies oeconomicall and political: Political have for their
end (...), selfe-sufficiencie, never to be found, if all men were plow-men:
the multitude of our defects must be supplied by the multitude and variety of
Arts and Artificials; since then God gave man a natural appetite of a civil
and sociable life, which appetite being natural, is not in vain, nor yet was
lost by sin; for Cain, an heinous sinner, built the first City, it had not so
well suited either with the nature of man, or with the wisdom and goodness of
God, to have adjudged all men to that one condition of life; besides, what had
become of Sciences, liberal Arts? Had not been mechanical, rude, and inchoate
manners as courtly as old Evander found them among the wild Aborigines, the
whole world had been benighted, darkness had been on the face of the earth,
Egyptian darkness, and yet not felt, and God himself had scarce found an
unblemishable Levite to serve at his Altar, (...), says the 7. of the
Politics, The Plowman is no sit Priest.

Thus much of the act: I now come to the qualification of the act, In the sweat
of the face: To sweat is proper to the body, yet may be translated to the
soul, neither is it a bold metaphore, Tully has it de Oratore, Commentatio
and stylus ille tuus multisudoris est: so that Archimedes sitting still in his
study, did sweat as well as Marcellus his Soldiers, then in the midst of
Athens, neither does the word face restrain the sense to bodily exercise,
since it is so frequent by metaphore, to attribute to things incorporeall,
things proper to corporeal, thus does Aristotle call the understanding, (...),
and David prays, Turn away thy face from my sins, O God, when as God has
neither figure nor face.

Thus much de signo, the word, or the name; now de signato, or the thing
signified: Man is a continual Actour, the Sun rises and sets upon his action;
waking, he moves, hears, discourses, and when his external senses are locked
up, his vegetative faculty is at work, and his fancy dreams; the whole man
here never rests, nay, let it seem a paradox, I am sure it is true, there is
no rest in Heaven. The grand Stoic denied motion, I deny rest. But yet take
this distinction, Rest is either a mere cessation from action, a simple not
operation, or a cessation from some action that wearied the Agent: there is a
great deal of difference between these two. In the former sense God rested
the seventh day, from production of new species: In the latter it was not
possible for him to rest. In the former, man in all his faculties, all at once,
is never at rest: In the latter, he is in the time of sleep, in this sense our
God wills neither perpetual labor nor rest, it was his providence that the
Heavens should move, that diverse parts of the earth might be disposed by the
influence of diverse stars; upon this motion follows a necessary vicissitude
of day and night, upon that a vicissitude of rest and labor: these two God
has wisely knit together, intending the one for the laxation, yet continuance
of the other, (...), The final cause of rest is labor: Arist. Ethic, 10. Now
penal labor, there is a continual succession of these two, the end of the
one is the beginning of the other; the one is from justice, the other from
mercy: Now let Anaxagoras look up, and see whether heaven be, (...), all of
stone.

To be, is good; but to be doing, is the good and end of being: we perfect our
selves by action; for the defects of nature are supplied by habits, and habits
acquired by actions, which so long as they are simply voluntary, are pleasant,
once forced become tedious; so much as they have of constraint, so much of
grief, (...), Rhet. Arist. 1. Violence is beside nature, and therefore has
grief annexed to it.

These painful actions which my text calls for, are of the same nature with
those that Aristotle calls (...), partly voluntary, partly violent; for as the
poor man parts with his purse to a thief, yet would not do it, but to save
his life, setting the less evil in the place of good; so we spend our
spirits in some actions, not because they are pleasing to the will, but because
they are necessary, partly to satisfy the Law, partly for the attaining,
partly for the ornament, partly for the maintenance of happiness; supposing
then that we efficaciously will this end, or happiness; we necessarily will
these penal actions, as means to the end, no other way to be purchased. For
our condition is not like that of the Lillies, which are clothed and spin not;
nor that of the little Lambs, whom their mothers bring forth in the mountains,
wrapped in natural rags against the injuries of the air; neither is it with us,
as they say it was with Mercury, who was borne in the morning, found playing on
the lute at noone, and driving of oxen at night: we are first infants, then
boys, then youths; how many are the wants of these ages? and when we come to
be men, we espy more, and are feign to double our pains, the more our
knowledge is, the more intense are our desires, and our desires employ our
members; the vast capacity of our souls, and our large wills add much to our
travail; the appetite of bruits is terminated here below, ours ranges about
the earth, the sea, the air, attempts heaven with waxen wings, mounts up to
Angels, to God himself, and rests not there; which very unrestinesse, though
it be full of anxietie (Non enim est absque dolor quod aliquis perfectionem
appetat: Aquin. Comment. on Ethic.) seem to me wonderfully to exalt man above
other creatures, that whereas they al disport themselves in some slender
rivulets of good, only man looks to that boundless and bottomless deep, the
Deity of his Maker, not to be sounded, not to be compast.

You have heard the sentence that God has past on the sons of men, and that an
heavy sentence, yet me thinks easier than if he had condemned us to do
nothing, this (...), this (...), as Aristotle terms it, contradicts not only
the nature of the soul, whose very being is to be, and whose well being is to
be well doing, but also the whole nature of things: Could a man stand in Delph,
which Cosmographers call Vmbilicum terrae, the very navell of the earth, and
turn his eyes to all positions of place, to the right hand, to the left,
behind, before, above, and beneath, he should find them all meet, and conspire
to smother, or expose this spurious or supposititious brat, and shall man
father it, and harbor it in his bosom?

Go to the little Bees, thou sluggard, Pullos vel triduanos ad pensam vocant,
they set their little ones their task at three days old; nec insenectute in
fucos degenerant, neither turn they Drones in their old ages. Next turn to
the Ant, and see her ways, what are those ways? Ask the natural Historian,
Etiam per saxa and silices vestigia videas and semitas, Thou may find her
steps and paths upon the hardest flints: So often does that little, yet
exemplary creature, trudge this way and that way, backward and forward, to
store her earthy granarie, and keep off a winter famine.

Now if there be any to whom God has dealt so liberal a portion of these
temporal goods, as that they need not labor to prevent either want or cold,
or famine, even to these also do I preach, In the sweat of thy face shall thou
eat thy bread: they that sit on high, so high, that the poor below seem
(...), no bigger than Ants, says Lucian, are not always to sit still, quality
and condition exempt not from labor, but from the manner of labor; and
therefore does Solomon set the Spider, that emblem of industry, in that she
spins her Web out of her own bowels, to spin even in the Courts of Princes,
though she has been often swept out for her labor. Why now should the
sluggard yet fold his arms? why should he for forty, fifty, sixty years
rest those bones to whom nature owes so long a rest? surely his soul is crept
into his body to the same end that Epimenides did into his Den, to sleep out
sixty years: he forgets how long a rest he is like to take in the grave, he
and all the travelers of the earth; let the poor laboring man, he that
grinds in the Mill, the hireling, whose pains are trebled by the sins of great
ones, solace himself with this, that this day shall end in a night, not like
the nights of the year, which after a few hours give place to the day: nor
like that in Ogyges his time, famous for nine months, but longer and more
shadie: where Abel has slept almost from the foundation of the world, where
Israel makes not, nor Egyptian Pharaohs tire the people with building
Pyramids, where silent Nations sleep in beds of Clay, and shall not rise, nor
wake, nor rub their eyes, till the Trumpet shall sound in their ears, and
heaven and earth inflamed, shall light them new start up to Christ's Tribunal.

Thus much of our sufferings: the term of suffering follows in these words,
Till thou return to the earth: where you may take notice of four things: the
first employed our coming from the earth: the second expressed our return to the
earth: First, as the end of evils: Secondly as it self an evil. First of the
part employed, our coming from the earth. Luc. Iun. Brutus consulting with the
Oracle, who should be Consul, received this answer, That he should be Consul
that first kissed his mother, he by and by fell on his face, kissed the earth,
returned home, and was created Consul, Romes first Consul: beside the faith
of the History, that man is of the earth, witness the like qualities of his
nutriment, his sinking in the water, melancholy, his compact flesh, the
dryness of his bones, the constancy of his figure, and that which is not of
least moment, the base worldling, that has fixed his eyes on the earth, and by
his life-preaching Gentilisme, does sacrifice at Vesta's Altars, and calls her
the mother of gods and men; it may be Lucretius read his Pedigree, where he
tells of men, whom the earth after certain conversions of the heaven grown
big, brought forth and nursed with her own milk: But let the Poet dream of
prodigious birthes, we know that God made man of the earth, I do not say as
some did, fetched from the four extremities of the earth, to show that his
Dominion, and the world had the same bounds, but of earth: First, that we
might the more joy in our Ascension to heaven, and glorify our Maker, for
raising our heavy bodies to so high a place above the Air, above the Fire,
above the Moon, and though Leucippus taught (...), that the Orb of the Sun
was the supreme Orb, above the Sun, above all the Stars, except those that
praised him in the morning. Job. 38. The blessed Angels, whose early harmony
echoed to the harmony of the newborn world.

Secondly, of earth, that we might have from whence to raise our souls: but
not why to raise our Crests, that great ones might not look too big on the
poor, but resemble in this that glorious Planet, the bright eye of the World,
the Sun: the higher it is, the less it looks, that they might consider, the
humble shrub lives in Mount Lebanon, as well as the stately Cedar, and many
times lives longer, always safer: that it is somecimes in States as in nature,
that gives to lighter bodies the higher place; that all faces are drawn in
dust, though some in illustrious dust; that very Cyrus, who in his time was
writ (...), now begs his memory as Strabo writes, (...), O man I am Cyrus, he
that styled himself great from the Empire of the earth, stood but like the
Emblem of inconstancy, with his foot upon a Globe, a slippery Globe, earth
upon earth: he and poor Diogenes lived both but for a time, and both in a time,
though not both in a Tub: and Plutarch says, they dyed both in one day: Death
you see makes no difference, and Christ himself seems to make none: it is
noted to this purpose, that on the mount there appeared with him Moses and
Elias, the one in his younger years was a mighty man in Egypt, after a
leader of Gods people: the other, always poor, cold, and hungry, clothed with
Goats hair. Away then with that Knave Lisippus, that must needs paint
Alexander with a Thunderbolt in his hand, with Caligula, that set his head on
Jupiters shoulders, and with Darius, that by all means must be a god, though
but for thirty days: better was that speculation of Philip the Macedonian,
who on a time falling, and viewing in the dust his length, cried out, Lord what
a little portion of earth is not content with the whole earth: he well took
notice, that as he had fallen on the earth, so he came from the earth: which is
my first part; and should return to the earth, which is my second.

(...), Rhet. 2. Arist. who knows not that he shall dye? to consult about an
escape were (...), seriously to deliberate what course a man might take, that
the Sun should nor rise or set. I have read of Temples dedicated to Fears, but
that no people did ever consecrate a Priest or Temple to death, as being well
known to be inexorable; who have not heard of the gates of Death? who knows
not that they lie open, and that for him? yet because Evils that may be far
off do not much affect: and we while the blood runs hot in our veins put
far from us, that frozen and benumbed age, as if eternal Hebe or Youth filled
our Cups, as Poets say she does their Joves: it will not be out of place or
time, in the middle of Summer to admonish of Winter; 'twas the Devils policy
in old time, to have the dead buried without the Walls, out of sight, that the
living might not lay it to heart: he that steeres well, must sit at the end of
his Boat: and it is the good Politician, (...), when danger is far off, then
to suppose it neat: in this respect it cannot be out of season: this is my
second part, our return to the earth.

The whole man came not from earth, and therefore cannot return to the earth:
the soul shall go to places deputed to her, the body to the earth, one and
the same our Mother, our Nurse, our House, our Tomb; that these two should
part, proceeds from causes Moral, and Natural; the Moral cause is sin,
that made a separation of God from the soul, then followed a separation of the
soul from the body: for God made not Death, neither takes the Potter pleasure
in bruising an earthen Pitcher: two things (I may safely say) cannot God make,
a God and Sin; of these (take the word properly, he has no Idea.)

The Natural causes of Death are either external or internal; exrernall, O
that I could number them! I should then learn to number my days: the
internal cause is the mutual conflict of contranie qualities: the brain being
cold, the Stomach, and the Liver hot, the Bones dry, and the Reins moist: the
soul comes from the Father of Spirits, it self a Spirit; into a body whose
principles exercise natural and irreconcilable enmity: me thinks at her
first entrance into an house so divided against it self, she should look
about her like that fellow in Libanius, that coming home, and finding painted
on his Wall two ready and instructed Armies, cries out, (...), who has made my
house a Military Camp? The members of every man's body are at continual War;
we may be at peace with foreign enemies, our domestic are always in arms:
It Is false that Solinus writes of a people in Jury, that are so equally mixed,
their temper so arithmeticall, without excess, defect, or jarre, ut
aeternagons sit cessantibus puerperiis, that there is always the same number of
people, and yet no children borne: Who shall make me believe that Jury, or any
part or Jurie is exempted from death, since life it self, our Lord and Savior
Jesus did dye in Jurie? Death erects her Trophies as well in Iuries as Greece,
and in Greece as Scythia; her victories are here above, her Captives lie below;
God made the face of the earth to be inhabited, sin and death the bowels:
this is the place of them that live, that of them that have lived. Thus is the
earth the common receptacle of the living and of the dead: other Elements serve
us in our life, her service continues after death, when our funeral fires have
turned us to ashes, when the Air our Breath has left us, and the water belcht
us up, she is to our tossed bodies a shore, to our bodies turned to ashes an
Urne, to our bodies out of breath a place of Repose, a Seat to rest in.

Thus much of my second part, our return to the earth: I now come to our
return as the end of evils. Hercules his Pillars were the term of his
Travailes, the term of his life was the term of his labors; Life and Labor
go hand in hand, death and rest: hence some did conclude it the prime good not
to be borne, the next to dye speedily: Pliny thought so well of death, that he
conceived no other end of venomous Herbs, than to rid men out of life,
siquando taedio esset, when it grew wearisome. But seek not, said Solomon,
death in the error of your lives; Death is not to be hastened, and need not
be feared: never did Pinace arrive at the blessed Islands, that first passed
not through the straights of Death; God and Nature have set them between us and
home.

There is a place, says Job, meaning the grave, where there is no order; and
yet this for our comfort, there is no tumultuous confusion, for Pompey and
Caesar are at peace, the Senate and the people, nay Rome and Carthage: Fortune
there rules no Orb, anger and revenge lie chained up, and they that divide the
Empire of our living world, pride, ambition, injustice, fraud, covetousness,
oppression, have not so much as one little Province: 'Twas well done of Nature,
that condemned us not to any long stay here, that cuts off our sins with our
thread, and our pains with our lives, for did not men weep oftener before the
flood than after? and did not old Priamus shed more tears than young Troilus?
to all that float upon the troubled waves of this world, there is one common
and universal Haven, the haven of death, and yet even there in the very haven
do all men suffer shipwreck, which casts me on my fourth and last part, the
discourse on death, as death is an evil.

Sin, and the punishment of sin, are members adequally dividing humane evils;
the former presupposed no evil or privation, it presupposed imperfection in
him that sinned, as mutabilitie of will, which is no evil or privation; for it
is universally and actually in all individuals, but no privation is actually
affirmed of the whole species: the later presupposed evil, an inordination in
free actions or omissions, called Malum culpae, which in Gods justice is paid
with that other, called Malum poenae, the evil of punishment, to which member
I reduce the hate of Nature, the last enemy, the last of evils, Death; but not
the least.

Can that be the least of evils, which is so abhorred of all those appetites
which God has printed in the soul, to wit, the natural, animal, and
rational? Does not the nutritive faculty earnestly labor to maintain us in
being, (...), says Aristotle, Mor. 1. even when we are asleep? Does not the
irascible defend our being, and the concupiscible, together with the generative
propagate it? Does not that universal faculty (as Suarez calls it) the will,
love and desire, the being and well being of all inferior parts? Show me but
any thing of the most obscure being, that desires not to maintain that being,
and I shall the sooner with the Egyptians believe two Gods that made the nature
of things, the one good, the other bad. Stay then, take notice, see and be
amazed too, to see by what strange ways and windings the derived rivers become
tributarie to the sea, all things flow from the deep of divine goodness, see
how he fetches them back again, he has made them all, at least by some
analogy, to love him in that they love themselves; for they are drops of the
bucket, and so much as they love themselves, which are by participation, so
much they must needs love him, which is of himself; they cannot love to be,
but they must love him who swallows up in his infiniteness of being, all
being, whose nature and essence it is to be, let me tell you of a paradox, if
there be any in afflicted Jobs case, that weep that they died not from the
womb, that bless the barren mother, and the paps that never gave suck, even
these, the damned spirits and unhappie souls, out of a mere love to their
being, desire not to be: such is our love to our being, and God himself
glories to say of himself, I am, and yet this our being does death, as far as
it can, destroy.

Again, can that be the least of evils, which drownes in tears the eyes of
widows and orphans? that leaves the streets as a green field, and changes the
palaces of Princes into lodges of Bats and Owls, that had not God for a
father, not Nature for a mother, till she was adulterate? that is ushered in by
a thousand evils, the sword, pestilence and famine, excess in labor, excess
in pleasure, lingering, grief, and sudden mirth, with a thousand more.

Now that death is a passage from these to a more blessed mansion, from these
cloudy regions to those enlightened by the Lord God, it is no thank to death,
death is still the ruin of Nature, the demolisher of Gods Work, this is the
goodness and power of God, who will raise us again out of the dust, and the
dark grave, and then will bless us, and show us the light of his countenance,
and say in the end of the world as he said in the beginning, let there be
light, and there shall be light; a light that no Cloud from thenceforth shall
dim, that shall never set: to which light he lighten us, who lights every
man; nay who is that very light, and for Jesus Christ his sake, our only Lord
and Savior. Amen.

FINIS.
The second Sermon.
ECCELES. 12.1. Remember now thy Creator in the days of thy youth.


THE Text naturally falls into these parts: First, an act, Remember: Secondly,
the object of that act; and that first in a general notion, as the Creator:
Secondly, in a special, with this restraint or appropriation, thy Creator:
Thirdly, the time when, set forth three ways: First, in thy youth: Secondly,
in the days of thy youth: Thirdly, now in the days of thy youth.

First, of the act, Remember: But because the memory of any thing does of
necessity suppose the former knowledge of that, here comes in another act,
laid down by way of supposition, that we know God: First then of this
supposed; Supremum in homine (says S. August. de Civit. Dei) attingit supremum
in mundo; The noblest faculty in the little world, man, reaches to the noblest
thing in the great world, God, the builder of heaven and earth. When God in the
creation did stamp on the rude Chaos this face of method, he was not lavish of
his own image, he gave to humane nature an intellectual soul, and became
himself the object of it: He has not dealt so with every nation, go down
into the deep, and tell me if that scaly people have heard of the God of Hosts,
Do they that dwell in the air, those winged Tribes, sing Psalms to him that
taught them, to him that made them? Do the beasts of the forest build him a
Tabernacle? or the Cedars of Lebanon religiously bow their heads to him: No:
they are not capable of so royal service, their portion is not fallen in so
fair a place, they all move in shallower waters; only man, like the stately
Pine, lanches out into the Maine, and moves upon that boundless and
bottomless Ocean, the infinite and invisible God.

Now the knowledge of this God is twofold, either revealed by Oracles,
visions, dreams, tradition, Scripture, divided into the new or old Canon; or
natural, such as the Heathen and Gentiles had by the bare light of reason,
which though compared to ours, it was no more than the Glow-worme to the Sun,
yet was enough to leave them inexcusable, if according to that measure of
knowledge, they did not honor the true God.

The means by which they came to this knowledge, was first by reflection on
their own souls.

Secondly, by the unsatiable appetite of happiness, which cannot rest in any
finite good.

Thirdly, by the powerful conservation and upholding of all things: and here,
O Lord, to whom shall I liken thee, either in heaven, or in earth? What Agent,
either natural or artificial, is such to his effect, as thou to the world?
What the Sun produced by day, it leaves at night, and Arts, (...), says
Aristotle, Lib. 1. Mor. cap. 11. though they are fond of their own works, and
love them as their children, yet leave them to strangers, to fortune, to rust,
to time. Where is Minerva, the work and glory of Phidias? or Mercury, of
Polycletus? Time has razed their Temples, and like Metellus, when he took
Athens, has cursed the very Gods in triumph. But of all the works of God, of
all the parts of this great whole, there is not one missing, not one grown
feeble with time, or that stoops to age. I have seen the heavens painted on
Atlas his shoulders, but me thought he made a filthy sour face. There is one,
and but one, sufficient for this, he that cast the mountains in their mold,
and weighed them in a balance, he that stretched forth the heavens as a
curtain, and spread them like a tent to dwell in.

Fourthly, by the neat linking of causes with themselves, and with their
effects, by the voice of the heavens; for their sound is gone out into all
lands, since their creation have they both day and night preached their
Creator, Non verborum, sed rerum eloquentia, says the Father, Not with
eloquence of words, but of things.

Lastly, in this great volume of Nature, what page soever they turned, they
might (as in a fair print) read a God. So that to them that never saw the
books of Moses, as Pagans and Heathens, who never read that in the beginning,
God created the heaven and the earth, it will be damnation not to know a God.
For like as though God had never said, Thou shall not kill, or, Thou shall not
steal, it had been sin to take that which is not a man's own, or to shed man's
blood, because the voice of Nature cries loud against it (and therefore was
Cain guilty of murder, before the Law was given in Sinai against murder.) So
though God had never revealed himself, yet not to have known him, had been
inexcusable ignorance, usually called in the School, Ignorantia vincibilis,
Ignorantia pravae dispositionis, Ignorantia privativa: that is, the absence of
that knowledge, which though we have not, yet we might, and ought to have had.

But in us there can be no such ignorance, the night is past, and darkness is
no more upon the face of the earth, we all know him, we speak of him, we
sing of him, we confess him with our pens, our words, our prayers, and daily
oaths, when we are but in our cradles, we are taught to call God Father, and
while we hang on our mothers breasts, to say, I believe in God.

But because to know God, and proceed no further, is like Moses from Mount
Nebo, to have a view of the land of Canaan, but to dye before he could set foot
in it, because we know God as we are men, but remember him as we are good men:
therefore I now proceed from the supposed act, the knowledge of God, to that
other explicit act, the remembrance of him.

The good actions of men are of small continuance, and cease to be so soon as
their effect is complete, like as natural motion cease when the form is
produced. If they continue for any time, they may thank the memory of
posterity, that faithfully records the noble acts of her fathers, and suffers
not the same dust that covers their bodies, to cover their names; by her they
that dwell in the dust live, and the bodies of Martyrs shall bleed a fresh to
all generations; it is she that writes good deeds with a pen of iron, and makes
the acts of one age the history and lecture of the next.

Now in this respect do men call for a remember, that seeing they themselves
have no long parts to act upon the stage of this world, when the time comes
they must go out, the curtain be drawn, and they put off their upper
clothes, their bodies, they may leave to this world their name behind them, to
testify that they themselves had sometime been here: but in this respect
cannot God require our remembrance of him, seeing that what he is, he has
been from all eternity, and so shall continue, when time shall be no more.
The reason why he calls for our remembrance of him, is not any benefit that
shall accrue to him; alas, how far is a creature, a silly man, a little
quickened dust, from adding to him, who if he himself could add any thing to
himself, I would not acknowledge him my God; the fullness of his perfection
excludes all access of new, our prayers, our psalms, our remembrance of him
do him no good, Quod colitur Deus, homini prodest, non Deo: neque enim fonti
quispiam dixerit se profuisse si biberit, nec soli, si viderit: If we do God
service, we profit our selves, not God; for who will say, that the fountain
is beholden to him that quenches his thirst at it; or the Sun to him that sees
by it. There is a service, whose end is only the benefit of him that rules,
and this is more properly called servitude, and it was the lot of that impious
son of Noah, Cursed is Cham, a servant of servants shall he be. Again, there is
a service where the benefit is partly his that rules, and partly his that is
ruled, and such a service had he in the Gospel, in whose behalf the
Centurion besought Jesus in this form, (...), Lord, my boy lies at home sick
of a palsy: And the Original will bear, my child lies at home sick of a
palsy. And such a service was that we read of in Genesis, and Isaac blessed
Esau, that he might serve his brother. But now beyond both these, there is a
relation of Lord and Servant, between God and Man, where the Lord reserves to
himself only honor, and puts over all the profit to us his servants; and yet
though our service be not good to him, but to our selves, it is his pleasure
and goodness to require it; it is he that led the pen of Solomon, when he
began this Chapter, as we should begin every day of the week, every day in
the year, Remember now thy Creator in the days of thy youth.

The Creator is the object of our remembrance, and that first in this general
notion, as the Creator: secondly in a special as thy Creator: First of the
general; the poor Philosopher that knew no other, no better God than the
Sun, when he was asked for what he was borne, made answer, (...), to look
upon the Sun; though his ignorance was too too gross, in that he made a God of
a Creature, adoring the Sun for him that inflamed the Sun; yet had his ground
been true, had that been a God which he supposed to be a god, how worthy had
his answer been, to be sent in Letters of gold to posterity, to read and
practice: be it what it will, it is writ against us, and shall be read against
us at the great accounts, if knowing the true God, we deny him in our lives.

Of all those Acts by which Almighty God communicates himself to the Creature,
he is most visible in his act of Creation, as for his acts of executive
providence, though they are equally certain, yet they are not equally seen:
it was the ignorance of those that puzzled the Epicure, and drove him to his
wits end, to find out, why all things come alike to all, to him that
sacrifices, and to him that sacrifices not, why the thunderbolt should pass
a Tavern and fire a Temple; why the Foxes should have holes, and the Birds of
the air nests, but humility and simplicity not where to lay their head: which
knot when he had thus tied, but could not untie, he desperately broke it, and
peremptorily sets down, that there was a God in heaven: but he, a careless
and sleepy one, wherein in that he took away from him providence, he indeed
left him no God: not much unlike the Cretians, that call their god Jove
immortal, yet talk of his Tomb with this inscription, (...), Here lies Jove
the Son of Saturn; but his act of Creation, he that sees it not must needs be
guilty of damnable ignorance, of voluntary and affected ignorance, and seems
to have his eyelids given him for nothing else but to shut out day; and
therefore this remembrance of God is rather urged from his act of Creation,
than from his act of Providence.

There is a second reason which may claim our remembrance of him, and that is
the extent of his goodness in this act of Creation; before heaven or earth,
before day or night had God been of eternal, and infinite continuance, he was
then alone, solitary, yet wanted no company: it is not with him, as with man,
whose natural infirmities breed a natural, and necessary desire of society:
hence says Solomon, two are better than one, neither wanted he the earth for a
footstool: to want a footstool is proper to bodies, to elementary and
gross bodies; neither wanted he a house to dwell in, for then he should want
it now: For behold the heaven of heavens contains him not: and yet for all
this it pleased him to create an heaven and earth, the one for thy Footstool,
the other for thy Canopy, both of them of rare beauty, of wonderful
continuance, of such perfection, that to them, as Solomon says, no man can
add, and from them can no man diminish, unless it be some one so wickedly
curious, as he in Lucian, that blamed him first for making a woman: secondly,
for placing the Bulls horns above his eyes.

But because no efficient acts at random, but has respect to some end which
either it self tends to, but apprehends not, as it is in all things below man,
or which it self both tends to and apprehends, as it is in all intellectual
agents, and chiefly in the first, the infinite wise God; who therefore in the
Theology of the Gentiles is called the first intelligence: take further notice
of the end for which he became a Creator, and then unless thou be more stupid
than Clusius Sabinus, that could never hit of Hectors Name, or Messala Corvinus
that forgot his own, thou can not but with thanks and amazement call to mind
thy God, thy Creator, and his mercies which have been of old. Look into the
upper and nether world, both Sun and Moon give thee to see, though they see
not themselves: and in this lower world, whatsoever bleats or lowes, or roares
upon a thousand hills, whatsoever chants in the air, or is silent in the
water, both are, and grow, and multiply either for thy pleasure or for thy
necessity: descend from the sensitive degree to the vegetative, thou shall
find the Laurel in the cold of Winter put off her leaves for Caesar's head: for
him the Pine leaves her native Mountain, for an inhospitall Element, and at
the Artificers pleasure the Cedar comes down from Lebanon, and puts on the
form of men, of beasts, of gods. If this be not enough, do but think how
GOD has placed the head of trees below the foot of man, (...), The head of a
tree is the root. Arist. de anim. Of all these, Et Dominiu^ and usus fundatur
in humana natura, Suar. de oper. 6. dierum, Both Dominion and use is founded in
the nature of Man: Whatsoever he created in those first six days of the
world, he made in reference to thee; to thee (I say) whosoever thou art; he
desires no man to remember him for whom he did not create these things; he
that has not so much land as he can cover with his prostrate body, for him
was the whole earth created: whatsoever is now enclosed, had not sin entered
into the world, should have lain common: the Civilian had not broacht those
terms of division, dominion, acquisition, prescription, usucaption,
occupation, it had not been in controversy whether the Mariner might cast
Anchor at this or that shore, nor whose was the swarm of Bees that settled in
this or that tree, there had been no settling of Landmarks, no buying, no
selling either of hand of Justice; no Michaelmas or Easter Term. Aquinas
notes, that buying or selling was never heard of, till Abraham bought a burying
place of Ephron the Son of Zoar; and here by the way you may note, that the
first thing this good man bought was a burying place, as if the end of his life
had been the beginning of his thoughts: the River of God, says the Psalmist,
is full of Water; you have heard how this River keeps not within bancks, but
rejoices to break out, and run down with a mighty stream, to make glad the
face of the whole earth.

Thus much of the object in general, as the Creator: I now come to the object
in a more special notion, with this restraint or appropriation, thy Creator:
where wast thou when I laid the foundation of the earth, (says God to Job) let
the Poet make answer, qua non nata jacent, were things that are not yet borne
or conceived are, that is just no where: how much then do thou owe to God
that gave thee life, when as yet thou could not ask it of him? and when he
first gave thee life, thou wast as thy days are, but a span long, and yet what
a fair place did he make ready for thee? even the wide and spacious world,
that when thou come to years and man's stature, thou might have elbow
room enough.

That God is the Creator, and therefore Almighty, is matter of fear and
trembling, but that he is thy Creator is matter of love, and thankful
remembrance. Did he not give thee a being? yes, but so he did to stocks and
stones. Did he not give thee a soul and life? thus much he has done for
beasts and trees. But did he not give thee a reasonable soul? to deny it
were the best argument, that he did not. But in that he has given thee a
reasonable soul, remember this thing that he has done for thee: The soul of
Beasts is from the earth, earthly; the soul of man from the Father of Spirits,
and is spiritual; the soul of Beasts is but for a time, and then dies with
the body, the soul of man lives after the body, and returns to God that gave
it.

Some of the old Philosophers compare the soul of a man to a Circle; for like
as a Circle returns to the first point, and ends where it began, so the soul
of man returns to God from whom it began: to which may that be well applied
which God says of himfelfe, J am the beginning, and I am the end.

But now though it be true that the wise men said of old, that the soul of
man does resemble a circle; yet is there some disparitie and unlikenesse in the
one and the other; for every Circle returns to the point from whence it
begins, but every man's soul does not return to God that gave it: for the
souls of the wicked go out from him, and are lost in this world, and never
return to him again: but the souls of the just are like the Dove which Noah
s^^t out of the Arc, which finding no rest for the sole of her foot, returned
back again, and he put forth his hand and received her. In this do the
souls of good and bad agree, that they were all created by one and the same
God, that they are all for a time to be united to the body, that they shall all
at the end of that time be separated from the body, that they shall all put on
the very same bodies which sometimes they put off; that they shall all come to
judgment; and here begins the woeful and lamentable difference, some
proving Chafe, some Wheat; some Sheep, some Goats some being set on the right
hand, and some on the left; some marked out to eternal death, and some to
eternal life: now that thou may never feel the happiness of the one, and
never feel the misery of the other, take with thee this Counsel, it is the
Counsel of a King, of Solomon the King, let it be to thee as the Signet of
thy right hand, and as Jewels of gold about thy neck; write it upon the Nails
of thy fingers, upon the palms of thine hands, upon the posts of thine house,
and in every corner of thy heart, Remember thy Creator. The fruit that will
spring from this remembrance, will be much and rare: from contemplation of his
highness and thy low estate will spring humility, from thought of this, that
he gave to thee not only when thou had nothing, but wast nothing Charlie to
the poor, from his mercy hope, from his Justice a true balance; fear of his
Name, resolution ard contempt of injuries, from his immensitie and illimited
presence in all places, watch fullness and wariness in all thy ways, words,
and actions.

But because there is an appointed time for all things, a time for every
purpose under the Sun, my Text does not only set down whom we must remember,
but the time when we must remember him, and that in three particulars:

First, in our youth.

Secondly, in the days of our youth;

Thirdly, now in the days of our youth,

First of the first. It was the superstition of the old Romans, primam
lanuginem Diis Consecrare, to consecrate the first hair of their cheeks to
their gods: what was superstition in them, will be good Religion in us, God
will have our firstlings; what are they? the first borne male of thy Cattle,
and of thy sheep, thou shall sanctify to the Lord thy God, was the old Law.
But now, I will take no Bullock out of thine house, nor Goat out of thy fold:
will I eat the flesh of Bulls, or drink the blood of Goats? Offer unto me
praise, and pay thy vows, call upon me (but mark what follows) in the day
of trouble, not in the night, not after Sun set, we must not defer it so
long; and I say, call upon him early, betime in the morning; and if not in the
morning of the day, yet surely in the morning of thine age, that is, in thy
youth. How many have thought to call in the evening, who have been called away
themselves at noone, and been benighted at midday? for we are here but for a
time, and then must be gone: like Travailers, or wayfaring men, we must pay
our debt and reckoning to Nature, and then away; after we have eat and drunk
here, or like Tenants at will, who must give up our Title and Land, even that
small portion of earth which we carry about us, when God shall call, as he
called to Abraham, exi de terratua, go out of thy Land: and whither then? to the
place that Job in his tenth Chapter speaks of, dark as darkness it self;
where there is no order; where there is no place for repentance, for as the
tree falls so it lies. Six days shall thou labor and do all that thou
have to do, in these thou must gather thy Manna; if thou gather on the
seventh, it shall stink and bring forth worms: never had man pardon of his
sin to whom it was not sealed in this world; we must be wrought here, and
sifted and squared for the house of God, or no where, for after this life shall
cease the noise of the hammer, the Axe, and the Chisill: the day is for action,
whether good or ill: the night comes, in which no man works; for that
reason remember thy Creator here, and for this remember him here in thy youth,
because it is uncertain whether thou shall ever be old: none are old which
were not young; many are young which shall not be old. Times and ages, God, as
a wise dispenser has kept in his own hands, to the intent that we might
suspect a shorter thread of life, and yet not despair of a longer.

There is a time to be borne, and a time to dye (says Solomon) mark his
language, here is birth and death, but no talk of life; as if in a new way of
Philosophy, he would make a passage ab extremo, ad extremum sine medio, as if
we were to spring immediately out of our mothers womb, out of our swaddling
Clouts into our winding sheet.

But suppose it were so, that thou had a long lease of thy life, and were
forced to go to thy grave as a sheafe of Wheat into the Barn, ripe and in a
good age: suppose thou had a promise to see thy childrens children, and their
Children, yet were it extreme impiety to defer thy repentance to thy later
days, to give thy beauty and youth to thy pleasure, and thy wrinckles and
gray hairs to thy God. Have thou not read, has it not been told thee, that
God will have no pleasure in thy leavings, the halt, the lame, the bleare-eyed,
and the blind, are these fit offerings on his Altar?

Besides, how unjust is this, to play away the strength of thine age, and then
to lay the burden of all thy sins upon thy old and decrepit age, which God
knows is a burden to it self, whose knees tremble and shake under as many
diseases as sins. O Lord, that back that so stoops under threescore years,
how shall it sink under the sins of threescore years? the sins, I say,
whose weight he full well knows, that calls to us, Come unto me all you that
are heavy laden; for this I call heaven, and earth, and hell to witness; for
the earth sunk under the sins of Corah, Dathan, and Abiram: the first sin
weighed the apostate Angels to hell; and now is another hell to them, and the
sin of man weighed down from heaven to earth: The Son of God, who on the
Mount of Olives sweat drops of blood, under the load of our iniquities, and
when he bare them on the Cross, he cried out in the anguish of his soul,
heaven and earth bewayling the extreme weight that lay upon him, for the Sun
shut his eye, and the whole Land of Jury became as a close mourner; for it was
wrapped in a black Mantle of Darkness from the sixth even unto the ninth hour:
is this then a burden for thine old age? for crazie and faint limbs? then let
a Pigmie, a Dwarf, twitch up Mount Aetna at the roots, and strut away with it
on his shoulders.

Besides all this, do but think of the many and certain miseries of that
age; Nonius Marcellus coats three places out of Aecius, Pacuvius, and
Titinnius, where senium is put for Malum, as if it were one and the same thing
to be old and miserable: add hither the decay of Senses, conscience of an
ill-acted life, the fear to dye, and yet weariness to live, with Chiliads,
and Iliads, more of evils, Ministers to the first, I tremble to say the second
death.

Beyond all this, there are some vices natural to old age, as jealousy,
peevishness, morositie, loquacitie; their present life being but a vain
repetition or memory of their former, (...), they live by memory, says
Arist. I add hither also Covetousness, so proper to this age, that the
Philosopher therefore calls it (...), uncurable, because (...), old age, and
every impotencie breeds it, whether it be, that when the gifts of body and
mind fail, we catch at those of fortune, as our last refuge, like men half
drowned, that missing of better hold, catch at strawes or weeds, which reason
Aquinas on that place gives; or whether it be (...), which is the Philosophers
one Reason in 2. of his Rhetor. because old men by experience best know how
necessary those eternalls are, and yet how hardly got, how easily lost: This is
that, that makes them, when they are even at their journies end, break their
Asses backs with laying on new provision, not much unlike Rivers, that then
run biggest, and gather most waters, when they come nearest to the Sea, to
their own home.

Lastly, how hardly does gray headed sin leave a sinner? This is that
Egyptian Tyrant, that Pharaoh that will not let Israel go: it is continuance
in sin, that makes an earnest sinner, our first sins are with some
reluctance, some checks, some gripes, our later with delight; happy is he that
dashes those Brats, those little ones, against the Stone, as it is in Psalm
one hundred thirty six. Some Interpreters by little one, do there,
understand sin in its Infancy, and by the Stone the Rock, the Corner stone,
CHRIST JESUS.

How hardly is the iniquity of our Heels shook off? Cassiodorus expounds our
Heels our later Age, and the difficulty proceeds partly from the Devil, to
insidiaberis calcaneo, said God to the Serpent, thou shall lie in wait for his
Heel; partly from the sinner, he is an old, a grave sinner, hardly cureable;
not as if the Balm of Gilead failed, not as if GOD wanted mercy, for he ran
to meet the Prodigal afar off, and Saint John saw, Jerusalem with twelve
Gates open, to the East three, to the West three, to the North three, and to
the South three: but because God in Justice hardens such sinners, not
positively, but negatively, that is, Non impertiendo malitiam, sed non
impertiendo gratiam, says Lumbard, not by making them evil, but by not making
them good, leaving them stupid, bed-ridden, and speechless sinners, without
sense, without motion, not able to do or say so much as the Prodigal did, I
will rise, or I would rise, and go to my Father.

Hence now I pass to the second particular, In the days of thy youth.

Why in the days of our youth, more than in the years of our youth: They that
have set us out the shortest time for youth, allow us from fourteen to
thirty four, but this is to put us in mind of uncertaintie of life, as if
our youth was but for a few days, or like as at the end of the day comes
evening, and then dark night, so at the end of our youth comes old Age, and
then Death.

Or it may be without violence to the Text, you may take in the days of thy
youth; for, by the good actions done in thy youth, and then the sense will be,
give testimony that thou Remembrest thy Creator, by thy well-doing, in thy
youth; for so may this word Days be used: Abraham (said Moses) departed full
of days, Hooest (says Aquinas) plenus operibus lucis and diei: Neither do I
without warrant expound this Preposition in as a causall, signifying by; so
would some have it meant in the very first word of Genesis, and so it is used
in the Psalm, In wisdom have thou made them all: that is, by wilsedome; for
the Son is the wisdom of the Father: And so is it used in the first of the
Hebrews, (...), he spoke to us in his Son, that is, by his Son.

Thus I have done with the second particular, In the days of thy youth. But
that is not enough, the wise man adds, now in the days of thy youth. I say
now: for now is the Sabbath Day, to the hallowing of which, GOD prefixed, as he
did to my Text, a Remember, Remember that thou keep holy the Sabbath day.

Secondly, remember him now, because no time is thine, but this very now,
whether any be to come it is uncertain; and what it may bring with it as
uncertain: That which is past is behind thee, and seeing thou art a Travailer
on earth, the further thou journyest, the further thou leavest it.

Thirdly, Rememeber thy Creator now, because now, in this very moment, this
very Article of time, does he create thy better part, thy soul: for by the
very same action by which it was first created, is it till this day created,
is this minute created, and shall be created to all eternity, (mistake me
not) the Conservation of it in being, being nothing else but the Creation of it
continued: since therefore, God upholds thy soul in being by the same act, by
which he gave it being (I mean thy soul only, for he did not in a proper
sense create thy body) and since no cause loses its Name, or Formalitie, till
its actual influence, or causalitie cease: who sees not that when soever he
did first create it, yet he now creates it: he is now thy Creator, therefore
thou shall now remember him: if he be thy beginning, thou must make him thy
end: the first efficient, and the last end must needs be co-incident: if he
do for thee, thou must do for him; if he now remember thee, thou must not
now forget him; because thou wast at first deduced from him, thou must be thus
reduced to him. Alcinous in his Introduction to Plato says of him, (...), he
held GOD of a Sphaericall figure: and truly, though God be of no figure, yet
(to omit many instances) he seems to love this figure: for as a Circle
returns into it self, and ends where it began; so all things that were
derived from him, (and what was not derived from him?) must end in him: Ister,
Achelous, Euphrates, and Ganges, all these Rivers flow from that mighty Well:
and after all their windings, come to pay tribute, and fall with a loud noise
into that mighty Well.

Last of all, Remember you especially your Creator now, because there was of
late evil in your great City, the evil of Plague, but now is not, because
the Giant has now laid by his Quiver, his Bow, and his Arrows, because she
that did sit in Ashes, is now become the glory of Cities, the seat of joy, of
mirth, and health; because now her streets, her Courts of Justice her Temples
are returned from solitude to their old frequencie, because now she hears not
Zim, nor the Scriech-Owle by night, nor the Vulture, nor the Raven by day: O
let it not be told in Edom, let not the Hittite and the Stranger hear that
Israel found a mindful God, but God an unmindfull Israel, that you are still a
rebellious people, though his Angel past by your houses, and your firstborn
live, that you hear not him, whereas he heard for you, your very doors
calling, and crying, Lord have mercy upon us. *

Errata.
PAge 2, line 4. read vilescit for vile est. p. 3: l. 15. r. leaving for
bearing p. 4. l. 17. r. mind to that, for mind that. p. 5. l. 24 r. are not
ascribed, for do not ascribe. p. 8. l. 1. r. put for set. p. 8. l. 16. del.?.
at Arts, and set it at Sciences. p. 25. l. 16, r. carried for cursed.

FINIS.

