THE Humble Address AND PETITION Of several PEERS of this Realm, TO HIS MAJESTY
of Sacred Memory, King CHARLES the First. 1640.
To the Kings most Excellent Majesty.
WE are here to cast our selves at Your Majesty's. Feet, being Twelve of the
Peers of this Realm, humbly craving to recommend to Your Royal Consideration
several great Dangers and Distempers which threaten the Church, State, and Your
Majesty's Royal Person, which are reducible to the following Heads, viz.

1. The Danger and Hazard to which your Majesty is exposed in the War, the
waste of your Revenue thereby, and the Discontents occasioned by the disorders
of the Soldiers. 2. Sundry Innovations in matters of Religion. 3. Increase of
Popery, by employing those of that Religion in Places of Trust, in Commanding
Men and Arms in the Field, they being not permitted by Law to have any Arms in
their Houses. 4. The great mischiefs which may ensue, if the Forces raised in
Ireland should be brought into England. 5. The urging of Ship Money. 6. The
heavy charge upon Merchandise, to the discouragement of Trade, and the
multitude of Monopolies, whereby the Manufactures of this Kingdom are
burdened. 7. The grief of the Subjects by long intermission of Parliaments,
and the dissolution of those that have been called without effect.
For the Remedy whereof, we pray, that the Parliament may be summoned, whereby
the Causes of the Grievances that the People lie under may be taken away, and
the Authors and Counselors of them be brought to Trial and Punishment, as
their Offenses shall require: And that the War may be composed without Blood,
to the Honor and Safety of your Majesty's Person, the Comfort of your People,
and the Uniting of both Realms against the common Enemy of the Reformed
Religion.

Bedford, Hertford, Essex, Warwick, Mouldgrave, Bullingbrook, Bristol, Say,
Brook, Paget, Mandivile. Howard,


WHether the Petitions of these times are Copies of this of 40, is not hard to
judge, nor is the method wholly forgot that then was used; for soon after the
Lords had Petitioned, (says Baker) some of the discontented Party so
influenced the Common Council, that a Petition was framed in the names of all
the Citizens of London; and a little before, the King took into the Privy
Council some men that were well thought of by the Mobilee. Thus far we agree
pretty well. Next the Scots were put upon by their Friends the Dissenters of
England, to present a Petition to the same effect; but here we differ, hoping
the Scots in 80 have one to put them in mind of the traitorous Villainies of 40.
It Is prodigious, that in the same Age, the same Nation should bid so fair for a
Ruin, by the same men, in the same manner; yet those that take it for an
affront not to be thought honest, run into these premunires. Sure every one
that will abominate the repetition of the late Rebellion, will (were it for no
other reason) abstain from subscribing, because that was the fatal manner of
the beginning of the late Civil Wars. Though this be enough, yet every honest
man has reason to refuse, because the King, considering the ill effects they
formerly produced, does almost Petition his Subjects not to impose upon him.
But it is answered, that it is their duty to show their Grievances, and God
commands us to Petition him, and it is rational to Petition the Prince. But they
never consider, they oftentimes ask of God and have not, because they ask
amiss, nor can they reasonably expect a favorable reception, when the manner
is expressly forbid; but subjects have a Privilege of making their Prince
understand their necessities, and though they are sure to increase their
Grievances, yet that they will choose to bear rather than lose an useless
Privilege; but this is the only way the King can be offended, without breach
of Law; so that we may guess at the love of these ungrateful Wretches, who
mischief him all they can, prompted by his indulgence, who never put them to
the strictness of Law, which they do to him, resolving not to obey any
indifferent Command that rigorous Law commands not; they are resolved, to their
perpetual infamy, to make our late Sacred Royal Martyr speak truth to futurity,
viz. That they are not to be won with Obligations. How unbounded is their
liberty, like their malice and ingratitude? How absolute did the King make
them, when but for asking, he passed the Habeas Corpus Bill; yet they who reap
the only benefit of it, refuse him a reasonable request. What can be expected,
from such ill things? Humanity sorbids to call them Beasts, and will not suffer
me to call them men; for these creatures, of all men, might rationally be
thought the last in such Ingenteel Proceedings, because (as I said before) they
were, as Dissenters, under the lash of the Law; but they differ not more from
the Church than good Manners. These are the very scandal of Protestants, since
they protest against nothing more than Loyalty: These that are suffered to
Worship God after their own wrong way, and are so far from being compelled,
that in favor of them, Reason it self is almost constrained to believe them
men of tender Consciences; and yet these to be the first, nay, God be thanked,
daily disturbers of our Governor Moses. What do these differ, as lately was
observed, from Corah, Dathan, etc. who in lewd Assemblies offer false fire, and
make some seeming Conscience of their words, and none of their deeds: Are not
these they that for Gods sake obey not the Ordnances of men? But what if God
design to bring a Judgment on the Nation, and make this an occasion of hastening
it, as he did when he moved David to number the people, it is said, that the
anger of the Lord was kindled against Israel and Judah, and the Lord moved
David to say, Go number Israel and Judah. And the number of fighting men that
were in David's Territories were thirteen hundred thousand, which (as
undoubtedly it did) were enough to make David valiant himself, which God was
pleased to humble, by taking away with Pestilence seventy thousand in three
days time. Now if God should move the Heads of the Faction to see what number
they can draw of their confederacy, and if so be they perceive themselves of
number sufficient to rebel, God may inflict the same judgment as befell
Israel; and if a judgment of this nature happen on (more) rebellious London,
than learn to obey and tremble. For none can doubt, that more the number of
Rebels was coveted, than the sitting of the Parliament; else Rebel Iretons Son
could never have the impudence to say, That he knew them that esteemed it an
honor to his Father, to have his Head on Westminster Hall.

FINIS.

