An Humble ADDRESS WITH Some PROPOSALS for the Future Preventing of the
Decrease of the Inhabitants of this Realm.

With Allowance.

To. L'Estange.



LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1677.

Proposalls for the Future preventing of the Decrease of the Inhabitants of
this Realm.
FIrst, it is most evident, that this Island is so fertile, and so productive of
all sorts of corn, flesh, and fish, and all other things necessary for the
maintenance of it is inhabitants, that it can maintain thousands more, than it
is now peopled withal: It is also productive of many Merchantable, and staple
Commodities, about which many thousands might be employed more than are, or
more than there are of the ordinary rank of people in the Nation. These things
are so true, that there needs no argument to Confirm them.

Secondly, it is beyond all question, That the strength of the King, and
Kingdom, both in peace, and war, consists in the multitude of it is
inhabitants; and that the riches, and poverty of a Nation have their rise and
original from the number or paucity of them; and by the same causes a Nation is
rendered either considerable or inconsiderable amongst it is Neighbors, as to
Alliances, etc.

So that it seems to be an affair of the chiefest concernment, to prevent the
decrease of the inhabitants of our Nation, and to propose a certain and
undeniable method how such a public mischief, may be remedied, which I shall
endeavor briefly.

None then that understands the constitution of this Nation can deny, but it is
polity, fundamental laws, and government, are as just, and convenient, as any
in the world, notwithstanding in every age, there is a necessity of abrogating
Old, and establishing New Laws, the reasons, of some ceasing, and new public
inconveniences happening, which it is necessary to obviate by New Laws.

Now with all those penal Laws made against the most capital crimes, viz. Such
as Felony, Burglary, and Murder it self, the King by his Prorogative, has a
power to dispense, either wholly by acquitting the Offender from punishment, or
by Commutation of the greater punishment into a Less; nay the Law it self does
daily admit such a Commutation, by inflicting the burning in the hand (upon the
easy terms of reading a verse in the Bible), on these, who according to the
rigor of it are to lose their lives.

And these criminalls, being thus acquitted either by the Kings clemency, or
the Law, may return to their former employs, or undertake any other lawful
calling without any obstacle or impediment.

But let it be supposed, that a Malefactor is found guilty of some Capital
crime, viz. Murder, Treason, etc. which the King will not pardon, nor the Laws
admit any Commutation for, but condemn him to the most ignominous death; yet
this person is in a better, and more desirable condition, than that to which
the severity, and cruelty of some inexorable men oftentimes reduce their
fellow subjects, whose misery, according to some present Laws, it is not in the
Kings power to relieve, although at such a time, when the King, and Nation
stands in greatest need of their help, and assistance.

To manifest this is not difficult, from the frequent instances, and examples,
of those whom we every day see deprived of Liberty, cast into prisons, where
they are forced to live, under all the circumstances of misery and want, and
that irrecoverably, for some small and trifling debt, which their poverty, (to
which it may be they are reduced by Divine providence) not dishonesty, is the
cause of not paying. Now the terror of these sufferings, more dreadful to a
Generous Spirit, than the severest death, is one of the principal reasons of
drawing great numbers of people out of this Realm.

First, if we consider the Seamen, (than whom there is no rank of men more
beneficial, nor necessary for England, being an Island.) The humors and
inclinations of these men are to be liberal, yea, even prodigal in their
expenses so long as the stock of their Wages last: that being consumed, they
venture further upon their credit, in hopes of a succeeding employ, of which
probably failing, longer then they did suppose, and being incapable of paying
their impatient creditors, from whom they constantly fear the severity of a
prison, they betake themselves to some foreign Nation, as France, Holland,
etc. who are always ready to entertain such useful persons; where they fix, and
never more to venture into England, nor have any desire for their Native
Country, probably having more strong engagements of wife and children to
oblige them to another Nation.

Secondly, The artificers, or handicrafts-men, do oftentimes either by
mispending what they acquire by their labor, or by providence, fall into
penury and want, and prove engaged in debts, which they have no prospect of
paying, and therefore evidently discern that the miseries of a prison must be
their portion, out of which, (being once confined to it) they see no
possibility of being rescued. Their next resolution therefore, is to leave
their Country, there being no other way, by which they can evade those
dangers, and preserve their liberty. And to give themselves an encouragement to
prosecute those resolves, they consider their art and labor, will procure
them, as plentiful a subsistence abroad, as at home.

Thirdly, The next that fall into calamity, various ways, are Farmers, who
notwithstanding their care, and indesty, either by the smallness of their
crops, the loss of their stocks, or hard bargains, to which their ignorance
betrays them, are frequently disenabled to satisfy their Landlords, which
though sometimes they prove charitable, and generous persons, and consider the
undone condition of their distressed Tenants, yet oftentimes may prove men of
much inhumanity, and will accept no satisfaction, besides the ruin of their
miserable Debtors, which severity puts many Contrymen, (the want of whom
causes such large tracts of ground to lie un-occupyed in England) to try their
future Fortunes in remote parts.

Fourthtly, the last sort of men I shall instance, are Merchants, and
Tradesmen, many of which do suffer greater loss both by Sea and Land, then any
other; and this is so incident to their very employs, that few can pretend an
exemption. Sometimes their losses are so very great, that they are altogether
incapable with their small remainder, to make any proportionable satisfaction.
Therefore, nature her self, whose first Law is self-preservation from misery,
instructs these men, rather than submit to the cruelty, that some unrealed laws
enables unmerciful Creditors to inflict on them, to secure themselves by flying
their Country.

From all this it must be evident to any unprejudiced person, that so many
leaving this Nation for fear of being imprisoned during their lives for debts,
(which frequently providence and not unthriftiness has brought upon them;) And
the irrecoverable confinement of such multitudes to prisons, is the chief
reason of drawing people out of England. Those who escape are ordinarily
followed by their Families. The confinement of those who are imprisoned,
deprive the kingdom of themselves, and proves the utter destruction of their
Families. So that those who upon this account leave the Land, and those who are
(as it were) buried alive in prisons, by the most moderate computation does not
amount to so few, these twenty years last past, as ten thousand persons, one
year with another, which in that duration of time, amount to two hundred
thousand, besides that increase, which might be reasonably expected from such a
multitude.

Now for the preventing of this greatest inconvenience and mischief, for the
future, these things are most humbly Proposed.

First, That some days may be set apart, every Term at Westminster, and at the
Assizes in every County, of which public notice may before be given, upon
which day the Keepers of all Prisons shall be obliged to bring all the
Prisoners confined for debt, either to Westminster Hall, if they are within the
Cities of London, or Westminster, or County of Middlesex, or to the respective
Assizes, and whatsoever prisoner, will give a true, and just account of all his
Estate, both personal and real, upon Oath, and assign it to his Creditors or
other Trustees for their use, and payment of debts as far as it will amount,
shall be immediately discharged; or if any prisoner, shall upon Oath, in any of
those places mentioned, before the Honorable Judges, declare himself not to
have any thing left to the value of then to be discharged from prison, and from
his debts. The like power may also be conferred upon the Justices at the
Quarter Sessions.

Secondly, There are yet in force, and unrepealed certain ancient Laws, which
make Merchants, Shopkeepers, Grasiers, and all such whose employments consists
in buying, and sellings, Bankrupts, upon sundry accounts, and for diverse
reasons contained in those Statute-Laws, which were of very good use at that
time when Enacted, and would not want their conveniences now, were they
rightly, and according to their first intendment used. But many of this age are
grown so cruel, and unreasonable, that no former times can parrallel them, by
which inhumane causes, they bring no advantage to themselves, but ruin to the
person they prosecute, and are the cause of a certain damage to the public.
In those ancient, and more charitable times, when those statutes were made, if
the debtor were under such circumstances, that he could not by giving all he
had, satisfy his creditors, they did willingly accept of what he had, and he
was set at liberty and freed from all confinement, and had some small portion
of his Estate returned, as a fund, upon which he might build his future
fortunes.

In this our age, if those Statutes were made use of against the most just and
honest person, though some, nay most of his creditors were so kind and
merciful, to be contented with the debtors estate, proportionably to be
divided amongst them, yet if he prove so unfortunate, as to be engaged to one
who is of a cruel, and uncharitable disposition, who has for any pretended
cause taken up a malicious pique against him, the kindness of the others can be
no advantage to him, neither is there any possible means to secure himself from
ruin.

Hence it is, that many men of honest designs, and just principles, have been
forced, after considerable losses, with their little that was left, to seek for
security and refuge, in foreign parts, by which the Creditors were deprived,
of what they might have had, the King and Kingdom, of that service, and
advantage they might have expected from whole families.

To this may be added, what has frequently happened, that many have voluntarily
offered their Creditors ten or fifteen shillings in the pound, to free
themselves from trouble and perplexity (if possible) whose estate after the
deduction of the charges out of it, for the obtaining the Statute against them,
and the ill disposal, which was made of the rest, has been so diminished, that
it could not afford two shillings in the pound.

In order therefore to prevent alt these mentioned inconveniences, both to the
public, and particular persons, it is humbly proposed, that there extreme
rigor of these Statutes be mitigated, which will much tend to public good,
as has, and may further be demonstrated: and that for future all Bankrupts may
be summoned to appear before some Authority to be appointed for that purpose,
and there give a full, and just, and true account upon Oath, of all their
Estates Personal, Real and in Reversion, and deliver up all their Books,
Bills, Bonds, and assign their whole estates to their Creditors, to be
proportianally divided amongst them; and themselves thereupon to be freed from
all future trouble, and prosecution.

This course being taken, there will be encouragement to friends, and
Relations, either to give or lend money to the debtor, or trust him with
commodities, by which he may de novo be put into a condition of living, and
trading, and providing for his family, which otherwise must be ruined: nay the
Creditors themselves (suppose the debtor a man of honest principles) may by
this means, get the remainder of their debts, which his estate could not pay.
And this has been the practice of former ages, and is made use of in most
Nations, so that if we look through Christendom, we shall scarce find that the
Laws of any place, confine men to a perpetual imprisonment, who relinquish
their whole Estates to their creditors, (though this is not sufficient to
satisfy all dents.) And here I humbly desire notice, may be taken, that so long
as a Statute is in force against any, which must be till all creditors will
agree, there can be no encouragement to any, to give, or lend the debtor any
thing for a new fund; nor to credit him, for the Statute will reach whatsoever
he has in possession.

To all this there seems to lie two Objections.

First, It will hinder the great credit that is now given.

Secondly, It will occasion perjury, for many will forswear themselves to
secure their Estates.

As to the First: For those men, who will give no credit except they may have
power to ruin the debtor if any contingent cause should hinder the most exact
payment, let such keep their moneys, and commodities, till they can dispose of
them to their own minds, which if they do, others that are not of such
mistrustful tempers, will be very great gainers, who though sometimes they
should meet with some l^sses, yet the greatness of their trade would make up,
and compensate these.

Secondly, It is much to be desired, that no credit at all might be given for
things of absolute necessity, such as meat, drink, clothes, etc. which would
put men, who live idle lives, upon labor; these being things which must be
had; and if so many multitudes of men and women who now spend their lives in
Idleness, were necessitated to undertake some employment, it must needs bring a
considerable advantage to the Nation. And this course would make the money of
the Kingdom oftener circulate.

As to the second Objection: That many will forswear themselves to secure their
Estates; Let not only those punishments which the Law has already provided, be
inflicted on the perjured person, but it may be made Felony without benefit of
Clergy, or Treason, by which the worst of men would be deterred from it, it
being great odds, but some way or other, they will be discovered, and convicted.

Page 4. line 27. for indesty read industry.

FINIS.

