A DISCOURSE OF PLURALITIES; (With the APPENDANT NON-RESIDENCE) Evincing the
Great EVIL in TAKING, And Necessary DUTY of FORSAKING Them: By him that would
approve himself a faithful Minister of God.

Take heed unto your selves, and to all the Flock, over which the Holy Ghost
has made you Overseers,

Act. 20.28. For the love of Money is the Root of all Evil, but thou, O man of
God, flee these things,

1 Timothy 6.10, 11. LONDON, Printed for Thomas Parkhurst at the Sign of the Bible
and Three Crowns in the lower end of Cheapside. 1680.

TO THE READER.
Courteous Reader,
THere was lately Published a little Piece, Entitled, An Endeavor for Peace
among Protestants. the aim whereof was upon Christian, Charitable, and Safe
Condescensions on the Churches part, (as the Author thought) to reconcile unto
her Communion those who most unhappily had been so long Dissenters from it.
What the success thereof will prove, it is only time can afford a Judgment. But
the mean while, it is very evident, That Pluralities (the Possessors and
Abettors whereof are both so numerous and so powerful) must be Back-friends to
the Design, which is built on Self-denial; besides the many other Injuries,
that they are guilty of toward God, our State and Church therein; as will be
seen hereafter. If therefore this Discourse (which owneth its Original merely
to those Thoughts) shall, by the Almighty's blessing, prosper any thing toward
the Cure of such an Evil, the Author will receive an Ample Reward. However; his
Work is with the Lord, and Labor shall not be in vain in him. But his Prayer
must be, That Gospel Ministers may ever serve the Lord Jesus, and not their own
Belly: not seeking their own, but the things which are Jesus Christ's: and that
these Papers may be serviceable to the purpose, whereto all good men, whether
others hear or do forbear, will readily say, Amen.

AGAINST PLURALITIES.
ALthough I nothing doubt,. 1. Introduction.
but that some good and honest minds, (what with the laws connivance at it,
others example in it, and their own defect of serious thoughts about it) have
been unhappily snared in the foulest guilt of holding More-Cures-than-one, the
very distance whereof bars all possibility of their discharging duly the Duties
that belong unto them; yet there is cause to fear, that in the Crowd of such
Delinquents, there may be others found, who are plainly of their number, on
whom the blessed Paul imprints that blackest Character of Suppposing Gain
Godliness. And certain it is, that this Unchristian Practice gives but too much
occasion to the People, for crying out of All therein engaged, in St. Peter's
words, That through Covetousness they do make Merchandise of them. For who can
see a Person settled in a Benefice, which does not only comfortably support him,
and his Family, but has to spare, (the common Case, and here reflected on) yet
grasping on another, that he cannot attend one, but will be apt to conclude;
It Is not the work of Christ, but Mammon of Unrighteousness, whereto he is a
Votary? And, how many such sad Spectacles may a little Traveller in this
Kingdom meet with? and yet, the wonder is not great, if now, as heretofore; and
in this Church as well as in the Primitive, men shall be found, and in the
Sacred Office, who serve not our Lord Jesus, but their own Bellies. The fairest
Crop of Wheat may have some Tares therein. Honey it self is not without its
filth and scum: nor is the richest Ore quite free from Dross. It ought not
therefore to cast a worse reflection on the English Clergy, that some bad men
creep in among them; than 'twas disgraceful to the Blessed Apostles, that Judas
was of their Society. It Is pity any should be so like him, as to pretend
Christ's service, when they only mean their own, by carrying of his Bag. And
those concerned ought to bestow sad thoughts upon it; that though that wretch
made shift a while; severest Vengeance was not long in overtaking of him: yea,
it is observable, that his Hypocrisy was no sooner manifested, than Notoriously
stigmatized also, John 12.6. A fair direction for guiding us upon the like
occasion! who may not therefore spare their open great miscarriage; that,
seeming to be Christ's Disciples, do tread so plainly in his Steps, that did
betray him. I will not say to the Non-resident Pluralist, as Nathan did to
David, Thou art the man; yet, cannot but with grief observe they are too like,
in this respect; Both seek their own, and not the things which are Jesus
Christ's.

For it is notorious,. 2. Case stated.
that we have great numbers of those Ministers in this distressed Church, whom
a Single Cure of Souls, (sufficient to make a serious man cry out with Paul,
Who is sufficient for it?) although endowed, not only with a Competent, but
abundant Maintenance, cannot content; but they must seize upon another, the
remote distance whereof, besides the most important and tremendous work
belonging thereunto, makes it impossible, that both should be attended by them.
A course, so evil in it self, and of so bad, and fatal Influence, both on our
Church in general, the particular Congregations that are concerned, and those
Ministers own Immortal Souls, that words are wanting, fully to Express the
vileness of it. Surely it is no rash Sentence in him that says; Pluralities are
the Pest of the Church, and Bane of our Religion. Which, I shall hope, will not
be disappointed of all good men's Suffrages, even those that hitherto may by
surprise have been entangled in this snare, when once they hear what Cogent
Arguments lie against it, and what Clear Answers unto all Pleas for it. Of both
these in their order; and as briefly, as the Case will bear.

The Arguments are these that follow; 1. 3. Arguments against Pluralities.
They war against Scripture; 2. Antiquity is a Stranger to them; 3. They are
doomed by Councils; 4. Are against Justice; 5. And Charity; 6. And Honor; 7.
And Prudence; 8. Serving only to Vice, and naughtiness.

1. 1. Argument against Scripture.
Pluralities make open War against the Scriptures; I mean not only, because
there is not in them any Title of Precept, or Example, to encourage them: but
they are plainly condemned there. Should any ask for a Particular Law in Terms
unto this purpose; it might not happily be absurd to answer, that, Ap.
Plutarch, Romul.
as Romulus made not any such against Parricide, because he judged so great a
Villainy was not incident unto human nature; so probably the Sacred Penmen
might in this case forbear, as being loath to think that such a Monster should
e're be hatched in the Church of Christ. And give me leave to note it, that, as
Rome could not afford an instance of that Unnatural Barbarism until about six
hundred years were past from the building of that City: So Christianity was not
pesterd with this grievous Plague, till full as many years, or more, had been
elapsed from the first Birth and Infancy of the same. But this is not intended
as a shift; for that is utterly needless; as he must see, who will observe how
plainly, Holy Writ does; Manifested two ways.
1. Condemn Ambition, Covetousness, and Sloth, as bad in all, but stark naught
in Ministers; which they should flee from, as from Hell it self; from whence
they come, and whereunto they go: And 2ly. Command Personal Attendance on their
several Flocks, from those that have them; without any Dispensation,
ordinarily, in the Case.

Touching the Former; First, Scr. condemns Ambition, Covetousness, and Sloth in
Ministers.
that Ambition, Covetousness and Sloth are so condemned in the Minister; should
any ask me, what is this unto our purpose? He may as well demand, Why Sin is
blamed for all our Miseries? It Is not more manifest, that all our Woe does
spring from Sin; Than that Pluralities do owe their being to those wicked
Parents, Covetousness, Ambition, and Sloth; For when there is before Enough,
and Spare: (as was supposed) it is impossible to assign any other real cause of
grasping after more, but to maintain their Laziness, Pride, and Covetousness.

And when the disciples of our Savior had a spice of one of those Diseases;
does he not presently apply himself unto the Cure, and clap a Corrosive to the
Proud Flesh, which was growing up? He tells them, 'twas a Heathenish Plant, and
should not grow in Christian Soil; by no means, in the Holy Sanctuary: It shall
not be so among you, Matthew. 20.25.26. Does not be that lodged in his Masters
bosom, set a black brand upon Diotrephes, for his aspiring humor? 3 John 9.10.
How does the great Apostle of Us Gentiles, charge his dear Timothy, to beware
of loving Money, the Root of all Evil; when he says, Thou, O man of God, flee
these things, 1 Timothy 6.10.11. And he of the Circumcision, banish all filthy
lucre from the Ministers Eyes, in taking up a Single Charge, 1 Pet. 5.2. What
Death, do we think, would he have doomed it to; had he perceived it gotten into
the heart of any, to make him grasp for more than one? yea, and to show us, how
naturally, cursed sloth, and Negligence attend the other Two; long before them
all, the prophet calls such Ministers, Dumb Dogs that cannot (at least will
not) bark, sleeping, lying down, loving to slumber; yea, greedy Dogs, which can
never have enough; Shepherds that cannot understand, looking all to their own
way, every one for his gain from his Quarter, Esai. 56.11. But why should I
light a Candle to the Sun, or spend more words in a Case so plain? To quote all
places in the Scripture against these Vices, particularly this Idolatry, ( Col.
3.5.) and in Ministers especially; would be to transcribe good part of the Holy
Bible.

As for the Latter, That Personal attendance on their Flock is indispensibly
required of Ministers, Secondly, requires Personal Attendance on their Flocks.
Ordinarily; the Scriptures are as full unto this likewise. There may
sometimes, and for a while perhaps, be just occasion of the Ministers absence;
on which necessity, he may pass guiltless both with God and Men. But to do this
Ordinarily, or for a Constancy, and merely out of Choice, as well as plainly
for some Secular Interest; This will not be dispensed with in the Court of
Heaven, whatever Dispensations may be gotten here on Earth. The Apostle does
command the Ephesian Elders, Act. 20.28.
Acts 20.28. to take heed unto themselves and to all the Flock, over which the
Holy Ghost had made them Overseers, and to feed the Church. That the Elders
here, were Ministers, is out of question: and that they were merely Presbyters,
and not Bishops, Comment i^ Tit. 1.
St. Jerome confidently affirms: to be sure! they are charged in their own
Persons to attend the Flock; as plainly, as words can speak is. And note it,
the self same way that they are called upon to tend their own Souls, they are
required to attend the Flock: for there is but one taking heed, which serves for
Both. And surely that was not to be By Another, Numb. 18. Infra.
and without Themselves. But the wretched Shift of doing this by Another, was
not then born; and shall be hereafter handled by us, according to its merit:
mean while, I would fain know, how Pluralists can with any reason be supposed
to be made Overseers by the Holy Ghost of that Flock; which, after they have
seized on, they hardly ever see; or to no other purpose, but to Fleece, not
Feed them: St. Paul, while he staid there at Ephesus in his own Person, both
taught them publicly, and from house to house, vid. 20. Vid. 20.
And proposed that Practice for the Presbyters imitation. And do not our
Non-residents keep very close unto this Copy? They have their seasons, I
confess, to go from house to house, and not omit the poorest: but it is to call
for, and exact their Dues; How many pluralists are there in England that hardly
see either of their livings in a year? Sir S. Degge a strenuous
Contra-Pluralist, Pars. Couns. Part. 1. chapter 4. 1 These. 5.12.13.
For other Doctrines, they are so far from doing any thing like to the keeping
Conventicles; that the Temple shall not see them in a Twvelve mouths time
together; or more, perhaps. Can we imagine that this same Apostle, when in
another place, 1 These. 5.12.13.) he does beseech the People, to know them that
Labored among them, and were over them in the Lord, and did admonish them; and
to esteem highly of them for their works sake; can we, I say, imagine, that he
should ever mean Pluralists and Non-residents; that are so far from
Admonishing, Laboring, and Working with them, that they are not among them?
Nay, is it not most evident hence, that all who take the Care of Souls upon
them, should both be Present; yea, and Painful likewise, with their People?
(...): gregem, qui a vobis pendet; uti apud Sophoclem, (...), abs te pendemus,
Bez. in loc. 1 Pet. 5.2, 3.
Does not the Apostle Peter therefore to this purpose, charge the Elders to
feed the Flock of God, that is among them; that is, whereof they have the Care:
and to be ensamples to them, (1 Pet. 5.2, 3.) And are not they marvellously
likely to do thus for them, and be thus to them, that are at twenty, forty, or
a hundred miles distance from them; Ministers should be indeed the Light of the
World: but be they snuff'd never so well, and shine they never so bright, those
that are so far from them, may walk in darkness notwithstanding. Were it indeed
believed by Non-residents, that they must give an account to God for the Souls
they undertook the charge of; (and they acknowledge to the Bishop, when they
are admitted, that they accept so great a Care) they would surely watch, and
know that they could not do so unto any purpose, except they kept upon the
Spot, where the danger is. That they must answer thus, and therefore ought to
watch so, as we speak, is clear by Hebr. 13.17. Hebr. 13.17.
They watch for your Souls, as they that must give account. And then, what man
may safely dare to take another, and a distant Cure; where he can never do the
Watchmans part? For, being absent, he can give no warning; for want of warning,
the Sinner dies in his Iniquity; and the blood of him so dying, will God
require at this false Watchmans band, Ezekiel. 3.18. Ezekiel. 3.18.
If Personal Attendance were no Duty, why should our Savior brand that
Shepherd for an Hireling, that flees when the Wolf is coming, John 10.12. And,
John 10.12.
what is the difference 'twixt fleeing from, and not coming at the Flock? Both
equally expose it unto danger; yea, may not they be strictly said to flee, and
leave the Sheep; who, after their Induction, come not at them, save to fleece
them? Was not Peter bound, if he loved his Lord, to feed his Lambs and Sheep in
Person, John 21. John 21.
nothing more manifest. But to produce more Scripture-Testimonies, would be the
pouring water into the Ocean; I shall therefore beg Non-Resident Pluralists to
observe with sadness, what a dreadful Woe God has denounced against those
Shepherds that feed themselves, Ezekiel. 34.2. etc.
and not the Flock, in Ezekiel. 34.2, 3, 4, to verse. 11. Son of Man, Prophecy
against the Shepherds of Israel, Prophecy and say unto them, Thus says the
Lord God unto the Shepberds, Woe be to the Shepherds of Israel that do feed
themselves: should not the Shepherds feed the Flock? Ye eat the fat, and ye
Cloth you with the Wool, ye kill them that are fed: but ye feed not the Flock.
The Diseased have ye not strengthened, neither have ye healed that which was
sick, neither have ye bound up that which was broken, neither have ye brought
again that which was driven away, neither have ye sought that which was lost;
but with force and with cruelty have ye ruled them. And they were scattered,
because there is no Shepherd: and they became meat to all the Beasts of the
Field, when they were scattered. My Sheep wandered through all the mountains,
and upon every high hill: yea, my Flock was scattered upon all the face of the
Earth, and none did search or seek after them. Therefore, ye Shepherds, hear
the Word of the Lord; As I live, says the Lord God, surely, because my Flock
became a prey, and my Flock became meat to every Beast of the Field, because
there was no Shepherd, neither did my Shepherds search for my Flock, but the
Shepherds fed themselves, and fed not my Flock: Therefore, O ye Shepherds, hear
the Word of the Lord; Thus says the Lord God, Behold, I am against the
Shepherds, and I will require my Flock at their hand, and cause them to cease
from feeding the Flock, neither shall the Shepherds feed themselves any more;
for, I will deliver my Flock from their mouth, that they may not be meat for
them. And surely, if Non-resident Pluralists are not quite past feeling; they
must be sensible, that they are the men concerned therein. Personal neglects
are there complained of: and that is their guilt; and unavoidably so. And
Personal Vengeance is there threatened, on all such Delinquents: from which, by
timely Repentance, may the Good Lord deliver them.

So much for the first Argument, Pluralities war against the Scriptures:
wherein we have spent more words, because it is of greatest consequence; the
rest will be dispatched sooner.

2. Antiquity is an utter Stranger hereunto: 4. 2d. Argument against Antiquity.
I may safely say, a bitter Enemy to the Roots, and Seeds hereof; Sloth, Pride,
and Covetousness, in the Ministers of the Gospel: Rebukes, both frequent, and
severe, against these Vices (as well as others) may be met with in the Ancient
Fathers. But not one Title about that, we now are dealing with. The truth is,
This Piece of Naughtiness was only in the womb; not midwif'd into the world as
yet. Twill not serve the turn to tell us; That the Church was under Persecution
in those Elder days; and then there was not such Provision made for Ministers,
as has been since: For, though some part hereof be true; the whole is not. I
hope at Constantine's time, there was no cause to complain in either of those
respects: Both Cruel Persecution then was gone, and Great Prosperity did
succeed it: but how much to the Churches benefit, let the Reader judge by St.
Jerome's words. Part 3. Epist. 43. de vita CaptrMon.
He tells us, That the Church of Christ did thrive by Persecutions, was crowned
with Martyrs: but when Christian Princes were in power, Her riches did indeed
increase, but virtues decrease. And this was that which gave occasion to the
well-known Proverb; piety was brought-a-bed with Plenty, and the Daughter
choked her Mother. But notwithstanding such degeneracy then, we have no
notice, that this foul Corruption of Church-mens Spiritual Bigamy did any where
prevail in the Church for the first Six hundred years. No instance can be found
(upon my best enquiry) of any Ministers taking two Wives at once: or rather a
Concubine to his Wife, Hist. of Couns. of Trent. lib. 2. ad sin. Anno Dom.
1546. Engl. Edit. page 217.
to vex her; I mean a Second Church, unto his former. A learned and excellent
Author, faith this boldly; Never any thought to hold the Title of an Office, or
enjoy the Profit without doing Service; but only after the year seven hundred
in the Western Church. And as before a Person was chosen sit for the necessity
of the Church; so afterward, a Degree, Dignity, or Emolument was fitted to the
Quality of the Person: from whenoe arose the exercising of the Ministry by a
Substitute. Behold by this the Venerable Hoary Hairs of Curates, and their
Masters, Pluralists! with whom the Christian Church was utterly unacquainted,
till Popery had invaded it; and the Universal Bishop gotten to be Tyrant over
it. It should seem indeed, that some such Creatures were creeping into the
Church before, about four hundred and fifty years after Christ; but they were
quickly disordered, and as soon repulsed by the Council of Chalcedon, Infr.
Argument 3.
consisting of six hundred and thirty Bishops: as we shall hear anon. And the
Attempt was reinforced near two hundred years after this Council: but Gregory
the Great, then Bishop of Rome, and just before the Man of Sin was mounted on
his Throne, Did. 89. c. 1. Singula.
crushed it in the Shell: as may be seen by his Letter extant in the Decrees:
wherein he Orders, That the several Duties belonging to the Church should be
committed unto several men: and that no one Person, how well soever
experienced, should at one time hold a double Service. Thus long you see the
Ancient Church was not acquainted with our Pluralists; or laid their Ax unto
the very Root thereof, when once they found it. It Is true that some time after
(as also has before been noted) this Mischief, with a Crowd of others, came
in, as a Reteiner unto Antichrist.

3.. 5. 3d. Argument against Church Canons.
This Practice has been doomed too by several Councils; and many Canons of the
Church have passed against it: Methinks, it does betray its guilt, by the very
face thereof. Are not these Craftsmen glad to get their Licenses, and
Dispensations to set up with? Were there no Transgression, Plain men would ask,
What need of Dispensation? The Canons of our Church, it is thought, are not
severe enough against it: and yet they have not the fairest aspect on it
neither. Witness the Vid Can. 41.
Many Restrictions, necessity of Residence, and sufficiency of the Curate, that
is enjoined. However, St. Augustins Plea does her good service too. It Is one
thing (says he) what the Church does tolerate; and another, what She teaches.
Aliud est quod docemus, aliud quod sustinemus etc. Contr. Faust. l. 20. c.
prope sin.
It Is only that, not this, may be imputed unto Her. And yet it must be said,
(however it may reflect upon us) that other Churches, both long before any
Reformation had been made; and since it too; and which bear a Mortal hatred
thereunto, have made most smart Decrees against it. For the Reformed Churches
abroad, I need not be concerned to produce their Censures of it; till it be
made appear, which of them have e're been troubled with it. Well then, the
first Cannon planted against pluralists, that I shall mention; is that of the
Laterane Council under Alexander the third and about the year 1180. Tom.
council. 3. Can. 13.
The words are these; Because some men, putting no bounds unto their
Covetousness, endeavor to get Ecclesiastical Dignities, and more than one
Parish Church, contrary to the Order of the Holy Canons: so as when they are
hardly fit to discharge one man's Duty, they receive the Wages of several: We
strictly command, that it be never so done any more hereafter. When therefore a
Church is to be disposed of, let such a Person be found out, as will Reside
there, and discharge the Cure himself: Otherwise the Receiver shall lose what
he has taken, and the Giver his power of disposing. So that Excellent Canon;
and from a Popish Council! And, To the Extirpation of Pluralities, and
Non-residences; without adding one word of Explication!

But near four hundred years before this time, An Do. 781. Pride. Conc. Synops.
Tom. 3. Couc. Post. Act. 7. Can. 15.
another General, and the second Nicene Council, (as it is called) is found to
have this Grain of Wheat, in a whole Heap of Tares: Let not a Clergy man be
henceforth settled in two Churches: for, this belongs to Merchandise and filthy
Lucre, and is alien from the Churches custom: Every one therefore ought to
abide where he is called, and to settle in one Church: So full and plain, An
Do. 454. Pride. ubi supr. Tom. Council. 2. Act. 15. Can. 10.
as to need no Comment! Nay, and three hundred years before this last mentioned
Council, that undoubted General one of Chalcedon (glanced on in the former
Argument) nipt this mischief in the Bud, and would not let it blossom; much
less hear Ripe Fruit. For thus it says, It Is not lawful for a Clerk to be
Entitled to (or enrolled in) two Churches: viz. That wherein he was Ordained
at first, and the greater whereunto, for Vain-glories sake, he goes
afterward: but let such men be brought back to their first; and only there
attend their Duty. Which needs must bar all hopes of having Churches more than
one; or not discharging Duty by ones self, where it was undertaken. But to
conclude this point of General Councils, the late Trent Assembly, styled by the
Romanists, Decret de Reform. C. 17. Sess. 24.
the last General Council; whatever the Deeds among them are, in Word condemn
this Practice. For, reciting that Speech of the Council of Chalcedon, (but just
now mentioned) Neminem oportere in duabus Ecclesiis conscribi, they exclaim
against their wicked Covetousness, who are grasping after many Benefices: and
charge the whole Clergy, even Cardinals themselves, To keep no more than one
Cure of Souls: as may be seen at large in the place referred in the Margent.
Nay, there were among them then and there; Hist. Count. of Trent, l. 2. p. 253.
ad An. 1547. Circ. med. and l. 6. Anno 1562. Engl. Edit. page 496.
and the major part of a General Congregation too; that did maintain, Both that
Residency was required by the Law of God, and Pluralities by the same forbidden.

Now adding hereunto, Pope Extrav. com. lib. 3. Tit. 2. De Praeb. and Dign.
Cap. 5. Execrabilis.
John 22th. his Decree, That non (save Cardinals and Kings Sons) shall keep
more than one Cure of Souls, and one Dignity without cure; upon pain of losing
both, in case of disobedience: together with Pope Greg. Decret. lib. 3. Tit. 5.
De Praeb. and Dign. C. 28. De multa.
Innocent the 3d. his peremptory Determination, That whosoever accepts 1
Benefice with Cure, (having before another of that nature) shall be forthwith
deprived thereof; and if he make a stir to keep it, shall forfeit both: now
putting these Decrees of Popes, and Popish Councils all together, as I said;
it is worthy to be seriously though on; whether it does not cast an ill
Reflection on a Protestant Church, to connive at that, which very Papists do
condemn? especially, since both their Latter, as well as Elder Doctors, De
Cleric. San^^im, Cap. 11. Sect 4 Arg. 5. 6.
are therein Unanimous, as a Learned Author of theirs, and in an Excellent
Piece against Pluralities, has evinced sully. But we must make haste.

4. 6. 4. Argument against Equity and Justice.
It Is most apparently likewise against all Equity and Justice, That, Beneficium
datur propter Officium, the Benefice is bestowed for the Service that belongs
unto it, Who is able to make a doubt of? Does not every new Incumbent yield
himself (accipere curam) to undertake the Cure; the Work and Duty that is; when
he receives his Title from the Bishops hands? Does not the Apostle make it
plain, That the Ministers Reaping Carnal things is founded merely upon Sowing
Spiritual; as Ministering about holy things only, could only entitle to the
right of Living on the things of the Temple; and waiting at the Altar, for
pertaking with it? yes, he does so: and he concludes it Gods Ordinance now;
That they who preach the Gospel, should live upon it, 1 Cor. 9.11, 13, 14. So
that maintenance is only due for Service: which was our Saviors mind too, when
he said, That Meat belonged to Workmen, Matthew. 10.10. and Hire to Laborers,
Luke 10.7. And, who can be ignorant, or not ready to acknowledge it, that our
Kings and other Benefactors, settled Glebes, and Tithes with us (which Law
confirms) for the particular Service of those Places, whence they rise, and
whereunto they are assigned? Those Donations were upon such Conditions; namely,
That the People should be there Attended, where the Ministers were so Rewarded.
And we know who said, If it be but a man's Covenant, (...).
(or Testament) no man disanulleth, or adds thereunto, Gal. 3.15. So that
Justice and Equity, as well as the Express Law of God conclude, That he that
Teaches, is to be communicated to by him that is Taught, and not another, that
does not teach them, Gal. 6.6. Nay, as he that does not work, must not eat at
all, 2 Thessalonians. 3.10. So, he may not have a double Mess, that does but single
Work, if that.

What an Unequal, and an Unrighteous thing is it then, that one man should take
all the Pains, and another the Profit thereunto belonging? That Laborers
should go without, and Loyterers bear away the Hire, and Reward from them? Why
should Lazy Pluralists expect the Pay, belonging unto Laborious Soldiers; or
demand the Wages due to painful Workman? Diligent Preachers are the One, and
Other, in the Gospel: but they are neither; in one of their Cures at least. Can
it be justified, that when I sweat at plow all day; another, that did not so
much as look on, shall carry away my Wages at night? Or, when I venture my Life
in the Field, he that never struck one Stroke, should come at Muster day, and
take away my Pay? This is the Case betwixt the Painful Curate, and the Lazy
Pluralist: and, what words are bad enough for the Iniquity of such Deeds? Why
may they not as well go into Peoples Houses, and take away what Plate, or other
things they have a mind unto; or stand upon the Road, and put the Moneys of
those men they meet with, into their own Pockets? Oh! There Is a Jayl and Gibbet
in these Cases! But the Curse of God, and Hell hereafter, are they nothing in
the other? Well, that we may proceed.

5. Tea, and against Charity too;. 7. 5th. Argument against Charity.
I mean not only, what is due to the Souls of Christians, and their own also:
which too many Pluralists, God knows, seem not to have a Stock of, that may
so much as match the gleaning after Vintage. For, beside the failing in his
Personal Duty, which God requires; how commonly do we see Ignorant, or Vicious
Curates (whether will serve cheapest) give him good content; if some men do not
seek for such: when the Profits of the Place would well encourage, it may be
Two, Learned, Pious, and painful Preachers; as the the necessity of a numerous
Congregation probably may require the same. It Is certain, would they resign
their Super-numerary Living to a Worthy Successor, there would be proof of
Christian Love unto their Peoples Souls; and they should thereby deliver their
own from heavy Guilt.

But there is another kind of Charity also, which this Practice is at enmity
with. The Pluralists know, vast numbers of Worthy Scholars, that are Ministers;
(in and out of the Universities) and some with the charge of Wife and Children
on their hands; hardly find means to get them Bread: but they have several
Hundreds; perhaps a Thousand Pounds, or more, per annum, by their Cures, and
Dignities the while: so that, though their Pains be that of Drones, yet they
both eat the Fat, and drink the Sweet; live in their palaces, are Clothed in
Silks, and keep their Coaches, with ample Retinues; and like them in Amos, 6.4,
5, 6. are never grieved for the Affliction of their Brother Joseph, though
brought upon him, by their Uncharitable, and Ungodly Covetousness: besides the
manifest Injustice, as we have heard; Is there not the shutting up of bowels of
Compassion, here? And consequently, just cause, with fear, to ask; How dwells
the Love of God in such? 1 John 3.17. Their works proclaim, that it is the love
of Money, (which is the Root of all Evil, 1 Timothy 6.10.) and of this World,
(with which the Love of the Father cannot consist, 1 John 2.15.) whereto they
pay their Homage and stand Devoted. But let them remember; The Laborers Hire
cries, and the Cry does enter into the Ears of the Lord of Sabbath: and
themselves are Deaf, if they do not hear it.

6. Against Honor also; how unworthy is it,. 8. 6th. Argument Against Honor.
for any man to accept, much more to Court, and sue for, such an Office, which
he knows himself incapable to discharge; and truly, never does intend it? To be
a Labourer in Christ's Vineyard; and yet to Loyter out, one half of his work, at
least? To cry up, and magnify Primitive Purer times; and live a perfect
Nonconformist thereunto; To avow separation from an Apostate Church, and yet
to keep so foul an instance of her Apostasy; which her self, for very shame, by
Words, is forced to condemn? To make a show of Love to Justice and Charity, and
indeed regard neither; but hate both? Is not this to play the Current; nay, the
Errant Hypocrite? See then, how well our Pluralists do come off! How honorably
they acquit themselves! In a word: If it be Noble, to be false and negligent in
the greatest Trust on Earth; to be Unjust, and Cruel to our dearest Brethren;
to count Gain Godliness, and prefer Earth before Heaven: then, these
Delinquents may pass for men of Reputation: else, their own hands will lay
their Honor in the dust. This is so legible, that he that runs may read it.

7. Against Prudence, beside:. 9. 7th. Argument against Prudence.
As for Spiritual Wisdom: that surely is utterly banished hence. Were it
possible else, that men's own, and Peoples Souls should be postpon'd unto, and
scorned in comparison of the Mammon of Unrighteousness? Nay, Common Prudence is
abandoned by these men! For, What can be more undiscreet; than, when there is
no need at all (as was at first supposed) to create themselves the ill Opinion
of, It was the saying of a merry fellow, That in Christendom there were neither
Scholars enough, Gentlemen enough, nor Jews enough. And when answer was made
him, there was rather too great a plenty than any scarcity: he replied, if
there were Scholars enough, so many would not be double or treble Beneficed: if
Gentlemen enough, so many Peasants would not be ranked among the Gentry: if
Jews enough, so many Christians would not profess Usury. So Doctor Heylen
prints the Scorn made of them, Cosmogr. Com. W. Genoa, at the beginning.
and become indeed just Scorn unto, the generality of Understanding, Sober, and
Impartial Christians? Is It not almost a proverb, Their only way to climb to
Heaven, is by heaping Steeple upon Steeple, as the Giants did one Mountain on
another for that purpose? Certainly, themselves cannot be ignorant, that the
Gentry censure them, the People hate them, and their own Best Brethren grieve,
and blush for them. Nor do they think it Wisdom in the man that said; --
Populus me sibilat: at mihi plaudo
Ipse domi; simulac nummos contemplor in arca.


In short: They every where pass for Perfect Drones, who feed, and fatten on
the sweat of others brows. And most men in their hearts, Ignavum fucos pecus a
praesepibus arcent: wishing the Magistrate would speedily put his hands thereto.

8.. 10. 8th. Argument, serves only to men's Corruptions.
Lastly, The Pluralities spoken of are only serviceable unto Covetousness,
Ambition, Pride, Luxury, Sloth, and Universal Vnconscionableness in the whole
Christian, and Ministerial Calling. For Proof; do but consider duly what has
been already spoken, and consult your senses therewithal, and more there is not
need of. He that can show the man that is not bated, but increased in his
Diligence, Sobriety, Humility, Modesty, Liberality, and Universal Conscience in
Religion by Pluralities, Erit mihi magnus Apollo; shall be esteemed one, that
has made an Observation, which the whole World has hitherto been a perfect
Stranger to.

So many Evident Proofs being therefore made against Pluralities, the Bill must
needs be found, a Verdict given, and Sentence past thereon, for Condemnation of
them.

But what Criminal is there,. 11. Pleas urged, and answered.
but will say something for himself: or what Cause so bad, but that one Plea or
other, shall be made for it?

We shall therefore fairly hear what the Delinquent, with whom we have to do,
can plead in the defense; or at the least, excuse of the Guilt imputed to him.

1. 1st. Plea.
Learned and Good Ministers have been found to do so; and it has been used for
many ages in the Church.

Admit, That Learned, and Good Men too, Answer.
have done it, ( for who am I to judge men's States with God, nor dare I but to
maintain such thoughts of some;) neither sound Learning, and much less True
Godliness, could prompt them to it; as by what above appears. All Stories,
and the most Sacred too, afford too many Instances of some Good Men's great
Miscarriages. And the very Best do yet know but in part: and can therefore do
not better. However, we are to follow a very Paul, but as he does Christ. As
for the length of time, wherein it has been used: we heard before, how Old it
was; younger by a great many hundred years, than Christianity; and born with
Antichrist. But could it write a great deal Elder; what were it worth, whilst
we can truly say, From the beginning it was not so. This Plea is therefore
Silenced by St. Cyprian: Custom without Truth, is but the Antiquity of an
Error. Consuetudo sine veritate est vetustas erroris Ep. ad Pomp. prop. fin.
2d. Plea. Answer.


2. The Law allows (with Qualification) to take another Church.

What Ecclesiastical Laws require you in the Case, has been heard already: and
in a perfect Contradiction to this Plea. And a man would think, that Good
Church-Laws should have no little value with Good Churchmen. Doubtless if the
Church forbid, though the State allow; such men, as those, soon know, not only
that forbearance is the safer Choice, but manifest Duty to them. However, no
Humane Laws (whatever Rome shall say) can dispense with the Law of God: and
that, we have already found most peremptory in the Negative. Touching the
Common, or the Statute Laws with us, I must confess great ignorance in them:
but yet that worthy Knight, and Lawyer too, Pars. Couns. p. 1. C. 7.
Sir Simon Degge will tell you, That the Commons of England always complained
against Pluralities and Non-residence: and many Parliaments under several
Popish Kings moved for several Penalties against them. And whatsoever allowance
in that Case is made by Law, was done in times of Popery: which gives no cause
to Protestants to be fond thereof. This I am sure of, Those that will think all
good, that Humane Laws (whenever made) allow of; must quickly think many
thing bad, which Divine Laws enjoin us. And then let them pass for never so
Loyal Subjects to their Temporal Prince, they must prove Rebels to the King of
Kings.

3. 3d. Plea.
Two smaller, though far distant Parishes may be better cared for by one
Minister, than many a single Great One, in some Towns and Cities; especially
London.

It Is somewhat odd (methinks) to offer this Comparison; If it be meant, Answer.
that there are some so exceeding numerous Congregations, that they are too
great a Charge for the best qualified Minister to undertake: I say, that,
first, It Is pity but the State should take meet care about it; either by making
more Churches, or providing more Ministers for them; next, that no man is
compelled to take up a burden (of this kind) as is like to break his back.
Lastly, That if he be engaged already; he must either lay it down, or take in
help unto him: to be sure, at least, he is obliged to lay out the utmost of
himself therein; and then he may have hopes of a more than ordinary blessing
with him. But for Two Places, and far distant, it is not possible that a single
Person can discharge the Duty of them both; and therefore it is a mockery, to
talk of doing it better, when it cannot be done at all.

4. 4th. Plea.
All Church Livings are the Churches Common Bank: and therefore She may dispose
thereof at Her discretion; provided all the Churches shall be taken care of
duly.

1. Answ. 1.
But we see Pluralities never suffer such due Care to be taken of all
particular Congregations wants. And who would make new ventures, where all
before him had miscarried?

2. And then, not only Two, but Ten, or Twenty, 2.
or an Hundred Cures, or more, (for what should hinder, if supplies be made?)
may be assigned to one man. And this were a Monopoly, I think, the boldest
Pluralist would never seek a Patent for.

3. nay, wherefore truly, 3.
should not the Bishop take all the Profits of all the Livings within his
Diocese into his own hands; allowing Pensions, which he thought convenient, to
those that should officiate in the several Parishes?

4. Lastly, But we do see, that Glebes, 4.
and Tithes ought both of Right, and do by Law, belong unto particular
Parish-Churches, whence they arise; and for encouragement of those particular
Ministers, who labor and take pains among them: as was before evinced.

5. 5th. Plea.
Why? But, indeed, the Bishop has the Care of all the Churches in his Diocese,
be they never so many: Why may not then a Presbyter take the Care of Two? and
put one other in his room, as he does many?

1. Answ. 1.
Had we nothing else to say but that, not men's Example, but Gods Word must be
our Rule; that were enough to baffle this Pretense. We heard before, where God
has made men Watchmen, or Overseers; they owe a Personal Attendance on the
respective Flocks, and all among them.

2. 2.
Our Bishops Charge lies purely here; to see, as far as in him lies, that you
discharge your duty to the Flock, and they to you, and unto one another, and
all to God: or else to deal with Both or Either, according to the Rules of
Government. You undertake, and that unto the Bishop, the other Part of their
Instruction: wherein, it is likely, that you quit you very well, in not seeing
their Pulpit in a twelve month once!

3. 3.
Lastly, If (as you say) the Bishop puts off his Care to you, why may not
you do so with yours unto another? Besides the Error last taken notice of; I
would also ask; Why may not also that other, whom you trust, put off his Care
unto a Third; that Third unto a Fourth: he unto a Fifth: and so in Infinitum?
Till at the last, Every Body's work, (according to our Proverb) be no Body's
work: and you shall make the most Careless business in the World, of the most
Careful Office that belongs to it!

6. 6th. Plea.
Lastly, But the Pluralist has a Curate, that discharges all the Duty
whereunto himself is bound. And to do it by another, is as well as if himself
had done it.

It may be better, Answ. 1.
For though too many Curates are but Sorry Things; it is to be feared, most
Pluralists are a great deal worse.

But 1st. We have heard already what a late Invention, this of Curates is. But
if, when God commands a Minister to watch, and warn, to teach, and feed his
Flock himself, the Pluralist thinks still well enough, and that he is obedient
unto those Commands, so long as another does it for him: I would ask him, why
he should not fulfill all other Commands the same way too? Let another Repent,
Believe, Love God, and Forsake Sin for him also, and not himself; And so at
last, let another be saved for him too: and himself be lost for ever! The
Arguing is as good in the one, as in the other Case.

2. If another may do it for him: why may not La-men, as well as Clerks be
presented, instituted, and inducted into Church Livings also? Nay, why should
Women be excluded from an equal share in such a Privilege? These are as
capable of discharging the Duty of those Places by the way of Curates, as well
as Ministers are: and, probably, it might prove better for the People so, than
otherwise. For we may reasonably think, that most of them would make better
allowances, and so find better Substitutes than the Covetous Pluralist
ordinarily does.

3. Once more, either the Curate is a bad, 3.
or good man; and worse, or better than the Pluralist is himself? If he be Bad;
where is the Conscience, to send a Wolf to tend the Sheep? Bad Curates are
worse than Thieves and Robbers: they are Soul-Destroyers And should he be
rewarded, that sends a man to kill and slay the Peoples Souls! If he be but
worse, than he that sends him: what reason is there, that we should pay whole
wages, when but half our work is done? What! Give a Master-workmans Hire, to
one that is newly come unto, and can do little at the Trade? If he be good; Why
should he do all the work, and do it well, and not have half, perhaps not a
fifth, or seventh, or tenth part of the Wages due thereto? If better than his
Sender too: Why should the worst be best rewarded? Nay, Why one Penny, where
there is no Pater Noster? It seems, this is the Hireling, and the Curate the
True Shepherd. And it is a thousand pities that be, so ill deserving, should
have the Charge and Profit of two Flocks; and this, with so much merit, of none.

Thus all the Pluralists Pleas are insufficient to save him harmless: and that
Evil Practice, whereof he is indicted, must be pronounced hateful both to God
and Men. As what is plainly against the Holy Scriptures, Antiquity, Canons,
Justice, Charity, Honor, and Prudence too; serving none other Ends, than of
downright Ungodliness.

For a Conclusion,. 12. Conclusion, with Address in greatest Seriousness unto
Pluralists.
I shall apply my self, and briefly, to those concerned in the Guilt before
detected.

Fathers and Brethren, the practice you are found in, appears bad above
excuse: Will you be persuaded to reflect thereon in the fear of God? You own
your selves, For the Churches Service.
True Sons of the Church of England: and can you be persuaded, such a behavior
is to her Service, and Reputation? Do you not know, Monopolies in the State,
are not more mischievous than Pluralities in the Church? It were but little, to
bid you consult your Memories, or ask your Fathers, for the Odium they have
brought of old: Whether, For men to seek their own, and not the things of
Christ be not of influence most pernicious, and destructive, let Holy
Scriptures judge. How much this evil contributed to her late Calamity, cannot
be forgotten: and how near unto a Deathbed it has been helping to bring Her
now, he cannot but see, that will not wilfully shut his Eyes. Is it nothing to
you, although Dissenters do reproach Her, and Papists ruin Her; provided, you
be at dividing of the Spoil, and come in for a Child's part? Is this to be
Legitimate, and no Bastards! If the True Mother would not have Her Son divided,
and so destroyed: they are surely false Sons, that make no matter though the
Mother be served so!

Again; Gods Honor.
Have you not taken on you a Calling that is most Honorable, and yet most
Careful, of any other in the World? you are Gods Ministers; Christ's
Ambassadors! Can you sufficiently be concerned for your Masters Honor, and
your own Duty? And, do not your Proceedings plainly argue neglect, if not with
Scorn, to both? They make you Laborers, and you are Loiterers! You undertake
to work, but yet are idle! At very best, discharge but half of that you charge
your selves withal! you are to mind your Masters Service: whilst you are only
serving of your selves! Let others tend, and feed the Flock; so you make sure
of the Fleece! Is there any thing else your Practice, speaks your care for? You
dare not to deny that your Commission runs, To Preach the Word; be instant in,
and out of season; Reprove, Rebuke, Exhort, with all Long Suffering and
Doctrine. To feed all the Flock, over which the Holy Ghost has made you
Overseers: and so to feed them with you; as not for filthy lucre, but of a
ready mind. You do it not: and are incapable, in far distant Congregations,
were you of never so ready a mind.

Lastly, The Souls committed to you, And Souls Salvation, their Peoples and
their own.
and undertaken by you, should make you tremble, both for them, and for your
selves, when you consider, how carelessly you treat them both. To talk of taking
care by others, when God expects it by your selves, is vain, and idle; is vile,
and unexcusable! Will it pass with you, to bid your Servant do such, or such a
business carefully, that is of great concernment to you; and he shall take his
ease, and pleasure; and without your privity set another to perform it any how?
Will a Prince endure that his Ambassador, Commissioned, and Equipped for an
Affair of his Crown and Kingdom, should make (and for the Tithe too (may be) of
his Salary) a Substitute without his License? And, dare you serve the King of
Kings thus? And, in a matter of his Kingdom? And, for the base respect of
putting Money in your Pockets? For it is just thus. You pretend his Commission:
undertake the Charge: to be sure take the Profits: and, without Gods leave,
employ your Hireling in the Service. How the Affair succeeds, you trouble not
your thoughts! whether Gods Kingdom get or lose: his Subjects be increased or
diminished, and peoples Souls be saved or damned eternally, you neither do, nor
can, at distance, concern your selves according to your Duty. So little do you
prize the purchase of Christ's Blood; the Souls of Sinners, and your own! but,
be you sure, the end must pay for all: and 'twill not go thus cheap at last,
whatever you think on it now. The Lord has spoken it, When I say unto the
Wicked, thou shall surely dye, and thou give him not warning: he shall dye in
his Iniquity: but his Blood will I Require at they Hands.

Reverend Sirs, would you but seriously ponder these things, how could you be
able not to renounce the Wages of Unrighteousness, and honestly labor in the
Single Lot of Christ's Vineyard, for the Fruits you eat thereof; leaving the
increase of other Fields unto the particular Dressers of them? Surely, you
would then conclude, one Flock would find you work enough, if you attend the
same with Conscience. If not; one is too many: Why have you any at all? How
will you answer for your negligence at Christ's Tribunal? But to grasp more
Business, and what, it is impossible, were you never so willing, never so able,
to go through with; is as void of Reason, as Religion! For indeed, you tell the
World, That it is not Work, but Wages you look after.

However remember, if Souls miscarry through your neglect, your own must answer
for them. Let then the Hire, and Labor, go hand in hand, as they ought to do,
to those that can, and will attend the same with faithfulness. What God (and
Man) have joined together, far be it from you to put, or longer keep asunder.
Forget not, that you are Stewards, by your Office. And it is required in
Stewards, says the Apostle, that they be found faithful.

Who then is that faithful, and wise Servant, whom his Lord has made Ruler
over his Household, to give them their portion of Meat in due Season? Blessed is
that Man, whom his Lord, when he comes, shall find so doing, Luke 12.42, 43.

FINIS.
ERRATA'S.
TO the Reader, last line save two, read, to that purpose. page 1. line 24.
read, on. ibid. l. 28. r. But yet p. 3. Marg. to l. 32. 1 Iom. p. 6. l. 17. r.
v. 20. p. 10. l. 28. r. discovered. p. 11. Marg. r. Contr. Faust. l. 20. c. 21.
p. 13. l. 13. r. referred to. p. 19. l. 16. r. True Goodness. p. 20. l. 14. r.
for severest Penalties. p. 23. l. 3. r. thinks it is well, with many other
Mistoppings.

Lately Printed for Tho. Parkhurst.
1. ONe hundred select Sermons on several Texts, most upon Public Occasions by
Tho. Horton D. D. late of St. Hellens, London.

2. A Discourse concerning the Actual Providence of God, by John Collings D. D.

3. An Exposition on the six first Chapters of the Revelation, by Charles
Phelps.

4. The Kingdom of God among Men. A Tract of the Sound State of Christianity,
by John Corbet Minister of the Gospel.

5. Christ Displayed. Published by Oliver Heywood.

6. A Discourse of Grace and Temptation, by Tho. Froysell, late of Chin in
Shropshire.

7. Best way to mend the World, by Sam. Perk Minister at Poplar near Stepney.

8. Art of Divine Meditation, by the Author of the Godly man's Ark.

9. Glimps of Eternity, by Abraham Caley.


