The Humble PETITION AND REMONSTRANCE OF SOME HVNDREDS of Retaylers, who have
Sparks of Charity, and Reason in them.

And of Country Chap-men of the Associated Counties, and of thousands of poor
people besides: For the Restoring of Farthing Tokens; who are extremely
damnified, and are like to perish by the suppression of them.

Printed in the year 1644.

TO BOTH THE HIGH AND HONORABLE HOUSES of Parliament.
The humble Petition and Remonstrance of some hundreds of Retaylers, who have
sparks of Charity, and reason in them; and of Country Chap-men of the
Assosiated Counties, and of Thousands of Poor people besides, for the
Restoring of Farthing-Tokens, who are extremely Damnified, and are like to
perish by the suppression of them.
LAMENTABLY showing: That these dismal days, (as it seems) surpass other
destructive times. For now the Axe is laid to the roots of Shrubs, whereas
heretofore tall Cedars bare off the Stroke: And doubtless all the Engineers
on both sides since these Wars began, have not by their Stratagems finished
the days of more men; Then a very few Retayling Tradesmen by their gilded
sinister suggestions (being mere covetous Earth-wormes) are like to do; not
only of men, but of women and children also: If consideration be not had of the
Petitioners present complaint: Wherein the pretended Grievance, and Objections
of these handful of Retaylers (the poores adversaries, though their best
customers) are really answered, and truly set forth: For the shadow of him that
rides on the Pale Horse has already made an impression in the faces of your
Petitioners: And the vacuity of their Bowels by their inward contraction,
sounds shrill, and loud in the ears of such as pass by them; and say, Woe
betide them that were the cause thereof, etc.

For as much therefore, as all their temporal Hopes of present Relief
concerning this their most urgent Cause, and best outward Pillar that supports
their very Being; depends wholly upon these two capital Houses, or chief
Courts of the Kingdom. They therefore humbly beseech, That your Honors
commiseration of their deplored Estates may be answerable to your Greatness,
and that the same may not be referred to any other Court; but that these
ensuing Objections and Reasons may be here deliberately considered of, and
according unto equity granted; That so your poor Petitioners fainting souls?
may be revived, and maintained to pray heartily for your Honors prosperity.

The complaining Retaylers maine Objections against Farthings in their Petition
printed, and presented to the Parliament two years since, are these, in their
ownewords;

Viz. Object. That the allowance of one and twenty shillings in
Farthing-Tokens, for twenty shillings in money, has been the chiefest cause of
their great Burden; For many covetous persons have usually fetched out great
quantities of Farthings, and forcing them upon poor laboring people.

Answ. 1 They that complain most of their loss, are (though it see^e a
Paradox) the greatest gainers, because they are the chiefest Retaylers, and
principal venters of their commodities to the poor. For certain it is, that
all such that in a Retayling way sels by Penny, halfe-peny, and Farthings worth,
gain more by twelve pence in the pound at least, then other Shopkeepers do,
that sell by greater quantities, etc.

2. The poorest people are these Retaylers best customers, and constant
frequenters. If therefore the current of the poores Farthing Revenue be stopped;
These complainants will lose by the decay, and ebb of their custom, more then
the loss of twelve pence in the pound; and then wish they had not leap't out
of the Fryingpan into the fire, as some of them already do.

3 If there were as many silver pence, and halfe-pences coined as now there are
Farthings; Yet those will not by a fourth part as much avail the poor as
Tokens will; Partly in regard that it is the hereditary use, and inclination of
men to delight in, and retain Silver more warily then Brass, and partly
because, he that can, or will give a Farthing, either cannot, or will not
bestow a halfe-peny, or penny: And therefore that old saying, Many a little
makes a mickle, is now a maine plea for the poor, and consequently for these
few Silver-thirsty Retaylers, if they well understood it.

4 If the apprehension of these Retaylers had been well composed together, and
their minds freed from extreme covetousness, they would never have lifted up
their voice against Farthings, if they had conceived but these two Reasons only.

1 In regard of the settled Excize, which turns to their account, and clear
benefit twelve pence in each Barrel, which is two shillings in the pound gain
to them more then ever they had: For the Excize is but two shillings upon the
Barrel; and they, when they sell cheapest, have penny farthing for each quart,
which Farthing upon the quart, is just three shillings in the Barrel. 2 To
suppress Farthings at such a time, when a quart of that liquor which refreshes
the spirit of the poor, is raised a Farthing higher then ever it was; does
cause such a peevish continued trouble in their small distracted rules of
Arethmetick; and is such a fretting whet-stone to sharpen the edge of their
groans, that it will endanger the renting of the clouds. Besides, it is most
unseasonable (as it is humbly conceived) that this mighty storm of the loss
of threescore or foure-score thousand pounds at least should fall upon the
distressed subject, when they are already in a languishing condition, through
the decay of Trade, contractition of men's hearts, and the absence of people;
that there is as much elbow-roome now in this City, as in some remote
Corporation Towns. Therefore a Reformation in this at present, is (as it were)
a new piece of cloth stitched to an old ragged garment, which will make the
rent far worse.
5 That in their said printed Petition, they say some five hundred subscribed
to it; Whereof, (if so) two parts of them are Victuallers, or victualling
Chaundlers, who gain more by the Tap, then by all their other Trinkets (and so
much the more by means of the Excize) and but four or five of these five
hundred were the only Stickles, or Bell-weathers that tincklet the rest in (as
heretofore they have underhand attempted to do) and these do it, but to
maintain some superfluous sauce to their full dishes, having their eyes closed
up with Saul's persecuting scales, that they cannot behold one glimpse of
Providence, but what they find and feel in their own fingers: Whereas on the
other side, here are ten times so many thousand, who are constrained to make
hunger their best sauce, and are glad to have where withal to sustain nature,
and behold Providence shineing each day upon them, as the birds of the air
do. Therefore, although Christianity lies slumbering, yet the Body Politic
is awake; and surely will not esteem more of a few full-fed, well-lined
Retaylers, then a great number of Lean-ribb'd, thin-cloth'd Christians, that
nothing makes the difference, but that the sheres went side-wayes in the
cutting out of the piece; or (...) say that the Head has no need of the little
Toe, or of the very nail thereof: But surely that Body will preserve all. For
it is said, The poor you shall have always with you; unless now by this
means they will be altogether starved: As some report they are, who observe the
weekly Bills of Mortality; That many already departs this life by a new kind of
Plague, for not having the old Tokens about them, etc.

6 That without all doubt, these few complaining Retaylers know full well, that
their said poor customers traficke neither for the Gold of Opher, nor for the
Silver wedge of India, but (for the most part) possess that metal that suits
most with their low estate, which are Farthings; And therefore these Retaylers
(let them say what they please in their petition) knowing what Coin their said
Clyants trade most in: Do oft-times provide such ragged stuff, and decayed
Commodities for them; as withered costive Cheese, twice-bak'd Bread, Butter of a
stronger odor, Drink that stood long out of its proper element, and all other
things in their defect; So that if they lost two shillings in twenty in
Farthings; Yet, if their large consciences did not hold down their hands they
would lift them up, and lay them upon their mouths, and say one to another
Tace etc.

7 That this very point is the Gulf of their conceits, and the mystery of
their griping iniquity, mixed with vain glory ( viz) To suppress these
Farthing Tokens, that so they may advance their own Tokens, Stamps, Seals,
Names, Signs, Superscriptions, if not Images, as now appears (though they be
far inferior in dignity to Caesar) And also altogether oppugnant to diverse
weighty reasons both in the King, and his Royal Fathers Proclamations issued
out for restraint of theirs, but for the allowance, and confirmation of these
Farthings: By means whereof they rivet, linck, and incorporate their Customers
unto them, and seal them up for their own selves; so that they cannot move an
Intch to any other Tradesman, because their Coin is not current out of that
narrow Clymate: Which thing in it self is really the greatest oppression that
can be imposed upon distressed people; and makes good the last mentioned
reason, That their poor customers will now be constrained to accept of their
said decayed commodities, and at what prices they please: But these Farthings
retain that virtue in them, which is derived from a superior Power, and
therefore pass through to most places, and at all times.

8 That if these troublesome Retaylers had taken the pains, but to have
plucked out a piece of each of the beams that are in their eyes; they would
have seen clearly how small a mote of Inconvenience these Farthings have made;
and on the contrary what a Mountanous fallacy, and deceit these their Tin,
Pewter, Lead, Leather, Horn, and Wax Tokens do bring to pass: For; when any
of these Retaylers that have thus clinch'd in their said customers, either dye,
run away or break (as it is a common accident in these tottering times) Then
all these trashie inferior Tokens are immediately defunct, and choked up in
the nest, and of no use at all; So that whosoever possesses any of them, are
subject to a monthly fraud, and mutation; Whereas the other sort is scarce
subject unto the like, once in a Coronation.

9 That the foresaid Country Chap-men do (as it seems by their froward words)
faint under their present Assesments, and wonder that this unexpected By-Blow
should fall so unseasonably upon them, That they begin to Reele about, and say
they have as many Farthings in their custody as will bear their charges awhile
in the Kings Army, where they will pass: Yet being loath to leave house, and
home; they most vigillantly attend the Carriers weekly return from London to
bring them happy Tidings of their Restoration again; Which if they, and the
rest, fail of their Hopes therein, It may (as it is humbly to be feared) beget
some Inconvenience, that otherwise may be easily, and requisitely prevented.

10 That upon an Ayry suspicion, or a mere invention, which some malignant
Retaylers were always prone to conceive for to suppress Farthings, only for
their own Ends; It was gives out, that Tokens were Imported from foreign
parts; upon which Alderman Chambers was desired to make diligent enquiry of the
truth thereof; which he accordingly did; and found, that none at all had been
at any time imported, unless they should be wafted from beyond seas within the
Sculles of their Cunning Contrivings.

11 That these few Retayling Incendiaries do at present Boulster up themselves
in their hard-hearted Imaginations, and verily believe that the just outcry of
the poor is now hush't, and become but a nine days discourse, because they
are somewhat silent, through the feebleness of their bodies, and contraction
of their Lungs, and in regard they suppose some of these poor people have
withdrawn themselves from these parts; If that be so; O; but then where are
they gone into the Countries, and what can they hope to have there; but either
Pilfer a little to linger our Nature; or otherwise to have scope enough under
the Cope of Heaven, and the Covert of a Hedge, or Ditch to surrender up their
last Breath into the hand of that Power that challenges Revenge to belong
proper unto himself; Who will impresse such a knowing stamp upon them for their
full Requital, as they do upon their paultry Tokens for the poores Deceit.

12 That the State by the suppressing of Farthings lose a very Considerable
yearly sum; which surely would be better had, and reserved, then lost, and
cast away like the snuff of a Candle to offend others;

But howsoever these opposers of freindly Tokens absolutely confess in their
said printed Petition, That to lay down the office will be inconveinent, for
then (say they) all Retayling Trades will want small moneys, and the poor
Relief. Therefore the Remnants of their retayling wares, afford these scraps
of Charity for a remedy to support the office.

1 The first is, That the Office be settled only in the power of the Crown.

Ans. That was their Conceit when their Petition was then printed; and may be
ordered as the State please; if they be now of the same mind.

2 The second is, That the Extrinsick Denomination, and the Intrinsic value of
a Farthing may step somewhat nearer in proportion.

Ans. These are fine words that fills their brains to as small purpose, as such
great pieces of Brass would do their Boxes: But the cause of their Grievance
being removed (which is the supposed loss of twelve pence in the pound) their
Complaint being the effect thereof, will vanish away.

3 The third is, That it may be felony either to Import, or Counterfeit them.

Ans. That may be ordered so, if the State please.

4 The last is, That no Advantage be allowed in the Issuing of them out, or
returning of them into the Office.

Ans. Surely, this is but a very Close-fisted lumpish motion; To imagine that
such extraordinary pains, charges and attendance should be bestowed about
Farthings, and that no profit should accrue to the managers thereof: For which
of them will take the pains to compass, and score out a Cheese into so many
penny worths, and then receive no benefit by it etc.

But the present ease, and remedy humbly proposed, and earnestly implored from
the rice of Dejected souls are only these Three.

1 That the State would be pleased so to order it; That all Covetous persons
whom these Retaylers complain of in their said Petition; who fetch out great
quantities of Farthings, and force them in payments upon poor laboring people:
May be enjoined under a penalty not to force, or pay above twelve pence in ten,
or twenty shillings in any such payment etc. 2 That all the benefit, and
profits of the said office may always remain there in safe Custody under two
or three Locks; and not hereafter to be transported beyond seas, as it has
been, but reserved constantly for Rechange, and use of the State; And that the
restoring of these Farthing Tokens and Confirming of the said office again,
may be by your Honors Order published in all needful places. 3 And lastly;
That forasmuch as there is now a unhappy ^hannell cut out in the Kingdom, that
is very proper to receive ^^is supposed flowing stream of Farthings (though it
were (...) bigger) that overmuch waters the Meadows of these few ^etaylers
Conceits ( viz) This war; That therefore the com^on soldiers may receive
twelve pence or more in each ten shil^^ngs of their Pay; Doubtless they would
then use such Retorick (...) all Corporation Towns where they came to, that
without ^^y difficulty they would pass current; And surely they would be ^^ry
necessary for them; because they might then have a pint Beer for a Farthing,
which now they cannot have; And in^^ed these Tokens are as useful in such
places, as in this City: sides there is seldom any civil or vncivell Wars,
but it ^^th its illegitimate Coin; and verily, that Coin is most pre^^est to
remain at present, that was approved off on both sides ^^thin these few days.
By this means the flood of these few Retaylers complaint, will be wasted, and
dried up.

And the poores Revenue recovered from a Nonsuit, and themselves revived.

And all men will expect that Old Things shall pass away, when a
Long-looked-for Peace shall be established in our Israel.

FINIS.

