THE TRIUMPH OF PEACE. A POEM.

Aggredere O magnos (aderit jam tempus) honores
Chara Deum Soboles, magnum Jovis incrementum!
Aspice convexo nutantem Pondere mundum,
Terrasque, tractusque maris, Coelumque profundum
Aspice, venturo laetantur ut omnia Soeclo!
-- Virgil. LONDON: Printed for Jacob Tonson, at the Judges-Head in
Fleetstreet, near the Inner-Temple-Gate, School.

To Sir Richard Blackmore, Knt. M. D. Fellow of the College of Physicians in
London, and Physician in Ordinary to his Majesty.
SIR,
I Hope you will pardon my Presumption in prefixing your Name to so small a
Trifle. It Is the first Essay of a young Poet that has not yet reached his
Twentieth Year; the first I mean that I have ventured to make Public, and
therefore having but little Experience to recommend me to the World, I make
bold to choose you for my Guardian during my Minority. The favorable Judgment
you have been pleased to make of some former Lines, makes me flatter my self that
you will not be less Indulgent to these; and I am proud to make this public
Acknowledgement of the kind Reception I have met with from so great and worthy
a Person; One who has vindicated the Reputation of the Muses from the Dishonor
reflected on 'em by the loose Lives and Writings of some witty men, and has
given the World a noble Instance that good Morals and good Poetry are very
consistent. But I must not proceed; trifling Presents ought not to be ushered
in with much Ceremony. I shall only add, that in a Sense of the many Favors
received from You, I shall always endeavor to approve my self,

Sir, Your most obliged, and most humble Servant, JOHN HUGHES.

THE TRIUMPH OF PEACE. A POEM.
HEAR, Britain, hear a rough unpracticed Tongue!
Tho rough my Voice, the Muse inspires the Song;
The Heaven-born Muse; even now she springs her Flight,
And bears my raptured Soul through untrac'd Realms of Light.
We mount aloft, and in our airy way
Retiring Kingdoms far beneath survey.
Amid the rest a spacious Tract appears,
Obscure in view, and on its Visage wears
Black hovering Mists, which thick'ning by Degrees,
Extend a lowering Storm over Earth and Seas.
But, lo! an Eastern Light arising high,
Drives the tempestuous Wrack along the Sky!
Then thus the Muse -- Look down, my Son! and see
The bright Procession of a Deity!
She spoke; the darkning Gloom was vanished quite,
And well-known Europe stands disclosed to Sight.
Of various States the various Bounds appear;
There wide Hispania, fruitful Gallia here!
Belgia's low Soil conspicuous from afar,
And Flandria, long the Field of a destructive War.
Germania too, with clustered Vines o'respread;
And lovely Albion from her watery Bed,
Beauteous above the rest, rears her auspicious Head.
Sea-Nymphs beneath her chalky Cliffs resort,
And awful Neptune keeps his reedy Court;
His Daughter Thames, rich Presents in her Hand
Of bounteous Ceres, traverses the Land;
And seems a mighty Snake, whose shining Pride
Does through the Meads in sinuous Volumes glide.
Ah, charming Isle! fairest of all the Main!
Too long thou do my willing Eye detain.
For see a Hero on the adverse Strand!
And, lo! a blooming Virgin in his Hand!
All hail, Celestial Pair! -- a Goddess she
Of Heavenly Birth confessed, a more than Mortal He!
Victorious Laurels on his Brows he wears;
The attending Fair a branching Olive bears.
Slender her Shape, in Silver Bands confined;
Her snowy Garments loosely flow behind,
Rich with embroidered Stars, and ruffle in the Wind.
But once such differing Beauty met before,
When Warrior Mars did Love's bright Queen adore.
Even Love's bright Queen might seem less winning fair,
And Mars submit to his Heroic Air.
Not Jove himself, Imperial Jove can show
A nobler Mien, or more undaunted Brow,
When his strong Arm through Heavens Aetherial Plains,
Compels the kindled Bolt, and awful Rule maintains.
And now embarked they seek the British Isles,
Pleased with the Charge propitious Ocean smiles.
Before, old Neptune smooths the liquid way;
Obsequious Tritons on the surface play;
And sportful Dolphins with a nimble Glance,
To the bright Sun their glist'ring Scales advance.
In oozy Beds profound the Billows sleep,
No clamorous Winds awake the silent Deep;
Rebuked, they whisper in a gentle Breeze,
And all around is universal Peace.
Proceed, my Muse! The following Pomp declare;
Say who, and what the bright Attendants were!
First Ceres in her Chariot seated high,
By harnessed Dragons drawn along the Sky;
A Cornucopia filled her weaker Hand,
Charged with the various Offspring of the Land,
Fruit, Flowers, and Corn; her right a Sickle bore;
A yellow Wreath of twisted Wheat she wore;
Next Father Bacchus with his Tigers graced
The Show, and squeezing Clusters as he passed,
Quaff'd flowing Goblets of rich-flavour'd Wine.
In order last succeed the tuneful Nine;
Apollo too was there; behind him hung
His useless Quiver, and his Bow unstrung;
He touched his Golden Lyre, and thus he sung.
Lead on, bright WILLIAM! In thy happy Reign
Peace and the Muses are restored again.
War that fierce Lion long disdaining Law
Ranged uncontrolled, and kept the World in aw,
And trembling Kingdoms crouch'd beneath his Paw.
At last the reeling Monster, drunk with Gore,
Falls at thy Feet subdued, and quells his Roar;
Tamely to thee he bends his shaggy Mane,
And on his Neck admits the long-rejected Chain.
At thy protecting Court for this blessed Day,
Attending Nations their glad Thanks shall pay:
Not Belgia, and the rescued Isle alone,
But Europe shall her great Deliverer own;
Rome's mighty Grandeur was not more confessed,
When great Antonius traveled through the East,
And Crowds of Monarchs did each Morning wait
With early Homage at his Palace-Gate.
Haste then, bright Prince! thy Britain's Transports meet;
Haste to her Arms, and make her Bliss complete!
What'ere glad News has reached her listening Ear,
While her long absent Lord provokes her Fear,
Her Joys are in suspense, her Pleasures unsincere.
He comes, thy Hero comes! O beauteous Isle!
Revive thy Genius with a cheerful Smile!
Let thy rejoicing Sons fresh Palms prepare,
To grace the Trophies of the finished War;
On high be hung the Martial Sword insheath'd,
The Shield with Ribbons dressed, and Spear with Ivy wreathed!
Let speaking Paint in various Tablets show
Past Scenes of Battle to the Crowd below!
Round this Triumphant Pile in rustic Dance
The shouting Swains shall hand in hand advance;
The wealthy Farmer from his Toils shall cease;
The Ploughman from the Yoke his smoking Steers release,
And join to solemnize the Festival of Peace.
No more for want of Hands the unlabored Field,
Choked with rank Weeds, a sickly Crop shall yield;
Calm Peace returns; behold her shining Train!
And fruitful Plenty is restored again. --
Apollo ceased; -- The Muses take the Sound:
From Voice to Voice the harmonious Notes rebound,
And echoing Lyres transmit the volant Fugue around.
Mean while the Steady Bark with prosperous Gales
Fills the large Sheets of her expanded Sails,
And gains the intended Port; thick on the Strand,
Like swarming Bees, the assembled Britons stand,
And press to see their welcome Sovereign land:
At his Approach unruly Transport reigns
In every Breast, and Rapture fires their Veins.
A general Shout succeeds, as when on high
Exploded Thunder rends the vaulted Sky.
A short Convulsion shakes the solid Shore,
And rocks the adjacent Deep, unmoved before;
Loud Acclamations through the Valleys ring,
While to Augusta's Walls the Crowd attend their King.
And now behold The Quire of St. Pa^^s op (...) Peace.
a finished Temple rise,
On lofty Pillars climbing to the Skies!
Of Bulk stupendous its proud Pile it rears,
The gradual Product of successive Years.
An inner Gate that folds with Iron Leaves
The charmed Spectator's entering Steps receives:
Where curious Works in twisted Stems are seen
Of branching Foliage vacuous between.
Over this a vocal Organ mounted high
On marble Columns strikes the wondering Eye,
And feeds at once two Senses with Delight,
Sweet to the Ear, and splendid to the Sight.
Marble the Floor, enriched with native Stains
Of various Dye, and streaked with azure Veins.
Even Aemulous Art with Nature seems to strive,
And the carved Figures almost breath and live;
The painted Altar, glorious to behold,
Shines with delightful Blue, and dazzling Gold.
Here first the illustrious Three of Heavenly Race
Religion, Liberty, and Peace embrace;
Here joyful Crowds their pious Thanks express
For Peace restored, and Heavens Indulgence bless,
Auspicious Structure! Born in happy Days,
Whose first Employment is the Noblest, PRAISE!
So when by just degrees, the Eternal Thought
His Six-Days Labor to Perfection brought,
With Laws of Motion first endu'd the Whole,
And bad the Heavens in destined Circles roll;
Then polished Spheres commenced their Harmony;
All Nature in a Chorus did agree,
And the World's Birthday was a Jubilee.
FINIS.

