AN HVMBLE PETITION AND REMONSTRANCE PRESENTED Unto both the High and
Honorable Houses OF PARLIAMENT, CONCERNING The insupportable grievance of the
Farthing Tokens.

Printed in the year, 1642.

TO The Right Honorable the Lords now assembled in the High Court of
PARLIAMENT.
The humble Petition and Remonstrance of us whose names are here subscribed of
London, Westminster, Middlesex, Southwark, and other places of the Kingdom, in
behalf of themselves and others.
Humbly shows,
1 THat about 26. years since, King James of blessed memory, conceiving that
Farthing Tokens would be useful to the Subjects, and helpful to the poor,
caused some quantities thereof to be made, and committed the care and trust
both for the issuing forth and rechanging of them again to John Lord
Harrington, and afterward to the Lady Anne his wife.

2. That 1. Caroli the King by his Letters Patents grants unto the Duchess of
Lenox, and Sir Francis Crane, the office of making Tokens for the term of 17.
years, at the rent of one hundred Marks per annum.

3. That 11. Caroli the King grants the office of making the said Farthings to
the Lord Matravers and Sir Francis Crane, their executors, administrators, and
assigns.

4. That 15. Caroli the King by his Letters Patents grants the office of making
the Farthing Tokens to the Lord Matravers alone at the rent of fourscore
pounds per annum.

5. That in all the several Patents their Majesty's have declared their
gracious intents and pleasures was that the said Farthing Tokens should be
issued forth for the good and ease of the Subject, and that without any loss
or hindrance at all, or any other inconveniency, and therefore appointed the
rechange as well as the exchange thereof.

6. That many of your petitioners have still remaining in their hands great
quantities of Farthings unrechanged, which were made and issued forth by the
authority of the said Duchess of Lenox and Sir Francis Crane, and since by the
authority of the L. Matravers and Sir Francis Crane, which your petitioners
cannot get to be rechanged, although they have often desired and endeavored
the same, and although all the said Patentees have undertaken and covenanted
with his Majesty to rechange them.

That the allowance of one and twenty shillings in Farthing Tokens for twenty
shillings in money, has been the chiefest cause of your petitioners great
burden, for many covetous persons have usually fetched out great quantities of
Farthings, some five pounds at a time, some ten pounds, some more, and forced
them in payments upon poor laboring people.

That your petitioners have lost by the rechange of Tokens into the Office some
of them fifty pounds, some an hundred pounds, some two hundred pounds, and much
more do still daily lose, so that your petitioners are greatly oppressed and
damnified in their trading.

That your petitioners have heretofore petitioned to his Majesty for relief,
who was graciously inclined to releeve them, and referred the consideration of
their grievances to the Lords of his most Honorable Privy Council, and their
Lordships commiserated your petitioners sufferings, nevertheless they have
been no way releeved, whereby they are much impoverished, not able to subsist
without redress, all which in their humble Remonstrance may fully appear.

Wherefore the petitioners most humbly pray that they may have all their said
tokens rechanged, and for ever hereafter freed from this great oppression and
trouble, and in the mean time the Office prohibited from issuing forth any
Tokens, with such other reparations and relief for their insupportable losses,
as to the great judgment of this Honorable Assembly shall be requisite. And
they shall pray, etc.

About five hundred hands subscribed to this Petition.

An humble Remonstrance concerning the grievance of Farthing tokens.
BLessed King JAMES tendering the good of his Subjects, knowing that the richer
they grow, the better able they would be to serve him; wisely considered that
small monyes would be exceeding helpful to the poor, and for retailing
trades, about the eleventh year of his Reign caused a copper coin to be
made, and to pass under the denomination of a Farthing for the ease and
benefit of the Subject.

And the Kings Majesty that now is, has ever since the death of his Royal
Father continued the same, and to the same end, as by their several Patents
and Proclamations may appear.

Nevertheless it has been for a long time, and still is the greatest
oppression that ever was upon the Subject; for put all those insupportable
projects or monopolies that of late years has been set on foot into one end
of the balance, and this grievance of Farthing tokens into the other end, and
it will out weigh them all, unto the Petitioners and to many thousands more,
which for manifestation they do here humbly present to the great Judgment of
this honorable Assembly these considerable things: 1. The Petitioners
inconceivable loss. 2. How the same is occasioned. 3. The great benefit the
Office makes thereby. 4. The remedy or prevention of this evil for future
times.


For the greatness of the loss, that it is heavier then all the projects or
monopolies, appears whether considered in the Petitioners yearly loss or
total sum.

The projects for Salt, Soap, Starch, Tobacco, Cards, Pins, Butter, caskes,
transporting of Leather, Ship-mony, etc. all which, most of the Petitioners
were losers by, yet the loss of all these put together, is not comparable to
the Farthings.

For in all these to lose forty shillings a year, or twenty shillings a year
for each man was much, but this oppression of Farthings is to some five pound
per annum, to some eight pound, ten pound, to some twelve pound, fifteen
pound per annum, and more, enough to bring many thousands of families to
breaking and beggary.

And many of these great losers are poor men which never was able to be
brought within the list of Subsidy or Ship-mony.

And for the total of the Petitioners losses, it is to some twenty pound, to
some forty pound, fifty, to some a hundred pound, a hundred and fifty, to some
two hundred pound and more, so that many of the Petitioners have lost more by
tokens then their whole estate amounts unto.

Besides these monopolizing oppressions of Soap, Ship Money, etc. have been
imposed of late years, but this of Farthing tokens, has continued for this
twenty seven years and more, and many poor retailing trades men do lose as
much by them in one year as they are worth.

The second thing to remonstrate, is how this great oppression is occasioned.
The first occasion is, in issuing forth from the Office one and twenty
shillings in tokens, for twenty shillings in money, which profit intices rich
men to fetch them out, some forty shillings, five pound, some ten pound a week
constantly, and in greater sums, and forces them in payments upon poor work
men, as if they were hirelings to the Office to ruin the Kingdom

And with these tokens poor people come to buy bread, butter, cheese, coals,
and other necessaries, and the Petitioners must either take them or leave off
trading, then are forced to bring them weekly to the Office, and lose twelve
pence per pound, five pound per centum at the least.

The second occasion is, the altering of the stamp which has been done five
several times, and at each alteration tokens have been left upon the
Petitioners hands.

And many of the Petitioners have yet great quantities of old tokens
unrechanged, some forty shillings, five pound, some ten pound, fifteen,
twenty, thirty, forty, fifty pound, and more, which the Office refuse to
rechange, although they have been often required thereunto, and although the
patentees have covenanted with his Majesty to rechange them, as by their
several Patents, and the Kings Proclamations may appear.

The third occasion is, the abuse of the Office causing the Petitioners daily
attendance before they could get their tokens rechanged.

For all the week they take to deliver out tokens, and appointed but three
days a week to rechange, and but six hours in a day, viz. from eight to
eleven in the fore noone, and from one till four in the after noone, and the
greatest part of that little time was spent in delivering out tokens, and the
rest in a trifling rechange of a small quantity, whereby the Petitioners have
waited day after day, week after week, to have their tokens rechanged, and in
the interim want money to manage their trades, for those with whom they have to
deal will not be paid in tokens, besides the Office has cut and defaced many
of those tokens which themselves have issued forth, pretending them to be
naught.

The third thing to remonstrate, is the great profit which the Patentees do
make by Tokens.
The greatness of the profit will appear upon examination of the quantities
of the Farthings, issued forth upon each several stamp, and of the small
sums received in.

For instance, the last stamp of single ringed tokens, it is conceived there
was a hundred and twenty thousand pounds made and issued forth; and when the
stamp was altered, there was not forty thousand pounds received in again; so
that there must be still in the hands of the subject fourscore thousand pounds
at the least, which they could never get to be rechanged.

Now the charge of copper and making of the tokens, is not above five shillings
per pound, so that the Office gains fifteen shillings in twenty, which
amounts to threescore thousand pounds de claro that they have gotten by one
sort of tokens; a far greater profit then all the Kings Mints of England,
Scotland, etc. can make.

For the coinage of fourscore thousand pounds in silver is but eleven hundred
and eleven pounds, three shillings four pence, which properly belongs to the
King, out of which he defrayes all the charges of the Mint, except the
workmanship, which charges being deducted, the King gains not de claro five
hundred pounds but in fourscore thousand pounds of Tokens, the Office gains
threescore thousand pounds at the least, which shows that the Office of
Farthings is more then a hundred times as good as the Mint, quantity for
quantity: and out of all this great profit the King has but fourscore pounds
per annum rent: an inconsiderable sum for so inconceiveable a gain.

The fourth thing to remonstrate, is the remedy or prevention of this evil for
future times.
For to lay down the Office will not be convenient, then all retailing trades
will want small moneys, and the poor relief, therefore it is requisite,

1. That the Office be settled in the power of the Crown, and not in any
subject. 2. That there be some nearer proportion betwixt the extrinseck
denomination and the intrinseck value. 3. That it may be felony either to
import or counterfeit them. 4. That no advantage may be allowed upon issuing
forth any Tokens, and the Office to receive them in upon the like terms.
It may be alleged,

Alleg. 1. If the oppression were so great, and of such continuance as is
pretended, it would long since have been complained of.

Ans. The Petitioners have not been wanting to their great charge to complain
and seek relief, both to King JAMES, and to the Kings Majesty that now is,
and they, graciously inclined to releeve them, have several times referred the
same to the Lords of the Council, and by their Lordships to some Lords
Committees, but the Petitioners could never procure any thing to be done
therein.

And the Office has been made acquainted with the Petitioners complaints, and
has given in their answers of defense: the chief heads whereof we do here
humbly present.

First pretense of the Office.
That the issuing forth of one and twenty shillings in Tokens for twenty
shillings in money, and the rechange of one and twenty shillings in Tokens for
twenty shillings in money is warranted by the Kings Patents and Proclamation,
so that the Office is no way faulty.

Answ. The King by his several Patents and Proclamations does declare that it
is his intent and pleasure that the Farthing Tokens should be an ease and
benefit to the Subject, and not otherwise; but it is an insufferable
oppression, and so against the Kings mind.

Second pretense.
That to rechange upon the same terms as is delivered out, is no damage to any.

Ans. It is true, if the same parties that fetch them out did bring them in,
but it is otherwise, for the rich fetch them out, and gain five pounds per
cent. and the Petitioners bring them in, and lose five pounds per cent. and
never fetch out any.

Third pretense.
That the Petitioners knowing the loss by rechange, proportion the prizes of
their wares accordingly, and so are no losers.

Answ. It is not so: for the Petitioners deliver out their commodities either
by weight or measure, neither do they know what money people bring, and when
their commodities are cut or weighed out, they must take Tokens, or else lose
more by taking the commodity again, and lose their customers too.

Besides, if the Petitioners should proportion their wares according to the
loss by rechange, then the oppression of the subject would be the greater,
for that would inhance the prizes of provision, which is the beggering of a
Kingdom.

FINIS.

