To the Kings Most Excellent Majesty.
The Humble Petition and Address of the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Commons of
the City of LONDON.
WE Your Majesty's most Dutiful and Loyal Subjects being deeply sensible, and
apprehensive of the great Danger Your Royal Person, the Protestant Religion,
and the good Constitution of this Kingdom, have been, and [as we have reason to
fear,] are still in, do with all Humble Thankfulness acknowledge your Majesty's
great Grace and Goodness in causing the Parliament to meet, and sit, to the
great Satisfaction of this City, and of all your good Subjects at home, and the
Comfort and Encouragement of all your Protestant Neighbors abroad, and for
your most Gracious Speech at the opening thereof, in those assurances You were
pleased to renew for the security of the Protestant Religion, and in
Recommending to their Care the suppression of Popery, and the prosecution of
the Horrid Popish PLOT, with a strict and Impartial Inquiry, without which,
neither Your Royal Person, nor Your good Subjects can be in any safety.

And We being also sensible how much the Happy Conclusion of this Session of
PARLIAMENT will conduce to those Ends, do most Humbly Beseech Your Majesty,
that You would be Graciously Pleased to hearken and Incline to the Humble
Advice of That Your great Council, for the Safety of Your Royal Person, the
Preservation of the PROTESTANT RELIGION, the Quieting and Uniting the Minds of
all Your Good Subjects, and for securing the PEACE of this your Great CITY, and
the whole KINGDOM.

And We do in Most Dutiful manner, and with Unanimous Consent, Humbly assure
your Majesty, that in Pursuit of Those Councels, Your Great City of LONDON will
be ready at all times to promote your Majesty's Ease and Prosperity, and stand
by your Majesty against all Dangers and Hazards whatsoever.

And as in Duty bound shall always Pray for Your Majesty's Long Life, and Happy
Reign, etc. Novembr the 12th. 1680. IT was now agreed and Ordered by this Court
(nemine contradicente,) That the Humble Petition and Address to His Majesty
from this Court now drawn up, and here read, be Presented to His Majesty as
soon as conveniently may be; And the Right Honorable the Lord Mayor, attended
with Mr. Sheriffs, is Desired from this Court, to Present the same to His
Majesty accordingly.
LONDON, Printed for Francis Smith at the sign of the Elephant and Castle in
Cornhil near the Royal Exchanges MDCLXXX.


