TWO SERMONS PREACHED, On the Ninth of September 1683. (being the
THANKSGIVING-DAY;) AT St. THOMAS Hospital, in SOUTHWARK.

By William Hughes Hospitaller there at that time.

Put them in mind -- to obey Magistrates,

Tit. 3.1. That Prayers and giving of Thanks be made -- for Kings,

1 Timothy 2.1. Sic bonam elegit vitam, ut etiam bonam non negligat famam.

St. Aug. de Doctr. Christ. L. 4. c. 28. Nobis enim vita nostra necessaria est,
aliis fama nostra.

Id. de bono viduitat. c. 22. TOGETHER WITH A CANDID PLEA TO A CRUEL CHARGE.

By the same AUTHOR.

LONDON, Printed by J. A. for Samuel Walsall at the Heart and Bible at the
West End of the Royal Exchange in Cornhill, 1684.

TO THE READER.
OUR Lot being cast into a very Inquisitive Age; it may not be amiss to
gratify the Curiosity thereof, by giving a short account, both Why these plain
Sermons come forth so late, and Why, indeed, at all. As for the former enquiry;
they were not made for the Press, but Pulpit; nor are they suited to the
Critical Eyes of a Learned Kingdom; but to the heavier Ears of an Unlettered,
small, and mean Auditory. Where having done their duty, a Writ of Ease was given
them, and they were laid by to Rest in Peace amongst their Fellows. But then;
Why are they thus disturbed now; is the other Question? You must know, their
Author's Guilt (but in his very Youth, and betwixt 30 and 40 years ago)
although repented of, and pardoned; and Elsewhere more at large, and with
severity, by himself reflected on; and all long since; has been now very
lately (by information doubtless of true Doegs, who live in Israel, but are
Edomites) with great unkindness, and hardest measure, in his opinion, revived
against him, to his damage in Estate and Name, indicta causa. And where the
Former of them might possibly be dispensed with in silence; the latter yet is
better than precious Ointment says the Preacher; and rather to be chosen than
great riches, in the Wise man's judgment. And therefore although That may be
despaired of, as past all reparation; it is hoped that This may notwithstanding
find relief, by publishing of these Notes. He has great reason to look upon
himself as going off this Stage of Earth apace; and after the approving of his
soul to God, he would be glad (he thinks, with innocence) to leave an Honest
Memory behind him. And he can never think, that open Disloyalty, or Loyalty in
Masquerade only, therewith consistent. Which Principle he could wish some
Church-Dissenters of his acquaintance would seriously think of, and heartily
Espouse; whose business it is (and in manifest proof of their own foul guilt
too) malignantly to calumniate honest, though late Conformists, that assert it,
as Renegado's and Apostates. As if the fear of such folks clamor must cripple
duty, and stifle truth! But, alas! where worldly Interest is Men's whole
Religion; no marvel, if Hypocrisy there take any shape to serve that Idol; and
Inspire them with Diana's Crafts-men's Zeal against All supposed to bring their
craft in danger of being set at naught. And if you ask what aileth them? And
they dare to tell the reason, of their outrage; it will be done in Micah's
Words, Ye take away my gods; and what have I more? But if these Papers; which
are some Months elder than the Authors Sufferings, and did exist when there
were no jealousies of such a thing, but all presumptions to the contrary; and
which rebuke Rebellion, and Sedition, encouraging Loyalty and Obedience; prove
not successful to reclaim such Desperado's, or any others that wander from
their duty; they may be useful notwithstanding to confirm Good men therein:
however, I nothing doubt, but that, with common charity, they will stop the
mouth of, cursed Malevolence, and prove a Pledge for the sincerity of the
Author. Which, on the Instance of better Heads than his own, has brought them
thus into the World; and not, I trust, without a Blessing with them.

Psalm. XXI. 1. The King shall joy in thy strength, O Lord: and in thy Salvation
how greatly shall he rejoice?


THE Contents of this Psalm, plainly respect, the many Mercies and Deliverances
God had vouchsafed to its Author David. And it is a Psalm of Praise, and Prayer;
composed in the Churches Name, and for its Use, in the Public Worship. Witness
the Title; To the Chief Musician a Psalm of David. For David's Psalms, and
others also, were by Divine Appointment to be Sung with Music in the Solemn
Assemblies: as may be seen, 2 Chronicles. 7.6. and 29.25, 27, 28, 30. But there is a
difference in the wording of them. Some Psalms run in the Author's; others, in
the Churches Name: as the Author, or the Church may be more especially
concerned in the Thanksgiving, or Supplication, or both, therein contained. Out
of many Examples, only observe; That the Twenty third Psalm is wholly in the
Authors; this Twenty first in the Churches Name. There, the First Person is
altogether used: Here, the Third. In that the Author speaks of himself; The
Lord is my Shepherd; and I shall not want: And so on, to the End.

In this he makes others to speak of him. For Example; my Text is not, I will
joy in thy strength: in thy Salvation, I will rejoice. But the King shall joy:
and He shall rejoice. God's Church and People; the Israelites, and David's
Subjects; they make this Address to God on the Kings behalf.

To understand the meaning whereof, let us more particularly consider, and
explain the Words.

[The King,] that is, Words opened.
David, thine Anointed, and our Sovereign; say the People of Israel.

[Shall joy in thy strength:] shall joy, that is, in thy might, and power put
forth, and exercised for his Protection and Defense in the many dangers he has
passed through.

[And in thy Salvation,] viz. In thy deliverance of him from his Enemies, and
the Victory thou have given him over them.

[How greatly shall he rejoice?] By Joying before, and Rejoicing here, meaning;
That he shall declare, and express great joy, and gladness with thanks and
praises unto God the Author of all his mercies and deliverances. Wherein
themselves do also bear their part, making (as was before observed) this
Triumphant acknowledgment on their Kings behalf, and for his Mercies.

All the difficulty remaining is, Whether the King and his Subjects are to be
understood, as praising God in this behavior: since that is not in terms
expressed; and it is only said, There shall be joy in Gods strength, and
rejoicing in his salvation, by them.

But this is removed easily, by considering, that the plain meaning of the
Phrase, To rejoice in God, or in his Salvation, is nothing else; Than with glad
hearts to give him praise. For Psalm. 97.12. where it is said, Rejoice in the
Lord, the righteous. If it be asked, How shall that be done? It follows in the
next words, Give thanks at the remembrance of his holiness. But especially, and
most plainly, Psalm, 33.1, 2. It Is written; Rejoice in the Lord, O ye Righteous:
for praise is comely for the upright. Where you see, That rejoicing in the Lord
is nothing else, than joyfully praising of him. So in the New Testament, When
the Blessed Virgin magnified the Lord; her Spirit rejoiced in God her Savior,
Luke 1.47. And to give no more instances, when our Savior rejoiced in spirit,
he gives God thanks, saying; I thank thee, O Father.

And now the Words thus opened, plainly teach us this Lesson: That

A Kings Salvation does both oblige Himself, Lesson.
and his People also, to the joyful praise of God, that gives it.

The Church, you see, does undertake, on both sides in my Text: and by her
word, and practice shows, That as the Sovereign, so the Subjects are alike
engaged. And it is no marvel; since the Gospel plainly lays it as a Duty on all
Christians, as to make earnest Supplications unto God for their Sovereigns
welfare, safety, and happiness; so likewise to return most hearty thanksgiving,
when such mercy is vouchsafed. St. Paul himself does teach us this, as plain as
words can speak it, in 1 Timothy, 2.1, 2. saying, I exhort therefore, that first of
all: that is, as one of the chiefest duties lying on you: supplications,
prayers, intercessions; meaning thereby, all manner and kind of petitions unto
God, that Christians use on the behalf of themselves, or for their Brethren:
and giving of thanks also; be made for all men: of what Profession, Order,
Rank, or Quality soever they be: but it follows there, that in a more especial
and particular manner, this is to be done, for Kings and all that are in
Authority. So that the Prayers and Praises of Christians are due apparently on
the behalf of Magistrates; Supreme and subordinate likewise; Kings, and all
that are in Authority. And the practice of this double duty, is not only
enforced by the Exhortation of the Holy Apostle; which might have abundantly
sufficed for the Obligation; I Exhort: But there is a further Motive and
Encouragement thereunto subjoined, from the benefit and advantage likely to
arise from thence unto our selves: it has a tendency to our leading of a
quiet, and peaceable life in allgodliness, and honesty also.

Now if Christians were bound in duty thus toward Sovereigns and Superiors,
which were but Heathens; strangers to, and Enemies of the Gospel, (as was the
Case when this was Written, and a great while after): how much closer, and
stronger is the Tie on Us; who by God's merciful Providence, enjoy a Prince,
that is, a Professed Christian, a Defender of the Faith, and a Protector of
them that own it?

Doubtless, as our continual Prayers should be poured forth for his Protection,
and Prosperity: so when the Arm of God is made bare for his defense, and
safety, our most Solemn Praises are doubly due to the God of His, of Our, and
All Salvation.

But that the important Duty of joyful Praising God, which we are engaged in
This Day, may be discharged to the best advantage, my purpose is to lend you
mine assistance (such as it is) in clearing these Four Propositions unto you,
and concluding with some Practical Reflections on the whole.

The Propositions are

1. All Salvation is from the Hand of God. 4 Propositions.
2. Gods Salvation uses to be exercised toward Kings, in an Especial manner.
3. Our present Sovereign is a signal Instance of the care God takes of Princes.
4. This is just occasion of His Majesty's, and his Peoples great Joy, and
Thankfulness unto God.
On which, follow short Reflections.

The First Proposition is: 1. Propos.
That all Salvation is from the hand of God. And, methinks, my Text implies
plainly: The King shall joy in Thy strength O Lord: and in Thy salvation, etc.
Not in his own Courage, or Conduct; not in the Power and Policy, whereof he was
the Master: nor in any thing else; though he wanted none of those
accomplishments that were found in the Greatest Prince, and Bravest General of
the World: but in the strength of the Lord, and in the Salvation of God. So,
that whatsoever Dangers are escaped, whatsoever Evils are prevented, or
removed; nay, whatsoever Good shall be obtained; though the most proper means
that could be found, or thought on, or were in Nature, had been made use of;
with all the advantages, that power, art, and industry could possibly improve
them by; yet at the last, the success must be acknowledged entirely unto God:
as without whose hand there had been no help. Salvation belongs unto the
Lord, Psalm. 3.8. And against his Claim, not Any, nor All the Creatures can set
up any honest Title at all. Strong holds, and places of defense cannot preserve
us from our Enemies hands, much less, deliver us out of them. Truly, in vain is
salvation hoped for, from the hills, and from the multitude of Mountains; as
likely a refuge as they are: truly, in the Lord our God is the Salvation of
Israel, Jer. 3.23. Horses are a generous kind of Animals, both swift, and
strong, and stout; those especially, that are bred up, prepared, and managed
for the Wars. Iron Chariots, of old, were a grear Terror to the Enemy, and a
good security to those that had them. But yet an horse is a vain thing to save
a man: Psalm. 33.17. And though some trust in Chariots, and some in Horses; the
Royal Psalmist and his friends would not take that course: but trust in the
name of the Lord. And what was the issue? Those were brought down, and fell:
but these arose and stood upright: Psalm. 20.7, 8.

But Men you will say, outdo all other Creatures. And what great things have been
done by them; the Great Ones especially: and with Great Armies under their
Conduct? Yet, vain is the help of man, Psalm. 60.11. And we must not put our
trust in Princes; nor in the son of Man; whosoever he be: in whom there is no
help, Psalm. 146.3. Nay, no King, himself, is saved by the multitude of an Host;
nor a mighty man by much strength; Psalm. 33.16.

In short, the Holy Scriptures teach us; That no Design can prosper, how
rationally soever it be laid: none Affair succeed, how likely soever in it self
to speed, and with whatsoever prudence and diligence it be managed; without the
Lord. Except the Lord build the house, they labor but in vain that build it.
Except the Lord keep the City, the watchman waketh but in vain. It Is in vain
(without God) to rise up early, sit up late, and eat the bread of sorrows,
Psalm. 127.1, 2. Our very Food cannot nourish, nor sleep, refresh; nor Clothes
warm, nor Medicines heal, nor any Endeavors profit us; unless God vouchsafe a
blessing therewith to us. And when he intends any Relief to any of his
Creatures; it shall be effected: although the means made use of shall, be mean
indeed, and most contemptible: although improper, and contrary unto Humane
Judgment: nay, though there be none at all in the case.

The holy Scriptures do abound with Instances unto all these purposes: and it is
needless to recite them; they are so generally known. Let me only add, That
the Almighty can at pleasure make the very Eater to afford Meat; and the
Destroyers themselves to become Saviors. He that promised his people, that
their Exactors should be righteousness, has often saved them, by those very
Hands that should have slain them. Nothing is too hard for God: and all
salvation belongs to him. We need not go from home to seek Examples for the
proof of this. Our late Domestic, and most Devilish Plots, give ample
Testimony hereunto: wherein, the very Agents in the management of them, and
that should have been so in the Execution also; do by the wonderful hand of God
prove Instruments in the revealing, and disappointing of them. Which, as it
bears further witness to the Truth of Scriptures, That safety is of the Lord,
Prove. 21.31. So it engages us to join this day with the Church, in the words
of my Text; The King shall joy in thy strength, O Lord: and in thy salvation
how greatly shall he rejoice?

The rather to, For

The Second Proposition, 2. Propos-
which is; God's salvation uses to be exercised in an especial manner toward
Kings. Or in other words; Divine Providence takes peculiar care of Princes.
Which seems also to be intimated in my Text: in that it is there so
Emphatically said, The King shall joy in the strength of God: and He shall
greatly rejoice in God's Salvation: without the Express mention of his Subjects
doing so: though they be tenderly concerned therein; as before was hinted, and
hereafter will be fully proved.

And certainly, if the Fowls of the Air, and the very Flowers of the Field,
are not shut out from the care of God: If the little Sparrows, as our Savior
does assure us, Matthew. 10. are interessed in his Providence: Humane Affairs
must claim undoubtedly a greater share therein, and more tender respect from
thence. And therefore Government of States, and Kingdoms, without which,
nothing but Confusions, and Desolations would be Mankind's dismal Portion;
cannot but be admitted to have the highest interest in the same. And so at
last, Princes, and Chief Governors, upon whose Fates; (that is, the Good, or
Ill, befalling them,) the Public and General Weal, or Woe depends, must be
allowed to be the Peculiar concern of him, that Governs all Things with
Infinite Wisdom and Goodness.

But to put this past all doubt, there are Three Considerations that do offer
their effectual service.

1. Consi^nations.
The Station God sets them in. 2. The Charge he lays on People concerning
them. 3. His own very mavelous Actings for them.
1. Consid.
The station God sets them in. Kings are by him Ordained, not only Superior
unto others: but Supreme over all their People; to Rule and Govern them under
himself, and in his own room and place. It is by him Kings reign, says
Solomon, Prove. 8.15. He sets them up, says Daniel 2.21. Wherefore not a Saul
only; whom God particularly appointed to Rule his People Israel: but Cyrus
also, an Heathen Prince, is honored by the Mouth of God himself, with that
high Title, of being God's Anointed, Isa. 45.1. And in this matter there is
great Harmony between the Gospel, and the Law. St. Paul tells us, The higher
powers are God's Ordinance, Romans 13.1, 2. And that they Rule as his
Vicegerents, Deputies, and Lieutenants: in hi^ room and place, that is. For
ver. 4. It Is said, He is the Minister of God. Nay they are dignifyed so, as to
be styled Gods, of old; Exodus 22.28. Psalm. 82.1. That is, Gods on earth; as
Viceroys to the God of Heaven and Earth: and who, by his Commission, are to
keep good order in the World; by punishing Wickedness, and Vice; and
encouraging Religion and Virtue among the Sons of Men. Wherefore, whatsoever
injuries, and affronts shall be offered unto them, they do redound to God
himself; whose Character they bear, and whose Person they represent. Does it
not stand to all reason then, that the Almighty should own, abet, and be
especially concerned for his own Commissioners; and in the Execution of the
Trust received from him? Can it be otherwise, than that his peculiar Providence
should be engaged for his Highest Officer upon Earth; who derives his Title
from, and is an Immediate substitute to the Supreme in Heaven?

Do we not know, That Earthly Sovereigns will be careful for the greatest
safety, and best respect to those, whom they depute to supply their place in
Administering Justice to their Subjects? And will they not avenge indignities
put upon those Ministers with severity; because they light upon Themselves at
last, by whom they are Authorized? And who can doubt, but that the Supreme
Governor of the Universe will take equal care of Princes, that stand in the
like relation unto him, and for like reason? We may be well assured of it. And
shall be better by what follows.

2. 2 Consid.
The Charge God lays on People concerning them. If God commands us the
Highest Value, Greatest Respect, and Utmost Service to our Sovereigns; it must
be necessarily admitted, That the Almighty has most tender and especial care
for them. King David's so strict a charge to his General, and other Captains,
concerning Absalom, for the safety of him, and their kindness to him (2 Samuel
18.) makes it most manifest, how dear he was unto his Father, and what an
Affectionate care he took of him. Thus an Indulgent Providence toward Princes
cannot but be inferred; since we do find the Word of God so copious in the New,
as well as Old Testament, for exacting such true and high Devotion unto Kings:
and this, as rooted in our minds; so professed by our Mouths; and attested to
by our Lives.

To be particular; 1. 1. Our Mind.
It was from God that Solomon spoke it, Prove. 24.21. My son, fear thou the
Lord, and the King: and meddle not with them that are given to change. A man
would think upon first Hearing, that this Counsel were directed peculiarly to
our times. But certain it is, that as 'twas not amiss for any age; so it is very
proper to the present Generation. And observe; the Precept serves to put our
Minds into the fittest temper toward those that are Above us, the Heavenly and
the Earthly Sovereign: and that is of Fear. I knows This commonly coucheth under
it all the Expression of Love and Duty, and Obedience. But as I need not so I
shall not thus consider it here. We Will keep it therefore to its stricter, and
most proper sense, of Awe, and Reverence, Esteem, and Veneration of the Mind
unto its Object. So God is indeed to be first served, as he best deserves.
First, we must fear the Lord, who is King of Kings: and next; the King; who is
under him, and over us. The meaning is; the Best opinion, and most worthy
thoughts of Princes must be entertained by us. The most fair construction must
be put on all their Counsels and Affairs, that they can possibly bear. And we
may not dare to let loose our Minds to other Methods. For then, adieu the fear
and reverence that we owe them. The Holy Preacher means this very thing, when
he forbids, to Curse the King, so much as in our thoughts. Eccles. 10.20. Every
evil, and unworthy, and indecent Conception of him, is to be utterly banished.
But alas! have we not in the present Age too many secret Shimei's, at the
least? Whose pleasure it is, to frame the worst Idea's of their Governors, and
their Actions in their own minds; and are then in travel to be delivered of
them to their Neighbors on the first opportunity? Yet Holy Scriptures teach us
no such Doctrine; but the contrary. And as we have heard, what the Precept here
instructs us in: so we shall find, the Prehibition added does confirm it;
Meddle not with them that are given to change. Whence we plainly learn; both,
That Irreverence toward a Sovereign has a tendency to Subversion of his
Government: and especially; that, for the preservation of our due respect unto
him, we ought to shun the Conversation of Dissaffected Persons to the Present
Lawful Establishment. To be given to change is commendable in nothing, because
it argues want of Reason's Ballast; and betrays the levity of a fickle Mind:
but is utterly to be condemned when it tends to a removal of what God has
Established. Novelty, it is true, is but too grateful unto Humane Nature. It was
so in its Innocence. But the issue thereof was horrible mischief! A desire to
change involved our First Parents, and all their Posterity in lamentable Woe.
Hence is sprung up our degeneracy from that Primitive Purity, wherein we were
made. And this great Itch of Novelty is not the least part of our Degeneracy.
But what vast expenses of Treasure and Lives, besides men's dearest Consciences,
it has put the World to, in the several States and Kingdoms thereof, I need
not insist on. For who can forget to what a dismal Pass Three Realms of our own
were thereby lately brought?

And much more does it therefore concern us, to regard the good caution from
Heaven; to have nothing to do with Novelists; not to meddle with them that are
given to change. Of old, the Good, and old way went both together, Jer. 6.16.
To be sure, where God has set up his Landmark, it is an horrible Trespass to
attempt its plucking down. And Kingship, we hear, is God's own Establishment.
If then we will fear the Lord; we must, next unto him, fear the King likewise.
That is, maintain the greatest reverence, and best opinion of him in our Mind.
And this is the first part of God's charge on People toward their Sovereigns:
to show the peculiar care he takes of them.

The Second and next is, 2. Mouths.
That our Mouth be managed suitable to our Mind. We must be always ready to
speak, as well as think, the best of Princes. We may by no means dare to utter
any thing reproachful of them. And this is also part of God's Charge upon us
concerning them. For Exodus 22.28. It Is Written, Thou shall not revile the Gods;
nor speak evil of the Rulers of thy people. Their very Title of being Gods,
should lay an awe on men toward them: and God's command requires most Reverend
Speeches of them. Railings, and Reproaches of our Equals, or Inferiors, are
Unchristian Practices; and condemned in the Holy Gospel. But to serve Superiors
at that rate; a Sovereign, especially; is much more hamous, and to be abhorred,
even to Hell, from whence it comes.

Those men then can have no conscience toward God, that make no conscience to
revile the Gods. For they have no regard to the Word of God, which does so
expressly forbid this wickedness. Let them beware, whose filthy Mouths trade in
traducing, and defaming the Persons, and Proceedings of their Lawful
Governors. It Is very observable; That when St. Paul had, by surprizal, only
less decently, and when unjustly used, rebuked his Superior, but one much
Inferior to a Sovereign Prince; he does not only Apologize for that
miscarriage with a plausible excuse, That it was his ignorance thrust him on so
doing (upon his own long absence from Jerusalem, and their great confusion in
the choice of Officers, we must understand:) but he is honestly plain in
professing; That such behavior is not to be justified, but Condemned Acts
23.3, 5. And he quotes the very Text of Exodus, which you last heard of, to
that purpose. Now, how unlike that holy man; and how inexcusable with all good
men, are Those, too many, of this present Age; who without regard to Truth, or
falsehood, or any good manners in the World; and to be sure, against all
Christian Reverence to the Word of God, and their Lawful Governors, make it
their business to fill their own Minds, and then the Ears of others, with
jealousies, and suspicions; nay, with Male-interpretations, plain slanders, and
Reproaches of the Highest Powers? How any such Persons, though they would be
counted Christ's Disciples, and perhaps esteem themselves of the Highest Form
among them, can reconcile such Practices with Gospel Principles, is never to be
showed.

We are certain of this, and I pray God they may consider it, as they ought;
That those people have the blackest Brand put on them, who Despise Dominions,
and speak evil of Dignities, both in 2 Pet. 2.10. and Jude 8.

Another and Second Instance to the former purpose.

Last of all, 3. Lives.
our lives must give an Attestation to our Minds and Mouths. God does require,
that we should be Internally and Externally All of a piece toward our Princes.
(1.) Obey their Laws.
We must be ready to obey their Laws, and support their State. Touching the
Former: should it so happen, that the command of an Earthly King should cross
the command of the King of Heaven: then such command is ipso facto superseded,
and has no Obligation on us. For, that we ought to obey God, rather than man,
is the Christian Doctine, Act. 5.29. But withal take notice: That when we
cannot be active in Obeying, we must be Passive in submitting. And there is
none allowance, but an utter Condemnation of all Resistance, and Rebellion in
the case; and by the self same Doctrine of our Religion. St. Paul injoyneth,
That every soul be subject to the Higher Powers; Romans 13.1. There is none
excepted; be he Prophet, Apostle, Bishop, or of any other Order of Men
whatsoever. There is no Privilege, or Exemption of any. The Pope of Rome
indeed refuses his Obedience to the Emperor; and, at Pleasure will discharge
his Clergy, or Laity, from their Duty to their Natural Princes. But the Apostle
Paul, and Apostate Pope, are of Two Minds, you see: they are contrary one to
the other. Therefore, that is one reason of the Apostles marking him for the
Man of Sin; in that he does exalt himself above what is called God, on Earth,
as well as Heaven, 2 Thessalonians. 2.4. But whosoever will be St. Paul's Disciples,
and not the Popes, must love Obedience, and hate Rebellion. For he that
resists, says the Apostle, flies in the face of God: Resists his
Ordinance, Romans 13.2. And though possibly they may escape here; hereafter
'twill be dearly paid for. For without Repentance, They that resist shall
receive to themselves Damnation: ibid. And if we will prove our selves True
Christians; we must be thus obedient, not only for wrath; lest we suffer for
our Rebellion: but for Conscience Sake: as we hope to approve our selves unto
God, who has laid this law upon us: ver. 5. ibid. St. Peter is of the same
mind with St. Paul. For in his 1 Epist. 2.13, 14. we read, Submit your selves
to every Ordinance of Man for the Lord's sake. Whether to the King as Supreme;
or to Governors, as to those that are sent by him. Where you may observe, That
the subordinate, as well as supreme Magistrate is to have our Homage, and
obedience, without resistance, paid unto him. And this in Conscience toward
God to: for the Lord's sake. Which are but other words, for the same thing St.
Paul had spoken: so that, whatever any sort of men suppose may be objected by
the Law of Nature; the Law of Grace controuls that Fancy; and does most plainly
determine our Obedience, and the Doctrine of Nonresistance. For, who may say
unto the King, What do thou? Eccles. 8.4. And this is a great part of our
Duty, who are Ministers to declare unto you; especially, in such a Turbulent,
and Seditious Age: namely, To put you in mind to be subject to Principalities
and Powers, to obey Magistrates, to be ready to every good work, Tit. 3.1. As
if there were little likelihood of any other Good Works; if this of our
Obedience were neglected.

Touching the latter; Their State must be supported likewise. And this both by
our Purse and Person also. Support their State
Need I remember you, By Purse.
How shameful, and unsafe it is, for any Kingdom, to have a King that is poor
and needy? Does not the Honor and Interest of a People, then Plead for a
Liberal Supply unto their Prince? But you shall hear, that Contributions to
this purpose are matter of Duty toward God. For the Apostle Romans 13.6, 7.
says, For this Cause, even Conscience Sake, (the Words that do immediately
precede) Pay you Tribute also. And the next Verse, Render to all their due;
(not your Courtesy, but their Due:) Tribute to whom tribute, Custom to whom
Custom appertains. Which makes me greatly wonder, how any persons of sober,
or of honest Principles, should (as they say it is common) steal their Customs
from the King! It Is so unconscionable, that I nothing doubt it to be worse than
Robbing of our common Neighbor of what are his unquestionable Goods. Because
our Sovereign's Right is manifest: and the Wrong is highly aggravated by the
Great, and Public Capacity of the Person injured. It Is plain, our Blessed
Savior would rather work a Miracle for Paying Tribute to the Higher Powers,
than neglect the doing it; Mat. 17.27. And if he perform this Duty; should not
we go, and do likewise?

Nor are our Persons (suppose them capable,) exempted from his Service, when
they are needful to it. Honoring of our Parents enjoined by the Fifth
Commandment, intends the helping of them, upon occasion, with our Hand; as well
as succouring them with our Estate. And the Civil Parent justly is by all
Interpreters included there. Was it not very honorable in Ittai, a Stranger
and an Exile, only taken under King David's Protection, to vow; That
Wheresoever the King should be, in life or death, he would bear him company, 2 Samuel 15. And should not natural Subjects think themselves under a greater
Obligation? Yes: God's People of old, would by no means have their King hazard
his Person in the Battle: because, say they, Thou art worth Ten thousand of us:
but they would freely venture their Lives for him: 2 Samuel 18. They were not for
Plotting his Destruction; much less, for actual Murdering of him: as was too
lately done upon the Royal Martyr by the prevailing Party in our late
Rebellion; to the Eternal shame thereof. No, no; to save his blood, they would
spill their own; and expose their own Throats to preserve the Crown upon his
Head. This is the part of Christian Loyalty. And let me add; That when we
cannot by strength of Hand, and force of Arms be Serviceable; that must be made
up by Counsel and Designs, as far as our capacity reaches. What adventures did
Husha, Zadock, and Abiathar, and their Sons run, to save their King, the Lord's
Anointed; and to defeat the Treasons of Ahitophel, 2 Samuel 16, and 17 Chapters?
Whereas, if their Loyal Practices had been Discovered, though they had been
Masters of a thousand Lives, we may be sure, they had all been Sacrificed to
the most Exquisite Tortures, that witty, and enraged Traitors could have
invented. But there needs no more of this, as being taught already in the
Doctrine of Obedience, which we have before discoursed of.

So much then of the Second Consideration; to prove the peculiar care God takes
of Kings; by The Charge he lays on people concerning them.

The Third and Last I offered for the Proof hereof was this; God's own very
mavelous Actings for them. 3 Considerations.
And if it shall appear, That numerous Signal Providence have been exercised
for the safety and preservation of God's Anointed Ones; I think, we shall have
overmeasure to our present purpose. Now multitudes of Instances might be
produced of this Nature, both front amongst Jewish, Heathen, and Christian
Princes. I shall only pick out one of each, and be brief therein: because
indeed this Point will lead me home to the Third Proposition which is so near
unto our selves, as cannot but prove most convincing with us.

First then, A Jewish King.
the Care of Providence about a Jewish King. And David is the Person to be
spoken of. Now he, observe it, though hunted unto death, whilst but a Subject;
and for none other fault, than Saving of the King, and Kingdom; does still
approve his Loyalty: not only in not offering Violence to his Sovereign, who
most unjustly Persecuted him: but abhorring the thoughts of such accursed
Treason, with The Lord forbid, that I should stretch forth mine hand against
the Lord's Anointed, 1 Samuel 26.11. And this, when injuries provoked,
opportunities invited, companions urged, and impunity seemed to Charm him
thereunto, For he was Heir Apparent; and the Crown does purge all stains. But
he was not an Oliver, or a Bradshaw: hating to think, that Providence
justified, or encouraged unto any Villainy. And yet, when himself is Lawful
King, there are many Conspiracies for his Destruction. I shall take notice but
of one; but that the worst of all the rest: The Unnatural Plot of his Own
Natural Child, but Rebellious Son, Absalom. And here let us consider, First, 1.
What a Bloody Design it was! not only to remove ill Ministers of State; nor
barely, to prune the overgrown branches of Prerogative; no, nor merely and
simply, to transfer the Crown to a better Head. Treason Rampant enough! But
plainly; to Chop off that Head that wears it, 2 Samuel 17.2. And that this is the
Natural Process of successful Rebellion, our selves are too well aware. 2.
Next; observe the Terror of the Attempt; by the vast Numbers of the Rebels.
We read of All Israel therein engaged: which, at the least, implies a very
Great part of the Ten Tribes: Judah only (which includes Benjamin) continuing
entirely Loyal. Nay, Antiq. Jud. l. 7. c. 9.
Josephus tells us, That David's Army had but about Four thousand in it. And the
Text assures us, That 2 Samuel 18.7.
Twenty thousand of the Rebels lost their Lives in the Battle. What a frightful
advantage had they therefore in their Number!

But Lastly; The King is Saved; his Enemies Destroyed; 3.
and both by the hand of God. Thou have given me the necks of mine Enemies:
thou have delivered me from the strivings of my people: it is God that avengeth
me, and brings down the people under me, says the King: and upon this
account, as well as any other, 2 Samuel 22. And note it; because David was the
Lords Anointed, he thus became the care of Providence. As may be seen in the
same Song, at Psalm. 18.50. Great deliverance gives he to his King, and shows
mercy unto his Anointed, unto David, etc.

Next for an Heathen Prince: An Heathen.
What a special Providence was it toward Ahasuerus; when Two Great Courtiers,
and his Chamberlains, who Treasonably had conspired against his Life, and had
so fair and many opportunities to effect their Villainies, were notwithstanding
barred the Execution of it? And how more remarkable was the care of God
concerning him, in that poor Mordecai, no Natural Subject; but a Stranger and a
Captive taken in War, should first come to have notice of the Treason; and then
have an heart to adventure the discovery of it? Was it not dangerous for a man
in his Circumstances to Impeach Two such Great Personages; whose powerful
Interest might well threaten to turn the blow upon his own head, and make him
the Traitor? And what an abatement to his Zeal would it be apt to prove; That
this very Prince, intended to be Destroyed, was, in a kind, the Destroyer of
his Native Country, and all that was dear unto him in it?

Far less rebukes than these have too often hindered many from discharge of
Duty. But God, that takes special care of Princes, carries him through all
difficulties. The Treason is detected; the Traitors Punished; and the King
saved, Esth. 2.

Lastly, A Christian.
The Christian King, Constantine the Great; how he was delivered from
Treacheries at home; preserved, and prosper'd in the day of Battle abroad; and
what signal care the Divine Providence continually took of him; is declared
largely to us, with special Remarks of the manifest hand of God frequently
stretched out for him, by the Church Historian, Eusebius in vita Constantini.

But we need not stay longer here; for our next Proposition, which goes no
further than our own doors, will put the matter past all doubt. Only Remember,
That if Gods placing Kings in his own room on Earth; charging their people in
Thought, Word, and Deed to be their Votaries; And Lastly, doing Wonders for
them himself; suffice to show the peculiar care of Providence over them; then
our Second Proposition may be discharged, as fully proved.

And so we come to the

3. 3. Propos.
Proposition; which is, Our Present Sovereign is a signal Instance of the Care
God takes of Kings. For the especial concern of Divine Providence for Royal
safety, is plainly manifested in His Sacred Majesty; who has obtained such
frequent, and so eminent Salvations from the God of all Salvation. And under
the same Indulgent care may he live for ever! My business is not to give a
large account of His Majesty's Life, with the various Passages of the greatest
Jeopardy which by the Heavenly Conduct he has passed through. It shall suffice
to point at Three, or Four such great Deliverances of him, as may convince an
Enemy, and an Atheist, That the hand of God was with him in them: and will
therefore more confirm our belief of the special Care God takes of Kings, and
also stir us up to greater Thankfulness for his mercy toward our own.

The First Deliverance I shall recommend unto you, 1 Deliverance.
shall be that of His Majesty's strange, but safe, escape from Worcester. Not to
insist upon the Extremest hazard, wherewith his Royal Person was environed in
that fatal Fight, when so many of his Loyal Subjects fell on his Right hand,
and on his Left; before him, and behind: is it not Evident, by this very glance
already taken, that his Life was precious in the sight of God; and that he
covered his Head in that day of Battle? But after that, when all was lost; to
consider seriously, his hardest shifts, and greatest dangers; but his
Preservation still, and safe Deliverance at the last, must make us say; This
was the Lords doing, and it is mavelous in our Eyes! What was it, think you,
for a necessity to lie upon so great a Potentate, to change Majestic Robes,
See Boscobel.
for a Peasants Weeds? To turn his Garter, George of Diamonds, and other
Princely Ornaments, into the course Accoutrements of meaner Rusticks? For a
Crowned Head, and Royal Face, to be deformed, and sullyed so, as to Represent a
Country, Slovenly Swain! That he should take upon him the place, and business
of an ordinary, inferior Servant, who was the Rightful Lord and Master of
Three large Kingdoms! And that a Person accustomed to the choicest Delicacies,
and greatest Varieties, with most noble Attendance, suitable to his Imperial
State, and Dignity; should be constrein'd to wait his time; and then content
his Hunger with courser Fare; and sometimes too of his own Cooking! To be so
put to it; that wet Stockins, gravel'd Shoes, and galled Feet must be born
with patience by Him. Nay, Skulking in a Barn, Hiding in Holes, Sheltring in
Woods, and Lodging on a Tree, become good shifts! And with all, these
Distresses to be infested frequently with the Alarms of many Blood-thirsty
Enemies, and Jealousies of some seeming Friends, and disappointments of most
promising Hopes! And, as the last, and, perhaps, the worst of such a Throng of
Evils, To have a Price set on his Head, which far out bad the reward of Judas's
Treason; and so the more powerful temptation to a Traitor! Yet, that after such
Great Difficulties and Dangers, spun out unto full Six Weeks, abating but one
day; after Traveling up and down near Three hundred Miles, always in the Midst
of Foes, often through his Armed Enemies Quarters, and when the whole Country
was filled with Watches, for the seizing of him; it should be possible for our
King to get to Sea, and be Imbarqued with privacy, and safety; Escaping all
Mischiefs, though in the very Mouths of them; Who is there that believes a
Providence, and is not forced to say, as Job did in another case; The hand of
the Lord has wrought this?

The next Deliverance to be observed by us is, 2. Deliverance.
That from his Exile. It Is hard indeed, and so we ever justly take it, to be
driven from our Native Soil, and forced into a Foreign Land. But 'twas a
wonderful Mercy to our Prince, that he could get from home, and arrive abroad;
and both in safety! And then his Support there, when his Crowns, and Kingdoms,
and Revenues, were all lost and gone into the hands of Rebels, deserves
admiration too! No doubt the difficulties met with must needs be many; and his
Necessities often very great. His Loyal Friends that he left behind him were
but few; and those reduced generally to the lowest Ebb of Fortune. And where he
came, his Enemies influence quickly grew so great, that old Allies, and near
Relations became both shy, and weary of him; and it comes at last to that cold
kindness, That He must not stay within their Borders. But, notwithstanding all;
the same kind Providence, that saved him here, preserves him there: yea, and
provides both a safe Abode, and sufficient Support for him. Nor are there many
Years gone over, before the hand of God, in the Eyes of all the World, is made
bare and naked on his behalf. For when the King has no Foreign Aid at all:
either Navy to waft him safely over Sea, or Army to Fight his way on Land: and
when his old Faithful Subjects in his own Dominions, were still kept under
hatches so, that they could raise no Force, one way, or other, for his
Assistance: and when all Power was yet remaining in those Rebellious Hands,
whereby he had been banished from his Kingdoms, and his Birthright: When all
these Mountains lying in his way, should suddenly become a Plain, by the
All-ruling Providence; and matters be so ordered and disposed by the same,
touching Hs Majesty's Restoration to the Throne of his Fathers; That, what is
Written of Judah concerning David, may truly be applied to England, touching
Charles the Second; He bowed the heart of all the men of Judah, even as the
heart of one man; so that they sent this word unto the King; Return thou, and
all thy house: 2 Samuel 19.14! And our King returned, in peace and safety, with
greatest welcome, and Universal Joy; without the shedding of one drop of Blood,
or striking of one Angry stroke! Which must constrain us to confess to God in
the Psalmists Words, This is thy hand; and thou Lord have done it.

The Third is, 3. Deliverance.
Our Sovereigns Preservation in the late Popish Plot. And that there was a
Design, laid deep as Hell, against the Protestant Religion, and all its sincere
Professors in the Three Kingdoms, with all that was dear unto them; nay, and
against His Sacred Majesty's Life; by the Popish Agents, and Sons of Belial, we
have as good assurance I think, as any man could wish; excepting Them alone,
who would have had us felt it. For is not the Royal Word, and often repeated,
passed upon it? Have not Four succeeding Parliaments concurred to declare the
same? Is not the Public Justice of the Nation, in several Trials, Sentences,
and Executions, a voucher for it? Not to insist upon the Point Blank Evidences,
and most convincing Circumstances to the purpose. He that can think, That
Judges, Parliaments, and Sacred Majesty it self, could either be imposed upon
by their too much credulity; or that they would impose upon the Peoples Faith,
what themselves believed not; must necessarily, to my understanding, reflect
indecently; indeed, most scurrilously, if not worse, upon their Sagacity, or
Integrity; their Wisdom, or their Honesty. And this no Loyal Person surely can
be guilty of. Though I have not asked yet; Who, on the disbelief of such a
Plot, shall atone for so much innocent bloodshed in the case? All which, makes
me very apt to conclude, That he that will not now believe the Plot, neither
would he do it, though the Traitors from the dead were sent to confess it to
them. But notwithstanding there were New Fauxes enough to do the Villainy;
though the time, and place, and manner were appointed more than once; though
all the requisites were prepared for making of a Royal Sacrifice by the
barbarous Butchery of his Sacred Majesty; yet, the Alseeing, and Almighty, and
most Gracious Providence, does interpose, and discovers, and disappoints those
Hellish Factors. Thanks be to God, Our King Lives; Our Religion stands; And
they are fallen. The Blow is turned upon their own Heads. And as the Psalmist
says, They are sunk down into the Pit, which they made: in the Net which they
hid is their own foot taken. The wicked is snared in the work of his own hands,
Psalm. 9.15, 16.

The Last is, Our Kings Salvation in this last Fanatic, 4. Deliverance.
and Atheistical Plot. Fanatic it was: as being certainly inspired; of the
Devil, that is. And it cannot but be Atheistical; as disclaiming all sense of
God upon their Souls, who engaged in it. There is not any consistence of the
Principles leading to Assassinate Princes, or Massacre Subjects, with any
Religion, in the same mind. And the only True Religion, (and our Church's,)
called Protestant, Homiles against Rebels.
justly Condemns them to Hell, from whence they came. The Espousers of them
therefore, when they take the Name of Protestants on them, do but Nickname
themselves, to put a blind upon the World, and carry on their Devilish purposes
with the less suspicion. They must have been brought up in Ignatius Loyola's
School, or John-a-Leyden's, necessarily. It Is true, it seems a Reproach unto
our Religion, that those who did wear its Livery, and would be counted
belonging to it, should be given up to work such Wickedness: but really, it is
none: when we remember, That there was a Judas, who was a Devil, among the
Twelve Apostles; and had the name of One also. And as that Treason was abhorred
by the Eleven; so is this by all sound Protestants. What was designed by those
Wretches, you have had Public Notice, and a large account of, Once, and Again,
by His Majesty's Declaration. Which must assure every honest Man of the reality
of the Plot: although we had not Evidences, and Confessions now made Public,
that are able to convince an Infidel? But how to aggrvate justly the Nature of
the Thing, and fully represent the dismal Consequences thereof, if it had
succeeded: I must confess, that I want both Wit, and Words. The King, and his
Royal Brother to have been Barbarously, Brutishly, and Devilishly Assassinated!
So many Eminent Persons of the greatest Quality, and Loyalty butchered. What
but a general Massacre could have been expected! What but Three flourishing
Kingdoms wallowing in their own Blood, could have ensued thereupon? I need not
say, That our Laws, and Liberties, and Estates, must have layn at mercy to a
New Civil, and more Bloody War, that what we were not long since delivered
from. Or, that our Dear Religion, and the Gospel, would have been by such
Confusions cast upon their Deathbed, if ever they had recovered thence. There
is no man knows, whose very Life should have been given him, as a Prey! How
frightful are the thoughts of these things! But how abominable to God, and all
Good Men, must be the Authors of them! But thanks be unto God, Our King is
safe; and we together with him. Wherein those Men of Mischief dealt proudly,
indeed cruelly; the Almighty was above them. Blessed be the Lord, who has not
given us a Prey unto their teeth. The snare is broken, and we are escaped. Our
help is in the name of the Lord, who made heaven and earth. Psalm. 124.6, 7, 8.
Thus is our King a Signal Instance of God's peculiar Care of Princes; which
fairly leads us unto the

Fourth, 4. Propos.
and Last Proposition: This is just occasion for His Mafesties, and his Peoples
great joy and thankfulness unto God.

All Mercies bring with them just matter of Rejoyceing in, and giving Thanks
for, unto God, that gives them. But the more signal any Blessing is, the
greater is the Obligation thereby laid upon us, to enlarge our Hearts in joyful
gratitude. 'Twas a great fault in King Hezekiah, though a good Man otherwise,
That he rendered not again according to the benefit done unto him, 2 Chronicles.
35.25. And our Savior makes a just complaint against the Nine Lepers, That
they returned not to give God glory for his Mercy to them, Luke 17.17, 18.

As for our Sovereign; so many remarkable Circumstances, in that Deliverance
this day acknowledged, concur to commend, and advance the singular kindness of
the Almighty toward him; that they cannot but influence his Royal Soul to
joyful Thanksgiving.

As First; A Design, in its Nature so horrid and feral, to be disapointed! The
very Life of Himself, and Dearest Brother, with such Cruelty, and Inhumanity to
be ravished from them! And by his own Subjects, and Servants, that ought with
alacrity to have laid down their Lives, for his sake! So many Principal
Ministers, if not all his Loyal Subjects, and Three whole Kingdoms lying at
stake together!

Again, To escape such a Plot, that was unsuspected! For though the King knew,
no doubt, of a Discontented Party: Nothing is more probable, than that he was
secure of any such vile, and villainous Attempt. And truly, the thing is so
uncouth, and monstrous, so aliene from, and adverse to Humane Nature; (to say
nothing of Christian Religion, which damns the very Seeds and Principles
thereof:) that an innocent, honest, and well-meaning man, but for such clear
Evidence that shines like the Sun at noonday, would be apt in this Case to
take up the words of Nicodemus in an other, How can these things be? But so
plain is the proof; that now for one to deny it, seems, if not to Confess, he
is in it; at least, to signify good wishes to it.

Yet further, an horrible mischief to be blasted, That was so easy to have
been effected! His Majesty (though not without need, we clearly perceive) being
always provided of a meet Defense for his Sacred Person; yet at this time, and
place, out of Confidence, we may suppose, of the Loyalty and Love of his
People, seeming to neglect his wonted Guards; at least to be satisfied with a
less number than usual; encouraged the Villainy, and threatened less danger to
the vile Undertakers.

Besides; The unexpectedness of the Providence that defeated the Treason, adds
much to the mercy of scaping it. The burning down of his Majesty's Town, kept
up the Tabernacle of his Majesty's Body. New Market Fire, though it were not
likely to quench those Traitors thirst for his Sacred Blood, yet it choked
them from drinking it. For, that so sad an Accident there, was made the
occasion of great gladness elsewhere: in causing the removal of the King before
his intended, and their expected Season.

Lastly, That a Confederate in the Villainy, as deep, and as forward as any of
the vilest, should be smitten so with the Horror of the Fact (as himself does
confess,) that the Fever and Convulsion of his own mind would give him no
rest, till he made the Discovery!

These are all such Circumstances, that severally would do much; but joined as
they are, do mightily enhance the price of God's Care for the King's
Preservation. And accordingly they have prevailed upon him, for the most Solemn
and Public Acknowledgment thereof. Which, past all doubt, is very well, and
most Religiously done. That, as Mordecai called his People, to a day of Public
Gladness and Rejoicing, for his Own, and Their Deliverance, from Haman's Rage
and Cruelty: So on a much like occasion, our Sovereign should invite his
Subjects to such a Solemnity of Public and joyful Thanksgiving, as at this
day: both on his own behalf, and ours.

For it must be remembered, as 'twas told us before, That we likewise are
concer'd in duty herein. It must be our business, as well as our Kings, To
rejoice, and bless God for this great Salvation. And were there none other
reason, we were obliged hereto, solely for the sake of our Sovereign. The Holy
Scriptures have told you already, That Prayers, and Praises besides, are owing,
for Kings, and All in Authoriiy. And what is more reasonable and just? Does not
He Protect us (under God) in our Lives, and Liberties, and Estates? Nay, which
is yet more: Is not He the Defender of the Faith; and a Preserver of the Gospel
amongst us? You know, He Is our Governor, our Father, and our Head! How great
is our Concernment therefore in His Safety and Happiness? Is there any of us,
that can honestly grudge to say to our King, as David's good Subjects once said
unto him, Thou art worth ten thousand of us? And if God's Church of Old,
bewailed the loss of their King, as loosing the breath of their nostrils, Lam.
4.20? Should not a Christian Church have an Equal Value for their King now? Nay
verily, if God had permitted this Dreadful Design to have prosper'd, we should
have had but too much cause to have taken up their mournful Dialect, and in the
Utmost Extent of its sense too.

For I beseech you consider, into what a dismal Chaos Matters had presently
been trun'd! What frights and spoils; what havocks and slaughters, must have
instantly followed? When the White Flag of Peace had been dipped a Blood-colour;
and the ravenous Sword, like an hunger-bit Lion at his Prey, were tearing and
devouring our Flesh; whither then could we fly for Refuge? Say, that some of us
might have escaped with our Lives: where had our Liberties been? Must not our
Ears have been bored; and We sealed an Indenture of perpetual Slavery to the
Prevailing Party? What would have become of Religion, Posterity, and Numberless
Souls God only knows! The Prevention whereof, gives us just reason to say;
This is the day which the Lord has made: we will rejoice and be glad therein.

But this will have its more proper place in

The Practical Reflections on the Whole: Practical Reflections.
which are but these Two; For 1. Obedience to Man. For 2. Thankfulness to God.


1. For Obedience to Man; the Magistrate, 1 Reflect.
that is: the King as Supreme, and Governors, as sent by him; as St. Peter
Expresses it. And I need do little else, than pray you to remember, What
plentiful Testimony you have already had from the Holy Scriptures for this
great Duty. So that, the Refusers hereof, must needs be Rebellious against God:
disobedient unto, and contemners of his Word. Whoever will prove faithful
Servants of the Lord, must also be found Loyal Subjects to their Prince. He can
never be true unto God, that is false to his Minister; which the Magistrate is.
Be dutiful therefore, in cheerful complying with all good Laws. And if any be
suspected: you must be pa^ent in submitting, where you cannot be active in
fulfilling. Join also highest Veneration for your Governors and the Chief
especially. Having heard before, That the best thoughts of them, should always
fill your Minds. And let your Discourse be sparing about Public Matters; and
still most reverend thereof; and of those that manage them. Is it fit to say
unto a King, Thou art wicked? And to Princes, ye are ungodly? Job. 34.18.
Beware of speaking evil of the Rulers of the people; Act. 23.5. The best
Constructions, and best Expressions of all Public Managements, do best become
us, and are due from us. Our distance will not allow a due Judgment; and our
duty binds us to the fairest Interpretation of them.

The Covering very nakedness of Superiors gat the Blessing; when the contrary
method of divulging it brought the Curse, Genesis 9. Private Men's Work does lie
at home, within their own Sphere: and such a Person should check his aptness to
extravagate, with, Who makes Me a Judge; as our Savior once rebuked a
Pragmatick Spirit, Luke 12.14? Why will any be so busy then in Affairs of
State, which are not their Province? Would we consult the Spirit of the Gospel;
and tread his Steps, the Prince of Peace, and Lamb for Meekness, that did send
it; and theirs the Sons of Peace, of Patience, and Submission, who did bring
it; how easy would this business be; and how effectual would the Counsel to it
prove with All? Let us therefore study to be quiet, and do our own business; as
St. Paul Commands, 1 Thessalonians. 4.11. And according to St. Peter, make a full
proof, that we Fear God, by Honor paid unto the King.

2. For Thankfulness unto God. 2 Reflect.
The just occasion for it has so fully been already manifested; that nothing
else is wanting, but the Practice of it; whereto so many Motives press us. How
should our Hearts be now enlarged; how should our Mouths be opened to Bless,
and Praise the Lord; to Exalt and Magnify his Name, for this so great
Salvation, he has wrought? 'Twas not our Strength, and Power; no Wisdom and
Fore sight of ours; nay, nor our Care and Diligence that was contributary to
the Deliverance! But it was God's right Hand, and his own Arm, and the light of
his Countenance that did All; because he had a favor to us. Shall we not say
then, and say it from our Hearts; Blessed be the Lord, the God of Israel, who
only does wondrous things: and blessed be his Glorious Name for Ever, and
Ever? Do we love our King? Who ought to be the Delight of our Eyes; the joy of
our Hearts; and the breath of our Nostrils. Let us Magnify then the Almighty,
and most Merciful God, That his Anointed was not taken in their pits. Have we a
value for our Country? Acquaintance, Friends, and near Relations, are they dear
unto us? Let us Exalt his Name that is most High, that they are not wallowing
in their own goar; nor it become a New Akeldama, a Field of Blood again.

Is our Religion, and the Gospel more than our very Lives with us? Let us give
thanks, and praise to God, that still he does preserve them. For had that
wickedness prosper'd, when Irreligion like a Deluge must have overwhelmed us,
what had become of the Word and Ordinances, of all true Piety, and Devotion?

Can we forbear the Psalmists Language now? Bless the Lord, O our Souls: and
all within us, magnify his holy Name. How should we, from our Hearts, as I
said, declare God's praises with our Mouths?

And let me add thereto, before we part; How should our Lives and Conversations
Echo hereunto? For I must tell you, That Thanksgiving unto God is not matter
of mere Complement. Nor are his Praises the labor of our Lips only. No man
can be truly thankful, unless he will be really holy. To speak well of God, and
spurn his Laws the while, is like to Joab's kind saluting of Amasa when he
stabbed him. Whilst the Life Dishonours God, the praises of the Mouth are no
better then Dung Sacrificed; which will be thrown back with indignation into
his Face that offers it. Will the most Holy and Alseeing God account, That
Tongue does bless his Name, as it ought, with Thanks and Praise; whose daily
trade it is, to Blaspheme the same with horrid Oaths and Execrations? Or can
he reckon those Persons thankful for his Mercies, whatever they say; that abuse
those very Mercies, to the Service of their Lusts, and Satan? What? Atheism,
and Profaneness, pay God the Tribute of his Praises! Can drunken Healths, or
wanton Embraces; open Violences, or secret frauds, or any irreligious Courses
give him Glory; to whom they bid Defyance. Assure your selves, That ungodly
Lives, and holy Praises, are like the Ark and Dagon; they never stand together
in the sight of God. You must therefore either necessarily leave your Sins, or
loose your Thanks; how fair soever they may seem. If we would then be truly
Thankful, and to God's Acceptance: Let us praise him with our Lips, and please
him in our Lives. Let Us being delivered from our Enemies, serve him that has
delivered us, in righteousness and holiness before him all our days, Luke 1.75.
This is that Thanksgiving, which is alone thankworthy. All other is not Current
Coin: indeed, Reprobate Silver, or mere Dross. Let us be renewed and reformed
therefore. Let us Renounce the works of darkness, and walk as Children of the
light. Let us cleanse our selves from filthiness of Flesh and Spirit, to the
perfecting holiness in the fear of God, 2 Cor. 7.1. Without a sincere endeavor
after which, as our Praise is lost; so are our Persons too, for ever. For God
hates all the workers of iniquity.

And take this further Motive hereunto. You would be, surely, counted Loyal to
your Prince; but give me leave to tell you, a debauched, vicious, and sinful
Life, is so far from being any proof thereof, that it gives great cause to fear
the contrary. It Is somewhat hard to think; How that Man should be truly Loyal
to his King; that is, an open Rebel against God. So, such Sinners are. Whatever
Obligation they may stand in to their Prince, those on them unto God are
infinitely greater. And what security is there, that he that breaks the
stronger Bond, should not likewise snap the weaker?

This we are sure of; That Profane, and Ungodly Subjects may, by their wicked
Lives, work great mischief to their Sovereign; though they may not mean it in
their Minds. And so we are urged unto Holiness, on the account of Loyalty also.
'Twas the Prophets Counsel unto Subjects, 1 Samuel 12.24, 25. Fear the Lord, and
serve him in Truth, with all your heart: for consider how great things he has
done for you. And it follows: But if ye still do wickedly, ye shall be
destroyed; both ye and your King. See here the Public Mischief that may be
done by Private Persons continuing in their wickedness. Even Majesty it self is
not secure from it. And it is strange Loyalty that over-turns Sovereignty!
Whereto, it is manifest, That Subject's Sins have an apparent tendency.

For a Conclusion of all. If we love our King, our Country, our Friends, our
Selves, both Souls and Bodies; let it be our care and business, with highest
Praises for all God's mercies; and This signal One, to join the Holy Practice
of all God's Commandments.

Then,

Whosoever offers praise, glorifyeth me, says the Scripture; and to him that
orders his Conversation aright, will I show the Salvation of God. Psalm.
50.23.
FINIS:

