THE Humble ADDRESS AND ADVICE Of several of the PEERS Of this REALM, For the
Sitting of the PARLIAMENT.

Presented to His Majesty at WHITE HALL, the 7th. of December. 1679.

LONDON: Printed in the Year of our Lord, 1679.

THE Humble Address, etc.
SIR,
WE are here to cast our selves at Your Majesty's Feet, being ten of the
Peers of Your Realm of ENGLAND, and in our own Names, and in the Names of
several others of our Fellow-Peers, do humbly beg, That Your Majesty would
consider the great Danger Your Royal Person is in; as also the Protestant
Religion, and the Government of these Your Nations.

We humbly pray, That in a time when all these are so highly concerned, Your
Majesty will effectually use Your Great Council the Parliament.

SIR, Out of the deepest sense of Duty and Loyalty to Your Majesty, We offer it
as our Humble Advice and Earnest Petition, That the Parliament may sit at the
time appointed; And that Your Majesty would be Graciously pleased to give
Public Notice and Assurance thereof, that the Minds of Your Majesty's Subjects
may be settled, and their Fears removed.

This Address was offered in the Names and by the Order of the Peers
undernamed, (Viz.)

-- 1.Kent, -- 2.Huntingdon, -- 3.Bedford, -- 3.1Clare, -- 4.Stamford, --
5.Shaftsburg, -- 6.Say and Seal, -- 7.Eure, -- 8.North and Gray, 1 --
1.Chandos, 1 -- 2.Gray, -- 9.Howard, ^1.Herbert, 1 -- 2.Rockingham, 1 --
3.Townshend, -- 10.Holles, ^2.Delamer.
And was personally presented to His Majesty by four Earls, and five Barons.
(Viz.)

Huntingdon, Clare, Stamford, Shaftsbury, North and Gray, Chandos, Gray,
Howard, Herbert.
With whom the Earl of Bedford had personally joined, but that by a sudden
indisposition he was prevented.

It was delivered by the Earl of Huntingdon, in the Name of the abovenamed
Lords. And they were introduced to His Majesty by his Highness Prince Rupert.

His Majesty was Graciously pleased to return this Answer.

THat He would consider of what they had offered, and could heartily wish that
all other People were as sollicitous for the Good and Peace of the Nation as he
would ever be.

By the Statute 13. Car. 2. Cap. 5.

It is Enacted that after the first of August, 1661. no Person or Persons
whatsoever shall repair to His Majesty upon pretense of presenting or
delivering any Petition, Complaint, Remonstrance, Declaration, or other
Addresses, accompanied at any one time with above the number of ten Persons.

Which is supposed to be the reason why no greater Number of the Lords were
personally present.

FINIS.

