The Humble Address, and hearty Desires of the Gentlemen, Ministers and
Freeholders of the County of NORTHAMPTON.
Presented to his Excellency the Lord General MONK, at his arrival at
Northampton, January 24. 1659.
WE the Gentlemen, Ministers and Freeholders of the County of Northampton,
humbly conceiving that the first Force put upon the Parliament has been an
Encouragement to open the way to all the rest; and finding that your
Excellency under God has been the principal means for the repairing of the
last Interruption, are the more encouraged, and (having the convenience of your
presence now amongst us) to desire your assistance in the procuring these our
just Desires, as the visible means of a happy Peace and Settlement of these
Nations.

I. That whereas every freeborn Subject of England is supposed to be present
in Parliament by the Knights and Burgesses of the place where he lives, and
thereby is presumed to consent to all things that pass in Parliament; So it is
now, that there is not one Knight for all the Counties in Wales, nor for diverse
Counties in England, and some of them the largest in England, as that of
Yorkshire. II. That no freeborn Subject of England may have any Taxes levied
upon him, without his consent in Parliament. III. To that End, that all vacant
places may be supplied, whether they became vacant by Death, or Seclusion; and
that those that were secluded by force in the year 1648. may fit again; and
that no previous Oath or Engagement may be put upon any that is chosen by his
Country to fit and Vote freely in Parliament. IV. That the Fundamental Laws of
England, the Privileges of Parliament, the Liberty of the Subject, and the
Property of Goods, may be asserted and defended, according to the first
Declarations of the Parliament, when they undertook the War. V. That the true
Protestant Religion may be professed and defended, all Heresies, Sects and
Schisms discountenanced and suppressed, a lawful succession of Godly and Able
Ministers continued and encouraged, and the two Universities, and all Colleges
in both of them, may be preserved and countenanced. VI. That all the Soldiery
that will acquiesce in the Judgment of a free and full Parliament, in the
promoting and settling a happy Peace upon those Foundations, may have their
Arrears paid, and as many of them as the Parliament shall think necessary, may
be continued in the public Service; and that as many of them as have been
Purchasers of Lands from the Parliament, may either enjoy their Bargains, or
their Money paid back with Interest, and some considerable Advantage over and
above, for their satisfactions, as the Parliament shall judge expedient for the
public good of the Nation.
This Address was prepared by the Gentlemen, etc. abovesaid, to be presented to
General Monk, at his entrance into Northampton.


