A Fast-Sermon, Preached to the LORDS IN THE High-Court of Parliament
Assembled, On the Day of SOLEMN HUMILIATION for the continuing PESTILENCE,
October. 3. 1666. And by their ORDER Published.

By GEORGE Lord Bishop of Chester.

London, Printed for Timothy Garthwait, 1666.

Psalm. vii. 9. O let the wickedness of the wicked come to an end, but establish
the just.


THat our Plague-sick Land may be healed, That the destroying Angel after his
slaughter of so many thousands and Ten thousands, may be bidden to return his
Commission as sufficiently executed, This is the aim; and business of our
solemn convention and posture of Humiliation this day, a Humiliation, which as
long as it has been continued, I wish it were yet well begun, we are both
called, and concerned to seek the face of our infinitely incensed God; and we
have answered, Thy face, Psalm. 27.8.
Lord, will we seek. But that we may seek him not in vain, we must seek him in
earnest; and the holy Prophet is our ready Monitor, Isa. 21.12.
If you will seek him, then seek; do it to purpose: And he seems, me thinks, to
pull us on, whom he sees negligent and dilatory, Return, come, Isa. 21.12.
seek him in earnest? But so we may, and yet in vain, if we seek him not in a
right order: we know there was a breach of God upon his people once for this,
That they sought him, 1 Chro. 15.13.
but not in a due order: And certainly, the right order of removing judgments
is, a causa ad causatum; beginning with the cause; taking away that, that the
effect may cease: That a fire may be put out, the fuel which feeds it, must be
withdrawn, or well quenched: That there may be no foul weather, there must be
no condensed clouds, no foul vapors exhaled: That there may be no Plague to be
deprecated, there must be no plague of the heart cherished, for there it
begins, Psalm. 60.2.
That the sores and breaches of a Land under which it mourns and shakes, may be
healed, the backslidings of that Land must be healed, Jer. 3.22.
Here is a short course, and a sure issue; Let wickedness come to an end; --
let pestilential manners cease, and the pestilence has nothing to seize upon;
Pray down the one, and you pray off the other. Now you see the Text is proper,
natural, and right to our purpose; God make my sudden thoughts upon it as
kindly operative upon all our hearts, (...), 2 Timothy 1.13.
healing, sound, wholesome words should be spoken by us at all times, but at such
a time especially, that they may be medicinal and preservative to drive away,
to keep off infection, to restore health to the daughter of Gods people, the
cure is much in our selves, as the cause of the disease is altogether in us.

Wickedness to come to an end? This is not iniquum petere, but is it not in
auditum petere? Well might this be the option, the wish rather then prayer of
David the good King; but the prediction of David the Prophet sure it could not
be; For to what time could it be calculated? or when should these things be?
Not till there be a new Heaven, and a new Earth, a more pure, holy and happy
age then ever yet was, and much less is like to be. Let the wickedness of the
wicked come to its height, so as to reach up to Heaven; let the measure of
iniquity be filled up, and running over; let the manners of men be so
superlatively and profligately vicious that they cannot be worse. If the Text
had been thus, this age would bid fair for the fulfilling of it, but not
otherwise; and to any one who will measure the acceptableness and energy of a
prayer, by the likelihood of its success and return, this looks like a prayer
quite lost, and sounds like that strange Absolution which was pronounced over a
great sinner, Deus tui misereatur si vult) and condonet (quod non credo.) But
God forbid we should cast all those prayers as vain and unacceptable, which do
not obtain their expressed effect: We pray in our Letany, That God would have
mercy upon all men; We know he will not, or rather, in honor he cannot; yet it
is a very acceptable piety, and duly extensive charity, to pray so; For would
God have all men to be saved, and would not we? Is it a scruple to put as many
into our prayers, as our Lord Christ did own dying for? Or are we afraid, lest
the many prepared mansions in Heaven should be over-filled, though there were
as many blessed Saints as Men? My prayer returned into my own bosom, (said this
man after Gods heart, Psalm. 35.13.) such a return and reserve at least there is
of every good man's Prayer, if it obtain no more; I do not say, this Prayer here
did only return into David's bosom; I know the contrary, His enemies did feel
the force of it.

And whosoever looks into the occasion of this Psalm, and considers how it was with
this best of Kings, and Men, will see particular urgent reason for this Prayer,
That wickedness might come to an end; For was he not hard beset with
inveterate, irreconcilable Enemies? with false, treacherous Friends? Of his
Council, of his Household, of his own Loins? Plotters against his Person?
Disturbers of the peace of his Kingdom? There was no end of the malignity, nor
like to be, unless the Divine Providence would give a strange check and stop
unto it; therefore as if he did point at such particular persons, (the
perpetual thorns in his side) at Achitophel, (says Theodoret, but there is no
good synchronism in that) at Saul, (say Cajetan and Lyranus) he devotes them to
the Justice of God, and in their destruction assures and foretells his own
establishment: It may be the unhappy Fate of the best of Princes, That all the
most obliging graciousness of his Government, shall not endear him to
ungracious Subjects; his Golden Scepter shall gain no more to his obedience,
then the Iron Rod of a Usurper did: Wickedness will still have its Attempts,
and there is no security from them; Isaiah 7:4:
smoking Firebrands laid together, will be quickly ready to take fire, and set
all in combustion; but as happy is, the issue may help all, That wickedness,
shall come to an end; it shall be taken off, and shall not be able to hinder
the establishment of his Throne; and that it may be so, prayer must be made to
the righteous Punisher or Restrainer of the wicked, and establisher of the
just, O let the wickedness of the wicked come to an end.

But what? do we find David here devoutly cursing his Enemies on his knees? --
Tantaene animis Coelestibus Irae? Consumet nunc malum impios, so the
Interlinear. He wishes a present Consumption upon them, destruction upon them,
(as the Chaldee) They who thus understand him, do suppose his aim to be only
at the more malicious, implacable Enemies of Gods Kingdom, and his, according
to that other passage of his, Psalm. 59 5.
Be not merciful, O God, unto them who offend of malicious wickedness, (to men
of Readiness spirit.) But you may also (if you please) find some charity and
tenderness appearing through all that anger; for as elsewhere he said, Psalm.
141.6. I will pray yet against their wickedness, or against their mischiefs,
not against their persons; so here he does no more: It is (if you observe)
destructur malitia, not let them, but let their wickedness be destroyed, and
come to an end; and to confirm this, when David seemed most exasperated, so
that he could not contain from a Confundantur, Let them be confounded; yet he
did not curse, but bless the men, even in that, as he interprets himself,
Confound them (that is) in their imaginations; and Psalm. 83.16. Let their faces
be filled with shame, but eo consilio, that they may seek thy Name; as if he
did strike purposely at their wickedness, and yet would save their persons if
he could: And the charitable gloss which Sr. Basil puts upon this prayer of
his, is, That they may repent of their wickedness, and be reclaimed, and not
infect others. But how St. Austin, Jerome, and some others with them, primae
Cerae, could think that David here looked as far as to the Jews, Crucifiers of
Christ, praying, That they might accomplish their wickedness, and so hasten the
accomplishment of the redemption of Mankind, I confess I am too purblind to see
so far off: Well, in praying, O let the wickedness of the wicked come to an
end. 1. This supposition is clear:

Wickedness (if let alone) will be interminable and Infinite; there will be no
end of the provocation, nor of the mischief of it.

2. Upon this the Inference will be strongly enforced, In Policy as well as in
Piety; it should not be let alone, but provided against, and prayed against.

You have heard it often said by Divines, That every ungodly person sins in
eterno suo; the passage was St. Gregory's, Justum ut qui in suo eterno peccavit
contra Deum, in Dei eterno puniatur: If the man we speak of, might live so long
as his wickedness would live, and be continued, it would be to the days of
Eternity; for so says he again, Iniqui voluissent sine fine vivere, ut sine
fine potuissent in iniquitatibus permanere: O God (cries out our holy Psalmist)
shall the Enemy blaspheme thy Name for ever! for ever and evermore; or for ever
and yet (for so the Hebrew loves to exaggerate) as if it would (...) a term of
duration longer then eternity, in that he implies, Let them alone, and they
will certainly blaspheme thy Name for ever.

Our Masters in the Metaphysics do easily determine, Non dari actu Infinitum,
That God himself cannot make another Infinite; but if sin could be fitted with
a subject to perpetuate it self in, it would prove the contrary; nay it does
also (it is no Paradox) prove an actual Infinity; For, when does this leave a
man? when it has corrupted and worn out his miserable body, and brought him to
the grave? Is this the last mischief of it? Alas no, the bad works as well as
the good, do follow men into the other world; the sin is as immortal as the
soul which it has polluted; and what but that in the guilty Conscience,
becomes the gnawing worm that never dies? As the torments of the damned can be
no other then eternal, so are their sins also; they can no more cease to sin,
then to suffer; Culpa quae est irreparabilis de se, habet quod perpetuo duret,
and ideo ei debetur paena eterna, (says Aquinas.)

The petulant and ever-importunate nature of sin, how far it would be from
giving over, and coming to an end, the daily practice of men gives
Demonstration enough. As God said concerning those mad designing
Babel-builders, Genesis 11, 16. This they begin to do, and now nothing will be
restrained from them which they have imagined to do: So may it be said of all
other active sons of wickedness, As men begin to do, according to the visible
wildness of their actings, nothing would be restrained from them, there would
be no end of the mischiefs and confusions they would make. The Evil which is
done, is with both hands, earnestly, Micah 7.3*
as the Prophet most emphatically expresses the impiety. By the way, Why should
not we put both our hands, as earnestly, (the strength of the Brachium Seculare
added to our weaker Ecclesiastical Coercions) to manacle and hamstring those
mighty men in outrageous wickedness, (...)
who every where confront, not us, but God, being engaged in a continual and
open Theomachy? In short, so far would ungodliness proceed, as the not bounded
malignity of a Devil could set it on, until Heaven it self were turned into a
Hell, I am quite confounded to think of it. It is vulgarly said of the
Crocodile, That he knows no Maximum quod sic, he is always growing bigger, and
never comes to a certain pitch of Monstrosity so long as he lives: Every
habituated wicked man would (if he were let alone) be such a Monster,
perpetually growing worse; for sin does never cease from him, but he from that.
There is a known expression in Scripture, Romans 2. Treasuring up wrath against
the day of wrath; does not that import a perpetual labor of Cumulation, and
adding to the heap so long as the Divine Justice will permit? whence the
Apostles (...), 2 Timothy 3.6.
mulieres peccatis cumulatas. We read of an Ephah going forth, a full measure
of iniquity, Zach. 5.7. Joel 3.13.
(by this token, A Woman was seen sitting in the midst of it) and of Fats so
full that they overflowed; I do not suppose such a full measure intimated
there, that no more would be added, but no more is permitted to be added, the
Actors being taken off. We read of Transgression sealed up in a bag, Job 14.17.
and iniquity sowed up: That Seal is not put upon the bag, nor is it sown up by
the transgressors themselves, but by the righteous God, whose wearied
long-suffering cannot hold out to endure their transgressions any longer; and
it is so expressed, My transgression is sealed up in a bag, and thou sowest up
mine iniquity; I acknowledge also the damning phrase of Fulfilling lusts, yet I
do not think that ever any man did plenarily fulfill his lusts, so that they
required no more service of him; that he could ask, (...), and supererogate
this way; but that being wholly devoted to them, he does his devoir, and spends
himself in their service. For are lusts ever to be fulfilled and satiated? Come
to particulars, I would know when Covetousness will think it self sufficiently
crammed and served? That Daughter of the Horse leach crying always, Prove. 30.15.
Give, give, certainly as soon will Hell and the Grave say, It is enough.
Though a sordid avaricious wretch should sit brooding on his Bags to multiply
them, though he could wallow among his heaps of Gold, and could grasp as much
as his eye can reach, and would take the Devil to his word, as he is ready to
do, All these things will I give thee, is it possible he should yet account
himself full, and well-pleased? No, it is quite otherwise, The eye is not
satisfied with seeing, 1 John 2.16.
This (...) is never to be glutted. Sacrilege (whose mouth is an open
Sepulcher) Would this ever leave swallowing up and devouring, while the Church
has any remaining Patrimony, God any house in the Land to be impropriated and
taken into possession?

Will Lust think it has had gratification enough, so long as there is any
Marrow left in the bones? What God said by his Prophet, of the spiritual
whoredom, is more experienced of the bodily; Ezekiel. 16.29.
Thou have multiplied thy Fornications, and yet thou art not satisfied.

When will Schism sit down, as thinking it has made the rupture wide enough
in the Garment of Christ? Certainly not till it has torn all into small
pieces, so that Lots may be cast for it; not till the Church of God be all in
fractions, quite dis-churched by it. There is without all question, an infinity
of wickedness, of it self it would never come to an end.

What then remains, but that it be shortened and cut off, that a Providential
violence be used upon it? Psalm. 76.
The fierceness of man shall thou, O Lord, restrain; so the rage of man's
wickedness shall thou restrain. Thou who do put a hook into the nostrils of
the Leviathan, a bridle upon the Sea, and say, Hitherto shall thou go, and no
further, and here shall thy proud waves be stayed; Thou by the interposal of
thy Mighty, Overruling, Coercive Power, can, and wilt do this, which else
will never be done.

Dissert. 4. (...).
The ingenious Max. Tyrius has a grave Dissertation of the (...), The many, and
those everlasting Torrents of wickedness, so multiplied, and so strong, that
they might require, and puzzle many Oracles, ((...) is his word) to tell men
when there will be a stop of them; and no man (says he) in my opinion, can be
blamed for asking inquisitively this Question of the Oracle (the very Question
of the Text) (...)? what the end of wickedness will be? or, whether there will
be any end at all? To this (as he adds) Socrates could answer, as well as
Apollo Pythius; and therefore did Apollo adopt and take him in as his Colleague
and Assessor, -- (...), because he had as good skill as himself: The only way
that I know to give an Oracular Answer to this Question, will be this; When
iniquity is full ripe, and ready for vengeance, then it shall have an end; as
when the Corn is ripe and yellow, the Sickle is called for, Joel 3.13.
Put ye in the Sickle (says God to his Reapers the destroying Angels) for the
Harvest is ripe, for the wickedness is great. It was the sad greeting of
unhappy Zedekiah -- And thou -- whose day is come, when iniquity shall have an
end. Ezekiel. 21.25.
And when is that, in a full and proper sense, but when it has passed all its
gradual Acts, so that it is now consummate, perfected and completed; (...),
James 1.15.
(as the Apostles word is) sin finished, and so the Sept. renders David's sense
here by a pregnant word (...), signifying both consumatur and consummetur, when
it is got to its height, acting all the parts of an Imperial Usurper, being
grown despotical and Absolute, Legislative and Imposing; and when the Dominion
of it is so extended, that it is become National and Universal, so insolent,
that it tramples and glories over all Laws of God and Men; so impudent, that it
has steeled its forehead, and is openly shameless, boasting of its exploits;
They declare their sin as Sodom, I^a 3 9.
they hide it not: So wanton also, that it racks the brains of men to devise
new modes of wildness: And indeed, to proceed Professors in Vice in the Devils
Academies now, does require more Art and improved ingenuity in ungodliness,
then those duller and less studied sinners our forefathers, could attain unto.
Simply to commit sin, in an ordinary vulgar way, is small demerit; but to
search out iniquities, and to accomplish a diligent search, Psalm. 64.6.
our holy Psalmist notes this as a proof of a fair advance of the Devils
Vertuosi. The Sept. have in an elegant kind of Reduplication expressed the
industriousness of men more studiously wicked, by their researches of new ways,
and mysteries of iniquity, in that place, (...), but men's practice out-doth the
expression, they studying some more new, and formerly unknown ways of
ungodliness, to accomplish themselves, and as if a consultation had been had
with the French, Italian, and all outlandish Devils, to advise us of all their
several Modes and Fashions of Vice, we are so good at following them, that
indeed we are more complete in them then our Patterns. And what? when the
hearts of men are so full of impiety, that they cannot contain from venting
(...), James 1.21.
the superfluity or overflowing of the gall of wickedness, in Atheistical
droling scoffs at whatsoever is most Sacred, and to be trembled at; and our
ears tingle to hear such high and frequent darings of Divine vengeance, that
the most deeply damned in Hell could never be guilty of worse, when wickedness
is come up to this height, Is it not near coming to an end? Wonder not if this
be the cordolium of all who are faithful and sensible in the land; if it put
them into the lamenting Prophet Jeremy's Iliaca passio, his fit of the Cholich,
to cry out, My bowels, my bowels, Jer. 4.19.
I am pained at my very heart, my heart makes a noise in me, I cannot hold my
peace: 2 Pet. 2.8.
It is enough (shall I say) to vex the soul of a righteous Lot? to make a
zealously affected Ezra to rend his Garment, and his Mantle; to pluck off the
hair of his head, and of his beard? Ezr 9 3. (...) Acts 17 16.
To raise a Paroxisme of grief and indignation in the holy Apostle? Yea, truly,
to make the hearts of all good men to sink and die in them; to see how
prodigiously lewd and impudent men are grown, since that most obliging miracle
of our Restoration; Seneca declaimed sufficiently as he thought against the
vices of his time, when he said -- Certatur ingenti quodam nequitiae certamine,
Men do play prizes in wickedness; as if he were the gallantest man who could be
most wicked: and Undique velut signo dato; that is the phrase of the Scripture
too: Jer. 8 6.
As the Horse rusheth into the battle upon the signal given, so do men
fearlesly run upon the Pikes of divine wrath, through whatsoever wickedness is
before them. It was bad when he observed such was the generality of all kind of
Iniquity -- Ut Innocentia non rara sit, sed nulla. He did there in effect cry
out with our holy Psalmist, Psalm. 12.
Help, Lord, for the godly man cease, the fidelities fail from among the
Children of men, such also it seems was the publickness and impudence of vice
then -- Ut scenam desiderent, They want only (says he) open Theaters, or
Belconies to be seen acting their lewdness upon -- Omnem omnino pudorem, etc.
Modesty is put out of countenance; nay, -- Adeo lupanar quoque verecundum est,
a very Brothel house is modest in comparison. Tertullian thought he had
complained enough (and he never wanted expressiveness) when he said -- Delicti
durior frons est, and ab ipso delicto impudentiam docto, etc. and when he taxed
some of the other sex, calling them -- Pudoris sui interemtrices, and
infelicissimas publicarum libidinum victimas; I am loath to English it. The holy
Bishop and Martyr Cyprian thought himself no doubt a sour and severe Reprover
when he complained to the Proconsul of Africa that there was no shame of
wickedness remaining; Cyprian ad Demetrianum.
and men did so offend -- Quasi per ipsa peccata placeatur, and so Salvian --
Quasi liceat, quasi oporteat: but truly all those were soft and gentle
redargutions, like old Eli's (Nay my sons) which Reverend Du Moulin called
whipping them with Rosemary: they were not smart enough for this Brawny Age;
those Times brought forth but Punies and Pigmies in comparison of our Anakims
in wickedness: Now sure when it is come to such a formidable height, it is time
for good men to be upon their knees, to pray that it may come to an end.

The general Concernment for this, is so great, that (interim ut fit) they
being let alone, nothing could be imagined to follow, but the worst that can be
imagined. We will dispute no longer in the Schools, whether sin be a mere
Privation? Whether it has any Positive Entity? Be it a privation, it is such a
one as has very real influxe, and is the efficient of most horrdi mischiefs,
being enough to bring Heaven and Earth together.

Lord! what dismal and amazing changes will this make? What Elijah's powerful
prayer did for the better, this will do for the worse; when there is a clear
sky, like a Molten Looking-Glass, Job 37.18.
(as it is most elegantly called) not a Cloud to be seen of the bigness of a
man's hand, all on the sudden this shall overspread with black Clouds the whole
face of the Heavens, and make a Meridian night, the Sun going down at noonday.

What effects will it not have upon Nature it self? upon every Element?

Upon the Air to corrupt and poison it, till it become Pestilential, and make
the breath we draw, and live by, the savor of death unto us, (our present case
and complaint.)

Upon the Earth, to make it quake under the Inhabitants, or open its mouth to
swallow them up.

Upon the Water, to make such an opening of the Windows of Heaven, and the
Fountains of the deep, as shall let in a Deluge to drown a world.

Upon the Seasons of the Year, to make them so unkindly and interfering one
with another, as if Nature had quite forgot it self.

Upon the Soil, making a fruitful Land barren.

Upon the very Name of a People, changing it from Ammi, to Loammi; as it
changed Pashur's Name to Magor Missabib, of which David was the Interpreter,
Fear on every side; was it his Name? Psalm. 31.13.
or is it not ours?

Upon Cities; O thou Enemy, thou have destroyed Cities; Psalm. 9.6.
their memorial is perished with them: (...) is a terrible word, importing
plucking up by the roots, utter destruction -- ipsae periere ruinae, and so
that their memorial is perished with them, unless it be in the Stories of their
ruin, there are no remainders of them; nay, there is more also in it, if the
Seventy did not mistake; for they read (...) with a sound; The ruin is so
made, that the World rings of it.

Upon a Church, what disorders will it not bring? Psalm. 78.49.
what evil Angels or Asmodei will it not send? the raisers of all our storms,
the Authors and Fomenters of all our intestine Divisions, Factions and Schisms;
the setters of all the Close Juncto's for the carrying on of endless Commotions.

And now if such a world of mischiefs as I cannot name, do follow upon
wickedness, and that also is so far from coming to an end; what shall I say or
think of our condition?

We will give glory to God this day, though to the confusion of our own faces:
It was time for thee, Lord, to lay to thine hand, to take hold of Vengeance, to
spend thine arrows upon us, as thou did once threaten, Deuteronomy. 32.23. I will
spend my Arrows upon them; and did bid the Archers to spare no arrows against
Babylon, Jer. 50.14.
to shoot at her, for she has sinned against the Lord. One of those arrows
(the first commonly of the three which God makes use of) and of which we have
frequent mention, (War) has been not only upon the string, but drawn and
shot, so that it sticks still in us, and -- ((...) God only knows, who is the
Lord of Hosts, and great Arbiter of War, what the issue will be. As happily as
we have been engaged against our Enemies, being blessed with glorious Successes
(under an excellent Conduct:) The Apostles counsel is good and proper for us,
Be not high-minded, but fear. The Alternations of the success of War, have
been every Ages Experiences; Homer's -- (...), and his -- (...), was not more
elegant than certain.

And suppose the best, I cannot but sadly think, what a lost labor, what a
damp we may put upon all those most hazardous and valiant Engagements of our
Friends at Sea, if while they do their work to the height of our wishes and
prayers, making themselves formidable to the flying Enemy, we being at such an
unhappy distance from God by our unrepented wickedness, do seem to enter
prohibitions in heaven against our enjoyment of our Successes, Alas! what is it
to prosper and prevail at Sea, where the Righteousness of our Cause (in the
hands of our just God to whom we appealed) makes us Victors, if in the mean
time the unrighteousness of our persons and practices do so continue to provoke
God by Land, that he cannot but set his face against us, and break out upon us?
We may possibly still beat and Master them, but God, I am sure, will be too
hard for us; they may flee before us one way, but we may be put to flee, if we
could, from Gods wrath seven ways; we may be potent abroad, but feeble and
undone at home; God give us hearts to consider it.

The other poisoned Arrow of Pestilence, is that which we now sigh and groan
under, which fires our blood, and kills us, -- Haeret lateri lethalis arundo:
How this has flown by day and night, on this hand of us, and on that, lighting
a little short of us, and beyond us; how it has never missed its mark, though
it could never glance aside to hit any but its mark; Thousands have fallen beside
us, Psalm. 91.7.
and ten thousand at our right hands, Our hearts do yet bleed with the thought
of it; the perpetual doleful Passing-Bells both day and night in your ears who
continued here during the heat of the Contagion, did (I am afraid) make Death
too familiar to you, so that you have ever since less regarded and considered
it; it being perhaps with you, as it is with the Birds which Nest in your
Steeples, so used to the noise of Bells rung by them, that they hear them not
Alas! how did people fall then by the righteous, but dreadful hand of God, as
leaves beaten down by a vehemet wind? such heaps upon heaps, that it might be
reasonably hoped, the force of this deadly Arrow was spent, and it had done its
worst; it was suspended at least, and superseded by that late dreadful Calamity
of our Mother City; then one Rod of God swallowed up another; A strange Cure
and Remedy of that Disease was brought by a more fearful Judgment: Fires had
been formerly made in the Streets of the City, to purge the Contagious air; but
here the activity of the fire upon, and within the houses, was most unhappily
over experimented; as if like that old fretting Plague of Leprosy, Levit 14.45.
when it was so got into the house, that it was spread in the walls, and no
scraping of it within and without could cleanse it, there was no cure but
demolition, all the Stones and Timber were to be pulled down. So it seemed
here, as if there had been no other way to free and prevent infected houses,
but by firing and destroying them; the labor was then saved of shutting up the
doors of the infected, and setting the Red Cross upon them, the Red Cross was
all-over; and that which opened the Prisons, and (without fear of an Indictment
either of a Rescue, a Riot, or Burglary) did give a Liberate to poor
unresponsible Prisoners of Debt, yea, to Malefactors also, that would not do
less for Gods Prisoners, who were shut up for the Pestilence. I would not
anticipate any thing of the Work of the approaching Fast Day for that
Astonishing Conflagration. But how can I forbear to drop some tears as I pass,
to weep over this our Mother-City, as our great Example our Lord and Savior
did over Jerusalem.

Lord! What an incredible change have three days made of the Metropolis of
England, and most famous Emporium of Christendom? It might be said, but a few
days since, as, Walk about Sion, and go round about her; Psalm. 48 13.
tell the Towers thereof, mark ye well her Bulwarks; Consider her Palaces: See
and observe O ye Travelers, the stateliness and convenience of the Halls of
her several Companies, the comeliness of her many Churches, the liberal
accommodation of her Hospitals, the fullness of her rich Shops and Warehouses,
the Royalness of her Exchange; and is all this glory so suddenly confounded and
buried in a common ruin? a new sad comment upon that word which was threatened
to proud Women, not Cities, Burning, instead of Beauty; Isa. 3.24.
nothing remaining but a strange maze and labyrinth of naked Steeples, useless
Chimneys and pitiful fragments of ragged Walls, amidst perpetual heaps of
Ashes, Stones and Rubbish; We have here no continuing City (said the Apostle;
Heb. 13.14.
) Now we find it so indeed; Forgive this little turning aside, to see that sad
sight; we hoped, I say, that the force of this deadly arrow of Pestilence had
been spent, and (blessed be the good hand that sent it forth) it is not so
fatal, so hot, and formidable now in this place, as when Moses said, Go
quickly, take a Cencer, Numb. 16.6*
and make an Atonement, stand between the living and the dead. But how it has
diffused its venom in many parts abroad -- Telum volat, and incandescit eundo;
What a circulation it may make, and how long it may be, before both the Head
and Body of the Kingdom may be sound and whole? or whether ever it shall
recover? is worth our solicitous thoughts, and the propitiating of our angry
God, is our great and present concernment. But suppose the best here also, That
our supplication this day is heard on high, Take away this plague only, Are we
ever the more secure from after judgments of some other kind? Do we not know,
that God has many other Arrows in his Quiver, as quickly to be drawn? Many
other ways to ease and avenge himself of his Adversaries? Great plagues remain
to the ungodly; great both for weight and variety, Psalm. 32.10.
(...) is plural; many plagues, or sorrows. In the hand of the Lord is a Cup,
and the wine is red, it is full of mixture, etc. A bitter composition of many
deadly ingredients, and the Dregs of this are reserved, you are told for whom;
The wicked of the earth shall wring them out, and drink them. Not some one
great Fluctus decumanus only, but all God's waves and billows shall go over
them; and in conclusion, the evil of men (which will be sure to find them out)
shall inevitably pursue them to their fearful end, if they use not a timely
Prolepsis, to bring that to an end, and break it off by Righteousness.

Now I know, I should not need to make use of any other Rhetoric to deter
Impenitents from their sinful course, than those many angry and judicial
passages in Scripture, though sounding like so many Tolerations and Licenses;
as wherein they are bidden to go on, and fill up their measure, He that is
unjust, Prove. 22.11
let him be unjust still; and he who is filthy, let him be filthy still,
((...)) still so, and still more so; let the grinders of the faces of the poor,
still keep their Mill going; let extorting corrupt Officers go on to pluck off
the skin from their indigent suffering fellow subjects, M^cah 3.2.
and the flesh from off their bones; Our Daemone Daemoniores, God-damn-me
Miscreants may proceed in their affrighting Hellish Rantings; all the various
uncontrolled (and in former ages unexampled) wickedness must come to an end,
Damnation (which slumbreth not, will much less sleep away from them whose
proper portion it is; it shall, I am sure, at last, though not presently,
overtake them. The Greeks used to say, -- (...), God is not hasty to
animadvert, so as to punish the provocations of men; and we cannot say he has
been quick with us in the Judgments now upon us, he had waited long enough for
our repentance, and given us many fair warnings before his answering by fire in
that dreadful manner; but though his wrath be slow-footed, it is heavy-handed,
-- Tum gravior, cum tarda venit, Men may be reprieved and respited for a while,
but how is that? Psalm. 94.13.
Until the pit be dug up for the ungodly; they may frolic and dance
jovially upon the brink of that bottomless pit, but their foot shall slide in
due time, Deuteronomy. 32.35.
for the day of their calamity is at hand, and the things that shall come upon
them make haste: What was said of a son of violence, Prove. 28.17.
he shall flee to the pit, let no man stay him, will be the infallible fate of
all other impenitent trespassers of the Divine Justice: But though by that
Justice thus provoked, and sure to be revealed, I may menace and dare men to
continue in their course at their utmost peril, yet I would much rather use a
softer and more ingenious way, thus therefore:

If there were no such Judgment in the way to be seen or feared, as this which
we now deplore; Isa. 14.23.
no such Besom of Destruction (the Plague is most properly called so, making
clean work, depopulating and sweeping away whole Streets and Cities) if this
were quite laid aside as useless; if this Rod were not held over us, as it is;
or if it had no voice to preach Repentance to us, and we were not required now
especially to hear it, Hear ye the Rod, Micah 6.9.
and who has appointed it, -- (...) was Sophocles his known Epithet, and the
Plague is more peculiarly so, Numb. 16 46.
called therefore wrath from the Lord; and (...) the word for the destroying
Pestilence, some will needs fetch from (...) locutus est, this being the
loud-speaking word from heaven of Gods wrath against men. If God had no
particular nor National Controversy (as our guilty hearts do smite and tell us
he has a great Controversy with us;) if that (which is the longing and prayer
of all good people) an honorable, well-condition'd, and well-setled Peace were
concluded (which is now so far off, that it is not within our prospect;) if
this our Jerusalem were established and made again the praise of the Earth for
outward splendour and prosperity: In short, if all were well with us, and no
Temporal inforcement lay upon us to become penitent and religious; yet that all
such wickedness as is now in fashion, should come to an end, and resolutions
should be taken up to this purpose, I humbly offer to your thoughts upon this
only consideration, and in this only name, because it is the wickedness of
the wicked; for what is not imported in that? Enmity against God, deicidium (in
will, though not in effect:) What but this is the great makebate between God
and his people? The disquieter, as I may say, and griever of his Spirit? That
which makes him humanum pati, to be affected, filled (modo puriori) with
hatred, with jealousy, not only smoking, but burning like fire: That which
provokes him to have recourse to his full Magazine of Weapons of War, his
sharpened, furbished, and glittering Sword, his Battle-axe, his Rod of Iron, his
Threshing-Instrument with teeth, his Winepress, his hot Thunderbolts; That
which makes him press his Stars to fight in their courses, I^a. 28.21.
which puts him upon strange work, (the work of Judgment is so) and will not
suffer him (without most unsufferable trespasses upon the Honor of his Justice
and Righteousness) to keep his right hand in his bosom, Psalm. 74.11.
to forbear smiting and punishing; Do not I hate them, O God, which hate thee?
Should not I set against that (with all animosity) which sets so hard against
thee, and makes thee set thy face so severely against men? None who now hear
me, (if the whole Nation could be supposed within hearing) but should take up
this Resolution.

But in a more particular manner, You the (...), the Peers of the Kingdom to
whom I am called to speak, should take it to heart: You well know, the due
Honor of your Nobility cannot privilege or exempt you from the common
Obligation and Law of Religion, no more then it can from common Judgments; your
houses may be entered by a Pestilence, or a Fire, as soon as others: And need I
be your Monitor, That the greater your Persons and Honors are, the more
pressing is your obligation to be Religious, because your Examples are more
leading, and imperative, and influential; The City-houses were not more
catching of the flames from one another, than your Inferiors are, and will be,
of any Exorbitancies which they can see in you. And what is it that Illustrates
and Ennobles your Nobility it self, making you to shine more gloriously and
more serviceably to God and the King, but Piety and Religion; Religion, I say,
not made your umbrage or praetext, nor your diversion and entertainment of
leisure hours, but your great work and business. You have a Proverb, (I wish
there were no worse going) Bonus sanguis non mentitur: O let it appear so by
your virtuous and honorable actions answering the Nobility of your Blood; That
you who are (...), (that was your Name in Athens) should (...), (a rich and
noble word in Homer) ever contend to excel in what is most excellent and
laudable: You who are Optimates, should be Optimi, the Best wheresoever you
are, is so necessary and essential to your high Quality, that it will make a
Solaecisme and contradiction to be otherwise; As therefore you will not endure
any filthy spots upon your Robes of Honor, upon your Stars, your Coronets,
your Escutchions, disdaining any thing that can leave a stain and blemish upon
your Names and Families; so generously detest and abominate any thing which
has the Name of wickedness named upon it. Take heed also, I beseech you, of
the iniquity of your Heels (your Attendants) that it compass you not about.

We are cast to live (woe the while) in the very dregs of Time; The world lies
(rather is steeped) in wickedness, was never so demonstrated a Truth as now:
But Tu ne cede malis, is a good Reserve of holy Wisdom. If we cannot make
others better, yet to be sure -- hic murus abaeneus, that they make not us
worse.

To stem, and set vigorously against the stream of high-swelling and
over-bearing wickedness, is a proof of Noble Christian strength; To be Virtuous
and Religious, Chaste and Pure, Regular and Exemplary, (even in this Generation)
when it is so much the Fashion to be otherwise; This will be true singular
honor, fit to be upon Sacred Record; and if your Faces shine not here among
men, yet you shall assuredly shine as Stars in the Firmament among the Blessed
Angels hereafter: Which God grant unto you all; To whom be all Glory, and
Honor, and true Obedience now and for ever. Amen.

Finis.

