The Humble ADDRESS OF THE Archbishop, the Bishops, AND The rest of the Clergy
of the Province of CANTERBURY, In CONVOCATION Assembled; Presented to HIS
MAJESTY At KENSINGTON, On MONDAY the Tenth Day of MARCH, 1700.

Together with His Majesty's MOST GRACIOUS ANSWER.

LONDON, Printed by Charles Bill, and the Executrix of Thomas Newcomb,
deceased; Printers to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. 1700.

The Humble ADDRESS OF THE Archbishop, Bishops, and the rest of the Clergy of
the Province of Canterbury, in Convocation assembled.
May it please your Majesty,
WE Your Majesty's most Dutiful and Loyal Subjects, the Archbishop, and
Bishops, and the rest of the Clergy of the Province of Canterbury, being, in
obedience to Your Majesty's Summons, assembled in Convocation, do take this
opportunity to present our humble Thanks to Your Majesty, for the constant
Protection and Favor which the Church of England, by Law established, has
received from You ever since Your Happy Accession to the Crown.

We do also thankfully acknowledge Your Majesty's Pious Concern for the
Reformed Churches in General; beseeching Almighty God, that, as He has made
Your Majesty His chief Instrument in the Preservation of them hitherto, so He
would still bless Your Majesty's endeavors for their further Security against
the imminent Dangers wherewith they are threatened at this time.

And We humbly crave leave to give Your Majesty all possible assurance of our
steadfast Fidelity and Affection to Your Sacred Person and Government; which we
shall always testify, by maintaining Your Supremacy, as Established by the Laws
of this Realm, and the Articles and Canons of our Church; by promoting true
Religion and Loyalty among Your People committed to our Charge; and by our
earnest Prayers to God for Your Majesty's Long Life and Prosperous Reign over
us.

His Majesty's most Gracious Answer.
My Lords, and the rest of the Clergy,
I Am very well pleased with the Affectionate Sense you express, of the
constant Protection I have shown to the Church of England, as by Law
Established.

I assure you I shall always continue to deserve your Thanks in this
particular.

Your Good will to the Reformed Churches abroad, and Tenderness for such of
them as may be in Danger, is also very Agreeable to Me.

I likewise thank you for your promises of maintaining My Supremacy, according
to Law, beyond which I will never extend it.

I never doubted of the Fidelity and Loyalty of the Church of England to Me.

I make no Question of your Zealous Endeavors to promote Religion, Virtue, and
Piety, among the People committed to your Charge; and I shall be ever ready to
contribute what is proper to be done on My Part, to make your good intentions,
in that Kind, more Successful; as being the great Concern of us all.

FINIS.

