THE POWER OF PARLIAMENTS Asserted,

By G. H.

In a Letter to a Friend, lately Chosen a Member of the House of COMMONS. In
Answer to an Indigested Paper by E. F. Called a Letter from a Gentleman of
Quality, to his Friend, upon his being Chosen a Member to serve in the
approaching PARLIAMENT. Being an Argument relating to the Point of Succession
to the CROWN, etc.

Fort. of the Court of Parliament. Si antiquitatem spectes est vetustissima, si
dignitatem est honor atissima, si jurisdictionem est capacissima.

Printed in the Year 1679.

THE POWER OF PARLIAMENTS Asserted, In ANSWER to a LETTER from a Gentleman of
Quality to his Friend, etc.
SIR, if E. F. had kept himself strictly to his Task, premised in the Title
Page: namely, of the great difficulty, which is the true meaning of his two
Epithets of Improbable and Impossible of barring the Right Line in the
Succession; I should have acquiest, knowing it to be a great Truth, but when,
in the height of his Zeal to the Cause, he admits of a barring Law to that
purpose, yet he invalidates it, as he would have the Nation believe, to all
intents and purposes: his Reasons for that, Worthy Sir, may be worthy
Consideration; the Steps that he makes toward it, are in my Opinion not very
congruous to his designed End, which must be submitted to the scrutiny of your
more discerning Judgment.

He begins first with the Statute of the Queen about Succession. Whosoever
shall, after the Death 13 Eliz. C.
of the Queen, affirm, That the Parliament of England has not full Power to
bind the Crown in Point of Descent or Succession, shall Forfeit his Goods and
Chattels. Which he very Learnedly says, Does not affect a Member of the
Commons, because he is so, neither does it affect any other Person, because its
natural for any Member freely to advise with his Friend about it, with mutual
safety: and to prove the latter, I suppose, he tells us what irrefragable
Records of Parliament he has perused, that the Members of the Commons in
Ancient time, have sometimes demurred to Pass certain Bills of extraordinary
nature, till they had consulted their Countries they served for. And then
showing his ill Nature to the Statute of Eliz. he goes on, and tells us, he
hopes his Friend will find he has Stabbed it into the Fifth Rib, a man that
had not Studied to forget Scripture, as the Wicked Jews in Antiochus's time,
endeavored to Uncircumcise themselves, would have said under, or in the Fifth
Rib, but why should he be quarreled with, for his unskilfulness in Scripture
Language, when he is so notoriously out in other matters: he tells his Friend,
he has searched Records, but that may be questioned, when his mistakes about
that Statute are so gross, for the Words are not as he gives them. If any shall
after the Death of the Queen, etc. but they are, If any shall, during the
Queens life, Claim Right to the Crown, etc. Or affirm, That the Laws and
Statutes of this Realm do not bind the Right of the Crown, and the Descent,
Government and Limitation thereof, etc. Yet though they are Printed in an
Italick Character, as all expired Statutes are, he makes so many impertinent
flourishes and inferences about his own Sense in the matter, that there is no
room to lay any fault upon the Printer; yet it may be these mistakes arises
from his not trusting the Printed Statutes, because sometimes faulty, but
applying himself to the Record, which, for want of skill in that Obsolete Hand,
caused these mistakes; yet from what he says, no man knows what measures to
take, for having afterward occasion to have another bout at that Terrible
Statute, at the end of his Letter, he makes it talk at another Rate.

This Gentleman you see has but ill luck in his preliminary Attaque, how he
behaves himself afterward, is now to be examined, he lays down for his Maxim,
That Parliament of England cannot by their Act Exclude or Disable the next Heir
of Blood Royal from Succession to the Imperial g. 2.
Crown of this Nation, when he has made out that -- Erit mihi magnus Apollo.
For this assertion, he gives several Reasons, such as they are.

For his first Reason, he alleges, That the Succession to the Crown is
unseparably annexed to proximity of Blood by the Laws of God and Nature.

Secondly, Statute Laws contrarient to those, are Null and Void. To make good
his first Reason, he offers at the 27 of Numb. which he calls the Statute Law,
which God himself pronounced for ordering the descent of Honors and
Possessions, (to use the Authors own Words,) but to so little purpose, as I am
sorry he lies under the suspicion of being an English man.

For the first part of that Chapter Treats only about directions concerning
the disposal of the Inheritance of Zelophehads Daughters, which should be a
standing Rule or a Statute of Judgment to the Children of Israel. The latter
part gives an Account about nominating a Successor to Moses in the Kingdom or
chief Magistracy, upon Gods giving him an Account of his approaching Death, in
which as may appear by the Text, proximity of Blood was not at all regarded,
for though Moses in probability had Sons, because no account of their Deaths,
however he had Nephews, yet Joshuah the Son of Nun, all others set aside; was
preferred for his Graces and excellent Endowments, And the Lord said unto
Moses, thou shall put some of thine Honor upon him, that all the Congregation
of the Children of Israel may be Obedient. Is not this a special Text to prove
descent of Honors, according to Proximity of Blood? but I conclude no great
matters from that practice against this Champion for Succession by Blood,
neither indeed is any part of Moses's Law, whether Judicial or Ceremonial, at
all Argumentative in our Circumstances, for if the Statute about Zelophehads
Daughters was as binding as the Moral Law, then woe worth all Tenants in
Copyhold or Borough English for evermore; From hence he goes on to other
Scripture Presidents, to as little purpose, and then falls a citing of Fathers
to less, for what inference can be made to affect the force of our Laws from
any thing the Fathers have said about Government?

From thence, to confirm and fortify this his first reason, he had recourse to
Bodin a Frenchman, who argues strongly for the descent upon the Issue Male of
the next of Blood, Sic enim ordo non tantum natura and Divinae Legis sed etiam
omnium ubique gentium postulat, for so, says he, not only the Order of Nature
and Divine Right, but of all Nations do require it. Anotable Advocate for the
Kings of England, who claim by the Female, Then he falls to Cite a Company of
Civilians with hard Names, as pertinent to his Design, as if he had Prayed Aid
from the Jewish Talmud, or the Old Arabian Doctors, but at last, as if he was
Conscious of some mistakes, he is content to leave the Argument to Civilians
and Divines, who are as proper for it, quatenus so, as such, as the Lord Mayor
of London and Court of Aldermen.

Now he falls into an Heroic Harangue, and tells us it is most Evident, but
how, he has not told yet, that all the Humane Acts and Powers in the World,
cannot hinder the descent of the Crown upon the next Heir of Blood, to make
this out, he tells you of Watsons Case, of the Kings never dying, as if
limiting the Succession would alter it: After all, he takes a great deal of
pains to prove Allegiance due to Kings, from the form of the Indictments for
high Treason, as if any Body in their right Wits would deny it.

Now he falls to a very confident but undue concluding the Question, and says,
as the Common Law is more worthy than the Statute Law, so the Law of Nature is
more worthy than that, from thence he Tryumphantly concludes, no Humane Power
can hinder the descent upon the Right Heir of the Crown. Because Allegiance to
the King is due by the Law of Nature, as he proves by the forms of the
Indictments before spoken of, which no body will deny, though they cannot agree
with E. F. in the Conclusion, as being too foreign to the point, especially
when it is obvious, how that every day both the Common Law and the Law of
Nature are imposed upon, and set aside by the Statute Law in something or
other; for the first it is known to every little Pettisogger, to the latter I
shall speak hereafter: This Common Law, that he, so much without all reason
cries up, as if he had by some Vow abandoned the Divine faculty of the Soul, as
People do when they turn Papists, received its vigor from a meaner Power, than
the Statute Law, for it had its Sanction from the Conqueror alone, who had
right here, neither by God nor Nature. In the preamble to the confirmation of
St. Edwards Laws, which he made the Fourth of his Reign, you may find these
Words, Electi igitur de singulis totius patriae comitatibus vir. duodecem quo
^^ possent recto traimite incedentes, Sp. Glos. L. 1. C. 6.
nec ad dextram nec adsinistram divertentes Legum suarum, and consuetudinum
sancita patefacerent nihil praetermittentes, nil addentes, nil praevaricando
mutantes.

Twelve men of every County being chosen, did first make Oath before the King,
that to their Power, they would without any deviation to the right hand, or the
left, discover the Sanction of their Laws and Customs, pretermitting nothing,
adding nothing changing by prevarication, the Commissioners made their return,
and the practice has gone since accordingly, but when the Statute Law breaks
in upon it, and for the better ease and instruction of the People, they were
turned into French. This was the Original and Growth of the Common Law, so
Sacred with my Author.

Yet E. F. mistrusting I suppose, the efficacy of what he has said, shuffles
all off to the Law of Nature, about which he had been nibbling a little all
along, and declares it not abrogable by any Humane Power, and from thence
concludes an incapability of disherison by Parliament, as being but a Humane
Power; Then the Gentleman falls on to Illustrate his Dogmatismes by Examples of
our own Stories to as little purpose as the rest; He tells you that the Second
William Usurped upon Robert his Elder Brother, which cannot be Granted, for
William claimed by virtue of the Conquerors Will, who (after the example of the
Patriarch Jacob, who gave to Joseph his younger Son, the Land which he had
taken with his Sword and his Bow) gave his younger Son, his English
Acquisition: it is true Robert made a bustle, but all was compounded for 3000
marks per Annum at present and the Crown in reversion: now though the
Intrinsic value of that Sum be much more than so much now, yet it falls far
short of any thing like a valuable compensation. To clear now the Usurpation of
William the Second, I offer this Foreign Story* Alphonso of Arragon Conquered
the Kingdom of Naples, and gave it to his base Son Ferdinand, his lawful Son
Succeeded him in the Crown of Arragon, Sicill, Ferdinands Posterity enjoyed it,
without any imputation of Usurpation by any Writers of that or any succeeding
Age, until they were expuls'd by the French Arms, the Treachery of the
Spaniards concurring.

Then he tells you, without any regard to Truth, though it be to no purpose, of
the Establishment of H. the II. in whom the Saxon line was restored, as he
faith, his Grandmother being the next Heir to Edgar Atheling: which all that
knows History, must conclude a notorious untruth, for Edgar King of Scotland
was Brother uterine to that Lady, whose Posterity is yet undetermined, this
Gentleman by these petty remarks, I suppose, will put in for a compurgatour at
the Trial of the next Traitors, being as well qualifyed as any Young man of St.
Omers.

From thence, after some impertinent digression, concerning the Multitude of
men, killed in the Civil Wars 'twixt York and Lancaster, he comes to Records,
which he seems to set a great value upon, and tells us, That the entayl of the
Crown upon H. 4. and his Heirs, was over ruled by Rich. Duke of Yorks Friends;
and gives you the Words Pro and Con, and likewise tells you it had the same
Success under Edw. 4. and from thence Magisterially concludes, That a Title of
that Sublimity and Grandeur is not at all impeachable even by Act of
Parliament. Now any man of common sense would have given another reason, than
the sublimity of the Title to have defeated that Act, namely, the incompetency
of the Parliament that past it, being not rightly Constituted, as not Convened
by a Legal Authority, under a Lawful King, that was the true reason of its
faileur, though others may be fancyed, which more fully appears from the
invalidity of all the Acts of Parliament by the Three Henryes, till Confirmed
in Edward the IV. time, as may appear by ^ E. d 4. C. 1.
the Statute of Confirmation, to which I refer the Inquisitive.

Now further to confirm what he would be at, he puts a modest Case of the King
and his Three Estates, for that's the natural meaning of the Word Parliament, of
passing an Act, that no man should Honor the King or Love his Parents or
Children, or give Alms to the Poor, or pey Tithes to the Parson of the Parish,
it would be Void in it self, as

The better to adjust his two later Examples, he Cites Doctor and Student, L.
1. C. 6.
and 21 H. 7. 2. but still according to his wonted ingenuity, for the Doctors
Words there are, if it were Ordained, that no Alms should be given for no
necessity, the Custom and Statute were void, yet he with the same Wind
determines, that the Statute of 23 of Edw. III. since repealed, which forbad,
under the Penalty of ImPrisonment, every man to give Alms to any Valiant
Beggars, as he terms them (which I suppose were the Words of the Statute) that
may well labor, that so they may be compelled to labor for their Living, to
be a good Statute, for it observed the intent of the Law of God, there is a
later since made, that so modifies Alms giving, that it is not to be done at
all times and all places under a penalty: so that Authority makes nothing for
his Case, his other is like 151 Psalm. no such thing in being, for the last Act
of H. 7. was in the 19 of his Reign as may appear by the Printed Statute, which
passes in all Courts for Record and uncontraversable Evidence.

Then Dictator like, he concludes, after all this foisting, that he has proved
his two first Propositions, That the Succession of the Crown in England, is
inseparably annexed to Proximity of Blood, by the Laws of God and Nature, and
that Statutes contrarient to such are Void, from whence it necessarily follows,
as he says. That the Heir of the Blood Royal, cannot be barred from Succession
by Parliament, what need he now say any more? but being satisfied, I suppose,
of proving nothing all this while, he goes on to his second Reason. That the
Succession of the Crown to the next Heir of Blood, is a Fundamental
Constitution; to confirm this now, which no body will deny, he Cites Sir Edward
Cook, but now, whither that or any other Fundamental, or any thing so called,
be not alterable by Parliament, is the Question, about which Words the
Gentleman seems to be fallacious, for if by that Word, he means only the major
of Lords and Commons, excluding the King, as he seems to do, by so slightly
speaking of their Power, he is in the right, but if by Parliament, he means as
the Law means, he is (as I hope to make it appear) mistaken, now he would run
down the reasonableness of their Authority, from Consequences, for if says he,
a Parliament may alter such a Constitution, then the Monarchy of England will
become Elective in a short space: but why, he does not so much as offer at, but
he says it, and that's enough, well, if it should be Elective; as long as all
parties concerned are agreed, no sin against the Holy Ghost, I hope: Poland is
an Example in this Case, which became an Elective Kingdom, from Despotical,
upon the failing of the Posterity of Crocus in Popielus the second; as Denmark
has of late by consent of their Estates, become an Hereditary, from an
Elective Monarchy, but nothing of that can be here, without the Royal Assent,
which as in probability, it will never be demanded, so it will never be granted
to that, then that fear is out of Doors.

Then he goes on with a company of lofty words, about the Oriency of the Pearl
of Succession, and tells you that the Kings of England themselves, their
Chancellors, Treasurers, and all great P. 9.
Officers of State, their Privy Counselors and Judges, are all by the
Provision of the Law, sworn upon the Holy Evangelists, to defend and maintain
the Rights of the Crown, and that they suffer no Disherison or Damage to
accrue thereto, and very gravely cites Poulton for his Authority: this 1. Edw.
3. 18.
is very disingeniously done, for that President he so much raves on, is only
the Form of the Oath for Justices, by which name Judges were then called, to
^ake upon admittance, which I suppose. they may do at this day, to their
Offices, which was amongst other things, That they should not assent to any
thing in Damage or Disherison to our Lord the King, nor to know any such Damage
or Disherison, but to reveal or cause it to be revealed unto him; not a word of
the Rights of the Crown, which are, I suppose foisted in, the better to impose
upon the World, that the Judges, etc. are bound by the Tenure of their Oath, to
hinder any Law, to alter the Succession; the words do not at all look forward,
but are only as to what may concern the King Regnant, to whom they are sworn.

It Is a great fayleur in our Law, that there is no punishment, for such
Impudent mis-citers of Records, to serve a turn: for, without doubt they are
within the Equity of the Pillory for their officious pains and industry.

Next he comes to a great Remarque in Parliament, which he cites the Roll for;
namely, that the Lords and Commons, being demanded their Advice by the King, in
a matter relati^g the Crown, did Answer with one Voice, That they could not
Assent to anything in Parliament, 42 Edw. ^.
that tended to the disherison of the King, and his Heirs, or the Crown,
whereto they were Sworn This looks like somewhat, but will not appear much,
upon strickt Inspection: The Story is thus; The Archbishop of Canterbury,
declared in that Parliament, that the Offers of David Bruce of Scotland for
Peace were, so as he might freely Enjoy to him the whole Realm of Scotland,
without any subjection, etc. The Lords and Commons, being willed to give their
Advice, made several Answers, That they could not Assent to any such Peace, but
to the disherison of the King, and of his Crown, and to the great danger of
themselves, being Sworn to the same. That Answer now, resolves only into this,
it sets forth the ill consequence of such a Peace, not much considered it may
be before, as the Disherison of the King of the Fee of Scotland, which his
Parliament could not, that is, were unwilling to Assent to an usual Form of
denial amongst great men, it does not at all declare their incapability through
want of Power, for had that been the Case, the Kings Council would not have
been so weak as to have put it to them. But Sir Edward Cokes Comment upon the
Record makes all out, as he says, in Margin or the Margent of Inst. 4. 14 no
King can Alien the Crown, though by Consent of Lords and Commons, then my
Author is at his old Ward again, for my Lord Cooks Words are not so full, but
only Declarative, what were the Words of the Parliament at that time, what his
Opinion was of the Power of that High Court, I shall show hereafter; Then he
comes to a late Example of the recognition to King James, in which that Kings
Title is acknowledged, and the Parliament does Humbly beseech the King to
accept the Recognition not only to himself but to his Heir forever, nay, they
go 1 Jac. C. 1.
further, they desire that this Recognition may have the Royal Assent, etc. I
Wonder now this should be urged, for nothing of Virtue can be conveyed by an
Act of Parliament to that Title that is derived from God and Nature, because one
Parliament may undo the Acts of any of their Predecessors, nay Magna Charta it
self is not shotfree, notwithstanding 25 Ed. 1. C. 2.
the Statute, that says, all Judgments against Magna Charta shall be Void.

Next he tells you, That the Right Heir of the Crown cannot be Barred or
Excluded by Act of Parliament, Because the descent of the Crown in an Instant
absolutely Purges and Discharges all Obstructions and Incapacities
whatsoever, Created by the same Act of Parliament, but now, if an Act of
Parliament hinder that descent, that Argument is Nonsuit, notwithstanding all
his Examples according to his usual way, to no purpose, no Case alleged being
any thing Parallel to that he pretends to; One great Argument he has is, That
the Law of the Crown differs from Subjects in point of descents, as descending
to an Alien, no Coheirs in the Case, no Tenancy by Courtesy, Descent by half
Blood, as all Honors do, And therefore that may be Law in Case of the Crown,
p. 15.
which is not in Case of the Subject. So not to be affected by Parliament as he
would imply, or else he says nothing; by that Rule Copyhold Tenure and Gavel
kind are exempted too, because their Descents are not like the Common Law, a
pretty Consequence.

I must now take Notice how this unworthy Son of the Church of England, as he,
and I think truly terms himself, Treats Queen Elizabeth, though it be out of my
Province to say any thing in justification of the usage of the Queen of Scots,
yet I must vindicate that great Queen from his Black Calumny: after a kind
Expression or two about the Scots Queen, he tells you, That Queen Elizabeth
Inheriting her Fathers Malaversion to the House of Scotland, sent her to a
loathsome Prison, it is true, She was a Prisoner at large under the Care of the
Earl of Shrewsbury, where nothing of Liberty was denied her but Access to the
Queen, until she fell into the Correspondence with Babington, etc.

He tells you farther, That the generality of Mankind looked upon Maryes Title
to the Crown better than the other, Elizabeth being Bastardized and rendered
incapable by Act of Parliament, yet unrepealed, at leastwise but a Stature
Queen, as he unmannerly Terms her, when he Treats Queen Mary her Sister, who
was in his Sense but a Statute Queen at another rate, for in the Dispute
betwixt her and the Lady Jane Gray, he brings in an Historian, saying Tali and
constanti veneratione nos Angli legitimos Reges prosequimur ut ab eorum debito
obsequio, etc. By him thus Englished: Such and so constant a Veneration have we
Englishmen for our Lawful Princes, that we are not to be drawn from our due
Obedience, etc. Here Queen Mary notwithstanding her being Bastardized by
Parliament is allowed a lawful Queen, but Religion covered her Nakedness, which
laid the others more open; but our Protestant is now come to himself, for Cat
will be Cat still.

I must ask this Protestant now who they were that Judged Queen Maryes Title
better than Queen Elizabeth, it was not the Parliament, for Queen Elizabeth was
Proclaimed Queen by a Popish Parliament, sitting at her Sisters Death, she was
so by Heath the Chancellor, Archbishop of York She was allowed to be so by the
Pope, and so Styled, till his Holiness published his Bull against her, she was
so Styled by all Christian Princes, except you will say, Francis the Second of
France his Quartering her Arms was an implication to the contrary, though he
never had the Courage to justify it.

Besides all these, my Author may remember what he allowed to be Law once in
Her Case, and in the Case of Hen. the Seventh, That the Crown takes away all
Defects in Blood and incapacities by Parliament, and from that time that the
King viz. Henry the Seventh did Assume the Crown, all Impediments were
discharged.

I have now run over the most material Points of his Arguments about
Succession, to which I shall now oppose something of my own: I shall lay down
for my Position, That the Parliament may make what Laws they please, even
against the Law of Nature, which nevertheless shall be Binding.

But before I enter any further I premise this, That my Design is only to set
forth the Power of a King environed with his Three Estates, more terible than
an Army with Banners; His Power is then like that King Solomon speaks of, In
the Word of a King there is Power, who may say unto him, What do thou: it is
not at all to Direct or Advise to make use of it, hoping there may never be
occasion for it.

In order now to the making good my assertion, its fit to Examine a little what
the Law of Nature is, or what is meant by it, which he was never so kind to do;
though he make such a noise about the Words, yet he would never tell us what he
meant by them, which by his good Favor, is a kind of (if not absolute) Jargon
or Canting; one of the Fathers defines it to be impressio divini luminis an
impression in us, and a participation of the Eternal Light in the rational
Creature. Another says, It is an Act of Reason taken properly, Man now being a
Creature adopted to Society is allowed by Natures Law (which Aquinas.
according to which Definition you please) is nothing but rectified reason, to
improve it, as far as he pleases, saving to every man the like Liberty, either
by way of commerce or otherways, notwithstanding now this natural liberty,
nothing's more ordinary than to rescind it, as in Case of Wars betwixt
Country, and Country, or upon other State accounts, yet no complaining in our
Streets, by the Law of Nature every man is free to follow what Profession he
pleases, yet you see how there are restriction laid daily in the Case upon men,
and such and such Trades confined to such, and such Societyes of Men, as the
East-Indy, Guiny Companys, etc. or else to persons qualified, by the
contemptible Statute Law (as the Learned Author would intimate) to follow them,
yet not a word of these Violations, upon the sacred Law of Nature; nay to come
more Home, and familiarly to the Case, the great Law of Nature is violated in
the Statute that declares who are, and what shall be the punishment of Rogues,
yet the most strict Casuist, never wrote, nor much spoke against them. If now
upon an Indictment E. F. should be enterteyned upon the Traver^, who would make
us believe he is a Lawyer, to run down those Acts as Invalid, because violences
upon the Law of Nature, (as he does endeavor to run down one though not yet in
Embryo, if it should pass into an Act, upon the same Account,) he would pass
for a Quaker, or one Candidate for the new Palace in Morefields, nay Polygamy
is not against the Law of Nature, yet the restrictions upon it, I hope by E.
F's. leave, are pardonable.

It will not be amiss now in order to our end, to examine how those Laws of
Nature for Succession, according to Proximity of Blood are regarded in other
Christian Countries, they are set aside in all Elective Kingdoms, as the
Empire, the Kingdom of Poland, the Titulado Dukedom of Venice, nay the Kingdom
of France, which is E. F. s beloved president, gives no regard to the Example
of Zelophehads Daughters, though he lay such stress upon it in another case;
besides how many times, without regard to the Male Line it self, has that Line
bin altered? yet none disputes that Kings Title, but to say the Truth, the
Pope, who alone may dispose of Succession, had a hand in advancing the
Carolingian Line, to the prejudice of the Merovinian, which like Offa Cerbero,
a sop to Cerberus, keeps the Cur from snarling,.

How was that Law of Nature violated by the gui^t of the Dauphinale to the
Crown of France, by the Union of the Kingdom of Navarr and Duchy of Britain to
the said Crown? By Virtue of which Union, Britagne is enjoyed by the French
King, when the Right of Proxinity of Blood lies in the House of Savoy to no
purpose. If Natures Law be Violable, or has bin violated in one place, without
Taxation of Injustice, at the Discretion of the Supreme Power, which in every
Constitution of Government is lodged somwhere, as by these Examples is made
out, then it may admit of Violations again under the like Circumstances, that
is of Safety and Security, for those were the true ends of those Unions, For
that rule of Living, Quod tibi fieri non vis alteri ne feceris, what thou
would not have done to thy self, do not to another, improved by the Law of
Grace to, whatsoever you would that* Men should do unto you, that do unto them:
does not at all reach Communityes or Societyes of Men, as may modestly be
offered, otherways Maiefactours might make use of that Plea against the
security of the Laws in their concerns; now a great Latitude must be allowed to
the Legislative Power, in making Laws upon emergent occasions to provide for
the Public safety, otherwise our Sanguinary Laws against Robbery and
Polygamy, being contrary to the Laws of God, which directs otherways in the
former, and allowed, the latter must fall under a severe censure.

I shall now hasten to Conclusion only subjoyn somewhat about Henry the Seventh,
Whose Laws E. F. says my Lord Bacon Comments (because he says something in his
Case) very handsomely upon, That King past two Notable Statutes, as he says, one
that the Crown should rest and abide to himself and his Heirs, etc. The other
that all persons should be indemnifyed that served the King for the time being
in his Wars, This Law says my Lord Bacon, had in it parts of prudent and deep
foresight, for it took away occasion for the People to busy themselves in
prying into the Kings Title to the Crown: for howsoever that fell out, good or
bad, the peoples safety was provided for. The same Author in the close of that
Kings Life, accounts it amongst his Blessings that he dyed so soon, viz. before
the Prince comes to man's Estate, who, in likelihood considering his great
Spirit, would not have sitten down under the Law of settlement, but have seized
the present Possession of the Crown, as his Right by common Law, the Curtesy
not reaching the case of the Crown, as has bin said before, This E. F. is
mighty fond on, as coming from so great a Man, but to examine the matter over
again, I cannot see notwithstanding my Lord Bacons Authority, how the Peoples
safety was provided for by the Law of indemnity, if the Kings was not by the
Statute of settlement; For if once Henry the Seventh had fallen under the Power
of his Son, as there has often happened such Cases or any other Pretender, of the
House of York, the Statute of safety for the People, as well as that of
settlement for the King had bin equally out of Doors, by alleging that Henry
the Seventh was no Legal King, so no Legal Parliament, like those of the
three Henryes, and therefore nothing of that King binding. I wonder therefore
so great a Man as my Lord Bacon should branch at so empty a Rate, but more that
so palpable a nothing should pass upon a man, that has such Skill in that
Knotty way of Argumentation, as E. F. pretends to have.

Now that something has been said to prove that Parliaments have done, and do
daily encroach upon the Law of Nature, without the least grumbling imaginable,
I shall give some Scripture Presidents when Proximity of Blood, the thing
insisted upon, in the Case of Government has not been much regarded, yet no
absolute proof of Gods immediate Command in the Case, Cain was set aside for
Seth, Sem is not agreed to have bin the Elder Brother, whether Abraham was or
no, is likewise a Question, but to be sure neither Isaac nor Jacob were,
Reuben, Simeon and Levi were set aside for their Vices, and the Dominion of all
given to Judah; but these Examples may be Objected against, because the times
before the Flood were dark; and the other may be said to be in relation to
Spirituals; because none of them had, as appears, many to exercise a Royal
Authority over, but a Royal Power some did Exercise as is Evident by Abraham's
Offering to Sacrifice his Son, and Judah's commanding his Daughter in Law to be
burnt, which none but an unaccountable person could do: From the time of Moses
unto David Proximity of Blood was not regarded, Joshuah of another Tribe
succeeded Moses in the Monarchy, the Succession going at the same race amongst
all the Judges, except in the Case of Abimelech, whose manners and Success are
not very Argumentative for the Traverse: now That those Judges were Kings, or
so esteemed, is plain from the Text, In those days there was no King in Israel,
but every man, etc. because at that time when that Villainy was committed by the
Benjamites, then was an Inter regnum, none to Judge the People as formerly.

The Asmonaean Family or Machabees began at the same Rate, for Mattathias who
got a party to oppose the Wicked proceedings of that ungodly Antiochus
Epiphanes, when he dyed, bequeathed the Captainship of Israel, which he had
exercised amongst them successfully for a while, unto Judas his Third Son, as
the most fit, setting aside Simon his Eldest, though a worthy person, which he
made appear when he came after the Death of Jonathan his Younger Brother, to
the Administration of Public affairs, no immediate hand of God in this, as may
be said in the other, for then there was no Prophet in Israel to direct them,
the Theocracy being determined, as may appear from Match. 1. Cap. 4. Ver. 46.
And they laid up the Stones in the Mountain of the Temple in a convenient place
until there should come a Prophet to show what should be done with them.

For a parting blow, now in Answer to what is or can be said in the Case, I
shall lay down this Thesis, That Statute Laws though contrarient to the Laws of
God are binding, this I shall make out by pertinent Examples, an unanswerable
Argument of the Power, though perhaps not of the Justice of Parliaments;
concerning their Power I will give you my Lord Cooks Sense, whose Authority my
Author seems to value elsewhere.

The Power and Jurisdiction of Parliament for making of Laws in proceeding by
Bill, is so transcendent and absolute, as it cannot be confined either for
Causes or Persons within Inst. 4. c. 1.
any bounds, to whose unlimited power the Judge applies the Verse of Virgil.

Hic ego nec metas rerum^ nec tempora pono,
Intimating the same, I must now to make my position good give you some
Examples of their Extravagancies, yet binding Acts, Jan. 26. An. 14. Edw. 4. It
was Enacted that Henry Duke of Buckingham should be to all Intents and purposes
reputed and taken a person of full Age of 21 years. It may Bastardize a Child
that is by Law Legitimate. as in Marys Winc. Case 5. 6. Ed. 6. It may
Bastardize Secundum quid as to part, to bar the Fathers Inheritance, and not
the Mothers, as the late case of the Children of the Lady Anne Pier^nt, it can
Legitimate Totally or Secundum quid, as in the Case of the Children of the ^ke
of Lancaster, who were Legitimated to all Capacities but the Crown; it can
allow ^ man to marry another Wife, his former being living, as the Case of L.
R. nay it ^n dispense with a new intermarriage to both parties, no peccancy in
the Case, as the ^ng and the Lady Anne of Cleve. 23 H. 8. C. 25.

If these Examples now be not at least some of them contrary to Gods Law, I Am
in the dark, what is; There being a positive Text in one Case; as ^om God has
joined together, let no man put asunder; and the other so sig^ly Anathematized,
as it may be said by Moses, A Bastard shall not enter into the ^ngregation of
the Lord, even to the Tenth Generation: But of all the Exam^es Deuteronomy. 23. 2.
of their Power, there is none greater than that of T. Cromwell, Earl of Essex,
whose ^ory is commonly mistaken, but it lies thus; the King Commanded the Earl
to attend ^e Chief Justices, To know whether a man that was forthcoming might
be Attainted Parliament of Treason and never called to his Answer? The Judges
made Answer, that it was a dangerous question, The High Court of Parliament
ought to give Examples Inferior Courts, and none of them could do the like,
and they thought that the Parliament would never do it, but being pressed again
by a second Message for a Positive An^wer, They said, If he be Attainted, it
could not come in question afterward, whether he ^as called or no, The Earl
soon after was sent to Prison, Attainted without being called ^o Answer and
Executed accordingly.

That this Statute was contrary to Gods Law, none will Dispute, that Considers
that say^ng of Nichodemus; Does our Law Judge any man before it hear him, and
know what he I. 7. 51: De. 17. 10. 8. 19. 15.
^oth, now as much contrarient, to use E. F's. new Word once more, as this Law
was and is ^o Gods Law; its so far from being Void in respect of that, that it
Works to this day, that Family Suffering under it yet, as deprived by virtue of
that harsh Attainder, of the Earldom of Essex, which no Prince or Parliament
ever yet took notice of to the Advantage of that Injured Lord.

I shall give you another Instance, that Acts of Parliaments against the Law of
God quoad forum humanum, though not in foro Conscientiae, to man-ward, though
not to Godward are binding, which is to be so understood by my position at the
beginning of this Paragraph, for though we must choose rather to Obey God than
Man, yet to Oppose by force an Act so made, viz. contrary to Gods Law, is
Treason by man's Law, as it may be Circumstanced, my Presidents are such as both
Papists and Protestant E. F. and G. H. will agree to be such: The Bloody
Statute of the VI Articles which made Popery a Statute Religion, as well, as
some say, that Protestanism is made so since, was against all the Rules and
Methods of Christianity, and consequently against the Laws of Gods, as all
Protestants hold, yet it must be allowed to be binding, as long as it lasted:
The Papists, viz. E. F. and his Fellow Clubbers at the Compendium of the Plot,
that bundle of Lies and Ill manners, without doubt think, and upon Occasion,
will say, that our Sanguinary Laws against Priests are against the Laws of God,
yet even they will not deny but they are binding Quoad Forum Humanum to manward.

Now as Conclusive, and in Answer concerning what he says, That his Sacred
Majesty that now is, will not suffer in his time, a Pearl of this Magnitude and
Oriency, to be Ravished by any hands out of the Imperial Diadem of this Realm,
I shall offer this, That a Declarative Act of that Power in the Parliament is
the greatest Security to any Prince Regnant, in the Case of a contingent
remainder, as I will put a Case, which may, but I hope will never be our own,
admit the now Queen of Spain, happen to be the next remainder or Presumptive
Heir, which God forbid; and being Acted by her Husbands and other Popish
Councils should without natural Affection, which is always with them postpond
to Religion, attempt to remove the Obstruction by Vile Agents, Quis tot refer
fa^inorum formas potest, Regnum petentis per gradum omnium scelerum.

Who can express the Methods of Impieties in them that ambitiously seek after a
Kingdom, commit insolent overtacts, as quartering the Arms of England, as Mary
of Scotland did when Queen of France, which might be the occasion with the
continuando of that Act of the 13 of Eliz. so much talked on, nay admit her
Husband the King of Spain, should make open War, by attempting an Invasion, and
Claim the present Possession of the Crown, as devolved unto the Pope for
Heresy, and from him consigned unto that King, who without doubt has as good a
Title to the Crown of England, as Julio II. had to Navarr, The Example of Spain
disinheriting the Daughter.
yet the King of Spain holds upper Navarr, that is all in a manner worth
holding, by Virtue of that Grant to this very day, its well enough known how
other Crowns too have been disposed on by the Sea of Rome, what shall we in
such a Case sit and Sigh, and feed our Fancies with a company of insignificant
Wishes, Hang up a Rogue or too when we can catch them, and behave our selves
like the foolish Jews, who tamely let their Throats be Mac. L. 1. c. 3. V. 36.
37.
Cut on the Sabbath day without resistance, shall we with them say? Let us die
in our Innocence, Heaven and Earth shall testify for us, That you put us to
Death Wrongfully.

Spain in the late Marriage with France, provided against all Contingencies of
that Nature, by making the Daughter of Spain renounce all pretensions to the
Crown, in Case it should happen to be her Right, and though it may be Objected,
it was not Injurious, because of her Assent, yet whosoever Considers Her Young
Years, will not Argue much from thence.

If there was no Remedy in such a Case, especially when there is a natural
impossibility of defeating the Presumptive Heir, by natural means, as in the
Case of the late great Queen, what encouragement can any man have to do his
Duty, in Defending the present Possessour from the practices of the Impatient
Heir, when he is sure to be at last laid open to all Injuries imaginable* The
Holy League to prevent that, Petitioned the Consistory at Rome, That they might
have leave to overthrow the Succession in a full Assembly of the States, and to
make the naming of a Successor Subject unto the said States, yet none of that
Party concerned themselves much, with the unreasonableness of that Petition,
being satisfied I suppose, with the expediency of the thing.

Therefore since that no Laws can be, or has been made, but such as shall at
some time entrench upon some particulars. It rests then naturally in the
Supremacy to add what new ones it in reason shall think fit, that being the
only proper Judge of all Conveniences in that Case, to think otherwise were to
dismantle and disarm the Government, by making it so defective, as not to be
able to provide either for its own Support or the Subjects Security, a
Parliament, viz. the King and his Three Estates, being then the only Remedy in
such a Juncture: I shall apply for a Conclusion to that uncontrollable and
unaccountable Authority, the 33. 34. Verses of Job. 41. Upon Earth there is
none like him, who is made without fear, He beholds all High things, He is a
King over all the Children of Pride.

no more Worthy Sir, but I am Your Humble Servant, G. H.


