Munster and Abingdon Or the Open Rebellion there, and Unhappy Tumult here.
(Bred in the same womb) THAT From Sleidans Comm. L. 10. THIS From eye and ear
witnesses. With Marginall Notes of MVNCER and MAHOMET. Faithfully communicated
to English Readers, in a Book and Postscript, For A seasonable Caution to the
British Nation. And A serious check to rash and Giddy spirits.

By W. H.

2 Timothy 3, 1, 2, 3, 4. In the last days perilous times shall come; for men
shall be lovers of their own selves -- despisers of those that are good,
Traitors, heady, high minded etc.

Matthew. 24.24. For there shall arise false Christ's and false Prophets --
insomuch that (if it were possible) they shall deceive the very Elect.

Mark. 13.37. What I say to you I say to all, WATCH.

OXFORD. Printed by HENRY HALL Printer to the University, for ROBERT BLAGRAVE.
1657.

The Books Request.
Hear me, but out, My Judge, before Thou sentence pass; I Will ask no more.

The Translators Preface.
Serious Reader,
THe Husbandman was not more diligent to sow his corn, than the Matthew. 13.25.
Enemy was to scatter tares among it. The Event does prove this was no less
prophetical than Historical. Where ever was a Christian Reformation set on
foot, but a Devilish Deformation dogged it at the very heels? Let a Church for
Christ be setting up, it is hard but Satan's Chapel mates it. To spy abroad
for observations of this kind is to overlooke the beam at home. Ask but the
seven years past with us, and you shall quickly find, this land has not
enjoyed its Sabbath from this sort of Sowers yet. Not, but that we see, and
thankfully acknowledge a hopeful harvest of better fruits. But when the
Laborers are so few already, that a design should drive so Jehu-like to keep
off others, yea turn off these, (though such as Christ has set on work, and
prospered in it to the bringing in of all, or most that are not yet abroad) to
turn off these, I say, sure this makes plain to half an eye there, is no
friend at work. Yet do not we see those spirits, wide as Dover and Newcastle
from one another, and themselves too often, meet here? And to cry down the
public Ministry, as eager as they to cry up (b) Diana? A plot, Act. 19.28.
whether less Christian, or Humane, I cannot tell. Let me say nothing, the
thing it self will speak, that since their time, who were immediately called
from heaven, the Godly-learned Ministers were the men that planted, watered,
yea and soyld with their very blood the Church of Christ in every age. Were
they not those that, under God, did first deliver our souls from Antichristian
bondage at the utmost peril of their own bodies? Witness Luther, Zuinglius,
Calvin: Latimer, Ridly, Hooper, Bradford, and that cloud of others staked at
the fire in England. Who else have been the spiritual Fathers to the
thousands of faithful holy souls (now gone to heaven) for the hundred years
last past, with us and other places: yea, and begat to grace and knowledge
those (therewith endued) whose violence now against them labors to make
requital with worser than Cashiering for their service? Which were it once
effected, and no public Ministry longer left among us, into what a doleful,
heathenish, hellish, plight, those many hundred parishes (too ignorant and
profane already) in these Nations would be quickly cast? specially since we
see the Devil and his drudges are not idle, Reader, let thy sad thoughts
resolve thee. O dismal day when Judgment sends a famine, Amos 8.11
not of bread but of the word of God, Nu. 21.5.
upon a Land that fell to loathing of it! We know, with God all things are
possible, but know not, why to look for miracles, and leave off such a course
himself appointed, and from heaven so long and often has approved. And then
for inhumanity, what is more barbarous than that so many hundred families of
Godly Ministers, to whom we are so nearely related as men, in a manner of the
same flesh and blood with our selves; and to whom we owe so much as Christians,
should, for no other fault but their well deserving at our hands, be turned out
of their propriety, and sent a begging, against all right and reason, as we
speak, all Law and Conscience? Blessed be God, our former Governors have
washed their hands of any such like business, and we nothing doubt but that
such special grace is present with those now present at the Helm that they
will continue to abhor it. And we trust, through mercy, notwithstanding all the
catching at the stirrup by some furious spirits, they never shall be able to
dismount the Riders to get themselves into the saddle. Let what there will be
uppermost it is sadly feared (if not plainly manifest) such a business lies at
the bottom. Should which time come, what fence another man's propriety can get
when the Ministers shall lie common you will quickly see unto your Costs. Mean
while, for a Comment on the whole, Reader, Ibeseech the read and well consider
the ensuing story: where thou shall Find a pretended zeal for setting up
Christ's Kingdom on the earth made usher (oh most dreadfully!) to the verydregs
of villainies spit from Hell.

The truth of which said story on understanding and indifferent person will
ever call to question. But yet because absurdities are so much in fashion, let
me entreat the scrupulous person (for such there are too many) to consider what
beams of evidence he shuts his eyes against: How likely is it we should be
abused in a business --

First, So public: not done in a Corner, This Story 1. Public.
but the principal City of Westphalia, Munster. 2. So many Councils sitting in
the Empire about it. 3. An Army of many thousands raised for it. 4. And a siege
almost a year and half before the City, ere it could be taken: with yet much
more like that.

Secondly, 2. La'e Anno. 1517 Ann. 1536
and so late: After Luther had began the Reformation some nine-teene years,
and now just sixscore since those stirs were ended.

Thirdly, 3. Near.
so near us: not in Tartary, China or the Indies (though thence we have
intelligence that goes for current) but in Germany, and that part thereof that
borders on the Low Countries: almost at home.

Lastly, 4. And having multitudes of Authe^tique Authors.
and that has so many credible Authors. Luther, Melancthon, Bullinger, Menius,
and Rhegius, with scores of others, were it worth the while, that might be
named. And now these, 1. so far from Papists, as first restorers of the
Gospel. 2. Men of eminent piety. 3. That lived in the same Country. 4. At the
same time, spectators, in a manner, of the whole business from first to last.
And for this Author Mr Sleidan; He was a Protestant, one fearing God, and then
living there, and of great esteem and credit amongst all professors of the
Gospel, and deservedly famous for his writings to past, and present, and
succeeding ages: and which is of special notice, one that took not any thing
upon mere heresay, but all either of his own knowledge, or out of public
Records.

He that will not yet believe it, doubts happily of our bloody Marian days,
the eighty eight Invasion, the powder Plot, the fight at Edg-Hill. It may be
whether the woman, that bred, and brought him forth, be his own mother. And so
is worthy not of words but stripes for gaining his assent.

Touching the Translation, only thus much. It was so much my care, (some
happily will call it superstition) to tread exactly in the Authors steps
(saving the divisions into chapters, and contents thereon) that I would not
step aside to take up any the proprieties of our English speech that lay on
either hand as we passed along. But this too, as the rest, is humbly cast at
ingenuous Critics feet.

If any say; Sure those with us against Infant Baptism are not of kin unto the
Germans mentioned in this story.

I answer, That it is no doubt with me, but that many Godly, precious souls
are found amongst them, whose hearts would rise at the very hearing of this
hellish tragedy: whose souls establishment in the grace of God we pray for,
and whose Christian fellowship we gladly should embrace, and mourn to see the
folly that keeps them at such a distance. Yet truly, in this hour of
temptation, many, many seeming stars have fallen from heaven: and this our age
has spoken more, to carnal reason for Saints final Apostasy, than all
Arminian arguments. Yea, to speak our hearts, whosoever shall please but heedfully
to feel the pulse, and mark the face of many leaders now adays among them, I
fear will be too apt to say I find some John a-Leidens Fellows. For my part I
will leave it to the Readers judgment, whether that Spirit that biddes so fair
as both at once to pull down the public Ministry and root up the settled
Magistracy look not so like him as if it were his own begotten.

This is a truth of Gods own teaching, Jer. 17.9.
that the heart is deceitful above all things, and desperately wicked, who can
know it? And we our selves by sad experience have often learned it, that many
have thought it utterly impossible for them, ever to incline unto such wretched
courses, as afterward they have been mad in. When the Prophet told Hazael
what mischief he should sometimes do in Israel. Is thy servant a dog, quoth
he, to do this? But the event made it truer than he was aware of, 2 Kings 8.13.
with 10.32, etc. 13.324, 22.
whilst be wanted power to effect it. And truly Reader, here with us they are
but young days yet: allthough, alas! every moment thriveth, but too fast,
toward a dismal noone.

To conclude: this use, at least, this story serves us to: that trembling to
behold Gods righteous judgments against abused kindness, where ever we find
this spirit working in another (thoug with the smoothest face) we stop it what
we may: and for our selves to watch and pray lest we fall into temptation.

The History of John a-Leyden, The Anabaptist King in Munster.
CHAP. I.
The Introduction. Of T. Munster. And Anabaptists in general.

We are coming now to the seige of Munster, the principal City of Westphalia:
save that something must be further fetched, even from the first beginning of
those stirrs till their Authors punishment upon the taking of the City. Of
Thomas The story is briefly thus: Muncer having lest the Preaching of the
Gospel, fell to new Doctrine; inveighs not only against the Pope, but Luther
also: At first he taught against Profaneness, would have the body Curbd with
fasting, and mean attire; was for a grave set face little talk private
meditation etc. Then we must ask of God a sign that he did love us, and chide
him too, if he gave us none: That God revealed his will in dreams; that
revelations with the Scripture must be our Rule, withal community of goods did
best become us; and all to be of equal rank. At last, ungodly Magistrates
must be down; in order whereto he gets 8000 men together, and exherts them to
fightagainst their princes, by this time with an Army near them, tells them
they knew it was not his fancy, but Gods Comm and that set them on this work,
And help from heaven should make them Conquerors: As for their Bullets he
would receive them all in his own Coat: And Lo, says he, what a gracious
God we have! Behold the taken of his everlasting favors Lift up your eyes and
see the Rainbow in the Heavens, which since we have its picture in our
Colors, Shows plainly God will be with us in the Battle to our enemies
Rain. At the encounter Muncers Party is quick'y routed 5000 slain in the
field, 300 more in a Town they ran too: Muncer was hid in a house by the Gate:
Thither comes in a noble man's servant, to see the house: gets up the stairs,
finds one in bed, asks whether he be one of the Rebels. Muncer says, no: But
that he had been sick a great while of a fever. The Servant Spies apurse
Caught it with hope to have a Prize, Opening he finds letters unto Muncer
from the Earl of Mansfeild to for bear Rebellion: Then asks him whither they
were sent to him or not: on his denial, the servant threatens to dispatch
him: he prays him to hold; and confesses he is Muncer: Then on the Rack
crying out for pain they bid him now remember how many silly souls his
Villainy had destroyed to day. He with a mighty Laughter, says, Themselves
desired it: Yet at the Point of death he publicly confessed his fault. But for
Example sake his head cut off was fastened to a spear and Placed in the miale
of the Camp. This was in Germany the year 1525.
Muncer's his sedition amongst the Rabble, his doctrine and his end, our fifth
book made report. By him was hatched that brood of men who for their Practice
and opinion are called Anabaptists: of whom also something has been said
already. For they for bid Baptizing little ones, are rebaptized themselves,
affirming, All men else should do the same, and clearly Null the former
Bapistme. They pretend unto an outward dress of Holiness, Teach Christians
should not go to Law, bear Civil office, make oath, maintain propriety, but
leave all things Common. They began with These; then, matters far more
beynous, as I shall show anon. And whereas Germany was far and near infested
with them. Yet, Luthers and most other learned men's oppositions to them, with
the Magistrates narrower eye upon them took so, that they could hardly Sowder
into a Considerable Number. At last they fixed in the aforesaid City strongly
fortified.

CAP. II.
B. Rotman first brings the Gospel to Munster. The Popish Clergy oppose. But
in vain. And are silenced.

It fell out thus: hard by this Munster is St Maurice Church; There did one
Bernard Rotman in the year of our Redemption 1532, with great Concourse of the
Citizens, preach the Gospel, and when they had some thoughts of getting him
into the City, the Popish Priests, to prevent it, give him a pretty sum of
moneys to exercise himself some other where. He takes his leave, and having
veiw'd some Places where he might improve his parts, a few months after comes
back again. They, angry at his return, would feign have put him off from
Preaching: But all in Vain, the People being taken with him. Soon after he is
entertained in the City by certain of the Chiefest Citizens, and when the
Church was shut against him, they make a Pulpit for him in the Porch without.

But the number of the Citizens and his hearers increasing daily. They require
the Priests to set open the Church, or they would break it up.

In the Nicke of this, He, by Advice of those the People chose theretoo,
dispatcheth letters into Hassia, that was near them of the Lantgraves
Jurisdiction, to desire that some learned Godly men might be sent unto him,
there to sow the Gospel with him. Two hereupon are sent from Marpurgh. Upon
their coming six of them get together and consult of the quickest course to
set the Popish Clergy packing, that the Gospel might succeed the better. The
best expedient found hereto was this; They draw up the Popish Errors and digest
them into some thirty heads: Those they deliver to the Or Common Council that
Ruled the City.
Senate with this resolution, That if they did not Prove by the word of God All
those waged war therewith, they would submit to any punishment.

The senate Calls the Priests into the Court, and propose the Errors whereof
we spoke. And because they ever bare in hand their doctrine to be pure, and
grounded on the word of God, which the Preachers now deny, and offer to make
good upon their lives, They ask them, whether they would confute by
Scriptures, what should be objected? They, thus demanded, and perceiving that
the Senate was in very earnest in the business, make a short Answer, That they
had just nothing to defend their cause withal, but whereas hitherto they did
pretend their way was right and good, it was from opinion and their Ignorance.
The Senate then, since they convicted of their errors and false doctrine, could
say nothing for themselves, but confess their naughtiness, command them
henceforth not to medleany more with taching, but give way in all the Churches
to these new Teachers that had unmasked their knavery. On this (the People too
concurring with the Senate) the Churches were Assigned to them respectively
where to teach.

CAP. III.
The Bishop instigated by the silenced Pricsts blocks up the City, this party
is surprised by the Citizens. Indentures of Peace are mutually Signed.

THat Business bred ill blood among the Priests, them especially of the
Cathredrall Church, for the most part all of Noble Blood. They, none other
shift being left, depart in rage, applying to the Bishop of that City.
Whereupon Council had, it was resolved to block up all the ways, that no
provision might come to the City. A little after, the ways being all and every
where beset, the Bishop with those of whom I spoke, to promote their work the
better, comes unto Tolget, a little Town some one mile distant from the City.
Thence letters are dispatched unto the Senate to this purpose. That they
forbear their Course, restore their former State, or to be taken as Enemies.
The Bishop was Earl Francis Waldec, next before him had been Frederick, own
Brother to the Archbishop of Colen. But He, whether because he had not well his
health there, or that he smelt out something, not long, before of his own
accord had left the Place, and to live private, returned him home into his
Country. They of Munster well pausing on the business, deteine the Messenger,
and the night before Christ's birthday about 900 Sallying forth unlooked for
take both the little Town and (making good the Gates that none might escape)
All that were in it. The Bishop as fell out, was gone the day before. The
prisoners were forthwith brought into the City. Amongst them were the
eminentest of the Clergy, and some also of the Nobility; The Senate asks them,
what their pleasure is, and if they mean to stop the Preaching of the Gospel.
They freely Anlwer, Their endeavors should not be wanting to promote that
doctrine. Hereon they strike the bargain. A Copy whereof the Senate sent the
Lant-grave, with all beseeching for the Gospels sake and public good to have
his helping hand. He sends some of his own to them: by whose Mediation it was
concluded, that their hearts agreed, and distaste removed, both sides should
cherish peace: The Gospel to be preached in six Churches, all superstitious
and ungodly worship turned packing: in the Cathedral Church, no alteration to
be made, nor the City reckon that in any case belonging unto them. This form
of their agreement was signed by the Lantgrave, the Bishop and his Party, the
Nobility and all the people, Feb. 14. the year of our redemption 1533.

CHAP. IIII.
Leiden arriveth. Starteth Anabaptisme. Rotman opposes publicly. A
disputation is entered. Rotman revolts. And the Anabaptists are banished.

THings thus appeased, there came to Munster a certain Holland That is a
mender of old Clothes.
Botcher, one John a-Leiden an eager Anabaptist. He at the first insinuating
into a familiar discourse with them; would use to ask the Preachers of the
Gospel whither they thought, that Infants duly might be baptized, They saying,
yea, He that was warped quite Crooked on the other side, begins to laugh and
scorn thereat. Which taken notice of Bernard Rotman (of whom before) exhorts
the People in his Sermon to pray that sound doctrine might be preserved with
them, and kept incorrupt from fanatique Persons, the Anabaptists especially,
who at this time did Creep amongst them, and get in peoples company, whose
opinion should it prevail woe, would it be, not only to the state of
Commonwealth but also of Religion. Just then, almost, comes thither Herman
Strapeda, who being made Rotmans Colleague, publicly Inveighs against
Poedobaptisme. His Master was one Henry Rolls, whom they of Vtrecht (before
this time a little) had punished for Anabaptisme. This fellow was indeed
another step to this new kind of doctrine. And now the Business was of such a
Pitch, that most of all the talk about the City was of Anabaptists; Though
things were yet but closely Carried. For none could be admitted but who were of
their Sect. And then the Authors did not openly profess these things, nor
teach them, but by night; and when others were asleep then only were their
holy exercises. But the business coming out, when very many of the Citizens
were enraged at it, crying out, It Was base, an upstart Tenet should be
scattered privily and by night, The Senate ordered, That the Authors should be
gone the City. But they going forth returned another way, Vapouring, That they
had Command from God to stay, and There, in earnest to go through with their
business. This was a Trouble to the Senate and somewhat did amaze them, and
therefore to prevent disturbance and farther danger the Preachers both of the
Gospel, and of Anabaptisme are commanded their appearance at the Court, and
some learned men together with them. Then Rotman, which he had concealed till
now, shows himself; and condemns Paedobaptisme as a wicked and accursed
thing. But Herman Busch especially did so make good the other side before the
Senate, That they were by Public Order Commanded forthwith to depart the City.
Yet when they Pleaded that they could not safely pass the Bishops Country,
The Senate both procured them public faith, and also gave provision for their
Journey. But they who long before, resolved not to stir a foot, step privily
aside into their own Associates, and lie close a while.

CAP. V.
The Lantgrave sends Preachers. A fresh debate appointed. And the terms
rejected by the Anabaptists.

Mean time the Senate, e're they might again appear above board, shut all
the Churches up, save only one. For it was feared, least the Anabaptists,
whose number daily did increase, should with their speakers Tumble out the
Preachers of the Gospel from the Church. Then, in the month of November the
Lantgrave at entreaty of the Senate, sent them two Teachers, Theodorique
Fabrice, and John Melsinger: And this, perceiving the disturbance, startled
also at the danger, goes home again. The other vigorously admonished the
Citizens to keep a jealous eye upon the Anabaptists Doctrine. After which rate
he held until the Anabaptists getting uppermost turned the others out of
Town, as you shall here anon, And that nothing might be wanting, he draws up
a form of doctrine and Church Government, to the Content both of the Senate
and the People. Then, with the Senates leave, Peter Wirtem begins to Teach
again. But a few Sermons hardly over, by Rotmans Instigation, the Anabaptists
cast him out. Who now growing feircer challenge Fabrice and others to a
disputation. The Senate likeing it, it was thought meet to have the business
managed from holy Scriptures and other writings suting with them: some honest
learned men, as moderators, to be joined; who upon due Cognizance of the
opinions and Arguments of either side, should determine; what they determined,
to be ratifyed: So as at last, dissentions laid aside, peace might be restored
to the Church. But as for those Terms, Rotman and his fellows would none of
them. When therefore they refused Public Test, they began to fall into a
General contempt. To wash off which stain they find another more compendious
Course.

CHAP. VI.
Popular Tumults, And open Insurrection by Anabaptists. A skirmish and
agreement.

ONe of them, like a man inspired, runs through the City and cries out, Repent
and be baptized or else the wrath of God will overwhelme you. Here first began
the vulgar Tumults. And all that were baptized again cried out as he, and in
his Posture. Many ensnared by their own simplicity (men otherwise Honest) for
that they feared the wrath of God, whereof these made such noise, come in unto
them, and others too, to save their stakes. For the truth is, the Anabaptists
dealing coursly with their Adversaries did fairly turn them out of all. This
was about Decembers end. And now again these peep out of their holes, of whom
I spoke before. Who with an outcry hurrying to the market place together,
command all not bapts'zd to be put to death as Pagans and ungodly wretches.
Then seized they on the Magazine and Hall, laying violent hands on many. The
others to defend themselves and theirs, make good another Certain Place within
the City, by nature fortifyed, surprising very many of theirs. This skirmish
against the Anabaptists that kept the Hall and fenced it round held, till on
giving Mutual Hostages, They came to Terms, where by it was provided, That
every man should keep his own Religion go home and live at peace.

CHAP. VII.
Anabaptists send to confederates abroad. The City fills with them.
Poedobaptists mastered. Anabaptists rule. And fire the suburbs. Banish
dissenters. And seize their estates.

ROtman the while; and Bernard Cnipperdoling the very foreman of that Gangue)
although they gave their good word unto this agreement, yet by their secret
letters to the Neighbor Towns encouraged all them of their stamp, That
bidding adeiu to whatsoever they had, they should Post-hast be with them there;
look what they left behind they should enjoy with Tenfold Interest. Such ample
and magnificent promises set on their way to Munster both men and women in the
greatest Number, with certain expectation of enjoying greater matters; The
poorer sort especially that had not to live at home. The Townes-men, chiefly
those of fair Estates, perceiving how the City filled with strangers, with as
much Covenience as they Could, withdrew themselves, leaving behind, the
Anabaptists and the multitude. This was about Shrove, Tuesday in the month of
February, 1534. When the other Party had been weakened thus, The Anabaptists
form a new Senate, of their own Creatures all; and Create (a) Consuls also,
Like our Mayors; but they were too.
Cnipperdoling for one. Within few days they set upon St Maurice Church in the
suburbs and fire both it and all the building near it. Then rob they all the
Chnrches and tare down the inside of the Chiefest. By and by they run on
heaps through all the streets, and first they cry, Repent, but quickly after,
depart from hence immediately ye wicked ones, except you mean to lay your
lives at stake. Withal they are strait in Arms together, and whosoever were
not of their sect, without more ado, they thrust them out of town without
respect to either sex or Age. So as indeed some women great with Child
miscarried in this tumultuous and precipitant banishment. Immediately they seize
on their Estates they had turned out. And notwithstanding this befell the day
before the Bishop did beseige the City, yet of the multitude that were feign to
leave it, some falling into the Bishops hands, were reckoned enemies: others in
danger of their lives, and among the rest, two Preachers of the Gospel. He of
whom I spoke before Peter Wirtem being himself in danger, was saved by the
Mediation of the Lantgrave. Others of the Townsmen that were good men, troubled
at this to see that if they left the City they were forced to run on present
danger abroad, upon compulsion in a manner and against their will, did stay
behind.

CHAP. VIII.
Community commanded. All books burnt but the Bible. A Smith jests on them,
and pays dearly for it.

ABout this time the foreman of the Prophets (for that's the Title they do
arrogate unto themselves) John Matthew gave command that whatsoever Gold,
silver, Movables any man enjoyed, on pain of death he should bring forth
among them. And for this Use there was a public house appointed. The people
much amazed with the rigor of this Order, Obeyed. Nor was it safe for any man
to fail, or to defraud them of any part. For there were two Girls possessed
with Spirits of Divination, that discovered whatsoever fraud had been
committed. Nor did they only bring their own Goods thus together, but theirs
also whom they had turned out of Town, they did convert to their own use.
This done, the self same Prophet did command that no man henceforth keep any
other book about him but the holy Bible: all others must be brought forth and
abolished. This was commanded, as he said, from heaven. And thereupon Books in
great Number heaped together were all consumed with fire. it happened that a
smith about that time, one Hubert Truteling had broake some Jest upon the
(selfe-named) Prophets, which being known they call the people and command the
Soldiers to be present: Instantly they accuse the fellow, and sentence him to
die. The people were exceedingly astonished at the business: But the
fore-prophet (whom I named before) lays violent hands on the poor wretch, and
with a spear stabd him lying flat on the ground: yet without Mortal wound,
although he fell upon him with a mighty force. Then he Commands him to be
carried to another Place; where snaching up a Gun, from a young man by him,
with a Bullet shoots him through, lying all along. The fellow for all this not
dying presently he tells them, that it was reveald from heaven unto him, that
his time to dye was not yet come, and God had shown him mercy. But a few days
after the poor man ends his life. That being known the Prophet, all in have,
catches up a long-sized spear, and running madly through the City, Cries out
that God the Father had commanded him to beat off the enemy from the City.
Approaching to the Camp a certain Soldier that engaged him, ran him through.
And though the error of his predictions was this other time discovered also,
yet had his Comrade Prophets so befooled the men and put so fair a dress upon
the business, to the vulgar, that he was much desired, and some Calamity
presaged impendent on them from the loss of such a Worthy personage. But John
at Leiden next Prophet to him bad them take heart, it was long ago revealed to
him that he should come to such an end. And for the wife he left, she should be
his. Within two days of Easter they run into the Churches and set all the
Bells in every Place a ringing. Shortly after Cnipperdoling prophesyeth, That
those which were of the highest form must be tumbled down, and others from
the ba^^st bench and very dunghill be exalted. Then bids he them demolish all
the Churches, protesting seriously that he had such command from God. They all
are at his beck, and with their utmost diligence put in execution the Command
(he calls) from heaven. At the self same time almost John at Leiden gives the
sword to Cnipperdoling and makes him Hangman for such was Gods pleasure that
He, before who bare the greatest office and was Confull, now take the meanest,
and be Hangman. He, far from unwilling, with thanks accepts the office put upon
him.

CAP. IX.
The Bishop craves aid of neighbor Princes, and obtaines it. The City stormed.
But Without success.

WHen now the Bishop for some Months had been himself at all the Charge of
war against them, Herman Archbishop of Colen, and John Prince of Clev^ sent aid
of money, arms, and some troops of horse and foot. The Archbishop of Colen
goes also to the Camp himself to give advice. And not long after they assault
the City in certain Places. But when no hopes remained of taking it by storm,
they built seven fortresses to stop all Passage, and Place some Colors of
foot, and troops of horse in every of them for winter quarters. And to the end
the siege and war might be carried on, which equally concerned them all, the
Bishop of Munster craves aid of all the Princes and the Cities in the Province
of Rhene, as being next unto him. For this, there was a meeting called at
Confluence, about the 13th of December 1534. For Germany in the whole has six
divisions, Franconia, Bononia, Suevia, Saxony, the tract of Rhene, and
Burgundy. Within these limits of ancient course were reckoned all the Princes
and the Cities one or other at Imperial dyets. At this day is division of the
upper and the lower Saxony, then also is there lower Germany, Westphalia and
Austria, so that at present ten Countries do make up the Empire.

CAP. X.
Leiden dreams three-dayes. Creates Twelve Governors. Proposes new Doctrins.
Leading Anabaptists seized by some well affected. Who loose their lives for it.

AFter the fruitles storm John a-Leiden takes him to his rest, and falls a
dreaming three whole days space together. When he awakes, speaks not a word,
but makes signs for paper, and therein Assigns twelve men (some well
descended in the Number) to be over all affairs, and as in Israel, steer the
whole. For this He tells them is the heavenly Fathers pleasure. And now, when
by the twelve a stirrup thus was made him to the Kingdom, he falls proposing
certain Tenets to the Preachers, and requires their confutation of them by the
Scriptures: where if they fayld, he would refer them to the People for their
approbation, and establishment. Of those, this was the Cream, That men were
not obliged to one only wife, but if they pleased might marry many: which when
their Teachers did oppose, He calls them with the Twelve unto the hall. At
their appearance there, he puts off his Cloak and threw it with a new
Testament on the ground; by those as signs he swears, The Doctrine he had
broached, was revealed from heaven to him, and therefore sharply threatens
them, with the frowns of God upon them, if they do not bid it welcome.

At last they jumpe, and it was a full three days work for the Preachers
Sermons to talk of Marriage. He quickly gets him three wives, one, the great
Prophets John Matthew, of whom I speak before. This leading case others were
not long behind So as it was reckoned for a credit to be often married. But now
some Citizens that could by no means brook this trade, by a token given
through the City get all that loved the Gospel to a meeting at the Hall. Then
they lay hold upon the Prophet. Cnipperdoling, and all the Teachers. The Rabble
at first notice of it run to Arms, rescue the Prisoners, and with cruel
torments slew some fifty: for tying some to Trees and stakes they shot them
through: The ring-leading Prophet making acclamation, That he that would do God
good service should discharge upon them first. Others had other ends.

CAP. XI.
A new prophet declares that John a-Leiden must be King. It Is done.
Cnipperdoling playing Rex is put in prison.

ABout the 24 fourth of Juneup starts a new Prophet by trade a Goldsmith. He
having called the People to the Hall, declare it as the will and pleasure of the
heavenly father, that John a-Leiden should be Lord of all the world, and that
he marching forthwith a mighty Army should destroy all Kings and Princes, one
or other, showing mercy to the People only, that is, to those that do love
righteousness: and that he should possess the seat of his father David,
until the Father do require the Kingdom of him, for the ungodly trodden under
foot, the Saints must reign, even in this life. This spoken openly, John
a-Leiden insta^tly faling on his knees and lifting up his hands to heaven cries
out, Men and brethren, I have been no stranger to this business, for these
many days, and yet I had no mind to publish it, but now, to put it out of
doubt, the Father has made use of another Messenger. Thus being then made King
he forthwith Nulls the Twelve, and as the Regal mode is, Creates him Nobles,
Commands two Crowns, a Scabbard, Chain, and Scepter with other such like
Badges of state to be provided for him of the purest Gold. Then he appointed
certain days of hearing in all causes that required his Cognizance. As often
as he came in Public he was attended with his officers and nobles of his
Court. Next to him followed too young men mounted. He on the right with a
Crown and Bible, the other with a naked sword. In like state was his
Principal wife attended, for he had many at that time: In the hall there was
erected a lofty throne of state, covered with Cloth of Gold. The Complaints and
suits before him, for the most part were of marrying or divorcing, a thing now
thredbare with them. Insomuch that some who many years had lived together were
now first put asunder. But on a time the People standing very thick and crowded
in the hall to hear, Lo, Cnipperdoling leapeth up and Scrabling by all four
on the Crowd, he wanders to and fro upon their Tops, and gaping wide mouthed on
them, says to them severally, The Father has Sanctified thee, receive the
Holy Ghost. Another day leading a dance before the King, quoth he, thus my
little whore and I sometimes are want to do: But now the Father bad me do the
same before the King. And when he never would have done, the King went forth
offended at him. Then he mounts up the throne and Plays Rex himself. But the
King the while returning pulls down my man and claps him three days up in
prison.

CAP. XII.
A book Printed for the Reign of Saints. And confuted.

THe siege continuing they write a bookeandpublish it, their Title is The
Restitution. Herein, with other stuff, they broach: That Christ's kingdom
shall be such before the last day of Judgment, that all the ungodly every where
extinct, the Godly and the Elect shall reign. They tell us also, that the
people may turn off their Magistrates, and though the Apostles were not
commanded to take the Civil power into their hands, yet the present Ministers
of the Church ought to claim title to the Sword, and to enforce a new form of
Government. Moreover, that none but true Christians might be suffered in the
Church, and that none could be saved except they would relinquish all propriety
in the Estate they had, and make it common. For Luther and the Pope of Rome
they were both false Prophets, yet Luther was the worser of the twain. And as
to unbelievers Marriage, it is polluted and impure, nor to be reckoned (say they)
than for whoredom and adultery. Those their opinions were oppugned chiefly by
Melancthon, Justus, Menius, and Vrbanus Rhegius whose writings upon this
Subject are extant very clear and full.

CAP. XIII.
New Apostles. Their Commission.

A few weeks after the new-sprung Prophet Spoken of before, by Sound of
Trumpet throughout all the Streets proclaims that all should make appearance
in their Arms at the Cathedrall-Porch, because the enemy must be sent packing
from the City. At their coming thither they find a supper ready. Being bad
about 4000 sit down unto it: after, they sup that were the while upon the
guard about 1000. The King and Queen with their household Servants wait. Having
eaten and supper almost ended, the King himself reaching bread to every one
says, Take eat show forth the death of the Lord: The Queen holding out the
cup says, Drink, and show forth the death of the Lord. This done the foresaid
Prophet steps up into a pulpit, asks them whether they would obey the word of
God: All saying, yea, quoth he, It is the fathers command that Teachers of the
word should be sent forth, about eight and twenty, who going into the four
quarters of the world may preach the doctrine famous in this City. Then names
he them, directs the way that every one should take. Six were dispatched to
Osenbruge, as many unto Warendorse, eight unto Susat, the like number unto
Cosfield. Afterward the King and Queen sit down to supper with their other
servants, and those appointed for the progress. At supper the king starts up:
says, that he has a little business the father has commanded. It chanced
there was a certain Soldier taken him, as another Judas, the King accused of
treason and himself beheads him. This done he returned to supper, and merrily
brags of that his brave exploit. Having supped the foresaid 28 are sent away,
within night a little, and besides provisions for their journey every man has
his piece of Gold which in the places where their doctrine is refused they are
bid to leave behind them, as a token of their future destruction and eternal
ruin, for contempt of peace, and such a saving doctrine.

CAP. V.
The Apostles behavior. And entertainment where they come.

WHen they departing came into their several places, with a loud out cry
through the streets. That men repent, or look for sudden ruin: They spread
their garments on the ground before the magistrate, and threw the Golden pieces
that they had received thereon, assuring them that the father sent them to
offer peace unto them, which if they would embrace, they must make common what
they had, but if they did refuse, then hereby, as an earnest, they did protest
against this wickedness of theirs and ingratitude. For now the time is come
whereof all the Prophets spoke, when through all the world God will have
righteousness be embraced. And when the King in doing of this duty shall
bring the business unto such a pass that righteousness reign in every
place, then shall it be that Christ deliver up the Kingdom to his father.
Talking at this rate they are laid hold off, and freindly first, then on the
rack examined of their faith and life, and of the Cities Strength. They answer,
that only they themselves held the true Doctrine and they would bear witness
to it at the peril of their lives. For from the very Apostles time neither had
the word of God been truly taught, nor any righteousness set a foot. There
are in all four Prophets, and no more, two righteous ones, David and John
a-Leiden, two wicked, the Pope and Luther, and this the worser of the twain.
Being asked why against their promise given they banished honest men the City,
seizing on their goods and wives; and Children, and by what place of Scripture
could they prove and maintain that righteousness of theirs. They say, this is
the time Christ spoke of, that the meek should inherit the earth, and in this
manner heretofore God gave the Egyptians goods unto the Isralites. Speaking
afterward of the forces and provisions of the city, they confess, most men
have above five wives and that they looked for forces out of Friezland and from
Holland, as soon as ere they come, the King will march forth with all his Army
and subdue the world unto himselfes putting to death the Kings for not
administering Justice. Having been examined, when they would bide by what they
were, nor acknowledge any Magistrate besides their King, Death was their doom,
yet one of them escaped.

CAP. XV.
The King makes Dukes, and Halbaltiers. Their Encouragement.

BY this, the City was so close begirt that there was no way of getting out for
any: the Citizens therefore fearing famine and troubled at the danger they were
in, had thoughts to apprehend the King and deliver him bound unto the Bishop.
The King, that by some tokens Smelt the business out, makes choice of twelve
out of all the heap, that he judged most faithful, and calls them Dukes,
assigning unto every of them some part of the City to defend: and also yeomen
of the Guard to prevent commotions. Then did he promise all the people that at
Easter they should be quit both of Siege and want together. But for the Dukes
he chose, far greater matters are assured to them: they shall be Lords and
Masters (as he tells them) yea and particularly lays out, what Province,
Castles, and Manors each should have. None but the Lantgrave should be spared,
he said; because he hoped at last he would strike in with him.

CHAP. XVI.
More Princes meet. The besieged admonished.

ABove we told you of a meeting called at Confluence in the month December, of
those states that were within the Province of Rhene, with them associated of
his own accord John Frederick Prince Elector of Saxony. The business duly
weighed in that assembly, speedy aids are ordered to the Bishop, of horse
three-hundred, and three thousand foot for six months space. Over these forces
and the whole war Wirich Earl of Oberstene is made General. It Is ordered
also that all other states within the Empire shall be solicited for
assistance. And because Caesar was in Spain that King Ferdinand be desired
against April next for this to call a Diet. Then sent they letters sharply to
admonish the besieged to leave off their course, which is so both dishonest and
ungodly as nothing more: except they yield and submit them to their lawful
Magistrate, they tell them plainly that the whole Empire will not be wanting to
assist the Bishop. This was about Decembers end. They answer the 13th day of
January 1535. with words enough, but little to the purpose. Yet so as too
commend and justify their undertakement, but as to what had been objected
about the King they coined, they are quite dumb to that.

CAP. XVII.
Anabaptists write to the Lantgrave. The Answers. They Reply etc.

BUt in their private letters to the Lantgrave they would feign excuse
themselves, talking much about the ruin and destruction of all the wicked,
about the liberty and dominion of the godly in this life, and herewith send him
the book of Restitution, that I spoke of. They admonish him also to repent and
not like other Princes, wicked men, wage war against them harmless souls,
and Gods people. The Lantgrave having read the Letter and the book notes what
he did dislike therein, and orders some of his to answer. And since they very
briefly but somewhat blindly wrote, their king was not so much of theirs, as
of Gods appointment. He asks them why they did not show those Scriptures
whence they thought this course was lawful, and why they had not first
confirmed it by signs and wonders. For of Christ's coming God by all his
Prophets long before foretold so evidently that not only of what tribe or
stock, but also when and where he should be borne was clearly manifest. It Was
also their desire to have a hearing of their cause. Hereto the Lantgrave
answers. Now there was no room for that since they had usurped authority and
were the Authors of so much mischief. For all men see whereat they aim, even
to the overthrowing laws and commonwealths. And as their course is palpably
wicked and villainous, so also the desire of having cognizance taken of their
Cause is feigned and counterfeit. That for his part he had sent them faithful
ministers of the Church, by whom he is sure, they have been well instructed.
But whereas by their nasty doctrine they revolt from their Magistrate, Seize on
other men's estates, take many wives, choose a new King, deny Christ to have
taken humane nature of the Virgin Mary, assert free will, force men to make all
common, deny forgiveness to a lapsed sinner. These all are both against the
laws of God and men. This answer brought them, they fall again to scribbling,
and send withal a book composed in the vulgar speech, Of Scripture Mysteries.
In their Epistle, they put new trimming on their cause, and reinforce their
principles: but in the book we speak of they divide the whole worlds age,
from first to last into three periods, and the first (they tell us) from Adam
unto Noah perished by a flood, the other wherein we are shall by fire, the
third shall be new all over, wherein reigns righteousness. But before this
last appear, the present must be changed with fire. Yet that is not like to be
till Antichrist be revealed, and his power quite subdued. Then shall it be that
the decayed throne of David shall be erected, and Christ obtain his Kingdom
in the earth, and all the writings of the Prophets he fulfilled. For the
present world is as the age of Esau, for both herein is justice silenced, and
the godly are afflicted. But as from Babylons captivity, so also now from so
great miseries the time of deliverance and restoring is at hand: and the
wickedness of the wicked shall be abundantly recompensed to them, as is
signified in the Revelation. But this restoring shall precede the world to
come, that all ungodly men trod under foot, a seat and habitation may be
prepared for righteousness. The Lantgrave having received their book commends
it to some Ministers of the Church with him to draw up the confutation of it.

CAP. XVIII.
Free Cities meet at Esling. The Result.

THe decree that was made at Confluence some few cities that were present
utterly disliked, and say they will send notice home against it. After, all the
other cities of the Empire meet at Esling: and there they come to this
Conclusion, that they who met before at Confluence had not to do to impose any
charge on them: for that therein there ought to be the Authority and Consent of
Caesar and all the states. Therefore they reject that Order made, and promise
mutual help in case that any danger be incurred in that regard by any of them.
But whatsoever shall be duly resolved upon for public good in public Diets
of the Empire, therein they give assurance they will do their duty.

CAP. XIX.
City wants provision. One of the Queens pitties the poor. The King beheads
her for it. And promises largely to the people, but pays poorly.

BUt now provisions growing so scarce and dear throughout the city in the
month of February, that there was no hopes but some must needs be
hunger-starved: one of the Queens commiserating the peoples case did chance to
say unto the others, that she did not think it was the will of God, to have the
people thus consumed with famine. The King, whose Larder was well fraught not
only for necessity but even to luxury, hearing hereof brings her and all the
other with her to the Hall. Where having bade her fall upon her knees, he takes
off her head, and being dead, brands her for a whore. Upon this deed, the other
chaunt his praise and thank the heavenly father. The king then leads a round,
and persuades the people that had nothing left but bread and salt to dance and
to be merry. But when Easter came and no deliverance did appear: The King that
had been Lavish of his promise, to salve the business feignes himself sick
for six days space, at last comes forth into the Hall, and tells them, He had
sat upon a blind Ass, and that the father had laid the sins of all the
people on his back, and therefore they were clean all over, nor needed any
other expiation. This was that deliverance which he promised, wherewith they
ought to be content.

CAP. XX.
Luther writes against the Anabaptists.

LVther, amongst other things he put forth at this time in the country
Language, Alas! quoth he, what or how shall I complain and bemoane those
wretched creatures? In truth the thing it self does say that Devils dwell in
heaps among them. But for our parts we have all reason in the world highly to
advance Gods bottomless mercy. For notwithstanding for contemning of the
Gospel, and reproaching of the name of God, and pouring forth the blood of
godly men, Germany deserves sore affliction at the hands of God: yet has he
curbed hitherto Satan's rage and fury, and does not lay the reine upon his neck
to let him rant it at his pleasure with us; but is a gentle Monitor, and by
this Munster tragedy (far from a cunning piece) calls us to amendment. For
should not God bridle and check him in, I make no question but that most
subtle spirit, and such a master of his craft would have managed matters at a
far other rate. But now since God has maimed him sorely, he storms and
rages, not how himself desires, and would have it, but as the rope is given
him. For that wicked spirit which endeavors to subvert the Christian faith,
takes not this course to introduce polygamy, because, since all men see the
cursed baseness of the thing, he knows it well enough, they will abhor it.
Policy indeed and civil government may be this way disturbed, but Christ's
kingdom must with other tools and engines be assaulted. He that will neatly
toll a man into deceit and snares, must not put strait for a kingdom, or
dominion, and play the Tyrant. For all men do condemn that course and see his
aims. But by some hidden means as foot-paths come unto it. To wear a rusty
garb that's out of fashion, to set ones face to gravity, to hang down the
head, to fast, to touch no money, to eat no flesh, to abhor marriage, to
reckon civil office or Magistracy as profane, to refuse authority, to
profess a singular humility of mind: here lies the way, and Method to entrap a
wise man by, and that does by disguise, and in the dark set open the door to
Sovereignty. But by a face of brass to claim a kingdom, to take as many
wives as his lust inclines him to, this is not the subtilty of an artificial
Devil, but some one newly at the trade. Or if he be the Master of his Craft,
for certain then God has so tied his hands that he cannot play his game more
cunningly. The end whereof no doubt is that we might fear his Majesty, and be
stirred up to repentance before he loose that beaten Soldier which surely will
assault us much more to our damage. For if a young Gramarian Devil can make
such stirs, what will they be, when he comes full sail against us as an higher
graduat, I mean as Lawyer or Divine? Such a rude Devil therefore need not
much affright us. And I also think this trifling stage play likes not all
those in the city, but very many have sad hearts about it who not without sighs
and tears wait for Gods deliverance: as some years since it proved in the
insurrection of the country men. And would to God there was no craftier Devil
in the world than this of Munster. Let God but spare his word among us, in
truth I am persuaded that scarce a man would heed such a homely senseless
sir. Although indeed when the wrath of God is kindled, there is no error so
absurd and graceless but Satan can persuade it, as we see befell in the
doctrine forged by This fellow was an Arabian, of the posterity of I^hmael,
borne meanly a out the year of Christ 597, his father was a Pagan, his mother a
Jew, himself of no religion. In his youth he served a Merchant and kept his
camels. His master dying; by the help of Magic he married his Mistress, left
very rich. Being a crafty follow and ambitious, yet no scholar he makes
himself a prophet, pretends revelations, goes up and down amongst his country
men awretched people, never under any good government, but either lived at home
by robbery, or else were soulders of fortune abroad and setting his fancies to
their lioeptious humors gets many followers. In fits of the falling sickness,
frequent with him, he made believe the Angel Gabriel conversed with him, which
his flesh not able to bear fainted under. Another of his taking cheats was
that a dove being taught to feich corn at his ear passed current for the holy
ghost revealing mysteries to him. Thus getting famous, the Saracens his
countrymen who fought under Heraclius the Emperor being denied their pay and
called dogs for asking it, revolt, over whom with little difficulty Mahomet is
made general about the year 620. Then to make sure, by the help of some
beretiques and Jews, he compiles a form of Doctrine, called the Alcoran,
which is the peoples Bible and swears the Angel Gabriel carried him to heaven
and there he learnt it. Some other things be taught them. In truth his doctrine
is a very monster patched up with scraps of Christianity, Judaisme and
Paganism cramb'd with nonsense fables and self contradictions. For a taste of
all. That Christ was a great Prophet (not God) but Mahomet greater. The Jews
did not crucify him, but one like him. Children must be circumcised. Ofterings
made in the Temple at Mecca. Turn thitherwardin all their prayers. God in
Sinay (as in one place, but elsewhere it is in Jerusalem) gave 1515 precepts.
Noah desired God to drown the world for the Idols of Huden Scbuon Jaguta
Jannea Naccu It Is lawful to have four wives and as many Concubines as one
please. The Angel Gabriel flying his wing chanced to touch the Moon and
darkened it. The day of Judgment Continues 50000 years. After it Death shall be
turned into a ram. Paradise consist in sensual pleasures, fair women etc.
Hundreds more as bad [Magdeb. Cent. 7. c. 15. See Alcoran in English.] yet are
the Turks by far the vastest Empire in the worll, bewitched with this Vanity at
this very day. Whether Muncer, Leiden and too many of the present time with us
came not out of Mathomets shop I refer to the Readers own Resolution.
Mahomet. For though there be not one drame of brains in any rag thereof or
the whole peace together: Yet the light of Scripture being out, it spread so
far, and grew to such a pitch as now we see it. Which, had not Muncers counsels
and endeavors been crushed by God, would have been the same in Germany. For
the least spark that is when God gives leave, Satan can blow into a mighty
flame. Nor is there any better way to quench this fire than by the word of God.
For whereas the enemy wears not corporal arms he cannot be conquered by
either troops of horse or any other warlike engines. But our Princes and our
Bishops go another way to work. They hinder the Gospels teaching, whereby
alone the minds and hearts of men are healed; and try the while to save by
punishments the body from the Devil, but the better part of man his very heart
and soul they let him take. They speed herein just as the Jews that would
extinguish Christ by cross and punishment.

But now as to the things that are spoke abroad, and written of the men of
Munster. I take them to be very truths. And I am confirmed herein by their
own writing lately published. wherein their madness is neatly painted by
themselves. For first in matters of faith, they teach very foul absurdities.
And of Christ, as if he were not fowen Of Mary (as they phrase it) although
they do confess that he came of the seed of David. But they do not fully let
us know their mind herein. The Devil hatcheth (sure enough) some monster under
it. It Is true this is not darkly hinted by him, That the seed or flesh of Mary
cannot save us. But the attempt is fruitless, for Scripture speaks it, that
Christ was borne of the Virgin Mary, which phrase all languages do refer to a
young one that, conceived and formed of the mothers flesh and blood, is brought
to light.

Then for their censure on former baptism as profane: that also is their
ignorance. For they do not reckon it as an ordinance of God, but as a work of
man. But if that ought to be condemned wholly, and thrown out of doors
whatsoever wicked men do give or have, I wonder truly why they do not abhor
the Gold and silver and other riches

which they robbed from the wicked; and invent new substance for themselves,
for, as these things, so also baptism is the work and creature of God. When a
wicked man swears he abuses the true name of God; if it be not the true name
of God to him, he does not sin. He that robs by the way, steals, or makes
a prey of any thing, breaks the command of God: if it be not the true command
of God to him, he offends not. So also if our former baptism be null, then
they who were by it baptized did not amiss. Why then do they accurse the
former baptism as a piece of villainy, when yet it is nothing by their own
saying.

If marriages of the former age be to be reckoned as whoredom and adultery;
because contracted between those, they say, that wanted faith pray do they not
confess themselves to be the sons of whores? Now if they be bastards and
illegittimate tell me why do they hold the possessions of their cities, and
their Ancestors? In truth it were but meet, since they are such, to
dis-inherit them, and with their new kind of marriage, turn them to get new
riches and estates of an honester title. Nor truly is it handsome for such holy
and foresooth religious men to support their lives with these whorish
illegitimate goods, or take them by force and robbery from other men. As to
that their ridiculous kingdom: there are therein so many and such palpable
pieces of roguery that I need not say a word more to it.

And truly this we speak is both too much, and seems not very necessary,
specially since others fully have dispatched the same already.

CAP. XXI.
A Diet held at Worms.

IN the Diet of the empire, which king Ferdinand at the entreaty of the Princes
did by his Ambassadors or Messengers.
Legates appoint at Worms in the month of April, the Cities, which had
hitherto parted with no moneys, at their first entrance do protest that their
appearance there was not for the order made at Confluence but in obedience unto
Caesar and King Ferdinand. Then fell they to great dashing with them about the
contribution with the Princes. At last they did conclude of aid for five
Months space, at the rate of 20000 Crowns the month: also that the City being
got by storm or otherwise there should be mercy showed to the harmless
Multitude: and that the honest, who either were besieged or had wandered to
some other place should have their goods restored to them. Upon this order the
Bishop of Munster gives up the Army to Oberstene. But whereas public moneys
were very slowly, and almost too late dispatched unto them, nothing worthy
notice could be atcheived; yea the Captains more than once were in danger of
their lives by the Soldiers mutiny for want of pay.

CAP. XXII.
The famine increases. Many die. The rest complain. But hold on their course.

NOw when within the city things were in such a plight that many daily perished
with the famine: many also got away to other places, who came forth, so nothing
else but very skin and bone, that it commanded pity from the enemy to them:
the commanders give the Townes-men notice if they would deliver but the King
and some few others with him, themselves should suffer nothing. The Citizens,
though it were their earnest longing, yet frighted by the vigilance, and
severity of the King durst not venture. For so obstinate was the King that
whilst he lived as himself (but with fewothers) openly declared he would never
yield. The Commanders therefore upon this writing back forbid the sending forth
of any more, so much as women and Children. This was the first day of June.
Next day they answer, complaining that they could not have a lawful hearing,
and that they were ill dealt with, far beside their merit, in the soarest
manner: that if any would discover their error to them, they should be ready
to their duty. Then they unfold a place of Daniel about the fourth beast, which
was by far the cruellest of them all. The close of the letter was by Gods
blessing they would abide by this confession of the truth. But all this was
thus written by the Kings appointment.

CAP. XXIII.
Two Revolters suggest a way to take the City. Their counsel embraced. And the
City taken. Rotmans desperate end. The King and Cnipperdoling taken Prisoners.

BUt now when things within the City were brought unto the lowest ebb, out
ran two of them. One taken by the Soldiers, the other, upon paroll comes to
the Bishop, and both tell the way to take the City. Oberstene and the Bishop
having heard the revolters talk, and the business duly weighed, on June the
22 by parle advise the townsmen to yield themselves, and save the starving
multitude. They in the presence of the King, answer by Rotman: yet so as to
hold on their course. Two days after about eleven a clock by night the forces
drew down silently to the City, and by the industry of one of those revolted,
the forlorn having slain the centiness, get through the trench into the
bulwark: others at their heels find a wicket open, and about five hundred with
some captains and their colors threst through into the City. There then the
townsmen in a body made others halt that were breaking in at last with much
ado repulse them, and clapping fast the gate fall on those gat in already,
putting many to the sword. And when a sharp dispute held thus for two hours
space, the Soldiers thus shut in tear up by strength of hand the gate next to
them, where the guard was weak, and clear an entrance for their fellows, who
instantly rush in with a mighty Ocean. And when at first the townsmen stood
their ground, and had made good the Hall; the case appearing desperate, and
many slain; they, at the first assault cry quarter and obtain it.

Here now the King and Cnipper doling both are taken prisoners. Rotman past
hopes of escaping, that he might not fall into their hands alive, Charge the
enemies body and is ran through. The city being taken, half the plunder and
the Arms the Bishop takes to himself. Then the Army is disbanded: two
Colors only kept to be his guard.

CAP. XXIV.
Another Diet of the Empire.

THere follows upon this another Diet of the Empire at Worms about the 15 day
of July. Therein King Ferdinand by his Legates does propose and ask whether,
the City being now possessed, course should be farther taken for the utter
rooting out of the Anabaptists. Advises also, that the Princes move the Pope
about the Counsel. They answer, what course to take with Anabaptists is
provided for already by certain Edicts. For a counsel the Pope has more
than once been solicited thereunto by Caesar: nor would they make, they said,
any further progress in it. At the same meeting the Bishop of Munster desires
that his charge and damage might be repaired; and complains that the moneys
promised were not yet come in. When no proceedings farther could be had, and
few Estates were present, another meeting was appointed about the first day of
November, when there should be hearing had of the accounts and charges of the
war: and resolved upon what form of government for the time to come at
Munster should be established. When that day came, the Legate of King Ferdinand
reports the causes of the calling this Assembly, namely among other things,
that it might be also thought on how the City lately taken might be henceforth
settled in its old Religion. Then the Bishops legate shows them how great
expenses he was at throughout the war, how deeply he was run in debt, how,
though the City now were taken, yet to prevent disturbance and all danger he
was enforced to raise two Cittadels in the City and to garrison them: Upon all
which he desires consideration may be taken. It Was answered: that the Bishop
was possessed already of both the greater part of the spoils and all the
Arms, yea, and the Citizens goods, all which indeed belong unto the Empire:
that it was meet to have the things, being prized, compared with the charge,
what more was wanting care should be had thereof. After it was resolved that the
Bishop of Munster, as heretofore, should be subject to the Empiretall the
Nobility he restored, and the Citizens also, so they were not Anabaptists, that
were wandered unto other places: for religion, that the Bishop follow the
decrees of the Empire, in the beginning of the spring, next year that the
Legates of the Princes go to Munster, take Cognizance of the Citizens
conditions, save the innocent, demolish all the forts raised by the
Anabaptists, and that the Bishop also pull down the Cittadels raised by
himself within the City. For the King and Cnipperdoling and Cretchting, that
were prisoners, let him punish them without longer stay at the first
opportunity according to their demerits. As to that we told you was resolved on
about religion, the Princes of Saxony, the Lantgrave of VVirtemberg, and Anhalt
publicly protested their dissent the same professed the Cities also: and they
would not have the ancient fortifications of the City to be demolished, for the
new they were content.

CAP. XV.
The King and his fellow prisoners carried about to the Princes. Debates with
them.

THe King and his two fellow prisoners were carried up and down unto the
Princes to be looked, and laughed at; Through this occasion the Lantgraves
Preachers get a conference with the king; and the list is entered specially on
these Articles: Of the Kingdom of Christ. The Magistrate, Justification,
Baptism, the supper of the Lord, the incarnation of Christ, and marriage.
Wherein they went so far by proof of Scripture that the man, for all his
wrestling to make good his ground, was, though not fully turned, yet bent and
weakened so that at the last he almost granted all. Which yet it is thought he
did in hopes to save his life. For when they came the second time unto him he
promised, if he might be spared, that he would make the Anabaptists grown so
numerous in Holland, Brabant, England, Friezland, all to be still and submit in
all things to the Magistrate. The same men then enter disputation with his
fellows, both by word and writing, Of Mortification, Paedobaptisme, Community
of goods, and the kingdom of Christ.

CAP. XXVI.
The Kings discourse with the Bishop. His and his fellows Punishment.

WHen they were brought to Talget, the King being asked by the Bishop, by what
authority he durst to arrogate such license on his City and his people? Asks
him again, and who gave him the Rule and Government there? when the Bishop
answered that he had it by consent of the College and the people: he replies
God called him thither. Then on the 19 day of January they are brought back to
Munster and put in several prisons. The same day also thither came the Bishop,
and with him the Legates of the Archbishop of Colen and Prince of Cleve. The
two days following were spent in godly admonition to reclaim them from their
error, and the king indeed confessed his sin, and praying, made his
application unto Christ for Succor. But the other two neither did acknowledge
any fault, and stiflly stood upon their vindication. Next day the King brought
forth upon a scaffold is bound unto a stake. Two Executioners are standing by
him, and tongs burning hot. At the three first pinches he spoke not a word: but
afterward continually imploring God for mercy, when he had been torn this
fashion for an hour or more, by a sword at last thrust through his heart, gave
up the Ghost. His fellows fared alike. Being dead, they are all made fast in
several Iron cages, and hung upon the highest tower of the City. The King
indeed betwixt them both, and about the stature of a man above them.

The POSTSCRIPT, Of the Tumult late at Abingdon.
. 1.
Indifferent Reader.
SOme years are past since first the story and its preface gone before were
dressed and ready in that very garb (unto a little trimming) now thou findst
them in, but had never put the foot (I am persuaded) over the threshold of
their own door, no not so much as to take the air with a friend or two, much
less to have rambled up and down the Country at this rate they do, had not
the sad condition of a froward age, and serious conscience of serving souls
(perhaps thine own for one) to pass by friends desires, conspired in a
restless importunity to force them to this posture. What relish the Essay it
self, or this profession concerning it will find with persons over-byassed by
the prejudice of their own spirits; consequently, what return of thanks at
the same hands such a venture will bring in, needs no diviner to presage.
However, on supposall that the costs, when well cast up, will not inflame the
total past possibility of being cleared off even to a token, and something
spare, by the mere assurance of the designs integrity nakedly to promote the
public interest (as is the case, nor quite forsaken of all hopes to speed
therein) I hope the supposed inconvenience will be somewhat balanced, and this
attempt of Christian service sufficiently abetied. That we are all apt to be so
fond of the Bird of our own neast so to fancy the issues of our own mind, as
to make our jealousy burn like fry: at whatsoever carries but the appearance
of a noncompliance with this our in dulgence, is not to be denied: Oh that it
were bewailed! What other reason (to instance there) can be assigned that such
a signal Monument, as this Munster tragedy is, of the Almighties vengeance
against man's turning grace in to wantonnnesse, should be so much out of credit
with the present successors of their faith and practice (at least from whence
they are denominated) that instead of being looked upon, and trembled at, and
warning took thereby, it is cause enough, but with too many of them, to enroll
him for an enemy (in despite of the purest aim to act the friend therein) that
shall persuade thereto. It is somewhat lighter I confess since a chief
Apostle has been put to that Apology, Am I therefore become your Enemy
because I tell you the truth? Gal. 1.16 ( P. 2.) A [Presage of things with us]


. 2.
But the proof of this is now no longer beyond the seas, having landed on our
Coasts some years ago, and taken up its Quarters in every County (if not most
townships) of the English Nation. Our wonder is the less because (though more
is the pity, and the rather that it is so little laid to heart) the Old known
enemy to all concernments of Christianity having bankrupt there both cash and
credit is shuffling the cards to play ore his game (once more) with us, Their
imputation (that it may be would be gamesters) unto this suggestion, as
savoring purely of a spirit overgrowne with melane choly, that fears its own
shadow, and cries out when there is none to hurt him, may easily raise dust
enough (sutably to his method that chaseth darkness for his work, as being
prince thereof) to convoy a plot without observance by a purblind eye, but
really has little efficacy to put off men for trees to a firmer sight; and
none at all to bless him with the happiness of a dissappointment to his fear
that labors under it. For my own part without dissembling (for now it is no
time for silence when the very Echoes of seditious language makes almost every
hill and vale to ring again) to me nere did a cloudy lowering morning speak
louder for some storms a brewing, then do the discontents amongst us avowed
and triumphed in, even to the clowding of the very air with the smoke
thereof, portend some fire at bottom (with the gentlest gale) ready to
inflame. Whoever will be at the cost but by looking ore the former story, only
to observe the Germane Monsters shape and compare it with that Embryon hatching
(you will see anon) but alas too fast in England (the sonle indeed of actual
insurrection is, through mercy, not yet infused) I shall be confident of
finding him remote enough from rejecting this sad presage as purely
Melancholicall.

. 3.
Let us a while say nothing of the Books in print, [Grounded on common
discourss, and^^
although those say enough; let us meddle not with public prayings and
speakings, which yet speak plain to the point in hand: only attend a little
unto what is growing unto table talk common discourse in every mouth almost of
those reteining to our male-contented spirits: What comes it to? The Saints
must rule. It Is true in Scripture sense, but when or how we will spare to ask
it here. It seems it is plain with them, they do not then as yet; do not they
mean themselves alone can any think? Why else one dram or two of charity left
for the people not their own, would bid them spare the pains of seeking what
they have already. The ungodly must come down, we do not doubt it neither, in
the sense of Scripture still. But who are they, if the Judgment always must be
their own (as to be sure it shall when once they rule the roast) May I speak
the fears of others the honest Presbyterian and Independent will be in the
number: or, which comes to one the godly, not of their persuasion? Else, for
the ranting royal Enemy it is seen by all he is humbled pretty well already:
at least is not a man of Power now, and therefore not therein intended. The
present Powers, how little mercy have they at their hands? Not of God, injust,
apostaticall, illegal, tyrannical, persecuting, and enough of this kind
tossed like a football up and down the Country: More, Must not be paid to,
nor prayed for, and this practical too within our observation. And pray why
not resisted next? Though one told me (upon an Item given of the Munster
business) some of them (the modester belike) thought it not convenient so to
do. By what of mine own ears, and by what of other honest men's reports, I
meet with, beside their books, Reader, I may be well content to hear thee
say, as she once did in another casse: The half is not told me. And now, can
any man that is well in his wits, how ere the matter may be blanched over to
any excuse, pretense or varnish whatsoever, forbear to say, What means this
bleating in mine ears?

. 4.
Whether the business late at Abingdon, [The Affaireslate at Abingdon
considered]
in the County of Berks, the rumor whereof has been upon the wing ere this
no doubt unto the utmost limits of English ground, contributes any farther
evidence, and what that is to the already just suspicion comes now to be
considered. That the ways are so blocked up from those men's coming at any
certainty of intelligence in that affair, whose habitations are remote (such
to be sure as either wear the same livery with themselves or otherwise, whose
over fond credulity will dispose to any inpression) by a most lame report (to
speak most softly) the parties delinquent thence have thrust upon the Nation
in a single sheeted pamphlet, must be confessed by all whose eyes have coasted
on it. And yet I nothing doubt, but that a person of indifferent apprehension
(provided allwaies his affection be none other) upon due perusal of that
complaining Testimony, for so it is styled, will need no Index for directing him
to find firm bottom that may bear a ground piece of state disturbance
fastened on it. A piece (with good leave of the Reader, to begin the Account
intended, with first casting up how much that comes to) so every way (in mine
opinion) past reclaiming, that its parents, notwithstanding natural fondness,
have cause enough to disinherit it, yea never more to look upon it as their
child. In earnest, if one silly sheet of paper (for it is no more) may possibly
breed bate twixt Folly, Falsehood, and Sedition, whose share is greatest in it;
I think it is here. [Which is found fowly guilty of]
Having once but clearly showed how the Competitours lay their several
claymes, I Will leave the controversy undecided as I find it.

. 5.
First, (1) [Folly]
to create the expectation of a doleful tragedy, say, to hang forth some
Hercules Furens dyed deep as scarlet from top to toe with the blood of next
and dearest relations: and then to entertain the Longing spectatour with the
cruel murder of a man of straw, or to demonstrate the gaping mortal wounds
made on a little finger by a merciles pin, drawn from the sleeve its scabbard:
I ask, whether the merits of such a cause may fairly plead not guilty of
childish vanity, or justly make complaint it is nicknamed, if any chance to
call it trifling, and ridiculous. If this be not of kin, yea cosengermane to
the case in hand upon the evidence the paper mentioned it self gives in, I Will
ask no mercy at the hands of any: if so, I think there is as little need to
fear the censure. The lintell of the door has written on it, I mean the
Title Page cries out, [In sad cryes]
of sore calamity nay inhumane dealings of officers and soldiers (repeated
page 1) that is, a behavior of them befitting bruits not men: no wonder then
to hear of sore calamity. Whose pity now would not this provoke? Go on your
first step in the Entry (the first Epistle) shows you contempt, despite,
reproach; yea sufferings and tribulations, under which they are. Really if so,
and undeserved too, 'twould make ones heart to ache. At the other end (the
second epistle) there you may run and read a sad complaint indeed of
persecution, Cruelty, and blood of Brethren. Whose bowels would not yearne to
hear the story of one brothers plucking out, as it were, another heart, and
washing his hands in the very blood thereof? Were this the case, no marvel
though they call it a dark and gloomy day, as twice they do in the breath of
the first room, or page you come at.

. 6.
But yet alas! when all does come to all, [Without all cause]
what is this saddest matter, if we take their own bare word for all? View
well the Testimony (I wish themselves would do it) and there you find (upon all
their most unsufferable provocations) One had his hawking bag searched and it is
said writings (happily seditious) taken out. Others even for (no better then
calling) they say, comparing the Commander and his party to their very faces
unto high way men (for answering but as Soldiers to their petulant challenges
of them upon their Orders and Commission) commanded to their chambers, and for
their insolences in that carriage, caned by him. Some at their meeting house
door by the Guard, there set (of soldiers it seems, and with their pistols
too, and in their hands belike) hindered from going in. And in particular one
living there had a pistol presented (it may be fixed for they say it was
cocked) to his breast ( not back) when pressing in. At the last and worst
assault (when fair means could do no good Reader assure thy self) They tell
you one was pulled down from something that he stood upon. Another to get out
of the way stumbled over stones to his hurt. A third offered to be rode over,
but not come at. A fourth had many blows made at him, but was touched by none.
A fifth had his hat slashed in three or four places, and which is worst of
all, the Commander cut diverse. But who, and what they were: what danger in
their wounds; where they lie under surgeon, with such like weighty
circumstances; No, not a word. It was such a fray that though they write, some
had their clothes torn, and some were haled (not dragged upon the ground)
about the market place: yet how many were slain upon the place, how many
mortally wounded, or how many utterly disabled we must go some where else to
be informed. This is their story, Reader (mine account whereof I trust upon thy
strictest search will pass for current: most sure I am with care and
conscience it has been called to the test) this is, I say their story served
in with sore calamity, with cruelty and blood, as more thou heardest but now.
Which what it makes on the first Claimers side, I Will leave unto thy self: but
with presumption that some silent thoughts at least will tell thee thy pains
and patience have just their amends, who gaping out of breath, to see the
mighty monster (doubtless) which a mountain fallen in travail would bring
forth, at last perceive there comes a little mouse. As for their parts when
they complain of hard measure, that their nakedness is so taken notice of,
and withal acquit themselves of the imputation of immodesty so too,
themselves, uncover it in public view, we are content to stand obliged for
giving better satisfaction to them. Mean while, having but once enquired what
else should mean this querulous and unreasonably whining spirit, save to lay
low (with those tame souls they deal with blindfold; for an open eye sees in
it nothing else but very chafe) the reputation of our Magistrates, who give
such hardest measure: and to raise their own, who quietly put it up. and
added, that if ever those worthies, Heb. 11. (to look no further) suffered but
at, and yet complained after such a rate, I Will never trust mine eyes again. We
will hearken unto what comes next.

. 7.
Then whether Truth and conscience do not suffer somewhat more than mere
restraint, (2) Falsehood.
I mean flat banishment, at the hands but of too many passages in that Paper,
could I be heard, I would beseech themselves well to consider. To take the
testimonies but of two or three, enough to make a valid proof if they speak
home to the point in hand, if not, I must profess they are Barbarians unto me,
or mute as fishes. For instance. First where they call it now a day of their
sore calamity, [In notorious misreports of their-owne and -- ]
elsewhere amplified (as it is well known) by words of heaviest weight and
saddest import, contempt, reproach, persecutions etc.

But is the matter thus indeed? Or is it possible themselves alone of all the
world should see it is so? What are those pressures lying on them that fetch such
sighs and groans from their very hearts again? If we go round the Nation,
and ask their Neighbors in every tything, who can acquaint us with them? May
we not, Reader, must we not say unto them, as the Apostle did to others, who is
he that will harm you if ye be followers of what is good? Are not their
liberties and their Properties ascertained to them by as good a title as any
other persons whatsoever. Yea by as good a title as unto the Present Government
it self, I mean the Instrument. Who does not know that theirs and its must
live and dye together, unless themselves lay violent hands on either before
the time. And are they not in possession of them? Ah worst ingratitude to the
hand of mercy, that puts sweet for bitter, and bitter for sweet, that
nicknames light darkness, and darkness light, good evil and evil good! And
can a gracious soul forget or slight the bitter word against that evil frame
of spirit? Isay 5.20.
All that is said, or possibly can be (whereof I am aware) which whether
heavier than the dust of the balance is quickly tried, comes but to this, some
(very few) of their friends are kept in Prison. And must their friends (if one
should ask them) of all the world alone be lawless? Is this the liberty
contended for (to put that also) that they speak what they please, do what
they list and no man dare to call them to account? Or if (once more yet)
Authority shall make so bold, and with their friends, for preservation of the
whole, as to command the paring of a nail or cutting of a corn, is all then
gone to wrack immediately? The tender usage of that very small and
inconsiderable number (if now at all a number) under restraint, is just so far
(their miscarriages duly measured) from laying ground of half those clamours
gone abroad about it, that it irresistably obliges unto gratitude all
ingenuous spirits Sympathizing with them. He that hears any thing, without his
own door, cannot be ignorant that nothing less than flat defiance of
Authority with us, brought them where they are. A lesson sure enough nere
taught them by the blessed spirit, Romans 13-1.
whose language is let every soul be subject to the higher powers, because
they are the Ordinance of God.

. 8.
Nor does it serve the turn, [Sions present condition, specially -- ]
only to call it now a day of their own calamity, but Sion also must be
entitled to that complaint: Sions tribulation; so the subscription to the
first epistle has it.

Is Sion only among themselves? Let any show me how that phrase will fairly
bear another sense. There is then but little Truth in that I think all other
men will say: and lesser love (me thinks) I may: but that (alas!) it is no such
news to find it so with them. Or if we strain their [Sion] that there may be
room for other, all Saints else, besides themselves, within these Lands to
shelter under it, it is still as much an Alien unto Truth as formerly. Had indeed
the Lord caused the ways of Sion to mourn, because none came to her Solemn
Assemblies: had the Lord abhorred his Sanctuary that his voice from thence were
no more heard: had the Lord given her walls into the hand of her Enemy, that
she must hold her tongue and not make mention of the name of Lord. Were this,
or worse, the case of the Sion here with us: who of her sons but his eye must
needs affect his heart unto a doleful lamentation for and with her? But,
whilst our eyes behold our teachers, and see the beauty of their feet that
bring glad tidings: whilst we sit under our vines and fig trees none making us
afraid: Whilst Kings are nursing fathers to us, and Queens our nursing
mothers: as here it is thus with Sion yet, and somewhat better (adored be that
grace from whence it is so) it cannot sink into our thoughts but as her heart is
filled with joy and mouth with laughter hereupon, so her complaints will find
some fitter matter to spend themselves upon, most likely, that untoward frame
of spirit that does not duly prize and make a just improvement of those signal
mercies enjoyed by her.

. 9.
I shall pass by their frontispeece -- implicit accommodation of the 3 of
Malachy and 15 verse unto our times: and discharge the second parties claim
upon the hearing only of one evidence more given in, [The gross untruth in
pleading not guilty under such apparent misbehaviour]
in one half line in their last page. And thus it says, Little against any
was spoke or done at the meeting.

But where is now the soft and tender Conscience that will not bear false
witness, and dares thus deliberately in the face of heaven and earth, and by
so many hands (how few soever were the heads about composing right hearts for
certain herein being fewest of all) to cast up, in print, so vast a bill of
venomed provocations into very ciphers? All was but little, say they, but what
that little was it seems they have more wit (at least) than tell. A little
truly of their little, Reader, thou may expect to hear anon. Mean while I
would ask themselves. Is this the part of faithful Historians; but no more of
that: does it become honest and upright Christians, Sons of Sion, [Testim:]
page 4. l. 31, 32, 33.
to pretend an exact Relation, for preventing false reports, with acouched
obligation on men's consciences, at least their brethrens, to credit none but
theirs: and that too in a business of such moment wherein all Authority on one
hand is concerned, and some private persons on the other, upon a tender point,
Reputation of the dearest kind, conscience, piety, (what not?) and yet to be so
grossly partial to the eye of every Reader, as on their own behalf to put
down pence for pounds or better, and on Authorities neither pence nor pounds
at all. Whom will not such proceedings put in mind of the people that made lies
their refuge, and under falsehood hid themselves? Believe it it is the easiest
task after this rate to justify the wicked and condemn the righteous, with
abundant plausibility, that may be thought on. Nere did the womb of Newgate
deliver a viler wretch than by this method of procedure might die a Martyr, and
leave the blackest brand of Persecutor on his most upright judge, that passed
the sentence on him. Surely the 9th Commandment but well considered and
awfully received, would have marred that claim that lies so fairly now (or
foulely rather) for falsehood in that paper.

. 10.
We are come at last unto the last Pretender that is Sedition. (3) [Sedition]
To pronounce it as the Soul that animates the whole, would both prejudge the
trial, and look too like a passing ore those bounds then set when first the
Champions were usherd in to play the prize. Let the Reader only take that hint
and pursue it further at his own discretion.

Not to insist upon the plagues they threaten such as faithfully will serve the
state. Epist. 2.8.


If Scorns, and raylings, slanders and black censures upon Authority it self:
if these not cypherd but in words at length, [In vile revilings of Authority]
not single but in companies, not once but oftentimes belched out may commence
Sedition: that Paper sure enough has done all its exercise, and is as well
fitted for the faculty as a vagabond for the Stocks. What think ye where it
says the soldiers had -- Orders from their Lord -- in the first leaf: and
one whom -- They call -- M. Genesis Bridges, in the last? Tush this is nothing:
take it by whole sale (for it is not fit to be retayled) Apostates, Persecutors,
Traitors (like Judas) and a Sodomitish generation, and this no further off than
the two Epistles is the greeting which they give our Powers.

He that can find a fitter name than what I give this language, shall quickly
have me his disciple; but whosoever thinks their dark profession (at the
close of all) against an actual rising then, both reason enough for seeking
out another name, and a sufficient security on their parts, for keeping of the
peace must give me leave to enter my dissent. Most sure I am, the blessed
saints of God recorded in the holy Scriptures are not the Patrons of this
ranting talk. No, we may learn from them it has another father than that
Spirit of holiness, meekness and humility which lodged in their bosoms. If
this be news to any Reader, let him remember what their character is: who
despise dominions, Judge. 8.2. Pet. 2.10. Romans 13.1, 2, 3, etc.
speak evil of dignities, and resist the powers; whereto the margent will
assist him. Let him withal consider sadly (oh that themselves would do it!) to
whom that Prophecy holds out the finger which tells us. In the last days
perilous times shall come: For men shall be lovers of their own selves --
disobedient to parents -- despisers of others that are good, 2 Timothy 3.1.2, 3,
etc.
Traitors, heady, high-minded: and which is the misery, all this under a form
of godliness, but without the power: and much more like it.

Believe it; all the paint and varnish in the world improved by the rarest
Artist for setting of such a rate of carriage as spiritual and divine, will
have alike success (with every wise and sober Christian) to the greatest
pains for washing white the Ethiopians skin, which is proverbially called
Labor in vain. No, No, with such a one, as their complaining Testimony cannot
be taken for a new Book of Martyrs: so neither is he able to shift of his
saddest fears, that such a spirit as breathes therein will do its best to
prove himself no bastard to his Progenitors beyond the Seas. Although it be
his earnest suite at the throne of grace, that an Almighty hand may dispossess
it of its hold in gracious hearts, and plucking them as brands out of the
burning, frustrate its hopes, and his own fears together.

. 11
By this time, (2) [By a just Narrative of the Author touching -- ]
Reader, (supposing now thou have as little mind as I my self to meddle in these
Rivals quarrel) thou art expecting a just compendium of that Affair at
Abingdon. And I must profess there is so little pleasure to me in the work,
that were I not herein (without a complement) devoted to thy service, a mere
review of what is past already would bid me supersede all further information.
But, for thy sake, until they please (who wrote upon the place, all passages
worthy observation) to gratify their Country with so small a Curtesy as the
making public of their notes, I will attempt the pushing of the pikes to let
thee share in part of that exact intelligence freely bestowed on me (then
absent, as fell out, though often there, and always living within six miles
distance of the place) by persons, and my honored friends, of Piety and
Prudence, Spectators of the Business.

Mr Pendarves, [Mr Pendarves his death]
late pastor to the Adversaries of Infant Baptism in that Town, having
yielded up the Ghost some weeks before at London, and changed his many
quarrels here for everlasting peace (I am so persuaded from that intimacy some
years ago betwixt us) in our fathers kingdom; after some hot debates twixt
his surviving friends about his bodies resting place on earth: was brought at
last, by water (in a chest like those for sugar, filled up with sand, and lodged
at a Grocers) there to deposite the remains of death, where the service of his
life had been devoted. This brought of persons (of the same complexion with
him in religious matters) out of their respect unto his memory, from most parts
of the Nation, and some the remotest, a number of both sexes (both far and
near) very considerable.

The State took Item of the inconveniences the concourse of so great a people
(where disaffection to our present peace apparently predominates) might start
at such an opportunity, (Known to the state)
and prudently to prevent the worst, assign eight troops of horse under
command to Major General Bridges to take up quarters, at the very Juncture, in
Wallingford: a Town within the same County, and upon the same river, seven
miles below the place forenamed.

All things prepared for the funeral, [And Burial with -- ]
and the company met on Tuesday the 30 of September -- 56 (the day unto that
work appointed) the Corpse, with meet solemnity, in a new burying place,
before a Garden (for such a one of late has been procured at the Towns West
end, and in the Oxestreete: whether because they would not have communion with
us a live or dead, or for what other reason I must be silent) is espoused to
the grave. That day, saving what time attendance on this evening-worke borrowed
of necessity, was spent upon Religious exercises: several, as thereunto drawn
forth, taking their turns in praying and in speaking. The morrow is as
yestarday with them.

. 12.
But it is sad to hear at what a rate they deal with God and Man. [The
companies strange and sad behavior there at the meeting.
The burden of that whole demeanor rings only, as a disingaged person will be
apt to think, of blowing the match that should give fire unto the train laid
for enflaming heaven and earth against our peace and powers.

There it was said (with gall enough) The treacherous dealers have dealt very
treacherously: and I think none want directions for the application. There it
was told the Lord that he had made Him like to Cain (who slew his brother) a
vagabond, and one afraid where no fear is.

And to make sure the dullest Scholar might understand the person aimed at,
it was added, therefore he sends after us; Lord bring him down, we will not
give thee rest until thou answer us. There was the Man that had face enough
to say, God never prospered our armies by land nor sea since our rebellion
against Jesus Christ, and turning traitors to his kingdom: and, to see the
forehead! this notorious falsehood (without a blush) spoke to the face of God
himself, with solemn notice taken of his hand appearing in it, and farther
hopes expressed that he would never make it better with us for hereafter. Truly
this takes the less upon us unto admiration, since sure enough, false witness
is an evil hardly of so deep a dye as blood. And yet the question being
started there by one in prayer, whether Gods people must be a bloody people (in
an active sense) was carried by the same in the affirmative, who spoke it with
sufficient boldness (whatever others say unto the contrary) that they must be
a Bloody People. To make which passage good (it is too too probable) the request
was sent to heaven by him that begged importunately for a pouring forth the
spirits of David's Soldiers on them, whereby their hands might be taught to war
and fingers to fight, that when they had done all they might give the glory
unto God. Which that it might not die as a faint desire in the very birth was
midwif'd unto life and vigor by the greatest care, as of other hands; so of
his especially, who in a large discourse drew forth a parallel betwixt Gods
people's case with us, and Lots in Sodom, from Genesis 19.15. the text he spoke
'on. Thence (if the Reader will accept a taste of what at large lies by me) he
acquaints the people, that Gods people must not stay in the plain, but up to
the mountains and undertake hard things: with more unto that purpose. The
doctrine thus commended was cleared by removal of objections, as from the
hardness of the dispensation, the improbability of accomplishing the design,
a trade, a family, and relations to be attended, ye^ soul enjoyments within,
besides outward, liberty of Gods Ordinances, and such like: which all being
put together (it was confessed) seem to speak fair for sitting still and
being quiet. But a wet finger wipes off all. For it is returned hereto, amongst
other things, that it is worse to stay in Babylon, Lot had got nothing by saying
thus: a fiery dispensation it is, up then and be gone least flames ore take you.
The call must be obeyed, though as Abram did, you go you know not whither.
Nothing that is dear must now be valued. Expect rubs in the way; arugged
dispensation it is. Friends, Relations, great ones of the Earth, will oppose, and
oppress you. But the work is Gods, and he will prosper it. If this will not
salve the soar: then the curse on Meroz for not submitting to the present
dispensation in coming forth to help the Lord against the mighty; and
menacings of Gods fury breaking out against that man, that out of Jeare, or a
spirit of indifferency declines the work, is brought in to enforce the
Exhortation past all resistance. But for the dispensation talked of, he that
would know what that may be, is soon informed by attending only unto what that
person spoke thereof, who told the Major General upon his examination: Though
it had been of the Lamb heretofore, yet now it was to be the dispensation of
the Lion. I had almost forgot to give you notice of his Revelation, who, in the
peoples hearing, held the Almighty very hard in prayer on a special promise,
made him before he came thither, to meet him there with special presence.

As for the dealing with the public preachers of the Gospel at that meeting
(to save their longing who perhaps desire thereof a little intimation) let it be
known in brief, the Courtship there afforded them without distinction, Wa^,
dumb dogs, members of Babylon, Antichristian priests, and the smoke of the
bottomless pit. Save that he seemed a little modester, who was complaining that
the waters of the Sanctuary did run foul, and scarcely one in a hundred of
them is able to give a reason of the hope that is in them: till at the last he
fauls so foul as to pray, down with the Priests, without mercy unto any one
at all among them.

Reader, me thinks, thou should excuse me, if I have no farther mind to rake
in such a kennell, tho it would be easy, from the hands aforesaid, to acquaint
thee with much more a kin to this, about both praying down, and pulling down
the Powers that imprison Saints, about both flat and frequent calling (SOME
BODY) Rebel and Traitor, about comparing soldiers unto Irish Rebels, about
tearing flesh; and such like dishes, served in, as common entertainment,
within the compass of that meeting.

. 13.
Tidings hereof was quickly brought (for you must know there were that did by
Order lie leaguer for exact intelligence) unto the Major General. [Signified
to the M. General who -- ]
Who, whether wisely to give them rope, or in expectation of their voluntary
separation, or (whereto for certain reasons I rather do incline) upon
misinformation given by a leading person thereabouts, forbeares,
notwithstanding this so just and full a provocation, the first and second days
of their convention in so public manner: for you must know that many of them
on Saturday before first took the Town. [Sends a party that-]
On Thursday morning a party of some fifty horse commanded by a Lieutenant is
dispatched with Orders to dissolve the meeting.

Upon their entrance the pleasure of the state was published to them, THAT THEY
MUST DEPART UNTO THEIR SEVERAL HABITATIONS; those that are strangers that is;
for Townsmen they are left unto their liberty.

This would not take upon them, though backed with importunities both of
persuasions and entreaties.

Some had given out before, that they had put up requests to God they waited
for returns unto, and did not know how long they might be kept in expectation.
But the common answer was by flat affronts to the Soldiers faces. A guard was
set upon the house they met in, that they might not enter there. The multitude
cut scores for that, and hurry to the market place. [Under greatest patience
and bitterest provocation]
There in the Cryers Pulpit they begin to pray and speak, or rather rant and
rail in wild confusion. Abusing the Protector; and the Soldiers to their very
teethes. There one cries out now Lord appear, now or never for confounding of
these thine and our Enemies. Another, we are not for Cromwels Kingdom, for
Priests and Universities, but for the Kingdom of Christ. Whole armefuls more
of Billingsgate flowers, far fetched indeed, but at the cheapest rate were
there put off that might be. The female sex mean while encouraging the
Tumult-leaders with their acclamation, Hold on ye Sons of Syon. One passage
more at least is worth your noting, I mean that man's Adventure, who in the
market place calls for a sign from heaven in hearing of that great assembly,
though also know 'twas with alike success to those that had no voice, nor any
answering, in the 18 of Kings the 18 and the 26. O the amazing patience of him
that sees spite and mischief, which he can with ease requite, and yet
forbeareth!

When at the last their contempt and obstinacy was grown insuperable,
[Dissolves the meeting.]
either by request or by commands, the Soldiers were constrained with their
own hands to pull down the speakers, and so to make division of them. But of
all the mischief done in such a tumult, at such resistance, by Canes, and
Swords (for the Guns it seems were silent) whatever it were, I cannot learn
unto this day, though I live so near, and have often since been upon the quest
among themselves and others, there and else where, who has a wound to show for
that days work. The worst that ever I met with, and that was from themselves
(for I will not willingly conceal a little worth the hearing) was that some
body, who I know not, was slightly scratched upon the nose (as others tells me)
by a Soldier in the drawing forth his sword: and another individuum vagum cut
upon the hand.

This being over, the Major General enters with his whole Brigade of horse,
and having called before himself, and chiefest officers the principal
somenters of that Seditious Business, assayes, not merely by extreme
civility, but freindly and affectionate tenderness to reduce them to sobriety.
But with what success? None would acknowledge, as to own, the present
Government. Many, even hoyes, with heads uncovered would dispute it with him.
And others would not engage for Peace, not knowing, as they said, how soon
they might (...) called out to do the Lords work.

Upon the issue of this whole affayre but only five of all that number (where
the common signal of a Mutiny [they were all one] was often given out) were
committed unto custody (though since, [The issue of all, with]
I hear, released) for further answer to their misbehaviour. Yet what a stir
is made about it: much rather, at how cheap a rate a tumult of that nature was
appeased, I think is worthy admiration. Reader; thou have the sum and
substance of what upon this subject came to my hands from persons, as I told,
thee of unquestionable credit: whereto (without the breach of modesty, I
nothing doubt) I may and do profess a faithful adherence on my part from
first to last. And if thou want yet some fuller evidence for ripening of thy
Judgment on the issue of such strange behavior, [Intimation of the Spring and
head thereof.]
I think thou will not loose thy labor by consulting only GENERATION WORK
Part 1. especially page 23.24.110. compared with a Sermon, sometime preached in
Abingdon, a short account whereof thou have, in an Appendix to Church-Rules for
Abingdon, published by the Minister there, who heard it preached without the
least reply thereto unto this day, though long before his death, whose burial
did give life unto The Tumult. That the Moral Law, for instance [thou shall
not kill] should veil the bonnet to a [dispensation meerely] calling unto
blood! The Lord awaken souls and make them try before they trust.

Presuming now at last, thou art as weary as my self, having once, good
Reader, but expostulated a little with our discontented Brethren I Will turn
thee loose,

. 14.
Sirs,
Will you vouchsafe to cast an eye (indifferent) on a few lines, (P. 3.) [An
Expostulation with our discontented Brethren, about]
that do protest (as far as possibly their utmost intimacy with their Masters
mind can reach) have nothing else before them but your real service? An alms
(me thinks) so cheap, you should not grudge (so many of you at the least as
have not sealed Indentures unto sullen Passion) an earnest beggar, suppose him
friend, or otherwise.

What is it then that ayleth you to make this noise, [Their present enjoyments,
and]
and stir you do? Why cannot the Nations rest in peace all long of your
disturbance? Who is the Man that does, or dares entrench upon your privileges,
but at his peril, and on whom you may be righted, if you list to make
complaint? Is not the seife same scope, and elbow room allowed you in all
concernments, as any the good people of the Nations whatsoever? Where Is any
other Lord and Master of your faith, but whom your selves set up? Are not your
meetings for doctrine and for practice left to your own discretion? Can you
complain the beams of supreme Power light with a fairer and fuller influence
on the otherwise minded, than those of your persuasion? Name the capacities for
Honor or Advantage (or what you please that is worth the naming) whereto your
mere Profession can give a non-suite to your claim. Do not all men see many
your friends (for we presume your selves do not think the several merits of
them all can mount so high) in Court, and Camp, in Council and in Country,
Stars of the greater magnitude?

. 15.
The premises are so above board in open view to all, [Past Professions,
compared]
that I am so little solicitous about your own concession of them, as to be
confident very strangers in our Israel are apt to think the disease lies not in
perishing for want, [Past Professions, compared]
but taking surfeit by excess. Look back a little; how long is it since the
world was made believe far less than this would have served your turn? Can
your selves forget the time wherein you bare in hand, might you but at the last
reach but to liberty in Gods worship, you should sit down as at your journeyes
end? This, O this, the very darling of our hearts, and life of souls (the
speech then went) would make amends and over measure to sighs and groans, to
prayers and tears, to coin and blood adventured for it. And now the treasure
is landed with Interest for its stay so long, and both enjoyed, not yet to be
contented, nay to cry out all is lost and ship wracked, whom does not this
amaze? who can unriddle it? Say, ye had something (we know not of) to stop our
mouths withal, will it serve to silence Providence also? What think ye, Sirs,
when Egypt is left, the wilderness over, the Sea passed, the Egyptians dead
upon the shore, yea the land of promise viewed already, and ready to be entered
on: if the people now (prompted by an unhappy faction) will be complaining
still, as if they were at their brickes and lash; if Moses and Aaron, the
instruments of their deliverance, must be kicked off with scorn for all their
service; if through their sides by mutinous murmures and seditious practices
the face of heaven be flowen against, and the whole bundle of dear bought
mercies quite unravelled to the very end of the bottom: what think ye if the
Lord distaste this course, and declare from heaven against the Abettors of it in
a dreadful posture? will such a doctrine learn us nothing in the Application?
Could there be nothing said in their behalf, who serve Christ Jesus in his
Gospel publicly, but that you might add farther to your present work of
letting fly whole quivers of arrows, even bitter words, against them, without
distinction, notwithstanding their bespeaking you in the Apostles language
where is the blessedness you (sometime) spoke of? for I bear you record that,
if it had been possible, you would have plucked out your eyes and given them
us. Are we therefore become your Enemies because we tell you the truth? I say
but that you might add farther (oh most sad!) endeavors to fulfill the
prophecy John 16.2. He that kills you shall think he does God service. Yet,
Sirs, to raise your selves upon the ruins of your other Brethren (for these
you will not take into the number) or both to fall as footstooles to a worser
third, besides the riotous wasting such a stock of precious mercies, and making
all profession a hissing and a byword unto scorners, cannot (me thinks) but be
of dismal consideration to your own retired thoughts. Whether the face of
things now carrying on amongst you look not this way too wishly, who is it
almost but can resolve it? oh that your selves would timely look to it!

. 16.
For what you talk of (enough at random truly) Old principles are apostatized
from. [Consideration of their Objections 1 Old principles departed from,, and
-- ]
If humane frailties in your supposed Adversaries although our Rulers must have
(hard measure!) no benefit of Clergy at your hands; if the blessing upon Sem
and Japhet when Ham was cursed Genesis 9. be not at all regarded; if the weapons
of the Ancient Church (pretended to by none more then your selves in former
days) Prayers and Tears must be quite thrown down, as never more to be
taken up: yet at the least be cool a little, whilst I ask you, Will not all
principles and engagements spoken of be easily (in your own sense) resolved
into this one, PROMOTING SIONS INTEREST? I am confident you do admit it. Then
further, tell me, Is not encouragement of Gods people in their worshipping of
him according to their different light (I appeal unto your selves, according
to what you hither to have spoke and wrote) most eminently the life and soul
of SIONS INTEREST? I take this also granted. And I beseech you now, if taking
breath a little, you put us to the proof that this is as the apple of the eye
unto our present Governors, do ye not (bethink your selves) make question
whether fire be hot, or which comes to one, doubt of the Suns being up at
noone? All other principalls engaged to, from whence you say departure is made,
when once you make the world acquainted with them (till when I hope your
charity must excuse a non-attendance on them) if they prove such indeed as can
find their Register amongst the rest of kin to Sion, I think, a private person
may undertake either to show them swallowed up as rivers in this Sea, or
(craving leave) in the states behalf to promise a seasonable retrivement of
them. Mean while 'twould well become us private persons to look to our
exemplar, who made me Judge? and move within our proper sphere, by minding of
that work our calling does cut out unto us.

. 17.
And for the tenor of all your moanes, [ 2 Christ's visible Reign neglected]
Christ's reign is not regarded. For my part I must tell you, it has been
oftentimes refreshment unto me (the rather I confess for yours and some other
angry peoples sakes) that I see just cause, even at this day, to pronounce it
after David, The Lord does reign let the earth rejoice, and the I sles be
glad thereof. As for the visible kingdom whereof you are in travail in the
expectation; at least you may be told, that It is of later date, I mean as to
your common taking notice of it, than those Engagements spoken of, as revolted
from, and so were not in view when they were entered. It lies upon you therefore
to acknowledge the dealing is not fair to raise your level for it on that
ground: making complaint of being false (if I mistake not) to what was scarcely
thought on, much less engaged to.

Besides I hope, your selves allow that many eminent souls in grace, [Whereof
many godly doubt, and --
not clear therein (although not simply contradicting it) are yet as heartily
desirous as your selves both of their Masters exaltation and their own most
near enjoyment of him who, consequently, did it appear his mind, could bid as
welcome to it (though it may be to their costs in some respects) as others
seem to do; and therefore do not deserve such weight and measure at your hands
or tongues as yet they find. But you may know it has no little influence on
them to suspende about it, when, besides what ever may be said as to the season.

. 18.
First, [Why] (1)
it is as bright as day to them, that the design wherewith the Gospel is filled
up to the very top looks at a kingdom not consisting in meats and drink, in
worldly power and the like (sufficiently pleasing doubtless to the fleshly
part) but of another nature, Righteousness, and peace, and joy in the Holy
Ghost. To make us Kings and Priests, not among men, but unto God: triumphers,
through believing, one Hell, and curse, and sin, not by a carnal weapon over
all men else, though nere so godly, if not complyers with our persuasion.

And then remember, (2)
their Lord (according to the prophecy of him that he should not cry, nor lift
up, nor cause his voice to be heard in the street, as the mode of earthly
Princes is) not only did refuse to be made a king on earth, but seems
elsewhere to give the reason of it, My kingdom is not of this world.

And it does not yet appear that ever he changed his mind.

Beside it is no doubt with them but that it was the disciples weakness
(before the pouring forth of the spirit on them) which they also had received
by tradition from their Jewish fathers to expect Messiah's reigning in an
earthly kingdom. (3)


Add hereto, that the proof [of such a kingdome] is borrowed only from
darker prophecies, and obscurer passages, (4)
in the book of God, not written with that Sun-beame the other is, wherewith
their hearts are taken up. And it is worth your heeding, that as it is past
excuse in them, who wretchedly sport the Scriptures into a very Allegory, so
they must bear their blame, who in the prophecies thereof will look no
further than the earthy side of promised mercies. The Holy Ghost so clothing
spiritual blessings then (as likely most to take on children) in the Churches
nonage, yet when she is grown up in Gospel days would have her understand
them in the sense he meant them. And therefore more than once we find such
prophecies of the old Testament as seem to speak of glory and advantage to
the outward, yet in the New, interpreted by himself, of those belonging to the
inward man.

And lastly, (5)
their great experience of small advantage by enjoying so the world at will
unto the spiritual part (the reason why so many good words in the book of God
we find bestowed on afflictions) and sad observations of their unhappy fate
(through an apparent hand of God therein) who in an over hot pursuit of an
earthy kingdom, quite lose (so it falls out) the way onto the heavenly:
witness the former story.

These things cast up together are thought by some to come to somewhat, that
may make a sober Christian pause upon the business.

. 19.
But, put the case 'twere past all question that such a kingdom should
sometimes be. [If granted not by Sin to be promoted, therefore -- ]
May we the while do evil that good may come upon it? Or needs the Lord
Jesus our lie unto his glory? Or do ye think, (and I beseech you to be serious
in it,) it is his mind we should pull down HIS WRITTEN LAWS IN SCRIPTVRE, to
set up a kingdom so darkely written there, as next to not at all? That nothing
less than this way lays you in the road, you travail, was seen before, and
I therefore hope you need no Monitor afresh. If my words will not take upon
you, at least let the Apostles have their errand with you. [They are Exhorted]
We beseech you BRETHREN study to be quiet, doing your own business. Beware
of suffering as evil doers, or, which is all one, as busy bodies in other men's
affairs, persuade your selves, 'twere much more happy with us, would we all
make conscience more to tend the duties of those Places wherein we are, than
quarrel by our carriage even at Providence for placing us unto such duties.
Come, Sirs, lets never pawn the public peace, the comfort of our souls, the
credit of our dearest Lord, for satisfaction to a discontented humor; which,
when it has devoured them all, will never be full, whilst we have flesh to
feed it. My heart does give me, that if many of you did but see unto the end
that way, you enter now so boldly on, does lead, 'twould make your souls ride
post, with switch and spur, craving all help of heaven and earth, until you
were got out again: Remember, Sirs, it is not usual for men at once to arrive
at the very worst. No, our malignant Enemy Satan leads by steps: but when it is
down a steep it is hard recovering; for him especially that is far gone. One
evil spirit once bad welcome makes room with ease and speed for seven other
worser than himself. Who has not heard that little boys creep in at windows
to open doors for bigger thieves? Why do we not lay to heart how great a matter
a little fire kindles?

Sirs, be entreated in the bowels of Jesus Christ, to stoop betimes to Solomon's
counsel: let thine eye look right on, and thine eyelids strait before thee,
Ponder the path of thy feet and let thy ways be stablished.

. 20.
May the Lord arise to favor Sion and repair those saddest gaving breaches,
[The Lord entreated and]
Ignorance and error with the want of Christian love on every hand have either
made upon her or do keep open in her; and turn unto his people a pure
language, that with one consent his Name be called on amongst them, and no rest
given him till he make Jerusalem the praise of all the the earth. And May the
same Lord in mercy rescue the honest upright souls amongst you, not yet
acquainted with the depthes of Satan, from that unhappy snare of being longer
made the staulking horse unto the Jesuiticall, and Satanicall design of those,
who prostitute Religion, Conscience, (what not?) for homage to their accursed
IDOLS, ADVANTAGE, and AMBITION.

[The whole concluded.]
This is the Authors fervent prayer for Her and you: a friend (how ere you take
him) affectionate unto Both: and whose soul desires ever to be found in doing
nothing against the TRUTH, but for it.

Hinton, Berks. December 26. 1656. W. Hughes.

FINIS.
Mistakes of the Press.
Epist. p. 5. l. 23 d. y. ibid. l. 25. r. no. Book. p. 2. l. 1. d. ta. p: 49.
l. penult. r. clashing. p. 50. l. 6. to honest ad people Postscr. p. 1. l. 1.
marg. ad (P. 1. An Apology) p. 2. Title r. Abington Tumult ibm. l. 26. r. fire.
p. 4. l. 12. r. ehuseth p. 68. l. 26. after one ad once. p. 69. l. penult. ad
(1. By their own report) p. 75. l. 1. in too d. o. p. 79. l. 7. d. the page
85. l. 16. r. passing p. 95. l. 7. r. title.


