AN EXPLICATION OF THE DIAL SET UP IN THE KINGS GARDEN AT LONDON, an. 1669.

IN WHICH VERY MANY SORTS OF Dyalls are contained; by which, besides the Hours
of all kinds diversely expressed, many things also belonging to Geography,
Astrology, and Astronomy, are by the Suns shadow made visible to the eye.

AMONGST WHICH, VERY MANY DIALLS, ESPECIALLY the most curious, are new
inventions, hitherto divulged be None.

ALL THESE PARTICULARS ARE SHORTLY, yet clearly set forth for the common good,
By the Reverend Father FRANCIS HALL, otherwise LINE, of the Society of JESUS,
Professor of Mathematics.

PRINTED AT LIEGE, By GUILLAUME HENRY STREEL, in the Year of our lord 1673.

Superiorum Permissis.

pyramidical dial

A BRIEF EXPLICATION OF THE PYRAMIDICALL DIAL set up in his Majestey Private
Garden at White hall July 24. 1669.
THE Dyall being placed upona Pillar by his Majestey order, in the Privy
Garden: it was intimated unto me by diverse Worthy persons as a thing very
Expedient, that an Explication should be published, of the use, of the several
Dyalls there contained. For although to diverse of them were added a verse or
two Explicating how the hour, etc. was to be found by them yet in regard many
of them were new, and not te be found in any Author: and others belonging to
Astronomy, Cosmography, etc. not so easily conceaved by all, they judged very
Expedient a Declaration there of should be set forth whereby such as came
daily to see it, might receave more satisfaction.

Here upon, havinge soon after the setting up of the Dial, left London, and
being arrived at my lodging in the Country, I began the said Explication: and
being much desirous to add yet some further ornament to the Dial already
placed, I began the making of four water Dyalls to be placed at the 4. Corners
of the Pyramidicall Dyall in a co^petent distance from the same. To this
undertaking I was moved, as well, by the opportunity of a fountain in the Privy
Garden, so near the Dyall: as also for that Experience had taught me, that
such Dialls, as formerly I had made to show the Hour in several ways by
water, were for their rarity and novelty noe less pleasing to the beholder,
then the rest.

Being now very busy in these two Employments, and having toward the middle of
winter made a considerable progress therein: I received a letter from a friend
at London, wherein he told me, that the Dial, for want of a cover (which
according to his Majestyes gracious order, should have been set over it in the
winter) was much endomaged by the snow lying long frozen upon it; and that,
unless a cover were provided (of which he saw little hope) another or two such
tempestuous winters, would utterly deface it. Hereupon I laid aside as well
the said Explication, as these Waters Dyalls, it seeming to noe purpose, an
Explication should come forth, of the Use of the Dial, when it was now rendered
Useless. Which resolution being understood by some of those worthy persons,
who before, had urged for the publishing the said Explication they judged that
not withstanding the Dial it self should be rendered Useless; yet the said
Explication, was not to be omitted: since thereby would be given occasion to
some other skillfull Mathematicien (of which we have many in England) to set
up another in place thereof both more specious and durable, and adorned with
more variety of invention.

This reason suting well with the desire I formerly had, of adorning his
Majestyes Garden with some curiosity that might in its kind surpass what might
else where be found, I resolved to take in hand again the said Explication.
Which that it may the better be performed, I will first enumerate the parts or
pieces of which the whole Dial consists, and then descend to the Dialls
described on each particular piece.

CHAPTER I. Of the several parts of this Dial: and of the Dialls described on
each part, in general.
THis Dial Standing on a Pillar or Piedestall of stone, consists chiefly of 6.
parts or pieces, one less then another, and placed one above another in form
of a Pyramid, as yousee in the precedent page.

Of the first Piece.
THe first and largest of these 6. Pieces, or base of the said Pyramid, is a
round Table of about 40. inches in Diameter: and some 8. or 9. inches in
thicknes: The Edge whereof is cut into 20. Equal playnes, which being made
hollow like so many boxes of an inch deep, are covered each of them with a
clear polishd glass: and on the inside of each glass is described a Dyall:
whereof some of them show the Hour according to the Ancient or jews Manner of
counting the Hours: Others according to the counting used by the Babylonians:
Others according to the Italians: Others according to the way of counting used
by Astronomers: and lastly others show what Hour it is according to our usual
and ordinary way of counting the Hour, used in most parts of Europe. These 20.
Dyalls thus described on the Edge of this Table or first piece, are all
vertical Declining Dyalls: Whose Style or Gnomon, is Either a Lions paw, or
Unicornes Horn or such like relating to his Majestyes Arms, and painted on the
bottom of the Box, as shall be said in the next Chapter.

Moreover upon the upper part of this Table, are placed 8. Reclining Dyalls,
all made hollow, and covered with polishd, glass like the former: but differ
chiefly in this that they show only the usual Hour in different ways: one of
them show ing the Hout by the shade of the style falling upon the Hour Lines:
another by the shade of the Hour lines falling upon the style: a third without
any shade Either of Hour lines or style, etc.

Upon this Piece stand also 4. Globes, cut into several Panes: upon one of
which Globes are described several Dyalls belonging to Geography: on an
another, Dyalls belonging to Astronomy: the third Dyalls showing several
things appertayning to Astrology, as what planet raigns every Hour: the
Horoscope: Aspects of the sun with the stars, etc.

There are also belonging to this piece, and yssuing out of the sides thereof
toward the East, West, North and South 4. Iron branches supporting Each of
them a glass Boule, which show the Hour, in 4. different ways to wit by the
4. Elements as shall hereafter be said.

Of the second Piece.
THe second Piece of the Pyramid is also a round Table, almost like the former,
but somewhat less, having only 30. inches in diameter, and about in thicknes.
It stands upon the first, held up by 4. iron supporters. The Edge or
circumference of this Table is cut into 16. Equal Playnes, all made hollow,
and covered with glass, like those of the first Table. But they differ from
them in this, that here the Dyalls are not described on the glass covers, but
on the bottom of the boxes: neither doethey show the Hour, but the different
Rising of the more remarkable stars, according to the three manner of Risings
observed by Astronomers, to wit, the Cosmicall Rising, the Acronycall, and the
Heliacall, as shall be declared hereafter, when we speak of the Dyalls of this
second piece. The style to each of these Dyalls is a little star painted upon
the inside of the glass cover, the better to keep it from the weather.

Out of the sides of this Piece issue also 4. Branches toward the East, West,
North and South, and carry on each of them a glass Boule to show the Hour,
like those of the first Piece, but in a different way. For one of them shows
the Hour by a style without a Shadow: another shows it by a Shadow without a
style, etc. whereas those of the first Table show it by the 4. Elements, Fire,
Water, Aer and Earth, as shall be said in their due place.

On the upper part of this Table are plaeed 8. Reclininge Playnes: 4. where of
are covered each of the^ with a plate of looking-glass, on which the Hour
lines, or style of a Dyall being painted, are reflected upon the bottom
inclining playnes, of the Third piece, and there show the Hour, as shall be
presently said. The other 4. have also Dyalls upon them, which are to be seen
each of them in a looking glass placed upon the said bottom inclining
playnes, of the Third piece: of which we shall now speak.

Of the Third Piece.
THe Third Piece of this Pyramidicall Dyall, is a great Hollow Globe, of about
24. inches in diameter: and is placed immediately without any supporter, upon
the second piece. The superficies of this Globe is cut into 26. playnes: two
whereof being octogones serve for top and bottom. The rest are divided into 8.
Equal Reclining playnes. 8. Equal inclining playnes: and 8. Equal vertical
or upright playnes. These playnes are all of them made hollow like those of the
first and second piece. The incliners are not covered with glass, but left
open, that they may the better receave and show the Dyalls reflected, as has
been said, from the second piece.

Two of the 8. upright playnes looking toward the North, have noe bottomes: but
are covered only with clear glass, as serving only for windows to look in to
the Globe, and behold there the Dyals described on the Globe, which are seen
as well without the same, as within. The other 6. have not only Each of them a
cover of clear polishd glass with a Dyall described thereon, like those of
the first piece, but have also a glass for their bottom; which glass is
thinnely painted over, with white color, to the end the shade of the Hour
lines drawn upon the cover, may be seen as well, within the Globe as without.
On these bottom glasses are drawn several pictures, holding either a Scepter,
or a Troncheon, or the like, the end whereof points the Hour, you look for.

Two also of the Recliners looking toward the north, have only a glass cover
serving for a window to look into the Globe. The other 6. have double glass,
like the former. Their Dyalls are some drawn upon the cover, others upon the
bottom: but all so contrived, that the Hour cannot beknown by them, but only
by looking within the Globe.

More over from the top of this Globe issue 4. iron Branches toward the 4.
parts of the world, each of them carrying a glass Boule, proportionably less
then those of the first and second piece: on which Boule, are also Dyalls
described, but different from the former showing the Hour according to the
several ways of counting the Hours. These Boules are painted on the inside with
thick color to keep out the light, except a little place which is left clear
like a star for the sun beams to pass through and show the Hour: and the
place also where the Hourlines are drawn, is only painted on the outside
thinnely with white color, that the light of the sun passing through the
said star may be seen, and show the Hour.

Of the fourth Piece.
THe fourth piece standing on the before said Globe, and held up by 4. iron
supporters, like to those which hold up the second piece, but proportionably
less, is also a round Table of about 20. inches diameter, and 6. in thicknes.
The Edge of this Table is cut into 12. Equal superficies, not plain, as
hitherto, but concave like so many concave semicylindres: On each of which is
described a Dyall, which shows the usual Hour by the shade of a Flower de luce
fixed at the top of each semicylinder.

From the top of this Table issue forth 4. iron Branches, carrying each a
glass Boul just like those of the first, second and Third piece, though
proportionably less. The Dyalls described on these glass Bouls differ from
those of the Third piece, not only because they show only the usual Hour; but
also because here the Hourlines are al left clear for the sun beams to
pass through: that by so passing they may exhibit the like Dyall on the
opposite side of the Boule: which side is for that purpose, thinnly painted
over with white color, that the said Hours may be seen, and show the Hour by
their passing over a little star painted in the middle thereof.

Of the fifth Piece.
THe fifth piece standing upon the 4th. and held up also by 4. iron supporters,
is a Globe of about 12. inches diameter: whose superficies in cut into 14.
playnes, 8. whereof are Triangles Equal and Equilaterall, the other 6. are
Equal Squares. The Dyalls described on these playnes show only the usual Hour
by the shade of a Flower de luce fastened to the top or bottom of each plain.

Of the last or Highest Piece.
THe Highest piece or top of the Pyramid, is a glass Boule of some 7. inches
diameter, standing upon a foot of iron placed on the middle of the fifth piece.
The north side of this Boul is thinnly painted over with white color, that
the shade of a little golden Ball, that is placed in the middle of the Boule
may be seen to pass over the Hourlines, which are drawn upon the said white
color, and note the Hour. The Boule is included between two circles of iron
gilded, with a cross on the top. And thus much concerning the parts of this
Pyramidicall Dyall, in general.

To which may be added, that the first 4. pieces have all their sides covered
with little plates of black glass, fastly cemented to the said pieces, except
those places whereon the Dyalls are drawn: which being, as is said, covered
also with plates of polished glass, there appears almost nothing on the
outside af this Dyall, but glass: which for the greater ornament of the Dyall
the angles or corners, where those little plates of black glass are joined
together, are gilded, as almost all the iron work of the Pyramid, as well
supporters, as Branches, style, etc. are either wholly, oras much as serves for
ornament, covered in like manner with gold.

CHAPTER II. Of the 20. Vertical Dialls described on the Edge of the first
Piece.
BY what is said in the precedent Chapter of the first Piece it appears, that
besides the Dyalls described on the 4. great Globes, which stand on the said
first piece: there are 32. Dyalls belonging thereto: Viz. 20. Vertical, or
Upright Dyalls: 8. Reclining Dyalls: and 4. Sphaericall Dyalls. Of the 20.
Verticalls, we shall now speak in this Chapter: of the 8. Recliners in the next:
and of the 4. Sphaericall in the 4th. Chapter.

These Verticalls being made hollow Boxes, (as is said) covered with glass:
the Hour Lines of each of them are drawn upon the glass: and the style (which
is either a Lions paw, or Unicornes Horn, etc.) is painted on the bottom of
the box. Whence it follows, that whereas in the ordinary way of making sun
Dyalls, the shade of the style or Gnomon passes over the Hour Lines: here on
the contrary the shade of the Hour Lines passes over the style. So that
whereas before, when the sun did not shine, you saw nothing in the bottom of
the box, but a painted Lion or Unicorne, etc. So now as soon as the sun
shines, you may behold there a perfect Dyall with all its lineaments and numbers
exactly described, and just like the other drawn upon the glass cover: as
being only the shade thereof caused by the sun beams passing through the
said glass. Which shady Dyall being moved by the motion of the sun from one
part of the said bottom to another, shows by passing over the paw of the Lion,
for example, the same Hour of the day, which in the ordinary Dyalls is showed
by the shade of the style passing over the Hours.

These 20. Dyalls, thus deseribed are not all of the same kind, nor show the
time of the day all in the same manner, but in very different ways, according
to the different ways of numbering the Hours used by several sorts of people:
Some beginning to count their Hours from sun Rising: others from
sunne-setting: others from noone, and others from Midnight. And again, of
those, who count from sun Rising: some count always 12. Hours from sun
Rising till sun setting for the day: and as many from sun setting till
sun Rising for the night: whether the days or nights be long or short. And
these kind of Hours are therefore called the unequal Hours, as being longer or
shorter according as the days are now longer, now shorter.

Others there are, who also count from sun Rising, but continue the number
till next sun Rising: counting always from sun Rising till sun Rising
24. Hours. According to which, it is all ways 24. a clock at sun Rising.

Other on the contrary count allways 24. Hours from sun setting till next
sun setting: so that when sun setts, it is all ways 24. a clock.

Others count also 24. Hours, but begin at Noone, and End at next Noone; and
with these it is all ways 24. a clock at Noone.

Lastly others beginn at Midnight, and count 12. Hours till Noon: and then 12.
more till Midnight: and according to these, it is all ways 12. a clock, at
Noone and at Midnight.

The first of these 5. ways, and which divides the space be tween sun Rising
and setting into 12. Equal parts, making thereby the Hours unequal (as is
said) that is longer in summer then in winter, is the Most ancient of all; and
are therefore called Horae Antiquae. They were anciently used by the jews, at
is manifest by diverse places of holy writ. So that when in S. Matthew chap.
27. v. 54. it is said to have been darkness (at our Saviors passion) from the
sixth Hour till the Ninth: it is to be understood according to our manner of
reckoning the Hours: that there was darkores from Noon till about 3. a clock
after dinner: since according to this counting by unequal Hours: it is all
ways at Noon 6. a clock, and 12. at sun set. And for this reason, they are
called here in the Dyall Horae antiquae sive Judaicae. They are also called
Horae Planetariae: because the Ancient Astrologers supposed a new Planet to
reign in each of these unequal Hours.

The second way of counting 24. Hours from sun Rising till sun Rising, is
used by the Babylonians, and these Hours are therefore called Horae
Babylonicae: the Babylonian Hours.

The third way of counting 24. Hours from sun set to sun set, is used
chiefly by the Italians: and therefore these Hours are called Horae Italicae:
the Italian Hours.

The fourth way counting also 24. Hours from Noone or Midday till next Midday,
is used by Astronomers in calculating the places and positions of the stars
and Planets in the Heavens, etc. And are therefore called Horae Astronomicae:
Astronomicall Hours.

The fifth and last way: which counts 12. Hours from Midnight to Noone, and as
many from Noone to Midnight, is used as well in Most parts of Europe, as here
in England: and is therefore styled in the Dyall, the usual or vulgar way: and
the Hours, Horae Vulgares; the vulgar or usual Hours.

Now there being (as has been said 20. Dyalls placed on the Edge of this first
piece: there is allotted in the Dyall to each of the 5. sorts, 4. Dyalls: which
are so disposed, that at any time of the day you may behold the time of the
day represented in every of those 5. manner of ways, And that they may be the
better conceaved it seemed good to set down one of each sort, in the next
Page: which by their titles are easily know.

For 1. those 4. whose title is, Per horas numeratas, ab ortu Solis, FIG. 1.
more antiquo, sive Judaico, and have a Red Lion painted on the bottom, show
by the shady Dyall passing over the paw of the Lion, what a clock it is said to
be at Whitehall, according to the Ancient or jews account. 2. Those 4. whose
title is Per Horas numeratas ab ortu Solis more Babylonico, FIG. 2.
and have painted on their bottom a Harp with a Scepter, show by the shady
Dyall passing over the top of the Scepter, what a clock it is at Whitehall
according to the Babylonian way of the counting the Hours. 3. Those 4. whose
title is, FIG. 3.
Per Horas numeratas ab occasu Solis more Italico, and have on their bottom a
Flower de luce, show by the like shady Dyall passing over the top of the Flower
de luce, what a clock it is there according to the Italian account. 4. Those 4.
whose title is, Per Horas numeratas a Meridie more Astronomico, FIG. 4.
and have on their bottom a Unicorn, show by the often mentioned shady Dyall,
what a clock it is to be said to be according to the count used by Astronomers.


1
^er Horas Numeratas ab ortu Solis more Antiquo (...) Iudaico
2
Per Horas Numeratas ab ortu Solis more Babylonico
3
Per Horas Numeratas (...) ^^casu Solis more Ita^^^^
4
Per Horas Numeratas a Meridie more Astronomico
5
Per Horas Numeratas a Media nocte more Vsitato


Lastly, these 4. whose title is, Per horas numeratas a Meridie and media
nocte, FIG. ^.
moreusit ato, and have on the bottom a Lion painted in its natural color,
show by the shady Dyall, passing over the Lions paw, what a clock it is
according to the usual and ordinary way of reckoning the Hours.

So that for example: if at the beginning of July (at what time the sun
rises at 4. clock and setts at 8.) I find by looking on the usual Dyall, that
it is just 8. a clock in the morning I shall find a the same time by the
Ancient or Judaicall Dyall, to be just 3. a clock: by the Babylonian to be 4.
by the Italian 12. and by the Astronomicall to be 20. and thus much for the use
of these 20. Vertical Dyalls.

Now the reason of their difference from the ordinary Dyalls which show the
Hour by the shade of the style passing over the Hour Lines is, that the sun
being moved in the same manner, whether the shade of the Hour Lines be moved
over the style, or on the contrary, the shade of the style moved over the
Hour Lines the self same effect, in order to the showing the Hour, must needs
follow both ways: since the Hour Lines are noe other then the sections, which
the playnes of the Hour circles in the Heavers make with the plain of the
Dyall: in each of which playnes, the style also is, as insensibly differing
from the Axis of the world.

From whence it follows, that the before said Dyalls being made according to the
ordinary way of making the like vertical declining Dyalls, are to be inverted,
to the End they may show the Hour.

CHAPTER III. Of the 8. Reclining Dyalls Standing upon the first Piece.
THe 8. Reclining Dyalls, being also made hollow, and covered with glasses like
these 20. verticalls we now spoke of, show only the usual Hour; but perform
it in different, or rather contrary ways one to another. For of those 4. which
stand upon the south part of the Table; one shows the Hour by the shade of the
style passing over the Hour Lines. Another on the contrary shows it by the
shade of the Hour Lines passing over the style. A third shows it both ways; as
well by shade of style passing over Hours, as shade of Hours passing over
style. The fourth shows the Hour without shade either of style or Hourlines.

In like manner, of those 4. which stand on the North part of the Table, in one
you see the Hour Lines, but noe style. In another you see the style, but noe
Hours. In a third you see neither style nor Hours, unless the suune shine, as
shall be declared by and by. In the fourth, you see indeed both Hours and
style: but in a different way from what has been hitherto practiced: for here
you behold the style in the same superficies with the Hour Lines. Whereas in
the common practice of Dyalling, the style is always lifted above the
superperficies in which are the Hour Lines, to the end it may cast its shade
upon them. And thus much of these 8. Reclining Dyalls in general. We shall now
speak of them in particular and first.

Of those 4. Which stand upon the south part of the Table.
THe first of these 4. whose title is, Per umbram styli, and shows, FIG. 6.
(as is said) the Hour by the shade of the style passing over the Hour Lines,
has upon the glass cover, painted a little star: which serves for style:
and on the bottom are drawn the Hour Lines: over which the shade of the said
star passing shows the Hour.

The second whose tittle is, Per umbram Horarum, and shows the Hour by the
shade of the Hours passing over the style, FIG. 7.
has upon the glass cover painted a Harp, whose strings are the Hour Lines:
and on the bottom is painted a Flower de luce, whose top serves for style. So
that by the shade of those strings passing over the Flower de luce, the Hour is
known.

The third, whose title is, Per umbram tam styli quam Horarum, FIG. 8.
and shows the Hour as well by the shade of the Hours passing over the style,
as by these hade of the style passing over the Hours, has upon the glass cover
a Unicorne painted with certain little stars on his back: each of which
standing for an Hours, has its number written over it. On the bottom are
drawn the Hour Lines of a Dyall, and by them a Scepter: so that when the sun
shines you may behold the Unicornes shade being moved by the motion of the
sun, to note the Hour with the end of its Horn: and at the same time, the
shade of the said little stars, to show the same Hour by passinge over the
Scepter.

The fourth and last of these, whose little is, Sine umbravel styli, vel*
Horarum, FIG. 9.
and shows the Hour without shade of either style or Hours, has painted upon
the glass cover a Flower de luce, together with a Harp, whose strings are the
Hourlines: and the top of the Flower de luce is their style. Now out of 6
PER VMBRAM STYLI
7
PER VMBRAM HORARUM
8
PER VMBRAM TAM STYLI QVAM HORARVM
9
SINE VMBRA VEL STYLI VEL HORARVM
this Flower de luce, you shall see, when the sun shines, another Flower de
luce of light, to arise, and by passing under the said string of the Harp, to
note the Hour: and by consequence, to show (as is said) the Hour without shade
of style or Hours.

As for the reason of the three first, there needs to add noe more then what
has been said of the 20. vertical Dyalls. But concerning the 4th. the reason
why the style or Flower de luce lies in the same superficies with the
Hour Lines, is, that the said luminous Flower de luce arising out of the
painted Flower de luce, and showing the Hour, is reflected from a looking
glass placed upon the bottom of the Dyall.

Of the other 4. Reclining Dyalls, Which stand upon the North Part hof the
Table.
THe three first of these Dyalls are so contrived, that the Hour cannot be
other wise known by them, then by looking through a little Ring placed on the
back of the Dyall: as shall now be explicated.

For in the first, FIG. 10.
whose title is, Per Horas latentes, if you look on the face of the Dyall, you
perceave noe Hour lines, but only a style, that is a Flower de luce painted
upon the cover: and on the contrary if you look on the back of the Dyall
through the said Ring, you shall see the Hour Lines, but noe style, unless the
sun shine: for then you shall behold the shade of the said Flower de luce to
pass over the said Hour Lines, and note the Hour.

In the second (whose title is, Per latentem stylum) by looking on the face of
the Dyall, FIG. 11.
you behold only the Hours: that is, you see only a Crown bedecked with
stars, each whereof stands for an Hour: And on the contrary by looking 10
PER HORAS LATENTES
11
PER LATENTEM STYLUM
12
PER LATENTES TAM HORAS QUAM STYLUM
13
PER TAM HORAS QUAM STYLUM PATENTES
on the back through a little Ring, you behold only the style, that is a
Scepter, unless the sun shine: for then you see also the shade of those
starry Hours to pass over the Scepter and note the Hour.

In the third, FIG. 12.
whose title is, Per latentes tam Horas qua stylum, you see neither Hours nor
style by looking on the Dyall but if you look (as before) on the back: you may
behold the Hourlines: and if the sun shines, you may perceave also a little
star, to pass over them, and show the Hour.

Lastly in the Fourth, whose title is, Per tam stylum quam Horas patentes, FIG.
13.
there appears both style and Hours: but the style is without shade, and the
Hours without lines. That is upon the glass cover are painted certain little
stars, serving for the Hours: and a Scepter serving for style: out of which
Scepter, when the sun shines, you may behold another Seepter of light to
issue, and by passing under the said stars, to show the Hour.

Now for the reason, why in the three first you cannot see the Hour, but by
looking through the Ring on the back of the Dyall: it is, because their
bottomes being glass thinnely painted over with white color, nothing can be
seen by looking on the face of the Dyall, that is drawn on the lower side of
the bottom glass: and on the contrary, by looking on the back, nothing can be
seen that is drawn upon the glass cover, but only the shade there of, when the
sun shines.

The reason of the fourth, is the same which was given for the fourth of those,
which stand on the south part of the Table.

CHAPTER IV. Of the 4. glass Boules standing on the 4. Branches of the first
Piece.
THese 4. Boules show also the usual Hour in 4. different ways. For one of
them shows the Hour by Fire: another by Water: the third by the Air: and the
fourth by the Earth: as we shall now declare.

Of the first Boule.
THe first there fore, whose title is, Per Ignem, FIG. 14.
and shows as is said, the Hour by Fire, is a little glass Boule filled with
clear water. This Boul has about 3. inches in diameter, and is placed in the
middle of another Sphaere of about 6. inches in diameter, consisting of
several iron Rings or circles representing the Hour circles in the Heavens.
The Hour is here known by applying your hand, to the said Hour circles, when
the sun shines: for that circle where you feel your hand burnt by the sun
beams passing through the Boule filled with water, shall show the true Hour:
according to the Latin verse there adjoigned. Cratem tange: manusque Horam tibi
reddet adusta.

The reason of this Dyall is, that the parallel rays of the sun passing
through the said little Boul are bended, by the densily of the water, into a
cone or pyramid, whose vertex reaches a little begond those Hour circles, and
there burns the hand applied. For so many rays being all united into a
point, must needs make an intense heat. Which heat is so powerful in the
summer time that it will fire a piece of wood applied unto it.

Of the second Boule.
THe second Boule, whose title is, Per Aquam, shows the Hour by water: FIG. 15
that is by the rays of the sun passing through the water, with which the
Boule is filled, as in the praecede^t. Which rays although they be bended by
the density of the water, as before, yet they burn not, being cut of at their
going out of the Boule, by a little white color laid thinnely on that part
where they break out: making thereby only a round circle of light upon the said
color: the center of which circles shows the Hour amongst the Hour circles,
there described on the said white color: as the Latin verse does also
explicate, Luminis hic centrum qui tangit, tangit and Horam.

The reason of this Dyall (besides what we now said of the bending of the
rays) is, that these Hour-circles being noe other then the sections, which the
playnes of the caelestial Hour-circles crossing each other in the center of the
boule make in the superficies thereof: and the said center of the circle of
light madd on te Boule, answearingt perpetually to the center of the sun, it
necessarily follows, that it show always the true Hour. As any one knowing
but the first Principles of Dialling will conceave.

Of the Third Boule.
THe Third Boule, whose title is, Per Aerem, and shows the Hour without any
style, FIG. 16.
is only filled with Air: and exhibites to your sight, when the sun shines,
two little pictures 14
PER IGNEM
15
PER AQUAM
16
PER AEREM
17
PER TERRAM
of the sun, like two small stars, within the Boule. Both which, if by
moving your eye, you bring under the same Hour-circles described on the Boule,
or at least, parallel unto it, they shall show you the true Hour; according to
the there underwritten Latin verse, Unam det geminus Sol Horam, and vera
patebit.

Now the reason, why by those little pictures of the sun, seen both under the
same Hour-circle, or parallel to it, you find the Hour, is, that those Hour
circles described on the Boule, being the sections, which the playnes of the
caelestiall Hour-circles make in the superficies of the Boule, (as was said
also of the second Boule) and these two little suns being reflected one of
them from the unequal superficies of the Boule, and the other from the concave:
it follows by the Rules of Reflection, that those two pictures of the sun,
are both seen in the same plain in which is also the eye which sees, and the
sun which is seen. Wherefore since the sun is always in the plain of the
true Hour-circle: it necessarily follows, that the eye behold both those
pictures, at the true Hour. For although one Reflection cannot sufficienly
determine the eye to behold the sun in the true Hour-circle: yet two
reflections suffice.

Where is also to be noted, that these three Boules we have now spoke of, have
this praeeminence above all other Dyalls depending on the shade of the style,
that they show the Hour, when by none of those others it can be discerned: that
is when the sun shines so dimly that it casts noe perceptible shadow.

Of the fourth Boule.
THe fourth Boule whose title is, FIG. 17.
Per Terram shows what a clock it is in any part of the world. Which is here
performed by a Geographicall description of the whole earth upon the inward
superficies of the Boule: together with a Meridian circle moveable upon the
North and South poles: and the Aequinoctiall circle divided into its 24. Equal
Hours and fastened to the said Meridian, at the Hour of 12. at which place also,
is erected a Flower de luce: and at the North pole is fastened a third. The
boule being thus prepared, and rightly placed: if you turn the said moveable
meridian till the flower de luce cast noe shade upon the Boule, and then
bringing the third over any part of the world till it cross the Aequinoctiall
circle: yoe shall see the Hour there noted belonging to that part or parts, of
the world, over which the said third passes: according to the verse there
adjoined: Umbram toll Orbi, totumque stat Hora per Orbem.

CHAPTER V. Of the 4. great Globes Standing on the first Piece.
Of the first Globe.
THe first therefore or these Globes, whose title is, Horologia Geographica,
having about 13. inches in diameter, has its superficies cut into 32.
playnes; whereof 20. are Triangles all equal and equilaterall. The other 12.
are Pentagones or fiveangled figures, all of them likewise equal one to
another. Some of these Pentagones are made hollow like Hemisphaeres, others
like cones, the rest, as also the Triangles, are left plain. The Dyalls
described as well on the Pentagones, as on the Triangles have for style, a
sharp poynted iron perpendicularly erected.

The Dyalls described on the Pentagones show not only the situation, of the
more remarkable countries in the world, but also what several actions, are
performed in them, at the same time: for example, who are now at Dinner, who at
supper, who are rising, who sleeping, etc.

For those two, FIG. 18
whose title is, Tempus surgendi, show by the shade of the style in what part
of the world it is time of Rising, or 6. a clock in the Morning.

Those, FIG. 19.
whose title is, Tempus Prandendi, show in the same manner, in what part of the
world, it is time of Dining or Midday.

Those whose title is. FIG. 20.
Tempus Coenandi, show in what country it is supper time, or 6. a clock at
night.

Those, FIG. 21.
whose title is, Tempus Dormiendi, show where it is Midnight, or time of
sleeping.

But those two, whose title, Habentes Solemn supra caput, show by the shade of
the style what people, whether by sea or land, have the sun just over their
Heads at such time as you look upon the Dyall. FIG. 22.
Which is performed by inverting that part of the Terrestrial Globe, which is
included between the two Tropicks. The reason of which inversion is, that the
shade 18
TEMPUS SURGENDI In Iamaica In Guiana In Groenlandia In Brasilia In canarijs In
Lusitania In Hispania

19
TEMPUS DORMIENDI In Nova Albion In California In Nova Granada In No^^ Hispania
In Virginia In Nova Anglia In Marilandia In Islandia

20
TEMPUS PRANDENDI Apud Mogores In Nova Zembla In Tartaria I^ Arabia In Moscovia
In Polonia In Dania

21
TEMPUS CAENANDI In Cauchinchina In Bengala In Camba^a In Persia In Sinu-Arab:
In Arabia

22
Habents Solemn supra caput
Tropicus Capricorni

Equator

Tropicus Cancri

Zefata

Nubia

Oceani^

AEthiopia

Brasilia

Tabair

Guiana

of the style being always cast toward the contrary part to the sun, that
is, if the sun be East, the shade falls toward the West, etc. it was
necessary the eastern part of the world should here lie Westwards; and the
Northern Southwards. And thus much for the 12. Pentagones, described on the
Globe.

Now for the 20. Equilaterall Triangles: the Dyalls described on them, FIG. 23.
and 24.
show only what a clock it is in this or that particular place, according to
the usual way of counting the Hours from Midnight to Noone, and from Noone to
Midnight whereof only three examples are here set down. For example, one of
these Dyalls shows what a clock it is at Jerusalem: another at Constantinople:
another in Jamaica, etc.

Of the second Globe.
THe second Globe, whose title is, Horologium Astronomicum ostendens, etc. is
just like the former, whereof we have now spoken: that is the superficies
thereof is cut into 12. Pentagones and 20. Triangles. But the Dyalls,
described on these Pantagones and Triangles, are much different from those of
the former. As not showing the Hour of the day: but diverse other things
belonging to Astronomy, as the Azimuth or distance of the Sun from the South:
The Almicantarath, or Height of the Sun above the Horizon: what Hour he rises
and setts: and the like as shall now be said.

23
IEROSO LYMIS
24
CONSTANTINOPOLI


First therefore the Dyall, whose title is, Azimuth Solis a Meridie, FIG. 25.
shows by the shade of the style (which in each Dyall here also is
perpendicularly erected) how many degrees the Sun is distant from the true
Soutb, at such time as you look upon the Dyall. The lineaments of this Dyall,
are noe others then the sections, which the playnes of the vertical circles
crossing Each other on the top of the Style, make with the superficies of the
Dyall.

2. The Dyall whose title is, FIG. 26.
Altitudo Solis supra Horizontem, shows how many degrees the Sun is elevated
above the Horizon. The lineaments of this Dyall are the Sections which the
superficies of the Dyall makes with those Cones whose bases are parallel to the
Horizon, and whose common vertex is the top of the style: or center of the
Earth.

3. The Dyall, whose title is, Incipit Aurora, shows at what Hour beginns Break
of Day, FIG. 27.
that is when first the Crepusculine Arch begins to appear. The lineaments by
which this is here performed are the Sections, which the superficies of the
Dyall, makes with the Cones, whose bases are parallel to the Equator, and whose
common vertex, is the top of the style, or Earths center.

4. The Dyall, whose title is, Sol Oritur, shows by the now named Sections of
those cones, FIG. 28.
whose bases are parallel to the Equator, at what Hour the Sun rises: and by
consequence, when he setts.

25
Azimuth Solis a Mer
26
Altitudo Solis
27
Sol oritur
28
Incipit Aurora


5. The Dyall, which has for title, In quo signo Zodiaci sit Sol, FIG. 29. and
30.
shows by the said sections of the superficies of the Dyall with the cones,
whose bases are parallel to the Equator, in what part or sign of the Zodiac
the Sun is. But because the shade, of the top of the style falls twice every
year, upon the same section, by reason of the Suns ascending and descending
from the one Tropic to other: therefore to avoid confusion, here are two
Dyalls, of the same sort, one serving from the 10th. of December to the 10th.
of June: the other from the 10th. of June to the 10th. of December.

6. The Dyall, whose title is, Dies Mensis shows by the like conicall sections
now mentioned, FIG. 31 and 32.
what Day of the month it is: at least, as near as can be expected in so
little a form. Here are likewise two Dyalls of the same sort, for the reason
now mentioned. And these Dyalls which in this second Globe, we have hitherto
spoken of are all of them described on the Pentagones. Those which follow are
described on the Triangles.

7. The Dyall, whose title is, In qua part Horizontis incipiat Aurora, FIG. 33.
shows in what part of the Horizon begins the Break of the Day: that is, in
what part thereof begins first to appear the unequal part of the Crepusculine
Arch: Whether just in the East, or in the North East, or South East, etc. And
by consequence, in what part also the Evening Twilight Ends. The lineaments of
this Dyall, are the Sections which the playnes of the vertical circles
crossing Each other on the top of the style, Make with the plain of the Dyall.

8. The Dyall, whose title is, Duratio Crepusculi, shows by the now often
mentioned Conicall Sections of the superficies of the Dyall, FIG. 34.
with the Cones whose bases are parallel to the Equator, How long, as well the
Morning, as Evening Twilight 29
In quo Signo Zodiaci sit Sol.
a 10 Dec. ad 10 Iunij

30
In quo Signo Zodiaci sit Sol.
a 10 Iunij ad 10 Dec.

31
Dies Mensis
a 10 Dec. ad 10 Iunij

Ian Feb: Martius Aprilis Maijus Iun


32
Dies Mensis
a 10 Iunij ad 10 Dec.

Nou: Oct: Sept: Aug: Julius Iunius


33
In qua Part Horizontis incipiat Aurora
34
Duratio Crepusculi
does last: That is, how many Hours are from Breacke of Day till Sun Rising:
and from Sun setting to the End of Twilight, or till dark night.

9. The Dyall, whose title is, In qua coeli plaga existat Sol, shows by the
Sections of the Vertical circles, FIG. 35.
see n. 7. in what part of the Heaven the Sun is: Whether in the East or
West, outh East, or South West, etc.

10. The Dyall, FIG. 36.
whose title is, Amplitudo Ortiva Solis, shows by the Conicall Sections
Mentioned n. 3. how many Degrees the Sun rises wide of the true East point
whether toward the North, or toward the South.

11. The Dyall, FIG. 37.
whose title is, Quot Horae restent ad occasum Solis, shows by the Sections of
the Italians (see c. 2. n. 3.) Hour circles with the superficies of the Dyall,
How many Hours rest till Sun set.

12. The Dyall, FIG. 38.
whose title is, Quota pars Diei sit Elapsa, shows by the Sections of the
Unequal (see ibid. n. 3.) Hour circles, what part of the Day, or space from
Sun Rising to Sun setting is now spent, whether the third, or fourth, or
fifth, etc.

13. The Dyall, FIG. 39.
whose title is, Declinatio Solis shows by the Conicall Sections Mentioned n.
3. the Suns Declination: that is how many Degrees he is distant from the
Equator.

14. The Dyall, whose title is, Qua Hora Sol perveniat ad verum Orientem, FIG.
40.
shows by the same Conicall Sections, at what Hour the Sun comes to be just
East: and by consequence, at what Hour after dinner he will be just West.

35
In qua Caeli Plaga existat Sol.
36
Solis Amplitudo ortiva
37
Quot Horae restent ad occasum Solis
38
Quota Pars Diei sit elapsa
39
Solis Declinatio.
40
Qua Hora Sol Perveniat ad Vera orientem


15. The Dyall, whose title is, Refractio Solis, show by the Conicall Sections
spoken of n. 2. the Suns Refraction; FIG. 41.
that is how many minutes he appears to be Elevated above his true height, by
the bending of his rays in passing through our thick Atmosphaere.

16. The Dyall, whose title is, Quoties umbra contineat Corpus Erectum, FIG. 42.
shows by the shade of the style falling upon the aforesaid Conicall Sections
Mentioned n. 2. how often the shadow of a body perpendicularly Erected upon a
plain parallel to the Horizon contaynes the length of the same body.

17. The Dyall, whose title is, Longitudo Diei, shows by the shade of the Style
falling upon the Conicall Sections spoken of n. 3. the length of the Day: FIG.
43.
that is, how many Hours are between sun rising and setting.

Lastly, the Dyall, whose title is, Quot sint Horae Elapsae ab ortu Solis, FIG.
44.
shows, (by the shade of the style falling upon the Sections, which are made in
the superficies, of the Dyall, by the playnes of those circles, which divide
all the parallels of the Suns daily, motion into 24. Equal parts: according
to what was said c. 2. n. 2.) How Many Hours have passed since Suns Rising.

Of the Third Globe.
THe Third Globe, whose title is, Horologium Uranographicum, is about the same
bigness with the two former: but the superficies, thereof cut into 20.
Triangles, all Equal and Equilaterall: some whereof are made hollow like
Cones; the rest left plain. The Dyalls described on these Triangles, show what
situation or posture, the Heavens have at any time of the Day, when the sun
shines: that is, what stars are rising, what setting, what stand just over
your Head, etc. So 41
Solis Refractio
42
Quoties Vmbra Contineat Corpus erectum
43
Diei Longitudo.
44
Quot sint Horae ab Ortu Solis
45
Constellationes Orientes
a 10 Decembris ad 10 Iunij.

Aries Taurus Orion Leo Virgo Serpentari


46
Constellationes Orientes
a 10 Iunij ad 10 Decembris.

Pisces Pegasus Libra Virgo Leo Cancer


this Globe standing immovable, performs, by the shade of the styles
belonging to these several Dyalls, that in effect, which a Caelestiall Globe,
whereon all the Fixed Stars, or Constellations are painted, would do, if
being rightly placed, it were continually turned about, according to the sunde
daily Motion: where is to be noted that here are always two Dyalls of Each
sort, one serving one half year, and the other another, for the reason given
in the fifth Dyall of the second Globe.

First therefore those two Dyalls, whose title is, Constellationes Orientes,
FIG. 45. and 46.
show by the shade of the style, what constellation, or company of stars,
begin then to rise above the Horizon: provided that you look upon the Dyall
belonging to the time of the year in which you are in according to what was
now said. The lineame^ts of these Dyalls, are the Sections, which the plain of
the Ecliptike circle makes with the superficies of the Dyall, at such time, as
those several constellations, noted upon the Dyall, begin to rise.

2. Those two, whose title is, Constellationes Occidentes, show in like manner,
what Constellation begins then to set, or go under the Horison. The
lineaments of these two Dyalls, are the Sections, which the plain of the
Ecliptike circle makes with the superficies of the Dyall, at such time, as this
or that constellations begins to set.

3. Those two Dyalls, whose title is, Constellationes existentes in Meridie,
show what Constellation begins to pass the Meridian circle, or full South.
Which is here performed by the Sections, which the plain of the Ecliptike
circle makes with the superficies of the Dyall, when the several
Constellations there noted, begin to pass the Meridian circle.

4. Those two, whose title is, Constellationes existentes in ipso Orient, show
what Constellations stand just East, whether it be in the Horizon, or elevated
above the same. Which they perform by those Sections, which the plain of the
Ecliptike makes with the plain of the Dyall, when Such Constellations, as are
there noted, do pass the East circle, or first Vertical.

3. Those who, whose title is, Constellationes existentes in ipso Occidente,
show on the contrary what Constellations stands just West. Which is done by the
like Sections made by the Ecliptike, when those Constellations begin to pass
the true West.

6. Those two Dyalls, whose title is, Constellationes existentes supra Caput,
show what Constellation stands, over your Head. Which is also done by the a
fore said Sections, made when the Constellations there noted, pass the Zenith,
or vertical point.

Now these 12. Dyalls being all made (as is said) by the Sections of the
Eccliptike with the superficies of the Dyall: it will be sufficient to give
here a Diagramme of the two first.

But because these 2. Dyalls show only what situation the stars, have in the
Day time, when the stars cannot be seen, unless there should happen a total
Eclipse of the Sun: there are therefore described on the same Globe 6. other
Dyalls, showing what situation the stars will have at 8. a clock at night; a
time proper, to behold them and see the truth of the Dyall.

Wherefore 7o. Those two Dyalls, whose title is, Constellationes existentes in
Orient Hora octava Vespertina, FIG. 47. and 48.
show what Constellation will stand just Eastward at 8. a clock at night. Which
is here performed, by the Sections, which the superficies of the Dyall makes
with those cones, whose bases are parallel to the Equator, and whose common
vertex is the top of the style. Or center of the Earth.

8. Those two, whose title is, Constellationes existentes in Occidente Hora
octava Vespertina, show by the now named sections, what Constellation will be
just Westward, at 8. a clock in the Evening.

Lastly those, two, whose title is, Constellationes existentes in Meridie Hora
octava Vespertina, show by the sections, which their superficies make with
there aforesaid Cones, what Constellation, at 8. a clock at night, will be just
South. And these 6. Dyalls being all made by the Sections of the same Cones, it
will suffice to place here the Diagramme of the two first. And thus much of
the Third Globe.

Of the fourth Globe.
THe fourth and last Globe, whose title is, Horologium Astronomicum, is also
cut into 20. Triangles equalland Equilaterall, just like the precedent. The
Dyalls described on these Triangles, belong to Astrology: and are placed here
for those who are delighted with such conjecturall uncertayntyes. These Dyalls
are as follows.

1. The Dyalls, whose title is, Domus Astrologica Solis, shows in which of the
12 Astrologicall Houses described according to the way of Regiomontanus, FIG.
49.
the Sun is, at the time you behold the Dyall. The lineaments of this Dyall,
are the sections which the playnes, of those circles, which crossing Each other
47
Constellationes in Orient Hora 8ua Vespert:
a 10 Decembris ad 10 Iunij

Cancer Leo Virgo Boots


48
Constellationes in Orient Hora 8ua Vesp:
a 10 Iunij ad 10 Dece

Perseus Andromeda Cygnus Lyra


49
Domus Astrologica Solis
Domus 7^a Domus ^ua Domus 9na Domus 10ma Domus 11ma


50
Signum Horoscopans
a 10 Decembris ad 10 Iunij




51
Signum Horoscopans
a 10 Iunij ad 10 Decembris




on the North and South points of the Horizon, divide the Equator into 12.
Equal parts, beginning at the East point of the Horizon, and so descending,
make with the plain of the Dyall.

2. Those two Dyalls, FIG. 50. and 51.
whose title is, Signum Horoscopans, show the Horoscopon (as Astrologers term
it) that is which of the 12. signs do begin to rise above the Horizon. Which
is here performed by the Sections, which the plain of the Ecliptike makes at
the time they begin to rise, with the superficies of the Dyall.

3. Those, whose title is, Signum Culminans show by the like sections of the
Ecliptike with the superficies of the Dyall, what Sign, of the Zodiac is in
the Meridian, or full South. Wherefore these 4. Dyalls being made by the same
sections, it suffises also to put a Diagram only of the two first.

4. Those Dyalls, which here serve for the several days of the week show
what Planet reigns, according to the opinion of ancient Astrologers, Every
Hour of that Day. So the Dyall, FIG. 52. FIG. 53.
whose title is, Dominatur die Lunae, shows what Planet reigns at any time of
the Day on Monday. And in the same Manner, the Dyall, whose title is, Dominatur
die Martis shows what Planet reigns at any time on Tuesday. And so of the
rest. The lineaments of these Dyalls, being all alike, to wit the sections,
which the playnes of the Unequal Hour circles make with the superficies of the
Dyall; it will be sufficient also to put here the Diagrams of the two first.

5. Those two Dyalls, whose title is, Conjunctio Solis cum Stellis Fixis, FIG.
54. and 55.
show with which of the more remarkable fixed stars the Sun is in
conjunction; or under the same circle of longitude.

Lastly those two, whose title is, Varii Aspectus Solis cum Stellis Fixis, show
the other Aspects of the Sun, as the Trine Aspect 52
Die Lunae Dominatur
Saturnus Jupiter Mars Sol Venus


53
Die Martis Dominatur
Sol Venus Mercuri Luna Saturnus


54
Coniunctio Solis Cum Stellis Fixis
Cum L^orso Cum Femore Cum Cauda aust Cum Corna Cum Cauda Cum Oculo Cum Cornu
dex


55
Coniunctio Solis Cum Stellis Fixis
Cum Fro^te Cum La^nce aust Cum Spica Cum Alasin Cum Cord Cum Asellis


the Quadrat, etc. with the said Fixed stars. These 4. Dyalls being much
alike, as made by the sections, which the superficies of the Dyall makes with
the cones whose bases are parallel to the Equator, and common vertex is the top
of the style, or center of the Earth, it will suffice to place here also the
Diagram of the two first. And thus much of the Dyalls belonging to the first
Piece.

THE SIXTH CHAPTER. Of the Dyalls described on the Edge of the second Piece.
1.THose Dyalls, which described on the Edge of this Table, FIG. 56, and 57.
have for title, Stellae Orientes Cosmice, show what star rose Cosmically,
(that is to say, rose at the same time when the Sun rose) on the Day you
look upon the Dyall: provided you look upon the Dyall belonging to the time
of the year: here being two Dyalls of the same Sort, one for the one half of
the year, and another for the other half.

2. Those Dyalls, whose title is, Stellae Orientes Acronice, show what star
will rise Acronically; that is, will rise just at Sun setting. Where also
care is to be had, that you look upon the Dyall agreeable to the time of the
year.

Lastly, those Dyalls, whose title is, Stellae Orientes Heliace, show what
stars rise that Day Heliacally: that is what star which for some time
before had by reason of its neerenes to the Sun, lay hid, beginns now to
appear again, 56
Stellae Orientes Cosmice.
a 10 December: ad 10 Iun:

Ala Pegasi Triangulum Pessin Cornu Pessin Aurigae oculus


57
Stella Orientes Cosmice
a 10 Iunij ad 10 December:

Sagitta Spica Arcturus Cauda Sirius Canicula


58
Per Horas Sine Stylo
59
Per Stylum sine Horis
by getting out of the sun beams.

Now the lineaments of these Dyalls being all of the same sort: to wit such
Conicall sections, as the plain, of the Dyall makes with those Cones, whose
bases are parallel to the Equator; and whose common vertex is at the top of the
style, that is at the middle of the little painted star, which here in Each
Dyall represents the style: This I say being so it will suffice to place here
two Diagrams of the first sort.

THE SEVENTH CHAPTER. Of the 8. Reflecting Dyalls placed on the top of the
second Table.
THe reason why these Dyalls placed upon the second Table were made by
reflection of looking glasses, was not so much for variety as for necessity.
For the Table Standing high, the Dyalls placed on the upper part thereof, could
not have been seen, but by being reflected on the bottom or inclining playnes
of the great Globe, which stands (as in said in the first Chapter) upon this
second Table. Whereas now being reflected they are weary well seen upon the said
bottom, together with their titles, as follows.

1. The Dyalls, FIG. 58.
whose title is, Per Horas sine stylo, has its Hour Lines described and
visible on the bottom of the a fore said Globe; but by the style which is a
Flower de luce, being painted upon a looking, glass placed on the Table,
appears not: but only the shadow thereof appears: which being reflected upon
the said Hour Lines drawn on the bottom of the Globe, shows the Hour:
according to the verse there adjoined. En Horas! stylus a lucenti Sole
petendus. These Hourlines being noe other then the sections which the playnes
of the ordinary Hour circles, crossing Each other upon the top of the said
Flower de luce, make with the plain of the Dyall, there needs say noe more but
that it is a Reflex Dyall, supposing always the Sun as much depressed under
the Horizon, as it is defacto Elevated above it.

2. The Dyall, whose title on the contrary is, FIG. 59.
Per stylum sine Horis, has its style (which is a Lions paw) painted upon the
bottom of the Globe: and therefore easy to be seen: but the Hour Lines being
drawn upon a looking glass placed upon the Table, appear not: only their
shadow reflected upon the said Lions paw show the Hour: according to what the
verse there intimates, Da mihi Phoebe Horas: Horamque tibi ungue notabo. This
Dyall being only the former inversd, according to what was said of the like
inversion in the second Chapter, there needs add noe more. As also neither is
it needful to say any more of the other, which there in the self same manner
shows the Hour by the Hour Lines reflected upon the end of an Unicornes Horn:
according to the verse: Sol mihi luce dat Horas, Horam do tibi Cornu.

3. In the Dyall, whose title is, Sine Horis vel stylo, appear neither
Hour Lines nor style, unless the Sun shine: for then you see them both: that
is you see the shadow of both style and Hour Lines reflected from the looking
glass upon which the said Hour Lines are drawn. This Dyall differing nothing
from an ordinary Reclining Dyall Declining we need say noe more thereof: as
neither of the other 4. which also differ noe otherwise from ordinary Dyall,
then that they are not to be otherwise seen then each of them in a looking
glass placed on the bottom of the great Globe. Wherefore it will suffice to
place the Diagrams of the two first.

THE EIGHTH CHAPTER. Of the 4. Dyalls supported by the 4. Branches of the
second Piece.
THese 4. Dyalls are drawn Each of them upon a glass Boule of about 5. Inches
diamether: and show the usual Hour, by 4. different ways. Viz. by a shade
without any style: by a style without any shade: by a style and shade: and
without either style or shade.

1. The Dyall, FIG. 60.
whose title is, Per stylum sine umbra, shows the Hour by moving the style,
(which here is a Flower de luce fixed on a moveable Equator) to and fro till
it cast noe shade upon the Boule: which being done, the Hour sought for shall
stand just under the style; as the verse there added declares: Nulla sit umbra
stylo: Veram stylus indicat Horam. Now the reason, why the style casting noe
shade on the Boule, stands over the true Hour, is, that these Hours lying all
in the sections, which the playnes of the Hour circles make in the superficies
of the Boule, it is necessary, that then the top of the style be in the plain
of the same Hour circle, in which at that time is also the center of the Sun.

2. In the Dyall, FIG. 61.
whose title is, Per umbram sine stylo, the Hour is found by observing, where
the part of the Boule Enlightyned by the Sun meets with the part not 60
Per Stylum Sine Vmbra
61
Per Vmbram sine Stylo
62
Per Stylum and. Vmbra
63
Sine Stylo Vel Vmbra
Enlightened: for this meeting shows the Hour; as the there adjoined verse
Explicates: Vis Horam? lucemque inter, tenebrasque require. The reason whereof
is, that the Sun by reason of its immense distance Enlightening without any
considerable difference, the one half of the Boule, and the Hour points being
all noted in the Equator of the Boule, or section which the plain of the
Equator passing through the center of the Boule, makes in the superficies
thereof, the said termination of light must needs fall upon the true Hour
point, provided that the Dyall be once rightly placed.

3. The Dyall, FIG. 62.
whose title is, Per stylum and umbram, shows the Hour by the shade of a style
perpendicularly Erected upon the superficies of the Boule and therefore differs
nothing from an ordinary Dyall described on the unequal superficies of a Globe;
There are three Such Dyalls placed upon this Boul, to the End, that when the
shade of the style ceases, by reason of the convexity of the Boule, to show the
Hour in one, may show it in another.

Lastly the Boule, FIG. 63.
whose title is, Sine stylo vel umbra, shows the Hour without Either style or
shadow: for if you place your self so as to behold your face in the Middle of
the little unequal looking glass which is there paced on the South pole of the
Boule, you shall at the same time, if the Sun shine, behold the picture
thereof at the true Hour: according to the verse, there adjoined: Spectanti
Speculum, Horam dat tibi Solis imago. The reason whereof is, that the Eye when
placed, as is said, being in the Axis of the World: and by consequence, in the
plain of all the Hour circles, and therefore in the plain of the true Hour
circle: in which plain also the center of the Sun being necessaryly placed,
it follows that the said picture of the Sun appear at the true Hour: since
by the Rules of Beflexion, the Eye seeing and the point seen, are in the same
plain with the point of the Reflection.

As for the Hour Lines of these 4. Dyalls, they are noe other then the sections
or some point of them, which the playnes of the Hour circles makes in the
superficies of the Boules. Which playnes in the first, second and fourth,
cross Each other in the eenter of the Boule: but in the third, they Cross one
another at the top of the style.

THE NINTH CHAPTER. Of the Dyalls described on the great Globe which stands on
the second Table.
THis Globe having 8. Reclining Playnes. 8. Inclining, and 8. Upright playnes:
The Dyalls described on them are as follows.

1. Six of the 8. Upright playnes being made hollow like those 20. on the Edge
of the first Table, are covered also with glass, and Dyalls described on them,
just like those 20. the difference only being, that here the bottomes are also
covered with glasses thinnely painted over with white color, to the End the
Dyalls may be seen as well within the Globe, as without: To which purpose, two
of these upright playnes, looking toward the North, are covered only with
clear glass, as Serving for windows to look into the Globe. On the said
bottom glasses, are drawn several pictures, as of their Majestyes; the Queen
Mother; the Duke of York. Prince Rupert, etc. In his Majestyes picture the Hour
is shown by the shade of the Hour Lines passing over the top of the Scepter:
In the pictures of the two Queens, it is shown by the like shade passing over
the top of a Flower: and in the other three, by passing over the end of a
troncheon, which each of them hold in their hands. Under each picture is
written a Chronograph for the year 1669. in which the Dyall was set up: and
Suitable to the person. Which Chronographs, according to the order now named,
are as falloweth.

1. Regnet DIV CaroLVs IMperetqVe BrItannIs. 2. FaXIt RegIna Det RegI RegnoqVe
ProLeM CatharIna. 3. RegIna Matter nato sIbI CaroLo DIV frVatVr. 4. IaCobVs and
RegIs frater, and InsIgnIs BrIta^nI ADMIraLIVs. 5. FILIVs seCVnDVs RegIs
BoheMIae.
These 6. Vertical Dyalls being all alike it will suffice to place here the
Diagrams of the two first. FIG. 64. and 65.


As for the Dyalls described on the Reclining playnes of this Globe, they are
in substance like those Recliners placed upon the first Table: Except that,
whereas those of the first are most of them made to show the Hour by looking on
the outside of the Dyall: here noe Hour can be seen but by looking through
the before said windows in to the Globe: which doing, you shall behold in one a
star, in another a Flower de luce showing the Hour, by passing over the
Hour Lines: in a third you shall behold a Lion with certain stars on his
back, each where of represents an Hour, to pass under a cloud, and so by 64
Regnet DIV CaroLVs IMperetqVe BrItannIs
65
FaXIt RegIna Det RegI RegnoqVe proLeM CatharIna
successively hiding them, to note the Hour: and the like of the rest of these
Recliners. As for the inclining playnes, which are placed on the bottom of the
Globe; the Dyalls belonging thereto are already Explicated in the precedent
Chapter, as made by reflection of looking glasses, etc.

THE TENTH CHAPTER. Of the 4. glass Boules supported by the four Branches of
the great Globe.
OUt of the top of the great Globe issue (as was said in the first Chapter)
four Branches each bearing a glass Boule like those of the first and second
Piece: but somewhat less in proportion to the Pyramid. These 4. Boules are
gilded over except where the Hour lines are drawn: which is thinnly painted
over with white color: to the end the Sun beams passinge through a little
star left clear on the top of the Boule, and making the like star of light
upon the Hour lines may be seen to note the Hour. These Dyalls show the Hour
according to the different ways of numbering the Hours, used by several
Nations, as was said in the second Chapter.

1. The Dyall, FIG. 66.
whose title is, Per Horas Italicas, shows by the said luminous star passing
over the Hour Lines, what Hour it is to be said according to the Italian
account, which numbers from Sun set to Sun set 24. Hours. These
Hour Lines are the sections, which the playnes of the Italian Hour circles
crossing Each other in the middle of the said star placed on the top of the
Boule, make in the superficies thereof.

66
Per Horas Italicus
67
Per Horas Babylonica
68
Per Horas Astronomicas
69
Per Horas Antiquas


2. The Dyalls, whose title is, Per Horas Babylonicas, shows in like manner,
what Hour it is according to the Babylonians way of reckoning, FIG. 67.
who count 24. Hours from Sun Rising tille next Sun Rising. Which it
performs by the sections which the playnes of the Babylonian Hour circles
crossing Each other in the middle of the said star, make in the superficies
of the Boule.

3. The Dyall, whose title is, Per Horas Astronomicas, shows by the like
star, FIG. 68.
the Hour according to the Astronomicall account, which numbers, 24. Hours from
Noon till next Noon. This Dyall is made by the like sections of the usual
Hours circles crossing Each other in the middle of the said star: The numbers
set to the Hours being only different: that is, one a clock in the morning is
here called 13. and two, 14. three a clock, is called 15. etc.

Lastly the Dyall, whose title is, Per Horas Antiquas, sive Judaicas, FIG. 69.
shows the Hour according to the Ancient way of numbering the Hours: Viz.
counting always 12. Hours from Sun Rising till the setting thereof.
Wherefore the sections by which this Dyall is made, are those which the playns
of the unequal Hour circles make in the superficies of the Boule: which playns
also cross each other in the middle of the star, or style of the Dyall. And
thus much of the Third piece, with the Branches belonging to it. The Diagrams
of these 4. Boules are as follows.

THE ELEVENTH CHAPTER. Of the three Uppermost Piece of the Pyramid.
THe Dyalls belonging to the three lower Pieces of the Pyramys, being
Explicated in the precedent Chapters, we will now in this Chapter Explicate the
rest, that is, the Dyalls appertayning to the three highest, or uppermost part
thereof.

The fourth Piece, therefore, consisting, (is is said in the first Chapter) of
12. Concave Semicylinders, and Standing upon the Great Globe held up by 4.
Supporters, FIG. 70.
like those which hold up the second Piece, but less: has upon Each of those
Semicylinders a Dyall described showing the usual Hour by the shade of a
Flower de luce fixed at the top of the Semicylinder. Out of the top of this
Piece issue 4. Branches carrying Each a little glass Boul, showing also the
usual Hour by the light of the Sun penetrating through the Hour Lines (which
for that purpose are left transparent, the rest of the Boul being gilded over)
and passing over a little star painted on the lower part of the Boul.

The first Piece, FIG. 71.
consisting of 8. plain Triangles Equal and Equilaterall: and six Equal
Squares and held up also by 4. Supporters, has in like manner Dyalls described
thereon showing the usual Hour by the shade also of a Flower de luce.

The sixth and last Piece, or top of the Pyramid, FIG. 73.
is a great glass Boul Standing upon the fifth, supported by a foot of 70
71
72
73
iron, and Encompassed with two iron circles having on the top a Cross. This
Boul also shows the usual Hour by the shade of a little golden Ball placed in
the middle of the Glass. The Dyalls belonging to these three pieces, showing
only (as is said) the usual Hour: it will suffice to set down a Diagram for
Each piece.

As for the reason of these Dyalls, they all showing only the usual Hour,
there needs say noe more, FIG* 37.
then what has already been said of the like, Viz. that in the 4th. and 5th.
piece, the playnes of the Hour circles Cross each other upon the top of the
Flower de luce: but in the 6th. they Cross on the center of the little Ball
placed in the middle of the great Boule. The Dyalls of the 4. little Boules
supported by the branches, are noe other then the Astronomicall Dyall of the
precedent Chapter inverted, and only differ in the numbers set to the Hours.
And thus much concerning what in this Short Tract was intented, to wit the use
and reason of the Dyalls described on the said Pyramid.

END.
GEORGIUS GRAIUS SOCIETATIS JESU, Provinciae Anglicanae Praepositus
Provincialis. CUm P. FRANCISCI LINI, Societatis nostrae Explicationem Horologii
erecti in Horto Regio anno 1669. tam Latin, quam Anglice scriptam tres ejusdem
Societatis Theologi, quibus id commissum fuit, recognoverint, atque in lucem
edi posse probaverint, potestate accepta ab Admodum Reverendo P. nostro Joanne
Oliva ejusdem Societatis Praeposito Generali, Facultatem concedimus, ut typis
mandetur, si ita iis ad quos pertinet videbitur.

In quorum fidem has litteras manu nostra subscriptas, and Sigillo nostro
munitas, dedimus Londini 24. Martii 1673. GEORGIUS GRAIUS.

PERMISSIO.
PErmittimus ut explicatio Horologii erecti in Horto Regio anno 1669. per
Patrem FRANCISCUM LINUM, Societatis JESU scripta, tam Latin quam Anglice,
typis detur.

Leodii 9. Aprilis 1673. JO. ERNESTUS BARO DE SURLET, Vicarius Generalis
Leodiensis.

ERRATA.
Page 1. l. 4. Majestey. Majestyes. p. 1. l. 7. Majestey. Majestyes. p. 4. l.
10. Hout. Hour. p. 11. l. 15. darkores. darkness. p. 16. l. 16. these hade. the
shade. p. 16. l. 26. little. title. p. 18. l. 14. hof. of. p. 22. l. 13.
circles. circle. p. 22. l. 22. madd on te* made on the. p. 25. l. 19. or. of.
p. 30. l. 4. soutb. south. p. 32. l. 7. to other. to the other. p. 34. l. 7.
outh. south. p. 38. l. 6. sunde. Suns. p. 40. l. 14. there. the. p. 40. l.
20. Astronomicum. Astrologicum. p. 48. l. 8. diamether. diameter.


