The humble Petition and resolution of the County of ESSEX.
(Presented to the Right Honorable the Lords and Commons Assembled in
Parliament, and read in both Houses the 17. of this present JUNE, 1642. With
the Answer thereunto annexed, and commanded by the Lords to be forthwith
Printed and Published)
Humbly shows;
THat we having with joy and admiration, observed the wife and gracious
Passages and Proceedings of this Parliament: and the pious, tender, and
affectionate care of your Honors, for the preservation of the Peace and Honor
of his most Excellent Majesty, and these three thrice hapily united Kingdoms;
represented to the World in your several Ordinances, Declarations, Votes and
Remonstrances, sufficient to stop the mouth (if it were possibly) of envy and
malignity it self, cannot but with grief and indignation wonder to hear,
that there should yet be found and that even about the Regal Throne, such
unnatural and evil affected spirits, and malignant Counselors, who,
desirous to swim to the haven of their ambitious hopes, in the blood of their
dearest Friends and Countrymen, do continually instill into his Majesty's
Royal breast, a sinister conceit, and mis-interpretaion of your most Humble
and Loyal Affections, and noble Actions, and Undertakings.

Wherefore we understanding (not by misinformation of flying reports, but) by
the late Votes and Declarations of both your Honorable Houses,

That his Majesty seduccd by wicked Council, intends to make war against
the Parliament: that so to do is a breach of the trust reposed in him by his
People, contrary to his Oath: And that whosoever shall serve, or assist him in
such Wars, are Traitors by the Fundamental Law^s of this Kingdom.

And withal perceiving your most Christian and Heroical Resolutions to
persist in your Honorable Endeavors:for the public safety, though you
should (which God avert) perish in the work,

We thought it our duties humbly to represent to your Honors, the faithful
affections and invoyable resolutions of our souls to Stand or Fall, Live or
Die, together with you: According to our Protestation.

Thus with our hands upon our Swords, we stand ready at your command, to
perform our Vows to God and Oaths of fidelity of his Majesty, In taking up
Arms against those false Flatterers, and Traitors: who abuse his Royal Favor,
intending under the glorious Title of his Name and Standard, to fight against
the Peace and Honor of their Sovereign, against Religion, and the Laws: and
to make a prey and spoil, of three flourishing Kingdoms at once: And to spend
our dearest blood in the defense of the lives, and liberties of our Country
men; the Laws which are the life of our Liberty, and Peace; Religion more
precious then both; and the King and Parliament: In whose libes lie bound up
the life of all the rest. Whosoever is otherwise affected, we hold him not
worthy the name of a Soldier but a Proditor of his King and Country to all
Posterity.

Lastly finding a multitude of well affected People, whose hearts are good to
join with us, but want Arms, we most humbly crave, That Restitution may be
made of those Arms, which were taken out of their County, either out of the
store lately arrived from Hull, or otherwise as to your most excellent Wisdom
shall seem best.

The Lords Answer to the ESSEX Petition.
MY Lords have taken your Petition into consideration, and receiv much
contentment in the good affections you have expressed, and do give you hearty
and extraordinary thanks, thus seasonably and necessarily for the good of the
King and Kingdom, and of their Lordships encouragement in the performance of
their duty; and my Lords do assure you, that God willing, they resolve to
insist in their former declared Resolutions, for the upholding the true
Religion, the Kings Authority in the highest Court, which by sundry late
Declarations and practices to abuse the people, they find so much vilified and
invaded, the Privileges of Parliament, free Course of Justice, the Laws and
Peace of this Kingdom, notwitkstanding any dangers and hazards that for that
cause can befall them. That for the manifestation of their good affections, and
their Lordships kind acceptations thereof, they have commanded your Petition
and the Answer, to be forthwith Printed and published.

John Brown, Cleric. Parliament.

This Resolution was presented to the trained Bands, and Companies of
Voluntieres, who appeared at Dunmow: Jun. 10. 1642. And was received with
universal Approbation by holding up of Hands, throwing up of Hatts, and
Acclamations: professing, That they held them unworthy to live, that should
dislike it. And it was within three days after subscribed with ten Thousand
Hands.

London Printed June the 18 For Joseph Hunscott. and John Wright 1642


