THE Complete Vineyard: OR A most excellent Way FOR THE PLANTING OF VINES: Not
only according to the German and French way, but also long experimented in
England.

WHEREIN Are set forth the whole circumstances necessary for the Planting a
Vineyard, (viz.) The best election of your Soil; the situation thereof; the
best way for the Planting of your young Plants; the best time and manner of
Proining, both the Stocks and Roots; the turning and translation of the ground,
etc. With all other things necessary to the Plant; and the fashion of your Wine
Presses; with the manner of Bruising and Pressing; and also how to advance our
English Wines: never before Printed.

By William Hughes.

LONDON, Printed by G. M. for W. Crook, at the three Bibles on Fleet Bridge,
and John Playfere, at the White Lion in the Upper Walk of the New Exchange,
1665.

To the Reader.
Courteous Reader,
IT is the saying of the Philosophers, that those things are most principally
to be taught and maintained, which in the Commonwealth are most profitable and
necessary: according to which opinion, if we consider how profitable many acts
of Husbandry have been to the Commonwealth, I think it necessary that this of
Vines should be made public: for as Seneca, Cato, Varro, Columella, etc. do
affirm, the Planting of Vineyards have been more gainful then any other act of
Husbandry whatsoever.

And it being manifest, that there have been plenty of Vineyards in, England
heretofore, as Mr. Hollinshead in his History of England does affirm, and
Cambden in his Chronicle makes mention; and some there are at this day both in
Essex, and in the West of England, as also in Kent, which produce great store
of excellent good Wine: I think it not impertinent to set down a way how we may
of our English Grapes purchase a very good Wine; and the rather, for that I
find the same to be both probable and possible, not only by Antiquities, but
also by experience, set down by Mr. Barnaby Googe, in his Book of Husbandry, as
also by that inevitable Argument which be draws from the same latitude of the
Pole wherein we are, and under which there be found beyond the Seas most
fruitful Vineyards, and which does yield both good and pleasant Wines; as about
Backrach, Colin, Andernach, and diverse other places in Germany, which has, as
he affirms (and also others) the same Latitude and disposition of the Heavens
that we have; whereby is sufficiently confuted that common received opinion
against our Climate, that is should not be hot enough for that Plant: nay, he
preveth farther, that the wideness to the South is not altogether the cause of
good Wines, as appears in, that you have about Orlance great store of good
and excellent Wine; whereas if you go to Bruges, two daeyes journey farther to
the South, you shall find a Wine not worth the drinking; the like is proved
between Paris and Barleduke, aend diverse other places,

And here I have just cause to accuse the extreme negligence and blockish
ignorance of our people, who do most unjustly lay their wrongful accusations
upon the Soil, which truly may be removed on themselves; for whereas neither in
Pasture or arable ground, they look for any great increase without all the due
and necessary circumstances of Husbandry be performed to the same; yet in Vines
only they expect a plentiful Harvest, or else they condemn the Soil; although
they bestow no other manuring, proining, or ordering of them, but only cut or
proine them in the twelve days, and that very carelessly, and without any due
regard or choice had of the branches, which should be taken away close to the
stock, and which should be cut off between the third and fourth joint, and many
other observations as we shall hereafter show in our following discourse:
Therefore, in a word, I have just cause (as I said) both by Travels, Discourse,
and Experience in England, and also out of it, to be fully persuaded: Nay, I do
know, that Plants by continuance of time and good ordering once made familar
with our Soil and Climate, will produce both full and good Wine.

This Method in Planting was used by that experienced Gardner M. K. Deceased;
who for about twenty years practiced the same in his own Country, Germany. And
about the Year one thousand six hundred thirty two became over into England,
and from that time until the Year one thousand six hundred fifty eight he
practiced the same here; from whose own mouth I turned it out of High Dutch
into English my self, having for some years before been an observer of his
proceedings and operations; and since being abroad in the world, have added
many observations of my own experience, both according to the German, French,
and English practice; which if fully and rightly understood, is the full and
sole discour, a necessary for the producing of English Wine, which is most
natural to our constitutions, as I shall hereafter prove. Thus Reader, I desire
thee to excuse the rudeness of the language, and the several faults thou
meetest with; and however accept of my good will, who has not written ad
ostentationem, I onoly now wish I were present at thy proceedings. Vale.

William Hughes.

The Contents.
CHAP. I.
OF the excellency of the Vine. Extreme heat or extreme cold not good for the
Vine. How to bring Vine plants from beyond Sea. Vines to bear the first year.
Whether the Vine were known before the flood. Vineyard more gainful then other
Husbandry. The diverse ways of dressing of Vines. What tree is good, and what
hurtful to the Vine. The height of the Vineyard Vines. Of the Grafting of
Vines. Of weeding the ground. The best time to gather Grapes.
CHAP. II.
The siituation of the Vineyard. The manner of fencing the Vineyard. How the
Vineyard ought to be laid before it be planted. Of dunging the Vineyard, and
when good.
CHAP. III.
The Vine a tree of the Sun. Proining of Vines, and the time when. Best not to
proine till the second or third Month. When to lay open the roots of Vines.
What dung is best for Vines. How to hasten the ripning of Grapes.
CHAP. IV.
The proining of Vines. Cautions in proining of Vines. How to choose your young
plants. The time when to gather your young plants.
CHAP. V.
Of proining. How to order your young plants, to plant in May or June. When to
water your young plants. How the roots of your young plants ought to be left.
How to replant young plants, The best time to plant, when. At what distance the
young plants should be set. The French way of planting. At what distance the
French usually see their plants.
CHAP. VI.
Of weeding your ground.
CHAP. VII.
When good to take up your young plants. The French way of cutting out plants.
The time when it is good to break off sulperflnous branches. How your Vine are
supported and tied. When to take up your young plants.
CHAP. VIII.
How to defend the root of the Vines from mush heat and wet. When to water the
young plants. The time when your Vines begin to flower.
CHAP. IX.
Grapes how they ripen best.
CHAP. X.
Observations in gathering your grapes. How to preserve the bunches till they
are ripe. How to know when your grapes are ripe. The fashion of your
wine-presses. How to bruise your grapes the best way. Of diverse things that
belong to bruising your grapes. Of the best Juice or Liquor. How to make your
Claret wine. Wine-presses how they are made. Another fashion wine press. How to
make other sorts of wines, as of Rasbes, Cherries, Curtrans, etc.
CHAP. XI.
When to gather grapes to keep long. How the first and second running is
called. The manner of pressing. What vessels you ought to put your wine in. Of
the best Cellars. Of fermentation. How to keep wine from decaying. How to help
the wine that reboileth. When the wine fermenteth. Thereason why wine
reboileth. How to purge wine quickly. How to make wine brisk or quick. How to
make wine more pleasant. The best way to help our English wines. To help your
sharp wine another way.
CHAP. XII.
Of weeding your Vineyards. Vineyard grapes the best. Air a great help to the
Vine, as also to all other trees. How the Germans preserve their Vines in the
winter. When to cut away the small roots of the Vines.
CHAP. XIII.
Of proining. Of laying open the roots. Of several things to be used to prevent
the bleedig Vines
CHAP. XIV.
How to have grapes to grow long upon the Vines. How to have them grow long on
the Vines another way. How to preserve bunches of grapes long. Another way to
preserve bunches of Grapes. How to keep Claret wine, or any wine good 9. or 10.
years. How to separate water from wine. How to make spirit of wine. How to make
good Vinegar. How to make Vinegar with your corrnpted wine. How to make
Verjuice of Grapes.
THE Complete Vineyard.
CHAP. I.
The excellency of the Vine.
AMong all Trees and Plants the Vine by good right challenges the Sovereignty,
seeing there is no Plant used in Husbandry more fruitful, and more commodious,
then it; not only for the beautifulness and goodliness of the Fruit; but also
for the easiness he has in growing, whereby he refuses not almost any kind of
Country in the whole world, Extreme hot or Extreme cold not good for the Vine.
except such as are so extremely scorched with the burning heat of the Sun, or
else too extremely frozen with vehement cold; prospering also as well in the
plain and Champion Country, as it does upon the Mountain and hilly Country;
likewise as well in the stiff and fat ground, as in the soft and mellow ground;
and oftentimes in the leany and lean ground, as in the fat and foggy; and in
the dry as in the moist and myrie; yea and in many places in the very Rocks,
and gravily ground, it grows most abundantly, and most fruitfully; but this
is for the most part in other Countries, as in Germany, France, Spain; etc. How
to bring Vine Plants from beyond Sea.
for here we are more choice in the election of our Soil; yet the Plants being
brought over, of what sort you please, (if you cannot have them in England) and
with use made familiar with our Climate and ground, I know they would prosper
in many sorts of this soil. The way we used to bring our Plants out of Germany,
was this; At Proining time we cut out as many Plants as we sw good, or that we
thought we should have need of, and filled large and deep Baskets or Tubbs with
good earth, and so we pat or set in the said Plants, almost to the head or
top; and bringing them thus over, we ordered them as you are taught in March,
by which means we were furnished with diverse sorts or kinds of excellent
Grapes, which are prosperous to this day; for of thousand of Plants that I have
seen ordered and planted, as hereafter is shown, there has scarce any mist
growing; Vine to bear the first year.
yea, I have known some bear the first year, and others the second or third
years after they have been planted, whereof we have had Wines.

Whether the Vine were known before the flood.
Whether the Vine were known, or at least in request, before the Flood, I know
not; but the first Planter of it after the Flood, according to the general
opinion, or that I read of, was Noah, and with good reason indeed; Vineyard
more gainful then other Husbandry.
for Seneca, Cato, Varro, Collumella, etc. do affirm the Planting of Vineyards
have been more gainful then any other Art of Husbandry whatsoever.

The diverse dressings of Vines.
These Vines are also very diversely dressed, according to the fashion of each
Country; for they are Dressed otherwise in Spain then in Italy, neither do
they Dress them so in France as in Germany; but every Country using his several
manner, as is best known to them.

Also there are different ways in Planting or supporting; for as Pliny and
Collumella teaches, the Vine may be Planted five several ways; as some are
suffered to run upon the ground; or without a stay grow upright; or upon an
Arbor, serving to sit under; by a house, or Wall side; but properly in a
Vineyard they have a Stay or Prop set for them, and they climb up by it, or
run up by a course of stiff props, or sustained with four, as you see good.

What tree is good, and what is hurtful to the Vine.
Some will not have them to be sustained by either Nuttree, or Bay Tree, etc.
for that by their Antipathy they spoil the Vine, but will have them either
supported or sustained by Elm, Willow, Ash, Poplar, Fig, Olive, etc. which
by their Simpathy do rather cherish the Vine then hurt it.

Also some will have the body of the Vine to grow not The height of the
Vineyard Vines.
above 5, 6, or 7. foot high at the most; some nor above 3, or 4. foot; others
will have all cut away to one Stock or Twigg; and that cut within two Joints of
the ground.

As in this, so they differ much in the cutting out of their Plants, and after
in the planting of them, or the fashion of placing of them in the ground.

Of the grafting of Vineyard.
Some held heretofore Grafting of Vines a good way, for the which the best time
(say they) is a warm weather, when the winter is past, and when the Bud and
Rind is naturally moved, and it safe from cold, the which might annoy both the
Stock and Graff; for which purpose you must choose a warm day, and no wind, or
as little as may be, should be stirring; the Graff must be round and sound, not
full of Pith, but of Buds, and of thick Joints the tenant whereof must not
exceed three inches, and small and even cut; the Stock and Cleft must be well
closed with Clay and Moss,

The Poets observed or took notice heretofore of this manner of operation
according to this Verse, It is received that Seed of Grapes being sown,
Bring forth degenerate Clusters, or else none:
But Stocks being grafted prove a faithful Vine,
Whose pleasing Berries yield a generous Wine.


There are also great variety of opinions concerning the Digging and Dunging,
for some would have them to be dugge every Month, some but three times in a
year, and that between the Tenth of October and the Tenth of March, etc. Weeding
As for their opinion in Weeding them, I shall very well approve of, which is,
if it be found needful, to Weed them every Month, which some do with a Hoone,
but it is better to pluck them up by the Root, for thereby they do somewhat
hollow the ground, neither are they so apt to grow again.

The best times to gather grapes
And some there be so nice and curious, as to observe and take notice in what
Sign or Degree the Moon is in when they gather their Grapes, and say, that the
best time to gather them, is the Moon being in Cancer, Leo, Scorpio, Capricorn,
etc. But passing by all controversies and varie^ies of opinions, and large
discourses, which many have written (which if you please) you may read at large
in their several books of Husbandry now extant, as being for the most part
taken from authors who have written and approved the same in other Countries.

CHAP. II
WE will now come to set down, a plain, easy, new, yea, and the best and
surest way, that I could ever see or hear of, for the planting and bringing up
of vines; and experienced here in England for many years last past.

The situation of the vineyards.
And in the first place give me leave (as nigh as I can) to describe unto you
the situation of our ground, or what kind or sort of ground it was, the manner
of fencing, and also how it ought to be ordered, and dunged before it be
planted, and in what fashion it should be laid in.

First, then for the situation it was on the side of a hill, which lies
toward the South or South-east-part.

Secondly; as for the sort of ground, it was a sort of red earth, which is
commonly called Marle, a little intermingled with sand; the other part was
sandy, and gravilly ground.

The manner of Fencing.
Thirdly, it was fenced with a wall, (which may also be done with a bank, or
pale close Jointed) to keep of as much as might be, the North, North-east, and
North-west-winds, and withal not hindering the force of the Sun, but by the
reflection to further as much as may be.

How it ought to be laid before it be Planted.
Fourthly, clearing the place of bushes or any other rubbidge which might
otherwise be noxious, let it be made even or level, either by bringing in of
earth, or by abating one place to raise another, so that it may lie slooping
down almost as the flat side of a house; and being thus laid, dung it with good
rotten dung, as Ox or Cow Dung, or Hoggs-dung, and if your dung be mingled
with Sheeps-dung for Dunging good, and when.
sandy ground, so much the better; also if your ground be more cold, pigeons
dung is excellent, and other dung may be used, as you see good; which being
dung'd we digg a good depth to turn in the dung, about October, November, or
December. that it may lie all or most part of the winter, that so the turffe (if
any be) and the dung may be rot together; then when the spring draws nigh you
ought to lay on it a little more good dung (being well rotted) or rank earth if
you think your ground be not rank enough before; and so digg it again, which
being this dugg and laid even, or rather as it were, in little berries
according to the French fashion, as we shall hereafter more at large declare
(but slooping as I said) plant it as is shown in March.

CHAP, III January.
The Vine a tree of the Sun.
THe Vine is a most excellent tree of the Sun, which to set down the several
names, and kinds, according to each Country, and according to every quality,
would be a thing beyond my reach to perform: besides it would be here
altogether needless, therefore we shall not trouble you with long tautologies,
but come to our discourse intended.

Proining of Vines, and the time when.
First, then you may in this month proine your vines; but observe that the
surest and best way is to stay till the beginning of the next month, and then
proine them as I shall there declare; the first quarter of the moon and the
last is held the best time to cut or proine in, and by the way observe, that if
you proine the first year after they be planted, it must be done with great
care, therefore in my opinion it is better to break off some of the leaves and
branches and let them alone (which is most usual) till the second or third
year, and then warily proine them.

Best not to proin till the second or third year.
(I say) proine your vines in this month, if the time be inclining to be
seasonable, (viz.) not to much cold winds and black-frosts; for it is observed
that the earlier in the year a Vine is provided, the earlier in the spring it
begins to budd; but afterward many times comes (as I said) cold winds and
frosts and nips the buds, and so spoileth the fruit.

When to lay open the Roots.
In this month you may also dig away the mould or earth (which some do three
times a year) from the root of your vine-trees, that have born fruit, and so
mingle it with good rotten dung and lay it too again

What Dung is best for your Vines.
Pigeons dung is excellent mingled with other dung for the same purpose, also it
is said that Ox blood, or Horse blood, or I suppose the blood of any other
beast tempred with Pigeons dung, is most excellent to lay to the principal root
of any vine (the root of the Vine having taken aier a few days by laying it
bare) for some say it will make a decaying tree or Vine, to bring forth fruit
and blossoms fresh; also the blood of beasts tempred with some lime (for
without lime the blood ingendreth great store of worms) is said to be
excellent to be laid on the roots of vines, both to make them bear, and also to
hasten the ripening of the grapes.

To hasten the Ripining of the Grapes.
This is best to be applied to make them bear in February, or March, but to
hasten the ripening of the grapes apply it in July, or August, and also any
piss, or urine put to the root, especially in some sort of ground is excellent,

CHAP. IIII. February.
The proining of Vines.
The Proining of Vines.
THe surest and safest way is, not to proine your vines till this month, for
then the spring draws nigh, and the cold winds, and black frosts are almost
past, which otherwise might nip the bud, and spoil the fruit, as aforesaid.

Cautions in proining.
First note, that if you can let the wind be the South, or Cautions in proining.
South-west, for commonly then it blows somewhat warm, and if you cut them so
that the slope place which you cut be to the south, so much the better, but in
this you need not be very cautious.

Further note, that when you proine your Vines that you do not cut the little
sprouts that shoot, or spring out at every knot, or joint, too nigh; but about
a straws breadth from the body or sprigg.

Note also, that you cut off the great spriggs, that come from the body of the
Tree, namely the tops, between the two joints, somewhat nigher to the lower
Joint then to the uppermost.

In this time of proining, you may observe to cut off some old branches that
you see begin to decay, pretty nigh to the body of the tree, and let a young
one grow up in the room of it.

How to choose your young Plants.
Leave not too many branches upon the body of the Tree, for if you so do, unless
your ground be very well Manured and ordered, it will not bring forth, but (may
be) grow wild; but if it do bring forth it will not bring them to perfection,
but commonly half of the berries of each branch will be small and never come to
be ripe.

As for the choosing, cutting out, or gathering of your plants observe this,
that you choose them, so that the butt end may have some of the old stock in it
(for some are of opinion that a Vine will bear the sooner at least for leaving
some of the old stock on it; this I know, that they will take root better and
come to be a Tree the sooner) and that they be of a reasonable bigness toward
the lower or butt-end, let them be somewhat less or about the bigness of the
forepart of your little finger, and about a cubit or near two foot in length,
and cut in the middle of the Joint at the lower end (which is not to be done
till you set them in the ground) and at the upper end between the two Joints.

The time when to gather your young plants.
The time to gather your plants is, in what Month or time soever you find fit to
proine your Vines; note that you cut them where they may be best spared.

So having gathered so many plants as you think you shall need to use, lay the
butt-ends in the mould, or earth, any where in the Garden or Vineyard, to keep
them moist, and so let them lie till a little before Easter or the month of
March, (but the French do plant them in a Vineyard or in a nursery as soon as
they have cut them, and some English following their fashion do the like) as
the season of the year and discretion shall best instruct, at which time (they
being cut even at the butt-ends) bind them up in bundles and set them in the
ground, as I shall declare in March.

Also in this month you may if you have time, or by reason of neglect before,
digg away the mould from the root of your Vines, and so mingle it with some
good rotten-dung, and lay it too again as I said before in January.

CHAP. V. March.
Of proining.
IN case of necessity, or that you have neglected, you may in this month proine
your Vines, so it be before the tenth day, for then the sap begins to ascend*

How to make up your plants to put into the earth, to plant in May or June.
To make up your Plants to plant in May or June
Having chosen and cut out as many plants as you think you shall have occasion
to use (as before) and having cut the butt-ends smooth and even in the middle
of the Joint, as it were between the new and the old part (for they should be
but one years growth) but rather leaving some of the old on, lay the said
butt-ends of all your plants even together, and bind them with two withs or
twigs, or such like things, pretty hard in a bundle, or bundles; and so dig a
hole in the earth in some warm place, as deep or deeper then the length of the
said plants and so put them into the hole; the top downwards and then fill up
the hole again; till it be within a hands breadth of the top of the butts (the
butts being upwards) then take some Field-moss and lay over and about the
butts, and then the hole being filled even, lay some sand and earth mingled
together upon the Moss, about a fingers length in thickness; and so let them
there remain till May, or June, and as for the time to take them up, observe
what is said in those Months.

When to water your young plants
But if the time or season be very dry, so that you think they are dry, or want
moistning, Water them a little (not so much as to starve them) two or three
times as you shall think need requires, pouring the water on the sand that it
may soke in by degrees.

How the roots of Plants ought to be left.
Now the reason why they be thus planted, is, that the Moss by the exhalation of
the Sun keeps them moist, it being spungeous and imbibes the water, and the
sand and earth by the reflection of the Sun beams or rays keeps them warm,
so that they shoot out the earlier, by which means at the time of your
replanting, you shall find a root (although young and tender) ready grown; of
which you must be very careful, and leave but two or three of the principal
branches or sprouts for the root of each plant.

The manner of setting these plants is the same with those that have been
planted a year or two, and are to be removed as I will here next declare.

How to replant those plants that have been planted, one, two, or three years.
How to replant young plants.
Suppose you have some plants that have been planted in a nursery, or elsewhere,
a year, two, or three, and that you would replant them, you may in this month
take them up and remove them, having your ground ready dug and in good order as
aforesaid: and having also ready some good rotten dung, and good rank earth, or
mould mixed together, or very good earth only to put to the roots, and then
set them half a foot or more into the ground long ways, leaving the very top
only out; for your plant is cut commonly with about three or four of the
principal roots left; the rest must as superfluous be cut off, and so close up
the mould or earth close about them.

When the best time to plant.
The last quarter of the Moon, and the first is by the Germans observed to be
the best time to plant or remove in, if the weather be good and seasonable, as
I have before noted.

At what distance your young plants should be set.
Also here you may take notice that these plants (as also the young ones) ought
to be set a yard, or very nigh a yard distance, squarely each from other, that
you may have a convenient passage between the rows if it be in a vineyard, not
only to mould, dung and weed them almost as you do your hops, but also to
proin, to break off the superfluous leaves and branches, and to gather the
grapes when they be ripe, and such other conveniences as are required: I shall
make it more plain by an example or two.

Example.
If you have a piece of ground prepared as we have before shown, and that you
would have it planted after the German manner, or as some now use in England;
you may suppose at each of these prlcks to be set a Plant a yard distance each
from other squarely.

planting out scheme

And set in the ground slope-wayes along the row, with the tops up the hill;
and so have you room to pass between them which way you please; neither do they
incumber the ground so much, but that it may bear them.

The French way of planting.
The French manner of planting as it was learnt of them, and is now used in some
places of England, is this:

Example.
They having prepared their ground ready as is before shown (viz.) laid
sloping, they lay about two foot even, and then about a yard they rise somewhat
higher, and then even, and then raised in a kind of a little berry, or bury,
as it were, and so they do, all through the piece of ground they intend to
plant, as thus: suppose a Plant or Vine at each of these pricks.

planting out scheme the lowest ground.

the highest ground.



At what distance the French set their Plants.
A yard from row to row in the midst, or that which lies highest, or about two
foot from row to row in the narrowest, or that which lies low and level, and
they do not set the Plants long ways in the rows, but the tops of the Plants
of each rows together, and the butt-ends toward one another thwart, that so
you may dig and dung at your pleasure; as suppose they were set thus, planting
out diagram the highest and broadest part.

the lowest part being plain.

And in the widest place between each two rows over the butends or roots is
laid your earth mixed with good dung: but in my opinion this way of planting
incumbreth the ground too much, and seldom will it maintain so many Plants as
to stand at this distance.

Note.
Here note, that you do not let your Plants grow high too quickly, but every
year by degrees, as the Stock or Body of your Tree increases in bigness and
substance.

If they be thus thick planted, one stock is enough to grow up from each plant
or root.

But if they are planted after the Dutch way, you may sometimes let two or
three grow up.

CHAP. VI. April.
THere is little to be done in this Month, unless it be so that you could not,
or by any neglect you have not ordered them in the foregoing Months, as is
there set down; in such case you may both dung and plant as is before expressed.

Also you may weed in this Month, and such other operations as you shall find
necessary.

CHAP. VII. May.
Of the taking up of your young Plants.
When to take up your young plants:
IF the Spring be very forwardly, and the weather good and seasonable, you may
take up your Plants which were set in the ground in bundles in or about March,
and plant them according as I have said in that Month of the other Plants; but
if the Spring be not forwardly and the season very good, it is best to let them
alone till June; Note
the best way to know when they be ready, is, to observe the Vine leaves, as
thus, when they are pretty broad and some of them begin to look of a grass
green color, then is in nigh ready to take them up, for then have they a
little shot forth as you will find.

The French fashion.
The French they cut out their Plants when they proine, and presently plant them
where they intend they shall grow, or else in some Nursery to remove afterward.

Observe
The time when it is good to break off superfluous branches
That if your Vines be forwardly, you may toward the latter end of this Month
break off some of the leaves where they grow too thick, and some of the long
branches or tops (that small part I mean which is above or beyond the bunch)
where they grow too thick, or two or three together, as your reason may best
instruct you; and have a care in breaking, that you break not off the young
bunches with them; Note.
you may also break off the young springs that spring up from the root of the
Tree if there come up more then you would willingly have to grow, observing to
leave so many young ones to grow up to supply where is wanting; How your Vines
are supported and tied.
and as they grow in length tie them up with Rushes, Saggs, small Withs, or such
like things; or else nail them up with leathers, if it be by a Wall or House;
but in a Vineyard they are supported by sticks fit for the same purpose, as
before.

If the weather prove very hot in this Month, after you have planted your
young Plants you must water them a little only to keep them moist, not so much
to keep them very cold, for then they will not grow so well, nor so fast. Now
the reason why it is necessary to break off leaves and branches at such times,
is, because when such superfluous branches are taken away, needs must the Tree
have the more force and nourishment for that which is left.

CHAP. VIII. June.
When to take your young plants.
HEre is further to be noted, that if the Spring be backwardly, you ought not to
take up your young Plants; namely, the bundle or bundles which you put in the
ground in March until this Month, as you may observe by the Vine leaves; so
your ground being prepared and made ready, plant them as I have before set down.

How to defend the root of the tree from much heat or wet.
And if the parching heat of the Sun do offend the root of the Vine, or dry the
ground too fast, you may prevent it with the help of boards, stones, etc.
setting or laying them at the root of the Tree.

And if by much rain in Winter, the wet offend the said Vines, you may prevent
that also with the use of boards, etc.

Also it is necessary if the Spring be backwardly in this Month, to break off
some of the leaves and branches according as is said in May.

When to water the young plants
Further observe that if the weather prove very hot and dry, after you have
planted your young Plants, you must water them a little, only to keep them
moist.

The time when your Vines begin to flower.
About the tenth of this Month your Vines begin to flower, by which it is, by
some observed a plentiful or scarce year of Grapes.

CHAP. IX. July.
Grapes how they ripen best.
IN the latter end of this Month, it is very necessary that we take notice
where the leaves, or long shouts, or branches, grow too thick, and break them
off; but see that you do not break them off so, that all the bunch will be
exposed to the Sun, nor to leave it so, if you can help it, that it will be
always in the shade; but that it may be a little shaded and sometimes in the
Sun and so will they ripen the more kindly.

CHAP. X. August.
IN this Month you may also break off some of the leaves, according as is said
in July; and if the Summer be wet so that the rain makes the Grapes swell, you
must break off the leaves that the Sun may come at them the better.

Observations in gathering.
When you gather your Grapes do not slive them off, but cut them at the next
joint to the sprig they grow.

How to preserve the bunches till they are ripe.
I might here add many artificial ways to preserve the bunches either on, or
off the Trees to last long, and to preserve them from the frost, or wet, till
such time as they are fully ripe.

As those that have but a few, tie some of the best bunches in Glasses, others
set up boards over them slope ways to shoot off the rain if too much wet
offend them, and many other artificial ways are used to preserve them as may
be best added by the operators in this emploiment, only some few receipts
worth the noting I shall hereafter set down.

How to know when they are ripe.
You may know when they be ripe, thus; if the stones begin to look black, or if
with crushing the Grape the Stone slip out smooth, or else only by the
clearness of the Berry, but especially by the taste.

The fashion of your Vine pre^ses
And here I think it not impertinent to set down the fashion of a Wine Press,
the manner of bruising and pressing of your Grapes, and such other
circumstances necessary thereunto.

How to bruise your Grapes best way.
The Germans have an extraordinary great weight with devices, as scrues, and the
like, to lift it, and so to let down to press the Grapes; but we shall describe
here another and better manner of pressing.

First, then for bruising your Grapes you may have made two rowles of good
sound wood; each of which may be about a yard round, and about a yard, or an
ell in length; to each of which you must put a turnless, in the form of a
turnless for a grinding stone, and then place these two rowls Of diverse things
that belong to bruising
together about breast high (they having gudgeons, or things of iron in each end
to turn upon) in some pieces of wood to put athwart to turn upon, in what room
or house you please to have it in; and continue it so, that you may set one of
the said rowles wider or closer as you please, for the bruising of your big or
small berries, as you shall have occasion; by the turning of these said rowles
contrary the one to the other, does squeeze or crush the Grapes, as the Mill
crusheth the Sugar Canes, out of which runs the juice of which the Sugar is
made.

The rowles being thus set, hang over them slopewise to put your Grapes in a
kind of a hopper, made in the form of a large tray, at the lower end of which
over the middle of the two rowles, must be a hole made to put them down at, as
the rowles turn, and under the said rowles you must set a receiver to take the
bruised Grapes and Wine.

Of the b^st juice or liquor.
Here note that all the liquor or juice which will run only with this bruising,
is much the better, and is usually kept apart from that which runs in pressing.

How to make your Claret wine
And here you may also further observe, that as for your white Grapes, of which
is made your white Wine, you may press them presently after you have bruised
them; but as for your red Grapes, of which comes your Claret Wine, you must let
it stand for the space of four and twenty hours or more, or less, according to
the high or pale color you desire to have your Claret look; for it is the
standing together after they are bruised, which causes the skins of the Grapes
to give it the color; for should you press it presently (as the white) it
would have very little or no color of redness at all.

The Fashion of Presses.
Wine Presses how they are made.
Now as for the Press, some will have them after one manner, others after
another; one fashion is this; you may have made a couple of large and long
scrues, and in what room you please to set your press, you may have them very
firmly fixed, by some weighty pieces at the bottom and top of the said screws
so that they may not rise, or stir with screwing; upon which screws you must
have two boxes (as they are called) fitted, with ends made convenient to screw
or force down in pressing, in the form as Sider in some places is made; and
between these two screws toward the bottom you must have made fast a very
strong and thick piece of planck, made round or square, as you please; upon
which must stand a strong basket to hold your Grapes, being bruised; and round
about the basket in the said planck must be cut a natch, or channel, for the
juice or wine to run round into one spout, under which must be set a receiver.

Another Fashion wine press.
Another fashion press is this, (which I think is the best) in place of the two
screws aforesaid you may have fast fixed, that is to say, on each side two
supporters or posts; at the top, or pretty high athwart; between them must be
fixed a very strong box, in which must turn a strong screw in the middle, and
on the lower end of the screw is a cross piece fastened for the end of the screw
to turn in, as it is moved or screwed commonly, with a long and weighty crow of
iron by two holes made in the square toward the lower end of the screw cross,
for the end of the crow of Iron to go in, to force, or screw it down, and the
basket in which you put the Grapes to be pressed in, may be made round, and also
the trench or channel in the planck, etc.

There are other ways used besides baskets, as wreaths of straw, etc. But I
shall forbear to treat of them, for that they are more tedious and troublesome;
and for that you may this way that I have here set down, bruise and press an
hundred bushels or more in a day.

How to make other sorts of wines.
This way you may also make Gooseberry Wine, Rasberry Wine, Wine of Cherries,
either black or red, or Wine of Currants, Apricock Wine, Wine of Plumbs, etc.
but these last must be stoned.

CHAP. XI. September.
IN this, and both the former, and the next Month is the time to gather Grapes
here with us in England, wherefore (as I said before) it is best in the
gathering not to cut off your bunches close to the Tree, but one joint or knot
from it.

When to gather grapes to keep long.
Gather not your Grapes (if you mean to keep them long) till the full Moon,
otherwise it is not observed

And here you may take notice that when you have gathered your ripe Grapes, and
put them into some large vate or vessel, which you shall find convenient for
that purpose, according to the French, Spanish, or German manner; you shall
before you come to brusing (being many together) have a liquor expressed from
them which is called Protophum, as being the first that comes or drops.

How the first and second ^^^ning is called.
Secondly, That which runs immediately from them being trodden or used, is
called fortimum; the best part of the liquor: But of the diverse kinds of names
we shall speak in a second part hereafter.

The manner of pressing.
Thirdly, Let us come to pressing, where note that the first part of each
pressing is accounted the richest or best part of the juice which comes by
expression, and is included under the general name Vinum; the latter running is
accounted (although of the same sort or kind) smaller or weaker.

What vessels you ought to put your wines in.
Your Grapes being thus pressed, and you having received your Wine together or a
part, as you see good; let your Vessels wherein you put the same be firm, new,
and well bound with Iron, Of the Cellar.
also let your Cellar be very deep, for the deeper the more cool is it for
Summer, and the warmer for Winter, which is a great help for the keeping and
perfecting of good Wine, as may be seen in Germany, where their Cellars are 18
or 20 foot deep or more.

Note.
But by the way note, that your Wine must first have wrought, before you tun it
up in so deep a Cellar; for understand Of fermentation
that heat causes fermentation.

As for the manner of rolling and shifting your Wines upon the Lees, experience
will best instruct you; as also to know the time when they are fit to be drunk.

How to keep wine from decaying.
But if in the spending of your Wines, they begin to loose their spirits, and as
it were decay (as a great deal will, by that time that half the cask is drawn
out;) to prevent it, you may at the first piercing draw it all out into
Bottles, and set the said Bottles afterward in sand (as before.) When you find
it begin to grow flat never so little, you may dip a piece of linen cloth in
melted brimstone, and put it in at the Bungho le of the cask, and set it on
fire, the linen cloth and brimstone I mean, (not the cask) and let it so hang
in the cask by some wire or some such like thing till is be burnt, keeping in
the sulpherous vapors as much as you can, and so stop it up close again; this
does help decaying Wine very much, by adding spirits thereto, for all Wines
have in them a Sulpherous part as may be proved and seen in burning.

To help the wine that reboileth.
Also to help your Wine that reboileth, if you put a piece of Cheese into the
vessel you will presently see the effects; or else if you put a bunch of
Peniroyal, or Organy, or Calamint, about the hole at which the Wine comes out
it helps.

When the wine fermenteth.
For the Wine Merchants observe in France, and every where else where there is
Wine that during the season that the Vines are in flower, the Wine which is in
the Cellars makes a kind of fermentation, and pusheth forth a little white Lee
upon the surface of the Wine, which continues in a kind of disorder until the
flowers of the Vines be fallen, and then this agitation or fermentation being
ceased, all the the Wine returns to the same state it was in before, according
to the opinion of the ancients, 1300 years ago: The same time does this
fermentation happen that the Vines seem to exhale their spirits in the
Vineyards.

The reason why wine reboileth
Now those Wine spirits that issue from the buds and flowers, filling the air,
they are drawn into the vessels by the connatural and attractive virtue of the
Wine within; and these new volatile spirits entering, do excite the most fixed
spirits of the Wine, and so cause a fermentation, as if one should pour therein
new or sweet Wine; for in all fermentations there is a separation made of the
Terrestrial parts from the oily, which come out of the essential parts, and so
the lightest mount up to the superfices, the heaviest become Tartar Lees which
fall into the bottom but in this season if one be not very careful to keep the
Vine in a proper and temperate place, and keep the ca^k full and well bung'd,
and use other endeavors which are ordinary with Wine-Coopers, one runs a
hazard to have his Wine impaired or quite spoiled, because that the volatile
spirits coming to evaporate themselves, they carry away with them the spirits
of the Wine that is barreled, by exciting them and mingling with them.

And it is not only in France and other places where Vines are near Cellars of
Wine, that this fermentation happens; but in England also where we have not
Vines enough as yet to make good store of Wine the same thing is observed; yea
and some particularities beyond: Although we make not very much Wine to any
considerable proportion, yet we have wine in great abundance, which is brought
over by the Merchants as from the Canaries, from Spain, and from Gascony; now
these Regions being under different degrees and climates in point of latitude,
and consequently one Country is hotter or colder then the other; or that some
vegetables grew to maturity sooner it comes to pass that the aforesaid
fermentation of our differing Wines advances it self more or less, according
to the Vines whence they proceed do bud and flower in the Regions where they
grow, it being consentaneous to reason that every sort of Wine attracts more
willingly the spirits of those Vines whence they come then any other but no
more; this being only a digression by the by

How to purge wine quickly
So then if your Wine be new, and you would have it quickly purged, you must put
half a pint of Vinegar to every fifteen quarts of Wine.

I do not write this to Vintners nor Wine-Coopers, neither do I do it to put
them in mind, for that they are ready enough of themselves early and late with
their jumbling slights and mixtures, which if they forbear it would be much
better both for the credit of their houses and health of their Customers.

To make wine brisk or quick.
True indeed, for if the wine be not brisk, how shall we make it without the
addition of Sugar, Vinegar, Vitriol, -- etc. to sparkle or rather bubble in the
Glass or how will the color be altered as we please without the use of Red
wine, and many other ingredients which must not be mentioned, fore there must
not be pierced a fresh cask so often as Customers desire ^o have change, yet
must they be pleased if possible; but no more of this.

To make your wine more pleasant.
Let us proceed further and suppose that we have performed all things necessary
in this work, and have here the juice of the English Grape such as it is, but
yet it wants a sufficient and perfect digestion to bring it to maturity, or a
pleasantness to please your pallat; to perform this, let us according to the
Spanish and some others fashion, boil this said juice, by which boiling is
evaporated the thin or aquious quality, so that, that which remains is more
pleasant, and it being cold, may be mixed with equal proportion of the crude
Wine, or else proportion it according as it will best pleasure your own pallat.

The best way to help our English wines.
But if we be forced to use outward helps in default of our Soil or Climate, in
my opinion this is the best; as to every gallon of our English Wine, such as it
is, add one pound of Raisins of the Sun, or Maligo Raisins, being first washed
in several waters; or for other sort, choose the best Currants you can get, being
well cured, and washed and picked, and use the same proportion as before, to each
gallon of red Wine; leave them in this imbibition until the Liquor have
extracted the tincture and strength of the fruit; then draw the Wine from the
fruit, and let it stand until they have wrought themselves into one body, at
which time they will become a most pleasant Wine, resembling diverse kinds,
either to be drunk alone, or serving to taste any other Wine, according to the
proportion of the fruit that is infused.

To help your sharp wine another way.
I will here add one observation more. Suppose you have a piece of Wine which
naturally is too sharp for your drinking, you may draw it out into bottles, and
in each bottle put a spoonful or two of refined Sugar, and so set them in sand
in a Cellar, and let them stand a considerable time before you drink it, and
you will find it pleasant and good Wine.

Here I might add more ways for the help of our English Wines, but that it
would be impertinent; for, Verbum Sapienti sufficit*

CHAP. XII. October.
MOst commonly the year is so favorable, that the latter part of your Grapes
or Vintage is not gathered til this Month; for the gathering of which, choose a
dry day, and gather none but those which are ripe, if they be for Wine, lest
being not ripe, they spoil all; the rest, if they will not come to be ripe at
all, yet may you use other ways and means with them, so that they may be very
useful for Vinegar, or the like.

Of weeding.
Also in this Month you must weed, either by heaving, diging, or pulling up the
weeds, for they commonly grow very fast about this time of the year.

Vineyard grapes the best.
Note, that your grapes come to be far better, and more riper in a Vineyard,
than upon any house or wall: partly because they grow so nigh the ground; Air a
great helper of the grapes.
and partly because the Sun has more liberty to go about them, and also the
air, which is a very great advantage to them, as experience (the best Judge)
teaches, as you may by an example prove; for if you have by the glasier made a
case (as it were) either round or square, but long, according to the height of
one of your Vineyard Vines, into which glass (being close) made up but only
on one end; put the said Vine (I mean any one of your Vineyard Vines) so that
the air come not to it: let it be put in when the Grapes are but half ripe, or
when the berries be very small, and look what bigness the berries are when you
set over your glass, of that bigness shall they be (for want of air) when you
take off the glass again, although they will grow sweet by the heat of the Sun;
but if you let it stand till the other are full ripe, yet will not they be
bigger, as I have seen tried.

November.
How the Germans preserve the Vine in the Winter.
In this Month there is little to be done here in England, but in Germany and
other places where the Climate, or Winter is very cold, they cut off the
Boughs, and Branches nigh to the Tree, and so lay the Tree along the ground,
and cover it on each side, only leaving the top uncovered, so to defend it
from the nipping Frost, and there let them remain till January, or February,
but here in England the Frost is not so sharp, violent, or piercing but they
may stand all the year: so that you need not cut them till proining time.

When to cut away the small roots of the Vines.
But if it be so you do lay open your roots, you may cut away the small ones, as
being superfluous, with care, and so will the principal root, or roots, prosper
the better.

This must be done but the first five years.

CHAP. XIII. December.
Of Proining.
IN this Month you may proine your Vines here in England if you think you shall
not have leisure in January or February; but to do it in these months is the
best and safest way, as I have before shown: Of laying open the roots.
you may also if you please lay open the roots of your Vines, and having lien
open a certain space, storcorize them, and lay the mould too again.

And here I think it not amiss to set down several things fit to be applied to
prevent the bleeding of Vines.

It falls out many times that there are many sort of Vines Of several things
to be applied to prevent the bleeding of Vines.
much subject to bleed when they are proined, or cut, especially when the sap is
ascended never so little, yea, sometimes to the loss of the Vine if it be not
prevented in time; which to do, presently cover the place with good store of
Turpentine, and it will sometimes stay the bleeding: or, bind a packthread
very strai^ about the Bark, or sear the place with a hot Iron, and put hot
ashes presently upon it: or,

Take the powder of Bole-almenack, and the white of an egg, beat the white of
the egg well, and put too the bole, and mix them, and bind it fast on the
place that bleedeth, with flax, or linen cloth: or,

Take the order of a man that is dry and stiff, and bind it on the place very
hard with some packthread: or,

Drop on the place where it bleeds some melted Brimstone, etc.

There are many other ways to prevent this bleeding, or gleeting; but I
suppose this is sufficient at the present: so that here we shall conclude this
with only a small addition of pretty receipts and useful upon many occasions.
If any be curious to know something of the different kinds, and also the many
virtues of the moderate use of Wines, he may partly be satisfied in perusing
Mr. Gerrards Herbal, from page 724. to page 736. where he has set down a
lively description thereof, etc.

CHAP. XIIII. How to have Grapes to grow long upon the Vines.
DO thus, put a Vine Branch through a Basket in December, choose such a one as
is like to bear Grapes, fill the Basket with earth, and when the Grapes are
ripe, cut off the Branch under the Basket, keep the Basket abroad whilst it is
warm weather, and within doors in cold weather.

Another way is this to have them grow late.
Toward cold weather you may cover with Horse Dung, or Flax (but I think Flax
the best) all the stalks of the Vines, even to the bunches of Grapes, covering
the bunches themselves with straw, or put them in Glasses, and so you may
happen to have Grapes growing on the Vines at, or near Christmas.

How to preserve bunches of Grapes very long.
When the Grapes are ripe, and before the Frost has taken them, in the new
Moon gather as many of the fairest bunches as you would keep, and having
knocked some nails, or hooks into a Box, or Chest-lid, with some thread, hang
some bunches thereon, so that they touch not one another, and shut down the lid
close that no air come at them, and set them in a room wherein is usually kept
a fire, and when you would use them plump them in a little warm water.

Another way.
If you cut a large Branch of the Vine which has one, two, or three clusters
of Grapes on it, and at each end of the cutting thrust only the Branch whereon
the bunches grow in a sound and lasting apple, and so hang it up.

To keep Claret Wine, or any Wine good nine or ten Years.
At every vintage draw almost every part out of the Hogshead, and then roll it
upon his Lees, and after fill it up with the best new Wine of the same kind
you can get.

To separate Water from Wine.
To separate Water from Wine, put into the vessel of Wine melted Alum, and
after stopping the mouth of the said vessel with a sponge, drenched in oil,
turn the mouth of the vessel so stopped downwards, and so the water only will
come out: or,

Cause a vessel of Ivy Wood to be made, and put therein such quantity of Wine
as it will be able to hold* the water will come forth presently, and the wine
will abide pure and neat.

Some do use presently to change the Wine so watered, and to draw it out into
another vessel, and then to put a pint and a half of salt to every fifteen
quarts of Wine.

Others do boil the Wine upon the fire so long until the third part be
consumed, and the rest they use three or four hours after.

How to make Spirit of Wine.
This of all vegetables is the most precious thing, and also the truest of all
Cordials, as we shall hereafter show, and is thus made.

Take of good white Claret Wine, or Sack, which is not sour nor musty, or
otherwise corrupt that quantity which may serve to fill the vessel wherein you
make your distillation to a third part; then put on the head, furnished with
the nose, or pipe, and so make your distillation, first in ashes, drawing about
a third part from the whole: as for example, six or eight pints out of four and
twenty, then still it again in B. M. drawing a third part, which is two pints,
so that the oftener you still it the less liquor you have, but the more strong;
some use to rectify it seven times.

How to make good Vinegar.
Take as much Wine as you see good, either white or red, and cast into it Salt,
Pepper, and sower leaven mingled together; afterward heat red hot some tyle or
gad of Steel, and put it hot into the Wine. Or

In like manner a Radish-root, a Beet-root, or a shive of Barley bread new
baked put in Wine, and it being set forth in a Glass in the Sun or in the
Chimney corner to the heat of the fire, will make good Vinegar in a short time;
which to make better you may infuse in it the leaves of Red Roses, or put in
the Juice of Mints and Centry.

To make Vinegar with your corrupted Wine.
Take your marred Wine and boil it, and take away all the scum that rises in
boiling; thus let it continue on the fire till it be boiled away one third
part, then put it up into a vessel wherein has been Vinegar, putting thereto
some chervile, cover the vessel in such sort that there get no air into it, and
in short time it will prove good and strong Vinegar.

To make Verjuice of Grapes.
Take of your Grapes before they be quite Ripe, as many as you please, beat or
bruise them, and press out the juice and put it into some small vessel that so
you may fill it, let it stand to settle and work a pretty while, and you have
an excellent Verjuice for to sharpen your sauces and provoke or whet the
appetite.

FINIS.
Books newly Printed for William Crook, at the three Bibles on Fleet-bridge,
1665.
SIn Dismantled, showing the loathsomness thereof in laying it open by
Confession, with the Remedy for it by Repentance and Conversion; Wherein is set
forth the manner how we ought to confess our sins to God and Man, with the
Consiliary decrees from the Authorities thereof, and for the showing the
necessity of Priestly Absolution, etc. And an Historical relation of the Canons
concerning Confession, and the secret manner of it; also the Confessors
affection and inclinations are showed, by K. A. L. Rev. L. I. D. D. 40. 1664.

There is newly engraven the so much desired Cuts or Pictures to the Old
Testament, all lively done, to fit Bibles of all Volumes, small and great, 1665.

Sixty nine Enigmatical Characters, all exactly drawn to the Life, from several
Persons, Humors, and Dispositions; pleasant and full of delight the 2d.
Impression; by the Author R. F. Esquire 1665.

The Royal Stem, being an account of all the most remarkable actions either by
Land or Sea, in these Kingdoms since William the Conquerours time to this year
1665. With the Picture of K. Charles the IId. in the middle; all in a
Broadsheet of Paper, fit to hang in Houses, Closets, or Chambers.

The famous and delightful History of St. George the Patron of England; showing
all his Life, Atchivements, Miracles, and Deeds of Renown, with his Conversion
of Arabia, being the exactest relation ever was Printed, by the 16. years
industry of J. Lowick Gent.

Caliope's Cabinet Opened; wherein Gentlemen may be informed how to adorn
themselves for Funerals, Feastings, and other Heroic Meetings; also here they
may know their places of worth, with all the degrees and distinctions of Honor
in the Realm: Showing how every one ought to take place, with their Titles due
to them; with other things of Antiquity very observable by James Salter 1665.

FINIS.

