The humble PETITION AND REPRESENTATION OF The Gentry, Ministers, and others of
the Counties of Cumberland and Westmerland, to His Sacred MAJESTY.

With His Majesty's Answer thereunto.

York 5 July. 1642.



YORK: Printed by ROBERT BARKER, Printer to the Kings most Excellent Majesty:
And by the Assigns of JOHN BILL. 1642.

To the KINGS most Excellent MAJESTY.
The humble Petition and Representation of the Loyal and Dutiful Affections
of the Gentry, Ministry, and others, your Majesty's Subjects of the Counties
of Cumberland and Westmerland, whose names are hereunto annexed.
Most Gracious Sovereign,
WE acknowledge, with all possible Retribution of gratitude, Your Majesty's
Princely favor in yielding your Royal Assent to such Bills as have passed
since the beginning of this present Parliament. As for your gracious
Declaration to continue the same as occasion required, for remedying the evils
and perils incident to Church and State, and for your firm Resolution that the
Laws of the Land should be the Rule of your Government; But more particularly
endeared to our memories is that Royal sense your Majesty expressed of our
dangerous condition and impendent fears, when we stood engaged as part of the
Pledge to the Scottish Army; and your personal recommendation thereof to the
speedy consideration of both your Houses of Parliament. The former benefits we
hold as the fruit of your general care, equally extending to all; by this you
suffered your Royal Nature to be tendered with a Compassion more nearly
regarding us; for which Grace we conceive our selves tied in a more singular
and strait Obligation then the most of your other Subjects are, in which
respect our just fears might have presented us too remiss in performance of
this duty, after so many had gone before us, but that our paucity, and the
inconsiderablenesse of these Counties for quantity and quality, withheld us
thus long, until the too visible distempers of the times justled out such
fears, as now unseasonable: Our own sense is our assurance of your Gracious
Government, we see and acquiesce in this truth, that your Majesty's profession
of the true Protestant Religion, and the exercise of it go together; nor can we
take up any more effectual ground for a belief of sincerity. All our
happiness, and that of all Your Dominions would be complete, and what were
wanting we were in the way for, if a right Understanding were renewed between
your Majesty and great Council.

It is therefore our humble desire, That your Majesty would still be pleased
in your wisdom to recollect, and in your goodness to embrace all good means
that may tend to this happy union, whereby we may reap the true enjoyment of
the long labors of your Majesty and great Council, for the effecting whereof
we shall redouble our Petition, That some place may be thought on, which may be
free from exception both of danger and distrust; and then we doubt not, but by
Gods Almighty power, such ways and means might happily be propounded, as may
reconcile all differences and mistakings; and your Majesty have full
satisfaction in your Demands.

And we (as we are bound) shall be ready, according to Our Power, with our
lives and fortunes to defend your Majesty's Person, Honor, Crown, and Dignity,
the Religion and Laws established against all Maligners of your Majesty's
Royal Prerogative, and the peace and prosperity of this Kingdom.

Hereunto were annexed the names of four thousand, seven hundred, seventy and
four, of the Knights, Gentlemen, and others, of the Counties aforesaid.
DIEV ET MON DROIT
At the Court at York, 5 July. 1642.
His Majesty Has Commanded me to give this express Answer to this Petition.
THat His Majesty is very well pleased with the Duty and Assertion of this
Petition, and has commanded me to signify His good Acceptance of it, and
Thanks for it to the Petitioners, and to assure them, That if some others had
had the same sense of, and gratitude for His Justice and favor toward them in
the yielding of His Royal assent to so many good Bills as the Petitioners
have, and given as good credit to His Professions and Protestations for the
defense of the Religion and Laws established as the Petitioners give, and been
as ready to recollect and embrace all good means that might tend to a happy
union, and renew a right understanding between His Majesty and His Parliament,
as His Majesty has been, is, and ever shall be; This (by the help of God) had
been by this time a most secure, united, and happy Kingdom, free from all the
present Iealousies, Distractions, and Dangers. And as His Majesty consents
with the Petitioners in a most earnest desire that such a way may be discovered
and pursued, which might reconcile all Differences and Mistakings, and by which
He might have full satisfaction in His just demands; so He likewise consents
with them, that the choice of some place free from exception, both of danger
and distrust, would be the most probable, and indeed a certain means to attain
that end: which out of His great Affection to Justice and Peace, and His Care
of the Freedom, (which is the principal Privilege) of Parliament, His
Majesty has often intimated, and of late seriously recommended to both
Houses; But not only without Success, but without Answer.

His Majesty does likewise assure the Petitioners, that He will no longer
expect, that they should make good their Professions of being ready, according
to their power, with their Lives and Fortunes to defend His Person, Honor,
Crown, and Dignity, then He shall be ready, occording to His Power, with His
Life and Fortune to defend the Religion and Laws established, against all
Maligners of the Peace and Prosperity of the Kingdom.

FALKLAND.

FINIS.

