Jacobs Ladder

A MANVAL of DEVOTIONS By Jo. Hall: B. D.

London, Printed for N. Crouch



Jacobs Ladder: OR, THE DEVOUT SOULS Ascension to HEAVEN, IN Prayers,
Thanksgivings, and Praises. In Four Parts, viz. 1. Private Devotions for every
day in the Week. 2. Family Devotions for every day in the Week. 3. Occasional
Devotions. 4. Sacred Poems, Upon Select Subjects.
With Graces and Thanksgivings. Illustrated with Sculptures.

By Jo. Hall, B. D.

The second Edition Enlarged.

London, Printed for N. Crouch in Exchange-Ally in Cornhil, 1676.

To the Virtuous and Religious Gentlewoman, Mrs. M. P.
IT is not the excellency of the Gift, but your Goodness that must render this
small Manual acceptable to you, of which having had so great experience, I
cannot doubt its continuance.

And knowing your devout Inclinations toward books of this nature, I could not
think of a more pleasing return for your many Favors, than this Jacobs Ladder,
whereby your Soul may Ascend to Heaven, and make known all your wants, and (by
Faith accompanying your Prayers) may receive answers to all your holy Desires,
and Petitions.

I doubt not but many have done Worthily, yea, much excelled in this kind; but
I have found, though there are many Manuals of private Devotion; yet there are
very few for Families, which Want, I have heard complained of; and therefore
though I could not better employ my vacant hours, than to make a Collection of
some daily Prayers, that might be both plain, and pertinent: and indeed, the
Family-Devotions were my first design; only I thought that to make it complete
and conformable to others of this nature, it will be convenient to add some
Private and Occasional Devotions, together with some brief Meditations of the
vanity of man's life, and certainty of his death, which we can never too much
think of, nor too soon prepare for.

If you, or any other, reap any benefit by it, I have my desire; If it be not
well, it is because I could not help it; however, I doubt not but you will
accept the will for the deed, because it is from

Your devoted Servant, Jo. Hall.

Preparations to Devotion.
PRemeditation is the preparation to Private Prayer; Private to Public;
Private and Public, to the hearing of the Word; to Private and Public Prayer,
together with the hearing of the Word, to the worthy participation of the holy
Sacrament: For the Sacrament receives strength and vigor from the Word, the
Word preached from public Prayer: public Prayer from private devotion, and
that from Premeditation, and Pre-consideration of the nature of Devotion, and
the necessity of preparation it self to all holy duties in the immediate
worship of God.

What Devotion is.
DEvotion is the hearts warmth, or rather the lifeblood of Religion: It is a
sacred bond knitting the Soul unto God: It is a Spiritual Muscle moving only
upward, and lifting the heart, eyes, and hands continually to Heaven.

Whosoever desires to make a Divine Prayer, must by Premeditation frame in his
mind,

First the Form which must be,

1. Short, or conceived in as few words as may be.

2. Conformable in all things to the Pattern, the Lords prayer.

Secondly, The Matter, which consists of three parts.

1. Humble Confession.

2. Confident Invocation, Petition or Supplication.

3. Hearty Thanksgiving.

1. In humble Confession set before thee.

1. God, his terrible name, glorious Majesty, All-seeing-Eye, Infinite Purity,
strict Justice, Fierce wrath against Sin.

2. Man his vileness, wretchedness, sinfulness, wants and inability.

2. In the second part, Invocation, and Petition, fix thy thoughts.

1. On God, his love to man, his mercy and long suffering, his gracious
promises, and his omnipotent goodness.

2. On Christ his perfect obedience, his plenary satisfaction, his perpetual
Intercession.

In the third, which is hearty Thanksgiving, recount Gods benefits.

1. Spiritual, as Election, Creation, Redemption, Vocation, Justification,
Sanctification, and hope of Glorification.

2. Temporal, as Health, Strength, Wealth, Liberty, good Name, Friends, and
Safety.

Some Texts of Scripture, which may be orderly applied to every one of the
foregoing particulars.

When you pray, use not vain Repetitions, as the Heathen do, for they think
that they shall be heard for their much speaking, Matt. 6. 7.

After this manner pray ye, Mat. 6. 9.

I said I will confess my Transgressions to the Lord, and thou forgavest the
iniquity of my sin. Psalm. 32. 5.

Let them praise thy great and terrible Name, for it is holy, Psalm. 99. 3.

Who is the King of glory, even the Lord of Hosts, he is the King of glory,
Psalm. 24. 10.

Mine eyes are upon all their ways, they are not hid from my face, neither is
their Iniquity hid from my eyes, Jer. 16. 17.

And one cried to another and said, Holy, Holy, holy, is the Lord of Hosts,
Isai. 6. 3.

Who will render to every man according to his works, Romans 2. 6.

Thou, even thou art to be feared, and who may stand in thy sight when thou art
angry? Psalm. 76. 7.

Surely every man is altogether vanity, Psalm. 39. 11.

O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of this death,
Romans 7. 24.

We are all as an unclean thing, and all our Righteousness is as filthy rags,
Isai. 64. 6.

Without me ye can do nothing, John 15. 5.

All things whatsoever you shall ask in prayer, believing, you shall receive,
Mat. 21. 22.

God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever
believed in him should not perish, but should have everlasting life, John 3. 16.

The Lord is merciful, and Gracious, slow to anger, and plentiful in mercy,
Psalm. 103. 8, 11.

Come unto me all ye that are weary and heavy laden, and I will give you rest,
Mat. 11. 28.

Though your sins are as scarlet, they shall be as white as snow; though they
be red like Crimson, they shall be as wool, Isai. 1. 18.

They that sow in tears shall reap in joy, Psalm. 126. 5.

To him that is able to do exceeding abundantly, above that we ask or think, be
glory, etc. Ephesians. 3. 20.

Thou wast slain, and have redeemed us to God, by thy blood, Rev. 5. 9.

Christ is entered into Heaven, now to appear in the presence of God for us,
Heb. 9. 24.

Giving thanks always, for all things to God, and the Father, Ephesians. 5. 20.

What shall I render to the Lord for all his benefits, Psalm. 116. 12.

God has, from the beginning, chosen you to Salvation through sanctification
of the spirit, etc. 2 These. 2. 13.

Thy hands have made me, and fashioned me, Psalm. 119. 73.

Blessed be the Lord, for he has visited and redeemed his people Luke 1. 68.

I am not come to call the Righteous, but sinners to repentance, Mat. 9. 13.

Being justified by his grace, we shall be made Heirs, according to the hope of
eternal life, Tit. 3. 7.

Such were some of you, but ye are washed, ye are sanctified, 1 Cor. 6. 11.

Thou shall guide me with thy Counsel, and afterward receive me to Glory, Psalm.
73. 24.

Bless the Lord, O my Soul, and forget not all his benefits, Psalm. 103. 2.

The Lord kills and makes alive, he brings down to the grave, and brings
up, 1 Samuel 2. 6.

It is God that girdeth me with strength, and makes my way perfect, Psalm. 18.
32.

Also the Lord gave Job twice as much as he had before, Job ult.

Thou have set me at liberty when I was in thrall, Psalm. 4. 1.

And these all having obtained good report, through Faith, receive not the
promise, Heb. 11. 39.

Ointment and Perfume rejoice thy heart, so does the sweetness of a man's friend
by hearty Counsel.

Thou Lord only make me dwell in safety, Psalm. 4. 8.

The Lord shall preserve thee from evil, he shall preserve thy Soul, Psalm. 121.
7.

A Preparatory Hymn Collected out of diverse Psalms.
THou say: seek ye my face, my heart says unto thee, Thy face Lord will I
seek, Psalm. 27. 8.

Hide not thy face far from me, nor put thy servant away in anger, verse. 9.

Cast me not away from thy presence, and take not thy holy spirit from me,
Psalm. 51. 11.

Hear O Lord when I cry unto thee, have mercy also upon me and answer me, Psalm.
27. 7.

Ponder my words, O Lord consider my meditation, Psalm. 5. 1.

My heart is inditing a good matter, my tongue is the pen of a ready writer,
Psalm. 45. 1.

O Lord open thou my lips, and my lips shall show forth thy praise, Psalm. 51.
15.

Let my prayer be set forth before thee as Incense, and the lifting up of my
hands as an Even^^^ ^^^rifice, Psalm. 141. 2.

Set a watch O Lord before my mouth, and keep the door of my lips, Psalm. 141. 3.

Let the words of my mouth, and the meditations of my heart be acceptable in
thy sight, O Lord my strength and my Redeemer^, Psalm. 19. 14.

An Exhortation to stir up Christians to Prayer.
PRayer is of that force and virtue, that it ties the ear of God to the tongue
of man: O it is an acceptable Incense to God always, for how has he always
rewarded it, and regarded it? It never returned but with a blessing, so that
the Prayer be sent up out of a pure and upright heart, mingled with Faith; for
we must ask in Faith, and waver not, as St. James says.

By fervent Prayer the children of Israel were delivered from the Egyptian
bondage, as you may read, That when they cried unto the Lord, he heard them,
and delivered them out of their Enemies hands: Therefore let us continually
pray unto God both Morning and Evening, and let us call and cry unto him, for a
blessing upon us, and desire him to preserve us, and to remove his Judgments
from us. To which end, I have thought good to frame this Manual of private
Devotions, for a help to those that may want them.

PRIVATE DEVOTIONS, OR, A COLLECTION OF Morning and Evening PRAYERS For Private
Persons, For every day in the Week.

Evening and Morning, and at Noon will I Pray, and cry Aloud, and he shall hear
my voice,

Psalm. 55. 17. Private Devotions.
A Prayer for Sunday-Morning.
ALmighty God, the blessed Creator and Finisher of the Salvation of Mankind,
who in memory of thy glorious Rest from both thy noble works, have blessed and
sanctified a day of holy rest unto thy self, sanctify me for it, that laying
aside my accustomed business, and sequestring my thoughts from all worldly
cares, I may keep it and my self holy to thee, by dedicating and devoting my
self wholly to thy peculiar worship, and immediate service, and to the end that
this my Religious service may be more acceptable to thee, quicken me with thy
Spirit, that I may perform it with all allacrity and cheerfulness, and may make
thy Sabbath my delight. Touch my Heart and Tongue with a coal from thy Altar,
that from the sweet Incense of my Meditations, Hymns, Prayers, and
Thanksgivings, thou may smell a savor of Rest. O Prince of Peace, sanctify
thy rest unto me, that I may find rest to my Soul from all temptations,
troubles, and fears, and may rest from my own works which are painful and
sinful travels, and may employ this day, all the powers and faculties of my
Soul and Body in doing and considering thy works, in adoring thy Majesty, and
admiring thy wisdom, and acknowledging thy Power, and embracing thy Love, and
magnifying thy goodness, and rejoicing in thy Mercies, and trembling at thy
Judgments; In visiting thy holy Temple, and praising thee with thy Saints, and
offering up the Calves of my lips; In diligently reading thy Scriptures,
attentively hearing thy Word, ^everently celebrating thy Mysteries, charitably
relieving thy Members, and zealously practizing all holy duties both public
and private! O let me this Whole day walk with thee as Enoch sometimes did, and
talk with thee as Moses did, and seek thy Face as David did: And grant, that
beholding thine Image in thy holy Word, as in a clear and Crystal Mirror, I
may be changed ^to the same Image, even from Glory to Glory. Let this Sabbath
put me in mind of thy Holy rest from thy works, and assure me thereby of an
Everlasting Sabbath in Heaven from my Works; into which rest, that I may enter,
stir up good desires in me, raise my thoughts and affections to the things
which are above, renew me according to the Image of thy Son, and frame my Life
to a Heavenly conversation, enlighten my understanding, sanctify my will,
moderate my desires, govern my affections, mortify my fleshly members, destory
the man of sin in me, and deliver me from the Body of death: work (...) me a
fear of thy power, and a love of thy goodness, and zeal of thy glory, and
thirst after thy grace, and an earnest desire and constant resolution (as much
as in me lies) to approve my self to thee in all things, and frame all my
actions to the rule of thy Word. Hear me, I beseech thee, for thy Church, and
thy Church for me, and Christ for us all, saying, Our Father, etc.

A Prayer for Sunday Evening.
HOly, Holy, Holy, Lord God Almighty, which wast, which art, and which art to
come; Hollow my nature, that I may Hollow thy Name: As thou impartest thy
goodness to me, whereby I live and move in thee; communicate to me some measure
of thy Holiness, that I may live and move to thee. Let thy Spirit of grace
possess my Body and Soul, that the desires of my mind, and thoughts of my
heart, and words of my lips, may be holiness unto thee: Sanctify me that I may
glorify thee. And first with Joy and Thankfulness I acknowledge it a special
Testimony of thy love, that thou have given me liberty, and means to keep a
holy Sabbath unto thee, to meet in thy House, to offer up my Joynt-Prayers, and
thanksgiving, with thy Holy congregation, to confess my sin, to profess my
faith, to lay open my wants, to clear up my self, by Singing the sweet Songs of
Sion, to hear thy Sacred Word read, and Preached; whereby my faith has been
strengthened in the Mysteries of Salvation, my hope established in the promises
of the Gospel, and my life set forward in a settled course of holiness, and
righteousness, whereby the Kingdom of sin and Satan is beat down and destroyed,
and the Kingdom of Christ built up in me; By this thy Word, the careless sinner
is admonished, the ignorant instructed, the presumptuous te^rified, and the
Penitent comforted, the Power of sin is abated, the force of temptations
weakened, the motions of the Spirit quickened, grace received, and my Election
assured by the infallible marks and tokens thereof, set before me in holy
Scriptures. Blessed be thy Name for it, this day thy word has dwelt with me
richly in all wisdom: The dispencer of thy Mysteries has scattered many
Doctrines, like so many Pearls among the People; Lord grant that with Mary I
may keep these and all thy sayings in my heart, and make use of them in my
life, and receive comfort from them at my Death. And here I would proceed to
entreat at thy hands, the continuance and increase of thy Spiritual and
Temporal blessings upon me; but my sins lie at the door of my Conscience, and
affright me. My heart smites me for my failings, in the performance of the
duties of this day: My devout meditations have been ^tifled in the womb that
bare them, my Prayers have not been without distractions, my hearing without
^earisomness, nor my Alms-deeds without Grudging: Pardon, dear Father, the want
of preparation before I come to thy house, of intention and Zeal at thy
service; and of Meditation and Application of those things which I heard there,
since I came thence. Bury I beseech thee these slips, and all my sins,
especially of this week and day, in the night of eternal oblivion. Ease me of
the burden of them, that I may more securely repose my soul and body upon thy
gracious protection, to take their natural refreshing by sleep, whereby I may
be enabled and strengthened to do the better service the next day, in walking
carefully, diligently, conscionably, and constantly, in the ways of thy
Commandments, and in the duties of my Calling; so as may be to thy honor and
Glory, and my eternal comfort, through Jesus Christ our Lord. To whom be honor
and glory world without end. Amen.

Our Father. etc.

A Prayer for Munday-Morning.
MOst Glorious Lord God, the great Creator and preserver of all mankind;
Blessed be thy Name that thou have been graciously pleased to preserve me the
night past, and that thou have once more vouchsafed me the light of the
Morning, whereby to manage my affairs and business; O Lord preserve me this
day, and keep me in all my ways, give unto me the repose of a quiet
Conscience, and the clear light of the Gospel, to guide my feet in the way of
peace; and grant that this light may convince me of the Errors of my
understanding, the depravedness of my will, the disorder of my affections, the
Impunity of my thoughts; the vanity of my desires, the deceitfulness of my
heart, and the wickedness thereof. Make me sensible O Lord what a wretched
creature I was in my birth, slime and filthiness; what I am in my life, vanity
and solly; and what shall be in my death, stench and rottenness, Discover unto
me O Lord that I have nothing, which I have not received; that without Christ,
I can do nothing; that in me, that is, in my flesh dwells no good; that I am
not able of my self (as of my self) to think a good thought; that I cannot
desire to think, nor have will to desire, nor grace to will any good: O Lord
let me consider, that my comforts in this world, are very few and small; my
crosses and troubles many and great; my pleasures here are momentary and short,
my pains hereafter (without my repentance, and thy great mercy) are permanent
and everlasting: My gifts O Lord are very small, my wants and infirmities are
great, my helps are weak, my assaults and temptations are strong, my good deeds
are few, and they tainted with Imperfections, but my ill deeds are infinite.
Let these considerations, O Lord, humble me in my self, that Christ may raise
me; and wound me in my self, that Christ may heal me. And O Lord, who this day
made the Heavens or Air, without which I cannot breath naturally, no not for
a moment; infuse into my heart the Spirit of thy grace, without which I cannot
breath Spiritually in my Prayers, nor sigh, nor so much as move any part or
faculty of my soul or body unto thee; and as often as I take in, or let out the
air which I breath, let receive me in grace from thee, and breathe out praise
unto thee. Be my guide, O Lord, this day, and do thou keep me both Now and
Ever, Amen.

Our Father. etc.

A Prayer for Munday-Evening.
HOly and Eternal Lord God, who art the King of Heaven and the Watchman of
Israel, who never slumbrest nor sleep; Look upon me thy unworthy servant,
who by reason of my sin and the corruption of my nature, am wholly subject to
sloth, and am even now ready to ease and rest my self upon my bed: I know not
whether thou will this very night make my bed in the dark; and the hour of my
visitation be this present Evening, all my years are but a span long, my days
pass like a Weavers Shuttle; my life ends like a Tail that is told; this hour
may be my last hour, my next sleep may be my last and long sleep: I beseech
thee therefore, that I may every Evening seriously ponder and meditate heaven,
that I may be the better prepared in that day and hour that thou shall call me:
And though my Eyes shall now sleep, and enjoy that moderate refreshment which
thou have appointed for the wearisome condition of my weak body, yet let my
soul continually watch unto thee, to attend thy coming. Forgive me, O Lord, the
sins of this day past, and all other my former sins and misdemeanors; keep me
this night both in body and soul, that I may with the next light joyfully rise
again. Let not my sleep be unmeasurable and excessive, to please the ease of my
flesh, but sufficient and seasonable, whereby I may be the better disposed to
thy service to morrow, diligently and fruitfully walking in my calling, and
repenting me of my sins, with fear to offend thee.

Let thy unspeakable mercy always preserve me, let thine endless sweetness
rejoice me, let thine heavenly truth strengthen me, let thy knowledge imbolden
me, and thy goodness keep me from my Enemies, visible and invisible, now and
for Evermore. Amen. Our Father, etc.

A Prayer for Tuesday Morning.
O Eternal Lord God, thou command us always, at all times, and in all
things, to call upon thee; day by day, I come unto thee, beging refreshment
from the overflowing streams of thy mercy; O Lord open unto me the gate of thy
favor, and let me be satisfied with the fountain of thy loving kindness. O
merciful Lord, who have said, As surely as I live, I desire not the death of a
sinner, but rather that he should Convert and Amend, and Live; Who have also
said, Call upon me in the day of trouble, and I will deliver thee; have mercy
upon me for Jesus Christ his sake, whom thou would should be a peacemaker,
to the end that thou might show thine exceeding great Wrath against sin, and
thine inestimable mercy toward Mankind, sanctify and illuminate my heart with
thy holy Spirit. O God the guide of my life, forsake me not, turn from me the
filthiness of desire. Turn mine Eyes away from beholding vanity, strengthen me
in thy ways, and grant that mine offenses in this world overcome me not, and I
beseech thee, O Lord, with a most ardent affection, that this day and ever thou will keep me, and all mine, and that thou will be unto me a Mighty Protector, a
firmament of strength, a covering against heat, a shadow at noontide, a
defense from falling, an assister from offending, a comforter of my soul, an
enlightner of my mind, a giver of health and happiness in Christ Jesus, my Lord
and Savior; To whom be all glory, honor, and power, for ever. Amen.

Our Father. etc.

A Prayer for Tuesday-Evening.
MOst mighty and most merciful Lord God, by whose goodness I was created, by
whose Justice I am punished, and by whose mercy I am saved; I cast my self down
before thee, and lift up my hands unto thee at this present as my
Evening-sacrifice, but alas my conscience accuses me, the secret cogitations
of my heart reprove me, my fear checketh me, the infinite number of my sins
oppress me, yea, my miscarriages this day witness against me, and exceedingly
condemn me; O Lord what am I, that thou should yet favor me and show thy
self so loving and bountiful a Father unto me? why should thou so nourish
me, who am so unworthy a wretch, with thy mercy and loving kindness? I know
that it is for His sake in whom there is no guile, and in whom there was found
no evil, that thou regardest me and imbracest me; Pardon, I beseech thee,
through Jesus Christ, all my sins, faults, vices, and offenses, and indue me
with all holy virtues; make me to live a godly life, and to continue to the end
in good works; Take away all darkness from my mind, that I may see thee by
understanding thee, and love thee by knowing thee. And grant O Lord, that I may
so keep, and govern, and end my life, that I may sleep in peace and rest in
thee; and so into thy hands I commend my self, both soul and body, this night
and for ever. Hide me I beseech thee under the shadow of thy Wings, that I may
rest quietly, void of all fear, spiritual darkness, danger and despair; comfort
me in all those things wherein I have been any way discouraged this day;
Preserve me to the end, that sleep with rest, and rest with quietness, and
quietness with everlastingness, may receive me, that having run the race of
this life, I may be made partaker of a better; that so I may live and reign
with thee for ever, through Jesus Christ my Lord and only Savior. Amen.

Our Father. etc.

A Prayer for Wednesday-Morning.
HOly Lord God, the glorious face of the Sun, which shows it self, and
casts its beams over the whole World, I take it for an argument and earnest
of thy good will toward thy Children, in the number of whom I account my self,
though the chief of Sinners, and not worthy to loose the latchet of thy shoe,
for if we enjoy such benefits in this strange country, together with thine
Enemies, then what joy and glory, what excellent goodness shall we be made
partakers of, when we come to our heavenly country, the blessed land of Canaan,
where we shall not see this earthly Sun, but thou, O Lord, who art the Son of
Righteousness will be continually before us. And now, O Lord, I Praise thy
blessed name for preserving me from the many dangers of the Night past, and for
bringing me safe to the beginning of this day; As thou have now wakened my Body
from sleep, so, I beseech thee, awaken my Soul from sin, and carnal Security,
and as thou have caused the Light of the day to shine in my bodily Eyes, so,
good Lord, cause the light of thy word, and holy Spirit to illuminate my heart,
and give me grace as a Child of Light, to walk in all holy obedience before thy
face this day; and grant me to endeavor to keep a good Conscience toward
thee, and toward all men, in all my thoughts, words, and dealings; and to this
end I commend my self, and all my ways and actions, together with all that do
belong to me, unto thy gracious direction and protection, beseeching thee to
keep both them and me from all evil, and to give a blessing to my honest
Labors and endeavors, this day following, and for evermore. Amen.

Our Father, etc.

A Prayer for Wednesday Evening.
O Most Mighty Lord God, and most merciful and loving Father in thy Son Jesus
Christ: I sinful Creature am bold to return unto thee, all possible Praise and
thanks for all thy great and manifold favors, which thou in thy mercy have
from time to time vouchsafed unto me a sinful wretch, who am full of sin, and
iniquity. I beseech thee, favorably to hear my imperfect prayers, and to grant
my requests, and needful suits, which I make unto thee at this time: Forgive me
I entreat thee good Father, all the sins that I have committed from day to day
against thy divine Majesty, and suffer me not, O Lord, to offend thee any more
hereafter, that neither sin nor Satan, nor any unruly passions may have
dominion, nor reign any longer in my mortal body: for I confess I have herein
done wickedly, and have broken all thy commandments; for which thou might in
thy severe Justice, punish me both in Soul and Body, to eternal Death, besides
those sins which I have this day committed. Forgive me O Lord all my sins past,
and blessed be thy name that thou have kept me this day in my going out, and in
my returning home. O Lord watch over me this night, and be thou my defense and
protection, from all dangers, casualties, and troubles; grant that I be not
overcome with any fantasies, and dreams, or other Temptations, but that I may
fully set my mind upon thee, love thee, fear thee, and rest in thee, and thou,
O Lord, waken me again in due time, that I may behold the light of the next
day, to my comfort, still preparing my heart and mind to thy service every day,
and my whole life time in truth and sincerity, that when I have run the short
race of this mortal life, thou may be pleased to call me to be partaker of a
better; and so I may live and die, and ever remain with thee, in thy Heavenly
Kingdom, through Jesus Christ our only Lord and Savior; in whose name I beg
all these graces, in that short, and absolute form of Prayer, which he has
taught us. Our Father, etc.

A Prayer for Thursday-Morning.
BLessed and glorious Lord God, thy mercys are infinite, and thy long-suffering
and patience is exceeding great, else had not I a poor wreched miserable sinner
been spared so long, considering my many provocations against thee, in thought
word and deed; but thou have exalted thy mercy above all thy works, and of
thine infinite goodness have preserved me this night, and have given me the
light of this day: Lead me, I beseech thee, O Lord, and guide me this day in
the way of all truth and righteousness, and so govern all my actions that I may
not run into any Sin, or any kind of danger, but that all may Actions may tend
to thy glory, and the discharge of my duty, in my life and Conversation; defend
and deliver me also from all temptations, and afflictions, in this sinful
world, and from all mine Enemies, and from all the deceits and dangers of
Satan, the deadly Enemy of Mankind. Kindle in my heart and affections a fervent
Zeal to do thy will, and let me embrace thy holy word, and walk in thy ways,
strengthen me with thy holy Spirit, boldly and constantly to profess the honor
and service of thy great name. O Lord, strengthen my weak faith; Kindle it more
and more in fervency and love to reward thee, and in all Christian love toward
my Neigbours. Give me a contented mind with my estate, and all other blessings
which thou, O Lord God, of thy bountiful goodness in mercy have bestowed upon
me, that I may use them soberly and discreetly, and be truly thankful to thee
for them; keep my wandering will and affections from all evil thoughts, my
tongue from profane and lewd Speeches, my body and every part thereof, from all
sinful Actions, and outward violence; let all my love, my hope, my delight and
confidence, be only upon thee. And grant that I may lead my whole life, and
conversation so, that I may live in the fear of thy holy and blessed name, and
may die in thy favor, that I may also rise again, to live for ever and ever
with my Lord Jesus. In whose Name and Words I further pray.

Our Father, etc.

A Prayer for Thursday-Evening.
O Heavenly Father, the giver of all good things, and the Protector of all
those that love thee, I yield thee most humble and hearty thanks, not only for
keeping and preserving me this day, but also all my life, that neither my
Enemies have prevailed against me as they might, nor any other danger which in
this world is incident to Mankind, has overcome me; but that thou as a loving
father, and careful purveyor, have given unto me, and provided for me, all
things necessary; for which thine inestimable love I cannot suffiently praise
thee; O Lord forgive me mine offenses, which this day I have committed, and
done against thy most holy Majesty; pardon them O God, for Jesus Christ his
sake, and vouchsafe me thy grace to amend my life, and to return unfeignedly
unto thee in serving of thee; And since I cannot have a being without thy
continual Protection, be pleased to extend the same toward me (a wretched poor
creature) this night, that I may quietly take my rest, which thou have
appointed for the refreshing of my weak and wearied body. I beseech thee, O
Lord, to guard me and defend me, that nothing hurt me; preserve me by the
watching of thy holy Angel, that I may take my rest with thee, until the
morning; and that I may then give my self to the fulfilling of my duty, and the
discharge of my calling, and the doing of thy will unto my lives end. Here me,
I beseech thee, for these things, and for all things necessary for me, and for
all others whom thou have commanded me to pray for, even for all such as are in
any kind of Affliction in body or mind. O Lord, Strengthen them, and bless
them, and me; and keep me, and mine, this Night, and for Evermore. All these
Petitions I humbly beg of thy Majesty in and through thy Son Jesus Christ; in
whose Blessed Name and Words, I further Pray, Our Father, etc.

A Prayer for Friday Morning.
HOly, and most Gracious Lord God, who art full of loving Kindness and Mercy,
and art a continual Defense to all that trust in thee, whether they wake or
sleep, I a poor unworthy Sinner, render unto thee humble and hearty thanks,
that it has pleased thy Great Goodness to keep and preserve me the Night past,
as well from all my Enemies, as from all other casualties and dangers that poor
mortal Creatures are subject unto, and that thou have given me sweet and
pleasant sleep, that I find my Body refreshed and comforted, for performing the
Duties of this Day. O Lord, I beseech thee, show thy goodness to me this Day,
in preserving my Body and Soul, that no evil may overtake me, and that I may
neither speak nor do any thing that may be displeasing to thy Fatherly
Goodness, nor dangerous to my Soul, nor hurtful to my Neighbor, but that all
my enterprises may be agreeable to thy most blessed Will, by doing always that
which may advance thy Glory, and be suitable to my calling; that whenever thou
shall be pleased to call me from this Vale of Misery, I may be found a Child of
Light, and not of darkness, and so may for ever Reign with thee in Glory, who
art the True and Everlasting Light, whose Kingdom is an Everlasting Kingdom,
whose Joys and Glories are such as Eye has not seen, neither has Ear heard,
nor has it entered into the heart of Man to conceive what it is. To this
Blessed Place O Lord do thou at last bring me, through Jesus Christ; to whom
with thee and the Holy Ghost, be all Honor, Glory, Power and Praise, for Ever
and for Evermore. Amen.

Our Father, etc.

A Prayer for Friday Evening.
GRacious Lord, and heavenly Father, I cannot cease but I must cry unto thee
for mercy, because my sins cry against me for Justice, how shall I address my
self unto thee, but with the Publican, I must stand and admire thy goodness
toward me, considering thy tender mercy, and long patience toward me, in that
thou have kept me this day past from being consumed, and brought to naught? for
Lord, what is man, or the son of man, that thou regardest him? for the more
days past over my head, the more sins and iniquities I heap up against thee; if
I should cast up the Accounts of my good deeds this day, O Lord how few and how
small would they be? but if I should reckon up my miscarriages this day, surely
they would amount to many and great. O blessed Father, let thy sons blood wash
me, and cleanse me from all my impurities, and from all the stains of sin that
are upon me; give me grace to lay fast hold upon his merits, that it may be my
Reconcilation and Atonement unto thee; that I may assure my self, that my sins
are forgiven by his death and passion. And now, O Lord, I beseech thee, to
embrace me in the Arms of thy mercy; vouchsafe to receive me into the bosom of
thy love, shadow me with thy wings, that I may safely take my rest in thee this
night; in the Name of thy Son Jesus Christ, in whom I refer my self wholly to
thy protection, beseeching thee, that when this life shall end, my last sleep
being come, I may take my everlasting rest with thee in thy heavenly Kingdom,
for the glory of thy holy Name, and to my eternal comfort; through the merits
of thy dearly beloved Son, my Lord, and only Savior; in whose perfect form of
Prayer, I conclude my imperfect Petitions, saying,

Our Father, etc.

A Prayer for Saturday Morning.
O Merciful Father, for Jesus Christ his sake, I beseech thee, forgive me all
my known and secret sins, which in Thought Word or Deed, I have committed
against thy Divine Majesty; and deliver me from all those Judgments which are
due unto me for them, and sanctify my heart with thy Holy Spirit, that I may
henceforth lead a more Godly, and Religious life. And here, O Lord, I praise
thy Holy Name, for that thou have refreshed me this Night with moderate sleep
and rest: And I beseech theee, to defend me this day from all Perils, and
dangers of Body and Soul; and to this end I commend my self, and all my
actions, unto thy blessed protection and government, beseeching thee, that
whether I live or die, I may live and die to thy Glory, and the Salvation of my
poor Soul, which thou have bought with thy precious Blood: Bless me, O Lord,
in my going out, and coming in; and grant, that whatsoever I shall think,
speak, or take in hand this day, may tend to the glory of thy Name, the good of
others, and the comfort of my own Conscience, when I shall come to make up my
last accounts before thee. O my God, help thy servant, that I do no evil to any
man this day; and let it be thy blessed will, not to suffer the Devil, nor any
of his wicked Angels, nor any of his evil Members, to have power to do me any
hurt or violence; but let the eye of thy holy providence watch over me for
good, and not for evil; and command thy holy Angels to pitch their Tents round
about me, for my defense and Safety in my going out, and coming in, as thou
have promised they shall do about them that fear thy name; Grant this O
heavenly Father, for Jesus Christ thy sons sake, in whose blessed name I give
thee glory, and beg at thy hands, all other graces which thou see to be
needful, for me this day and ever, in that prayer which Christ himself has
taught me, saying.

Our Father, etc.

A Prayer for Saturday-Evening.
O Most gracious God, and loving Father, who are about my Bed, and know my
down-lying, and mine up-rising, and art near unto all that call upon thee in
truth and sincerity; I wretched sinner do beseech thee to look upon me with the
Eyes of thy Mercy; Father, I beseech thee, let thy holy Spirit work in me such
a serious Repentance, as that I may with Tears lament my sins past, with grief
of heart be humbled for my sins present, and with all my endeavor, resist the
fame sins for the time to come. And now, O Lord, I Bless thee for my Health,
Food, Raiment, and Prosperity, and more especially, that thou have defended me
this day now past, from all dangers and Perils both of Body and Soul,
furnishing me with all necessary good things, that I stand in need of; and as
thou have ordained the Day for man to Travel in, and the Night for him to take
his rest, so I beseech thee sanctify unto me this Nights rest and sleep, that
I may enjoy the same as thy sweet blessing and benefit, that so this dull and
wearied body of mine, being refreshed with moderate sleep and rest, I may be
the better enabled to walk before thee, doing all such good works as thou have
appointed, when it shall Please thee of thy Divine goodness, to waken me the
next Morning: More especially, I beseech thee, to prepare me for thy Service to
Morrow; it is thine Holy day, O Lord, prepare me for the Sanctifying of the
same, that I may not spend it in my own Lusts and pleasures; but that my chief
delight may be to Consecrate it to thy Glory and Honor, and that ceasing from
the works of sin, as well as from the works of my ordinary Calling, I may
through thy Blessing, feel in my heart, the beginning of that Eternal Sabbath,
which in unspeakable Joy and Glory I shall celebrate with the Saints and
Angels, to thy Praise and Glory, in thy Heavenly Kingdom for Evermore.

Keep my heart, O Lord, in thy fear, and guide all the course of my life by thy
Favor, and prepare me against the hour of Death and Dissolution, that if thou
should this night make my Bed in the dark, and turn my sleep into Death, I
may Live and Die unto thee, who live Everlastingly: these Graces, and all
other Blessings which thou O Father, know to be requisite and necessary for
me, I humbly beg, and crave at thy Hands, in the Name and Mediation of Jesus
Christ thy Son, in that form of Prayer which he himself has Taught me, saying.

Our Father, etc.

FAMILY DEVOTIONS, OR, A COLLECTION OF Morning and Evening PRAYERS For Families
for every day in the Week.

But as for me, and my house, we will serve the Lord,

Josh 25. 15. Family-Devotions.
A Prayer for a Family for Sunday Morning.
LOrd teach us to Pray, that we may call upon thy Name: Prepare our hearts to
seek, and open thou thy ears Mercifully to hear us. O Eternal and Everliving
Lord God, Creator and continual Preserver of all things, both in Heaven and in
Earth, by whose gracious Providence, as we were at the first wonderfully and
fearfully Made; so we are no less preserved and kept unto this present: We the
Workmanship of thy own hands, desire to humble both Soul and Body before thee.
And now, O Lord, we being here in thy Presence, cannot but acknowledge and
confess against our selves, our own unworthiness to come before thee to call
upon thee, or to perform even the least Duty that shall concern thy Worship and
Glory. Our hearts alas, are no better then the sink of sin, and a mass of all
Pollution, and uncleanness. Wheresore O dear God, most meek and Merciful
Father, we poor Wretches, heartily beseech thee, to be Gracious unto us, for
Jesus Christ thy Sons sake, for his Death sake, for thy Promise, Truth, and
Mercies sake, have Mercy upon us; Pardon us and Forgive us all our Sins,
Iniquities, and Trespasses, whatsoever we have committed against thee, in
thought, Word, or Deed, Ever, or at any time hitherto, by any means. Dear
Father have mercy upon us, though we be poor, yet our Christ is Rich, though we
be sinners, he is Righteous; though we be impure, yet he is Pure and Holy; for
his sake therefore, O Lord, have mercy upon us, and Write thy Law in our
Hearts; engrave it in our Minds, we heartily beseech thee. And let us this
Morning of thy Holy Day, wholly turn unto thee, with all our Hearts, Minds,
Thoughts, Deeds, and Meditations, that we may join in Praises to thy holy Name,
for thy preservation of us the night past, and refreshing us with sweet sleep;
and let us declare thy loving kindness in the Morning, on thy Holy and Blessed
Sabbath Day; for it is thy Will and Commandment that we should Sanctify this
thy Day unto thy Service, and in Praise unto thee, and offer up unto thee a
morning Sacrifice of Praises, and Thanksgiving, and to hear what thy Spirit, by
the preaching of thy Word, shall speak unto us thy Servants: O let not our sins
stand as a cloud to stop our Prayers from Ascending up unto thee, or to keep
back thy Grace from Descending, by thy Word, into our hearts, that we may cease
from the works of sin, as well as from the works of our ordinary calling; and
that we may feel in our hearts the beginning of that Eternal Sabbath, which
brings unspeakable Joy and Glory, and filling us with the Spirit of Prayer,
make us diligent and ready in the performance of thy will. And take us, O Lord,
into thy custody and governance for ever, both our Souls and Bodies, yea our
Lives, and all that ever we have, so that our Lives may please thee, and our
Deaths may praise thee, through Jesus Christ our Lord: for whose sake we
heartily Pray thee to grant these things thus asked, and all other things
necessary for soul and body, and that not only to us, but to all others also,
for whom thou would we should pray. Grant unto us all true and hearty
Repentance, that we may turn from our evil ways, that thou may turn from us
the evils that we have so highly deserved.

And with us, O Lord, bless thy whole Church, especially that part of it in
these Kingdoms; Be Gracious to thy servant and our Sovereign Lord King
Charles, Bless him in his Government, and in his Royal Relations, our Gracious
Queen Katherine, James Duke of York, and all the Royal Family, bless the
Nobility, Clergy, Magistracy, Gentry, and the whole People of this Land: be
merciful to all our Kindsfolks, and Families, Neighbors; and to all such as
are any other way Related to us; and we beseech thee to grant us all thy
Blessings, and thy holy Spirit to sanctify us, and to keep us this day and for
Evermore from all Evil, to thy Eternal Glory, and our everlasting comfort,
through Jesus Christ, our Lord and only Savior: in whose Blessed Name and
Words, we further Pray, Our Father, etc.

A Prayer for a Family for Sunday Evening.
O Eternal God, our most loving and merciful Father in Jesus Christ, it is
thine own commandment, that we should call upon thy name, and it is thy
gracious and merciful promise, that where two or three are gathered together in
thy name, there thou will be present among them; we thy poor and unworthy
servants, Dust and Ashes, yet the Workmanship of thine own Hand, are more bold
to come before thee, to offer unto thee this Evening sacrifice of Prayer, and
Thanksgiving: O Lord, we beseech thee, to sanctify unto us thy word which we
have heard, and read this day; make it the seed of life unto our souls, that it
may fructify, grow, and increase, and get such strength by thy good
providence, that neither the burning heat of affliction, or persecution, cause
it to wither, but that as seed sown in good ground, it may bring forth thirty,
sixty, and a hundred fold, as thy heavenly wisdom has appointed. And now, O
Lord, being here before thee, we cannot but acknowledge, and confess, ever from
the bottom of our Hearts, against our selves, our own Unworthiness, that we are
grievous sinners, Conceived in sin, and born in iniquity, whereof we have
brought forth most vile fruits in our lives to the great dishonor, of thy Name
the utter dismaying of our own Consciences, and the evil example of our
Brethren, by which we have deserved likewise thy wrath and heavy indignation,
to be poured upon us, both in this life, and that which is to come, in such
sort that no creature in heaven, or earth, is able to reconcile us again to thy
Majesty, but only thy Son Jesus Christ; we entreat thee therefore O Lord, to be
merciful unto us; and as we acknowledge our sins unto thee, so be thou faithful,
and just, to forgive us our sins, and cleanse us from all unrighteousness; wash
us thoroughly from our wickedness, and cleanse us from our sins; for we
acknowledge, O Lord, against thee we have sinned, and done evil in thy sight: To
thee therefore, O Lord, do we come to crave the pardon of our sins, both ^or
the guilt and punishment of the same, that so they may not draw down upon us
our deserved Judgment; And good Lord we pray thee, accept of our Thanksgiving
unto thy Majesty, for all thy mercies, and blessings, from time to time
bestowed upon us; for this life, and for a better; we praise thee for our
Election, Vocation, Justification, Sanctification, and continual Preservation,
and the assurance thou have given us of a better Life when this is ended; as
also for all temporal blessings health, peace and prosperity; for thy goodness
extended toward us; for this day past, that thou have go^ in, and out, before
us, and freed us from many dangers of soul and body, and have brought us with
peace and comfort, to the beginning of this night; Lord Watch over us, by thy
Spitit, and Presence; give us a holy and sanctified use of our rest and sleep,
and fit us for the Duties of the next day; especially, O Lord fit us for that
day, which shall never give place to night. And grant unto us all good things,
that thou in thy Wisdom know more expedient to give, than we to ask; and
all we beg for Jesus Christ His sake, in whose Name, and Words, we conclude
these our imperfect Prayers, saying, as he has taught us. Our Father, etc.

A Prayer for a Family, for Monday Morning.
MOst Merciful and Gracious Lord God, we do not present our selves here before
thy Majesty, trusting in our own merits, or worthiness, but in thy manifold
Mercies; which have Promised, to hear our Prayers and grant our Requests, which
we shall make unto thee, in the Name of thy Dear Son Jesus Christ our Lord; who
has also commanded us to assemble our selves together in his Name, with full
assurance, that He will not only be amongst us, but also be our Mediator and
Advocate toward thy Majesty, that we may obtain all things, which shall seem
expedient to thy blessed Will, for our necessities: Therefore we beseech thee
(most Merciful Father) to turn thy loving Countenance toward us, and impute not
unto us our manifold sins and offenses, whereby we justly deserve thy Wrath,
and sharp punishment, but rather, receive us to thy Mercy for Jesus Christ his
sake, accepting his Death and Passion, as a just recompense for all our
offenses, in whom only thou art Pleased, and through whom thou can not be
offended with us. And seeing that of thy great Mercy, we have quietly passed
this night, Grant O Heavenly Father, that we may bestow this day wholly in thy
Service, so that all our thoughts, words, and deeds, may redound to the Glory
of thy Name, and good examples to all men, who seeing our good works, may
Glorify thee our Heavenly Father. And because thou have commanded us, to pray
one for another, we do not only make request O Lord for our selves, and them
that thou have already called, for the true understanding of thine heavenly
Will; but for all People and Nations of the World, who as they know by thy
wonderful Works, that thou art God over all; so they may be instructed, by
thine own Spirit, to believe i^ their only Savior and Redeemer. And the Lord
be merciful to us, and let not our sins, and wickedness, be a hinderance to thy
Mercy: We are now come before thee, to bewail our sins, and miscarriages,
heartily desiring thee, to cause us to turn unto thee, to seek and love thee;
that our hearts may cleave fast unto thee, diligently following thee, all the
residue of our days; and that thou will be pleased, to guide us with thy holy
Spirit, that we may make Conscience of all that we do; never accounting any sin
little, because thy Son died for the least: Remove from our minds all
Ignorance, and Blindness; making thy Word unto us, as a Lanthorn unto our feet,
to guide ou^ paths, that we may find Christ our Savior, and Redeemer; and by
his rule, be so directed, that all ignorance in the Mysteries of our calling,
be done away, and that we may learn thereby how to live: and further, good
Lord, settle every one of us in such a constant course of obedience to thee,
that we may serve thee, as thy own Children ought to serve thee, and not as the
World, the flesh, and the Devil will have us; Suffer us not, O Lord, to set our
hearts upon things below, but having Food, and Raiment, let us be therewith
content; and be thankful un^o thy Heavenly Majesty, that thou O Lord, our God,
may prosper all our labors and handy-Works. These and all other blessings,
we beg of thee, in the Name of Jesus Christ, our blessed Lord and Savior: in
whose blessed Name and Words, we further Pray,

Our Father, etc.

A Prayer for a Family for Monday Evening.
O Lord God Almighty, and our Heavenly Father, who art Everlasting and full of
Pity, we acknowledge and confess, that we are not Worthy to lift up our Eye^
unto Heaven, much less to present our selves before thy Majesty, wit^
confidence that thou will hear ou^ Prayers, and grant our requests, i^ we
consider our own deservings* For our Consciences accuse us, an^ our Sins do
Witness against us^ we know that thou art an uprigh^ Judge, which does not
justify sinners, and wicked Men, but punish^ est the Faults of all such as
brea^ thy Commandments; yet mo^ Merciful Father, since it has pleased thee to
Command us to call o^ thee in all our Troubles and Adversities, promising even
then to help us, when we feel our selves as it were Swallowed up of Death, and
Desparation; we utterly renounce all worldly confidence, and fly to thy
Sovereign Bounty as our only stay and refuge; beseeching thee not to call to
Remembrance our manifold Sins and Wickedness, whereby we continually provoke
thy Wrath and Indignation against us. Neither do thou lay to our charge our
negligence, nor our unthankfulness, that we have not worthily esteemed, nor in
our lives sufficiently expressed the sweet comfort of the Gospel, revealed unto
us: But do thou rather Accept the obedience and Death of thy Son Jesus Christ,
who by offering up himself, a Sacrifice once for all, has made a sufficient
recompense for all our sins. Have mercy therefore upon us, O Lord, and forgive
us our offenses. Teach us by thine holy Spirit that we may rightly weigh them;
and earnestly Repent for the same, and so much the rather, O Lord, because that
Reprobates, and such as thou have forsaken, cannot praise thee, nor call upon
thy Name; but the repenting Heart, the sorrowful Mind, the Conscience
Oppressed, Hungring and Thirsting for thy Grace, shall ever set forth thy
Praise and Glory. And now O Lord, though we are but Dust and Worms, yet thou
art our Creator, and we are the work of thine Hands; yea, thou art our Father,
and we are thy Children; thou art our Shepherd, and we are thy Flock; thou art
our Redeemer, and we are thy People, whom thou have bought; thou art our God,
and we are thine Inheritance. Correct us not therefore in thine Anger, O Lord,
neither according to our deserts punish us, but mercifully Chastise us, with a
Fatherly affection, that all the World may know, that if a sinner repent him of
his sins, from the bottom of his Heart, thou will put away his wickedness out
of thy Rememberance, as thou have promised by thy holy Prophets. And for as
much as it has pleased thee, to make the Night for Man to rest in, as thou
have Ordained him the day to travel in; Grant dear Father, that we may so take
our bodily rest, that our Soul may continually watch for the time that our Lord
Jesus Christ shall appear, for our deliverance, out of this mortal life; and
grant that we be not overcome this Night, by any Fancies, Dreams, or other
Temptations; but that we may fully, set our mind upon thee, love thee, fear
thee, and rest in thee; and let not our sleep be excessive, or overmuch, after
the in^atiable desires of our flesh, but only sufficient to content our weak
Nature, that we may be the better disposed, to live in all Godly Conversation,
to the Glory of thy holy Name, and the profit of our brehrent, through, Jesus
our Lord: in whose Name we pray, as he has taught us, saying,

Our Father, etc.

A Prayer for a Family for Tuesday Morning.
MOst Mighty and most glorious Lord God, who art of infinite Mercy, who sit
upon thy Throne above Heaven, and Earth, are full of thy Glory; we that are but
Dust and Ashes, unprofitable Servants, presume to present our selves before
thee, this morning, and beg such things as we have need of from thy Divine
Majesty; we have tasted of thy Favors this night past, and for ever since we
awaked, we have tasted of thy Goodness. Thou thoughtest of Saving us, before we
began to serve thee; thou had an eye upon us, when we were yet unborn; and
notwithstanding our unworthiness, thou still receivest us; thou give us our
daily Bread, and hourly Breath, thou continuest, and we hope wilt comfort us,
in Death, and wilt Crown us with Life in the World to come: Why should thou
be so careful of us, since we are so careless of thee; surely O Lord, in that
thou affordest us health to our bodies, liberty to our persons, prosperity to
this Family, in which we live, we can give no reason, but because thou art
Merciful. The Heavens are within a Spain, the Earth within a Circle, the Waters
within thy fist, mountains upon the balance; but what number, or measure, or
bounds can we set to thy Goodness and Mercy O God? O let the Ocean of this thy
Mercy, be a Partition between us and our sins, betwixt thee, and thy Judgments!
who can bring a clean thing, out of an unclean, but thou alone who justifiest
the ungodly, and quickenest the dead in sin? Remove therefore from us, O Lord,
whatsoever there is in us, that displeases thee, for thine Eyes do behold our
manifold imperfections; send thy Hand of Mercy, we pray thee upon us, and take
away from us, whatsoever there is within us, which does offend the Eyes of thy
Goodness. And as thou have in great Mercy, kept us this Night past, from all
Perils and Dangers of the same, so we beseech thee, keep us this day, that the
Son of Righteousness, may Rule in our Hearts, and that all the darkness that
lurketh in them, may be scattered, to the comfort of our souls; and that we may
walk in the light, as thy Children, without danger of stumbling. Prosper, O
Lord, our labors, and the works of our hands, and grant that we may grow in
Grace, all our days, until we come to Live, and Reign with thee, in thy
Heavenly Kingdom. And together with us, bless, O Lord, thy Church Universal;
comfort all that Mourn in Sion, give them Beauty for Ashes, and the Oil of
gladness, for the Spirit of Mourning and Heaviness. Bless our Gracious King,
defend his Person, uphold his Crown, maintain his Government; bless our
gracious Q. Katharine, James Duke of York, and all the Royal Family: bless the
Nobility, Magistrates, Bishops, and Ministers: and let thy blessing be upon all
of us, in this household, guide us in our ways, and lead us into thy Truth.
Bless all our Friends, and Kindred, all that are in any Affliction, or
Tribulation. And do for them, and us, whatsoever thou know necessary for us,
for the Sake of Jesus Christ, our only Savior, and Redeemer, in whose Name,
and Words, we beseech the, saying,

Our Father, etc.

A Prayer for a Family for Tuesday Evening.
HOly, and Glorious Lord God, what shall we reader unto thee, for all thy
Benefits? because thou host inclined thine Ear unto us, therefore will we call
upon thee, as long as we live, from the rising of the Sun, to the going down of
the same, let thy Name be praised; among the infinite Riches of thy Mercies
toward us we render thee abundant of praise and thanks, for thy merciful
preservation of us this day, as well as all the times and days of our lives,
that thou have bestowed upon us so many excellent blessings and mercys, both
Spiritual, and corporal, contrary to our deservings: All these thy mercys call
upon us, that we should be thankful to thee for them; and all our miseries,
call upon us, that we should call upon thee for the continuance of thy mercies:
Cleanse our Souls therefore, we beseech thee, O Lord, from whatsoever is
offensive to thee, and hurtful to us, and give us what is necessary for us. And
now, O Lord, Watch over us this night, give us comfortable and sweet sleep, fit
us for all services of the day following; make our souls to watch for the
coming of the Lord Jesus Christ; let our beds put us in mind of our Graves;
and our rising from thence, of our last Resurrection; so that whether we wake,
or sleep, we being thine, may wait for thee; O Heavenly Father, so form these
hearts of ours, that we may ever delight to live, according to thy Will and
Ordinance, in Holiness, and Righteousness before thee, all the days of our
lives; O Lord let us consider, the time will come, when the Trumpet shall and
will sound; the dead shall Rise, and we, even we, all and every one of us,
shall assuredly stand before thy Judgment Seat, with open, and unfolded
Consciences, there to give an account of all our deeds whatsoever; at which
time, all such as have believed in Christ, and truly served thee in this life,
shall to their endless, and unspeakable joy, hear that comfortable saying of
thine, Come ye blessed of my Father, Receive the Kingdom prepared for you,
before the beginning of the World: but woe to all that live wicked and sinful
lives in that day; they shall drink of the Wine of the Wrath of God, and shall
be Tormented in Fire and Brimstone for Evermore. O Dear God, and gracious
Father, keep us from this condition, and knit our hearts fast unto thee, and
cause us now, while we have time, with the help of thy Grace, not only to think
rightly of these things, but so to walk before thee, in this present life, as
becomes thy people, and Children; O continue the Word of Truth evermore
amongst us, to comfort us, and let the seed thereof take such fast root in our
hearts, that it may fructify and bring forth fruit, to thy Glory, and our own
good and comfort, that we may be the more enabled thereby, to walk in they
fear, in the midst of a wicked, and perverse Generation. Shower down thy
blessings upon the Head and Heart of our gracious King and Queen, and upon all
the Royal Family, Bless O Lord the Ministers, Judges, and Magistrates of this
Land. Bless all the people of all degrees, and kinds; Let thy blessing be upon
our Relations, Kindred, and Friends; and upon all others, whom we are bound to
pray for, in any affliction, pain, trouble, sickness, or any other distemper
whatsoever. Bless them all, and bless us, and ours, and do more for us, then we
can express unto thee, and all we beg in the Name, and Words, of our blessed
Savior, and Redeemer, saying,

Our Father, etc.

A Prayer for a Family for Wednesday Morning.
MOst gracious Lord God, and holy Father, thine eyes are more pure than the
Son, and cannot behold any thing that is unclean; the Cherubins, and Seraphins,
cover their faces before thy glorious Majesty; the heaven of heavens are not
clean in thy sight; How then shall earth, sinful earth, dust, and ashes, appear
before thee? we persume not, O Lord, to come before thy Tribunal, to plead for
our righteousness, for all our righteousness is as filthy rags; but we
prostrate our selves, with all humility of body, and soul, at thy mercy seat,
to make confession of our sins: Hear Lord, and have mercy on us, and as thou
have Redeemed us by thy Son, so we beseech thee, to sanctify us, by thy holy
Spirit; Mortify in us every day more and more, all sinful lusts and
affections; and quicken us in all saving graces, and virtues; increase our
faith, confirm our hope, inflame our Charity, teach us to imitate the life of
Christ, the true pattern of perfect Obedience, and only true rule of a Godly
life; Teach us. Humility, Patience, Meekness, Gentleness, Chastity, Temperance;
Teach us to contemn earthly things; to deny our selves, to overcome the world;
grant us consolation in adversity, and true tranquillity of mind; grant us
victory in temptations, and deliverance from the devils treacheries; grant us
in thine appointed time, a blessed departure of this life, and a bless^^
resurrection unto life everl^sting; And we pray not for our selves alone, but
in obedience to thy Command; we make our supplication unto thee for all men;
save and defend thy universal Church, enlarge thou her borders, propagate thy
Kingdom; Bless thy servant Charles, our most gracious King and governor; Bless
together with him, our gracious Q. Katharine, James Duke of York, and the rest
of the Royal Family; Bless we beseech thee, the Lords of his Majestys most
Honorable Privy Council; the Nobles, Judges, Ministers and Magistrates of this
Realm. Be thou a Father to the Fatherless, a Comforter to the Comfortless; a
Deliverer to the Captives, and a Physician to the Sick; Grant that the Sickness
of their Bodies, may be for the good of their souls. Hear us likewise, O Lord,
for the sake of Christ, and accept our thanksgiving; we thank thee for
preserving us, ever since we were born; and for defending us this night, from
all perils and dangers; for the quiet rest wherewith thou have refreshed our
bodies; for thy mercy renewed unto us this morning; let thy mercy be continued
unto us this day; let thy Spirit direct us, in all our ways, that we may walk
before thee, as Children of the light, doing those things, that are pleasing in
thy sight; Let the dew of thy blessing, descend upon our labors; for without
thy blessing, all our labor is in vain; Prosper thou the works of our hands
upon us; and grant that we may so conscionably seek after things temporal, in
our callings, that we do not finally lose the things which are eternal; we are
unworthy, O Lord, we confess, to obtain any thing at thy hand, either for our
selves, or any other, even for the sinfulness of these our prayers; But since
thou have promised, to hear all those, that call upon thee, in thy sons name;
make good we beseech thee, thy promise unto us, now calling upon thee, in thy
Sons name, and praying as he has taught us, in his holy Gospel.

Our Father, etc.

A Prayer for a Family for Wednesday Evening.
MOst Glorious Lord God, whose dwelling is in the highest heavens. And yet
beholdest the lowly and the humble upon earth; we blush and are ashamed to lift
up our eyes unto heaven, because we have sinned against thee, which dwell in
the heavens; But look down we beseech thee, from heaven thy dwelling place, and
behold the humility of thy servants here on earth, which prostrate themselves
at the footstool of thy mercy, confessing their own guiltiness, begging pardon
for our sins; we confess, O Almighty Creator, that thou made us at the first,
after thine own Images; thou cloathedst us with Innocence, as with a Garment;
thou seatest us in Paradise, a place of all delight and P^easure; But we have
defaced thine Image, we have cast off our first Covering; we have thrust our
selves out of that pleasant place; we ran away from thee, and were not obedient
to thy Voice. And we do still shut our Eyes, O Lord, that we might not see, and
we have refused to be ruled by thy Law. The law of sin in our flesh, does daily
capt^vate us; The root of sin, which lies hidden in us, does every day put
forth new branches; all the parts, and faculties, of our bodies, and souls, are
as so many Instruments of unrighteousness, to fight against thy Divine Majesty.
Our hearts imagine wicked things; our mouths utter them, and our hands put them
in practice; Thy Mercys are every day renewed unto us, and our sins are every
day multiplied against thee; in the day of health, and prosperity, we forget
thee, and we never think upon thee, in the day of sickness, and adversity; Thy
benefits heaped upon us, do not allure us to obey thee; neither do thy
Judgments inflicted upon others, make us afraid to offend thee; what could
thou have done, O Lord, more for us? or, what could we have done more against
thee? Thou did send thy Son, in the fullness of time, to take our nature upon
him, to fulfill thy Law for us, and to be Crucified for our sins; but we have
not followed the example of his Holy Life, but have every day afresh, Crucified
him by our sins; and now O Lord, if we should become our own Judges, we cannot
but confess, that, we have deserved everlasting torments in Hell fire; but
there is mercy with thee, O Lord, therefore will we not despair; our sins are
many in number, but thy mercys are without number; the weight of our sins is
great, but the weight of thy Sons Cross was greater; our sins press us down to
hell, but thy mercy in Christ Jesus, raises us up; by Satan we are accused,
but by Jesus Christ we are defended; By our own Consciences, we are condemned,
but by Jesus Christ, we are absolved and pardoned; in us there is nothing but
Sin, Death, and Damnation; in him there is treasured up for us, Righteousness,
Life and Salvation; we are poor, Christ is our Riches; we are naked, he is our
covering; We are exposed to thy fury pursuing of us, he is the buckler of our
defense, and our refuge; he is the Rock of our Salvation, and in him do we
trust; Guide us, O Lord, by thy holy Spirit, to amend what is amiss in us,
increase all gifts and graces, which thou have already given, and give unto us
what thou best know to be wanting; Be gracious, and favorable to thy whole
Church, especially to that part of it among us; Bless thy Servant and our
sovereign Lord, King Charles; our gracious Queen Katharine, and all the Royal
Family; we beseech thee also to be gracious to the Kings Council, the Nobility,
the Magistracy, the Ministry, the Gentry, the Commonalty; Forget not, O Lord,
all those that are under the Cross, and affliction; Cloth the Naked, feed the
Hungry, visit the Sick, deliver the Captives, defend the Fatherless and Widow,
relieve the Oppressed, confirm and strengthen those that suffer Persecution for
Righteousness sake; cure those that are broken in heart, speak peace unto their
consciences, that are tormented with the sense of their sins; stand by those
that are ready to depart out of this life, and when the house of their earthly
Tabernacle shall be destroyed, then Lord receive their Souls. And now O Lord,
we bless, and praise thy Name, for our Health, Maintenance and Liberty, for
preserving us ever since we were born, for blessing us in all that we have put
our hands unto this day; Let thy mercy still be continued unto us, we beseech
thee; let the eye of thy providence, which never slumbereth nor sleeps, watch
over us, and let the hand of thy power, Protect, and defend us; Cover us this
Night, under the Shadow of thy Wings, that no evil happen unto us; Grant that
our bodies may be refreshed this night, with such moderate rest, that we may be
the fitter, for the works of our vocation, and thy service the next morning;
Hear us we beseech thee for Jesus Christ his sake, our Lord, and only Savior;
in whose Name, and Words, we call upon thee, further Praying, Our Father, etc.

A Prayer for a Family for Thursday Morning.
GLorious Lord God, and in Jesus Christ our merciful and loving Father, we
thine unworthy creatures, sinful dust and ashes, are here in all humility of
souls and bodies, prostrate as the lowest footstool of thy glorious Majesty:
beseeching thee, to bow down thine ears unto our prayers, and to open thine
eyes to our Supplications, who from the very bottom of our hearts, do
acknowledge and confess, that we have been unprofitable servants, prodigal
Children, and bad stewards of that time which thou have afforded us for
repentance, and good works, and of those tallents, which thou have committed to
our improvement; we are Children of rebellious and disobedient parents, our
hearts are cages of unclean birds, of noisome lusts, and the thoughts thereof
have been evil, and only evil, and that continually: And if we look, O Lord
unto the actions of our lives, there are few sins we have not committed, no
Commandment which we have not broken; These eyes, which now look up unto
heaven, have beheld vanity; these tongues which now call upon thee, have
dishonored thee; and these hands, which we now lift up unto thee, have been
many times lifted up against thee, and thy statutes; so that we have made our
selves unworthy of the east of thy mercies, but worthy of the greatest of thy
Judgments; but deal not with us, after our sins, neither reward us according to
our ^niquities: Spare, us O Lord, Spare thy people, whom thou have creat^d
after thine own Image, and redeemed with thy own blood; And according to the
multitude of thy tender compassions, which have ever been of old to us, blot
out the multitude of our transgressions, pardon our sins, and receive us again
into thy favor, for his sake, and Suffering, who has Satisfied thy Justice to
the utmost farthing: And for the short residue, and remainder of our days, give
us grace O Lord, to consecrate the remainder of them, to thy service, to redeem
that time, which we cannot recall, and to make our calling and election sure,
before we go home and be seen no more; And because the corruption of our
nature, are too many, and too strong for us, and the Devil, like a roaring
Lion, goes about continually to devour us; leave us not to our selves but
assist us by thy grace; perfed thy strength in our weakness, and preserve both
our bodies and souls blameless, and spotless, that when we shall have finished
our course and run the race of our natural Pil^grimage, we may receive that
crown of righteousness, which thou the righteous, and just Judge, have laid up
for all them that love, and expect the day of thy appearing; And together with
us, we entreat thee, for a blessing upon our King, Queen, Duke, and the rest of
the Royal Family; upon our Counselors, Ministers, and Magistrates; upon our
friends, Kindred, and acquaintance, upon the whole Church, and every afflicted
member of it; Eccept of our Morning sacrifice of praise, and thanksgiving, for
all the mercies and favors, comforts and deliverances, which from time to time
thou have afforded and continued to us, we thank thee for thy last mercy, in
preserving us, from the dangers of this night past, for refreshing our bodies
with seasonable rest, and bringing us safe to the beginning of this day: Lord,
what is man, that thou art so mindful of him, and the son of man, that thou
should thus visit, and remember him? give us grace, O Lord, to remember
thee, and to be mindful of thy mercies, that we may praise thee for all thee
truth, and faithfulness, which thou show to us in the land of the living;
that as thou have brought us to the comforts of this day, so thou may go
along with us, in the same, to enable us for the Duties, of those callings
wherein we are placed, and to deliver us from those dangers to which we are
exposed, ever for Jesus Christ his sake: in whose most blessed name and words,
we conclude these our weak and imperfect prayers, saying as he himself has
taught us, in his holy Gospel. Our Father, etc.

A Prayer for a Family for Thursday Evening.
O Eternal God, and most merciful Father, in Jesus Christ, in whom thou have
made a Covenant of Grace and Mercy with all those that come unto thee in him;
in his Name and Mediation, we humbly prostrate our selves before the throne of
thy mercy-seat, acknowledging that by the breach of all thy holy Laws and
Commandments, we are become wild Olive Branches, strangers to thy Covenant of
Grace; we have defaced in our selves, thy sacred Image, imprinted in us by
Creation; we have sinned against Heaven, and before thee, and are no more
worthy to be called thy children: O admit us into the place of hired servants
Lord, thou have formed us in ou^ Mothers Wombs, thy Providence has hitherto
watched over us, and preserved us, to this present time; O stay not the course
of thy Mercies and loving kindness toward us; Have mercy upon us, O Lord, for
thy dear Son Jesus Christ his sake, who is the way, the truth, and the Life; In
him, O Lord, we appeal from thy Justice, to thy Mercy, beseeching thee in his
Name, and for his sake only, that thou will be graciously pleased freely to
pardon us all our sins, and disobedience, whether in thought, word, or deed,
committed against thy divine Majesty, and in his precious Bloodsheding Death,
and perfect obedience, free us from all the guilt, the stain, the punishment,
and dominion of all our sins, and cloth us with his perfect Righteousness;
there is mercy with thee, O Lord, that thou may be feared; yea thy mercyes
swallow up the greatness of our sins; speak peace to our souls and consciences,
make us happy, in the free Remission of all our sins, and be reconciled to thy
poor servants in Jesus Christ, in whom thou art well pleased. Suffer not the
works of thine own Hands to Perish, thou art not delighted in the death of
sinners, but in their Conversion; turn our hearts, and we shall be turned;
convert us, and we shall be converted: Illuminate the eyes of our minds, and
understandings, with the bright beams of thy holy Spirit, that we may daily
grow in the saving knowledge of the heavenly mystery of our Redemption, wrought
by our dear Lord and Savior Jesus Christ; sanctify our wills and affections,
by the same Spirit, the most sacred fountain of all grace and goodness; reduce
them to the obedience of thy most holy will, in the practice of all piety
toward thee, and charity toward all men. And with us, be gracious to thy whole
Church, bless thy servant Charles, our gracious King and Governor; bless our
gracious Queen, James Duke of York, and all the Royal Family: bless the
Nobility, the Magistracy, and Ministry of this land, of what quality, or
degree soever. Be merciful to all, that are under any affliction, or trial
whatsoever; be a Father to the fatherless, a husband to the Widow, and a
Comforter to the Comfortless, in what straight or necessity soever they are:
support them, and bring them out of it, to thy Glory, and their comfort. Be
merciful to all that we are bound to pray for; bless our Relations, Kindred and
Friends, and let them serve thee, and live to thy Glory. And now we desire to
return all humble and hearty thanks, to thy heavenly Majesty, for all thy
blessings, continually showred down upon us; In Creating us, and Preserving us
to this day; in keeping us the day past, from all dangers, and casualties, that
we are continually subject to: Continue, O Lord, we beseech thee, this favor
to us, and let thy Angels pitch their Tents round about us, this night, to
guard and defend us from all perils both of soul and body; let our weak, and
wearied bodies, be refreshed with seasonable, and convenient rest and sleep,
that so we may be the more fit to discharge our duties, both toward God, and
man, the day following; Grant these our weak Petitions, and give us all other
blessings that thou know we stand in need of, and all we ask of thee, in the
blessed Name and Words, of our dear Savior, and Redeemer, further Praying. Our
Father, etc.

A Prayer for a Family, for Friday Morning.
MOst Holy, most Glorious, and Eternal Lord God; we thy poor, and unworthy
servants, in all humility of soul and body, and unfeigned acknowledgment of our
duty, prostrate our selves before the Throne of thy Mercy, praising and
magnifying thy fatherly goodness, for the abundance of thy blessings, and for
the multitude of thy mercies, heaped upon us; beseeching thee for Christ his
sake, to be merciful to all our sins committed against thy divine Majesty; upon
the consideration of which, we confess we are not worthy to appear in thy
presence, much less to ask a Blessing at thy hands; for, by reason of our
corrupt nature in us, derived from our first Parents, our inclinations have
been pro^e to commit all manner of sin and wickedness against thy goodness: thy
laws and precepts we have broken, both in thought, word, and deed; out of our
hearts proceed evil, and wicked imaginations which defile the soul, and the
whole man is altogether abominable: these things, O Lord, we confess, to our
shame; and if thy mercy prevent not, it will be our utter destruction of soul
and body. Yet O Lord, thou a^t our Creator, thou have made us, and thou have
sent thy dear Son, Jesus Christ, to die for us; and thy holy Spirit to
sanctify us; and many are the benefits and blessings which thou have bestowed
upon us, and which by thy goodness we enjoy, both of soul and body; and
therefore by the testimony of our own consciences, we stand convicted; and the
thoughts of our great sins, and transgressions, do much astonish us; what shall
we say therefore, or wherein shall we open ou^ mouths? who shall deliver us
from the misery due unto us, for our transgressions? nothing can be expected in
this life, but mercy, and confusion; and in the world to come, eternal
condemnation: But yet, O Lord, in obedience to thy command, and in confident
assurance of thy endless, and unspeakable mercy promised in Jesus Christ to all
sinners which come unto thee, with sorrow in our hearts, shame in our faces,
and in all humility of Spirit. And we would appeal from thee, a just Judge, to
thee a merciful Father, from the throne of thy Justice, to the seat of thy
Mercy, beseeching thee, O Lord, to have mercy upon us, and to turn away thy
face, from all our sins, and to blot out all our transgressions, for the only
Meritorious Death and Passion of Jesus Christ, who so abundantly shed his Blood
on the Cross, to take away the sin of the World: and be pleased now to reform
our affections, transform us out of sin, into the glorious liberty of thy own
children, to live in newness of life, in a holy conversation, and continual
obedience to thy divine Majesty.

And now we further entreat thee, O Lord, for a blessing upon thy Church
Universal, more especially we beseech thee, to continue the peace and
prosperity of these Churches wherein we live, and every member thereof; and in
a more especial manner, bless with the chiefest of thy blessings, thine
Anointed, and our Sovereign Lord King Charles, the Queens Majesty, James Duke
of York; and the rest of the Royal Family; bless the Lords of his Majesty's
most honorable privy Council, the Reverend Clergy, and all civil Magistrates;
bless all our kindred, friends, and acquaintance; bless all, O Lord, from the
highest to the lowest.

And since it has pleased thee, O Lord, of thy Goodness, to deliver us from
the power of darkness, and all dangers of the night past, affording us quiet
and comfortable rest, bring us safe to the beginning of this day; our souls,
and all that is within us, shall praise thy holy Name; We beseech thee to bless
and defend us, O Lord, this day; direct, and protect us in it; bless our going
out, and coming in; let thy Spirit guide us in all our actions; prosper all
our labors, and endeavors this day; make us diligent and dutiful in our
Callings, that we may keep a good Conscience in all our dealings, not any way
to defraud any one, knowing, that one day we must give an account of all our
words and deeds.

Lord hear us we beseech thee, and accept of this our morning Sacrifice, of
praise, and thanksgiving; hear our prayers, and grant our petitions that we
have asked; and all other blessings which thou in thy infinite wisdom know
most necessary for us, we ask at thy merciful hands in the Name, and through
the mediation of thy dear Son, our blessed Redeemer, Jesus Christ, our Lord; in
whose most excellent form of Prayer, we conclude our imperfect Petitions,
saying, Our Father, etc.

A Prayer for a Family for Friday Evening.
MOst glorious, and everlasting Lord God, which inhabitest eternity, and
dwell in that light which no mortal eye can attain unto; the God in whom we
live, and move, and have our being, we thine unworthy servants, do here in all
lowliness, and humility, present our persons, and Prayers, before thy divine
Majesty; confessing, and acknowledging, that we were conceived in sins and
brought forth in iniquity; and as if that had been but a small matter, we have
heaped up our Actual transgressions, as the sand upon the seashore, and as
the stars in the firmament, for number: we have broken thy Commandments, we
have profaned thy Sabbaths, we have dishonor thy name, we have abused thy
creatures, we have neglected the day of our Visitation, and turned thy grace
into wantonness, whereby we have most justly provoked thy wrath, and
everlasting displeasure; we have wounded our own consciences, weakened our
assurance of salvation, and greived thy good Spirit, which seals us up unto
the day of our redemption; And now, O Lord, if thou should deal with us after
our deservings, thou might pour upon us, the deluge of thy wrath, and sury,
to sweep us out of the land of the living, into that place of torment prepared
for the Devil, and his Angels. But thou have revealed thy self to the sons of
men, to be the Lord, the Lord Merciful and Gracious, Long-suffering, and of
great Goodness, who pardonest Sins, and passest by the transgressions of thy
people; this is thy Name for ever, and thy Memorial throughout all generations;
we beseech therefore, for Jesus Christ his sake, to be merciful unto us, in the
free pardon and forgiveness of all our sins that we have ever committed against
thee; Accept of his obedience, for our disobedience; of his righteousness, for
our unrighteousness; of his Sufferings, for all our sins; wash them away in his
blood, nail them to his cross, hide them in his wounds, and bury them in his
grave, that they may never rise up for our confusion here, or for our
condemnation hereafter; O Lord, be unto us a Father of Mercy, and a God of
Consolation; Speak peace unto our souls and consciences, and say unto us, that
thou art the God of our salvation.

And give us grace, for the time to come, to dye daily unto sin, by virtue of
thy sons death, and to rise up to newness of life, by the power of his
resurrection, wean our hearts, and take off our affections, from the things of
this world, which endure but for a season, and raise them up unto those things
which are at thy right hand for evermore; enlighten the darkness of our
understandings, subdue the stubbornness of our wills, rectify the disorder of
our affections, and bring into obedience, whatsoever exalts it self against
thy will, that at last we may become such, as thou would have us to be.

Continue, and enlarge thy blessings upon the Church and Land wherein we live;
upon the person and government of our King, bless all the Royal Family;
together with his Majesty's council; the Nobility, Magistracy, Clergy, and
Gentry of the land; Be merciful to all those who are afflicted with any cross
or calamity, all our relations and acquaintance, and all others whom we are
bound to pray for. O Lord accept our Thanksgiving this Evening, for all the
mercys and favors which thou have afforded for our souls or bodies, for this
life, or a better; more especially, that thou have preserved us, and our Family
this day, in health and happiness; Now holy Father, seeing the night is upon
us, and we are ready to take our rest, in thy hands we commit our souls, and
bodies, and all that we have, beseeching thee, who art the keeper of Israel,
that neither sleep, nor slumberest, to take care of us; for if thou protect
us not, Satan will devour us; yea, we shall sleep a prepetual sleep, and never
arise up to praise thee; we praise thee therefore, be good to us this night,
de^e^d us from danger, refresh us with comfortable rest, and raise us up to
glorify thee in the duties of the day following, that thou may still be our
God, and we may be thy people; hear us, and graciously answer us in these our
requests, and what else thou know needful and expedient for us, and that for
Jesus Christ his sake, in whose most blessed name, and words, we conclude these
our imperfect Prayers, saying, as he himself has taughts us,

Our Father, etc.

A Prayer for a Family for Saturday Morning.
GRacious Lord God, thou art the great Creator of Heaven and Earth, we confess
our selves unworthy to come into thy presence, or to speak a word before thee,
wretched sinful Creatures that we are, full of all iniquity and uncleanness;
and who can make that clean which is taken out of an unclean thing? the
thoughts and imaginations of our hearts are evil, and only evil, and that
continually.

Yet, O Lord, seeing thou have commanded us to call upon thee, and have
mercifully promised to be present with thy Children, to hear their prayers, and
to grant their requests, which they put up in faith, unto thee. O Lord, this
does give us boldness to come before thee, and in confidence of thy goodness,
that thou will make good the same promises unto us at this time, we here offer
up unto thee this morning Sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving, humbly
acknowledging and confessing, from the bottom of our hearts, our manifold
transgressions and offenses, which we have continually multiplied against thee,
in thought, word, and deed, from the beginning of our days, unto this present
time; we acknowledge, O Lord, our Original corruption, in the which we were at
the first conceived, and born, and from which there has sprung the most
bitter, and unsavory fruit of sin, apostasy, and Rebellion, to the great
dishonor of thy Name, and wounding of our poor souls and consciences, and the
evil example of others, amongst whom we have lived; by the which, O God, we
confess that we have justly deserved that thy Wrath and indignation, should be
poured out upon us, both in this life, and in the life to come.

And therefore, O God, we come not here before thee, in our own worthiness, but
in the worthiness, and mediation of Jesus Christ, beseeching thy gracious
goodness, for his sake, to forgive all our offenses; our open sins, our secret
sins, our sins of Presumption, sins against Knowledge, against Conscience,
against thee, or against our Brethren, either in our younger years, or in the
days of our knowledge; as we must needs confess, that in many things we offend
all, we beseech thee, O Lord, for Christ his sake, to forgive the same unto us,
and persuade our Souls and Consciences more and more, that thou art at peace
with us, and that all our sins are done away in the blood of thy Son. And
grant, O Lord, that by the assistance of thy Holy Spirit, we may serve thee
with more freedom of mind, and liberty of will, in Righteousness, and true
Holiness, unto the end of our days. And, good Lord, begin not only repentance,
and true conversion in us, but of thy great mercy, perfect the same: O lead us
forward more and more to perfection; increase in us the saving knowledge of
thee, and of thy Son Jesus Christ.

And now, O Lord, we magnify, and praise thy Holy Name, for thy Blessings and
Mercies bestowed upon us, both Spiritual and Temporal; for our Health, Peace,
Food, Raiment, and all the comforts of this life: O Lord let us make a right
use of them, that we may not abuse them unto licentiousness, but let us be
daily stirred up by them, to devote our selves unto thee, and thy service; we
acknowledge thy goodness toward us, the night that is now past, freeing us
from many imminent dang^rs, both of Soul and Body, and giving us sweet and
comfortable rest, we beseech thee to be with us this day, and bless us in all
our lawful undertakings, and keep us all the days of our lives, and teach us to
walk, as Children of the light, that thy Name may be glorified by us, others
may take good example, we our selves enjoy the peace of a good Conscience, so
that at the last we may come to reign with thee in Glory.

Bless the Churches and Kingdoms wherein we live, with the continuance of our
peace, and true Religion, bless all in Authority, especially the Kings most
excellent Majesty, our gracious Queen, James Duke of York and all the Royal
Family. Bless the Nobility, Clergy and Gentry of this Nation; bless us all out
of Sion from the highest to the lowest. Be merciful to all that are afflicted
in body or mind or both; let it please thee, O Lord, to stay them, and support
them in time of their distress, and g^v^ them a happy issue out of the same; as
it shall seem good unto thee; and ^it us all for all times and conditions which
thou shall please to bring upon us. And thus, O Lord, we have commended our
suits unto thee, humbly beseeching thee to pardon our infirmities in the
performance of this present service, and since thou know our wants better
than we our selves can express them unto thee, we pray thee to take notice of
them, and minister unto us a gracious supply in thine own due time, even for
Jesus Christ his sake; in whose Name we conclude these our weak and imperfect
Prayers in that perfect form of Prayer which he himself has further taught us,
saying,

Our Fa^h^r, etc.

A Prayer for a Family for Saturday Evening.
HOly Lord God, and our Heavenly Father in Jesus Christ, we thine unworthy
creatures now here before thee, cannot but acknowledge and confess, even from
the bottom of our hearts against our selves, our own unworthiness, that we are
grievous sinners, conceaved in sin and born in iniquity, whereof we have
brought forth most vile fruits in our lives, to the great dishonor of thy
name, the utter dismaying of our own consciences, and the evil example of our
brethren, by which we have deserved likewise thy wrath and heavy indignation to
be poured upon us, both in this life and that which is to come. But yet, O
Lord, we know that the merits of thy d^ar Son do far exceed our sins, though
the multitude of them were as the sand upon the Seashore; in his name
therefore and for his sake, we present our selves Souls and bodies before thy
most heavenly Majesty, beseeching thee to forgive us all our sins and
transgressions, and we do further desire to bless thy name and to show forth
thy praise this, Evening and to magnify thy goodness toward us for perserving
us this day from all dangers, and for keeping us from our birth even hitherto,
for thou art a God of patience, pity, and much forgiveness, showing mercy unto
thousands, and blotting out all our offenses: O Lord, set not before us the
sinfulness of our hearts and ways, so as to hinder good things from us, but
grant us thy grace that we may amend our lives, and unfeignedly serve thee in
the several duties of our callings, to thy glory, and the comfort of our Souls;
remit our punishment, continue thy favor unto us, and receive us into thy most
gracious protection, and keep us this night and for evermore, that the Devil
may have no power over us, nor any evil overtake us; and, O Lord, whether we
sleep or wake, live or dye, let us be always thine, for thou art our Creator
and Redeemer, guard us about with the Armies of thy holy Angels in our
habitations, do thou, O God, assist us, that we may peaceably sleep and rest in
thee; hide us in thy Tabernacle, and we will fear no evil, for thou that
keep us do neither slumber nor sleep; let thy rod and thy staff comfort
and defend us, and let thy mercies, O God, prevent and follow us all the days
of our lives, that at last we may dwell with thee, praising thee for evermore:
and to that end refresh our wearied weak bodies with moderate sleep, that if
thou shall let us live till the next day, even thy holy Sabbath day, we may be
fit to perform all the services and duties thou requirest of us. Let us hear
thy word with fear and re^erence, and let us lay it up in our hearts, that the
fruits of it may be seen in our holy lives and conversations. Let us pray unto
thee by says, that so we may receive what we ask; and let us devote our whole
Souls, minds and affections to thy service.

And with us be gracious to these Churches in this Kingdom, we beseech thee to
put a stop to that Spirit of Atheism, Irreligion, and Profaneness that is come
in upon us like a flood, and make us all an holy people, that so we may be a
happy people. Let the choicest of thy blessings descend upon our gracious King
and Queen, and all the Royal Family; bless all estates and conditions of men of
what quality soever, the Nobility, Clergy, Gentry and Commonalty; bless all our
friends, kindred and relations, be a father to the fatherless* a husband to the
widow, and a comfort to the comfortless. Be our God and guide in all our ways;
lighten our darkness, we beseech thee, O Lord, and by thy great mercy, defend
us from all Perils and dangers of this night; let thy mighty Hand, and
Outstretched Arm, O Lord, be still our defense. And hear us, and answer us
above and beyond the desires of these our weak Petitions; In the blessed Name
of Jesus Christ our only Lord and Savior, in whose most holy Words, we further
pray.

Our Father, etc.

OCCASIONAL DEVOTIONS; OR, A COLLECTION OF Prayers and Thanksgivings UPON
Several Occasions, And for several Persons.

Be careful for nothing, but in every thing, by Prayer and Supplication, with
Thanksgiving, (...) your requests be made to God,

Phil. 4. 6. Papish superstition and Tyranny --

The Return of the Gospel.

The Spanish Invasion in 1588:



Upon the return of the Gospel, and deliverance from Popish Idolatry and
Tyranny in the time of Queen Elizabeth.
Darkness is fled, the Sun appears
Extinguishing our flames and fears.
The Glorious Gospel's once more free
From Romish dark Idolatry:
We hear no dying Martyrs groan,
But Truth and mercy fill the Throne.
The Smith-field Fires do burn no more,
And England now does hate the Whore;
And all her Fallacies defies,
The King of Glory now does rise
With healing underneath his Wings,
And England her deliverance sings.
The Gospel now in Triumph flies,
Enlightening men's benighted eyes:
And all may now be safely good
Without subscribing with their blood.
Lord grant we nere may sin away
The mercies of this Gospel day.
The Persecution in the time of Q. Mary, and the carriage of the Papists in it,
is thus described by the excellent Bp. Jewel.
YOu have (says he) imprisoned your brethren, you have stripped them naked, you
have scourged them with rods, you have burnt their hands and arms with flaming
torches, you have famished them, you have drowned them, you have summoned them
being dead to appear before you out of their graves, you have ripped up their
buried carkases, burnt them, and thrown them out upon dunghils, you took a poor
babe falling from its mothers womb, and in a most cruel and inhumane manner
threw it into the fire.

By all which several ways and means the Martyrs in all parts of the Kingdom in
the 5 years reign of Q. Mary amounted to the number of 277. persons of all
sorts and ages, for there perished by these flames 5 Bishops, 21 Divines, 8
Gentlemen, 84 Artificers, 100 Husbandmen servants and laborers, 26 Wives, 20
Widows, 9 Virgins, 2 boys and 2 infants, one springing out of his mothers womb
as she was burning at the stake, and most unmercifully flung it into the fire
at the very birth, 64 more in those furious times were persecuted in their
faith, whereof 7 were whipped, 16 perished in prison, 12 buried in dunghils, and
many more lay in captivity condemned, who were happily delivered by the
glorious entrance of Queen Elizabeth.

A Thanksgiving for the return of the Gospel, and our deliverance from Popish
Superstition and Tyranny.
O Most glorious, most merciful and gracius Lord God, we cannot but remember
thy mercies to us, and to our Fathers of old, when thou wast pleased to deliver
this Nation from the spiritual Egyptian bondage which we were under in the
Mari^n days, when our Fathers were in the condition of those Worthies of old
who were tortured, not accepting deliverance, that they might obtain a better
resurrection, who wandered about in sheepskins and goat skins, being destitute,
afflicted, tormented in deserts, in mountains, in dens and caves of the Earth,
and the sound of the Turtle was not heard in the land, This, O Lord, was our
miserable condition under that Romish Tyranny under which we groaned; but thou
our most merciful Father in the midst of judgment did remember mercy, and
did bring back our captivity, as the rivers in the South; thou broughtest thy
servant Queen Elizabeth from prison to reign, and with her did the glorious Sun
of thy Gospel arise upon these late dark lands, and the word of the Lord went
throughout the Nation, thou quenchest those flames that destroyed so many of
thy blessed Saints and servants, and did at once restore to us religion,
peace, plenty, and Victory over all our and thine enemies. O what shall we
render unto the Lord for all these his great benefits to us a most unworthy,
wicked and sinful people, let us render unto him the sacrifice of praise and
thanksgiving, and let our lives and conversations so show forth his praise,
that we may never provoke the Lord to remove his candlestick from us, and once
more to scourge us with the thorns and briars of Popish Tyranny from which his
grace and goodness has so wonderfully delivered us, and all this we ask
through the merits and mercies of thy blessed Son, our blessed Savior Jesus
Christ. Amen.

The prayer of King Edward the sixth (called Englands Josiah) against Popery.
LOrd God, deliver me out of this miserable and wretched life, and take me
among thy chosen, howbeit not my will but thy will be done: Lord I commit my
spirit to thee, O Lord, thou know how happy it were for me to be with thee,
yet for thy Chosens sake send me life and health that I may truly serve th^e, O
my God, bless thy people, and save thine Inheritance, O Lord God save thy
chosen people of England, O my Lord God defend this Realm from Papist^y, and
maintain thy true Religion that I and my people may praise thy holy name.

Upon the Spanish Invasion in that remarkable year 1588. intended to reduce
this Nation to Popery and slavery by the (so called) invincible Armada.
Poor Englands ruin is designed,
The Pope and Spain have both combind
Both have infallibly decreed
In Eighty Eight, England must bleed.
A vast Armada Spain prepares
The cost and toil of many years,
An hundred fifty Sail and more
Come thundering from the Spanish shore,
The Pope to make up the bravado
Styles it the invincible Armado;
Whose vast and numerous Hulls contain
The Treasure* and the strenght of Spain.
Full twenty thousand Soldiers,
And to increase our woes and fears
Fetters and chains they did prepare,
The marks of slavery we must wear.
Religion, Laws and Liberties
All were designed a Sacrifice.
To Romish Tyranny, and we
Most wretched slaves designed to be,
Our Queen with watchful eyes surveys
The approaching storm and soon does raise
Two Royal Armies to withstand
The bold Invaders of our Land,
A Royal Fleet too she provides,
But God himself the cause decides,
The Lord of Hosts soon made them see
There Is none Invincible but He.
He with a breath of wind does blast
Designs so mighty and so vast,
That all might see that none but He
An Universal King can be.
In the year of our Lord 1588. and in the one and thirtieth year of the most
glorious reign of Q. Elizabeth, Philip the second King of Spain set forth this
mighty fleet, the Spaniards themselves being so amazed at the vastness of it
that they named it the Invincible Armada, it being the best furnished with men,
ammunition, and all manner of provision of any that ever the Ocean saw,
consisting of a hundred and fifty tall ships, in which were twenty thousand
Soldiers, and the D. of Parma was designed to bring out of Flanders fifty
thousand more to join with them; it had also eight thousand six hundred
mariners, two thousand and eighty gally-slaves, two thousand six hundred and
thirty great Ordnance besides boats and tenders of all sorts with provisions,
the Pope also contributed a million of gold to this design. All these were to
be landed at the Thames mouth, that by seizing on the head, they might the more
easily command the body of the Kingdom. The Queen had prepared a double guard,
one for the land, and another for the sea, that by land was divided into two
Armies, the one consisting of two and twenty thousand foot and a thousand horse
commanded by the Earl of Leicester, whose camp was at ^^lbury, where the Queen
with a masculine spirit came and took a view of her Army, and riding about
through the ranks of armed men drawn up on both sides her with a Leaders
trunche on in her hand, sometimes with a martial pace another while (...) li^e
a woman it is incredible how much (...) rag^d the heart of h^ Capta^ns and
Soldiers by her presence and peech to them. The guard by sea consisted of one
hundred and forty ships, divided into 3 squadrons, commanded by the L. Howard
Admiral, Sr. Francis Drake Vice Admiral, and the Lord Henry Seymour
Reer-Admiral.

When the mighty moving wood of Spain was entered into the British seas and
found the Queen so well prepared contrary to their expectation, they resolved
rather to make a chase fight than lie by it. The Queen commanded the L. Admiral
to make ready eight of her worst ships, and to besmear them with wildfire,
pitch and rosin, and fill them with brimstone and other combustible mat^er,
which he sent down the wind in the dead of the night among the Spanish Fleet,
who spying the flames, and thinking them deadly inventions and murdering
engines; raised a sad o^tcry, and presently weig^'d anchor, (...) their
(...)les, and in a terrible Panic^ ^ear with great have and confusion put to
Sea. Whereupon the Queens fleet under Drake and other brave Commanders took
some of them, sunck and drove some on the sands, and many others being driven
Northwards, and grievously tossed, impaired, and mangled by storms and wracks,
and enduring all manner of miseries, at length returned with shame and
dishonor, by all which ways were lost more than half the Spanish fleet, and of
the English only one ship; and that of small value. And thus this great Armada
which had been three complete years in preparing with infini^e expense, was
within one months space many times fought with, and at last overthrown, with
the loss of abundance of Spaniards, and this mighty design came to naught.
Gloria Deo.

A Thanksgiving for our deliverance from the Spanish Armada in 1588.
MOst high and mighty Lord God Almighty, who workest wonders in the Heavens, in
the Earth and in the Sea, who art a present help to all that call upon thee; we
the people of these Nations have infinite cause to bless thy holy name for thy
mercies of old to our Fathers, in delivering us from that slavery and misery
that was designed to be brought upon us by thine and our enemies, who intended
to have tyrannized over our souls, our bodies, our consciences, they had
prepared whips to scourge us, chains and fetters to bind and manacle us, and
they did boast themselves to be invincible, and that none could withstand them,
but thou O Lord did blow upon them with a blast of thy mouth, and they were
scattered like chaff before the wind, and they perished at thy presence; thou
did put fear into their hearts, and they fled, thou did confound all their
projects and devices, and they were all brought to naught. O Lord let us never
forget this mercy of thine and the multitude of thy mercies that we have
recieved since that time which thou know, O Lord, we have not improved as we
ought, and may therefore justly fear that we have so provoked thee by our
crying abominations that thou may once more give us over to Romish Tyranny* O
Lord we beseech thee yet to remember mercy, and rather take us into thine own
hand to correct us, than give us into the hands of wicked and unmerciful men,
whose tender mercies are cruelties, remember thy loving kindness to us of old,
and save us according to thy wonted mercy, not for our own sakes, but for the
merit of thy dear Son and our blessed Savior Jesus Christ. Am^n

Upon the fifth of November
1
THis day allows thy praises Lord,
Our grateful hearts to thee shall sing.
Our thankful lips they shall record
Thine ancient loves, Eternal King.
2
Our Land shall boast; the holy One
My great preserver is become,
My friends my foes has overthrown,
And made the pit they dig'd their tomb.
3
With Parthian bows the Archers came,
Romes poisonous oil on the arrows shone.
Thy Turtle was the Archers aim,
Shoot, shoot, says Satan, all is our own.
4
Fond foolish Rome, how dare to oppose?
Whom God in his safe bosom lays,
Thy malice may it self disclose,
But frustrate still shall turn to praise.
5
Thy Crozier staff, thy tripple Crown,
Those ensigns of deceit and pride.
Thy purple robe, thy blazed renown The Gunpowder Treas^n


The dust shall ever ever hide.
6
Thy merchants shall thy fall lament,
Thy lovers all in sackloth mourn,
While Heaven and Earth in one consent,
Shall sing Amen let Babylon burn.
7
Then Lord thy Spouse whose dropping eyes
Whose sighs, whose sufferings prove her thine
Shall from her pensive sorrows rise,
And as the Lambs fair Bride shall shine.
8
Sweet day, sweet day, when shall it be?
Why stays my Lord? dear Savior come,
Thy mourning Spouse cries after thee,
Stay with me here, or take me home.
Of the Powder Treason.
THe Plot was to undermine the Parliament House, and with Powder to blow up the
King, Prince Clergy, Nobles, Knights, and Burgesses, the very confluence of all
the flower of Glory, Piety, Learning, Prudence and Authority in the Land,
Fathers, Sons, Brothers, Allies; Friends, Foes, Papists and Protestants all at
one blast.

This damnable design was coutrived by some Priests, Jesuits and other Papists,
to which end they took lodgings near the Parliament house, and then all the
Conspirators took an oath of secresy in these words.

You shall swear by the blessed Trinity, and by the Sacrament you now purpose
to receive never to disclose directly or indirectly, by word or circumstance
the matter that shall be proposed to you to keep secret, nor desist from the
execution thereof till the rest shall give you leave.

And now the business went on apace, and all things being ready, the 5 th of
November 1605. was the day designed for the execution, but about ten days
before a letter directed to my Ld. Monteagle was delivered by an unknown person
to his footman in the street with a strict charge to give it to his Lords own
hand which accordingly he did, and the Lord being troubled at the contents
presently imparted it to the Secretary of State, who soon presented it the
King, which was in these Words

My LORD,

Out of the love I bear to some of your friends, I have a care of your
preservation; therefore I would advise you, as you tender your life to devise
some excuse to shift off your attendance at this Parliament, for God and man
have concurred to punish the wickedness of this time, and think not slightly of
this advertisement* (...) retire your self into your Country, where you may
expect the event with safety; for though there be no appearance of any stir,
yet I say they shall receive a terrible Blow this Parliament, and yet they
shall not see who hurts them; this counsel is not to be contemned, because it
may do you good, and can do you no harm, for the danger is past so soon as you
have burnt the letter; and I hope God will give you the grace to make use of
it, to whose holy protection I commend you.

The King reading this letter, did conclude by several dark passages in it,
that it contained in it some extraordinary design, and therefore by the Blow
did suppose was meant some blast of Gun-pouder. And after strict search made
under the Parliament house about midnight, the very night before the Parliament
was to set, at the door of the entrance of the cellar was found one Guy Fauks
clothed and booted, he was apprehended, and then removing some billets that
were laid to prevent discovery, they found the serpents nest stored with thirty
six barrels of powder, and searching the Villain, there was found about him a
dark lanthorn three matches, and other instruments for blowing up the powder.

And thus was this horrible plot discovered, and we saved, and the Conspirators
received their deserved punishment.

Those that were first in the Treat son were

Robert Catesby, Thomas Piercy, Tho. Winter, Robert Winter, John Wright, Chr.
Wright, Guy Fauks, Gentlemen, and Bates Catesbies Man.

Persons made acquainted with and promoters of it were Sr. Everard Digby
Ambrose Roohwook Esquire Francis Wesham Esquire Robert Kegs John Grant Gent.


A Thanksgiving for the fifth of November for Gods miraculous deliverance of
this Land, King, and people from that horrid Gunpowder Treason 1605.
O Our gracious Lord God, who is like unto thee, or who can strive beyond thy
admittance? has any thing been done or attempted but what thou know of?
Yea, thou see all things, savest all thine, and wilt not let a hair of their
heads perish. O then who is like unto thee, for thou art ever gracious and
merciful, slow to anger and of great kindness? O come then let us worship, and
fall down, and kneel before the Lord our maker; for never any people had more
occasion ministered unto them than this people of great Britain and Ireland,
yea, all that belong to this Monarchy, to praise the great God of Majesty,
Power, Might and Dominion, who did deliver us out of thraldom, when nothing
was wanting for making this Sacrilegious Parracide a pattern of mischief, and a
crime without example: they would have joined the destruction of the body, to
the head, so as all at one Thunderclap, should have been sent to Heaven
together; the King our Head, the Queen our fertile Mother, and those young and
hopeful Olive plants; yea, not only theirs, but also ours, our honorable and
worthy Senators; yea, the whole representative body of the Land, without
distinction of degree, or Age; yea, even the stones, and walls, should have
felt their fury, and the Hall of Justice, the house of Parliament, the Church,
used for the Corronation of our Kings, the Monuments of our former Princes, the
Crown, and other Royalties, all the Records as well of Parliaments, as of every
man's particular right, with a great number of Charters and such like, should
all have been comprehended under that fearful Chaos, and the remaining trophies
of the eternal glory of our former Princes, should have all been cousumed
together, and so not only we, but the memory of us and ours should have been
extinguished in an instant: how can we therefore sufficiently magnify and
praise thy great mercy, who did thus preserve us when we were so near
destruction? Therefore consider our dangerous estate, we come unto thee, O thou
great and mighty Judge, in trembling and in fear, humbly beseeching thee not to
heap upon us thy deserved vengeance, but let thy tender kindness and love thou
bear to Christ, thy dear Son our gracious Lord and Redeemer, cover our
iniquities, for whose sake do thou pardon us, and have compassion The
Martyrd^me of King Charles

on us; to whom with thy self and thy blessed Spirit, be given all prays honor
and glory, of us and all our posterity after us, from this time forth and for
evermore, Amen.

Upon the Martyrdom of King Charles the first, January 30th. 1648.
An Epitaph.
STay Passenger: Behold and see,
The widdowed grave of Majesty;
Why tremblest thou? here is that will make,
The most stupid Soul to shake.
Here lies entombed the Sacred dust,
Of Peace, and Piety, Right, and Just:
The Blood, (O start thou not to hear!)
Of a blessed King, 'twixt hope and fear,
Shed, and hurried hence to be,
The miracle of Misery!
The Lawgiver, amongst his own,
Sentenced by a Law unknown.
Voted Monarchy to death,
By the course Plebian breath:
The Sovereign of all command,
Suffering by a common Hand.
A Prince! to make the Odium more,
Matryr'd at his very Door.
^^The Head cut off! Oh, death to see it,
In obedience to the Feet!
And that by Justice, you may know,
If thou have Faith to think it so*
We Will stir no further then, this Sacr'd Clay,
But let it slumber till the Judgment Day.
Of all the Kings on earth, its not denied,
Here lies the first that for Religion Dy^d.
A Prayer for the 30th of January, being the day of the Martyrdom of King
Charles the First, 1648.
O Blessed Lord God, who by thy wisdom not only guidest, and orderest all
things most suitable to thine own Justice, but also performest thy pleasure, in
such manner, that we cannot but acknowledge thee to be righteous in all thy
ways, and holy in all thy works; We thy sinful people fall down before thee,
confessing that thy Judgments were right, in permitting wicked men, this day to
Imb^ue their hands in the Blood of thine Anointed: we having drawn down the
same upon our selves, by the great and long provocation of our sins against
thee, for which we do therefore, here humble our selves before thee, imploring
thy mercy for the pardon of them all, and that thou would deliver this
Nation from blood guiltiness, (that of this day especially) and turn from us,
and our Posterity, all those Judgments, which we by our sins have deserved.

And now, O Lord, thou whose righteousness is like the strong mountains, and
thy Judgments like the great deep, and who by the Martyrdom of thine Anointed,
our Sovereign this day, have taught us that neither the greatest Kings, nor the
best of men are more secure from violent, then from natural death. Teach us
also hereby, so to number our days, that we may apply our hearts unto wisdom,
and grant, that neither the splendor of any thing that is great, nor the
conceit of any thing that is good in us, may any way withdraw our eyes from
looking upon our selves, as sinful dust, and ashes, but that (according to the
example of this thy blessed Martyr) we may press forward toward the price of
the high calling, that is before us, in faith, and patience, humility, and
meekness, mortification, and self-denial, charity, and constant perseverance,
unto the end; and we desire to bless thee, O Lord, that thou did not leave us
for ever, as sheep without a shephard, but by thy gracious providence, did
miraculously preserve the undoubted Heir of his Crown, our most gracious
Sovereign, KING CHARLES the Second, from his bloody enemies, hiding him under
the shadow of thy wings, until their Tyranny was overpast, and bringing him
back in thy good appointed time, to sit in peace upon the throne of his Father,
The Kings (...) Return

and to exercise that authority over us, which of thy Special grace, thou have
committed unto him; for these thy great and unspeakable mercys, we render thee
most humble thanks, from the bottom of our hearts, beseeching thee still to
continue thy gracious protection over him, and to grant him a long, and happy
reign over us; so we will give thee thanks for ever, and will always be showing
forth thy praise from generation to generation, through Jesus Christ our Lord,
Amen.

Upon the Twenty Nineth of May, the Day of his Majesty's Birth, and happy
Return.
NO voice more soft then Thunder, can express,
Our present joy, our past heaviness.
None can the largeness of this Joy set out,
Unless at once, he make three Kingdoms shout.
O therefore, let us jointly all proclaim,
The praise of this great Act, due to the Name
Of Him by whom Kings Reign: and Oh that we,
Could make our souls, Winged with Devotion, flee
To God on High, in Thankfulness and Praise,
Who without Blood has Crowned our King with Bays;
Brought from three conquered Nations, which he
Holds in Subjection, but to keep them free,
From the hard Yoke of Bondage, which of late,
So gaul'd our necks, whilst that we called a State,
Was naught but madmen sitting at the Helm,
It Was a great Bedlam, which is now a Realm.
But those bad times are past; this day we were
Even rescued from the Sword, without a War.
Without a War, Great Charles his Kingdoms wone,
Thus strait, when God, Will hav't, the thing is done.
O may we thankful be, and sing his praise,
Who for our Cypress, now has given us Bays.
May we give God, and Caesar all their due.
And always Peace, and Loyalty Pursue.
A Thanksgiving for the 29th of May, being the day of his Majesty's Birth, and
happy Return.
O Lord God, who by thy divine providence and goodness, did this day bring
into the world, and did this day also bring Back, and restore unto us, and to
his own just, and undoubted right, our most gracious Sovereign Lord, thy
Servant, KING CHARLES, preserve his life, establish his throne, we beseech
thee: be unto him a helmet of salvation, against the face of his enemies, and a
strong tower of defense, in the time of trouble. Let his reign be prospe^ous,
and his days many; and let him so duly serve thee on earth, that he may
hereafter everlastingly reign with thee in heaven: and let us thine unworthy
servants, make an oblation of our selves unto thee, vowing all holy obedience
in thought, word, and work, unto thy divine Majesty, promising in thee, and for
thee, all loyal and dutiful Allegiance, to thine anointed servant, and to his
heirs after him; whom we beseech thee to bless with all increase of grace,
honor and happiness: And together with him, bless the whole Royal Family with
the dew of thy heavenly Spirit, that they ever trusting in thy goodness,
protected by thy power, and Crowned with thy gracious and endless favor, may
continue before thee, in health, peace, joy, and honor, a long and happy life
upon earth, and after death, obtain everlasting life, and glory in the Kingdom
of Heaven, by the merits and mediation of Christ Jesus, our Savior; who with
the Father, The ^Pestilence (...) 1665

and the holy Spirit, lives and reigns for ever, world without end. Amen.

Upon the Dreadful Pestilence in 1665.
ON the great City of this Sinful Land,
London, with Wealth, and Folk abounding, and
With sin, the cause of woe too, God first poured
The brim full Vial of his wrath, and showered
His ireful Judgments; There his Angel drew,
The sword of Vengeance, and that people slew,
At first by Tens, which soon to Hundreds come;
Then Thousands weekly sent to their long home.
The frighted Citizens, begin to fly,
From house and habitation, lest they dye.
A wrathful day, a dismal time, wherein
Thousands receive the wages of their sin.
Now might you see, Red Crosses there great store,
And Lord have Mercy, upon many a door.
The Knells of death, continually do ring,
And that same doleful sound of Buryers, Bring
Your dead out. Mortal ears with Terror Pierce!
And now a Cart becomes too many a Hearse:
Now might you see all faces blackness gather;
The son lamenting, for his dying Father;
The wife for her deceased husband crying;
And parents, mourning for their Children dying.
And some who did in stately houses dwell,
Now gladly creep into a Country Cell.
And others wandering up and down the Fields,
No Town, or Village, them admittance yields.
Thus from the Rod of God, poor sinners fly;
Not from their Crimes, for which they smart, and dye.
Had you your selves forsaken, when at home.
You need not thus about the country rome.
Had you fled from your sins before as fast,
You need not from the Plague, have made such have.
There have been three great Plagues in London, within these sixty years; and
how much greater this last was then the former, may appear by this Comparison:
In the year 1625. Buried of all Diseases 54265 Whereof of the Plague 35417 In
the year 1636. Buried of all Diseases 23359 Whereof of the Plague 10400 In the
year 1665. Buried of all Diseases 97301 Whereof of the Plague 68586

A Prayer in time of Pestilence.
OMnipotent Lord, thou sin revenging God, who for disobedience, did threaten
thine own people Israel, to smite them in the knees, and in the legs, with a
sore botch, that could not be healed; be pleased, O thou great offended Lord,
in the bowels of thy compassion, to let thine anger cease, and to bow down
thine ear to thy sorrowful servants; we turn unto thee our weeping eyes, our
dejected countenances, our wringing hands, our bended Knees, our mournful
voices, and our groaning hearts; O Merciful God, behold our tears, and view our
countenances, and look upon our hands, and strengthen our Knees, and hearken to
our voices, and comfort our hearts; Give us a fight of our sins, O Lord which
have thus provoked thee* to enter into Judgment with thy Servants; and make us
more to loath, and tremble, at our wickedness, then at these Messengers of
death; wean us from the love of sin, from the consideration both of thy
displeasure, and our own mortality; and speak peace and health, unto our souls,
which do every moment expect our dissolution to come; O Lord, thou art a God,
who can not abide to behold unrighteousness; look not therefore with thy
wrathful eye upon us, who are full of sin, and pollution; but look upon thy
Son, and his righteousness; or, if thou will look upon us, first cloth us with
the righteousness of that immaculate Lamb, and so shall thou see us, with love
and delight, and we shall behold thee with unspeakable joy: Seal unto our souls
the remission of our offenses, and then make us willing to resign our bodies
to thy disposing, yet we know, O Lord, if thou do but Speak the word, we
shall be made whole; and if thou say, the Plague shall not come near our
habitations, we then know we shall be safe; if it be thy blessed will, O Lord,
let us praise thee in the land of the living; cleanse us from our sin, and take
away our iniquities, and then we need not question, but thou will take away thy
hand from off us. Hear us, O Lord, for our selves, and also for thy distressed
people; and hear them for us, and hear thy Christ for us all; that to him and
thee, and thy blessed Spirit, we may render, as is most due, all praise and
glory, and Thanksgiving, and obedience, for evermore. Amen.

Upon the Lamentable fire in London, begun Sept. 2. 1666.
O Let us never forget, that dreadful day,
That in sad ruins, did our City lay;
When as that blazing, and prodigious Fire,
Without remorse, or pity, did conspire,
To lay it all in ashes; which to some,
Did represent, the dreadful day of doom.
When all the world, with fire consumed shall be,
And time shall give place to eternity,
Those mighty flames, that were our Conquering foes,
Were far too great for Mortals to oppose:
The furious Flames ride on, with full carreer, London in Flames


And no repulse, do either feel, or fear;
Fling down strong structures, both of stone, and wood,
And proudly scorn their power should be withstood.
The fire marches on, roars, murmurs, rends, and raves,
Burying in ruins, Sepulchers and Graves;
And with a perverse, envious mind is bent,
Not to leave standing, one fair Monument.
That angry Majesty, which in the year,
Six hundred sixty five, by death did clear,
So many Thousands, by the Pestilence;
And from, their habitations, sent them thence:
In sixty six, a woe as great did make,
And did the Houses, from the dwellers take.
So this most ancient City, ruined fell,
And scarce can any story parallel,
In any Age, or Country, Town, or Nation,
So sudden, and so great a Devastation;
As in three fatal days, to ruinate,
To spoil, consume, destroy, depopulate.
A Place so Famous, so renouned for Glory;
That 'twas the Mirror, both of Age and Story.
THis lamentable Fire began Sept. 2. 1666. about one a clock in the morning in
a Bakers house in Pudd^ng-Lane near Fish-street Hill London, which raged
extremely (being blown with a strong North-East wind) so that despising all
means used for its extinguishing, it spread far and wide, sometimes with, and
against the Wind, and so continued for the space of near four days, till it had
burnt down thirteen thousand two hundred houses which stood upon 337 acres of
ground within the walls and 63 acres and 3 rod without, besides 89 Parish
Churches, the most spacio^s Cathedral of St. Paul, six consecrated Chapels,
the Royal Exchange, the great Guild Hall, the Custom-house, many magnificent
Halls of Companys, several principal City-gates, and other public Edifices;
which was accompanied with the loss of vast quantities of rich household-stuff,
and goods of all sorts, but especially of 4 or 5 sorts of commodities, viz.
Books (of which alone were lost near the value of 150 thousand pounds) Tobacco,
Sugar, Wines, and Plumbs, being heavy goods, so that the whole loss is computed
by an ingenious person to be nine millions and nine hundred thousand pounds,
and yet by Gods providence not above six or eight persons were burnt in this
vast Incendy.

A Prayer for September. 2d. the beginning of that lamentable fire in London, 1666.
HOly Lord God, we must confess thou have found out the iniquity of thy
servants, and have discovered our nakedness and pollution in a vengeance suited
and answerable to our grievous crying sin: our pride, oppression, and fullness
of bread, had made us like unto Sodom, and thou have afflicted us like
Gomorrha, we would not be reclaimed by thy exemplary punishments upon others or
our selves, and therefore thou have made us a terror and an astonishment to all
that are round about us; yet O Lord we must needs acknowledge that thou art
just in all that is come upon us, for thou have done right, but we have done
wickedly; yet consider, O Lord, we are thy people, though a rebellious and
unthan^ful people; suffer us therefore to implore thy pity, and the sounding
of thy bowels, and for thy names sake, and mercies sake, incline thine ear to
us and save us: and above all, we beseech thee leave us not to our selves, but
by what method soever it shall please thee to reduce us, though to this cup of
trembling, thou shall add more and more grievous afflictions by any the
severest course, subdue us unto thy self, and make us see the things belonging
to our peace before they be hid from our eyes that being duly humbled under thy
mighty hand, we may be capable of being relieved and exalted in thy due time.

And now we bless and magnify thy name, O Lord* for that wonderful mercy thou
have vouchsafed us in the midst of thy just and dreadful judgments. It is of
thy goodness that we are not consumed, that when we had pro^oked thee to give
us all up to utter ruin and desolation, and thy hand was stretched out to
execute thy whole displeasure upon us, yet thou have preserved a remnant, and
plucked us, as a brand out of the fire, that we should not utterly peri^h in
our sins; add we beseeeh thee one mercy more to all that thou have hitherto so
unsuccesfully cast away upon us, and by thy convincing Spirit awaken our sleepy
Consciences, soften and melt our hard hearts that being humbled by thy
chastisements, we may by thy goodness be led to repentance, and sin no more
lest a worse thing come unto us; therefore let us faithfully improve this
respite and relief with all its precious advantages and opportunities to a
thankful, humble and profitable walking before thee, that so thy name may be
glorified, the Gospel credited, and our Souls saved in the day of the Lord.
Grant this O Father for Jesus Christ his sake our only Mediator and Redeemer.
Amen.

Upon a Sea Fight
MEthinks I see the swelling billows boil
Heat by the fire that does from guns recoil;
The roaring guns which pierce the parting Air
With terror we on land far distant hear.
They shake the massy Earth, and Thunder like
Houses and windows into trembling strike,
And each broadside which strikes my ear I think
Now a brave shipwith braver men dothsink
Enraged mortals striving to outvy
Thundering and Lightning in the lofty sky:
Blood from the reeking decks into the Main,
Pours down like water in a shower of rain;
Discoloring the Ocean by its fall
As if twould turn it to a Red sea all.
Fire ships set all on flames and make a show
As subterranean fires were from below,
Broke through the waves, and one would think no doubt
Fire strove to drink up sea, sea to put out
The fire, and men by their contentious action
Put all the Elements into distraction.
Now on the deck, some shriek with painful wounds
And others sinking are in deadly swounds.
Here a Commander falls, the opponents hollow
The soldiers soon in death their Leader follow.
Here from torn shoulder flies an arm, and there
From shatterd thigh a leg the bullets tear.
Here flies a head off, one man's brains are dashed
Full in the next man's face his bowels pasht
On his next neighbor, and a third is found
Groaning his Soul out in a wide-mouthed wound.
There bullets fierce drive a heart out, which dies
To mortals rage a bloody Sacrifice.
Good Lord how will Heaven quietly hold those
Souls who just now were here such deadly Foes.
A Prayer in the Time of War.
ALmighty Lord God, Thou art he only which give victory, to thee it is all
one, to save by many or by few, thou can make one to chase a thousand; thou
can cause the hearts, even of the most valiant to melt; their hands to be
weak, their minds to faint, and their knees to fall a way like Water; if thou
fight for us, we cannot miscarry; if thou favor us not, we must needs be
discomfited: O be gracious unto us, and be on our side, now that men are risen
up against us; Go out, O Lord, with our Navys, and Armies, give wisdom and
courage to our Captains; gird them with strength unto the battle; be with our
Seamen, and Soldiers, teaching their hands to war and their fingers to fight:
Assist their consultations, prosper their policies, crown their enterprises
with good success, which are undertaken for the common good, and comfort of the
State: Doubtless, O Lord, we deserved thine anger, and our Sins do cry aloud in
thine ears for vengeance, and it were but just with thee, it thou should make
us a prey, and spoil unto our enemies; but, O gracious God, let us now fall
into thy hands; for thy mercies are great, and let us not fall into the hands
of men; let it appear that thou art in the midst of us, and that we shall not
be moved; that thou will help us, and that very early? and in thy due time set
thou peace in our borders, and make strong the bars of our Gates; especially
let the Gospel of thy Son sound yet louder among us, that by it many Souls may
be gathered unto thee; So we thy people, and the sheep of thy pasture, shall
praise thee for ever, and from generation to generation, we will set forth thy
glory, through Jesus Christ, our Lord, and only Savior. Amen.

A Prayer in time of Prosperity.
HEavenly Father, Lord of plenty, thou who have created the world by thy power,
and continuest thy love in thy providence, and protection; to thee do I render
thanks, for my plenty, and to thee do I offer the service of my store; what I
have, is thine; for the Earth is thine, and all that therein is; the Compass of
the World, and they that dwell therein; it is thou only, that give a blessing
to the fruits of the Land, to the Corn, to the Wine, and to the Oil; It is thou
only, that command thy blessing in the storehouses, and in all that thy
servants do set their hands unto; Lord make me one of thy faithful servants,
that what thou have sent me, may be a Testimony of thy love, and not of thy
hatred; make me allways to magnify thee in the time of plenty, and not to be
high-minded, nor trust in uncertain riches, but in thee the living God, who
give me all things richly to enjoy; O suffer me not, to treasure up the
deceitful riches of this sinful world as thereby forgeting to be rich toward
thee, but as from thy bounty I receive these temporal blessings, so in thy
mercy, make me abound in grace, that allways having Sufficiency in all things,
I may abound to every good work.

In this my prosperity, prepare me for adversity, if it shall please thee at
any time to send it unto me, give me a sense of the afflictions of many of thy
saints, and distressed servants, and enlarge my heart, that I may be ready, and
forward to contribute to their necessities; make me to show mercy with
cheerfulness, and to possess with thankfulness what thou sendest unto me, that
I may neither ^orget thee in thy poor members, nor deny thee to be the giver,
let me never stop mine ears at the cries of the distressed who beg for relief
in the name o^ thy self. Thou, Christ, who were rich did for my sake become
poor, that so through thy poverty thou might make me rich; Lord make me as
willing to the poor for thy sake, always considering that the Vanities of the
earth are not worthy to be compared to the glory that shall be revealed. Make
me labor for heavenly riches, and for the ornament of the hidden man in the
heart, in that which is not corruptible, even the ornament of a meek and quiet
spirit, which is in thy sight of great price; make me, O heavenly Father, rich
in thy self, rich unto liberality, rich in good works and in faith: make me to
buy of thee gold tried in the fire that I may be rich, and white raiment, that
I may be clothed, that the shame of my nakedness may not appear; let me always
remember that great account which one day I must render to thee, the Lord of
Heaven and earth, that so I may serve thee here with my substance in my body,
and in my Soul with zeal and devotion; and hereafter be received to thine
everlasting glory, through the merits of thy Son, in thy bosom Jesus Christ, my
only Lord and Savior. Amen.

A Prayer in time of adversity.
FAther of pity and Lord of comfort, thou that hear the cry of the
afflicted, look down in mercy on a distressed Sinner; thy hand O God is heavy
upon me, for thou have taken from me what I called mine, by reason that I did
not call it thine; O Lord thou know my bleeding heart, my sorrowful eyes,
and my mourning tears; thou see how poor I am and what miseries I suffer, I
am a scorn to my neighbors, and a derision to those that are round about me:
my life is become a burden unto me because thou have deprived me of the
comforts thereof; my lovers and my acquaintance stand looking upon my misery,
and my ^insmen stand asar off; Lord if it be thy pleasure thus to humble me,
let it be thy goodness to give me patience to endure it; the pride of my heart
and my forgetfulness of thee in the time of plenty did cry aloud for thy
severest punishments, now, O now I feel thy just displeasure and groan under
the burden and weight thereof; yet thou, O Lord, can ease me, thou can
restore me, hear Lord and have mercy, Lord be thou my helper, suffer me no more
to rely upon the arm of flesh, or to put my trust in uncertain riches, but make
me forever to depend upon thy bounty, forgive me, O Father, the sins which I
have committed when I lived in prosperity, for I am sensible that they are a
cause why at this time thou hidest thy face from me, and causest me to be
troubled: O give me a sight and sense of the greatness of them and true
contrition and sorrow for them; that so though the world forsake me, I may yet
find favor and mercy in thy sight; without thy assistance this sore burden is
too heavy for me to bear, Lord either remove it from me, or make it easier for
me to bear. Lend me thy gracious and helping hand, that as I am scourged with
thy rod, so I may lean upon thy staff; let me never despair of thy comfortable
relief, but in all my miseries be thou my refuge, be pleased to endue me with
patience from above, that I may give no advantage to the Tempter in my
suffering, open the eyes and the charitable hands of those that should see and
know mine adversity, and so enlarge their hearts, that they may administer
relief and comfort to me in the midst of my necessities.

O thou that feedest the young ravens which call upon thee, thou that did
bless the poulse to thy servant Daniel, be pleased to fill my hungry Soul with
the blessings of thy bounty: grant that whatsoever I suffer in my body, my Soul
may thereby draw near unto thee, in the misery of hunger do thou satisfy me
with thy grace in my scorching thirst do thou cause me with joy to draw water
out of the wells of Salvation, in the pinching cold do thou warm my devotion,
and in my poorest and meanest habit do thou cloth me with the Righteousness of
my Redeemer. O suffer me not to offend thee in my greatest want, but make me
rely and depend upon thee. Teach me by this chastisement the vanity of the
World, and wean me from the fond delights thereof, and carry me so through the
storms of this troublesome life, that in the end I may arrive at the happy haven
of eternal peace and rest through thy own merits and passion, O Jesus Christ,
my Lord and only Savior.

Amen.

A Prayer before the receiving of the Sacrament.
O Most gracious and merciful Lord God, thou have called all those that are
weary and heavy laden with their sins to come unto thee, and have promised to
ease and refresh them; thou have invited all those that hunger and thirst after
thy Kingdom and the righteousness thereof to come to thy Table, to taste of thy
Supper, and have promised that thou will satisfy them; in assurance therefore
of these promises I come to thee, blessed Lord Jesus, beseeching thee to ease
me, to refresh me, to satisfy me with thy mercy, for my Soul hungers and
thirsts after thee and thy Salvation. I confess and acknowledge that my daily
sins have made me unworthy of my daily bread, much more of this Manna, this
Bread of life that came down from Heaven.

I confess, O Lord, I am not prepared according to thy preparation of thy
Sanctuary, yet for as much as this day I have set my heart to seek to thee,
thou, O God, be merciful unto me, and though I cannot bring with me a clean
heart, (for who can say his heart is clean?) yet behold, O Lord, I bring with
me a contrite heart and a broken spirit, despise not, O God, this Sacrifice. As
for the sins that I have committed against thee, bind them up into one bundle,
and cast them into the bottomless Sea of thy mercy, bury them in thy wounds,
and wash them away in the blood of that immaculate Lamb Christ Jesus, and for
the time to come sprinkle my Conscience with the same blood, that being
cleansed from dead works I may serve thee the living God in righteousness and
true holiness all the days of my life, that so this blessed Sacrament may be a
means to quiet my Conscience, to increase my faith, to inflame my charity, to
amend my life, to save my Soul, and to assure me that I am of the number of
those blessed ones who shall eat at thy Table, and be called to the marriage
Supper of the Lamb. Grant this, O Lord, for Jesus Christ his sake, in whose
name and words I conclude these my imperfect prayers, saying as he himself has
taught me.

Our Father, etc.

A Prayer after the receiving of the Sacrament.
O Most gracious God; from whose bounty every good and perfect gift is derived,
I and all that is within me praise and magnify thy holy name for all thy
mercies and favors which from time to time thou have bestowed upon me. But
especially I thank thee for Jesus Christ thy Son, the fountain and foundation
of all blessings and benefits that thou have sent him into the world to take
our nature upon him, and to die for us; and that thou have fed me who am
unworthy of the least of thy favors with the precious merits of his death and
passion. Blessed Lord God, thou have been pleased this day to set thy seal to
the pardon and forgiveness of all my sins, oh let me not lose it again by
unthankfulness, or relapsing into my old sins from which thou have purged me,
lest my last end be worse than my beginning. But if hereafter I shall be
tempted by the Devil, allured by the world, or provoked by my own flesh, then
set before mine eyes by the remembrance of thy Spirit how dear the expiation of
my sins cost my Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, even the effusion of his most
precious and holy blood, that in the contemplation of his death, and
application of his most bitter passion, I may die daily unto sin, and so may
show forth the Lords death till he come and bring his reward with him, I may
receive the Crown of Righteousness which he has purchased and prepared for all
those that love and expect the day of his appearing, with the precious price of
his incorruptible blood. And whereas I have this day renewed my covenant with
thee my God in vows and purposes of better obedience assist me by thy grace,
and strengthen me by thy power, that I may pay the vows which I have made unto
thee, and that by virtue of thy heavenly nourishment I may grow up in grace and
godliness, till at last I come to be a perfect man in Christ Jesus.

Preserve and maintain always this thine Ordinance that it may be a note and a
badge of my public profession, and give unto all of us that have been
partakers of thy body and blood, one heart and one mind in the unity of Spirit
for the worthy and reverend receiving of the same whenever we shall come to
thy holy Table again; and for this thy mercy toward me, do I yield unto thee
all praise, and glory, and wisdom, and thanks, and honor, and power, and
might, and majesty, through Jesus Christ our Lord, in whose most blessed name
and words I further pray

Our Father, etc.

The Prayer of a Virgin.
BLessed Lord, Son of a Virgin, who did honor Virginity, when thou tookest
our nature; hearken to the cries of a lamenting Maid; Lord I am not worthy to
come unto thee; I am not worthy to receive any favor from thee, for I have
forsaken thee, my most indulgent Husband, and have followed other Lovers. My
soul is too much polluted to be called thine, too often have I broke my vows,
and my promises, to hope for thy love, or thy gracious pardon. But Lord, what
shall I now do, if yet I shall fall into a despair of thy Mercies, I should
increase my disloyal^y, and either deny or despise the power of thy Passion? So
great was thy love to the Church, thy Spouse, that thou gave thy self, to
sanctify and cleanse it, by the washing of water by the Word. My Soul, O
Christ, is a member of thy Spouse, be pleased, O Jesus, so to sanctify, and
wash my soul, that thou may present it to thy self, without spot, or
wrinckle, both holy and blamless.

O thou who have opened a Funtain to the house of David, and to the inhabitants
of Jerusalem, for sin and for uncleanness, do thou wash me thoroughly from mine
iniquity and cleanse me from my sir. And Lord, as in mercy thou have given me
Chastity of body, so give me likewise Chastity of mind, and purity of soul;
suffer not either the flesh, or the Devil, by their wicked suggestions, to
seduce me to uncleaness. And though I am but a weak and an earthen vessel, yet
be thou pleased to make me a chosen vessel, a vessel of mercy; cause me to keep
my body holy, and to possess it in sanctification and honor, and not in the
lust of concupiscence, like the Gentiles which know thee not; O be thou m^
Father in the grace of Adoption, be thou my Brother in thy pity and
compassion, be thou my Husband in thy love and affection, and be thou my Jesus
in the salvation of my sinful Soul.

Arm me with constancy against all assaults of carnal imaginations; give me
modesty in my countenance, decency in my apparel, civility in my behavior,
sobriety in my discourse, and contentedness in my condition; make me obedient
to my Parents, respective to my Superiors, courteous to my Inferiors, and
loving unto all. Let not my adorning be outward of putting on of apparel, but
give me that wisdom which is from above to be as an ornament of grace unto my
head, and as chains about my neck; preserve, O Christ, both my body and Soul in
chastity and honor while I am here upon Earth, as becomes a Virgin espoused
to thy self, and when my dust shall return to the earth as it was, let my
spirit return unto thy self who gave it, and to thee let it sing that new
song with the Quire of Virgins before thy Throne for ever and ever. Amen.

A Prayer of a Married Woman.
ALmighty Lord, and everlasting Father, who have been pleased to vouchsafe me
the blessings of this life, and to give me my desires both in a husband and
children; be pleased to give me a Thankful heart, for these thy Mercies; it is
thy goodness, and not my merit, that I have received from thee these blessings
of thy bounty; justly, O justly might thou at once deprive me of these
comforts, because I have neglected my obedience to the one, and my care of the
other. Humbly, O my God, I confess my failings, and am sorry for mine offenses;
Lord be gracious to me thy servant, and let me testify my thankfulness in my
industrious care to perform my duties. Be thou still the Protector, and the
gracious Defender both of me and mine: Bless him whom thou have set over me,
and grant that he may dwell with me, according to knowledge, that so we being
heirs together of the grace of life, our prayers may not be hindered. As thou
have made me a fruitful Vine by the Walls of his house, so make me endeavor to
be fruitful in good Works, and increase in the Knowledge of thee my God. Let
those Olive branches about my Table be every one like a green Olive in the
house of thee my God, and trust in thy mercy for ever and ever; make me to my
Husband a prudent Wife, as sent from thee, that he may rejoice with me, the
wife of his youth: And to this purpose set a watch, O Lord, before my mouth,
and keep the door of my Lips; make me a gracious Woman, retaining Honor, that
I may be a Crown to my Husband; and a wise Woman, laboring to build up my
house and family; and a virtuous Woman fearing thee; Hear me, O my God, and
grant me my Petitions, for the Worthyness of him who is our indulgent husband
to his Spouse the Church, even Jesus Christ my only Lord and Savior: in whose
blessed Name and Words, I further Pray, Our Father, etc.

The Prayer for a Woman with Child.
MOst Merciful and Gracious God, who wilt not turn away thine Ear, from those
that call upon thee in sincerity and truth, Look down with an Eye of pity and
compassion, upon thy unworthy servants; I must confess, my sins are very great,
and so is my danger, which is at hand; my pains to come will be grievous, and
my life is now most uncertain. Assure me I beseech thee, of the forgiveness of
all my sins, mitigate my fear and sorrows, strengthen me with the comforts of
thy Spirit, confirm me in the Faith of my Savior, and bless all good means,
appointed for my comfort, that in due time I may be a joyful Mother, and see
the fruit of my body, safe, sound and perfect, without blemish or deformity.

O Lord, I know not how soon my travel will steal on me, when I must fight that
battle of life and death, one drop of thy mercy has sovereign power, to cure
all the Wounds of those sorrows; Shed therefore, O holy Father, that drop of
grace upon me, in that minute when I am to encounter with so stern an
adversary; strengthen me with patience, bless me that I perish not; bless the
work of my Midwife; let not the child yet unborn, the babe in my Womb, be
punished for mine offenses; but give it growth, give it flourishing, and ^orm;
and when the time is come, that thou will call it out of this close house of
^lesh, where it now inhabiteth, to dwell in the open world, sanctify thy
creature, make it by Baptism, a member of thy Church, a Lamb of thy Flock, and
direct it in the ways of godliness to its lives end, and all through Jesus
Christ our Lord: in w^ose blessed Words I continue to Pray, Our Father.

The Prayer of a Woman, in the Time of her Travel.
O My Lord, and my God, my heavenly Father, my merciful Jesus, upon whom I
depend in the midst of my Anguish, hoping in thy wonted mercies; Bow down thine
Ear, and harken to the cries of a pained Woman; unto thee O Lord do I cry, thou
art my refuge, and my portion in the Land of the living; Attend therefore unto
my cry, for I am brought very low; Consider mine affliction, and deliver me,
for I do not forget thy Law; all my desire is before thee, and my groaning is
not hid from thee; in thee I trust, who art the living God, who art the Savior
of all, especially of them that believe; I love thee, O Lord, my strength, thou
art my Rock and my fortress, my strength, in whom I trust, my buckler, the horn
of my Salvation, and my high Tower; O save me now in this heavy distress and
deliver thy servant; hear me, O Lord, in this day of trouble; O God of Jacob
de^end me; Give an happy end to these my torments, that I may enjoy the fruit
of my Womb, for which I suffer them; O Lord in mercy if it may stand with thy
eternal decree, preserve both my life and the life of my issue, arm me with
patience to undergo these pangs, and in the end give me comfort in what thou
shall send me; but if otherwise thou have determined to end my life by these
heavy torments, O my sweet and merciful Jesus, receive me into thy bosom that I
may pass from misery to eternal happiness. Hear, O Lord, and have mercy upon me
and mine, and grant my petitions, for the worthiness of that most merciful and
blessed Son of a woman, thine only begotten Son Jesus Christ our Lord and only
Savior, in whose most holy name and words I pray, Our Father, etc.

A Prayer of a Woman after her delivery.
O Merciful God and heavenly Father, who have now most especially made known
unto me that thou art able to do more exceeding abundantly above all that we
can ask or think; make me thankfully to rejoice in the works of thy love and
thy tender mercy, thy favors are great and wonderful in sparing the life of my
self and mine Infant, and freeing me from my pangs, and it from the Darkness of
the silent Womb.

Thine, O Lord, is thy power, by which I am delivered; thine is the mercy, by
which I am safely returned into my bed; thine is the work of the frame and
fashion of this my Babe; thine therefore shall be likewise thy glory for ever
and ever; Grant blessed Father, that I may never forget thy goodness, but may
express my thankfulness, in new obedience, Make me careful to perform what
service I promised thee, in the extremity of mine Anguish: As thou have given
me the fruit of my body to the joy of my heart, so give me the fruit of
Righteousness sown in Peace. Give me the Wisdom which is from above, that is
full of good Works, without hypocrisy. Lord make me thy servant by grace, and
make this child, thy child by adoption and mercy; give me comfort in its life,
for the sorrows which I endured at his birth^ Give thy blessing on the means
for the nourishment of this Child: Give it strength, that it may live to
receive the seal of thy Mercy, in the Laver of Baptism; and do thou be present
with thy blessing, when the sign shall be administered. O let it live, if it be
thy blessed Will, and grow up in wisdom, and in stature, and in grace, both
with thee and with men; that so I may magnify thy Name, for making me an
instrument to propagate the number of thine Elect. Take pity upon all that
suffer afflictions, especially on those Women who are in Labor with Children:
Give them comfort in the time of their miseries, ease from their Torments, joy
in their desired Issue, and thankfulness for thy blessings; Lord grant that
both I and they, may sing praises to thy Name, for the greatness of our
deliverance, and express our thanks, in our godly lives; that when this painful
life shall have end, we may sing triumphantly in Eternal Glory, through Jesus
Christ our only Lord and Savior; in whose most blessed Name and words, I
conclude my imperfect Prayers, saying, as he himself has taught me,

Our Father, etc.

The Prayer of a Widow.
O God, in the knowledge of whom is the perfection of all joy, at whose right
hand are pleasures for evermore, thou make the comforts of this life
momentany, that we may not overprize them, and yet have made them requisite,
that we may not undervalue them; I a late sharer of this worlds happiness, but
now a sad witness of its Vanity, do here address my self to thee, the only
Crown of all my joys; in whom there is no variableness, nor shadow of change:
Lord thou did give me what my unthankfulness has taken from me; but thou
have taken from me, what thy goodness has promised to Supply; Thou have given,
and thou have taken, blessed be thy name for ever; Thou then, O God, who art
not less able to perform, then willing to promise, whose mercy is more ready to
bestow, then my misery is to beg; strengthen my faith, that I may believe thy
promise; encourage my hopes, that I may expect thy performance; quicken my
affections, that I may love the Promiser; Be thou all in all unto me, that am
nothing without thee; Sweeten my misery, with the sense of thy mercy; and
lighten my darkness with the Sun of thy glory; Seal in my heart the assurance
of adoption, that I may with boldness, call thee my Father; sanctify my
affections, with the Spirit of meekness, that my conversation may testify that
I am thy Child; wean my heart from worldly sorrow, lost I mourn like those that
have no hope; But thou my Bridegroom, and let our marriage-chamber be thy
heart; Own me as thy Bride, and purify me; with the odours of thy spirit
prevent me, with thy blessings protect me, by thy grace preserver me for thy
self, and prepare me for thy Kingdom; be thou a Father to bless me, be thou a
husband to comfort me; in the midst of my want, be thou my plenty; in the depth
of my mourning, be thou my mirth; Raise my glory from the dust, and then my
dust shall show forth thy praise; Supply all my wants, for the sake of Jesus
Christ, my blessed Lord; in whose most holy words, I further pray,

Our Father, etc.

The Prayer of an Orphan.
ALmighty God, and heavenly Father, who art a Lord of comfort, and a God of
Consolation, look down upon a sinful and distressed Orphan, be^e^^ of the joy
and help of earthly Parents; It was my own unworthiness (of so loving parents)
that has made thee, to take them away from mine eyes; my disobedience to their
commands, and my neglect of honoring them according to thy laws, has provoked
thee to anger, and to deprive me of them; O Lord forgive me my manifold
offenses, and remember thy promises, which thou have made unto the fatherless;
and that I may be capable of those thy promises, give me grace to become thy
child by obedience; thou, O Lord, art my Father, to whom belongs honor; thou
art my Master, and requirest me to fear thee; Lord make me fear to offend thee,
who art a righteous Judge, and make me love, and honor thee, who art a gracious
Father; be with me in all the ways wherein I shall walk in this mortal life;
comfort me in my sorrows, support me in my miseries, provide for me in my
wants; and in all places, and at all times, be thou my Father, my Rock, and my
strong salvation; do thou defend the poor and fatherless, do justice to the
afflicted and needy: Supply all my wants, and confer upon me all necessary
blessings: O be reconciled unto me, in the blood of thy Son, that I may ^ere
depend upon thy fatherly protection, and may hereafter be received into thy
heavenly Kingdom, there to reign with thee, world without end, through Jesus
Christ, my Lord and Savior: in whose blessed name and words, I conclude my
imperfect Prayers, saying, as he himself has taught me,

Our Father, etc.

The Prayer of a Mariner.
MOst glorious, and eternal God, whose power and wisdom is infinite, and whose
dominion is without end; thou can order and dispose of thy poor creatures to
thy own praise, and to their souls comfort; Be pleased to look down from
heaven, the habitation of thy dwelling place, and take notice of the broken
requests of a poor worm, in thy presence, that is not worthy to take thy name
into his lips: Lord I may well say, What is man that thou art mindful of him?
or the son of man, that thou should visit him? that thou should compass him
about with loving kindness as with a garment? The divine Architecture of this
goodly fabric of heaven, and earth, raised out of nothing, to this admirable
perfection, is beyond the apprehension of poor sinful dust and ashes; but to
behold thy glorious works, upon the deep waters, is much more admirable; these
declare thy glorious power, O blessed Lord, vouchsafe thy presence, with a poor
sinful creature, in this undertaking, that I may praise thee in the vast Ocean;
be a preserve from the danger of the Sea; and prosper what is lawfully
undertaken; but especially, preserve me from the danger of sin: Oh let the
gales of thy gracious spirit blow my soul at last, to its desired harbor.

Oh thou that carriest the winds in thy fist, so take care of me, that the
waves of the sea or of worldly desires may not swallow me up, and return me
home in safety, that I may bless the land of the living, and in the
congregation of thy people; and all this and whatsoever else is needful I ask
for the sake of Jesus Christ my Lord to whom with the holy Spirit of grace be
glory and honor now and ever.

Ame^.

The Thanksgiving of a Mariner after a prosperous voyage.
EVerlasting God, the powerful preserver of men, there are no bounds to be set
to thy bounty; for besides the great work of thy Creation, thy continued
Preservations and wonderful works of Providence declare thee to be a God of
mighty power, so also of wisdom, goodness, justice and truth; oh never to be
enough magnified is thy mercy for the continuance of thy favors, thou never*
leavest nor forsakest those that put their trust in thee. Oh holy Lord, what
shall I render unto thee that so aboundest in love and mercy; in the deep the
Lord has been seen and every morning thou preventest me with thy loving
kindness, and though sin has abounded, yet thy grace has superabounded, Thou
do fulfill the desires of them that fear thee; oh now as thou have given me a
new life, and delivered me from the dangers and terrors of the deep waters, so
be graciously pleased to give me a thankful heart: let there be found in me
hungring and thirsting after righteousness, that I may be brought home at last
to that land of promised blessedness. Good Lord do this, and what else thou
see needful for thy Son Jesus Christ his sake our Lord, in whose most holy
name and words I further pray,

Our Father, etc.

A Prayer to be used by all Christians.
O Almighty everlasting God, and most gracious and dear loving Father, I
beseech thee for Jesus Christ his sake, thy most dear and only Son, to have
mercy, pity, and compassion upon a most vile, wretched, and miserable sinner,
whose innumerable off^nces both old and new are grievous and great, by which I
have justly deserved thy grievous wrath and everlasting damnation. But now good
Lord, I do only appeal to thy great mercy which far surmounteth all thy works,
and thou have promised in thy holy Word, yea, and sworn as truly as thou
live, that thou desire not the death of a sinner, but rathe^ that he should
repent and live. O gracious Lord, I do confess that I am a great and grievous
Sinner; yet, O Lord let me not perish, nor suffer that everlasting death of my
Soul, which I have so deeply deserved, but make me a vessel of thy great mercy,
that I may live and praise thy name amongst thy chosen Children for ever. O let
not my great sins separate me from the sight of thy holy Majesty, but let thy
great power and mercy be magnified in me as it was in David, and Peter, and
Mary Magdalen, and the Thief upon the cross. O Lord I put my whole trust and
confidence in thee, who have taken away the sins of the World, who came not
to condemn the World, but to save it, that none which truly believe in thee
should perish, but should have everlasting life, who came no^ to call the
righteous but sinners to repentance: O gracious God, give me true, hearty,
earnest, and unseigned repentance, that I may from the very bottom of my heart
continually lament my manifold sins and wickednesses, and so assist me with thy
grace that I may never trespass against thy divine Majesty any more, but that I
may gladly serve thee in true holiness and righteousness all the days of my
life. Guide me O Lord by thy holy Spirit in all my ways, works, words, and
thoughts* that I may glori^y thy holy name, which live and reignest for ever
through Jesus Christ my blessed Lord and Savior in whose name and words I
further pray Our Father, etc.

A Prayer of a sick person.
FAithful Creator, and preserver of all men, look down I beseech thee upon thy
poor servant, who is punished and afflicted in body with the smart of my pain
and sickness; and who is also troubled with the fear of thy heavy displeasu^e
for my many sins and iniquities, wherewith I have provoked thy holy Majesty in
the time of my health, I confess that of very faithfulness and goodness to me,
thou have laid this scourge upon me to the end that by the stripes of my fle^h
my spirit might be healed and saved in the day of the Lord Jesus. I valued not
the benefit of health as I should have done, and therefore thou have made me
sensible of it, by the want of it; in my prosperity I remembered not the
afflictions of my brethren, and therefore thou have afflicted me like unto
them, I was in a kind of spiritual lethargy, till thou did awake me with the
str^^ke of thy hand; and because I know that it is good for me to be thus
disciplined by thee, I humble my self under thy mighty hand, and kiss this thy
rod, which I trust through thy grace shall make my Soul appear fair and
beautiful in thine eyes. Comfort O Lord, my fainting spirit, and strengthen my
feeble knees, and support my weak hands and revive my deaded heart, and so
powerfully assist me with the spirit of strength, that I may with confidence
call upon thee, with patience endure this trial, with hope expect thy good
pleasure, with wisdom make use of this thy Visitation and with thankfulness
ever praise thy goodness and mercy for my safe recovery, if it may fland with
thy will; whereunto I submit and wholly resign now and for ever, through Jesus
Christ my blessed Lord and Savior, in whose most holy words I further pray,

Our Father,

A Thanksgiving after recovery.
O Lord God of my health and salvation, who have known my Soul in trouble, and
did make my bed in my painful and dangerous sickness, and have now raised me
out of it to stand before thee, I offer now unto thee a sacrifice of praise
because I emplyed not the saculties of my Soul, and members of my body as I
should have done, thou did bereave me of the strength, and vigor, and use of
them for a season, but now because thy compassion fails not, thou have returned
them to me again, wherefore I consecrate and devote them perpetually to thy
s^rvice, and as I am in the state of my body, so by the power of thy renewing
grace I will become in the estate of my Soul a new man. My broken heart which
thou have healed shall now entirely love thee, my feeble knees and weak bones
which thou have settled shall night and day bow to thee, my weak hands which
t^ou have strengthened shall continually be lifted up unto thee. I confess unto
thee, O Lord, that in my health I often read and heard that worldly delights
and comforts were vain, and much like flags and bulrushes, which men in danger
of drowning c^tch to bear them up, but they sink do^^^ under water with them,
yet did I not learn till I suffered, till thy rod had imprinted it even in my
flesh. Now O Lord I beseech thee to knit my heart unto thee, that I may fear
thy name, create in me a new heart, and renew a right spirit within me. I asked
life of thee and thou gave it me, I now desire and crave thy Salvation, O my
God withhold it not; make me to repent of my sins (the cause of my sickness)
and to depend upon thee, the giver of all good things, and make me in the time
of prosperity to think of adversity, in health to think of sickness, in
sickness to think of death, and at all times so to think of judgment, that
whither I wake or sleep, eat or drink, or whatsoever I do else, I may ever have
this voice sounding in mine ears, Arise ye dead and come to judgment. Give me
grace, O Lord, to make this use of mine affliction past, and to cleave and
stick fast unto thee in all holiness for the time to come, through my Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ, in whose name and words I further pray, Our Father, etc.

The Prayer of the Sick now ready to depart this World.
ETernal and Omnipotent, infinite incomprehensible God, Lord of my life, and
determiner of my days; my body now is returning into dust, and my soul
returning to thee, that gave it; O Lord, most holy, O most mighty, draw near
unto me, who make have to come unto thee; give me a clearer sight of thee, by
how much the nearer I am out of the dark prison of my body; Give me also a
quicker taste of the powers of the life to come, that I may the more comfortably
pass over these last troubles of this present life; O Father of mercy, and God
of all consolation, let not the guilt of my s^^s, or horror of thy judgments,
or Satan's suggestions, or the fear of death, or terrors of hell, drive me to
desperation; I confess, that for my unmindfulness of thee, and ungratefulness
to thee, all my life, I deserve that thou should utterly abandon and forsake
me now at my death; but thy thoughts, are not like our thoughts; nor thy
affections like ours; Dear Father, show thy strength in my greatest weakness,
confirm thy mercy to me, in my greatest need, apply thy comforts to me, in this
my last extremity; assuage the pains of my body, with spiritual Comforts; and
diminish the fear of death, by the assured hope of a better life; O let me,
that am now returning to dust, and ashes, speak but this once, to my Lord and
Maker; with ill my heart, soul and strength, I beseech thee, by all that my
Savior Jesus Christ has done, and Suffered for me, I entreat thee, to speak
peace unto my soul at its departing; and say unto it, I am thy^ Salvation. Make
my election sure, by my true repentance, fervent charity, assured confidence,
constant patience, and comfortable, perseverance to the end, and in the end,
Amen.

At the Hour of death.
WElcome blessed hour, the period of my pilgrimage, the term of my bondage, the
end of my cares, the close of my sighs, the bound of my tarvels, the goal of my
race, and the heaven of my hopes, I have fought a long fight in much weakness;
I have finished my course, though in great faintness; and the crown of my joy
is, that through the strength of thy grace, I have kept the true faith, and now
I dye in it; I willingly resign my flesh, I despise the world, and I defy the
Devil, who has no part nor share in me; And now,

what is my hope? my hope, Lord Jesus, is even in thee, for I know that thou my
Redeemer live, and thou will immediately receive my soul, and raise up my
body at the last day, and I shall see thee in my flesh, with these eyes, and no
other; my heart ^ainteth, my strength fails, my tongue faltereth; Lord let
thy spirit of comfort help mine ins^^mities, and make Supplication for me, with
sighs and groans that cannot be uttered; I submit my self wholly to thy will, I
commit my soul to thee, as my faithful Redeemer, who have bought it with thy
most precious blood; I profess to all the world I know no name under heaven, by
which I may be saved, but thine, my Jesus, my Savior; I renounce all
confidence in any merits save thine; I thankfully acknowledge all thy blessings;
I unfainedly bewail all my sins, I steadfastly believe all thy promises; I
heartily forgive all mine enemies, I willingly leave all my friends; I utterly
loath all earthly comforts; I entirely long for thy coming; Come Lord Jesus,
come quickly; Lord Jesus receive my spirit.

SACRED POEMS UPON SELECT SUBJECTS: WITH Divine Meditations OF THE Vanity of
Man's Life, and the World. And also of the Four Last Things Death, Judgment,
Heaven, and Hell. With Graces.

Speaking to your selves in Psalms, and Hymns, and Spiritual Songs, singing and
making melody with your Heart to the Lord,

Ephesians. 5. 19. The Souls Breathing after Her Heavenly Country.
1.
JErusalem, my happy home,
O that I were in thee,
Oh would my Woes were at an end,
thy joys that I might see.
2.
Oh happy harbor of the Saints,
Oh sweet and pleasant Soil,
In thee no sorrows may be seen,
No Cross, no Grief, no Toil.
3.
In thee no sickness ever is;
No Hurt, no Ach, no Sore,
There is no Death, nor ugly Devil,
but life for evermore.
4.
No damp, no mist is found in thee,
No Cloud, nor darksome Night.
There every Star shines like the Sun,
There God himself gives Light,
5.
Thy Houses are of Ivory,
Thy windows Crystal clear;
Thy Tiles are maid of beaten Gold:
Oh would that I were there!
6.
Thy Turrets, and thy Pinacles,
With Carbuncles do shine;
Thy very streets are paved with Gold
Exceeding pure, and Fine.
7.
Within thy Gates can nothing Come,
Which is not passing Clean:
No Spiders Web, no Dust, no Dirt,
No Filth may there be Seen.
8.
Thy Saints are Crown's with Glory great,
They see God face to face;
They still Triumph, they still Rejoice,
Most happy is their case.
9.
We that live here in Banishment,
continually do Moan
We sigh, we Sob, we Weep, we Wail,
continually we Groan.
10.
But there they in such pleasure Live,
and such delight always,
That unto them a thousand Years
does seem but Yesterday.
11.
Thy Vineyards, and thy Orchards,
are Most beautiful and Fair,
Full furnished with Trees about,
Exceeding Rich, and Rare,
12.
Thy Gardens, and thy gallant Walks,
Continually are Green;
There grows such sweet and pleasant Fruit,
As no where else is Seen.
13.
There Is Nectar and Ambrosia,
There Is Musk and Civet Sweet,
There Is many fine and dainty Drugs
lie trodden under Feet.
14.
There Is Cinnamon, and Sugar too;
There Myrrh and Balm abound.
What tongue can tell, or heart conceive,
The joys that there are found*
15.
Quite through the streets, with silver streams
The flood of Life does flow,
Upon whose Banks on every side,
The Trees of Life do grow.
16.
The trees do evermore bear Fruit,
And evermore do spring,
There evermore do Angels sit,
And evermore do sing.
17.
There David stands with Harp in hand,
As Master over a Quire;
Ten thousand times, that man is Blessed,
that does this Music hear.
18.
Gods praises there are always sung,
with Harmony most sweet:
Old Zachary, and Simeon,
Have not their songs to seek.
19.
Their Magdalen has left her moan,
and cheerfully does sing,
With blessed Saints, whose Harmony
In every street does Ring.
20.
O Heavenly frame, Jerusalem,
At length I hope to see,
Thy glorious Throne, and in the same,
For evermore to be.
21.
O Heavnely City, fair, and bright,
when shall I come to thee,
When shall my sorrows have an end,
Thy Joys that I may see.
Upon the Passion.
1.
THus died the Prince of Life; He
That could not die, even dyed for me:
My thoughtful heart, Lord shall arise,
And ponder these deep Mysteries.
2.
What means his Death, that knew no sin?
Or what my life, who live therein?
Mine was the debt, and Death my due,
Though thou wast pleased thy Son to sue.
3.
Thou Lord, wast pleased on him to lay
The debt, and He the price to pay:
Thy Gospel-feasts, though sweet to me
Are the Emblems of His Agony.
4.
And Oh! how great his Sufferings were,
Who the Wrath of God and man did bear;
The Father then forsakes the Son,
And creatures against their maker run.
5.
Judas betrays, Disciples flee,
-- Whilst Jews and Romans Crucify:
Hereat the Sun furls up his light,
And clothes the Earth in sable Night.
6.
The joyless Stars even seemed to say,
Israel had quenched the Lamp of day;
The stubborn Mountains they lament,
The Rocks they are asunder Rent.
7.
The Graves their sealed doors unclose;
-- The dead awakened, also Rose;
The amazed Centurion, mourning cries,
-- Oh! it is the Son of God that Dies.
8.
Thus these all labor to confess
-- Thy Deity, thy Righteousness.
Enough Dear Lord! these offer me
Supports, for the utmost faith in thee.
The Souls Farewell.
1.
Farwell poor world! I must be gone;
Thou art no home, no rest for me;
I Will take my staff, and travel on,
Till I a better world may see.
2.
Why art thou loath my heart? O why
Do thou recoil within my Breast?
Greive not but say Farwell, and fly
Unto the Ark, my Dove! there is Rest.
3.
I come, my Lord, a Pilgrims pace,
Weary and weak I slowly move,
Longing, but cannot yet teach the place,
The gladsome place of rest above.
4.
I come my Lord! the floods here rise,
These troubled Seas foam naught but mire;
My Dove back to my bosom flys;
Farwell poor world! Heaven's my desire.
5.
Stay, stay, said Earth, whether fond one?
Here Is a fair World, what would thou have,
Fair World, Oh no! thy beauties gone,
An heavenly Canaan, Lord, I crave.
6.
Thus the ancient Travelers; thus they
Weary of earth, sighed after thee;
They are gone before, I may not stay,
Till I both thee and them may see.
7.
Put on my Soul! put on with speed.
Though the way be long, the end is sweet.
Once more, poor world! Farwell indeed,
In leaving thee, my Lord I meet.
Of Man's Life, by the Right Honorable the Lord B.
1.
THe World's a Bubble, and the life of Man,
Less then a Span;
In his Conception, wretched from the Womb,
So to the Tomb.
Cursed in the Cradle, and brought up to Years,
With cares and fears.
Who then to frail Mortality shall trust;
But Limns the Water, or but Writes in dust.
2.
Yet since with sorrow here we live oppressed,
What life is best?
Courts are but only Superficial Schools
To dandle ^ools,
The Rural parts are turned into a den;
of savage men.
And where is a City from all vice so free,
But may be termed the worst of all the three?
3.
Domestic cares afflict the husbands bed
Or pains his head.
Those that live single, take it for a Curse,
Or do things worse.
Some would have children, those that have them moan,
Or wish them gone.
What is it then to have, or Have no Wife;
But a single thraldom, or a double strife,
Our affections still at home to please,
Is a disease;
To cross the Sea to any foreign soil,
Perils and Toil;
Wars with their noise affright us; when they cease,
We Are worse in peace.
What then remains? but that we still should cry,
Not to be born, or being born to die.
All Vanity but Virtue.
SWeet day, so cool, so calm, so bright,
The Bridle of the Earth and Sky.
Sweet dews shall weep thy fall to Night,
For thou must Die!
Sweet Rose, whose hew, angry and Brave,
Bids the rash Gazer wipe his Eye,
Thy root is ever in its Grave,
And thou must Die.
Sweet Spring, full of sweet Days, and Roses,
A Box where sweets compacted lie;
My Music shows you have your Closes,
And all must Die.
Only a sweet and virtuous Soul,
Like seasoned Timber never gives,
And when the whole World turns to Coal
Then chiefly Lives.
The Vanity of man's Life.
WHat are poor men, but quickened lumps of earth,
A feast for worms, a bubble full of breath,
A looking-glass for grief, a flash, a minute,
A painted tomb with putrefaction in it.
A map of death, a burden of a Song,
A winters dust, a worm of five foot long,
Begot in sin, in darkness nourisht, born
In sorrow, naked, shiftless, and forlorn;
His first voice (heard) is crying for relief,
Alas he comes into a world of grief.
His first age is sinful, and his youth is vain,
His life's a punishment, his death's a pain.
His life's an hour of joy, a world of sorrow,
His death's a winters night that finds no morrow.
Man's life's an hourglass, which being run
Concludes that hour of joy, and so is done.
2.
How poor a thing is man? how vains his mind?
How strange, how base, and wavering like the wind?
How uncouth are his ways, how full of danger?
How to himself is he himself a stranger?
His hearts corrupt, and all his thoughts are vain;
His actions sinful and his words profane;
His wills depraved, his senses are beguiled,
His reasons dark, his members are defiled,
His hasty feet are swift, and prone to ill,
His guilty hands are ever bent to kill.
His tongues a sponge of venom; or of worse
His practice is to swear, his skill to curse.
His eyes are fireballs of lustful fire,
And outward helps to inward foul desire,
His body is a well-erected station,
But full of folly, and corrupted passion.
3.
How slight a thing is man, how frail and bri^le
How seeming great is he, how truly little.
Within the bosom of his holiest works,
Some hidden embers of old Adam lurks.
Which oftentimes in men of purest ways
Burst out in flame, and for a season blaze.
Lord teach our hearts, and give our souls directions,
Subdue our passions, curb our stout affections.
And in thy mercy grant this boon to me,
That I may die to sin, and live to thee.
4.
Our life on earth is a like a thread of flax,
That all may touch; and being touched, it cracks.
Death is a Calendar composed by fate,
Concerning all men, never out of date:
His days Dominical are writ in blood;
She shows more bad days, then she shows good
She tells when days, and months, and terms expire,
Mesuring the lives of mortals by her squire
Death is a Pursuvant with Eagles wings,
That knocks at poor men's doors, and gates of Kings.
Worldling beware betimes, death sculks behind thee,
And as she leaves thee, so will Judgment find thee.
A Farewell to the World by the Honorable Sir H. W.
Farewell ye gilded follies; pleasing troubles,
Farewell ye honored rags, ye glorious bubbles.
Fames but a hollow Echo, gold pure clay,
Honor the darling but of one short day,
Beauty, the eyes idol, but a damask'd skin,
State but a golden prison to live in,
And torture freeborn minds; imbroydered trains,
Merely but pagents for proud swelingveins
And blood allied to greatness is alone;
Inherited not purchased, not our own.
Fame, honor, beauty, state, train, blood and birth,
Are but the fading blossoms of the earth.
2.
I would be great, but that the Sun does still
Level his rays against the rising hill;
I would be high, but see the proudest oak,
Most subject to the rending thunderstroke
I would be rich, but see men too unkind,
Dig in the bowels of the richest mine;
I would be wise, but that I often see
The fox suspected, whilst the ass goes free,
I would be fair, but see the fair and proud,
Like the bright Sun often setting in a cloud.
I would be poor, but see the humble grass
Still trampled on by each unworthy Ass,
Rich hated, wise suspected, scorned if poor,
Great feared, fair tempted, high still envyed more.
I have wished all, but now I wish for neither
Great, high, rich, wise, nor fair, poor, I Will be rather*
3.
Would the world now adopt me for her heir,
Would beauties Queen entitle me the fair,
Fame speak me fortunes minion, could Ivy
Angels with India, with a speaking eye
Command bare heads, bowed knees, strike Justice dumb,
As well as blind and lame, or give a tongue
To stones by epitaphs, be called great master,
In the loose rimes of every Poetaster.
Could I be more than any man that lives,
Great, fair, rich, wise, in all superlatives;
Yet I more freely would these gifts resign
Than ever fortune would have made them mine.
And hold one minute of this holy leisure,
Beyond the riches of this empty pleasure.
4.
Welcome pure thoughts, welcome ye silent groves,
These guests, these courts my Soul most dearly loves.
Now the winged people of the sky shall sing
My cheerful anthems to the glad somspring
A prayer book now shall be my looking-glass,
In which I will adore sweet virtues face,
Here dwell no hateful looks, no palace cares,
No broken vows dwell here, nor palefac'd fears.
Then here I Will sit and sigh my hot-loves folly
And learn to affect an holy melancholy.
And if contentment be a stranger then,
I Will nere look for it but in Heaven again.
Conclusion.
BIrth is a brag, Glory a blaze,
Honors earths pomp, riches a gaze.
Fame is but a wind, Beauty a flower.
Pleasure a dance, the World a bower
In Heaven with thee, Lord let me be:
On earth, my Heaven's alone in thee.
Quatuor Novissima: OR, Meditations on the four Last Things; Death, Judgment,
Heaven, and Hell.
Death.
CAn he be fair that withers at a blast,
Or he be strong that airy breath can cast?
Can he be wise, that knows not how to live
Or he be rich; that nothing has to give?
Can he be young that's feeble, weak, and wan
So fair, strong, wise, so rich, so young is man
So fair is man, that death, a parting blast,
Blast his fair flower, and makes him earth at last,
So strong is man, that with a gaspingbreath
He totters and bequeaths his strength to death.
So wise is man that if with death he strive
His wisdom cannot teach him how to live:
So rich is man, that, all his debts being paid
His wealths the winding sheet wherein he laid:
So young is man, that broke with care and sorrow,
He Is old enough to day to die to morrow.
Why brag'st thou then, thou worm of five foot long,
Though art neither fair nor strong;
Nor wise nor rich nor young.
Judgment.
The trumpet shall blow, the dead awaked shall rise,
And to the clouds shall turn their wondering eyes,
The Heavens shall open, the Bridegroom forth shall come,
To Judge the World, and give the World her doom.
Joy to the Just, to others endless smart,
To those the voice bids come, to these depart. Death

Judgment

Heaven

Hell


Depart from life, yet dying live for ever;
For ever dying be, and yet dye never.
Depart like dogs, with Devils take your lot,
Depart like Devils, for I know you not.
Like dogs, like Devils, go, go, howl and bark,
Depart in darkness, for your deeds were dark
Let roaring be your music, and your food,
Be flesh of vipers, and your drink their blood
Let fiends afflict you with reproach and shame,
Depart, depart into eternal flame.
If Hell the portion then of sinners be,
Lord give me hell on earth:
Lord give me Heaven with thee.
Heaven.
When I consider New Jerusalem.
Wherein's reserved my Crown, my diadem,
O what a Heaven of bliss my Soul enjoyes,
On sudden rapt into that Heaven of Joys,
Where troops of Powers, Virtues, Cherubins,
Angels, Archangels, Saints and Seraphins,
Are chaunting praises to their heavenly King,
Where Hallelujahs they for ever sing.
Where joys are full and pure, not mixed with mourning;
All endless, and from which is no returning.
No theft no cruel murder harbors there
No hoary-headed care, no sudden fear,
No pinching want, no griping fast, oppression,
Nor Death, the stipend of our first transgression;
But dearest friendship, love and lasting pleasure,
Still there abides without stint or measure
Fullness of riches, comfort sempiternal,
Excess without surfeting, and life eternal.
Hell.
Let Poets please to torture Tantalus,
Let griping Vultures gnaw Prometheus,
And let poor Ixi^, turn his endless wheel,
Let Nerve^s to^ment with whips of steel:
They far come short to express the pains of those,
That rage in hell, enwrapt in endless woes,
Where time no end, and Plagues find no exemption,
Where cries admit no help, nor place Redemption.
Where fire lacks no flame, the flame no heat,
To make their torments sharp, and plagues complete,
Where wretched Souls to tortures bound shall be.
Serving a world of years, and not be free.
Where nothings heard but yells, and sudden cries;
Where fire never slacks, nor worm ere dies
But where this Hell is placed, my muse stop there
Lord show me what it is, but never where.
Of Death and Judgment, Heaven and Hell,
Who often does think, must needs die well.
Short Graces and Thanksgivings before and after Meat.
Before Meat.
SAnctify O Lord unto us the use of these thy creatures of which by our sins,
we have made our selves, and grant that the end of our eating and drinking may
be to be better enabled to serve thee in our several places, through Jesus
Christ our Lord* Amen.

After Meat.
ETernal thanks and praise be ascribed unto thee, O blessed Lord, which have
opened thy hand at this time, and made us partakers of thy benefits, Lord let
us never cease to offer unto thee the Sacrafice of praise and thanksgiving,
through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Before Meat.
HUmble our souls before thee, O Lord, and cause us to see the Smalness of out
desert, even in respect of the least of thy mercies, and bless these thy
creatures to us at this time to the rejoicing of the soul of thy Servants
through Jesus Christ. Amen.

After Meat.
We give thee most hearty thanks, O Lord, for thy bountiful Liberality to us at
this time, grant we may serve thee better in the enjoyment of these favors,
Amen.

Before Meat.
LOrd lift up our hearts to look unto thee for a blessing upon our meats, that
we may comfortably use thy creatures, as pledges of thy favor, through Jesus
Christ. Amen.

After Meat.
LOrd accept our thanks for the mercy we have enjoyed in receiving these thy
creatures for our bodily relief, and let us also labor for the meat that
perishes not, for the sake of our Savior Jesus Christ. Amen.

Before Meat.
O Lord bless us, and bless these thy good creatures to the nourishment of our
bodies, and grant that whether we eat or drink, or whatever we do, we may do
all to the praise and glory of God, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

After Meat.
AS thou have filled our bodies O Lord with thy good creatures, far above our
desert, so be pleased to endue our souls with all Spiritual blessings in
heavenly things, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

FINIS.

