The Humble PETITION Of the Captains, Officers, and Soldiers of the Trained
Bands, and Volunteers in the County of Buckingham, Assembled at Alisbury, June
17. 1642.

Presented to both Houses of Parliament, the 24 of June, 1642. And commanded by
them to be forthwith Printed and published.

H. Elsyng Cler. Parl. D. Com.



Together with a Letter from a Merchant of Dublin, to his Friend a worthy
Gentleman in Bassing-Hall street, in London.

Relating the happy proceedings of the Protestant Army against the Rebels.

London Printed for Joseph Hunscott, and John Wright,

To the Right HONORABLE The LORDS and COMMONS Assembled in PARLIAMENT, The
humble Petition of the Captains, Officers and Soldiers of the Trained Bands
and Volunteers, of the County of Buckingham, Assembled at Alisbury, June 17.
1642.
Humbly shows,
THat they give you thanks from the depth of their hearts, for the great and
many benefits they have already reaped from your no less chargeable, then
Indefatigable pains, and in particular for your necessary Ordinance of the
Militia, on which, as we conceive (under God) our safety does depend, unto
which we most cheerfully, sudmit, as is manifest by this days appearance, not
only of the Trained Bands, but of well near a thousand Volunteers, that make
all demonstration of Obedience, as well to this, as all other Commands that
shall come from your Honorable Houses, in opposition to the Popish malignant
Party at home, or any other power from abroad, notwithstanding the many visible
discouragements from ill affected persons that make it their business to
blemish the validity of your Authority, as also by the Lord Lieutenant's
absence contrary to the trust reposed in him.

Therefore we humbly implore the continuance of your care for our Safeties, and
to appoint such a Lord Lieutenant, in whom we may confide, as surely you may in
us, who are resolved to lay our lives and fortunes at your feet, in defense of
the King and Parliament.

And we shall pray etc.
June, 24* 1642.
IT is desired that the Lords would join with this House, in nominating the
Lord Wha^ton to be Lieutenant for the County of Buckingham in the place of the
Lord Paget.

It is this day Ordered that this shall be forthwith Printed and Published.

M. Elsyng, Cler. Parl. D. Co^.

Tuesday the 7. Iunii, 1642.
Worthy Sir,
YEsterday I received your letters, which (as mine to yours were) wanted a
date, I thank you for your pains in your particular and exact relations
therein contained.

The distractions there with you, do extremely perplex us and discourage many
men from particular undertakings, which would conduce to the common good, for
whilst we fear the danger there, our hands are enfeebled for doing what many
otherwise would adventure upon.

The Lord in his good time send an happy end to these troubles, the matters in
Print are constantly sent by my Cofen Nicholas Loftus, to Sir Adam here, of
which I do participate, and therefore I shall excuse you of what they
contain, what else you know, I pray you impart unto me as convenience affords
it self; our army does not move until Friday next, at which time they take
the field, they are here in this City and in the Country round adjoining about
14000. horse and fo^t; it is conceived they will march in three bodies, one by
the way of the mountains, into the County of Wacklow and Wexford, where all the
English Cowes are kept which remain; another through the County of Kildare, on
the west side of the mountains, toward the County of Ca^^rlaug^ and t^en
meeting with the former bodies, will b^^^ (...) and take in the City of
Kilceny, and pillage all that rich Country, the third through the Counties of
Mead and west mead, to Multingaine, and from thence to raise the siege of
Athlone; this I know not for certain, other then by conjecture of some that
have good grounds for what they say, and indeed it is a very probable way to
effect the reducing of the pale. I hear that several of the Gentlemen of
Fingall, are in great distress, for the Irish in the North do pillage them
when they come hither, and send them home to fight, and here their rebellious
wickedness have made them incapable of mercy, so as they are enforced to shift
from place to place, not daring to show their heads; it is true as you have
heard that Walter Evers the civilian is hanged, but I did neither conceive the
man nor the matter so considerable, as to value either, for news worth
relating. On Friday last one Lieutenant Allen went from the Naas, with a party
of Musketeers, and took the Castle of Irishton, belonginging to one Mr.
Seidon, and slew there one Captain Dougan as they say, brother to Sir John
Dougan: yesterday being monday, Captain Michaell Jones issued out of the Naas,
with a 140. men, and took the strong Castle of the Dowings, wherein were
several of the Rebels, and slew them, and pillaged the place; from thence he
went to a castle called Blackwood, where one Mr. Edward Dougan lived, and took
and pillaged it also, and slew several men there, and returned home without
the loss of any one man, having gained a great part of Cattle and much
pillage; not long before he went over a great Bog, into the Island of Allon,
belonging to Maurice Pitz-Gerauld of Allon, and from thence brought with him
1400. Sheep, and 300. Cowes, in spite of all the Rebels which kept several
horneworkes made on the passages into the Bog, out of which he did beat them,
and was forced to pass through the Bog, above two mile almost kneee deep, in
the Bog was found a trunk of apparel and some plate, our Courts of Justice
do sit constantly in the term, although we have little to do, save only to
endict Rebels, of which this last term here, were found near 2000. guilty by
several grand Juries of the City of Dublin, Counties of Dublin, Wicklow,
Mead, Cavan, and Longfora, victuals we have God be thanked, at as good
rates, as any at Chest^^: and Seafish in abundance, at easy rates, Corn
begins to grow dear, it being at 18s. a pecke, but I hope when the Army is
gone forth it will grow cheap again, we have no good grass Beef yet which is
fat, but I hope shortly they will be good. here is great store of Cattle about
the Town brought over by the Army, the Castle of Baldongan near Cordaff was
taken some 12. days agone by Colonel Craford and 500. men; here were slain
above 140. stout Rebels, and of our men only two. This is all for the present,
so I rest your assured loving friend,

John Busse.

FINIS.

