The Humble PETITION Of the County of CORNWALL, TO THE KINGS Most Excellent
Majesty.

Subscribed by above seven thousand hands.

WITH His Majesty's Answer thereunto.

Whereunto is added, The Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy.

LONDON, Printed for T. Warren. 1642.

To the KINGS most Excellent Majesty, The humble PETITION of the County of
CORNWALL.
WE Your Majesty's most Loyal Subjects in all duty render unto Your Majesty
all thankfulness for Your Majesty's Unexempled favor and Grace in granting
unto Your Subjects, by the Concurrence with Your Parliament, such Laws and
freedoms, which have most fully expressed Your Majesty's gracious goodness
uuto Your People; And we most thankfully receive Your Majesty's free offer of a
General Pardon, whereof we most humbly desire to be made partakers.

And we most humbly beseech Your Majesty, Never to suffer Your Subjects to be
Governed by an Arbitrary Government, nor admit an alteration in Religion.

And Your Petitioners being most feelingly grieved for Your Majesty's
discontents (partly occasioned by diverse scandalous Pamphlets, and seditious
Sermons, and no way lessened by unlawful Tumults) do wish a confluence of all
Comforts, Honor and Happiness unto Your Majesty, and do most heartily pray
for the Reconcilement between Your Majesty and Your Parliament:

And in all humble thankfulness for Your Majesty's said Grace and Goodness,
Your Petitioners do offer themselves most ready to maintain and defend with
their lives and fortunes, Your Majesty's Sacred Person, Honor, Estate, and
lawful Prerogative against all persons whatsoever, according to the Oaths of
Supremacy and Allegiance.

CORNUB. John Grills high Sheriff. Warwick Lord Mohun. Sir John Trelawney
Knight and Baronet. Sir William Wrey Knight and Baronet. John Arundell of
Trerise Esquire. Charles Trevanion Esquire. Walter Langdon Esquire. Peter Courtney Esquire.
Samuel Cosowarth Esquire. Richard Prideaux Esquire. John Arundell Esquire. Renatus Billot
Esquire. Francis Jones Esquire. Robert Rous Esquire. Edward Trelawney Esquire. Nevil Blighe
Esquire. William Bastard Esquire. Charles Grills Esquire. Nathanel Dillon Esquire. William
Arundell Gent. William Courtney Gent. Ed. Courtney, Gent. Walter Glin Gent.
Edward Cook Gent. Hugh Pomeroy Esquire. Ambrose Billot Gent. John Samuel Gent.
Nichol. Kendall, Major of Lostwithyell. Obadiah Ghoship Cler. John Kette Cler.
Thomas Harrison Cler. Thomas Porter Cler. Simon Lann Cler. John Peter Cler.
George Brush Cler. Barnard Achim Gent. Theophilus Laugherne Gent. William
Guavas Gent. Nicholas Sawell Gent. William Robinson Gent. Thomas Robinson Gent.
Joseph Jolly Gent. Thomas Trear Gent.
THe aforesaid Gentlemen Subscribed at Lostwithyell unto the Petition direction
to His Majesty, together with Seven thousand more, Esquires, Gentlemen,
Freeholders and other Inhabitants which subscribed and signed the said Petition
in their several Parishes.

HIS MAJESTY'S ANSWER to the Petition of Cornwall, At the Court at York, 26.
June, 1642.
HIs Majesty is so very well pleased with the duty and affection of this
Petition, That He has commanded me to signify His good acceptance of it, and
thanks for it to the County of Cornwall, and to assure them, That as He will be
always ready to increase the happiness of His people, by consenting to such
good new Laws, as shall be proposed to Him for their advantage, so He will be
forward to venture His life in maintenance of the Religion and Laws
established, which He doubts not, with the assistance of the Petitioners, and
other His good Subjects, He shall be able to defend: His Majesty will be ready
to grant such a general Pardon to the Petitioners as they desire; And will no
longer expect the continuance of their duty and affection, then Himself
continues true to those Professions He has so often made of maintaining and
defending the Religion and Laws of this Kingdom.

Falkland.

The Oath of Allegiance, Tertio Iac. cap. 4.
I A. B. do truly and sincerely acknowledge, profess, testify, and declare,
in my conscience before God and the world; that our Sovereign Lord King Charles
is lawful and rightful King of this Realm, and of all other his Majesty's
Dominions and Countries, and that the Pope neither of himself, nor by any
authority by the Church or See of Rome, or by any other means with any other,
has any power of authority, to depose the King, or to dispose any of his
Majesty's Kingdoms or Dominions, or to authorize any foreign Prince to invade
or annoy him, or his Countries, or to discharge any of his Subjects of their
Allegiance and obedience to his Majesty, or to give license or leave to any of
them to bear arms, raise tumults, or to offer any violence or hurt to his
Majesty's Royal Person, State, or Government, or to any of his Majesty's
Subjects within his Majesty's Dominions.

Also I do swear from my heart, that notwithstanding any declaration, or
sentence of exco^muuication, or deprivation, made, or granted to be made, or
granted by the Pope, or his successors, or by any authority, derived, or
pretended to be derived from him, or his See, against the said King, his Heirs
or Successors, or any absolution of the said Subjects from their obedience: I
will bear faith and true Allegiance to his Majesty, his Heirs and Successors,
and him and them will defend to the utmost of my power, against all
conspiracies and attempts whatsoever, which shall be made against his or their
Persons, their Crown and Dignity, by reason or color of any such sentence, or
declaration, or otherwise, and will do my best endeavor to disclose and make
known unto his Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, all treasons, or traiterous
conspiracies, which I shall know or hear of, to be against him or any of them.

And I do further swear, that I do from my heart abhor, detest and abjure as
impious and heretical, this damnable doctrine, and position. That Princes
which be excommunicated or deprived by the Pope, may be deposed or, murdered
by their Subjects, or any other whatsoever,

And I do believe, and in my Conscience am resolved, that neither the Pope, nor
any Person whatsoever, has power to absolve me of this Oath, or any part
thereof, which I acknowledge by good and full authority to be lawfully
ministered unto me, and do renounce all pardons, or dispensations to the
contrary. And all these things I do plainly, and sincerely acknowledge and
swear, according to these express words by me spoken, and according to the
plain and common sense, and understanding of the same words, without any
equivocation, or mental evasion, or secret reservation whatsoever. And I do
make this recognition, and acknowledgement heartily, willingly, and truly, upon
the true faith of a Christian: So help me God.

The Oath of Supremacy, Primo Eliz. Cap. 1.
I A. B. do utterly testify and declare in my Conscience, that the Kings
Highness is the only Supreme Governor of this Realm, and all other his
Highness Dominions and Countries, as well in all Spirirituall or
Ecclesiastical things or causes, as Temporal: And that no foreign Prince,
Person, Prelate, State or Potentate, has or ought to have any Jurisdiction,
Power, Superiority, Preeminence or Authority Ecclesiastical or Spiritual
within this Realm. And therefore, I do utterly renounce and forsake all
foreign Jurisdictions, Powers, Superiorities and Authorities; and do promise
that from henceforth I shall bear faith and true Allegiance to the Kings
Highness, his Heirs and lawful Successors: and to my power shall assist and
defend all Jurisdictions, Privileges, Preeminences and Authorities granted or
belonging to the Kings Highness, his Heirs and Successors, or united and
annexed to the Imperial Crown of the Realm: So help me God: and by the
Contents of this book.

FINIS.

