THE HUMBLE PETITION OF The Gentry and Commons of the County of York,
presented to His Majesty at York, April 22. 1642. AND His MAY ESTIES Message
sent to the Parliament, April 24. 1642.

Concerning Sir John Hothams Refusal to give His Majesty Entrance into Hull.

LONDON, Printed for W. J. in the year, 1642.

To the Kings most Excellent Majesty.
The humble Petition of the Gentry and Commons of the County of York.
Most Royal Sovereign.
ENcouraged by Your Majesty's many Testimonies of Your Gracious Goodness to us
and our County, which we can never Sufficiently acknowledge we in all duty and
Loyalty of heart address our Selves to Your Sacred Majesty, beseeching You to
cast Your eyes and thoughts upon the Safety of Your own Person and Your
Princely Issue, and this whole County, a great means of which we concieve
does consist in the Arms and Ammunition at Hull, placed there by Your Princely
care and charge, and since upon General apprehension of dangers from Foreign
parts represented to your Majesty, thought fit as yet to be continued. We for
our parts, conceiving our selves to be still in danger, do most humbly beseech
your Majesty that you will be pleased to take such course and order that your
Magazine may still there remain, for the better securing of these and the rest
of the Northern parts: And the rather because we think it fit, that that part
of the Kingdom should be best provided where your Sacred Person does reside,
your Person being like DAVID'S, the light of Israel, and more worth then ten
thousand of us.

Who shall daily pray etc.
His Majesty's Message sent to the Parlia^ent, April 24. 1642.
Concerning Sir John Hotham's Refusal to give His Majesty Entrance into Hull
HIs Majesty having received the Petition enclosed from most of the chief of
the Gentry near about York, desiring the stay of his Majesty's Arms and
Munition in His Magazine at Hull, for the safety (not only of His Majesty's
Person and Children, but likewise of all these Northern parts: The manifold
rumors of great Dangers inducing them to make their said Supplication) Thought
it most fit to go Himself in Person to his Town of Hull, to view His Arms and
Munition there, that thereupon he might give Directions, what part thereof
might be necessary to remain there, for the security and satisfaction of His
Northern Subjects, and what part thereof might be spared for Ireland. The
Arming of His Majesty's Scots Subjects that are to go thither, Or to replenish
his chiefest Magazine of the Tower of London, Where being come, upon the three
and twentieth of this instant April, much contrary to his expectation, He
found all the Gates shut upon him and the Bridges drawn up, by the express
command of Sir John Hotham, (who for the present commands a Garrison there) and
from the Walls flatly denied his Majesty Entrance into his said Town, the
reason of the said denial being as strange to his Majesty, as the thing it
self, It being, That he could not admit His Majesty without breach of Trust to
his Parliament; which did the more incense his Majesty's anger against him, for
that he most Seditiously and Traitorously would have put his disobedience upon
his Majesty's parliament; which his Majesty being willing to clear, demanded
of him if he had the impudence to aver, that the Parliament had directed him to
deny his Majesty entrance, and that if he had any such Order, that he should
show it in Writing, for otherwise his Majesty could not believe it; which he
could no ways produce, but maliciously made that false interpretation
according to his own Inferences confessing that he had no such positive Order,
which his Majesty was ever confident of: But his Majesty not willing to take
so much-pains in vain offered to come into that his Town only with twenty
Horse, finding that the maine of his pretense lay, That his Majesty's Train
was able to Command the Garrison: Notwithstanding, his Majesty was so desirous
to go thither in a private way, that he gave warning thereof but overnight;
Which he refusing, but by way of Condition (which his Majesty thought much
below him) held it most necessary to declare him Traitor) unless upon better
thoughts, he should yield obedience) which he doubly deserved as well for
refusing Entrance to his natural Sovereign, as by laying the reason the reof
groundlesly and maliciously upon his Parliament.

One Circumstance His Majesty cannot forget, That his Son the Duke of York, and
his Nephew the Prince Elector, having gone thither the day before, Sir John
Hotham delayed the letting of them out to his Majesty till after some
Consultation.

Hereupon His Majesty has thought it expedient to demand Justice of his
Parliament against the said Sir John Hotham, to be exemplarily inflicted one
him according to the Laws, and the rather, because his Majesty would give them
a fit occasion to free themselves of this imputation, by him so injuriously
cast upon them, to the end His majesty may have the easier way for the
chastising of so high a disobedience.


