HUMBLE PROPOSALS TO THE PARLIAMENT Now Assembled.

Whereby the Profession of the CIVIL LAW may be used in certain Cases, to the
great ease and benefit of the People, without looking back to Episcopacy, or
any thing that is abolished, or making any use of the Popes Law, commonly
called the The Canon Law, or taking away any thing from the Common Law, and in
a perfect compliance with this present Government.

LONDON, Printed by E. C. for R. Royston at the Angel in Ivie-lane, 1656.

HUMBLE PROPOSALS TO THE PARLIAMENT Now Assembled.
Civil or Eclesiastical, that has been abolished, and do so little intend the
use of the Canon Law, and least of all to abridge the Common Law in any thing,
that they are very willing, that in any Act that shall be made for the exercise
of their Profession, some such clauses may be inserted, whereby the people of
this Nation may be satisfied in these particulars;

1. That it is done for the continuance of the study of the Civil Law only,
that is so useful for determining matters done upon the Sea, correspondence
with foreign Nations, and public Transactions both of Peace and War. 2. That
all their proceedings shall go in the name and style of the present Government,
and stamped with such inscription and seal, as shall be allowed. 3. That it
shall not be lawful for any, either Judge or Advocate of that Profession, to
vouch or cite in Court for authority any part of the Canon Law, nor any
Ecclesiastical Law heretofore of use in this Nation, but shall vouch the Civil
Law only. 4. That if in the cases permitted them to exercise their Profession
in, there be any Law of the Nation express in the case, no Judge or Advocate
shall presume to cite the Civil Law to the contrary, but shall leave it to be
decided by the established Law of the Nation. 5. That thereby nothing is
intended to be granted to the Civilians, that by any Act of Parliament, or the
ancient usages of this Nation has belonged to the conisance of the Common Law.
London, that as to the doing of justice in the cases hereunder mentioned, they
shall be ready to serve them in such places of the Country as the Parliament
shall appoint, as formerly they did, though under another capacity and notion
then heretofore.

Court or Law can challenge; but do justly hope, that what they Petition for,
shall be continued in them, because they have a certain rule for those cases in
the Civil Law, and the Common Law has none.

Papal or Episcopal, but such as will commonly happen amongst the people under
this present Government, and which all well ordered States, for the quiet and
satisfaction of the people, do provide for.

These things being premised, the matters whereof they desire to have the
conisance and trial in the several Countries, are these ensuing;

1 Probats of Wills, as to personal Estate only.

This has always undeniably belonged unto the Courts of the Civil Law only.

2. Granting of Administrations, where persons dye intestate, and without any
Will.

3. To call for Inventaries and Accounts upon them.

Of these two there has never been any question neither.

4. Distribution of Portions out of the Goods and Personal Estate of such as
shall dye without any Will made, amongst Wife, Children, or Kindred.

Of this there has been some question made, whether the Courts of the Civil
Law might do it or no; and the Courts at Westminster have sometimes sent
Prohibitions to stop them from proceeding to execute any such power. But yet
they never undertook to distribute Portions themselves, nor have, or pretend to
have any Rules for it. And in cases where Prohibitions have not come (as not
one in a hundred Cases has) distributions have been constantly for many Ages
practiced by the Courts of the Civil Law. That therefore there is a necessity
to settle them finally somewhere, and rather in the Civil Law then any were
else: there be these Reasons;

1. Because the Common Law for want of Rule and practice, cannot order them,
nor ever did. 2. Because the Civil Law has certain Rules for them in every
Case, the Cases whereof are very many, and some very difficult. 3. Because else
the Administrator, that gets the Administration, after debts paid, will keep
all the rest to himself, though there be never so many as near of Kin as he;
and so it may happen, that the eldest son that has all the Land, by getting
Administration, may have all the Goods too, and the rest of the children have
nothing out of their Fathers Estate to keep them; for if a Prohibition come,
the younger children are without any remedy. 4. Because this matter of
Distributions is but an appendant or accessory to Administrations, and
therefore it is requisite, that both should be decided by one and the same
Judicatory. And if practice and knowledge may make out to any a Title to them;
the Civilians have most to say for themselves, being always practiced, and
having most skill in them both.
5. Causes of Marriage, Divorce, and Alimony.

Of the first there will be use, when two persons have by formal promise each
to other contracted themselves in marriage, so that nothing is wanting to make
them Man and Wife, but the ceremony of marying, and yet the one denies such
promise, or refuses to perform it, or happily mary's another man or woman.

This may be so settled, as not to entrench or derogate from the late Act of
Marriages, if that be thought fit to continue of force still; for the solemnity
of Marying may still be the same, as that Act appoints, This new intended
provision is but to supply those Cases, which that Act has declared nothing in.
Besides, the subjects hereby shall have but a double remedy, leaving them to go
to the Justices or Sessions, or to this new Judicatory; But where the complaint
is first entied, it shall be a Bar to hinder the other from proceeding.

Of the second, namely, Divorces, there is use, when two persons marry one
another, that for near kindred or alliance, or some other Legal impediment, are
not capable to intermary; or when one married person is quite forsaken by the
other, and is not heard of in many years, and is reported to be dead; or when
such irreconcilable enmity is happened between them, that they may be better
severed as to cohabitation, then permitted to live together.

That of Alimony is useful, when the Husband will live asunder from his Wife,
and yet will allow her no maintenance, or uses her with more cruelty then can
be endured. In which case the duty of cohabitation may be taken off, and the
Husband may be enjoined to allow the Wife Alimony and maintenance to such
proportion as his Estate can bear.

Of these several Cases the Civil Law has always had the Conisance, the
Common Law never did pretend to any of them. The Chancery has by special orders
of late ordered Alimony, but that was because the Ecclesiastical Courts were
abolished, and was intended only to serve for a present supply of justice, till
a perfect settlement could be made, which now we hope for.

6. Causes of Legacies given by last Wills and Testaments, of Money, Goods,
Chattels or other personal Estate; not of Lands, or any Freehold, which is
recoverable only at Common Law.

Since the fall of Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, these Causes have been pro
tempore put into several hands to judge them, but intended for a present
supply of justice only, and not to remain any longer there, then till a more
perfect settlement could be made by Parliament.

7. Causes of Tithes, for so long time as that kind of maintenance shall be
kept up, excepting the Tithe of Corn and Hay, which is recoverable at Common
Law by Treble damages.

For the recovery, hereof since the taking away of the Ecclesiastical Power, to
prevent a failer of justice, several Orders have been made and directions given
to order them by other hands, but intended to endure no longer. then till a
perfect settlement should be made.

8. Repairs of Churches, and the payment of Rates toward them, together with
the keeping up of Parsonage and Vicatidge houses; which were constantly ordered
by the Courts of the Civil Law, and never otherwise: But only of late some
orders were made in them, as in other Cases above mentioned, for supply of
justice for the present, to prevent imminent and daily mischiefs.

These are the few Cases that the Civilians are Petitioners for, to exercise
their Profession in, throughout the several Countries of this Commonwealth: In
order to which, they pray,

1. That any Act or Bill, that shall be brought into the Parliament for the
settling of these Cases or any of them in any Judicatory in the Country, may
have a Clause or a Proviso in it; That the said Cases shall be tried and judged
by Civilians, and by the Rules of the Civil Law, as formerly they have been. 2.
That such a Coercive Power may be granted to the Judges thereof, as may be
sufficient to make men appear to answer in the said several and respective
Cases, and to do and perform what shall be adjudg'd therein, that their keeping
of Courts may not be in vain. 3. That if any shall find themselves aggrieved
by any final and diffinitive judgment, that shall be given upon the whole
matter, and would run the hazard of a second Trial, they may have liberty to
appeal to the Lord Protector in the High Court of Chancery, and the Cause to be
tried by a Commission of Delegates in such manner, as always formerly has
been.
This may seem burdensome, that all Appeals should be to London. But the
difficulty and charge thereof will be such a check to contentious spirits, that
but upon weighty and just grounds, and in matters of moment, men will not be so
easily tempted to appeal as they will when the charge is light, and the trouble
not so great.

Which Cases except they be 'setled upon the Professors of the Civil Law,
thereby to employ themselves in, and to keep that learning on foot still, so
useful for all Maritime affairs, and public Negotiations with foreign States,
that learning will be irrecoverably lost for ever; and one whole calling, that
the youth of this Nation was heretofore bred in and advanced by, will be quite
taken away; for other means of preserving it will not be found in a practical
way, which only can make it useful to this Commonwealth.

THE END.

