PARADOXES by I. de la Salle



PARADOXES BY J. De la SALLE.

Obscuris vera involuens.

LONDON, Printed for Francis Eaglesfiel at the Marygold in Paul's Churchyard.
1653.

To the Worthily honored ROBERT BRANTHVVAITE of Buly-Castle, in the County of
Westmorland, Esque
WHen I consider with my self, who it is that brings the importunity of this
address upon you, I cannot but be doubtful of the entertainment you may
afford it, but when I shall withal have represented unto you, that things of
this nature have found acceptance with all the polished Nations, that Tully
himself was not ashamed to appear in this kind, and that the Author may well
be justified by the example of Sir Will. Cornwallis, Dr. Done and Carpenter in
our own Nation; I have the more assurance to offer you this, and so much the
more, as I must witness for the Author those great sentinents of honor and
respect whch a most effective and excellent virtue, that is to say, your own
can work upon him; besides that you are one of the few that even in a desperate
age inte est your self in things noble. So that I do my self but right in
acknowledging my self your Honourer, and bringing these things into your
Protection, which if your Candor, and usual ingenuity will not deny me, you
have satisfied the ambition, and wishes of

Worthy Sir, Your most humble servant, J. DAVIES.

TO THE READER.
IT will be wondered at happly by some, that in such a restles age of printing a
man should decline that, which so many Court and Idolize, the reputation of an
Author, and be hardly induced to suffer his works to come into the World by
another hand. It must needs be a great mind that can contemn great things. But
that I should be so much concerned in the publishing of this, I cannot but give
thee an account. Going about the beginning of 1649. beyond the Seas, I left
some three, or four of these Paradoxes imperfect, yet such was the estimation
the Author had gotten by former things* and such the avarice of the plodding
Stationer, that he would needs fasten on them as they were, but with a slight
promise from the other to divertise so far as to bring them into some
considerable bulk. Upon these hopes, some months after my departure, what I
left was committed to the press, but as for any advance (by reason of the War
in Scotland, whither the Authoor was designed in order to some public
transactions, as also his relation to the State, besides the burden of his
profession, not easily admitting such diversions) there was so little done,
that returning into England toward the latter end of 1651. I found so much
printed, as I had left behind me in writing. But understanding that there was
a considerable impression of them, and that the obstacle why they came not
abroad, was, besides the imperfection, the smalness of the bulk, I have for thy
satisfaction, been so importunate with the Author, as that he has built up
those foundations to what thou find. The superstructure I must confess is
not much but if it be considered that without it thou had had nothing, I may
say it is all. Nor may thou justly quarrel, that the satisfaction is but
slender in regard of the Parenthesis of almost three years, that this book has
been printing, had thou received nothing but that of the Government of Women,
a discovery, which happily, were it put in execution might bring us to a greater
settledness and certainty of Government, in regard that Women, where they once
come to govern, do it perpetually, and had rather want life then domination.
This is all I have to say to thee, unless it be to tell thee that my interest
with the Author may happily prevail with him, to do that violence to his nature
as to furnish thee with some other things of better consequence, though
certainly we meet with an age which has so little inclination for any thing of
worth, that were it not for some particular persons left like things gathered
from a shipwreck, we might despair of ingenuity, or at least that of reception.
In the mean time enjoy these, and do as well as thou can.

J. D.

To his very honored Friend, the Author of these Paradoxes.
REason of man being the most exquis^
And noble part, and of that reason, wi^^
And amongst wits, that which does prove of a^^
Most rationally Paradoxicall;
Then you most eminent must needs possess
Amidst the most refined, a prime place.
For other Scienceers and Artists do
Wait only servilly on Truth, but you
Make it on your assertions to attend,
And verify what ever you intend,
Especially when you are pleased to stretch
Your fancy thus above the vulgar reach.
Whilst others but engender, you create,
And where they life receive, you animate;
You lead, they follow truth, they keep the tract
That common is, and therefore do but act
Thing's Ordinary but your spirit on
Strange paths with wonder treads by ways unknown.
Tho. Vrquhart.

A Justification of the Author and these his excellent Paradoxes.
COuld we recall that rude and simple ag^
When it was thought presumption to engag^
Beyond a Proverb, such as should dispense
Morality, and 'stablish the common sense;
Or when, things more divine for to display
A Parable was thought the only way;
Or could we but enjoy those innocent times,
When for to know the humors and the crimes
OF the age, the peoples entertainment was
A mess of m^rry edifying plays;
This work might have been spard man's ^reer m^
Had not by Stoicisme been confined*
To fancy or dislike be kind or Coy
Where nature bids not shun nor yet enjoy.
But man grew learned, and began to wast
His hours to study hatred and distaste
To common things; One labors to disgrace
What Is most Authentic with the Populace
Another vows no peaceful thoughts till he
Has hammered out some tenet, that shall be
High and abstruse and only must admit
The disquisition of some soaring wit:
A third rapt in Enthusiastic rage
Quarrels at the stupidity of the age
Raves it does not receive some truth so plain,
As happily is reserved to the next Kings reign
A fourth yet more refined can think not on
Ought but dreams of his own perfection;
Laughs at Antiquity; sweetly inveighs,
At the strange ignorance of former days
Derides its customs, hardly can excuse
The obsolet fashion of a pair of shoes.
Learning is brought to the rack, and made confess
That time may happily make a more and less
In Truth, since what was once not thought to be
Is since tormented into certainty.
So that a dish of Paradoxes now is but cheer
For a mechanic military ear.
It Is now confessed the clammie Earth runs round,
That East and West may in one pnint be found;
That vegetables among the Antipodes
Grow not inverse, or fall into the skies;
Who quarrels at the wind's inconstancy
Raise up his soul a little, let him see
That in the Equator constantly there must
From East to West flly a perpetual gust.
Nay now the only Paradox is, to say
There Is any, for if when that brighter day
Broke forth upon us, only this was meant,
All propositions are indifferent;
Error and truth each other does comprise,
And men demonstrate Contradictories;
What the Author says as Paradox, may be
A sacred truth vail^d in a prophecy
And for the women he may safely teach
They may go naked, and govern where they Preach.
(...)
Paradoxes.
Par. 1. THat an absolute Tyranny is the best Government. page 1. Par. 2. That
content is but lazy patience, if not misery. page 30. Par. 3. That women ought
to go naked. page 54. ^^r. 4. That it is the pleasantest life to be always in
danger. page 78. Par. 5. That Women ought to govern states rather then Men.
page 104. Par. 6. That it is better to be lame or bedridden then lusty and able
to walk abroad. page 135.
Paradoxes By John Hall* Obscuris vera involuens

LONDON, Printed for JOHN WA^^^^, at the Star in Pope's Head Alley, MDCL.

Paradoxes*
PAR. I.
That an absolute Tyranny is the best Government.
SInce that power is the very life and essence of every Government, and those
Governments are the most perfect, that have the most power, and that that power
is most in tense, which resides in one, and more weak and faint which is
dispersed among a many, since that all people hate to be Governed by their
equals, and therefore chose to put themselves under an Umpire, it must needs
follow, that, Lordly or absolute Monarchy is the best and most natural
Government. For if all Governments, if they do not at first begin with
Monarchy, yet in process of time they grow up from republciks into Monarchies
as into more perfect estates* and all Monarchies turn into Tyrannies, after a
very little time, why may we not infer that all other Governments are
imperfect species till they be consummated and made Tyrannical.

If we conceive that most correspondent to the law of nature, which most
Nations do agree in (though in other things they disscent) and that we see upon
all the Globe very few and little Republics, but many and vast Kingdoms, we
may deduce from thence, that most people, do desire to be under the sway of
one, who if he be not endued with a supreme and unlimited Power, is rather
their servant then their Prince, and it is but rediculous to think that so
great a part of mankind, would be content to obey their slaves.

Nor does it proceed from cowardice: for we see the old and modern Persians,
the stoutest Septentrionall Nations, the Turks, Scithians, and Muscovites at
this day, pride themselves so much in this Government, that they adore their
Emperors as gods; Nor does it proceed from Stupidity, for the wisest and
politest Nations have embraced it, and though some politicians have termed it
but the privation or disease of Government, yet many more, have accounted it
the only best way of rule, and that from the course and order of nature, which
in every kind forms a Supremacy, as the Eagle among Birds, the Lion among
Beasts, the Vine among Vegetables, and the Rubye among stones. Nay, and Divines
of all sorts except some J^suites and Independants) unanimously conclude, that
all Government must be obeyed without resistance; Now they assume, that
Royalty is the only government that God has ordained, and is pleased with
(Kings being ectypes of him and bearing his name) and therefore they ought to
be obeyed without resistance, and none ought to lift their hands against them.
Now if none ought to be the least disobedient, and that Rebellion is as the
sin of witchcraft, they invest an absolute power in them who they say are not
to be controled, for if they might be controled, it should be for the
imposition of some unjust commands, which if Subjects might actually disobey
and call to account, all the world would be filled with confusion and
Rebellion. But say they, Kings are only answerable to God whose Vicegerents
they are, and not subordinate to any human power, and above all law, which
evinced, whatsoever they do is lawful and not examinable.

Besides, what more contrary to the ease and order of the people, then the
multiplicity of Laws, litigious interpretations of them, and obstreperous
Lawyers? but all this is cut off, and saved, when the fountain of Law is in
one breast, and the people may presently know the resolution and interpretation
from one that cannot do wrong. For all Law being in the King, and he by
maxim not capable of doing any wrong, whatever he does must be just and right;
and what greater happiness to a people, then granting them speedy justice.

The proportion of every man's spirit may be measured by his wishes: Now the
greatest souls aim at nothing so much as at rule, and at no rule in
comparison of that over men. Now if Virtue and excellent endowments, cannot be
truly rewarded with any thing that is evil; and Nature never teaches any man
useless inclinations; it must follow that superiority seems to be set as a
whetston and reward of Virtue. And what soul would not disdain to govern,
where he is pounded up with servile restrictions, and limited by those who
were borne to obey him. Caesar chose rather to be the first of a Village, then
the second in Rome; and would not he, think we, choose rather to have been
Duke of one street of Florence, then a (...) Pageant to (...) the Dominion of
Venic^?

Now for the happiness of a State, what better way to it then peace, and what
better way of preservation of peace, then by having continually ready armed
force, which may quel every insurrection, and stifle it in the birth, and yet
serve for outward magnificence and attendance upon the Prince? what better
plentation of wealth, then to have a Court entertained with all delights, and
glittering in all the ^poyles both of the Sea and Mines, and as it were
triumphing in all the productions and curiosities of Art? and yet this without
Princes Courts is vainly expected.

Rome had never known Nero's golden house, had it not been for Nero; nor the
great Arch, had Trajan never lived; nor had Spain ever dreamt of an
Esicuriall, if he had wanted a Philip. And yet things are among their chiefest
and lasting glories. Besides what better way to keep a Kingdom quiet then by
employing the poorer sort of people, upon such works as the Prince shall
either fancy or delight in? Thus we see the Pyramids at this day remaining, the
fame of the place whereon they stand. And we read of the Hortipensiles of
Babylon, etc. none of which had ever been done or known, had not the care and
noble wisdom of the King employed the people that way, who else might have
sunk into Luxury, or snorted themselves into implacable enmities.

Besides, all the wisdom of the Politicians could never shape out but three
kinds of Government, Democracie, which is nothing but dregs and confusion, and
an audacious license to do every thing; and indeed an interstice of government,
rather then government. Aristocracy, when only the nobles have the reign in
their hands, and are so apt to burst into factions, that it could not thrive
nor prosper any where. Aristotle indeed in his Politics mentions some few
obscure ones, and we know but one extant at this day. And Monarchy which is the
only perfect system of government, which indeed includes optimacy within it
self; for a Prince must have Counselors, who if they were Guardians to him,
and might impose their advice, what a repugnant, inconsistent, contrary thing
were a Monarch to himself. But if the last judgment of every thing be to be
left to him, and no man can so absolutely rule his understanding, but that it
must be somewhat swayed and biased by his will, it will follow, that it is
necessary to the very essence of a Prince, to have his own will free and
uncontrolable, and then what a poor thing is a Prince, if he be not obeyed.

Besides, since all particulars do ascend and dissolve into universals, there
must among so many private fathers, be one public Father, to be the great
Archetype of all the rest. And if private fathers have such entire authority
over their sons; (Nay which the Romans and some wise Nations had power of
life and death over their children) it is but equitable, that public Fathers
should have Analogicall authority over those who stand bound to them in that
relation.

You will say, they may be vicious persons. But their vices are only as private
men, and cannot render them in their public capacity either less just or
less skillful. Besides they stand open to the eyes and envy of all men, and so
every little slip of theirs may be observed and blazed, which if they had been
private persons, had been as obscure as Midnight. Or put the case their vices
be high and big, they seldom want superior virtues to cloud and shadow them.
For every thing being in great and high souls, excessive, it is impossible for
them to keep a mediocrity in their vices, which are commonly illustriously
great, and rather matter of observation, then hate or scorn: for the Grandeza
and Gayety of them, exempts them from those poor ridiculous consequences which
fall on the slips of more mean and sordid natures.

And you will say, they may be ravenous: great fires must have great store of
sewell; great magnificences that cannot stoop to thrift, must stray to gain,
and who should better supply the head with spirits, then the lower parts of the
same body? Besides the public loss is nothing all this while, for it is in
the same Country, only gathered into one hand, and gloriously spent, whereas
otherwise it might have been insensibly misled away in amany, and Princes what
they draw up from their Subjects in Vapors, they return down to them in
showers and enrich and fatten the places where ever they reside.

And in case they sometimes fall heavy on private persons, it is but exercising
that severity which the law provides against vice, and then it is work of
excellent justice, Or if happily the parties be innocent and blameless, we
should account him but a bad Citizen that would not redeem a public Burden,
with his own private sufferings, and cheerfully resign up his estate when the
Commonwealth, should either gain or save so much by it:

But then you may object, they are Usurpers, no man envies reward to danger,
and what greater danger, then for a man with all his relations and interests,
to encounter a present power, which if they overthrow, it is fit they should
enjoy the fruits of it. And then coming by this means, ingages them to a
great wariness, and to many flatteries and obligations of the people, which
otherwise they would have neglected. And they must also walk providently,
least they leave holes for others to creep in at upon them, as they did upon
their Predecessors, Withal it has been known that a many Princes have
sweetened and disguised the memory of their access to Government, by making
many excellent laws and provisions in their several Dominions, which
hereditary and successive Princes (confident of their titles and strengthened
by the stock of their Ancestors reputation) either omit, to do the contrary.

You will say further, that the rays of these suns will but quicken bad
humors, and beget abundance of Insecta's and Monsters, and among all Monsters
none so eminently evil as Flatterers and favorites. But I pray you will you
not give people that do great things leave to enjoy the poorest reward, the
relation and report of them? Or in case they did nothing memorable, would you
not allow them that groan under the burden of public affairs, so small a
diversion and entertainment as flattery? which indeed soberly considered, is so
necessary to allay the miseries of life, that the most unfortunate men, whey
they want others to do it to them, do it for themselves, and pleasantly chase
away all ugly thoughts and Idea's by their happy feeding themselves with a few
lovely dreams.

For Favorites, will you deny them the privilege of private persons, to make
choice of their own Privadoes? or if you suffer them to make choice, will you
strangle their friendships, denying a mutual interchange, and correspondence
of Courtasies? Or will you be so injurious to good parts, as where you see
them any where brightly break forth deny to entertain them? And what more
powerful provocation of virtue then the aim and design of the particular
affections and endearments of a Prince, which seldom pith in any body wherein
they do not find somewhat like themselves, that is, divine.

In a word, since the very Heathens could see that royalty streamed forth
immediately from Jove himself, and that royalty is but a dull languid thing if
it be clogged with the least restriction: That Monarchy which enjoies the most
perfect Liberty is, (...) with the greatest abundance of Names and Attributes.
And since Duality is the very Damn of Division, and the utter destroyer of all
Prerogative, it is but just that al Sovereignty reside in one. And even those
Philosophers, which stand most stoutly for the infinity of worlds do also
consent and acknowledge that there is but one God.

PAR. II.
That Content is but lazy Patience, if not misery.
THere is no one question which has so violently tortured the Moralists, or
variously divided them then that of a chiefest good, which yet, they could
never yet so determine, but that it lies open to further objections, and begets
new doubts: they might (methinks) with more ease have considered the variety of
men's complections, and neglecting the search of an universal happiness, have
affirmed that the Summum bonum, was only that which the particular fancy and
humor of every man would be pleased to make it, for so long as their
temperature clime education, custom and interests are so different, it is
impossible to bring them to a conformity.

Yet notwithstanding what they had resolved on this, had been but the
production of a new falsity, if there had been a wanting of stupidity and
drowzinesse in men, and that Fictum impossible of content had never been
imagined.

For if we consider the several ends that men propose to themselves: and
find most of them either irrational and imperfect, or else unsuitable to the
persons, we shall find a great deal of reason to pity mankind that
distracts it self with so many monstrous and untoward thoughts, and many times
bends al his endeavors to obtain that which he should be afraid to enjoy, and
many times with a great deal of sweat and industrious madness, devises and
labors his own ruin, so that there cannot be a greater plague to him, nor
can fate more completely punish him then by resigning him over to the enjoyment
of his own wishes.

And put the case he should enjoy them, since he is so stupid that he cannot
wish any thing truly good, he did but please himself under his burden, and
deceive his understanding with glittering misery, and then what better were he
then some jovial mad man, who imagines himself to be some great Prince
amidst his fetters and straw, but in case he miss and should sit down
without murmuring, is not that man miserable, who is frustrated of his best and
dearest aims, and is forced cowardly to undergo the contrary wants; what
other is this, but as if he could not dance a galliard, should swallow down
opium, and think to allay his loss, but self stupification.

And put the case that some few men arrive at any of these dull complacences,
which most do so studiously court, what one condition wants its sting and
venom: wealth cano^t make a man invulnerable, jealousy does ever; honor
cannot make a man secure, yet it raises up a multitude of enemies: fame can
neither render a man more strong or wise, yet it is easily blasted, and when
once it declines brings double ignomy; health may render a man active, and save
a groan or two, yet at such a state it may arrive that it may prove a
sickness; or suppose it never so constant, one poor steeletto can in an
instant destroy it: now what one man can be easily satisfied with either of
these when it is infected with such bitter ingredients, whom easily spoil all
the rest of delight, which is only imaginable whilst they are real, but we
love to toil for uncertainties, and in this are worse then children, who sport
in raising of bubbles and such toys, but we are earnest in things more
rediculous.

But we will, suppose that any of these fooleries could be enjoyed without their
inherent evils, yet surely a consideration of the uncertainty of all sublunary
things, might now and then suggest a possibility of surviving them, and then
what more hideous misery then to have been fortunate; and since death must
either surprise all men, or overcome all men; and his stroke is as uncertain
as unevitable; what man can fully please himself with that which he is not
certain to enjoy a minute?

But suppose a man were entirely possessed of a happiness, such a one as were
perfect in it self, and he might perpetually enjoy without the least fear of
loss. If it were but single, and such a one as runs in one continued
current, time would make it burdensome, and repitition loathsome; for that
eternity is but durance, that is not diverted by change; and those pleasures
but tortures, that are not varied by sweet jealousies, or shadowed by eclipses.
Who would not rather choose the rack at length, then perpetual repose upon a
bed of roses? What taste would not be soon weary of the sweetest delicaties?
Among all the terrors of men, death is the sharpest; of all their desires,
life the strongest: Yet we see Tython after he had obtained a petty
immortality, grew weary of himself, and after a great many wishes, was very
glad to shrink into a Grasshopper: nay, and for this very cause, does an old
Critic quarrel with Homer, for making his gods eternal, when they are
subject to the passions of men, and but masters of determinate pleasures.

But suppose this happiness were chequered with variety, and that there would
be evernew entertainment, and new diversions, this were not content, but rather
a transportation: And how can we say the soul is satisfied, when she is ever
laboring of new desires, and ever stroak'd with fresh entertainments, which if
ever they come to repetition, grow much more wearisome, and much more gall and
spurn her. Thus have we seen many persons great and glorious in their several
ages, tired with the formality of* their greatness, and willing to fall back
even to solitude and ease. Thus did Lucullus surfeit on Asiaticke victories,
and providently retire to a strange and unheard of luxury: And yet Dioclesian
afterward taking the same course, was presently wearied of that silence and
secrecy, which he imagined would have been pleasing to him, and endeavored to
return again to business. Whence we may deduce, that as the most capacious
souls are the most eager in their delights, so are they the least satisfied
with them, and have the most violent appetitions of change; and what is this
but to hate content, which is nothing but a tame slavery under the tyranny of
one condition?

Nay, were it possible, that variety could be endless and infinite, yet this
variety would be so troublesome that a man would naturally grudge, and cry on
an inordinate flux and change, and bless those lives as happiest, that
regularly over-acted the same things, and spent every minute according to rule
and prescript. And certainly he that killed himself, out of a weariness of
overacting the same things, would also have dyed on the contrary terms, if his
life had been wafted in a perpetual variety.

And if we look somewhat more nicely into the thing it self, we shall find
that the sluggish Name of content never came from any other forge then the dull
multitude (who though they be masters of words, are commonly enemies of reason,
and therefore ought to be accounted one of those Grotesco Maxims, and
willy-with-wishes, that do so disfigure and misguide the life of man.

For alack, what is it? has it not a sound of restraint and sufferance? and
does it not rather imply a lethargy, then any actual pastime? Joy it does not
amount unto, but rather a heavy privation of joy. It signifies rest, and
imperfect acquiescence; but joy is quickened by perpetual motion, and tickled
with change of pastimes, and may be content though not happy; but joyfulnesse
immediately includes happiness: Now what a contemptible condition is that,
wherein a man must be patient without either? and how can that man not be weary
of himself that wants that sweet charm, that bewitches man's life into all that
is lovely, Joy? And if he wants joy, he wants happiness; and if his
unhappiness be accompanied with ignorance, is he not I pray, wrapped up in a
double misfortune? Since the plague of ignorance is the greatest that can fall
upon men, the badge of our forefathers sin and our slavery; and that very
weight which sinks us down from our erect constitution, into the cernuous
lowness of beasts.

Besides, content is a mere mortification and eradication of the passions,
those excellent wings and engines of the soul; but joy does both enliven and
heighten them, she both stirs them up and tutors them, whereas the other
mangles and fetters them. And whereas joy is like an itch, which spreads
further by that delightful madness of rubbing and chasing: content merely
mortifies the mind, and so brings in a gangreen, and a gangreen is followed
with no milder attendants, then cutting and burning.

But suppose you miscall happiness content, yet were there not such a thing in
nature. For as Boethius has demonstrated, there is but one great happiness, and
that made up of a complete variety of those things whose shadows we so much
adore; and that no man can be happy till he be made in some measure a Deity.
And how far we poor pismires that crawle upon this hill, are from it, let
any body judge. Some Emperors indeed, drunk with their prosperity, have and
still assume this Title, yet they dye like men. Nay and in the very height of
this vanity are ashamed of their parasites, and consute all these portentuous
attributes, by the stings and whispers of their own thoughts. Nor indeed if we
should feign a reality in such a conceit, is the soul capable of receiving
it. For as she has a kind of a circumscribed ubiquity within herself, so
has she a limited, as I may say, immensity: And therefore is restless and
extravagant in her appetitions and desires, and like the heaven from whence
she first came, is carried on in a perpetual motion, which Content
endeavoring to stop, does but in a manner stifle, and by consequence
annihilate her. Besides, she being a thing of such a strange capacity and wide
comprehension, it is impossible that any determinate narrow thing, much less,
some fragment or fraction of it, should be supposed of a proportion to fill her.

Since it is thus, it easily follows what an unworthy thing it is in man to
set up his rest upon any of these toys, and to dote upon one particular shadow
in a broken mirror, where he cannot see that face which would have irradiated
one entire image in the whole; for since all pleasures here are but petty
frustillations, and parcells of the whole, and therefore have lost of its
nature, like Crystal beaten to pieces, being Opake, which otherwise would
have been Diaphanous; it is but a folly to look after them, since we can never
find them all, or if we would, cannot unite them: I must conclude, that man
must like a Cilinder be perpetually rolled on his own Axis, and as much as
lies in him avoid, to be misshapen, and squared, by the violence of any heavy
flegmaticke morality.

PAR. III.
That Women ought to go naked.
THough we may justly incur the displeasure of the Women in asserting this
Thesis, by divesting of them of all that the Tailor contributes, which is as
much as to deprive them of the best part of themselves; yet I am sure I shall
have the pardon, if not the favor of most of mankind, or at least the most
noble and flourishing part of it, youth, which are the only judges in this
case. As for those things which they call old men, I except against them, as a
generation of decrepit and withered understandings, a people whose minds,
could they be looked into, would prove infinitely more monstrous then their
bodies, and such as like old Monkies, having either gnawed away, or lost their
tails, read lectures to young ones to cut theirs too.

But I positively affirm, that what was done in the primitive times, when our
reason was not depraved with long traditionall customs, nor tinctured by any
prevalescent humor, is most consonant to the law of Nature, and consequently
ought most to be followed. But Adam and Eve we know was so far from being
clothed, that it was the great mark of their liberty and uprightness, and
the first brand that stigmatized them after their fall. Nor indeed did the ages
that presently succeeded that, either grow up into garb or fashion, but
continued with a very little variation, and possibly what their progenitors did
only with Figge-leaves, they supplied with Kid-skin aprons.

Yea, and those Nations who have not alienated their naked simplicity, either
by commerce, or busy inventions, do as yet retain this open integrity, and
declines not into these unworthy sophistications of Garments; as was observed
in many of the Indians at the first discovery, who living merely among
themselves, and by their own peculiar customs, it is to be supposed retained
most among them, of that which nature desired, to be kept pure and unvaried.

Not to say, that all men naturally desire to go uncovered, yet certainly it
is a shrewd suspicion of it, that when the sun returns to this side our
Horizon, they know no better way to congratulate the presence of that fruitful
light, then by putting on thin or open clothes, and frequent bathings, which
is no other: but, since that Tyrant custom prohibits them absolute nakedness,
they would approach it as near as they can, and surely it must either be
happiness or excellent duty, that they strive to perform it upon that
occasion.

But in women, these desires are far more intense, for they we see, do at
all times uncover the part of their chiefest Beauty, as their face, neck,
breasts and hands, so that they do endeavor in part to break that restraint
which hides the rest of their glory, and to set sorth their delicat Tresses
plaited and weaved with such variety, their Ivorie necks, their harmonious
faces, their milkie spherical breasts; and their melting hands. And though
possibly jealousy may cause all these to be hid, yet it is but violation: and
the weather, yet that is but providence, or possibly company, yet that is but
compliance, for what woman is there, the beast exempted from deformity, that
could not wish that all her garments were of Lawn and transparent, rather then
rich and gorgeous. For if, as Plato says, souls unwillingly depart out of
fair Bodies, that must needs be a curious mansion, which so fine a substance
as the soul is in love with, and then I pray you can you blame the owner to
delight in it, and what a torment is delight if it be shut up in one breast,
and not defused into a lively communication, for all kind of blessings multiply
by their devision, and what greater blessing, then a rare simmetry and
contexion of feature, which can charm knowledge into admiration, and majesty
into love.

We give to all the Virtues the habits and visages of women, and of all the
virtues Truth is the best (for Truth is the mother of Justice, and Justice they
say, comprehends them all) yet she is naked, though she love the public and
hate corners, and is it not very fit that all the sex should imitate such an
excellent pattern and mistress?

It may be objected, that this would produce infinite provocations and
incitements to lust: but I say not; for I dare say, that what by painting, what
by the looseness and change of garments, what by these gaudy inventions of
dressings, that flexure and fracture of gate, the deformity is hidden, unless
to a very nice eye, there is much more fuel added, then if all went with no
more mantles then Nature thrust them into the world with; Hair hanging loosely
down, or else carelessly gathered up in a fillet, and perhaps some little kind
of cover, that might restrain the Virgin all flower, from being too much gazed
at, and blown upon. Nay, this experience will tell us, for Lerius avows, that
in his voyage to Brazill, affirms he had fewer insurrections among that naked
simple people, then he had had among the curiosities and adulterated beauties
of his own Country. For indeed if we consider it aright, there is nothing
that does so much puff up lust, as the circumstances of rich apparel,
curious dressings, and strong perfumes, which scrue up the apprehension, and
fix the imagination upon somewhat that is great. So that by this means, we know
a number of great persons zealously courted to have their appetites satisfied;
whereas if they were either left naked, or reduced to a vulgar garb, they
might lie fallow, or be endited for Witches.

But indeed nakedness restores women to themselves; for what an irregular
height does Venetian Chippins mount them to? What Towers do the Turkish Tires
wear upon their women's heads? How are the Grecians buried in clothes? How do
the dressings of all Nations disguise them? that they must put off their
Masquine habits, or be taken to pieces like watches ere they can be enjoyed;
and to what other end, I pray, were they made? The customs of Countries are
different, and that garb is majesticke at one place, which is rediculous or
sordid in another. All people have not the same conceptions of beauty; which is
as hateful to an Ethiopian as black to us: But once uncloathe women, and they
are all the same; but the conceptions about the harmony and measures of a body
differ not. And what greater right can we do to women, then to bring them to
be judged by one rule? And since every woman judges herself the fairest, she
that would be backward to this arbitriment, would be diffident of herself, and
consequently a Rennagade from her sex. The three goddesses in Ida designed to
be stripped to the view, and the single examination of a shepherd; and Comines
will tell you, that she was a Princess that appearing in a Lawne smock to
be viewed by Ambassadors, as toward a marriage, said she would put off that
too, if there were any necessity: For as there is an inextinguishable jealousy
and emulation among women, so there is an unmeasurable pride; and pride arising
out of confidence will never decline judgment: And what better way of
judgment, then those rules, which the voices of all men conclude upon? for a
woman may paint a green or yellow cheek as easily as a red; but the sweet
composure and measure of her body, her thighs, breast or visage, limbs, she
cannot alter. And how imperfectly are they to be seen through clothes, which
may hide and falsify many things, which may truly be discerned in a veracious
nakedness.

There have two great blemishes ever lain upon this sex; the uncertainty and
change of their judgments, and their inconstancy in their clothes and
carriage. And how can either be better removed, then if they were once reduced
into such a posture as they should all necessarily agree in, and they had not
liberty to change? And I pray what other way is there, unless you make them
all naked.

But then they may complain, that take away their Arts and their Ornaments,
they shall want of their complacency, and provocations to their husbands. But
notwithstanding, they have liberty enough left them, they may Dye, or pounce,
or figure their flesh, they may have abundance of cheap artificial ornament
from shells, feathers, and stones; and since the deeds of our Ancestors are left
us for example, the old Danes and Britains may be imitated in this, for dying
and carrying: And since it is fit to borrow the customs of other people, if
they be useful, and fit to be assumed, there may be seen choice of
dressings enough in the one, and the other Indies.

In a word, since the Sun, the Moon, and all the glorious battalia of
heaven, appear as Nature made them, since the strongest and most handsome
Animalls are satisfied in their own natural Vestures, and the most ugly and
deformed repine not, since the most delicate and Aromatic flowers are not
ashamed of their barks or prickles, which are commonly unsightly, if not
offensive. It Is but an irregular and morbid desire in women, who are the
Master-peeces of Nature, and of that sort of her productions, wherein she is
most vainglorious, and emulous to undo herself, to descend to these poor,
little adulterations of Art, which are so far beneath her as the most
exquisite artificial thing in the world, is below the most careless
production of Nature.

PAR. IV.
That it is the pleasantest life to be always in danger.
THough I am not ignorant what danger I incur both with timorous and severe
men in asserting this Paradox: yet since it pleases me extremely, and carries
not with it the least allay, either of suspicion or fear; I am apt to believe
that all actions of this like nature, are to a wise man accompanied with the
same assurance and satisfaction: And this I am the proner to affirm, because
(according to the right method of disputation) first stating the word, and
freeing of it from ambiguities, I find that this is just a chimaera, and a
notionall nothing. For if we say there is such a thing as danger before hand,
it may be fear, or misinformation, yet possibly the danger may never touch us:
If we consider it in the present tense, and really effected, it is not Danger but
misery. And if we consider it in preter tense, it is past and gone. Now since all
time is comprehended under these three terms, and this falls under none of
them, it follows that this has no time at all, which being inseparable to
every existence, as the measure of its duration, it will be evident, that
Danger is a mere Nonentity, and those that fear it, fear just nothing.

In the comparison of good and evil, we ever account those evils the least,
which are the leastlasting, and e contra those goods the best, which are the
most constant and durable. Now for Dangers, supposing that we should grant them
to be evils, what more courteous and slight evils could we wish for, then
those that are come and gone in a minute. But dangers are so far from that,
that they are commonly sooner past then known, but the remembrance of them
remains perpetually fresh, and bring every day new circumstances to claw the
understanding. Nay, and such a faithful good it is, that no malice of fortune
can bereave us of, but it stays with us in other miseries, whereas friends,
Patrimony, honor, can quickly vanish, and as we can no more graspe them then a
shadow, so can we no more recommand them then call back yesterday.

But supposing danger such a thing as ought possibly to be feared, since all
wise men agree with the Stoics in this, that we ought not to be troubled for
things which are not in our power, and we cannot help; and that the life of
man is beset with such a many contingencies, which may every minut either
surprise or assault us, what a madness were it, to anticipate our inevitable
miseries, and like him in Florus, throw away our gold for fear of loosing it.
Furor est ne moriare mori. Yet since Death will at last conquer us, and they
call it the (...) the madness of men has not showed it self more in any
thing then in their fear of it. Some assassinating themselves for fear of
assassination, and therein showing at once an act of the greatest cowardice and
cruelty (for every thing must needs love it self the best) that is possible.
Others execute* themselves by lingering deaths and tortures of their fears, and
so make it a punishment greater then nature ever meant it.

Morsque minus poenae, quod mora mortis habet. Whilst that gravest, and most
sober men put it only inter munera Naturae, and by their frequent composures,
even at the very instant of their dissolution consute the horror of it. And if
this great Bugbeare of mankind, when its Vissard is off, prove such a tame
foolery, I wonder what the petty Dangers must shrink into.

There is nothing among all the excellencies of mankind, more shining then
knowledge and courage, and both these without dangers would be dull, heavy, and
unactive habits. What use were there for knowledge if we met not with the mazes
and intricacies of life? and what more wise, then a present ingenuity in
avoiding dangers, or a vast conduct in preventing them, or a sly dexterity in
weakening them. If there were no storms at Sea, what use were Pilots of, but
talkative Burdens: but upon the first outrage of a storm, they are the only
things that are called upon and worshipped.

For Courage it is only seen in danger, and without them, Hares and Lions are of
equal fortitude, great souls that dare affront dangers are therein tried, and
move at that time in their natural motion, and to its own proper motion every
thing has an appetency, and therefore must necessarily delight in it. And can
there be a greater pleasure to a man then for so small a trifleas his own heart
should enable him to conquer a monster or a multitude. This the ingenuous Ovid
knew well enough, and therefore after he had completely armed Cadmus, he says
he had a mind -- Telo praestantior omni. For indeed such minds, are like gold
purified by the fire of dangers, and exalted up to their due perfection. And if
Nature do so cheerfully, even in her vegitative things embrace every
advantage, may we not think that rational souls have these desires so much the
more stronger, by how much their Natures are the more noble.

For the passive part of fortitude, it is so far from being a Traitor to the
happiness of man, that it inebriates the mind in all calamities, and makes
them lushious; nay restorative unto her. Now this without danger could not be,
for jealousy ever attends upon misery, and there is none holds fast one link
of it but he may justly fear for to catch another. What greater misery then
poverty which threatens by flying from us, and is a negative enemy? yet Baucis
and Philemon by enduring of it.

Effecere levem -- And since what is not burdensome to us but light, must needs
please us, and that a man is never himself but when he exercises his head or
his heart, which without dangers he could not do, it is evinced, that we are
beholding to them, as the spritefull spurs, and dear entertainments of the
life of man.

Moreover, man delights in nothing so much as in fame, and how can he be more
glorious then by showing a serenity, nay gladness amidst so many enemies as
dangers are? Or what can be more delightful to him, then to see he is so much
his own master, that he can defy all casualties, and either carelessly contemn
them, or expect them with confidence.

What more pernicious to whole Armies, nay even insulting Conquerors, then
security? what better means to frighten away securities then dangers? which
must needs be of a very sovereign virtue, that are a means to preserve whole
Armies, and of a most diffusive fruitful nature, that when they appear least
they are greatest.

Besides, rewards are proportioned unto dangers; which shows them of a worthy,
and deserving nature, and therefore many men have been called the saviors of
their Country at one time, for some little performances, which if they had done
at another, would hardly have been noted, and hence it is that many great
stratagematick wits, have no better ways either of startleing their enemies, or
retaining their friends, then by increasing the show of their dangers.

Now what other means, if Tyrants had to possess themselves of Guards, to
bring the people into commiseration then by this only pretense, which
necessarily shows how powerful and popular dangers are, and what attendance
they require (which shows their majesty) that they whom they once threaten,
must immediately be secured, for what else are guards but honorable
imprisonment?

But if the shadow, and mere representation of dangers, what is the substance
and dangers themselves, when a man's in safety few regard him, many may envy
him: but falling once into danger, tears, commiseration, releife, and that
possible from his enemies, which is the sweetest of al, come unto him.

Since we have manifested, the rare use and necessity of dangers, it will not
be hard for us now; to show them of that Gallant Cordial Nature, that they
closely accompany the best things, and immediately flow from our most apparent
happinesses, from which they are no more separable then heat from light.

And are not I pray you the best things ever in the greatest danger, Purselain
and Venice Glasses are the most apt to be broke, the richest flowers are the
soonest pulled, the goodliest Stag, will be soonest shot, the best Faces do the
soonest decay, the best men are most liable to envy, the richest to spoil, or
indeed, what better in all the world, then that divine stone of the Chemists,
yet men in the atchieving of it, do commonly hazard both their brains and
subsistence, and in case they come near an end, it is a very good escape if
their glasses be not melted or broken, or evil spirits, as Flamell
admonishes, do not through envy blind their eyes, and spoil all the work.

But indeed to consider the thing aright, dangers are so incorporated and
mingled with the best courses of life, that like Hippocrates twins they both
live and dye together.

What more fortunate then to be the favorite of a Prince, yet the thrones of
Princes themselves are not placed on Cubes, nor are those Cubes founded on
Rocks, or cemented with brass; there is a sword hangs by a horse hair
perpetually over their heads, and they may dye by the cornel of the grape, by a
hair, by a prick, as well as other men, and then where is the Favorite, does
not he hold by a poor Tenure, that has no more assurance? and can he promise
himself continuance in case of the change of the Lord: or suppose the
greatness of his Master were constant and durant, how shall he be assured of
the same constancy of his affection? or be free from that secret undermining of
that vast faction and a dangerous precipitation in his fall? and yet
notwithstanding all this, who would not choose, nay, wish to be the Privado of a
Prince? so that it was but pusillanimously said of him who was of an opinion,
that if a Crown were lying on the ground, and men knew with what thorns it was
lined, they would hardly take it up.

For if we will consider the principal courses of life, which men imagine to
themselves will be the most pleasant and fullest of delight, we shall find
them attended with depending inconveniences and dangers. What greater piece of
allurement then the company and conversation of women and yet this for the most
part brings on venereal diseases which are the most nasty, dangerous, and worse
to be rooted out of any whatsoever? What life seems more royal and magnificent
then to be perpetually feasting? And yet this brings on surfets, gouts, and
other diseases that make a man miserable even to his grave. What greater or
more compendious way to profit then Merchandise, which notwithstanding is every
hour subject to hazard, that a man's life and substance being committed to wind
and water, two of the most uncertain things in the world, are continually, but
two or three inches from destruction.

Since we have been so far in danger, it were a sin not to be in debt, since
debt and danger, accompany on the other, and me thinks if a man would but
consider these great enjoyments which men in this condition have, he must needs
say there is somewhat in it, much more pleasant than the vulgar imagine, who
though they think it an estate, wherein there is nothing but misery and the
uttermost calamity of fortune, yet is it quite otherwise: For first, a man
having past the Meridian of his fortune, sets and rests without noise, he is
not entangled with dependencies, needs neither to care for public burdens or
miseries, but is wholly withdrawn into himself. Besides what nobler duty is
there of mankind, than to give every man his own, and this he is perpetually
solicited to, nor does he want his daily attendance and visitations, which the
greatest Favorites in the cadence of their fortunes miss; nor can he ever be
unprovided for, since at the utmost, he is sure of lodging and good company.

All which put together will amount to this, that since dangers are not only
unavoidable, but even consequential to the greatest pleasures, it were a
madness to avoid the one for fear of the other. And certainly Damocles very
little understood the value of a royal entertainment, when for fear of the
sword hanging at a horse hair over his head, he could not enjoy himself out of
that noble feast that was set before him.

That Women ought to govern States rather than Men.
Paradoxes V 5.
I Have sometimes wondered how it came to pass that the late Knights errant of
Philosophy, who have assalted and pulled down the whole frame of Nature, and
rebuilt it according to their several Chymericall humors, not sparing the
very Heavens, but either Tumbling down or dislocating its Orbs, never
contenting themselves with usual and, common remedies, but running in quest
after odd Sympathetical and Universal Medicines, have among all the rest of
their extravagances forgot to transfer the Powers of the World from men that
have held them hitherto, into the hands of women, since a Scepter is not more
heavy than a distaff, and a cap of State very near as soon made and embellisht
as some headtires. Was it that they knowing such a superiority too cruel and
insupportable at home, thought it in conscience too dangerous to recommend to
the Public? Or finding that the croaking of such Night-ravens wrought more
upon many great Persons than the sound of a Trumpet, thought they, they possessed
in reality though invisibly, and therefore not needing any alterations? Or else
(according to their manner) considered they this as a business not concerning
life, and therefore neglected it as inconsiderable? Certain it is that those,
who have employed their deepest resveries in the Transformation of
Commonwealths, and made them such as unless men were good Angels they could
not live in them, or if they were Devils might possibly be forced unto peace,
there is not one of them but has forgot to set down this most excellent and
considerable piece of reformation.

Yet since we all ought to give up our endeavors to the promotions of Truth,
and finding out of new lights, I could not be backward in so disquisitive and
Restless an Age as this is, to offer my mite unto the Public Treasury.

And therefore I stick not to affirm, that Domination and government is not
only lawful and tolerable in women, but Justly, Naturally, and properly
theirs.

First then, though some Crazy Philosophers drunk and besotted with
Aristotelism, have endeavored to devance them from the same Species, with men;
and others madder than they to deny them souls, yet when we shall oppose holy
scripture, which makes man the consummation of the creation, and them the
consummation of man, if we would cite those high Attributes the Rabins give
unto them, or instance those particular indulgences of Nature, which Agrippa
reckons unto them, or those peculiar advantages of composition and
understanding which Zacutus Lusitanus ascribes them, not to mention that of
Trismegistus (reputed the Ancientest and most divine Heathen writer) who calls
them Fountains and perfections of Goodness; nay, and shall add to this that
which must even stop the Mouth of Barbarism it self, to wit, the high
estimation put upon them even by the Mahumetans, who in them place the greatest
pleasures of their Paradise) it must needs be acknowledged, that those
assertions are as irrational as may be, and consequently consonant to that
Philosophy.

And indeed this is a quarrel wherein Nature has declared her self a most
interrested party, that we need go no farther then the judgment of our eyes
(the quickest and surest that man can make) to decide the controversy. For
whom can we imagine to be so insensible, as not to be presently toutched with
the delicate composure and Symmetry of their bodies. The sweetnesses and
killing languors of their eyes, the meslange and harmony of their colors, the
happiness and spirituality of their countenances, the charms and allurements of
their Mine, the Air and command of their smiles, so that it is no wonder if
Plato said, that Souls were unwilling to depart out of such fair bodies,
whereas men are mere- rough-cast, bristly and made up of tough materials; and
if they approach any thing near beauty, do so much degenerate from what they
are.

This gains us our main Topic. For if the majesty or comeliness of the person
of a Governor gain so much upon the people as Politicians have observed, and
experience teaches it does, what advantage have they in Magically chaining and
winning of the People given them by Nature, which the other cannot obtain by
Art, for who would not be sooner smitten with Tresses curiously snak't and
built up by a ravishing Architecture then with Commodus hair though poudred
with Gold? who would not adore a face glowing with all kind of sweetnesses
rather than a countenance Savage with bristles or indented with soars?

That this is a truth, needs so little Demonstration, that looking but into any
story, you shall find, even the greatest conquerours, lusty and proud in their
triumphs, humbled and brought on their knees by some fair enchantress. This we
account admirable in Alexander and Scipio that they cold avoid, in Caesar and
Mark Anthony we pardon it in respect of the greatness of their other actions.
And therefore if great Captains and founders of Empires be things of a more
excellent nature, then ordinary lazy governors that creep in by succession, or
be stilted by election, and these people have ever commanded them, and made
them decline in their very meridians, has not nature think we given them a
Priority, and enjoy they it not in effect, though they seem not to enjoy it in
show?

But a Martiall-man, you will say, is a savage brutish thing, a thing that
knows how to run into dangers and to despise them, one whose thoughts are
always at random and abroad, seldom with drawn and upon their guard, and
therefore it is no wonder, if such men be easily surprised with such dazzling
triffles. But when a man tells you, that even the wisest men, have been strange
doters on this sex, and absolutely given up to them, it will change the case.
I suppose there is no man thinks Solomon a fool, and it is well known, how
these white Devils seduced him. Augustus, that was certainly one of the
steadiest men in the world, one that in his youth outwitted the hoary senate,
was all his life time led by one Livia, who had that great prevalescence with
him, that he by her means disposed the succession of the Empire upon a son of
her womb by a former husband, though he had nearer kindred of his own. But to
make this yet plainer, age we say begets wisdom, now how general the affection
of old Men is to Women needs no proof, especially the older they grow, some of
threescore, marrying Girls of sixteen, and therefore it is a clear Argument of
the truth of this point, and of the wisdom of those reverend seniours that
proceed accordingly.

Besides, as certainly there wants not its reason in Philosophy, that all
virtues are of this we plead for; so we may, in the perusal of History, find
as many fair and brave examples of virtue given by women as there has been by
men. Look over the ^oul of them, and ye may easily fill each of them into a
sufficient common place, where many things put down as nobly done by men, it
may be are either brutish, heady, or passionate, whilst in the woman things
appear more smooth and temperate. Or if there be any thing of passion or
exorbitancy, it is but an addition of luster to their sex, as a blush, or
glowing in the face sets off their beauty.

Now if it be necessary, that governors should be of good entertainment,
affable, open of countenance, and such as seem to harbor no crooked or dark
design, no men, can be so fit for Government as women are. For besides their
natural sweetness and innocence, their talk, is commonly directed to such
things as it may easily be inferred, that their heads are not troubled about
making of Wars, enlarging of Empires, or founding of Tyrannies. So if we
consider both what has been said, and that even those attributes, which are to
be most wished for in a Governor are in them we shall clearly gain what we
desire: What greater happiness to a people than to have a Governor that is
religious? Now all Philosophy and Experience teaches us, that the softest
minds are most capable of these impressions, and that women are for the most
part more violently hurried away by such agitations than men are. How few men-
Prophets do histories afford us incomparison to Prophetesses; and even at this
day, who such absolute followers of the Priests as the women are? If you wish
them merciful, these are the tenderest things on the earth; They have tears at
command, and if tears be the effect of Pity and compassion, and pity and
compassion be the mother of virtue, must we not think that mercy rules most in
them, and is the soonest expected from them? If you wish affection to the
Country; where can you better have it? Have not the women many times cut of
their Hairs, to make Ropes* for Engines and Strings for Bows? Have they not
given up all their Rings and Jewels to defray charges? Have they not been
content to perish with their husbands in their habitations, and what greater
love of country can be shown? And how great would this be, if a woman looks
upon her self as the mother of her Country? What tenderness would she not have
toward the people her children? When you see private women sometimes show such
extraordinary effects thereof, that it comes near dotage or madness. Or would
you have affection to the people at home? No effect so violent, as that of
women: murders, banishments, proditions have been but small matters thence
arisen, and what Tragical effects their despairs have brought, Poets and
Romances will abundantly show.

Thus were this noble sex restored to that right which nature has bestowed on
it, we should have all Quiet and Serene in common-wealths-Courts would not be
taken up with factions and underminings, but all would flow into pleasure and
liberty. Instead of molding of Armies, we should be preparing of masks, and
instead of depressing of Factions, we should have balls and amorous
appointments. So that men might follow their handycrafts, oxen might Plow,
Mill-horses drive about the Wheel, whilst all this labor, and sweat should
serve but for the furtherance and easiness of the Court.

Then also should we have no Wars, which Slectingius and Socinus argue so much,
and the people pray so much against. For women, being of tender conditions, and
most part of sedentary lives, would not engage in such rough employments,
proper only for man, who is only the best kind of savage, over whom they
have also this priveledge, that they can bring forth the greatest conquerours,
but man can only destroy them. Neither for several emergencies have they
wanted their active valor, whereof they want not their several Instances. Nay,
some nations have unanimously grown up into it, as the Amazons of old, and I
believe, were it not for the usurpation of men at this day, we might have seen
someting modern very like them, and Sir Walter Rawleigh, needed not have been
at the trouble to have fetched them from Guyana.

Withal we know, how necessary it is in every Statesman to be master of all
the Artifices and slights that may be to gain upon them he deals with. Now if
any can be fitter for this than women, I am much deceived. For what by their
importunities, glances, trains, slights ambushes, artifices, and little
infidelities, it is as impossible to escape them, as to go -- per ignes.

Suppositos cineri doloso.

But I see a volly of Objections coming on, but yet such, as I shall easily
escape unhurt. You will say they will be inconstant, fitter they for all
occasions of business. They can turn and tack about according as the wind
serves, and so will never shipwreck, whereas many Princes have split themselves
and their posterity by being too Obstinate in one course. You Will say they will
be proud. But what more proper than Majesty and high deportment in a Governor;
without pride how should there be reverence and without reverence how should
there be subjection? You will say they will be too delicate and gay. This is
but to keep the imaginations of the people aloof, which must necessarily be
heightened by such curious deceptions, which are as needful for them, as the
Arcana Imperij are for the men. You Will say they are talkative. So much the
better for the people, whereas dark and obscure Princes, that either mean
nothing or ambiguously leave the people in suspense, and make liberty either
dangerous, or flattery misconstrue it. You Will say they will be cruel? I would fain
know what King, take the wisest or the best, ever boggl'd much if a head or two
were in his way. And therefore why should we condemn them for what is so
usually practiced. And lastly you will say they are unwise. But I pray you how
many sotts, and naturals, and changelings by virtue of succession have mounted
the Throne? Things it may be of obstinate natures to boot, whereas women,
cannot be worse (...) worst: and withal are more easy and supple to be guided
by wise Counselors.

We must therefore conclude, that as women bring forth children into the world,
as they multiply themselves into these visible and corporeal souls, and after
they have brought them forth, are most tender and careful to bring them up; So
it is most fitting, having all these preheminences and indulgences of nature,
that when they were brought up, they should also have the Government of them.
For a Potter would think it a hard measure, if after the pitcher were made, it
should fly in his face.

That it is better to be lame or bedridden, than lusty and able to walk abroad
Paradoxe. VI.
IT is an inherent folly in mankind to be so indulgent to it self, or rather
too fondly tender, that whatsoever it either commonly enjoyes, or sees others
usually enjoy, that it thinks to be the fittest and the happiest, as being
blindly led by example, and hurried away by its first thoughts whereas if it
truly descended into a strict scrutiny and consideration of things, it would be
easily found, that many things, which to appearance and taste are gay and
wholesome, are in the use and fruition clean the contrary, and many such things
as we think make other men happy, are but burdens and inconveniences to them,
and such, as if we our selves were condemned to enjoy, we should make it part
of our first wishes to be dispensed withal.

To go no farther for instance than the very business of Walking, and
confinement to a bed or chamber, how much seems the one to be valew'd, and how
much irksome appears the other: whereas if they were both stripped into a naked
consideration, there is nothing but trouble, and a kind of servitude in the
one, and repose and acquiescence in the other. For if man were to be valued by
the continuation or frequency of his motions, a spaniel or a wild Beast were
certainly the more noble thing, and much more a volatile that is not chained
and shackl'd to the earth, but can roam abroad in the air, and descend at
pleasure. Whereas a quiet and sedentary posture of life, wherein a man is in a
manner naturally disfranchis'd of foreign and outward disturbances, and wholly
collected into himself, must be much a braver posture of life, and more
suitable, to that high and contemplative nature, which his great maker has
endowed him with.

Not that this is to be understood of fixed and painful Chronicall diseases,
which rend and tear the mind asunder, even with the body (for certainly its
very pleasant to hear the stoiks direct a man not to groan or change
countenance at a fit of the stone or colic, as though a man's mind could
absolutely be abstracted from his senses, to which it is so straightly conjoined)
but I mean of such imperfections or weaknesses, as confine a man only to his
Chamber or a Couch, leave him his soul free and at liberty to exercise those
noble functions that her nature leads her to. For to run upon a common place of
contemplation (which by this means, must be strangely advanced) as it were not
only unnecessary, so may it be objected, that the freest and most active men
might take such enjoyment, if they pleased, and confine themselves at their
pleasure. But it is answered, when it is said that all the businesses troubles
and inconveniences of life are hereby avoided, that a man ^s safe within
himself, unengag'd to any long or tedious attendances, unconcerned in any
factions ruling in a state, excused from all those duties and peevish
employments, or to say better, slaveries under superior Governors, they must
needs acknowledge, that it were much better for a man thus quietly and serenely
to be his own prisoner, then with a great deal of pains and trouble carry
shackles about him under the mere denomination of a Freeman.

We may add to this that going in man, seems to be one of the greatest marks of
his mortality and weakness, Serpents, which were cursed to craule upon their
bellies, curle and vary themselves so finely in their progressive motions, that
it is no less wonder and delight to see them, than to behold man himself, that
claims the Monarchy, walk upright, and hale one leg after another. And
therefore the ancient Poets, though they indiscreetly enough attributed most of
the passions and infirmities of men to their titular Gods, yet this was such a
weakness and imperfection, that they durst not do it, and therefore Virgill
speaking of Venus says.

Et vera incessu patuit Dea. Which as a modern Poet has englished it --

-- She did not go,
And step like us, but awfully did flow,
And swim to sight,
Intimating, that even the motion of such miserable Divinities, must needs be
nobler and more vigorous, than the poor and weak haltings of common man. Nor is
it much to be urged, that nature recompenses this sometimes in others by
extraordinary swiftness, for not to say, that such are very few, and these in a
manner useless, rather made indeed for matches than service: who was ever yet
heard of that could outrun a Heart or a Barbary, or to make equal journies with
a Dromedary? And if it should be supposed that they were able to do so, that
were nothing but declining into the nature of those creatures, and falling back
from their own worth into that Glass.

Besides we are to consider the means, by which men commonly arrive at
lameness, and and those for the most part are honorable. For as there are but
few diseases that cause it, so it proceeds for the most part either from hurts,
or loss of members which must needs be from a man's particular valor, or else
received in the defense of his Country. If it be the former, what greater
assurance can you have of a high and a daring soul, than to sacrifice ones
limbs to the sense and tenderness of honor. If the latter, what more noble and
generous martyrdom can be imagined than to loose part of what we brought into
the world with us, as a sacrifice to that common mother, to whom we owe all we
have, or to speak a little more pressingly, to all the interests both of our
Altars and Chimneyes, Friends, Children, Laws and Liberties. Certainly upon
this occasion one man may safely and rationally be more proud of a pair of
Crutches, than another man, who has merely obeyed the agitations and stings of
ambition, ought in conscience to be of a triumphal Chariot.

To all this we are to add, that we, by this means enjoying rest, enjoy that
which all things, even to the lowest inanimates tend unto with a strong
appetency, stones themselves violently rush down to their Center, and increase
their motion, when they approach it; flames and fire mount upward impatient of
these Unctious and Sulphurous Prisons, to which we confine them. All things
tend to quiet and rest. Consider but even the nature of things, and it will be
found but a mechanical protrusion, clashing and arietation of atoms, which
scuffles being once ceased, they rest in shapes, and quiet themselves into a
Body.

But to go no further than the mind of man, all the passions and traverses of
it, are but so many hurries and tempests, and they must be calmed before a man
can see himself, as waters must be smoothed which a man would make a mirror of.

Or if a man give himself to the pursuit of sciences; there is no way so
advantageous as quiet and a serene attendance upon our thoughts. Hence it was
that the Poets secluded the Muses to Mount Parnassus, to Fountains and Groves,
as knowing that Cities were not places for any profound and abstractive
meditations, and consequently much conversation an enemy unto it. Out of this
reason I believe it was that Sr Henry Wotton, after so many Embassies and
Negotiations concluded an Epigraphe of his.

Tandem hoc didici animas sapientiores fieri quiescendo. But least I may seem
to speak without ground, and not out of Experience, and the things themselves,
as many subtle and aerie wits have done, whose contemplations have been rarefied
into such thinness, that they have vanished into nothing, things and actions
being ever the best furniture and directors of conceptions, whilst the mind
it self, towering merely by the strength of its own notions, either looses it
self in its height, or falls down out of weariness, it will be but necessary
that I quote an example or two, the one of a Spaniard, the other of a
Countreyman; the one of as little merit as he has much fame; the other of very
small fame, considering the greatness of his worth. It Is Ignatius Loyola, and
Mr Anthony Bacon, son to the Lord Keeper Bacon, Brother to the Lord Chancellor.

The first being a Spanish soldier, and becoming bedridden of his wounds
recollected that great mind of his which had been usually employed in war,
into that fatal invention of the Order of the Jesuits, which as in its
increase, it is in a manner miraculous, so in its discipline, it is no less.
For of what profession, Physic excepted, has it not brought forth excellent
men in great numbers? How have they out-stript all other Orders in a few years,
and were it not for their blind cursed dependence upon the Pope, whereby they
even wilfully put out their own reason, and that they are a sort of men
absolutely given to the aggrandization of their own society, they were
certainly to be imitated by the best Governments on the earth. But as
Physicians say, that too good a posture of health is sickness, because the
humors, being in Equilibration may the sooner be over-turned; and we see the
most admirable inventions have brought along with them their inconveniences, so
is this sort of men, out of an intended harmless society, grown up into such
artifice and insinuation of State, that like your sutlest poisons, they work
most dangerously and subtily unseen, and have been so inconsistent with civil
government, that France once banished them for a time, and the state of Venice
for ever.

For the other as he writ nothing, so his infirmity withheld him from doing
much. He that could but consider the mavelous spirit of his Brother, the
difference of Lamenesse put into the scale, might easily shape an Idaea of him,
but with this disproportion, the one tower'd into all the heights of sciences,
and like an Eagle was one of the first that could behold intellectual truth,
the other dived into the secrets of state, and like a cruel Mineralist, left no
vein unsearch'd. The one had a hand larger than his Fortune, for all those
great offices and preferments he past through, supplied only his state and
liberality into a great debt and a poverty not fit to be mentioned to posterity
without ignominy to his Prince. The other had a providence so much greater than
his necessities, as you may say exceeded on the other side. He was a great
Transactour for the Essex faction, when they and the house of the Cecills, upon
the setting of Queen Elizabeth, strove who should be the greatest adorers of
rising King James. He wanted not kindred on the other side, which he knew very
well, and so cunningly used it, that by throwing out doubtful and suspicious
words when he lay bedridden, he got Essex house in the Strand given him at one
time which, what he sold it for, Sir Henry Wotton will tell you, and also ask
you this question What he would have done if he had been ble to walk. Certainly
he was a man of a vast and a regular mind, so great a Commander of himself,
and so much a master in the Arts of life and Government, that his Brother the
high Chancellor was not to be blamed, when he wished his infirmity upon
himself, so that the other might go abroad about her Majesty's service?

What I have said of this head, that is to say, of Natural restraint, as I may
so call it, I believe may very well serve also for civil restraint or
imprisonment, which though for the most part it be but temporary, as the other
is, and assures not of a continuation so long as life, yet it seems to be
accompanied with more horrors and more dangers. For being inflicted by the
civil Magistrate, it seems but as an earnest of some further punishment. But
if we examine the grounds upon which most men are thrown into Goales, which we
find to be either for the breach of some law, or for denying to act some what
against law, or else such as whose attempts have not been answered with
success, there will not any thing so formidable be found in it. For if it be
the former, it is our deserts, and we ought to submit to it, as to that which
the law imposes upon us for our demerits, and at most it is but a gentle
schooling for an error, wherein the progress of the party offending is
hindered, and it may be his final ruin prevented, while in the mean time he is
at leisure to look into himself, and to make use of his experience for future
causes. If it be the second, what more noble occasion in the world of
suffering, than in denying obedience to unjust commands, which certainly may
assure and pacify any resolved and constant honesty, amidst the greatest
torments, much more restraint. For what greater satisfaction can any man have,
than the fruition of his integrity though it be clouded and covered with never
so much misfortune? And for the third, since it is not much more than the
fortune of the war, and every man that attempts must needs hazard, it were
unworthiness and pusillanimity to attempt if a man will not be content with the
dispensations of fortune, to which we remit our selves, withal not knowing,
how she in her lubricity may every moment change cases.

Upon the whole it will appear, that since Restraint is the most high happy and
wholesome course of life, and that our souls which are much nobler than our
Bodies, are much advantaged thereby, and yet these souls, though such immortal
and noble substances, are but imprisoned and pent up in our bodies, it were a
very great injustice that the body should ill resent any confinement, when that
the immortal soul that actuates it, is so close a prisoner to the body it self.

FINIS.
Errata.
For page line read plentation 13 15 plantation esicurial 14 13 escurial he ib.
14 it things ib 15 these things whey 26 ult when pish 28 12 pitch he 35 8 he
that, but ib. 12 by ever 36 3 ever torment ignomy ib. 12 ignominy whom 37 6
which was 57 1 were beast 61 14 best desused 62 13 diffused aftergate 64 12,
wherrby carrying 75 8 carving undo 77 3 outdo if 93 17 have after dangers 94 16
be such subsistence 96 2 substance cornell 98 12 kernel nours 141 18 nours, and






