The Humble REPRESENTATION AND ADDRESS Of several Churches and Christians in
South WALES, and MUNMOUTH- shire, etc.



DVBLIN, Printed by WILLIAM BLADEN, Anno Dom. 1655.

To his Highness OLIVER LORD PROTECTOR Of the Commonwealth of England,
Scotland and Ireland, and the Dominions and Territories thereunto belonging.
The humble Representation and address of several Churches and Christians in
South Wales, and Monmouth-shire.
May it please your Highness,
WE should yet longer have contented our selves with praying and praising God
for you, in secret, and taken advantage from our distance as to public
affairs, and from your Highnesses most Christian and favorable understanding
of us, to have still for born any address of this manner to You; but that a
late printed Paper, Entitled (A Word for God, or a testimony, etc. from
several Churches, and diverse hundreds of Christians in Wales, etc.) coming to
our view (the largeness of which title to those that did not compare it with
the subscriptions, nor know that Country might seem to involve under it the
generallity of the good people there) We therefore think our selves loudly
called upon, to assure your Highness, that most of such as fear the Lord in
that Country, are not led aside with those temptations, but continue still
through grace, such as you judged them once to be, highly esteeming and
honoring not only your Person, or being before them in Christ, but also that
Government and Magistracy which God by most eminent, and signal providence,
has called You to the exercise of, over these Nations, and cannot now but in
the rear of some thousands of good people, bear our testimony in this manner
to it, as that wherein at present, we believe the cause, and interest of God,
so long contended for, the protection of the Saints, the liberty of the
Gospel, the interests of all the people, are under God imbarqued; And we
cannot see if some who are so earnestly set against this Government (and for no
other visibly) had their wills, how these mercies can be preserved to us. And
indeed (my Lord) it has not a little affected us, that while you are sitting
at the Stern, and wrestling with difficulties for us, any professing Christ
(and especially from among us) should the while, be doing the thing that tends
evidently to sink the whole Vessel, Nor can You easily judge how much we are
grieved that your Highness should have any seeming occasion, to think the
generallity of the poor Saints of Wales, who were once so much your joy, should
now so sadly degenerate, as to have head, heart, or hand in this unseemly
Paper. And though we hope we should have hearts to bless God for You
exceedingly, if we might but under You lead a quiet and peace^ble life in all
godliness, and honesty (as who, having a heart to it may not, and be also
greatly encouraged from the Authority) which is a mercy would have been valued
at an other rate by our Forefathers, and such as no Nation in the world
besides, that we hear of, do enjoy, Yet we cannot rest there, but must
acknowledge that (which in private has rejoiced our hearts) we see other good
things upon the wheel: Endeavors and ways taken to remove all oppressions
from the bodies of men, also godly Governors, appointed into all parts to
protect the well affected, and discountenance sin and wickedness. Taxes
lessened as far (at least) as the safety and preservation of the whole could
give way. Godly Protestants of Foreign parts owned, and sympathized with, in
their distress; Designs laid in the most probable way for the extirpation of
Popery, and making further passage for the Gospel, and Kingdom of our Lord in
the world; which the hearts, and spirits of the Saints, for this many hundred
years have been engaged on, and yet we wonder, Friends, that seemed once to be
of the same mind, should take the advantage that was too sadly given the Enemy,
to pass so hard a sentence upon the works of God, whole ways are in the deep;
not weighing aright what experience might have taught us all ere this, that his
usual course is to pull down where he intends to build, and to make
instruments base and vile, that his own arm may be considered, when he shall
appear with them. And we humbly take notice, that not only in this case men
that run before God, in prescribing ways, and times, for the bringing forth
the merciful dispensations, he has pomised to these latter days, seem to
have a spirit to the work in their own time and way, but none in Gods. And for
what remains undone of all that was declared, prayed, and sought for, we and
the rest of our Brethren of this Commonwealth, may if we would deal
faithfully with God, and our selves justly acknowledge, that our grievous sins,
and our sad unparralleld abuse of those manifold mercies already received,
together with the monstrous pettishness, and too common indisposition in diverse
good men; to follow God, and to yield cheerful obedience to him in the
Government, (which doubtless is of his own workmanship) is the real proper
Cause, why any good things hoped for, by any man, is so sadly retarded, and
endangered, it is not our meaning to trace our Brethren, in all the particulars
instanced in that Paper; as the imprisoning some Noblemen, etc. which We
conceive to be the mildest course could be taken, and keep them from ruining
themselves, and hazard the whole Nation with them, and we wish in naming such
with the respect they do, though Cavileers and Enemies, our Brethren, to
magnify the opposition, do not forget the spirit themselves were once of
toward they, and all their Party; nor what they urge touching the continuing
the Army together, with the Taxes, Customs, Excise, etc. even as they say in
the time of Peace, without considering by what hands under God, that Peace, and
all the Mercies with it, as it was obtained; is to this very hour (and as yet
cannot without a Mirracle be otherwise) conceived to us, only we are so far
from undervaluing, that we must remember and own with them the noble
Principles, that were in some of our Patriots in the old Parliament, and the
frequent appearances of God, for his Cause and People, during their sitting,
and yet wonder our brethren should so soon forget their own sense of them in
the latter end, how weary they were grown of their Government, and how far they
were then from judging it to be a dishonor to God, a scandal to Religion, or
grief to good men, to have a period put to that authority. But we greatly fear
many of our dear Brethren take too too much liberty, to censure the manifest
revolutions, and actions, that the right hand of God has brought forth amongst
us, and to ravell into, and put contrary senses on those passages of
Providence, which themselves, together with the Generation of Saints, had once
written EBENEZER upon, which God in his own time will (we hope mercifully
convince them of, in the mean space as We have through Grace some
fellow-feeling with you in your burdens, so we rejoice in the goodness of God
to You, that has armed You with such a measure of strength, as in the midst
of trouble, enough from other hands, to be able to bear with the numerous
oppositions, contradictions, and infirmicies of the weak Saints; and while the
spirit that is in them (which perhaps they knew not) carried them to be pulling
down, the Wall, and Hedge, God has set about them. That You should still
continue a Protection and Defense to them, and us, and not to be discouraged in
the work of God under Your hands, and we trust that the provocations and evil
of this late Paper (though it be very great) will not prevail over that
glorious Spirit in You, but that You will still in some likeness to-Your
Heavenly Father, be doing good for evil, and rendering love and compassion for
perverseness, and so convince calumny it self, And God even Your God will be
with You in the rest of the Works he has given You to do, And (after we hope
many years longer over us) reckon You amongst the Over-commers, and welcome You
into his own Eternal Joy and Glory, which is the Prayer of

Your Highness most humble Servants, and Subjects in the Lord, etc.

FINIS.
The Names of the Subscribers.
RAl. Williams Edw Harry Geor. Robinson H^gh Rogers Io^n Nicholas William
Blethy Edward Herbert Thomas Martin. John Williams George Morgan Rich. Williams
Rice Jones Richard Parker. Morgan Jones John Gregory Thomas Calls Nichol.
Peather William Arnold John Watkins Jews Rogers Robert Jones James Kemeyd
Alexander Jones Francis Watkins Walter William Harry John William John Robert
Curnock Griffin Ienkin William Pitcher Francis John Walter Howel Andrew Jews
Edward Lewis Lewis Richard George Edwards Morgan William Hopkin Rogers Morgan
Rosser John Bygan Rosser Edward Walter William Rich. Howel William Thomas Giles
Morgan Rice Williams Rosser Thomas Harry Thomas Edw. John Tho. Williams Thomas
Arney Robert Baker William Richard Lewis Evan John Thomas Knewill Thomas Walt.
Williams Charles Jones Thomas William Edw. Hutton John Baker George Ambrose
William Packer Edmond Jones of Itton. Will. Richard Iun. Thomas George Rice
Williams Thomas Jones Walt. Radock Rich. Charnock Hen. Walter Walt. Ienkins
John Tailor John Perin John Walter John Jones John Morgan VVil. Philips Rosser
Williams VVil. Potheras Richard Pen Rich. Namer David Jones Francis Sincus
VVil. Bide Wroth Richard Rich. Buller John Williams Thomas White James
Morris Roger Williams Thomas Evans Gresham Bray Charles Ienkins Philip
Williams John Davies John Morgan David Morgan Thomas Caple Walt. Richards
George White Lawr. Nonney. VVil. Jones John Jones VVil. Jones John Evans John
Morris John Powel R. Ouldaukine John Bowens John Daniel Tho. Williams Maur.
Bedwill James Jones John Roberts Tho. Philips John Daniel Iun. Roll. Thomas
John VVhithear Thomas Daniel Hopk. Thomas John Morgan VVil. Price Frankl.
Mathews Lancl. William Evan ab Owen Robert William Walt. Jones John Biyes
Daniel Higgs VVil. Richard John Thomas Ienkin Byvan M^rma. Mathews VVil. Jones
Griffin Bowen VVil. Prichard David Baily Ioh. Retherought Matthew Jones Edward
Jews James Philips Evan Griffiths Moor Py William Baily William Morris John
Ace Ienkin Tailor Richard Bevan John Lucas John Knaeth John David William
Rogers John French John Powel Edmund Ellis Edward Gamage Robert Puel Henry
Nichols John Gowler G^iffith Darild Robert Thomas Will. Watkins Rice Davies
Morgan Thomas Edward Barter Ienkin Edward Evan Lewelin Ienkin Elliot Ienkin
Thomas John Nichol Christo. Ienkin George Matthew Edward Thomas Rice S^muel
James Walker Edward Morse Edward Wrinch Will. Wrinch John Morgan John Thomas
Ienkin Lloid Matthew Cuffe William Cuffe Waking Nichols Waking Thomas Leyson
Thomas Arnold Griffith Charles Robeot Tho. Williams Griffith Richards Ienkin
Evan Thomas David's Anthony Lutton Morgan Howel David Lewis William David
Griffith Howel Rawleigh Fox Thomas Griffith Morgan Cook Thomas Nichol Richard
Ienkin John Harry Thomas Thomas David Lewelin Ienkin Griffith Howel Prichard
Evan Howel Thomas John Rees William Morgan David Richard Howel William Howel
Morgan Griffith Morgan Thomas Edw. Matthew Edward Thomas Morgan Lewis Morgan
Evan William Thomas Lewis Harry Watkin Robert Watkin Thomas Rice John John
Moses Thomas John Harry Philip Rich Ioh. William Edward Thomas Lewellin John
Andrew Rosser William John Lewis John Robert Philips Morgan William Rosser
Thomas John William Morgan Bruir Reinold Morgan William Thomas Warkin Jones
John Day VVil. Morgan Edw. Rowland Edward Lloid Henry Morgan Mo. Tho Gunter
Evan Jones William Philip Edward Gabriel Miles Bruer William Ienkins Evan
Rosser Tho. Lewis Morgan John Barkley Tho. ap Thomas Howel John Rosser Richard
William Richard Walter Howel Knywilling John Rob. Williams Henry Williams Will.
Williams Edmond Turban Evan Rosser Tho. Giles Lewis Rosser Thomas Lewelin David
Philip William Edmond Harry Philip Thomas Rice John David Mered. Thomas David
Evan Philip Thomas John William Morgan William Patrick Walter Gibbon William
John Howel Nathaniel Ripid John Evans Samuel Lort Robert White Thomas Elliot
Henry Garlake Edward Wills Richard Lort Giles Denham Abel Bishop Griffith Howel
Rice Price Rober Tennant Thomas Warren Stephen Young John Elliot jun. Thomas
Howel William Hughs William Steward David Dyer James Picton Ieni in Jones
William Moyl Thomas Wills Edward Morris
From the Church of Christ at Langom in Penbrookshire, the 11 month, 17 day,
1655.
Edward Carver John Says Christop. Iackson Hump. Gunter Erasmus Hicks Anthony
Stocks John Lewis Owen Young Thomas Melets John Luntley Robert Peiest Richard
Brown Stephen Love Peregrine Philips Thomas Smith Richard Rayler Edmond Thomas
Walter William William Watkin Ros. Tho. Griffith Evan Jews Rice Harry James
Richard Thomas William Philip Lewis James Lewis Morgan Rosser Thomas Evans
Nicholas Watkin Lewis Rice William Evan Rice John Lewis James Rosser Harry
Llewellin John Rees Will. John Rosser Harry L^wis Ros. Th. William. Th. Ed.
Thomas Will. John Morg. Thom. Edwards Thomas Jones John David John Thomas Edward
Morgan David Morgan John Davies Rosser Watkin John Lew^s VVatkin Harry Thomas
Howel Lewis Llewelin Philip Rees Edmund Evan John Jones Edmund Morgan Thomas
William Elias Harry Evan William Thomas Morgan VVat. Ioh. Philip Harry Morgan
William David Lewis David Thomas Evan Thomas David Ioh. Phil. VVillia^ Thom.
Rowland Rowland Robert Will. Rithersh Walter George Henry Morgan John Herbert
Joshua Miller Thomas William Watkin Benedict David John Lawrence Reece Lew.
Harr. VVat. Edward Lewis Harry Edmond Harry John Reynald Morgan Rice John Lewis
Will. Wat. Rosser Harry Evan Harry Th. John Rosser Evan Rosser Gregory David
Rice Philip Lew. Ross. VVat. Will. Benedict Thomas Reece William Green John
Miles David Davi^s William Thomas Morgan Jones John Price Lewis Thomas John
Thomas Evan Bowen Howel Griffith Thomas Jones John Williams John Beaban David
Thomas Thomas ab Evan David Hopkin Owen Llewelin David Hopkin Evan Thomas
Edward Robert Thomas Hopkin Will. Nicholas John Morgan Sim Butler Philip John
VVil. Thomas David Thomas Robert Matthews Charles Morgan Philip Ienkin William
Matthew Will. Morgan Hugh Bailey Will. Morgan David Griffith Owen Dowl Thomas
Hopkin Richard Edward Thomas John Ienkin Franklin John Knayth Nicholas Tanner
William Rees Moses Whityard Reese Pue George Williams Will. Badcock Evan John
Edward William Roger Thomas Howel John Evan Llewelin John D^vid Leison David
John Davies Morgan Jones George Rood Philip Jones Llewelin Evan David Lawrence
H^gh Matthew Wi^liam Thomas Evan Tory Robert Edward John Givelin Richard Else
George Harry Hopkin David Philip David Griffith Bowen Francis Williams Howel
Jones Reynold Thomas Robert Callow William Philips James Philips Robert Morgan
David William Morris John David Morgan William Philip David Ienkin Daniel
william Ieavan William Lewis Richard Will. Huddliston Abeding Godfre. Morgan
Aubre Henry Griffith Thomas Proud Morgan Robert Thomas Beevan William Thomas
Griffith William Vincent Powel William Watkins Thomas Watkins William Watkins
Rice Powel William Proserp Owen Parry John Howel Jones Lews Thomas Thomas
Prosser Watkin Thomas Ienkin Morgan Watkin Philips Watkin Lewis William
Prichard Thomas William Thomas Ienkin Will. Wa^kin David Rogers Roger Jones
Watkin Thomas Humph. George William Price Richard Powel William Powel Thomas
Powel William Parry Thomas David William Philip Richard Prees Walter Griffith
John Medith Roger Morgan Roger Prosser Thomas Lloid William Morgan Thomas Pugh
D^vid Pugh Richard Williams Edward Bruhord Llewelin William Thomas Fainton
James Philips Anthony Rydley Richard Coslat Charles Rosser Rog. Tho. Badam
Philip William Morgan Rosser Lewis Ienkin W^lliam Morgan Richard Gibbon Will.
Ioh. Morgan William Badam Thomas Edward Lew. John Howel John Howel Tho. John
Rosser William Morgan Andrew Morgan Mirick David Edward Lewis Rich. John Thomas
Price Watkin Ienkin Tho. Williams Rees David Thomas Lewis John Ienkin Richard
Creed John Jones Thomas Edmund Watkin Ienkin Ienkin Watkin Will. VVatkin
Rosser Morgan Rees Jones Edmond David Rosser William Harry Lewis Morgan John
Thomas William William Ienkin John Rosser Renald William James Watkin John
Parry Watkin Harry Ioh. Rosser Ioh. William Renald Will. Preet Andrew Ienkin
Ric. Ioh. Meredith James James Meredith Richard Rice Griffith Walter Thomas
William Philip William David ^illiam Jones ^en. R. Williams Robert Knaeth ^^hn
David Owen William Thomas Lloid Edward Frood William Raterd Rees John Evan
Ienkin Michael Howard Robert Thomas Thomas Rice Daniel Howel Ien. Gri^fi^h
Llew^lin Morgan William Jones Hamphry Philips Thomas Parry Will. Watkin Owen
Lewis Evan Llewelin Matthew Hodson Walter Prosser Edw. William William Hughs
Philip Lacock Philip Pember Richard Clark Edward Morgan Thomas Mason Eustace
Mason Thom. Matthews John Larcot Richard Heigh James Lacock James Crews Walter
Edwards Roger Watkin Thomas Prosser Thomas Bevan Thomas William Thomas Watkin
Roger Prosser Roger Philip John Jones Thomas Prosser Thomas Williams Watkin
John R^es Price Richard Bevor Howel Yohan Thomas Lewis James London Thomas
London James Williams Watkin Brown John Lewis H^rry Rees Watkin William Oliver
Gilbert David Francis Thomas Williams Roger Jones Christoph. Price John Edward
John Morgan John Richard Thomas Lewis Edw. Owsley William Gunter Rosser Ienkin
John Parry Thomas Rogers Anthony Parry Lewis Hughs
Abergaveny.
W^lter Sampson Richard John Peter Harry G^iffith Ienkin William Thomas Howel
Lawrence Thomas Richard Reynold Tumlin Walter William Edward Water Evan
Griffith H^rry Thomas Will. Nicholas John David John Jones William Davies John
Abbot Will. Prichard Richard Rosser Edward Giles Walter Williams William Morgan
Andrew Morgan Sampson Ienkin Lewis Samuel Thomas William Joshua Rosser Richard
Gibeo^ Walt Williams William Beran Morris Philip John Hughs Sen. Stephen Hughs
Richard Ienkins Evan Davies David Williams David Harry David Morris Walt.
Richard Harry William Nich. Richard John Nicholas Anthony Griffith Samuel Jones
Ien. Daukings John Rice Thomas ap Owen John William ^evan ap Owen Dav. Will.
Philip Morgan Thomas Rees Evan David Evan John Ievan David Richard William Rees
Evan Dan. Griffit. Rees David David Griffith John Evan William David Thomas
John Evan Thomas John Powel Meredith Davis Francis Davis Thomas David Rice
John's Drahern Evan David John's Dav. Matthew Owen David Rees John Morgan John
John Bowen Griffit. Humphry Thomas Morgan John Owen Rees Thomas Griffith John
Dav. Bowen Owen David Morgan Thomas John Evan Evan Morgan John Walter Richard
Hugh David Harry Antho. Thomas Ezekias Thomas John David Griffith Hopkin.
FINIS.

