A SERIOUS EPISTLE TO Mr. WILLIAM PRYNNE, Wherein Is interwoven an Answer to a
late Book of his, the Title whereof is inserted in the next leaf. By J. HALL,
of Grays- Inn.

PROVE. 6. 2 and 3. Thou art snared with the words of thy mouth, thou art taken
with the words of thy mouth.

Do this now my son, and deliver thy self; when thou art come into the hand
of thy friend: go, humble thy self, and make sure thy friend.



LONDON, Printed for John Place, and are to be sold at his Shop at
Furnifolds-Inne gate, 1649.

To him that will Read.
THat this Book has come later from the press, then either stands with the
Celerity of the Adversary, or duty and obligation of the Author, it will be
hoped you will be inclined to Forgive, when you once are assured that a
Treatise of almost ten-times the bigness of this, might have come abroad in
the time this was a making ready; Notwithstanding all clamours and
expostulations; and therefore the Author may promise himself so much Justice,
as to be Rescued from the savagenesse of their opinions, who dam all things not
immediately falling under their concern, or complying with the pettishnesse of
their own Humor.

A LEGAL VINDICATION Of the Liberties of ENGLAND, AGAINST ILLEGAL TAXES And
pretended Acts of Parliament, Lately enforced on the People: OR, Reasons
assigned by WILLIAM PRYNN of Swainswick in the County of Somerset, Esquire, why
he can neither in Conscience, Law, nor Prudence submit to the New Illegal Tax
or Contribution of Ninety Thousand pounds the MONTH; Lately ^mposed on the
Kingdom, by a pretended Act of some Commons in (or rather out of) Parliament.

To Mr. WILLIAM PRYNNE of Swainswick Greeting.
Mr. PRYNNE.
YOu will scarcely believe, what an high obligation, you have lately put upon
all men, that can but the lest discover between good and evil in Books, and
how much you were likely* to have further indeered your self to them, By the
continuance of your patience and silence. For whereas you were Accustomed
usually once a week to great them, with a small Trifle of some twenty or thirty
sheets; and thereby either incur their indignation or laughter; you have been
of late graciously pleased to withdraw your benevolences of that nature, and ^o
put them in hopes that you would no more lend an hand to the Multiplication of
evil Things: Nor any more bear a part in the variety of those hideous Noyses,
which do now distract and deafen Europe.

But indeed (this is but a friendly Congresse, and we must be free and open)
your silence to me was very Omnious and full o^ bad signification; nay, I must
confess to you; far more dreadful then the opening of the mouth and speaking.
For having found and Experimented that your Nature was such that it could no
more forbear scribbling then a Paralytick his shaking, or one bit with a
Tar^^tula his dancing, I began to fear and tremble lest either you were in
l^bour with some great voluminous work, which like a Leviathan* would swallow
up all the Paper, and be a means to raise Ballads and Pamphlets, from three
farthings to a penny a Sheer, or else that you were intended shortly to depart
this world (as the volentary slipping of Fistula's and Issues betoken Death to
the party) and so not live a while to survive your Progeny, and see the Memory
of them lost among Men.

But indeed I was of late doubly undeceived, for I both found (to my amazement)
that you were alive, as also that your late Book was but eight sheets, which
indeed for that very cause I should have bastardiz'd and disclaimd for being
yours; But that I therein found that a many profuse and impertinent dashes did
absolutely Characterize it yours, and besides I saw abundance of Quotations,
which I suppose no other Man would upon that occasion have placed there.

Now finding your Book (as I said) so short and withal so little to the
question; a kindly Itch and lechery presently Tickled me to answer it, and the
rather because I suppose I might gratify you in giving you an occasion to
write again, as also make your opposition to the present Government, more known
and famous (a thing I know you cove^) as also be a procatartic cause of some
further sufferings, which I knew could not but be very acceptable because I
have observd your Genius more especially delighted in persecution and
opposition to the present power, and therefore I could never blame you for
precipitating your self into a heady action; as being willing to permit every
man to follow his own Inclination, and I knew you were led very strongly this
way.

Nor indeed was I insensible of some advantage on my side. No man lying, so
open, so unguarded, so easy to be beaten by his own Weapons as you. Besides you
most times take i^^ ayms, and strike clear besides your enemy. So that besides
these small encouragements, I saw I needed not be half so long as you, (and
this is somewhat with the judicious) and I needed but once state the
questition, and all your Arguments would fall in pieces, and for quotations I
knew it was either transcribing of yours into my Pref. to Don quixot*
Margent (which is as much concerned in them as yours) or else to follow
Cervantes his advice, and take the first Catalogue of Authors I met and own
them.

But then again upon second thoughts I began to demurre, as considering you a
person very dreadful and terrible; as well by your Roman constancy in writing,
(for you never yet permitted any Adversary to have the last word, nor any power
so long as you had pen and ink to put you to silence as by the Reputation you
have of a various learning and multiplicity of Reading: Not to mention your
numerous Prints, whereby you have not like Tostat three sheets for every day in
your life, but almost three volumes, so that it is pity that you were not
either borne of German parents, to have written in high dutch that you might
have outdon the reputation of the greatest of their Authors, who are commonly
valued at the rate of their boldness and prolixity. Notwithstanding upon a
third dispute with my self I found all these were chimera's, and could cause
no Real affrights* as for your pertinacy in Answering, Responding Rejoyaing
Anti qu^rying, Reviewing etc. However it ^ad wrought upon some other men I
resolved it should not do on me* until you forsook your custom of un-weaving
the web at the wrong end, and never approaching to the heart of a dispute (as I
shall presently instance) and this was a favor which as being a stranger to
you I supposed you would hardly confer on me, although you had ability and
possibility, either given you by nature or belieu'd of you by men.

For the fame of your Learning I found that it had rather invaded the minds of
the multitude, and possessed the weak inconsiderate swallowers of all Books,
and interested it self in those people, who had before interested themselves
in those opinions, which you either oppugn'd or maintained, then any ways
recommended you to those judgments, who calling all things to a sharp Test,
are not wont to favor without Eminency of merit. And therefore I called to
mind that I had heard many of them say, that (though your industry were not at
all discommendable, yet it did not infer any such vaffnesse or Immensity of
nature in you, as the Titles or Margents of your Books seem to promise, for
(say they) Nature makes ever the dullest Beasts most laborious, and the
greatest feeders. Therefore they observed that* though you had read and
swallowed much, yet you had concocted little; and so (wanting Rumination) it
was no vvonder if you vomited up abundance of things crude and raw and I could
prove it to you out of Authors, that to cast up things un-alter'd is a symptom
of a feeble and infirm stomach; and as an error in the first concoction
derives it self to the others, and nourishing up a prevalescent humor begets
at last a disease; even so your judgment being once depraved turns all your
Reading, (be it never so choice) into bilious or putrid humors, which being
perpetually increased by your insatiate gluttony of Books do miserably foment
and heighten your malady of writing.

Nor truly was I much amazed with your Books themselves, which though they
appeared big and tall were extreme feeble and ill complexion'd, and though
they carried menacing aspects, yet were things purely childish and unactive,
they put me in mind: (I beseech you pardon so homely a comparison) of the two
Giants that stand to guard Guild Hall, and look down as furiously upon the
contentious Rabble, as if themselves intended to be Peacemakers, and to
powder them all with one blow, when alas one uncourteous greeting with a hasell
stick would presently discompose all their gallantry* and reduce them to their
first matter of sticks and past-board. For (Sir) It Is the general opinion of
all Learned men (as I could bring quotations to that purpose) that books large
and empty are the greatest enemies to that perpetuit^ and largeness of fame,
that every diligent Writer ought to aim at, that can be possible. For
Posterity that passes a severe and impartial sentence upon all things formerly
done, cannot but hate and brand those men that deal ^o unreverently with her,
as to put things upon the file of Memory as would even be tedious in table
talk where no drollery for the most part comes amiss, and therefore we see
all Ages willing to op off such excrescencies, and destroy if possible their
very Remembrance.

Saepius in libro memoratur Persius uno.
Quam levis in tota Marsus Amazonide.
Now you having so unpardonably offended this way, I would not at all start
back at you^ volumnous and Gigantous Nothings, but resolutely encounter and
grapple with them. For though you have a Faculty (to your great renown) to put
that into ten sheets, which another man might comprize in ten lines; and
therefore have filled as much paper as if you were to burn for a Martyr would
serve instead of fagots; yet must I say, there is very little in all this to
the purpose. For though you are not yet a Didimus* and transcribe whole
Tragedies, yet I may say you insert many things not condusing to the present
purpose, though I must acknowledge the great praise of your humanity and
goodness* that you commonly either write the most material things (as you
conceive) in Capitals, or else very courteously with an hand or a Note on the
Margent, direct the Reader to them. Vt si maluerit lemmata sola legate. And
therefore were it for no other cause* Master Noy de^lt very uncourteously with
you, that offered to make you and the water-poet, Bed-fellowes in Lincolns-Inne
Library, as being two of the same altitude, and crisis of writing.

For the multitude of them I was of Virgils mind, Non Numer^m lupus, the
smallest insecta's come in greatest shoals out o^ the womb of their dam putri
action. A Python, a Hydra, or any such Royal Monster come alone, and that but
rarely, if at all, petit creatures can be delivered of many at a birth; Lions,
Elephants* and those more noble carry but one, and that after long
impregnation: by the same Analogy men of poor, strait, low and slender
thoughts, have ever the greatest exuberance and vent most; whereas Regular and
Castigated souls, who know how dear and hard it is to think aright, and how
difficult the pursuit of Truth is, and under how many censures any thing of
public concern must necessarily fall; vent their notions nicely and
scrupulously, as thinking they must be writ in marble, whilst the inconsiderate
put every running thought upon the sand; is for example, most of your sustian
puff-past Treash, which within a few years is as quite effact, as if your I^k
had been made of nothing but ^oprisse: and no more Regarded then the Inventory
of some sick man's dreams; and therefore to me you have writ a very few things,
they being such as no man will enquire after, but such as delight in things
obsolete and antique, or supposing the things are many, it is a lump made up
like Democrit^^ worlds of atoms which raise up a great mass yet are
imperceptible in themselves.

I suppose by what I have said, you may have a shrewd guess, at what I
conceive of the pertinency of them, never was there any thing truer said in all
senses then in Multi loquio non deest peccatum, Certainly so your literary sins
in this kind (not to Account your morrall or Theological) are horrid and
Innumerable and (without the interposition of somewhat above Mercy)
Impardonable, How pitifully did you once afflict the House of Commons in that
fatal Night of Voting the Kings answer the grounds of a firm Peace, yet when
that most Insuls Harang came to see the Press the substance (so you Title it)
does but amount to some seventeen sheets close Printed: It Joy'd your
New-liguers, and Co-Martyrs, the Cavaliers, that they had sprung such a
Champion, and therefore the Book (and as I think the first of yours that was
so) came to be twice Printed, and possibly is yet extant for all men, that have
a mind to survey the art of Amplication, to peruse, with much about such
di^cretion as this* Do you endeavor to blow up liberty of Conscience, for in
your Book superscribed, The sword of Christian Magistrates supported you first
lay down the whole question (in effect) as a postulate or undeniable axion, and
upon that ground make a shift to Rear up a Paper, trifle of 20. large sheets,
and this with that Celerity (the infallible sign of a good writer) that between
the Date of the Book you answer, and your own, there interceeds but (as I
Remember) twenty days: Notwithstanding you say they are the lucubrations of a
few cold Winter Nights, and you tell the Lords you have not lost one minute
from their service. I could tell also that while you should explode the vanity
of love locks, you only fall foul upon long hair, and so run clear out of
distance from your question, with a Man of much less Reading might have embost
with curious Philo^ogy, and instructed the age into an affright off: Thus in
your unhealthfulnesse of health drinking, you only quarrel at much drinking,
and so make a forementioned escape. But I am sorry such dust and cobwebs stick
in my memory, I have repeated too much already, and for particular passages I
could put you in Remembrance, Vsque ad nauseam and Ravim, but that I would no^
slip into an humor which so much disgusts me in you. Only that Posterity may
acknowledge how strongly you have obliged them by your Poetry* I cannot but
with pleasure put you in mind what a dear son you have been to the Muses.
Never did any man tune such round delays as you have. Never did any man so
powerfully drag and hale poor s^^lables into verse. Never durst any Tirant
exercise these cruelties upon the bodies men, that you have upon Meeter. It Is
the greatest praise of the Architect of this Universe, that he did all things
in Number, Weight and Measure, and the just contrary must fall upon all your
Works, especially o^ this nature. Alas, what ups and downs have you! what
noyses, what calmes! what tractures, what unnatural closures! how do you one
time Rumble like a Brewers empty Cart, another while d^il you meters miserably
on a sled: Certainly (Sir) i^ you had been that Poet that presented the Poem
to Alexander* and was to receive as Recompense a buffet for every bad line, you
had been buste^ed to death, thou you had had as many lives as nine Cats:
Verily had you had Orpheus place in the Fable, you ^ad put all your birds and
trees into a fright, instead of a Letalto, and your Thracian women out of mere
Revenge of your noise had done t^^t out of justice to you, which they did out
of cruelty to him: Verily had you been Amphion, and gone about to build the
walls of Thebes with Your Harp, the stones out of mere rage vv^uld have
mu^ined and pelted You to death. O Master Prynne, Master William Prynne, Master
William Prynne an utter Barrester of Lincolns-Inne* late a Member of the House
of Commons and now of Swainswicke in the County of Somerset Esquire. It Is
impossible that all the Rage of a drunken Imagination could have imagined, or
prophesid such a Bard as you are. Certainly, after you; we may say all
Monsters will be natural and quotidian* and that al^ men may do whatsoever
they desire or dream of. For I profess to you it is a Miracle to me, hovvever
it could enter into your thoughts to make Verses: subjects I am sure you could
not want; you might have been throwing the dust of Records in the faces of the
Bishops, you might have put on a fools Coat, called your self Tom-Tel-Troth,
and barkt against the Army, you might have busied your self about
Excommunication, or conquering Independencie, and propping up the House of
Lords; but so dismally to mi^carrie: to improve Rocks, (which certainly are
so^ter then your Meditatio^^) to man new Sea Compass, and quack Cordials, I am
lost, I am lost (great Sir) I am lost, this is too deep for me, and exceeds my
understanding.

For the quotations which are as delight^ull to you, as they are distasteful to
all Mankind else; but V^etins who loves you for it, and I could wish you to
consider whether the Ghosts of a many brave Authors ought not in all Justice to
hant and torment you? some of them you make stand on the Pillorie of your
Margents for no cause, some of them you make to bear fal^e witness, other
some you make tell half Tales, some of them you familiarly quote which you
never conferred with nor possibly saw, so that what with these courses, and
mistel^ing of Pages and Chapters, which are but Pec^adillo's with you, you make
them pure Knights of the Post, and swear what you will. Certainly, a man that
has this Faculty may prove what he will, and write Libraries, and i^ any man
ever had the Knack so dexterously as you, my Acquaintance, with Books is
either none or false. How do you fit them, as proving the Sovereign Power of
Parliaments (which Book I think you h^ve forgot you ever wrote) exactly quote
Moral sentences out of S^neca etc. What an Immense Annotation have you in your
Book against Cosens concerning Nile. How common i^st with you to prove out of
How Hollinshead* Fabian, Speed, Tailor, that R. 2. was murdered at Pontefract.
How naturally in your Arminianisme does bring men to disclaim opinions that
were not thought on while themselves lived? What rare Mosaic Work do you
make with sentences of Scriptures, and how cong^uously do you grave them on
the stones of the Mount* Orgneil. How aptly do you q^ote Poets by the page*
and sometimes bring in a piece of Tully by the Section* with all which
acc^utrements I can count you no better th^n an Indian with Feathers about you;
or if you will have it so I can compare you* to a Pedlars Pack-Horse, that
carries a^undance of Trinkets about him, which he can never either enjoy or use.

Iam dic Posthume de tribus capellis. Having with these considerations
disburthened my self of all fear, I know no Reason why I may not now descend
to a more particular consideration of your last Book, and the rather because it
vainly threatens so much, and according to your usual fate produces nothing.
Nay indeed declares you a person Incapable of meddling with the question, as
having too scant a knowledge and too Purblind an insight to discuss it. For I
suppose, No Rational man will deny me, but that he would exactly examine the
justness of al changes of States and Commonwealths, Must have another
Touchstone* then the bare Municipall Laws of a Country, which commonly carry
the stamp of their invaders, or else being made out of the necessity of times,
are commonly declind by those men that desire to Innovate; No they are those
General and Royal Laws of Reason Nature, Nations and Necessity that must be
appeald to, by these all must examine and Judge, and as being fixed veritable
and universal, whereas particular Ordinances of any place are not so; but
being either Imposed by a power or become valid by contract, are no longer to
be obeyed, when that power is broken or contract dissolved.

But you (Master Prinne) do not go thus Rationally to work, nor Revitting
your discourse on some steady maxims arise up to a full and perfect view of the
General Laws, and then bring them home to the particular of our Nation, which
had been your only true and Regular method, and likelyest to make good what you
designed to your self, but instead thereof you decline all examinations of
Governments and their ends (a thing perhaps not to be treated of by one that
writes scans ped^ in vno) and most cruelly tormented with a many Presidents and
Statutes, which being either such as depended upon the will of them that
usurped rule over us, or at best such as best suited the wisdom of the times
that enacted them, I see not why they should preserve any more force then
reason, especially seeing that daily contingencies and notations of humane
things, call ever a fresh for new Laws, and fresh provisions: not to add that
the necessity of a time and occasion, the continual groans of the oppressed,
the concurrent and visible hand of providence may many times Warrant that which
to the strict formal Letter of the Law might seem otherwise. For certainly
every Law must be conceived so far sacred and inviolable, as it conduces to the
great design of the essential happiness of those for whom it was deviz'd*
and if so then suppose it, in it self and in the si good and profitable* yet
if it dash and enterpher with the maine end of Government, and that great
Arcannum of preservation, I suppose he cannot be called a Bad Citizen that out
of a just piety to his Country endeavors to break through it; or else rectify
it to its right intentions.

Thus much (out of a great deal else which I reserve as due and proper to
another place) I have set down; to the end you may perceive how unfortunate you
have been in grounding the question, as also that (if you please to take the
pains) you may by it examine over all your reasons, and find them all either
vain, sophistical or false. But lest you may be a wrighting some other Book
and therefore want leisure, or if you had le^sure might possibly be desirous to
save the pains, I shall to do you a curtesy, and merit of some of your
Proselits whom I may reduce, examine them one by one, though I cannot promise
^ither your Copiousnesse or Rancor.

Your discourse is founded upon a Sillogisme which taking up a page in you, I
am given to transcribe, but shall thus ^ully and faithfully a br^viate. That by
the fundamental Laws and known Statutes* No Tax ought to be Imposed but by the
will and Common assent of the Earls Barons Knights* Burgesses, Commons, and
whole Realm in a free and full Parliament* By Act of Parliament, all other are
unjust and oppressive, etc.

But this present Tax of 90000. l. per mensem was not thus Imposed.

Ergo, It ought not to be demanded nor levied, and you might in conscience and
prudence withstand it.

Your Proposition which you take as indubitable would in the first place be
stated and Rectified, because so many of your Reasons, and indeed your most
pressing, nay the very strength of the Assumption lean upon it, But you must
consider that though I agree with you, that no Tax ought to be laid but in
Parliament, yet I utterly dissent from you in the Acception of the word
Parliament, and though I grant you the whole Realm yet I do not extend it to
your Latitude; which I thus explain and confirm.

First, I take the Realm of England to be no other, But that People which God
and nature has planted in this Island, free from all humane power and positive
Law, save what they elect and constitute over themselves, or their
Representive (by their authority) enact for their good and welfare; and
therefore whatsoever power is not derived from them, ought not to be obeyed by
them, Nor the Laws Imposed by and under that power to be held any other then
Tirannicall and not binding.

That they are not under the Right of any foreign domination, I suppose you
leave me as granted, and therefore to consider them in themselves, we must look
whither they be a people naturally endewed with a free disposition of
themselves, (as was just now laid down) or else by the Laws of God, or their
own stipulation they ought to obey some superior power (whither in one hand or
many) which should Inviolably or unalterably rule over them.

If you can affirm this of Monarchy, you must ravell this consideration to
its first principles (as there is no better way to understand the making of a
watch then to take her in pieces) and consider what Right Kings have to Rule
over us; if they say from God, this is but ^ bare assertion; let them prove by
some signs and wonders that it is Gods declared will and we shall obey; if they
say all Kings are of God. They must prove how they come to be Kings; if they
say that in the Scripture God does favor and delight in Monarchy, let them
tell us what kind of Monarchy it is, and what limits God has appoi^ted both of
power and Law, for certainly if they Trespass never so little upon either of
these they are usurpers: If they say from nature (I study brevity here) let
them prove that nature makes one man to govern an other, nay such an other
number of people, and that themselves are they. If they say by compact and
choice of the people, let them produce it and its conditions, and then stand a
trial, whither the people could pass away the liberty of their successors, or
themselves upon breach of Trust or other considerations, Recall and annull: if
none of these will hold, they must necessarily be intruders and deposable upon
the first occasion.

All this I conceive remained to be proved before our Kings can affect their
Jus Regnands in so clear and safe a manner as the late CHARLES pretended to it.
But if they were only elected (as the supreme expositor the Parliament have
declared) then it evidently declares that in the height of their intrusion they
either could not stifle a remembrance of the peoples Right* or else by an odd
Arcanum Imperii practiced by the Primitive Roman Emperors) they were willing by
a specious show of liberty, to banish all offense and Recollection of their
Intrusion. And of election* questionless those that have power to choose have
power also not to choose.

Then secondly if Kings be not Integrall parts of our Parliaments,
Representatives or National meetings ('it is things I mind not words for the
people cannot all at once meet in Council) it will Porismatically follow that
the Lords being his vassalls, constitutes or at least but Councillors, are
not, as being not entrusted nor called thither by the people, who have the only
power to make their Deputies, and gives voices in their National meetings.

Thus much being gaind there will flow a Third, That will immediately invest a
supreme authority in those meetings, and this authority must needs make them
Judges of cases of necessity, and necessity oftentimes warranting, nay bidding
violent courses, some actions and carriages may be justifiable, nay laudable
and glorious in them that Immedi^tly concern the public weal, although they
vary from and throughout the Common Regular proceedings: Thus could no honest
Roman have blamed Cicero, though he had suspended the major part of the Senate
had they adhered to Cataline. Thus were the Tribins of the people never
accounted Traitors to their trust of preserving liberty, Notwithstanding they
often brought Laws to make a Dictator who had an unlimited power. Nor have you
Reason to storm with this Parliament, for voting the exclusion of part of
their Members (whereof your self were one) that had concurred in dangerous and
destructive pernicious Votes.

And now you may see how unsound your Proposition was, and how utterly the
State of the whole Syllogi^me is altered, for if you will but take along with
you what has been said, you will find their was an huge deal of Equivocation
and Fallacy in the words of Parliament and whole Realm, and therefore the
whole ought thus to be conceived.

That by the Fundamental Laws of the Nation what Tax is Imposed by the C^mmons
of the Realm in a free and f^ll Parliament, by Act of Parliament, and none
other, is lawful.

But this Tax of 90000. l. per mensem was thus Imposed, Ergo it ought, etc.

The Proposition is manifest out of what has bee^ said to the Assumption for
the present, I shall say thus much; That since King and Lords are no essential
parts of it, and that they make up the customary number, we have no Reason to
disavow them on that Tophick, some other Reason then must we search, and see
whither they were either lawfully called, or else since their calling some act
either done by themselves or others have in Law dissolved them. But for the
Legallity of their Assembling your self are so far from denying, that you found
some Arguments upon it; and I further justify that they immediately were
entrusted by the people, and that the Kings did put them into a course, not
give them Authority, (for if it had, then must all power Immedidately flow from
the King which we have denied) and therefore though the Right of the people
were at that time c^og'd with that load, there is no Reason but they might when
they could shake it off, and restore themselves to those Privileges nature
endowed them with. And therefore they must necessarily remain anauthoritative
Body after the decollation of the King as not sitting by him: But it is a
question according to the word of the Law, whither they ever can be dissolved
or no* the King not being alive to dissolve them. Howsoever you can distinguish
a King in the abstract, and concret and know that it is not his Personal
presence adds any thing to them: for otherwise your own books must rise up
against you, and all their actions since the Kings de^ertion will prove
un-Parliamentary.

We must see if there be any thing that in Law dissolved them (since they are
in origin a lawful Assembly) and that must either be by the King, themselves
or some external power: By the King it must be either by some act of his, and
that I think you are not ready to say, or by his remotion, and that we have
just now answered: if by themselves why ^it they? or show me an Act or
Ordinance of theirs why they should not: if from external ^^rce: external
force I say may violate it but cannot dissolve it* since the Speaker declared
his opinion two years ago, that nothing could dissolve this Parliament, But an
Act of Parliament, which you cannot produce either in your own sense or mine.

And now we see what miracles you have performed, and how according to your
manner you have es^oygn'd from the question; for it is not the Recital of a
many Impertin^nt Presidents with any slavish head, that has but the p^tience to
collect may muster up to weariness.

But a right stating and deduction of things, and a General view of the
question in its whole latitude that must convince and enforce in these cases,
For producing authorities though it may be of excellent use in proving matter
of fact or that things were so, yet it is not of much concernment when matter
of right or reason falls under dispute. For whosoever does rightly converse
with the writings and Records of former times cannot bu^ know, that since a
many things are spoken out of the sense and interest of the times. A many
things through decourse of affairs are altered from their Primitive reason, a
many things imperfectly related and circumstances of great light often omitted,
they are not at all authoritative to after times, save where a clear and
undeniable analogy of reason does apply and enforce them.

But least you may think I fraudulently elude the strength of your arguments
by these general avisos, I care not much if I put them (I mean the strength
and heart of them for you are very fatal in setting down things at length)
into a Catalogue briefly overthrowing those that are not Immediately,
Implicitly, or peremp^orily answered in the former pages, and putting the
others to no other trouble, but a bare rehersall, as things that carry their
confutations in their bowels.

Your First Reason is The Parliament is dissolved by death of the King. 2. Or
supposing it in being yet the Lords a^^ented not. 3. Suppose the Commons alone
co^ld Impose a Tax yet now the House is neither full n^r free if you will give
every man leave to be Judge of his own liberty, they can the best tell what
they think of theirs, an^ they have declared themselves free from any fear or
Restraint; and certainly it is one shrewd sign of it* in that they have
performed that under that which you call aw; which none of their Predecessors
in all their pretended l^^erty and fulness could ever atchieve; and if you
say they are not full and free because all their Members do not actually sit.
For my part I hold them freer, as being eased of so oppressive an humor, that
so long Rendered their Counsels abortive or unprosperous, yet in poi^t of
reason I see not why he should be entrusted with the liberty of a Country that
is an enemy to it. Or admitted into a Counsel whose ruin he is both by his
i^terest and opinion obliged to endeavor. Though the tenderness of the
Parliament is such that they Re^dmit all such as they can either with surety or
safety, and the obstinacy of the absent Gentlemen is such that they refuse to
comply with the ways of providence, and come into action, rather suspending*
themselves then being suspended. 4. Though it should oblige those places whose
Knights Citi^ens* Burgesses sit, yet, it cannot those whose etc. sit not. Now
ou^ of all your Presidents find me one that shall warrant this distinction for
that of the writ of wast will not do: for upon the same reason, the County o^
Dur^am, or such Buroughs as have no Members to sit for them are not tied by
any act of Parliament, as not consenting to it, and for any thing I see the
same reason should hold in those Counties or places whose Representatives
should be for some unquestionable crime thrust out of the House; Nay, why may
not this extend to absent Members? But I pray Sir consider that the House of
Commons must be considered as a collected body* and not as made of particular
persons, and that must be taken for its Ordinance which is the agreement of
all, or the m^jor part, without any other consideration of Individualls, save
sometimes the entering of a dissent, which may declare a private dislike, but
cannot disauthorize any thing.

For those two objections though you keep an hacking and slashing of them, yet
you do not at all infirm or destroy them, For I would gladly know of you what
radi^^ll distinction you can perceive, between businesses of greater and lesser
moment in the House as you seem to infer, I mean what difference you can make
between the House when it handles lesser businesses and the greatest, For
questionless it is an House still and has the same Privileges and authority.
Nor does your objection of the frequent summons make any thing for you, saving
that it proves it has been a custom to summon in absent Members, either when
their abillities were particularly a^anting or else the number of absent
Members took from the Majesty and Splendour, Not the necessity and being of the
House. 2. Though you suppose. They might make an House in cases of abso^ute
Necessity, yet you say their was never such a case as till now, that 40 might
expel 400 etc. To this I say that, Never was their so great a necessity* as
that of their suspension, as may ea^ily be demonstrated. 3. 'Twas the Army
suspended some Members indeed, but injured not the collective body, and
abundance absented either through disaffection, guilt, or suspicion; and
whereas you challenge them to show such a Law or custom, I cannot but laugh at
you. For if it be lawfu^l* it may well stand on its one legs, without such an
infirm and unproper stay If unlawful you will not expect any example should
make it so* For by the same reason every vice that can but parallel it self in
Zwinger or Lycosthenes, will soon be gilded into a virtue, and you your self in
every action you do and garment you wear, unless you can prove your
Grandfather did and wore the like, sin extremely* and herein at one dash
confu^e your whole Histrio-Mastix when by so many Presidents Records*
Iournalls, Historyes, Diarys, Ledgeer Books, An^alls Poems, Orati^ns, etc. it
can be proved that plays have been in former times acted and entertained into
the delig^ts of Princes, as your self write, confess, declare, acknowledge,
manifest, and prove by Authors in your Retractation to that purpose. 4. Then
Fourthly, since you stand so stiffly upon it, I challenge you to show me by any
Journall, Year-Book, Records, the time when forty was not accounted a
Parliament (though this far exceeds that number.) For 5. you say. Neither
Commons nor whole House ought to do it without K. or LL. Still Crambe ^is
co^^au; sed you not that Topic largely before, and do you now vomit it up
again? I do not now wonder at the faculty of squirting Books, when you have
this art of Repetition. Truly (voluminous Sir) methinks you are like Flaminius
his host who entertain his Noble gu^st with a great many various dishes, which
yet in the conclusion proved nothing but Swines-flesh, or rather to
Erisichthon's daughter who though she were sometimes sold under the shape of a
Cow, sometimes of an ass, sometimes of a Sheep, was but still Erisichthon's
daughter, and therefore who knows one of your Book knows all* and who confutes
one confutes them all. Only I advise all that shall hereafter have to deal
with you* to meddle with you no otherwise then the great Grotius did with a
learned man that spoils and looses abundance of brave learning amidst his
volumes instead of answering the Book to confute the contents. So would I
interdict any man further Commerce with you then the Title (which is ever the
best of your Books) and having confuted that* to sit down in quiet.

For your answer to the second objection* (which sneaks in at the Back door*
and stands like Ela in the Gamuth, and no wonder, for a man of your h^ste may
easily forget Importancies.) viz. That the present Parliament shall not be
dissolved unless by Act of Parliament, by the Statute of 17. Car. 'swas
con^uted ^ut of what has been already spoken* and has been already touched
upon you. But to come closer to you, that if the Kings Person were so necessary
a business, with what face did you justify their proceedings without when he
was at O^ford? or if the form o^ writ calling them together to con^u^t with
him Render them a mere Juncti^^o of his, and no longer a body then he lends
them a soul, what miserable, and slavish people were we, whose National
Counsels were to depend upon the will and pleasure of one man, as though we
had been created for no other end, and cast hither by providence only to make
so many vassalls for a Tyrant. But I hope* Master Prinne you know better what
the safety of a people is, then to adhere to so miserable Rules, which being
commonly struck from the present occasion, cannot prevent all inconveniences,
and therefore must be Subject to change, and alteration; and with what prudence
can you ^rge that your Act was only intended as to your l^t^ King not to his
Heirs and Succ^ssors (your reasons are so tr^fling I pass them) when you know
the King of England never dies? and it is an horrid thing that the welbeing of a
people should depend upon the truth of one who is but a Bubble and must dye
like ^ man. For suppose in that heavy conjunctu^e of time (which produced the
act) King Charles had put off his Mortality, either the best Parliament that
ever was, should have broke up and left us both in the present hazard of
affairs, and danger of never any more Parliaments; or else the Supreme Right
of the People and necessity would have confuted what you assert. Besides the
Parliam^nt was called for such and such ends, and if the King had dyed before
the fulfilling, had it not been m^erly an illusion and a frustration o^ the
very act, which even ob^^g^ them to the accomplishment of such and such things.
But methinks that clause which you so Ingenuously quote cleers the Business, and
that every thing ^r things whatever done or to be done for the adjour^ment or
proroging or dissolving of the present Parliament* contrary to the present Act,
shall he utte^ly void and of none effect, upon this score the Anti-Parliament^t
Oxford was counted unlawful, and the Kings disclaiming them (^or a while) of
none effect. But (say you) the Kings death cannot properly be said a thing done
or to be done by him, for the adjournment of the Parliament contrary to this
present Act, cannot make the Kings death void and of none effect, by restoring
him to life again.

Spectatum admi^^i Risum T^neatis Am ici! But pray Sir, is not death a
privation? what talk you then of it as an Act and of a privation you will not
say it has any thing positive, the King has done nothing by it whereby to
dissolve and raise the Parliament.

I shall add, only you stand so strictly upon poor Formalities* why you may
not as well say that the Parliament is not at al because their are no Bishops
in it, as well as you say about Loros: For you cannot be ignorant how far in
these dark times of superstition the Bishops have incro^cht, (and why should
Presidents for the Temporal Lords be more inviolable then for them) insomuch
that they once came to a contest of Precedence, which certainly they would
never have done without some assurance of themselves and interest, and
therefore it was no more Injury to the Lords Temporal to be dispossessed then
for the Spiritual, they being both derived from one power; and though you will
say the latter were ejected in a free and full Parliament, and so not the
former, yet I think I proved other whilst I had in hand your Syllogism, and
must now tell you, I conceive not what more Right or title the one have then
the other, and why they may not as well be disrobed of these Privileges, which
are both unnec^ssary and burdensome and to speak freely, Superior to any other
in Europe, and Incon^istent with the liberty of our Nation.

I shall not much trouble my self with your disingenuitie in quo^ing the
Parliaments former Declarations against them, since that They have been as good
as their words in procuring the liberty of the Nation, and what they do^ at
this present is merely out of public necessity and safety; But I must tell
you, that of all men living you ought the least to encounter your adversaries
out of the^r own writings, since your own do abo^^d with such strong monstrous
Contradiction and forget^ulnesse, that a man may suppose you change ^ou^es as
often as you do shirts, or else there is an unanimous conspiration in mankind
to adopt all absurdities whatsoever under your Name.

And now have I (thank the courtesy of my fates) fully surveyed your first
Reason, and truly if your other Nine take me up as much time, I shall with
difficulty wade through the rest of this inglorious task, and I am afraid,
obtain your faculty of Multiplication of lines, and in stead of your adversary
turn your Scholar: like Julian the Emperor, that essayed at first what he
could say against Christianism, but at last exercised himself into a loss of
it.

And now for your second Reason, which tells us that there are some sit in the
House who ought not to sit, some whose Elections have been Voted void, some
chosen by a new great Seal since the Kings death, some that are Noblemen, and
therefore incapable of sitting there etc. But stay; bring me but one example or
president where the illegality of Election deprived the Parliament (which must
ever be considered in the Aggregat not dis-junctively) of its authority, and
Right, sure we have proved them a Parliament and supreme, why may not they make
a Seal and use it, and for the Lords (since their House is broke up) why should
the people be denied their liberty of choosing, or the Lords (without any
demerit) their capacity of sitting.

For your scruple at the Oath of Allegiance, I see not how it obliged further
then civil obedience in lieu of civil protection, or why it should oblige
longer then the power that imposed it had existence, or why it should oblige a
man to a perpetual pertinacy contrary to his judgment and conscience: Till I
be satisfied in this, I must put away all your Arguments of this hea^, and in
the mean time Recruit you to that judicious and learned piece of Mr. Asch^m
concerning this subject and truly if you want emp^o^ment you would do well to
gnaw a little upon that file.

The Third you learnedly draw from the ends of your Tax, which being two, you
accordingly branch your Argument into two heads; The first whereof the
Maintenance of my Lord Fairfax his A^my, and to this you answer That their
notorious defections and Rebellions have made them unworthy of pay. To this I
say, you in your confused Catalogue of their misdemeanors, you lay many things
to their charge, which are not properly theirs, a many things you mistake, and
many things you falsely suggest: so that he that pares off your exaggerations,
and considers them nakedly, will find them an illustrious brave sort of people,
particul^rly favored by Providence, and worthy all the encouragement and care
of this State. Then secondly you say No ^ax ought to be imposed but in case of
Necessity (let any judge, whether there be not a Necessity for this Tax!) But
you say there is no necessity of keeping up this Army for these strong Reasons.

The Kingdom is exhausted with seven years Taxes, and therefore for saving a
little, money now must be utterly ruined, and as though you in all your reading
could want examples how often such a base parsimony has bin fatal to people
and Cities. 2. The decay of Trade, as though a petty payment hindered either
Importation or exportation, or slackned men's endeavors, or as though that
money were not spent among the people that pay it, and so there can be no
decrease in the main stock. But a decay of Trade must ever be expected in or
immediately after a civil^ w^rre, and so you lodge this cause amiss. 3* It
destroys trade, why did you not tumble this with the former, for they both
came to one head; Still you ^urn to your vo^ it of impertinency and largenes^e.
4. There is no visible enemy in the field, and therefore not in Houses or
abroad; Do not you know Ma^ter Pri^ue that an enemy is not quite vanquished
when he is forced to give the field, but so long as he has animosities,
grudges, opportunities, encouragements, hopes, is to be feared, and therefore
for any people to gull themselves in such a mad security can be no other then
to fall a sleep, that their enemies might with the better convenience, cut
their throats. Besides you cannot be ignorant that that Thing which you call a
King hovers and flutters over, and if he could but engage any foreign Prince
on his desperate lost fortunes, would come over, and see if he could set up the
Dagon of Monarchy once more amongst us, and you would have us tamely cast away
our swords, that he might with more liberty exercise those cruelties upon us,
and that either his indignation, revenge, flatterers, or possibly Inclination
might suggest unto him. 5. This was but at first established 40000 l. per
mensem and after 60000. But why 90000 l. now since those for Ireland of that
establishment, Thou know not it seems Will, Prynne, Nor thy Neighbors at
Swanswick that there are a great many new forces raised, and their are a great
many there already to be maintained. The Country Militia's might serve, the
form of them in secure time is good enough, But not in the midst of such
contingencies as we daily see, and if we be at present so surrounded with
enemies, as who knows we are girt with both extremes which now begin to close
and unite into one, why should we dissolve any Army of choice and brave
Veterans, for a sort of Raw country fellows, that neither have the courage nor
the art of fighting; not to mention the just causes of distrust of them, which
though you endeavor to remove, yet you do nothing, for you say, 1. These men
may enforce an Army till Doomesday; as though their politic capacity took away
their natural of Dying, or that things would be ever in their present
insecurity. 2. If they dare not trust the People, why should the people trust
them? (this I think is your sense for you are long and cloudy and want an
expositor) The strong Retort! they will not follow the humor of the R^bble,
and therefore the Rabble ought to get up on the Saddle; and act the bold
Beauchamps upon the Commonwealth. 3. The Gentlemen of England have little
reason to trust this Army that have violated their Laws, and say all is theirs
by conquest. Reader! understand this in the contrary sense, and Master Prinne
is in the Right. But he should have told where ever the Army aver'd all was
theirs by conquest, or if ever any private man said so, and if some had said
it, why the integrity and actions of all shall be blasted through the vapor or
Surquedry of a private Soldier.

Now to the second part of the same tune* the second End of this Tax is for
Ireland, which was but at first 20000. l. now 30000 l. To this you say, 1. That
by Statutes, etc. No Freemen ought to be compelld to go in person, etc. Or to
pay Taxes, etc. without their consents in a free Parliament, such an one you
deny this present to be, and I contrariwise affirm it, and have demonstrated
it, and so farewell this Argument. 2. Most of those Ancient forces are revolted
and declared Rebels, and therefore this Parliament shall not avail themselves
of others in their Rooms. 3. Many now pretending for Ireland has been
obstructers of its relief. This is a strong Argument against the Legalitie of
the Tax. 4. The relief of Ireland is not now upon the first just and pious
grounds. ('It Is false they are now just the same.) But to join with Owen Roe;
the Parliament have disclaimed the actions of two brave men in that affair.
Notwithstanding the prudence advantage and necessity of it; which certainly
cannot but declare that they are not over affected with him and his Interest.

Your Fourth Reason is the coercive power and manner of Levying this Tax, as
though upon cases of necessity and Imminent danger a State must want necessary
relief, because such and such a skittish person is not satisfied, and if we
see that many actions of private men (otherwise illegal) are justified by
their subordination to the public. How much more must we think of
Commonwealths themselves in whom the chief care and trust of preservation is
reposed; which how they could be endowed with, know not I, unless they had
also a power to enforce those reliefs, which necessity and reason of Sta^e so
usually require, and therefore your First reason that they ought not to
distraine is nothing, since it determines not in what cases it is unlawful to
distraine, and you withal take it as granted that this is an unlawful Tax. 2.
For Imprisonment; It hangs upon the same false supposition as the former, and
all you can instance who has been imprisoned upon this Act invalid; since a
many Laws come accompanied with a terror, which they also intend shall seldom
or never be put in execution. 3. Levying of Taxes by Soldiers was judged high*
Treason in Strafords case, as though there were not difference between a
Supreme authority and a Subject, a time of peace and War. 4. If any person
bring his Action at Law we shall be stopped by the Committee of Indemnity, as
though the Parliament (who are so much above all ordinary proceedings of Law)
ought not in Justice to protect those who execute their just Commands.

Your Fifth Reason is; The tune sticks much with you, for if we have such a Tax
in the first year of Englands declared freedom, what shall we have in the
second, etc.

To this I answer Evax! vah! there wants a Comma, to express Irrision and
Indignation.

Your Sixth, Is the order or newness of Tax is is the first you find Jmpos'd
by the Commons House after the Parliament dissolved.

Lingua! thou strikst too much upon one string
Thy tedious plain-song grates my tender ears.
I thought this Argument had been thread bare enough to be used again, But no
matter it is your custom, but certainly, A man of your Employment and speed is
to be forgiven if he forget what he wrote three pages before; and yet this you
confirm with a not able reason (as you think) out of Ovids Remedio Amoris:
Principiis obsta, etc. a bu kin that may fit any fool, and clog any objection
whatever.

Your Seventh is the excessivenesse of the Tax. A main objection indeed, when
you were to treat about its Legality, but I must tell you occasions are also
excessive, as I told you when I answered your third Reason in which this your
seventh Reason (according to the usual Caball of your writing) was also
involved, I shall only add now that I wonder by what Arithmetic you
Calculate 90000 pounds per men's* to be half the Revenue of the Nation, and by
what Analogy of Reason; you instance the Imposition of the Popes Legate on the
English Clergy, to affront an Act of Parliament concerning the whole Nation.

Your Eighth (for I would gladly once be rid of you) is, the Principal
Judgment of this Tax is to free us from Free quarter, and you say* 1.
Free Quarter is illegal (and you make an ample citation for it) and so ought
to be taken off without any compensation. It Is true! but when there is a
Necessity of keeping up a Soldiery whether of the two evils is to be chosen:
and secondly, you say, That they have often promised to take off Free quarter,
but still as soon as Contributions were paid, there was as much free quartering
as formerly, and therefore because some Underofficers are negligent, and some
Common-souldiers rude; An Act of Parliament must become invalid, although it
may be affirmed that the discipline of this Army is as regular and strict as
can be possible, and therefore it is not strange, if they be not subject to
such disorders as might commonly make such Companies of men both detestable or
hated, and yet certainly there are some among them very rare Myrmidons, if that
strange Tragae-Comedy of May 22. (a day it seems fatal to your strong-beer and
provisions) be true, for certainly (according to your Lamentations) it is as
dreadful and hideous as the breaking up of an Enchanted Castle, or some new
Commotion in the dolorous Cav^, or St. Patricks Purgatory.

To your Ninth (which in my understanding is the same with your third) the end
of this tax is not for defense of the Kingdom, but abolishing of Monarchy etc.

We affirm this for the defense of the Nation, and all the rest we confess.

To the Last, which you suppose chain-shot, but indeed is a squirt, whereas you
say, that in your poor judgment it will be offensive to God and good men.
Certainly God has stamped too many visible Characters of his favor upon these
proceedings, to withdraw his assistance from this Parliament, for prosecuting
that work which he is pleased with: and for good men; there are thousands think
it both necessary and fit to pay it. Scandalous to the Protestant Relegion. As
how? dishonorable to the English Nation, for bravely asserting their
liberties, and giving so fair an example of Magnanimity and bravery to Europe
and posterity, hindering the speedy settlement of our peace. Me thinks we are at
peace already, if you mean a peace with C. Stewart, cursed be the Peacemakers:
Engage Scotland and Foreigners to avenge the Kings death, (as though that Arm
that has hitherto held us up were shortened) and dis-inheritance of his
Posterity, who you say will be settled. Quid si coelum ruat? and therefore you
would have us accept of C. Stewart, and jumble up a Peace. Certainly, Mr.
Prynne) if you had but the least dram of a considerate person within you, you
could not but know that the Reestablishment of the King of Scotland among us,
were somewhat worse the an Anarchy, and that a peace with him were more
dangerous and destructive then any war, for if we will consider his attaining
the Crown of England according to the principles of his own party, we may find
it a business so horrid and detestable, that none but a Cataline could lend a
wish to it: Either certainly he must come in by Foreign Conquest, or under
pretense of his old Title, or else by Admission and Constitution of the People:
if the first, what English man can conceive it either safe or honorable? What
man would not dread to be scourged by Foreign force? or whether are such
auxi^iaries safe or no to him that employes them? or by what Law or Justice
could He bring in people of strange Tongues or habits to subdue those people,
whose father he pretends to be? or who must give account for the blood that
must necessarily be spilt in such a quarrel? or where will there be found
wealth in an exhausted Nation to satisfy the Avarice of strangers, make up the
losses of homesufferings, and reward deservers? Questionless the Outrages of
Marius and Scilla, and the Spanish butcheries in America would be but petty
Executions to what the Victor (armed with rage and revenge) would inflict, and
we should suffer; and how many brave lives would be taken away, and made
sacrifices to the ghost of our last King, it is Perfidy and disloyalty (me
thinks) to the majesty of the People of England to imagine the sadness of
these consequences; Nor see I how those of the second head are much milder; For
suppose him like Titus, or our Henry the Fifth, bettered by his access to
Government, and that he dealt with this People as Tender and cautiously as any
man under heaven could do. Yet were not our weakness able to endure that
alteration. For if it has cost so much blood and Treasure to come to the point
where we are. A Relaps must needs be considerably worse, seeing it would be
impossible to eradic^^e Memories and Revenges; but the dregs thereof would
stir the prevailing party to some Insolensies which the spirit or condition
of this people were unable to endure, and what this would by degrees come to;
It is not safe to imagine: or if you would have it the third (as me thinks an
Elective King suits but ilfavouredly with your politics) methinks it were not
hard for the People to find out some hand to which (in case there were either
Necessity or Reason for such a change) they might entrust their liberties,
better then with one who coming from an unfortunate Family, scourged for many
Generations with Tragical and untimely ends, and now a long time groaning
under the Anger of Divine Justice, must in all reason and probability export
the consumma^ion and accomplishment of the same Fa^e. Not to say that a filial
alleagiance may oblige him to some savagenesses, which could not at all fall
under the interest of another person, and that education and continual
infusion of the same Machivilian Councels, must necessary make him bend his
Government that way, which has been so detestably oppressive to three Nations,
that they preferred a long, sharp and unnatural war, before durance under it.

For your Transcriptions out of John Lilburn's Book of June 8. I shall not say
much, because it is indeed his work (excepting a few idle glosses of your own)
and it is you that I only have at Task and Time, and besides that book has
been fully answered in another place, only give me leave to fix a Remark upon
your violent and furious malice that so blinds you, that you seize upon any
thing (though never so unjustly or indiscreetly) that may the least contribute
to the dishonor of that Senate from whence your demerits have so worthily
ejected you: that Lilburn whom not many months since, you called liar,
detestable liar, notorious liar, whom you writ against in several of your
Treatises, and loaded with all those Calumnies and Reproaches which an
^xulcerated malice, or a debausht Pen could cast upon him; now, when he begins
the least to close with you (though God knows upon different ends and
principalls) is no more an Abaddon, a Fury, a disturber, but a grave veritable
authentic Classic author, and one whose excellent writings (for never in all
this world were two pens so like) must contribute above ten pages to the latter
end of your book.

And besides, consider what Reputation it is to you, that seem to carry the
face of a grave civil writer, to stuff your material books (and this indeed
I think you conceive one of your Masterpieces) with such large Contributions
of the most unworthiest pamphlets, which the disease and intemperance of a
depraved time can vomit up amongst us. Consider it I pray you, and flatter not
your self with any hope that the world will continue to expect any thing else
from you then dirt and Ribaldry, and that your books will carry any other
desteny with them (as being all born under such bad ascendents, and untoward
aspects)* then had the Cardinal Compegio's Sumpters, which though they marched
in a magnificent and sightly array, were (upon a little bolder examination)
found to be stuffed with old boots and rags, and such like Trumpery.

And now before a close give one (who though he be much inferior to you both
in years, and acquired Knowledges, yet has spent the small time he has lived
in the best observation of men and things that he could) to be a little serious
and Remonstrat unto you somewhat, which being spoke by them that have the most
charity, and best wishes for you; cannot but if you follw it, bring repose unto
your self, some content to the world, ease to the Stationer, and possibly make
the Catalogue of indiscreet busy men less by one: You are of an honorable
profession, do not dishonor it by a Continuation of your lybelling. In that
orb you may Arrive to some estimation, but when you stray out of it, you are a
Traitor to your own credit, and do your self that same disrepute which your
enemies could wish unto you; if you stay where Providence has placed you: your
presidents, and bulkish quotations may be of use and service, but when you
break your ^edder, you run wild, and like Ajax in the Trajedy, fight with sheep
in stead of men; for it seems that All-seeing wisdom has not designed you a
master of those knowledges which direct and enable the mind of man to judge and
examine the changes of humane things, and therefore it were no more but your
duty rather to sit still with a sober Acquiesce and acknowledgement of that
knowledge you now enjoy; then vainly and wildly to run in such paths whither
neither your stars nor Genius seem to lead or prosper you.

Another thing is, that this continual kicking at the present power, shows you
to have somewhat of the Salamander in your nature, and that like the Camel you
list to drink of no waters which your feet have not troubled, and therefore
you would do your self much more right with all that are to judge you, if you
discreetly and patientl^ complied with all the outgoings of Providence, and
would not murmur at some dispensations, which it seems God would have to be no
otherwise: and therefore give me leave to conjure you to manage your leisure
better then in producing such filthy ill-natured pamphlets as you almost every
day belch out against the State, which protects you; Or that if you must needs
write, you would be pleased to inhibit or suppress them, and by that means
save the charge of brown paper for Roast-meat and pye-bottoms: or else
according to Horace his advice, let them serve a nine years apprenticeship at
the druggists, which if they serve, you might try whether you your self had
the patience to read them, and so learn to forgive others that could not: But
if none of this will do* and you are deaf and inexorable to your own purposes;
we must give you up as incurable, and say, the spirit of sedition and Jenkins
has enterd this man, and the Blatant-Beast (in Spencer) is never like to be
bound again so long as she survives in you. Fare ye well.

The End.

