To the Kings most excellent Majesty.
The humble Petition of the Baronets, Esquires, Ministers, Gentlemen,
Freeholders, and others peaceably affected in the County Palatine of
LANCASTER.
Showing to your Sacred Majesty,
Our heartbreaking sense and sorrow for the unhappy Rents and Distractions in
your Majesty's Dominions, especially in the time of the Session of so grave and
godly a^ Assembly (most graciously convened by your Majesty) endeavoring the
Glory of Almighty God in the Reformation of Religion, and the Honor and Weal
of your Majesty, and your Realms in settling and securing of your Royal Throne
in plenty and peace. But perceiving the long and remote distance of your
Majesty from that Honorable Assembly to have distracted the hearts of your good
Subjects, and animated the Popish and Malignant party among us, and fearing it
may expose us to the danger and fury of a foreign foe, retard the settling of
the weighty affairs in our Land, and the subduing of the Rebels in Ireland,
and finding your Majesty's late Resolution for that Expedition to threaten
danger to your Royal Person, far more worth then ten thousand of us.

We therefore your Majesty's most loyal Subjects out of our zeal to Gods true
Religion, your Majesty's Honor and safety, and the peace and welfare of your
Dominions, and out of the deep sense and apprension of our interest in the
same, do in all humility present and prostrate our selves and supplication at
your Royal feet, beseeching your Majesty to return to your great Council (the
Representative Body of your Kingdom) in whom this Nation has so far confided,
that they have entrusted them with their lives, liberties, and in which
multitude of Counsel^ours, there is health and steadfastness, and whereby your
Royal Throne may be established in Righteousness, and we with the rest of
your faithful Subjects shall continually praise and pray for your prosperous
and happy Reign over us.

At the Court at York, XIth May. 1642.
His Majesty has expressly Commanded me to give you this his Answer to your
Petition.

THat this Petition (as some others of this Nature) is grounded upon
misinformation, and (being grieved and highly offended to see how his good
People have been, and are abused by false Rumors and Intelligences (which have
procured causeless fears, and Apprehensions) refers the Petitioners to the
Answers he has given to the Declaration presented to him at New Market, and to
the Petition presented to him the 26. of March last at York, wherein his
Majesty faith, you will clearly perceive that he is not gone, but driven from
his Parliament; His Majesty likewise for your further information of His
proceedings and intentions, recommends to your view and consideration his two
Messages and Declaration concerning Hull, and his Message touching the Reasons
of his refusal to grant the Militia: all which when they shall be fully
represented to the rest of your County, he doubts not but that you will rest
very well satisfied of his constant Resolution for the maintaining of, and
governing his People by the Law of the Land, his unmovable resolution for the
maintenance, and defense of the true Protestant profession, and the Suppression
of the Barbarous Irish Rebellion: And his Majesty faith, that he believes you
may then find reason to Petition the Parliament to Comply with his Majesty's
just Desires and gracious Offers, which is the only way safely and speedily to
Cure the present distractions of this Kingdom and (with Gods Blessing) to put
a happy end to the Irish Rebellion, for the effecting whereof (as his Majesty
has often said) he will neither spare pains, nor decline any hazard of his
Person or Fortune.

Edw.Nicholas.

Printed at London by A. N. for John Frank. 1642.


