THE HVMBLE PETITION OF THE MERCHANT-STRANGERS, and others in the City of
LONDON, concerned in the Importation of Plate and Bullion into this Kingdom.
Presented to both Houses of Parliament.

WITH AN ORDINANCE OR DECLARATION OF THE LORDS and COMMONS Assembled in
Parliament, Concerning the said PETITION.

Die Sabbathi 26. Augusti. 1643.
ORdered by the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, that this Petition,
with the Ordinance concerning the same, shall be forthwith printed and
published.

I. Brown Cler. Parliamentorum.

LONDON, Printed for John Wright in the Old Bayley, Aug. 28. 1643.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THE LORDS and COMMONS now Assembled in Parliament.
The humble Petition of the Merchant-Strangers, and others concerned in the
Importation of Plate and Bullion into this Kingdom,
Shows,
THat the Petitioners Correspondents have forborne to lade their Plate and
Bullion in English Ships, as formerly they have done, by reason of the Visits,
Search, Arrests, and Molests which have been lately attempted and used for the
finding out or seizing of the said Plate and Bullion, which has been a great
hinderance to the Petitioners, and a general damage to this Kingdom. For by
the Importation thereof, many Ships were employed, the Navigation increased,
the Owners encouraged to build and maintain good Ships, great profit by the
Coinage, and by the low Exchange, Merchants had plenty of Money to employ in
the Manifactures of this Kingdom; and generally the whole Kingdom has been,
and is, enriched by the said Treasure that comes in and remains in the
Kingdom. And the Petitioners are very confident, That if they could give their
Correspondents assurance by an Ordinance of both Houses of Parliament, That
their Plate and Bullion may for the future be imported in English Ships
without any molest or interruption, with Declaration that they should also have
and enjoy the full benefit of the Articles of Peace made with Spain, that then
they would employ English Ships again, and remit their Plate and Bullion,
and other Goods to Dover, as formerly they have done: And for the real
effecting hereof, and better encouragement of the Parties concerned, and for
the removing of all Doubts and Iealousies for the future:

The Petitioners humbly pray this most Honorable Assembly, to make an
Ordinance according to the tenor of this Petition, or as in your Wisdoms
shall be thought fit, and that this Petition, together with the said
Ordinance, may be printed and published by Order of both Houses of Parliament,
and they permitted to send them abroad, for the timely prevailing and effecting
of a work of so much importance to this Kingdom.

And the Petitioners shall pray.

AN ORDINANCE OR DECLARATION OF THE Lords and Commons.
Assembled in Parliament.
Die Sabbathi 26. August, 1643.
The Lords and Commons now in Parliament assembled, having received information
by a Petition of Merchant-strangers, and others, concerned in the importation
of Plate and Bullion into this Kingdom, That their correspondents inhabiting
in the parts beyond the Seas, have conceived many fears and jealousies which
might discourage them in the usual importing of Bullion into this Kingdom;
For the better security and encouragement of all Traders and bringers in of
Bullion or Coin into this Kingdom, do Declare, and Ordain, That Bullion and
Coin, that shall be brought into this Kingdom, by any English shipping, shall
have free and safe passage and protection, as in any former times; both by Sea,
and Land, into the Ports of Dover and London: and accordingly into, and out of
His Majesty's Mint in the Tower of London, without any interruption.

FINIS.

