The humble Petition of the COMMONS of KENT, Agreed upon at their General
Assizes.

Presented to His MAJESTY August the first, 1642.

With certain Instructions from the County of Kent, to Mr Augustine Skinner,
whereby the Desires of the said County may be presented by him, to the
Honorable House of COMMONS.

With His MAJESTY'S Answer to the aforesaid Petition.

At the Court at YORK, August 4. 1642.

Printed by his Majesty's special command, At CAMBRIDGE, By ROGER DANIEL,
Printer to the famous Universitie. 1642.

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms

To the Kings most Excellent Majesty: The Humble Petition of the Commons of
KENT, agreed upon at their General Assizes.
Most gracious Sovereigne;
WE do, with all thankfulness, acknowledge Your great Grace and favor toward
us, and the whole Kingdom; In passing many good Laws for the benefit of Your
Subjects; In promising to ease us of all our grievances; And graciously
inviting Us by Your Letter directed to the Judge of Our Assize, full of Love
and Care for Your Peoples good, to petition for redress of them, promising a
gracious Answer: And we should with all humility have presented them to Your
Majesty at this time, did not the present great distractions and apprehension
of a Civil War (which we earnestly pray to God to divert) put us beyond all
thought of other grievances. For prevention whereof, we have with all Loyalty
of Heart to Your Sacred Majesty, with all Love and Faithfulness to our
Country, presented our humble advice in certain Instructions, to one of our
Knights of the Shire now here present with a Committee from the House of
Commons, to be presented by him to that Honorable House: The Copy whereof we
make bold to annex unto this Petition.

Most humbly desiring Your Excellent Majesty, That if it shall please the
Houses of Parliament to satisfy Your Majesty's just desires in these
particulars, That then Your Majesty would be graciously pleased, to lay down
Your extraordinary Guards, and cheerfully meet Your Parliament, in such a place
where Your Sacred Majesty and each Member of both Houses, may be free from
tumultuary Assemblies;

And as in all Duty bound, we shall daily Pray for Your Majesty's long Life,
and prosperous Reign over us.
Instructions from the County of Kent, to Master Augustine Skinner, whereby the
desires of the said County may be presented by him to the Honorable House of
COMMONS.
WHereas a Committee from the House of Commons is now sent down to the Assizes,
upon a credible Information (as they say) that something should be done to the
Disturbance of the Peace of this County.

We, the Commons of Kent, require you Master Augustine Skinner (as our Servant)
to certify to that Honorable House, That you found the County in full Peace,
and that there is no ground for any such Information, and that you desire, in
our Names, to know the particulars of that Information, (of which it seems you
are ignorant, and the Informer) that this County may have full reparations in
Honor against so scandalous an aspersion cast upon them; and that the
Informer, of what quality soever, may receive condign punishment. And that the
House of Commons may understand our desires, not only to preserve the Peace of
this County, which (with Gods blessing, and the help of the good known Laws of
this Kingdom) we are confident we shall maintain, but also of the whole
Kingdom, being now in so great a distraction, that every Man stands at a gaze,
to see what the event is likely to be, and well weighing what a great fire a
small spark may kindle; abhorring and detesting the thought of a Civil War:
We farther require you to offer our humble advice, as Faithful and Loyal
Subjects to His Majesty, and good Patriots and Lovers of our Country, for
settling the Distractions of these times. One principal means to effect it, we
conceive will be to give His Majesty full satisfaction in His Just Desires, in
these four Particulars.

1. In presently leaving the Town of Hull in the same State it was before Sir
John Hothams entrance into it; And delivering His Majesty His own Magazine. 2.
In laying aside the Militia, until a good Law may be framed, wherein care may
be taken as well for the Liberty of the Subjects, as the Defense of the
Kingdom. 3. That the Parliament be adjourned to an indifferent place, where
His Sacred Majesty, all the Lords and Members of Your House of Commons may meet
and treat with Honor, Freedom, and Safety. 4. That His Majesty's Navy may be
immediately restored to him.
Our Reasons are these. 1 For withdrawing your Garrison out of the Town of
Hull, we are persuaded your fears and Jealousies of foreign forces, of French,
or Danes, or of the Papists at home (an inconsiderable Party, especially being
disarmed) are long since vanished, the Magazine or a great part of it being
removed to London, we conceive Master Major of Hull may safely keep the Town as
before. 2. For laying aside the Militia, we are free from Jealousies of Foreign
Forces, so that you may have time enough to frame a lasting Law, which
notwithstanding, for fear of Inconvenience to the Subjects Liberty, you may, if
you so think fit, make the Law a Probationer. Besides, His Majesty, if occasion
should be, is vested with sufficient power to raise forces for the Defense of
the Kingdom, for which only we are confident His Majesty will employ them.
And we should hold our selves worse then Infidels, if, after so many
Protestations to maintain the True Religion by Law established, the Subjects in
the Liberty of their Persons and Propriety of their Goods, and the Privileges
of Parliament, and that He will Govern us by the known Laws of the Land, we
should not with full assurance, believe in Him and confide in Him. 3. For
adjourning the Parliament to another place, His Majesty has expressed the
Reasons, That He was driven away by tumultuary Assemblies, and that he cannot
return thither with Honor and Safety: And diverse of the Lords are absent, who
promise to return back to the House, when they may sit with the Liberty, and
that condition that the Peerage of England formerly have done, secured from all
menaces, or demanding any Account of their particular Votes; which we conceive
to be against the Freedom of Parliament, which by our Protestation we must
maintain, and from tumultuarie Assemblies: These having been the Occasions, as
we believe, that of near five hundred in the House of Commons, there are but
about one hundred and forty left to sit there, and the greater part of the
Lords gone away. 4. For the Restitution of the Navy, our Reason is, That the
Neighbor Nations do take notice, that His Majesty's Navy is detained from
him, which if not suddenly restored, may turn to His Majesty's dishonor, whose
honor, by our Protestation, we are bound to maintain.


Another means, we conceive, to settle the States and Minds of the Subjects, is
a free, general, and large pardon: which since His Majesty has so graciously
offered we desire and expect to receive, and if any Man do dislike it, he may
be excepted, and the generality of the Subjects not hindered of their good, and
His Majesty's Grace and Goodness.

His Majesty's Answer to the humble Petition of the Commons of Kent, agreed
upon at their general Assizes, and presented to His Majesty, August 1.
At the Court at York, August 4. 1642.
HIs Majesty has with great satisfaction in the Loyalty and Affection of the
Petitioners considered this Petition, with the Instructions annexed to their
Knight of the Shire, and has expressly commanded me to return this His Answer
in these words:

That the Petitioners are not more eased and satisfied with the good Laws His
Majesty has passed, then His Majesty Himself is pleased with that way of
obliging His Subjects, neither has He ever made the least Promise or
profession of repairing or redressing the grievances of His People, which He
has not been, and always will be ready to perform.

His Majesty cannot blame the Petitioners to be apprehensive of a civil
War, since the present distractions (grounded upon no visible cause, to which
His Majesty could, or can yet apply a remedy) threaten no less confusion. But
his Majesty doubts not, that the Petitioners and all His good Subjects, do
well understand, That His Majesty has left no way unattempted, which in
Honor or Wisdom could be consented to, to prevent that confusion.

That after so many Injuries and Indignities offered to Him, so many
combinations and conspiracies against Him, He departed so much from His own
Majesty, and the Justice due to it, That he required no other reparation, then
to have His Town, Goods, and Navy (taken and kept by violence from and against
Him) to be restored to Him: The power of making Laws without Him, by the way of
Ordinances (and that in particular, concerning the Militia) to be disavowed.
And that a safe Place might be agreed on, where He might be present with His
great Council, for the composing of all misunderstandings, and making the
Kingdom happy.

That before any Answer returned to His Majesty (whilst with all patience and
hope His Majesty forbore any action or attempt of force, according to His
promise) Sir John Hotham issued out of Hull in the Night, burned the Houses,
and murdered the Persons of his fellow subjects (though he knew His Majesty
quietly expected an Answer to His reasonable and necessary demands) and has
since exercised most barbarous cruelty upon a Drummer then taken prisoner by
him.

That those Propositions made by His Majesty, and mentioned by the Petitioners
in their Instructions, are dissented from, and His Majesty not suffered to
enjoy what is as unquestionably His own, as any thing His Subjects can call
most theirs, upon pretense there is some trust on foot to dispossess His
Majesty of them: Whether any such trust be derived from the Petitioners,
themselves best know.

That a General is made to command His Subjects against Him, and Forces
already marching with Cannon toward Him, under the conduct of the Lord Brook,
whilst all Labor and Endeavor is used, to cut off all Succor and Supply from
His Majesty, as from a Foreign Enemy.

When the Petitioners and all other His Majesty's Subjects have weighed this,
and considered that these strange unheard of proceedings must be the effects of
desperate Resolutions, and that all this calamity is brought upon this Nation,
to wrest from his Majesty His just Rights, when no sober man can see the want
of any thing which is in His Majesty's power to grant, and necessary for the
peace and full happiness of the Kingdom.

That when all encouragement is given, scandals raised, and provocations used
to incense the People against His Majesty, and to publish Petitions and
Declarations against the known Laws and established Government: The
Petitioners, and all other His Majesty's good Subjects (who out of a true sense
of the distraction and ruin the Commonwealth must speedily fall into through
these distempers have prepared sober and moderate Petitions and Animadversions
for the peace of the Kingdom) have been discountenanced, censured, and
imprisoned in a Lawless Arbitrary way, when no offense has been committed by
them, of which the Law has taken notice: That all their Rights, Interests, and
Privileges, which they were born to, by the good known Laws, are taken from
them, or subjected to an unintelligible Arbitrary power and resolution, which
destroys their confidence and assurance even in Innocence it self; They will
think it time to provide for their own security, by Assisting His Majesty for
the Defense of His Person, preservation of the true Protestant Religion, and
maintenance of the Law of the Land, and Liberty of the Subject; of the which,
as the Petitioners care is very eminent, and deserves all protection, thanks,
and estimation from His Majesty; So His Majesty will venture His Life and His
Crown with them in that Quarrel.

Lastly, lest any of the Petitioners may unjusty suffer for making or
presenting this humble, dutiful, and modest Petition to His Majesty; His
Majesty declares, That He will with His utmost power and assistance protect
and defend them against any power whatsoever, which shall question them for so
doing; And to that purpose advertiseth them, That they are not obliged to yield
Obedience to any Pursuivants, Sergeants, or Messengers, who shall endeavor to
molest them for doing their Duty, and discharging their Consciences therein.
And that the whole County of Kent may know His Majesty's gracious acceptance of
this expression of their Duty and affection unto Him: It Is His Majesty's
pleasure, that this Answer, together with the Petition and Instructions, be
read in all the Churches and Chapels of that County.

Falkland.

FINIS.

