The humble PETITION Of 85. Gentlemen and Freeholders, and 15. Ministers of
the County Palatine of CHESTER.

Preferred to His Majesty at YORK, the seventh of May, 1642. In behalf of
themselves and others.

Together with His Majesty's gracious Answer.

YORK: Printed by ROBERT BARKER, Printer to the Kings most Excellent Majesty:
And by the Assigns of JOHN BILL. 1642.

TO THE KINGS MOST EXCELLENT MAJESTY.
Humbly shows,
THat though our Fears and Distractions have been many and great, and much
increased by your Majesty's absence from your Parliament, yet were we never
destitute of hope, that the Fears and Prayers of your dutiful and
truly-affected Subjects might be powerful with your Royal Breast, so far as to
embrace, with tenderness, your whole Kingdom, in its representative Body, your
great Council. But now our Sorrows are doubled, our Fears multiplied, and even
the little hope we had fails us, hearing the report of your Majesty's
Resolution to undertake a dangerous voyage into Ireland, whereon we reflect
with much terror and amazement; yet we are confident your Majesty will pardon
our love and duty, if in our hearts we cannot consent to a Journey wherein your
Royal Person is exposed to variety of peril by Land and Sea, Wind and Water
making no difference betwixt the greatest King and the meanest Subject: and if
God (the Guardian and Preserver of Princes) should safely waft you over, yet
your Majesty's Person cannot, in our apprehension, be secure amongst so many
Popish, Cruel, and Barbarous Rebels, who have forgot Religion, Piety, and even
Humanity it self, murdering your Majesty's innocent Protestant Subjects,
without respect of Age, Sex, or Condition, thereby rendering themselves
unworthy, and incapable of any Grace or favor from Your Majesty, their
Actions calling for Your exemplary Justice upon them, and our hearts affections
imploring Your Gracious consideration of these ensuing particulars.

1 To comfort our hearts by deserting your journey into Ireland, and by
residing where you may with more convenience and security, consult with your
great Council.

2 To consider to what danger (if your Resolution for Ireland continue) You
expose us by the Popish Faction, when your Majesty shall leave us naked, we
not being put into a posture of Defense, to repel the rage and attempts of the
enemies to our Religion, who (we have too just cause to fear) but wait for an
opportunity to bring to birth their cruel Conceptions; and what so great
advantage can they hope for, as by your Majesty's absence.

3 To advise, Whether this Journey will not much retard the intended Relief
for Ireland, since upon the first Rumor, many who were minded to subscribe,
demur in their proceedings, and others wish they might recall what they have
subscribed, and not to deprive us at once of that poor remainder of hope we
have to reap further good by the endeavors of your Parliament, whereof we
shall despair, when your presence shall be wanting to perfect their Proposalls
and Conclusions.

4 To consider how David (that Religious and Valiant King) offering to go in
Person against his Rebels, was by his people (in the tenderness of his Person)
humbly dissuaded from that Resolution, they valuing his Person above ten
thousand of their own: which gracious and provident Petition David graciously
yielded unto, saying, What seems you best, that will I do; which we humbly
beg may be the effect of your Majesty's Answer to your humble Petitioners, who
forbear to press your Majesty with number of Persons, or multitude of Hands
(though plentifully enabled to either) knowing your Majesty's disaffection to
both.

And we shall ever pray, etc.
At the Court at YORK.9. May 1642.
His Majesty has given me express command to give you this His Answer to your
Petition.
THat He sees plainly that this Petition of yours has been framed without
having heard the Answer His Majesty gave to His Parliament, upon their
Petition to Him for desisting from His Journey into Ireland; for He cannot
think that that Country (from whence He has received formerly so good
expressions of their loyal Intentions, by two former Petitions presented long
since to Him and the Parliament) would have been so much mistaken, as to have
made this Petition, after they had seen and well considered His Majesty's said
Answer. And His Majesty observes very well, that this Petition is not like
others, which by an untimely Zeal, have desired Him to return to His
Parliament; you only desiring Him there to reside, where with more convenience
and security He may consult with His great Council, then by going into
Ireland: His Majesty being confident, That your well weighing of His Answers
concerning that subject, has been the cause that you have not imitated some
few other Countries in that particular; And that you have well considered the
Rebellious Affront offered to Him at Hull, by a hostile opposition of His
entrance; and therefore believes that the same Reason which made you, at this
time, express your tender care of His Person, and the former good expressions
you made of your Loyalty and right-set Affections to the good of the whole
Kingdom, may sooner induce you to petition the Parliament to apply themselves
to a right understanding of His Majesty's ways and intentions, and to do Him
Justice for that Affront, then make you to prefer any such ill-grounded
Petition. And that you may be the better informed of His Majestiesties
proceedings in those particulars; He recommends to your view and consideration,
His Answers, to the Declaration presented to Him at New Market, to the Petition
presented to Him at York the 26. of March last, concerning His journey into
Ireland, His two Messages and Declaration concerning Hull, all which, when it
shall be fully represented to the rest of your County, He doubts not but that
you will rest very well satisfied of His constant Resolution for the
maintaining of, and governing you by the Law of the Land, His unmovable
Resolutions for the maintenance and defense of the true Protestant Profession,
and the suppression and chastising of the barbarous Irish Rebellion. As for
your apprehensions of danger of being left naked, and not put into a posture of
Defense, His Majesty assures you, That He will take care that it shall be done
in the true old legal way which has been used in this Kingdom, without
bringing in strangers to govern you, or admitting new and exorbitant Powers,
derogating both from His Majesty's undoubted Legal Authority, and the Liberty
of the Subject which, as He has constantly denied, so He expects, and no ways
doubts, but that you will give Obedience to that, and that only, which shall
proceed from His Majesty in a legal way.

Subscribed by M. Secretary Nicholas.

FINIS.

