An Humble Motion To The PARLIAMENT Of ENGLAND Concerning The ADVANCEMENT of
Learning: And Reformation of the Universities.

By J. H.

LONDON, Printed for John Walker, at the Star in Popes-Head-Alley. MDC IL.

TO THE PARLIAMENT.
IT has been the usual method of that Eternal Wisdom in the pursuance of
any of his high Designs, to render his Instruments, while they continued
faithfully useful, full of honor and success: But when they once began
either to stand still, or look back; to decline that honor which he had
formerly cast upon them, and to wrap it up in a cloud of forgetfulness and
misery; and then raise up such other means, which though to the eye of Reason
they might appear contemptible, should carry on his great work to a just
period, and make a full assertion of his glory, in despite of all the wicked
cunning and resolution of men and the deepest Theorems of contrary policy.

That this Assertion is neither vain nor new, I need not call in the Aids of
any remoter Histories, if I appeal from the walls where you now sit in
counsel, to the eyes wherewith you now see, you will find as strange and as
noble an assertion of this Thesis, as was ever beheld by any Age or Nation. For
whereas at first you met together by the conduct of a strong Providence (which
in spite of all opposition and backwardness of these times and powers
assembled you together) and begun more seriously and courageously to weigh what
a heavy trust lay upon your shoulders; such of you who were early laborers,
cannot but with joy remember through what pangs and throws you were delivered
of the first attempt of Freedom; when that great Bugbear of a continual and
shining power (which though it endeavored to seem a great light of it self,
yet was only an opake dense body, and had no other splendor but the
reflection of yours) hung back, nay was possessed against you, when some
ill-behold on to their education had not shaken off those prejudices which
commonly attend men that judge according to their first thoughts; and others
who could not but make a right judgment of things* being either biased by
interest, or poisoned with hopes, grew cold toward you; what a labor was it to
make one head, (which had it followed the Law, might have as much obliged the
Nation as any whatsoever) an oblation to a betrayed and oppressed people? Nay
when that was done, and an Army not of our own Nation, with excessive care and
charge removed; how were you encumbred by a violent and sturdy humor, which
would not suffer you to make use of those little advantages of liberty which
you had ^lready gained, but assayed to return you under the ^ormer, if not a
severer Tyranny.

But the counsels of men were abortive, and you were reserved for greater
matters, that humor burst forth like an Impostume, and went out from you,
which had it continued within, and not professed open hostility, had been
dangerous, if not fatal. But when you were ^^ce left to your selves, you had
power to act more vi^^rously, and by a happy Antiperistasis to grow more
intense; so being closely united in the Center, you bravely brake through that
stiff circumference that beset you, and were made the Masters of many happy
and signal Victories.

Yet those Victories seemed notwithstanding to carry ^ ^ate with them; for
whereas your excessive lenity had permitted some of your conquered enemies to
lodge amidst you, they scattered such a quick and powerful contagion among
those whom you represent, and especially the chief City, that there were
apparent symptoms of a relapse, which was shortly followed by such a dangerous
sickness, that if you had not been miraculously aided with an almost immediate
hand of Providence, you had never overcome, and yet you suddenly, and ere your
selves could imagine, wrastled out of it.

But when your Victories were redoubled with these successes, there wanted not
some who sat in counsel among you, who to say no worse, either durst not, or
would not be courageous in following those opportunities wherewith Providence
courted you; nay they to retarded you by cunning cross debates, that your
^tter peace seemed far more dangerous to you, then ^ther of your former wars,
you standing struggling with this oppressive humor, and not discovering any
signs of motion, unless it were of Retrogradation; whilst you enabled your
conquered enemy to give you what was already yours, and stroke you with such
concessions, as you had far more reason to dread, then any of his former
Proclamations or menaces.

But how soon were all these corrupt counselors purged from among you, and
dis-inabled for to disperse any of their infection? whilst you being loosed
from those charms wherewith you before were maleficiat^* began to act
powerfully and smartly, and indeed performed more in a few months, then you had
done before in twice as many years, or your Ancestour^ could do in the double
number of Centuries.

I mention this with no other design, then for you^ glory (for you have
cleared our liberties, and set them now on the right Base, having by a
transcendent comprehensive piece of Justice, removed the common oppressor) and
also to tell you, that unless you do no^ also not rest here, but even run
forward to the end o^ that course to which the divine will shall by apparen^
signs direct you, the work will be taken out of you^ hands and put into
others, who finishing it with the li^^ and constancy which you ought to have
done, must expect that reward and honor which waited on you.

I say not thus much that either I fear it in you, o^ that I can gather any
even remote causes of fear, b^^ that I would from it say, that unless you do
absolutel^ alter the complexion and temper of the Common wealth, and endeavor
to your utmost to provide the best means to preserve it in the best
constitution for the future; all that which you have hitherto done for us, will
prove nothing, if not evil.

Now by what means this may be effected, I have neither vanity nor impudence
enough to direct you, especially since you seem to the exactest judgment of
man, ^o be as happy in re-erecting, as you were fortunate in ^^l^ing down, and
to take such a course both in matters (...)e, Civil, and Military, as may, as
much as possible (...) or render abortive all the machinations of future
^^^ch^efe, and avoid those errors and imperfections ^^ich cannot be exempted
from humane Laws. But ^et (as here you must be acknowledged for res^^ing that
liberty which warrants this freedom) all ^^ese cares, which are so pious, so
noble, so worthy of ^^ch Lawgivers, will be found neither intense nor large
^^ough, if ye remit one grand consideration which must ^^^fuse it self through
all, and knit them together; ^ay bestow on them both form and vigor: The most
effectualll advancement, I mean, not the bare permissive ^^opagation of
Learning.

Somewhat you have done in this kind, but how ^uch to this purpose I cannot
judge; for besides that it ^^ached no further then Political aims, it removed
^any persons of a more thriving and consistent growth ^ learning, then it
either left there, or planted in their ^^eads; it meddled not at all with a view
or reformation of ^^ose fundamental constitutions, on whose happy on ^^ak
designations* the interest and prosperity, the decay ^^d ruin of such litterary
Republics principally depends, (...) we shall shortly find opportunity to
demonstrate.

But the wishes of the most knowing and best men are (...) far above these
^^ender performances; they profess and I do but now make their sighings
Articulat) that ^^e body of learning lies scattered in as many pieces as ever
Medea cut her little Brother into, and that they are as hard to find and
reunite as his was. That there is no public encouragement given to these
gallant industries that endeavor to gather them up, and as much as may be,
recompose them: That we seem insensible of that great Genius which animates and
conducts this present Age, and therefore slight the discovery of that in
particular persons, who being many times big with Heroic designs, perish for
want of assistance in the delivery; or in case they be delivered, are found to
have wasted themselves in the production of a weak or abortive infant, which
otherwise might have been strong and goodly: whereas men if they would but se^
themselves to awaite and receive every glimpse and dawning of knowledge (or at
least cherish those that would do so) would find it easy to bring it into a
just and beautiful body, and make an happy inversion of that common saying,
That our Ancients were Giants and we are Dwarfs. And whereas some of the
Heathen wise men could say, That those were the best personage that lived
nearer, and less remoter from the Age of the gods: we might contrarily by
experience find, tha^ we had made up the decays of Humanity, and enforce
ba^ke time into its first happy and lusty circle.

For if we look into the life of man, take him in the bare naked condition, in
which Nature thrust him upon earth, what a miserable helpless thing shall we
find him? miserabler in this then the bruits themselves, wh^ having at the most
(though this also be denied with a good reason as granted them) the use of a
dim an^ dark reason, or rather sense, and that in a direct line cannot be
judges of their condition, and therefore consequently want the greatest
ingredient of misery, the sense of it; man is betrayed by his reason, (which
cannot be smothered in him, but that there will be some sparks and embers still
alive) to a discerning of his sufferings and some rude and unpolished wishes of
a better condition; which if he can ever get into, it is merely by the
collision of his natural faculties, which strike out some small sparks to
kindle that fuel: so that he being in a manner in the condition of a Beast,
has no other way to exempt himself from that misery and slavery, but that
little knowledge which chance, or the dark Axioms of his own reason can
help him with.

And if again we consider men gathering into the Primitive societies, and
assisting each other with their mutual endeavors and observations, we shall
find that they come nearer civil Societies, by how much they have made
greater inroads into experience, and were better versed in the acts of life.
Nay, how willing have they been to congratulate, yea Idolatr^ze some of them,
and put them into the lists of their gods, (as we may see out of the ruins of
some Histories which time has not yet eaten up) for some little inventions,
which are at this day so common with us, that they seem to be among the
postulated principles of nature, and to be borne with us; so that these men who
were ignorant of knowledge, and possibly would have slighted it, if it had
been offered to them in its own luster; yet did live, subsist, and were
^ivilized by it.

But if we make a step further, and look upon Commonwealths, how easy will it
be to observe, that as they flourished under the verdure, so have they withered
under the decay of Learning. Nor have they been so fortunate under any
governors as those who coming from a noble education, and a right observation
and deduction of things (which may well make a man learned, though he never had
seen a book) were neither subject to these wild e^^^ations, nor savage
rudenesses which untutored Natures, through the want of a better discipline,
were apt to fall into.

Nay, if we look somewhat more narrowly into them, we may see that many
private men born amidst the dregs of the people, and not capable of any such
high hopes, have by this means far overtopped men of antiquity and ancient
descent, and outvyed them with unequal services; whether by way of prevention,
as old Appius a man wholly unacquainted with any systematicall knowledge, in
dissuading the Romans from an inconsiderate peace they were about to shuffle up
with Pyrrhus; or conservation, as that excellent reign of Augustus, one, who
though his Cradle was not private, yet in his first access to business, was
not only left in a private capacity, but surrounded by an inimicall faction:
or if we look on augmentation what an illustrious time had Rome under Trajan,
though a Spaniard, that she seemed to renew her age, and spread the wings of
her Eagle, where they could never have hoped to reach in her first period of
greatness, which eve^ after his days fell into a sensible and graduall
weakness: not to note Epaminondas that god-like Theban* who owed all his
orient virtues to the light of the Schools, with whom (though he came from a
vulgar womb) the greatness of his Country (as Plutarch observes) di^ shoot up
and fade.

But if we would go no further than the ornaments and outward splendor of a
place, what was it distinguished all the Palaces in Rome and Neroes golden
house from the Sabin cottages, or the dwelling of Publicola? or the Imagery of
Greece and Statues of Corinth, from the first rude shapes of unpollished oak,
but curiosity and art; which yet notwithstanding had been vainly hoped, if
there had not been a concurrent humor of men to entertain and foster it; and
this humor has been so fortunate to them, that notwithstanding time has
defaced all the bounds of the Roman conquests, and left them as invisible and
inobservable, as the flight of any bird that flew yesterday, yet in a few
stones and Medalls (not to mention the monuments of her intellectual
greatness) she has left us such prints and measures, that we may justly trace
and compute her (as he did the Giants bulk by his thumb) in her vast and
stupendous symmetry: whilst other Countries more remote from this greatness
and happiness that have not so much as their ruins left them to vindicate
them from ^ables, and to testify that they once were, live notwithstanding in
all learned mouths, and that from the interest perhaps of o^e Citizen, whose
merits has made him a part of posterity, and enabled him to a noble gratitude
to his Country, in rescuing her from the dotage and Tyranny of Time. And indeed
without letters, and consequently the preservation and encouragement of them,
to what a darkness and mist should we be confined, and in what a shadow should
we live, a darkness worse then that of Plato his cave, when our children, or
childrens children, should be to seek for what we know to day, and no
observation be left to mankind (for traditions must needs be in a few hands
and soon corrupt) to shorten the long journey of knowledge, and to bring it
nearer an end: As we may see by one example: The best man upon earth, and the
only more than man, spoke and did so many things as all the Volumnes in the
world could scarce contain (as one of his own Penmen witnesses of him) and yet
there is no more memory of them preserved amongst us, then what is left in a
very few sheets, not at all to mention that Question, whether all the integrall
parts of that divine Book were preserved or no. Certain we are what a great
loss we have in humane stories, and what a large measure of Time, was either
not described by them, or not now to be found, so that in a Trichotomy of Time
made by the learned Roman sixteen hundred years since, there was one part
unknown, and the other fabulous; and yet sure we cannot but believe, but that
before mankind had gleaned up some litterature, and was softened and polished
by it, there were abundance of examples of either fortitude, and many
invincib^e Heroes before Achilles, whose Trophies are buried with them, and
Triumphs forgot as if they had never been seen, whilst those others that
remain, must be accounted just such with us as the favor or envy of Poets and
Historians are pleased to make and represent them, so vast is the Prerogative
of letters, that they can dispense not only life, but estimation and glory
unto whom they please, and command the reputation of past, and the belief of
present and future ages.

But to advance knowledge to its highest and truest end, how necessary and
subservient will it be to that great design of Religion, which without an
immediate concourse and favor of Providence, can scarce either subsist without
it, or preserve it self untainted with gross errors, or distempered
imaginations; how serviceable may it be to many sublime minds and refined
understandings, that calling all things to an exact Test of reason, will not be
brought to the acknowledgement of their Maker, or the Truth of what is left
concerning him; if they be not guided by forcible demonstrations and
porismaticall inferences of nature, which may not precariously, but
irresistibly infer a Deity; and strong and natural inductions of Reason:
without which, such minds are but in vain attempted, and difficultly
overcome: Or to go further; how shall we ever be sensible of the excellency
and power of that divine Book, which Gods own finger has wrote and left us;
if we want ability and eyes to look upon the fullness and order of those
Treasures; Man indeed who is a determinate narrow thing, must necessarily
confine his thoughts to one subject, and when he thinks of one thing, of
necessity desists thinking of another. But God who is such a free infinity, can
with one intuitive knowledge see all things, and is the center in every part of
his circle. And therefore what he writes must needs be as universal as his
own Spirit, and at one time communicate many knowledges; whereas man can only
write of this or that, and therefore it is unprofitable industry, not to ^^
undertaken without due assistances to attempt the search of that Book, which
like himself, has an infinity and immensity of knowledge in it. Not to speak
of the form of it, which being writ in Tongues much removed from this place
and age, and that surely with all height of Elegance and fullness of
expression; it is not to be hoped for that any Translations can come up to it,
but that there must be abundance of exquisite knowledge smothered up in the
Original. Which though it has been studied and pursued, by numerous exalted
wits, and unwearied undertakers; yet we know that there are abundance of ripe
notions left to be found out by future and latter endeavors, which shall never
think to want a Crown from this attempt, till this earth burn i^ her funeral
Pile, and we shall see all knowledge not in ^ mist, but in a myrrour, and view
the center, the spring* the root, the life of it face to face. Nor can I see
what ca^ more heighten or beautify this best Science, then the regaining those
Trophies from the Heathens which they stole from us, who, though they knew not
how to use, yet triumphed in them: For all their glimmering notions, were but
lighted at our candle, although they obscured and disguised them with false
lights; yet b^ that light did they shine to themselves and after ages* who
cannot but look up with reverence at their advanced Natures, and wish they had
been heightened b^ a more noble principle, which had crowned all the^ various
Sciences with the principal Science, and in the^ brave strayings after Truth,
helped them to better fo^tune than only to meet with her handmaids, and kep^
them from the fate of Ulisses, who wandering through Hell, met all the ghosts,
yet could not see the Queen. B^ there is a strange Magneticall attraction in
knowledge which plucks and draws the soul toward it, which ^ just so much
nearer its due repose, by how much it fal^ nearer to this center; And indeed it
were a pity, that the great Princess of it should be less adorned, then some
of her subjects; and that she who is all glorious within, should want her
garments of wrought gold and needlework, and not as well make her self
glorious in the spoils of her enemies, as the Israelites steal away jewels
from the Egyptians, or Solomon fetch gold from Ophir to adorn the Temple.

I wish it were in my power, and your patience (most Noble Senators) rather to
view this intention, in its many large particularities, then to propose it thus
dead colored in a general draught, which can like a Mercury on the way, only
point but go no further; But truly it is enough for me a person, (hid in
obscurity and neglected into retirement) to make good wishes and breath after
these huge attempts, which I hope the sublime disposer of all humane affairs,
will as well put into your hearts, as he has put into your hands to
accomplish. You have done great things for us, and equal to what has been
done in any Nation, either stoutly or fortunately. And if you will but now make
good our hopes in this one thing, you will put an end to all our wishes, and
settle us in a condition which will somewhat resemble that eternal fruition
which we all breath after, a time of praises.

And indeed, if you were men that only looked upon your selves, and studied no
further then the propagation of your own fame and interest. What better means
have you to confute all the scandalls and imputations of your deadly
adversaries, who have not spared to speak you worse then Goths and Vandalls,
and the utter destroyers of all Civility and Literature, then by seriously
composing your selves to the design of cherishing of either. What directer
caus-way could you find to the aggrandization of your own glory, then
entertaining the celebrated care of so many Kings, the only splendor of so
many Republics, the life and luster of so many Ages? That which is certain to
make all brave men for the future, your admirers and followers, and to
distinguish your Government from theirs, who being hurried by Confusion and
Barbarism, shall hereafter vanish into eternal forgetfulness. What better
way to your profit, then to command abundance of fruitful wits, which shall
every day bud forth with some invention, serviceable either to the necessities
of the poor, or graver magnificence of the rich? when mechanical knowledge
shall be multiplied and abbreviated, and you be able not only to requite
foreign parts for the curiosities they have lent you; but also invite them
hither to be your scholars, when there shall be a confluence of the finest
industries among you, and he shall be accounted to want of due civil
Accomplishments, that has not come to perfect them from this place.

How serviceable will it be to you when you overflow with retired sagacities
and raised industries, whom you may either for Gown or Sword by land or sea
employ upon all occasions; when you shall not need to put people in the places
of greatest trust by reason of their Titular borrowed Gayety, but make use of
such persons, as shall discover the greatest luxury and efflorescency of
Virtue; Such persons who may succeed you in the seats where you now sit, (and
may it be a fortunate Omen) exceed and outstrip your glories, such persons,
which shall preserve us in a blessed peace; ^herein yet there shall be neither
sloth nor luxury, ^^d either enlarge our Territories with wide foreign
^^quests, or else pull down those powers which are ^ow the hate and burdens of
the face of the earth.

But you that are men of sublime minds, that have ^^rried you beyond all the
doubts and objections of flesh and blood, above the extent of your own
designs, ^^ almost the latitude of your own wishes, beyond the dictates of
common Law and reason, will not give over while there remains so great a work.
That God who is abstract wisdom, and delights that his rational creatures
should search after it, and that his Ministers should study to propagate it,
will expect that you should be Foster-fathers of knowledge. He may punish your
natural children with stupidity or ignorance, if you do not take the day
while it is yours, to lead them into the paths and Mazes of Science. And will
he, think you, forgive you (you being Fathers of the Publickew^ale) if you
forget those that are your children in that relation? He cannot surely; he that
is just will expect from you the discharge of your duties, which how it can be
without a complete taking care of your charge your best selves can best
consider. But certainly it is none of the probablest ways to bring a people
into a little shape of liberty, and free their estates, from some small
inconsiderable burdens, and leave the better part of them, their minds, no
(...)re enlightened, no more tutoured, no more bur(...)ed, than you at first
found them. By this time some may object, to what end I press all this. Have
not we Universities as famous as any under Heaven? Is there not provision in
this case enough? Have not our Ancestors been liberal beyond any of Europe?
will we violate their wills? discompose the present frame, before we be
ascertained what other to set up? beside running the Commonwealth into an
unnecessary charge, and that for an unnecessary end, and in a time unfit, if
not contrarian^ to these designs, and that for an Idaea?

Believe me these are pretty Objections, and till the^ be confuted, very
probable; but I believe well look(...) into, they will according to the usual
ingenuity (...) Truth, prove both to conduce to, and further this in* tention,
and also to demonstrate unto you, that the thy(...) it self is so easy and
feasible, that your selves canno(...) without imputation of a gross neglect,
and ugly discare of the Public, avoid this consideration.

It Is true that our Universities for outward Magnisicence, and a large, if not
luxurious liberality, are equal if not superior to any of those that we yet
know of (...) the lettered part of the world. They are venerable so their
antiquity, and have a long time thriven under th(...) indulgency of the past
ages, and been ennobled by the p(...)duction of many rare and divine
personages, who ha(...) made more illustrious the whole Nation. But wheth(...)
in general their Statutes be so exact and refined, (...) may satisfy the need
and curiosity of this exalted ag(...) or that our Accademies at the present
teach either al(...) or the gallantest Theories of knowledge, will be see(...)
anon. And that being once made evident, it will no(...) be hard to infer,
that other Universities of a late standing and poorer subsistence, have both in
extent o(...) knowledge, and multiplicity of excellent persons, be(...) able to
equal, if not out-doe them. Nay that tho(...) present Revenues whereupon they
now ^ur^eit, have (...)hoaked abundance of active Industries* nay been a
means to thrust into Ecclesiastical or Litterary offices (...) many of
persons, who had they been suffered to obey their own inclinations, and
followed some Trade or Handicraft, might have ranked themselves amongst the
ablest of their Profession; Whilst others who had ^oules more towardly and
capable, were by such ^rones as these kept out of the Hives, and either
for(...)d to seek their food from afar, or else sit down (unless provided for
by their Parents) with no other gain by their Philosophy and Reason, then a
few S^oicall sentences in the contempt of wealth, and the commendations of
poverty.

Now that there is provision enough, we shall both grant, and by it take
occasion to insinuate, that the State need not multiply any of her expenses in
pur(...)ance of this wish. All our suit is, that these endowments, and pious
liberality, may be converted into uses (...)table to the ends of the Donors,
and tend rather to a public advantage, then to the private fostering of (...)
many idle Pedantick Brotherhoods. It now lies like (...)cke, and possibly is
noisome to the place where it (...)* but spread it abroad, it will manure all
the Land, and return the increase of an unvaluable and happy har(...)st. There
is none requires it to another use, but one(...) to a better use, and in the
end it can be no more rob(...)y, then it is sacrilege to rescue a Temple from
the superstition wherewith it was defiled, to the use of a (...)er and more
illuminated Religion.

I must needs confess, (and I speak it with a deal of Religion to the memory
of them that are gone before us,) that among the many good examples they have
left to this Nation, their liberality, if not profuseness, in things of this
nature has not been the least. But then I beseech you, Honorable Worthies,
consider in what times they lived; they were dark, befe(...) with mists of
ignorance and superstition, and they could only direct their charity that way
so far as they knew it best. Their Ordinances and cautions, were, no doubt in
their times, full of excellent wisdom and deep reason. But since they ceased
to be mortal, it has pleased the Son of Righteousness to break through the
clouds which shadowed their ages, and to let u(...) have more of day. And as
the Sun here below does not only in his rescuing the light, discover himself*
but also guilds and discloses all about him; so that eternal Sun, when he
opens himself, opens at the same time all humane and inferior knowledge,
which (...) still more or less visible, as his rays shine on it, o(...)
withdraw from it. Now he having every day made greater appearances of himself;
humane learnin(...) has also been more enlightened; and he is not acquainted
with the Business of knowledge, that knows no(...) what sensible increases (I
had almost said perfections it has of late arrived to. So that what means was
used before to preserve it from perishing, and to propagate it, must now be
used for augmentation, an(...) splendour. What means were used to keep it in a
few hands in a corner (like a great exile, thrust away by(...) contrary power)
till some better times, must now b(...) used to disperse it through the face of
the earth, and t(...) make it tread as far as mankind. What means we(...)
used before, for a bare historical knowledge, mu(...) (...)ow be turned into a
censorious justice upon over old opinions, and into severe and eager
disquisitions of new truths; for knowledge has no limits nor Landmarks but
being ubiquitary, and therefore desirous to diffuse it self, she endeavors by
all means her promotion and dil^tation. Nor does she ever meet with any that
would enlarge her Empire, but she ambitiously encourages them, and willingly
crowns them. Now for any one to think, that one and the same means are to be
used to preserve a State, either new curdled and molded into form, or else by
outward violence retired to its last seat and almost first principles, and the
same state when it has overcome either its infancy or misery, and like a
wakened Giant begins to rowze it self up, and look where it may conquer, is
utterly unvers'd in the affairs of the world, and below instruction.

And doubtless, upon these considerations, were it possible that these happy
souls could either return (...)ither, or were it suitable to their
blessedness to mind things that are done under the Moon, they could not but
join with any that would undertake to serve them in so pious an engagement, as
to make their contributions more excellently serviceable to the ends they
purposed. And therefore we cannot think it any more violation to their will,
at all to advance their provisions to their own ends by better ways, then
(...)e think that you (Noble Senators) are parracides to your Country in
rescinding those Laws which your Predecessors made, yet through length of
time, and (...)pine of those in whose care they lay, began contrary (...) their
first intention, rather to oppress, then defend and releeve us. For so long as
humane reason is weak and imperfect, it can never provide any Laws against
all circumstances of chance, length of time, fraud and weakness of mankind,
but it will bring forth a necessity to repeal them, equal, if not superior
to that which first enacted them.

For discomposition of the present frame, may not, I pray this be a Topicke for
any Government, though never so ill grounded, never so irregular, or never so
Tyrannical? Should we sit still, and expect that those in whose hands it is,
should quietly resign it, or new mould it themselves, or some fine chance
should do i(...) to our hands? or should we not out of this very reason, if our
houses were all untiled and obvious to all injuries of the weather, forbear to
pull them down o(...) mend them, because we would make no alteration, and so
continue in our miserable patience, because we fear a change and some trouble;
like Aesops Plowma(...) crying to Jupiter, to help our cart out of the mire,
an(...) we never put to a hand? or should we expect tha(...) some Deity, or
unthought of influence would rescu(...) us from these inconveniences which we
saw, but would not remove? I am afraid whether any can be serious upon this
question: For as happiness is the reward o(...) courage and industry; so what
ever people ever yet obtained any Reformation without sweat or wounds, an(...)
a just violence to the overruling power; just I say though it clashed with the
letter of some Positive La(...) for with the Fundamental and true ends of
government it could not. But there is no need in this ca(...) to urge this so
hard to you, who so nobly bra(...) through this objection, and redeemed the
supreme power, which being now so indisputable in your hands this wish requires
no more of you then the exercising (...) it, wherein you will only find
opposition from those who have endeavored to blast, and yet continue a will to
defeat and malign your best actions. Nay, and (...) hope you will give me
leave to mention it for your Honors) we are encouraged rather to press this
from your own example of magnanimity, and zeal (...) whipping those high
Priests, and buyers and sellers (...)t of our Temple, and that when your power
was (...) umbrage, that now you will (when it has obtained its just light and
fullness) employ it on so easy a take, as this last piece of Reformation;
which will (...)balm your memories, and leave almost nothing to your
Successors to do piously or justly. That this (...)e of time may not be
capable of such a noble alteration, I am not afraid from the best comparison
and recollection of times and reasons, not only to (...)ny, but even to evince
the contrary. For what more seasonable opportunity can we have, then that we
see the highest spirits, pregnant with great matters, and in despite of these
Tumults and Troubles which inviron them of every side, laboring with somewhat,
the greatness of which they themselves cannot tell, and with a wonderful
deal of courage, attempting the discovery of a new world of knowledge? These
bodings cannot be of nothing, but upon (...) arrower recognition will appear
full of miracle, which amounts with me to no less then the chasing away of
shadows before the break of the great day. (...)d surely, that begins a fuller
manifestation of himself, suffers us to approach him by these degrees, and
therefore has diffused a great and a restless Genius in this age, far greater
then any has been of a long time. And as Astrologers say, that there are at
some certain times some powerful influences showred by the conjunction or
positure of some Planets, which if they be not received and magically applied
at that very time, do immediately pass away, and become ineffectuall, and are
not to be expected again, till after many ages; so any tract of time, when it
meets a sublime and elevated spirit to assist and guide it, cannot certainly
witho^t disadvantage and loss, refuse to entertain it; nay they cannot be so
stupid, as not to think both that the time is unregainable, and that a
judgment awaits them for being so bold as to resis(...) the discoveries of it.
But I cannot think so ill of these men among whom I was borne, that they will
shut their eyes against this light that breaks so brightly and glistringly in
upon them, and be lethargically content to please themselves with the reverend
follies and dreams of their forefathers.

It Is no matter what some frozen Sadduces, or some others of a worse name if
there be any, can scoff* that it is folly to entertain any such vain
imaginations, and madness to prosecute them: It Is folly will prove the happiest
wisdom, and no more a deviation of the understanding, then the entertaining a
new natural exact scheame of heaven, and nature, in lieu of the old broken
interfering Hypotheses, which rely on no other probability but a sent of sense,
distorted by education, and brawned by custom.

It Is no matter, what some purblinde Politicians, or sneaking worldlings talk
of the difficulty of times, and say, that these soft aires of peace, cannot be
heard (...)midst the loud music of War, and that men's thoughts, are too
much broken and harrassed to fall (...)pon these things, which must be the
fruits of the (...)eepest and most silent leisure, You have the highest destiny
favoring your designs, put an end to all (...)ch Tumults; and we have now no
more of War then (...) necessary to the preservation of our peace, which
(...)ems to smile on us again, and promise us, that she (...)ill not fly
away, for fear lest her snowy* garments (...)old be stained in blood.

But put the case that your Enemy were as visible (...)d powerful as ever, yet
I dare be known to think, (...)at it were much more honorable for you to
assume (...)ese thoughts: nay that they both were not consistent together. What
can you imagine to do (...)re worthy of memory, or imitation, then in the
(...)dst of your most urgent dangers to lay a model, and (...)w the lines of
happiness and security for all post(...)y? How can you better demonstrate
your selves (...)rlesse and hearty, in what you go about, then by (...)wing
such a severity and composition of spirit; nay (...)h a contrary neglect of
what opposition is set be(...)e you, as to mind those vast designs of
litterall ^gnificence, or further acquisition? What more (...)ning in all the
Annalls of Rome, then the porten(...)us bravery of sending Forces into Spain,
when (...)nniball was at the Gates, and selling that field (...)ereon he en
camped at so dear a rate, as it would (...)e passed at, had he been prisoner
within the walls, (...)d his Army dispersed? yea (and to show that these
(...)er times want not parallels of the Ancient Gran(...)rs) what will be more
illustrious in the History of Holland, then their high and visible cares, and
al(...) prodigal magnificence for learning, while as they y(...) strugled with
a sad war, and had not yet released the(...) necks, from the sway of a
per^idious and horrid Tyrant?

For the people whom you are to care for, it can not be but that peace might
have softened and ema(...)culated them, whereas their calamities have brought
them into a better agility and constitution, to promo(...) their excellent
desires to liberty in any thing which they may conceive really conducible; and
there is n(...) cause to doubt, but they will facilly be swayed (...) that
power under whose valorous conduct they (...) asserted themselves from all
impressions and marks (...) dishonor and slavery, which usurpation, iniquity
(...) time, or foreign force had put upon them.

It cannot be denied, but by the invaluable loss (...) blood and Treasure, the
body of this Nation is become thin and lean, and therefore he were a Vi(...)
that would offer to gnaw or suck it any more (for (...) farther pressure, be it
never so little is now excessi(...) and therefore it would be but just to wave
a Pet i(...) for any public contribution (though possibly the has been some
liberality exercised to worse e(...) which had it been directed this way, might
have (...) qualled any of the ancient magnificencies and hono(...) able
profusenesses upon learning) although if y(...) were urged to some small
liberality, or rather p(...) vented any suit for it, it would be a huge further
a(...) to what is desired of you, yet we only beg; nay o(...) jure you by all
that is dear to you, or desired you, that you will employ this which you
find(...) (...)ady left to your hands, and do these things without any
charge, and only lend us your Authority, to (...)oe this longed for work; and
no doubt if you cannot, or will not lend any fuel to it, God will stir (...)
the hearts of many private persons, and inflame (...)em with equal intentions,
and make their hands (...)ing it in in a full measure.

And now that which remains of me to do (for I (...)nceive I have quitted my
self of the Objections, (...)d therefore may dismiss them) will be a triple
(...)ske. First, to show how far the state of our Uni(...)rsities needs a
reformation. Secondly, how it may (...) brought about: And thirdly, I shall
particularize (...)me ends which I have transiently before glanced at, (...)t
as ends, but as fruits and enjoyments of your (...)ble piety. And herein I
shall the rather be short, (...)cause these being at the most, but the best
sort of wishes, I shall observe that course which the best (...)en do in their
devotions, to pray for the best things (...)ey can, yet not limit the power
they pray to, to (...)ch or such a way of granting their requests, as being
(...)olved by what means soever it comes, to receive it (...)earfully, and
knowing that power which they ad(...)esse themselves unto, cannot only do it
in a bet(...)r manner then they can think of, but in a fuller.

For the first: I could never yet make so bad an Idaea (...) a true University,
as that it should serve for no (...)bler end, then to nurture a few raw
striplings, come (...)t of some miserable Country-school, with a few (...)eds
of Latin, that is as immusicall to a polite ear as (...)e gruntling of a Sow,
or the noise of a Saw can be (...) one that is acquainted with the Laws of
harmony. And then possibly before they have survayed th(...) Greek Alphabet,
to be racked and tortured with (...) sort of harsh abstracted logical notions,
which their wits are no more able to endure, then their bodies the Strapado,
and to be delivered over to a jejune bar(...) Peripatetick Philosophy, suited
only (as Mounsi(...) Descartes* says) to wits that are seated below
Mediocrity, which will furnish them with those rare imaginations of Materia
prima, Privation, Universalia, and such Trumpery, which they understand no more
then their Tutors* and can no more make use of in the affairs of life, then if
3000. years since they had r(...) through all the Hierogliphicall learning of
th(...) Egyptians, and had since that time slept in their Mu^my, and were now
awaken. And then as soon (...) they have done licking of this file, to be
turned t(...) graze in poor Ethics, which perhaps tell them (...) much in
harder words, as they had heard their Mothers talk by the fireside at home.
Then are they turned loose, and with their paper-barks committed to the great
Ocean of Learning; where if they (...) not torn, they return back so full of
desperation and contempt of their profession, and sad remembrance of their
youth so trivially spent, that they h(...) all towardly engagements that way,
and suffer themselves either to sink in a quagmire of idleness, or to be
snatched away in a whirlepool of vice. But in c(...) some with much ado get a
shore (for a long or a (...) voyage upon these terms they cannot make) and
(...) the foresaid means stilt themselves into some proof(...)on; what
deplorable things (unless it be those fe(...) which Nature makes for
o^tentation to be jewels i(...) this earth) prove they, in filling the world
with detestable quacking Empericks, lewd, and contentious, Gown-men, or
ignorant mercenary Divines?

Again, I have ever expected from an University, that though all men cannot
learn all things, yet they should be able to teach all things to all men, and
be able either to attract knowing men from abroad out of their own wealth, or
at least be able to make an exchange. But how far short come we of this, though
I acknowledge some difference between our Universities? We have hardly
Professors for the three principal faculties, and these but lazily read, and
carelessly followed. Where have we any thing to do with Chimistry, which has
snatched the keys of Nature from the other sects of Philosophy, by her
multiplied experiences? Where have we constant reading upon either quick or
dead Anatomies, or ocular demonstration of herbs? Where any manual
demonstrations of Mathematical Theorems or Instruments? Where a promotion of
their experiences, which if right carried on, would multiply even to
astonishment? Where an examination of all the old Tenets? Review of the old
experiments and traditions which gull so many junior beliefs, and serve for
nothing else but for idle Priests, to make their Sermons more gaudy? Where is
there a solemn disquisition into History? A nice and severe calculation and
amendment of the Epochs of time? Where a survey of Antiquities, and learned
descants upon them? Where a ready and generous teaching of the Tongues? Free
from Pedantisme, and the impertinencies that that kind of learning has been
pestered with? And all this done not by some stripling yongster, who perhaps
understands that which he professes as little as any thing else* and mounts up
into the chair twice or thrice a year, to mutter over some few stolen
impertinencies, but by some stayed man, of tried and known abilities in his
profession, allured by a competent encouragement to stay in the University, who
may at certain times read, at certain times attend the resolution of doubts,
offering directions at other times, and engaging them in sober and rational
disputes, in which being restrained from sophistry, they may chafe and polish
their endowments, and when one the other by praise or emulation.

If we find very few, or perhaps none of them in our Universities* I suppose I
offer no violation nor in* jury to their hoarinesse and venerable fame, if I
say, they are ^apable of farther promotion, and that they have not yet arrived
to the exactness of the Jesuits Colleges, and many transmarine Universities,
the latter of which, if not the former, they far exceed in pecuniary endowments
and outward stateliness.

And truly, but that I would not do violence to the Mother that bare me, and
profane that place which is in my account holy, I could lay open abundance of
their customs, both superstitious, irrational, uncivil, and ridiculous; I
could instance how some vices are grown general in some degrees of them, how
many slugs there are, how some courses they take will prove merely the choking
of all literature. But since this would amount to a long ^abble, and degenerate
into some Satyr or Pasquill, rather then an Areopagitick, I will be content,
having a public business in hand; to lay aside all bitterness, though it
might be advantageous to my purpose, and with due mecknesse* and
(...)quanimity, draw to my last task, and then sit down with silent wishes
and earnest expectation.

Two things then I have to beg; some assistances (...)hat you would give the
Universities from themselves* and some assistance that you would give them from
without themselves. From themselves: that you would (...)educe those Frier-like
Lists of Fellowships into a fewer number, and those that you retain, to be
bestowed on men, excellent in their particular endowments, and peculiar for
some use or other, that so the number ff the Professors might increase, and
all of them be enabled to prosecute the hints and impetus of their own
inclinations* and others of more patient heads (...)e tied to instruct those
several persons which should make addresses to them; a third possibly, worn
out with* contemplations and those greater labors of the mind, might sit
warm, and know nothing less then Necessity in their honored old age. Six
Fellowships thus ordered, with a sufficient allowance and encouragement would
be more advantageous, and contribute more to the raising up of the despised
head of learning, then sixscore at this present do; while the remaining
portion of Revenues might be sequestered by (...) select Committee of able and
knowing men (wherein some Representatives of the University should be mingled)
to be changeable and accountable every (...)ear: to be disposed of, for
examining and pursuing experiments, encouragements of honor, completing and
actuating some new inventions, supplying the nee(...)y ones that really wanted
these wings to take great (...)ights, relieving of strangers; and lastly,
provoking some sydereall and flaming souls to display themselves in their full
and radiant meridian luster. For then will it prosper with Learning, when
rewards fit themselves to men, and men are not forced to distort themselves to
rewards; when every man's Genius moves in its own orb, and is not hurried
aside in an eccentrick motion.

From without the Universities: that you would think of some better way of
disposing those few Colleges which are thinly scattered up and down the land,
and make them either collateral or subservient to this design; whereas now
they are of little or no other use then to nourish the supine idleness of a
few Lurdans, and foment their illitterate debates; tossed to and fro among them
without any delight to any but those who love bawling and canvasing such
unlearned opinions which run in this circle without end, and contribute not
the least to the promotion or discovery of Truth.

Secondly, that as you would (with all due provision for the civil peace) take
off that hateful gagg of licencing which silences so many Truths, and frights
so many ingenuities, and makes them abhor the public; so you would put such
a gentle imposition upon Books, that upon every Impression two might go to the
public Library; and that foreign Books, brought over hither in any number,
might do the like, or at least at some reasonable rate.

Thirdly, that all the Medalls, Statues, ancient Rings, and other Antiquities,
pictures of learned delight, or famous men, that either were the late Kings or
any other persons whose estates stand confiscate to you* might be appropriated
this way. For by a cheaper (...)d more generous magnificence you cannot endeare
(...)ur selves to all the lovers and sons of knowledge, and (...)refull Patrons
of mankind; nor secure the memory (...) your noble acquests by more
illustrious Trophies.

And lastly, since that this Island can no more possess (...) the Treasures of
knowledge then it can the Trea(...)es of the earth, that you would be ready to
cast all (...)pect and honor upon learned foreigners, although (...)u use no
largess toward them. Men that through (...) ^hirst of fame have beguiled
themselves into large (...)d divine contemplations, cannot but think they reap
a great fruit of their labors, and be surprised with it, when they see
themselves smiled upon, and courted by (...)h a mighty State, and be ambitious
to disperse their (...)eories there, where they see they are so much
ho(...)red. Now how by this policy your Brethren of (...)lland, have in a
manner monoplized all the spark(...)g wits of Europe; there are many that sit
among (...) that can best inform you. Nor is there yet any apparent reason to
me why you should not also studde (...) embosse this Nation with them. Now to
what (...)e particular design all this should level. There (...)e been so
many modells, and those so various, (...)ugh to the same end, chalked out by
the greatest (...)enuities, that it would be very hard (loved I tran(...)ptions
or largeness never so well) to represent (...)m all, each one abounding in his
own sense, and (...) possibly not so servient to the designations of ano(...).
It shall be enough for me (waving my judge(...)nt or disquisition of them) to
set down the resul(...)ce of a many diligent observations and iterated
thoughts; which as they have not strayed too much ^^ to wild Idea's, so I know
not why they may not ^^ more particularly fitted for our elevation.

First, I have considered that an endeavor to bring all persons under the sway
of knowledge, could no^ but approach very near a Pla^onicke Commonwealth, and
must in the trial enervate the people, and call them from those necessary
professions of Tillage an^ War, and make them acquainted with the artifices o^
delight. Besides there were but a few inclinations so noble, as could overlooke
the gross entertainment of sense, and aim at a more pure and intellectu(...)
happiness. And among these men I found particul(...) Temperatures as it were,
and some secret Sympat(...) and Antipathies to some, or some particular study
whilst there were very few intellectual complexi(...) that desired all; and
these enjoyed not the particula^ so fully as those that bent that particular
way. (...) found also that many men rudely educated, and (...) as would have
proved no great Clerks, though th(...) had been bred up in the Pedanticke way
of t(...) Schools* had notwithstanding through long a sore observation, so
well tutored their reason, th(...) they proved many times persons fitter for
busi(...) then those that had the assistance of much unpro(...)able literature.
I had seen also some men after ma(...) years spent in the world, begin to
retire into themselves, and as seriously and effectually as they c^^ apply
themselves to Books, which yet was commonly ineffectuall to them, if not
quickened with so^ live-voyce and knowing assistance.

From this mass of observations I fell to consid(...) (...)us, That if Man
were a creature both so excellent (...)d active, it were but justice to him
that the natural (...)rgency of his Genius should be found out and assisted;
(...)d that surely could not be in any better time then (...)his infancy at the
dawning of his reason, when he (...)ld not be employed any other way, and his
inno(...)cy made him most susceptible of any impression or (...)ure. And if at
such a time, then surely he was to (...) assayed by most easy trialls, and
that by pleasant (...)stimes of sense, and not by any harsh abstractions (...)
rough discipline. Yet those recreations of his I (...)ought ought to be such as
should be profitable, and (...)le to furnish his maturer thoughts with some
solid (...)as and sound representations of things. And here made account I had
found the right path, which our (...)hooles having so long left, was the reason
they (...)re so seldom prosperous or fruitful in great mat(...)rs. Well, this
being so, those that had spent their (...)ildhood thus, I supposed, might with
much more (...)vantage and ease, retire into a more ignoble calling; (...)d
those whom some harder fortune alienated to o(...)er employments, might carry
such grounds away (...)h them, as might conduct and dispose their
obser(...)ions all their lives after; whilst all those who had (...) greater
vivacity of spirits, might be set apart to (...)orthy and suitable employments,
and none be des^ired by ill methods, or tyrannical Tutors.

Thus far had I got, and there remained this with (...); That those men that
were set apart for knowledge (...)st busy themselves about two things, either
about (...)e dispersing, or augmentation of it: And about dis(...)sing of it,
there could be no better means then to make it easy and amiable; and this
brought me to believe that that education would thrive the best in any place,
that was the least cumbred with unnecessary notions, and did the most facilly
and orderly insinuat(...) it self into the understanding; and I took the duty
of a Master to endeavor these two. Besides, I considered that that was the
best which was the most real and universal: and then I perceived that it was
bette(...) to grave things in the minds of children, then word(...), for I had
known some great speakers, though indiscreet, gazed on only as strange sights
and Patra(...)* where as I could not imagine, but that if a wise ma(...) came
into any Country, whose language he had neve(...) heard, he would by his
deportment and insinuations make a shift to be entertained and respected. And
this made me suppose, that many men that could count their languages by their
fingers, might possibly be of no more use among mankind, then so many Apes or
Magpies. But such whose minds were strengthened with realties, were only men,
and indeed so much men, as they were masters of the true use of reason, and
knew how to guide it; and that to them* Languages must of necessity add beauty
an(...) perfection, and acquaint them with a much of knowledge which was never
writ in their mother Tongue. And since that there were some men who would
fortunately learn and teach the knowledge of others, though they could not
augment it much themselves; I judge that nature did principally intend these
for dispensators and conveighers of it. And others of more vast and capacious
intellectualls, that could never be bounded by the Theories of one other, were
only fit (...)or augmentation; and because there were some propensions and
aversions, of which they themselves (...)old not well render an account, which
if disobeyed succeeded untowardly and unsuccessefully; I presently (...)ferred,
that the genius of each one was to be employed and cherished in its own kind;
and that there (...)as seldom any great matter to be expected from it, (...)
preternaturally diverted, or dispersed into many va(...)ous thoughts and
designs, which did only distract (...)d weaken it.

But when once I began to take a prospect of the whole Landscap of Knowledge,
Methought there was ^uch of it moorish and fennish, much of it overgrown with
thorns and brambles, and some parts of it had (...)t been justly measured, nor
indeed fully discovered, (...) that I thought it would be too stupid humility,
to (...)st with the traditionall wisdom of our Ancestors, (...)d not to look
after further enlargement and advancement. For there being much of it
uncultivated (...)d unmanured; I saw there was abundantly left, (...)r to
provoke and satisfy each future industry, which (...)w they should be
employed, I could not better tell (...)w to design then thus; first,
considering the excel(...)cy of Man, and the restless activity of his
understanding, and the strange volutations of his affairs, I (...)ought the
actions of so noble a creature deserved (...)r better, then to be covered in
oblivion. And because experience was nothing but a sober deduction (...)d
summing up of many observations, and man was (...) apish imitative thing; I
thought there was nothing better to abreviate the length of observation, and to
(...)rnish him with good copies which he should follow, then being acquainted
with past actions and time(...)* and conversing with the images of the bravest
persons that went before. And truly, all this, I for a while flattered my
self, was supplied us out of those Histories which as yet survive. But after
some acquaintance with them, I began to quit this belief; for I found many of
them clash, many of them rent, many ridiculous, most composed to pleasure, and
therefore not descending to those particularities and circumstances, without
which a History is but dead, and a bare Skeleton without either flesh or
sinews. Besides a many of them seemed to flourish up into Ideas, and others
were so larded and pestred with the private discourses and conceptions of their
Writers, that they seem to have been composed for no other end. Besides most of
them were but Summaries and Epitomes, so that those deductions which were
drawn from them, were not so pertinent, but fallible, and such as seemed
rather to follow the conceptions of the Observatour, then to be naturally
enforced from the things themselves. For this cause I began to wish that there
were a place in some University appointed for a collection of all such Papers,
Letters, Transcripts, and Relations, which should discover the inner side of
Negotiations, and events, and the true fa(...) of things, without the
adulteration of common policy. And I thought it were profitable rather to
ta(...) in many needless things, then to leave out one needful, because a
judging mind out of many particularities, could draw a better estimate of
things, and deduce more certain, and unquestioned axioms.

But because Man is a creature of such infinite variety, and that in every one,
there is somewhat shining and excellent; I wished that some laudable diligence,
had gathered a catalogue of Characters, and that (...)f the lives of some of
the more eminent; which I (...)old not care, how much they had been stuffed
with particular actions, because Man in business is but a Theatricall person,
and in a manner but personates himself, but in his retired and hid actions, he
(...)ulls off his disguise, and acts openly. So that I judged by that means
that Characters were the best and (...)aithfullest to be gained, and we should
come to a (...)ighter knowledge and judgment of Virtue, and the ^assions. For
I had seen abundance of things related as high acts of generosity, which
possibly were but (...)e effects of weakness, cruelty and despair. And
withal seeing only the greatnesses of some men mentioned, and neither their
particular imperfections, nor the means by which they achieved their (...)nds
particularly set down; I thought it could not out stretch many weak minds to
disproportionate thoughts; and like Palme^ine or Don Quixote make them think
of things beyond the Moon. Therefore (...)d* I conceive it necessary to trace
these Grandees as much as may be, through all their windings and hidden paths.

But because men must walk upon the earth, and (...)eeds receive those
influeuces which are shed from (...)eaven, and therefore exceedingly differ
according to their several climes; I thought not only an exact
(...)escription of the several Countries was to be obtained, and if it were
possible, all their secret myste(...)ies, and retired criticismes of state;
that so, observative minds, might have far richer stuff, and variety of
forms whereupon to work. And also there might probably by this means in
length of time, be found out several satisfactory reasons, and ways o^
discovering and judging the many inclinations and natures of men: And so by
that means a greater facilitation of business, and possibly greater success
in it, then have yet commonly happened.

Moreover, Man that had solely the use of reason, and by it was separated from
other creatures, (...) thought had all the interest in the world to endeavor
the perfection of it, and the several ways of it^ best advantages. And this I
thought, was no bette^ way attempted, then if* the veins of things were
rightly and naturally cut up, and he had such principles placed within him, as
would without any disturbance or confusion assist him in the pursuance of any
Truth, or in the examining of any thing doubtful. This I thought had been done
by Logic (as they call it) but there the Predicaments were so untowan^ly
ranged, that a man's mind shall not without some hesitation know where to
fasten; and then when he has pitched there, he is but engaged in a dispute.
But I believe had the dissection been natural, the mind would instantly have
pitched right, and the^ have been enabled to have weilded that Notion* to her
best use. Here I expected relief from Metaphysics, but they were so
abstrusely abstract, and so far remote from use, that they seemed to hurry the
mind too far away, and make it too volatile and aerie, and so difficultly
attainable, that half a life need to beseverely spent in learning them. But
the conduct of reason which I wished for, I wished natu(...)ll and easy, and
such as might gently sink into (...)unger minds, and be there embraced with
no im(...)lsion; but the delight which commonly tickles the (...)ule when she
meets with any radiant and pregnant (...)uth. This made me imagine highly of
the Mathe(...)ticks for the clearness of their grounds and excel(...)t
building upon them; but these were withdrawn (...)m Quantity, and besides had
the liberty to make (...)eir own suppositions, which to moral and politic
(...)ason (which was to judge of things as it found them (...)tracted into many
casualties and circumstances) was (...)ied; and therefore that there was but
little ad(...)tage to be had this way, so that I could not de(...) any better
means then to make the mind pliant (...) passible to any Truth, to free her
from all these (...)uinated prejudices of education, tradition, or (...)ldish
observation, and then withal to plant such a (...)btfulnesse in her, as should
not easily ascent to any (...)e thing which was not fortified with strong
reason (...) right experience. And to do this, there cannot (...) be extreme
necessity of a person not meanly versed (...)he causes of error, and
stratagems of reason, who (...)uld dig out such axioms as should rectify the
mind, (...) lead her by the hand, in the most subtle contem(...)tions, and so
refine her, that she might be able to (...)ract pure and large Theories out of
things most im(...)s'd and hid in matter.

^or the Mathematics themselves, I found them full (...) excellent variety and
harmony, strongly fenced (...)h their own Truth, and branched out into many
(...)irable inferences and productions. But yet methought that there was
somewhat in them which was yet hid from us, and that the ancient founders of
these sciences had been content to retain somewhat not fully discovered. For I
found most men employed only in learning those immense hea^s of Demonstrations
they had left us, but seldom enlarging them or going forward, which made me
fear that the key of these Sciences were hid, and that without such a key, or
engine it had been unpossible to rear up such a huge super-structure of vast
consequences. But this I found two or three great spirits had already light on,
and had directed a way which if well followed, will make our Mathematical
reason nimble and apt to find the fountain head of every Theoreme, and by
degrees, as we may hope, enable us to the solution of any Problem without any
more assistance then pen and ink (so that a man may carry all these admirable
Sciences about him) and direct us to more exact and easy instruments then any
have been yet known, and recall men's minds by delicate ravishing
contemplations, from the sordid juggling use of those instruments on which they
now so perversely and unanimously dote.

But when I once begun seriously to view that strange disposition of things
which we call Nature; I could not even in my ruder estimation of it but be much
astonished. For it was plain to me there was more art and prodigious
workmanship in a Gnat or a Fly then there was in the greatest engines or
productions of man; which if they were not casually found out, were but the
mere promotions and pursuances of Nature. By this I took my self deeply
engaged for to look upon that Fabric with more curiosity and diligence then
they commonly use, who judge and suppute every thing according to the outward
tickling and blandishments of sense. And as to this design, I thought I was
well provided for, by those many volumnes of natural Philosophy, which I found
to flatter me with a many large and braving Titles. And I thought that when I
was once well acquainted with them, I should have had my mind fitted for
excellent notions, and embellished with such rich principles, as could not but
furnish me with a many excellent and sweet deductions. But when I had spent
some time thus; and began to shake off that implicit faith which must for a
while bind up learners, and discovered what contradictions, loose conceptions,
and endless controversies those Volumnes were fraught with, I perceived I had
gained nothing else but a multitude of vain speculations, which in all reason
of the world I ought to dis-beleeve. About this time I happened to be
acquainted with a sort of books that denounced a sharp war against the old
Philosophy, and very severely undertook to put it all under the sponge, and
withal to raise up such other new observations as should prove more
handsomely, and truly make up the apparences and changes of Nature. These men
I hugged, and indeed expected from them, some performances equal to my
expectations; but then again I found that man may be far more happy in
discovering of errors then in finding out of Truths. For some of those
Treatises were merely draughts and designations, others violently wrested the
explaining of things to their own principles, and rather forced Nature to
their conceptions, then enlarged their conceptions as wide as Nature. Othersome
there were, who abusing a Philosophical liberty, strayed into some anticke
Theories, and made Nature monstrous: Others laid down very probable and neat
Hypotheses, but absolutely unsuited to the nature of the thing; so that I
collected, that though we had made some steps forwards, yet we were not at our
journies end. And because I saw that a many curious notions were but like
spiders webs, and that experiences have the greatest light, I thought we were
principally to insist upon that way. But because most experiments were found
out rather casually then by Philosophical reasoning, and some men out of one
small observation could be bold to raise abundance of vain consequences* and
for one and the same experiment, there were sundry reasons brought, and it was
easily wrested, and salved by diverse principles, I judged that as there was an
extreme deal of diligence and nicity to the practical pursuance of Nature,
so, that it was not safe to draw any one principle from any one observation,
unless there could not possibly be any other reason given for it, or else
alike discoveries had confirmed it, that if any other interpretation were put
upon it, it was unproper and vain: For as it is easy for men of acute wits to
mis-judge and mis-expect Nature; so when an axiom is rightly gained, it is
easy to work it up, and to draw from it many strange and magical Productions.

And because there are abundance of extraordinary appearances both at home and
abroad, I judged it necessary, that all these should be carefully gathered and
registered; so that those many varieties coming into a long Catalogue, and
digested by a sober mind, might afford many rare and beautiful discoveries of
the glory of their Creator.

What other means might be used both in this and Medicine, would be too large
now to insist on, since I at first purposed but a Synopsis, which, I cannot
despair my self, if it were rightly or hotly pursued, could not but bring
forth a more plentiful harvest then we at the present expect. There are, no
doubt, many of nobler thoughts, who might furnish you with more exact and high
designations; and truly; I shall think my self abundantly satisfied, if, from
these poor reflections, you may be invited to take their advice, and follow
their vast and judicious considerations in this nature. However for my part let
this humble Essay be as much neglected or reviled as may be, I shall sit down
quiet with a conscience of the discharge of my duty, though it can reap no
farther, then the putting of these wishes upon the file, and transmitting them
to Posterity.

These things, as I have but briefly touched, so to particularize them had been
extreme folly, your Wisdoms being so able to direct you, in case God stir
your hearts for to take in hand this task: which if you cheerfully go
through, no doubt but that gale of divine favor, which has constantly gone
along with you, will not now leave you, but bring you to the end. And as your
eyes have been blessed with many strange fights, and your mouths oftentimes
filled, nay stricken dumb with wonder; so there is no doubt, but if you do
this one thing which now remains, you shall see the Taper of a learned Piety
burn among us, I hope, like an immortal lamp, fed w(...) refined* and
sublimest knowledge, whilst all those false ligh^ of ignorance, humane forgery,
and superstition shall vanish away, or be put out, and the stubborn pervicacy
of humane reason turned into a gentle compliance to divine truth. You shall see
Nature traced through all her Turnings, to a clear demonstration of her first
cause, and every day bring forth varieties of experiments, either to the
relief, astonishment, or delight of men; you shall then see us freed from all
these fabulous illusions and impostures, which have hitherto beset either
Traditions or Cures; and Nature which now disguises her self into so many
shapes, forced into an open veracity and pure nakedness. You shall see the
number of Arts daily increased* and th(...) we known already, wonderfully
promoted. You shall then see Scheams of Commonwealths brought forth, easy and
natural, and not varied into a multiplicity of crooked Hypotheses. You shall
then see Policy reconciled to Divinity, Morality, and it self, and yet better
able to lay designs and prevent dangers. You will then have it in its native
simplicity, and your posterity may at once learn to be both wise and innocent.
You shall have the use of the Tongues daily increase, and that judgment of
confusion, which has so long and so heavily lain upon mankind, by degrees
removed. You shall have the ways of Education made smooth, and your children
with a pleasant success possessed of all the Treasures of real knowledge, ere
they could have thought they had entered the gates. So that when you have added
these fights to the former, and witnessed by a happy old age the blessedness
of this Land; you may see the reins also prosper in the hands of those that
shall be your Successors, and melting away in a soft dissolution, find that
Crown above which is owing to fidelity, and that reward below, that the best
Lawgivers have ever met with; that is, your Names shall increase in the silent
motion of Time, and all Posterity shall look back upon you, with an eye of
Piety and Adoration.

The End.

