TO THE HONORABLE THE Knights, Citizens and Burgesses, IN PARLIAMENT
ASSEMBLED, The Humble^ PETITION of the Members of the Common Council of the
City of LONDON, hereunto Subscribing.
SHOWS,
THat your Petitioners humbly conceived and hoped, That the late Act of
Parliament for Reversing the Judgment in the Quo Warranto against the said
City, would have restored the City to its ancient Rights and Privileges; but
the contrary happening, your Petitioners beg leave to represent to this
Honorable House,

That notwithstanding the said Act, several Aldermen of the said City, made or
elected by virtue of Commissions or Charters from the late King James under his
Great Seal, Act still as Aldermen by that Authority, under pretense, That by
some doubtful Expressions in the said Act, they are continued, as well as
Ministerial Officers.

That by color of their assumed Authority and illegal Proceedings, Sir Thomas
Pilkington was by them, on the day of Election appointed by the said Act,
declared and made Mayor, though not duly Returned by the Common Hall, according
to the Usage of the City.

That by the contrivance of the said Mayor and Aldermen, Mr. Leonard Robinson
is imposed on your Petitioners as Chamberlain of the City, notwithstanding
another Person was duly elected into that Office, and declared so to be by the
Sheriffs; and the Hall thereupon dissolved.

That diverse Members of our Common Council are illegally excluded; and others,
duly elected, are refused their Admittances.

That the Place of Town Clerk having been vacant three Months and upwards (an
Office of great Trust in the City) and only eligible by, and in,
Common Council, the said Mayor and Aldermen have, of their own Authority,
appointed several Persons to the Execution thereof, without the Consent of the
Common Council, against the constant known Rights of your Petitioners.

That your Petitioners have not been suffered to meet and consuit about the
necessary Affairs of the City, according to their Ancient Rights and Customs.

That a Common Council being summoned and assembled, about the third Day of
October, many Debates arising concerning the Premises, and several Motions
being made, and the Majority of the Common Council agreeing, That for settling
the Rights of the City, an humble Address should be made to this Honorable
House to explain the said Act: And thereupon the Question being desired to be
put, the said Mayor refused it; and to prevent any such Application,
immediately dissolved the Court, and went away.

Wherefore your Petitioners having, by these evil Practices, all their ancient
Rights and Privileges invaded, and neither Mayor, Court of Aldermen, Sheriffs,
Chamberlain, Common Council, or Town Clerk, as of Right they ought to have; and
being elsewhere without Remedy, humbly pray such Relief in the Premises, as
shall consist with the Wisdom and Justice of this Honorable House.

And your Petitioners, as in Duty bound, shall ever pray, etc. Will. Dodson,
Ralph Box, Richard Alie, Will. Withers, Richard Holder, Rob. Bedingfield, John
Midgley, Nich. Alexander, John Wright, John Genew, Mich. Prescott, Dan.
Templeman, Tho. Mills, Tho. Sissan, James Oades, John Hardrett, John Owen,
Peter Pickering, Will. Saltmarsh, Edw. Aston, Hugh Strode, Will. Wocdroffe,
Tho. Blackmore, Abraham Jaggard, Tho: Rogers, Geo. Bearcroft, Rob. Master,
James Cook, Tho. Darwin, Rich. Beauchamp, Will. Thatcher, Israel Knowles, John
Slyford, Tho. Gardener, John Gross, John Bland, Isaac Brand, Henry Jews,
James Hudson, Ben. Ayloffe, John West, John Knapp, John Johnson; Fran.
Brerewood, Rich. Goodall, Anth. Gregory, Tho. Salter, Will. Jews, Peter
Floyer, Rob. Littlebury, John. Moore, Will: Fownes, John Webb, Fran. Minshall,
Will. Yate, John Green, Percival Gitborn, Edw. Herne, Will. Rous, Tho. Symons,
Jolim Moore, Law. Goles, Geo. Newland, Jaws Woods, John Cooper, Mich. Symonds,
Cha. Feltham, John Blake, James Smith, John Kent, Paul Wides, Sarm Gerrard,
Symen Wilmott, John Domley, Will. Strange, John Saunders, Eaw. Morse, Nich.
Smith, John Westhrooke, Tho. Langham, Walter Coventrye, John Cook, Henry
Clerk, Rich Yerbury, Ralph Izard, Edw. Shaller, Erad Norman, Jawer Clement,
Rich. Edmondson, Rich. Hoare, Will, Pett, Rich. Weedon, Sam. Ongley, Geo.
Benson, The. Short, Sam. Leake, Augustine Marriot, John Sawyer, Will. Reeve,
Roger Reeve, Fran. Griffith, Tho. Templer, Sam. Clerk, Geo. Coke, John
Stevenson, Jer. Wait, Jer. Elwes, Reb. Brough, Sam. Walton. Rich. Hamond, John
Foster, John Freeman, Dan. Brown, Phil. Scarth, James Foulis, Edw. Polhill, W.
Pellatt.


LONDON. Printed by T. Braddyll, and R. Everingham, and are to be sold at the
Seven Stars in Ave-Mary lane. MDCXC.


