An humble VINDICATION Of a Free ADMISSION Unto the Lord's Supper.

PUBLISHED For the ease, support, and satisfaction of tender Consciences
(otherwise remediless) in our mixed Congregations.

As it was delivered at two Sermons upon the occasion of this solemnity, in the
weekly labors of John Humfrey, Master of Arts, and Minister of Froome in
SOMERSETSHIRE.

The Second Edition.

A Priest is taken from among men, and ordained for men in things pertaining to
God, who can reasonably bear with the ignorant, and them that are out of the
way, for that himself also is compassed with infirmity.

Heb. 5 1, 2. London, Printed for E. Blackmore, at the Angel in Paul's
Churchyard, 1652.

ERRATA.
Page 9. line 6. for sin, read in, page 24. line 26. read Let some of our other
side. page 74. line 20. for most, read more.

To the Reader.
Courteous Reader,
HAving (by good providence) had some gleanings of this ensuing discourse, as
it was delivered by the worthy Author in own Congregation, and conferring my
notes with an honored Christian, I found such support and contentment to my
own conscience in the sympathy of his approbation, that made me very
importunate to have them perfected; and having at length obtained a complete
copy, I could not but humbly think it an engagement, much conducing to the
glory of God, to get this precious light, left under a bushel in a private
auditory, to be set up publicly in a candlestick of the Church, that the
spirits of many others might be thereby disclouded from the like scruples, that
most sadly hinder the blessed enjoyment of this Ordinance of Christ.

The work needs not the commendation of another, having in it some exquisite
notions, and self excellency enough, to commend it and its compiler; and
although it must expect several censures (which is the common fate of the best
works) according to the variety of men's humors in these times, yet I am
persuaded by experience, to an impartial and disengaged judgment, perusing it
with a single eye, it will afford abundant comfort and satisfaction, it being
weighty, spiritual, and ingenuous, and a piece wherein (if I may use the word
of one more learnedly able to judge of it) Mr. Humfrey has comprised the most
material things that can be said in this business, as rationally and concisely
as any beside him.

As it has pleased God therefore (pious Reader) to make me isntrumental that
ever this came to thy sight, let me beseech these two reasonable requests of
the. First, That thou will pass no censure upon the Book or Writer, before
thou have read all over, weighing the whole parts together, and examined them
seriously by the unerring rule of the word of God. Secondly, Having so done,
that thou will not suffer thy self to be swayed from judging according to the
truth, by any earthly respect whatsoever; and then I doubt not, but the Lord
will suitably pour thee out a double blessing in the reading; of establishment
for thy judgment, and of peace for thy conscience, which is the end of
publishing this work, and hearty prayer of the oc^^sioner of it.

I. C.

An humble VINDICATION Of a Free ADMISSION Unto the Lord's Supper
Mark 14.23. And the all Drank of it.


I Have spoken of the Institution, Nature, and Ends of the Sacrament; I come
now to the Receivers, And they all drank of it. In the 17 verse of the Chapter,
we find the twelve with Christ; They were his whole Congregation; in the 18th.
v. They were all sat at the Table; as they did eat (in the 22.) Jesus took
bread, and gave it them, and so likewise the Cup ( v. 23) Saying, Drink ye all
of it ( Mat. 26.27.) And they did so says the Text; They all drank of it, all
the twelve without exception; from whence I gather a free Admission to this
Ordinance.

My Brethren, this is a point we know troubles many, and I do humbly
acknowledge my self the weakest of a thousand, to satisfy the difficulties of
others; yet whereas the apprehensions, many times, of a plain honest meaning
Christian, in its pure naturalls (I mean unconfounded with the judgments of
others) may suit better with common understandings, than a more learned and
elaborate disquisition; I shall Sincerely propose my very heart and thoughts in
this thing, being ready to lie down at the feet of any truly Godly Soul; that
either out of tenderness of Conscience, or strength of Reason, dare not or will
not, submit unto my judgment and practice in it.

For the managing the point, I shall briefly lay down my meaning or state of
the Question, give my Proofs, Reason, and Answer Objections.

For my meaning it is honest, and very plain, without reservation. The Lord
Jesus has a Church in the World, wherein there is a visible profession of his
name; In this Church, God has set up his Ordinances of the Word and Sacrament.
Of these Ordinances, some are capable, and some incapable; Those that are
incapable, are so, either by Nature (who can discern no meaning hereof) as
Children, and Distracted persons, or by the Churches censure of Excomunication,
and no others. For those that are capable, we must rightly consider this
capacity, in regard of the Church (or Minister) in Admission of them to the
Ordinances; or in regard of the Communicants themselves in coming thither. Now
I dare not yet positively say for the peoples part, that all are so capable
that they may come as they list (though it be a duty none is excused from)
because there is a solemn preparation required, and many cannot seriously find
in their hearts to enter; or renew their Covenant with Christ, whereof this is
a pledge if it be not misused. Yet I am humbly persuaded for the Minister and
Churches part, (who on Gods behalf is to offer Christ freely, and so to tender
the Covenant to all that will receive him) there is such a universal capacity
for all men indefinitely, that if any come in, as professing themselves ready
to enter Covenant with Christ, desiring so to serve him in the worship of this
Ordinance (the former only excepted) we are to encourage them, saying with the
Bride, Revel. 22.17. Whosoever is a Thirst let him come, whosoever will let him
come, and drink freely of these waters of Life, or means of Salvation.

In a word, I do not believe that any, unless first excommunicated ( ipso
jure, or de facto) ought to be refused the participation of this Sacrament.
They all Drank of it.

For my proofs; look into Ex. 12. we read of the Passover, which is the same in
signification with the Sacrament, v. 3. Speak unto Israel, let every man take
his Lamb, a Lamb for a house. v. 47. All the Congregations shall observe it.
And v. 50. The whole people did so as the Lord commanded them. Add to this 2 Chronicles. 30.5. The Decreed to proclaim through all Israel from Dan to Beersheba
that they should come and keep the Passover to the Lord. Here you see free
Admission without exception. Indeed in Number. 9.7. we find a legal pollution
keeping some back for a month and no longer, as it appears in the 11 verse,
which nevertheless was dispensable too at the prayer of Hezekiah, 2 Chapter 30.18.
the reason being, because such uncleanness kept them from the Congregation (a
plain type of the excommunicated only) but as for any spiritual pollution
whatsoever (which is to be washed away with a penitent heart) we read of none
that might debar them from that Ordinance. This is that we stand upon: As for
their legal rites, who knows not they are abolished?

Now the Elder Brother (the Passover) being dead, we shall find the younger
(our Sacrament) to have possession of his inheritance in his free
Administration. Turn to the 1 Cor. 10.17. We being many are all partakers of
one Bread. All; at Corinth there were many it seems, came over from Heathenism
to the Church, and as many as came into them, All (this is the very truth) were
admitted to their Communion.

But now I pray, what All were these? see ver. 14. Flee Idolatry, I speak to
you, as men of understanding, judge ye what I say, is not this Sacrament the
Communion of Christ, how then can you communicate with Idols? This is the
sense in brief of the whole Chapter; mark it: These Corinths were such
lukewarm Christians, that they were sometimes ready to go to their Idols,
and sometimes to Church; like those in the second of Kings 17.41. and happily
thought it not unlawful. Now this Argument Paul uses to reclame them; Do we
not All partake of one Bread? therefore join not with Idols. As soon as you
come in to us we admit, and join with you in our Communion, and profession of
Christ, (who is God) and therefore how can you with shame now go to the Table
of I dolls (which are Devils?) This is very forceable and apparent, That these
Corinths whilst they are but willing to profess Christ, though yet given to
Idolatry, are admitted with the rest to the Sacrament, which very thing too, is
urged as a means to reclame them from it: Compare this with 1 Cor. 11.18. And
there are the same Corinthians mutinous and even drunken together at this
Table; now this certainly was a great profanation, for which they are reproved
and directed to examine, and carry themselves better for the future; but as for
their coming together. and general participation, that was but their duty,
and nothing is, or could be said against it.

Look back to 1 Cor. 10.4, 5. There we have the whole body of the Israelites
that passed through the Sea and Wilderness, Baptized under the cloud, and
drinking of the same Rock, Jesus Christ; that is, admitted freely to both our
Sacraments. Take any Christian, and he will be ready to say, give me but any
place of Scripture, or example of a general Admission, and I will be
convinced; Now here is one express, where all without exception, even those
very scandalous ones, with whom God was not well pleased, but destroyed in the
Wilderness (while there was no legal Rites, spiritual uncleanesse not
forbidding any) do freely participate of the outward Signs one with another.

Neither is it the saying this was a fleeting Ordinance, and necessary to
preserve their lives, that can abate the strength of this place, For do we but
mark the sense of the Apostle, and you shall see in this very point, and to
this very purpose does he parallel these Types to our Sacraments.

The scope is this, These Corinths were given to Idolatry and many vices, but
yet thought well enough of themselves, being ready to glory of their outward
profession, that they were of the Church, baptized, and communicating with
Christians: Now the Apostle to beat them off from this vain conceit, tells them
plainly, I would not have you ignorant (says he) that All the Israelites were
partakers of both these Sacraments, as well as you, and yet many of them were
justly destroyed when they ran to Idols as you do; and therefore take heed,
and let them be a warning to you; As for these outward rites, they are things
indeed, all that come to our Church, and profess Christ are admitted to, and so
are ye, but yet think not you shall escape Gods Judgments, if you walk not
answerable to your profession. The true importance of these words being well
weighed, are sufficient of themselves to end this controversy, the sense of
Scripture, and not barely the words being Scripture.

Turn to the parable of the Feast Matt. 22. with Luke 14.16.23. and though
parables are not wholly Argumentative, yet sin their main purpose they are as
enforcing as any Texts besides; Now if this general Admission is not a chief
thing intended, nay the very scope of the parable, judge by these particulars.

1 First, In Luke there is no other thing added, but the calling of all unto
the Feast is the main business there set down only. 2 Secondly, In Matthew.
where the story goes on to the Wedding garment, unto the Masters command is
added the Servants bringing in all; both Good and Bad. verse the 10th. 3
Thirdly; The Lords very exclusion of him that came in to the Feast, manifests
he must be needs first admitted, and brought in by the Servants, his Sin
consisting not in his coming thither; for that he was compelled to do, (by
which I conceive is meant his duty) but in his neglect of putting on his
Wedding Garment; whereby it appears by his unpreparednesse, he had no mind to
come at all, if he could have helped it 4. Fourthly, Our Savior explaines his
own parable, signifying hereby that many are called, that is the work of the
Ministry, we are freely to offer Christ in his Ordinances: but few are chosen,
that is the work of God, which we leave only to him. The Servants I say still
brought the man in, it was the Lord only took upon him to Judge and cast him
out. Now who is that the faithful Steward that gives the household their portion
of meat in due season, Luke 12.42. but these that are thus doing? 1 Cor 4.1, 2.
Acts 20.28. even as John Baptizes All that came to him for his Baptism, Mar.
1.5. Matt. 3. to the 11 verse, though at the same time some of them he calls
vipers ( Adultis eadem est ratio utriusque Sacramenti, so that I take this a
strong proof with John 3.26.) and as the Apostles themselves, that when
thousands are converted at a Sermon, Acts 2.41.42. they immediately communicate
with them, distributing freely not only the meat of the word, but Bread too of
the Sacrament.
See once more, Acts 10.28. A peculiar place I like for the expression. Saint
Peter here was very scrupulous of admitting Christian Communion with any but
the Jews, it was a pollution under the Law to participate in any thing with
the Gentiles, Io. 4. But being better instructed by a vision from Heaven, God
has showed me now, says he, that I should not call any man polluted and
unclean; I thank the Lord I have learned this same Lesson with a satisfied
Conscience, to esteem no man unclean, but all (unless excommunicated) free in
the use of Gods Ordinances Add to these proofs the consideration of such Texts
as set forth Free grace, as Isa. 55.1. Rev. 22.17. Matt. 11.28.1. Tim. 2.4. I.
6.37. with the like; And tell me when the Gospel offers Christ, or when Christ
offers himself and grace, which are the things signified, thus freely to poor
Sinners, how can we have the Conscience to turn them away from the Signs and
means thereof in this Ordinance?

For my Reasons. The first and chiefest I draw from the nature of the
Sacraments. The Sacraments are Verbum visibile, a visible Gospel; A declaring
of Christ crucified; A Memorial of the Covenant made by his death; that is,
The Sacraments set forth Christ to the eye, as the Gospel does to the ear; the
same matter is presented in both, only to diverse senses, and therefore the same
latitude (I suppose us within the Church and neither Infants, Fools,
distraught, (I may include drunk) or excomunicate) must be granted to them both
in their administration.

Upon this ground me thinks I stand as upon a Rock, against which all
objections, like waves, do but dash themselves in pieces. Look into the 1.
Cor. 11. we find Christ in the words of Institution, ver. 25. telling us, The
bread is his Body, the Cup is the blood of the New Testament, and the whole
action, an ordinance in the remembrance of him. Now the Apostle comments on
this in the 26 verse, For as often as you do it, you do show forth (says he) the
death of the Lord; whereby you see plainly what is his judgment of our Saviors
Institution, whatsoever you may think of it, and that is to be a Declaration,
showing, or holding forth his death (or Covenant made by his death) unto the
Receivers. This word (...) this annunciation, or showing forth is taken from
the Jews, Exo. 12.26.27. who were to instruct and declare the matter to their
children at the Passover; so Christ is here showed forth, as the matter of the
Sacrament set forth, I may say, of God, Romans 3.25. as a reconciliation through
Faith in his blood, to declare his righteousness for the remission of sins,
alike in the Word and Sacrament. You have a place may fully express this for
us: O ye Galathians Gal: 3.1. before whose eyes Christ has bin set out as
crucified among you. This expression may be well applied to the Sacraments,
which do so show forth Christ's death, that they describe him crucified unto
the sight, and set him out unto the eye, that which the word declares him to
the hearing. Now if there be any to whom the matter of the Gospel may not be
declared if there be any to whom we may not, or cannot show forth the death of
Jesus Christ; if there be any stand thus excluded from the Church, that
(without her mitigation) we may not tender to them the Covenant, it is they,
and they alone can be debarred from the Sacrament.

To this end we know the Sacraments are counted Signs and Seals, (and Seal
indeed as Signs) now wherein is this but as they signify or represent the new
Covenant to us, ratified in the blood of Christ? Understand it thus; A man
covenants with a Landlord about a purchase for his children at such a prize,
the price being paid the bargain is established; This done he requires a
writing, wherein the whole agreement is expressly declared; unto this writing
the Lord puts to his Seal to witness the confirmation, and so it is delivered
for his posterity. Jesus Christ does thus make a purchase for us, his death is
the price he lays down to God for it, for conveyance of this purchase, the
writing that is drawn is the Gospel, and the Seal put to this writing, is the
Sacrament, both of which must go, to make the public Instrument firm, that is
to testify the ratification of it, and so it is delivered for the use of the
Church.

More fully thus; A Prince (by intercession of a Favorite) sends forth a
Proclamation of Grace to Rebels, upon condition of laying down their arms, and
coming in to him, unto which he sets his own Seal for their assurance. This
Proclamation is the word of reconciliation preached, which runs conditionally to
all, The Seal annexed, is the Sacrament; now can it be imagined there is any to
whom the Proclamation belongs, without the Seal? Is not the Seal public as the
contents of it? And so will it not be plain, that as we offer the conditions
thereof to any, so likewise may we, and must we the Seal (upon their desire) to
confirm them to come in, and submit unto them? Thus we see the very nature of
the Sacraments is as Seals to a Writing, to be but necessary appendices of the
Gospel.

To conclude this first reason, then let me add force to it briefly. in these
four considerations.

1 That we find that the Gospel is to be preached to every creature, and a
Baptizing them (which on the same ground in an orderly way includes this
Sacrament with it) joined as largely in the same Commission. 2 That as the
Gospel is to All, so it offers Christ freely; Now can any avouch, that a poor
Soul may take Christ freely without qualifications, (which is true is regard of
any precedent merit, so there be a present giving up himself to him sincerely,
as his Lord and Savior) and yet let none but such as are qualified to their
mind, be Admitted to receive him at the Sacraments? Is Christ offered as a free
gift in the Word, and must we not come without our price and money to this
ordinance? Why this is even as they conceive of Judas, who being about to sell
our Savior, went out to make his bargain, at the Supper. 3 That the
Gospell-way is the best way to bring in Souls unto Christ. Let a Man be fully
convinced of the free grace of God in Christ, his heart can stand it out no
longer against his conversion. Now when the word is preached, the Covenant
opened, and the Seal too applied, this Message of reconciliation comes in its
full virtue for the working this conviction, and faith unto Salvation. 4 That
the Gospel is a peaceable Gospel, an Embassy of Peace, now how shall this
peace be kept, if where it comes, it goes to making separations at this
Ordinance? may a poor Soul say, O Lord Jesus Christ, though I cannot lay claim
unto thee as a Saint, I can as sinner (I mean as a wounded sinner) whom thou
came to save; and shall none but Saints apparent be suffered to come unto him
hither? In a word, is the Gospel peaceable, converting, free, universal? What
is the Gospel but a declaring Christ Crucified? and what is the Sacrament in
the Matter and Contents of it; but the very same? If Paul can tell us what it
is 1 Cor. 11.26. therefore there ought to be a free admission to it, as to the
Gospel. Provided only I mean still, that we keep within the state of our
question and observe the general rule of decency and order 1 Cor. 14.40. which
text forbids all confusion (as to receive before one is baptized) and disorder
(all coming unworthily) in Gods Ordinances, but not the Ordinances themselves
for some men's disorderlines in them, otherwise there must be no ordinance at
all allowed in this world.
My second Reason I draw from the nature of the visible Church; The visible
Church is a number of such as make profession of Jesus Christ, and so are
Saints by calling, whatsoever they are in truth; the essential marks whereof
(whereby it subsits us visible) is the Preaching of the Word, and
Administration of the Sacraments; now unless Men will be so bold to divest our
mixed Congregations (and so consequently all England formerly) of the name of
the visible Church, they cannot take from us one of its essential notes, in
the free use of this Ordinance. This Reason may have invincible support from
Christ's own doctrine and example.

First, His doctrine in those parables of the little and great fishes in one
net; The good and bad called to one feast, as before; The Chafe and Wheat in
one Barn; Especially, the Tares and Corn in one Field, Mat. 13. The Kingdom
of Heaven is compared to that Field, and the Field (says Christ) is the World,
that is, the Kingdom of Heaven in the world, or the visible Church clearly in
its Ordinances consisting of two sorts of professors, the Hypocrite, and the
true believer; which must grow together without separation (even when the
Servants discerning the Tares, come and tell their Lord of them) until the day
of Judgment; now who dare go to anticipate that day, and enter upon the Throne
of Christ? Lord is it thy mind we should make the separation between these
Tares and the Wheat at one of thy Ordinances? I can never believe then, thou
would have left this parable so undoubtedly set forth in the Gospel.

Secondly, His example, not only in the frequent converse with Publicans and
Sinners, but even in this very thing we find him at the Passover, and his own
Supper with Judas. The three first Evangelists bring him in express with the
rest at Table, and as for John, who wrote after the other, the truth is, (which
many do not, or will not know) he finding this Supper fully set forth by them
already, as in other things, he says nothing of it. St Luke is most evident,
22. ver. 21 where we read after the delivery, Christ says, Yet behold the hand
of him that betrayeth me is at the Table. Yet, as if he should say, Alas,
though this Judas partakes with us in this very supper, yet will he go and
betray me; So that a the same time, when he openly declares what a reprobate or
Devil he was (that this may not be poorly shifted off with his being a close
hypocrite) he not only washed his feet with the rest at a Supper a little
before, which John only mentions, but here communicates with him both of the
Passover and of this Supper. The evidence of which fact has ever appeared so
fully to the Church, that this alone has been ground sufficient to deduce their
right of free Admission; and what need more indeed be urged; but that men when
they are willing not to see, will let any hand, put over their eyes be enough
to blind them.

My third Reason I take from the nature of Christian Communion, and
Church Fellowship, which ought to be in Charity; in humility; without judgeing;
every one esteeming others better than themselves, with the like in many
places; especially in the Minister, who is to be gentle to all, suffering the
evil ((...)) to win them by this free way to Repentance, 2 Timothy 2.24.25. And
how impossible is this, if we must go to censuring of men's worthiness and
unworthiness, preferring our selves, rejecting others? the ready way to nothing
but heart-burnings, and divisions, as we have too sad experience already in
most Congregation. To Give weight to this, remember three passages of our
Saviors.

First, That of the Pharisee and Publican, Luke 18. I need not relate it, only
I beseech you lay it to heart whether there be not something (at least (...)) 1
These. 5.22.) of the Pharisees, I thank God I am not like this Publican, in the
turning away poor sinners from this Ordinance. There is a proud, Pharisaisme, I
will not accuse any of this, the very latchets of whose holy desires (erring
after a likeness here to the Church in Heaven) I may not be worthy; and there
is a strict Pharisaisme, as the Jews that were so rigid in their Sabbath,
Christ was fain to rebuke and moderate them in it; Of such a rigidness as this.
I cannot but most sorrowfully complayn in those, that will not allow a free
Communion. O my Savior rebuke the humor of these times that is amiss, and
moderate the zeal of all such men, least by their placing a peculiar and
superstitious holiness on this Ordinance, they quite invert the charitable use
of it and withhold the legacy thou have left thy people.

Secondly, That passage in Luke 6. When they murmured at him for eating with
sinners; the whole, says he, need not the Physician but the sick, I come not
to call the righteouss but sinners to repentance. O sweet Jesus, did thou
alive offer thy self and company to the veryest Publicans, and never castedst
out any that came to the, and shall we take stomach that thou art now thus
offered at this Sacrament.

The third place is in Jo. 8. When some severe Jews had brought a woman taken
in Adultry, accusing her by the law of Moses that she should be stoned, Jesus
said unto them, Let him that is without sin himself, cast the first stone at
her. My Brethren, so say I, let a man examine his own heart, and if he does not
find himself conscious of the same corruptions; let him have a censure to cast
out others; for my part I must profess the serious acknowledgement of mine own
vileness, makes me afraid at heart to turn away others, but I have learnt
with Christ ( Heb. 5.2.) to pity them (as a fellow sinner) by my own infirmity.

My fourth Reason will arise from the vanity, formality, impossibility, of
selecting people to this Ordinance. Look up but to the heart of all these
separations they come to nothing; For put the case, you will have a gathered
company, I pray who do you account indeed to be fit and worthy receivers? If
not all that make profession as we do mixtly, then, those only that have an
interest in Christ, and are true believers: Well, but how will you be able to
know them? The heart of man is deceitful above all things, who can know it?
And if we can hardly discover our own hearts, how shall we ever discern
others? So that all will come but to those that have the fairest show, those
that seem such, and you cannot be secured, but there may and will be some
Hypocrites, and so this true partaking as all one body and one blood, in such
an unmixt Communion as you pretend, vanishes, and there can be no such matter;
But now if men stand here upon a formal purity, and will have the outward
purest Church they can, they go to separating again, and never leave
separating and separating (as we have daily Testimony) till they are quite
separated one from another; Even as in the peeling of an Onion, where you may
peele and peele, till you have brought all to nothing, unless to a few tears
perchance, with which the eyes of good men must needs run over in the doing.

My fith Reason I gather from the uniformity of the Service of God; If all
other worship lies in common, it is an intrenchment upon the common liberty to
put an enclosure upon the Sacrament. Are all the commands of God universal,
why not Do this also? If an unregenerate man cannot perform any thing that is
acceptable to Christ, but is turns to sin (non perse, sed per pravam
dispositionem Subjecti) and so is Damnable, Pro. 28.9. and yet he is to do his
endeavor, and not to be excluded nevertheless from any duty; why must there
needs be an exclusion here upon fear of the like sin and condemnation?

Let men on one side answer, why do you allow a Syntax in the whole service of
God besides; and bring in a Qua genus of Anomolaes and Heteroclites, only at
this Ordinance?

Let the other side answer, how can we admit of Children as Members of the
visible Church, being born of Christian parents, unto Baptism, and yet turn
away the parents of those Children from the Sacrament? Those that have gone
about to answer this, had better happly have said nothing. for our free course
of Baptism, and a denial of this, is such a Seam-rent, as will never be
handsomely drawn up, though stitcht together; Nevertheless in yielding the one,
they have granted the other.

I will add, whereas on either fide they have their forms, which they urge as
Necessary (there being no admission otherwise) to a very joining in the service
of God; let both answer, whether they offend not a branch of our Christian
freedom concerning ordinances of men Col. 2.18.20. which, though we might
submit thereto as prudentiall only, in the outward man, we dare not suffer to
be set, or creep into the seat of God, I mean the conscience, that is in
bondage if any religion be placed in them. It is ill putting Gods Worship upon
stilts, which to advance it a little higher in the outward port, are sure to
give it a fall into dangerous scruples and divisions.

My sixth Reason I lay down from my innocence in this doing: 1. I do but my
duty. 2. I have no power to turn away any: 3. I hope the best, of all: 4. I
know God can turn the worst even at this ordinance if he please: 5. I endeavor
my utmost de jure, that all come prepared: 6. I humbly confess all our sins (as
Hezekiah) desiring true repentance, and a pardon for all our omissions; and so
lastly, I venture the issue all on God, knowing that his ordinances are a sweet
savor unto him, whether we are saved or perish by them.


I might add here more considerations very pressing, from the command, and
good of coming; from the evil of omitting this ordinance.

For the good of coming; The Sacrament is a means, and a pledge; a means as
well to receive grace, as a pledge to assure us thereof: Now suppose a poor
Soul wants grace, whether shall he come but to the means of receiving it? The
ordinances are as the Baths, there are many come to the Bath, that are never
the better for it, yet as they are means of health they are open and free for
all, to come, and make experience of them. I conceive as much of the Sacrament,
and though we may scruple how an unregenerate man can receive it as a pledge,
yet as it is a means whereby grace is conveyed, there is no difficulty.

For the evil of omission; In the Law those that neglected Circumcision and
the Passover were to be cut off; and in the Gospel Matt. 22. those that came
not into the Feast, were destroyed, the Lord giving a reason ver. 8. because
they were not worthy. Alas! we make a scruple only of coming unworthily,
whereas they are most unworthy of all that come not in to the Supper; we do
not find any of the Servants durst refuse to call in all: if they had left out
any, they might have bin worse served. This one thing has long stuck on my
thoughts; how shall we neglect a certain duty of administering, or of coming to
the Sacrament, for fear of accidental scandal, or of committing an uncertain
sin, in the doing? It not this a kind of doing evil, (the evil of omission)
that good may come of it? whose damnation is just: Romans 3.8.

But I will say no more, thus much shall suffice, (...) I will not give you my
Reasons by the heap, but by the weight; I humbly commit them to you, only
with this caution, that no man take occasion from hence to presume; for as the
Isralites (that were destroyed, after they passed the Sea, and drank of the
Rock) are set for a warning to the Corinthians, so are they both set for a
warning to us, that we daily examine our selves, and come with reverence,
least we being freely admitted by Gods goodness, perish nevertheless with them
for our own unworthiness.

The Second SERMON.
NOw for answering Objections (...), Two things I must premonish you* 1.
Whereas common notions are like dishes, where the same matter dressed but in
another way, or variegated in the expression, receives a several relish and
esteem in the palats of ordinary judgments, you must pardon me the Liberty if
at any time I be forced in the Cookery of the same sense to serve you in more
words than enough to any Objection. 2. Whereas many Godly in these times have a
prejudicate opinion against this free Admission, so that whatsoever may be
said, is not like to remove all scruples, which are so much fastened on their
Consciences, thinking they have holiness on their side; we are to go unto the
Throne of Grace, to pray the Lord to give us his Spirit of illumination to
direct us in this truth, which is able alone to convince and satisfy us. And
as for me, if I deliver what is not consonant to the holy Word, I desire the
Lord to blot out my Sermon, with my sin, that none of his Little ones may be
offended by it; but if it be the mouth of Truth too much kept in silence,
delivering nothing but the very doctrine and practice of Christ himself and his
Apostles, (as one of his weakest servants does heartily believe) I hope the
Lord will give a blessing on it, and send it out as a light into your hearts,
to discover those subtilities of Satan, whereby he would obstruct your comfort
in the use of this Ordinance.

Objection 1. This Doctrine will take away the use of the Keys, Excommunicate
Excommunication, and leave us no Discipline in the Church.
Ans. Unto this by way of concession, although it has been thought these
censures belonged but to the Church, until they had a Christian Magistrate, I
grant,

First, That there is a power of the Keys in the Church.

Secondly, that the exercise of this consists in Excommunication.

And thirdly, That the want thereof in the right institution is to be bewailed.

But by the way of satisfaction, I Answer, this objection is grounded merely on
false surmises about Excommunication, which being removed as the fuel from
the fire, it will go out of it self.

1 It surmises this Church Discipline to lie in suspension from the Sacrament,
as if Excommunication were but an Excommunion.

Let us therefore know, that these Church censures are punishments upon
scandalous persons (after a legal conviction) whereby they are debarred from
Christian society in general (lest they leven others by their example) for else
what is it to keep a profane person from the Sacrament, but to gratify him
who never intended, at least never cared, to come thither? But now when men
will take these keys that were made to the great Church door, opening and
shutting to all fellowship, and fit them only to the Chancell door, as if they
peculiarly belonged to this Ordinance, they many times get them in so far, that
being unable to work them out again, they never leave turning and locking till
they have both shut out the Sacrament from the Church, and the Church from the
Sacrament.

2 It surmiseth the institution of this power to be in reference only to the
Ordinances, to keep them pure and holy, as if the Sacrament especially would be
defiled otherwise to the receivers.

Let us therefore further know the ends of these Church censures, that they
concern not those that are admitted to the Ordinance, but are used in reference
only to Offenders, that thereby they may be kept in awe, and brought to
Repentance. The only ends are (...) (as others have it) for their reformation,
satisfying the Congregation, and to warn others.

3. It surmises a most near essential relation, between this Excommunication
and the Communion, as if it were a part of it; at least some necessary
Antecedence, as if the Sacrament could not be Administered without it. Let us
therefore distinguish finally, between the exercise of the Keys as Acts of
Discipline, and the use of the Ordinances as acts of Worship; and though the
Keys may have some disposing power in regard of the outward order of our
worship, yet is there no alliance in the nature of one another; one is in one
Element, the other is in another? even as the Acts of the Assizes may have
influence on, but they have no relation to the nature of your private
occupations.

In duties there may be a double relation; a relation of Ingrediency, as Faith
has to Prayer, without which be in it, it cannot be effectual; or a relation
of Subserviency, as the Law has to the Gospel, in being preparatory to it; now
there is no such relation at all, not only no ingrediency as a part of it, but
even no essential subserviency, or dependence between Excommunication and the
Sacrament. For what is the exclusion of another, to the communicating of the
Receiver? what Physical or Moral antecedence, has the punishment of one at the
Assize, to the work in your shop, doing your trade? there is indeed a Key of
instruction very requisite for our preparation, but as for these Keys of
censures what can be more distant and impertinent, to those that are coming
hither? So that I judge there is no more reason for one upon this ground to
say, I will no go to the Communion, because there is not excommunication, than
for one to say, we have here no Justices or Sessions, we have no Magistrate in
this Town to look to people in their dealings, therefore (because it is better
that we had) we will not live here but hold it altogether unlawful to follow
our ordinary vocations.

Rep. But is it not a heavy case we have no discipline established?

Answ. I say, true; but what then? therefore must we have no worship? Socrate
ambulante fulguravit.

Object. 2. The most of men are wholly unfit and not capable of this Ordinance.
This is enlarged, Here are things to be done, Preparatory, a serious
examination; Executory, an exercise of Faith, Love, etc. And here are things to
be received, Remission, Increase of Grace, Assurance, which all cannot obtain
neither. Therefore no free Admission hither.
Answ. There is a manifest weakness in this arguing from men's unability, to our
duty. For as to the Churches part, in admission of all (as I at first
distinguished) who can but look upon at outward capacity; here is nothing to
them, no more than Judas unworthiness and inward incapacity was to Christ. Let
every receiver think what he has to do. But as to the peoples part, I answer
3. things.

1, There is no duty a natural man can perform rightly, so that most men are
wholly incapable to hear, to pray, or come to any Ordinances, where Graces are
to be acted and receive, as well as at this Sacrament, but I hope that will not
exclude them therefore from all, and give them a writ of Ease to do nothing; I
wonder grave men should beat the air thus with a Feather. 2. I say to every
man, though he cannot do what he should and ought to do, he must still
endeavor to do what he can. The insufficiency of any debtor (incurred through
his own fault) does not discharge his Bond, but he is to pay what he can; it is
every man's doing less than he can, that shall condemn him at the last day, say
Divines; so say I, Let every man do what he can still, and this is plain
Divinity. 3. There may be a difference between a worthy Receiver, and a
Receiving worthily; as a poor man (says Pemble) though but unworthy to sit
there, may carry himself very worthily at the Kings Table. In this case
therefore whosoever thou art, do thou labor thy best to prepare thy heart,
and if after thy examination, thou judge thy self but unworthy, let thy
humbled soul come and say nevertheless, Lord, if I am unworthy, whither shall
I go to make me worthy? Is it not to thee my kind Savior, that has an
invitation (come ye laden) for the poorest sinner? It is true, many count me
but as a Dog, Lord I confess I am no better in my own apprehension, but let
even this poor Dog eat of the crumbs of thy Table. If I neglect my duty, I
certainly offend thee, If I come Lord, I do but humbly venture on thy mercy.
Rep. But is not the Ordinance hereby taken in vain against the third
Commandment?

Answ. On the Receivers part when they find no benefit by it, they may judge
so, and are find their fault, and repent of it; But not of the Admitters part,
who are to do their duty, and leave the success to God; Even as Christ
Preached to the people in Parables, and gave only his Disciples the privilege
to understand them: And as all were suffered to touch Christ, when but one only
received virtue from him; so do I humbly conceive are we to suffer all to
come unto him here, leaving it to his breast alone, to give out the effectual
benefit, to whom he pleases.

Objection 3. Holy things to holy men.
Answ. There is a double holiness, an Inward, and Outward holiness; And this
both in Things and Persons: In Persons, An outward holiness consists in their
bare profession, and name of Christian, and so are Saints by calling; an Inward
holiness consists in the work of Grace upon their hearts, and so are Saints
by election. In Things likewise, The Ordinances are all holy, There is an
Outward holiness in the Outward communication of them; There is an Inward
holiness in the Inward Communion, virtue, power or efficacy of them, Now
Outward holy things to Outward holy men, and Inward holy things to Inward holy
men; a visible Ordinance to the visible Church, and the invisible Grace, to the
invisible Members that have a saving interest in them by Faith.

Rep. But do we not hereby make our selves one with the wicked with whom we
join, and can we have Communion with Christ and Belial?

Answ. We do, and must be one, with all that join in the same profession; that
is, we are one, or one body, as Members of the same visible Church in its
outward capacity, freely administering the Ordinances, whereof we are to
partake; but we are not one with them in their evil discourses, we disclame
them wholly in the impiety of their conversation. So that we have communion
herein only with Christ, and have nothing to do with Belial. For I would not
have any so grossly think, that a joining with a wicked man's person, is having a
communion with Belial, but accompanying him in his evil ways ( Communio
malorum non maculat quemquam participatione Sacramentorum (says Austine) Sed
consentione factorum:) If the Corinthians were alive, and you joined with them
in going to their Idols, this were indeed a communion with Belial, but if you
only joined with them in coming to the Lords Table, you should partake of
Christ alone, as the Godly of them the did, and as we ought to do. I will go
with the wickedst man alive to the Church, but I must leave him at the
Alehouse; We may join with any to do good, as to worship God in his
Ordinance, to profess, and confederate in Christianity; but we cannot (that is
we may not) join with any in the least evil; we cannot serve God and the Devil.

But you will say further, Do we not profess the wicked, with whom we join,
not only to be one of us, but one of Christ, and Partakers of his death? and
how can we do so? I answer very well. The visible Church is the Body of
Christ, as Christ said, Every branch, in me, that bears not fruit. Io. 15.2.
As Peter says, There are some that deny the Lord that bought them. 2. Pet.
2.1. As Paul says, There are some that are sanctified with the blood of the
Covenant, which they trample upon. Heb. 10.29. (with Heb. 2.9.2 Cor. 5.14.) So
say I of all ungodly professors, They are such branches in Christ, redeemed and
sanctified, in the same sense as the Scriptures mean in these places; that is,
in regard of a visible esteem, whereby they externally partake of the
Ordinances of Christ, and so are reckoned as Members of him.

Let such texts be laid a little more to heart, and when you have made the
Orthodox interpretation the Question will be even done, and we shall be no
longer afraid of a free Admission, when we must affirm, that there is an
historical visible faith, that gives an outward Church-right unto the
Elements, as a true saving Faith, that gives interest to the effectual grace of
the Sacraments; Even as the branches have some union with the root, that bring
forth only Leaves, though they partake not of that vital sap, that sends forth
fruit also.

Object. 4. the Seal is set to a Blanck, if All be admitted.
Answ. Unto this, which has trouled many, I answer not presently by the
distinction of an Outward and Inward, an Absolute and Conditional sealing: But
I desire a right understanding of this Notion, how the Sacrament is a Seal
taken up upon the Churches trust. I have always thought here lies generally
some mistake, men take it to be a Seal unto their Faith, and if there be no
true faith, it is set (they think) unto a blank, and this breeds a miserable
fear, to whom it is delivered. Let us know therefore (I propose it
submissively) that the Sacraments are not properly Seals unto our Faith. How
do we conceive Faith, such a thing as must have Gods Seal put to it? God does
not attest our Faith, but the truth of his own promises, Heb. 6.17. but they
are Seals properly of the Covenant: A Covenant is a thing must be sealed, and
the maker is to attest it thereby.

Indeed they may be said to be Seals of our Faith (as Divines speak)
consecutive, by a consequence of speech, because as Seals confirm a thing, so
Faith is confirmed and strengthened by receiving; which is an effect thereof,
Heb. 6.18. but they are not Formaliter, formally in a true proper sense, Seals
unto any thing but the Covenant, or representations of the effectual Seal,
the blood of Christ, by which it being ratified with God, the Lord declares it
by the Gospel; unto the administration whereof, the Sacraments are set, to
signify the undoubted truth of it, as Seals (we say) and signs, showing us,
As the Bread and Wine is broken, powered out, and offered, with the other
actions, so surely has Christ's Body been broken, his blood shed, that all that
believe in him according to this Covenant, should have grace and salvation by
him.

And if it be to say more, God does hereby engage himself to make it good. The
expression is borrowed from Romans 4.11. where Circumcision is said a Seal, not
simply of Abraham's Faith, but of the righteousness of his Faith (or, of
righteousness, I take it, through Faith: Phil. 3.9.) that he should be the
Father of them that believe, which thing sealed to, is the very tenor of the
Covenant. Now let Circumcision be received on Isaac the Child of promise, or on
Ishmael that must be cast out, it is the same Seal of Abraham's Covenant; Let
the Sacrament be offered to the Godly, or to the Hypocrite, it is the same Seal
of God declaring the truth of his Covenant, which stands most sure, and all the
unbelief in the World cannot make it of no effect. Even as a Proclamation of
pardon (as we instanced before) unto Rebels, comes with the Broad Seal to those
that refuse it, and yet it is no less a true Seal, and set to a true writing,
than if they did all come in and embrace it: so that if it want its due effect
on the Receiver, it may be said (if you will) to be set upon a blank (where
Seals are set) but not to a blank, seeing the Lord has set it, to the truth
of his Word, or grace of his Gospel.

Rep. But were it not absurd for a man to set his seal, when there has been no
agreement and transactions before? So do unregenerate men, who come to the
Sacrament without that solemn giving up the Soul to God, as he ought who
enters Covenant with him.

Answ. I grant with sorrow, there are too many of us come absurdly, and but
wickedly, when we forget to do that we ought; the Lord forgive us: but though
in the reciprocal action, as it is to be a seal (as is said) of man's part, the
receiver fails in his solemn mutual engagements according to the Covenant
(whereof he is to repent,) yet as for the Minister, or Church, who offer it as
seal on Gods part, there is a true seal to a true Copy, and nothing out of
Order.

The Sacraments therefore may be considered in their nature, and in their use:
In their nature, I take them to be Gods seals only, as primarily signifying his
grace, and showing forth Christ, though in the use and effect they are to be
man's too, as secondarily he is reciprocally to believe, and engage himself unto
God: (Sacramenta nostra accipimus ex manu dei, and nobis sunt signae gratiae
primo, secundario obligationis and professionis nostrae. Paraeus in Loc.
praedict.) In the notion they are man's seals, we may conceive the Sacraments
Seals of Faith, for Faith is the condition of the Covenant, and we seal to our
Condition, so that as they are conceived thus indeed, they are seals of Faith,
because seals of the Covenant, which I stand upon; But as they are Gods seals,
for the same reason they cannot be seals of Faith (but consecutive, as I said
before, in regard of the effect to the Godly, to yield what (remotely and
expressively) may be) because God seals not imaginably to our part of the
Covenant which is Faith, but to his own part, which is the Promise, and so I
call them seals of the Covenant or promise formally and not of Faith.

Now I say clearly, though an unregenerate man cannot receive the Sacrament, as
a seal of his Faith, yet the Church can give it, as a seal of the Covenant; and
though it wants its due effect on him, there is the right nature nevertheless
in the Administration, though not a right use of it in the receiver; even as at
the word, where there may be true preaching, and the nature of the Gospel,
though the hearers apply it not as they ought by faith.

Look back to that only place To. 4. where it is said Circumcision is a seal,
Abraham is said to receive it as a seal, which receiving includes Gods giving,
so that we must look upon the Sacraments in the nature of them, as Gods seals
from the very institution; who else durst appoint such things to signify such
spiritual matters? and as they are Gods seals they are set to his own word,
and so can never be to a blank while there is truth in the promise, and writing
in the Gospel. Now then the Sacraments being Gods seals certainly, in the
institution and nature of them, if I should deny them to be man's seals at all,
there being not for it one tittle of Scripture, I should quite remove the
scruple from the hearts of men; but whereas (that I may not remove their care
and duty too) I grant though in the nature of seals, they Gods Seals, Gods own
Seals, seals of the Covenant only, yet in the use of seals and effect, they are
to be man's seals also, seals to the Condition of our part, seals of Faith, and
so I cannot, I may not acquit the receivers wholly, but that they come absurdly,
set a seal to a blank, and take the Sacrament in vain (as it is to be their
seal) if they come without Faith, and those solemn engagements as God requires
of us: though I can fully acquit the Church herein, in her delivery of the
signs on Gods part (as we are his Ambassadors;) because the Covenant by him
stands sealed to all whomsoever, and there can be no doubt of sealing to a
blank I affirm, so long as the Promise or the Gospel it self holds in force,
the tenor whereof this Sacrament seals absolutely to us. The tenor of it I
say, mark me, not our interest in it; for that it seals not absolutely.
Assurance being concluded by way of discourse, and whatsoever is common to the
Hypocrite with the believer cannot conclude it. The Sacrament is the external
seal (the internal only of the Spirit (as witnessing with our spirits, To.
8.16.) can absolutely give this interest to any) this outward seal, is set to
Gods outward Copy of the Covenant, that is the word; now look what the word
affirms, the Sacrament seals, and confirms according to the tenor thereof, and
no otherwise. Now the word speaks not particularly of any man's single interest,
but generally it declares to all a common interest upon condition they believe;
now as this interest is expressed conditionally, so the Sacrament cannot seal to
it but conditionally, according to that tenor is expressed; or rather let me say
the Sacrament seals generally (so I will express it) the truth of the Covenant
freely to all, engageing them unto it, and the interest or benefits of the
Covenant, to every single person, upon the terms, conditions, or tenor only of
the Gospel.

I must profess this in the Embrion has layn a long time in my apprehensions,
and I cannot but be glad to find of late a pierccing godly and excellent man (I
take him) whom the right conceiving of this alone (he says) converted his
opinion and satisfied him.

The Covenant runs thus, He that believes shall be saved, add I believe; Ergo
I shall be saved; from which syllogism we gather our assurance. Now to which of
those propositions (says he) does the Sacrament seal? not to the minor as it
is surmised, for no Scripture says of any particular man he believes, and God
seals to his own word, not ours. Nor to the Conclusion for the same reason. But
to the major, which it absolutely seals, as true to us, according to the tenor
of the Gospel.

Object. 5. The Covenant belongs not to All, therefore the Seals neither.
Answ. The Covenant is sometimes taken in Scripture for those absolute promises
of Gods putting his Laws in our hearts, keeping us by his power to salvation,
and to the like purpose, Heb. 8. which are proper only to his Elect, and
belonging to his secret will: Or the Covenant is taken as it is for the tenor
of the Gospel in Gods revealed will, and so it runs on these terms, whosoever
believes shall be saved, and whether this belongs to all, is no question. It is
true for our comfort; whosoever comes under these conditions, may have an
assured trust, that the absolute promises also belong to him; but nevertheless
it is the conditional Covenant, or the Covenant in its conditional capacity,
that is tendered to us in the word, and sealed to, in the Sacrament: So that
the Covenant is indeed of the same extent with the Gospel, and the very tenor
shows it universally belonging to whomsoever.

Now then, As when I have a business to propose in general to my Parish, I
read the Contents, which when they like, I propose certain Articles, and say,
whosoever will agree to this, let them come and set their hands unto it. In
like manner here, when I have held forth the glad tidings of the Gospel, I
show them the conditions of the Covenant: Jesus Christ offers life to all upon
these terms of Faith; If you will resolve to accept him as your Lord and
Savior, to forsake sin, and serve him; come, put your hands and seals
thereunto, in this Sacrament, and lo here is the seal of God, on his part if
you do, (to witness the certainty of salvation promised to you) obliging him
to his word. So that to speak sincerely, if we should propose two men, one
that is not in Covenant with Christ, and one that is, this Sacrament does more
ingenuously belong unto the first, who hereby comes to do it solemnly at this
time; supposing, now he resolves to enter Covenant with him. You will say, the
Covenant does not belong to him; What? Does it lie upon his everlasting
damnation or salvation, and not belong to him? The benefit of the Covenant, you
may truly say, belongs not yet to him, until he is in Covenant, but the
Covenant it self is of Epidemicall concernment, and so far belongs to all, that
it is to be tendered freely, and offered to them, that whosoever does receive
it, may have the benefit of it.

Rep. But what right does this give him to she Covenant?

Answ. As the Sacrament is a showing forth of Christ, with a tender of the
Covenant in his bood, there is an open, free, general right to it, for all
that will come in to Christ. Let me beseech you, mark this distinction; There
is a double right here observable. A right of Obligation, and a right of
Privilege: For the right of Obligation, in the Ministers offer of Christ
freely, and the peoples receiving him in his own terms, I do avouch a
universal right, to every Ordinance, Isa. 66.23 they being duties of worship,
which is of universal command (and this often, primitively once a week) though
for the right of Privilege in any, to enjoy the sweetness, comfort, efficacy,
life, and benefit of them, I acknowledge is it a perogative, belonging only to
the Saints, and Elect of God.

Now put case, a poor soul should stand in doubt of his right to this
Ordinance, that yet fain would come to Jesus Christ. Let him say, Lord, My
heart is humbly afraid of my unworthiness, yet seeing I come resolving to give
up my Soul to thee, and it is our duty to come in, at this Supper; This Right
of Obligation shall be my warrant to bring me in, and then Lord I hope thou will let me find the Right of Privilege too, in thy due season O my God.

Put case again, A godly heart should rise at the conceit of a wicked person
receiving with him, Let him think presently thus, though there is a nearer
Right unto my soul, blessed be the mere free grace of God, yet there is a Right
of Obligation to every one, I ought not to be offended with any, the Lord
sanctify it to them for their conversion. The knowledge of this plain
distinction (without the inveaglement here, of Adrem and In re) may do very
much to allay the troubles of many Judgments, and more Consciences in this
controversy.

Object. 6. The Sacrament is not a converting Ordinance, we preach to all to
convert them, but we may Administer only to the regenerate, to confirm them.
Answ. Unto this Objection because it is so much urged, give me leave to use
some words. I do acknowledge Divines do usually distinguish, of a Sacrament of
Initiation, and Confirmation, ingenuously attributing our new birth first to
Baptism, and then our nourishment and increase unto the Supper, and so they
make a converting Ordinance of the Word, and Baptism (the laver and means of
regeneration) and a confirming one only, of this Sacrament; although I take a
grant of the one, to be a sufficient medium to prove the other.

But under favor, unless this distinction be taken only in regard of the
outward visible Church (into which, it is true Baptism alone does initiate,
enter, or first incorporate us, and this supper confirm, or continue us as
members thereof) we must understand it, not after a rigid form of speech, and
Idiome of truth, but after a more solute and ingenuous conception; that is, it
is such a notion as holds full enough to be handsomely spoken, but holds not so
strictly as to build arguments on it, otherwise the ingenuity thereof will trip
up their judgment.

It is a rule therefore worthy here of our knowledge, that in divinity, we
often give an indefinite denomination to things as they are most eminently
inclined; As for instance, in indifferent things (which are indifferentia ad
unum) when they incline more to evil in the use than to good (as many
harmless recreations) we condemn them indefinitely as evil, though in some
cases they are warrantable. Ec. 3.4 And I may happily with right circumstances
lawfully use them. So whereas this Sacrament does more eminently incline to be,
and is (...) most usually confirming, and more seldom converting, they do a
part eminentiori denominate it indefinitely a confirming ordinance only. And
indeed this is true when it is taken in respect of the same persons, whom we
supposing to have been converted by the Word and Baptism (suo modo) already,
the Supper is, and can be only a confirming Ordinance unto them without
question. But as for others, who we conceive, not yet converted, and so humbly
coming hither as waiting in the ways of God for conversion, I doubt not, as
there is no Scripture to the contrary, so there is no reason, but as the Word
and Baptism do confirm, as well as convert; (the Spirit is not tied to one
means, John. 3.8.) so may this Sacrament convert as confirm, according as God
gives forth his grace to the Condition of the Receivers.

There is therefore an error (to answer directly) in this Objection about the
nature of the Sacrament (which being as we have shown) a visible word holding
forth Christ and the Covenant to the light, is converting, as the Gospel doing
the same to the hearing; for if the Centurion believed only by seeing Christ
corporally on the Cross; if the contemplation of the Creatures, sacrifices,
sight of miracles, have been means, to some of their religion and conversion;
we cannot doubt, but the eyes may much more splritually instruct us here in
the melting objects of Christ's passion, redemption and tender mercies outwardly
represented, seeing we hope the working of the Spirit too, by virtue of an
ordinance. As at the word, Christ comes into the heart by the sense of hearing,
so at the supper by the sense of seeing, touching and tasting

Let the World Answer Paul's argument, To show forth the death of Christ is the
means of Conversion. The Sacrament is the showing forth his death. 1. Cor.
11.26. Therefore as it does so, it is undoubtedly converting, Hence I observed
in the words of institution, there was a Take and an Eat, two words, a Take for
such as have not Christ (a word of grace) to convert those: and an Eat, for
such as have already received him, to nourish and confirm them. For, put case,
a moral man, taken for a good man, yet unregenerate, is, and cannot be refused
to be, admitted hither: The man does his beast to prepare himself, and so
comes; do we think now, to such a man the Ordinance is necessarily
fruitless, and can have no work on him? then God help us. Shall not his
examination, confession, prayers, meditation, with all the Ministers
exhortations, be more solemnly conducing now, to work grace in his heart, and
to convert him (this being the way of the spirits motions) than the bare
preaching of a sermon? Especially seeing the word does not only precede, but
accompany, and is a very part too, of the Sacrament. Accedat verbum ad
elementum and fit Sacramentum.

But, put case further, a poor Soul much humbled in the sight of his sins
that cannot yet be able to believe and close with Christ, comes hither, hoping
to meet with this favor here; well the word of reconciliation is freely
opened, the free mercies of Christ set forth, and all this while it has not
happily this effect upon his heart, yet when he comes to see the truth of all
this sealed with Gods own seal, Christ freely offered, and peculiarly received
of him in the Sacrament, his Soul by all these heavenly wires is caught, taken,
drawn, and even enforced to a saving Faith; the Spirit using such most
powerful methods, for the work of his grace, which he infuseth in us, by a
sweet attemperation to the will, not by compulsion, habitus infusi, being
wrought per modum acquisitorum. And this we have lively represented in the two
Disciples of Emmaus whose hearts did burn within them at the hearing of
Christ, but at the breaking of bread their eyes were fully opened to know and
to believe him, Luke 24.30, 31.

Rep. Although a Man may be converted At, it is not By the Sacrament, it is
occasionally, but not intentionally a converting Ordinance.

Ans. This being undeniably granted of our opposites, the matter is upon the
point yielded; for consider sincerely this: It may be, Peradventure a man may
be converted by it, and no text expressly forbids any coming to it; is not this
enough? An It may be granted, (lay it well to heart) and no place to the
contrary alleged, who doubts not but all It may bee's, all occasions must be
taken for our salvation?

But that I may wholly root out this subtility, which I think the spirit of
error has insinnuated in the hearts of many Godly men; I have three things more
to say, which by Gods blessing will fully do it. Provided, if the thing serves
our turn you will not be grating on the expression.

1. Let us clearly know, that the Sacraments, and all Ordinances, are primarily
and properly means of grace; It is but in a remote sense, they are means of
conversion, or confirmation. For this grace we receive in the use of them, is
that which convert some, and strengthens others. Now then we come to this
Sacrament, as the means to receive Gods grace, and this grace, which he
distributes as a most wise God, works in every one, as his state and need
requires; in the converted for their strength and establishment, and in the
unregenerate for their conversion.

2. Consider what is Conversion. There is an outward conversion from
Heathenisme, to the profession of Christ; we do not stand to say the
Sacrament is such a converting Ordinance, as if Christ should bid us go forth
with this Sacrament, and convert the Nations, let this be imagined only of the
word. But there is an inward effectual conversion of such as outwardly
profess Christ, to the truth of grace in their hearts. Now how is the work of
grace (or true conversion) wrought through the word it self? Not from any
active power it has per se, upon the Soul; but per modum objecti we say, and
instrumentally: the object is proposed or revealed, that is all the word does,
and then it is the Spirit that by illuminating the mind, and the touch upon the
will, brings the heart to embrace the object, whereby it is converted. Now is
it not just thus likewise in the Sacrament? This Sacrament shows forth Christ
Crucified according to the Covenant, who is the true object of Faith and Life,
upon this the Spirit of God draws the heart (by illumination and conviction) to
embrace him upon those terms he here is offered, insomuch that experience can
witness that some are, and have been hereby converted. What difference is
there imaginable between this conversion, and at the Word? what a shift is it
to say it is only At, and not By the Sacrament, when it is isntrumental
(morally we mean, not physically) per medum objecti, as the Word? where I may
say the same too as truly, that it is more properly At, than By, the Word it
self, there being no active virtue but of the Spirit, in the one, or the other.

3. As for this scruple of the Sacrament being occasionally, not intentionally
converting; There may be a principal intention and subordinate; more primary,
or secondary ends in an Ordinance: Though the word be the principal converting
Ordinance, we cannot deny but others may be subordinately also converting, as
Prayer; why else does the Church pray, Turn thou us, and we shall be turned,
Convert thou us, and we shall be converted? Now as Prayer and other means of
Grace are converting, and that intentionally in being used to this end; So I
affirm of the Sacrament, unless you can find in your heart to keep this
pitiful shift still, and say, rather than this shall be, you will distinguish
between a converting ordinance and means of Conversion, other ordinances are
means of Conversion, but yet the word, you persist, is the only intentionally
(that is intended) converting ordinance: Well; go too, what then I pray? To
the purpose. Then you will say the word shall be held forth to all as intended
to convert them, but the Sacrament shall not, being not so intended in the
Institution: Be it so: It follows then, there must be no Ordinance administered
to those that are not converted, but only that which is thus an intended
converting Ordinance: Is this as you would have it? This is the very ground on
which you stand: But hark ye, my Friend, I pray then what shall become of
public prayer and other Ordinances in the Church, when the Word is the only
principally intended converting Ordinance out of question? By this doctrine at
one dash you take away all other duties in our mixed congregations: In what a
case are you here brought? what can you invent? On necessity you must recant
and confess indeed, that Prayer and the like duties, though not principally,
yet in a subordinate way are converting Ordinances, or means and helps of
conversion; and upon that account you admit all to them: Now if you will do
so, then is the door as full open in this subordinate way too, for the
Sacrament: If you will not, I believe the Sacrament will be contended to be
shut out with such good company, and desires to fare no better than her
fellow-ordinances.

Rep. But unregenerate men (you will say) are dead in their sins, and shall we
give bread to the dead? men must first be living, new born, and converted
Christians, before they can feed at the Sacrament?

Answ. As for the sense of this, it is answered already, as for the words and
Fancy, I return accordingly. If we could conceive any bread to be such, as
would fetch life in a man, we should give it him when he is dead; but now see
Io. 6.33. I am the bread of life, says Christ, not only (I hope) to confirm,
but give life; Now Christ being offered in this Sacrament, this bread, is the
bread of Life, this cup, the cup of Life, able by Gods grace as well to beget
Life, as increase it. If we give Aqua vitae to dying men, we may give Calix
vitae to dead Christians, to quicken and convert the unregenerate, as to
comfort and establish others.

Object. 7. Judas received not the Supper, for in Mat. 26.23.26. he is said to
dip his hand in the dish before the administration, and in Io. 13.30. as soon
as he received the Sop he immediately went out. Besides some learned men
conceive the Sauce he dipped in, was the Sauce of bitter herbs in the Passover
(called Cheroseth) and that was therefore before the Sacrament.
Answ. Here is a manifest mistake in the ground of the objection. It is
supposed St. John speaks of the Passover Supper, as the other Evangelists, but
see the first verse of John 13. with verse 29. and it is expressed, Before the
feast of the Passover, Supper being ended; as if he should say, As for the
Sacrament Supper at Passover, the other Evangelists have fully spoken, but
there was a Supper a little before, where there was remarkable these passages
they have omitted, and so he relates a washing the Disciples feet, and other
things that were not to be done at the solemnity of the Passover, for the feet
were to be shod then, and the like gestures quite contrary: Ex. 12.11. But if
(as some say) those passages which noted their haste out of Egypt, were not
obligatory when they came to the Land of Rest, yet so large a circumstance as
is here mentioned of John, to be introduced of Christ at that time is not
probable.

See Io. 12.1. There Christ came to Bethanie six days before the Passover,
where abouts he stayed that time (going sometimes to the City to preach, Mar.
11.17.19. and back again) it being near the Mount of Olives, which he did then
frequent. Luke 22.39. In this space he rode to Jerusalem on an Ass, and came
back at night. Mar. 11.11. Now this night happily, or thereabouts, was this
Supper John mentions, where Judas having received the Sop, went from thence, to
agree with the Priests, the Devil then putting it into his heart. Luke 22.1,
2, 3, 4, When the Passover drew near, mark it, Then entered Satan into Judas,
and he went and communed how he might betray him. Then when it drew near, that
is about a night before, or just two nights, comparing this with Matt. 26.2.14.
Mar. 14.1-12. So that it could not be at the time supposed, that is manifest.

Now on the morrow, or two days after this, Christ went from this Bethany,
again to Jerusalem, (which was some 2 miles thither) it being the day of the
Passover. [Whether Christ kept it the same night with the Jews, I need not
controvert, seeing he kept it certainly the first day of the Feast, Matt.
26.17. Exodus 12.16. and the time when the Passover was to be killed Lu. 22.7.
Mar. 14.12.] There according to the Law, he eat that Supper with the Twelve,
and instituted his own. Mat. 26.26. Now here was Judas amongst the rest,
sitting together with them at the Table till all as done. Luke 22.21. And when
they were risen, Christ with his Disciples going again to the Mount of Olives,
Judas stole away (happily in the dark) to fetch the Officers according to his
agreement, and betrayed him. So that Christ forewarned his Disciples twice of
Judas Treason, the night or two before, by giving him a Sop, with which the
Devil entered his heart at first, to set him upon his bargain; if you consider
well Io. 13, 27, 28, 29, 30. with Luke. 22.3, 4. and here at the time of his
own Supper with a like Item again, by dipping his hand with him in the dish; A
like I say, not the same; for St. John's giving him the Sop is not the same
thing, as not at the same time, with Saint Matthew and Marke's dipping in the
same dish. That I say being before the bargain (while it was to do, that thou
do do quickly ibid. 13.27) this at the very time of accomplishing it; (being
already agreed, and so in effect done, verily the Son of man is betrayed, Mat.
26.24. with Luke 22.22.) Neither may the Disciples second enquiry It is I,
Scruple us herein, if you but ponder what John adds upon this, ver. 28. and
Luke 18.34.

As for many learned men's thoughts about the Sop and the Supper, whether there
was one two, or three, this night, I leave only as conjectures, wherein they
may err as they have likely done in this, and so not to be built upon; and
forasmuch as Judas was at Table, by the testimony of 3 Evangelists, me thinks
their witness should be sufficient for his receiving; but when it shall be
considered too, that the fourth is so far from saying any thing against it,
that he says nothing of this Supper at all, they having sufficiently done it
already, I hope this objection will trouble Folks no more.

As Christ offers himself to those that refused him, You will not come unto me,
that you may have life. I would have gathered you, and you would not. As Christ
converses with those that could not profit, You understand not, Io. 8.43.
because you cannot hear my words. And as Christ when he preaches to all freely,
says, He that has ears to hear, let him hear; So does he administer this
Sacrament to Judas amongst the rest, and so do I administer it to all, saying,
He that can receive, Let him receive it.

Object. 8. Unworthy Receivers are guilty of Christ's blood, and eat their
damnation, therefore we must not allow a free Admission.
Answ. Unto this I shall speak First on the Churches part, and Secondly, on the
Receivers.

1. For the Churches part, I mean the Admitters (if the term takes place with
us) and Ioyners; I do verily believe, let men urge what they will, this can
never be made any way to concern the^. There is a general command. Do this,
every one is to examine himself and to come worthily, if they do not, they
receive their own damnation ((...) 1 Cor. 11.29.) they receive not ours, who do
our duty as we are bound, and leave others unto God.

Rep. But you will say; If another should be taking a cup of poison shall not
we be partakers of his blood, if we do not hinder and forbid him? Qui non
vetat, etc.

I answer, (besides that we have no Quum possit) it is a wonder to me any
religious man should compare this Sacrament to a Cup of Poison, seeing it is in
its own nature a Cup of Blessing, and if it prove death to any (as Sin may take
occasion from the Commandment and slay us) through their own impiety; it is
more than we can know, or ought to judge, seeing God is able to make it (as it
is) a Cup of Salvation, even to the worst. Let us act with charitable thoughts,
and leave the success to God. Even as Paul in his preaching, who in 2 Cor. 2:
tells us, It was the savor of death unto some, ver.16. yet must he preach it
in every place, ver.14. because it was nevertheless a sweet savor unto
Christ, in those that perished, as in those that were saved, ver. 15. So say I
of this Sacrament, we must do our duty and administer freely, knowing God will
make all his ordinances a sweet savor to himself, whether it be of life unto
life, or death unto death to any of us.

2. For the Receivers part, there is a double duty; A principal. Do this: And
an accessory, Let a man examine himself. We are bound to come, and to come
worthily; If a man fails in the one, and is not sufficiently prepared; I dare
not say, that must keep (I am sure it will not excuse) him from the other. This
is certain; those dreadful expressions of being guilty of Christ's blood, and
drinking damnation, are to make men take heed that they prepare themselves and
come worthily, but I cannot think they are to affright any man from the
Sacrament. There are 3 Quaere's therefore I will submit here to further
consideration.

The first, whether the very eating and drinking of an unworthy Receiver be
damnation, that is, (to free some weak minds from fearful thoughts) whether it
be such a sin, as makes a man guilty (without repentance and Gods mercy) of
Condemnation? And I conceive we must distinguish between the very receiving,
which is good; and the unworthiness, which makes the sin only. This
unworthiness is in the Person, or in the Act: In the Person it consists in his
evil conscience, which will condemn him whether he comes, or abstaines from
coming. Put case one receives not, and is unworthy, the guilt of his
unworthiness lies nevertheless upon him for that, it may be, more; for in
this very refusing, his own Conscience condemns him, and God is greater than
his Conscience, whereas if he comes, it happily may excuse him something in not
neglecting the outward performance, not aggravate his condition; for though he
fails in the inward, and that failing is sin, yet that Act he does makes him
not more sinful for the doing, but he would have sinned more to have failed in
that too, and not have done it. Unworthiness in the act, consists in the
obliquity, deficiency, or failing in the right manner of receiving, though the
outward work it self be not amiss. There is the matter of a duty, and manner;
As for the matter, every one can do, in a Christian deportment at the Table,
but in the manner, to receive in Faith, Love, and other graces as we ought,
this a natural man cannot do, and so he sins in his duty. His very Act is
not sin, so far as he does do in the matter it is good (not only sub genere
entis, but good in tanto, sub genere morum) but this failing and swerving in
the manner, is the evil, which as it cleaves unto, we may conceive, defiles
the Act, and makes it liable unto judgment.

Now then my second Quaere is, Whether receiving the Sacrament unworthily, is
otherwise damnable, then praying and hearing unworthily; (whereof Christ says
as much, Go and preach, he that bele^^eth not is damned, Mar. 16. John 3.18.
ipso facto as much as here) And if it be not, why upon the same account, as men
go to prayer, to the word, and other duties, though they cannot pray and hear
worthily, they may not as well go to the Sacrament? my thoughts are thus; It
is a sad Dilemma unregenerate men are in; If they pray, hear, receive, they
sin (not in what they do, I conceive, but in what they not do) by failing
in the manner, their persons being not acceptable; If they do not pray, hear
and receive, they sin worse and are impious. Now what must be done here? If
there be a necessity of sinning, of two evils the least must be chosen: its a
less evil to do what we can, though the outward matter only be done, than to
fail in matter and manner too, wholly casting off the care of God. But if that
axiom be true, Nemo angustiatur ad peccandum, there is no case wherein a man is
necessitated to sin, (and so that saying Of two Evils, must be taken always
de malo poenae, not culpae, Romans 3.8.) then it is most clear, Every man must
come and do the best he can, which if he does happily he shall not sin at least
so far he does not) and God may bless his endeavors, Habenti dabitur, whereas
if he neglects, he sins without question, this being malum perse, the other
per accidens only. I will be bold therefore to distinguish: there may be a
profane, presumptuous coming to an Ordinance, or a Christian coming in
conformity to Gods worship; though it is better not to come, than to come in a
profane way, this being rebellion and sin in the fact; yet I say clearly, it is
better to come in a Christian way, though but in an outward co^formity to Gods
service, than altogether to neglect it; which being granted and practiced of
all in other duties, I think it but a begging the question, to deny it in this
Sacrament.

My third Quaere is, Whether an unregenerate man conceiving himself not worthy,
must never come to the Sacrament, for fear of eating his damnation. And herein
my thoughts are apt to run comparatively on the word; The word sets forth
Christ on the terms of Faith and new obedience, that is the Gospel rightly
administered, whatsoever effect it has on the hearers; Now it is their part
indeed to receive and apply it by Faith, if they do not, it pronounces them
damned; Thus the Sacrament likewise shows forth Christ unto the sight; and for
the Churches part she is to declare and offer him to all, however he is
received: Now the receivers, it is true, in the like manner again are to receive
in Faith as they ought to do: If they receive unworthily, as the word
denounces, this seals to their damnation. Now a man will say, if the word
pronounces may damnation, so long as I am an unworthy hearer, I will not go
thither, I shall but hear my damnation; but I say you must go thither, you lie
in a damned state already, and it is necessary this damnation should be
pronounced upon you, to awake you out of your security in it, that by the
terrors of Conscience you may be driven to repent and be converted; so the
word is good in it self, and the savor of life even while it damns a man, if
he usefully receive it: so say I of the Sacrament, it is good in its nature, it
is appointed for our good, and so we are to come unto it, as a means of grace;
but if it accidentally seals to any man his damnation, it is through his own
unworthiness, and he is then to make the same use of it, as of the damning
word, that laying to heart the horror of his sin, in being guilty of the
blood of Christ, he may be provoked thereby to fly to Jesus Christ, for a merit
of his blood to wash away his guilt of it; and having receive so many seals of
his damnation, he may be forced to the Lamb who alone is able to open all those
seals, by pardoning his sins, and so to turn the savor of death unto life, and
to make even damnation it self (such is the power of his grace) subservient to
his conversion and salvation. I sum up this: If coming unworthily makes a
man guilty of Christ's blood, by pouring it out in vain, what shall an open
refusing deserve, that even tramples upon it in the despising this ordinance?

Object. 9. The Ordinance is polluted if all be admitted.
Answ. Unto the unworthy receivers, it may be said defiled, in that sense, as
all things else are to the unbeleevers, whose conscience is defiled, that is I
conceive in sinning in all that he does It Is. 1.15. But unto the admitters
(unless they be convicted) and joyners (who (as the Schools say well) concur
in their Actu physico, not morali, to their act of receiving, not unworthiness)
their minds being pure, All things (even the worst) are pure, and there is no
more reason to be afraid of coming for that unworthiness of another, than for
a man to scruple likewise, because the cloth is not clean enough upon the
Table.

Indeed in the Law we read of a distinguishing the clean from the unclean,
Levit. 10.10. and 11.47. which otherwise would defile their Sacrifices. Hag.
8.14. and their very Temple. Ez. 23.38, 39. Such an outward holiness had their
legal Rites, that it could be touched, but the holiness God now requires is
more inward certainly, and to be laid up closer in the heart, than that the
external holiness of another should come at, or reach it: We must conceive
under the Gospel, all this legal holiness, in places, persons, things is
abrogated, so that there is nothing unclean now unto us. Romans 14.14. which
thing was showed Peter in a vision; it is pity men had need of another to mind
them of it. But that all scruple may be removed, Christ has left it in plain
words, Nothing without the man, defiles the man, Mar. 7.15. and nothing that
enters into the mouth; as if he would meet with this in particular, Matt.
15.11. If the heathen husband be sanctified to the believing wife, which is the
nearest communion that can be, 1 Corinthians. 7.14. so that she must not separate
from him in the duties of Marriage, as it is Gods Ordinance, I may resolutely
say, it is not the unworthiness of another, shall make the true believer
separate from the Sacrament, but even the vilest that comes there, are
sanctified to him ((...)) that is, are clean in respect of his communicating
with them, so that their wickedness, being an external thing to him, cannot
defile his duty. This is the privelege (I take it) of the Gospel many think
not of, that now we are to have Free Ordinances, and to account no man unclean
in the use of them.

My Brethren, there are some touches of the Law and Superstition on you; you
know what a sacred thing was made of the Communion Table when the Rail was
about it: now I pray think how you refine and spirituallize your old
Superstition, by putting a spiritual rayl about the Sacrament, when you
debar poor sinners from coming hither; Let us take heed, there will be
something of the Pharisee in these spiritual proud hearts of men, there will
be setting a rail still about the Communion Table.

Rep. But are we not faulty and partake of other men's Sins, if we do not our
best to have the Leaven purged out, and therefore we may not say, Am I my
Brothers keeper, look they to it?

I Answer. There are several duties of a Christian he is to do: He is to pray,
receive; He is to love his neighbor: Among the rest there is a duty (much
neglected) of brotherly Admonition, whereby we are to Rebuke the faulty, and to
tell the Church of them, supposing it in a capacity to hear us, if we neglect
our duty we are guilty in some measure, partakers of their sin, and defiled by
it; well, let this be granted; what there? why we must labor a Church
establishment, and so to amend this great neglect among us, but I hope it will
not follow, that in the mean while we must not receive the Sacrament, pray, nor
perform those other several duties we have to do, it is a plain fallacy ( a
dicto simpliciter ad dictum secundum quid I take it) to think our coming to
the Sacrament with a wicked man is sin it self, or makes it the sin, or us more
guilty of the sin, because we ought to have admonished them, and labored their
excommunication: no, this neglect of ours is the sin by it self, and the
coming is our duty: God forbid that I should think, if I do sin in omiting one
thing, that I must not therefore go to do my duty in another. Because go to do
my duty in another. Because the leven is not purged out must there be no lump?
this was, I may humbly say, a too overly surprise of godly Mr. Buroughs.

Rep But you will say more obviously. Are not all ignorant and scandalous
persons Swine and Dogs, to be rejected and kept from the Pearls and holy things
of the Sacrament?

I answer, I dare not say so; though I see what interest lies at stake, which
may soon fancy a Christian convenience, into a Divine necessity,

For First, This is Petitio Principii, and if you speak indefinitely, my proofs
assure the contrary.

Secondly, I place a great distance between an unfitnes to come unto the
Sacrament as in other duties ( Let a man examine himself) and being excluded.

Thirdly, the keeping of any cannot be pretended to, without power in our
uneldred Congregations, it being confessed a power not of order, but of
jurisdiction.

Fourthly, men may be Dogs and Swine, either in the course of their lives, or
in the public esteem of the Church; now in our Ministerial admission, we are
to look on men as they are in the Churches esteem; and may not account or deal
with them as Dogs (as we cannot execute an arrant thief) until they are
juridically censured to be such, by lawful authority. And though they have no
right here in foro poli, Det, yet they have in foro soli, Ecclesiae.

Fifthly, To speak particularly: Concerning the ignorant, I dare not judge so
rigorously; The 5 Heb. 2. comes near me heart; there are many sorts of
ignorance, the case whereof may need instruction mostly, not censure; Now that,
the very solemnity, with all our Preaching, Catechism, and exhortations, does
(I conceive) afford, to all of capacity, (who only come) fully informing them
of the difference between this Sacred Table and common bread; which is
discerning the Lords body, 1 Cor. 11.29. Sufficient happily to our admission
though not to their Salvation. For the scandalous we know there must be
admonition first, twice or thrice, Mat. 18.15.16. And then if they continue
obstinate (not else) and are notorious, an Excommunication is granted. verse
17.1 Cor. 5.13. yet I cannot find any where (unless I look without the book)
that this is merely in reference to the Sacrament, but from Christian Communion
in general; at least in the primary nature thereof, though I will yield much
by way of indulgence, unto the Churches wisdom, according to the ancient
practice of the Jews and Greek Christians; the several species or rather
degrees whereof I must leave unto more Learned Rabbis, And as to this present
writ of suspension in hand, which men would have a middle thing between
Admonition and Excommunication, I must make my return truly, Non est inventa,
in baliva nostra.

I speak it with reverence to wiser judgments, who may allow as prudent, in the
way of Discipline, what they will not enforce upon the Conscience, as
necessary, in our worship.

Obj. 10. The last Objection is from those several Texts that are alleged for
a separation from wicked persons.
Answ. Unto all which I answer briefly, and (I conceive with submission) fully;
Separation from wicked men is either in regard of their sins; or their
Persons In regard of their sins, it consists in departing from their evil
courses; In regard of their persons, it is either in case of common
familiarity, or in case of Excommunication. Now it is certain we must
separate, First, from all wicked men in their sins and evil courses, this is
out of question. Secondly, we grant that we must separate also from them in
common familiarity; taking heed of intimacy and keeping them company, lest we
be partakers of their sin, by infection or connivance with them. But Thirdly, I
affirm there is no Scripture commands our separation from them in the
Sacrament, or any of Gods public Ordinances, unless in case of
Excommunication; which alone can debar any from Church Communion.


In the first sense you must take these Scriptures, Ephesians. 5.11 1 Cor 10.20.21.
These Corinths did well to come to the Lords Table, their sin was only in
partaking with Idols. so 2 Cor. 6.14. to the end, where they are rebuked for
joining in the same sin of Idolatry. If you understand this, Be not unequally
yokt, of Marriage, compare it with 1 Cor. 7.13.14. There the believing wife
must in no wise separate from her Infidel husband, here she must come out and
be separate, how can this be reconciled but that she may have communion with
the Person in what is Lawful, and yet be separate from him in his ways, that
are evil? You may add happily in this first sense. Ier. 15.19.2. These.
3.6.11. Rev. 2.6. All which texts are hereby answered, that though indeed they
do command a separation from the wicked; it is from them in their sins, not
from joining with them in doing our duty.

In the second sense, you may take 1 Cor. 5.9. to the 12.2 These. 3.14. Romans
16.17.2 Tim. 3.5.2 Io. 10.11. Pro. 22.24.25. and it may be 2 These. 3.6. Tit. 3
10 and so these Scriptures are likewise answered, which do further forbid us
the wickeds familiarity, as their sins; not a bare accompanying with any in
Gods Ordinances.

Rep. But you will say, If I must decline a wicked man, so as not to eat with
him, (which I interpret by our ordinary conversatio^) how much more must I
decline him at this Sacrament?

I answer, this is a clear fallacy, I am sorry to see many graveld in their
minds at it; as if there were any force in this, I must not be such a man's
common companion, therefore I must not go to Church with him: we must know,
Arguments from the less to the greater, must be in things of the same kind and
nature; Now it is one thing to eat at home, an indifferent action where I am
left to my own arbitration and must not choose evil, I mean in preferring bad
society: and another to eat at the Sacrament, which I am bound unto as a piece
of the service of God, and cannot omit at my pleasure, without offending his
command. Let me add (to explain, and avoid scruple) I may sin in admitting one
into my friendship, whom nevertheless I may lawfully be withal I doubt not,
(and at Table too) on my occasions.

In the third sense I take Mat. 18.17. 1 Cor. 5.1. to the 9. where the whole
Communion or Life of Christians, is compared to an unleavened Feast (from which
that Person was to be excluded in general) without peculiar mention (as some
would have it) of the Sacrament; you may reckon hither many places Io. 9.22. 1.
Tim. 1.20, etc. In which case only when excommunicated, the matter is granted.
And thus I am apt to think, 1 Cor. 5.9.10.11. 2 These. 3.6.14. 2 Io. 10. etc.
quoted in the second sense before, if strictly taken, stands in full force
only. As for Mat. 7.6. which properly concerns Admonition. Ier. 15, 19.1 Tim.
5.22. which, (with some ceremonious precepts of the Law as 2 Chronicles* 23.19.) In
the words, are much applied for the scaring of many Consciences, I must appeal
to other Judgments when they are well weighed, whether in their proper sense
and importance they are not many leagues off this peculiar business of the
Sacrament.

I will conclude with 4 Wishes: 1. I Wish we had a Government established in
the Church, the nearest in Christian prudence that may be, to the word of God:
2. I Wish the duty of Fraternall correption, a watching over, and admonishing
one another in love were better known and practiced amongst us. 3. I Wish that
men would look more into their own consciences, and leave the judging of others
spirits, hearts, and reins alone, to the judgment seat of Christ. 4. I Wish,
though there may be some judging by the fruits, that wise religious men would
be more cautious of countenancing these separations in the visible Church,
seeing upon the same ground that you go to gather a Church out of my mixed
Congregation, another will gather a separation our of your Church; and so
continue (as I have intimated from our sad experience) an endless separating,
until this first separation shall in a few years be able to take up the saying
of that Greatest Grandmother, unto those many schisms she shall see issuing, as
her natural offspring, out of her own bowels, Rise up Daughter, go to thy
Daughter, for thy Daughters Daughter has a Daughter; for this separations
separation has a separation.


Deo Gloria, mihi Condonatio;
J. H.

FINIS.

