The BOW of JONATHAN WITH The FLOWER de LVCE: IN A FUNERAL LAMENTATION
Committed to the men of Judah: Parallelled and applied to that Worthy his
Compeere ROBERT LVCY Of CHARLCOTE in the County of Warwick ESQUIRE Lately
Deceased: In a SERMON preached at Charlcote By RICHARD HUNT, B. D. And Pastor
of Bishops-Ichington.

LONDON, Printed by William Godbid, M.DC.LVII.

To the truly Honored MARGARET LVCY, The dear CONSORT and now right sorrowful
Relict of ROBERT LVCY, Esquire DECEASED: And, to the Brethren, Sisters, and Friends
of that renowned Family of CHARLCOTE: Be Joy, Comfort, and Salvation in Christ
Jesus.
My noble Friends,
THis Piece of Jonathans Bow, and its Parallel in a rural expression, might
both have been laid up in the Book of Jasher, in some obscurer corner, and
unknown, and the Author deservedly (like the Latinian Shepherd) have ever slept
in some more solitary cave, had not the fair aspect of your merit and
importunity stooped so low as to make the speakers lips your favorite to bring
this work to light, which now like Memnon's Statue, the Son of the morning, is
so framed of dark marble, that the rising Sun of the LUCY's name casting its
beams upon it, makes it to render a resplendent image of it self, with a
mournful sound in lamentation for its Master; and may these Notes flying abroad
become as Funeral Birds, each morning to bewail the loss of so true deserving a
person; for nothing is more to be condol'd, or moving humane compassion, than a
Son of the morning to be suddenly interposed with darkness, and a flower of the
light soon blasted and withered in the blooming, Bacon. de Sap. vet. cap. 14.
as the learned Lord Verulam makes the moral: I cannot therefore blame your
mourning Blacks and Cypresses, much less your Tears and Sorrows, when I read of
a Turquois stone that would glister and look bright upon the Living owners
finger, Caufin. Embl. li. 11. c. 54.
but at his Death to have changed his color into lowering and sweating tears,
as sensible of the loss. The Darling of the time, this lovely youthful
Gentleman, is changed into a Cypress tree, whose boughs and bark lopt and cut
down by Death, bids you take hence your mourning wreaths, the funeral rites
belonging as consecrate to the Death and Obits of the nobler sort; which wood
will entertain no moth or timber-worm of vice to breed or thrive upon it, and
once cut down, revives no more but in succeeding plants; Vespasian miracles,
fallen over night, and reflourishing more fixed and green the next morning in its
followers: of whom, the next in league is you Dame MARGARET, his dear and only
Spouse, who amidst the Ladies boasting of their tire and jewels, Plutarch. in
Phocion.
might with the Grecian Dame show forth your Husband, and say for you and him,
Hic est ornatus meus; Lo, here is my richest ornament and jewel. Your sweet
conjunction, and conjugal affection drew forth your beholders and your
countries hearts to vote that this Sun might stand still in Gibeon, Josh. 10.12.
and this Moon in the valley of Ajalon. But Divine pleasure has forbidden
that, Ovid. Met. 1.11. fab. 10.
and parted the two Kingfishers of Love and Delight, and left you without your
Mate, to bewail your condition, as now widowed and bereaved of your companion.
Fonseca the Spanish Friar will teach you n^^ to lay aside perfumes of
Ambergreece, and Nuptial garments, and to smell of Frankincense and Prayers at
visits of your Husbands tomb; Lent. Ser. 18. Luc. 7.11.
to dress your windows, not with roses, violets, and pansies, or love and
idleness, but with the herbs and flowers of Artemisia, that Motherwort, of
mortifying those affections; bearing the name of her who by drinking each day a
spoonful of her Husbands ashes for a Mornings draught, at last made again two
bodies into one, and entombed him in her own bowels. De viduis. 1 Timothy 5.4, 5.
St. Ambrose has many comely precepts for the Widows, second to S. Paul's, and
seems to correct the Poets fancy, that Widows should be changed into Birds
called Kingfishers, with greenish feathers, and a ruddy beak, and face, as
ill-beseeming that condition to fly abroad with new green fancies, and to show
their face too full of sanguine amorous complexion. I have showed you a more
excellent way: Learn by this your sad experience, the truth of that Hebrew
Proverb, Drus. probl. 5. clas. 1.
The Bride gets up into the Marriage Bed, and little wots 'twil prove her
Bridegroomes Deathbed: At the Wedding therefore they use to take a Glass,
wherein both drink, to begin their joys; but then they break it, Idem li. 2.
quest. 9.
to denote the brittle condition of the Marriage-bonds, and how soon it may be
da'shd to pieces. S. Francis also somewhat minding this, was wont to make him
Wife and Children of the snow, fair, but soon fading comforts. Fancy you so of
Husbands, and their Issue, twill wean your mind the more from all such worldly
allurements and relations. This Text of Jonathan will tell you they are but
Butts or Prickmarks standing within a dangerous distance, and at the mercy of
Death: and all the glory of Youth, Beauty, Valor, and Wealth, high places of
Honor, and Relations of Friends, wherein the pride of heart does flant it out,
is by the true confession of the Gallants in Solomon, like an arrow which
parts the air, Wisd. 5.12.
and immediately comes together again, and a man knows not where it went
thorough. And you my honored Friends, Pardon I pray you the Enquiry, my
affection led me into the Ark and carriage of your Ancestors, lest mine eye may
seem too curious to peep into, or my hand too rash and presumptuous to be laid
upon it, it is your due, and more if I could do it; Mr. Dugdal's Warwickshr.
our industrious Chorographer will make it out.

The short and sum of all I shall humbly present to your thoughts, is
contained in that ancient Proverb, Parate vos in vestibulo, ut ingrediamini
conclave, Dress you so in the Gatehouse, that you may enter into Christ's
withdrawing Closet; Heb. Prove.
for he that labors the six days of this life, may eat and rest on the
Seventh, his perpetual Sabbath. This will be done by observing of the best
Examples, and the best you hear or saw exemplary in your deceased Brother,
Fidelity in Trust, love to Virtue, Humanity to his Friends, Bounty to the Poor,
Providence in his Affairs, Welcome to his Relations, Humility in his
deportments, Kindness to Brothers and Sisters, Innocence to his Neighbors,
Love to all; in which incomparably your Ancestors are known to have excelled,
Holcot. on Wisd. 5. Lect. 66.
and left a light for you to follow. An old Archer, and good Marks-man, to
allude to the Lesson of my Text, will advise you further, and bids, Beware of
three arrows in Satan's quiver, Rev. 6.2. 2 Kin. 13.16.
1. Carnal concupiscence, 2. Envious detraction, 3. Whispering suggestion;
these wounded not his Liver, Eyes, or Ears. The quiver of Christ puts three
better into your hands: The 1. is the Light of Scripture, in this the Man of
God must guide and give you aim. 2. Is the Death of Nature, this directs you to
the life of grace. The 3. is the day of Censure, which keeps you in the fear of
God. The three first of Satan's arrows he was free from, and afraid of: The
three last he was much exercised in, and well acquainted with, his Example he
has bequeathed to you. The Legacy, Dear Mistress, he has left to you is
comprised in three Counsels, Have Purity in your Religion, Erpenius Arab. Prove.
Patience in your Condition, and Prudence in your Conversation. To you all, and
as many as follow these Rules, peace be upon them, and mercy, and upon the
Israel of God; Gal. 6.16.
which is in fine the vote of

Your loving Countryman, and humble Servant in Christ Jesus, RICHARD HUNT.

JONATHANS BOW.
2 SAMUEL 25.26. Oh Jonathan! thou wast slain in thine high places; I am
distressed for thee my Brother Jonathan, very pleasant have thou been unto me,
thy love to me was wonderful, passing the love of women.


IT was a solemn custom of the Hebrews, to visit the graves of their Friends,
thereby to remind themselves of their mortality; Novarin, schedas. lib. 5.
sect. 73.
and the Bells of Aarons priestly coat were placed in the fringe and bottom of
his garment; to signify to the people, Origin. in Exodus 28.
that their passing bell was always tolling, that they might consider their
latter ends, the bottom of life to them, and the judgment to follow after
Death. David, the sweet Singer of Israel, accordingly has lost a friend, and
for his commemoration and obsequies, is musing on a Funeral Song, whose name
and title must be new and singular, which himself will compose and set; and
then commit in charge to the men of Judah and their children, sons and
daughters, to sing in the houses and streets all abroad as well as to the
Choristers in the Quire: This singular friend is Jonathan, who deserves to have
a Song and Lesson set to himself, and that is this, the Bow of Jonathan, so
called not for any surmised meaning to set up Artillery in the Commonwealth of
Judah, Willet ad locum.
as it was commonly mistaken; but to set up and advance the life and death of
Jonathan, a master at that art of shooting, and so excellent a Bowman, that he
might without arrogance compare what all that were past, challenge all then
present, and set a sample to all posterity so famous in their Ages; Alex. ab
Alex. 2 Samuel 22.
as that Sythians, Parthians, Persians, and Roman Emperors, at the Bow and
unexampled skill of shooting might learn of him. From the Blood of the slain,
and the fat of the mighty the Bow of Jon. turned not back: That this is the
proper and approved sense and intention of David in this Title, and that the
men of Judah should learn the tune is the importance of the Hebrew word
Chesheth, the word Bow, set emphatically, and independently by it self, without
relation before or after it. Serrar. Sancher. Cor. a Lap. Mariana. and Mr.
Greg. on the Plar.
The Seventy Translation sounds no discord, but a Ditty dedicate to
Lamentation; to the same tune, the vulgar Latin: the report of Josephus that
the Elegy continued to his time, the custom of Israel to endite their sonnets
in this sort, and the consent of Gentile Authors to give some signal name and
title to their tracts and poesies. This Monodie, nene, or Lamentation funeral
was recorded in the Canon, and lest that should miscarry, or not be exposed to
common view, behold it is written in the Book of Jasher, where every one might
read it; a Letanie to be sung, and a Legacy entailed to the use and memory of
Jonathan and generations after him that bare the Burden of the Song, O Jonathan.

Hence by the way we learn that Interpreters are not all in one tune, and the
opinions of men are of like authority, unless reason and learning show the
difference; Titles of Music Lessons are not to be tampered with by unskilful
hands, lest they mistake a figure for a vulgar form, and dance a false measure
after their own fancy; like him that took Orpheus harp, supposing to himself
(like our unstinted fumblers) that he made good music how unskilfully soever
he handled it, being, as St. Paul says to Timothy, (...), men that love to hear
themselves to sing or play.

Next to this we may consider with Solomon, 2. Eccles. 9.11.
that the Race goes not always with the swift, as Asahel; Mercer ex Midras
Ibid.
nor the Battle with the strong, as Abner; nor Bread to to the wise, as
Solomon; nor Riches to men of understanding, as Job nor Favor to men of skill,
as Moses; for the swift sahel was overtaken, the valiant Abner was slain, the
wise Solomon by report begged his bread, Job the wealthy was wasted to a
potsheard, and Moses lives not to enjoy a foot of the promised land. And
Jonathan how art thou made as heir apparent to the fortunes and successes of
the most or all of them? Proverbs.
how art thou cut down with the helve of thine own wood, how wounded with the
feathers of thine own wing, how set in the stocks of thine own making, how
taken in thine own toil, fallen in thine own pit, roaring in thine own Bull,
slain by the bow of the Philistims thine own masterpiece and weapon? how does
time and chance untimely take thee away? O Jonathan how wast thou slain!

But now my Errand is to bend this Bow another way, to teach the children of
this coast and country the use of the Bow. An ancient way of Triumphs was to
erect great Arches or Bows of marble to the honor of worthy Patriots who had
been Vindicators of their country against Enemies, Pancirol. de ^rcubus
trium^h. part. 1. tit 28.
and true deservers of renown and fame; in these were written and inscribed the
noble acts and achievements done in memory of the actors: hereof were thirty
six at Rome, and one thousand in the Eastern parts, as in China. This might be
the mind of David, and under favor of more knowing judgments, may serve to
instruct us that pass by to read and consider the merits and noble virtues of
our deceased Friend, and countries Worthy, who after many testimonies of grace
and virtue exhibited in his life, was at the last shot by a deadly Philistines
arrow, that drank up his Spirits riding a summers progress under the Sun, that
Apollo that in the camp of mankind smites with his darts of Epidemical
diseases here and there to Death; Homer. Il. 1.
leaving us with David to erect his Arch, to write his acts and publish his
memorial; When also all the hearts of the hearers may be so taken like untoucht
instruments, to resound and echo by a loving sympathy to honor and lament
him, O Jonathan, etc.

The particle, O, is as an herald or chief chanter to all the parts of this
doleful song and harasange, and may serve to be applied to all As Oh For
exclamation at the matter. As Oh For affection to the name of the man; O
Jonathan! As Oh For indignation to the place; how in the high places, As Oh For
lamentation for the person, woe is me for thee my Brother Jonathan. As Oh In
consideration of the loss; very pleasant have thou been to me. As Oh For
admiration of the Love; thy love was wonderful. As Oh For the comparison of
all; passing the love of women.


Thus the life and death of Jonathan is shortly and sorrowfully descanted on by
David, Musathen. Cap. 17.
running as all mortals do upon the 7 notes of Music, with Longs and Shorts,
Sharps and Flats; as Putean makes it out, to call men's life here below, until
we ascend above the spheres into heaven, Revel. 14.
and there sing our part in the Song of the Lamb, Revel. 14. So I resort to
the first part of my Text, the Note of Exclamation at the matter, O.

The Masters of speech and eloquence observe this particle (o) to attend all
the passions of the mind, Martin. Lex. in O.
and in no less then twelve great affects of the soul express a full
signification and sense of it self; Tesmar de Eloq. Page 167.
as of joy; Oh! that thou were as my Brother that sucked the breasts of my
Mother, Cant. 8.

And of grief, Oh waetched man that I am,
Romans 7. Of wishing, Oh that I had the wings of a Dove
Of Indignation, Oh faiihlesse and crooked generation,
Luke 24. Of Expostulation, Oh Inhabitants of Judah, judge I pray you,
Isa. 5. Of Exclamation, Oh ye sons of men,
Psalm. 4. Of comparison, Oh man who art thou that disputest with God?
Romans 9. Of all at once, as here, o Jonathan: and thus it is made the Mistress
to teach, and the mouth to utter all our affections.

And serves us not to use it, like the braying of an Ass, Use.
as Erasmus forbids, but seriously and in earnest, when it comes on the hearts
errand to witness unfainedly some affection of the mind, as in the former
places mentioned, and then it becomes the speaker, as the Bow of Jonathan, and
makes a fair impression in the heart as if written with a pen of Steel, Jerem.
9.1.
or the point of a Diamond; and thus it is used by David, who in the drawing of
this Bow now bent for mourning, fetches deep sighs from the bottom of his
bowels, and sends them forth like arrows singing in the air, and are now come
to our use and ears; and so sink into our minds to cry out and complain, to
disdain and lament, to consider and admire, to compare and make a parallel with
David's Jonathan slain, and ours deceased, and leads me on to the second part of
my text, The affection to the name, O Jonathan!

Lovers are much affected with the names of their Paramours and friends,
insomuch that the naming betrays the guilt and conscience in the pulse and
countenance; Heu quam difficile est crimen non prodere vultu!

The Arabians have a proverb, he that loves much, makes much mention of his
love. It Is David's case, he names Saul but three times in this song, Jonathan
four, Expen. in Prob. Arab.
and makes his name to carry the burden of the song, with tears and kisses as
the woman in the Gospel, Pouring out her Alablaster box of ointment on his
body, in token that she loved much; or as Christ on Lazarus, Behold how he
loved him: and, Luke 7. John 11.
Lord he whom thou love is dead. Names, says Luther, are the boxes that the
graces of the Spirit of God are preserved in, the Caskets of those Jewels, the
cups of the heavenly potions, the combs of the honey, and the baskets that take
the fragments of the Divine banquet, he that is not acquainted with these
handmaids can very hardly come to the speech of that Mistress; Agrip. Occult.
Philos.
what influence or intelligence does pass between stars and names, let the
curious Arts declare. But sure I am that Saul had no ill Spirit to suggest or
vex him, or ill presage to possess him when he gave to his Son this name of
Jonathan; Lexicon Sanctum by Greg.
a name turned into our English, as much as Gods gift, or the Dove comes,
Jon-tha, as Bercorius alludes, an heavenly extraction in the first, and a sweet
allusion in the last. This in a transcendant way is drawn from God, and the
other in a lovely nature and Spirit comes to man; the springs from above, and
the springs below, which was Calebs choice gift, Jug. 1.11.
do both meet in this name; The Greek (...) of (...), extremely to love, is the
name of the Dove that came from heaven, sat upon the Son of God, loves to dwell
with man, build in his house, eat and drink with him, brings him fruit and
food, and by similitude teaches as a Domestical Chaplain, the lessons of
faith to look up and ask, of thanksgiving to God above, of innocence, having no
gall, of patience without complaint, of charity without revenge, of concord and
joint assistance, in their building, brood and company: all which David by
sweet experience found in Jonathan as the gift of God to him, and a Dove coming
still to comfort him, thus Convenient rebus nomina saepe suis.
Names oftentimes agree,
To tell you what the man will be.


This experience that David had of his noble virtues and divine indowments had
so ravished and transported him, Use.
that he is in an holy ecstasy and a little out of himself, making a speech to
a dead man, wishing that his name pronounced aloud might raise and awake him to
life again; or calling the world to witness, that with Jonathan was buried the
Mirror of Love, the Miracle of Nature, and the Darling of Mankind.

In this name, let us with David open the shells that we may find out the
pearls, unlock the caskets to come at the Jewels, press and examine the combs
that we may suck the honey, open the baskets to feed on the dainties laid up in
pious names for the honor of the owners, and the imitation of their manners.
The practice of the Church of Rome is not so graceless, as not to teach her
children this lesson, and that under Canon of the Council of Trent, and her
Sermons seriously exhorting that pious names be imposed as copies and samplers
for posterity to behold and imitate: Regerlinck in Fest. circumcis. Tit. 2.
Let not Samaria outdo Jerusalem; good names may imprint conformity to good
manners, and though we have lain with nature and the world like scullions
among the pots and coals, yet we may be by Gods grace as the wings of a Dove,
Psalm. 68.13.
that's covered with silver, and our feathers like yellow gold.

Our Jonathan hereby bears the name of a Lucie, probably sprung from the Roman
Lucins, a stem of that root that was the first Christian King of the world,
that borrowes his original from the first Orient Light, as the morning star
born at the break of day; a name given to Christ himself in the song of
Zachary; and to the newborn Christians, Luke 1. Act. 13.1. Romans 16.21.
Act. 13.1. and Romans 16.21. descending to Lucius King of England, a great
favorite to the Roman Emperors, especially to Lucius Verus, who distributed
provinces to his fellows and friends: This Lucius is said to be Baptized by
Timothy, contemporary with Polycarpus and Martyr; Armacanus de primord. E. Ang.
Bin. Conuc. page 70.
the 7 of Marc. Aurelius, Anno 166. A name that in the Roman comes from Lights,
in the British Isles the same, and suites well with the Event, that made it so
Christian and illustrious, as the Verse upon it notes, Prima Britannorum fidei
lux Lucius esse
Fertur, qui rexit moenia Brute tua. Al. Neckham.

First Light of British faith was Lucie called,
Who ruled the Cities which thou Brutus walled.


A name that crowns this Nation more then Mulmutius first Crown of gold, our
common Lawgiver, or all the Laurels and Diadems of Kings and Conquerors that
did not make us Christian, by how much Christian Religion excels all these
earthly Laws and Powers; a name recorded in those ancient coins, one of silver
and the other of gold, bearing the Image of a Christian King, by the sign of
the Cross impressed, and the letters Luc. name entitled upon it: A name famous
for eminent and worthy actions and deserts, in three Roman Consuls, three
Christian Bishops of that Sea; the first a glorious Martyr, Chronic.
Noringberg. Platina in vitis.
the two latter inferior unto him, but great advancers of the holy war
against infidels, and suppressors of spreading heresies in their times; A name
sainted in the female sex, Saint Lucie, who suffered for Christ, gave all her
rich portion and patrimony to poor widows in charity, and rather then violate
her chaste Virginity, chose rather to kiss the stake, and to embrace the flames
of burning faggots. A name illustrious in that Elizabeth Lucie, a Lady for her
princely virtues and comportment deemed worthy of the Queenship to Ed. the
fourth. Speed in Ed. 4.
And what shall I say more? a name wherein the faith of K. Lucius, the zeal of
the Bishops, the charity of the Saint, the worth of the Courtier, the virtues
of all did translucently shine. He was a mornning star in the midst of a
cloud, in the late tempestuous times not twinkling betwixt two opinions, but
constantly appearing in his course and station, and a plain Expositor of his
name; Let it remain as his ornament, as our instruction and posterities
Example, never to go out of that name, so long as Lucifer arises to bring in
the morning, whiles we bewail the sad vespers of his setting here; Oh
Jonathan, etc.

A note of Indignation, how wast thou slain in the high places! Kalat. wounded,
shot through, slain by a pitiful massacre in a tragical manner; this act,
this passion, this direful dispatch, David with Indignation does detest in the
persons that did it, and curses the place with barrenness that drank his
blood, that they might not pleasure God nor profit man: Oh ye mountains of
Gilboah, Verse. 21.
let there be no dew or rain fall upon you, nor field of offering: giving a
pattern to Alexander and Caesar, how to reward the Assassinates of royal blood,
though in the field they are vanquished enemies.

Pet. Martyr, no far Traveller, affirms, that the place where he took his
mortal wound, does stand smitten with barrenness, Buntingius Itiner.
as Aeternum monumentum tanti mali, like the figtree accursed by Christ.
Berchardus an eyewitness says, that as he traveled up that mount, there fell
such a violent shower that he was wet through his clothes, and the water in
abundance ran in the valleys: and in Anno 1283 sleeping upon this hill on the
Eve of all Saints, a great dew fell upon his clothes, but in many places it is
stony and barren. It Was then a wish of David's, that the heavens and earth might
have a kind of sense and consort in this calamity, feigning them as fit
mourners to grace these funerals. This mountain is forty miles from Jerusalem,
and has its name from Gil and Bagnah, a purchase of joy, a bubble of gladness;
so it might have proved to Jonathan, Greg. lex. sanct.
that had been victorious heretofore in such a place, but now the Shambles of
this noble Hero; here the Archers pressed sore upon him, and Jonathan fell down
slain in mount Gilboah, 1 Samuel 31.3.
to show that the Laurel of victory withers at the last, and all the
achievements of worldly glory are but a fit of mirth, and at last break like a
bubble into vanity, and then call me no more Naomi but Marah, no more Gilboah,
a purchase of joy, but Gaal Boah, a purchase to be abhorred, or Golgotha, a
place of dead men's sculs, not Kalat, but Kallailah. God bless us from it, our
God forbid.

Parallel to this somewhat was the place where our Jonathan received the arrow
of evil and contagious air that brought him to his long home, in that
mountainous and uncouth part of Worcestershire; visiting his park there, Psalm.
91.
that arrow of death that flies by day, invisibly fell into his sides, which
stole secretly to the heart, won the Castle of health, and let out his life. We
will not curse that ground, but wish that a witness or monument may there stand
to attest the loss and fail of so good a Master; The Analogy of this high
place may serve for a moral, to give, us caution and instruction that high
places are dangerous; the exceeding high mountains, whence we may discover the
whole glory of the world, are devilish tentations; the pinnacle of the Temple
is second to it, from hence the scepters and the miters take their rise and
fall; he had need to be another Savior that escapes. Trust not in Princes, nor
in preferments to high places, Expertus metuit Jonathan the Dove comes hither
and gives the Philistims arrow better aim, the morning star is made the
fairer mark; O Jonathan: which ushes in the fourth part, a note of Lamentation.

4
Tsur lignaleca achi, I am distressed, or woe is me for thee my Brother; the
Translations turn it sadly, I am (quoth David) straitened as one besieged with
sorrows, Greece. 70. Lat.
(...), I am not able to tell how sorrowful a man I am: Doleo, I am hewed and
shaved thin with grief for thee; I am straightened and begirt like a vessel that
must vent or break: many Apostrophes bound and rebound from Gath and Askelon to
Gilboah, from thence to Jonathan, from Jonathan to himself, from himself to
Jonathan, drawing this strong bow of sighs and ejaculations to the head, and
sending them out like arrows; I am undone for thee my Brother, whose Sister
Michol I have married, a fair, a wise, ingenuous and faithful wife; more wives
may I live to enjoy, but never more must I look to see such another Brother as
now is dead.

Let my loss and lamentation for ever warrant against all gainsayers the
ancient custom of Epitaphs and mournings at the departure and loss of friends,
Use.
our near and dear Relations; Let Adam and Eve forbear their frolicks, Fons^^d
ex Heb. Ser. 1.
and retire an hundred years in mournings to see the wages of sin so severely
paid in the slaughter of Abel, in the death of the body, and the abandoning of
Cain, for the soul: in this Equipage and train let Abraham and Jacob, Joseph
and Jeremy, the High Priest and the Old Prophet, the people for Moses, Aaron
and Samuel, and me for Saul and Jonathan, the Subjects for Josias, Christ for
Lazarus, (behold how he loved him) his Sisters for the same, the widow for her
Son, St. Paul for Epaphroditus, and the good women and neighbors for Dorcas.
Let the Barbarous Laughing and cruel revels, the profane fidling, and the
burial of an Ass, be banished to the Pagans, and as far off our Christian
funerals, as the Antipodes: to be so Stoical or stockish as to stiflle our good
afffections, and to strangle our winds in our baggs with Aeolus; is unnatural,
ungracious, unchristian Apathy. The will of God is not resisted with tears and
weeping, he bars not our affections, but bids us let them out, be of like
affection, weep with them that weep: Romans 12.
what though we cannot help it? yet lets weep the more because we cannot; it is
some ease to let these swelling waters out: lets weep with Xerxes, beholding
this numerous army of mankind, for that within one age not one of them
survives, into such a ruin has the sin of one involved us all; lets weep
for our selves that have sustained that loss, and let the losers have leave to
speak, that our sin has bereaved us, one of a father, another of an husband,
a master, a companion, a patron, a friend: if he were good, let them deplore
the Churches, countries, houses, townships loss; if evil, as Absalom, whose
graceless crime was as the Mule that carried his hairy scalpe to the tree of
execution; yet bewail him the more, Manass. Ben. Israel de Creat ^robl. 19.
as David is observed 8 times to have cried out for him, O Absalom, my son my
son! seven times for that sin of rebellion, containning the seven degrees of
evil that accomplish such a sinner, as naught, Belial, perverse, sinful,
wicked, impostor, scornful, proud, high-minded; which lead to those seven
stairs of the infernal dungeon, Sheol, Abaddon, Beor, Shacah, Bor, Tait,
Haijon, Thelamoth, Arets, Ecclus. 22.11, 12.
Tactith; Weep seven days for him that is dead, but for a fool all the days
of his life; weep for a noble friend thirty, forty days, an year, yet not
without hope as if all were cast away; blame not nature with Electra, nor kill
our selves with Jocasta, become not a stony fountain with Niobe; let heathen
rites be out of fashion with men of better hopes, baldness, vociferations,
hired counterfeits, slaying slaves, young men sent to death; making tombs for
horses, or keeping solemn funerals, with Crassus for a Lamprey, with Hadrian
for a hen, Catullus for a sparrow; but weep and overweep again each tear, till
ten months put an end to mournings. To conclude, rather then want mourners for
so noble Jonathans, let the widowed Swans in the River, and the Turtles in the
wood, the flowers in the Garden, and the fruits of the Trees, let the groves
and the walks, the chambers and the walls, let the bowels of the poor, and the
backs of his compliants, the towns round about, and this Church and Pulpit bear
a part in this lamentation, and say, woe is me for thee my brother Jonathan; and
that for good consideration in the fifth place.

Magnentha ti meod. 5.
Very pleasant have thou been to me, pleasant in thy person, very beautiful;
pleasant in thy expression, bountiful: beautiful, the first born son of Saul,
the properest man in all Israel; 1 Samuel 18.4.14.49, 50.
and bountiful, for Jonathan stripped himself of the robe that was on him, and
gave it to David, and his garments, even to his sword, and to his bow, and to
his girdle. His beauty is presumed, as begotten in the prime of his fathers
abilities, of Ahinoam the daughter of Ahimaaz, whose name signifies my fair
sister; Jonathan was then a bird of that Eagle, and a whelpe of that Lion, both
Father and Son so renowned, in ver. 23. Swifter then Eagles, stronger then
Lions, the Kings of birds and of beasts: fortes creantur fortibus, grapes grow
not out of thorns, nor figs of thistles: David praises in them, decorem formae
and constantiam animi, Lyra in loc.
for outward beauty amiable persons, for inward, bravery of gallant properties.
The way to the Temple of Honor was through the Temple of Virtue, and a fair
step to it is to be the son of Nobles, a true born Eaglet looking on the sun of
gallantry, and a princely Lion scorning the affronts of low-bred-currs and
whiplets. Pearls are begotten of the Orient dews, and the fair bed of Whitspar
the Spaniards call, el madre del ore, the mother of gold. Dion Chrysostom
tells of a family at Thebes, that had hereditarily a lance branded in their
flesh, as a mark of honor, by nature, See Causinus Eabl Tiraquel. de leg. con
lib. 9 Arsen. de Conjug.
without which they were reputed illegitimate and Bastards: nobleness goes by
Blood, and the word of God itself thrives not but upon good ground, an honest
and noble heart; Doves delight in white houses, and the Dove-like Spirit of God
takes up her lodging in the fairest coats. A Bishop of Millain retained none
into his family but the fairest he could choose, his reason was, Improbitas in
egregio corpore vix comperta, foul conditions are scarcely found in fair
complexions. St. Chrysostom notes it of the beggars of his time, that from
beauteous persons they would expect a bounteous alms: God, Man and Nature,
give the preeminence and principality to the fairest, even among Blackmores;
and who will not choose to eat out of the clean dish, to lodge in the fairest
linen, and his companion to be as Joseph or Jonathan, of a sweet complexion?
What an increase of grace is it, to come from a gracious deportment? Caus^^.
Embl.
and how grand an imposture to behold a fine Gentleman, like the Caspian Bird,
stalk forth, and turn him about stately like a Crane, with a scarlet back, and
a green breast, a white neck powdered here and there with spots of yellow, and
to the disgrace of all to come off with a weak small headpiece, a black foul
Bill, and a note as churlish as a Frog in a fen, a fair outside shamed and
belyed with a foul degenerous mind and language. Happy our Jonathan, and he
that enjoyed him, a sweet and alluring condition, Plutarch.
like the Dove perfumed in his feathers, as a harmless decoy, draws all good
natures to follow him, and entertains them in his houses: very pleasant have
thou been to me, and more then so, thy love was wonderful; A note of
Admiration, and my sixth part.

Niphleatha ahavatheca li, 6.
Thy love to me was wonderful, and what is that? a thing wrought extraordinary
by the rare work of God, Aug. ad Honorat. cap. 16.
above the common order of nature, such was the love of Jonathan to David; an
holy fire that came from heaven, and fell upon the altar of Jonathans heart,
kindling his affection to David; an Heroic motion that God put into his mind,
which like the touch of a loadstone drew the needle of his thoughts, to fix
upon this pole-starre: in a word, when that gallant pass was made by little
David, upon that formidable Goliath the Philistim; his head presented to Saul,
and his account of himself, and sonship made unto the King: the next word tells
us, how suddenly Jonathan fell in love with him, and the soul of Jonathan was
knit unto the soul of David: 1 Samuel 18. Nichserah.
as if the finger of God had woven and knit two souls into one curious piece of
work; or tied up two hearts into a ribband or bracelet. All that the Moralists
can prescribe, make not out the perfection of this friendship; not begotten
with profit, which is mercenary, nor with pleasure, which seeks her own end and
interest, sordid considerations that are won and lost for a triflle, and with
the turning of an hand; this is friendship at bowls with a self-bias; But the
virtue of David's acts, the grace of his sayings, was the allective, the
own-sake and service to do David good, was the end, and God was the Author.

To neglect his own profit and apparent inheritance to a crown, and the hope of
a kingdom, to hazard the evil will and displeasure of a King his father, and
to cleave so fast to an aspiring Rival and competitor against himself was
wonderful.

To see a soldier part with his arms, 2.
a courtier with his complements, a Prince with his apparent expectances, a
politician with his pretenses, against his honor, against his profession,
against hls fortunes, against his family, against his father, against himself,
to a shepherd, to plain country-swain, a to divest his whole family, and
advance David, this was divine friendship, that had God to the father, and
Jonathan the performer; 'twas wonderful.

For a man of his quality to covenant three times and keep them; 3.
of his relation, to digest that disparagement to his father, Saul his
thousands, but David his ten thousands; to have the opportunity of Michal to
make him away, and would not be of the council; the command to kill him, and
to treat for his security and life; to acquaint him with the danger, and swear
to do for him what his soul desired; to hazard his mothers reputation, and
bring himself and her within the misprision of high treason, 1 Samuel 20.30.
to yield to David the first title to the crown, and content himself with the
only hope of a second, to quit himself in the next capacity, and to design it
for another head; this is a work of more then a man, and a very wonder,
wrought in him by Almighty God.

Come all the paires of friends and twins of Amity recorded in divine or
humane writings, of Moses and Aaron, of Joseph and Benjamin, of Castor and
Pollux, etc.

The mirrors of love and friendship, kissing each other in the mount, clipping
and entertaining in a far different condition, not accepting immortality if
left without a second, engaging body for body, and life for life, refusing
honors, and resigning Empires, quitting lives, and surrendering dear contracted
spouses; and put the fairest colors of all into one masterpiece and picture:
and Jonathan to David shall outshine them all.

Let the great Moralist limn, and all his Commentators lay on colors to the
life, yet all will come too short of that love whose Original is Loves
fountain, God; whose subject is a Prince, whose object is only virtue, whose
effects are sincerity without hypocrisy, charity without counterband, secresy
without impeachment, resignation without consideration, acquittance without
payment, continuance without revocation.

Beloved, Use.
the old Picture of friendship was revived and a ^ed in our new deceased
Jonathan. A young man as Jonathan, taking divine affection to a poor shepherd
as was David, young, as never grown too old, fair, as always in his flower,
Pagius P^^ Abo^h.
bareheaded and open-fac'd, as not ashamed of his friend, in course clothes,
suited to serve you and yours to poverty it self; his side open just against
his heart, without dawbing or dissembling, his finger pointing to his bosom,
as ready to do from his heart whatsoever lies in his hand to do; On his
forehead is written summer and winter; on the fringe of his garment, in Life
and Death; and besides, this posie, yours at length and at hand, Far and
near. So you may learn to act and copy out this Jonathan of David's, and this
Lucie of ours, to the life. So I come to my last part, the Comparison,
Meahavath Nashim, passing the love of women.

Nashim is taken in the best sense, 7.
of Nasha to forget, because the name and house of their fathers is forgotten
in exchange for their husbands; In the worst, of Nasah to deceive, as if their
loves were of no other use or matter then the Ignis fatuus, a fire set forth to
infatuate men, and mock them from their wits: but in the better sense it is as
the moon, that forgets her own shape, to follow her husband the sun.

The love here is interpreted passively, Lyra. Serrar. A Lap. in lo^.
for the love men bear to women, or actively, as of women to men; the first not
so likely to be intended by David, in the praise of a man: yet that the man may
not lose his commendation, or the living their encouragement, Genesis 2
let the love of Adam to the woman Eve, appear in the first place, when he
embraced her body as the flesh of his flesh, and bone of his bone, loving her
so far that he lost the love of God, himself, and all Eden to pleasure her;
ne contristaret delicias suas, that he might not displease his darling. Aug. 2 Samuel 12.
What adventures Jacob made for Rachel, Shechem for Dinah? Uriahs affection to
Bathsheba, the lamb that lay in his bosom, is movingly set forth by the
Prophets parable: and Ezekiel was put hard to it, Eze^. 24 15.
when the desire of his eyes must be taken away, and his eyes must not weep for
the loss; Solomon compares her love to the man's cistern, as delightful as
fresh water to bath in; to a loving Hind, as a pleasant Roe in his own Park,
Prove. 5.15, 19.
to take his delight; this love shows it self most of all by the loss, and made
the very heathen resign their lives as captives to it.

Gracchus finding two serpents in his chamber, See Valor. Max.
was told, kill the Male, and you shall die first; the Female, and your wife
shall die; to save the last, he killed the first and dyed. A man's wife of
Naples was taken by the Mores, and shipped away, French Acad.
he swam after her, and by the power of such love, overcame the taker, that
sent them both home, Pedro Maxio lib. 5.14.
to wear out their loves together. Three noble Romans for love of their
ravished wives, made an end of themselves.

Orpheus his wife dying on the wedding day, he never loved other, but left the
world to be a companion to his deceased wife. A great Don of Spain, having
sustained this loss, that was his bed, his board, his pillow; slept a years
space in his clothes, eat not on any Table-cloth, nor sat down in a chair.

Herod was so enamored on Mariamne, Josippus.
that having embalmed her dead body, he used it as his living bedfellow. Few
men of our age outdo these affectionate examples: but I have shown them the
most excellent way, 1 Cor. 12.

Now Michal, Saul's daughter and David's wife, is a rare and only example of
lovingnesse to an husband; 1 Samuel 20.
by an officious feigning and counterfeit image suborned and invented to
further his escape. Otherwise the Scripture is silent, and leaves women to
speak for themselves; yea Jonathans mother had not his fathers good word, and
theirs but one single example of love to their husbands among the Jewish wives;
the more Jews you will say for that: But among the Gentiles go we to their
reports, and their Story produces numbers of most loving and adventurous wives.

Some putting on arms and playing the man in wars for their husbands company,
to hazard life or bring them off; some choosing death, according to the Oracle,
See F^. Acad.
to save them alive; some changing apparel to convey them out of prison, and to
stay and answer in their place, winning the hearts of conquerors by love of the
first to become their second husbands, killing their living bodies to lie by
their corpse; drinking their ashes to interre them in their bowels; at the
sight of their bloody coat swooning, travailing and lying, eating hot coals to
consume the^ for want of other weapons; in banishment, becoming slaves and
exiles, keeping their house and children at home, notwithstanding all their
abuses and indignities abroad; not enduring life, if husbands must die; opening
a vein, to bleed and die with them in the bath; forsaking rich fortunes to go
barefoot for a Scholars fancy, embracing both bodies to precipitate themselves
in the sea to end an incurable consumption; refusing Queenships, and preparing
poisons for joy-sops, rather then marry to their husbands murderers keeping
their chambers for a years space, and not so much as looking out at windows;
striving for precedence to be buried alive with their dead husbands; Calvis. in
Conrad. 2.
in a siege, carrying them on their backs for their best goods, ingeniously
deluding the intent, and winning the consent of conquerors, bearing their
beloved over the snow, lest his footsteps should betray their meeting and
avenues, bearing each others burden, and fulfilling the law of Love, Gal 6. Who
desires more examples of the love of women, may find in every age and climate
some to country, some to parents, some to children, and some to husbands, I
hope good store of company. But I will end at home, with one an example of
Queen Hellen, whose pillars and statues deserve to stand as Mary's boxes, but
unbroken, to the end of the world, to witness her work, and preach by the way
her memorial, who sucked with her lips the poisoned wound received in wars,
Speed. in Ed. 1.
to save her husband Edwards life. We have lately had one more at home, whom
it is hard to say who loved most; but these are parted, and I know not how to
apply to them the active or the passive sense employed in my Text.

I have been long on this Bow of love, bent on both sides, but I trust the
women will not think it so, as long as it is in commendation of that sex; nor the
men to gruge them this garland, so long as here is but one in their sex to
exceed them all, whose love surpassed the love of women. Use 1.
Let this stand as to this use, for a monument to the men husbands love your
wives, and be not bitter unto them, for Juno's marriage-sacrifice expels the
gall; and to the women, be it as the pillar of salt to season their manners,
and to keep them sweet and lovely to their husbands: to both, to set one
another interchangeably as seals upon their hearts, Cant 8.6, 7.
and signets on their arms: for love is stronger then death, and more hardy
then the grave; her coals are of fire breaking out into a vehement flame: much
water cannot quench love, neither can the floods drown it.

This is the love that past betwixt Jonathan and David, that like Hippoc. twins
did impart joys and sorrows one to another, and which I have endeavored to
recommend to you, in this masterpiece of love in the old Testament, which is
the character of a true disciple of the new; Saint Paul's most excellent way,
and Saint John's all-sufficient exercise; who in age not able to ascend the
pulpit, and carried to Church, used to say no more, but my little children love
one another; and being asked by his disciples the reason of so frequent
repetition of these words, Perald. To. 1. cap. 8.
answered, Quia praeceptum Domini est, and si solum fiat sufficit, It Is the
Lords command, if this be done, then all is done.

Where also I might seasonably shut up my sayings, were it not where Jonathans
part goes out, as acted, there onr second Jonathan, this much lamented person
should come in: on whom deaths sable mantle here has overspread it self, and
on whom this lesson of the Bow with David-like affection, may be played and wept
anew, I'arallels.
as being with little variation fit parallels in circumstance of life, and some
similitude of death; names answering in manners, and natures all agreeing: for
which let me bespeak your ears and affections for some spare minutes, and so
an end.

For their descent and family, Parallel 1.
Solomon tells us that the glory of children are their fathers; Jonathan was of
the tribe of Benjamin, unattainted for treason or apostasy: Saint Paul could
boast of this, if that Christ had not been in the balance, and our Jonathan of
the ancient family of the Lucies, whose loyalty to my report, was never yet
impeacht, but as Jonathan to Saul, Artabanus to Cinnamus, Sir Tho. E^iol. lib.
3. cap. 6.
or Ferdinando the Protector to the Castilian Princes, faithfully rendered and
performed. For religion, as Jonathan professed and maintained the faith of
Abraham and Israel his fathers, so he the Church of England, eldest daughter to
Rome, planted here by the Apostles of Christ, confirmed and propagated by King
Lucius, without a license from the Pope; making some suite for his counsel, but
owing none to his court: which religion came along, though less visible in her
professors, like those rivers that run under ground, or as the Orinoque
thorough the salt sea; retaining still her fresher water, until at last it
brake forth again, and was conspicuous to the world in the confession of
Augusta, and the protestation at Spiers, and the Apologies of the Church of
England.

A religion like Christ its own Lawgiver, the first and the last, the true and
pure Elixar, Rev. 1.17.
drawn out of the new Testament, and into that (casting off all scum and froth
of corrupt times contraction) at last resolving it self; for when death calls
the adversaries to the bar, and gives them the book to attest the whole truth,
and nothing but the truth, then Bellarmine untwists with Penelope his laborious
webb of works, and makes up the whole piece with the only Tutissimum of trust
in Gods mercy, for fear of vainglory and uncertainty of man's righteousness;
and in this mind and religion he makes his last will, with Lord have mercy on
me, not as a rewarder of Merits, Geor. D. of Saxonic.
but as an almoner of Pardons. Another great Lord, a great Anti-protestant in
his life, is persuaded at his death by his Chancellor, to the truth of his own
usual saying: he is the best Bow-man that shootes next to the mark; and so
rejecting all other aims given by his Priests dies Protestant, See ^enrad.
Dieteric. Dom. pass^p. 2. obs. 1.
fixing the arrow of his faith in the only and pure white of Christ's merits: A
religion which Father Sherer commends to his penitent at last, without mention
of his former ambageous trifles; the Confessor confessing to the sick, Sir, we
use to deal one way with the sound and well, but another with the sick and
weak. Thus the wounded Fowl betakes her self to firm land and leaving her
vagaries in the water, as Balaam, all his Essays against the truth of Israel,
Number. 23.10.
cries out, Let me die the death of the the protestant righteous, and let my
last end be like unto his.

Of this religion was the generation of our worthies fathers to three or four
ascents; whose noble examples have watered these parts, as the four rivers
falling from the mountains of the Moon watered Paradise. In this religion, to
see and observe his Bow, and bent, his practice in his timely readiness like a
morning star, or Lucifer, resorting and calling out his family to the public
service of God, how have I been comforted and cheared! and for the order and
harmony in private and at home, Jerom^
I may say with Jerome, Videbar mihi interesse choris Angelorum, Methought I was
among the Quire of Angels: and when the bow of death gave him that lamentable
blow, of which though he left his life, yet he took his religion away with him,
what time he made his compellation to the witnesses round about him, that as in
the profession of the Church of England he had lived, so he resolved to die;
and in that mind he departed. To add a testimony of his own, (not setting
aside the brethen of the Allobrogick platform) good God, how did thou
incline his heart with Jonathan to Samuel, and the men of God, to the Clergy
constant to their order, and of the Orthodox affection! Let the house of Aaron
now confess, what signal loves they have received, as if his house had been a
Naioth or College for the entertainment of scholars, and an Academy for their
resort, his nature being composed as Daniels, Ish chemdoth, a man of desires,
or a desirable man; as Cymbalum mund, Dan. 10, 11. Palamed.
to invite them, and his various expressions, (...), the Nightingal of the
Muses to detain them, received with such lowly greeting, entertained with such
smiling and lovely embraces, Theodaret. 5.7.
fed with such wholesome dishes, lodged in the choicest chambers, accompanied
with so grateful a presence, dismissed with such courteous adieus; as if
Jonathan had strived to ingratiate David, or Samuel; Theodosius the B. Ambros.
in ob. Val.
Meletius with kissing his eyes or lips, or Valentinian Saint Ambrose, Quem
Salutem sibi quandam venturam arbitrabatur, whom when he saw, he thought some
special healthfulness was coming toward him.

And when maturity invited him to marriage, who was the choicest pearl in his
eye, but the virtuous Margaret, allied collaterally to that mother of pearl,
his late deceased parent? To which choice he was not invited only by the eyes
for beauty; that Moon is soon clouded, changed or Eclipsed; nor by the fingers,
which values a woman no higher then her portion; nor by the ears, which by
credulity is often cheated with reports; but by Solomon's character, (...) 1.10,
(...).
Her price is far above pearls, and let her own works praise her in the
gates: In this his choice he seems to have had a mindful reflection on that
name and merit in his mother, who like another Rachel, Ruth 4 ^^.
did build the house of Israel, and did famously in Bethlehem that house of
bread.

Here the arms of Lucie and Spencer were enquartered and enclasped in one
coat, the Pikefish taken in a net or knot.

Here Lucie with his match is met,
As taken with a Spencers net.
Eros and Anteros, love and relove, so lively acting interchangeably their
parts, that (oh the pity they were so soon parted!) the fight would have made
a wise man's heart rejoice to see it; so little or no gall was there in this
Junoes sacrifice, but all the water turned into wine, John 2. and may she bear
also his religion, name, love, and just interest in estate, as his coat of
arms, in honor and memorial of such a Jonathan.

And could my speech reach to the ears of all his brothers and sisters, I would
appeal to their report, whether the loss of their late loving and provident
parents was not much eased and lightened by his supporting hand, becoming a
second father in performance, and a second mother in compassion; how did this
Lucifer send light, morning-influence and motion to fortify their matches, and
improve their fortunes in all proceedings, so long as he appeared oriental,
Lord of the house, and in a right aspect or conjunction with those of lesser
magnitudes; exceeding the examples of this age, as much as Jonathan did of his,
or the morning star, the scarce appearing twinklers of the times.

And you his Tenants and servants, whom he might say with Pyrrhus, he never
sent away to wear black clothes in sorrow for his acts, how you that have been
faithful in few things, has he not made rulers over many? and if you like
stones should hold your peace, the Farms, Leases and Estates for life would
speak, by him granted and confirmed; say Sirs, for that little model of
commands in his courtly service, found you not a great appearance of the graces
in his rewards? he has put the proverb out of date, an old serving-man and a
new gentleman in the place; how many largesses to his lacquais, suites of
cloths, with Jonathan, has he put off to invest and make known his favorites
withal? And now may you worthily put on your mourning weeds for Jonathan: 1 Samuel 1.24.
ye daughters of Sion weep for him that clothed you in scarlet, and put
ornaments of gold upon your apparel: and some whose lives he sought to save
with the hazard of his own.

To speak all in a few words, his house was a Bethgerim for hospitality of
strangers, a Bethlehem, an house of bread for the needy bellies, the poole of
Bethesdah for relief of waiters in her porches; Lucius and Aci(...) both alike.
and the house of the Lucies joined to the Spencers, was, pardon the
comparison, those two fishes which by the blessing of the Son of God, did feed
five thousand persons, and twelve baskets for the poor.

If the Bow-song on Jonathan suite not aright in all proportion, sure I am that
with David's leave, we may properly entitle his praise to the Shoshanim, and
tune of the Flower de Luce, for six leaves in that flower displaying themselves.

He was a true Flower de Luce, (to lose nothing of his name) which opened and
shut his favors with the Sun of righteousness, in a sympathy with his Savior
Christ, living and dying about the same age, and now following the Lamb
wheresoever he goes.

His six leaves of mercy to the body exposing themselves; Visito, Poto, Cibo,
Redimo, Tego, Colligo, Condo, I View, Drink, Feed, Redeem, Bring home, and
Bury, were accompanied with the six spires of spiritual assistance to complete
and answer them;

Consule, Castiga, Solare, Remitte, Fer, Ora;

Counsel, Reprove, Forgive, Bear, Pray, Makemerry.

A Flower de Luce.

1 Rooted so fast in his religion, that no wind or storm could stir or alter
him.

For his candor and sincerity, in which virtue he was so plainly visible and
transparent, that his bosom was (...), 1 Cor. 5.8.
exposed to the Sun, and might be seen thorough, sincere, with an heart so
clear, perspicuous and plain, that like Drusus house full of windows, all that
was contained within, might be seen without, as the Poet, -- Cui meliere luto
Juvenal.

finxit praecordia Titan.
Whom the pure Sun with better clay,
Made a true heart for yea and na y.


2 So candid and fair conditioned to treat, so oily and soft to handle, so
innocent and harmless to act, that Adam seemed to have lent him little matter
to be offended, and grace less mind to give offense.

3 So cool a temper in his nature, that as the lilly water allays and cooles
all burning sores and apostems, so he by example and sweet words loved to
assuage heart-burnings, swelling and fallingout of neighbors.

4 So white and spotless in the virgin and his married life, that he esteemed
and made his chastity most odoriferous to all in a bed undefiled and kept
whole; but if broken or bruised, he abhorred as too rank a smell for him, and
most unsavory in his family.

5 So open and expansed in his love and bounty spreading on every side, that
his dishes and vessels were as the baskets and bowls of the Lilly, full of
refreshment, ornament and medicine to his friends, all graced with such an
humble condescent, that you might say, there was the rose of Sharon, Cant. 2.1.
and the lilly of the Valleys.

A Flower de Luce broad in his blowed leaves upwards toward heaven, 6.
but contracted and narrow in the bottom toward the earth; being large and
heavenly minded in his contemplation of that land and mansion, esteeming all
his lands and houses not worth a thought to think on, nor a look with Lots wife
to reflect upon, no nor so much as one sisters tear to fall for the loss of
them, going as willingly to his grave with his body as to his bed, and sending
forth his soul as cheerfully as Noah's dove flew from the Arc when the flood
was past, or a prisoner to be enlarged to a palace. In a time large enough for
him to have lived longer, although determined of God, whose eternity meets and
complies with all times, but enforces none; in the Autumn, that deadly season
and fall of the year, when the Sun falls from his height, the days from their
length, the Elements from their beauty, the Corn under the sickle, Flowers
from the stalk, Leaves from the trees, Fruits from the boughs, men from their
families, now the lovely Adonis of all delight is rooting up by the dirty Bore
of winter hasting on, enough to make women superstitious to weep for this
Tamuz, Ezekiel. 8.14.
the sweetheart of the Sun; and cause enough for us to take on with David, for
our Sun is now gone down, of whom the world was not worthy; our Adonis is
withdrawn by death, our Brother Jonathan is in the dust. But stay Rachel, thy
work shall be rewarded, his body shall return in the day of Renewing, when the
great Lapidary shall have ripp'd off the earthy bark of this diamond, Mal. 3.7.
and shall make up his jewels, the righteous, and such as do likewise shall see
and enjoy him again: the stay will seem no longer than a sweet nights sleep, and
the time no more to you than the years past before you were born. But methinks
I see his soul and better part ere this become a gainer by this blessed change:
The Bow of Death has not taken this within its reach or distance, it is past
the stroke or aim of all these earthly Archers, and having broken thorough the
black color and cloud of death, Rev. 4.3.
shines like the Rainbow in the green color of Gods reflecting grace, until
both soul and body united shall ascend higher, even to the bright Aurora-colour
of full glory.

And in the mean time, learn Clergy, Laity, Widow and Posterity, Brethren and
Sisters, Tenants and Servants, Strangers and Familiars, Friends and Poor folks,
not to furnish the pasquils of men's ears with libels, jeers, or reproaches they
cannot hang upon his worthy Pillar, but fill it with the inscriptions of
complaints and praises, commendations and Panegyricks; and learn the lesson, if
not to excel or equal, yet to aim at, or to imitate; which was the end of
David's Lesson, and shall be of mine.

(...).

