CHRIST MYSTICAL; OR, The blessed union of Christ and his Members.

Also, AN HOLY RAPTVRE: OR, A Patheticall Meditation of the Love of Christ.

Also, The Christian laid forth in his whole Disposition and Carriage.

By J. H. D. D. B. N.

LONDON, Printed by M. Flesher, and are to be sold by William Hope, Gabriel
Beadle, and Nathaniel Web. 1647.

TO The only Honor and Glory of his blessed Savior and Redeemer:

And to the comfort and benefit of all those members of his Mystical Body,
which are still laboring and warfaring upon earth;

I. H. their unworthiest servant, humbly dedicates this fruit of his old age.

The CONTENTS.
1. HOw to be happy in the apprehending of Christ. 2. The honor and happiness
of being united to Christ. 3. The kind and manner of our union with Christ. 4.
The resemblance of this union by the head and members of the body. 5. This
union set forth by the resemblance of the husband and wife. 6. This union
resembled by the nourishment and the body. 7. The resemblance of this union by
the branch, and the stock; the foundation, and the building. 8. The certainty
and indissolublenesse of this union. 9. The privileges and benefits of this
union: The first of them life. 10. A complaint of our insensiblenesse of this
mercy, and an excitation to a cheerful recognition of it. 11. An incitement to
a joy and thankfulness for Christ our life. 12. The duties we owe to God for
his mercy to us in this life, which we have from Christ. 13. The improvement of
this life; in that Christ is made our Wisdom. 14. Christ made our
Righteousness. 15. Christ made our Sanctification. 16. Christ made our
Redemption. 17. The external privileges of this union, a right to the
blessings of earth and of heaven. 18. The means by which this union is wrought.
19. The union of Christ's members with themselves. First, those in heaven. 20.
The union of Christ's members upon earth. First, in matter of judgment. 21. The
union of Christians in matter of affection. 22. A complaint of Divisions, and
notwithstanding them, an assertion of unity. 23. The necessary effects and
fruits of this union of Christian hearts. 24. The union of the Saints on earth
with those in heaven. 25. A recapitulation and sum of the whole Treatise.
I Have with much comfort and contentment perused these divine and holy
Meditations, entitled Christ Mystical, An holy Rapture, and The Christian,
laid forth, or characterised in his whole disposition and carriage; and
relishing in them much profitable sweetness and heavenly raptures of
spiritual devotion, I do license them to be Printed and published.

JOHN DOWNHAM.

CHRIST MYSTICAL; OR, THE BLESSED Union of CHRIST and his Members.
THERE is not so much need of Learning, 1. How to be happy in the apprehending
of Christ.
as of Grace, to apprehend those things which concern our everlasting peace;
neither is it our brain that must be set on work here, but our heart; for true
happiness does not consist in a mere speculation, but a fruition of good:
However therefore there is excellent use of Scholar-ship in all the sacred
employments of Divinity, yet in the main act which imports salvation, skill
must give place to affection. Happy is the soul that is possessed of Christ,
how poor so ever in all inferior endowments: Ye are wide, O ye great wits,
whiles you spend your selves in curious questions, and learned extravagancies;
ye shall find one touch of Christ more worth to your souls, then all your deep,
and laboursome disquisitions; one dram of faith more precious then a pound of
knowledge: In vain shall ye seek for this in your books, if you miss it in
your bosoms: If you know all things, and cannot truly say, I know whom I have
believed, 2 Timothy 1. 12.
you have but knowledge enough to know your selves truly miserable. Would
thou therefore, my son, find true and solid comfort in the hour of
temptation, in the agony of death? make sure work for thy soul, in the days of
thy peace; Find Christ thine; and, in despite of hell, thou art both safe,
and blessed; Look not so much to an absolute. Deity, infinitely and
incomprehensibly glorious: alas, that Majesty (because perfectly, and
essentially good) is, out of Christ, no other then an enemy to thee; thy sin
has offended his justice, which is himself; what have thou to do with that
dreadful power which thou have provoked? Look to that merciful, and
all-sufficient Mediator betwixt God and man, who is both God and man, 1 Timothy 2.
5
Jesus Christ the righteous: It is his charge, 1 John 2. 1.
and our duty, Joh. 14. 1.
Ye believe in God, believe also in me. Yet look not merely to the Lord Jesus,
as considered in the notion of his own eternal being, as the Son of God,
co-equall and co-essentiall to God the Father, but look upon him, as he stands
in reference to the sons of men: and herein also look not to him so much, as a
Lawgiver, Luther in Gal.
and a Judge, (there is terror in such apprehension) but look upon him, as a
gracious Savior and Advocate; and lastly, look not upon him, as in the
generality of his mercy, the common Savior of mankind, (what comfort were it
to thee, that all the world except thy self were saved?) but look upon him, as
the dear Redeemer of thy soul, as thine Advocate at the right hand of Majesty;
as one, with whom thou art through his wonderful m^rcy, inseparably united:
T^us, thus, look upon him firmly and fixedly; so as he may never be out of
thine ei^s; and what ever secular objects interpose themselves betwixt thee and
him, look through them, as some slight mists, and terminate thy sight still in
this blessed prospect: Let neither earth, nor heaven hide him from thee in
whatsoever condition.

And whiles thou art thus taken up; 2. The honor and happiness of being united
to Christ.
see if thou can without wonder and a kind of ecstaticall amazement, behold
the infinite goodness of thy God, that has exalted thy wretchedness to no
less then a blessed and indivisible Union with the Lord of glory; so as thou,
who in the sense of thy miserable mortality, may say to corruption, Job 17.
14.
Thou art my father, and to the worm, Thou art my mother and my sister, can
now through the privilege of thy faith, hear the Son of God say unto thee,
Genesis 2. 23.
Thou art bone of my bone, Ephesians. 5. 30.
and flesh of my flesh: Surely, as we are too much subject to pride our selves
in these earthly glories, so we are too apt, through ignorance, or
pusillanimity, to undervalue our selves in respect of our spiritual condition;
we are far more noble and excellent then we account our selves. It is our
faith that must raise our thoughts to a due estimation of our greatness; and
must show us how highly we are descended, how royally we are allied, how
gloriously estated: that only is it, that must advance us to heaven, and bring
heaven down to us: Through the want of the exercise whereof, it comes to pass,
that, to the great prejudice of our souls, we are ready to think of Christ
Jesus as a stranger to us: as one aloof off in another world; apprehended only
by fits, in a kind of ineffectuall speculation, without any lively feeling of
our own interesse in him; whereas we ought by the powerful operation of this
grace in our hearts, to find so heavenly an appropriation of Christ to our
souls, as that every believer may truly say, I am one with Christ, Christ is
one with me. Had we not good warrant for so high a challenge, it could be no
less then a blasphemous arrogance to lay claim to the royal blood of heaven;
but since it has pleased the God of heaven so far to dignifie our
unworthiness, as in the multitudes of his mercies to admit and allow us to be
partakers of the divine nature, 2 Pet. 1. 4.
it were no other then an unthankful stupidity not to lay hold on so glorious
a privilege, and to go for less then God has made us.

Know now, 3. The kind and manner of this union with Christ.
my son, that thou art upon the ground of all consolation to thy soul, which
consists in this beatificall union with thy God and Savior, think not
therefore to pass over this important mystery with some transient, and
perfunctory glances; but, let thy heart dwell upon it, as that which must stick
by thee in all extremities, and cheer thee up, when thou art forsaken of all
worldly comforts: Do not then conceive of this union, as some imaginary thing,
that has no other being but in the brain; whose faculties have power to
apprehend, and bring home to it self, far remote substances; possessing it self
in a sort of whatsoever it conceives: Do not think it an union merely
virtuall, by the participation of those spiritual gifts and graces which God
works in the soul; as the comfortable effects of our happy conjunction with
Christ; Do not think it an accidental union in respect of some circumstances
and qualities wherein we communicate with him who is God and man; nor yet a
metaphorical union by way of figurative resemblance; but know that this is a
true, real, essential, substantial union, whereby the person of the believer
is indissolubly united to the glorious person of the Son of God; know, that
this union is not more mystical then certain; that in natural unions there
may be more evidence, there cannot be more truth; neither is there so firm and
close an union betwixt the soul and body, as there is betwixt Christ and the
believing soul: for as much as that may be severed by death, but this, never:
Away yet with all gross carnality of conceit; this union is true, and really
existent, but yet spiritual; and if some of the Ancients have termed it
natural and bodily, it has been in respect of the subject united, our
humanity, to the two blessed natures of the Son of God met in one most glorious
person; not in respect of the manner of the uniting: Neither is it the less
real, because spiritual. Spiritual agents neither have, nor put forth any
whit less virtue, because sense cannot discern their manner of working; Even
the Loadstone though an earthen substance, yet, when it is out of sight,
whether under the Table, or behind a solid partition, stirs the needle as
effectually, as if it were within view: shall not he contradict his senses,
that will say, it cannot work because I see it not? Oh Savior, thou art more
mine, then my body is mine, my sense feels that present, but so as that I must
lose it; my faith sees and feels thee so present with me, that I shall never
be parted from thee.

There is no resemblance, 4. The resembla^ce of this union by the head and body.
whereby the Spirit of God more delights to set forth the heavenly union
betwixt Christ and the believer, then that of the head and the body: The head
gives sense and motion to all the members of the body; And the body is one; not
only by the continuity of all the parts held together with the same natural
ligaments, and covered with one and the same skin; but much more by the
animation of the same soul quickening that whole frame; in the acting whereof,
it is not the large extent of the stature, and distance of the lims from each
other, that can make any difference; The body of a child that is but a span
long, cannot be said to be more united, then the vast body of a giantly son of
Anak whose height is as the Cedars; and if we could suppose such a body as high
as heaven it self, that one soul which dwells in it, and is diffused through all
the parts of it, would make it but one entire body: Right so, it is with Christ
and his Church; That one Spirit of his which dwells in, and enlives every
believer, unites all those far-distant members, both to each other, and to
their head; and makes them up into one true mystical body: So as now every
true believer may, without presumption, but with all holy reverence, and all
humble thankfulness, say to his God and Savior; Behold, Lord, I am (how
unworthy soever) one of the lims of thy body; and therefore have a right to all
that thou have, to all that thou do; Thine eye sees for me; thine ear hears
for me; thine hand acts for me; Thy life, thy grace, thy happiness is mine: Oh
the wonder of the two blessed unions! In the personal union, it pleased God to
assume and unite our humane nature the Deity; In the spiritual and mystical,
it pleases God to unite the person of every believer to the person of the Son
of God: Our souls are too narrow to bless God enough for these
incomprehensible mercies: Mercies, wherein he has preferred us (be it spoken
with all godly lowliness) to the blessed Angels of heaven; Heb. 2. 16.
For verily he took not upon him the nature of Angels, but he took on him the
seed of Abraham; Neither has he made those glorious spirits members of his
mystical body, but his saints; whom he has (as it were) so incorporated, that
they are become his body, and he theirs; according to that of the divine
Apostle; For as the body is one and has many members, 1 Cor. 12. 12.
and all the members of that one body being many, are one body, so also is
Christ.

Next hereunto, 5. This union set forth by the resembla^ce of the husband and
wife.
there is no resemblance of this mystery either more frequent, or more full of
lively expression, then that of the conjugall union betwixt the husband and
wife; Christ is, as the head, so the husband of the Church; The Church and
every believing soul is the Spouse of this heavenly Bridegroom; Esa. 62. 5.
whom he marries unto himself for ever in righteousness, Hose. 2. 19.
and in judgment, and in loving kindness, and in mercies; and this match thus
made up, fulfils that decretive word of the Almighty, They twain shall be one
flesh: Ephe. 5. 31.
O happy conjunction of the second Adam, Genesis 2. 24.
with her which was taken out of his most precious side; Oh heavenly and
complete marriage, wherein God the Father brings, and gives the Bride; Genesis 2.
22.
(All that the Father gives me shall come to me, Joh. 6. 37.
says Christ) wherein God the Son receives the Bride, as mutually partaking of
the same nature; Joh. 1. 14.
and can say, This now is bone of my bones, Genesis 2. 23.
and flesh of my flesh; wherein God the holy Ghost knits our wills in a full and
glad consent, to the full consummation of this blessed wedlock: And those whom
God has thus joined together, let no man (no Devil can) put asunder: What is
there then, which an affectionate husband can withhold from a dear wife? He
that has given himself to her; what can be deny to impart? He that has made
himself one with her, how can he be divided from his other-self? Some wild
fancies there are that have framed the linkes of marriage of so brittle stuff,
as that they may be knapt in sunder upon every slight occasion, but he that
ordained it in Paradise, for an earthly representation of this heavenly union
betwixt Christ and his Church, has made that, and his own indissoluble. Here
is no contract in the future, which upon some intervenient accidents may be
remitted; Cant. 6. 3.
but, I am my welbeloveds, and my welbeloved is mine, Cant. 2. 16.
And therefore each is so others, that neither of them is their own; Oh the
comfortable mystery of our uniting to the Son of God! The wife has not the
power of her own body, 1 Cor. 7. 4.
but the husband. We are at thy disposing, o Savior, we are not our own;
Neither art thou so absolutely thine, as that we may not (through thine
infinite mercy) claim an interesse in thee. Thou have given us such a right in
thy self, as that we are bold to lay challenge to all that is thine; to thy
love, to thy merits, to thy blessings, to thy glory: It was wont of old, to be
the plea of the Roman wives to their husbands, Where thou art Caius, I am Caia;
and now, in our present marriages, we have not stuck to say, With all my
worldly goods I thee endow; And if it be thus in our imperfect conjunctions
here upon earth, how much more in that exquisite one-nesse which is betwixt
thee, o blessed Savior, and thy dearest Spouse, the Church? What is it then
that can hinder us from a sweet and heavenly fruition of thee? Is it the
loathsome condition of our nature? Thou sawst this before, and yet could say,
when we were yet in our blood, Ezekiel. 16. 6.
Live: Had we not been so vile, thy mercy had not been so glorious: thy free
grace did all for us; Thou washedst us with water, (...) 16.
and anointedst us with oil, (...) 11,
and cloathedst us with broidered work, and girdedst us about with fine linen,
and coveredst us with silk, and deckedst us with ornaments; and did put
bracelets upon our hands, and a chain on our neck, and jewels on our
foreheads, and eare-rings on our ears, and a beautiful crown on our heads;
What we had not, thou gave; what thou did not find, thou made; that we
might be a not-unmeet match for the Lord of life: Is it want of beauty? Cant.
1. 5.
Behold, I am black, but comely: what ever our hiew be in our own, or others
eyes; it is enough that we are lovely in thine. Behold, thou art fair, Cant. 1.
16
my beloved, behold, thou art fair, yea pleasant; Thou art beautiful, Cant.
6. 3.
O my love, Cant. 7. 6.
as Tirzah, comely as Jerusalem. How fair and how pleasant art thou, O Love,
for delights! But, oh Savior, if thou take contentment in this poor unperfect
beauty of thy Spouse the Church, how infinite pleasure should thy Spouse take
in that absolute perfection that is in thee, who art all loveliness and glory?
And if she have ravished thy heart with one of her eyes, Cant. 5. 16.
how much more reason has her heart to be wholly ravished with both thine,
Cant. 4. 9.
which are so full of grace and amiablenesse? and in this mutual fruition,
what can there be other then perfect blessedness?

The Spirit of God, 6. The resembla^ce of this union by the nourishment and the
body.
well knowing how much it imports us both to know and feel this blessed union
whereof himself is the only worker, labors to set it forth to us by the
representations of many of our familiar concernments which we daily find in
our meats and drinks, in our houses, in our gardens and orchards; That which is
nearest to us is our nourishment; What can be more evident, then that the
bread, the meat, the drink that we receive is incorporated into us, and
becomes part of the substance whereof we consist? so as, after perfect
digestion, there can be no distinction betwixt what we are, and what we took:
Whiles that bread was in the bing, and that meat in the shambles, and that
drink in the vessel, it had no relation to us, nor we to it; yea, whiles all
these were on the Table, yea, in our mouths; yea, newly let down into our
stomachs, they are not fully ours; for upon some nauseating dislike of nature,
they may yet go the same way they came; but if the concoction be once fully
finished, now they are so turned into our blood, and flesh, that they can be no
more distinguished from our former substance, then that could be divided from
it self; now they are dispersed into the veins, and concorporated to the flesh;
and no part of our flesh and blood is more ours, then that which was lately the
blood of the grapes, and the flesh of this fowl, or that beast: Oh Savior,
thou who art truth it self have said, Joh. 6. 51.
I am the living bread, that came down from heaven. My flesh is meat indeed, 55.
and my blood is drink indeed; and thereupon have most justly inferred; 56.
He that eats my flesh, and drinks my blood, dwells in me, and I in him:
and, as a necessary consequent of this spiritual manducation, 54.
Whosoever eats my flesh, and drinks my blood, has eternal life: Lo, thou art
bread indeed; not the common bread, but Manna; not the Israelitish Manna; alas,
that fell from no higher then the region of clouds; and they that ate it died
with it in their mouths; but thou art the living bread that came down from the
heaven of heavens, of whom whosoever eats lives for ever: Thy flesh is meat,
not for our stomachs, but for our souls; our faith receives and digests thee,
and makes thee ours, and us thine: our material food in these corruptible
bodies runs into corruption; thy spiritual food nourishes purely, and
strengthens us to a blessed immortality; As for this material food, many a one
longs for it that cannot get it; many a one has it, that cannot eat it; many
eat it, that cannot digest it; many digest it into noxious and corrupt humors;
all that receive it, do but maintain a perishing life, if not a languishing
death: but this flesh of thine, as it was never withheld from any true
appetite, so it never yields but wholesome and comfortable sustenance to the
soul, never has any other issue then an everlasting life and happiness. O
Savior, whenever I sit at mine own Table, let me think of thine; whenever
I feed on the bread and meat that is set before me, and feel my self nourished
by that repast, let me mind that better sustenance, which my soul receives from
thee, and find thee more one with me, then that bodily food:

Look but into thy Garden, or Orchard; 7. This union rese^bled by the bra^ch
and the stock; the foundation and the building.
and see the Vine, or any other fruit-bearing tree how it grows, and
fructifies; The branches are laden with increase; whence is this, but that
they are one with the stock; and the stock one with the root? were either of
these severed, the plant were barren and dead: The branch has not sap enough
to maintain life in it self, unless it receive it from the body of the tree;
nor that, unless it derived it from the root; nor that, unless it were
cherished by the earth: Joh. 15. 5, 6*
Lo; I am the Vine, (says our Savior) Ye are the branches; He that abides in
me; and I in him; the same brings forth much fruit; If a man abide not in me,
he is cast forth as a branch, and is withered; were the branch and the body of
the tree, of different substances, and only closed together in some artificial
contiguity, no fruit could be expected from it; it is only the abiding in the
tree as a living lim of that plant, which yields it the benefit and issue of
vegetation. No otherwise is it betwixt Christ and his Church; the bough and the
tree are not more of one piece, then we are of one substance with our Savior;
and branching out from him, and receiving the sap of heavenly virtue from his
precious root, we cannot but be acceptably fruitful: But if the Analogy seem
not to be so full, for that the branch issues naturally from the tree, and the
fruit from the branch, whereas we by nature have no part in the Son of God; take
that clearer resemblance which the Apostle fetches from the stock and the
griffe, or cion: The branches of the wild olive are cut off; Romans 11.
and are graffed with choice cions of the good olive; those impes grow, and are
now, by this insition, no less embodyed in that stock then if they had
sprouted out by a natural propagation: neither can be any more separated from
it then the strongest bough that nature puts forth: In the mean time that cion
alters the nature of that stock; and whiles the root gives fatness to the
stock, and the stock yields juice to the cion, the cion gives goodness to the
plant, and a specification to the fruit: so as whiles the impe is now the same
thing with the stock, the tree is different from it was; So it is betwixt
Christ and the believing soul: Old Adam is our wild stock, what could that
have yielded but either none, or sour fruit? we are imped with the new man,
Christ; that is now incorporated into us, we are become one with him; our
nature is not more ours, then he is ours by grace; now we bear his fruit and
not our own; our old stock is forgotten, all things are become new; our
natural life we receive from Adam; our spiritual life and growth from Christ;
from whom after the improvement of this blessed insition we can be no more
severed, then he can be severed from himself.

Look but upon thy house (that from vegetative creatures, thou may turn
thine eyes to those things which have no life) if that be uniform, the
foundation is not of a different matter from the walls; both those are but one
piece; the superstructure is so raised upon the foundation, as if all were but
one stone; Behold, Christ is the chief corner stone, 1 Pet. 2. 6.
elect and precious; neither can there be any other foundation laid then that
which is laid on him; we are lively stones built up to a spiritual house, 1
Cor. 3. 11
on that sure and firm foundation; 2 Pet. 2. 5.
some loose stones perhaps that lie unmortered upon the battlements, may be
easily shaken down, but whoever saw a squared marble laid by line and level in
a strong wall upon a well-grounded base, fly out of his place by whatsoever
violence; since both the strength of the foundation below, and the weight of
the fabric above, have settled it in a posture utterly unmovable? Such is our
spiritual condition, O Savior; thou art our foundation, we are laid upon
thee, and are therein one with thee; we can no more be dis-joyned from thy
foundation, then the stones of thy foundation can be dis-united from
themselves: So then, to sum up all; as the head and members are but one body,
as the husband and wife are but one flesh, as our meat and drink becomes part
of our selves, as the tree and branches are but one plant, as the foundation
and walls are but one fabric; so Christ and the believing soul are indivisibly
one with each other.

Where are those then that go about to divide Christ from himself; 8. The
certainty and indissolublenesse of this union.
Christ real, from Christ mystical; yielding Christ one with himself, but not
one with his Church: making the true believer no less separable from his
Savior, then from the entirenesse of his own obedience; dreaming of the
uncomfortable, and self-contradicting paradoxes of the total and final
Apostasy of saints: Certainly, these men have never thoroughly digested the
meditation of this blessed union whereof we treat: Can they hold the believing
soul a lim of that body whereof Christ is the head; and yet imagine a
possibility of dissolution? Can they affain to the Son of God a body that is
unperfect? Can they think that body perfect that has lost his lims? Even in
this mystical body the best joints may be subject to strains, yea, perhaps to
some painful and perilous luxations; but, as it was in the natural body of
Christ, when it was in death, most exposed to the cruelty of all enemies, that
(upon an overruling providence) not a bone of it, could be broken; so it is
still and ever with the spiritual; some scourgings and blows it may suffer,
yea, perhaps some bruises, and gashes, but no bone can be shattered in pieces,
much less dissevered from the rest of the body: Were we left to our selves, or
could we be so much as in conceit, sundred from the body whereof we are, alas
we are but as other men, subject to the same sinful infirmities, to the same
dangerous and deadly miscarriages: but since it has pleased the God of heaven
to unite us to himself, now it concerns him to maintain the honor of his own
body by preserving us entire.

Can they acknowledge the faithful soul married in truth and righteousness to
that celestial husband; and made up into one flesh with the Lord of glory; and
can they think of any Bills of divorce written in heaven? can they suppose that
which by way of type was done in the earthly Paradise, to be really undone in
the heavenly? What an infinite power has put together, can they imagine that a
limited power can disjoyn? Can they think sin can be of more prevalence then
mercy? Can they think the unchangeable God subject to afterthoughts? Even the
Jewish repudiations never found favor in heaven: They were permitted, as a
lesser evil to avoid a greater, never allowed as good; neither had so much as
that toleration ever been, if the hard-heartednesse, and cruelty of that people
had not enforced it upon Moses, in a prevention of further mischief (...) what
place can this find with a God, in whom there is an infinite tenderness of
love and mercy? No time can be any check to his gracious choice; the inconstant
minds of us men may alter upon slight dislikes; our God is ever himself;
Jesus Christ the same yesterday, Heb. 13. 8.
and to day, and for ever; Jam. 1. 17.
with him there is no variableness, nor shadow of turning; Mal. 2. 16.
Divorces were ever grounded upon hatred; No man (says the Apostle) ever yet
hated his own flesh: Ephesians. 5. 29.
much less shall God do so, 1 John 3. 16.
who is love it self: His love and our union, is like himself, everlasting:
Having loved his own (says the Disciple of Love) which were in the world, Joh.
13. 1.
he loved them to the end. Mal. 2. 16.
He that hates putting away, can never act it; so as in this relation we are
indissoluble:

Can they have received that bread which came down from heaven, and that flesh
which is meat indeed, and that blood which is drink indeed, can their souls
have digested it by a lively faith, and converted themselves into it, and it
into themselves, and can they now think it can be severed from their own
substance?

Can they find themselves truly ingraffed in the tree of life, and grown into
one body with that heavenly plant, and as a living branch of that tree, bearing
pleasant, and wholesome fruit, Rev. 22. 2.
acceptable to God, and beneficial to men; and can they look upon themselves,
as some withered bough fit only for the fire?

Can they find themselves living stones surely laid upon the foundation Jesus
Christ, to the making up of an heavenly Temple for the eternal inhabitation of
God, and can they think they can be shaken out with every storm of Temptation?

Have these men ever taken into their serious thoughts that divine prayer and
meditation which our blessed Redeemer now at the point of his death left for an
happy farewell to his Church, in every word whereof, there is an heaven of
comfort; Neither pray I for these alone; Joh. 17. 20 21, 22.
but for them also which shall believe in me through their word; That they all
may be one, as thou Father art in me, and I in thee, that they also may be one
with us; And the glory that thou gave me, I have given them, that they may be
one, even as we are one; I in them, and thou in me. Oh heavenly consolation; oh
indefeasible assurance! what room can there be now here for our diffidence?
Can the Son of God pray and not be heard? For himself he needs not pray, as
being eternally one with the Father, God blessed for ever; he prays for his;
and his prayer is, That they may be one with the Father and him; even as they
are one. They cannot therefore but be partakers of this blessed union; and
being partakers of it they cannot be dissevered: And to make sure work, that
glory which the Father gave to the Son of his Love, they are already (through
his gracious participation) prepossessed of; here they have begun to enter upon
that heaven, from which none of the powers of hell can possibly eject them: Oh
the unspeakably happy condition of believers! Oh that all the Saints of God, in
a comfortable sense of their inchoate blessedness, could sing for joy, and
here beforehand begin to take up those Hallelujahs, which they shall ere long
continue (and never end) in the Chore of the highest Heaven. 9. The privileges
and benefits of this union:


Having now taken a view of this blessed union, in the nature and resemblances
of it; The first of them Life.
it will be time to bend thine eyes upon those most advantageous consequents,
and high privileges, which do necessarily follow upon, and attend this
heavenly conjunction. Whereof the first is that, which we are wont to account
sweetest, Life: Not this natural life, which is maintained by the breath of
our nosthrils; Alas, what is that but a bubble, a vapor, a shadow, a dream,
nothing? as it is the gift of a good God, worthy to be esteemed precious; but
as it is considered in its own transitorinesse, and appendent miseries, and in
comparison of a better life, not worthy to take up our hearts. This life of
nature is that which arises from the union of the body with the soul, many
times enjoyed upon hard terms; the spiritual life which we now speak of,
arising from the union betwixt God and the soul, is that wherein there can be
nothing but perfect contentment, and joy unspeakable and full of glory. Yea,
this is that life which Christ not only gives, but is: he that gave himself for
us, gives himself to us, and is that life that he gives us; When Christ, which
is our life, Col. 3. 4.
shall appear; says the Apostle: Phil. 1. 21.
And Christ is to me, to live: and most emphatically, Gal. 2. 20.
I am crucified with Christ; Nevertheless I live; yet not I, but Christ lives
in me; Lo, it is a common favor, that in him we live but it is an especial
favor to his own, that he lives in us: Know you not your own selves, 2 Cor.
13. 5
(says the Apostle) how that Jesus Christ is in you, except ye be reprobates?
and wheresoever he is, there he lives; we have not a dead Savior, but a
living; and where he lives, he animates: It is not therefore Saint Paul's case
alone; it is every believers; who may truly say, I live, yet not I, but Christ
lives in me: now, how these lives, and the authors of them are distinguished,
is worth thy carefullest consideration.

Know then, my son, that every faithful man's bosom is a Rebeccaes womb, Genesis
25. 22.
wherein in there are twins: a rough Esau, and the seed of promise; the old
man, and the new; the flesh, and the spirit; and these have their lives
distinct from each other; the new man lives not the life of the old, neither
can the old man live the life of the new; it is not one life that could
maintain the opposite struglings of both these: Corrupt nature is it that gives
and continues the life of the old man; It is Christ that gives life to the new;
we cannot say but the old man, or flesh, is the man too: Romans 7. 18
For I know (says the chosen Vessel) that in me, that is, in my flesh,
dwells no good thing: but the spiritual part may yet better challenge the
title. Romans 7. 22
For I delight in the Law of God after the inward man: That old man of ours is
derived from the first. Adam: as we sinned in him, so he lives in us; The
second Adam both gives, and is the life of our regeneration, like as he is also
the life of our glory; the life that follows our second resurrection: I am
(says he) the resurrection and the life. What is it then whereby the new
creature lives? surely no other then the Spirit of Christ; that alone is it,
that gives being and life to the renewed soul. Life is no stranger to us,
there is nothing wherewith we are so well acquainted; yea, we feel continually
what it is, and what it produces; It is that, from whence all sense, action,
motion flows; it is that, which gives us to be what we are: All this is
Christ to the regenerate man: It is one thing what he is, or does as a man;
another thing what he is, or does as a Christian: As a man, he has eyes, ears,
motions, affections, understanding, naturally as his own: as a Christian he
has all these from him with whom he is spiritually one, the Lord Jesus; and
the objects of all these vary accordingly: His natural eyes behold bodily and
material things; his spiritual eyes see things invisible; His outward ears
hear the sound of the voice; his inward ears hear the voice of Gods Spirit,
speaking to his soul; His bodily feet move in his own secular ways; his
spiritual walk with God in all the ways of his Commandments. His natural
affections are set upon those things which are agreeable thereunto; he loves
beauty, fears pain and loss, rejoices in outward prosperity, hates an enemy;
his renewed affections are otherwise, and more happily bestowed; now he loves
goodness for its own sake; hates nothing but sin, fears only the displeasure
of a good God, rejoices in Gods favor which is better then life: His former
thoughts were altogether taken up with vanity, and earthed in the world; now he
seeks the things above, where Christ sits at the right hand of God; Col. 3.
1.
Finally, he is such, as that a beholder sees nothing but man in him; but God
and his soul find Christ in him, both in his renewed person and actions; in all
the degrees both of his life, and growth of his sufferings, and glory: Gal. 4.
19.
My little children (says Saint Paul) of whom I travel in birth again until
Christ be formed in you. Lo, here Christ both conceived and born in the
faithful heart; Formation follows conception, and travel implies a birth: 1
Cor. 3. 1.
Now the believer is a newborn babe in Christ, 2 Pet. 2. 2.
and so mutually Christ in him; from thence he grows up to 1 John 2. 14.
strength of youth; and at last to Ephesians. 4. 13. 2 Cor. 13. 9. Heb. 6. 1.
perfection, even toward the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ;
And in this condition he is dead with Christ; Romans 6. 8
He is buried with Christ; Romans 6. 11.
He is alive again unto God through Christ, Col. 3. 1.
he is risen with Christ, Ro^. 8. 17.
and with Christ he is glorified; Yea, yet more then so, his Col. 1. 24
sufferings are Christ's, Christ's sufferings are his; Ro^. 8. 17.
He is in Christ an heir of glory; Col. 1. 27
and Christ is in him, 10. A complaint of our inse^siblenesse of this mercy,
and an excitation to a cheerful recognition of it.
the hope of glory.

Do thou not now find cause (my son) to complain of thy self (as, I
confess, I daily do) that thou art so miserably apt to forget these intimate
respects between thy Christ and thee? art thou not ashamed to think, how little
sense thou have had of thy great happiness? Lo, Christ is in thy bosom, and
thou feelst him not; It is not thy soul that animates thee in thy renewed
estate, it is thy God and Savior, and thou have not hitherto perceived it; It
is no otherwise with thee in this case, then with the members of thine own
body; there is the same life in thy fingers and toes, that there is in the
head, or heart, yea, in the whole man, and yet those lims know not that they
have such a life: Had those members reason as well as sense, they would
perceive that, wherewith they are enlived; thou have more then reason, faith;
and therefore may well know whence thou have this spiritual life, and
thereupon art much wanting to thy self, if thou do not enjoy so useful and
comfortable an apprehension: Resolve therefore with thy self that no secular
occasion shall ever set off thy heart from this blessed object; and that thou will as soon forget thy natural life, as this spiritual: and raise up thy
thoughts from this dust, to the heaven of heavens: Shake of this natural
pusillanimity, and mean conceit of thy self as if thou were all earth, and
know thy self advanced to a celestial condition, that thou art united to the
Son of God, and animated by the holy Spirit of God; Gal. 2. 20.
so as the life which thou now live in the flesh, thou live by the faith of
the Son of God, who loved thee, and gave himself for thee.

See then and confess how just cause we have to condemn the dead-heartednesse
wherewith we are subject to be possessed: and how many worthy Christians are
there in the world who bear a part with us in this just blame; who have yielded
over themselves to a disconsolate heartlesnesse, and a sad dejection of spirit;
partly through a natural disposition inclining to dumpishnesse, and partly
through the prevalence of temptation: For Satan well knowing how much it makes
for our happiness cheerfully to reflect upon our interest in Christ, and to
live in the joyful sense of it, labors by all means to withdraw our hearts
from this so comfortable object; and to clog us with a pensive kind of
spiritual fullennesse: accounting it no small mastery if he can prevail with
us so far as to be reave us of this habitual joy in the holy Ghost, arising
from the inanimation of Christ living, and breathing within us: So much the
more therefore must we bend all the powers of our souls against this dangerous
and deadly machination of our spiritual enemy; and labor, as for life, to
maintain this Fort of our joy against all the powers of darkness; and, if at
any time we find our selves beaten off, through the violence of temptation; we
must chide our selves into our renewed valor: and expostulate the matter with
our shrinking courage* (with the man after Gods own heart) Why art thou cast
down, Psalm. 42. 11 43. 5.
O my soul, and why art thou disquieted within me? hope thou in God; for I
shall yet praise him, who is the health of my countenance and my God. 11. An
incitement to joy and thankfulness for Christ our life.


Neither is here more place for an heavenly joy, then for height of spirit, and
raptures of admiration at that infinite goodness and mercy of our God, who
has vouchsafed so far to grace his elect, as to honor them with a special
inhabitation of his everblessed Deity: Yea, to live in them, and to make them
live mutually in, and to himself; What capacity is there in the narrow heart of
man to conceive of this incomprehensible favor to his poor creature? Oh
Savior, this is no small part of that great mystery wherein to the Angels
desire to look, 1 Pet. 1. 12
and can never look to the bottom of it! how shall the weak eyes of sinful
flesh ever be able to reach unto it? When thou in the estate of thine humane
infirmity offeredst to go down to the Centurions house, that humble Commander
could say; Lord, I am not worthy that thou should come under my roof: What
shall we then say, that thou in the state of thine heavenly glory, should
vouchsafe to come down, and dwell with us in these houses of clay; 1 Cor. 6. 19
and to make our breasts the Temples of thy holy Ghost? When thine holy mother
came to visit the partner of her joy, thy forerunner then in the womb of his
mother, Luke 1. 44.
sprang for the joy of thy presence, though distermined by a second womb; how
should we be affected with a ravishment of spirit, whom thou have pleased to
visit in so much mercy, as to come down into us, and to be spiritually
conceived in the womb of our hearts, and thereby to give a new and spiritual
life to our poor souls; a life of thine own, yet made ours; a life begun in
grace, and ending in eternal glory?

Never did the holy God give a privilege where he did not expect a duty: 12.
The duties we owe to God for his mercy to us, in this life which we have from
Christ.
he has more respect to his glory, then to throw away his favors; The life
that arises from this blessed union of our souls with Christ, as it is the
height of all his mercies, so it calls for our most zealous affections, and most
effectual improvement. Art thou then thus happily united to Christ, and thus
enlived by Christ? how entire must thou needs be with him, how dear must thy
valuations be of him, how heartily must thou be devoted to him? The spirit of
man (says wise Solomon) is the candle of the Lord searching all the inward
parts of the belly; Pro. 20. 27
and therefore cannot but be acquainted with his own inmates; and finding so
heavenly a guest as the Spirit of Christ in the secret lodgings of his soul,
applies it self to him in all things: so as these two spirits agree in all
their spiritual concernments; The Spirit it self (says the holy Apostle)
bears witness with our spirit, Romans 8. 16
that we are the children of God; and not in this case only, but upon
whatsoever occasion, the faithful man has this Urim in his breast, and may
co^sult with this inward Oracle of his God for direction, and resolution in all
his doubts: neither can he, according to the counsel of the Psalmist, Psalm. 4.
4.
commune with his own heart, but that Christ who lives there, is ready to give
him an answer. Shortly, our souls and we are one; and the soul and life are so
near one, that the one is commonly taken for the other* Christ therefore, who
is the life and soul of our souls, is and needs must be so intrinsecall to us,
that we cannot so much as conceive of our spiritual being without him.

Thou need not be told, my son, how much thou valuest life; Besides thine
own sense, Satan himself can tell thee, (and in this case thou may believe
him) Skin for skin, Job 2. 4.
and all that a man has will he give for his life; What ransom can be set
upon it, that a man would stick to give? though mountains of gold; Ps. 49. 7.
though thousands of ^^ms, or ten thousand rivers of oil? Micah 6. 7.
Yea, how readily do we expose our dear lims, not to hazard only, but to
loss for the preservation of it? Now alas, what is our life? It is even a
vapor that appears for a little time, Jam. 4. 14.
and then vanishes away* And if we do thus value a perishing life, that is
going out every moment, what price shall we set upon eternity? If Christ be our
life, how precious is that life, which neither inward distempers, nor outward
violences can bereave us of; which neither can be decayed by time, nor altered
with cross events? Hear the chosen Vessel; Phil. 3. 7, 8
What things were gain to me, those I counted loss for Christ; Yea, doubtless
I count all things but loss for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ
Jesus my Lord; for whom I have suffered the loss of all things; and do count
them but dung that I may win Christ; and, as one that did not esteem his own
life dear to him, in respect of that better; Act. 20. 24
always (says he) bearing about in the body, the dying of the Lord Jesus, 2
Cor. 4. 10
that the life also of Jesus, might be made manifest in our body: How
cheerfully have the noble and conquering armies of holy Martyrs given away
these momentany lives, that they might hold fast their Jesus, the life of their
souls? and who can be otherwise affected that knows and feels the infinite
happiness that offers it self to be enjoyed by him in the Lord Jesus?

Lastly, if Christ be thy life, then thou art so devoted to him that thou
live, as in him, and by him, so to him also; aiming only at his service and
glory, and framing thy self wholly to his will and directions: 1 Cor. 10. 31*
Thou can not so much as eat or drink but with respect to him; Oh the
gracious resolution of him that was rapt into the third heaven, worthy to be
the pattern of all faithful hearts; Phil. 1. 20, 21.
According to my earnest expectation and my hope that in nothing I shall be
ashamed, but that with all boldness, as always, so now also Christ shall be
magnified in my body, whether it be by life or by death: For to me to live is
Christ* and to dye is gain. Our natural life is not worthy to be its own
scope; we do not live merely that we may live: our spiritual life, Christ, is
the utmost and most perfect end of all our living; without the intuition
whereof, we would not live, or if we should, our natural life were no other
then a spiritual death: Oh Savior, let me not live longer then I shall be
enlived by thee, or then thou shall be glorified by me: And what rule should I
follow in all the carriage of my life but thine? thy precepts, thine examples,
that so I may live thee, as well as preach thee? and in both may find thee, as
thou have truly laid forth thy self, Joh. 14. 6.
the way, the truth, and the life; the way wherein I shall walk, the truth
which I shall believe and profess, and the life which I shall enjoy: In all my
moral actions therefore teach me to square my self by thee; what ever I am
about to do, or speak, or affect; let me think: If my Savior were now upon
earth, would he do this that I am now putting my hand unto? would he speak
these words that I am now uttering? would he be thus disposed as I now feel my
self? Let me not yield my self to any thought, word, or action which my Savior
would be ashamed to own: Let him be pleased so to manage his own life in me,
that all the interesse he has given me in my self may be wholly surrendered to
him; that I may be as it were dead in my self, 13. The improvement of this
life; in that Christ is made our wisdom.
whiles he lives and moves in me.

By virtue of this blessed union, as Christ is become our life; so (that which
is the highest improvement not only of the rational, but the supernatural
and spiritual life) is he thereby also made unto us of God, Wisdom,
Righteousness, 1 Cor. 1. 30.
Sanctification, and Redemption. Not that he only works these great things in
and for us, (this were too cold a construction of the divine bounty) but that
he really becomes all these to us, who are true partakers of him.

Even of the wisest men that ever nature could boast of, is verified that
character which the divine Apostle gave of them long ago; Their foolish heart
was darkened; professing themselves to be wise, Romans 1. 21, 22.
they became fools; and still the best of us (if we be but our selves) may take
up that complaint of Asaph: So foolish was I and ignorant; Ps. 73. 22.
I was as a beast before thee; and of Agur the son of Jake; Prove. 30. 2, 3.
Surely I am more brutish then man; and have not the understanding of a man; I
neither learned wisdom, nor have the knowledge of the holy* and if any man
will be challenging more to himself, he must at last take up, with Solomon; I
said I will be wise, Eccl. 7. 23.
but it was far from me; But how defective soever we are in our selves, there
is wisdom enough in our head, Christ, to supply all our wants: He that is the
wisdom of the Father, is by the Father made our wisdom: Col. 2. 3.
In him are hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge, says the Apostle:
So hid, that they are both revealed, and communicated to his own: 2 Cor. 4. 6.
For God who commanded the light to shine out of darkness, has shined in our
hearts, to give the light of the knowledge of the glory of God, in the face of
Jesus Christ: In and by him has it pleased the Father to impart himself unto
us; He is the image of the invisible God; Col. 1. 15.
even the brightness of his glory, Heb. 1. 3.
and the express image of his person. It was a just check that he gave to
Philip in the Gospel; Have I been so long time with you, John 14. 9
and yet have thou not known me, Philip? he that has seen me, has seen the
Father: And this point of wisdom is so high and excellent, that all humane
skill, and all the so much admired depths of Philosophy are but mere ignorance
and foolishness, in comparison of it; Alas, what can these profound wits reach
unto, but the very outside of these visible and transitory things? as for the
inward forms of the meanest creatures, they are so altogether hid from them, as
if they had no being; and as for spiritual and divine things, the most
knowing Naturalists are either stone-blinde, that they cannot see them, or
grope after them in an Egyptian darkness: 1 Cor. 2. ^4
For the natural man perceives not the things of the Spirit of God; neither
can he know them, because they are spiritually discerned; How much less can
they know the God of Spirits, who (besides his invisibility) is infinite, and
incomprehensible? only he, who is made our wisdom enlightneth our eyes with
this divine knowledge; Mat. 11. 27
No man knows the Father but the Son, and he to whomsoever the Son will
reveal him.

Neither is Christ made our wisdom only in respect of heavenly wisdom
imparted to us; but in respect of his perfect wisdom imputed unto us: Alas,
our ignorances and sinful misprisions are many and great, where should we
appear, if our faith did not fetch succor from our all-wise, and
all-sufficient Mediator? Oh Savior, we are wise in thee our head, how weak
soever we are of our selves: Thine infinite wisdom and goodness both covers
and makes up all our defects; The wife cannot be poor, whiles the husband is
rich; thou have vouchsafed to give us a right to thy store; we have no reason
to be disheartened with our own spiritual wants, whiles thou art made our
wisdom.

It is not mere wisdom that can make us acceptable to God; 14. Christ made our
Righteousness.
if the serpents were not in their kind wiser then we, we should not have been
advised to be wise as serpents: That God, who is essential Justice, as well as
Wisdom, requires all his to be not more wise, then exquisitely righteous:
Such, in themselves they cannot be; For in many things we sin all; such
therefore they are, and must be in Christ, their head, who is made unto us of
God, together with Wisdom, Righteousness; Oh incomprehensible mercy! He has
made him to be sin for us, 2 Cor. 5. 21
who knew no sin, that we might be made the righteousness of God in him; what
a mavelous and happy exchange is here? we are nothing but sin; Christ is
perfect righteousness; He is made our sin, that we might he made his
righteousness; He that knew no sin, is made sin for us; that we who are all
sin, might be made Gods righteousness in him; In our selves we are not only
sinful, but sin; In him we are not righteous only, but righteousness it
self; Of our selves, we are not righteous, we are made so; In our selves, we
are not righteous, but in him; we made not our selves so, but the same God in
his infinite mercy who made him sin for us, has made us his righteousness: No
otherwise are we made his righteousness, then he is made our sin: Our sin is
made his by Gods imputation; so is his righteousness made ours; How fully does
the second Adam answer, and transcend the first; Romans 5. 18
By the offense of the first, judgment came upon all men to condemnation; by
the righteousness of the second, the free gift came upon all men unto
justification of life. Ro^. 5. 19.
As by one man's disobedience many were made sinners, so by the obedience of one
shall many be made righteous; righteous, not in themselves, (so death passed
upon all, Romans 5. 12
for that all have sinned) but in him that made them so, 5. 11.
by whom we have received the atonement: How free then, and how perfect is our
justification? What quarrel may the pure and holy God have against
righteousness? against his own righteousness? and such are we made in, and by
him: what can now stand between us and blessedness? Not our sins; for this is
the praise of his mercy, that he justifies the ungodly; Rom 4. 5.
Yea, were we not sinful, how were we capable of his justification? sinful,
as in the term from whence this act of his mercy moves, not, as in the term
wherein it rests; his grace finds us sinful, it does not leave us so: Far
be it from the righteous Judge of the world to absolve a wicked soul continuing
such: Pro. 17. 15
He that justifies the wicked, and he that condemns the just, even they both
are an abomination to the Lord: No, but he kills sin in us whiles he remits it;
and, at once cleanses, and accepts our persons: Repentance and remission do
not lagge one after another; both of them meet at once in the penitent soul: at
once does the hand of our faith lay hold on Christ, and the hand of Christ lay
hold on the soul to justification: so as the sins that are done away, can be
no bar to our happiness: And what but sins can pretend to an hindrance?
All our other weaknesses are no eyesore to God, no rub in our way to heaven;
What matters it then how unworthy we are of our selves? It is Christ's
obedience that is our righteousness: and that obedience cannot but be
exquisitely perfect, cannot but be both justly accepted as his, and mercifully
accepted as for us. There is a great deal of difference betwixt being
righteous, and being made righteousness; every regenerate soul has an
inherent justice, or righteousness in it self; He that is righteous, Rev. 22.
11
let him be righteous still, says the Angel: But at the best this
righteousness of ours, is like our selves full of imperfection; If thou, Lord,
Ps. 130. 3.
should mark iniquities, O Lord, who shall stand? Behold, Ezra 9. 15.
we are before thee in our trespasses, for we cannot stand before thee, because
of this; How should a man be just with God; Job 9. 2, 3.
If he will contend with him, he cannot answer him one of a thousand. So then,
he that does righteousness is righteous, 1 John 3. 7.
but by pardon and indulgence, because the righteousness he does is weak and
imperfect; he that is made righteousness, is perfectly righteous by a gracious
acceptance, by a free imputation of absolute obedience. Woe were us, if we
were put over to our own acco^plishments; for, Gal. 3. 10.
Cursed is every one that continues not in all things which are written in the
book of the Law to do them; Deuteronomy. 27. 16.
and, If we say that we have no sin, 1 John 1. 8.
we deceive our selves, and the truth is not in us; Lo, if there be truth in
us, we must confess we have sin in us; and if we have sin, we violate the
Law; and if we violate the Law, we lie open to a curse. But here is our
comfort, that our surety has paid our debt: It is true, we lay forfaited to
death; Justice had said, Ezekiel. 18. 4
The soul that sins shall die: Mercy interposeth, and satisfies; The Son of
God (whose every drop of blood was worth a world) pays this death for us: Romans
8. 33 34.
And now, Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods elect? It is God that
justifies, who is he that condemns? It is Christ that died, yea, rather that
is risen again, who is even at the right hand of God, who also makes
intercession for us. Our sin, our death is laid upon him, and undertaken by
him; Esa. 53. 5.
He was wounded for our transgressions, he was bruised for our iniquities; the
chastisements of our peace were upon him, and with his stripes we are healed;
His death, his obedience is made over to us; So then, the sin that we have
committed, and the death that we have deserved is not ours; but the death which
he has endured, and the obedience that he has performed, is so ours, as he is
ours, who is thereupon made of God our righteousness. Where now are those
enemies of grace that scoff at imputation; making it a ridiculous paradox,
that a man should become just by another man's righteousness? How dare they
stand out against the word of truth, which tells us expressly that Christ is made
our righteousness? What strangers are they to that grace they oppugn? How
little do they consider that Christ is ours? his righteousness therefore by
which we are justified, is in him our own; He that has borne the iniquity of
us all has taught us to call our sins our debts; Esa. 53. 6.
those debts can be but once paid; Mat. 6. 12.
if the bounty of our Redeemer has staked down the sums required, and
cancelled the bonds; and this payment is (through mercy) fully accepted as from
our own hands, what danger, what scruple can remain? What do we then, weak
souls, tremble to think of appearing before the dreadful tribunal of the
Almighty? we know him indeed to be infinitely, and inflexibly just; we know his
most pure eyes cannot abide to behold sin; we know we have nothing else but
sin for him to behold in us: Certainly, were we to appear before him in the
mere shape of our own sinful selves, we had reason to shake and shiver at the
apprehension of that terrible appearance; but now that our faith assures us, we
shall no otherwise be presented to that awful Judge then as clothed with the
robes of Christ's righteousness, how confident should we be, thus decked with
the garments of our elder brother, to carry away a blessing? whiles therefore
we are dejected with the conscience of our own vileness, we have reason to
lift up our heads in the confidence of that perfect righteousness which Christ
is made unto us, and we are made in him.

At the bar of men many a one is pronounced just who remains inwardly foul
and guilty; 15. Christ made our Sanctification.
for the best of men can but judge of things as they appear, not as they are;
but the righteous Arbiter of the world declares none just whom he makes not
holy. The same mercy therefore that makes Christ our righteousness, makes him
also our sanctification; of our selves, wretched men, what are we other at our
best, then unholy creatures, full of pollution and spiritual uncleanness? it
is his most holy Spirit that must cleanse us from all the filthiness of our
flesh and spirit, 2 Cor. 7. 1.
and work us daily to further degrees of sanctification, (He that is holy, Rev.
22. 11
let him be holy still) neither can there be anything more abhorring from his
infinite justice and holiness, then to justify those souls which lie still in
the loathsome ordure of their corruptions. Certainly, they never truly learnt
Christ, who would draw over Christ's righteousness, as a case of their close
wickednesses; that sever holiness from justice, and give no place to
sanctification, in the evidence of their justifying: Never man was justified
without faith; and wheresoever faith is there it purifieth and cleanses; Acts.
15. 9
But besides that the Spirit of Christ works thus powerfully (though gradually)
within us, That he may sanctify and cleanse us with the washing of water, Ephesians.
5. 26, 27.
by the word, his holiness is mercifully imputed to us, That he may present us
to himself a glorious Church, not having spot, or wrinckle, or any such thing,
but that we should be holy and without blemish: so as that inchoate
holiness, which by his gracious inoperation grows up daily in us toward a
full perfection, is abundantly supplied by his absolute holiness, made no
less by imputation, ours, then it is personally his: When therefore we look
into our bosoms, we find just cause to be ashamed of our impurity, and to
loath those dregs of corruption, that yet remain in our sinful nature; but
when we east up our eyes to heaven and behold the infinite holiness of that
Christ, to whom we are united, which by faith is made ours, we have reason to
bear up against all the discouragements, that may arise from the conscience of
our own vileness, and to look God in the face with an awful boldness, as
those whom he is pleased to present holy, Col. 1. 22.
and unblameable, and unreproveable in his sight: Heb. 2. 11.
as knowing that he that sanctifies, and they that are sanctified are all of
one. 16. Christ made our Redemption.


Redemption was the great errand for which the Son of God came down into
the world; and the work which he did vvhiles he was in the world; and
that, which (in way of application of it) he shall be ever accomplishing,
till he shall deliver up his Mediatory Kingdom into the hands of his Father;
in this he begins, in this he finishes the great business of our salvation:
For those who in this life are enlightened by his vvisdome, justified by his
merits, sanctified by his grace, are yet conflicting with manifold
temptations, and struggling with varieties of miseries and dangers, till upon
their happy death, and glorious resurrection, they shall be fully freed, by
their everblessed and victorious Redeemer: He therefore, who by virtue of that
heavenly union, is made unto us of God, Wisdom, Righteousness,
Sanctification; is also upon the same ground made unto us our full Redemption.
Redemption implies a captivity; We are naturally under the woeful bondage of
the Law, of sin, of miseries, of death: The Law is a cruel exactor; for it
requires of us what we cannot now do; and whips us for not doing it; Romans
4. 15
for the Law works wrath; Gal. 3. 10.
and, as many as are of the works of the Law, are under the curse. Sin is a
worse tyrant then he, and takes advantage to exercise his cruelty by the Law;
For when we were in the flesh, Romans 7. 5.
the motions of sins, which were by the Law, did work in our members to bring
forth fruit unto death; Upon sin necessarily follows misery, the forerunner
of death; and death the upshot of all miseries; By one man sin entered into
the world, Romans 5. 12
and death by sin; and so death passed upon all men, for that all have sinned.
From all these is Christ our Redemption; from the Law; Gal. 3. 13.
for Christ has redeemed us from the curse of the Law, being made a curse for
us: Romans 6. 11
From sin* for we are dead to sin, but alive unto God through Jesus Christ our
Lord; Sin shall not have dominion over you, 6. 14.
for ye are not under the Law, but under Grace. From death, and therein from
all miseries: O death, where is thy sting? 1 Cor. 15. 55, 56, 57.
O grave, where is thy victory? The sting of death is sin; and the strength
of sin is the Law: But thanks be to God which gives us victory through our
Lord Jesus Christ. Now then, let the Law do his vvorst, we are not under the
Law, Romans 6. 14
but under Grace. The case therefore is altered betwixt the Law and us. It is
not now a cruel Task-master, to beat us to, and for our work; it is our
Schoolmaster, to direct, and to whip us unto Christ: It is not a severe Judge,
to condemn us, it is a friendly guide to set us the way toward heaven. Let
sin join his forces together with the Law, they cannot prevail to our hurt;
For what the Law could not do, Ro^. 8. 3, 4.
in that it was weak through the flesh, God sending his own Son in the
likeness of sinful flesh, condemned sin in the flesh, that the righteousness
of the Law might be fulfilled in us, who walk not after the flesh but after the
spirit. Let death join his forces with them both, Romans 8. 2.
we are yet safe; For the Law of the spirit of life, has freed us from the
Law of sin, and of death; What can we therefore fear, what can we suffer,
vvhiles Christ is made our Redemption?

Finally, as thus Christ is made unto us Wisdom, Righteousness,
Sanctification, and Redemption; so whatsoever else he either is, or has or
does, by virtue of this blessed union, becomes ours; he is our riches Ephesians. 1. 7.
, our strength Psalm. 27. 1 28. 7.
, our glory Ephesians. 1. 18
, our salvation 1 These. 5. 9. Esa. 12. 2. 3
, our all Col. 3 11
: he is all to us; and all is ours in him.

From these primary and intrinsecal privileges therefore, flow all those
secondary and external, 17. The external privileges of this unio^, a right
to the blessings of earth and heaven.
wherewith we are blessed; and therein a right to all the blessings of God,
both of the right hand and of the left; an interesse in all the good things
both of earth and heaven: Hereupon it is that the glorious Angels of Heaven
become our Guardians, keeping us in all our ways, and vvorking secretly for our
good upon all occasions; that all Gods creatures are at our service; that we
have a true spiritual title to them; 1 Cor. 3. 22, 23.
All things are yours (says the Apostle) and ye are Christ's, and Christ Gods.

But take heed, my son, of mis-laying thy claim to what, and in what manner
thou ought not. There is a civil right, that must regulate our propriety to
these earthly things; our spiritual right neither gives us possession of them,
nor takes away the right and propriety of others; Every man has and must have
what by the just Laws of purchase, gift, or inheritance is derived to him;
otherwise there would follow an infinite confusion in the world; we could
neither enjoy nor give our own; and only will, and might must be the arbiters
of all men's estates; which how unequal it would be, both reason and experience
can sufficiently evince. This right is not for the direption or usurpation of
that which civil titles have legally put over to others; there were no theft,
no robbery, no oppression in the world, if any man's goods might be every man's:
But for the warrantable and comfortable enjoying of those earthly commodities
in regard of God their original owner, which are by humane convciances justly
become ours; The earth is the Lords and the fullness of it; in his right what
ever parcells do lawfully descend unto us, we may justly possess as we have
them legally made over to us from the secondary and immediate owners. There is
a generation of men who have vainly fancied the founding of Temporal dominion
in Grace; and have upon this mistaking outed the true heirs as intruders, and
feoffed the just and godly in the possession of wicked inheritors; which
whether they be worse Commonwealthsmen, or Christians is to me utterly
uncertain; sure I am they are enemies to both; whiles on the one side, they
destroy all civil propriety, and commerce; and on the other, retch the extent
of the power of Christianity so far, as to render it injurious, and destructive
both to reason and to the Laws of all well-ordred humanity* Nothing is ours by
injury and injustice, all things are so ours, that we may with a good
conscience enjoy them as, from the hand of a munificent God, when they are
rightfully estated upon us by the lawful convention or bequest of men. In this
regard it is that a Christian man is the Lord of the whole universe; and has a
right to the whole creation of God: how can he challenge less? he is a son;
and in that an heir; and (according to the high expression of the holy ghost)
a coheir with Christ; As therefore we may not be high-minded, but fear; so we
may not be too low-harted in the under-valuing of our condition; In God we are
great, now mean soever in our selves: In his right the world is ours, what ever
pittance we enjoy in our own; how can we go less when we are one with him
who is the possessour of heaven and earth?

It were but a poor comfort to us, if by virtue of this union we could only
lay claim to all earthly things: alas, how vain and transitory are the best
of these? perishing under our hand in the very use of them, and in the mean
while how unsatisfying in the fruition? All this were nothing, if we had not
hereby an interesse in the best of all Gods favors, in the heaven of heavens
and the eternity of that glory which is there laid up for his Saints; far above
the reach of all humane expressions, or conceits; It was the word of him who is
the eternal word of his father; Ioh. 17. 24.
Father, I will that they also whom thou have given me, be with me where I am
that they may behold my glory which thou have given me; and not only to be
mere spectators, but even partners of this celestial bliss together with
himself; Ioh. 17. 22.
The glory which thou gave me I have given them, that they may be one, even
as we are one. Oh the transcendent and incomprehensible blessedness of the
believers, which even when they enjoy they cannot be able to utter, for measure
infinite, for duration eternal! Oh the inexplicable joy of the full and
everlasting accomplishment of the happy union of Christ and the believing
soul, more fit for thankful wonder and ravishment of Spirit then for any
finite apprehension!

Now that we may look a little further into the means by which this union is
wrought; 18. The means by which this union is wrought.
Know, my Son, that as there are two persons betwixt whom this union is made,
Christ and the believer; so each of them concurres to the happy effecting of
it; Christ, by his spirit diffused through the hearts of all the regenerate,
giving life and activity to them: the believer, laying hold by faith upon
Christ so working in him; and these do so re-act upon each other, that from
their mutual operation results this gracious union whereof we treat. Here is
a spiritual marriage betwixt Christ and the soul: The liking of one part does
not make up the match, but the consent of both. To this purpose Christ gives
his spirit; the soul plights her faith: What interesse have we in Christ but
by his spirit? what interesse has Christ in us but by our faith?

On the one part; He has given us his holy Spirit, says the Apostle; 1 These.
4. 8
and (in a way of correlation) we have received not the spirit of the world, 1
Cor. 2. 12
but the spirit which is of God; And this spirit we have so received, as that
he dwells in us; Romans 8. 11
and so dwells in us, as that we are joined to the Lord; 1 Cor. 5. 2.
and he that is joined to the Lord is one spirit. Gal. 2. 20.


On the other part, we have access by faith into this grace wherein we stand,
and rejoice in hope of the glory of God* Ephesians. 3. 17
so as now the life that we live in the flesh, we live by the faith of the
son of God; who dwells in our hearts by faith* O the grace of faith
(according to St. Peter's style) truly* precious; 2 Pet. 1. 1.
justly recommended to us by S. Paul above all other graces incident into the
soul; Ephesians. 6. 16
as that, which if not alone yet chiefly transacts all the maine affairs
tending to salvation: for faith is the quickening grace Gal. 2. 20 Romans 1. 17*
, the directing grace 2 Cor. 5. 7.
, the protecting grace Ephesians. 6. 16.
, the establishing grace, Romans 11. 20* 2 Cor. 1. 24.
the justifying grace, Romans 5. 1.
the sanctifying and purifying grace; Act. 15. 9.
faith is the grate that assents to, Heb. 11. 1
apprehends, applies, appropriates Christ, and hereupon the uniting grace, and
(which comprehends all) the saving grace. If ever therefore we look for any
consolation in Christ, or to have any part in this beatificall union, it must
be the maine care of our hearts to make sure of a lively faith in the Lord
Jesus, to lay fast hold upon him, to clasp him close to us, yea to receive him
inwardly into our bosoms; and so to make him ours, and our selves his, that we
may be joined to him as our head, espoused to him as our husband, incorporated
into him as our nourishment, engrafted in him as our stock, and laid upon him
as a sure foundation.

Hitherto we have treated of this blessed union as in relation to Christ the
head; 19. The union of Christ's members with themselves; First, those in heaven.
it remains that we now consider of it, as it stands in relation to the
members of his mystical body, one toward another* For as the body is united
to the head, so must the members be united to themselves to make the body truly
complete: Thus the holy ghost by his Apostle: 1 Cor. 12. 12.
As the body is one and has many members, and all the members of that one body
being many, are one body, so is Christ. From this entire conjunction of the
members with each other, arises that happy communion of Saints, which we
profess both to believe and to partake of; This mystical body of Christ is a
large one, extending it self both to heaven and earth; there is a real union
betwixt all those farre-spred limbs: between the Saints in heaven; between
the Saints on earth; between the Saints in heaven and earth.

We have reason to begin at heaven, thence is the original of our union and
blessedness: There was never place for discord in that region of glory, since
the rebellious Angels were cast out thence; the spirits of just men made
perfect must needs agree in a perfect unity; Heb. 12.
neither can it be otherwise, for there is but one will in heaven; one scope of
the desires of blessed souls, which is the glory of their God; all the whole
chore sing one song, and in that one harmonious tune of Allelujah. We poor
parcell-sainted souls here on earth profess to bend our eyes directly upon the
same holy end, the honor of our Maker and Redeemer, but, alas, at our best, we
are drawn to look asquint at our own aims of profit, or pleasure; We profess
to sing loud praises unto God, but it is with many harsh and jarring notes;
above, there is a perfect accordance in an unanimous glorifying of him that
sits upon the throne for ever; Ps. 31. 23.
Oh, how ye love the Lord, all ye his Saints, Oh how joyful ye are in glory.
Ps. 31. 23.
The heavens shall praise Ps. 149. 5.
thy wonders, O Lord; thy faithfulness also in the congregation of the Saints:
Ps. 89. 5.
O what a blessed Commonwealth is that above! The City of the living God, Heb.
12. 22
the heavenly Jerusalem (ever at unity within it self) and therein the
innumerable company of Angels, Ps. 122. 3.
and the general Assembly and Church of the firstborn, which are written in
heaven; the spirits of just men made perfect, and (whom they all adore) God the
judge of all; and Jesus the Mediator of the New Testament: All these as one,
Ps. 68. 17.
as holy: Those twenty thousand chariots of heaven move all one way; When those
four beasts full of eyes, round about the throne give glory, Rev. 4. 6, 7.
and honor, and thanks to him that sits upon the throne, saying, Holy, holy,
Rev. 4. 8, 9, 10.
holy Lord God Almighty, which was, and is, and is to come; then the four and
twenty Elders fall down before him, and cast their crowns before the throne;
No one wears his crown whiles the rest cast down theirs, all accord in one act
of giving glory to the Highest. Rev. 7. 4.
After the sealing of the Tribes, V. 9, 10.
A great multitude, which no man could number, of all Nations, and kindreds,
and people, and tongues stood before the throne, and before the Lamb clothed
with white robes and palms in their hands. And cried with a loud voice,
Salvation to our God, which sits upon the throne, and unto the Lamb; And all
the Angels stood about the throne, Revel. 7. 11, 12.
and about the Elders, and the four beasts, and fell before the throne on their
faces and worshipped God, saying, Amen: Blessing, and glory, and wisdom, and
thanksgiving, and honor, and power, and might be unto God for ever and ever.
Lo, those spirits which here below were habited with severalll bodies,
different in shapes, statures, ages, complexions, are now above as one spirit
rather distinguished, then divided; all united in one perpetual adoration and
fruition of the God of spirits; all mutually happy in God; in themselves, in
each other.

Our copy is set us above; 20. The unio^ of Christ's members upon earth: First,
in matter of judgment.
we labor to take it out here on earth; What do we but daily pray that the
blessed union of souls, which is eminent in that empyrcall heaven, may be
exemplified by us in this region of mortality? For, having through Christ an
access by one spirit unto God the Father, Ephesians. 2. 18, 19.
being no more strangers and forainers, but fellow Citizens with the Saints,
and of the household of God, we cease not to pray, Thy will be done in earth,
Mat. 6. 10.
as it is in heaven: Yea, O Savior, thou, who can not but be heard, have
prayed to thy Father for the accomplishment of this union; That they may be one
even as we are one; Joh. 17. 22 23.
I in them, and thou in me; that they may be perfect in one. What then is this
union of the members of Christ here on earth, but a spiritual oneness arising
from an happy conspiratio^ of their thoughts and affections? for whereas there
are two main principles of all humane actions and dispositions, the brain and
the heart; the conjuncture of these two cannot but produce a perfect union;
from the one our thoughts take their rise; our affections from the other; in
both, the soul puts it self forth upon all matter of accord, or difference. The
union of thoughts is, when we mind the same things, when we agree in the same
truths: This is the charge which the Apostle of the Gentiles lays upon his
Corinthians, and, in their persons, upon all Christians; 1 Cor. 1. 10
Now I beseech you, Brethren, by the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye all
speak the same thing; and that there be no divisions among you; but that ye be
perfectly joined together in the same mind and in the same judgment; And this
is no other then that one faith, Ephesians. 4. 5.
which makes up the one Church of Christ upon earth; One, both in respect of
times and places. Of times: so as the Fathers of the first world, and the
Patriarks of the next, and all Gods people in their ages, that looked (together
with them) for the redemption of Israel; are united with us Christians of the
last days in the same belief; Luke 2. 38
and make up one entire body of Christ's Catholic Church: Of places; so as all
those that truly profess the name of Christ (though scattered into the
farthest remote regions of the earth) even those that walk with their feet
opposite to ours, yet meet with us in the same center of Christian faith, and
make up one household of God.

Not that we can hope it possible that all Christians should agree in all
truths; whiles we are here, our minds cannot but be more unlike to each
others, then our faces: yea, it is a rare thing for a man to hold constant to
his own apprehensions. Lord God! what a world do we meet with of those, who
mis-call themselves several Religions, indeed, several professions of one and
the same Christianity? Melchites, Georgians, Maronites, Jacobites, Armenians,
Abysines, Cophti, Nestorians, Ruffians, Mengrellians; and the rest that fill up
the large Map of Christianography; all which, as whiles they hold the head
Christ, they cannot be denied the privilege of his members; so being such,
they are, or should be indissolubly joined together in the unity of spirit, and
maintenance of the faith which was once delivered unto the Saints. Jude 3.
It is not the variety of by opinions that should, or can exclude them from
having their part in that one Catholic Church; and their just claim to the
communion of Saints: whiles they hold the solid and precious foundation, it is
not the hay, or stubble, which they lay upon it, 1 Cor. 3. 12
that can set them off from God, or his Church: But in the mean time, it must
be granted, that they have much to answer for to the God of peace and unity,
who are so much addicted to their own conceits, and so indulgent to their own
interesse, as to raise and maintain new Doctrines, and to set up new Sects in
the Church of Christ, varying from the common and received truths; laboring to
draw Disciples after them* to the great distraction of souls, and scandal of
Christianity: With which sort of disturbers, I must needs say, this age into
which we are fallen, has been, and is above all that have gone before us, most
miserably pestered: What good soul can be other then confounded to hear of, and
see more then an hundred and fourscore new, (and some of them dangerous and
blasphemous) opinions broached, and defended in one (once famous and unanimous)
Church of Christ? Who can say other, upon the view of these wild thoughts, then
Gerson said long since, that the world now grown old, is full of doting
fancies; if not rather that the world now near his end, raves, and talks
nothing but fancies, and frenzies? How arbitrary soever these selfe-willed
fanatics may think it, to take to themselves this liberty of thinking what
they list; and venting what they think, the blessed Apostle has* long since
branded them with an heavy sentence; Now I beseech you, Ro^. 16. 17.
brethren, mark them which cause divisions and offenses, contrary to the
doctrine which you have learned, and avoid them; For they that are such serve
not our Lord Jesus Christ, but their own belly; and by good words, and by fair
speeches deceive the hearts of the simple.

But notwithstanding all this hideous variety of vain and heterodoxall
conceptions; he who is the truth of God, and the Bridegroom of his Spouse the
Church, has said, Cant. 6. 9.
My Dove, my undefiled is one. One, in the main, essential, fundamental
verities necessary to salvation; though differing in diverse mis-raised
Corollaries, inconsequent inferences, unnecessary additions, feigned
traditions, unwarrantable practices: the body is one, though the garments
differ; yea, rather (for most of these) the garment is one, but differs in the
dressing; handsomely and comely set out by one, disguised by another; Neither
is it, nor ever shall be in the power of all the fiends of hell, the professed
makebates of the world, to make Gods Church other then one; which were indeed
utterly to extinguish, and reduce it to nothing: for the unity, and entity of
the Church, can no more be divided then it self. It were no less then
blasphemy to fasten upon the chaste and most holy husband of the Church any
other then one Spouse; In the Institution of Marriage did he not make one? Mal.
2. 15.
yet had he the residue of the spirit; and wherefore one? that he might seek a
godly seed: That which he ordained for us, shall not the holy God much more
observe in his own heavenly match with his Church? Here is then one Lord, one
Faith, one Baptism; One Baptism, by which we enter into the Church, one
Faith, which we profess in the Church, and one Lord whom we serve, and who is
the head, and husband of the Church.

How much therefore does it concern us, 21. The unio^ of Christians in matter
of affection.
that we who are united in one common belief, should be much more united in
affection; that where there is one way, there should be much more one heart?
Jer. 32. 39.
This is so justly supposed, that the Prophet questions, Amos 3. 3.
Can two walk together, except they be agreed? if we walk together in our
judgments, we cannot but accord in our wills: This was the praise of the
Primitive Christians, and the pattern of their successors; Acts 4. 32.
The multitude of them that believed were of one heart, and of one soul; Yea,
this is the Livery which our Lord and Savior made choice of, whereby his
meniall servants should be known and distinguished; Joh. 13. 35
By this shall all men know that ye be my Disciples, if ye have love to one
another: In vain shall any man pretend to a Discipleship, if he do not make it
good by his love to all the family of Christ. The whole Church is the
spiritual Temple of God; every believer is a living stone laid in those sacred
walls; what is our Christian love but the mortar or cement whereby these stones
are fast joined together to make up this heavenly building? without which that
precious fabric could not hold long together, but would be subject to
dis-joynting by those violent tempests of opposition, wherewith it is commonly
beaten upon: There is no place for any loose stone in Gods edifice; The whole
Church is one entire body, all the lims must be held together by the ligaments
of Christian love; if any one will be severed, and affect to subsist of it
self, it has lost his place in the body; Thus the Apostle, Ephesians. 4. 15, 16.
That we being sincere in love may grow up into him in all things, which is the
head, even Christ; From whom the whole body fitly joined together, and
compacted by that which every joint supplyeth; according to the effectual
working in the measure of every part, makes increase of the body, unto the
edifying of it self in love.

But in case there happen to be differences in opinion, concerning points not
essential, not necessary to salvation, this diversity may not breed an
alienation of affection. That charity which can cover a multitude of sins, may
much more cover many small dissensions of judgment: We cannot hope to be all,
and at all times equally enlightened; at how many and great weaknesses of
judgment did it please our merciful Savior to connive, in his domestique
ples? They that had so long sat at the sacred feet of him that spoke as never
man spoke, were yet to seek of those Scriptures, which had so clearly foretold
his resurrection; Joh. 20. 9.
and after that were at a fault for the manner of his kingdom; Acts 1. 6.
yet he that breaks not the bruised reed, nor quenches the smoking flax, falls
not harshly upon them for so foul an error, and ignorance, but entertains them
with all loving respects, not as followers only, but as friends: And his great
Apostle, Joh. 15. 15.
after he had spent himself in his unweariable endeavors upon Gods Church;
and had sown the seeds of wholesome, and saving doctrine every where, what rank
and noisome weeds of erroneous opinions rose up under his hand, in the Churches
of Corinth, Galatia, Ephesus, Colosse, Philippi, and Thessalonica? These he
labors to root out, with much zeal, with no bitterness; so opposing the
errors, as not alienating his affection from the Churches; These, these must be
our precedents, pursuing that charge of the prime Apostle, Finally, 1 Pet. 3. 8.
be ye all of one mind; having compassion one of another, love as brethren, be
pitiful, be courteous: and that passionate and adjuring obtestation of the
Apostle of the Gentiles; Phil. 2. 1, 2.
If there be any consolation in Christ, if any comfort of love, if any
fellowship of the spirit, if any bowels and mercies; Fulfill ye my joy, that ye
be like minded, having the same love, being of one accord, of one mind.

This is it that gives beauty, strength, glory to the Church of God upon earth;
and brings it nearest to the resemblance of that Triumphant part above, where
there is all perfection of love and concord; in imitation whereof, the Psalmist
sweetly; Behold, Ps. 133. 1.
how good and joyful a thing it is brethren to dwell together in unity. 22. A
complaint of divisions, and, notwithstanding the^, an assertion of unity.


So much the more justly lamentable it is to see the manifold and grievous
distractions of the Church of Christ, both in judgment and affection. Woe is
me, into how many thousand pieces is the seamlesse coat of our Savior rent?
Yea, into what numberless atoms is the precious body of Christ torn and
minced? There are more Religions, then Nations upon earth; and in each Religion
as many different conceits, as men. If Saint Paul, when his Corinthians did but
say, I am of Paul, 1 Cor. 1. 12, 13.
I am of Apollo, I am of Cephas, could ask, Is Christ divided? when there was
only an emulatory magnifying of their own Teachers, (though agreeing and
orthodoxe) what (think we) would he now say, if he saw hundred of Sect-masters
and Heresiarchs (some of them opposite to other, all to the Truth) applauded by
their credulous and divided followers? all of them claiming Christ for theirs,
and denying him to their gainsayers; would he not ask, Is Christ multiplied?
Is Christ sub-divided? Is Christ shred into infinities? O God! what is become
of Christianity? How do evil spirits and men labor to destroy that Creed which
we have always constantly professed? For, if we set up more Christ's, where is
that one? and if we give way to these infinite distractions, where is the
communion of Saints? But he not too much dismayed, my son; notwithstanding all
these cold disheartnings, take courage to thy self: He that is truth it self
has said, The Gates of hell shall not prevail against his Church: Mat. 16. 18
In spite of all Devils, there shall be Saints, and those are, and shall be as
the scales of the Leviathan, Job 41. 15 16, 17.
whose strong pieces of shields are his pride, shut up together as with a close
seal; one is so near to another, that no air can come betwixt them; They are
joined one to another, they stick together, that they cannot be sundred: In all
the main principles of Religion, there is an universal and unanimous consent
of all Christians, and these are they that constitute a Church: Those that
agree in these, Christ is pleased to admit (for matter of doctrine) as members
of that body whereof he is the head: and if they admit not of each other as
such, the fault is in the uncharitableness of the refusers, no less then in
the error of the refused: And if any vain and loose straglers will needs sever
themselves, and wilfully choose to go ways of their own; let them know that
the union of Christ's Church shall consist entire without them; This great Ocean
will be one collection of waters, when these drops are lost in the dust: In the
mean time it highly concerns all that wish well to the sacred name of Christ,
to labor to keep the unity of the spirit in the bond of peace; Ephesians. 4. 3.
and to renew and continue the prayer of the Apostle for all the professors of
Christianity. Now the God of patience and consolation, Romans 15. 5, 6.
grant you to be like-minded one toward another, according to Christ Jesus;
That ye may with one mind, and one mouth glorify God, even the Father of our
Lord Jesus Christ.

Far be it from us to think this union of the hearts of Gods Saints upon earth
can be idle and ineffectuall; 23. The necessary effects and fruits of this
unio^ of Christian hearts.
but where ever it is, it puts forth it self into a like-affectednesse of
disposition, into an improvement of gifts, into a communication of outward
blessings, to the benefit of that happy consociation.

We cannot be single in our affections, if we be lims of a Christian community;
What member of the body can complain, so as the rest shall not feel it? Even
the head and heart are in pain, when a joint of the least toe suffers; no
Christian can be afflicted alone; It is not Saint Paul's case only; 2 Cor. 11.
29.
Who is weak, and I am not weak? who is offended, and I burn not? Our shoulders
are not our own, we must bear one another burdens: Gal. 6. 2.
There is a better kind of spiritual good fellowship in all the Saints of
God; They hate a propriety of passions, Ro^. 12. 15.
Rejoice with them that rejoice, and weep with them that weep. Their affections
are not more communicative then their gifts and graces; those, as they are
bestowed with an intuition of the common good, so they are improved; Wherefore
has this man quickness of wit, that man depth of judgment, this, heat of
zeal, that, power of elocution; this, skill, that, experience; this, authority,
that, strength; but that all should be laid together for the raising of the
common stock? How rich therefore is every Christian soul, that is not only
furnished with its own graces, but has a special interest in all the
excellent gifts of all the most eminent servants of God through the whole
world? Surely, he cannot be poor, whiles there is any spiritual wealth in the
Church of God upon earth.

Neither are, or can these gifts be in the danger of concealments; they are
still put forth for the public advantage: As therefore no true Christian is
his own man; so he freely lays out himself, by example, by admonition, by
exhortation, by consolation, by prayer, for the universal benefit of all his
fellow members; By example, which is not a little winning and prevalent; Mat.
5. 16.
Let your light so shine before men, that they may see your good works, and
glorify your Father which is in heaven; says our Savior in his Sermon upon
the Mount; and his great Apostle seconds his charge to his Philippians; That ye
may be blameless and harmless, Phil. 2. 15, 16.
the Sons of God, without rebuke in the midst of a crooked, and perverse
nation, among whom ye shine as lights in the world, holding forth the word of
life; Lo, the world sits in darkness, and either stirs not, or moves with
danger; good example is a light to their feet, which directs them to walk in
the ways of God, without erring, without stumbling: so as the good man's actions
are so many copies for novices to take out; no less instructive then the
wisest men's precepts. By admonition; the sinner is in danger of drowning;
Seasonable admonition is an hand reached out, that lays hold on him now sinking,
and draws him up to the shore. The sinner is already in the fire; Jude 23.
seasonable admonition snatches him out from the everlasting burnings. The
charitable Christian may not forbear this (often times thanklesse, but) always
necessary and profitable duty; Lev. 19. 17
Thou shall not hate thy brother in thy heart; thou shall in any wise rebuke
thy neighbor, and not suffer sin upon him.

By exhortation; The fire of Gods Spirit within us, is subject to many damps,
and dangers of quenching; seasonable exhortation blows it up, and quickens
those sparks of good motions to a perfect flame; Even the best of us lies open
to a certain deadness and obdurednesse of heart, seasonable exhortation shakes
off this peril, and keeps the heart in an holy tenderness; and whether
awful, or cheerful disposition; Exhort one another daily, Heb. 3. 13.
whiles it is called, to day; lest any of you be hardened through the
deceitfulness of sin.

By consolation; We are all naturally subject to droop under the pressure of
afflictions; seasonable comforts lift, and stay us up: It is a sad complaint
that the Church makes in the Lamentations; They have heard that I sigh; Lam. 1.
21
there is none to comfort me; and David sets the same mournfulditty upon his
Shoshannim; Reproach has broken my heart, Ps. 69. 20.
and I am full of heaviness; and I looked for some to take pity, and there was
none, and for comforters, but I found none. Wherefore has God give^ to men the
tongue of the learned, Esa. 50. 4.
but that they might know to speak a word in season to him that is weary? That
they may strengthen the weak hands, Esa. 35. 3.
and confirm the feeble knees; and say to them that are of a fearful heart, Be
strong, fear not. The charge that our Savior gives to Peter, Luke 23. 32
holds universally; Thou when thou art converted, strengthen thy brethren.

By prayer: so as each member of Christ's Church sues for all; neither can any
one be shut out from partaking the benefit of the devotions of all Gods Saints
upon earth: There is a certain spiritual traffic of piety betwixt all Gods
children, wherein they exchange prayers with each other; not regarding number,
so much as weight: Am I weak in spirit, and faint in my supplications? I have
no less share in the most fervent prayers of the holiest suppliants, then in
my own; All the vigor that is in the most ardent hearts supplies my defects;
whiles there is life in their faithful devotions, I cannot go away unblessed.

Lastly, where there is a communion of inward graces, and spiritual services,
there must needs much more be a communication of outward, and temporal good
things, as just occasion requires; Away with those dotages of Platonicall, or
Anabaptisticall communities; Let prieties be, as they ought, constantly fixed
where the laws, and civil right have placed them; But let the use of these
outward blessings be managed, and commanded by the necessities of our brethren;
Withhold not thy goods from the owners thereof, Prove. 3. 27, 28.
when it is in the power of thy hand to do it: Say not unto thy neighbor, Go,
and come again to morrow, and I will give it, when thou have it by thee. These
temporal things were given us not to engrosse, and hoard up superfluously, but
to distribute and dispense; As we have therefore opportunity, Gal. 6. 10.
let us do good unto all men, especially them who are of the household of faith.

Such then is the union of Gods children here on earth, both in matter of
judgment, and affection; and the beneficial improvement of that affection,
whether in spiritual gifts, or good offices, or communicating of our earthly
substance; where the heart is one, none of these can be wanting, and where they
all are, there is an happy communion of Saints.

As there is a perfect union betwixt the glorious Saints in heaven; 24. The
union of the Saints on earth with those in heaven.
and a union (though imperfect) betwixt the Saints on earth: So there is an
union partly perfect, and partly imperfect, between the Saints in heaven, and
the Saints below upon earth: perfect, in respect of those glorified Saints
above, imimperfect, in respect of the weak returns we are able to make to them
again. Let no man think that because those blessed souls are out of sight far
distant in another world, and we are here toyling in a vale of tears, we have
therefore lost all mutual regard to each other: no, there is still, and ever
will be a secret, but unfailing correspondence between heaven and earth. The
present happiness of those heavenly Citizens cannot have abated ought of their
knowledge, and charity, but must needs have raised them to an higher pitch of
both: They therefore, who are now glorious comprehensors, cannot but in a
generality, retain the notice of the sad condition of us poor travelers here
below, pa^ting toward our rest together with the^, and, in common, wish for the
happy consummation of this our weary pilgrimage, in the fruition of their
glory; That they have any Perspective whereby they can see down into our
particular wants, is that which we find no ground to believe; it is enough
that they have an universal apprehension of the estate of Christ's warfaring
Church upon the face of the earth; Rev. 6. 10.
and as fellow members of the same mystical body, long for a perfect
glorification of the whole.

As for us wretched pilgrims, that are yet left here below to tugge with many
difficulties, we cannot forget that better half of us that is now triumphing in
glory; O ye blessed Saints above, we honor your memories so far as we ought;
we do with praise recount your virtues, we magnify your victories, we
bless God for your happy exemption from the miseries of this world, and for
your estating in that blessed immortality; We imitate your holy examples, we
long and pray for an happy consociation with you; we dare not raise Temples,
dedicate Altars, direct prayers to you; we dare not finally, offer any thing to
you which you are unwilling to receive, nor put any thing upon you, which you
would disclaim as prejudicial to your Creator, and Redeemer. It is abundant
comfort to us, that some part of us is in the fruition of that glory; whereto
we (the other poor laboring part) desire, and strive to aspire: that our head
and shoulders are above water, whiles the other lims are yet wading through the
stream.

To wind up all, 25. Arecapitulatio^ and sum of the whole treatise.
my son, if ever thou look for sound comfort on earth, and salvation in heaven;
unglue thy self from the world and the vanities of it; put thy self upon thy
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ; Leave not till thou find thy self firmly
united to him; so as thou art become a limb of that body whereof he is head, a
Spouse of that husband, a branch of that stem, a stone laid upon that
foundation; Look not therefore for any blessing out of him; and in, and by, and
from him look for all blessings; Let him be thy life, and wish not to live
longer then thou art quickened by him; find him thy wisdom, righteousness,
sanctification, redemption; thy riches, thy strength, thy glory: Apply unto thy
self all that thy Savior is, or has done; Hier. Zanch. loc. com. 8. de
Symbolo Apost.
Would thou have the graces of Gods Spirit? fetch them from his anointing;
Would thou have power against spiritual enemies? fetch it from his
Sovereignty; Would thou have redemption? fetch it from his passion; Would
thou have absolution? fetch it from his perfect innocence; Freedom from the
curse? fetch it from his cross? Satisfaction? fetch it from his sacrifice;
Cleansing from sin? fetch it from his blood; Mortification? fetch it from his
grave; Newness of life? fetch it from his resurrection; Right to heaven? fetch
it from his purchase; Audience in all thy suits? fetch it from his
intercession; Would thou have salvation? fetch it from his session at the
right hand of Majesty: Would thou have all? fetch it from him who is one
Lord, Ephesians. 4. 5, 6.
one God and Father of all, who is above all, and through all, and in all: And
as thy faith shall thus interesse thee in Christ thy head: so let thy charity
unite thee to his body the Church, both in earth, and heaven; hold ever an
inviolable communion with that holy and blessed fraternity. Sever not thy self
from it either in judgment, or affection; Make account there is not one of
Gods saints upon earth, but has a propriety in thee: and thou may challenge
the same in each of them: so as thou can not but be sensible of their
passions; and be freely communicative of all thy graces, and all serviceable
offices, by example, admonition, exhortation, consolation, prayer, beneficence,
for the good of that sacred community.

And when thou raisest up thine eyes to heaven, think of that glorious society
of blessed saints, who are gone before thee, and are now there triumphing, and
reigning in eternal, and incomprehensible glory; bless God for them, and wish
thy self with them, tread in their holy steps, and be ambitious of that crown
of glory and immortality which thou see shining upon their heads.

AN HOLY RAPTURE: OR, A Patheticall Meditation of the love of Christ.

BY J. H. B. N.

The CONTENTS.
1. THe love of Christ, how passing knowledge; how free; of us, before we were.
2. How free; of us that had made our selves vile, and miserable. 3. How yet
free; of us that were professed enemies. 4. The wonderful effects of the love
of Christ; 1. His Incarnation. 5. 2. His love in his sufferings. 6. 3. His love
in what he has done for us; and 1. in preparing heaven for us from eternity.
7. His love in our redemption from death, and hell. 8. His love in giving us
the guard of his Angels. 9. His love in giving us his holy Spirit. 10. Our
sense and improvement of Christ's love in all the former particulars; and first
in respect of the inequality of our persons. 11. A further improvement of our
love to Christ, in respect of our unworthiness, and of his sufferings and
glory prepared for us. 12. The improvement of our love to Christ for the mercy
of his deliverance, of the tuition of his Angels, of the powerful working of
his good Spirit for the accomplishment of our salvation.
AN HOLY RAPTVRE: OR, A Patheticall Meditation of the love of CHRIST.
WHat is it, 1. The love of Christ how passing knowledge; how free; of us
before we were.
O blessed Apostle, what is it, for which thou do so earnestly bow thy knees
(in the behalf of thine Ephesians) unto the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ?
Even this, that they may know the love of Christ which passes knowledge. Ephesians.
3. 14. 19.
Give me leave first to wonder at thy suit; and then, much more, at what thou
suest for: Were thine affections raised so high to thine Ephesians, that thou
should crave for them impossible favors? Did thy love so far over-shoot thy
reason, as to pray they might attain to the knowledge of that which cannot be
known? It is the love of Christ which thou wishest they may know, and it is
that love which thou say is past all knowledge; What shall we say to this?
Is it for that there may be holy ambitions of those heights of grace, which we
can never hope actually to attain? Or is it, rather, that thou supposest, and
prayest they may reach to the knowledge of that love, the measure whereof they
could never aspire to know: Surely, so it is, O blessed Jesu; that thou have
loved us, we know; but, how much thou have loved us, is past the comprehension
of Angels: Those glorious spirits, as they desire to look into the deep
mystery of our redemption, so they wonder to behold that divine love whereby it
is wrought, but they can no more reach to the bottom of it, then they can
affect to be infinite. For surely, no less then an endless line can serve to
fadome a bottomless depth: Such, O Savior, is the abyss of thy love to
miserable man: Alas, what do we poor, wretched, dust of the earth go about to
measure it by the spans, and inches of our shallow thoughts. Far, far, be such
presumption from us; Only admit us, O blessed Lord, to look at, to admire and
adore that which we give up for incomprehensible; What shall we then say to
this love; Oh dear Jesu, both as thine, and as cast upon us; All earthly love
supposes some kind of equality, (or proportion at least) betwixt the person
that loves, and is loved; Here is none at all; so as (which is past wonder)
extremes meet without a mean: For, lo, thou, who art the eternal and absolute
Being, God blessed for ever, lovedst me that had no being at all; thou
lovedst me both when I was not, and could never have been but by thee: It was
from thy love that I had any being at all: much more that when thou had
given me a being, thou should follow me with succeeding mercies? who but
thou (who art infinite in goodness) would love that which is not? Our poor
sensual love is drawn from us by the sight of a face, or a picture; neither is
ever raised but upon some pleasing motive: thou would make that which thou
would love, and would love that which thou had made; O God, was* there
ever love so free, so gracious, as this of thine? Who can be capable to love us
but men or Angels? Men love us because they see something in us which they
think amiable; Angels love us because thou do so: But why do thou (O
blessed Lord) love us, but because thou would? There can be no cause of thy
will, which is the cause of all things; Even, so Lord, since this love did rise
only from thee, let the praise and glory of it rest only in thee.

Yet more, 2. How free; of us that had made our selves vile and miserable.
Lord; we had lost our selves before we were, and having forfaited what we
should be, had made our selves perfectly miserable; even when we were worse
then nothing, thou would love us; was there ever any eye enamoured of
deformity? Can there be any bodily deformity comparable to that of sin? yet,
Lord, when sin had made us abominably loathsome, did thou cast thy love upon
us: A little scurf of leprosy, or some few nastie spots of morphew, or, but,
some unsavory sent sets us off; and turns our love into detestation.

But for thee, (O God) when we were become as foul, and ugly as sin could
make us, even then was thy love inflamed toward us; Even when we were weltring
in our blood, thou said, Live, and washedst us, and anointedst us, and
cloathedst us with broidered work, and deckedst us with ornaments, and
graciously espousedst us to thy self, and receivedst us into thine own bosom:
Lord, what is man that thou art thus mindful of him, and the son of man that
thou thus visitest him? Oh what are we in comparison of thine once-glorious
Angels? They sinned and fell, never to be recovered; never to be loosed from
those everlasting chains, wherein they are reserved to the judgment of the
great day: Whence is it then, O Savior, whence is it that thou have shut up
thy mercy from those thy more excellent creatures, and have extended it to us,
vile sinful dust? whence? but that thou would love man, because thou
would? Alas, it it is discouragement enough to our feeble friendship, that he
to whom we wished well, is miserable: Our love does gladly attend upon, and
enjoy his prosperity; but when his estate is utterly sunk, and his person
exposed to contempt and ignominy, yea, to torture and death; who is there that
will then put forth himself to own a forlorn, and perishing friend? But for
thee, O blessed Jesu, so ardent was thy love to us, that it was not in the
power of our extreme misery to abate it; yea so, as that the deplorednesse of
our condition did but heighten that holy flame; What speak I of shame or
sufferings? Hell it self could not keep thee off from us; Even from that pit of
eternal perdition did thou fetch our condemned souls, and have contrarily
vouchsafed to put us into a state of everlasting blessedness.

The common disposition of men pretends to a kind of justice in giving men
their own; 3. How yet free; of us that were professed enemies.
so as they will repay love for love; and think they may for hatred return
enmity; nature it self then teaches us to love our friends, it is only grace
that can love an enemy: But, as of injuries, so of enmities thereupon grounded,
there are certain degrees; some are slight and trivial, some main and
capital; If a man do but scratch my face, or give some light dash to my fame,
it is no great Mastery upon submission to receive such an offender to favor;
but if he have endeavored to ruin my estate, to wound my reputation, to cut my
throat, not only to pardon this man, but to hug him in my arms, to lodge him
in my bosom as my entire friend, this would be no other then an high
improvement of my charity. O Lord Jesu, what was I but the worst of enemies,
when thou vouchsafedst to embrace me with thy loving mercy? how had I
shamefully rebelled against thee, and yielded up all my members as instruments
of unrighteousness unto sin? how had I crucified thee the Lord of life? how
had I done little other then trod under foot thee the blessed Son of God, and
counted the blood of the Covenant an unholy thing; how had I in some sort done
despite unto the spirit of grace? yet even then, in despite of all my most
odious unworthiness, did thou spread abroad thine arms to receive me, yea,
thou openedst thine heart to let me in: O love passing not knowledge only, but
wonder also! O mercy, not incident into any thing less then infinite; nor, by
any thing less, 4. The wonderful effects of the love of Christ: His
Incarnation.
comprehensible!

But, oh dear Lord, when from the object of thy mercy, I cast mine eyes upon
the effects and improvement of thy divine favors; and see what thy love has
drawn from thee toward the sons of men, how am I lost in a just amazement? It
is that which fetched thee down from the glory of the highest heavens, from the
bosom of thine eternal Father to this lower world, the region of sorrow and
death: It is that which (to the wonder of Angels) clothed thee with this flesh
of ours, and brought thee (who thoughtst it no robbery to be equal with God)
to an estate lower then thine own creatures. Oh mercy transcending the
admiration of all the glorious spirits of heaven, that God would be incarnate!
Surely, that all those celestial powers should be redacted to either worms, or
nothing; that all this goodly frame of creation should run back into its first
confusion, or be reduced to one single atome; it is not so high a wonder as for
God to become man; those changes (though the highest that nature is capable of)
are yet but of things finite; this is of an infinite subject, with which the
most excellent of finite things can hold no proportion: Oh the great mystery of
godliness; God manifested in the flesh, and seen of Angels! Those heavenly
spirits had ever since they were made, seen his most glorious Deity, and adored
him as their omnipotent Creator; but to see that God of spirits invested with
flesh, was such a wonder, as had been enough (if their nature could have been
capable of it) to have astonished even glory it self; And whether to see him
that was their God so humbled below themselves, or to see humanity thus
advanced above themselves, were the greater wonder to them, they only know: It
was your foolish misprison, O ye ignorant Listrians, that you took the servants
for the Master; here only is it verified (which you supposed) that God is come
down to us in the likeness of man; and as man conversed with men: What a
disparagement do we think it was for the great Monarch of Babylon, for seven
years together, as a beast to converse with the beasts of the field? Yet alas,
beasts and men are fellow creatures; made of one earth, drawing in the same
air, returning (for their bodily part) to the same dust; symbolizing in many
qualities; and in some, mutually transcending each others: so as here may seem
to be some terms of a tolerable proportion; since many men are in disposition
too like unto beasts, and some beasts are in outward shape somewhat like unto
men: But for him that was, and is, God, blessed for ever, eternal, infinite,
incomprehensible, to put on flesh, and to become a man amongst me^, was to
stoop below al possible disparities that heaven and earth can afford; Oh
Savior, the lower thine abasement was for us, the higher was the pitch of thy
divine love to us.

Yet in this our humane condition there are degrees; 5. His love in his
sufferings.
One rules and glitters in all earthly glory; another sits despised in the
dust; one passes the time of his life in much jollity and pleasure; another
wears out his days in sorrow and coffeehouse; Blessed Jesu, since thou
would be a man, why would thou not be the King of men? since thou would
come down to our earth, why would thou not enjoy the best entertainment that
the earth could yield thee? Yea, since thou who art the eternal Son of God,
would be the son of man, why did thou not appear in a state like to the
King of heaven, attended with the glorious retinue of blessed Angels? O yet
greater wonder of mercies; The same infinite love that brought thee down to the
form of man, would also bring thee down, being man, to the form of a servant.
So did thou love man that thou would take part with him of his misery, that
he might take part with thee of thy blessedness: thou would be poor to
enrich us, thou would be burdened for our ease, tempted for our victory,
despised for our glory.

With what less then ravishment of spirit can I behold thee, who were from
everlasting clothed with glory and majesty, wrapped in rags: thee, who fillest
heaven and earth with the majesty of thy glory, cradled in a manger; thee, who
art the God of power, fleeing in thy mothers arms from the rage of a weak man;
thee, who art the God of Israel, driven to be nursed out of the bosom of thy
Church; thee, who made the heaven of heavens, busily working in the homely
trade of a fosterfather; thee, who command the Devils to their chains,
transported and tempted by that foul spirit; thee, who art God all-sufficient,
exposed to hunger, thirst, wearines, danger, contempt, poverty, revilings,
scourgings, persecution; thee, who art the just Judge of all the world, accused
and condemned; thee, who art the Lord of life, dying upon the tree of shame and
curse; thee, who art the eternal Son of God, struggling with thy Fathers wrath;
thee, who had said, I and my Father are one, sweating drops of blood in thine
agony, and crying out on the Cross, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me?
thee, who have the keys of hell, and of death, lying sealed up in another man's
grave: Oh Savior, whither has thy love to mankind carried thee? what sighs,
and groans, and tears, and blood, have thou spent upon us wretched men? How
dear a price have thou paid for our ransom? What raptures of spirit can be
sufficient for the admiration of thy so infinite mercy? Be thou swallowed up, O
my soul, in this depth of divine love; and hate to spend thy thoughts any more
upon the base objects of this wretched world, when thou have such a Savior to
take them up.

But O blessed Jesu, 6. His love in preparing heaven for us.
if from what thou have suffered for me, I shall cast mine eyes upon what thou
have done for my soul; how is my heart divided betwixt the wonders of both; and
may as soon tell how great either of them is, as whether of them is the
greater. It is in thee that I was elected from all eternity; and ordained to a
glorious inheritance before there was a world: we are wont (O God) to marvel
at, and bless thy provident beneficence to the first man, that before thou
would bring him forth into the world, thou were pleased to furnish such a
world for him, so goodly an house over his head, so pleasant a Paradise under
his feet, such variety of creatures round about him for his subjection, and
attendance; But how should I magnify thy mercy, who before that man, or that
world had any being, have so far loved me as to pre-ordain me to a place of
blessedness in that heaven which should be, and to make me a coheir with my
Christ of thy glory: And oh, what an heaven is this that thou have laid out for
me: how resplendent, how transcendently glorious? Even that lower Paradise
which thou providedst for the harbor of innocence and holiness, was full of
admirable beauty, pleasure, magnificence, but if it be compared with this
Paradise above, which thou have prepared for the everlasting entertainment of
restored souls, how mean and beggarly it was? Oh match too unequal, of the
best piece of earth, with the highest state of the heaven of heavens. In that
earthly Paradise I find thine Angels, the Cherubim; but it was to keep man off
from that Garden of Delight, and from the tree of life in the midst of it; but
in this heavenly one I find millions of thy Cherubim, and Seraphim rejoicing
at man's blessedness, and welcomming the glorified souls to their heaven: There
I find but the shadow of that, whereof the substance is here; There we were so
possessed of life that yet we might forfait it; here is life without all
possibility of death: Temptation could find access thither, here is nothing
but a free and complete fruition of blessedness: There were delights fit for
earthly bodies; here is glory more then can be enjoyed of blessed souls: That
was watered with four streams, muddy, and impetuous; in this is the pure river
of the water of life clear as Crystal, proceeding out of the throne of God,
and of the Lamb: There I find thee only walking in the cool of the day; here
manifesting thy Majesty continually: There I see only a most pleasant Orchard,
set with all manner of varieties of flourishing and fruitful plants; here I
find also the City of God infinitely rich, and magnificent; the building of
the wall of it, of Jasper; and the City it self pure gold, like unto clear
glass; and the foundations of the wall garnished with all manner of precious
stones: All that I can here attain to see, is the pavement of thy celestial
habitation: and, Lord, how glorious it is; how bespangled with glittering
stars; for number, for magnitude equally admirable? What is the least of
them, but a world of light? and what are all of them, but a confluence of so
many thousand worlds of beauty and brightness met in one firmament? And if
this floor of thine heavenly Palace be thus richly set forth, oh, how infinite
glory and magnificence must there needs be within? Thy chosen Vessel, that had
the privilege to be caught up thither, and to see that divine state, (whether
with bodily, or mental eyes) can express it no otherwise, then that it cannot
possibly be expressed: No, Lord, it were not infinite if it could be uttered;
Thoughts go beyond words; yet even these come far short also; He that saw it,
says; Eye has not seen, nor ear heard, neither have entered into the heart of
man, the things which God has prepared for them that love him.

Yet is thy love, 7. His love in our redemption from death and hell.
O Savior, so much more to be magnified of me, in this purchased glory; when
I cast down mine eyes, and look into that horrible gulf of torment, and
eternal death, whence thou have rescued my poor soul: Even out of the greatest
contentment which this world is capable to afford unto mankind, to be preferred
to the joys of heaven, is an unconceivable advantage; but from the depth of
misery to be raised up unto the highest pitch of felicity, adds so much more
to the blessing, as the evil from which we are delivered is more intolerable:
Oh blessed Jesu, what an hell is this out of which thou have freed me? what
dreadful horror is here? what darkness? what confusion? what anguish of souls
that would, and cannot die? what howling, and yelling, and shrieking, and
gnashing? what everlasting burnings? what never slaking tortures? what
merciless fury of unweariable tormentors? what utter despair of any
possibility of release? what exquisiteness, what infiniteness of pains that
cannot, yet must be endured? Oh God, if the impotent displeasure of weak men
have devised so subtle engines of revenge upon their fellow-mortals for but
petty offenses; how can we but think thine infinite justice and wisdom must
have ordained such forms and ways of punishment for heinous sins done against
thee, as may be answerable to the violation of thy divine Majesty? Oh therefore
the most fearful and deplored condition of damned spirits, never to be ended,
never to be abated; Oh those unquenchable flames; Oh that burning Tophet, deep
and large; and those streams of brimstone wherewith it is kindled; Oh that worm
ever gnawing and tearing the heart, never dying, never sated: Oh ever-living
death, oh ever renewing torments; oh never pitied, never intermitted damnation;
From hence, O Savior, from hence it is that thou have fetched up my condemned
soul; This is the place, this is the state out of which thou have snatched me up
into thy heaven: Oh love and mercy more deep then those depths from which thou
have saved me; more high then that heaven to which thou have advanced me!

Now, 8. Christ's love in giving us the guard of his Angels.
whereas in my passage from this state of death toward the fruition of
immortal glory* I am waylaid by a world of dangers; partly, through my own
sinful aptness to miscarriages, and partly through the assaults of my
spiritual enemies, how has thy tender love and compassion, o blessed Jesu,
undertaken to secure my soul from all these deadly perils* both without, and
within: without, by the guardance of thy blessed Angels: within, by the
powerful inoperation of thy good Spirit which thou have given me? Oh that mine
eyes could be opened with Elishaes servant, that I might see those troops of
heavenly soldiers, those horses and chariots of fire, wherewith thou have
encompassed me! every one of which is able to chase away a whole host of the
powers of darkness: Who am I, Lord, who am I, that, upon thy gracious
appointment, these glorious spirits should still watch over me in mine
uprising, and down lying; in my going out, and coming in? that they should
bear me in their arms, that they should shield me with their protection?
Behold, such is their majesty and glory, that some of thy holiest servants have
hardly been restrained from worshipping them; yet so great is thy love to man,
as that thou have ordained them to be ministering spirits, sent forth to
minister for them who shall be heirs of salvation. Surely they are in nature
far more excellent then man; as being spiritual substances, pure
intelligences, meet to stand before the throne of thee the King of glory; What
a mercy then is this, that thou, who would humble thy self to be lower then
they, in the susception of our nature; art pleased to humble them in their
offices to the guardianship of man, so far, as to call them the Angels of thy
little ones upon earth? How have thou blessed us, and how should we bless thee
in so mighty, and glorious attendants?

Neither have thou, 9. His love in giving us his holy Spirit.
O God, merely turned us over to the protection of those tutelary spirits; but
have held us still in thine own hand; having not so strongly defenced as
without, as thou have done within; Since that, is wrought by thine Angels,
this, by thy Spirit; Oh the sovereign and powerful influences of thy holy
Ghost; whereby we are furnished with all saving graces, strengthened against
all temptations, heartned against all our doubts and fears; enabled both to
resist, and overcome; and upon our victories, crowned. Oh divine bounty, far
beyond the reach of wonder! So God (the Father) loved the world, that he gave
his only begotten Son, that whosoever believes in him should not perish,
but have everlasting life: So God the Son loved the world of his elect, that he
gave unto the^ the holy Spirit of promise, whereby they are sealed unto the day
of redemption; whereby according to the riches of his glory they are strengthened
with might in the inner man; by the virtue whereof shed abroad in their hearts,
they are enabled to cry, Abba, Father. Oh gifts; either of which are more worth
then many worlds; yet through thy goodness, o Lord, both of the^ mine: How rich
is my soul through thy divine munificence, how over-laid with mercies? How safe
in thine Almighty tuition? How happy in thy blessed possession? Now therefore I
dare in the might of my God, bid defiance to all the gates of hell; Do your
worst, o all ye principalities and powers, and rulers of the darkness of this
world, and spiritual wickednesses in high places; do your worst; God is mine,
and I am his; I am above your malice in the right of him whose I am; It is
true, I am weak, but he is omnipotent; I am sinful, but he is infinite
holiness; that power, that holiness in his gracious application is mine; It
is my Saviors love that has made this happy exchange of his righteousness
for my sin; of his power for my infirmity; Who then shall lay any thing to the
charge of Gods elect? It is God that justifies: Who shall separate us from the
love of Christ? Shall tribulation, or distress, or persecution, or famine, or
nakedness, or peril, or sword? Nay, in all these things we are more the^
conquerors through him that loved us: So as, neither death, nor life, nor
Angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come;
nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature shall be able to separate us from
the love of God which is in Christ Jesus our Lord. Lo, where this love is
placed; were it our love of God, how easily might the power of a prevalent
temptation separate us from it, or it from us; for, alas, what hold is to be
taken of our affections, which, like unto water, are so much more apt to freeze
because they have been heated; but it is the love of God to us in Christ Jesus,
10. Our sense and improvement of Christ's love in all the former particulars:
and first, in respect of the inequality of the persons.
which is ever as himself constant and eternal: He can no more cease to love
us, then to be himself; he cannot but be unchangeable, we cannot but be happy.

All this, O dear Jesu, have thou done, all this have thou suffered for me;
And oh now for an heart that might be some ways answerable to thy mercies!
Surely, even good natures hate to be in debt for love; and are ready to repay
favors with interest; Oh for a soul sick of love, yea, sick unto death! why
should I, how can I be any otherwise, any whit less affected, O Savior? this
only sickness is my health, this death is my life, and not to be thus sick,
is to be dead in sins and trespasses. I am rock and not flesh, if I be not
wounded with these heavenly darts: Ardent affection is apt to attract love even
where is little or no beauty; and excellent beauty is no less apt to inflame
the heart where there is no answer of affection; but when these two meet
together, what breast can hold against them? and here they are both in an
eminent degree. Thou can say even of thy poor Church (though laboring under
many imperfections) Thou have ravished my heart, my sister, my Spouse, thou
have ravished my heart with one of thine eyes, with one chain of thy neck; how
fair is thy love, my sister, my Spouse? And can thou, O blessed Savior be so
taken with the incurious and homely features of thy faithful ones; and shall
not we much more be altogether enamoured of thine absolute and divine beauty?
of whom every believing soul can say; My beloved is white and ruddy, the
chiefest among ten thousand; his head is as the most fine gold; his eyes are as
the eyes of doves by the rivers of waters, his cheeks are as a bed of spices,
as sweet flowers; his lips like lillies, dropping sweet smelling myrrh, etc.
It has pleased thee, O Lord, out of the sweet ravishments of thy heavenly
love, to say to thy poor Church, Turn away thine eyes from me, for they have
overcome me; but oh let me say unto thee; Turn thine eyes to me, that they may
overcome me; I would be thus ravished, thus overcome; I would be thus out of my
self, that I might be all in thee.

Thou lovedst me before I had being; Let me now that I have a being be wholly
taken up with thy love; Let me set all my soul upon thee that gave me being;
upon thee who art the eternal, and absolute Self-beeing; who have said, and
only could say, I am that I am; Alas, Lord, we are nothing but what thou will
have us; and cease to be when thou call in that breath of life which thou have
lent us; thou* art that inco^prehensibly glorious, and infinite self-existing
Spirit from eternity, in eternity, to eternity; in, and from whom all things
are: It is thy wonderful mercy that thou would condescend so low, as to
vouchsafe to be loved of my wretchedness, of whom thou might justly require
and expect nothing but terror and trembling. It is my happiness that I may be
allowed to love a Majesty so infinitely glorious: Oh let me not be so far
wanting to my own felicity, as to be less then ravished with thy love.

Thou lovedst me when I was deformed, 11. A further inforceme^t of our love to
Christ in respect of our unworthiness and his sufferings, and prepared glory.
loathly, forlorn, and miserable; shall I not now love thee when thou have
freed me, and decked me with the ornaments of thy Graces? Lord Jesu, who should
enjoy the fruit of thine own favors but thy self? How shamefully injurious
were it, that when thou have trimmed up my soul, it should prostitute it self
to the love of the world? Oh take my heart to thee alone; possess thy self of
that which none can claim but thy self.

Thou lovedst me when I was a professed rebel against thee, and receivedst me
not to mercy only, but to the indearment of a subject, a servant, a son;
where should I place the improvement of the thankful affections of my
loyalty and duty but upon thee?

Thou, O God, have so loved us, that thou would become the Son of man for our
sakes, that we who are the sons of men might become the sons of God; Oh that
we could put off the man, to put on Christ; that we could neglect and hate our
selves for thee that have so dearly loved us as to lay aside thine heavenly
glory for us!

How shall I be vile enough, O Savior, for thee, who for my sake (being the
Lord of life and glory) would take upon thee the shape of a servant? How
should I welcome that poverty which thy choice has sanctified? How resolutely
shall I grapple with the temptations of that enemy, whom thou have foiled for
me? How cheerfully should I pass through those miseries and that death, which
thou have sweetened? With what comfortable assurance shall I look upon the face
of that merciful Justice which thou have satisfied? But oh what a blessed
inheritance have thou in thine infinite love provided for me? an inheritance
incorruptible, and undefiled, and that fades not away, reserved in heaven for
me; so as when my earthly house of this Tabernacle shall be dissolved, I have a
building of God, an house not made with hands eternal in the heavens: An
house? Yea, a Palace of heavenly state and magnificence; neither is it less
then a kingdom that abides there for me: a kingdom so much more above these
worldly Monarchies, as heaven is above this clod of earth: Now, Lord, what
conceits, what affections of mine can be in the least sort answerable to so
transcendent mercy? If some friend shall have been pleased to bestow some mean
Legacy upon me; or shall have feoffed me in some few acres of his Land; how
deeply do I find my self obliged to the love and memory of so kind a
Benenefactor? Oh then, Lord, how can my soul be capable of those thoughts and
dispositions, which may reach to the least proportion of thine infinite
bounty, who of a poor worm on earth, have made me an heir of the kingdom of
heaven. Woe is me, how subject are these earthly Principalities to hazard, and
mutability, whether through death, or insurrectio^; but this Crown which thou
have laid up for me is immarcescible; and shall sit immoveably fast upon my
head, not for years, not for millions of ages, but for all eternity; Oh let it
be my heaven here below, in the mean while, to live in a perpetual fruition
of thee, and to begin those Allelujahs to thee here, 12. The improvement of our
love to Christ for the mercy of his deliverance; of the tuition of his Angels;
of the powerful working of his good Spirit.
which shall be as endless as thy mercy, and my blessedness.

Had thou been pleased to have translated me from thy former Paradise, the
most delightful seat of man's original integrity and happiness, to the glory
of the highest heaven, the preferment had been infinitely gracious; but to
bring my soul from the nethermost hell and to place it among the Chore of
Angels, doubles the thank of thy mercy, and the measure of my obligation: How
thankful was thy Prophet but to an Ebedmelech, that by a cord and rags let
down into that dark dungeon, helped him out of that uncomfortable pit wherein he
was lodged; yet, what was there but a little cold, hunger, stench, closeness*
obscurity? Lord, how should I bless thee, that have fetched my soul from that
pit of eternal horror, from that lake of fire and brimstone, from the
everlasting torments of the damned, wherein I had deserved to perish for ever?
I will sing of thy power; unto thee, O my strength will I sing; for God is my
deliverer, and the God of my mercy.

But, O Lord, if yet thou should leave me in my own hands, where were I? how
easily should I be robbed of thee with every temptation? how should I be made
the scorn and insultation of men and devils? It is thy wonderful mercy that
thou have given thine Angels charge over me; Those Angels great in power, and
glorious in Majesty are my sure (though invisible) guard: Oh blessed Jesu, what
an honor, what a safety is this, that those heavenly spirits which attend thy
throne should be my champions* Those that ministered to thee after thy
temptation* are ready to assist and relieve me in mine; they can neither
neglect their charge, because they are perfectly holy, nor fail of their
victory, because they are (under thee) the most powerful. I see you, O ye
blessed Guardians, I see you by the eye of my faith, no less truly, then the
eye of my sense sees my bodily attendants; I do truly (though spirituallie)
feel your presence by your gracious operations, in, upon, and for me; and I do
heartily bless my God and yours, for you, and for those saving offices that
(through his merciful appointment) you ever do for my soul. But as it was
with thine Israelites of old, that it would not content them that thou
promisedst, and would send thine Angel before them, to bring them into the
Land flowing with milk and honey, unless thy presence, O Lord, should also go
along with them; so is it still with me and all thine, were not thou with, and
in us, what could thine Angels do for us? In thee it is that they move and
are; The same infinite Spirit which works in, and by them, works also in me:
From thee it is, O thou blessed and eternal Spirit, that I have any stirrings
of holy motions, any breathings of good desires, any life of grace, any will to
resist, any power to overcome evil; It is thou, O God, that girdest me with
strength unto battle; thou have given me the shield of thy salvation; thy
right hand has holden me up; thou have also given me the necks of mine
enemies. Glory and praise be to thee, O Lord, which always causest us to
triumph in Christ; who crownest us with loving kindness, and tender mercies;
and have not held us short of the best of thy favors.

Truly, Lord, had thou given us but a mere being, as thou have done to the
lowest rank of thy creatures, it had been more then thou owe us: more then
ever we could be able to requite to thy divine bounty; for every being is
good, and the least degree of good is far above our worthiness; But, that to
our being thou have added life, it is yet an higher measure of thy mercy; for
certainly, of thy common favors, life is the most precious; yet this is such a
benefit as may be had and not perceived; for even the plants of the earth live
and feel it not; that to our life, therefore thou have made a further accession
of sense, it is yet a larger improvement of thy beneficence: for this faculty
has some power to manage life; and makes it capable to affect those means
which may tend to the preservation of it, and to decline the contrary; but this
is no other then the brute creatures enjoy equally with us, and some of them
beyond us: that therefore to our sense thou have blessed us with a further
addition of reason, it is yet an higher pitch of munificence; for hereby we are
men; and, as such, are able to attain some knowledge of thee our Creator, to
observe the motions of the heavens, to search into the natures of our
fellow creatures, to pass judgment upon actions, and events, and to transact
these earthly affairs to our own best advantage. But when all this is done, woe
were to us if we were but men; for our corrupted reason renders us of all
creatures the most miserable: that therefore to our reason thou have superadded
faith; to our nature grace; and of men have made us Christians; and to us, as
such, have given thy Christ, thy Spirit; and thereby made us of enemies, sons,
and heirs; coheirs with Christ of thine eternal and most glorious kingdom of
heaven; yea, have incorporated us into thy self, and made us one spirit with
thee our God; Lord, what room can there be possibly in these strait and narrow
hearts of ours for a due admiration of thy transcendent love and mercy? I am
swallowed up, O God, I am willingly swallowed up in this bottomless abyss of
thine infinite love; and there let me dwell in a perpetual ravishment of
spirit, till being freed from this clog of earth, and filled with the fullness
of Christ, I shall be admitted to enjoy that, which I cannot now reach to
wonder at, thine incomprehensible bliss, and glory, which thou laid up in the
highest heavens for them that love thee, in the blessed communion of all thy
Saints, and Angels, thy Cherubim, and Seraphim, Thrones, Dominions, and
Principalities, and Powers; in the beatificall presence of thee the ever-living
God, the eternal Father of spirits, Father, Son, holy Ghost, one infinite
Deity, in three, co-essentially, co-eternally, co-equally glorious persons; To
whom be blessing, honor, glory, and power for ever and ever. Amen, Allelujah.

THE CHRISTIAN, LAID FORTH IN His whole Disposition and Carriage.

BY I. H. D. D. B. N.

The CONTENTS.
The Exhortatory Preface.
1. THe Christians disposition. 2. His expense of the day. 3. His recreations.
4. His meals. 5. His nights rest. 6. His carriage. 7. His resolution in matter
of Religion. 8. His discourse. 9. His devotion. 10. His sufferings. 11. His
conflicts. 12. His death.
An Exhortatory Preface to the Christian Reader.
OVt of infallible rules and long experience have I gathered up this true
character of a Christian: A labor (some will think) might have been well
spared: Every man professes both to know and act this part; Who is there that
would not be angry, if but a question should be made either of his skill, or
interest? Surely, since the first name give^ at Antioch, all the believing
world has been ambitious of the honor of it; How happy were it, if all that
are willing to wear the livery, were as ready to do the service. But it falls
out here, as in the case of all things that are at once honorable, and
difficult, every one affects the title, few labor for the truth of the
achievement. Having therefore leisure enough to look about me, and finding the
world too prone to this worst kind of hypocrisy, I have made this true (...),
not more for direction, then for trial. Let no man view these lines as a
stranger; but when he looks in this glass, let him ask his heart whether this
be his own face; yea, rather when he sees this face, let him examine his heart
whether both of the^ agree with their pattern. And where he finds his
failings, (as who shall not?) let him strive to amend them; and never give
over, whiles he is any way less fair then his copy.

In the mean time, I would it were less easy, by these rules, to judge even
of others besides our selves; or, that it were uncharitable to say, there are
many Professors, few Christians; If words and forms might carry it, Christ
would have Clients (...)* but if holiness of disposition, and uprightness of
carriage must be the proof, woe is me, Esa. 24. 13.
In the midst of the Land, among the people, there is as the shaking of an
Olive tree, and as the gleaming grapes where the Vintage is done. For where is
the man that has obtained the mastery of his corrupt affections, and to be the
Lord of his unruly appetite? that has his heart in heaven, whiles his living
carcass is stirring here upon earth? that can see the invisible, and s^or^tly
enjoy that Savior, to whom he is spiritually united? That has subdued his
will and reason to his belief; that fears nothing but God; loves nothing but
goodness; hates nothing but sin; rejoices in none but true blessings? Whose
faith triumphs over the world; whose hope is anchored in heaven: whose charity
knows no less bounds then God, and men: whose humility represents him as vile
to himself, as he is honorable in the reputation of God; who is wise
heavenward; however he passes with the world; who dares be no other then just,
whether he win or lose; who is frugally liberal, discreetly courageous, holily
temperate: who is ever a thrifty menager of his hours, so dividing the day
betwixt his God, and his Vocation, that neither shall find fault with a just
neglect, or an unjust partiality: whose recreations are harmless, honest,
warrantable, such as may refresh nature, not debauch it: whose diet is
regulated by health, not by pleasure, as one whose table shall be no altar to
his belly, nor snare to his soul: who in his seasonable repose lies down, and
awakes with God, caring only to relieve his spirits; not to cherish sloth.
Whose carriage is meek, gentle, compliant, beneficial in whatsoever station;
In Magistracy unpartially just; in the Ministry conscionably faithful; in the
rule of his family, wisely provident, and religiously exemplary; Shortly, who
is a discreet and loving yoke fellow, a tender and pious parent, a dutious and
awful son: an humble and obsequious servant, an obedient and loyal subject.
Whose heart is constantly settled in the main truths of Christian Religion* so,
as he cannot be removed; in litigious points, neither too credulous, nor too
Peremptory: whose discourse is such as may be meet for the expressions of a
tongue that belongs to a sound, godly, and charitable heart; whose breast
continually burns with the heavenly fire of an holy devotion; whose painful
sufferings are overcome with patience, and cheerful resolutions; whose
conflicts are attended with undaunted courage, and crowned with an happy
victory: Lastly, whose death is not so full of fear and anguish, as of strong
consolations in that Savior, who has overcome and sweetened it; nor of so much
dreadfulnesse in it self, as of joy in the present expectation of that blessed
issue of a glorious immortality, which instantly succeeds it. Such is the
Christian whom we do here characterize, and commend to the world both for
trial, and imitation; neither know I which of these many qualifications can be
missing in that soul, who lays a just claim to Christ, his Redeemer. Take your
hearts to task, therefore, my dear brethren, into whose hands soever these
lines shall come: and, as you desire to have peace at the last, ransack them
thoroughly; not contenting your selves with a perfunctory, and fashionable
oversight (which will one day leave you irremediably miserable) but so search,
as those that resolve not to give over till you find these gracious
dispositions in your bosoms, which I have here described to you: so shall we
be, and make each other happy in the success of our holy labors; which the
God of heaven bless in both our hands, to his own glory, and our mutual
comfort in the day of the appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ, Amen.

THE CHRISTIAN.
THE Christian is a man and more; 1. His Disposition.
an earthly Saint, an Angel clothed in flesh; the only lawful image of his
Maker, and Redeemer; the abstract of Gods Church on earth: a model of heaven
made up in clay; the living Temple of the holy Ghost. For his disposition, it
has in it as much of heaven, as his earth may make room for; He were not a
man, if he were quite free from corrupt affections; but these he masters, and
keeps in with a strait hand; and if at any time they grow resty and headstrong,
he breaks them with a severe discipline, and will rather punish himself, then
not tame them; He checks his appetite with discreet, but strong denials, and
forbears to pamper nature, lest it grow wanton, and impetuous; He walks on
earth, but converses in heaven; having his eyes fixed on the invisible, and
enjoying a sweet communion with his God, and Savior; Whiles all the rest of
the world sits in darkness, he lives in a perpetual light; the heaven of
heavens is open to none but him; thither his eye pierces, and beholds those
beams of inaccessible glory, which shine in no face but his: The deep mysteries
of godliness which to the great Clerks of the world are as a book clasped and
sealed up, lie open before him fair and legible; and whiles those book-men know
whom they have heard of, he knows whom he has believed: He will not suffer
his Savior to be ever out of his eye; and if through some worldly
interceptions, he lose the sight of that blessed object for a time, he
zealously retrives him, not without an angry check of his own mis-carriage; and
is now so much the more fixed by his former slackning; so as he will henceforth
sooner part with his soul, then his Redeemer. The terms of entirenesse
wherein he stands with the Lord of life, are such as he can feel; but cannot
express, though he should borrow the language of Angels: it is enough that
they two are one spirit: His reason is willingly captivated to his faith; his
will to his reason; and his affections to both: He fears nothing that he sees,
in comparison of that which he sees not; and displeasure is more dreadful to
him then smart: Good is the adequate object of his love; which he duly
proportions according to the degrees of its eminence; affecting the chief
good, not without a certain ravishment of spirit; the lesser with a wise and
holy moderation. Whether he do more hate sin, or the evil spirit that suggests
it, is a question; Earthly contentments are too mean grounds whereon to raise
his joy; these, as he baulks not when they meet him in his way, so he does not
too eagerly pursue; he may taste of them, but so, as he had rather fast then
surset. He is not insensible of those losses which casualty, or enmity may
inflict; but that which lies most heavily upon his heart, is his sin: This makes
his sleep short and troublesome, his meals stomacklesse; his recreations
listlesse; his every thing, tedious; till he find his soul acquitted by his
great Surety in heaven: which done, he feels more peace and pleasure in his
calm, then he found horror in the tempest. His heart is the storehouse of
most precious graces: That faith whereby his soul is established, triumphs over
the world, wvether it allure, or threaten; and bids defiance to all the powers
of darkness; not fearing to be foiled by any opposition: His hope cannot be
discouraged with the greatest difficulties; but bears up against natural
impossibilities; and knows how to reconcile contradictions; His charity is both
extensive, and fervent; barring out no one that bears the face of a man; but
pouring out it self upon the household of faith: that studies good constructions
of men, and actions; and keeps it self free both from suspicion, and censure:
Grace does not more exalt him, then his humility depresses him: Were it not for
that Christ who dwells in him, he could think himself the meanest of all
creatures; now, he knows he may not disparage the Deity of him, by whom he is
so gloriously inhabited; in whose only right he can be as great in his own
thoughts, as he is despicable in the eyes of the world. He is wise to Godward,
however it be with him for the world; and well knowing he cannot serve two
masters, he cleaves to the better; making choice of that good part which can
never be taken from him; not so much regarding to get that which he cannot
keep, as to possess himself of that good which he cannot lose. He is just in
all his dealings with men; hating to thrive by injury, and oppression; and will
rather leave behind something of his own, then silch from another heap. He
is not close-fisted, where there is just occasion of his distribution;
willingly parting with those metals which he regards only for use; not caring
for either their color, or substance; earth is to him no other then it self,
in what hiew so ever it appears. In every good cause he is bold as a Lion;
and can neither fear faces, nor shrink at dangers: and is rather heartned with
opposition, pressing so much the more where he finds a large door open, and
many adversaries; and when he must suffer, does as resolutely stoop, as he did
before valiantly resist. He is holily temperate in the use of all Gods
blessings, as knowing by whom they are given, and to what end; neither dares
either to mis-lay them, or to mis-spend them lavishly: as duly weighing upon
what terms he receives them; and fore-expecting an account. Such an hand does
he carry upon his pleasures and delights, that they run not away with him; he
knows how to slacken the reins without a debauched kind of dissoluteness, and
how to straiten them without a sullen rigor.

He lives as a man that has borrowed his time, 2. His expense of the day.
and challenges not to be an owner of it; caring to spend the day in a gracious
and well-governed thrift; His first mornings task, after he has lifted up his
heart to that God who gives his beloved sleep, shall be to put himself into a
due posture, wherein to entertain himself, and the whole day: which shall be
done, if he shall effectually work his thoughts to a right apprehension of his
God, of himself, of all that may concern him. The true posture of a Christian
then, is this; He sees still heaven open to him, and beholds and admires the
light inaccessible; he sees the all-glorious God ever before him; the Angels of
God about him; the evil spirits aloof off enviously groyning, and repining at
him; the world under his feet, willing to rebel, but forced to be subject; the
good creatures ready to render their service to him; and is accordingly
affected to all these; he sees heaven open with joy and desire of fruition; he
sees God with an adoring awfulnesse; he sees the Angels with a thankful
acknowledgement, and care not to offend them; he sees the evil spirits with
hatred and watchful indignation; he sees the world with an holy
imperiousness, commanding it for use, and scorning to stoop to it for
observance; Lastly, he sees the good creatures, with gratulation, and care to
improve them to the advantage of him that lent them.

Having thus gathered up his thoughts, and found where he is, he may now be fit
for his constant devotion; which he falls upon, not without a trembling
veneration of that infinite and incomprehensible Majesty, before whom he is
prostra^e; now he climbes up into that heaven, which he before did but behold;
and solemnly pours out his soul in hearty thanksgivings, and humble
supplications into the bosom of the Almighty; wherein his awe is so tempered
with his faith, that whiles he labors under the sense of his own vileness, he
is raised up in the confidence of an infinite mercy; now he renues his feeling
interest in the Lord Jesus Christ his blessed Redeemer; and labors to get in
every breath new pledges of his gracious entirenesse; so seasoning his heart
with these early thoughts of piety, as that they stick by him all the day
after.

Having thus begun with his God, and begged his blessing: he now finds time to
address himself to the works of his calling* To live without any vocation, to
live in an unwarrantable vocation, not to labor in the vocation wherein he
lives, are things which his soul hates: These businesses of his calling
therefore, he follows with a willing and contented industry; not as forced to
it by the necessary of human Laws, or as urged by the Law of necessity, out of
the sense or fear of want: nor yet contrarily, out of an eager desire of
enriching himself in his estate; but in a conscionable obedience to that God,
who has made man to labor as the sparks to fly upward; and has laid it upon
him both as a punishment, and charge: In the sweat of thy brows shall thou eat
thy bread. In an humble alacrity he walks on in the way, wherein his God has
set him; yet not, the while, so intent upon his hands, as not to tend his
heart; which he lifts up in frequent ejaculations to that God, to whom he
desires to be approved in all his endeavors; ascribing all the thanks both of
his ability, and success to that omnipotent hand: If he meet with any rubs of
difficulty in his way, he knows who sent them, and who can remove them; not
neglecting any prudentiall means of remedy, he is not to seek for an higher
redress*

If he have occasion of trading with others; his will may not be the rule of
his gain, but his conscience; neither dares he strive for what he can get, but
what he ought: Equity is here the Clerk of the Market; and the measure which he
would have others mete out to himself, is the standard whereby he desires to be
tried in his mensurations to all other. He hates to hoise prices upon occasion
of his neighbors need; and to take the advantage of forfaits by the clock. He
is not such a slave to his trade, as not to spare an hour to his soul; neither
dares be so lavish as utterly to neglect his charge upon whatever pretense of
pleasure, or devotion. Shortly, he takes his work at the hand of God, and
leaves it with him: humbly offering up his services to his great Master in
heaven; and after all his labor sits comfortably down in the conscience of
having faithfully done his task, though not without the intervention of many
infirmities.

His recreations (for even these humane frailty will sometimes call for) are
such, 3. His Recreatio^s.
as may be meet relaxations to a mind over-bent, and a body tired with honest
and holy employments; safe, inoffensive, and for time and measure fitly
proportioned to the occasion; like unto soft music betwixt two long and
stirring Acts; like unto some quick and savory sauce to a listlesse and cloyed
stomach; like unto a sweet nap after an over-watching. He is far from those
delights that may effeminate, or corrupt the mind; abhorring to sit by those
pleasures, from which he shall not rise better: He hates to turn pastime into
trade; not abiding to spend more time in whetting, then till his edge be sharp;
In the height of his delectations he knows to enjoy God; from whom as he
fetches his allowance, so he craves and expects a gracious acceptance, even
when he lets himself most loose. And if at any time he have gone beyond his
measure, he chides himself for the excess, and is so much the more careful
ever after to keep within compass. He can only make a kind of use of those
contentments, with light minds are transported: and can manage his disports
without passion; and leave a loser without regret. A smile to him is as much as
a loud laughter to the worldling; neither does he entertain mirth as his
ordinary attendant, but as his retainer to wait upon his serious occasions: and
finally, so rejoices, as if he rejoiced not.

His meals are such as nature requires, 4. His meals.
and grace moderates; not pinching himself with a penurious riggardlinesse, nor
pampering his flesh with a wanton excess: His palate is the least part of his
care; so as his fare may be wholesome, he stands not upon delicacy. He dares
not put his hand to the dish till he have looked up to the owner; and hates to
put one morsel into his mouth, unblessed; and knows it his duty to give thanks
for what he has paid for; as well considering, that neither the meat that he
eats, nor the hand and mouth that receives it, nor the mawe that digests it,
nor the metal that buys it, is of his own making: And now having fed his
belly, not his eye, he rises from his board, satisfied, not glutted; and so
bestirs himself upon his calling, as a man not more unwieldy by his repast, but
more cheerful; and as one that would be loath his gut should be any hindrance
to his brain, or to his hand.

If he shall have occasion to entertain himself and his friends more liberally,
he dares not lose himself in his feast; he can be soberly merry, and wisely
free; only in this he is willing not to be his own man, in that he gives
himself for the time to his guests. His Cator is friendly thrift; and
Temperance keeps the boards end, and carves to every one the best measure of
enough: As for his own diet, when he is invited to a tempting variety, he puts
his knife to his throat; neither dares he feed without fear, as knowing who
over-looks him: Obscenity, detraction, scurrility, are barred from his table;
neither do any words sound there that are less savoury then the dishes.
Lastly, he so feeds, as if he sought for health in those viands, and not
pleasure; as if he did eat to live; and rises not more replenished with food,
then with thankfulness.

In a due season he betakes himself to his rest, 5. His nights rest.
he presumes not to alter the Ordinance of day, and night, nor dares confound,
where distinction is made by his Maker; It is not with him as with the brute
creatures, that have nothing to look after but the mere obedience of nature; he
does not therefore lay himself down as the swine in the stye, or a dog in a
kennell, without any further preface to his desired sleep, but improves those
faculties which he is now closing up, to a meet preparation for an holy repose:
for which purpose, he first casts back his eye to the now-expired day; and
seriously considers how he has spent it; and will be sure to make his
reckonings even with his God, before he part. Then he lifts up his eyes and his
heart to that God, who has made the night for man to rest in; and recommends
himself earnestly to his blessed protection: and then closes his eyes in
peace, not without a serious meditation of his last rest; his bed represents to
him, his grave; his linen, his winding sheet; his sleep, death; the night, the
many days of darkness: and shortly, he so composeth his soul, as if he looked
not to wake till the morning of the resurrection: After which, if he sleep, he
is thankfully cheerful; if he sleep not, his reins chasten, and instruct him
in the night season: and if sleep be out of his eyes, yet God and his Angels
are not: Whenever he awakes, in those hands he finds himself, and therefore
rests sweetly, even when he sleeps not. His very dreams however vain, or
troublesome, are not to him altogether unprofitable; for they serve to bewray
not only his bodily temper, but his spiritual weaknesses, which his waking
resolutions shall endeavor to correct.

He so applies himself to his pillow, as a man that meant not to be drowned in
sleep, but refreshed, not limiting his rest by the insatiable lust of a
sluggish and drowzie stupidnesse, but by the exigence of his health, and
abilitation to his calling; and rises from it (not too late) with more appetite
to his work, then to a second slumber; cheerfully devoting the strength renewed
by his late rest, to the honor and service of the giver.

His carriage is not strange, 6. His carriage.
insolent, surly, and overly contemptuous, but familiarly meek, humble,
courteous: as knowing what mold he is made of; and not knowing any worse man
then himself; He has an hand ready upon every occasion to be helpful to his
neighbor; as if he thought himself made to do good; He hates to sell his
breath to his friend, where his advice may be useful; neither is more
ambitious of any thing under heaven, then of doing good offices; It is his
happiness if he can reconcile quarrels, and make peace between dissenting
friends. When he is chosen an Umpire, he will be sure to cut even betwixt both
parties; and commonly displeases both, that he may wrong neither; If he be
called forth to Magistracy, he puts off all private interests, and commands
friendship to give place to justice* Now he knows no couzens, no enemies;
neither couzens for favor, nor enemies for revenge; but looks right forward to
the cause, without squinting aside to the persons. No flattery can keep him
from brow-beating of vice; no fear can work him to discourage virtue: Where
severity is requisite, he hates to enjoy another punishment; and where mercy
may be more prevalent, he hates to use severity; Power does not render him
imperious and oppressive, but rather humbles him in the awful expectation of
his account.

If he be called to the honor of Gods Embassy to his people, he dares not but
be faithful in delivering that sacred Message; he cannot now either fear
faces, or respect persons; it is equally odious to him to hide and smother any
of Gods counsel, and to foist in any of his own; to suppress truth, and to
adulterate it; He speaks not himself, but Christ; and labors not to tickle the
ear, but to save souls: So does he go before his flock as one that means to
feed them no less by his example, then by his doctrine; and would condemn
himself, if he did not live the Gospel, as well as preach it; He is neither too
austere in his retiredness, nor too good-cheap in his sociablenesse; but
carries so eaven an hand that his discreet affablenesse may be free from
contempt, and that he may win his people with a loving conversation; If any of
his charge be mis-carried into an error of opinion, he labors to reclaim him
by the spirit of meekness; so as the mis-guided may read nothing but love in
his zealous conviction; if any be drawn into a vicious course of life, he
fetches him back with a gentle, yet powerful hand; by an holy importunity,
working the offender to a sense of his own danger, and to a saving penitence.

Is he the master of a family? he dares not be a Lion in his own house; cruelly
tyrannizing over his meanest drudge: but so moderately exercises his power, as
knowing himself to be his apprentices fellow servants; He is the mouth of his
meiny to God, in his daily devotions; offering up for them the calves of his
lips, in his morning and evening sacrifice; and the mouth of God unto them in
his wholesome instructions, and godly admonitions: he goes before them in all
good examples of piety, and holy conversation, and so governs, as one that has
more then mere bodies committed to his charge.

Is he the husband of a wife? He carries his yoke even; not laying too much
weight upon the weaker neck; His helper argues him the principal, and he so
knows it, that he makes a wise use of his just inequality: so remembering
himself to be the superior, as that he can be no other then one flesh: He
maintains therefore his moderate authority with a conjugall love, so holding up
the right of his sex, that in the mean time he does not violently clash with
the britler vessel: As his choice was not made by weight, or by the voice, or
by the hiew of the hide, but for pure affection grounded upon virtue; so the
same regards hold him close to a constant continuance of his chaste love; which
can never yield either to change or intermission.

Is he a father of children? he looks upon them as more Gods, then his own; and
governs them accordingly: He knows it is only their worse part which they have
received from his loins; their diviner half is from the father of lights, and
is now become the main part of his charge. As God gave them to him, and to the
world by him: so his chief care is, that they may be begotten again to God;
that they may put off that corrupt nature which they took from him, and be made
partakers of that divine nature which is given them in their regeneration. For
this cause he trains them up in all virtuous and religious education; he sets
them in their way, corrects their exorbitances, restraines their wild desires,
and labors to frame them to all holy dispositions; and so bestows his fatherly
care upon, and for them, as one that had rather they should be good then rich,
and would wish them rather dead, then debaucht: he neglects not all honest
means of their provision, but the highest point he aims at, is to leave God
their patrimony. In the choice of their calling, or match, he propounds, but
forces not, as knowing they have also wills of their own, which it is fitter for
him to bow, then to break. Is he a son? he is such as may be fit to proceed
from such loins.

Is he a servant? he cannot but be officious: for he must please two masters,
though one under, not against the other; when his visible master sees him not,
he knows he cannot be out of the eye of the invisible; and therefore dares not
be either negligent, or unfaithful. The work that he undertakes, he goes
through, not out of fear, but out of conscience; and would do his business no
otherwise then well, though he served a blind master; He is no blab of the
defects at home, and where he cannot defend, is ready to excuse: He yields
patiently to a just reproof, and answers with an humble silence: and is more
careful not to deserve, then to avoid stripes.

Is he a subject? He is awfully affected to Sovereignty, as knowing by whom the
powers are ordained; He dares not curse the King, no not in his thought; nor
revile the Ruler of his people, though justly faulty: much less dare he
sclander the footsteps of Gods anointed. He submits not only for wrath, but
also for conscience sake, to every Ordinance of God; yea, to every Ordinance of
man for the Lords sake; not daring to disobey in regard of the oath of God; If
he have reached forth his hand to cut off but the skirt of the Royal robe, his
heart smites him: He is a true paymaster, and willingly renders tribute to whom
tribute, custom to whom custom, honor to whom honor is due; and justly
divides his duties betwixt God and Caesar.

Finally, in what ever relation he stands, he is diligent, faithful,
conscionable, observant of his rule, and careful to be approved such, both to
God and men.

He has fully informed himself of all the necessary points of religion; 7. His
resolution in matter of Religion.
and is so firmly grounded in those fundamental and saving truths, that he
cannot be carried about with every wind of doctrine; as for collateral and
unmateriall verities, he neither despises, nor yet does too eagerly pursue
them; He lists not to take opinions upon trust; neither dares absolutely follow
any guide, but those who he knows could not err; He is ever suspicious of new
faces of Theological truths; and cannot think it safe to walk in untroden
paths: Matters of speculation are not unwelcome to him; but his chief care is
to reduce his knowledge to practice, and therefore he holds nothing his own,
but what his heart has appropriated, and his life acted: He dares not be too
much wedded to his own conceit; and has so much humility, as to think the
whole Church of Christ upon earth wiser then himself; However he be a great
lover of constancy, yet upon better reason he can change his mind in some
litigious, and un-importing truths, and can be silent where he must dissent.

His discourse is grave, discreet, pertinent, Prove. 3. 27, 28.
free from vanity, free from offense; In secular occasions nothing falls from
him but seasonable and well-advised truths; In spiritual, his speech is such,
as both argues grace, and works it: No foul and unsavory breath proceeds out
of his lips; which he abides not to be tainted with any rotten communication,
with any slanderous detraction: If in a friendly merriment he let his tongue
loose to an harmless urbanity, that is the furthest he dares go; scorning to
come within the verge of a base scurrility.

He is not apt to spend himself in censures, but as for revilings, and cursed
speakings against God, or men, those his soul abhors. He knows to reserve
his thoughts by locking them up in his bosom under a safe silence, and when
he must speak, dares not be too free of his tongue, as well knowing that in
the multitude of words there wants not sin. His speeches are no other then
seasonable, well fitted both to the person, and occasion; Jigges at a funeral,
Lamentations at a feast, holy counsel to scorners, discouragements to the
dejected, and applauses to the profane, are hateful to him; He meddles not
with other men's matters, much less with affairs of State; but keeps himself
wisely within his own compass: 8. His discourse.
not thinking his breath well spent, where he does not either teach, or learn.

He is so perpetually resident in heaven, 9. His devotion.
that he is often in every day before the throne of Grace; and he never comes
there without a supplication in his hand; wherein also he loves to be
importunate; and he speeds accordingly, for he never departs empty; whiles
other cold suitors that come thither but in some good fits of devotion, obtain
nothing but denials; He dares not press to Gods footstool in his own name,
(he is conscious enough of his own unworthiness) but he comes in the gracious
and powerful name of his righteous Mediator, in whom he knows he cannot but
be accepted; and in an humble boldness for his only sake craves mercy; no man
is either more awful, or more confident; When he has put up his petition to
the King of heaven, he presumes not to stint the time, or manner of Gods
condescent; but patiently and faithfully waits for the good hour, and leaves
himself upon that infinite wisdom and goodness. He does not affect length so
much as fervor; neither so much minds his tongue as his heart.

His prayers are suited according to the degrees of the benefits sued for; He
therefore begs grace absolutely; temporal blessings with limitation; and is
accordingly affected in the grant: Neither is he more earnest in craving
mercies, then he is zealously desirous to be retributory to God, when he has
received them: not more heartily suing to be rich in grace, then to improve
his graces to the honor and advantage of the bestower: With an awful and
broken heart does he make his addresses to that infinite Majesty, from whose
presence he returns with comfort and joy: His soul is constantly fixed there
whither he pours it out; distraction and distrust are shut out from his closet;
and he is so taken up with his devotion, as one that makes it his work to pray:
And when he has offered up his sacrifices unto God, his faith listens and
looks in at the door of heaven to know how they are taken.

Every man shows fair in prosperity; 10. His sufferings.
but the main trial of the Christian is in suffering; any man may steer in a
good gale, and clear sea, but the Mariners skill will be seen in a tempest:
Herein the Christian goes beond the Pagans, not practice only, but admiration;
We rejoice in tribulation, says the chosen Vessel; Lo here a point
transcending all the affectatio^ of Heathenism. Perhaps some resolute spirit,
whether out of a natural fortitude, or out of an ambition of fame or earthly
glory, may set a face upon a patient enduring of loss, or pain; but never any
of those heroic Gentiles durst pretend to a joy in suffering; Hither can
Christian courage reach; knowing that tribulation works patience, and
patience, experience, and experience, hope, and hope makes not ashamed.

Is he bereaved of his goods and worldly estate? he comforts himself in the
conscience of a better treasure that can never be lost; Is he afflicted with
sickness? his comfort is that the inward man is so much more renewed daily, as
the outward perishes: Is he slandered and unjustly disgraced? his comfort is
that there is a blessing, which will more then make him amends; Is he banished?
he knows he is on his way home-ward; Is he imprisoned? his spirit cannot be
locked in; God and his Angels cannot be locked out; Is he dying? To him to live
is Christ, and to dye is gain; Is he dead? He rests from his labors, and is
crowned with glory: Shortly, he is perfect gold that comes more pure out of the
fire then it went in; neither had ever been so great a Saint in heaven, if he
had not passed through the flames of his trial here upon earth.

He knows himself never out of danger; 11. His conflicts.
and therefore stands ever upon his guard; neither of his hands are empty; the
one holds out the shield of faith; the other manageth the sword of the spirit;
both of them are employed in his perpetual conflict. He cannot be weary of
resisting, but resolves to dye fighting: He has a ward for every blow; and as
his eye is quick to discern temptations, so is his hand and foot nimble to
avoid them: He cannot be discouraged with either the number or power of his
enemies knowing that his strength is out of himself, in him in whom he can do
all things; and that there can be no match to the Almighty; He is careful not
to give advantage to his vigilant adversary; and therefore warily avoids the
occasions of sin: and if at any time he be overtaken with the suddenness,
or subtilty of a temptation, he speedily recovers himself by a serious
repentance; and fights so much the harder because of his foil. He hates to take
quarter of these spiritual powers; nothing less then death can put an end to
this quarrel; nor nothing below victory.

He is not so careful to keep his soul within his teeth, 12. His death.
as to send it forth well addressed for happiness: as knowing therefore the
last brunt to be most violent, he rouzeth up his holy fortitude* to encounter
that King of fear, his last enemy, Death; And now after a painful sickness,
and a resolute expectation of the fiercest assault, it falls out with him as in
the meeting of the two hostile brothers, Jacob and Esau, in stead of grapling
he finds a courteous salutation, for stabs, kisses; for height of enmity,
offices of love; Life could never befriend him so much, as Death offers to do:
That tenders him (perhaps a rough, but) a sure hand to lead him to glory; and
receives a welcome accordingly: Neither is there any cause to marvel at the
change; The Lord of life has wrought it; He having by dying subdued death,
has reconciled it to his own; and has (as it were) beaten it into these fair
terms with all the members of his mystical body: so as, whiles unto the
enemies of God, Death is still no other then a terrible executioner of divine
vengeance, he is to all that are in Christ, a plausible and sure convoy unto
blessedness; The Christian therefore now laid upon his last bed, when this
grim senger comes to fetch him to heaven, looks not so much at his dreadful
visage, as at his happy errand: and is willing not to remember what death is in
it self, but what it is to us in Christ; by whom it is made so useful and
beneficial, that we could not be happy without it; Here then comes in the last
act, and employment of faith; (for after this brunt passed, there is no more
use of faith, but of vision) that heartens the soul in a lively apprehension of
that blessed Savior, who both led him the way of suffering, and is making way
for him to everlasting glory: That shows him Jesus the Author and finisher of
our faith, who for the joy that was set before him, endured the Cross,
despising the shame, and is set down at the right hand of the throne of God;
That clings close unto him, and lays unremoveable hold upon his person, his
merits, his blessedness; upon the wings of this faith is the soul ready to
mount up toward that heaven, which is open to receive it; and in that act of
evolation puts it self into the hands of those blessed Angels, who are ready to
carry it up to the throne of Glory.

Sic, O, sic juvat vivere, sic perire.
FINIS.

