(...) OR, PERSECUTION FOR CONSCIENCE SAKE, Most vain, cruel, and destructive
to the Promoters and Abettors of it; demonstrated in a Discourse from Matthew.
2.16, 17, 18. and humbly presented to the Consideration of all, but especially
to the DIIS TERRENIS, or the Magistrates; from Gods Word, for their
Information; beseeching them to permit Jesus Christ the Sovereign Rule over the
Kingdoms of the Conscience, while he permits them to rule the Bodily State.

(...)

Novit Deus vnlnerare ad amorem. Sanctus in ira Dei, multo minus hominis,
emendari non vult, erudiri non vult.

Aug. By John Humphreys.

LONDON, Printed for the Author, 1682.

To the Humbled Reader.
THough thou by nature sinful art,
If thou thy self forsake,
Christ never will from thee depart,
But thee from woe will take:
For he from sin has made thee clear,
Shedding his Blood for thee,
And in Gods sight has made thee dear,
Keeping the Law for thee.
Will thou be thankful, then believe
That Christ did all for thee;
Will thou be thankful, then believe
That Christ gave thanks for thee.
On Angels wings thou shall be brought
TO enjoy the Heavenly Crown,
Deserved, preserved, by Christ for thee
In glory and renown.
Let not that Sin committed be,
Of which thou have repented,
The which God has remitted thee,
But let it be prevented.
For Faith breeds not security
In sin to wallow still;
But works true syncerity
In Heart, in Mind, and Will.
Persecution for Conscience sake, etc.
Matthew. 2.16, 17, 18. 16. Then Herod seeing that he was mocked of the wise men
was exceeding wroth, and sent forth and slew all the male children that were in
Bethlehem, and in all the costs thereof, from two years old and under,
according to the time which he had diligently searched out of the wise men.

17. Then was that fulfilled which was spoken by the prophet Jeremiah, saying,

18. In Rama was a voice heard, mourning and weeping, and great howling; Rachel
weeping for her children, and would not be comforted, because they were not.


THis is the first Persecution of Innocent Blood, committed upon Infants, in
the Infancy of our Lords Incarnation, and in the Infancy of the Fourth or Roman
Monarchy, in opposition to the Kingdom and Reign of Jesus Christ, whose Right
it is, Ezekiel. 25.27. (...) We are killed for thy sake; (or as the Hebrew, Psalm.
44.22. Super te, that is, Christ is our Rock and Foundation, for and upon whom
the Members are slain.
Upon thee, Super te;) all the day long, from the very morning, yea before the
dawning of the day, of Antichrist; and yet Blessed be the rock of our
foundation, 2 Timothy 2.19. Romans 8.38, 39. because we are slain upon him as our
Root, and upon his Death which is our Life; nothing can separate us from his
eternal love. In the 13th. Verse we have the persuasion of the Angel to Joseph,
to remove the young Child into Egypt, as a flash of Lightning before the clap
of Thunder; Gods Thunders are still attended with his Lightning to give
warning, but the Devils are in the dark, that he may ensnare us, Rev. 8.5. and
10.3, 4. For certainly John had been ensnared with a mock Revelation of the
Dragon from the airy Regions, his Prison at present, had not the Lord Jesus
cautioned him, (ver. 11.) to seal his Thunders, and not to write them.

Three Points are obvious in our Text; 1. By what occasion Herod was so set on
fire, as to murder the Innocent, namely, because he thought himself abused,
though it was but his Jealousy.

2. The Execution of this Massacre with the circumstances; 1. Of the place, it
was in Bethlehem, by Interpretation The house of bread, (...)
where our Lord was born; 2. Of the persons, Children of two years old and
under.


3. The Evangelist notes the fulfilling of a Prophecy anciently foretold by
Jeremiah, that they might know it was no accidental thing, and that Christ and
his must be from their birth persecuted unto Blood, before they should reign in
the Kingdom.

First, Herod thought himself mocked, not that he was so, but that he deemed
himself so. And hence we learn, That Princes think themselves abused, and that
disparagement is done to the State Royal, if men will not execute their bloody
Designs, and wrong their own Souls. Herod is mocked, because the wife men will
not relate the certainty of Christ's Birth, that he may murder him. And King
Saul thinks himself contemned, 1 Samuel 22.7. because his Footmen would not slay
the Priests of the Lord that had their hand with David.

Secondly, in that he terms it Mockery. Note, that the wicked can father that
upon others, whereof themselves are most guilty. For the wise men, they meant
simply, but that they were interdicted of God to return to the Court; but Herod
he mocked with the Lord, for though he knew that this newborn King was to
beset up, and that he must reign; yet in despite of God he thought either by
policy to circumvent it, or by power to withstand the Ordinance of the Lord,
scorning at the Oracles of the Prophets, and complaining of Cozenage, when
himself would have cozened the Almighty. Like Phimbria of Rome, who having
dangerously wounded one, the next day entered an Action against the party
grieved, because he had received but part of his Blade into his body, and not
all. And is it not strange, when Pharaoh shall call Moses hard hearted, when
the Wolf shall accuse the Lamb, and the Serpent say the Dove is too subtle, and
Herod exclaim upon the wise men for Mockery, when himself nourished so foul a
vice against the highest? He was wroth, but not simply because the wise men
returned not, but for his own sottishness, that he had not sent some man with
them, to have seen what was become of the Babe. But thus when Princes make
League, and band themselves against the Lord, and contribute toward the
afflictions of his Saints, he ensnareth them in their own intentions, and
infatuateth their devices, and destroys the counsel of Achitophel, 2 Samuel
17.14. Psalm. 11.26. With the froward the Lord will deal frowardly: to insinuate
that on others they hate, of which themselves are guilty, has and will be the
Draggons Logic, till Christ has chained him up.

The second point is the Execution of this Butchery; his end was, that if
possible he might have the blood of the Babe among the multitude, he spares
none; and stories report, that in this Massacre was slain his own Son,
whereupon Augustus the Emperor said in detestation of his cruelty, That he had
rather be Herod's Hog than his Heir.

Herod knew if Christ were born he must reign, yet against his conscience he
endeavors by deceit or cruelty to supplant the decrees of God. Thus ( Exodus
8.4.) Pharaoh did seek to cross the command and purpose of the Lord, in the
delivery of his Servants, though by many immediate proofs and wonders from
Heaven, he saw it written as it were on the walls, that the Israelites must
depart; and thus Saul sought the Life of David, though he was told by Samuel, 1 Samuel 15.28. that the strength of Israel, that could not lie, had rent the
Kingdom from him, and given it to his Neighbor.

Pharaoh at the first does but exact more labor of the Israelites, but after
he deals with the Midwives, Exodus 1.15. to kill them that should be born; and
after his malice breaks out more fiercely into a Proclamation, ver. 22. that
the Male born should be cast into the River. So Saul confessing, that he knew
God would establish the Kingdom on David, 1 Samuel 18.17. first he thought to
ensnare him by his Daughter, Fight thou the Battles of the Lord, and thou shall
have my Daughter; but after his Hypocrisy is discovered, chap. 19.2. making
solemn Proclamation, Who have I among all my Soldiers, that will do so much
for me as to kill David? So that he that could spare Agag whom he should have
killed, would pierce David whom he should not kill. So Herod, when he saw he
was prevented of his first purpose, he still travelleth with the same mischief,
till he had doubled his cruelty. Such a Fire is Sin to double and increase the
heat by burning. And the deferring their accursed Attempts, which should be as
Water to quench them, is as Oil to inflame them; especially where the
Constitution is malicious, and being wrought by the Devils malice, who casts in
fresh poison into our hearts, that if we be prevented of one Attempt, we may
more violently set upon another, Rev. 12.12. yea whole Floods.

Jesabel would have Naboths Vineyard, and cannot obtain it without his Life, 1
Kings 21.11. she shall have Governors to serve her turn, that will so follow
her cursed counsel. When no man will fall upon the Priests at the command of
Saul, 1 Samuel 22.17. then will Doeg take the Sword and do it, who was an
Edomite, a perfect Hater of the Seed of Jacob, Romans 9. and may have his Name
from (...) and (...), a Fisher; who with their poisoned Baits angle for the
Lives of poor Innocents, in whom the image and nature of the Lamb dwells. Herod
can here no sooner mention a Murder, but his Servants will do it; and if he will
be prepared for the Commander, its also for the Executioner. Though his act be
warranted by Authority, is it in the power of the Prince to bring in a Religion
against God? Or may they do what they will? God forbid: such an absolute power
may be when the Whore is burnt, Rev. 17. by the divided Kingdoms of the Roman
Empire; and may arise out of the bottomless pit, Rev. 11.7. and slay Gods
Witnesses -- But let them remember, that when the Witnesses rise, and Christ
their Deliverer comes, and pours out his fifth, sixth, and seventh Vials, that
Beast and false Prophet shall be cast alive into the Lake; Rev. 19.20, 21. and
their Generalissimo the Dragon chained up in the bottomless pit, Rev. 20.3, 4,
5. till Christ has with his new Jerusalem reigned over the Kingdoms of the
world, Dan. 7.27. If the Prince should command me to burn the Bible, I ought
not to do it; for a thing is not of God because the Prince commands it, but
because it is of God, therefore ought he to command it. Cambyses King of
Persia, inflamed with Incest, consulted with his wise men whether he may
lawfully marry his Sister? They answer, they find no such Law to warrant it;
but they find another Law, that the King of Persia is without all Law, absolute
in his own will, as were the Arabians, and that Beast that is said to arise (
Rev. 9.) out of the bottomless pit. For as all Lawful Power is Gods Image, and
comes from God; 1 Cor. 11.7. Romans 13.4. Isa. 42.8, 79.
so all Absolute Arbitrary Power, (that is only essentially in God) presumed
by Man, is from the Dragon, and not from God, who will not give away his own
Prerogative and Glory to any Creature. And thus do Princes Counselors feed
them in their humors, nodding at whatsoever Augustus will have done. And even
so miserable are the times, that men do wait at their Princes mouths, and
perform their Decrees, not scanning whether they be grounded upon the Law of
God, which ought to be the Rule whereat Princes should level their
Commandments, and by which Subjects should square their Obedience. For it is
not enough to slay Amon, 2 Samuel 13.29. at Absaloms command; neither Rabshake
excuse himself, Isa. 36.16. for railing on the living God, though he had the
Warrant of the King of Ashur to do it; but in these and such like sins they
hazard their own Souls. Wherefore let us keep to the ground that Balaam at
first stood on, Number. 24.13. Not for a house full of Gold to pass the
commandment of the Lord. I do not say rebel, but obey not against the Lords
command. Let Saul himself fall upon the Priests, if he will have them slain,
and let us not assist him. Let Jezabel herself sit in Judgment upon Naboth, but
let not us condemn him. We are bound to do good to the Saints of God, much less
to persecute them; and it is said in the Gospel, Matthew. 24.35, 36. he that
clothes a poor Prisoner, clothes the Lord Jesus. Now what shall we say then of
him that stands up like Tertullus ( Acts 24.5.) against Paul, to plead against
him, and to reproach him with the name of a pestilent seditious Fellow? For if
they shall be condemned that have not ministered to the needs of the Saints, but
have been ashamed of their bands, Luke 16.25. If Dives shall hang in Hell for
not refreshing Lazarus at his Gate, what shall become of them that take the
bread from Lazarus, and put Paul into prison, or else enforce Crimes against
him to retain him in bands? Judges 5.23. Cursed be Meroz, because they helped
not the Lord, nor stood in defense of his Truth. Obadiah against the express
command of Jezabel (1 Kings 18.4.) hides the Prophets; and Rahab ( Joshua
2.3.) ventures her life to preserve the Spies; and what better Spies can there
be than Preachers, that stand in the gap between God and us, as did Moses;
which watch over the Souls of the people, (if they will be obedient to them, as
Gods especial command is, 1 Pet. 5.5. 1 Timothy 5.1, 2, 17, 18.) and show them
their way to Heaven, Exodus 17.12. Psalm. 106.23. Jonathan being often incited by
his Father to kill David, 1 Samuel 20.2. protests David's innocence; though Saul
persuaded him, that David's Glory could not be without Jonathans ruin, and
would not be drawn to do it. And if he would not compass such a mischief at the
Edict of Saul, which had a threefold force in it, First, as proceeding from his
Father; Secondly, from his Sovereign; Thirdly, being joined with the temptation
of a Kingdom: much less are we to gratify the State with the affliction of
Gods Saints; for we must rather ( Acts 4.19.) obey God than Man: Yet disobey
not the Prince, for his Commandment stands on these two feet, either to do the
thing, or sustain the punishment for not doing it.

Herod's heart: For righteousness must not yield to iniquity, and Christ must be
born, and being born must reign. If he be born in thee, and thy Herod's cursed,
subtle, beastly, whorish Heart; and fleshly Interest, Profit and Pleasure, gilt
over with a formal whorish profession, be ready by subtilty or force to murder
the Babe and Royal Seed, as certainly thou do mystically as well as Herod
outwardly; why yet he will escape into Into Egypt, that is, mystically into
dark appearances and wilderness condition, Hos. 2.14. and and there when he
has slain thy Herod, thy dearest lusts and fleshly subtle wisdom, then will he
speak comfortably to thee; that is, (...) to or in thy Heart and Soul, to thy
everlasting peace and satisfaction for ever.
Egypt, and stay there till Herod be dead; and he will and must reign at last
over all that is in thee; or else he is never born in thee. And though the
Devil rage, and the World swell; certain it is there is no such peace as this
of Christ's reigning in thy Soul. It teaches peace between God and Man, between
Man and Man, between Man and his inward Soul, and makes the Wolves to become
Lambs, and thy Wolfish nature to turn to that of the Lambs; and causes the Lion
to lodge with the Lamb. But Heroa would have the Gospel abolished, and Christ
murdered, which cannot be. Shall Dagon yield to the Ark, or the Ark to Dagon? 1 Samuel 5.3. Shall the 10 Tribes go to Juda, or Juda to them? Herod loves not
Christ, therefore he murders the Children. If Herod's Crown cannot stand with
the Government of Christ, well may he harbor Murder in his thoughts against
him; but it shall fall on his own head. For God will watch over his own Son,
and fight for his own truth, and preserve as the Apple of his own eye his elect
and truly redeemed, who shall have Christ's Image in them, and the Devils
defaced. So as where the true Protestant Scriptural Religion, and Justification
by Christ's imputed righteousness alone, Doctrine of Free Justification in King
Edward and Queen Elizabeth's days, established by Act of Parliament, without
works, but by Christ's righteousness imputed and received by faith.
received by Faith, and declared by good works to men through the Spirit; and
where this has been granted by Parliament, and suppressed by private
commandment, there may the Subjects stand on the part defensive, to ward the
blow being smitten. But if it has not been established by public Authority,
then may they not take Arms to set it up, though Gods real Truth and Gospel;
but suffer for it.

Out of the Murder it self we gather, that though many be slain, yet Christ
escapes. And that in the greatest persecution, yet Christ's Religion shall
never be abolished, because Christ lives: Christ lives, and I live; yet not I,
but Christ in me, Gal. 2. When Jezabel thought she had had her hands full of
Blood, and had rooted out all the Lords Prophets, and visibly scarce a Face to
be seen, so as Elijah thought himself to be left alone, 1 Kings 19.18. yet says
God, I have reserved 7000 that have not bowed a Knee to Baal. And when by
scattering the Sheep, and smiting the Shepherd, Zach. 13.7. the Devil thought
himself flush; and that by Christ's Sleep in the earth he had utterly stung him
to destruction; then was his Resurrection most glorious, and then did the
Churches of Christ increase daily. For such is the nature of the Gospel, that
the more it is trodden down, the higher it rises; and all the Powers of Earth
or Hell, that ever stood against it, have in all Ages, and ever shall, be
either won by it, or ruined by it. For the more it is maligned, the broader it
spreads; and when it seems to be dead, then is there most life in it.

Sanguine fundata, and Ecclesia sanguine crevit;
Sanguine tam illa vicit, sanguine finis erit.
The third point, which is the Prophecy ( Jer. 31.15.) is to declare the
greatness of Gods mercy in the delivery of the Jews, and shows them that they
were like to the Benjamites or Israelites, that is, utterly destroyed and
carried away; insomuch that if Rachel, the Mother of Benjamin, could have risen
again to seek for her Children, she might have wept for want of them, but she
should have found none remaining. This does the Spirit bring in here, as a
Butchery foretold, to the end that none might wonder or be offended at it.
Though the Savior of the World should come with Blood, and cause the loss of a
multitude of Children, and himself preserved; to show that Christ and his
Gospel is attended with great crosses and losses, yea the dearest; and yet they
that will not leave all for him, are not worthy of him, Matthew. 10.37. Luke
14.28, 29, 30. Phil. 3.8, 9. The severest crosses, and the losses of the
profitablest, and sweetest, and pleasantest things attend Christ. If thou will
have Christ for thy Savior, for thy Lord, for thy King, for thy Husband, for
thy all; thou must have him alone, he will not admit of any Corrivals at all,
he must be sole in thee and over thee; or else thy Idol, for thy Idol and he
will never brook together, he will slay all thy Idols, whether Children, Lusts,
Gold, Honor, Pleasure, Profit, or whatsoever; and thou must lose all, Luke
14.28, 29, 30, 31, etc. Matthew. 10. yea Life must not be before him. Or else
like to the Gadarens, if thou valuest thy Swine before him, thy Swine shall
save thee in the day of the Lord, if they can.

Lastly, though Rachel lost her Children, yet she did not lose her Savior:
Though some here will rather lose Christ than their cursed Children, and the
Brats of their own bearing and fleshly fruits; such self-lovers are men, that
profess Christ and hold a shadow. But you that willingly lose for Christ, to
honor and save his Truth, as Rachel did her Children, shall at last have
double as Christ promised, Mark 10.29, 30. and mark that word Jer. 31.17. where
in the capital comfort lies, (...). (...) Signifies, At the end of the World,
in the last times of it; that is, in this new state, in Christ's Kingdom, thou
shall see them again.
In tuo novissimo spes est, There is hope in thy end; that is, in the
Resurrection and Kingdom of Christ she shall see them that are Gods Elect, and
had the Holy Ghost, not capable of dying or being slain any more, but in full
perfection and incorruption, 1 Cor. 15. This being believed, it palliates and
contemns Death, rather than makes afraid of Death.

FINIS.
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
Pro Rege and Regno Preces.
O Deus, judicia tua Regi da, and justitiam tuam filio Regis. Fac eum populum
tuum adjudicandum just, and pauperes tuos jure. Fac tu justum temporibus ejus
ad storendum, pacis etiam amplitudo donec non sit Luna. Et dominabitur a mari
uno ad alterum, and a flumine qu^quo ad fines terrie, fac Jehova. Ad
incurvandum ei omnes Reges and Potestates, ac omnes gentes servient ei. Deus
gratiam faciat nobis, and benedicat nobis and regno, and Sponsae Christi;
illustres faciem tuam erga nos maxim.

A Prayer for the King and Kingdom.
O God, give thy Judgments to the King, and thy righteousness to the Kings Son.
Cause him to judge thy people justly, and thy poor righteously. Let
righteousness flourish in his days, and abundance of peace, while the Church
endures upon earth. Let him rule from Sea to Sea, and from the Rivers unto the
ends of the Earth. Let all Kings and Princes bow before him, and all Nations
serve him. O God, let thy favor be shown to us; bless us and the Kingdom, with
the Church of Christ, and make thy face to shine upon us for ever. Amen.

Postscript.
TO all Christian Magistrates and Ministers, the Author of this Book most
humbly addresses himself; who acknowledges that he is Misiorum postremus, the
least of the least. What was said of the King of Cappadocia in Horace, may be
said of Jesus the King of the poor suffering Saints, Mancipiis locuples egit
aeris Cappadocum Rex, He has many poor suffering Servants, but little Money.
First, I humbly crave your pardons for any thing that may seem in me
presumptuous, or wherein I have missed the truth. Also I do protest for my
self, and I humbly conceive I may for many thousands more, that it is not in
any contempt of the Kings Laws and Authority, that we worship God without the
Forms and Modes by men imposed; but truly for conscience sake, as fearing the
great God, who is still maxima potestas, the highest power. And for my self,
since the Year 1664 I might have had many Preferments in the Church, as 100 l
per ann. if I would have conformed, and have underwent many trying
Dispensations, both from false Friends, false Brethren, and private and public
Enemies; which might have provoked me to accept of Honor and Preferment, had
not the Word of the Lord and a tender Conscience stood in my way, for which I
bless the Lord. I acknowledge Christ's merits and righteousness imputed to us,
of mere mercy and divine love, and received by the says of the operation of
God, for my Justification and Life; the Holy Spirit within, and the Word
without, for the rule of my Life and inherent Sanctification. I acknowledge a
Holy Catholic Church, dispersed militantly through the whole world, which
shall be gathered together into one, at the second coming of Christ. I approve,
teach, and practice, all conscientious obedience, to Kings and all Magistrates,
till Christ's second coming, before whom the Kings shall vail their Crowns. I
approve of a regular and Gospel Ministry in the Church, (being my self ordained
by Imposition of Hands in the Church of England) having the spirit of grace,
and ordinary acquired gifts, and the Authority of the Spirit by Imposition of
Hands by the Presbytery, 1 Timothy 4.14. I am not against Superintendents, and
such Prelacy as Timothy and Titus had in the Church of Christ. I am for Peace,
for Liberty of Conscience according to the Word, for Truth, and His Majesty's
long life and felicity. Amen.

FINIS.

