THE LORD HVMES HIS SPEECH, Delivered in the Presence of the Kings most
excellent Majesty, to the Honorable Court of PARLIAMENT of both Houses then
assembled in Scotland, the 16. of this present month of August, 1641.

Wherein is expressed his Loyalty to his Majesty, his love to both Nations, and
his hearty desire unto that Honorable Assembly, to prevent the inconveniences
that might arise between Scotland and England, though himself had bin formerly
one of the chief Covenanters against us.



Printed in the Year. MDCXLI,

THE LORD HVMES HIS SPEECH To both Houses of Parliament in SCOTLAND.
GENTLEMEN, and you the Knights, and Burgesses of each COUNTY of this KINGDOM:
we are here Assembled to do GODS business, and the Kings: in which our own
is included, and we are Christians, as we are Subjects. Let us first fear
God, then shall we honor the King the more: I am afraid we have been the
less prosperous in our affairs; because we have preferred other things before
him.

The Kingdom is likewise reduced to great Strait, for being locked up from the
free course of Trade, between England and us, wherein it were undutifulnesse
beyond Inhumanity, in the taking of advantage against them.

I have often thought, and said, that it must be some extremity that would
rectify this Kingdom: and when that extremity did come, it would be a great
hazard, whether it would prove a remedy or aruine; we are sure that the
greatest part of our Country is undone for the want of free Trade, and the
privileges which formerly we had therein, by Trading between England and us,
and for a better Commerce and Enter-course between this Kingdom and England,
and that it may be lawful to Trade and transport Goods and Commodities from
this Kingdom into England, as formerly we have done, and they to use without
any let or hinderance by each Kingdom, which is our desires.

I confess he is no good Subject, that will willingly take up Arms against
his King, and will nor willingly and freely lay down his life, when the end
may better the service of his Majesty, and the good of the Commonwealth.

But let us further reflect upon the ill effects, what those courses have
wrought, what by a dissension from us on the one side, and a sepatation on the
other, some imagining what was intended, and made haste to turn before hand
the better to be accepted of, and a great Multitude of them, seeing how far
they were gone, and fearing how much further they should go, have bin forced
to fly the Land.

When Foundations are shaken, it is high time to look to the Building: he
has no heart, no head, no soul, that is not moved in his whole man to look
upon the distresses, and the miseries of the Commonwealth, that is not forward
in all that he has to redress them in a right way. But rather let us make it
an advantage for them to do them best service, when they have most need, not
to speak our own good, but in them, and with them, else we shall commit the
same Crimes our selves, which we must condemn in others.

Now we see what the Sores are in general, and when more particulars shall
happen to appear, let us be very careful to draw out the koares of them, and
not skimme them over with a slight suppurating fester cure, lest they should
presently break out again into greater mischiefs, consider of that Counsels,
and speak your minds.

The which I humbly beseech this House, that it may be done with as much
moderation, as the public safety of the Kingdom can possible admit.



FINIS

