(...), OR THE CHARACTER OF An Heavenly Conversation, Being the substance of a
SERMON lately preached in YORKSHIRE,

By JOHN HUME M. A. and now Rector of Yelling in Huntington-shire.

Professis Christianae religionis militiam, non est medium inter Angelos and
Daemones, aut enim erunt Angelis similes, vel Daemonibus haud impares.

Hieron. CAMBRIDGE, Printed by John Hayes, Printer to the University, 1670.

To the Right Worshipful, the Lady CATHERINE CHOLMELEY, the Virtuous Relict of
Sr HENRY CHOLMELEY of Newton-Grange in Yorkshire, late deceased.
MADAM,
IT has pleased the Divine Providence to order the lines of my habitation at a
large distance from you, so that I cannot personally pay those respects and
services to your Ladyship, which your many and multiplied favors enjoin me to;
hence I take the boldness to present you with these few sheets, which may be as
a standing Monument and testimonial of my gratitude; and I make no question of
a Candid reception of these papers from your Ladyship; seeing your doors lately
were so freely open to the Author, in the day of his distress, when he was
unfit for public service, and lay under the proud triumphs of a Chronical
distemper. I find how Saint Jerome Dedicated several of his Commentaries, and
other exquisite Pieces which he penned, to Eustochium, Marcella, Paulina, and
diverse other Roman Virgins and Matrons, which may well Apologize for me in this
particular, seeing your Ladyship does Sympathize with those renowned Saints,
whose understanding in the sacred Oracles was so remarkable, and stupendous.
Indeed it had been more modish (as it is accounted now adays) to have tendered
to your Ladyship, some quaint Romance, some speculative rarity, or the solution
of some strange Phenomenon; many thinking that Abanah and Pharpar rivers of
Damascus, are more excellent then the waters of Jordan, or the pool of Siloam:
but you know my Profession leads me to the Gospel of Salvation; and I know your
Ladyships temper to be such, that though you have a large acquaintance with the
controversies of nature, yet nothing is so relishing to your Spiritualized
appetite, as the certain Topics and conclusions of sacred Scripture; from
whence I take the confidence to represent to your view, (as an encouraging
pattern) the holy deportment of angelical Beings, examples beyond the reach of
Momus, or the envy of a querulous reprehender; and I must beg your Ladyships
pardon, if I tell the world, that I believe few of your Sex go beyond you, in
these supernal excellencies I am treating of, viz. unity, purity, obedience,
thankfulness, and the constant service of the great Creator, the fruit and
sweetness of which you will undoubtedly reap, when these heavenly messengers
shall gather the Elect, from the several quarters of the spacious world; then
shall your Ladyships fervent piety, diffusive charity, your assiduous
meditations, and daily supplications, together with your worthy respect to the
Lords Ambassadors, receive their promised retribution. I have no more, but to
importune the Divine Majesty, that he would bless your Ladyship with all manner
of blessings in our common Savior, that he would be the staff and support of
your declining age, that his candle may shine upon your bead, and your
tabernacle may be in peace, that your seed may be great, and your offspring as
the grass of the earth, that you may come to the grave in a full age, as a
shock of corn comes in his season, and after all, may be made eternally happy
with the full enjoyment of that beatifical vision, which the Saints long and
wait for: And this shall ever be the fervent option, of

Madam, Your Ladyships most obliged, and most humble Servant JOHN HUME.

Text: Philip. 3. ver. 20. For our Conversation is in Heaven.
HOly Saint Paul being deputed by God to be the Apostle of the Gentiles, made
it his business to reveal the glorious Mysteries of the Gospel to those forlorn
heathens, who sat in darkness and under the region of the shadow of death; and
Heaven blessing his attempts and spiritual enterprises, he was a main
instrument in the constitution of several flourishing Churches, whereof this of
Philippi was one; which was a famous city and the Metropolis of Macedonia: and
to the believers here he writes by Epaphroditus from Rome, where he was in
bonds for the sake of the Gospel. Like as an indulgent Father fearing that his
child being distant from him should run into some miscarriage or irregularity,
writes a pathetical and moving Epistle to him that he may observe a right
decorum; so our Apostle, being absent from his Philippians, writes his
counselling lines to them, that their Conversation may be suitable to their
profession; and that they may keep within the due bounds and just dimensions of
holiness and piety. And whereas some had made a sad excursion, lest the way to
Sion and turned their faces toward Sodom, neglecting God and serving their
lusts, therefore he advises them not to imitate such men of Belial and children
of perdition, but that they would follow the holy steps and pious example of
him their spiritual guide, and other eminent servants of Jesus Christ, who were
(...) burning and shining lights in their generation; and the reason why they
should walk after his pattern and write after his copy (he tells them) is this,
Our Conversation is in Heaven. Which words have various interpretations amongst
the learned: Grot. in locum.
Grotius opposes them to the (...) minding earthly things; and makes this the
sense, nos animo in Coelo sumus and Coelestia cogitamus, our hearts are in
heaven, and heavenly things are the objects of our meditations. Erasm. in locum.
Erasmus makes them run thus, nos ad Coelestem civitatem non terrenam
pertinemus, Heaven is the country to which we do belong, and which we are
hastening to. Beza in locum.
Beza makes the words sound thus, ut municipes Coeli nos gerimus, we are free
citizens and denizens of Heaven, having a right and a title to all its
privileges; for say he and others, the word (...) signifies magistratum
gerere, vel munus aut of ficium aliquod concreditum administrare, the
management of some great office which has worth and dignity annexed to it. But
for all this it is well enough translated, our Conversation: for Saint Paul
speaking of his private Conversation says, (...), I have lived in all good
conscience before God to this day. And Grotius co^menting upon the words, Acts
23.1. Grot. ibid.
acknowledges that (...) Graecis scriptoribus est vitae genus sequi, this word
may have relation to any private course or state of living: and Beza speaks the
same upon the same words. Cornelius a Lapide and Gorran amongst other
interpretations express the sense of the words thus, Cornel. a Lapide and
Gorran in locum.
in terris agimus vitam puram and sanctam, qualem Angeli ag^nt in Coelis: our
Conversation is suited and squared according to the carriage and demeanor of
the Angels in Heaven; and Piscator tells us, that the word (...), which we
translate to have a Conversation, generali sens^ accipitur de moribus and
actionibus externis, in its general notion has relation to manners and
external actions, and so the signification of the Text in a good sense may be
this, We lead a heavenly life, we have an eye to the glorious and unspotted
Angels, and with them do spend our time in the serving, obeying and praising of
the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ; we do as the Angels do, therefore
make us your patterns and examples. Now because these words are usually spoken
of, and treated upon according to some of the other interpretations, I shall
not make any other enlargement upon the former glosses, but shall handle them
in this last acceptance, and so from hence insist upon this proposition or
Doctrine,

That it is the duty of Christians upon earth, to be suitable and conformable
in their carriages and conversations to the Angels in Heaven. And here I shall
examine the Angelical Conversation, and show how ours ought to be similar and
proportionable thereunto.

1. And first the Angels in Heaven lead a Conversation full of purity, there is
no filthiness or uncleanness amongst these Spiritual essences; holiness is
there drawn to the life, and purity is in its flower; there is no filthy
Sodomite, no profane Esau, or defiled Reuben; no pitch of iniquity stains
their white robes, all pure Ermins, none wallowing in the mire of any sinful
abomination. It Is true indeed, Job 4.18.
the Heavens are not pure in Gods sight, and his Angels he charge with folly;
not as if there were any real pollution in the Angelical nature, but it is
spoken in a comparative way, as if Eliphaz should say, All the holiness of
Angels is impurity, and all their wisdom darkness and folly, if it be laid in
the balance with the wisdom and holiness of the ever-glorious God; according
to that in the 1 Corinthians. 1 Chap. 25. ver. the foolishness of God is wiser then
men, and the weakness of God is stronger then men; but as to the Angels this we
know, that as they are mighty in respect of their power, 2 These. 1.7. so they
may be termed holy in respect of their unspotted purity.

So Christians should evidence an Heavenly Conversation by their purity, they
name the name of Christ and should depart from iniquity: for indeed
Christianity is nothing else but an imitation of the divine nature, and a
reducing of a man's self to the image of God, which consists in righteousness
and holiness. That Christians should be pure was shadowed out in the first
Centuries of the Church, when as those who were baptized, for certain days
together wore their white Stoles, Niceph.
betokening the holiness of the state into which they were translated; which
made the Deacon bring out the white garment to one Elpidophorus that had
revolted from the faith, telling him that he would keep it as a monument and
memorial of his Apostasy. Sic Plinius secun. ad Traja^.
So the Primitive Christians made a strict Covenant that they would not run
into the noted crimes of theft, robbery, or adultery; or into the more private
evils of breaking trust, Eusebius. lib. 3. cap. 30.
or denying to restore the committed pledge: thus it becomes us. And

1. Let purity go along with our meditations. God has implanted in man a
pondering, The moralist calls it (...), which he defines to be (...), Aristot.
consulting faculty; whereby he can exercise a reflex act, and hold a
conference with his own soul: sometimes we retire and sequester our selves (as
is our duty) from the clamours of our worldly transactions, then should our
thoughts be holy, then should we meditate of Gods works of wonder, of his acts
of creation and providence, of his power in forming, and care in preserving
sublunary things; thus David considered the Heavens, Psalm. 8.3.
the Moon, and the Stars which God had ordained. We should think of our
primitive purity, our wilful apostasy, our gracious recovery by Jesus Christ;
of our present estate and condition, our future decay and dissolution; the
joys of Heaven, and the misery of those that shall suffer a separation from
God. Two Cardinals riding to the Council of Trent, found a poor man mourning
over a Toad; being asked the reason, he told them he was in contemplation of
Gods goodness, who had not made him like that sorry and contemptible creature;
which made one of them cry out with Saint August. Indocti coelum rapiunt, the
illiterate take Heaven by violence. We should have a care that in our
meditations we entertain not a thought derogatory to the Divine Grandeur, or an
imagination which opposes it self against the interest of Christ; that our
thoughts be not as the filthy steamings of the bottomless pit; that we devise
not iniquity upon our beds, Micah 2.1.
and in the morning practice it when it is in the power of our hands: that we
be not as the fool who said in his heart there is no God; let us rather be as
David whose meditation of God was sweet; and as the blessed man whose delight
is in the law of the Lord, and who meditates in it day and night.

2. Let purity also accompany our expressions. The tongue is a member ever in
use, let us accustom it to speak the language of Canaan, and words savoury and
gracious, and tending to the edification of the hearers. Evil communication,
and filthy speaking, let it be far from us; (...) Colos. 3.8.
let us not use our tongues to daub over a specious sin, a notorious crime,
lest we prove the Devils Orators; (...). Chrysostom. in 4. Ephe. Hom. 14.
that our words be not as poisonous arrows let fly against holiness and piety,
wounding Christ through the sides of religion: let us beware that our tongues
be not set on fire from Hell, venting nothing but wrath and passion, and so we
be incendiaries and disturbers of those communities and societies in which we
are placed. Above all let us take heed of vain swearing, Atheistical
expressions, profane and frothy jests, the Dialect of the ungodly, and the mode
of our licentious times; remembering that blasphemy is a sin which directly
strikes at the Divine Majesty, Non minus peccant qui Christum blasphemant
regnantem in Coelis, quam qui crucifixe^unt ambulantem in terris. Augustine.
and they are as inexcusable who abuse Christ's Name, now he is reigning in
Heaven, as those Jews who managed his Crucifixion here upon earth. Let us
therefore imitate the kingly Prophet, who kept his mouth with a bit and a
bridle, lest he should offend: and as those pious ones, Mal. 3.17. who spoke
often one to another, and encouraged each other in the service of God in times
of profaneness and Apostasy. Fur vel raptor contumeliam insert Deo in
possessionibus subditorum, homicida in subditis; blasphemus vero ei contumeliam
fert in propria persona: secundum enim sublimitatem personae cui committitur
offensa, augmentatur culpa. Parald. lib. 2. do vitio Linguae.


3. Purity also should go along with our actions; and we should have engraven
upon them, holiness unto the Lord: a bribe should not cleave to our fingers,
nor with Ephraim should we hold the balances of deceit; fraud and cousenage,
oppression and rapine should be abhorred by us: the tears of the needy must not
be our drink, nor their groans our music. We should not build our cities with
blood, nor establish our houses by iniquity, lest the stone cry out of the
wall, and the beam out of the timber answer it, and so we consult shame to our
houses, and sin against our souls. We should not use Ziba's policy to get an
estate; nor Jezabels cunning, to obtain a vineyard; nor the subtilty of the
Roman Emperor, Suetonius de Vespas.
who did advance to the highest offices, the covetous and most rapacious
extortioners, on purpose that after they had notably enricht themselves, to
make them criminals, and so to seize upon their fortunes. Let us not do so,
considering riches ill got prove like mountains of snow which presently melt
away, and seldom make happy the third generation. Therefore let that of the
Apostle sound in our ears continually as a counterbane against all in justice,
1 These. 4.6. Let no man go beyond or defraud his brother in any matter, for the
Lord is the avenger of all such.

2 The Angels in Heaven lead a conversation full of Unity; there are no strifes
or unnecessary jarrings; no divisions amongst them, like those of Reuben; no
struggling, like Jacob and Esau, for priority in the new Jerusalem. There is no
opposing Jannes or Jambres; no Sheba to blow the trump of rebellion; no hot
disputes and unbrotherly cavils; no Harpyes or Vultures amongst these birds of
Paradise, but a rare harmony, a sweet composure, united affections, the
spiritual love-knot firmly tied; all agreeing in the service of the great
Creator: so we should manifest our Conversation to be Heavenly, by our Unity;
and should endeavor to promoteit,

1. In the state or kingdom in which we live; and to this purpose should have a
care of civil and intestine dissentions, of taking the gantlet up one against
another, of setting Manasseh against Ephraim, and Ephraim against Manasseh;
this will tend to our hurt and prejudice, division being the true forerunner of
destruction; which the heathen represented to his sons by a parcel of arrows,
which being in a bundle could not be broken, Scylurus.
but taken singly were presently snapt asunder. unity makes a people strong and
victorious, formidable and powerful, but when they crumble into Sects and
Factions, then like Reuben they lose their excellency, and become weak as
water. The Grecian Monarchy was glorious while the power was concentred in
Alexander; but when divided, Ptolemaeus Lagus ruling Egypt, Antigonus in the
lesser Asia, and Perdiccas in Macedon, Fulcrum est imperiorum servare
religionem and unitatem. Lipsius.
it lost much of its primitive luster, and was overtopped with the Roman
greatness. It is most true of Kingdoms what is reported of the pumice stone,
grandis innatat, comminutus mergitur, being in one entire lump it swims, but
when once broken it sinks in the water; so they; Unanimity makes them stand and
number out their peaceable Centuries, but division takes the Crown from the
head, and lays their honor in the dust; so that those places that looked big
in the records of fame, lie now obscure under the line of confusion, and the
stones of emptiness. Therefore let us strive to preserve national peace, and
then we may expect it shall be with us, as with the holy tribes in the days of
Solomon, Judah and Israel dwelt safely, every man under his Vine and Fig Tree,
from Dan even unto Beer-sheba, 1 King. 4.25.

2. Let us labor after Unity in the Church and Ecclesiastical assemblies;
imitating the Primitive Converts, who were all of one mind; Unus Deus enim, and
Christus unus, Ecclesia ejus una, and fides una, and plebs in solidam corporis
unitatem concordiae glutino copulata. Cyprian. de unit. Eccles.
and like to the people in Zephaniah, Chap. 3. ver. 9. who were to serve the
Lord with one consent. We should be careful to shun the Corinthians Schism, I
am of Paul, I am of Apollos; and the altercations of the Church in the days of
Arius and Athanasius, who differed so much in their Doxologies. Nothing is more
sad and un-edifying then contentions among Professors; when the Preachers
Pulpit, and the peoples pews clash one against another, it takes off the beauty
from our Religion, and shuts the door against those, that (it may be otherwise)
would have entered into the fold of Christ. So sharp and virulent they were in
the Sacramentarian Controversy, Melch. Ada. in vit. Theol. Germ.
that Strigelius wished himself in the grave; and it was one of Luthers prayers
about the same time, a piece of his Litany, ab inutilibus quaestionibus liberet
Dominus suam ecclesiam, that God would deliver his Church from needless and
distracting questions: and the truth is, axes and hammers, troublesome
disputes, and contentious broiles, should not be heard in Gods Sanctuary;
smooth Evangelical Doctrines, and the New Commandment (our Saviors Legacy)
should be embraced by us. There was little of God in the earthquake, 1 Kin.
19.11, 12.
the rending wind, and the flaming fire; the soft still voice was his Emblem.
Passion and animosities are not offsprings of heaven, but branches issuing
from the root of bitterness: therefore let us follow peace, Non invenitur Deus
in turbine impetuoso, in fragore vel igne, sed in voce placida, i. e. in
Spiritu mansuetudinis, Clarius in loc. Citat.
let not the cloak of jealousy, but the garments of love be in fashion amongst
us: and if we will be meddling with Drum and Trumpet, let it be to sound a
retreat, and beat a parley in order to the allay of those hostilities which
have pestred the Church of God; remembering always beati pacifici, blessed are
the peacemakers, for they shall be called the children of God.

3. The Angels lead a conversation full of order and regularity. That there is
a beautiful order amongst these celestial spirits almost all the Fathers have
asserted, Vide Grot. in Romans 8.38. ubi affirmat esse aliquos majores angelos
and in Regno Coelorum, and in regno Satanae.
especially Dionysius and Gregory have been so positive, as to divide them into
three ranks or Ternions. As

1. Seraphim, Thrones, Cherubins. 2. Dominations, Principalities and Powers. 3.
Mights, Archangels and Angels
And the above named Gregory allegorizing upon that place where it is said, the
woman having ten pieces of money lost one, applies it to our purpose; the piece
which was lost, says he, Gregor. in 15. Homil. super Luc. Ordines Angelorum
approbat Aquinas, and affirmat cos manner quoad distinctionem graduum post diem
judicii, Aquin. prim. part. Quast. 108. art. 7. Vide Mede in locum.
was the part of the fallen Angels, the other nine were the nine orders of Angels
who kept their station; and the finding of the money again was by making man in
their stead: and commenting upon the 28 of Ezekiel. and 13. ver. he makes the nine
precious stones there mentioned to be the nine orders of Angels. The Jews also
have an ancient tradition, that there are seven principal Angels which minister
before the throne of God and are called Archangels; these they say are the
seven eyes of the Lord which run to and fro through the whole earth, Zech.
4.10. And those that are against the Hierarchies of Dionysius, Hiero. Zanc. de
operib. Dei, lib. 2. cap. 14.
yet acknowledge an order amongst the Angels quoad officium, though not quoad
naturam, as they determine. But especially the holy Scriptures seem to
countenance this assertion, by telling us of the Archangel, of Thrones,
Dominions and Principalities, which make it at least a probable doctrine. So
we; our Conversation should be heavenly as to its order, which as I said of our
Unity, ought to be conspicuous both in our Civil and Ecclesiastical polity.

1. As to the Civil Government, order should be there: Grues unam sequuntur
ordine literato. Hiero. epist. ad Rust.
every one ought to know and keep his station: Order was observed by God in
making the greater and lesser lights, and by giving to man, as a more noble
creature, the pre-eminence: Order is observed by the irrational creatures, the
fowls of the air, and beasts of the field follow their respective leaders; Rex
unus apibus, dux unus gregibus, and in armentis rector unus. Minut. in octav.
The stars in their courses fought against Sisera. It is not fit that every
Swain should get into the Oak of Reformation, nor that the vulgar multitude
should equalize themselves with those whom God has dignified with nobility.
God has made high and low, rich and poor; not only the heards-men, but the
Nobles of Tekoah. Aulus gell. noct. Attic. Plutarch. in vit. Anton.
The very heathens cried out of irregularity, when Vendidius Bassus (one of a
mean parentage) was chosen Consul; and looked upon it as the greatest rarity
their times had produced. Add to this, (...). Arist. in Metaph.
how the book of God has declared to us the fatal Exit of Corah, Dathan and
Abiram, who were famous (or rather infamous) for their conspiracy against Moses
and Aaron. A levelling principle has no warrant from the divine oracles,
therefore let us all order our selves lowly and reverently to our superiors;
let not the child behave himself proudly against the ancient, and the base
against the honorable, Isa. 5.3. remembering, that it is but fit and
reasonable, that the lesser Sporades should always vail to the stars of the
first magnitude.

2. Neque euim aliunde natae sunt haereses, and aborta sunt schismata, quam
inde quod sacerdoti Del non obtemperatur, etc. Cyprian. Epist. 55.
Order in like manner should be observed as to the Ecclesiastical regiment.
It Is not fit every ignaro should turn Preacher, that the Gibeonite who is a
hewer of wood, should take upon him (...) to divide the Word of Truth, or that
the tradesman should throw off the leathern apron and invest himself with the
linen Ephod; or that those should climb into the mount with Moses, who ought to
stand below with the people. God is not the God of confusion, but of Order in
the Churches, 1 Cor. 14.33. Separate me, says he, Barnabas and Saul, for the
work I have for them to do: and how critical would Saint Paul have Timothy in
Imposition of hands; Videns diabole^s templa daemonum deseri, and in nomen
liberantis mediatoris currere humanum genus, haereticos movit, qui sub vocabulo
Christiano doctrinae resisterent Christianae. August. Civit. Dei, lib. 18. cap.
51.
showing that Ordination should not be given for fear and favor, but to the
most holy and deserving; as Alexander lest the Empire (...) to him that was the
best and meetest for rule and government. And indeed want of Order has been
the rise of those most pregnant Heresies which have been the trouble of our
Church and the bane of our Religion; this has been the worm that has consumed
our flourishing gourd, and has made our Church resemble Antigonus, who was
painted imagine lusca, with one eye or half a face, wanting its becoming
features: therefore let us imitate the Colossians, who had not only (...) but
(...), Metaph. a militibus qui stationem non servant, Beza in locum.
Faith toward God, but Order amongst themselves, Colos. 2.5. not as some of
the Thessalonians, who walked (...) not keeping their stations; let us not
follow those erratical stars and unsettled meteors that cannot abide
confinement to their proper orbs: or as the untamed Colt that cannot endure
fences and enclosures. Let us not with forgetful Shimei, Ecce habes Ecclesiam
per totum mundum, noli sequifalsos justificatores, and veros praecipitatores,
in illo monte esto qui implevit orbem terrarum, August. in Epist. S. Johan.
pass over the brook Kidron, but let that of the Apostle take place with us,
Brethren let every man wherein he is called therein abide with God, 1 Corinthians.
7.24.

4. The Angels in heaven lead a Conversation full of obedience and service.
Augustine and Gregory both tell us, that Angelorum vocabulum nomen est officii
non naturae, that the word Angel is more suitable to their employments and
offices, then to their natures and essences; for in propriety of speech it
signifies a messenger sent from this or the other superior concerning such
affairs as are most emergent: hence these blessed ones in Heb. 1.14. are styled
(...) ministering spirits; and indeed very ready and active they are in the
observance of the divine mandates, and in the execution of their Makers
pleasure. There is no torpor or laziness seizes on them, they are not as
Solomon's sluggard, or the secure Sidonians; but as the wheels of Amminadab so
are they, or as the nimble lightning which with incredible swiftness darts it
self through the airy region: One goes and feeds Eliah, another directs
Cornelius, another destroys Sennacheribs army, another releases Peter; and at
the last day they shall gather the Elect from the four winds of Heaven, to the
new Jerusalem.

So we; let us show our Conversation to be Heavenly by our obedience, and let
us serve our God

1. Timely and early, in the morning and spring of our days: let us not
sacrifice to our lusts and Satan the flower of our youth, and give the Almighty
the lame and blind offering of our decrepit age. Let us be like Obadiah, who
feared the Lord from his youth; remembering that under the law God would have
the first fruits of the ears of corn, as well as of their riper grain; and that
a young Timothy, a Solomon, and a Samuel, have ever been the greatest
favorites of the King of Heaven.

2. Let us obey our God willingly and freely; Miles in castris animo, ocu is,
auribus paratus ad omne imperium and intentu ^idem nobis sit, in hac militia
sequantur alacres and pleno gradu quocunque vecantem imperatorem, Lips. de
Constable. lib. 1. cap. 14.
not as the slave that is afraid of the lash of his Master, and so tugs at the
Oar: let not a slavish fear, but a holy love be the incentive to our duty; let
us serve our great Sovereign as well out of choice as necessity; let our
tempers and dispositions in this particular comply not with the sturdy Oak, but
the bending Willow, that when God says seek my face, our ingenuous souls may
echo out the Psalmists respond, Lord thy face we will seek.

3. let us serve our God indifferently; not to pick and choose of his precepts,
minding only those that are most feasible and least repugnant to our sensual
appetites. Let us meekly perform even a difficult commandment, and with Jacob,
endure the heat of the day and the cold of the night. let us be willing, with
Abraham, to sacrifice the Son of the promise, if God call for him, and to go to
Calvary and Moriah as well as Olivet, if it be the injunction of Our Heavenly
Father.

4. Let us serve God constantly: let him have the morning and the evening
sacrifice, the daily tribute of a pure devotion; and if a day have passed
wherein we have not yielded unto God our bounden duty, let us mark it in our
Calendar, as the Roman Emperor, Non dormientibus provenit regnum Coelorum, nec
otio torpentibus beatitudo aternitatis ingeritur, Prosp.
with diem perdidi, this was a piece of lost time. Let our loins be always
girded and our lamps continually burning, that the Son of man may not find us
idle. As the Heavens do not cease their motions, nor the sun to pace it through
the Zodiac, and the fountains of water to send forth their refreshing streams,
so let not Christians give over their spiritual exercises; let them not erect
their Hercules pillars, but let their motto be plus ultra, we press forward
toward the mark for the prize of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus, Phil.
3.14.

5. The Angels in Heaven lead a conversation full of abstractedness from the
world and all its enjoyments. Angels are not taken with our sensual pleasures
and earthly delights; the plenty of the fields, the income of the flocks, and
the fruit of the vine, to them are insignificant; the most Epicurean dainties
are by them despised. If Heliogabalus were to make his feast, and Cleopatra to
brew her cups with the most orient pearl, they would be as an insipid thing to
the Angelical palate. Let us kill a kid for thee, says Manoah to the Angel, but
he replied, though thou detain me, yet I will not eat of thy bread, Judge.
13.15, 16. So we; let us show our Conversation to be heavenly, by our
undervaluing of earthly things; let not the world be our beloved Delilah,
neither let us idolize a creature enjoyment. Let not our hearts long after the
fleshpots of Egypt, nor say to the wedge of gold, thou art my confidence. Let
us consider, these things are unsuitable to our immortal souls, which are buds
of Heaven, and blossoms of eternity, bubbled from the fountain of spirits, and
which cannot be truly satisfied till they center and repose themselves in God
the only complement of real happiness and felicity. Besides, earthly comforts
are inconstant and uncertain, and so not fit objects for our love; there is a
deal of imposture in sublunary contentments, and they have their flux and
reflux, like the floating Euripus. You shall see one to day upon mount Pisgah,
and by and by he takes up his lodging in Hadadrimmon the vale of tears: (...),
says the Apostle, the fashion of the world passes away, 1 Corinthians. 7.31.
Locutio desumpta est a thentro, Grot. in locum. Noli huic tranquillitati
confidere, momento temporis mare evertitur, and eodem die in quo luserunt
navigia, absorhentur, Sen. Epist. 4.
The best Emblems we can set out the world by, is a dying Taper, a fading
Meteor, or an Abortive which in one day fills the Calendar both with its birth
and dissolution. Such a fickleness in these terrene acquirements, that
Alexander made a sword to be portrayed upon a table within a wheel, intimating
that what he had got be conquest was subject to be changed and altered by the
wheel of fortune.

And Sesostris having his Chariot drawn with four captive Kings, observed one
of them ever and anon to look behind him; being asked the reason, said,
Foelices enim vel nos vel filios nostros, non divitiae terrenae faciunt, aut
nobis viventibus amittendae, Deus est qui foeaut nobis mortuis a quibus
nescimus (vel forte a quibus nolumus) possidendae, lices facit, qui est mentium
vera opulentia, August. de Civit. Dei lib. 5. cap. 18.
cogito de mutabilitate fortunae, I am meditating of the alterations of
fortune, for that part of the wheel which is the highest, is presently again
the lowest, which to me is an emblem of the inconstancy of earthly joys.

Let us also take a survey of their uselesness as to the help of our afflicted
bodies; a velvet slipper cannot cure the gout, nor the gold of Ophir ransom us
from a distemper. All our affluence cannot repair a breach in our clay
cottages, but we lie and die upon our languishing couches notwithstanding
worldly assistances. Neither can they in the least advantage our souls: all the
oil in the world cannot smooth the face of a galled conscience, Nec fortuna nec
solitudines protegebant, quin tormenta pectoris fateretur, Tacitus.
nor all the wine exhilarate the spirit of a guilty criminal. It Is said of
Tiberius, that all the divertisements of the Empire were not able to secure him
from inward scourges, and as for the redemption of our souls, we know that
cannot be with corruptible things, as silver and gold, but only with the blood
of Jesus Christ, 1 Pet. 1.18.

Therefore let us live by faith and not by sight; Sic tenete quae sunt hujus
mundi, ut non teneamini in mundo, terrena res possideatur, non possideat, sit
res temporalis in usu, aeterna in desiderio, Gregor. Homil. 14. in Luc.
mind those things that are eternal, and not dote on those that are transitory
and temporal. Let us not content our selves with the prodigals husks, when as
we may eat of the tree of life in the midst of the paradise of God. Let us not
adore the broken Cisterns and despise the water of the heavenly Bethlehem. Let
us with Moses have an eye to the recompense of reward, to the Crown of
Righteousness, and to the exceeding eternal weight of glory; and though we must
use these worldly things, yet let them be only as a necessary viaticum in our
journey toward our desired home.

Lastly, the Angels in heaven lead a Conversation eminent for praise and
thankfulness. This is the Saints everlasting work, they make up a heavenly
quire, and are ever ecchoing out their melodious notes. There the sons of the
morning shout with joy: David tunes his harp, and Moses and Deborah sing their
songs of deliverance. Were we but a while rapt with Saint Paul into the third
Heaven, what praises should we hear them give to the Father of Spirits, who
has settled them in eternal bliss, ransomed them from the flames of the
infernal Tophet, and has made them Kings and Priests unto himself. The
Scriptures record some of their Anthems, how they say Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord
God Almighty, Thou art worthy to receive honor and glory and power, for thou
have created all things, and for thy pleasure they are and were created, Revel.
4.11.

So we; let our Conversation be Heavenly in respect of our continued praises;
Vid. praeconia Constant. mag. in ejus vita, reforent. Eusebius. cap. 56, 57, 58.
lib. 2.
they are a special sacrifice we owe to God, he ought to have the Calves of our
lips, and most rightly does inherit the praises of Israel: hence the Jews had
this godly usage, that in their writings when they named God, they did insert
this abbreviature, the holy, or the blessed one; and when they celebrated the
passover, at the end thereof they had the great Halelujah, consisting of
several Eucharistical Psalms. Let us in like manner speak good of his name with
Jacob, Quisquis es mortalium, hoc mihi extremum calamitatis genus accidit, ut
pro tanto beneficio dignas tibi grates refer nequeam; at referat Alexander,
Alexandro vero dii, pro ejus summaa in meos humanitate and clementia, Justin.
lib. 2.
Genesis 32.10. and with Abraham, ever and anon erect an altar to the Lord the
everlasting God. Plato thanked God he was a man, not a bruit; a Grecian, not a
Barbarian. How highly did Darius resent the kindness of Polystratus, who
brought him a little water before his departure. Let not the heathens outvie
us who have a nobler and diviner light to guide us, and more rich and glorious
privileges; Let us praise our God for the formation of our bodies, which are
fearfully and wonderfully made, which are animated with rational and immortal
souls, when as we might have been as the horse and the mule in whom there is no
understanding: as also for the redemption of us, that he has kept us from
sinking in that sad abyss of sin and misery whereinto we were plunged; that
when by our prevarication we had made our selves children of wrath, that he
gave his Son to make an atonement for us, and to reconcile us to himself
through the Blood of the everlasting Covenant. Let us bless him for our
preservation, that we are secured from sad mischances and direful casualties;
that we escape the snare of the fowler and the net of the hunter; that he
protects us from the rage of bruits, the fury of Elements, the rod of the
oppressor, and the hand of the enemy: Bless we him likewise for the
conservatives of life; that we have bread to eat and raiment to put on, that
the gates are not black with famine, nor the wells dry without water; but that
we have the dew of heaven, the fat of the Earth, the kidneys of wheat, and the
pure blood of the grape; that the clouds drop fatness, affording us the former
and later rain in their seasons; that he makes peace within our borders, that
our swords are turned into plowshares, and our instruments of war into pruning
hooks, so that we sit peaceably under our vines and fig trees, having none to
make us afraid. Let not the stains of a base ingratitude cleave to us, that we
lightly esteem the Rock of our salvation. Let us not be as the Athenians, who
banished most of their noble Philosophers after they had done such worthy
achievements for them; or as the Romans who exiled Scipio Africanus, after he
had made their City the mistress of the World; this is not handsome carriage
toward so good a Benefactour: But let us say, Dens nobis haec otia fecit, the
Lord has done great things for us whereof we are glad; and therefore bless the
Lord O our souls, and all that is within us magnify His holy Name: Bless the
Lord O house of Israel, bless the Lord O house of Aaron; blessed be the Lord
out of Sion who dwells in Jerusalem, Psalm. 135.19. These gratulations will be
acceptable to the Almighty, and speedily enter the ears of the Lord of
Sabbath, these are (...), Chrysostom.
a foretast of Heaven, and a sweet preludium to our everlasting duty.

the Israelites in their passage to the earthly Canaan, had an eye to the Cloud
and Pillar of fire; thus we in our journey to the heavenly, ought well to heed
those glorious Seraphims, those burning lights, for so their name imports, the
Septuagint rendering them (...), comburentes vel incendentes, because they were
inflamed with the fire of the Divine love.

Seneca used to say, wheresoever I go I carry Demetrius along with me; and
writing to his friend Lucilius, Elige Catonem vel remissioris animi virum
Laelium, illum semper tibi ostende, vel custodem, vel exemplum, Senec. Epist.
11.
he bids him set before him Cato or Lelius, or some person that walked most
exactly according to the Canon of Morality. So let us set before us these
Angelical Beings, tread in their steps, that our Conversations may be regular,
and we may take the right road to Eternal Glory. Neither let us object and say,
alas how can we imitate them, they are spotless and perfect Creatures, not
composed of contrary qualities; but we are kept down with the poize of the
body, the ties of sense, and the solicitations of a carnal appetite. Well if we
cannot be as absolutely holy as they, must we use no endeavors to be holy at
all? must the Scholar throw away his Book, because he cannot arrive at the
knowledge of his teacher? or the Apprentice his tools, because he cannot
equalize the Master Workman? Si ad portum pervehi vis, mavum remis admoveas
oportet, and vela expandas, non ut otiosus captes and expectes ab alm ventum,
Lips. de Constant. lib. 1. cap. 22.
Let us strive and bestir our selves and beg of God the assistance of his
enlivening Spirit, that we may walk and not be weary, and run and not faint.
Let us do in this case as Phaltiel the son of Laish, who went weeping behind
his wise to Bahurim; so seeing in the paths of righteousness we cannot hold an
Angels pace, let us follow behind lamenting the defects of our duty, and the
blemishes of our Conversation; and what is wanting in our obedience as to its
perfection, let it be supplied in the sincerity.

Janus and sacrifice unto fury. They are for the torrid Zone of quarrels and
disputations, as if the temperate climate of moderation were inhabitable; and
with Nero strive to make a conflagration, hoping to warm their hands at these
destructive flames. Come to Order, many regard not this; they would turn
Monarchy into Democracy, and make the nobles of Israel servile Chams, they
would have the spade and scepter of equal value, and upon all magisterial
Supremacy would pronounce the Edomites language, down with it, down with it,
even to the ground? How disorderly are many as to the Church, they would have
Aaron to lay aside his breast plate, Qui contemptis Episcopis, and Dei
sacerdotibus, constituere audent aliud altar, Cypr. de unit. Eccles.
and think that any as well as the lawful Priest may offer the Divine incense,
setting a temple upon mount Gerizin in opposition to that of Jerusalem, placing
men over Congregations without the Divine disposition, make Ministers without
Ordination, the plague and bane of Religion sitting not in the Pastoral but in
the Pestilential Chair, Cypr. Ibid.
as Cyprian complains. Come to Obedience, how many neglect the Duties of the
first and second Table, they are for an easy Religion, and can be content to
be persuaded that the Antinomian Doctrines are the greatest verities. Come to
Abstractedness from the world, how many are strangers to it? Eccemundus in
seipso aruit, and tamen in cordibus nostris floret, fugientem sequimur, and
labenti inhaeremus, Gregor. Homil. super Evang. Johan.
the world and their souls cleave one to another, as Jonathans did to David:
the mammon of unrighteousness is their adored Deity: they labor for the bread
that perishes and heap up gold as dust; as if they made an agreement with Hell,
and a Covenant with the grave, and as if their bodies were like the scales of
Leviathan which could not be pierced with the Spear of death.

And lastly come to praise, how many have a taking hand, but no praise-speaking
mouth? they take no notice of the Divine Goodness, but applaud only their own
industry, and rest upon second causes: like the Egyptian Husbandmen that
worshipped Nilus, but never looked up to him that made it overflow its banks.
This is the case of too many who name the Name of Christ: and such untoward
Conversations many of us lead that it is to be feared God will yet send
destroying Angels against us, that seeing we will not regard them as examples,
we shall feel them as executioners.



1. He is a sworn enemy to Christ and the Gospel. No sooner came the holy Jesus
into the world but Satan devised his overthrow, First he set Herod his proxy
awork, who by a desparate stratagem thought to have involved him in the
massacre of the martyred Innocents; that failing, the Devil comes and
personally holds a contest with him in the wilderness, thinking to foil him as
he did our first parents in the Garden of Eden. No sooner was the Gospel
propagated, but he stirred up Jews and Gentiles, Epicureans and Stoics, and
all the kingdoms of the Earth, least it should run and be glorified. When Saint
Paul would have come to Thessalonica, Satan hindered him; and afterward when
Christianity got some footing, how did he stir up the Roman Emperors who
battered it with ten successive persecutions; more especially he got Julian to
use policy as well as power, Julianus vetuit, ne Christianorum liberi poetas,
and alios seriptores Gentiles perdiscerent, neve horum doctores audirent,
Sozom. lib. 5. cap. 17.
who strove to raze the name of Christ from under heaven, commanding that the
children of Christians should not be trained up in Arts and Sciences, that the
vail of darkness and ignorance might cover their faces, and so Christ and
Gospel mysteries might be riddles to them. But let us have a care of such a
carriage as this. Who ever magnified himself against Christ and prospered? who
can brag of his triumphs over the Son of God? the fatal Exit of Antiochus,
Julian, Maxentius and such like, Vide Hieron. ad Heliodor. lib. 2. Epist. 22.
may discourage us from such attempts. What are we to stand it out against
Divinity? A head of glass to a head of brass? There is as great a disproportion
betwixt a victorious Messiah and a frail mortal, Exquisitior crudelitas vestra
magisest illecebra sectae, plures efficimur quoties metimur, metimur, semen est
sanguis Christianorum, Tertul. in Apol. in fine.
as betwixt the thistle and the Cedar in Lebanon; the small Ant and the great
Behemoth, whose bones are as pieces of Brass and bars of Iron. Neither let us
lay blocks in the way of the Gospel, it is the truth and shall prevail; it has
the seal of Heaven upon it, and the malice of Earth and Hell shall never foil
it: therefore let this be our passionate wish that in all things the Lord Jesus
may have the pre-eminence, that all the kingdoms of the earth may be the
kingdoms of the Lord and of his Christ; and that the House of the Lord may be
established upon the tops of the mountains, and all nations may flow thither,
Isa. 2.2.

2. The Devil spends his time in enticing men to sin: he has his (...) and
(...) his depths and devices as the Scripture speaks, Rev. 2.24. Quos non
detinere potest in viae veteris coecitate, circumscribit and decipit novi
itineris errore, Cypr. de unit. Eccles.
he can suit himself to all humors, and dish up meat for every palate; he has
an Apple for Eve, a Grape for Noah, a Bag for Judas, and changes of Raiment for
Gehezi. Rather then men shall keep the even way he will draw them to some
extreme or other, either make them lean to an old superstition, or cheat them
with a new light or revelation, or cause them to be given up to a ranting
licentiousness: but let us not be the Devils journey-men in alluring men to
sin: we have transgressions enough of our own, and had not need to have the
blood of others to answer for; therefore let us not put the bottle to our
neighbor, nor say, Come cast in thy lot amongst us; or lay a stumbling block
as Balaam did; Si ta^ta mercedis est a morte eripere carnem, quamvis morituram,
quanti est meriti a morte animam liberare, Gregor.
but let us rather induce men to holiness by our savoury counsels and pious
examples. Let us see if we can stop the furious Jehues in their march toward
Hell and eternal Damnation. See if we can make the Shunammite return, and have
the Prodigal home to his fathers house, knowing that he who converts a sinner
from the error of his way, shall save a soul from death, and shall hide a
multitude of sins, as it is, Fames 5.20.

3. The Devil is a slanderer, an accuser, Scias hoc tempore esse opus Diaboli,
ut servos Dei mendacio laceret, and gloriosum nomen falsis opinionibus infamet,
us qui conscientiae sua luce clarescunt, alienis rumoribus sordidentur,
Cyprian. Epist. 52.
for so his name imports, hence he is styled Rev. 12.10. the accuser of the
brethren who accuses them before God day and night, he spoke evil of Job to
God, and told him if he touched his flesh he would curse him to the face. Thus
he calumniated Joshua the high Priest and the Church of Israel, till the Lord
rebuked him: and to our shame be it spoken, many come too nigh Satan in this
particular, they strive continually to defame their brethren and to make their
names which should be as a precious ointment, like the snuff of a candle,
altogether offensive and unsavory. All their Arithmetic is to reckon their
neighbors crimes, all their business to observe the Errataes of men's
Conversation, and are Chemists only in this to extract the sweetness out of
their associates reputations. Thus the Primitive Christians were abused with
nicknames and words of reproach, by men of Belial; all their holy actions
mis-interpreted; Sic pontificii accusahant protestants and Sander. Stapleton.
Fevarden. vide R. P. Morton. in Antidot. contra merita, cap. 20. sect. 2.
which made Tertullian, Justin Martyr and others write their defensive
Apologies; and as it was then, so now none can go without a censure. If a man
be of a quiet and sedate temper, he passes for a Lukewarm Laodicean; if he be
active and stirring then he is a fiery Zelot; if he seem to stand up for the
doctrine of Justification by Faith, he is accounted a Solifidian; and if he be
inclined to good works and alms-deeds, Detractores sunt canes Diaboli, gregem
ejus custodientes, etc. Paral. de vitio ling. lib. 2. Tractar. 9.
then he is for Papistical merit. But let us beware of this, and exercise
Christian Charity which thinks no evil, but bears all things, and hops
all things. Let us not make blots where there be none, magnify Peccadillo's,
as if they were gross impieties, and if our brother should offend, let us not
trumpet out his sin and shame: it behooves us rather with Sem and Japheth to
cover his nakedness, and if we can, restore him with the spirit of meekness,
considering as the Apostle says, that we our selves may also be tempted, Gal.
6.1.

4. The Devil is full of pride: So far as we can see, that was his Primitive
sin, and so much seems to be intimated in the 1 Timothy 3.6. Cornel. a Lapide.
Piscat. in locum. Ait Augustinus, Diabolum elatione inflatum, voluisse nominari
Deum, in quaest. vet. and nov. Test.
where it is commanded that a Bishop should not be a novice (that is, one newly
come to the faith) lest being puffed up with pride, he fall into the
condemnation of the Devil: and this he retained after his Apostasy; Surely it
was his haughty humor led him to contest with our blessed Savior, and to
dispute with Michael about the body of Moses, though it may be, other ends too
were proposed in these altercations. And thus he remains a defier of God, an
opposite to Jesus Christ, and a sworn enemy to the sons of Adam. But let us
avoid this sin: And first let us take heed of an Atheistical pride. Some live
as if they were Independents, and were not obliged to the glorious God: with
Pherycides they laugh at a Deity, esteem the exercises of Religion as a piece
of the Kingdom, as if they were delusive Doctrines, and the most Romantic
fooleries. But this pride will be humbled ere long: God sometimes takes them to
task here, and makes them fired Beacons of his indignation, that others may
hear and fear, and do no more so wickedly; and if such be not met with
presently, yet He whom it may be with Julian, they call the Carpenters Son,
will provide a Coffin, (and a worse thing too) for them (as the holy man
predicted.) Sozom. lib. 6. cap. 2.


2. Others have a spiritual conceitedness: they look upon themselves as the
Grandees of Religion; the great Monopolizers of Grace and Piety; the chariots
of Israel and the horsemen thereof: they look on others as punies and
underlings, and vaunt it with the Pharisee, God I thank thee I am not as other
men are: If a man have been brought up at the feet of Gamaliel, or with Moses
be skilled in the learning of the Egyptians; they shake their heads at him as
an Epicurean or a Stoic: As if spiritual graces and natural acquirements could
not reside in one and the same subject. If there be another that strives to be
an active Christian rather then a talking one; they hoot at him as a
ceremonious Legalist, and pass their rash censures upon the soberest Saints, as
if they were acquainted with the counsels of Heaven, and knew who were Apostles
and who Apostates: but know, God has not intailed his grace and favor upon
two or three individuals. There is a fountain set open for Judah and Jerusalem;
and in every nation, he that fears God and works righteousness, is accepted
by him. And surely I should most distrust those persons that boast they are so
cock-sure of salvation, that brag in every company of shinings and sealings, of
sonship and adoption: certain I am, the truest Christians work out their
salvation with fear and trembling, and walk humbly with their God: That
traveller always makes the least noise that has the greatest charge of
treasure. Therefore let us be clothed with humility; let us confess with
Abraham, Vera pietas nescis supercilium, simulata sanctitas gravis est
asperitate morum. Erasm. in 1 Corinthians. 13.4.
we are but as dust and ashes before the Lord; and learn of Christ to be meek
and lowly in Spirit, uttering the Publicans miserere, God be merciful to us
sinners. And let us have an affectionate carriage toward our brethren, let the
law of kindness be in our tongue, accounting our selves rather with the holy
Apostle the greatest of sinners, and the least of Saints; and owning all the
professors of the truth as members of the same mystical body, whereof Jesus
Christ is the head.

There be several other particulars in which we may imitate Satan; Quamobremhoc
tene, differri aliquando impios non dimitti, nec crimen quenquam i^pectore.
(...) are, qui non ^^^m N^l^^^in in tergo, Lips. de Constant. lib. 2. cap. 13.
as in his Apostasy, envy and malice, lusting to do mischief, which I shall not
now insist upon; all which we are to avoid as so many rocks and precipices in
our passage to the land of promise: knowing this, that hose that are fellows
with him in sin, shall be copartners with him in punishment, and shall take up
their lodgings with him in the infernal dungeons, where they shall do severe
penance for their impieties, till eternity confess a period.

were as so many Oracles, and who received his precepts with the highest
reverence and veneration; let us not then slight these noble Heroes, who do
afford us an exact method and lively representations of our incumbent duty. Si
necessariam habemus familiaritatem dignationis Angelicae, cavenda est nobis
eorum offensa, and in his maxim exercendum, quibus novimus eos oblectari.
Bernard.
Let us not sit and pore upon the earth, make circles in the dust, and tie our
selves to the modes and forms of depraved mortals, when we have such a rare
copy and exemplar given us by those Divine intelligences. Let not our untamed
passions hurry us out of the strait road of piety and virtue, lest we vex their
ingenuous natures, and cause them to deplore our sad excursions and eccentrical
motions. But let it be our care and study to perfect holiness in the fear of
the Lord, that they may rejoice over us, and congratulate our proficiency. In a
word to wind up all, let our Purity be conspicuous, and our Unity be obliging;
Let our Order be exact, and our obedience Universal: Let our abstractedness
from the world be through, and real, our praises large and persevering; then
shall we truly be (...), like to the Angels as in duty, so in glory; then shall
we be taken up to them to mount Sion and the new Jerusalem which is above,
where we shall see God face to face, and know even as also we are known, where
our heads shall be environed with glorious Crowns, our hands dignified with
graceful Palms, our bodies clothed with garments of light and immortality, our
tong^^^ also shall always sound out Canticles of Triumph, to the ever blessed
and adored Trinity, R^^^ 13.
even that of the Saints and Angels, Blessing, honor, glory and power be unto
him that sits upon the Throne, and to the Lamb for ever and ever. Amen.

FINIS.

