THE Healing Attempt: Being a Representation OF THE GOVERNMENT OF THE Church of
England, According to the Judgment of her Bishops unto the End of Q. Elizabeth's
Reign.

Humbly Tendered To the Consideration of the Thirty Commissionated for a Consult
about ECCLESIASTICAL AFFAIRS in Order to a Comprehension;

And Published, In hopes of such a Moderation of Episcopacy, that the Power be
kept within the Line of our First Reformers: and the Exercise of it reduced to
the Model of ArchBishop USHER.

Mediocria firma.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Parkhurst, at the Bible and Three Crowns in
Cheapside, near Mercers-Chappel, 1689.

The Epistle to the Commissioners.
Most Reverend, Right Reverend and Reverend,
I Bless you all in the Name of the Lord, and Blessed be your Meeting this Day,
and this Appointment for you to Sit about so Blessed a reconciling Work. I have
but this short Grace to say, Blessed are the Peacemakers.

When such a Choice of Persons is Congregated, and their Business
Accommodation, the Tidings hereof to the poor Outed Shepherds should, methinks,
be so affecting, as if the Angels were again upon the Wing, and singing over
that Hymn, Glory be to God in the highest, in Earth Peace, and good will
toward Men.

Alas! How many Years have passed since the Reformation, wherein your
Nonconformist Brethren have been a Loading, and their Burden increasing, and
none of you that were willing, were able to ease them, when by the Artifice of
the Papists, and the Higher Powers influenced by them, you were forced to bear
the blame of those things which your Souls did abhor: And now is the time come
when God has sent us such a Nursing Father and Nursing Mother to his Church,
as has called you to the liberty of showing of what manner of spirit indeed
you are. Blessed be his Name for it, and the ho^^es we have on that account.
This is the day which the Lord has made, we will be glad, and rejoice in it.

I know indeed how hard of belief the most of our Brethren generally are that
any good should be done for us by a Convocation or this Meeting. It is
impossible (they are readier to say) that those -- But Reverendly beloved, I am
persuaded better things of you, and things that accompany Salvation, though
they thus speak. I am persuaded that even this will stimulate you to a greater
earnestness to do them the more good (for such is Christianity), and that I
shall not need to say any thing (not any more than in the Title) to put you on
this grateful task, The same also which ye are forward to do: I have less need
to be impertinent in offering Arguments to such Wits, which were to bring Water
to the Spring: but this one thing I have need to do, which is, to beg of you
that you will Pardon what is done, if in any thing the Author seems to presume,
or to be more slender than he ought, for want of more time and search, or does
in any regard offend. I will also beg of you more Two things; the One is, To
take heed how you make more conditions necessary to us for Communion with you,
than Christ requires of you for Communion with him: The Other is, That you do
not Tantalize your Brethren, or Procrastinate that Kindness (whatsoever it is)
which you intend toward those who are capable to receive it; For we must needs
die, and are as water spilt upon the ground, which cannot be gathered up again:
Neither does God respect any person, yet does he devise means that his banished
be not expelled from him.

A Friend to the Design and Substance of these Papers, J. H.
October. 3. 1689.
THE AUTHOR TO THE READER.
THE Greatest thing in Controversy amongst Protestants is, Whether the Office
of a Presbyter, and Bishop be, according to the Holy Scriptures, the same? and
on a Just Determination of this Question depends the Peace of our Church.

To affirm, That the Bishop and Presbyter are of different Orders, That the
Power of Ordination is the sole Prerogative of Bishops, That Ordination, only
by Presbyters, is void and null, and that the Ordaining 'em again by Bishops is
not Reordination, destroys the Church State, not only of Dissenters, but of
all other Protestants in the World, except of those in the Church of England,
nulling their Ministry, Sacraments, and Discipline.

A Comprehension therefore on these Terms is none at all; It Is only an offer to
Unite with Dissenters on their doing what is to them Impossible; They cannot
Renounce their Ordination, nor Consent to the Destroying their own, nor the
Church State of Reformed Protestants Abroad.

But, lest the Impossibility they lie under be Interpreted a Peevish Humor,
and Obstinacy in them, the Sentiments of the First-Reformers, in the Days of
Henry the Eighth, Edward the Sixth, and Queen Elizabeth, are Impartially
Proposed and found to be exactly the same with theirs; and, what will, touching
Matters of Church Government, Heal our Divisions.

The Author could Descend lower than the last of Elizabeth; but there is no need
on it, and he must acknowledge, that though a great many Eminent Writers, Learned
Divines of the Church of England, asserted this Old Reformer's Principle; yet
the Canons of James I. ran another way, and in his Reign the Learned were
divided in their Opinions about the Office of Bishop and Presbyter; and so they
are at this very time: However, it cannot be denied, that the First Reformers,
adhered unto by Archbishop Usher, held the same, which the Dissenters have all
along stiffly maintained, and have Antiquity on their side.

The Learned Carleton is Positive, that the Power of Order by all Writers, that
He could see, even of the Church of Rome, is understood to be Immediately from
Christ, given to all Bishops and Priests, alike by their Consecration, and that
in this there was no Difference between Papist and Protestant; whence it
follows, that the Divesting the Parish Presbyter of the Pastoral Office is but
a late Invention.

Thus much He Asserts of that Power of Order which he distinguishes from the
Power of Jurisdiction, and includes in it the Power of Ordination.

And although, according to the most taking Opinion amongst those, who seemed
to be somewhat Zealous for Prelacy, the Power of Jurisdiction was peculiarly
appropriated to the Bishop, yet this Jurisdiction following Orders, could never
be so separated from it, but that there still remain some Convincing Instances
of its belonging unto Presbyters.

In the Case of a Bishop's Suspension, it is clear; I will only observe what is
at this time most obvious.

On the Suspension of the Archbishop of Canterbury, All Ecclesiastical and
Spiritual Jurisdiction belongs to the Dean and Chapter, who are but Presbyters,
as is daily Asserted in these words. Nos Johannes Tillotson Sacrae Theologiae
Professor, Decanus Ecclesiae Cathedralis and Metropoliticae Christi Cant'. Et
Ejusdem Ecclesiae Capitulum, ad quos Omnis, and omnimoda Jurisdictio
Spiritualis, and Ecclessiastica, quae ad Archiepiscopum Cant. pertinuit, nunc
ratione Suspensionis, etc. dignoscitur pertinere.

A Condescending to settle the Power of Orders, and Jurisdiction on Presbyters,
as well as Bishops, according to the Learned Archbishop Usher's Model, will as
to Matters of Church Government End the Controvesie between the Moderate
Episcopal, and Presbyterian.

As to what relates unto Stinted-Forms of Prayer, the Judicious Mr. Clerkson,
in his Excellent Discourse of Liturgies, having so Learnedly and fully
discussed it, the Author need do no more than only Commend its Perusal to the
Candid Reader, with an Assurance, that until it be cleared that Stinted
Liturgies are Ancienter than that Learned Person Represents them to be, we
shall be freed from a strict Imposition.

THE Healing Attempt.
The Introduction.
THose, who are most sensible of the late Deliverance from the Dangers we were
in of being overturned by the Papists, must be of an Opinion, that the many
Divisions, amongst our selves, had too great a hand in bringing on us what was
the true Ground of our Danger; that we can never be perfectly free from the
Fears of a Return, so long as our Breaches remain Uncured; and, that, it is
absolutely necessary, that every one do his Part toward the Settlement of a
lasting Union amongst Protestants, as the strongest Bulwark against Popery.

Thus much I count is very manifest to every Considering Mind; for, at this
time, Protestants, of all Persuasions, seem to be desirous of it.

Although there are different Apprehensions about the Means of attaining it,
as, whether by an Indulgence only; or, whether by Indulgence, and
Comprehension, yet is there no doubt, that I know, about the Union it self; and
seeing an Indulgence is already given, Extending Liberty of Conscience even to
the Quakers, and a Bill of Comprehension is at this time on the Anvil, I will
humbly offer my thoughts concerning it.

That such as are only for an Indulgence will be angry with this Essay, is no
other than I expect. However, the Arguments for a well-Establish'd
Comprehension influencing me more than the Displeasure of any Party of Men on
Earth, I am resolved in God's strength, to do the uttermost in me lies toward
the obtaining it.

It is a Concernment for the Protestant Faith, the Salvation of Souls, the
Glory of God, that puts me on this work; all which have been Endangered through
that want of Powerful Preachers in Parish Churches, which has been the Effect
of our Divisions.

I bless God, there are so many Faithful and Laborious Ministers in Public
Places, and yet, considering how few these are in comparison of the Churches
wants, I cannot but lament the Deplorable Condition of Thousands in this
Nation, who on this occasion are like Eternally to Perish, and pray the Lord of
the Harvest to Open the Door, that more Laborers may enter in, even men of the
most Tender Consciences, who, no doubt. will be the most successful in their
Ministry.

In Queen Elizabeth's, and James the First's days, it so fell out, that a strict
Injunction of Subscription Deprived the Church of the Labors of several
Divines eminent for their Learning, Holiness of Life, and Conversation.

Consult the Complaint, Presented to the Right Honorable the Lords of Her
Majesty's Council, and their Lordships Answer: The Copy of a Letter, written by
a Gentleman in the Country to a Londoner, touching the Answer to the
Archbishop's Articles: The Lamentable Complaint of the Commonalty by way of
Supplication to the High Court of Parliament for a Learned Ministry, and you will
see, that for Nonconformity some of the most Conscientious, and Painful
Preachers were brought to the Bar, Marshalled with the worst Malefactors,
Indicted, Arraigned, Condemned, New Christened with the odious name of Puritan,
Deprived, to the Advancement of Popery, Debauchery, Atheism, and to the great
Declension of the Power of Godliness.

A Disgracing those Ministers, that are sound in the Faith and Industrious in
their Work, has been one of the most successful Engines the Antichristian
Party have used.

The first Ten years of Queen Elizabeth's Reign, the Papists kept to our
Churches, and if Saunders, and some others, had not with an unexpected success
nicknamed some of the most Valiant Opposers of Popery, and Painful Preachers
with the odious names of Puritan and Precisian, to the good liking of some
amongst our selves, they might have still continued their Communion with us.

This is not the Observation of some Nonconformists only, The N. C. in their
Complaint to the Queens Council humbly advertise their Lordships, that the
Adversary very cunningly new Christened them with an odious name of Puritan,
that whilst they were occupied in the Defense of their Innocence the Adversary
might have greater freedom to go about their hateful Treachery. Part of the
Regist. page 129.
but of the Wise and Judicious Sir Robert Cotton, who assures us, that the
Reason of the Papists separating from our Church, and returning to their old
Apostasy, was not the Bull of Pius Quintus on the Bishop of London's Door (as
the Lord Chief Justice Coke apprehended) or the forbearing to hang up Priests,
but in conjunction with the Idleness and Insufficiency of many Teachers
conspiring with the Peoples cold Zeal, Saunders his pinning the name of Puritan
on some of the most Learned and courageous Protestants, gave life to that
Faction.

It was not (says this Noble Baronet) the Bull of Pius Quintus on the Bishop
of London's Doors, Posth. Cotton. p. 147, 148.
or the forbearing to hang up Priests, that have wrought this Apostasy, but the
Idleness and Insufficiency of many Teachers, conspiring with the Peoples cold
Zeal, that has been the Contriver of this Web. Until the Eleventh year of
Queen Elizabeth's Reign, Recusants name was scarcely known, the Reason was,
because the Zeal, begotten in the time of the Marian Persecution, was yet fresh
in Memory, and the late Persecutors were so amazed with the sudden alteration
of Religion, that they could not choose but say, Digitus Dei est hic. In those
days there was an Emulation between the Clergy, and the Laity; and a strife
arose whether of them should show themselves most affectionate to the Gospel:
Ministers haunted the Houses of worthiest Men, where Jesuits now build their
Tabernacles, and poor Country Churches were frequented with the best of the
Shire, the Word of God was precious, Prayer and Preaching went hand in hand
together, until Archbishop Grindal's Disgrace, and Hatfield's hard conceit of
Prophesying, brought the flowing of those good Graces to a still water; the
name of a Papist smelt rank even in their own Nostrils, and for pure shame to
be accounted such they reforted duly both to our Churches, and Exercises; But
when they saw their great Coryphaeus Saunders had slily pinned the name of
Puritan upon the sleeves of the Protestants that encountered them with most
Courage, and perceived that the Word was pleasing to some of our own side, they
took heart at Grass, to set little by the Service of God, and Duty to their
Sovereign -- most Men grew to be frozen in Zeal and benumbed, that whosoever
(as the worthy Lord Keeper Bacon observed in those days) pretended a little
spark of Earnestness, he seemed no less than red fire hot, in comparison of the
other. And as some fare the worse for an ill Neighbor's sake dwelling beside
them; so did it betide the Protestants, who, seeking to curb the the Papists,
or reprove an idle Drone, were incontinently branded with the Ignominious note
of Precisian, all which wind brought plenty of water to the Pope's Mill, and
there will most Men grind where they see Appearance to be well served: So far
Sir Robert Cotton.

And as the disgracing Godly-Ministers by fastening the names of Puritan,
Precisian, etc. on 'em, and the laying 'em aside from the public exercise of
their Ministry, did in the Reign of Elizabeth give life to Popery, so 'twill
still, and all those Protestant Ministers that are now denied entrance into the
Parish Churches will be in disgrace amongst the People and their Ministry not
half so successful amongst those that mostly need it.

The wider therefore the Church Doors are made, the greater will be the number
of Pious and Painful Preachers, the greater the Advantage on Truth's side, and
the greater Discouragement on the other hand.

But that the Door may be made wide enough to answer the desired End, seeing
our Governors are inclined to lay aside the strict use of Ceremonies, with
some more offensive Impositions there is this one thing, to wit, The Ordering,
and Declaring the Government of the Church to be now no other, but what it was
held, and intended to be by the first Reformers, will, as I humbly apprehend,
be the most Effectual Expedient of any else in the World.

Some of our Clergy have Notions about Church Government, very Dissonant from
what the Gentry, and Parliament Men have, and the first Reformers heretofore
had, and it is feared by some thinking Persons, that the Laws, yet in Being,
have Established a Government in the Church, very different from what the
Legislators, I mean, the King, the Temporal Lords and Commons generally
designed.

The Government settled in the Church by the first Reformers, and still
supposed by our Gentry to continue, is consistent enough with the Church state
of all other Protestants; but that, which is really Established by Law is
Inconsistent with, and Destructive of it, driving many Learned Godly Protestant
Divines from that Conformity which is at this time made necessary to the
Exercise of their Ministry in Parish Churches.

To clear thus much is (methinks) one of the most necessary things to be
attempted, and the very next step to be taken toward the settling a
Comprehension, which will be of validity with Judicious Men.

What were the Sentiments of the First-Reformers about Episcopacy, and Church
Government, during Queen Elizabeth's Reign, I will with the greatest
impartiality declare, as near as possibly I can in their own words, and add
some Arguments to show, that the most effectual way to settle such a
Comprehension as will best secure the Protestant Religion, is the Forming and
Framing the Government of the Church, according to the Sentiments of our
First-Reformers; which in the Learned Archbishop Usher's Reduction of
Episcopacy, I take to be very happily copied out unto us.

I will begin with those who lived in Henry the Eighth's days; for then began
the Reformation.

CHAP. I. The Sense of our First Reformers in Henry the Eighth's Days.
IN this King's Reign Tindall, Lambert and Barnes, Men of good Learning, and
blessed Martyrs, sealing the Truths they professed with their Blood, struggled
strenuously for a Reformation of Church Government.

Tindall, looking on Corruptions in Discipline to be a principal occasion of
that greater Deluge of Enormities in the Church, presses for a Reduction of
all things in the Discipline to the Apostolical Institution, and therefore
makes Enquiry after those Officers, the Apostles Ordained in Christ's Church,
and what their Offices were, and gives us an account of his Persuasion of it
thus: Wherefore the Apostles following and obeying the Rule, Tindall's Practice
of Popish Prelates.
Doctrine and Commandment of our Savior Jesus Christ, Ordained in his Kingdom
and Congregation TWO OFFICERS: one called after the Greek word Bishop, in
English an Overseer, which same was called Priest after the Greek, Elder in
English, because of his Age, Discretion, and Sadness; for he was as nigh as
could be always an Elderly Man. And this Overseer has put his hands unto the
Plough of God's Word, and fed Christ's Flock, and tended them only, without
looking to any other Business in the World. Another Officer they chose, and
called him Deacon, after the Greek, a Minister in English, to Minister the Alms
of the People unto the Poor, and Needy. For in the Congregation of Christ, love
makes every Man's Gifts and Goods common to the Necessity of his Neighbor --
There is Presbyteros called an Elder by birth, Tindall on the word Elder.
which same is called immediately a Bishop, or Overseer, to declare what
Persons are meant, -- They were called Elders, because of their Age, Gravity,
etc. and Bishops and Overseers by reason of their Offices. And all that were
called Elders, or Priests (if they so will) were called Bishops also, though they
have divided the names now, which thing thou may evidently see by the first
Chapter of Titus, and the twentieth of the Acts. Those Overseers, which we now
call Bishops after the Greek word, were always biding in One place to Govern the
Congregation there; But Deacons were Overseers of the Poor, and crept not into
Orders till the Church grew rich.

Lambert is of the same Opinion. As touching Priesthood (says he) in the
Primitive Church, Ach. Mon. Vol. 2.
when Virtue bare (as ancient Doctors do deem, and Scripture in mine opinion
records the same) the most room, there were no more Officers in the Church of
God than Bishops and Deacons, that is to say, Ministers, as witnesses besides
Scripture, full apertly Hierome in his Commentaries upon the Epistles of Paul;
whereas he faith, That those we call Priests, were all one and no other but
Bishops, and the Bishops none other but Priests, Men ancient both in Age and
Learning, so near as they could be chosen. Neither were they Institute, and
chosen as they be now adays, with small regard of a Bishop, or his Officer,
only apposing them, if they can construe a Collect. -- To conclude, I say, the
Order, or State of Priests, and Deacons was Ordained by God.

The Sixth Article against Dr. Barnes was, That he declared himself thus. I
will never believe, nor yet can I ever believe, that one Man may be by the Law
of God a Bishop of two, or three Cities, yea, of an whole Country; for it is
contrary to St. Paul, which says, I have left thee behind, to set in every
City a Bishop. And if you find in one place of Scripture that they be called
Episcopi, you shall find in many that they be called Presbyteri. -- I was
(says he) brought before my Lord Cardinal into his Gallery, and there he read
all my Articles till he came to this, and there he stopped, and said, That this
touched him, and therefore he asked me, if I thought it wrong that One Bishop
should have so many Cities underneath him? Unto whom I answered, That I could
no further go than to St. Paul's Text, which, set in every City a Bishop. Then
asked he me, whether I thought it unright (seeing the Ordinance of the Church,
that one Bishop should have so many Cities? I answered, that I knew no
Ordinance of the Church, as concerning this thing, but St. Paul's Saying only?
Nevertheless I did see a contrary Custom and Practice in the World, but I know
not the original thereof. Then said He, There were diverse Cities, some seven
Miles, some six Miles long, and over them was there set but one Bishop, and of
their Suburbs also; so likewise now a Bishop has also but one City to his
Cathedral Church, and the Country about it as Suburbs to it. Methought this was
far fetched, but I durst not deny it, because it was so great Authority, and of
so Holy a Father, and so great a Divine. But this I dare say, that his Holiness
could never prove it by Scripture, nor yet by any Authority of Drs. nor yet by
any Practice of the Apostles, and yet it must be true, because a Pillar of the
Church has spoken it: But let us see what the Drs. say to mine Article.
Athanasius does declare this Text of the Apostle, I have left thee behind, etc.
He would not commit unto one Bishop a whole Ylde, but he did enjoin, that every
City should have his Proper Pastor, supposing, that by this means they should
more diligently Oversee the People -- Also Chrysostom on that same Text: He
would not that a whole Country should be permitted unto One man, but He
enjoined to every man his Cure, by that means he knew, that his Labor should
be more easy, and the Subjects should be with more Diligence Governed, if the
Teachers were not distract with the Governing of many Churches, but had Cure,
and Charge of one Church only, etc. Methinks these be plain words, and able to
move a man to speak as much as I did -- But I, poor Man, must be an Heretic,
there is no Remedy, you will have it so, and who is able to say nay? Not all
Scripture, nor yet God Himself. So far these three Worthies.

About this time the Notion of these blessed Martyrs found respect amongst
those, that bore a great Figure in the Church. The Author of the True
Difference between the Regal Power and the Ecclesiastical, gives countenance
unto it, and at last Cranmer with many others fell in with it, and it became a
Point established by Authority, as may be seen in the Necessary Erudition of a
Christian Man, where, after the Description given of the Office of Priests and
Deacons, it is affirmed, That of these Two Orders only Scripture makes express
mention, and that we may not mistake 'em, it is added, of these two Orders only,
that is to say, Priests, and Deacons, Scripture makes express mention, and how
they were conferred by the Apostles by Prayer, and Imposition of hands.
Besides, The Description they give of the Office of a Bishop or Priest, for
when they speak of the Divine Institution, they make no distinction between
'em; it is thus: The Office consists in true Preaching and Teaching the Word of
God unto the People, in Dispensing and Ministering the Sacraments, in
Consecrating and Offering the blessed Body and Blood of Christ in the Sacrament
of the Altar, in loosing and assoyling from Sin such Persons as be sorry and
truly penitent for the same, and Excommunicating such as be guilty in manifest
Crimes, and will not be reformed otherwise, and finally in Praying for the
whole Church of Christ, and especially for the Flock committed to them. Thus
there are but two Orders only, that is to say, Priests and Deacons, no third
Order; Bishops therefore must be of the same Order with Priests, and their
Office the same, and the Superiority of one above the other only by Humane
Ordinance and Appointment. And whereas (say they) we have thus summarily
declared what is the Office and Ministration which in Holy Scriptures has been
committed to Bishops and Priests, and in what things it consists, as is before
rehearsed, we think it expedient and necessary, that all men should be
advertised, and taught, that all such Lawful Power and Authority of any one
Bishop [or Priest, for they are in the sense of these Great Divines the same]
over another were, and be given them by the Consent, Ordinance, and Positive
Laws of Men only, and not by any Ordinance of God in Holy Scripture. So far the
Necessary Erudition.

Thus in Henry the Eighth's days, the Bishop and Priest of the same Order
according to the Scriptures, and their Office the same, the Difference
therefore between 'em and the Government that is grounded thereupon by
Prelatick Bishops, Archbishops, etc. is only by the Positive Laws of Men.

In a Declaration made of the Functions and Divine Institution of Bishops and
Priests, subscribed by Thomas Cromwell, the Archbishops of Canterbury and York,
and diverse other Bishops, Consult the Addenda in Dr. Burnet's History of the
Reformation, p. 321, etc.
Civilians, and Learned Men, it is thus Resolved. As touching the Sacrament of
Holy Orders. We will, That all Bishops and Preachers shall instruct and teach
our People committed by us unto their Spiritual Charge. First, How that Christ
and his Apostles did institute and ordain in the New Testament, that beside the
Civil Powers, and Governance of Kings and Princes, which is called in Scripture
Potestas gladii, the Power of the Sword, there should be also continually in
the Church Militant, certain other Ministers, or Officers, which should have
Spiritual Power, Authority and Commission under Christ to Preach and Teach the
Word of God unto his People, and to Dispense and Administer the Sacraments of
God unto them; and by the same to confer and give the Grace of the Holy Ghost,
to consecrate the blessed Body of Christ in the Sacrament of the Altar, to
loose and absoile from Sin, all Persons which be duly penitent, and sorry for
the same; to bind and Excommunicate such as be Guilty in manifest Crimes and
Sins, and will not amend their defaults, to order and consecrate others in the
same room, Order and Office whereunto they recalled and admitted themselves;
and finally, to feed Christ's People like good Pastors and Rectors, as the
Apostle calls them, with their wholesome Doctrine* and by their continual
Exhortations and Monitions to reduce them from Sin and Iniquity so much as in
them lies, and to bring them unto perfect Knowledge the perfect Love and Dread
of God, and unto the perfect Charity of their Neighbors. -- That this Office,
this Power and Authority was committed and given by Christ and his Apostles
unto certain Persons only, that is to say, unto Priests, OR Bishops, whom they
did Elect, call and admit thereunto by their Prayer, and Imposition of their
hands. -- And to the intent the Church of Christ should never be destituted of
such Ministers as should have and execute the said Power of the Keys, it was
also Ordained and Commanded by the Apostles, that the same Sacrament should be
applied and ministered by the Bishops from time to time, unto such other Persons
as had the Qualities which the Apostles very diligently descryve; as it
appears evidently in the third Chapter of the first Epistle of St. Paul to
Timothy, and his Epistle unto Titus. And surely this is the whole Virtue and
Efficacy, and the Cause also of the Institution of this Sacrament, as it is
found in the New Testament; for albeit the Holy Fathers of the Church of
Christ, with all those things which were commendable in the Temple of the Jews,
did devise not only certain other Ceremonies than before rehearsed, as
Tonsures, Rasures, Unctions, and such other Observances to be used in the
Administration of the said Sacraments; but did also Institute certain Inferior
Orders or Degrees, as Janitors, Lectors, Exorcists, Acolits, and Subdeacons;
and deputed to every one of those certain Offices to execute in the Church,
wherein they followed undoubtedly the Example and Rites used in the Old
Testament; yet the Truth is, That in the New Testament there is no mention made
of any Degrees, or Distinctions in Orders, but only of Deacons, OR Ministers,
and of Priests, OR Bishops: Nor there is any word spoken of any other Ceremony
used in the Conferring of this Sacrament; but only of Prayer, and the
Imposition of the Bishops hand.

Thus the Power of Excommunication, and conferring Orders by Prayer and
Imposition of Hands, as declared in the New Testament, belongs unto the Priest,
which is the same with the Bishop; there being no Degrees or Distinctions in
Orders, but only of Deacons or Ministers; and Priests or Bishops, and
consequently no Superiority therefore of a Bishop above a Priest to be found in
the New Testament, during King Henry the Eighth's days.

CHAP. II. The Judgment of the Reformers in Edward the Sixth's Days the same
'twas in Henry the Eighth's, holding no Difference by Divine Law between a
Bishop and Presbyter.
IN the First Year of Edward the Sixth's Reign, an Act of Parliament passed,
sufficiently Declaring the Episcopal Orders as distinct from, and above that of
the Presbyter, to be wholly from the Crown; for it was affirmed, That all
Authority of Jurisdiction Spiritual, is derived and deducted from the King's
Majesty, as Supreme Head of these Churches of England and Ireland.

The Design of this Law, as Dr. Heylin has it, was to weaken the Authority of
the Episcopal Order, Hist. Edw. 6. p. 51.
by forcing them from their strong hold of Divine Institution, and making them
no other than the King's Ministers only, His Ecclesiastical Sheriffs (as a man
might say) to execute his Will, and disperse his Mandates.

Dr. Poynet Bishop of Winchester, in this King's Reign, in Answer unto a Book
writ by Stephen Gardener, though sent out under the Name of Dr. Martin, about the
Marriage of Priests, does sufficiently show that the Reformers in those days
were great Approvers of Calvin's Notions about Church Government, and therefore
willing to lay aside even the very Name Bishop, and make use of the Names [
Superintendent, Minister, Senior, Elders, etc.] for these are his words. And
further, whereas it pleases Martin, not only in this place, but also
hereafter, to Jest at the Name [Superintendent,] he shows himself bent to
condemn all things that be good. Who knows not, that the Name [Bishop] has
so been abused, that when it was spoken, the People understood nothing else but
a great Lord, that went in a white Rochet, with a wide shaven Crown, and that
carries an Oil Box with him, wherewith he uses once in seven years, riding
about to Confirm Children, etc. Now to bring the People from this abuse, what
better means can be devised than to teach the People their Error by another
word out of the Scriptures of the same signification, which thing by the term
[Superintendent] would in time have been well brought to pass -- The name
[Bishop] spoken amongst the Unlearned, signified to them nothing less than a
Preacher of God's Word, because there was not, nor is any thing more rare in
any Order of Ecclesiastical Persons than to see a Bishop Preach. -- I deny not,
but the name [Bishop] may be well taken, but because the Evilness of the Abuse
has marred the Goodness of the Word, it cannot be denied but that it was not
amiss to join for a time another word with it in his place, whereby to restore
that abused word to his Right Signification. -- Oh how the Papists would
triumph over us, if they had like proof for the names (I say) of Pope,
Cardinal, Canon, Prebendary, Monk, etc. as we, that profess Christ have for the
maintenance of the terms and names (Superintendent, Minister, Seniors, Elders,
Brethren,) and such like by us used.

The Resolution Archbishop Cranmer gave to the Questions propounded by Edw. 6.
approved by the Bishop of St. Asaph, Therleby, Redman and Cox, See Dr.
Stillingfleet's MS.
makes it manifest, that these great Reformers owned not Episcopacy as a
Distinct Order from Presbytery, of Divine Right, but only, as a prudent
Constitution of the Civil Magistrate for the better Governing the Church. In
the Apostles time (says Cranmer) when there was no Christian Princes by whose
Authority Ministers of God's Word might be appointed, Resol. to Q. 9.
nor Sins by the Sword corrected, there was no Remedy then for the Correction
of Vice, or appointing of Ministers, but only the consent of Christien
multitude by themself, by an Uniform consent to follow the advice and
persuasion of such Persons, whom God had most endued with the Spirit of wisdom
and counsel. -- Sometime the Apostles and other unto whom God had given
abundantly his Spirit, sent, or appointed Ministers of God's Word, sometime the
People did choose such as they thought meet thereunto.

-- The Bishops and Priests were at one time, and were not two distinct Things,
Resol. to Q. 10.
but both one Office in the Beginning of Christ's Religion. -- The People
before Christian Princes were, Resol. to Q. 11.
commonly elected their Bishops and Priests. -- In the New Testament, he that
is appointed to be a Bishop or Priest, needs no consecration by the
Scripture; Resol. to Q. 12.
for Election or appointing thereto is sufficient.

Thus far that Excellent Person (says a Reverend Divine of the Church of
England) in whose Judgment nothing is more clear than his ascribing the
particular Form of Government in the Church to the Determination of the Supreme
Magistrate. The Divine Right of Forms of Church Government Examined, p. 390,
etc.


CHAP. III. Aley Bishop of Exeter, Pilkington Bishop of Durham, Jewel Bishop of
Salisbury, Whitgift Archbishop of Canterbury, of the same Opinion with Tindall,
Lambert, Barnes, and the Reformers in King Edward's Time.
IN Queen Elizabeth's Reign, the first I find to mention any thing about the
Office of Bishops and Priests, is Dr. Alley Bishop of Exeter, in his
Miscellanea on his third Praelection, Alley 's Poor Man's Library, Tom. 1. page
95, 96.
read at Paul's in the Year 1560. on the word Bishops.

What difference is between a Bishop and a Priest, St. Hierome writing ad
Titum, does declare, whose words be these: Idem est ergo Presbyter, qui
Episcopus, etc. A Priest therefore is the same that a Bishop is. And before
Schisms and Factions by the instinct of the Devil begun in Religion, and before
it was said among the People, I am Paul's, I am Apollos, I am of Cephas, the
Churches were Governed with the Common Council of the Priests (or Elders.)

But after that every one thought those whom he Baptized to be his, and not
Christ's, it was decreed throughout the World, that one of the Priests or
Elders should be chosen to be set over the rest, unto whom all the care (or
charge) of the Church should appertain, and that the beginnings of Schisms
should be taken away. Some do think, that it is not the sentence of the
Scriptures, but ours, that a Bishop and Priest, (or Elder) are one thing, and
they do also think the one to be a name of Age, and the other to be a name of
Office. Let them read again the words of the Apostle to the Philippians,
saying, Paul and Timotheus the Servants of Jesu Christ, to all the Saints in
Christ Jesu, which are at Philippos, with the Bishops and Deacons, Grace and
Peace be with you, etc. Philippi is one of the Cities of Macedonia. And truly
there could not be many (as they are called) Bishops in one City. But because
at that time they called those Bishops, which they did also call Priests (or
Elders) therefore indifferently he spoke of Bishops, as of Priests (or Elders).
It may yet seem doubtful to some, unless it be approved by other Testimonies.
In the Acts of the Apostles it is written, that when the Apostle came to
Miletum, he sent to Ephesus, and did call the Priests (or Elders) of the same
Church, unto whom among other things he said thus, A Hand to your selves, etc.
And here mark you diligently, how that he calling the Priests or Elders of that
one City of Ephesus, did afterward call them Bishops, etc. And Peter which
took his name of the firmness of his Faith, in his Epistle says, I your fellow
Elder do beseech the Elders that are among you, etc. Haec Hieronimus. These
words are alleged, (says Bishop Aley) that it may appear, Priests among the
Elders, to have been even the same that Bishops were. But it grew by little and
little, that the whole charge and care should be appointed to one Bishop within
his Precinct, that the Seeds of Dissension might be utterly rooted out.

In his Second Tome, P. 15.
the Bishop adds out of St. Jerome, Sicut Presbyteri, etc. Like as Priests do
know themselves to be subject by the Custom of the Church, unto him which is
made Ruler over them: So let the Bishops know, that they are greater than the
Priests, rather by Custom, than by the verity of Dispensation given of the
Lord. He says also in another place, with the old Fathers, the Bishops were
the same that the Priests were; for the name of one is the name of Dignity, and
the other of Age and Time. So far Bishop Aley.

The next I meet with is Pilkington, Bishop of Duresme, the Author of the
Confutation of an Addition with an Apology, written, and cast in the Streets of
West-Chester against the Causes of Burning Paul's Church in London, declared by
the Bishop at Paul's Cross.

The Bishop did at Paul's Cross Exhort the people to take the burning of Paul's
to be a warning of a greater Plague to follow to the City of London, if
amendment of Life be not had in all Estates, the Author of the Addition (a
Papist, Histor. Q. Eliz. page 312.
notwithstanding what Heylin says to the contrary, when he tells us that the
Papists ascribe it to some practice of the Zuinglian Faction, out of their
hatred unto all Solemnity and Decency in the Service of God, performed more
punctually in that Church for Examples sake than in any other in the Kingdom)
imputes it to the laying aside of the midnight Mattins, forenoon Masses
formerly had in the Church, and Anthems and Prayers in the Steeple.

This Bishop, a Person of great Learning and good Temper, in Answer to this
Paper, does in the Sixth year of the Queens Reign, thus express himself. Yet
remains one doubt unanswered in these few words, when he says, that the
Government of the Church was committed to Bishops, as though they had received a
Larger and Higher Commission from God, of Doctrine and Discipline than other.
Lower Priests and Ministers have, and hereby might challenge a greater
Prerogative. But this is to be understood, that the Privileges and
Superiorities which Bishops have above other Ministers, are rather granted by
Man, for maintaining of better Order and Quietness in Commonwealths, than
Commanded by God in his Word. Ministers have better Knowledge and Utterance
some than other; but their Ministry of Equal Dignity. God's Commission and
Commandment is like, and indifferent to all, Priest, Bishop, Archbishop,
Prelate, by what name soever he be called -- Saint Jerome in his Commentary on
1 Chap. Tit. says, that a Bishop and Priest is all One, and in his Epistle ad
Evagrium he says, That the Bishop wheresoever he be, is of the same Power and
Priesthood. -- If they [the Papists] were not too much blinded in their own
foolishness, they might see in the last Subsidy granted in the time of their
own Reign, that they grant those to be their betters and above them, from
whence they receive their Authority. The Parliament gives them and their
Collectors Power to Suspend, Deprive and Interdict any Priest, that Pays not
the Subsidy: In that doing they grant the Parliament to be above them, and from
it to receive their Power. -- I had not thought to have said so much on these
his few words, and yet much more hangs on this their Opinion of claiming their
Usurped Power above Princes and other Ministers.

The Learned Bishop Jewel is of the same Mind with this Author, Apol. Par. 2.
Chapter 5. Divis. 1. Chapter 6. Divis. 1.
and thus much he delivers, not as his private Opinion, but as the sense of
the Church of England,. Furthermore we say, That the Minister ought lawfully,
duly, and orderly to be preferred to that Office of the Church of God, Chapter 6.
Divis. 3. Chapter 7. Divis. 5.
and that no man has power to wrest himself into the Holy Ministry at his own
pleasure; That Christ has given to his Ministers Power to bind, to loose, to
open, to shut; That the Minister does execute the Authority of binding and
shutting, as often as he shuts up the Gate of the Kingdom of Heaven against
Unbelieving and Stubborn Persons, denouncing unto them God's Vengeance, and
everlasting Punishment; or else when he does quite shut them out from the bosom
of the Church, by open Excommunication. Out of doubt, what Sentence soever the
Minister of God shall give in this sort, God himself does so well allow it,
that, whatsoever here in Earth by their means is loosed and bound, God himself
will loose and bind, and confirm the same in Heaven. -- And seeing one word is
given to all, and one only Key belongs to all, we say, there is but one only
Power of all Ministers, as concerning opening and shutting.

At this time so much was given the Priest, that no room was left to make the
Bishop of an Order distinct from him: The Keys belonged to all Ministers, to
the Priest as well as Bishop.

In the Defense of the Apology of the Church of England, Part. 2. Chapter 3. Divis.
5.
this Learned Bishop is more full and particular in his Assertions. In St.
Jerome's time (says he) there were Metropolitans, Archbishops, Archdeacons, and
others, but Christ appointed not these Distinctions of Orders from the
beginning. These names are not found in all the Scriptures: This is the thing
which we defend. St. Jerome says, Sciant Episcopi, etc. Let Bishops understand,
that they are in Authority over Priests more by Custom, than by Order of God's
Truth. -- Erasmus speaking of the times of Jerome, says, that Id temporis idem
erat Episcopus, Sacerdos, and Presbyter. These three names Bishop, Priest,
Presbyter, at that time were all one. --

To the Testimony of Jerome, the Bishop adds that of St. Austin, Epist. 19.
saying, That the Office of a Bishop is above the Office of a Priest, not by
Authority of the Scriptures, but after the names of Honor, which the custom of
the Church has now obtained.

The Bishop in Defense of the Church of England, Part 2. Chapter 9. Divis. 1.
had affirmed, That against the Sacred Scripture, neither Law, nor Ordinance,
nor any Custom ought to be heard, no, though Paul himself, or an Angel from
Heaven should come, and teach the contrary.

To this Harding replies, If all things necessary to Salvation be contained in
the Scriptures, then whatever is not in them contained, the same is not
necessary; if not necessary, why should we be laden with unnecessary Burdens?
Then away with all Traditions at a Clap, be they never so Apostolic. --
Remember you not what the most Renowned Fathers have said of the Necessity of
Traditions? -- If we go about to reject the Customs that be not set forth in
Writing -- we shall bring the Preaching of the Faith but to a bare name. For so
they were taken for Heretics, who denied the Distinction of a Bishop, and a
Priest, etc.

Jewel rejoyns, This [in the Margin] in an Untruth, for hereby both St. Paul
and St. Jerome, and other good men are condemned of Heresy. -- But what meant
Mr. Harding here to come in with the Difference between Priests and Bishops?
thinks he that Priests and Bishops hold only by Tradition? or is it so
horrible a Heresy as he makes it, to say, That by the Scriptures of God, a
Bishop and a Priest are all One? or, knows he how far, and to whom he
reaches the name of an Heretic? Verily, Chrysostom says, Between a Bishop
and a Priest, in a manner there is no difference; St. Jerome says somewhat in a
rougher sort, I hear say, There is one become so peevish, that he sets
Deacons before Priests, that is to say, before Bishops; whereas the Apostle
plainly teaches us, that Priests and Bishops are all one. St. Austin says,
what is a Bishop but the first Priest, that is to say, the Highest Priest? so
says Saint Ambrose, There is but One Ordination of Priest and Bishop, for both
of them are Priests, but the Bishop is the first. All these and other Holy
Fathers, together with St. Paul the Apostle, for thus saying, by Mr. Harding's
Advice, must be held for Heretics.

Besides, as the Bishop is very express in his asserting a Bishop and Presbyter
to be according to Christ's Institution all one; Part 6. Chap. 9. Divis. 1, and
2.
He is no less so in granting that the Bishop has received from the Prince the
several Privileges he has above a Presbyter. I grant there be many special
Privileges granted upon great and just Considerations of the mere favor of the
Prince, that a Priest being found negligent, or otherwise offending in his
Ministry, should be convinced and punished, not by the Temporal and Civil
Magistrate, but by the Discretion of the Bishop. -- Mr. Harding must remember
that all these, and other like Privileges passed unto the Clergy from the
Prince, and not from God; and proceed only of special Favor, and not of Right.

Archbishop Whitgift in opposing Cartwright's Platform about the Government of
the Church, asserted to be de Jure divino, distinguishes between Spiritual and
External Government, and says, That the External Government has both a
Substance and Matter about which it is occupied, and also a Form to attain the
same, consisting in certain Offices and Functions, and in the Names and Titles
of them. The Substance and Matter of Government must indeed be taken out of the
Word of God, and consists in these points: That the Word be truly taught, the
Sacraments rightly administered, Virtue furthered, Vice repressed, and the
Church kept in quietness and order: The Officers in the Church, whereby this
Government is wrought, be not namely, and particularly expressed in the
Scriptures, but in some points left to the Discretion and Liberty of the Church
to be disposed according to the state of Times, Places, and Persons. Thus much
in his Preface; conform to those who went before. The Ministry of the Word and
Sacraments, and Reprehensions, etc. which belong to the Priest, is of God, the
other Offices and Functions, which as he elsewhere has it, belong to the
external Order and Policy of the Church, and consequently the Distinction
between Bishop and Priest, Defense, Tract. c. 3. Div. 38, 39, 40, 41.
and Superiority of a Bishop above a Priest, are only of humane Institution.

More particularly, Cartwright contending for a sort of Discipline which is a
Matter of Faith, and necessary to Salvation, the Archbishop distinguishes
between such things as are so necessary, that without them we cannot be saved,
and such things as are so necessary, that without 'em, we cannot so well and
conveniently be saved; and then adds, To be short, I confess, that in a Church
collected together in one Place, and at Liberty, Government is necessary with
the second kind of Necessity, but that any one kind of Government is so
necessary, that without it, the Church cannot be saved, or, that it may not be
altered into some other kind, thought to be more Expedient, I utterly deny; and
the reasons that move me so to do, be these: The first is, because I find no
one certain and perfect kind of Government prescribed or commanded in the
Scriptures, to the Church of Christ; which no doubt should have been done, if
it had been a matter necessary to the Salvation of the Church. Secondly,
Because the Essential Notes of the Church be these only; The true Preaching of
the Word, and the right Administration of Sacraments: -- So that
notwithstanding, Government, or some kind of Government may be a part of the
Church, touching the outward Form and Perfection of it; yet it is not such a
part of the Essence and Being, but that it may be the Church of Christ without
this or that kind of Government; and therefore the kind of the Government is
not necessary unto Salvation. -- There is no certain kind of Government or
Discipline prescribed to the Churches, but that the same may be altered, as the
Profit of the Churches requires; and out of Gualters he says, Let every Church
follow the manner of Discipline which does most agree with the People with whom
it abides, and which seems to be most fit for the place and time, and let no
man here rashly prescribe unto others, neither let him bind all Churches to one
and the same Form. -- I do deny, that the Scriptures do set down any one
certain Form, and kind of Government of the Church to be Perpetual, for all
Times, Persons, and Places: without Alteration. -- It is well known, Tract. 17.
Chap. 2. Divis. 29.
that the manner and form of Government used in the Apostles time, and
expressed in the Scriptures, neither is now, nor can, or ought to be observed,
either touching the Persons, How then can the Government of the Church by
Bishops, Archbishops, etc. be Apostolical?
or the Functions. -- We see manifestly, that in sundry points the Government
of the Church used in the Apostles times, is, and has been of necessity
altered, and that it neither may nor can be revoked; whereby it is plain, that
any one kind of External Government perpetually to be observed, is no where in
the Scripture prescribed to the Church, but the charge thereof is left to the
Magistrate, so that nothing be done contrary to the Word of God. This is the
Opinion of the best Writers, This was it is like Universally* received by all
the English Clergy in Whitgifts time.
Neither do I know (says the Archbishop) any Learned Man of a contrary
Judgment. -- Either we must admit another Form now of Governing the Church than
was in the Apostles time, or else we must seclude the Christian Magistrate from
all Authority in Ecclesiastical Matters. -- I am persuaded that the External
Government of the Church under a Christian Magistrate must be according to the
Kind and Form of Government used in the Commonwealth; else how can you make
the Prince Supreme Governor of all States and Causes Ecclesiastical? -- If you
therefore will have the Queen of England Rule as Monarch over all her
Dominions, then must you also give her leave to use one Kind and Form of
Government in all, and every part of the same, and so to Govern the Church in
Ecclesiastical Affairs, as she does the Commonwealth in Civil.

Dr. Cosins, Chancellor to this Archbishop, in his Answer to the Abstract, Page
58.
asserts, That all Churches have not the same Form of Discipline, neither is it
necessary that they should, seeing it cannot be proved that any certain
particular Form of Church Government is commended to us by the Word of God. Dr.
Low speaks to the same purpose, Complaint of the Church, No certain Form of
Government is prescribed in the Word; P. 64, 66.
only general Rules laid down for it.

Bishop Bridges; God has not expressed the Form of Church Government, at least
not so as to bind us.

What is here mentioned of Cosins, Low, and Bishop Bridges, I have out of Dean
Stillingfleet's Weapon Salve, and out of a Learned MS. I have this following
passage about Whitaker, who, making his Remarques on St. Hierom's teling us,
Whitaker, De Ecles. Regimin. Contr. 4. q. 1.. 29. p. 540. Col. 2.
That the Difference between Presbyters and Bishops was brought in by Men, long
after the Apostles, as a Remedy against Schism, assures us, That it is a Remedy
almost worse than the Malady, for it begat and brought in the Pope with his
Monarchy into the Church; and this other of Bishop Morton, telling the Papists,
That Power of Order, and of Jurisdiction, which they ascribe to Bishops, does
de jure divino belong to all other Presbyters and particularly, Morton 's Apol.
Cath. lib. 1. c. 21. p. 55.
That [to Ordain] is the jus antiquum, the Ancient Right of Presbyters, in
fine, That Dr. Laurence Humfrey, and Dr. Holland, Humf. against Campian.
Jesuit. Part 2. p. 273.
both of them Doctors of the Chair in Oxford, did teach and maintain the same
Doctrine; Holland in the Act, July 9. 1608. concluded that the contrary is most
false against the Scriptures, the Fathers, the Doctrine of the Church of
England, the Schoolmen, Lombard, Aquinas, Bonaventure, etc.

CHAP. IV. Dr. Willet 's Sentiments much the same with the forementioned
Bishops, The Difference between a Bishop and Presbyter as of Divine Right
declur'd to be Popish, and opposed as such. The special Consecration of Bishops
was Ordained, not by a Divine Law, but by the Church, for the Dignity of their
Calling. Saravia for no other Difference between a Presbyter and Bishop but in
Degree. Bancroft for a Priority in degree only, holding with Dr. Robinson, Dr.
Reynolds, and Dr. Fulk, whose Authorities he insists on to Confirm his Opinion
about a Gradual Difference between Bishop and Presbyter.
TO these I will add another, namely, In his Life of Willet.
Dr. Andrew Willet; who, as Dr. Smith observes, is by Bishop Hall numbered
amongst those Worthies of the Church of England, Hall in his Noah 's Dove.
to whom he gives this Elogy, Stupor mundi Clerus Britannicus. This Dr. in his
Synopsis Papismi is very large in discussing the Difference between a Bishop
and Presbyter, and in his Determinations in most things agrees with the
Learned Authors I have already quoted.

The grand Question under Debate is, Willet 's Synops. Papism. Contr. 5. Quest.
3. Concerning* the Clergy. Append.
Whether the Difference between Bishops and other Ministers, be grounded upon
the Law of God, and Institution of the Apostles?

The Papists.

Bellarmine (says the Dr.) affirms, Lib. 1. De Clericis, c. 14.
That the Jurisdiction of Bishops, as now it stands in their Church, and the
Difference between them, and other Presbyters is, Jure Divino, grounded upon
the Law of God, and of such necessity, that he holds the contrary to be
Heresy; and those to be Heretics that hold this Difference to arise rather of
a Politic Constitution of the Church to avoid Schism, than of the Institution
of the Apostles; yea, they hold them to be no Churches at all, which are not
under the Government of Bishops, but of other Overseers and Superintendents.
Surely, I see not (says one) How there can be any Church where there is no
Bishop. Espenc. in 1 Timothy 194. h.
--

The Protestants.

Of the Difference between Bishops and Priests, there are three Opinions: The
first of Aerius, who did hold that all Ministers should be Equal, and that a
Bishop was not, neither ought to be Superior to a Priest, neither that there
was any Difference at all between them, August. de Haeres. c. 53. Epiphan.
Haeres. 75.
which Opinion of his was counted amongst other Heresies: The second Opinion in
the other Extreme is of the Papists, as we have seen, that would have not only
a Difference, but a Princely Pre-eminence of their Bishops over the Clergy, and
that by the Word of God. The third Opinion is between both, that although this
Distinction of Bishops and Priests, as it is now received, cannot be directly
proved out of Scripture: yet it is very good for the Policy of the Church, to
avoid Schism, and to preserve it in Unity. Of this Judgment, Bishop Jewel
against Harding, shows both Chrysostom, Bish. Whitgift.
Ambrose and Hierom to have been. And another most Reverend Prelate of our
Church in these words: I know these Names be confounded in the Scriptures, but
I speak according to the manner and Custom of the Church ever since the
Apostles times; which saying is agreeable to that of St. Augustine; Epist. 19.
ad Hieron.
Secundum, etc. according to the Names of Honor, which the Use or Custom of
the Church has obtained, a Bishop is greater than a Priest; so that Augustine
himself, who was no Aerian, does ground this Distinction rather upon Ancient
Custom than the Scripture.

-- The Difference between the Opinion of P. 275. Aerius on the one part, and
of Hierom, Ambrose, Austin, Chrysostom on the other, lies here: Aerius would
have no difference at all between a Bishop and a Priest: the Fathers above
allowed a difference, holding it to be profitable for the Peace of the Church:
They only affirmed, That this Distinction was rather Authorized by the Ancient
Practice of the Church, than by any direct place of Scripture. For the proof
that a Bishop and Priest were all one in the Apostles time, St. Hierom
alleges diverse places of Scripture. The second Argument is thus: Archbishops
and Primates have the same Right of Jurisdiction over other Bishops, which
Bishops have over simple Priests: But their Authority and Jurisdiction is
rather grounded upon the Ancient Custom of the Church, than any Apostolical
Injunction, or Institution in Scripture. -- A fourth Argument, If the
Distinction of Bishops and Priests were by the Commandment and Institution of
Christ and his Apostles, it should necessarily be enjoined unto all Churches;
But this cannot, without prejudice of many Reformed Churches, be affirmed,
which have no Bishops, though they have other Overseers in their stead --
Wherefore I cannot conclude that this special Form of Ecclesiastical Government
is absolutely prescribed in the Word: for then all those Churches, which have
not that Prescript Form, whether of Bishops or other, should be condemned as
Erroneous Churches. So then here is a difference between our Adversaries the
Papists, and us: They say, it is of necessity to Salvation to be subject to the
Pope, and to Bishops and Archbishops under him, as necessarily prescribed in
the Word; but so do not our Bishops and Archbishops, which is a not able
difference between the Bishops of the Popish Church, and of the Reformed
Churches. -- Let every Church use that Form which best fitteth their state: In
External Matters every Church is Free, not one bound to the Prescription of
another; so they measure themselves by the Rule of the Word. -- Now to conclude
this whole Matter, and to speak distinctly of every Point, that it may appear
how far this Difference in Ecclesiastical Functions is Divine, and wherein
Humane: This I judge may safely without any Contradiction be affirmed, that in
this Distinction of the Ministers of the Church there is some. what
Apostolical, somewhat also Political. -- First, In the calling of Bishops, as
they are now Ordained in some Reformed Church, there is somewhat Divine and
Apostolical: for it cannot be denied, but that to have Order in the Church, and
to have diversity of Degrees, and Ministrations to avoid confusion, proceeds
from the Institution of Christ. -- This then we say is agreeable to the
Institution of Christ, that there should be, not a Popular Equality, but a
convenient Superiority, and Priority in the Ministers of the Gospel; as St.
Paul also shows, First, Apostles; Secondly, Prophets, etc. Secondly, there is
somewhat Political, and that of two sorts, as touching the Polity
Ecclesiastical, and Civil.

To the Ecclesiastical Polity in the advancing the Dignity of Bishops these
things do appertain.

First of all St. Hierom says, of Confirmation committed only to Bishops,
Disce hanc, etc. Know that this Observation is rather for the Honor of their
Priesthood, than by necessity of any Law. Hierom. adver. Luciferian.

Secondly, The Council of Aquisgrane, cap. 8. says, That the Ordination and
Consecration of Ministers is now reserved to the Chief Minister, Solum propter
Authoritatem; only for Authority sake, lest that the Discipline of the Church
being challenged by many, should break the Peace of the Church.

Thirdly, The Author of the Book under Hierom's Name, De 7. Ordinib. says,
That the Consecration of Virgins, which is not now in use, in the Reformed
Churches, was reserved to the Bishop for Concord sake.

Fourthly, The Jurisdiction of the Church which in time past, Hierome says,
was committed to the Senate, or College of Presbyters, was afterward to avoid
Schism, devolved to the Bishop.

Fifthly, S. Ambrose says, 1 Timothy 3.
Episcopi and Presbyteri, etc. A Bishop and a Presbyter have but one
Ordination; for they are both in the Priesthood. Whereby it may appear, that
the Special Consecration of Bishops was since Ordained for the Dignity of that
Calling. And S. Hierom says, That in the Church of Alexandria, the Presbyters
did make Choice of one, Hier. ad Evagr.
whom they placed in a Higher Degree, and called him their Bishop; like as if
an Army should choose a General, or the Deacons should choose an Industrious
man whom they make their Archdeacon. So it should seem that the very Election
of a Bishop in those Days without any other circumstances, was his Ordination.

Sixthly, In Hierom's time, it was lawful for Priests and Ministers to Preach
without further License obtained from the Bishop, as it may appear Distinct.
95. c. 6. Qui non vult Presbyteros, etc. He that will not have a Minister to do
that which is commanded him of God (that is, to Preach) would be greater than
Christ, etc. -- But since to stay the Humor of Contentious and Schismatical
Preachers, it has seemed good to the Church to refer the Allowance of
Preachers to the Ordinary, according to the Decree of the Lateran Council Sub
Innocent. 3. c. 3. Praeter Autoritatem. He that Preaches privately or
publicly without the Authority of the Bishop, let him be Excommunicated.

Diverse other Constitutions have been made in Ecclesiastical Polity for the
maintaining the Dignity of Bishops -- So also the Civil State has augmented
and enlarged the Privileges and Immunities of Bishops, which they have rather
by the Munificence of Princes, than by Divine Authority, As first, the Division
of Provinces and Cities unto Archbishops and Bishops, and the limitation of
their Jurisdiction was brought in by the consent of Princes. Secondly, The
Revenues and Lands of Bishoprics have been given by Devout and Religious
Princes unto Bishops and their Successors, and diverse Imperial Laws have been
made in favor of the Maintenance of the Church. Thirdly, The Titles of Honor
annexed to Bishoprics, as that they are created Barons and made Lords of the
Parliament House here in England, have been bestowed by the Liberality of the
Kings of this Realm, not yet above 400 years since. -- Fourthly, The Judgment
of Matrimonial and Testamentary Causes, and of other such like Matters has
been reserved unto Bishops by the Civil and Imperial Authority. -- Thus we see
how in Civil Policy, the Dignity of Bishops, by the favor of Christian
Emperors, has been enlarged: And hitherto I have showed, what is to be judged
Political in the Distinction of Bishops from the rest of the Clergy, both as
touching the Civil and Ecclesiastical Policy. So far Willet, out of whom I
observe,

That the Government of the Church is not de jure divino; That according to the
Scriptures, the Office of a Bishop, and Priest is the same; That a convenient
Priority of Order amongst Ministers is Divine and Apostolical; That the Powers
of Confirmation, Ordination, and Jurisdiction are reserved to the Bishops by
Ecclesiastical constitutions only; That in the Beginning, a Bishop and
Presbyter had but one Ordination, and the Consecration of Bishops was added
since for their greater Dignity: In Hierom's days, the Election of Bishops
without any other circumstances being their Ordination; That Priests without a
License from the Bishop might Preach.

There is one thing more to be regarded touching the Difference of Bishops and
other Ministers, for says he, We differ from the Papists in two Points. First,
they say, That Bishops are not only in a higher degree of Superiority to other
Ministers, but they are as Princes of the Clergy, and other Ministers, as
Subjects, and in all things to be commanded by them; Secondly, They affirm,
That Bishops are only properly Pastors, and that to them only it does appertain
to Preach, and that other Ministers have no Authority without their License or
Consent to preach at all, and that not principally, or chiefly, but solely and
wholly to them appertains the Right of Consecrating, and giving Orders; so
that the making the Bishop to be of a distinct Order from the Priest, and the
denying the Priest to have a Power to Preach without the Bishop's License, or
any hand in Ordination, Willet opposes as Popish Doctrines representing the
opposite Notions to have been then held by the Church of England.

Hitherto the Government of the Church by Bishops, lays no claim to a Divine
Right: On the contrary, it is generally asserted, that according to the
Scriptures, the Priest and Bishop are the same, and that the superiority of the
Bishop above the Presbyter is only by Ecclesiastic Custom, and the Government
of the Church now different from what it was in the Apostles days.

Willet indeed says, That for the sake of Order the Presidence of one above
the rest is Divine and Apostolical, and toward the latter end of the Queens
Reign, the Episcopal Government is affirmed to be Apostolical, and a Divine
Institution; yet not to be de jure divine, and unalterable.

Saravia about the two and thirtieth year of the Queen, professes, Hoc enim
pacto fiet magis clarum, quid omnes Evangelii ministri inter se habeant commune
and quid cuique ordini sit peculiare. -- Ea vero in tres parts ego distribuo.
Prima est. Evangelii Praedicatio^: altera Communicatio sacramentorum. and
tertia Ecclesiasticae Gubernationis authoritas. -- De Diverse. Grad. Minist.
Evang. p. 15. Quamvis unum, and idem. Evangelii Ministerium sit omnibus
Pastoribus Ecclesiae concreditum; in hac tertia part non parva. inter eos
invenitur Inaequalitas propter diversos Authoritatis Gradus, quos primo Dominus
statim ab initio, and postea Apostoli constituerunt. -- p. 7. Primum ab ipso
Domino Duos Gradus Evangelii ministrorum institutos videmus, quorum alter
altero fuit superior, p. 25. Consensu totius Orbis Ecclesiarum probatur
Episcoporum supra Presbyteros authoritas. Quod inde ab Apostolorum temporibus
and patribus per universum terrarum Orbem factum ab omnibus Ecclesiis legimus
usque. ad nostra tempora Canonem Apostolorum immutabilem esse judico, p. 44. c.
20.
That the general Nature of the Evangelical Ministry, common both to Bishops
and Presbyters, contains these three things. 1. The Preaching of the Gospel.
2. The Communication of the Sacraments. 3. The Authority of Church Government;
and does only plead, that in this last, the Power of Bishops and Presbyters is
not equal; but the Bishop's Power is principal in Government. Whence arises a
Diversity of Degrees, not of Orders between them, and thus much he affirms has
been held by the Fathers of the Church universally ever since the Apostles
days, and therefore may well be looked on as an Unchangeable Canon of the
Apostles.

The Difference between Saravia and those who went before him lies here.

Whit gift, etc. Saravia. The Ministry of the Word and Sacraments divinely
Instituted, and to continue to the End of the World; but no particular Form of
Government left on Record in Scripture. The Superiority of a Bishop above a
Presbyter according to St. Hierom, rather by Custom of the Church, than an
Institution of Christ. Not only the Ministry of the Word and Sacraments, but
the Form of Government, instituted by the Lord himself, delivered by the
Apostles, confirmed by the Observation of the Fathers ought to continue for
ever. The Superiority in Degree of a Bishop above a Presbyter a Divine
Institution, and that St. Hierom was in the same Error with Aerius. Dico
privatam fuisse Hieronymi Opinionem, consentaneam cum Aerio, and Dei verbo
contrariam, p. 51.

A Year or two after Saravia's Book came out, Bancroft (afterward Archbishop
of Canterbury) publishes a Survey of the pretended Holy Discipline, as he
calls his Book in the Preface, to which he says, That we have a Church
Government of our own, which is in my conscience truly Apostolical, and far to
be preferred before any other that is received this day by any Reformed Church
in Christendom. And elsewhere in the Book it self, P. 105.
The Apostles (says he) having received the Promise of the Holy Ghost, after a
short time dipersed themselves (by advice) into diverse Regions; and there, by
painful Preaching and Laboring in the Lord's Harvest, they planted, no doubt,
very many Churches. As the number of Christians grew, and had their particular
Assemblies and Meetings in many Cities and Countries within every one of their
Circuits: they placed Pastors in every Congregation, they ordained certain
Apostolical men, to be Chief Assisters unto them: whom they placed, some one in
this particular Country, and some others in sundry Cities to have the Rule and
Oversight under them, of the Churches there, and to redress and supply such
wants as were needful! And they themselves (after a while, and as they grew in
age, and escaped the Cruelty of Tyrants) remained for the most part in some
Head City within their Compass, to oversee them all, both Churches Pastors and
Bishops, or Superintendents, and to give their Directions as occasions
required, and as they thought it convenient. When any of these Apostolical
Assistants, or of the Apostles themselves died, there were ever some worthy Men
chosen, and appointed to succeed them in those Cities and Countries, where they
had remained. For we may not idly Dream, that when they died, the Authority
which was given them ceased: no more than we may, that the Authority of Aaron
and of his Natural Sons expired with them; besides, it is manifest by all
Ecclesiastical Histories, that many Churches were planted after their Deaths.
And furthermore, it could not be, but that some Churches, especially under
those Apostles, that were soonest put to Death, were (when they died) in the
same case that Crete was, when Titus was sent thither, and had therefore as
much need of a Titus as Crete had. Furthermore, who can be accounted to be well
in his wits, that will imagine that Christ should ordain such an Authority, but
for some Threescore years? especially, the same Causes continuing, why it was
first instituted, that were before. Nay, I may boldly say, that there was
greater need for the continuance of it afterward. For the Apostles having so
great Power to work Miracles, and by their Prayers to procure from God such
strange Executions of his Pleasure upon the contemptuous, as did fall upon
Ananias and his Wife (and I doubt not but in like cases, sometimes upon some
others) their Ruling and Commanding Authority, was not so necessary then, as it
was afterward, when the Power to work Miracles ceased.

But what should I need to use many words in a matter so apparent? After the
Death of the Apostles, and of their Assistants, viz. the Bishops placed by
them, as is mentioned, the Ecclesiastical Histories, and the Ancient Fathers,
have kept the Register of their Names, that succeeded sundry of them, and ruled
the Churches after them, as they before had ruled them. Whereupon they were
called from all Antiquity the Apostles, and Apostolical man's Successors. This
Inequality in the Ministry of the Word has been approved and honored by all
the Ancient Fathers (none excepted) by all the General Councils, that ever were
held in Christendom: and by all other Men of Learning (that ever I heard of)
for many Hundred years after the Apostles time, saving that Aerius the
Heretic, an ambitious Person, growing into great rage, for that he missed of a
Bishopric, which he sued for, first broached the Opinion, which is now so
current amongst his Scholars, that there ought to be no difference between a
Bishop and a Priest.

Thus Bancroft, who seems to be of the same mind with Saravia about the
Apostolicalness of the Inequality, and that he means no more, P. 390.
seems clear from what he urges out of Dr. Robinson, Dr. Reynold's and Fulk, in
favor of his own Opinion, and his holding Ordination by Presbyters without a
Bishop to be valid.

I have (says Robinson) maintained it in the Pulpit, D. Robins. Answ. Exhib.
to the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury.
that the Titles of Honor, which we give to Bishops, are no more repugnant to
the Word of God, than it is for us to be called Wardens, Presidents, Provosts
of Colleges. And in my Judgment, they may with as good Conscience be Governors
of their Diocese, as we being Ministers, may be Governors of Colleges of
Ministers. Neither do I think, that this was a late devised Policy. For I am
persuaded, that the Angel of the Church of Ephesus, to whom S. John writes,
was one Minister set over the rest. For seeing there were many Pastors there,
why should S. John write to the Angel of the Church of Ephesus, and not rather
to the Angels, if there had been no difference amongst them? And if this
Presidency had had that Fault, which is reproved in Diotrephes, as St. Hierom
proves, that the Jews had not corrupted the Original Text before Christ's
coming. Quod nunquam Dominus and Apostoli, qui caetera crimina arguunt in
S^ribis and Pharisaeis, de hoc crimine quod erat maximum reticuissent: So I may
say, neither would our Savior, who by his Servant reproves those Disorders,
which he found in the Seven Churches, have passed over this great fault in
silence. Therefore as Titus was left to Reform the Churches throughout the
whole Island of Crete; so I am persuaded that in other places some of that
Order of Pastors and Teachers, which is Perpetual in the Church, even in the
time of the Apostles had a Prelacy amongst their Brethren, and that this
Pre-eminence is approved by our Savior. And if we come any lower, though the
word Episcopus, signify that care which is required of all, and in Scripture
be applied to all that have charge of Souls: yet I do not remember any one
Ecclesiastical Writer that I have read, wherein that word does not import a
greater Dignity than is common to all Ministers. Neither do I think that any
old Writer did under the name of Bishop, mean the Pastor of every Parish. --
"And thus far Dr. Robinson, with whom, if Master Dr. Reynolds do agree, I see
not whither the Factioners will turn them. For this Dr. in his Book against
Heart, says, That in the Church of Ephesus, though it had sundry Elders and
Pastors (He uses these two words in one signification, as by the Sentence
going before is manifest) to guide it, yet amongst those sundry, was there one
Chief, whom our Savior calls the Angel of the Church, and writes that to
him, which by him the rest should know. And this is he whom afterward in the
Primitive Church, the Fathers called Bishop. For, etc. the name of Bishop,
common (before) to all Elders and Pastors of the Church, was then by the usual
Language of the Fathers appropriated to him, who had the Presidentship over
Elders. Thus are certain Elders reproved by Cyprian Bishop of Carthage, for
receiving to the Communion them who had fallen in time of Persecution, before the
Bishop had advised of it, with them and others.

Here then you have two for Oxford, touching the Language of the Ancient
Fathers when they speak of Bishops. Now you shall have a Cambridge Man's
Opinion, I mean Dr. Fulke, who in his Confutation of the Rhemish Notes upon the
New Testament writes thus, Amongst the Clergy for Order and seemly Government,
there was always one Principal, to whom by long use of the Church the name of
Bishop or Superintendent has been applied, which room Titus exercised in
Creta; Timothy, in Ephesus; and others in other Places. Therefore although in the
Scripture a Bishop, and an Elder is of one Order, and Authority in Preaching
the Word, and Administration of the Sacraments (as Hierom does often confess)
yet in Government by ancient use of Speech, He is only called a Bishop, which
is in the Scriptures called (...), or (...), Romans 12.8. 1 Timothy 5.17. Heb.
13.17. that is, Chief in Government, to whom the Ordination, or Consecration by
Imposition of hands, was always Principally committed, and which most ancient
Form of Government, when Aerius would take away, it was noted amongst his other
Errors. Hitherto Dr. Fulke; so as hereby I trust it may appear to Master
Cart-wright's Reproach, and to all their Shames that shall pretend any
Authority from the ancient Fathers to impugn the Right Honorable and Lawful
calling of Bishops, not Parsons in every Parish, but Bishops in their Diocesses
and Provinces, appointed in the Apostles times, for the right Order and
Government of the Church of Christ.

So far Rancroft, who introduces these three great Men's Authority to
countenance the Presidency, or Chiefty of the Bishop over Presbyters in
Government, as Apostolical, though Fulke goes no higher than the Custom of the
Church, agreeing with Jewel and Whit gift, and it must be observed, that they
make not the Bishop to be a distinct Order from that of Presbyters, nor deny
the Presbyters to be Pastors; nor affirm the Invalidity of the Presbyterial
Ordination, only that the Ordination by Imposition of hands, was Principally
committed to the Bishops; and as Archbishop Spotiswood reports, Bancroft held
the Ordination only by Presbyters, to be valid and lawful. Histor. Church of
Scotland, lit. 7. p. 514.
Spotiswood has it in these words, A Question was moved by Dr. Andrews Bishop
of Ely, touching the Consecration of the Scottish Bishops; who, as he said,
must first be Ordained Presbyters, as having received no Ordination from a
Bishop. The Archbishop of Canterbury, Dr. Bancroft, who was by, maintained,
That thereof there was no necessity, seeing where Bishops could not be had, the
Ordination given by Presbyters must be esteemed Lawful; otherwise that it might
be doubted if there were any Lawful Vocation in most of the Reformed Churches.
This applauded to by the other Bishops, Ely acquiesced, and at the day and in
the place appointed the three Scottish Bishops were consecrated.

CHAP. V. The Learned Hooker, and Bishop Bilson's Opinion impartially stated,
differing but little from Saravia and Bancroft.
THE Learned and Judicious Hooker seems also to be of the same mind with
Saravia and Bancroft, for in his Third Book, it is only Polity in the general,
that in his Opinion is necessary to the several particular Churches;

For, Lib. 3. Sect. 1. p. 66. Edit. 61.
(says he) even the several Societies of Christian Men, unto every of which
the name of a Church is given, with addition betokening severally, as the
Church of Rome, Corinth, Ephesus, England, and so the rest, must be endued with
correspondent general Properties belonging unto them, as they are Public
Christian Societies. And of such Properties common unto all Societies
Christian, it may not be denied, that one of the very chiefest is
Ecclesiastical Polity. Which word I therefore the rather choose because the
name of Government, as commonly Men understand it in ordinary speech, does not
comprize the largeness of that whereunto in this Question it is applied. For
when we speak of Government, what does the greater part conceive thereby, but
only the exercise of Superiority peculiar unto Rulers, and Guides of others? To
our purpose therefore the name of Church-Polity will better serve, because it
contains both Government, and also whatsoever besides belongs to the
Ordering of the Church in Public. Neither is any thing in this degree more
necessary than Church Polity, which is a form of Ordering Public Spiritual
Affairs of the Church of God.

Thus Hooker looks on Polity to be necessary to the Church, and why necessary,
but because God himself is the Author of it. It is not possible that any Form
of Polity, much less of Polity Ecclesiastical should be good, Lib. 3.. 2.
unless God himself be Author of it. Those things which are not of God (says
Tentullian) they can have no other than God's Adversary for their Author. Be it
whatsoever in the Church of God, if it be not of God, we hate it.

But then he distinguished between what is of God by the Law of Nature, and the
Revelation made of the Divine Will in Scripture. Of God it must be either as
those things sometimes were, which God supernaturally revealed, and so
delivered them unto Moses for Government of the Commonwealth of Israel; or else
as those things which Men find out by help of that Light which God has given
them unto that end. The very Law of Nature it self, which no man can deny but
God has instituted, is not of God unless that be of God, whereof God is the
Author as well this latter way as the former.

The Controversy between Hooker, and the Old Nonconformists was, Whether any
particular Form of Polity be so of God, that it be set down in Scripture? and
the Noncons asserted. That no Form of Church Polity was lawful, Ubi supra.
or of God, unless God be so the Author of it that it be also set down in
Scripture. Hooker on the contrary, That he which affirms Speech to be
necessary amongst all men throughout the World, does not thereby import, that
all men must necessarily speak one kind of Language; Even so the necessity of
Polity, and Regiment in all Churches may be held without holding any one
certain form to be necessary in them all; so far He, who does moreover thus
reason with the Noncons: "You should tell us plainly, whether your meaning be
that it must be there set down in whole, or in Parts. For if wholly, show what
one form of Policy ever was so; your own to be so taken out of Scripture, you will
not affirm, neither do you deny that in part even this, which you so much
oppugn is also from thence taken. Again, you should tell us, whether only that
be taken out of Scripture, which is actually and particularly there set down;
or else, that also, which the general Principles and Rules of Scripture
Potentially contain. The one way you cannot so much as pretend that all the
Parties of your own Discipline are in Scripture; and the other way your mouths
are stopped, when you would plead against all other Forms besides your own;
seeing the general Principles are such as do not particularly prescribe any
one, but sundry, may equally be consonant unto the general Axioms of the
Scripture.

After the most impartial Enquiry, this Learned Man's Judgment about the Polity
of the Church appears to me to be thus: That though Polity in general be
necessary to the Church; yet it is not necessary that any one complete Form of
Church Polity be in Scripture. Besides, it is his conclusion, Sect. 10. p. 82.
That neither God's being Author of Laws, for Government of his Church, nor his
committing them unto Scripture, is any reason sufficient, wherefore all
Churches should for ever be bound to keep them without change. -- Again, if we
did seek to maintain that which most advantageth our own Cause, the very best
way for us and the strongest against them, [ viz. The Noncons.] were to hold
even as they do, That in Scripture there must needs be found some particular
Form of Church Polity, which God has instituted, and which for that very cause
belongs to all Churches, to all times. But with any such partial Eye to
respect our selves, and by cunning to make those things seem the truest, which
are the fittest to serve our purpose, is a thing, which we neither like, nor
mean to follow. Wherefore that, which we take to be generally true concerning
the Mutability of Laws, the same we have plainly delivered, as being persuaded
of nothing more than we are of this, that whether it be in matter of
Speculation, or of Practice, no Untruth can possibly avail the Patron and
Defender long, and that things most Truly are likewise most behovefully spoken.
Sect. 11. p. 90.
-- And to make manifest that from Scripture, we offer not to derogate the
least thing that truth thereunto does claim; in as much as by us it is
willingly confessed, that the Scripture of God is a Storehouse abounding with
inestimable Treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge in many kinds -- yea, even that
matters of Ecclesiastical Polity are not therein omitted, but taught also,
albeit not so taught as those other things beforementioned. For so perfectly
are those things taught, that nothing ever can need to be added, nothing ever
cease to be necessary: These on the contrary side, as being of a far other
nature and Quality, not so strictly nor everlastingly, commanded in Scripture,
but that unto the complete Form of Church-Polity much may be requisite, which
the Scripture teaches not, and much, which it has taught, become unrequisite,
sometime, because we need not use it, sometimes also because we cannot. In
which respect for my own part, although I see that certain Reformed Churches, the
Scottish especially, and French have not that which best agrees with the
Sacred Scriptures, I mean, the Government which is by Bishops; inasmuch as both
these Churches are fallen under a different kind of Regiment, which to remedy, it
is for the one altogether too late, and to soon for the other during their
present Affliction and Trouble.

He adds, The Matters wherein Church-Polity is conversant, P. 92.
are the Public religious Duties of the Church, as the Administration of the
Word, and Sacraments, Prayers, Spiritual Censures, and the like; To these the
Church stands always bound.

Laws of Polity, are Laws which appoint in what manner these Duties shall be
performed.

In their performance, the first thing in Polity required is a Difference of
Persons in the Church, without which difference, those Functions cannot in
orderly sort be executed. Hereupon we hold, That God's Clergy are a State,
which has been, and will be as long as there is a Church upon Earth, necessary
by the plain Word of God himself.

Again, where the Clergy are any great Multitude, Order does necessarily
require that by Degrees they be distinguished: we hold there have ever been and
ever ought to be in such case, at leastwise two sorts of Ecclesiastical
Persons, the one subordinate unto the other, as to the Apostles in the
beginning, and to Bishops always since, we find plainly both in Scripture, and
in all Ecclesiastical Records other Ministers of the Word and Sacraments have
been.

Moreover, it cannot enter into any man's conceit to think it lawful, that
every man which lists, should take upon him charge in the Church; and
therefore a Solemn Admittance is of such necessity, that without it there can
be no Church-Polity.

These are the Principal and Perpetual parts in Ecclesiastical Polity.

Thus much in the Third Book, where he looks on Church-Polity in the general
and some special parts thereof, such as a distinction between Bishops and
Presbyters, and a Subordination of the Presbyter to the Bishop to be agreeable
to the Word of God, but no complete form of Church Polity to be found in the
Scripture, neither are all the Laws of God concerning the Government of the
Church Immutable, and Everlasting: We must go to the Seventh Book for a more
distinct account of the Office of a Bishop, and the difference between him and
a Presbyter; where it is thus:

But to let go the Name [Bishop] and to come to the very Nature of that thing,
Lib. 7. Sect. 2. page 5.
which is thereby signified in all kinds of Regiment, whether Ecclesiastical or
Civil: as there are sundry Operations Public, so likewise great Inequality
there is in the same Operations, some being of Principal respect, and therefore
not fit to be dealt in by every one to whom Public Actions, and those of Good
Importance, are notwithstanding well, and fitly enough committed. From hence
have grown those different Degrees of Magistrates, or Public Persons, even
Ecclesiastical, as well as Civil. Amongst Ecclesiastical Persons therefore
Bishops being Chief ones, a Bishop's Function must be defined by that wherein
his Chiefty consists.

A Bishop is a Minister of God, unto whom with permanent continuance, there is
given not only Power of administering the Word and Sacraments, which Power other
Presbyters have, but also a further Power to Ordain Ecclesiastical Persons, and
a Power of Chiefty in Government over Presbyters, as well as Laymen; A Power to
be by way of Jurisdiction, a Pastor even to Pastors themselves. Those things
incident unto the Bishop's Office, which do properly make him a Bishop, cannot
be common unto him with other Pastors. Now even as Pastors, so likewise Bishops
being Principal Pastors, a^e either at Large; or else with Restraint. At Large,
when the subject of their Regiments is indefinite, and not tied to any certain
Place; Bishops with Restraint, are they whose Regiment over the Church is
contained within some definite local compass, beyond which compass their
Jurisdiction reaches not; such therefore, we always mean, when we speak of
that Regiment by Bishops, which we hold a thing most Lawful, Divine and Holy in
the Church of Christ.

But what does He mean by Chiefty in Government? In answer unto this, he tells
us how far the old Noncons went in the grant of an Inequality, and how much
further He goes. They which cannot brook (says he) the Superiority which
Bishops have, Sect. 3. p. 6.
do, notwithstanding themselves, admit that some kind of Difference and
Inequality there may be lawfully amongst Ministers. Inequality touching Gifts
and Graces they grant -- Again, a Priority of Order they deny not, but that
there may be, yea, such a Priority as makes one man amongst many a Principal
Actor in those things, whereunto sundry of them must necessarily concur, so
that the same be admitted only during the time of such Actions, and no longer.
-- The Inequality they complain of is, That one Minister of the Word and
Sacraments should have a permanent Superiority above another, or in any sort a
Superiority of Power Mandatory, Judicial, and Coercive over other Ministers.

Thus you see how far the old Noncons could go, and no farther, and immediately
after, he tells us how much farther the Church of England at that time went;
for, says he, By Us on the contrary side, Inequality, even such Inequality, as
unto Bishops, being Ministers of the Word and Sacraments, is granted a
Superiority Permanent above Ministers; yea, a Permanent Superiority of Power
Mandatory, Judicial and Coercive over them is maintained a thing Allowable,
Lawful, and Good.

In two things Hooker differs from the old Noncons.

1. They make the Superiority, or Priority of Order to be but Temporary: Hooker
makes it Permanent. 2. They deny the Bishops having a Power over other Pastors,
that is, Mandatory, Judicial, and Coercive: Hooker affirms it.
There is one thing more to be enquired into, viz. whether He grants to
Presbyters the Pastoral Office? He calls them Pastors, and in his very
definition of a Bishop, makes the Bishop to be a Pastor of Pastors (and of
Presbyters) and he calls the Bishop but Principal Pastor, and makes him to have
a Chiefty in Regiment above Presbyters; as if he held that the Presbyter had
some, though not so great a share in the Government; and out of Austin, That a
Bishop is a Presbyter Superior, and in several places a Bishop is of a Higher
Degree than a Presbyter. And although in his Third Book, he makes the Episcopal
Office to be a part of Church Polity perpetual, as though the Episcopacy had been
de jure Divino, and Immutable; yet in this Seventh Book, in clearing the sense
of St. Jerome, he is expressly against the Immutability and Unchangeableness of
the Bishop's Superiority; as if he held it to be Apostolical in the same manner
Bishop Downame does, of whom hereafter.

The words of St. Hierom, on which he puts his own Comment, are these. As
therefore Presbyters do know, that the Custom of the Church makes them subject
to the Bishop, which is set over them; so let Bishops know, that Custom rather
than the Truth of any Ordinance of the Lord's makes them greater than the
rest, and that with Common Advice they ought to Govern the Church. To this
Hooker replies, To clear the sense of these words therefore: Laws, which the
Church from the beginning universally has observed were some delivered by
Christ himself, with a Charge to keep them to the worlds End, as the Law of
Baptizing, and administering the Holy Eucharist; some brought in afterward by
the Apostles, yet not without the special Direction of the Holy Ghost, as
occasions did arise. Of this sort are those Apostolical Orders, and Laws,
whereby Deacons, Widows, Virgins were first appointed in the Church.

This Answer to St. Hierom seems dangerous, I have qualified it as I may by
addition of some words of restraint; yet I satisfy not my self in my Judgment
it would be altered. Now whereas Jerome, does term the Government of Bishops by
restraint, an Apostolical Tradition, acknowledging thereby the same to have
been the Apostles own Institution, it may be demanded how these two will stand
together; namely, That the Apostles by Divine Instinct, should be as Jerome
confesses, the Authors of that Regiment, and yet the Custom of the Church be
accounted (for so by Jerome it may seem to be in this place accounted) the
Chiefest prop that upholdeth the same? To this we answer, That as much as the
whole Body of the Church, has Power to ALTER with general consent, and upon
necessary occasions, even the Positive Laws of the Apostles, if there be no
Commandment to the contrary, and it manifestly appears to her, that change of
times have clearly taken away the very reason of God's first Institution as by
sundry Examples may be most clearly proved; what Laws the Universal Church
might change, and does not; if they have long continued without any alteration;
it seems that St. Jerome ascribes the continuance of such Positive Laws, though
instituted by God himself, to the Judgment of the Church. For they which might
Abrogate a Law, and do not, are properly said to Uphold, to Establish it, and
to give it Being. The Regiment therefore, whereof Jerome speaks, being
Positive, and consequently not absolutely necessary, but of a Changeable
Nature, because there is no Divine Voice, which in express words forbids it
to be changed, He might imagine both that it came by the Apostles by very
Divine Appointment at the first, and notwithstanding after a sort, said to
stand in force, rather by the Custom of the Church, choosing to continue it,
than by the necessary constraint of any Commandment from the Word, requiring
Perpetual Continuance thereof. Thus Hooker, who a little after says, Bishops
albeit they may avouch with Conformity of Truth, that their Authority has thus
descended even from the very Apostles themselves; yet the Absolute and
Everlasting continuance of it they cannot say that any Commandment of the Lord
does enjoin; And therefore must acknowledge, that the Church has Power by
Universal Consent upon urgent cause to take it away, if thereunto she be
constrained through the Proud, Tyrannical, and unreformable Dealings of her
Bishops. -- Wherefore lest Bishops forget themselves, as if none on Earth had
Authority to touch their States, let them continually bear in mind, that it is
rather the force of Custom, whereby the Church, having so long found it good to
continue under the Regiment of her virtuous Bishops, does still uphold,
maintain, and honor them in that respect, than that any such true, and
Heavenly Law can be showed, by the Evidence whereof it may of a Truth appear,
That the Lord himself has appointed Presbyters for ever to be under the
Regiment of Bishops, in what sort soever they behave themselves.

This Answer of the Learned Hooker makes it manifest, that though he held the
Institution of Episcopal Superiority to be Apostolical; yet he was not of
Opinion that 'twas unalterable. And although he held it Apostolical, yet suggests
as if there had been a Church Government instituted before the Episcopal took
place. The Apostles of our Lord (says he) did according unto those Directions,
which were given them from above, erect Churches in all such Cities as received
the Word of Truth, the Gospel of God: All Churches by them erected, received
from them the same Faith, the same Sacraments, the same Form of Public
Regiment. The Form of Regiment established by them at first was, That the Laity
or People should be subject unto a College of Ecclesiastical Persons, which
were in every such City appointed for that purpose. These in their Writings
they term sometime Presbyters, sometimes Bishops. -- That in process of time
the Apostles appointed under them Bishops, of an Order Superior above
Presbyters; the cause wherefore they did appoint under themselves such Bishops
as were not every where at the first, is said to have been those Strifes and
Contentions, for remedy whereof, whether the Apostles alone did conclude of
such a Regiment, or else they, together with the whole Church, judging it a fit
and needful Policy, did agree to receive it for a Custom, no doubt but being
established by them, on whom the Holy Ghost was poured in so abundant measure
for the ordering of Christ's Church, it had either Divine Appointment
beforehand, or Divine Approbation afterward.

This passage of Hooker, moves me to think he very much agreed with his most
Reverend Metropolitan, Archbishop Whit gift, who vehemently asserts an actual
change of Church Government in the Primitive Times, as well as the
changeableness of it in all Ages of the Church. There are other intimations in
this Learned Author, which oblige me to conclude that the Church of England was
not in his days come to a steady Resolution either about the Nature of a
Particular Church infimae speciei, or of the whole belonging to the Episcopal
Office.

Touching the Nature of a Particular Church of the lowest Rank, whether
Parochial or Diocesan, was not much with him; for speaking of the
Dissimilitudes which in some respects are found to be between the present
Bishops, and the Bishops in the Primitive times, he grants that many things
there are in the State of Bishops, Lib. 7. Sect. 2. p. 4.
which the times have changed, saying, That many a Parsonage at this day is
larger than some ancient Bishoprics were. -- To Men that have any part of
Skill, what more evident and plain in Bishops than that Augmentation and
Diminution in their Precincts, Allowances, Privileges, and such like, do make a
Difference indeed; but no Essential Difference between one Bishop and another.
But a Learned Nonconformist assures us, That he shall try among other things,
Treatise of Episcopacy, chap. 5. page 49.
whether the Name of a Bishopric will make a Parsonage and a Diocese to be
Ejusdem speciei, and whether Magnitude do not make a specific Difference
between the Sea, and a Rivulet or a Glass of Water, or between a Ship and a
Nutshell. And I may add, that if there be no Essential Difference between a
Bishopric no larger than a Parsonage, and a Diocesan Bishopric, the
Controversy between the Church of England and generality of Nonconformists,
may touching Church Government, be determined by such Condescensions made by
the Church to the Dissenters, as are short of an Essential Alteration to
Episcopacy. Let there be as many Bishoprics as there are considerable
Parsonages, or Parishes endowed, and a Provision made for the Presbyters who
are to assist the Bishops in the Government of these little Churches, and a
Superiority of the Bishop above the Presbyters, or a Chiefty in the Regiment
will be no longer a bone of Contention.

As to what belongs to the Episcopal Function as Different from the Presbyters,
it is held by some that Ordination, Confirmation and Jurisdiction, are proper to
it; Let us see then Hooker's Judgment for the first Point, There may be (says
he) sometimes very just and sufficient Reasons to all Ordination made without a
Bishop. Lib. 7. Sect. 14. page 37.
The whole Church Visible being the true-Original-Subject of all Power, it has
not ordinarily allowed any other than Bishops alone to Ordain: Howbeit, as the
ordinary course is ordinarily in all things to be observed, so it may in some
Cases not unnecessary, that we decline from the ordinary ways. The Power of
Ordination is appropriated to the Bishop by the Churches Allowance and no
otherwise, and the same Church allowing Presbyters to Ordain, their Ordination
is Good, so that Ordination is not proper to a Bishop quarto modo, for it does
not Convenire to him semper and soli; and therefore he adds in the next Page,
That we are not simply without Exception to urge a lineal Descent of Power from
the Apostles by continued succession of Bishops in every Effectual Ordination.
Lib. 7. Sect. 6. page 14.


For the second Point, I make not Confirmation part of that Power which has
always belonged only unto Bishops; because in some places the Custom was that
Presbyters might also Confirm in the absence of a Bishop.

Touching the last Point, How Bishops together with Presbyters have used to
Govern the Churches under them: Lib. 7. Sect. 7. page 17.
It is by Zonaras (says he) somewhat plainly and at large declared, That the
Bishop had his Seat on high in the Church above the Residue, which were
present; that a number of Presbyters did always there Assist him, and that in
the Oversight of the People, those Presbyters were after a sort the Bishops
Coadjutors. The Bishops and Presbyters who together with him governed the
Church, are for the most part by Ignatius jointly mentioned; They are
Counselors and Assistants of the Bishop.

Thus this great Man grants: That though Government in general be necessary to
the Church, yet no one particular kind of Government is so; That the Scriptures
do not make the Episcopal Government unalterable; That the Power of conferring
Orders, is not by a Divine Law so appropriate to the Bishops, that in no case
an Ordination by Presbyters can be valid; That the Church Visible is the
true-Original-Subject of all Power, and can alter the Government of the Church;
That Confirmation is not essential to the Office of a Bishop; That Presbyters
have a share in the Government; That the Difference between the Bishop and
Presbyter is in the Degree, the Bishop having a Chiefty in the Government, and
Presbyters the Bishops Coadjutors, Assistants, Advisers and Counselors.

The Learned Bilson, afterward Bishop of Winchester, speaking of the
Controversy between the Old Nonconformists and the Church of England,
Perpetual Government of the Church.
expresses himself in these words. Thus far we join, That to prevent
Dissension and Confusion, there must needs, Epistle to the Reader.
even by God's Ordinance, be a President, or Ruler of every Presbytery; which
Conclusion because it is warranted by the Grounds of Nature, Reason and Truth,
and has the Example of the Church of God, before, Under and after the Law, we
accept as Irrefutable, and lay it as the Groundwork of all that ensues. But
whether this Presidentship did in the Apostles times, and by their Appointment
go round by course to all the Pastors and Teachers of every Presbytery, or were
by Election committed to One chosen as the fittest to supply that Place so long
as He discharged his Duty without blame, that is a main point betwixt us. --

But more particularly he adds, In the Apostles I observe four things needful
for the first Founding and Erecting of the Church, and four other Points that
must be Perpetual in the Church of Christ. These are the Dispensing the Word,
Administering the Sacraments, Imposing of Hands, and guiding the Keys to shut or
open the Kingdom of God. The first two must be general to all Pastors and
Presbyters of Christ's Church; but so do not the other two. -- I have largely
debated and made it plain, as well by the Scriptures as by other Ancient
Writers past all Exception, there have always been selected some of greater
Gifts than the Residue to succeed in the Apostles Places, to whom it belonged,
both to moderate the Presbyters of each Church, and to take the special Charge
of Imposition of Hands, and this their Singularity in Succeeding, and
Superiority in Ordaining, have been observed from the Apostles times as the
Peculiar and Substantial marks of Episcopal Power and Calling.

"The Power of the Keys, and Right to Impose Hands (by which he always means
the Power to Ordain Ministers, and Excommunicate Sinners) belong unto the
Bishop, distinguishing "him from a Presbyter.

What the things are, Chap. 12. p. 208.
which must abide for ever in the Church I showed before; it shall suffice now
to rehearse them; namely, Power to Preach the Word, and Administer the
Sacraments, the Right use of the Keys, and Imposition of Hands. -- These four
parts for Brevities sake, I often reduce to two Branches, which are Doctrine
and Discipline, comprizing in Doctrine the Dividing of the Word and Dispensing
of the Sacraments, and referring the rest, I mean, the Public use of the Keys,
and Imposition of Hands to the Discipline, or Regiment of the Church.

The Discipline and Government of the Church, (I mean the Power of the Keys,
Chapter 12. p. 213.
and Imposing of Hands) are two parts of Apostolic Authority, which must
remain in the Church for ever. These Keys are double, the Key of Knowledge,
annexed to the Word, the Key of Power referred to the Sacraments; Some late
Writers by urging the one, abolish the other; howbeit, I see no sufficient
Reason to countervail the Scriptures and Fathers, that Defend, and Retain both.
The Key of Knowledge must not be doubted of, our Savior in express words
names it. Woe be to you Interpreters of the Law, for ye have taken away the Key
of Knowledge. The Key of Power stands in these words of Christ to Peter, I
will give thee the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, and whatsoever thou shall
bind on Earth; shall be bound in Heaven, etc. And likewise to all his Apostles,
Whatsoever ye bind on Earth, P. 218.
etc. -- It rests in this place to be considered to whom those Keys were
committed, whether Equally to all Presbyters, or Chiefly to Pastors, and
Bishops. The like must be done for Imposition of Hands, whether that also
pertain'd indifferently to all, or specially to Bishops.

This is the State of the Point in Controversy; namely, Whether the Power of
the Keys, and that of Imposition of Hands belong Equally and Indifferently to
all Presbyters, and Bishops; or whether they do not belong chiefly and
specially to Bishops: But whether the one or the other be affirmed, 'twill
unavoidably follow, that these Powers in a sense belong to both. Thus much is
supposed in the very state of the Question, which is not, whether these Powers
do not at all belong to Presbyters, but whether they do belong so much to
Presbyters as unto Bishops, so that the holding them, to belong chiefly and
specially unto the Bishop, implies, that they do, though in a lesser Degree,
belong unto Presbyters. They appertain both to the Presbyter and Bishop, but
not Equally, to the Bishop chiefly and specially. Now Conform hereunto the
Learned Bilson says, The Bishop then, or President of the Presbyters (for I
stand not on Names, Chapter 14. p. 293.
while I discuss their Powers) is by Christ's own Mouth pronounced to be the
Angel of the Church; that is, the Chief Steward over God's Household, and
Overseer of his Flock. -- And touching the Presbyter's Power, P. 319.
He adds, That at first the Presbyters sat with the Bishop as Assessors, and
Consenters, before Synods undertook such Causes; But after, when once Councils
began to have the Hearing of Grievances, then sat the Presbyters with the
Bishop only, as Beholders and Advisers of his Judgment -- The Private use of
the Keys in appointing Offenders upon the Acknowledging their Sins, P. 317.
for a time to forbear the Lord's Table, we deny not to Presbyters.

However the Ambiguity of the Name of Bishop, and Community of many things
incident, and appertinent both to Bishops and Presbyters, urged him to lay down
certain Peculiar Marks and Parts of the Bishop's Office, whereby they are
always Distinguished from Presbyters, and never Confounded with them, either in
Scriptures, Councils or Fathers. There were many Prerogatives (says he)
appropriate unto the Bishop, Chapter 13. p. 244.
by the Authority of the Canons and Custom of the Church, such as Reconciling
of Penitents, Confirmation of Infants, and others that were Baptized, by Laying
on their Hands, Dedication of Churches, etc. But the things Proper to Bishops,
which might not be Common to Presbyters, were Singularity in Succeeding, and
Superiority in Ordaining. These two, the Scriptures and Fathers reserve only to
Bishops, they never Communicate them to Presbyters. The Singularity of one
Pastor in every place preserves the Peace and Unity of the Churches, and
stops Schisms and Dissentions, for which Cause they were first Ordained by
the Apostles. 246.
This is a certain Rule to Distinguish Bishops from Presbyters, the Presbyters
were many in every City, of whom the Presbytery consisted. Bishops were always
Singular, that is, one in a City, and no more, except another intruded (which
the Church of Christ counted a Schism) or else an Helper were given in respect
of extreme and feeble age; in which case the Power of the latter ceased in the
presence of the former. And this Singularity of one Pastor in each place
descended from the Apostles and their Scholars in all the famous Churches of
the World by a Perpetual Chair of Succession, and does to this day continue;
but where Abomination or Desolation, I mean, Heresy or Violence, interrupt it.
-- The second assured sign of Episcopal Power, is Imposition of Hands to Ordain
Presbyters and Bishops, for as Pastors were to have some to assist them in
their Charge, which were Presbyters, P. 248.
so were they to have others to succeed them in their Places, which were
Bishops. And this Right by Imposing Hands to Ordain Presbyters and Bishops in
the Church of Christ; was at first derived from the Apostles unto Bishops, and
not unto Presbyters; and has for these fifteen Hundred Years without Example
or Instance to the contrary, till this our Age, remained in Bishops, and not in
Presbyters. -- Jerome, where he retcheth the Presbyters Office to the uttermost,
of purpose to show, that he may do by the Word of God as much as the Bishop, he
excepteth this One Point as unlawful for Presbyters by the Scriptures. Quid
facit Excepta Ordinatione, Episcopus, quod Presbyter non facit?

And whereas it is objected, That Imposition of Hands was by the Presbytery, he
answers out of Chrysostom, that by the word Presbytery in that place of
Scripture must be understood Bishops, not Presbyters, because Presbyters in the
Apostles time did not impose Hands on a Bishop.

All that we can say for the Power of Bishops above Presbyters out of the
Scriptures, P. 299.
is this: That the Holy Ghost by the mouth of St. Paul has given the Bishop of
each Place, Authority to Ordain such as be worthy, to examine such as be
faulty, and Reprove and Discharge such as be guilty either of Unsound Teaching,
and Offensive Living. Thus much he says to Timothy, and to Tite, and in them
to their Successors, and to all other Bishops of Christ's Church for ever.

The Power of Ruling the People is not solely, but chiefly in the Bishop. P.
304.
My meaning (says he) is soon understood. You establish one Chief in your
Presbyteries by God's Essential and Perpetual Ordinance, to execute that which
you decree, whom you call a President. How far I join with you, you shall
quickly perceive. To avoid Tumults and Dissentions, God has Authorized One in
each Place and Church, Able, to have and maintain a Presbytery, who with
Pastoral, and Fatherly Moderation, should Guide as well the Presbyters that
assist him, as the People that are Subject to him, according to the Laws of God
and Man; the Execution whereof is Chiefly committed to his Charge that is the
Leader, and Overseer of the rest: whom we call a Bishop. His Power I call a
Moderation, and not a Domination; because the Wisdom of God has likewise
allowed and provided Christian means as well to Bridle him from wrongs, as to
Direct him in Doubts. And whereas the Nonconformist tells him, that this is
right the Power which they give to their Presbyteries; his Answer is, Did you
not put Laymen instead of Pastors to be Presbyters, and make them Controulers,
where they should be but Advisers, your Presbyteries might have some use in the
Church of God; though far less now than when they first began. And amongst the
many uses of Presbyteries, P. 307.
the Bishop is Positive, "That at first, lest the Bishops only will should be
the Rule of all things in the Church, the Government of the Church was so
proportioned that neither the Presbyters should do any thing without their
Bishop; nor the Bishop dispose Matters of Importance without his Presbytery.

He distinguishes between the Private use of the Keys in Refusing to give the
Lord's Supper unto the Impeninent, and the Public use of the Keys, whereby the
obstinate Person is excluded from all Fellowship of the Faithful, as well
Sacred as Civil; The first belongs to the Presbyter, the last was by the Church
of God allowed always and only to Bishops. So in another place. P. 320.
-- For our parts, though we take the Power of the Keys to be Common to all that
have Pastoral Charge of Souls, in their Degree, yet to avoid the infinite
Showers of Excommunication, which would overflow all Churches and Parishes, and
the intolerable Quarrels and Brabbles that would ensue, if every Presbyter
might Excommunicate without the Bishops consent and License, we praise the
Wisdom of God's Church in suffering no Inferior to Excommunicate without the
Bishop's consent and License.

Thus far this Learned Bishop, who urges the singularity of Succession and
Superiority in Ordination, to be the Essential Marks of a Bishop, as he differs
from a Presbyter, yet not divesting the Presbyter of all Governing Power in the
Church of Christ. His Pleading for a Superiority of Power in the Bishop,
carries in it the grant of a lesser degree of the same Power, as belonging to
the Presbyter, and the denying Presbyters the Exercise of this Power without
the consent of the Bishop, is but by an Ecclesiastical Constitution, such as
that which makes the Reconciling Penitents, and Confirmation to be rather
Peculiar to the Bishop for the Honor of his Calling, than for any Necessity of
God's Word.

Thus I have gone through the Principal Writers about Church Government that
were in Queen Elizabeth's Reign; namely, Alley Bishop of Exeter, Pilkington
Bishop of Duresme, Jewel Bishop of Salisbury and Whitgift, Archbishop of
Canterbury, who held, that according to the Scriptures, there was no Difference
between a Presbyter and a Bishop, that in Scripture account their Office and
Powers were the same, and that the Apostles did not leave behind them any one
kind of Church Government to be observed throughout all the Churches at all
times. These were followed by Dr. Cosins, Dr. Low, and Bishop Bridges.

The Learned Willet, in his Synopsis Papismi, a Book Published at least three
or four times in Queen Elizabeth's Days, and afterward by King James his
Special Command, does in most things agree with the Bishops, but now mentioned,
and being more particular than they, affirming out of Jerome, That Confirmation
and Ordination were appropriated to the Bishop, rather for the Honor of their
Priesthood, and the Peace of the Church, than by necessity of any Law; the same
he says of the Jurisdiction of the Church; adding, That anciently there were
no distinct Consecrations of Bishops. The thing wherein he may be supposed to
differ from them is, that an Inequality amongst the Presbyters, and the
Presidency of some one above the other for Orders sake, he holds to be
Apostolical; but herein differs not from the Old Nonconformists.

After these, I have given the Judgments of Saravia, Archbishop Bancroft, the
Judicious Hooker, and Bishop Bilson; who affirm, the Government of the Church
to be Apostolical. Though formerly 'twas esteemed dangerous to the Civil
Government to hold, that Church Government must now be the same 'twas in the
Apostles days; yet it is looked on by these, as what ought to be. The Government
of the Church with them is a Divine and Apostolical Institution, but not
Unalterable. Bilson, I confess, says, it is Perpetual, and yet Bishop *
Downame, Defense of his Sermon, p. 26.
who most willingly and gladly professes to consent in Judgment with Him, P. 2.
does solemnly Declare in these words, That although he holds the Calling of
Bishops in respect of their first Institution, to be an Apostolical, and so a
Divine Ordinance, yet that he does not maintain it to be Divini Juris, as
intending thereby, that it is Generally, Perpetually, and Immutably necessary,
as though there could not be a True Church without it. And within a few Pages
after this, He declares his Opinion to be the same with King James's; who does
say, That it is granted to every Christian King, Prince, and Commonwealth to
prescribe to their Subjects, that Outward Form of Ecclesiastical Regiment,
which may seem best to agree with the Form of their Civil Government; but so
as they swerve not at all from the Grounds of Faith, and True Religion. This,
says Downame, makes not against the Government of Bishops, as I maintain it
-- Though I hold the Government-Episcopal to be of Apostolical and Divine
Institution; yet not as Generally, Perpetually and Immutably necessary: He does
not hold it necessary in all Places, nor in all Ages, but to be changeable by
Man; and if herein He and Bilson accord, the Perpetuity Bilson is for, will
admit of a Change.

But whether Downame gives us Bilson's Notion, when he states his own, I will
not contend, nor is it needful I should; It Is enough to my purpose, that the
difference he places between a Bishop and Presbyter is only in Degree, that
Confirmation, and Excommunication belong unto Presbyters; and that Bilson's
Bishop differs more from the Bishops by Law Established than from the
Nonconformist Parish Presbyters.

Bancroft professes to agree with Robinson, Reynolds, and Fulk, who differed
not from the Old Nonconformists, and Hooker never thought the Government of the
Church to be in all Places and Ages necessarily the same; nor did he look on
Bishops to be of a Different Order from Presbyters, but to be of the same
Order, differing only in Degree, the Bishop having only a Chiefty of Power in
the Church, nor did any Great Men of the Church of England, in Queen Elizabeth's
time, null the Ministry or Church State of the Reformed either in Scotland or
beyond the Seas; They held their Churches to be true Churches, and their
Government to be such as agreed with the General Rules of God's Word, and though
some esteemed the Ordination only by Presbyters to be defective, yet did not
judge it to be Invalid, but admitted those who had their Ordination only from
Presbyters abroad, to Ecclesiastical Promotions, on no other terms than their
Subscribing the Articles of Religion, which concern the Faith, and Doctrines of
the Sacraments only.

These Sentiments, which our first Reformers entertained about Episcopacy are
such, as would (if the Government of the Church be at this time Framed
accordingly) contribute much to the Peace of the Church, and Healing our
Divisions; and seeing they are most admirably copied out unto us in the Learned
Archbishop Usher's Reduction of Episcopacy, I will with some Notes present it
to the Reader's more Deliberate Consideration.

CHAP. VI. Archbishop Usher's Reduction of Episcopacy with some Notes on it.
The Reduction of Episcopacy unto the Form of Synodical Government received in
the Ancient Church; proposed in the year 1641. as an Expedient for the
prevention of those Troubles, which afterward did arise about the matter of
Church Government.
Episcopal and Presbyterial Government Conjoined.
BY Order of the Church of England all Presbyters are charged to administer the
Doctrine and Sacraments, The Book of Ordination.
and the Discipline of Christ, as the Lord has commanded, and as this Realm
has received the same; And that they might the better understand what the Lord
had commanded therein, Ibid. ex Act. 20.27, 28.
the Exhortation to St. Paul, to the Elders of the Church of Ephesus is
appointed to be read unto them at the time of their Ordination; Take heed unto
your selves and to all the Flock among whom the Holy Ghost has made you
Overseers to Rule the Congregation of God, (...) so taken in Mat. 2.6. Revel.
12.5. and 19.15.
which he has purchased with his Blood.

Notes.
Thus it was in the Old Book of Ordering Priests and Deacons; but on the
Restoration of Charles II. there were such Alterations made in the Books of
Common Prayer and Ordering Bishops, Priests and Deacons, as do plainly show,
that though heretofore the Presbyters had Power to Rule, yet now they have none.

In the Act of Uniformity, 14 Car. 2. it is Declared, That the King's Majesty
(according to his Declaration of 25. October, 1660.) granted his Commission
under the Great Seal of England, to several Bishops, and other Divines, to
Review the Book of Common Prayer, and to prepare such Alterations, and
Additions, as they thought fit to offer: And afterward the Convocations of
both the Provinces of Canterbury and York, being by his Majesty called and
Assembled, (and now sitting) his Majesty has been pleased to Authorize and
require the Presidents of the said Convocations, and other the Bishops, and
Clergy of the same, to Review the said Book of Common Prayer, and the Book of
the Form and Manner of the making and Consecrating of Bishops, Priests and
Deacons; And that after mature Consideration, they should make such Additions,
and Alterations in the said Books respectively, as to them should seem meet and
convenient; And should Exhibit, and Present the same to his Majesty in Writing,
for his further Allowance, or Confirmation; since which time, upon full and
mature Deliberation, they, the said Presidents, Bishops, and Clergy of both
Provinces, have accordingly Reviewed the said Books, and have made some
Alterations, which they think fit to be inserted to the same, and have
Exhibited and Presented the same unto his Majesty in Writing. All which his
Majesty having duly considered, has fully Approved and Allowed the same, and
recommended to this present Parliament.

The Books thus altered, were by this Parliament confirmed and established, and
the Alterations such as make the Office of the Presbyter quite another thing
than it was before; for though in the old Book of Ordering Bishops, Priests and
Deacons, the Reading unto the Presbyters at the time of their Ordination, Acts
20.27, 28. did put it out of Doubt, that the Presbyters were vested with the
Pastoral Office, having Power given 'em to Rule the Church; In the new Book
this Exhortation is removed from the Presbyters Ordination unto the
Consecration of Bishops, thereby manifestly Evincing the Pastoral Power to be
taken from the Presbyter, and feated with the Bishop only, and accordingly the
name [Pastor] which was in the old Book given unto the Presbyter, is in the new
omitted, and in several places the word [ Curate, or Priest] substituted in its
stead; and whereas, in the old Book, the Presbyter was admitted [to the
Ministry of Priesthood] in the new it is to the [Order] and Ministry of
Priesthood, thereby making Priesthood an Order distinct from those of
Deaconship and Episcopacy. In the Consecrating of Bishops in the Collect, to
show what they mean by Bishop more than formerly, it is added by way of
Explication to all Bishops [the Pastors of thy Church] and in the Prayer for
the Bishop [ Almighty God, etc.] in the old Book 'twas, Replenish him so with
thy Truth -- that He may faithfully serve thee in this Office to the Edifying
of thy Church; in the new it is [to the well Governing thy Church.] And when
the Archbishop and other Bishops present, do lay their Hands on the Elected,
and according to the old Book, were to say, [ Receive the Holy Ghost, etc.] in
the new it is added [ for the Office and Work of a Bishop Now committed unto
thee by the Imposition of our Hands in the Name of the Father, etc.]

Thus the Alterations by Law establshed do clearly show, that both the Name and
Office of a Pastor is taken from the Presbyter, and transferred over to the
Diocesan, who alone has the Power of Ordering Priests and Deacons, and of
Governing or Ruling the Church; whence it follows, that as there is but One
Pastor in a Diocese, there is but one Church; That all Parish-Assemblies are
but parts or parcels of this One single Church, under the Conduct and
Government only of the Diocesan Bishop, their only Pastor; That all Ordinations
by Presbyters are of no greater Validity than those by Deacons or Laymen; and
therefore although Ordination is no more to be repeated than Baptism, yet those
who have had their Ordination only by Presbyters, must be Ordained again, or
not admitted unto any Benefice, nor allowed the Exercise of the Priestly
Office, nor be esteemed Lawful Priests; so that as there is a vast Difference
between Queen Elizabeth's Bishops and Charles the Second's, so between Queen
Elizabeth's Law, and King Charles's. Q. Elizabeth's Act runs thus, That every
Person under the Degree of a Bishop, which does or shall pretend to be a Priest
or Minister of God's Holy Word and Sacraments, by reason of any other Form of
Institution, Consecration, or Ordering, than the Form now used in the Reign of
our most Gracious Sovereign Lady -- shall -- declare his Assent, and subscribe
to all the Articles of Religion, which only concern the Profession of the true
Christian Faith, and the Doctrine of the Sacraments, comprised in a Book
Entitled, Articles, etc. [viz. 39 Articles] -- upon pain, that every such
Person which shall not subscribe, shall be (ipso facto) deprived, and all his
Ecclesiastical Promotions shall be void, as if he had been naturally dead.

King Charles his Law is thus, That no Parson, who now is Incumbent, and in the
Possession of any Parsonage or Benefice, and who is not in Holy Orders by
Episcopal Ordination, or shall not be before the said Feast Day of St.
Bartholomew, Ordained Priest or Deacon, shall have, hold, or enjoy any
Parsonage with Cure -- but shall be utterly disabled, and ipso facto deprived
of the same, and all his Ecclesiastical Promotions shall be void, as if he had
been naturally dead.

Touching Persons ordained by any other Form than the Episcopal, a Subscription
to the Articles was sufficient by 13 Eliz. c. 12. to Qualify them for
Spiritual Promotion, and Whittingham's, whose Ordination was only by Presbyters
abroad, was esteemed good, and he enjoyed his Benefice to the day of his death,
as Traverse, in his Supplication to the Council, affirms: but though the Articles
be subscribed unto by one having only an Ordination by Presbyters, he must be
ordained by the Bishop, or not admitted to any Ecclesiastical Promotion; or if
admitted, he is ipso facto deprived; and whoever consults the Book of Ordering
Presbyters, will find that the whole of it plainly declares, that the former
Odination of the Person thus re-ordained, was invalid and null, and that till
now he was never of the Presbyters Office; for the Ordination of one never
before ordained, and the Ordination of him who was formerly ordained by
Presbyters, is the same.

Whether I am right in these my Sentiments, I appeal to the Right Reverend and
Reverend Bishops and others of the Dignified Clergy, who, with the greatest
importunity, are desired to declare their Judgments in this Matter.

To know what the Government of the Church of England is, that is by
Archbishops, Bishops; and what is the Office of a Presbyter, what that of a
Bishop, is a matter of extraordinary importance.

If it be the same it was in Edward the Sixth and Queen Elizabeth's days, which
is the same with what the Learned Archbishop Usher was for, the greatest Bone
of Contention between the Cons and Noncons will be removed farther. Every
Parish-Presbyter will be granted to be a Pastor, vested with a Right to Rule
the Church, (from whence, says the Learned Archbishop, the name of Rector also
was given unto him at first) and to administer the Discipline of Christ, as
well as to dispense the Doctrine and Sacraments, and the difference between the
Bishop and the Presbyter to be only in Degree, and not in Order, as this
Learned Primate ever held, as he says in an Answer to an abusive Report, that
went abroad of him: I have ever declared my Opinion to be (says he) That
Episcopus and Presbyter gradu tantum differunt, non Ordine, and consequently
that in places where Bishops cannot be had, the Ordination by Presbyters
stands valid; and Dr. Bernard in his Animadversions on the Archbishop's
Opinion, asserts, That in this Judgment he was not singular; Dr. Davenant, that
Pious and Learned Bishop of Salisbury, consents with him in it, Determinat. Q.
42.
produces the Principal of the Schoolmen, Gulielmus Parisiensis, Gerson,
Durand, etc. Episcopatus non est Ordo praecise distinctus a Sacerdotio
simplici, etc. non est alia potestas Ordinis in Episcopis quam Presbyteris, sed
inest modo perfectiori. And declares it to be the general Opinion of Schoolmen,
etc. And whereas the Primate says, That in Cases of Necessity, where Bishops
cannot be had, the Ordination by Presbyters stands valid: Bishop Davenant
concurs with him also, and produces the Opinion of Richardus Armathanus (one
of this Primate's Predecessors, and one of the most Learned men in his time) to
be accordingly. To which diverse others might be added, as in special Dr. Field
sometimes Dean of Gloucester, in his Learned Book of the Church, where this
Judgment of the Primate, Lib. 3. c. 39. and lib. 5. c. 27.
and the Concurrence of Bishop Davenant's, is largely confirmed. But that Book
Entitled, The Defense of the Ordination of the Ministers of the Reformed
Churches beyond the Seas, maintained by Mr. Archdeacon Mason against the
Romanists (who wrote also a Defense of Episcopacy, and of the Ministry of the
Church of England) is fufficiently known, and I have been assured it was not
only the Judgment of Bishop Overal, but that he had a Principal hand in it. He
produces many Testimonies, the Master of the Sentences, and most of the
Schoolmen, Bonaventure, Thomas Aquinas, Durand, Dominicus Soto, Richardus
Armachanus, Tostatus, Alphonsus a Castro, Gerson, Canisius to have affirmed the
same; and at last quotes Medina, a Principal Bishop of the Council of Trent,
who affirmed, That Jerome, Ambrose, Augustine, Sedulius, Primasius, Chrysostom,
Theodoret, Theophylact were of the same Judgment also. In a word, if the
Ordination of Presbyters in such places where Bishops cannot be had, were not
valid, the late Bishops of Scotland had a hard Task to maintain themselves to
be Bishops, who were not Priests, for their Ordination was no other.

What Dr. Bernard mentions about the Archbishop's dislike of the late
Prerbyterians here in England, is not so much against their Exercising the
Power, as the Manner of their Exercise, they did not add to the Imposition of
Hands [ Receive the Holy Ghost, etc.] nor so much as these words [ Be thou a
faithful Dispenser of the Word of God and of his Holy Sacraments, etc.]
Moreover in the Close to the Reduction the Primate and Dr. Holdsworth aver,
That the Suffragans, mentioned in the second Proposition, may lawfully use the
Power both of Jurisdiction and Ordination according to the Word of God and the
Practice of the Ancient Church, who yet are but the Chorepiscopi, of no other
Order than the Presbyters, as hereafter I shall prove. A Declaring therefore
thus much, namely, That the Presbyter is of the same Order, vested with the
Power both of Order and Jurisdiction, and an entrusting them with the Exercise
thereof, as in the second Proposition, will contribute very much toward a well
Established Comprehension; And in Requital it is not to be doubted, but the
Latitudinarian Nonconformist, of which there are a great number in this
Kingdom, will readily yield to the Presidency of one Presbyter, for the sake of
Union, to be over them, and close with what the Archbishop further adds.

Archbishop.

Of the many Elders, who in common Ruled the Church of Ephesus, there was one
President, whom our Savior in his Epistle to this Church, in a peculiar manner
styles the Angel of the Church of Ephesus: Revel. 1.
and Ignatius in another Epistle written about twelve years after unto the same
Church, calls the Bishop thereof. Betwixt the Bishop and the Presbytery of
that Church, what an Harmonious Consent there was in the Ordering of the
Church Government, the same Ignatius does fully declare, by the Presbytery,
which St. Paul, understanding the Community of the rest of the Presbyters or
Elders, who then had a hand, 1 Timothy 4.14.
not only in the Delivery of the Doctrine and Sacraments, but also in the
Administration of the Discipline of Christ: for further proof of which, we have
that known Testimony of Tertullian in his general Apology for Christians.
Ibidem etiam Exhortationes, Castigationes, and censura Divina; nam and
judicatur magno cum pondere, ut apud certos de Dei conspectu, summum summumque
futuri Judicii praejudicium est, si quis ita deliquerit, ut a Communicatione
Orationis, and Conventus and omnis sancti Commercii relegetur: praesident
probati quique Seniores, honotem istum non pretio, sed Testimonio adepti.
Tertul. Apologet. c. 39.
In the Church are used Exhortations, Chastisements, and Divine Censure; for
Judgment is given with great advice, as amongst those, who are certain they are
in the sight of God, and it is the chiefest foreshewing of the Judgment which
is to come, if any man have so offended, that he be banished from the Communion
of Prayer, and of the Assembly, and of all Holy Fellowship. The Presidents that
bear Rule therein, are certain approved Elders, who have obtained this Honor,
not by Reward, but by good Report, who were no other (as he himself intimates
elsewhere) but those from whose hands they used to receive the Sacrament of the
Eucharist. Nec de aliorum manibus quam Praesidentium sumimus. Id. de Corona
Militis, c. 3.


For with the Bishop, who was the Chief President (and therefore styled by the
same Tertullian in another place Dandi quidem Baptisini habet jus Summus
Sacerdos, qui est Episcopus, dehinc Presbyteri and Diaconi. Id. de Baptis. c. 17
Summus Sacerdos for distinction sake) the rest of the Dispensers of the Word
and Sacraments joined in the Common Government of the Church; and therefore,
where in Matters of Ecclesiastical Judicature, Cornelius Bishop of Rome used
the received Form of gathering together the Presbytery; Omni actu ad me perlato
placuit contrahi Presbyterium. Cornel. apud Cypr. Epist. 46.
of what persons that did consist, Cyprian sufficiently declares, when he
wishes them to read his Letters to the flourishing Clergy, Florentissimo
illic clero tecum praesidenti. Cypr. Epist. 55. ad Cornel.
which there did Preside or Rule with him. The presence of the Clergy being
thought to be so requisite in matters of Episcopal Audience, that in the fourth
Council of Carthage, it was concluded, Ut Episcopus nullius causam audiat
absque praesentia Clericorum suorum, alioquin irrita crit sententia Episcopi,
nisi Clericorum praesentia confirmetur. Council. Carthag. IV. cap. 23.
That the Bishop might hear no man's cause without the Presence of the Clergy,
and that otherwise the Bishop's Sentence should be void, unless it were
confirmed by the Presence of the Clergy; which we find also to be inserted
into the Canons of Except. Egberti, c. 43.
Egbert, who was Archbishop of York in the Saxon times, and afterward in the
Body of the 15. q. 7. c. nullus.
Canon Law it self.

True it is, that in our Church this kind of Presbyterial Government has been
long disused, yet seeing it still professes, that every Pastor has a Right to
Rule the Church (from whence the name of Rector also was given at first unto
him) and to Administer the Discipline of Christ, as well as to Dispense the
Doctrine and Sacraments, and the Restraint of the Exercise of that Right,
proceeds only from the Custom now received in this Realm, no man can doubt,
but by another Law of the Land, this hindrance may be well removed; And this
Ancient Form of Government by the united Suffrages of the Clergy, might be
revived again; and with what little show of Alteration, the Synodical
Conventions of the Pastors of every Parish might be accorded with the
Presidency of the Bishops of each Diocese and Province, the indifferent Reader
may quickly perceive by the perusal of the ensuing Propositions.

I.
In every Parish the Rector, or incumbent Pastor, together with the
Churchwardens and Sides-men, may every Week take notice of such as live
scandalously in that Congregation, who are to receive such several Admonitions
and Reproofs as the Quality of their Offense shall deserve: And if by this
means they cannot be reclaimed, they may be presented to the next monthly
Synod, and in the mean time debarred by the Pastor from Access unto the Lord's
Table.

Notes.
The Name Rector, which signifies a Governor or Ruler, was anciently given in
common to Prelates, Bishops, Abbots, and Parish-Presbyters, but chiefly to the
Parish Priest or Parson that had Cure of Souls, as DV FRESENE observes out of
the Lombardian Laws, Rectores Ecclesiarum Praelati, Episcopi, Abbates
Parochiarum Presbyteri in lege Longob. l. 3. tit. 1. Sect. 42. tit. 10. Sect.
4. In Capitularibus Carol. M. lib. 3. tit. 75. etc. Maxim Rector Ecclesiae qui
vulgo Curio, seu Curitus, ut in Charta Alaman. 43. apud Goldastum. DV FRESNE
Glos. in verb. Rector.
and Charles Great's Capitulars, and the Almaine Charter.

Lindwood also in his Provincial Constitution, declares the same; Communiter
loquendo [per ipsorum Rectorum] intelligas de Rectoribus Ecclesiarum
Parochialium. Potest etiam intelligi de omni Praelato Ecclesiae. Lindw. de
Consu. c. nullus ver. nullus Rector, and ver. Ipsorum Rectorum.
and Vid. Cowel's Interpreter, in Verb. Rector.
Cowell affirms, That in our Common Law, Rector Ecclesioe Parochialis, is he
that has the Charge or Cure of a Parish Church; qui tantum Jus in Ecclesia
Parochiali habet, quantum Proelatus in Ecclesia Collegiata, That a Parson and
Rector were anciently the same: So Lib. 4. Tract. 5. ca. pri.
Bracton, Sciendum quod Rectoribus Ecclesiarum Parochialium competit Assisa,
qui institui sunt per Episcopos and Ordinarios, ut Personae. Lindwood holds the
same: For, De Praesump. c. ne Lepra, Sect. quod si. ver. Personatus.
as he avers, That in aliquibus locis Rectores Ecclesiarum vocantur Personae,
so he is as express, that haec dictio Personae, est vulgar Anglicorum, and
ponitur pro Rectore. Wats in his Glossary, observing the Word Personatus in
Otho's Constitutions, delivered by Matthew Paris in Henry the Third's days, In
quibus locis omnibus accipitur pro Rectoria, quam a Parsonage vocamus.
and in Pope Innocent's Letter to the Abbot of St. Albans, assures us, that it
signifies a Rectory, and the Persona, or Parson, is the Rector. De Confess
Personar. and Cleric. Quod in quodan. ver. Persona.
John de Athon in his Commentary on Otho's Constitutions on the Word Personae,
says, (i.e.) Rectores; loquitur enim secundum vulgar Anglicorum. Lindwood, It
is also clear from anciently acknowledged rish-Church; and therefore
that Vicars Perpetual were to be Rectors or Governors of the Paon the
Constitution of Simon Langham, where it is Ordained, That Nullus Rector presume
to sell those Tithes of his Church not yet received, Nullus Rector, supple vel
Vicarius, ubi est Perpetuus De Consuet. c. Nullus Rector, ver. Nullus Rector.
before the Annunciation of the Blessed Mary, it must be understood also of
Vicars Perpetual: And John de Athon is very large in discussing, and positive
in determining it: Credo respectu Rectorum Vicarium dici Intitulatum, respectu
vero aliorum nominare debet Rectorem. Constit. Otho. de Instit. Vicarior. verb.
ad. Vicar.
For, says he, out of Innocent's Extrav. though if you consider a Vicar
Perpetual, with respect to his Rector, whose Vicar he is, he is not called a
Rector; yet if compared with others, he is a Rector.

It Is then very plain, That anciently every Parson and Vicar Perpetual, were
called Rectors or Governors; and why? but because they were vested with a
Right to Govern their Churches, notwithstanding which, it cannot now be
inferred, that those who still bear the Name of Rector, are Governors of the
Church; For the ancient Constitution of the Church is not only altered, whereby
Parish Presbytens, Parsons, Rectors and Vicars Perpetual, have lost all their
ancient Power of Ruling; but by reason of Impropriations, mere Laics, ever
since the Statute of Dissolution, that took away Appropriations from the
Church, have been Parsons and Rectors, but not Rulers of the Church.

Sir Henry Spelman very Learnedly does prove, Of Tithes, c. 29.
That after the Appropriations, the Parsonage still continues Spiritual, as
well in the Eye of the Common Law, as of the Canon Law: for if it became
Temporal by Appropriation, then were it within the Statute of Mortmaine, and
forfeited by that Act; and as it continues Spiritual, it must be made to a
Spiritual Person, and not Temporal, Spiritual Things and Spiritual Men being
Co-Relatives, that cannot in Reason be divorced. However, we see that, de
facto, Laymen are possessed of these Spiritual Impropriations, and thereby are
become the Parsons and Rectors; and the Ecclesiastical Incumbent, who has the
Cure of Souls, is his Vicar, who, although according to the Ancient Dialect,
might be called Rector, when compared with others, yet not with respect to the
Layman, the Parson or Rector of the Parish: He that has the Parsonage or
Rectory, is the Parson or Rector; and that is the Lay-Impropriator.

Besides, according to what has been offered in the first Note, it is plain,
that now no Governing Power is left with the Parish-Presbyter; He is not only
denied the Exercise of such a Power, but diversted of the Power it self; and if
any of 'em have the Name of Rector left'em, it is vox and praeterea nihil.

If in this I am mistaken, the Fathers of the Church are humbly desired to tell
the World so; but whether I am mistaken or no, the restoring the
Parish-Presbyters to the ancient Power of Rectors, and the Exercise of it, will
be a great step toward the healing our Breaches, especially if what the
ancient Chorepiscopi, whom I must again mention, who were but Presbyters,
enjoyed, may be allowed them: Of whom, more in my Notes under the next
Proposition.

II.
Whereas by a Statute in the Six and Twentieth Year of King Henry the Eighth
(revived in the First Year of Queen Elizabeth,) Chapter 14.
Suffragans are appointed to be erected in Twenty Six several places of this
Kingdom, the Number of them might very well be conformed unto the Number of the
several Rural Deanries, into which every Dioces is sub-divided; which being
done, the Suffragan supplying the place of those who in the ancient Church were
called Chorepiscopi, might every Month assemble a Synod of all the Rectors, or
incumbent Pastors within the Precinct, and according to the major part of their
Voices, conclude all Matters that shall be brought into Debate before them.

Notes.
The Suffragans appointed to be erected in the Twenty Sixth Year of Henry the
Eighth, were to be consecrated by the Archbishop, and Two other Bishops, or
Suffragans, and by them admitted to the Episcopal Dighity; but yet were not to
use, have, or execute any Jurisdiction or Episcopal Power or Authority within
their said Sees, nor within any Diocese or place of this Realm, or elsewhere
within the King's Dominions, but only such Jurisdiction, Power and Authority as
shall be Licensed and Limited to them, to take, do, and execute by a Commission
from the Bishop of the Sea in which he is a Suffragan; nor were they to use any
Jurisdiction, Ordinary, or Episcopal Power otherwise, nor longer time than
limited by such Commission.

These were the Suffragans appointed to be erected by Henry the Eighth, who
though Consecrated and Ordained to the Episcopal Dignity, yet must exercise no
other Episcopal Power than was delegated to 'em by the Diocesan's Commission,
which was a very precarious and uncertain thing. This Learned Archbishop does
therefore move, that instead of this sort of Suffragan, we might have men to
supply the place of the ancient Chorepiscopi, who were not at first under such
Limitations, tho without Episcopal Consecrations, they were vested with the
Powers and Authorities of City Bishops; and that they might be conformed to the
Number of Rural Deanries. A motion, which if closed with by the Church of
England, would, no doubt, touching this part of the Controversy about the
Government of the Church, heal the Division; and the Church in her
Condescension herein, would conform unto an ancient Practice of the Church,
recognized by all to be common, at least in the Third Century: For though
Bishop Parker will not admit them to have been in the Church till the Fourth
Century, because no mention of 'em in any Record before the Council of Ancyra
sat, which (notwithstanding what Angelocrator avers, who would have it be after
the Council of Nice, because Vitalis, Bishop of Antioch, the first named
amongst the Bishops that sat in it, was not made a Bishop before the Year
331.) it is generally held to be in the Year 314. And it is not easy to imagine,
that these Chorepiscopi could in so short a time spring out of Nothing, and
arrive to that height they were at An. 314, or as others 308. Besides, there
were several Chorepiscopi in the Council of Nice, that was but Ten or Twelve
Years after this; and Rabanus Maurus Seven or Eight Hundred Years ago produced
an Apostolical Argument to prove, that they were as ancient as City Bishops:
For (says he) in the Book which Damasus the first wrote on the desire of
Hierome the Presbyter, it is affirmed, That Linus and Cletus, by the Commandment
of St. Peter, Ordained Presbyters, who yet succeeded him not in the Apostolical
Chair, Clemens being by the Order of this blessed Apostle, made his Successor:
And (says Maurus) from hence it is, that the Chorepiscopi, as I suppose, had
their Rise, and have ever since continued in the Catholic Church, who being
Ordained, by their own Bishops, by their Commandment did Ordain Presbyters,
Deacons, and other Inferior Degrees, and discharge all the other Offices
belonging to Priesthood. So far Rabanus.

They were but Presbyters, and yet did Ordain and Exercise Episcopal
Jurisdiction.

That they did at first exercise Episcopal Jurisdiction in the Country, is
clear from the 13th Canon of the Council of Ancyra, which according to Zonaras
and Balsaman is thus:

(...). Exactly translated by Gentianus Hervetus, Chorepiscopos non ^icere
Presbyteros, vel Diaconos Ordinare, sed neque Vrbis Presbyteros, nisi cum
literis ab Episcopo permissum fuerit, in aliena Parochia. This, as Bishop
Parker confesses, is the most correct Copy; That it shall not be lawful for
Country Bishops to Ordain Presbyters or Deacons, nor yet for City Presbyters,
without the permission of their Bishop. Only he omits this material Expression.
[in another Parish or Diocess]; which Words do greatly confound the Learned
Archbishop of Paris, De Marca, who will therefore have the Greek Copy
corrected: Quid est illud in aliena Paraecia, ac si Chorepiscopis libera esset
Ordinatio. Presbyteri in sua Paraecia sine literis. De Marc. de Concord. Sacer.
and Imper. l. 2. c. 14. Sect. 1, 2.
What is the meaning of these words, (says he) (...), in alienae paroicia? as
if it had been lawful for-the Chorepiscopi to Ordain Presbyters in their own
Precincts, without the leave of the City-Bishop. He will therefore have it,
(...), in unaquaque Paraecia, which agrees not only with the Translation of
Dionysius Exiguus, but with an ancient Copy in the Library at Oxford, P. 140.
as Thorndike of the Right of the Church, reports, who can make no Sense of De
Marca's Emendation: For, says he, can the Reading of the last words, (...),
seem probable to Reasonable Persons? What Consequence of Sense is there in
saying, unless License be granted in every Parish? Which is plain, when it is
said, That the City-Presbyters do nothing in the Parish, that is in the
Country or Diocese, without Authority by the Bishop's Letters. So far
Thorndike, who is for the blotting (...) out of Zonara's and Balsanion's Copy,
and (...) out of the Copy at Oxford, and who agrees with De Marca, in adding
(...) to the Canon, and prefers Isidore Mercator's Translation before the
Original Greek, and have it thus, Vicariis Episcoporum, quos, Graeci
Chorepiscopos vocant, non licere Presbyteros vel Diaconos Ordinare, sed nec
Presbyteris Civitatis, sine Episcopi Praecepto, amplius aliquid Imperare, vel
sine Autoritate Literarum ejus in unaquaque parochia aliquid agere: Whereby,
contrary to all Rule, by Addition, Mutilation, etc. they impose a Sense
directly contradicting the express Words of the Canon; which is done in so
gross a manner, that Thorndike himself was compelled to acknowledge, Right of
the Church, page 141, 142.
That for his part he does not believe that we have the true Reading of this
Canon in any Copy that he has heard of or seen.

But why is Thorndike, who is followed by Dr. Hammond and Bishop Parker, all
differing from Queen Elizabeth's Old Episcopal Divines, so concerned to oppose
the Universally Received Copies of Zonaras and Balsamon, but because, do they
what they can, it may be easily inferred, that before the Council of Ancyra,
the Chorepiscopi did ordain Presbyters, etc. that afterward they might do it
in their own Parishes without leave; in other Parishes with leave, or at least
in their own Parishes with leave. Thus much is the Import of Zonara's
Balsamon's, and the Oxford Copies, one of which must be received,
notwithstanding any thing hitherto opposed unto 'em. The whole that Thorndike
has laid in against us, narrowly looked into, comes to nothing.

The Reasons why our Copy is to be suspected, says he, are these.

1. In an Arabic Paraphrase now extant in the Oxford Library, there is nothing
to be found of that Clause, (...). 2. Isidore Mercator's Translation, which
seems to be that which was anciently received in the Spanish Churches, before
Dionysius Exiguus, wherewith that Copy agreed which Hervetus translated, as
also Fulgentius his Breviate, which Pope Adrian the first followed, has only
this, Vicariis Episcoporum, quos Graeci Chorepiscopos vocant, etc. ut supra. 3.
Can the Reading of the last words, (...) seem probable, etc. ut supra. 4.
Seeing this is that which is afterward provided for, by the Council of
Laodicea, Cap. LVI. in the same Subject, it seems very probable, that this
should be the provision which the Council of Ancyra intended, as all Ignatius
his Epistles, and other Canons Apost. XL. Arelat. XIX. express it.
To all which I reply,

1. The Greek Copy compared with Translations, having the Reputation of an
Original, is not to be neglected, though in the Arabic Paraphrase the Clause
about City Presbyters is omitted; for it might be either negligently or
willingly done: Besides, if this Clause had never been in the Original, there
still remains enough to carry our Point in that, as we shall hereafter prove
the Chorepiscopi were but Presbyters, and yet by the other parts of this Canon
had power to ordain both Presbyters and Deacons, at least with the permission
of the City-Bishop.

To the Second, touching Isidore's Translation, which differs from Hervetus's
and Dionysius Exiguus's, as well as from every Greek Copy, cannot be of
strength enough to invalidate an Original, any more than the Vulgar, or any
other Translation of the Bible, can blast the Reputation of the Originals
either of the Old or New Testament.

What has been already urged about de Marca's disgust against (...), and
Thorndike's quarrel with (...), is a sufficient Answer to his Third Argument:
For if the Canon has any meaning, be it (...), or (...), or be there an
Omission of this Expression, it cannot but be granted, that before this Council
the Chorepiscopi did Ordain Presbyters and Deacons without the City-Bishop's
leave, and afterward with it.

To the Fourth, that the Council of Laodicea did many Years after this make the
same Provision, has nothing of Argument in it to prove, That the Council of
Ancyra did so, long before Laodicea's doing It now, seeing it is not by way of
confirmation of an anteceding Decree, is a sufficient intimation, that Ancyra
did it not.

However, seeing Thorndike will provoke us to consult this 56th, or rather 57th
Canon of Laodicea, to it we will go; which on a diligent search we find to run
thus: (...), [(...)] say some, [(...)] say others, (...). Hervetus renders it
thus, Quod non oportet in vicis and pagis Episcopos constitui, sed Periodeutas;
hoc est, Circumcursentores. Dionysius Exiguus, Quod non oporteat in Villulis
vel in Agris Episcopos constitui, sed Visitores. Isidore Mercator thus, Non
oportet in Villis and vicis Episcopos Ordinari, sed Visitatores; (i. e.) qui
Circumeant, Constitui: No Bishops ought to be appointed in the Country Towns
or Villages, but Visitors. Neither of these take notice of the Various Reading:
for it may be [(...)] as well as [(...)], and so be thus translated: For the
future there shall not be Ordained in Country Places any Bishops or
Periodeutae, or Visitors, making the Periodeutae and Country Bishops the same;
as De Marca, though he observes not this various Reading does, Vnde. Constanter
asserere audeo eundem esse Chorepiscopum, and Periodeutum; and as the same De
Marca further observes, these Periodeutae were only Presbyters, as in the 4th
Action of the Council of Chalcedon, mention is made of Alexander, Presbyter,
and Periodeuta, and in the 11th Action of Valentine, Presbyter, and Periodeuta;
whence I infer, that it is clear from this and the following parts of the Canon,
that till this Council, Presbyters were not so very much under the Power of the
Bishops, but could act according to their own discretion, without consulting
the City-Bishops. The Canon is, (...), and thus rendered by Hervetus, Eos autem
qui prius constituti fuerunt, nihil agere sine mente Episcopi, qui est in
Civitate, clearly enough insinuating, that until this Council the Chorepiscopi,
the Periodeutae, who were but Presbyters, did act in the Country as they judged
meet, without consulting the Bishop of the City; and it is well known, that
their work was to Ordain Presbyters, Deacons, etc.

Thus much may suffice to vindicate what we have drawn from the Council of
Ancyra to establish the Power of the Chorepiscopi, who agreeably enough to the
13th Canon of this Council, might exercise Episcopal Jurisdiction in their own
Precinct, without the leave of the City-Bishop, and with his Permission they
might do so out of their own Charge, even in the City.

To proceed, it is very clear that long after this time, yea, long after
Damasus, this Severity against the Chorepiscopi, and Leo the Third's Attempt to
suppress and banish them, when Charles the Great sent Arno Invavensis to know
the mind of his Holiness about them, they continued in the Exercise of their
Office, governing the Country-Churches, ordaining Presbyters, etc. And although
Hincmarus, as Baluzius in de Marca out of Flodoardus his History observes, De
Marca de Concord. lib. 2. c. 13, 14.
wrote bitterly against those City-Bishops that had 'em in their Dioceses,
Fbodoard. Hist. Remenf. lib. 3. c. 29.
yet Rabanus Maurus pleads as warmly in their Defense, In Histor. Lansiaca apud
Palladium, c 106. Legimus Elpidium Monachum Presbyterum ordinatum a Timotheo
Chorepiscopo. Chorepiscopos in Ecclesiis vacantibus innuit Hugo Flaviniac. an.
776. and Bercarius in Hist. Episcop. Verdanensium, n. 13. Post hunc,
Episcopatus istius Ecclesiae per 12. annos vacuus extitit, sed quidem servus
Dei (Amalbertus nomine,) juxta morem illius temporis Chorepiscopus factus ipsam
regebat Ecclesiam. For all these see Du Fresne's Glossary, ver. Chorepiscopus.
and they were continued in France and elsewhere. Elpidrus a Monk, was or
dained Presbyter by Timothy a Country Bishop: Amalbertus, a Chorepiscopus,
governed the Church of Verdun during a Vacancy of twelve years, consecrated
Churches, confirmed Children, etc. as may be seen in Rudolphus his Life of
Rabanus Maurus, and in De Marca.

That the Chorepiscopi did exercise the Episcopal Power, although they were but
Presbyters, may plainly be seen in the Decrees that were against 'em,
interdicting their presuming so to do for time to come. 'Twas this that filled
the Soul of Damasus 1. Vid. Epist. 5. Damasi 1. Prospero Numidiae primae sedis
Episcopo, Leoni, reparato, etc.
with so much indignation against them, that they being but Presbyters,
presumed to discharge the Episcopal Office: And for this very reason it was,
that Leo the Third, in Answer unto the Question moved by Charles the Great,
condemned them to Banishment, as may be seen in the select Ecclesiastical
Capitula of Charles the Great, where it is very clear, that though the French
Prelates mitigated somewhat of the Rigor of the Pope's severe Decree against
them, yet concurred so far with him, as to Ordain that the Country-Bishops do
no more enter on the Execution of the Episcopal Office, ita ut amplius nihil de
Cpiscopali ministerio praesumerent; and they decreed, That no Country-Bishop
presume, by Imposition of Hands, to give the Holy Ghost to any, or Consecrate
any Priest, Levite, or Subdeacon. And though these Capitula do null and make void
all the Ordinations and Consecrations of the Chorepiscopi, Nicholas the First
does ratify and confirm them, Vide. Epist. 15. Nichol. 1. Tit. 1.
as may be seen in his Epistle to Radolfus, and thus he did for the very
Reason, the Capitula as well as Leo and Damasus, did damn them. Damasus says,
that they are the same with Presbyters, because they are instituted according
to the Form of the Seventy Disciples, who were never vested with Jura
Episcopalia, Tit. 4. c. 3.
so Leo and the select Capitula of Charles the Great, the Chorepiscopi are not
Chief Priests, nor Bishops, neither do any of the Episcopal Rights belong unto
them, seeing they were instituted according to the Form of the Seventy; for
which cause let no one say, Et ne alicui talis Ordinatio, vel Confirmatio, aut
Consecratio Reiteratio esse videatur.
That when any of those who have been Ordained by the Chorepiscopi, are
afterward Ordained by the City-Bishop, that they were Re-ordained, but let 'em
attend that Saying, Quod non ostenditur gestum, ratio non sinit, ut videntur
iteratum. And Pope Nicholas 1. gives this as a Reason, why he judges their
Ordination valid. The Chorepiscopi were such as the Seventy, sent out by our
Lord Jesus, who without doubt were vested with the Episcopal Power.

But though these Papal Determinations are different, yet they agree in
witnessing to this Truth, That the Chorepiscopi exercised Episcopal Authority.
De Marca proves the same out of the Arabian Canons, translated by Alfonsus
Pisanus, and from the last words of the Canon of Antioch. Dr. Parker himself
makes no doubt of it; for (says he) That these Chorepiscopi had the Character
of Proper Bishops, Parker's Account, p. 154.
appears plainly from the tenth Canon of Antioch, that allows them to Ordain
the inferior Officers of the Church.

This of Bishop Parker does exactly agree with the 55. Chapter of Nice, as
translated out of Arabic by Turrianus the Jesuit. When the Chorepiscopus
visits the Churches and Monasteries under his Power, let him gather together
the Elders of Castles, and expound unto 'em the Holy Scriptures, and enquire
whether they have any Sons or Daughters, and give order that they be brought
unto him, that he may sign 'em, pray over them, impose Hands on 'em, bless and
institute Ministers, that is, say the Notes on this Chapter, Lectores,
Exorcistae, and Hypodiaconi.

And that these Chorepiscopi were but of the same Order with Presbyters, and
were no otherwise Bishops than as all other Presbyters are, is as clear; for
their Ordination was by one Bishop only, not by three, and when they entered on
the Exercise of the Episcopal Power, they had no new Consecration, as may be
seen in the 54. Chapter of Nice, translated out of the Arabic, where Turrianus
renders it thus: Et debet Episcopus [vid. Civitatis] recitare super electum
[scil. Chorepiscopum] Orationem consuetam, Chorepiscopus non ordinabatur, sed
per oraticnem benedicebatur.
and Benedicere illi, dareque illi nomina omnium Ecclesiarum and Monasteriorum
qua sub Potestate ejus sunt. The Notes on this Chapter have it, that they were
not consecrated anew to the Office of a Country-Bishop, but only by the Prayer
of the City-Bishop blessed. Damasus 1. expressly affirms them to be but
Presbyters, in these words; Quod ipsi iidem sunt qui and Presbyteri,
sufficienter invenitur, quia ad formam and exemplum septuaginta inveniuntur
prius instituti. The select Capitula of Charles the Great concurring with Leo
the Third, Tit. 4. c. 3.
and speaking of the Episcopal Rights, say the same; Haec vero non a
Presbyteris vel Chorepiscopis, qui ambo unius formae esse videntur.

Besides, such were some of the Ancient Canons* decreeing that there should be
but one Bishop in a Diocese; and he only in the City, that made it necessary
for some of those who anciently would have the Bishops to be of an Order
superior above Presbyters to hold that these Chorepiscopi, though they had the
name of Bishop given 'em, and were vested with the Jura Episcopalia, were but
Presbyters usurping on the Episcopal Office; so Damasus, Leo, and many French
Bishops in Charles the Great's days; and it has also put some later Writers,
such as Bellarmine, Boverius in his Paraenetic Censure of de Dominis,
Archbishop of Spalato's Book de Rep. Eccles. and De Marco to fancy, that
some, made Chorepiscopi, were formerly Consecrated to the Episcopal Dignity,
and that others were but Presbyters; and thus by distinguishing the Office from
the Person, they hoped to extricate themselves; but as Dr. Parker well
observes, Page 158.
This is precariously said without any shadow of Pretense for it, but merely to
salve his own Hypothesis.

Others, Thorndike of Rights of Church. p. 146.
such as Thorndike, are driven to the Invention of another Distinction, which
is between the Solemnity which an Act is executed with, and the Power and
Authority by which it is done And that it cannot be prejudicial to any Power to
do that by another, which seems not fit to be immediately and personally
executed by it. Some Acts of the Primitive Church seem to require this
Distinction; as the making of Presbyters by the Chorepiscopi, or
Countrey-Bishops, mentioned in the ancient Greek Canons. Which by all
likelihood were not properly Bishops, because not Heads of a City-Church, which
is the Apostolical Rule for Episcopal Churches. Thus Thorndike, who differs
greatly from the generality of his Brethren, who hold, that though the Potestas
Jurisdictionis may be delegated to one that is not a Bishop, yet the Potestas
Ordinis cannot. However, it must be acknowledged, that there is a great
difference between a Presbyter's Ordaining other Presbyters with the leave of
the Bishop, and his doing it by a Power derived from the Bishop. One vested
with a Power, may not be able to exercise it without the leave of another; and
yet when he has leave, he then exercises a Power inherent in himself, virtute
officii. The Bishops themselves cannot exercise the Power of Orders without the
leave of the Supreme Civil Magistrate; and now that they do exercise it, it is
with his leave; but it does not therefore follow, that the Power of Orders is
derived from the Supreme Magistrate to the Bishop.

In the Council of Ancyra it is not said, That the Presbyter shall not Ordain
Presbyters, unless the Bishop delegates unto him a Power enabling him so to do;
but he shall not exercise this Power without the consent of the Bishop, which
was enjoined by the Canon, to prevent Schisms and Divisions in the Church: So
that I cannot see how this Distinction of Thorndike, so applauded by Dr.
Parker, can help 'em.

To press this yet further, Henry the Eighth's Suffragans were consecrated
Bishops, and had the same Power virtute officii, that any other Bishop received
at his Consecration, but may not exercise it unless by Commission from the
City-Bishop. But when they did exercise the Episcopal Authority, was it by a
Power received at their Consecration, and inherent in them, or by a Power
derived unto 'em from the City-Bishop by Commission? 'Twas by the former, no
doubt; why else were they consecrated? If then this Commission given by the
City-Bishop to the Suffragan, limiting the Exercise of his Power, does not
infer, that the Suffragan did not act by a Derived Power, much less can these
Words, [Let not the Chorepiscopus Ordain Presbyters or Deacons without the
consent of the City-Bishop] imply, that the Chorepiscopus derived the Power of
Ordaining from the City-Bishop. The Bishop of Lincoln cannot Ordain Priests or
Deacons in Westminster-Abby without the leave of the Dean of Westm^nster; and
yet when the Bishop does Ordain any there with the Dean's leave, it is not, I
presume, by any Power derived from the Dean that he does it, but by a Power
inhering in himself; and the Words (...) import no other leave than this.

If then these Chorepiscopi be conformed to the Number of Rural Deanries, and
the Rural Deans allowed to exercise the same Power the Chorepiscopi did in the
ancient Church, 'twill afford great Relief to the Consciences of many Worthy
Protestant Dissenting Ministers, without exposing the Church of England to the
Reproach of Novelty. To return to the Archbishop's Reduction, which continues
the Second Proposition thus.

Archbishop.

To this Synod the Rector and Churchwardens might present such impenitent
persons as by Admonitions and Suspension from the Sacrament would not be
reformed, who if they should still remain contumacious and incorrigible, the
Sentence of Excommunication might be decreed against them by the Synod, and
accordingly be executed in the Parish where they lived. Hitherto also all
things that concerned the Parochial Ministers might be referred, whether they
did touch their Doctrine or their Conversation, as also the Censure of all New
Opinions, Heresies and Schisms which did arise within that Circuit, with
liberty of Appeal, if need so require, unto the Diocesan Synod.

Notes.
It is not to be doubted, but that as soon as the Church of England grants unto
the Presbyter the Exercise of the Episcopal Rights, they will be content that
the Rural Dean, or Chorepiscopus hold his Synod of Parish-Pastors or Rectors
within the Precincts of the Rural Deanery, and exercise as much Power as is here
desired.

III.
The Diocesan Synod might be held once or twice in the Year, as it should be
thought most convenient. Therein all the Suffragans [i. e. Chorepiscopi,] and
the rest of the Rectors, or incumbent Pastors (or a certain select number of
every Deanery) within the Diocese might meet, with whose Consent, or the major
part of them, all things might be concluded by the Bishop or Superintendent,
(...) (i. e.) Superintendentes, unde and nomen Episcopi tractum est. Hieron.
Epist. 85. ad Evagrium.
(call him whether you will) or in his absence by one of the Suffragans, whom
he shall depute in his stead to be Moderator of that Assembly.

Here all matters of greater moment might be taken into consideration, and the
Orders of the monthly Synods revised and (if need be) reformed: And if here
also any matter of Difficulty could not receive a full Determination, it might
be referred to the next Provincial or National Synod.

Notes.
Dr. Poynet, Bishop of Winchester, pleads for the Word Superintendent, as much
better than that of Bishop; and it is a word less offensive to the
Presbyterians than the other is; and perhaps because the Archbishop found it
so, he speaks so indifferently of the Name; and to give Reputation to the word
Superintendent, refers us unto St. Hierome: But it is to be hoped, that the
wiser of all Parties, when they have concerted the thing, will not quarrel
about the Name, whether one or the other.

IV.
The Provincial Synod might consist of all the Bishops and Suffragans, and such
other of the Clergy as should be elected out of every Diocese within the
Province; the Archbishop of every Province might be the Moderator of this
Meeting, (or in his room, some one of the Bishops appointed by him) and all
Matters be ordered therein by common consent, as in the former Assemblies.

This Synod might be held every Third Year; and if the Parliament do then sit,
(according to the Act of a Triennial Parliament) both the Archbishops and
Provincial Synods of the Land might join together, and make up a National
Council: Wherein all Appeals from Inferior Synods might be received, all their
Acts examined, and all Ecclesiastical Constitutions which concern the State of
the whole Nation established.

This Scheme of Church Government, drawn up by this Learned Primate, as it is
admirably adjusted to the several Tempers of Men of different Apprehensions
about some things in Church Government, so it is not in the least repugnant to
any thing of Christ's Institution; for there is not ascribed unto any of the
Synodical Conventions a proper Jurisdiction over any Parochial Church. That in
Matters of greater moment, care be taken, that all things be done in every
Parish by a general Consent, Concord and Agreement, is necessary; and to this
end, that the Parish Rectors proceed not to Excommunication until they have
consulted the Dean Rural's Synod; and that what is done by these Synods be
examined by Bishops in a larger Assembly, and that by a larger again, until we
come to a National, if the case so require.

Though it be said, Let the Sentence of Excommunication be decreed against the
obstinately Impenitent by the Synod, yet it may be understood thus, Let the
Rector of the Parish consult the Synod, and there come to a Resolution and
Determination with the consent of this Synod.

Whoever will consult the Learned Writers of the Church of England,
particularly Dr. Burnet, now Bishop of Salisbury, will see cause to conclude
them to be against the Power and Jurisdiction of Councils: That they are rather
for Concord than Regiment: That particular Churches, as to matters of
Government, are independent on any Convention or College of other Bishops or
Pastors whatsoever; that to this very end of securing the Power of the Diocesan
or City-Bishop, the Diocesan Church is made a single Church, Infimae Speciei;
and whatever Power, Authority or Jurisdiction belong unto a particular Church
of the lowest Rank, they are affirmed to belong to the Diocesan Church; which
Dr. Barrow has endeavored to prove to be independent: So that let the bounds
of particular Churches be made Parochial, or of no larger extent than a
Parish-Congregation, and the Parish-Minister be entrusted with Pastoral Power,
to be exercised as abovementioned, 'twill of course follow, that what is now
said to belong to a Diocesan, must be seated in the Parish Church.

There is not so much a Controversy between the Powers, Preheminences and
Privileges of a particular Church, as about its Bounds and Limits. Reduce the
Bounds of a particular Church to those of a Parish, and the Debate will be at
an end as to this point.

That the Primate by Chorepiscopi means Presbyters vested with the Episcopal
Rights, is manifest from what he and Dr. Holdsworth in the end of the Reduction
thus assert:

We are of the Judgment, That the Form of Government here proposed, is not in
any Point repugnant to the Scripture; and that the Suffragans mentioned in the
Second Proposition, may lawfully use the Power both of Jurisdiction and
Ordination, according to the Word of God, and the Practice of the Ancient
Church.

Ja. Armachanus. Rich. Holdsworth.

CHAP. VII. The Reasonableness of the Church of England's condescending to
establish the Government proposed by Archbishop Usher in this Reduction.
IF then the Government of the Church of England be declared to be the same
held by the First Reformers, and by the Renowned Archbishop Usher, any Law or
Statute to the contrary notwithstanding.

And the Subscription of Submission be only unto the Church Government, as
framed accordingly, there are many powerful Preachers (if not most of the Sober
Godly) amongst the Dissenters will cheerfully enter into Parish-Churches, and
be capacitated to exercise their Ministry in Public, whom the Multitude
otherwise will never hear, nor be benefited by their Talents.

The Allowance of this can do no hurt to the Bishops, unless the easing 'em of
an intolerable burden, or discharging 'em of such Duties now incumbent on
them, as are impossible to be performed by any.

Besides, that hereby shall all the pious and conscientious Parish-Ministers be
put upon the attending those Pastoral Duties which are enjoined them by the
Lord Jesus Christ, in order to the right Guidance and Edification of the
particular Churches committed to their Cure.

And as hereby the Church of England will be enlarged and strengthened by the
Accession of many Protestant Dissenters, great ease given the Bishops, without
the least Diminution of their Temporal Emoluments and Honors; all
Parish-Pastors allowed the Exercise of their Functions, as the Lord Christ
commanded them. In like manner hereby,

1. The Honor due to the First Reformers, that with their Blood, or other
grievous Sufferings, sealed to the Truth of the Reformation, shall be
maintained and restored. I must say restored, because the altering our
Episcopal Government, and shaping it to the measure of the Canons of 1603, and
since to the Act of Uniformity in Charles the Second's Reign, has made it so
much another thing than what they held and defended, that we cannot entitle
them to be the Assertors of it without Reproach, or a Vindication. The
Episcopacy they were for, I say, was but of the same Allay with the excellent
Moderation of Archbishop Usher.

2. This Primitive Government Restored, does not in the least interfere, or
clash with, but most effectually support the Ancient Regal Power in matters
Ecclesiastical. But the Canonical Episcopacy advanced by Laud, and in its
Heighths of Divine Right, established by Charles the Second, will on
Examination be found to be held by some of the Clergy, as unalterable, to the
great Diminution of the King's Ecclesiastical Supremacy, and the Power of
Parliaments.

3. This Government Restored, will give Countenance to the Protestant Reformed
Churches abroad, as well as to the Churches of Dissenters at home, owning their
Ministry and Sacraments, and holding Communion with them, as with true Gospel
Churches of Christ: Whereas the Episcopacy Vnrestored, (our Nobles and Gentry
of both Houses, having not been aware of it) does null their Church State,
destroying both their Ministry and Sacraments; and as that very Learned, but
herein more dangerous man, Mr. Dodwell, will have it, puts 'em out of the
common way of Salvation, and into the same deplorable Condition with the
Heathen. They must be saved by an uncommon Prerogative, or not at all.

I the rather insist on this Particular, because, since his present Majesty,
the glorious Instrument of our Deliverance, has been brought up, and continues
in the Communion of these Foreign Reformed Churches, we lie under a special
Obligatian of our declaring, that we hold Communion with them: And will it not
be a surprising Consideration, (if there be any who have not yet reflected on
it) that our Church owns the Ministry of the Church of Rome, and at the same
time disowns the Ministry of the Reformed Churches, even of the Churches of
which His Majesty is now a Member?

4. This Government Restored will remove out of the way of those Dissenters who
cannot do all that is necessary to their obtaining the Advantages of this
Comprehension, the principal Blocks, which hinder their holding Communion with
the Church of England.

The Reason why these Dissenters cannot join with the Parish-Assemblies in the
Established Worship, so far as I can guess, is not the bare use of a Liturgy,
nor the neglect of Discipline, nor because there are some disorderly Members of
their Communion, but because the Specific Nature of Christ's Instituted
Churches are destroyed; the Parish-Ministers, who were Gospel-Pastors, deposed,
and Church Government made impracticable, by the erecting Diocesan Churches,
one of which, composed of many Parishes, under the Government of one only
Pastor, called the Diocesan Bishop, is made a particular Church of the lowest
Rank, and substituting in the room of Parish-Pastors a New Order of
Sub-half-Presbyters, affirming all that have been baptized and live within the
Terriers or Boundaries of the Diocese, how ignorant or scandalous soever, to be
sit Matter for an Instituted Church of Christ; and because of their setting up
Forms of Prayer in opposition unto, and suppression of Spiritual and Free
Prayer; the Corruptions in the Liturgy; and imposing, as Terms of Communion,
such Ceremonies as are, in their Consciences, sinful.

If therefore the desired Church Government be settled, the Parish-Churches
will be established as particular Churches of Christ's Institution, their
Pastors Restored, Government made practicable, Disorders amended; and tho some
things remain in the Parishes which these men cannot conform unto, yet they will
own the Parishes thus Constituted and Reformed, for true Churches, and admit
their Members, if desired, unto Communion with them.

THE END.
ADVERTISEMENT.
PLain Dealing: Being a Moderate general Review of the Scots Prelatical
Clergies Proceedings in the latter Reigns. With a Vindication of the present
Proceedings in Church Affairs there. Printed for Tho. Parkhurst, at the Bible
and Three Crowns in Cheapside, near Mercers-Chappel.


