EIPOTHESIA: OR, A CONFIRMATION OF THE Apostolical Confirmation OF CHILDREN:
Setting forth The Divine Ground, End, and Use of that too much neglected
INSTITVTION. And now published as an excellent expedient to Truth and Peace.

By JOS. HALL, D. D. B. Norwich.

LONDON, Printed for John Place, at Furnivals Inn-Gate in Holborn, 1651.

To all Gods Faithful People every where, Grace and Peace.
NOt out of any light affectatio^, or out of a Cross humor of vainly striving
against the stream, (my witness is in Heaven;) but out of a care to approve
my faithfulness to Gods Church, have I undertaken this subject. Mine eyes tell
me too plainly, that an Apostolical Institution is palpably neglected; and my
heart tells me, both how infinitely advantageous, and beneficial, the practice
of it, if duly revived, might be to the Church of Christ; and how extreme
losers, Gods People are by the want of it. I durst not therefore but impart
these thoughts to the world before I leave it; humbly recommending the^ to the
serious consideration of all well-affected Christians; who shall soon find, upon
these poor suggestions, how happy it were, if in this case, we could walk with
an even foot in the midway betwixt Romish Superstition, and profane neglect.
The God of Heaven make us wise to Salvation; and guide our feet into the way of
Peace.

Amen.
THE CONTENTS of the several Sections.
. 1. NO notice taken of the Jmposition of hands, yet how important it is, and
ought to be esteemed, Page 1.. 2. What kind of Jmposition of hands is meant,
Heb. 6. 2. namely that of Confirmation, p. 3.. 3. Wrongs done to this
Jnstitution of Confirmation; And first, in the Excess; in making it a
Sacrament. p. 6.. 4. A second wrong in excess; preferring it before the
Sacrament of Baptism. p. 12.. 5. Wrong done to it in the Defect. By the utter
neglect and mis-construction of it, p. 18.. 5. Confirmation by Jmposition of
hands not dying with the Apostles, and continuing in the Church after the
miraculous gifts. p. 21.. 7. The Deduction of the use of Confirmation through
the Primitive times succeeding the Apostles. p. 27.. 8. Jmposition of hands,
not a dumb Ceremony; but joined with Prayer. p. 34.. 9. The order of
Confirmation as it is enjoined by the Church of England. p. 41.. 10. The
Considerations whereupon the Church ordered Confirmation to be given to those
that are of years of Discretion. p. 46.. 11. The judgment of Foreign Divines,
and Churches concerning Confirmation. p. 50.. 12. Motives to the practice of
Confirmation. First from conformity with the Primitive Church. p. 65.. 13. The
second motive from the great benefit, and advantage that arises therefrom. p.
69.. 14. The third motive from the great inconveniences that grow from the
neglect and dis-use of it. p. 73.. 15. The Objection of the disorder and
inefficacy of our late practice of Confirmation answered. p. 78.
Imposition of Hands.
Sect. 1.
IT is no small wonder to me, that amongst all those great wits of the later
times, that have so curiously pried into all the corners of Apostolical
Institutions and practices, I could meet with no one, that has so much as
taken notice of this, of the Imposition of Hands; which yet, all the while, lay
so broad open before them, as that the Doctrine thereof is by the Apostle
reckoned amongst the first Principles of Christian Religion: Is it for that men
are unwilling to know some Truths, whose unpleasing consequences they would be
loath to own? Or, is it that they are carried away with so high a prejudice
against this practice, by reason of the extreme abuse of it, as that they are
afraid to entertain any thoughts concerning it? However it be, certainly the
Spirit of God has not Hebr. 6. 2.
doubted to place this amidst the rank of the clearest and most concerning
verities; and amongst such, as are essentially fundamental to our Christian
Profession; joining it together with those main Principles of Faith,
Repentance, Baptism, Resurrection and Judgment: What shall we say then? Dare
any Christian presume to say, that the Apostle, the great and wise
Master Builder of the 1 Cor. 3. 10.
Church, mistook the foundation whereon he built? Or, dare any presumptuous
soul single this one Article from the rest, as merely temporary, when all the
rest are granted to be of eternal use? Can there be any time wherein Faith,
and Repentance from dead works, shall not be necessary, both for knowledge and
practice? Can it be, that Baptism should be ever out of date? Can the Doctrine
of the Resurrection from the dead, and of the last Judgment, be ever
unseasonable, and super annated? How, or why then should that of Imposition of
Hands, which is indivisibly marshalled with all these, by the blessed Apostle,
be shuffled out from the rest, as arbitrary, and altogether unnecessary?

Sect. 2.
Taking it then for granted, that the Apostle accounts the Doctrine and
practice of the Imposition of Hands, to be both of excellent use, and, as then,
of great importance and necessity in the Church of God: Let us inquire, in the
next place, what is meant by this so requisite Imposition, and of what kind it
is. Besides that extraordinary act of laying on the hand for curing of diseases
and infirmities, practiced by our blessed Savior and his Apostles, and for
conveying the Holy Ghost in a miraculous way; in the Primitive times there were
three occasions and usages of Imposition of Hands; in cases of, I.
Confirmation, 2 of Ordination, 3. of Absolution and readmission of Penitents.
That the first of these is here intended, not only all Antiquity, but all late
Interpreters (except some few Straglers) do unanimously agree: neither indeed
can it, with any probability, be taken of either of the other; Not of
Ordination: What should Novices have to do with that business now in the
Primer of their Christianity? Their Teachers were only concerned herein, not
the Puisnes in that School of Christ: Not of readmission of Penitents, the
ceremony whereof (for ought we can find) began not till after the Apostles:
Doubtless therefore of Confirmation; for which cause also (as Calvin Calv. in
locum.
well notes) it is paired together with Baptism, as an ordinary subsequent
thereof: So as this practice thus hinted by the Apostle, and made good (as we
shall hereafter show) by the constant Tradition of all following times, is
plainly derived, even by Mr. Calvin's own confession, from no less then
Apostolical Institution.

Sect. 3.
It has been the lot of this sacred Rite to fall into ill hands, and to be
foully wronged by a double extreme; the one, of Excess; the other, of Defect.

The Excess, in a superstitious over-doing, and overvaluing it; the Defect, in
a neglective dis-estimation; both which must be clearly evicted and quit, ere
we can present this holy Ordinance to the beholder, in its native beauty and
perfection: First then, it is an injurious Excess of respect that is given to
Confirmation, by them, who have advanced it into the rank of Sacraments,
forcing upon it that honor which it never originally affected, and which it
utterly (with due modesty) refuses to undergo.

To make up a Christian Sacrament, Bellarm. de Sacram. Confirm. l. 2. c. 2.
Sect. 2. Tria requiruntur.
Cardinal Bellarmine himself sticks not to profess three things to be
necessarily required: First, a promise of Grace; Secondly, a sensible sign,
together with a word, whereby that promise is applied; Thirdly, a command from
God, enjoining the ministration of it: Now after all his confident undertaking,
where are all, where are any of these to be found in this business of
Confirmation?

For the promise, he tells us of the Comforter, whom our Lord Jesus pre-ingaged
himself to send; and of that gracious word, at his last farewell, Ye shall
receive power, after that Act. 1. 8.
the Holy Ghost is come upon you: But what is this to the particular act of
Confirmation? All this might well have been, and yet no hands imposed, no
Confirmation employed. Well might this promise confirm the Apostles in a
confident expectation of some miraculous work to be wrought upon them, but
could give no intimation of a new Sacrament to be erected; no specialty of
their hands to be employed in an imposition: That distinction Vivald. Candclab.
aur. de Sacr. Conf. Tit. 3.
therefore of Alphonsus Vivaldus, that Christ instituted this Sacrament, though
not, exhibendo, yet, promittendo, is no better then frivolous; unless he can
show, that our Savior applied that general promise to this special
institution: which he shall never be able to perform.

For the sensible sign; here were hands indeed laid on, but not with any
intention of acting or constituting a Sacrament: And* where is the solemn Word
whereby that promise is applied, and that sign actuated? Surely, here, God is
silent; men may speak: For that set form which they bind their tongues unto, I
sign thee with the sign of the cross, and confirm thee with the chrisme of
salvation, in the name of the Father, Son and Holy Ghost; whose is it? They
dare not father it upon Christ, who is the sole Author of Sacraments; it is a
device of their own, and thereupon subject to much variation of expression, as
their Casuists stick not to confess.

As for any command, it is as far to seek, as either of the other: What
Scripture can be pretended to carry the least color of a mandate? It is a poor
shift of the Cardinal, in stead of a word of injunction, to flap us off with
the execution of Pro mandato damus illis mandati executionem. De Sacr. confirm.
c. 2.
the act: It is true, hands were laid on by the Apostles, the Holy Ghost was
given: but was this done with either purpose, or charge, to make this a
perpetual Sacrament unto the Church? Or, if this were any where to be found,
yet what were all this to the warrant of the rites used in the Church of Rome,
in the administration of this pretended Sacrament? Wherein, as if the Apostles
act were quite forgotten, there is no Imposition of hands at all, only some
strange and uncouth rites are foysted in, which the Apostles were never guilty
of thinking of: For in what Scripture shall we look for the Chrisme compounded
(as it needs must be) of oil and balsame? Where shall we look for the
consignation with the cross in the forehead? for the box on the ear given to
the confirmed, with the rest of the complements of that
pretendedly-Sacramentall action? So as now the Cardinal may spread before us
the testimonies of ten Popes, nine Councels, nine Bellarm. ubi supra*
Greek Fathers, ten Latin, besides middle aged Authors and Schoolmen, for the
avowing of this their Sacrament, and the antiquity of the holy appendances of
it: but all these fall too short for the proof of a true and genuine Sacrament
of the Christian Church; a truth that was well seen by the quick and Alex.
Halens. part. 4. qu. 24. Sixtus Senens. l. 4. Bibliotheo-Sanct. Poss. Appar*
Sacr.
piercing eyes of our Alexander of Hales, the Father of the Schoolmen, whom
they styled, the Irrefragable Doctor, and the fountain of life: As also, by his
acute Disciple, Cardinal Bonaventure, whom they have honored with the title
of a Saint; both which flatly deny any such Sacrament instituted by Christ, or
so much as by his Apostles; sending us for the first rise of it, to a French
Council held at Melde, which was not till the year of grace, 845. So as the
Roman Catechism, which from the counterfeit authority of their Fabian, would
cast their holy Chrisme upon Christ himself; and Scotus, who yet suffers for
stooping so low, as to fetch it from the Apostles, are quite beside the cushion.

Sect. 4.
Yet a far more injurious degree Confirmat. Sacramentum aeque sacrosanctum ac
ipse Baptismus. Catechif. Austriac.
of Excess it is, that Confirmation is not only ranged together with the holy
Sacraments, but also equalled, and (not without an high and intolerable
affront) preferred to Baptism it self: Not so much in respect of the dignity
of the person, whose hand was wont to be employed in this action, (held
commonly, and of old, in a key above Presbytery, or as Primus Presbyterorum,
in the lowest style) as of the virtue and efficacy of the act it self; without
which, the eminence of the agent could avail little to the dignifying of the
work: We know, the very Angels are content to condescend to mean offices, for
the good of us, wretched men; yet those acts to which they have stooped, have
been never the more ennobled in themselves: And if Lib. Sacrarum Cerem
an Emperor shall be designed to hold a Popes stirrup, the act is never the
less servile, because the Agent is royal: It is not for us, in this case, to
stand upon the person; to whom, if it were appropriated of old, as Hierome
speaks, propter honorem Sacerdotii, I fear it is now, by some, denied, propter
invidiam Sacerdotii; the case is herein much altered: Once men could have been
content, with the Galatians, to have pulled out their own eyes, and to have
given them to us: but in these last times, too many could be content to lose
one of their own eyes, that we might lose both ours: however, it were great
pity and sin, that so holy an act should lie still, as dead, whiles we strain
courtesy who should take it up. But it is not, as I said, so much the dignity
of the agent that is insisted upon, as the power and energie of the act of
Confirmation, which is by our Romish Doctors set up, proudly to contest with,
and overtop the acknowledged Sacrament of Baptism; If Baptism Ut pleni
Christiani inveniantur Decret. de consec. D. S. cap. Omnes fidcles. Chemuit.
exam. conc. Trid. cap. de confirmat.
be yielded to begin our Christendom, Confirmation, they say, perfects it; and
all the praises which they, from their Urban, Melchiades, Clemens, Fabian, and
others, yield unto their Confirmation, are understood (as Chemnitius well
construes them) as Antitheticall; so many derogations from the power of
Baptism: In Baptism, say they, we are regenerated to life; in Confirmation,
we are armed to fight: In Baptism, Quia nunquam erit Christianus nisi
confirmatione Episcopali fuerit Chrismatus. Decret. de Consecr. cap. Jejuni.
there is only preparation made for Gods in-dwelling in our hearts; in
Confirmation, he actually takes up the house-room for himself: Yea, in flat
terms, they dare say, He shall never be a Christian, that is not anointed by
Episcopal Confirmation; and it is the title of one of the Chapters of their
Decretum, Manus impositionis saer. etc. Manus impositionis Sacramentum dignius
est. Sacr. Baptismi. cap. de bis. ibid. Majore veneratione venerandum etc. ibid.
The Sacrament of the imposition of hands is more worthy then the Sacrament of
Baptism.

These, and whatever other excesses of Titles and Prerogatives, have been cast
upon this holy Institution, to the disparagement of other more noble
Ordinances, have not a little blemished the face of it, in some
undistinguishing eyes. To which may be added the over-eager and tumultuous
affectation, wherewith it was wont, not very long since, to be prosecuted Viz.
Cornwall and Devon.
in some parts (the Western especially) of this Church. It cannot be spoken,
with what fervor, and violence of desire, that people were wont to sue for
this sacred ceremony: What Fair-like confluences have we there seen of zealous
ambients? How have we been tired with the importunity of Suitors, impatient of
either denial, or delay? How have we been oppressed with the throngs of the
multitude, striving for the first admission? Insomuch, as we have been forced
to call for the help of Officers to our rescue from that well-meant
impetuousnesse? Yea, so has that people been formerly devoted to this
religious institution, that the want of it was one of the causes of their
insurrection in the days of King Edward the sixth; falling out, as then, by
reason of the absence, or willing forbearance, of Miles Coverdale, their
elected Bishop.

Now I must be pardoned, if I impute some part of this height of zeal in those
our modern Clients, to an ungrounded overweening of opinion, which they have
conceived of this godly Ordinance traduced unto them by their forefathers;
whereof, if need were, I could give too sufficient an account to the Reader: an
error, which by good counsel, might in good time be redressed.

Sect. 5.
But leaving the consideration of an excessive over-valuation, whereof (I dare
undertake) the greatest part of this Nation, at this day, are far enough from
being guilty: we descend to that other extreme, of defect; whereof, I fear,
there are not too many free: What an universal neglect is there of this holy
duty in all the Churches that profess Reformation? What a willing
forgetfulness of it? as if there had never been any such matter practiced in
the Church of God, never any such ceremony so much as intimated by any Apostle,
never any mention or memory of it in the succeeding ages; lastly, as if there
never had been, never could be, any profitable or godly use of it amongst
Christians.

Yea rather on the contrary, how odious is the very name of it grown to the
ears of those, who profess the strictest godliness? How is the practice of it
cried down, and hooted at, as merely superstitious and Antichristian? Who can
but wonder at this strange partiality? that men who profess so awefull an
observance, and so strict and punctual imitation of all the Apostolical
Ordinations and actions, should willingly abandon, and carelessly slight one of
their prime, and most apparent institutions? Feign would I know what they can
say to this irrefragable text? Was there not such a thing, in the Apostolic
times, as the Imposition of hands? Was not the Doctrine and practice of it held
so useful, as that it was singled out for one of the Principles of Christian
Religion? Is there not as much occasion and need of the use of it, as ever? Was
this only a temporary Institution, soon after to be abrogated? What need was
there then to trouble the Hic respexit ad usitatam Catechism. formulam. Calvi^.
in H^b. 6. 2.
heads, and to clog the Catechism of Christian novices with a vanishing, and
now already-gasping Ceremony? And why is it ranked in the style of Faith,
Repentance, Baptism, etc. whose use and practice must be perpetual? Surely to
coop up the Doctrine of Baptism, and Imposition of hands, in a Parenthesis, as
some have poorly devised, is both very unreasonable, and injurious to the
Spirit of God, which would have this Scripture to run freely, in all equal
relations, to the foregoing and following clauses: what God will have laid
open, it is high presumption in any man to enclose.

Sect. 6.
That the Apostles laid their hands on persons formerly baptized, and hereby
conveyed unto them the Holy Ghost, is so clear a truth, as none durst ever
deny: But did not this privilege rest only in them, and die with them? As it
could not be bought and sold, according to the profane and sacrilegious offer
of the wicked sorcerer; so, could it be bequeathed unto, and feoffed upon their
holy Successors? Surely, we hear our blessed Savior, at his parting, say, Lo,
I am with you always, even to the end of the Matthew. 28. 20.
world: Those blessed men to whom these cordial words were spoken, were not to
stay long in the world: not to their persons therefore, but to their succession,
was this promise both made and verified.

Not in respect to those miraculous gifts, which as persons extraordinary, they
both had, and conferred (in this singular qualification they neither had, nor
could have any Successors in the following times) but in respect to those
better graces, which, as Predecessors to the ordinary Pastors, and Overseers
of the Church, their Ministry should convey to the souls of Gods people.
Hereupon it is, that their Successors do justly claim a true right to this
Divine privilege, and find a just warrant for their Imposition of hands: For
the effectual performance whereof, yet, they challenge not any power, by an
inherent virtue in themselves, or by any authoritative bequest from, or to
others, but only in an humble way of impetration, by their faithful prayers,
which are the life of that holy Ceremony, according to the practice of the
Apostles themselves; who, though miraculously gifted, yet aided still their
hand with their tongue, devoutly suing for what they intended to give: Let no
man therefore pretend, that because the miraculous effects of the Apostolical
Imposition of hands are long since ceased, therefore the act is now idle and
useless. Divine Institutions are ill-measured by sensible operations: There
are spiritual Grotius his Vindicat. Heb. 6. and Act. 8. Pezelii resp. ad
Catechis. Trid. cap. de confirmat.
and indivisible fruits of holy Ordinances, which (as being most proper for
them) shall be perpetually produced by them, (through the blessing of the
Almighty) even when there is no appearance of any outward efficiency.

Such are they which proceed from the Imposition of sacred and authorized
hands, if the judgment of a learned Father, and eminent Saint, may find place
with us; It is not now, August. l. 3. de Baptismo, c. 16.
says he, as it was, that by the testimony of temporal and sensible miracles,
the Holy Ghost is by the imposition of hands given, as formerly it was, for the
commendation and better setting forth of the then new molded faith, and for
the enlargement of the newbegun Church: For who does now expect, that those,
upon whom hands are imposed for the receiving of the Holy Ghost, should
suddenly begin to speak with tongues? but invisibly and secretly by the bond of
peace is the love of God conceived to be thus inspired into their hearts.

The instance that Bellarmine Bellar. de Confirmat. lib. 2. c. 2.
himself gives to this purpose is beyond exception; In the beginnings of the
Church those that believed wrought miracles, as our Savior foretold his
Apostles; now that effect has long ceased; shall we therefore say that Faith
is vain and forcelesse? far be it from us so to slander that Divine grace,
which still and ever exercises a more excellent power in the Believer, in that
it quickneth him to a new life; according to that of the Prophet, The just
shall live by Faith. Although then we presume not to affect the working of
wonders by the imposing of our handsupon the heads of the baptized; yet why
should we not dare to hope that the solemn laying on of approved hands,
seconded by our fervent prayers, shall help to work an increase of grace in the
hearts of capable Receivers?

Now if any man shall think fit to match this imposition of hands upon the
baptized, with the anointing the sick with oil, mentioned by the Apostle; Jam.
5. 14.
which being both used, and required in the Primitive times, had doubtless a
sovereign effect; but now the power of healing being lost, is no better then a
purposelesse and vain ceremony: let him know there is a great difference to be
put betwixt both these, that oil was professedly intended and used for a bodily
cure only; receiving its virtue from a power above that of nature; and
therefore justly ranged amongst those primtive miracles, which continued not
Ages in the Church; whereas the imposition of hands was directed to Spiritual
ends, and such as were of eternal use and benefit; to which may be added, that
the doctrine of anointing with oil had never the honor to be numbered amongst
Christian principles, which yet is yielded to the imposition of hands by the
great Herald of the Church.

Sect. 7.
Had the Apostle only by the way so let fall the mention of imposition of
hands, that no further noise had been afterward made of it in the Church of
Christ, it might perhaps have been supposed some occasional ceremony not
intended for perpetuity; but now, when we find the continuation of both the
precept and practice, in the immediately-succeeding times, deducing it self
through all the ages of the Church, (though lateward not without some taint of
superstitious interspersions, which are easily wiped away) we have reason to
think it was never distin'd to an abrogation: Clemens the fellow laborer to
the Apostles, in that Epistle which he writes to his Disciples, Julius, and
Julianus, Clem. Ep. 4. Julio and Juliano.
makes an honorable commendation of it to all Christians, charging them to
hasten both their Baptism and Confirmation, by reason of the great uncertainty
of the time of their dissolution; attributing to it the conveyance of the
sevenfold grace of the Holy Spirit to the receiver. I may not conceal that the
credit of this Epistle amongst the rest has undergone question, (which indeed
none of his letters have escaped (as is confessed by Eusebius) save only that
to the Corinthians now lately published) but not to stand upon Turrianus his
terms of Apology; I must needs say, this one carries simplicity in the face of
it; passing under no other style then of Clemens Bishop of the city Clemens
urbis Romae Episcopus.
of Rome; and, that if the authority of it be suspected, yet the age cannot, so
as if not authentical, yet it is not denied to be exceeding ancient.

That story is famous which Eusebius. hist. Eccles. l. 3. c. 20.
is reported by Eusebius from Clemens of Alexandria, concerning the young man
whom Saint John the Apostle, after his return from Pathmos delivered and doubly
recommended to the careful custody of a grave Bishop, under a vehement
adjuration; the Bishop (says that ancient and unquestionable Author) received
the young man to his charge, trained him up in his house, and at last (...).
christened him; and after that proceeded yet to such height of diligent
observance of him, as that for a singular preservative, he added moreover to
him the obsignation with the seal of the Lord: (to wit, his Confirmation) who
yet proving afterward miserably debauched, was by the Apostle graciously
reclaimed.

Not to take in our way the full testimonies of Dennis the Diony. Eccl. ^ierar.
c. 2.
Areopagite, and Origin; that of Tertullian is most clear, the flesh is
over-shadowed with the imposition Orig. hom. 8. in Levit.
of the hand, that the soul may be illightned by the spirit. And elsewhere;
Then Tertul. de resur. ^arni^ and lib. de Baptismo.
is the hand laid on by that benediction, calling in, and inviting the Holy
Ghost: How frequent his Scholar the blessed Martyr Cyprian is in the report of
this practice, no man that has turned over his Epistles can be ignorant: And
that no man may say these (if hundreds more such) are but single witnesses; the
Council of Arles Council: Arelat. sub Sylvestro. Can. 8.
in the time of Constantine the great, consisting (as Binius numbers them) of
two hundred, or as Ado in his Chronicle of six hundred Bishops, ordaines, That
if any shall return to the Church from their former heresy, they shall be
examined concerning the Articles of their Creed; and if it be found that they
have been baptized in the name of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost;
hands shall be only laid upon them, that they may receive the Holy Ghost.

But to what purpose should I press my Reader with throngs of witnesses, when
all those testimonies which are mis-alledged by Romish Authors, whether of
Councels, or Fathers, or Doctors, to prove their Confirmation a Sacrament, yet
cannot be denied thus much validity, as to prove there has ever been a
confirmation. If they have uniustly contended to impose a wrong title upon the
imposition of hands, yet it is no less clear that there was imposition, then
that there were hands to be imposed; and if they have palpably corrupted that
wholesome institution with the inter-mixtures of their own mis-becomming devises,
this can be no more prejudice to the true Original purity of it, then it can
derogate from a beautiful face, that it was once besmeared with a foul
liniment; wipe off the filth, and the face is still it self. It is true, that
some of their additionall Ceremonies came in betimes, but late enough to
disprove their pedigree from any Apostolic authority; others of them (as
clapping on the cheek the cross of the thumb, treading on the toe, filleting
the forehead for seven days, and the like) may justly seem to be no less vain
then new; and to serve only to confirm us in the lightness and indiscretion
of their founders: Casting aside therefore all those fopperies wherewith time,
and weak Superstition have clogged this Holy Ordinance; Let us look at it in
that native (and thereupon most comely) simplicity wherein it passed from the
hands of the blessed Apostles, and in that plain and holy dress, wherein
they, by the guidance of the good Spirit of God, (wherewith they were inspired)
left it to the entertainment of the ensuing world.

Sect. 8.
That our Savior laid his sacred hands on the Children, that were brought unto
him, in way of benediction, and that his Apostles laid their hands on Acts 8:
Acts 19.
Persons that had been Baptized for conferring on them the Holy Ghost, it is
most evident; neither can it be doubted, but that their Successors in the
Pastoral Charge of the Church laid their hands likewise upon the formerly
Baptized; otherwise, (had not this been familiarly known both in the Practice,
and use of it) Imposition of hands had never been recorded for a point of the
Ancient Catechism of Christ's Church: Neophytorum 1^. (...), etc. Aretius i
locum: Tradebantur ergo ista catecbi mi initi^ brevibus paucu tanquam prae
cipua religionis nostra capi Bez. in Heb. 6. ^
The succeeding hands then were also imposed; but to what purpose? Surely no
Man can think the end of this act could in them be other then Holy, and
Spiritual; as they in their calling succeeded those Prime Founders of the
Church, so this act also succeeded theirs: though not in giving the visible
Graces of the Spirit (which in the^ was miraculous) yet in obtaining an
increase of invisible Grace to the Receiver, as theirs also more effectually
did: For certainly, we shall grossly mistake this whole act, if we shall
conceive it to have been only a dumb or dead Ceremony, completed in the motion
of an Hand, and touch of an Head; there was withal a life, and vigor put into
it by the zealous Prayer of the godly Pastor, and Congregation, which might not
return to him without a Blessing: Neither was it otherwise of old; When the
Patriarch Jacob laid his hands upon Ephraim, and Manasses Genesis 48. 15, 16, 17.
Head, it was not without a fervent apprecation; God, before whom my Fathers,
Abraham and Isaac did walk, the God which fed me all my lifelong unto this day,
the Angel which redeemed me from all evil, bless the Lads. It was not the
bare hand of Moses Deuteronomy 34. 3
laid upon Joshua that could replenish him with the spirit of Wisdom without
his Prayers: Yea, our blessed Savior himself, to whom all power was Mar. 7. 34.
given in Heaven, and in Earth, when he touched the dumb Man, and said,
Ephatah; he looked up into Heaven, as thence fetching his Cure: The Apostles,
when the seven Elected Deacons were presented unto them, did not without
solemn Prayer, lay their hands Act. 6. 6.
upon them: When Barnabas and Saul were separated by the charge of the holy
Ghost, to the great work of God, to which they were Designed, Hands were laid
on them, but Act. 13. 3.
withal, Prayers were made for them. So in this very case, when the Baptized
Samaritans should be confirmed by Peter Act. 8. 15.
and John, their hands were laid on with Prayers. These, these are they which
gave Virtue to the Hands; which certainly without these, being but Flesh, could
have no Spiritual Operation upon the Soul; but being thus seconded, could not
but be available to the furtherance of Grace in the Receiver.

This is the practice which Holy Cyprian tells was successively continued in
the Church; who speaking of the Samaritans Cypr. de baereticis baptiz andis ad
Jubaianum.
Baptized by Philip, and confirmed afterward by the Prayers, and Imposition of
the Hands of the forementioned Apostles, adds ( Quod nunc quoque, etc.) which
is still (says he) practiced amongst us, That those, which are Baptized in the
Church, are by the Governors of the Church presented unto us, and by our
Prayers, and laying on of our Hands receive the holy Ghost, etc. It is utterly
needless to cite any further proof of this Point; or any particular
Attestation to the act of Confirmation, done with great consent, and allowance
in the Primitive times; when S. Jerome Hieron. Dialog. adversus Lucifer. Cited
also by Bellarm. de Confirm. l. 2.
in his Dialogue against the Luciferians; having said, That by the imposition
of Authorized hands, the holyGhost was still convayed to the Baptized, adds;
Do thou ask me where this is written? In the Acts of the Apostles; but if
there were no Authority of Scripture at all for it, the consent of the whole
world to this point, might well challenge the force of a precept: Thus he.
Since therefore it is undeniably certain, that after the miraculous Gifts were
ceased, yet still this practice of Imposition of hands was, with the general
approbation of the Christian Church, continued to succeeding Ages; I ask when,
and why it ceased? Have we any warrant for banishing it out of the Church of
God? Have we any just ground of reason to forbear, and discontinue the use of
it? Have we less need of Grace, or Confirmation then our Forefathers? Or, is
the power of Gods Ordinance abated, and now languisheth with Age? Or, are we
less qualified to perform this gracious act then our Predecessors? Surely,
the Church of England which (to Her eternal praise and honor be it spoken)
has ever been studiously careful to maintain all Apostolical constitutions
and practices, above all Her Reformed Sisters has not failed to hold out this
Holy Ordinance, and to recommend it in the most Ancient, Simple, and
Inoffensive Form to all Her obedient Children: Neither do we find that the
present times (though too full of Distraction and Quarrel) have ever declared
any Opposition to, or Dislike of that never-interrupted, never-disallowed
Institution: so as we have just reason to think, that it both should, and does
continue in its full right and vigor.

Sect. 9.
But lest the discontinuance of the act, together with some prejudice of the
otherwise affected, should have worn out of the minds of Men the Memory of
that Laudable and Godly Practice, it will not be amiss to recall unto our
thoughts, the Wise and Exemplary Order wherein that Holy Rite was enjoined to
be administered.

First therefore, having removed away all the trash of Superstitious, and
frivolous Appendances, as the Cross, the Chrisme, the Stripe, the Fillet, and
the rest; as aiming only at the Original simplicity of that Religious
Ceremony:

Secondly, having removed away all opinion of a Sacrament, (for which the
Church of Rome has unjustly strugled) and therewith disclaimed all derogation
from the power and virtue of Baptism:

And thirdly, having solemnly professed against the misconceit of an absolute
necessity of this rite to Salvation in them, which die after Baptism, before
hands can be laid upon them; the Church of England has piously ordered the
Imposition of hands so to be Administered, as may be to the greater edification
of those that are to receive it; and therefore has ordained that none should
be confirmed but such as can give account of having learned the Articles of the
Faith, the Lords Prayer, the Ten Commandments, and that initiatory Catechism,
which is purposely appointed for their preparation; wherein this Church has
judiciously, and not without good ground both of Reason and Religion, reformed
that common Error and Abuse of the Church of Rome, which commonly casts away
their Confirmation upon Babes in the Cradle of their first infancy; For though
some of their Doctors are willing to limit Council. Aurelian.
this act unto the age of their puberty, which is the twelfth year; others to
the seventh; that so the Child may at least remember (though yet he understand
not) what was done to him; yet the most are of opinion, that there is no cause
to defer their Confirmation till they come to the use of Reason; and do
practice accordingly; so as Alphonsus Vivaldus Vivald. ubi supra. Cassand.
Consultat. de Confirm.
tells us that commonly in Spain, all Children of two, or three years old, are
wont to be confirmed; and Petrus a Soto and Cassander professes it to have
been the ancient Order of the Church, that forthwith after their Baptism,
Children should also receive their Confirmation: In which point I cannot but
allow the moderate determination of C. Bellarmine; Bellar. l. 2. de Confir. c.
7. sect. ult.
who tells us, that when persons of ripe Age come to be Baptized, the same day,
together with Baptism they receceive both Confirmation, and Eucharist; but
when they are Baptized, being Infants, the other two are justly deferred till
the Receiver attaines to the use of reason; since (as he truly resolves)
neither of them are necessary for Infants, and both of them are received with
more fruit, and greater reverence, by those which are come to a mature Age.

But though he come home to us in matter of time, yet the Church of England
goes beyond him in the qualification of the persons, in whom he (as holding
Grace given by the very work wrought) professes not to require that measure of
knowledge and preparation, which we call for, and presuppose in those who shall
be admitted to the Imposition of our hands; upon this ground, that the Ancients
stood not upon Catechismes and Examinations in the laying on of their hands in
the Primitive times, but conferred their Confirmation upon Infants; whereat no
man can wonder, that knows they were also wont of Old (upon a weak
misprision) to cram the blessed Eucharist into the mouths of Infants; to the
due participation whereof notwithstanding, we know a competent measure of
knowledge, and felf-examination ought to be required; doubtless if a meet time
be fit to be stood upon, much more a meet ability of understanding; so as in
this point, I may safely appeal to any well-informed conscience, whether the
Church of England have not chosen the better part, and with great judgment
reformed a palpable defect in the Roman profession.

Sect. 10
And certainly, the considerations whereupon this Church Liturgy of the Church
of England. Rubric before Confirmation.
professes to be led into this just and pious resolution are such, as may well
become the gravity and godly care of our gracious Mother; which the Rubric
thus expresses: First, because that when Children come to the years of
discretion, and have learned what their Godfathers and Godmothers promised
for them in Baptism, they may then themselves with their own mouth, and with
their own consent openly Non nisi adultiore aetate ut fiat nil prohibet hanc ob
causam ut parentibus, susceptoribus, and Ecclesiarum praefectis detur occasio
pueros de fide qua^ in Baptismo professi sunt diligentius instituendi and
admonendi. Cassand. Consult. c. de Confirmat.
before the Church ratify and confirm the same; and also promise that by the
grace of God, they will evermore endeavor themselves faithfully to observe and
keep such things as they by their own mouth and confession have assented unto.

Secondly, for as much as Confirmation is ministered to them that be baptized,
that by imposition of hands and prayer they may receive strength and defense
against all temptations to sin, and the assaults of the world and the Devil;
it is most meet to be administered when Children come to that age, that partly
by the frailty of their own flesh, partly by the assaults of the world and the
Devil, they begin to be in danger to fall into sundry kinds of sin.

Thirdly, for that it agrees with the usage of the Church in times past,
whereby it was ordained that Confirmation should be ministered to them that were
of perfect age, that they being instructed in Christ's religion, should openly
profess their own faith, and promise to be obedient to the will of God.

Now let any Reader, let any Adversary say, whether any determination could be
more holily-rationall, or more evidently conducing to the furthering of the
welfare and salvation of Christian souls, in this case, then this which our
Mother the Church of England has upon sad and serious deliberation fixed upon;
which if it had been accordingly executed, with that constant care and fidelity
as it ought, would certainly have prevented many foul and monstrous
exorbitances in matter of Doctrine, and many horrible enormities in the
practice of men's lives; with both which we are now miserably pestred and
overrun.

When the party then is upon due examination, found fit both for age and
knowledge, he is to be in due season presented to the imposition of hands;
which is ordained to be performed with such holy comeliness and such vigor of
devotion, as (be it spoken without envy) the Church of England may be herein
well proposed as a pattern to all the Christian Churches in the world;
doubtless if Imposition of hands with prayer, which was the old and pure
ceremonic of Confirmation. Fulk in Rhem. Act. 8.
there be any Church under heaven that has continued the Apostolical
institution and practice of the imposition of hands in the native simplicity
and purity thereof, it is the Church of England.

But that we may not think the Church of England (though more eminent in this
point then her other sisters) goes alone in her judgment and practice of
Confirmation, by imposition of hands, let us see the free and full astipulation
of other famous Divines and Churches to her, in both these.

Philip Melancthon, as in behalf of the Churches of Saxony, has thus: In ritu
Confirmationis fiebat etc. In the rite of Melanct. Confess. Saxoni^arum Eccles.
cap. de Confirmat. and unctione.
Confirmation there was of old an explication of doctrine; wherein every one
was to recite the sum of Christian Doctrine, and openly to profess his
detestation of all both heathen and Heretical phrensies; and that he will be,
and ever remain, a true member of the Church, and not depart from the true
belief which he then professed. This custom was profitable both for the
instruction of men, and for the retaining of them in the true acknowledgement
of God, and his truth.

Flac. Illyricus thus: Porro Mat: Flac. Illyr. Gloss. in Hebr. 6.
autem impositionem manuu^ etc. But further also, they had wont of old in the
beginnings of the Church to use imposition of hands after a more accurate
instruction in the Catechism, with public and fervent prayer, that they might
obtain for them the grace of the Holy Ghost, as we read it was done to the
Samaritanes, Acts 8. And I believe that so they were wont in the Primitive
Church to remove those which were novices, from the Catechumeni, to the rank of
those auditors which were allowed to be of greater maturity; that so now it
might be lawful for them, (as those that were judged worthy) to partake of the
holy Communion.

Learned Chemnitius, as for Chemmit. Exam. Council. Trident. de Confirmat.
the Protestant Churches in general thus. Nostri saepe ostenderunt etc. Our
Doctors have often showed, that the Rite of Confirmation might very well
(setting aside those unprofitable and Superstitious traditions, and indeed such
as are contrary to the Scriptures) be thus made use of; even according to the
consent of the holy Scripture; viz: That those which are Baptized in their
infancy (for such is now the estate of the Church) when they come to the years
of discretion, should be diligently instructed in a certain and simple
Catechism of the doctrine of the Church. And when they shall be thought to
have in some good sort attained to the understanding of those Principles, that
then they should be presented to the Bishop and the Church; and there the child
which was Baptized in his infancy, should first by a short and plain admonition
be put in mind of his Baptism; wherewith, how, why, and into what he was
Baptized, what in that Baptism the whole Trinity conferred upon him, and
sealed unto him; namely, the covenant of Peace, and the compact of Grace; how
that there he made a public renouncing of Satan, a profession of his faith,
and a promise of holy obedience, Secondly, that the child himself should before
the Congregation make a proper and public profession of this Doctrine and
Faith. Thirdly, that being interrogated of the chief points of Christian
Religion, he should give answer to them al; and if he fail in his u^derstanding
of any of them, he should be better instructed in them. Fourthly, he should be
admonished, and by this profession should declare, that he utterly dissents
from all heathen, heretical, phanaticall and profane opinions. Fifthly, that
there should be added a grave and serious exhortation out of the word of God,
that he persevere in that Covenant which he has made in Baptism, and in that
Faith, and Doctrine which he has there professed. Sixthly, that public prayer
be made for those children, that God by his holy Spirit would vouchsafe to
govern, conserve, and confirm them in this profession. At which prayer, without
all superstition, Imposition of hands may be used: Neither would such a prayer
be in vain; for it is grounded upon the promises made of the gift of
perseverance, and the grace of Confirmation.

Such a fashion of Confirmation would yield much profit to the edification both
of the younger sort, and of the whole Church, and would be agreeable both to
the Scripture and to purer Antiquity: For in the Apostolical imposition of
hands that there was an exploration of Doctrine, and a profession of Faith, the
history does manifestly witness Act. 19. Of the exhortation to perseverance,
and Confirmation by the word in the Doctrine and Faith once professed; there
are examples of the Apostolic Church Act. 14, 15, and 18. And that public
prayer was used, the History testifies Act. 8. So also of the examination and
profession of Faith and Doctrine in Confirmation, the seventh Canon of the
council of Laodicea, and the eighth Canon of the council of Arles do
sufficiently speak. Thus he.

Reader, I have thus at large transcribed the testimony of this worthy Author;
for that it gives both so full an attestation to the solemn Confirmation
hitherto used in the Church of England; and withal lays forth the grounds of
this holy practice fetched from the blessed Apostles, and from Scripture it
self: Judge now, whether there could be a better Commentary upon that form
which our godly forefathers have transmitted unto us, and our Church has
lately both prescribed, and recommended her dutiful Children.

Hemingius that great light of Dr. Nic. Hemingius Syntag. c. 22. ^. Votum,
Denmark for his own judgment, and the Danish Churches, has thus: Purior
Ecclesia secuta Apost. tempora etc. The purer Churches following the Apostles
times, when the children of Christians began to be Baptized, had this fashion:
That the children being instructed in the Catechism, should be publicly
brought forth into the sight of the Bishops, and there be interrogated
concerning the Articles of their Faith; and should there with their own voice
confirm the vow that was in their name made in their Baptism; and that action,
from a part of it was termed Confirmation; and that whole action consisted of
an examination, a solemn Confirmation of the vow made in Baptism, the Prayer
of the Bishop, and the imposition of hands.

This custom was exceeding profitable, and conduced much to the retaining of
their former confession and concord; for neither was it easily found that any
man would depart from that Doctrine which he had by his solemn vow ratified and
confirmed: And soon after, In our Churches, says he, the substance of the
ancient Confirmation is retained, all Popish superstitions being abolished: For
our Bishops in their visitations do publicly examine the younger sort in the
Articles of their Faith, and in the Doctrine of the Sacraments, and do then
confirm them in the same by instruction and exhortations.

For the judgment of the French Church both concerning the ancient use of
Confirmation, and of the laudable practice of it for the present; we need no
other witnesses then he, who is the just glory of it, Mr. Calvin, who tells us:
Hic mos olim fuit etc. This was the manner of old, that Calvin Instit: l. 4. 1.
19.
the children of Christians, after they were grown up to some good age, were
presented before the Bishop, that they might fulfill that duty which was
required of those who at a riper age offered themselves to Baptism; for they
sat amongst those that were appointed to be Catechized, till they being
rightly instructed in the mysteries of Faith, could be able before the Bishop
and the People to render a confession of their belief. Upon the ending of their
childhood, or in the entering of their youth, they were again by their Parents
brought to the Bishop, and were examined by the Bishop according to that form
of Catechism which they then had, which was both certain and common: And that
this action, which ought otherwise in it self worthily to be held grave and
holy, might carry in it so much the more reverence and dignity; there was also
therein used the Ceremony of the imposition of hands; so the child, after the
approbation of his belief professed, was dismissed with a solemn blessing: Thus
he.

And could that eminent Author, if he had been retained Advocate for the Church
of England, better have set forth her fashion of confirming, and her perfect
conformity herein to the ancient Apostolical practice?

Justly may I call it so, by Calvin. Com. in Hebr. 6.
warrant of the same Author, who commenting upon this Text of the Hebrews, has
thus, Transacta infantia etc. Their infancy past over, being instructed in
their belief, they offered themselves to Catechizing; but then another symbol
or sign was used, which was the imposition of hands: This one place, says he,
abundantly testifies that the Original of this Ceremony was derived from the
Apostles. Lastly, that it may appear how well he approved this practice* Nos
quoque Calvin de vera Reformandae Ecclesiae ratione.
etc. we also could well and worthily wish, that this rite were restored to the
Church every where; whereby children after the public confession of their
Faith made, might be offered up to God; and this would be a well-beseeming
approbation of their Catechizing.

And yet more fully in his Institutions Calvin Instit l. 4. c. 19.
thus, Utinam vero morem hunc. Would to God we might retain that fashion which
I admonished you formerly was used amongst the ancient Christians, before this
abortive counterfeit of a Sacrament sprang up; that there should be a
Catechism of all the heads of Religion, which without all controversy are
agreed upon etc.

That the child at ten years of age should tender himself to give a public
confession of his Faith, etc.

This Discipline, if it were at this day in force, there would be amongst
Christian people a greater agreement in matter of Faith; neither would there be
so great ignorance and rudeness as is amongst many; neither would some be so
readily carried away with new and strange Doctrines; thus he.

Tell me now Reader, whether in the judgment of this eminent Divine (whose
authothority is justly wont to sway so much with all Reformed Churches) we have
not great reason to plead for the continuance and inforcement of holy
Confirmation, and to bless God for the guiding of our wise predecessors into
those safe ways which others complain to have missed; and earnestly to desire
that this Religious and beneficial action might be so reverently and zealously
performed, as may most conduce to the edification of Gods Church.

Sect. 12
To the careful ideavour whereof, though I might urge many motives, yet I
shall take up with these following; not more few in number, then considerable
in weight.

The First shall be the agreement and contesseration, both in judgment and
practice with the Primitive Church: to whose example, doubtless, the nearer we
draw, the more we shall approach toward purity and perfection.

Now by the confession of all Divines, both Romish and Reformed, there was a
Confirmation by imposition of hands in all the first ages of the Church, and
that the manner of performing it was the true pattern of ours, I appeal to the
witness of those Protestant Authors, which I have formerly cited, and am ready
if need were, to second it with many more: And why, my dear Brethren, should we
think it fit or safe to leave so gracious an example, and to walk alone in our
own ways, untracked, untroden with the holy feet of our first and surest
guides? where the practice began sensibly to degenerate, in adulterating the
Ordinance with Superstitious additions, both of rites and opinions, there we
have justly declined it, and do with the zealousest professors cry down the
gross abuse of that godly institution to the pit of hell, whence certainly it
came: But shall we upon this pretense cast off that gracious act of Religion
which was sent us from Heaven by the hands of the Apostles? What if we cannot
second our Imposition of hands with sensible wonders as the Apostles did?
(else, as Oecumenius well observes, Simon Magus could not have seen that the
Holy Ghost was given by them) though we cannot work miracles, yet we can pray;
and our prayers have the same Spiritual effects with theirs; neither did the
ordinary Pastors that succeeded those blessed Apostles expect any other issue
of their hands imposed, yet still imposed their hands; and whether should we
affect to be like them, in acting and approving the laying on of hands, or to
some hesternall teachers that refuse and disallow of it? The common plea of
those gainsayers is the cessation of those miraculous gifts which were in the
Apostolic times by their only hands bestowed; (others in great numbers had
the Holy Ghost, none gave it but they) whereupon they argue, as they think
strongly, that the effect ceasing the cause is useless; whom I send to our
learned Fulk for satisfaction: There is (says he) another kind of imposition
of hands (besides that miraculous one) mentioned Hebr. 6. 2. whereof there may
be perpetual use in the Church; which is the same which Saint Austin calls
nothing else but prayer over a man; and whereof he speaks Tract. 6. on the
first Epistle of John etc. and soon after: We acknowledge imposition of hands
with prayer, that they which were so taught and instructed, might receive
strength of Gods Spirit, so to continue; so he. This is that only which we
profess and glory to imitate, as being well assured that the faithful prayers
of godly Pastors and Christian Congregations can never either be out of date,
or acceptance.

Sect. 13
The second motive shall be the great benefit which accrues to the Church of
God by the use of this Ordinance; which I had rather to express in the elegant
and solid terms of learned Hooker, then in my own. By this means (says he)
it Hooker Eccles. pol. lib. 5. 66.
came to pass, that children in expectation thereof were seasoned with the
principles of true Religion, before malice and corrupt examples depraved their
minds, a good foundation was laid betimes for direction of the course of their
whole lives, the seed of the Church of God was preserved sincere and sound, the
Prelates, and Fathers of Gods family, to whom the care of their souls belonged,
saw by trial and examination of them, a part of their own heavy burden
discharged, reaped comfort by beholding the first beginnings of true Godliness
in tender years, glorified him whose praise they found in the mouths of
Infants, and neglected not so fit an opportunity of giving every one fatherly
encouragement and exhortation; whereunto imposition of hands and prayer being
added, our warrant for the great good effect thereof is the same which
Patriarchs, Prophets, Priests, Apostles, Fathers, and men of God have had for
such their particular invocations and Benedictions, as no man I suppose
professing truth of Religion will easily think to have been without fruit; thus
he. And surely these are so excellent fruits of this work of Confirmation that
we shall not need to seek out for more; yet I may not pass over a serious and
important passage of a late writer, who in a profitable and well-laboured Mr.
John Brinsley Preacher at Yarmouth, Doctr. and practis. of Pedobaptisme. p. 76.
77. 78. etc.
discourse of the Doctrine and practice of Pedobaptisme, taking an hint from
Calvin (as he well might) to prove the high antiquity of Baptizing of Infants,
by the Primitive practice of their Confirmation, which is under the name of
imposition of hands, So Deodat. on the place.
coupled together therewith; and having well made out his Argument by the
received distinction of Catechumeni, takes occasion to set forth that Ordinance
in the Primitive institution of it; recommending it with those grave Authors
forementioned to be of singular use, if it were restored to the Original
purity; and recounting the benefits that might arise therefrom instanceth in
these following; by this means the neglected exercise of Catechizing would be
brought in life and credit; Secondly, the unity of Faith would be maintained;
Thirdly, Parents would be quickened up to a further care of the Religious *
education of their children; Fourthly, Children thenselves would be put on to
seek after knowledge; whereto he adds two others not hinted formerly by any
Author; Fifthly, that by this means, persons ignorant or scandalous might be
kept out from communion with the Church in the sacred Ordinance of the Lords
Supper; and so the stumbling block of mixed communion removed; Sixthly, that by
this means, the difference of the times about the formality of a
Church Covenant, in receiving in of members (as they call them) might be
compremised and taken up; there being here the substance of what is there
contended for, and that better bottomed (as he conceives) then the former: All
which as they are exceeding weighty and worthy of sad consideration, so, me
thinks, this last should be held fit to be listened unto by our brethren of the
Church Way; who may easily see how by but the admissio^ of a truly Apostolical
institution they may effect that which (not without greater difficulty to be
achieved) they project and desire.

Sect. 14
The third Motive shall be the mischieves and inconveniences which follow upon
the neglect and want of this holy Ordinance; which do plainly appear (as the
right serves to set forth both it self and the wrong) both in the privation of
those benefits which we have fore-specified, and in the seizure of those
manifold evils which have sensibly ensued.

For whiles this institution is 1.
let fall, we see Catechizing of Children (then which nothing can be conceived
more profitable and necessary in Gods Church) is grown utterly out of fashion.

And what woeful distractions 2.
of opinions, what horrible Paradoxes of contradiction to the Articles of
Christian Faith have been and are daily broached to the world, what good heart
can but tremble to consider? Certainly it was not without great reason, that
our wise and learned King James of blessed memory, when complaint was made to
him of the growth of Popery in his time, returned answer, that all this was for
the want of Catechizing: For surely, if the younger sort were soundly seasoned
with true knowledge of the grounds of Religion, they could not be so easily
carried away with every wind of Doctrine.

How cold and careless are 3.
Parents generally grown of breeding their children in a religious way; for
that they know they neither are, nor shall be ever called to any account of
their knowledge or proficiency.

How utterly regardlesse are 4.
the children themselves of so much as a verbal learning the principles of
Religion, which shall never be required of them to the shame of their ignorance
or unperfitnesse; being in the mean time wholly taken up with vain toys, and
idle impertinencies?

With what bold and sinful 5.
ignorance do too many of the promiscuous multitude thrust themselves upon Gods
table? which might be clearly avoided, if the prudent and Godly order of our
Church were duly observed; that none should Rubric after the order of
Confirmation.
be admitted to the Communion but those that have been Confirmed; none
Confirmed but those who are able to give account of the Catechism set forth by
the Church, containing the main grounds of Christian Doctrine, viz. the Belief,
the ten Commandments, the Lords Prayer, and the Sacraments.

Lastly, how lawlesly vicious 6.
are the lives of too many, which might have been in all likelihood somewhat
restrained, if in the entering of their youth, they had publicly engaged
themselves to God and the Congregation, to renew their Baptismall Covenant, in
renouncing the World, the Devil, and the Flesh; and solemnly promising to do
their utmost endeavor to keep Gods holy Will and Commandments, and to walk in
the same all the days of their life?

In the account of most of Calvin ubi supra. Instit. l. 4. c. 19.
these great inconveniences, I am seconded by Master Calvin himself, who
plainly imputes to the want of this Discipline, so much querrell in matter of
Belief, so much ignorance and rudeness in too many, and so fearful
distractions with new and wild opinions set abroach every where in the World.

So as, whether we consider the convenience and honor of our conformation to
the Primitive Church of Christ, or the great profit that arises from the due
observation of this Ordinance, or the no small inconveniences and mischieves
which ensue upon the neglect of it, we have great reason to wish, that it may
be happily in the purity of it restored to the Church of God.

Sect. 15
In the mean timelet no man think to choke me with the objection of the
disorder, and utter inefficacy of this Ordinance, as it was lately wont to be
practiced in our Church; I may not deny that in too many places there was fault
enough even on both parts, both of the giver and receiver: For Hooker Eccle.
pol. l. 5. of Confir. 66.
the one Mr. Hooker gives a grave and modest touch of reproof; No, says he,
there is no cause we should doubt of the benefit, but surely great cause to
make great complaint of the deep neglect of this Christian duty, almost with
all them to whom by right of their place and calling the same belongs: Let
them not take it in evil part, the thing is true, their small regard hereunto
has done harm in the Church of God, thus he. Neither can I but justify his
gentle reprehension: The Fathers of the Church generally failed in the zealous
prosecution of this so beneficial a work, being I suppose discouraged with
either the coldness or adversnes of too ma ny of their charge; into whose
thoughts some otherwise affected teachers had instilled a strong prejudice
against this institution; hereupon having eye enough to their own peace, they
were content silently to let fall the frequent and regular performance of that
which their hearts allowed; afterward, in the beginning of King James his
Reign, they were quickend with this Synodicall Constitution: Forasmuch Can, and
Constable. Eccles ^ n 60.
as it has been a solemn ancient and laudable custom in the Church of God,
continued from the Apostles times, that all Bishops should lay their hands upon
children Baptized and instructed in the Catechism of the Christian Religion,
praying over them, and blessing them, which we commonly call Confirmation, and
that this holy action has been accustomed in the Church in former ages, to be
performed in the Bishops visitation every third year; we will and appoint that
every Bishop, or his Suffragane in his accustomed Visitation, do in his own
Person carefully observe the said custom, etc. Upon this Canon, the Bishops
generally were not indiligent in performing this part of their charge, insomuch
as had there been a correspondent forwardness, both in the people, and in
their Brethren of the Ministry (who are by the Canon charged with the care of
preparing and procuring the presentation of such Can. and Constit. Can. 61.
persons as are meet to be admitted to Confirmation) this service had certainly
been accomplished with good effect, and was by diverse of them done accordingly.

But soon after, divisions grew on, the Authority of Ecclesiastical Superiors
began to abate in the minds of men, and there wanted not who suggestit to be a
piece of Piety to dislike and decry this (which they termed a Superstitious)
Ceremony; so as now there wanted heads on which hands should be imposed: Whiles
yet in some places of the remoter Diocesses, this Episcopal Benediction was
(in the other extreme) sought with so too much heat, as that it was not
possible to be given otherwise then in a breathless and tumultuary way, as I
formerly intimated.

It is not then for us to say how an holy service is performed, but how it
should be; what errors pass in any Godly administrations, ought not so much to
disgrace the Act, as to invite an amendment; and let me be bold to say, that
were this institution carefully and punctually acted on all parts, according to
the rules prescribed by the Church of England, there could be no doubt of a
plentiful blessing from heaven to be powered down upon that so Sacred and
Religious Ordinance.

Wherefore dear Brethren, laying aside all unjust prejudice that may arise,
either from the persons interested, or from the abuse of the thing, or
discontinuance of the practice, let us resolve both reverently to esteem, and
humbly to submit to an Institution, no less then Apostolical, and expect the
Heavenly Benediction of him who is the great Bishop of 1 Pet. 2. 25.
our souls; to whom with the Father and the Holy Spirit be all Praise, Honor,
and Glory, for evermore.

Amen.
FINIS

