The Spiritual Verses and Prose OF JAMES HUNT:

CONCERNING THE ADVANCMENT OF Christ his glorious and Triumphing Church, Which
by degrees shall flourish over the face of the whole world, which will be to
the overthrow of the Divill, and the false Church.

Dedicated to the Kings most Excellent Majesty, and to the most Honorable and
High Court of PARLIAMENT.

London, Printed for J. H. 1642.

The Spiritual Verses and Prose OF JAMES HUNT.
NOw Christian reader, the Apostle S. Paul says plainly, Col. 3.16. Let the
word of Christ dwell in you richly in all wisdom, teaching and admonishing one
another in Psalms, and Hymns, and spiritual songs, singing with grace in
your hearts to the Lord.

Wherefore by that grace that God has given unto me, I have writ some part of
my mind in a spiritual song, which will be to the praise and glory of God and
to the confounding of the divill: For my prose will clear and prove my verses
to be sound and true, for Christ Jesus, who is the perfect God, he says
plainly, John. 16 When he the Spirit of truth is come, he will reprove the
world of judgment. Now by that spirit of truth which our glorious God has
given unto me, I will plainly and boldly say, if I have not thereby, I say by
the help and power of God, reproved and quite overthrown the Bishops and all
their Clergy both in their doctrine, and in their judgment, as concerning true
and sound Religion, I will desire no mercy, but be content to be put to death
under the judgment of the high Court of Parliament, whom God, I hope, has
gathered together for the trial of the Spirits: Wherefore I James Hunt, a
Minister and Messenger of Jesus Christ, do humbly beseech you all, for the
mercies of God, and the true love that is in Jesus Christ, that you will
observe the Council of Saint Paul, which says, Quench not tht Spirit, despise
not Prophesying but prove all things and hold fast that which is good.
Wherefore I beseech, you to read my book through with observation, which I hope
will be to your everlasting joy and glory.

Christian Brethren, it is written, Reve. 19. 11. Behold a White horse, and he
that sat on him was called faithful and true, and in righteousness he does
judge and make War. I understand he that sits upon the White horse signifies
Christ and his Ministers, which are men of War, to fight the spiritual
battle of the Lord; For he that is joined to the Lord is one spirit. 1 Cor. 6.
17.

Wherefore I James Hunt to London come,
As Soldiers do by sound of the Drum,
To see if there be any spiritual Soldier in this town,
That can be able the plain Plowman to confound:
If there be any such here, or shall come hither,
I pray let him be Captain to wear the Feather.
But some of the Clergy say I am a fool;
It is because I am not taught in their school.
Why Mus a Mouse, and Pediculus a Louse,
Will not that serve in a Country House?
But Greek and Latin I must you tell,
I pray will you my words mark well;
Your kingdom will be quite thrown down,
By the clear voice of the trumpet sound.
For you have so many false doctrines raised,
By your Latin tongue and Greek phrase,
That now I trust in our glorious God,
The plain English tongue will win the praise.
For there are very few Mysteries in the Gospel that be so strong,
But they may be unfolded by the plain English tongue.
But Greek and Latin have you not heard of the great whore,
That seeks my life for to devour?
Her name is Mystery Babylon the great,
For Greek and Latin is her seat.
By which she has advanced her self to great honor, and renown,
But the sword of truth will cut her down:
For I understand by Gods great power,
She shall be confounded in one hour.
Wherefore Greek and Latin if you be offended at my writing or by my word,
I pray let you and I try it out with the spiritual sword.
Therefore look to your self that you do not prove a Cow,
And so it may be said as it was to your Captain William:
I pray thee who is most fool now?
For the deepest scholar in Cambridge School,
May be taught wisdom by Christ's fool.
But Greek and Latin you say that I do climb too high,
Your Pulpit I must not come nigh:
But I shall prove your doctrine is neither clear nor sound,
Therefore I pray let me get up, and do you come down.
Now Greek and Latin which in worldly wisdom do excel,
What can you say do I not follow my text well?
For I praise God I have wounded the Whore upon the head,
That she will bleed till she be dead:
For all the Doctors in Rome and Spain,
Cannot heal her up again.
For the Spirit of God will burn her down,
And lay her Level with the ground:
I mean by the powerful preaching of Gods word.
Which is the powerful and fiery sword.
Again, Greek and Latin, your halter will be fited to your head,
For you will be hanged till you be dead.
For I shall prove to you in brief,
She is a murderer and a thief;
And thus I end my spiritual song,
Hopeing I have done no man wrong.
For by speaking that which is just and true,
I shall give the Bishops Clergy their full due.
For by the help and power of God I will boldly say with S. Paul 1 Cor. 2. 12.
Now we have not received the spirit of the world but the spirit which is of God
that we might know the things that are freely given to us of God: Which things
we speak not in the words which man's wisdom teaches, but that which the Holy
Ghost teaches, comparing spiritual things with spiritual, that is comparing
spiritual light with spiritual light, and spiritual darkness awith spiritual
darkness: For all false doctrine with false worship is discovered and
overthrown by the power and glory of the light which is revealed in the
Gospel of Christ: Which things we speak not in the words which man's wisdom
teaches (mark this point I beseech you) for the Apostle says plainly, not in
the words that man's wisdom teaches, I understand, an natural man that has
but the light of nature may be taught the Latin and Greek tongue by his
tutors instructions; but the Apostle says in the 14 verse, The natural man
receives not the things of the spirit of God, neither can he know them for
they are foolishness unto him: And I have proved it so to be for I have bin
this seven year among the Clergy in this City, and and in the Country, to
prove that by the coming of Christ in the flesh, and his suffering one the
Cross, and the power of his resurection, he has ransomed his people quite off
from the old Law and Testament which is the bondage of death and corruption;
But unto this day I can find but one man among them all that will believe the
plain evident truth; therefore I shall prove their doctrine is pure in show,
but little in substance; For God does not tie himself to the Art of
schollership, which the Clergy have bin taught in the University, for he says
expressly by the divine power of his Word, 1 Cor. 1. God chooses the foolish
things of this world to confound the wise, and God has chosen the weak things
of the world to confound the things that are mighty. Wherefore I say plainly
God has raised me up to show his power in weakness to confound the Bishops and
all their Clergy both in their doctrine and their judgment, as concerning true
and sound Religion. It is written, in Reve. 20.8. concerning Gog and Magog. I
understand this Gog and Magog signifies the divill, and all his carnal
ministers, which are always raising up war and battle against Christ, and his
elect children; it is said in the 9. verse, They Went upon the breadth of the
earth, and camped the Saints about; I understand and can prove the Pope and all
his Clergy, and the Bishops here in England and all their Clergy, upon both
sides they have blinded and deceived all those people that are as yet held
under their power. Again for the Turk, the divill has his carnal ministers
amongst them, whereby he has deceived all those that belong to his Kingdom.
Again, for the Heathens the divill has his heathen Philosophers, whereby he
has deceived all those that belong to his dommion. Thus the divill and his
carnal ministers have spread themselves over the whole world, but it is said
fire came down from God, out of heaven and devoured them, I understand, and
shall prove the fire that comes down from God out of heaven, signifies the
divine power of the word of God in the Gospel of Christ, which shall shine so
clear and powerfully, that it will burn and consume all false doctrine which
belongs to the divill. For John Baptist was a burning and a flaming light:
Again it is said of our glorious God Heb. 1 Who makes his ministers a flaming
fire. For as a temporal fire will burn temporal buildings down to the
ground, even so the Word of God in the Gospel will be a spiritual fire, to
burn down all false doctrine and false worship by degrees from the face of the
whole world, and Christ and his glorious Church shall flourish. Wherefore I say
with S. Paul, 1 Cor. 3. 12. If any man shall build on this foundation, I mean
upon the bodily Temple of Christ, which is the glorious Church, if he shall
build gould, silver, precious stones, every man's work shall be made manifest,
for the day declare it: that is, the light of Gods word shall prove his
doctrine whether it be sound or false, if any man's work abide, he shall
receive a reward, that is a reward of eternal glory, but if any man's work
shall be burnt he shall suffer loss, but he himself shall be saved; so as by
fire, I understand, if any man have gathered to himself any doctrine which is
contrary to the word and will of God, he must count that labor to be as lost,
but when he shall be reconciled to Christ and to the obedience of his Word,
he shall be saved by the divine power thereof, which signifies the Holy
Ghost and fire; Now I say plainly, if there be any Divine, or any other man,
that can find any one place of Scripture in the new Testament, for to prove
the ministration of the old Testament, is to be joined to the glorious Church
of Christ, which is his body, if I cannot find 3 other plain truths to burn
up his judgment, I will be content to be burned under the judgment of the high
Court of Parliament, whom God I hope has gathered together for the trial of
the spirits; wherefore we receive a Kingdom that cannot be moved, that is such
a Jesus, and such a Gospel, as shall abide and remain for ever: let us have
grace to serve God with reverence and fear, For our God is a consuming fire,
Heb. 12. Now I will show* you how God is a consuming fire two ways: First, he
is the fire of love, to burn and consume all false doctrine and false worship
out of the hearts and minds of the people, as for to cause them to hate and
forsake it. For Christ so loved his Church, and gave himself for it, that he
might present it to himself a glorious Church, not having spot or wrinckle:
Ephesians. 5. This place of Scripture does signify that Christ would have his
people to be so chaste unto himself and to his Gospel, that it should be free
from all false doctrine, and false worship which belongs to the devil: For
God is love, and he that dwells in love, dwells in God, and God in him:
herein is our love made perfect, that we may have bouldnes in the day of
judgment, because as he is, so are] we in this world and so (I praise God) am I
in this world, for the spirit of God draws but one way, that is to Christ, and
to the obedience of his glorious Gospel; But on the other side, God will be
found to be the fire of Wrath to destroy all those carnal ministers or any
other false powers, whatsoever it be, with everlasting plagues and torments of
hell fire, that shall wilfully fight against Christ, and against the divine
power of his word, if they do not repent, and yield obedience unto it, as I
prove plainly in 2. These. 1. 7. When the Lord Jesus shall be revealed from
heaven with his mighty Angels, in flaming fire, taking vengeance on them that
know not God; and obey not the glorious Gospel of the Lord Jesus Christ, who
shall be punished with everlasting destruction, from the presence of the Lord
and the glory of his power. Thus I have showed you in breife how our God is a
consuming fire two ways.

For God has commanded me to sing a joyful and a mournful song,
To show and prove by the divine power of his word his mercies and his
judgments they are both exceeding strong.
His mercies toward all those that shall love and him obey,
But his fiery wrath and judgments toward those that shall refuse and still
say nay.
It is written Ephesians. 5. 13. All things that are reproved are made manifest by
the light. Now by that glorious light God has given me, I will show you in
breife, what abominable hipocrites the Bishops and all their Clergy are in the
sight of our glorious God, for they are always teaching and preaching that the
people may love God, and obey his commandments, but I shall prove that they
are the men that are enemies against God, and will not obey his Commandments,
for the first point I shall prove, that all those divines that do deny the
divine power of the word of God, they are enemies against God, now the Bishops
and their Clergy say, that there is no perfection for the people so long as
they are here in this world, but I shall prove, that Christ does present his
whole Church perfect before God the Father; For by one offering he has
perfected for ever them that are sanctefied, Heb. 10. 14. But some people may
say, how are we sanctified? My answer is, through belief and obedience to the
truth; for Christ says plainly, John 17. Sanctefy them through thy truth: Thy
word is truth, Christ is the word, and the word is Christ, which is revealed in
his glorious Gospel. Again, I can prove that Christ has a triumphing Church
here upon earth, but that the Bishops and their Clergy utterly deny; But if I
ask any of them if they believe that the Gospel of Christ, was preached by
Christ and his Apostles here on earth, they will answer yea, then I answer to
them again, as in 2 Cor. 2. 14. Now thanks be to God who always causes us to
triumph in Christ Jesus; for Mercy, Love, and Charity, rejoices and triumphs
against judgment; for S. James says plainly, He shall have judgment without
mercy which shows no mercy, and mercy rejoiceth against judgment. But what
judgment? I say not against the righteous judgment of God, but against the
divill and his false and deceivable judgment; thus I have proved in brief,
that God has a triumphant Church here upon earth. Again, I can prove that all
those people that are and shall be sanctified, by the divine power of the word
of God, they are thereby made both God and man, but that the Bishops and all
their Clergy utterly deny, but if I ask any of them if Christ be not God and
man, they will answer yea, then my answer is 1 John 4. 17. as he is so are we
in this world, For know you not how that Christ is in you except ye be
reprobates, 2 Cor. 18. 5. again 1 Cor. 6. 19. What know you not that your body
is the Temple of the Holyghost which is in you, again Ephesians. 4. 4. There is one
body and one spirit, one God and Father of all, who is above all, and through
all, and in you all; Now if God the Father, and God the Son, and God the Holy
Ghost, be in his people by the divine power of their word, I hope there is no
man can prove me a liar, because I say Christ and his Church is God and man,
for as a temporal tree has a abundance of boughs and branches, and all make
but one tree, so on the other side, all those people that shall be reconciled
to Christ and to the obedience of his word, they shall be joined to his
glorious body, and all make but one complete body though they shall be infinite
in number, for the Apostle says plainly, Col. 2. Ye are complete in him who is
the head of the Principalities and powers: Again, as a temporal tree all the
boughs and branches have their life and nourishment, from the root and stock,
so on the other side, all the children of God have their life and nourishment
from Christ, and the divine power of his word, which is revealed in his Gospel.
Again, I can prove that all those people, that are and shall be sanctified by
the divine power of the Word of God, they are thereby made Kings, Priests, and
Prophets, to God, but the Bishops and their Clergy say, there shall be no more
Prophets, but I have proved and shall prove, that that they themselves are all
false Prophets, which oppose themselves against the plain truth of God. It is
written, Reve. 1, By the blood of Christ we are made Kings and Priests unto God
the Father; This point of Scripture does plainly prove that it is not in a
Bishops power to make a man a Priest, for the spirit of God proves plainly, it
is by the virtue and divine power of the blood of Christ; Again, 1 Pet. 2. Ye
are a royal Priesthood to show forth the praises of him, who has called you
out of darkness into his marvilous light; But how shall the people show and set
forth those Riches, and Honor, and Glory, that belongs to Christ and his
Church, but by declaring of his Word, which is revealed in his Gospel,
wherefore I praise God, I plainly understand, because the Bishops and their
Clergy will suffer none but themselves to be teachers in the Churches, but now
I make no doubt but God will have his power known, that he will allow and
maintain, that al his people shall be preachers, according to that rule which
the Apostle sets forth, 1 Cor. 14. 29. Let the Prophets speak two or three,
and let the other judge, for ye may all Prophecy one by one, that all may
learn and all may be comforted: For to Prophecy is to open and unfold the
Mysteries and Parables in the new Testament, to the true meaning and
signification; again he says in the 37. verse, If any man think himself to
be a Prophet, or spiritual, let him acknowledge that these things that I write
unto you, are the Commandments of the Lord. Mark I beseech you the saying of
the Apostle, first he exhorts the people saying, When the Church are come
together they all may Prophecy one by one, that is in an orderly and decent
way, for these things that I write are the Commandments of the Lord: Hereby I
plainly understand and prove, that God has commanded that every man should
have free liberty to exercise his gift, according to that measure of grace
which God has given him, now because I have desired to declare my mind to the
people in Churches, to the praise and glory of God, as he has commanded me to
do, by the divine power of his spirit above, which is agreeable to his word
here below, for this cause I have bin ten times cast into prison. Again one of
the Churchwardens a Schoolmasters, which by his Greek and Latin tongues
has advanced himself to a great deal of Worldly wealth, he commanded two of
his Scholars to hang me in the Church, for they and he flew upon me, and put a
cord about my neck, and had almost mur thered me in the Church. Now I made my
complaint to a Magistrate, but his answer was that I had no authority to speak
in the Church: Indeed I have no authority from the Bishops, but I hope all
those that shall read my book or here it read, may plainly understand that I
have authority from a glorious God, whose power and authority will be found to
be greater then the Bishops; wherefore I now appeal to the most Honorable High
Court of Parliament, hopeing to find mercy and justice at your hands, for I
have already proved the Bishops and all their Clergy to be thieves and robbers,
and now I shall prove them again to be murderers in a spiritual way; for the
Apostle says plainly, 2 Cor. 3. the Letter kills: I understand and shall
prove, that the Letter that kills, signifies the Divill and the old Law, for
the old Law is the spirit of bondage and so is the Divill, for the Apostle
says plainly, and so say I, Romans 7. 6. Now we are delivered from the Law, that
being dead wherein we were held as held under the chains and bondage of
Satan, that we should serve in newnes of spirit and not in the oldnesse of the
Letter. I say, in the newness of the Gospel, not in the oldnesse of the Law:
but the Bishops and al their Clergy teach the people, saying, the old Law is
the rule of obedience, but I shall plainly prove, the more they bring the people
under the obedience of the old Law, the more they bring them under the bondage
of the devil; for S. Paul's zeal was to the old Law when he was a persecutor
of the Church of Christ, and then I hope you will al say with me, in so doing he
was an enemy to God, and a friend unto the devil; for he says plainly, Phil.
3. Concerning zeal persecuting the Church, touching the righteousness that is
in the Law blameless.

Thus I have proved to you in brief, that S. Paul's zeal was to the old Law when
he was a persecutor of Christ. It is written Heb. 2. 14. Forasmuch as the
children were made partakers of flesh and blood, Christ himself took part of
the same, that through death he might destroy him that had the power of death,
that is, the devil, and so deliver all those who through fear of death were
all their life time subject to bondage. I have already proved, that the old Law
is the spirit of bondage, and so is the devil, which Christ has redeemed all
those people from that will be reconciled unto him, and to the obedience of his
Word. Thus I have plainly proved the Bishops and all their Clergy to be
murderers in a spiritual way. Again, I have proved them all to be thieves and
robbers, for by their false doctrine and false power they rob the Church of
Christ of those riches, honor and glory which belongs unto it. Again I have
proved them all to be abominable hypocrites, which always are teaching and
preaching that the people must love God and obey his commandments, and yet
themselves are enemies against God, and will not obey his commandments, for
they will not suffer those things to be done in the Churches which God has
commanded by the divine power of his Word, and the plain truth is, the
Magistrates and Churchwardens do yet maintain and uphold them in their
abominable wickedness. I pray God give them all grace to be reconciled to be
reconciled to Christ and the obedience of his Word, which if they shall
wilfully refuse to do, they will be sure to draw down the fiery wrath of God
upon their own souls. Wherefore I hope if the Magistrates and Churchwardens
shall understand by the powerful Word of Gods command, that God has raised me
up to be a true and sound Preacher of hi^ Word, I hope you will all have that
wisdom to lay down your persecutin^ sword. Again I understand, the cause why
the Bishops, all their Clergy an^ doctrine is so false and exceeding poor, is
because they are climbers, and come not in by the door.

It is written Acts 19. A certain man named Demetrius a Silver-Smith, which
made Shrines for Diana, brought no small gain to the craftsmen whom he called
together with the workmen of like occupation, and said, Sirs, you know that by
this craft we have our wealth. This place of Scripture gives a plain and
perfect resemblance concerning the Bishops and all their Clergy, who by the art
and craft of schollership which they have learned in the University, have
gathered to themselves such abundance of worldly wealth and earthly
magnificence, now they begin to call and gather themselves together, saying, if
we shall suffer the plain English tongue to be Preachers, that will be a means
whereby our art of schollership will be little set by, or come to nothing: and the
plain truth is, I have already proved, and shall prove again in brief, their
doctrine will be found as just nothing, for the Apostle says plainly, so say I,
2 Cor. 5. 11. If any man be in Chtist, he is a new creature, and to be a new
creature is to be reconciled to Christ and to the obedience of his Gospel, Old
things are past away, behold all things are become new. The old things that are
past away signify the ministration of the old Testament, which Christ has
redeemed us from. Now we know in all the Churches in England which have been
for a long time held under the power and government of the Bishops and their
Clergy. First they read a lesson in the old Testament, and another in the New,
and when they are up in the Pulpit, they join in their doctrine the
ministration of the old Testament and the New together, and in so doing, they
have blinded and deceived all those people that are as yet held under their
power. Thus I have proved in brief their doctrine is as just nothing. Wherefore
now I make no doubt but that Prophecy which is written in Rev. 18. will be first
fulfilled in the Bishops and all their Clergy here in England, which says, in
one hour so great riches are come to nothing; so I hope all those that shall
read my book, or hear it read so much as may be read in one hour, may plainly
understand, that I have by the help and power of God stripped the Bishops and
all their Clergy quite naked, even as naked as a new-shorne sheep that has
nothing to cover her nakedness; but they scorn to learn of me whom God has
raised up to show them how they might be clothed with Christ his glorious robe
of righteousness, that the shame of their nakedness might not appear.
Wherefore now I trust in God that saying will be brought to pass which is
written in the eleventh Verse, no man buyeth their merchandise any more, for
all people by degrees shall see and understand, that their doctrine is so full
of heresy and hypocrisy, which is so hateful in the sight of our glorious
God, that no man that loves God will buy of their deceiveable doctrine any
more. Now I come to my text again. Behold a white horse, and he that sat on
him was called faithful and true, and in righteousness he does judge and make
war. I say once again, he that sits upon the white horse signifies
Christ and his Ministers, which are men of war to fight the spiritual battle
of the Lord. It is said in the 14. Verse, the armies that followed him, I say,
that shall follow after Christ and his Ministers, it is said they were upon
white horses: we all know in a temporal war the horsemen are very great in
force and power, so in like manner all those people that shall follow Christ
and his Ministers, their force and power will be exceeding great, that we need
not fear nor doubt but that we shall get the victory; for the glorious unity,
Father Son and Holy Ghost will help us to fight the battle. Now by the help
of God I will show you in brief what are the spiritual weapons that the
soldiers of Christ must take up to fight against all false doctrine and false
power that belongs to the devil. It is written in Ephesians. 6. Stand fast, having
your loins girt about with truth: for the Law was given by Moses, but grace
and truth came by Jesus Christ. Ioh. 1. Wherefore if any Divine shall tell you
that the old Law is to be joined to the glorious body of Christ, you may answer
him plainly, he speaks not the truth. Again, put on the breast plate of
righteousness, not the righteousness which is of the Law, which S. Paul calls
his own righteousness. For if righteousness come by the Law, Christ died in vain.
Gal. 2.21. For Christ is the end of the Law for righteousness to every one
that believes, Romans 10.4. God has made him to be sin for us which knew no
sin, that we should be made the righteousnsse of God in him, 2 Cor. 5.21. Thus
I have proved in brief, the breast plate of righteousness signifies Christ
and his Word, which is revealed in his Gospel. Again, Having your feet shod
with the preparation of the Gospel of peace. Christ says, In him we shall
find peace, that is, al those that will be reconciled to Christ and the obedience
of his Word, Christ will speak peace to their souls, For all the promises of
God are in him yea and Amen, to the praise and glory of his grace. For Christ
who is the perfect God, he says plainly, Ioh. 5.24. Verily verily I say unto
you, he that hears my Word, and believes on him that sent me, has
everlasting life, and shall not come into condemnation, but is passed from
death to life, that is, from the death and bondage of sin and Satan, by the
virtue and divine power of the Word of God in the doctrine of the new
Testament, which is the life of glory and grace. Again, take the shield of
faith whereby ye shall be able to quench all the fiery darts of the wicked. It is
written Gal. 3.11. The just shall live by faith, and the Law is not of faith; I
say, not of the lively and justifying faith, for S. Paul says plainly and so
say I, Gal. 5.16. By the works of the Law shall no flesh be justified, for
Christ was delivered for our offenses, and was raised again for our
justification. Therefore being justified by faith we have peace with God
through Jesus Christ our Lord, which is by the divine power of his Word, which
signifies the shield of faith. Again, take the helmet of salvation; for now I
praise God, I plainly understand that saying will be brought to pass that is
written Luke 3. All flesh shall see the salvation of our God, for now a
glorious God will show and set forth by the divine power of his Word Christ and
the true Church from the devil and the false Church, that al people by degrees
shall discern the one from the other with the eyes of their understanding, as
plainly as they may discern the Sun from the Moon with their bodily eyes: so
all people shall be forced to see the salvation of our God whether they will or no.

For God by the divine power of his word, will open the eyes of the people so
clear, that they shall plainly see and understand, that there is no salvation
to be attained but by Christ, and by the divine power of his word, which is the
helmet of our salvation; so all those people that will be reconciled unto it,
they shall see it to their everlasting joy and glory. But on the other side,
all those people that shall wilfully fight against it, they shall see it to
their eternal death and damnation, if they do not repent and yield obedience
unto it. Again, take the sword of the spirit which is the word of God, the
sword I understand and prove, that it signifies Christ and his word, for in
the beginning was the word, and the word was with God, and the word was God,
Christ is the word, and Christ was with God, and Christ is God, for the word of
God is quick and powerful, and sharper then any two edged sword, Heb. 4. First
it is quick in apprehention, for to cut and devide betwixt the Law and the
Gospel. Secondly, it is powerful to draw the people from the bondage of sin
and corruption, into the glorious liberty of the children of God. Thus I have
showed you in brief what are the Weapons that the soldiers of Christ must
take up to fight against al false doctrine, and false power that belongs to
the divil and his Kingdom of darkness; But if the trumpet give an uncertain
sound who shall prepare himself to the battle, wherefore I praise God, I have
proved the Bishops and al their Clergy to be false preachers which give a false
and contrary sound; for they are ministers of the Letter, which are instruments
of the devil for in Gods sight they are no better, For the more powerfully upon
that instrument they do sound, the more they help the divil bear up his
Crown, I have proved the letter signifies the old Law, and the Apostle says
plainly, and so say I, 1 Cor. 15. The strength of sin is the Law, and the
devil and al his carnal ministers they are yet the strengh of sin, for by
that authority that is given unto them they keep the people under unbeleife,
for I say once again Christ is the end of the Law, to every one that believes,
wherefore I James Hunt humbly beseech al good Christian people

In the city and in country round
For to observe the trumpet sound,
Which kindly does you all entreat:
To put on all your spiritual armory complete,
That you Christ's soldiers may be found,
To help me get the Bishops Clergies kingdom down
So when we have won the victory,
Christ will give the crown of glory to you and me.
To triumph in glory here for a time, and in the world to come world without
end. It is written 1 Cor. 6.2. Know you not that the Saints shall judge the
world? I have already proved, that the Saints are al those people that shall be
reconciled to Christ through belief and obedience of the truth. Wherefore I
plainly and boldly say, that the Saints of God by the divine power of his Word
shall proclaim a doom and judgment of everlasting death and damnation against
al those people that shall wilfully rise up in battle to fight against God and
us, if they do not repent and be reconciled unto God and us: so I make no
doubt when we shall declare our proclamation which we shall receive from the
divine power of God and his Word, it will be a greater fear and astonishment
unto al those people that shall rise up against us, then if there were thousands
of thousands of men in arms rising up against them to destroy them, for the
death of the body is as it were but for one hour, but alas, alas, the second
death which is the everlasting death and torment of the soul, is to be
lamented, which al those ministers or any other false powers whatsoever they be
shall be sure to receive, that will not be reconciled to God and to his Saints:
now I will show you how the Saints will be known by their colors, for they must
be white and red, which is to be discerned with the eye of man's understanding:
for the white color is to show mercy, love and peace to al those that will be
reconciled to God and to his Saints. But on the other side, the color that is
red, is to show and signify the fiery wrath of God to cut off and destroy al
those people that will not be reconciled to God and his Saints: for Christ who
is the perfect God, says plainly, Luke 18.27. Those mine enemies that will not
that I shall reign over them, bring them hither and slay them before me.
Hereby I plainly understand, that God now will by the divine power of his word,
which shall be executed by his Saints cut off, and root out, by degrees from
the face of the whole world, all those people that will not be reconciled to
Christ, and to the obedience of his glorious Gospel. Wherefore I James Hunt, a
Minister and Messenger of Jesus Christ, do humbly beseech all the Saints and
servants of Christ, that you will now with valor and courage hold forth your
kingly and princely power, which we shall freely receive from ^he glorious
unity, Father, Son and Holy Ghost, that by the divine power of the Word, which
is the powerful and two-edged sword, we may all with boldness and courage hold
forth the sword of justice both spiritual and temporal, to cut down and root
out al those people that shall wilfully fight against God and us, if they do not
repent and be reconciled: for Christ is called a lamb for his meekness and
humility* again, he is called a lion for his valor and courage, to be revenged
upon al his enemies that shall wilfully rise up against him: for behold the Lion
of the tribe of Judah, the root of David, has prevailed to open the book, and
to loose the seals thereof. I understand the opening of the look does signify
the opening and unfolding of the mysteries and parables in the new Testament to
the true meaning and signification to the praise and glory of God, and the
confounding of false doctrine and false worship that belongs to the devil,
for we know that the Son of God is come, and has given us an understanding to
know him that is true, and I praise GOD, so am I in him that is true, even in
his Son JESUS CHRIST, this is the true God, and eternal life, I in him, and
he in me, by the divine power of his Word which lives in me: I honor and
glorify the name of God our glorious Father for ever, and Christ Jesus our
Mediator and Redeemer, with the Holy Ghost, who is our loving Comforter, three
glorious persons, yet but one God: for as they three cannot be divided one from
the other: no more can the true Church be divided from them three, to whom be
al praise, honor, glory, power, might, dominion and Majesty, now and evermore,
world without end. Amen.

I acknowledge the Lords Prayer, and other godly prayers, that shall be agreeable
to the true worship and Honor of God, and David's Psalms shall abide in the
Church of Christ for ever, but for the old Law and Testament, I plainly prove,
that is quite abolished by the suffering of Christ on the Cross.

Again, the reading of the Common-Service book, does bring in the old Jewish
Religion again, which was under the Law, for the reading of that book does so
blind the minds of the people, that they do not discern betwixt the Law and
commandments, which is unto death and condemnation, from the Law and
Commandments which is to everlasting life and justification, for the
ministration of the old Testament is the Law of Commandments contained in
Ordinances, which Christ has redeemed us from. But on the other side, Christ
is the Law and Commandments in the second Covenant, I mean the New Testament,
which is the book of life, the fulness of him that fills all in all.

Again, in the Common-Service-book there are very many false inventions which
are contrary to the true worship and honor of God.

FINIS.

