

THE Contemplations upon the HISTORY OF THE New Testament, now complete.

The second Tome.

Together with Diverse TREATISES reduced to the greater Volume.

By Jos. Exon.

MDCLXI.

LONDON, Printed by James Flesher.

TO THE KINGS MOST EXCELLENT MAJESTY, CHARLES BY THE GRACE OF GOD KING OF
GREAT Britain, France and Ireland, Defender of the Faith.
Most Gracious and Dread Sovereign,
MOre then twenty years are slipped away, since I entered upon this task of sacred
Contemplations; presuming so long ago to prefix your Royal Name to some of the
first pieces of this long work, which I rather wished, then hoped I might live
to finish. The God of Heaven has been pleased to stretch out my days so far
as to see it brought, at last, (after many necessary intermissions) to an happy
end; Now, not with more contentment then boldness, I bring to your sacred hands
(besides variety of other discourses) that work complete, whereof some few
parcels saw the light before, under subordinate Dedications. The whole is your
Majesty's due, no less then the unworthy Author; whose age pleases and prideth
it self in nothing more, then in the title of one of your Majesty's most
ancient Attendants (in my station) now living,

JOS. EXON.

THE CONTENTS OF THIS SECOND TOME. CONTEMPLATIONS ON THE NEW TESTAMENT.
The First Book containing,
THE Angel and Zachary. 1 The Annunciation of CHRIST. 6 The Birth of CHRIST. 9
The Sages and the Star. 12 The Purification. 15 Herod and the Infants. 18
The Second Book containing,
CHrist among the Doctors. 23 Christ's Baptism. 27 Christ Tempted. 29 Simon
Called. 38 The Marriage in Cana. 41 The good Centurion. 44
The Third Book containing,
THe Widows Son raised. 48 The Rulers Son cured. 51 The dumb Devil ejected. 53
Matthew Called. 58 Christ amongst the Gergesens; or Legion, and the Gadarene
heard. 61
The Fourth Book containing,
THe faithful Canaanite. 73 The deaf and dumb man cured. 79 Zacheus. 83 John
Baptist beheaded. 91 The five loaves and two fishes. 100 The walk upon the
waters. 107 The bloody issue healed. 114 Jairus and his daughter. 120 The
motion of the two fiery Disciples repelled. 122 The ten Lepers. 126 The pool of
Bethesda. 132 Christ transfigured. 138 The woman taken in adultery. 152 The
thankful Penitent. 158 Martha and Mary. 165 The beggar that was born blind,
cured. 169 The stubborn Devil ejected. 173 The Widows mites. 177 The ambition
of the two sons of Zebedee. 179 The tribute-money paid. 183 Lazarus dead. 185
Lazarus raised. 190 Christ's procession to the Temple. 198 The fig tree cursed.
202 Christ betrayed. 205 The Agony. 209 Peter and Malchus; or, Christ
apprehended. 212 Christ before Caiaphas. 215 Christ before Pilate. 218 The
Crucifixion. 224 The Resurrection. 233 The Ascension. ^^^
Sermons and other Treatises.
A Sermon of public thanksgiving for the wonderful mitigation of the late
Mortality; preached before his Majesty at White Hall. 251 One of the Sermons
preached at Westminster on the day of the Public Fast April 5. 1628. to the
Lords of the High Court of Parliament. 261 A Sermon preached before his
Majesty on the Sunday before the Fast (March 30. 1628.) at White Hall. 271 One
of the Sermons preached to the Lords of the high Court of Parliament, on
Ashwednesday, February 18. 279 The Hypocrite; set forth in a Sermon at Court,
February 28. 1629. being the third Sunday in Lent. 291 The Beauty and Unity of
the Church; in a Sermon at White Hall. 304 The Fashions of the world; laid
forth in a Sermon at Grayes-Inn on Candlemas day. 311 The Estate of a
Christian, laid forth in a Sermon at Grayes-Inn on Candlemas day. 320 The Fall
of Pride; out of Proverbs 29. ver. 23. 329 Christ and Caesar: A Sermon preached
at Hampton Court. 337 The defeat of Cruelty prayed for, and laid forth in a
Sermon preached at a solemn Fast at White Hall. 344 S. Paul's combat, in two
Sermons preached at the Court to his Majesty in ordinary attendance. 1 352 S.
Paul's combat, in two Sermons preached at the Court to his Majesty in ordinary
attendance. 2 362
The Old Religion: A treatise wherein is laid down the true state of the
difference betwixt the Reformed and Roman Church. 369 The Reconciler: An
Epistle pacificatory of the seeming difference of opinion concerning the
Trueness and Visibility. of the Roman Church. 424 Occasional Meditations. 448
Certain Catholic Propositions. 499 An Answer to Pope Urban his Inurbanity,
expressed in a Breeve sent to Lewis the French King. 503
TO MY MUCH HONORED, AND RIGHT WORSHIPFUL FRIEND, Sir Henry Yelverton KNIGHT,
ATTORNEY GENERAL TO HIS MAJESTY.
Right Worshipful,
It is not out of any satietie that I change from the Old Testament to the New;
these two, as they are the Breasts of the Church, so they yield Milk equally
wholesome, equally pleasant unto able Nurselings. Herein I thought good to have
respect unto my Reader, in whose strength there may be difference. That other
Breast perhaps does not let down this nourishing liquor so freely, so easily.
Even so small a variety refreshes a weak Infant. Neither will there perhaps
want some palates which will find a more quick and pleasing relish in this
fresher substance. These I thought good to please with a Taste, ere they come
to sat themselves with a full Meal of this Divine nourishment; in emulation of
the good Scribe, that brings forth both old and new. If it please God to enable
my life and opportunities, I hope at last to present this Church with the last
service of the History of either Page: wherein my Joy and my Crown shall be
the Edification of many. In the mean time, I dedicate this part unto your Name,
whom I have so much cause to observe and honor. The Blessing of that God whose
Church you have ever made your chief Client be still upon your head, and that
honorable Society which rejoices in so worthy a Leader. To it and your self I
shall be ever (as I have cause)

Humbly and unfeignedly devoted, JOS. HALL.


THE FIRST BOOK.
Containing The Angel and Zachary. The Annunciation. The Birth of CHRIST. The
Sages and the Star. The Purification. Herod and the Infants.


The Angel and Zachary.
David's time till Christ's. It is a desperately depraved condition of a Church,
where no good orders are left. Judea passed many troubles, many alterations,
yet this orderly combination endured about an eleven hundred years. A settled
good will not easily be defeated, but in the change of persons will remain
unchanged, and if it be forced to give way, leaves memorable footsteps behind
it. If David foresaw the perpetuation of this holy Ordinance, how

The successive turns of the Legal ministration held on in a Line never
interrupted. Even in a forlorn and miserable Church, there may be a personal
succession. How little were the Jews better for this, when they had lost the
Urim and Thummim, sincerity of Doctrine and Manners? This stayed with them even
whiles they and their Sons crucified Christ. What is more ordinary, then wicked
Sons of holy Parents? It is the succession of Truth and Holiness that makes or
institutes a Church, whatever become of the persons. Never times were so
barren, as not to yield some good; The greatest Zachary and Elizabeth are just,
both of Aarons blood, and John Baptist of theirs: whence should an holy seed
spring if not of the Loins of Levi? It is not in the power of Parents to
traduce Holiness to their Children: it is the blessing of God, that feoffes
them in the Virtues of their Parents, as they feoffe them in their sins.
There is no certainty, but there is likelihood, of an holy Generation, when the
Parents Elizabeth was just, as well as Zachary, that the forerunner of a
Savior might be holy on both sides. If the stock and the griffe be not both
good, there is much danger of the fruit. It is an happy match, when the Husband
and the Wife are one, not only in themselves, but in God, not more in flesh,
then in the spirit. Grace makes no difference of sexes, rather the weaker
carries away the more honor, because it has had less helps. It is easy to
observe, that the New Testament affords more store of good women then
Elizabeth led the ring of this mercy, whose barrenness ended in a miraculous
fruit both of her body and of her time.

This religious pair made no less progress in virtue then in age, and yet
their virtue could not make their best age fruitful: Elizabeth was barren. A
just soul and a barren womb may well agree together. Amongst the Jews
barrenness was not a defect only, but a reproach: yet while this good woman was
fruitful of holy obedience, she was barren of children. As John, which was
miraculously conceived by man, was a fit forerunner of him that was conceived
by the Holy Ghost; so a barren Matron was meet to make way for a Virgin.

None but a son of Aaron might offer incense to God in the Temple, and Aaron,
and not any one at all seasons: God is a God of order, and hates confusion no
less then irreligion. Albeit he has not so straightened himself under the
Gospel as to tie his service to persons or places, yet his choice is now no
less curious because it is more large. He allows none but the authorized: he
authoriseth none but the worthy. The incense does ever smell of the hand that
offers it. I doubt not but that perfume was sweeter which ascended up from the
hand of a just Zachary. The sacrifice of the wicked is abomination to God.
There were courses of ministration in the Legal services: God never purposed to
burden any of his creatures with devotion. How vain is the ambition of any
soul that would load it self with the universal Zachary had a course in Gods
house, so he carefully observed it: the favor of these respites doubled his
diligence. The more high and sacred our calling is, the more dangerous is
neglect. It is our honor that we may be allowed to wait upon the God of heaven
in these immediate services. Woe be to us if we flacken those duties wherein
God honors us more then we can honor him.

Many sons of Aaron, yea of the same family, served at once in the Temple
according to the variety of employments. To avoid all difference, they agreed
by lot to assign themselves to the several offices of each day: the lot of this
Zachary to offer Incense in the outer Temple. I do not find any prescription
they had from God of this particular manner of designment. Matters of good
order in holy affairs may be ruled by the wise institution of men according to
reason and expediencie.

It fell out well that Zachary was chosen by lot to this ministration, that
Gods immediate hand might be seen in all the passages that concerned his great
Prophet; that as the person, so the occasion might be of Gods own choosing. In
lots and their seeming casual disposition, God can give a reason, though we can
give none. Morning and Evening, twice a day, their Law called them to offer
Incense to God, that both parts of the day might be consecrate to the maker of
time.

That the resemblance of prayers and incense might be apparent, whiles the
Priest sends up his incense within the Temple, the people must send up their
prayers without. Their breath and that incense, though remote in the first
rising, met ere they went up to heaven. The people might no more go Zachary
might go into the Holy of holies. Whiles the partition wall stood betwixt Jews
and Gentiles, there were also partitions betwixt the Jews and themselves. Now
every man is a Priest unto God, every man (since the veil was rent) prays
within the Temple. What are we the better for our greater

Whiles they were praying to God, he sees an Angel of GOD: as Gideon's Angel
went up in the smoke of the sacrifice, so did Zacharie's Angel (as it were)
come down in the fragrant smoke of his incense. It was ever great news to see
an Angel of God; but now more, because God had long withdrawn from them all the
means of his supernatural revelations. As this wicked people were strangers to
their God in their conversation, so was God grown a stranger to them in his
apparitions: yet now that the season of the Gospel approached, he visited them
with his Angels; before he visited them by his Son. He sends his

There is an order in that heavenly Hierarchy, though we know it not. This
Angel that appeared to Zachary was not with him in the ordinary course of his
attendances, but was purposely sent from God with this message. Why was an
Angel sent? and why this Angel? It had been easy for him to have raised up the
prophetical spirit of some Simeon to this prediction. The same Messiah, might
have as easily revealed unto him the birth of the forerunner of Christ, and by
him to Zachary: but God would have this voice, which should go before his
Son, come with a noise. He would have it appear to the world, that the
harbinger of the Messiah should be conceived by the mavelous power of that
God whose coming he proclaimed. It was fit the first Herald of the Gospel
should begin in wonder. The same Angel that came to the Blessed Virgin with the
news of Christ's conception, came to Zachary with the news of John's, for the
honor of him that was the greatest of them which were born of women, and for
his better resemblance

When could it be more fit for the Angel to appear unto Zachary, then when
prayers and incense were offered by him? Where could he more fitly appear then
in the Temple? In what part of the Temple more fitly then at the Altar of
Incense? and whereabout rather then on the right side of the Altar? Those
glorious spirits as they are always with us, so most in our devotions; and as
in all places, so most of all in Gods house. They rejoice to be with us whiles
we are with God; as contrarily they turn their faces from us

He that had wont to live and serve in the presence of the master, was now
astonished at the presence of the servant. So much difference there is betwixt
our faith and our senses, that the apprehension of the presence of the God of
spirits by faith goes down sweetly with us, whereas the sensible apprehension
of an Angel dismayes us. Holy Zachary, that had wont to live by faith, thought
he should dye when his sense began to be set on work. It was the weakness of
him that served at the Altar without horror, to be daunted with the face of his
fellow servants. In vain do we look for such Ministers of God as are without
infirmities, when just Zachary was troubled in his Zacharie's weakness, and
presently incourages him with a cheerful excitation, ( Fear not, Zacharias.).
The blessed spirits, though they do not often vocally express it, do pity
our humane frailties, and secretly suggest comfort unto us when we perceive it
not. Good and evil Angels, as they are contrary in estate,

There was not more fear in the face then comfort in the speech; Thy prayer is
heard. No Angel could have told him better news. Our desires are uttered in
our prayers. What can we wish but to have what we would? Many good suits had
Zachary made, and amongst the rest for a Son. Doubtless it was now some space
of years since he made that request. For he was now Zachary. The proof of
children makes them either the blessings or crosses of their parents.

The speech was so good, that it found not a sudden belief. This good news
surprised Zachary. If the intelligence had taken leisure, that his thoughts
might have had time to debate the matter, he had easily apprehended the
infinite power of him that had promised; the pattern of Abraham and Sara; and
How shall I know? Nature was on his side, and alleged the impossibility of the
event both from age and barrenness. Supernatural tidings at the first hearing
astonish the heart, and are entertained with doubts by those which upon further
acquaintance give them the best welcome.

The weak apprehensions of our imperfect faith are not so much to be censured
as pitied. It is a sure way for the heart, to be prevented with the assurance
of the omnipotent power of God, to whom nothing is impossible:

There is a difference betwixt desire of assurance and unbelief. We cannot be
too careful to raise up our selves arguments to settle our faith; although it
should be no faith, if it had no feet to stand upon, but discursive. In matters
of faith, if reasons may be brought for the conviction of the gainsayers, it
is well; if they be helps, they cannot be grounds of our belief. In the most
faithful heart there are some sparks of infidelity: so to believe, that we
should Zachary, but that which uses to guide others, Reason? ( I am old, and
my wife is of great age.) As if years and dry loins could be any let to him
which is able of very stones to raise up children unto Abraham. Faith and
reason have their limits: Hagar must be driven out of doors, that Sara may rule
alone.

The authority of the reporter makes way for belief in things which are
otherwise hard to pass; although in the matters of God we should not so much
care who speaks, as what is spoken, and from whom. The Angel tells his name,
place, office, unasked, that Zachary might not think any news impossible
Zachary should no less doubt of the style of the messenger, then of the
errand it self, he is at once both confirmed, and punished with dumbness. That
tongue which moved the doubt, must be tied up: He shall ask no more questions
for forty weeks, because he asked this one distrustfully.

Neither did Zachary lose his tongue for the time, but his ears also; he was

Zachary stayed, and the people waited: whether some longer discourse betwixt
the Angel and him then needed to be recorded, or whether astonishment

At last Zachary comes out speechless, and more amazes them with his presence
then with his delay. The eyes of the multitude that were not worthy to see his
vision, yet see the signs of his vision, that the world might be put into the
exspectation of some extraordinary sequel. GOD makes way for Zachary would
fain have spoken, and could not with us too many are dumb, and need not.
Negligence, Fear, Partiality stop the mouths of many, which shall once say,
Woe to me, because I held my peace. His hand speaks that which he cannot with
his tongue, and he makes them by signs to understand that which they might read
in his face. Those powers we have, we must use. But though he have ceased to
speak, yet he ceased not to minister. He takes not this dumbness for a
dismission, but stays out the eight days of his course, as one that knew the
eyes and hands and heart would be accepted of that God which had bereaved him
of his tongue. We may not straight take occasions

The Annunciation of CHRIST.
THE Spirit of GOD was never so accurate in any description as that which
concerns the Incarnation of GOD. It was fit no circumstance should be omitted
in that Story, whereon the faith and salvation of all the World depends. We
cannot so much as doubt of this truth, and be saved; no not the number of the
month, not the name of the Angel is concealed: Every particle imports not more
certainty then excellence. The time is the sixth month after John's
Conception, the prime

It was fit our reparation should answer our fall. An evil Angel was the first
motioner of the one to Eve a Virgin, then espoused to Adam, in the Garden of
Eden: a good Angel is the first reporter of the other to Mary, a Virgin
espoused to Joseph, in that place which (as the Garden of Galilee,) had a name
from flourishing. No good Angel could be the Author of our restoration, as
that evil Angel was of our ruin. But that which those glorious Spirits could
not do themselves, they are glad to report as done by the God of Spirits. Good
news rejoices the bearer. With what joy did this holy Angel bring the news of
that Savior, in whom we are redeemed to life, himself established in life and
glory? The first Preacher of the Gospel was an Angel. Gabriel to Mary; He that
was by signification the strength of God, to her that was by signification
exalted by God, to the conceiving of him that was the God of strength: to a
Maid, but espoused; a Maid for the honor of Virginity, espoused for the honor
of Marriage. The marriage was in a sort made, not consummate, through the
instinct of him that meant to make her not an example, but a miracle of women.
In this whole work God would have nothing ordinary. It was fit that she should
be a married Virgin, which

Whether does this glorious Angel come to find the Mother of him that was GOD,
but to obscure Galilee? A part which even the Jews themselves despised, as
forsaken of their privileges, ( Out of Galilee arises no Prophet.) Galilee,
out of which no Prophet comes, and the God of Prophets and Angels descends to
be conceived in that Galilee, out of which no Prophet arises. He that fills
all places, makes no difference of places. It is the person which gives honor
and privilege to the place, not the place to the person; as the presence of
God makes the Heaven,

It is the fashion of God to seek out the most despised, on whom to bestow his
honors. We cannot run away as from the judgments, so not from the mercies of
our God. The cottages of Galilee are preferred by God to the famous Palaces of
Jerusalem: he cares not how homely he converse with his own. Why should we be
transported with the outward glory of places, whiles our God regards it not? We
are not of the Angels diet, if we had not rather be with the blessed Virgin at
Nazareth, then with the proud Dames in the Court

But how gladly do we second the Angel in the praise of her, which was more
ours then his? How justly do we bless her, whom the Angel pronounces Mary,
he cannot bless thee, he cannot honor thee too much, that deifies thee not.
That which the Angel said of thee, thou have prophesied of thy self: we believe
the Angel, and thee. All Generations shall call thee blessed, by the fruit of
whose womb all Generations are blessed. If Zachary were amazed with the sight
of this Angel, much more the Virgin: That very Sex had more disadvantage of
fear. If it had been but a man that had come to her in that secrecy and
suddenness, she could not but have been troubled; how much more, when the
shining glory of the person doubled the astonishment?

Fear not, Mary, for thou have found favor with God. Let those fear who know
they are in displeasure, or know not they are gracious. Thine happy estate
calls for confidence, and that confidence for joy. What should, Abba, Father.
If that Spirit (O God) witness with our spirits that we are thine, how can we
fear any of those spiritual wickednesses? Give us assurance of thy favor, and
let the powers of Hell do their worst.

It was no ordinary favor that the Virgin found in Heaven: No mortal Creature
was ever thus graced, that he should take part of her nature that Lo, thou
shall conceive and bear a Son, and shall call his name Jesus. It is a question,
whether there be more wonder in the Conception or in the Fruit; the Conception
of the Virgin, or Jesus conceived. Both are mavelous, but the former does not
more exceed all other wonders then the latter

Doubtless the Virgin understood the Angel, as he meant, of a present
Conception, which made her so much more inquisitive into the manner and means
of this event: How shall this be, since I know not a man? That she should
conceive a Son by the knowledge of man after her Marriage consummate, could
have been no wonder: But how then should that Son of hers be the Son of God?
This demand was higher. How her present Virginity should be instantly fruitful
might be well worthy of admiration, of inquiry. Here was desire of information,
not doubts of infidelity; yea rather this question argues Faith: it takes for
granted that which an unbelieving heart The Holy Ghost shall come upon thee,
and the power of the most High shall over-shadow thee. It is enough to know who
is the undertaker, and what he will do. O God, what do we seek

The answer was not so full, but that a thousand difficulties might arise out
of the particularities of so strange a message; yet after the Angels Solution,
we hear of no more Objections, no more Interrogations. The faithful heart,
when it once understands the good pleasure of God, argues no more; but Behold
the Servant of the Lord, be it to me according to thy Word. There is not a more
noble proof of our Faith, then to captivate all the powers of our understanding
and will to our Creator, and without all sciscitations to go blindfold
whither he will lead us. All disputations with God (after his will known) arise
from infidelity. Great is the Mystery of godliness, and if we will give
Nature leave to cavil, we cannot be Christians. O God, thou art faithful, thou
art powerful: It is enough, that thou have said it: In the humility of our
obedience we resign our selves over to thee. Behold the Servants of the Lord,
be it unto us according to thy Word.

How fit was her womb to conceive the flesh of the Son of God by the power of
the Spirit of God, whose breast had so soon by the power of the same Spirit
conceived an assent to the will of God? and now of an Handmaid of God, she is
advanced to the Mother of God. No sooner has she said ( be it done) then it is
done, the Holy Ghost over-shadows her and forms her Savior Elizabeth was no
less of kin to her in condition; the fruitfulness of whose age did somewhat
suit the fruitfulness of her Virginity. Happiness communicated doubles it
self. Here is no straining of courtesy. The blessed Maid whom vigor of age had
more fitted for the way, hastens her journey into the Hill-country to visit
that gracios Matron Elizabeth that holy Matron did no sooner welcome her
blessed Cousin, then her Babe welcomes his Savior. Both in the retired Closets
of their Mothers Womb are sensible of each others presence; the one by his
omniscience, the other by instinct. He did not more forerun Christ then
overrun Nature. How should our hearts leap within us, when the Son of God
vouchsafes to come into the secret of our Souls, not to

The Birth of Christ.
AS all the actions of men, so especially the public actions of public men
are ordered by God to other ends then their own. This Edict went not so much
out from Augustus, as from the Court of Heaven. What, did Caesar know Joseph
and Mary? His charge was universal to Caesar meant to fill his Coffers, God
meant to fulfill his Prophesies; and so to fulfill them, that those whom it
concerned might not feel the accomplishment. If God had directly commanded the
Virgin to go up to Bethleem, she had seen the intention, and expected the
issue: but that wise Moderatour of all things, that works his will in us, loves
so to do it as may be least with our foresight and acquaintance, and would
have us fall under his Decrees unawares, that we may so much the more adore the
depths of his Providence. Every Creature walks blindfold, only he that dwells
in light sees whither

Doubtless, blessed Mary meant to have been delivered of her Divine burden at
home, and little thought of changing the place of Conception for another of her
Birth. That house was honored by the Angel, yea, by the over-shadowing of the
Holy Ghost, none could equally satisfy her hopes or desires: It was fit that
he which made choice of the Womb wherein his Son should be conceived, should
make choice of the place where his Son should be born. As the work is all his,
so will he alone contrive all the circumstances to his own ends. Oh the
infinite Wisdom of God in casting all his Designs! There needs no other proof
of Christ then Caesar and Bethleem; and of Caesar's, Augustus; his Government,
his Edict pleads the truth of the Messiah. His Government now was the deep
peace of all the world under that quiet Scepter which made way for him who was
the Prince of Peace. If Wars be a sign of the time of his second coming, Peace
was a sign of his first. His Edict; now was the Scepter departed from Juda. It
was the time for Shilo to come. No power was left in the Jews, but to obey.
Augustus is the Emperor of the World, under him Herod is the King of Judaea,
Cyrenius is president of Syria; has nothing of her own. For Herod if he were a
King, yet he was no Jew; and if he had been a Jew, yet he was no otherwise a
King, then tributary and titular. The Edict came out from Augustus, was
executed by Cyrenius; Herod is no actor in this service. Gain and glory are the
ends of this taxation: each man professed himself a subject, and paid for the
privilege of his servitude. Now their very heads were not their own, but must
be paid for to the head of a foreign Seat. They which before stood upon the
terms of their immunitie, stoop at the last. The proud suggestions of Judas
the Galilean might shed their blood and swell their stomachs, but could not
ease their yoke; neither was it the meaning of God, that holiness (if they had
been as they pretended) should Caesar himself must be a subject. The goodness
of our God picks out the most needful times of our relief and comfort: Our
extremities give him the most glory. Whither must Joseph and Marie come to be
taxed, but unto Bethleem David's City? The very place proves their descent: He
that succeeded David in his Throne, must succeed him in the place of his Birth.
So clearly was Bethleem designed to this honor by the Prophets, that even the
Priests and the Herod unto it, and assured him the King of the Jews could be no
where else born. Bethleem justly the house of bread; the bread that came down
from Heaven is there given to the world: whence should we have the bread of
life, but from the house of bread? O holy David, was this the Well of Bethleem,
whereof thou did so thirst to drink of old, when thou said, O that one
would give me drink of the water of the Well of Bethleem! Surely that other
water, when it was brought thee by thy Worthies, thou pouredst it on the
ground, and would not drink of it. This was that living Water for which thy
soul longed, whereof thou said elsewhere, As the Heart brayeth after the
waterbrooks, so longs my soul after thee, O God: My soul thirsts for God,
for

It was no less then four days journey from Nazareth to Bethleem: How just an
excuse might the Blessed Virgin have pleaded for her absence? What woman did
ever undertake such a journey so near her delivery? And doubtless Joseph,
which was now taught of God to love and honor her, was loath to draw forth a
dear wife in so unwieldy a case, into so manifest hazard. But the charge was
peremptory, the obedience exemplary. The desire of an inoffensive observance
even of Heathenish authority, digests all difficulties. We may not take easy
occasions to withdraw our obedience to supreme commands. Yea how did thou (O
Savior) by whom Augustus reigned, in the Womb of thy Augustus? The first
lesson that ever thy example taught us, was Obedience.

After many steps are Joseph and Mary come to Bethleem. The plight wherein she
was would not allow any speed, and the forced leisure of the journey causes
disappointment: the end was worse then the way; there was no rest in the way,
there was no room in the Inn. It could not be but that there were many of the
kindred of Joseph and Mary at that time in Bethleem; for both there were their
Ancestors born, if not themselves, and thither came up all the Cousins of their
blood; yet there and then does the holy Virgin want room to lay either her head
or her burden. If the house of David had not lost David could not so near the
time of her travel have been destitute of lodging in the City of David. Little
did the Bethleemites think what a guest they refused: else they would gladly
have opened their doors to him, which was able to open the gates of Heaven to
them. Now their inhospitality is punishment enough to it self: They have
Bethleemites, whilst we are wilfully more churlish, more unthankful? There is
no room in my heart for the wonder at this humility. He for whom Heaven is too
straight, Bethleem? He that came to save men, is sent for his first lodging to
the beasts: the stable is become his Inn, the cratch his bed. O strange cradle
of that great King, which heaven it self may envy! O Savior, thou that were
both the Maker and Owner of Heaven, of Earth, could have made thee a Palace
without hands, could have commanded thee an empty room in those houses which
thy creatures had made. When thou did but bid the Angels avoid their first
place, they fell down from Heaven like lightning; and when in thy humbled
estate thou did but say, I am he, who was able to stand before thee? How
easy had it been for thee to have made place for thy self in the throngs of
the stateliest Courts? Why would thou be thus homely, but that by contemning
worldly glories, thou might teach us to contemn them? that thou might
sanctify poverty to them, whom thou calledst unto want? that since thou which
had the choice of all earthly conditions, would be born poor and despised,
those which must want out of necessity might not think their poverty grievous?
Here was neither friend to entertain, nor servant to attend, nor place wherein
to be attended, only the poor beasts gave way to the God of all the world. It
is the great mystery of Godliness, that God was manifested in the flesh, and
seen of Angels; but here, which heard news of their Savior, then their
neighbors; their vigilance is honored Glory to God, for the incarnation of
his Son. What joy is enough for us, whose nature he took, and whom he came to
restore by his incarnation? If we had the tongues of Angels, we could not raise
this note high enough to the praise of our glorious Redeemer. No sooner do the
Shepherds hear the news of a Savior, then they run to Bethleem to seek him.
Those that left their beds to tend their flocks, leave their flocks to enquire
after their Savior. No earthly thing is too dear to be forsaken for Christ. If
we suffer any worldly occasion to stay Bethleem, we care more for our sheep
then our souls. It is not possible that a faithful heart should hear where
Christ is, and not labor to the sight, to the fruition of him. Where art thou,
O Savior, but at home in thine own house, in the assembly of thy Saints? where
art thou to be found but in thy Word and Sacraments? yea there thou seek for
us: if there we have not to seek for thee, we are worthy to want thee, worthy
that our want of thee here should make us want the presence of thy face for
ever.

The Sages and the Star.
THE Shepherds and the Cratch accorded well; yet even they saw nothing which
they might not contemn; neither was there any of those shepherds that seemed
not more like a King, then that King whom they came to see. But oh the Divine
Majesty that shined in this baseness! There lies the Babe in the stable, crying
in the manger, whom the Angels came down from heaven to proclaim, whom the
Sages come from the East to adore, whom an heavenly Star notifies to the world,
that now men might see that Heaven and earth serves him that neglected himself.
Those Bethleem might have seen: oft-times those Bethleem? the Sages came out of
the East to worship him whom that village refused. The Bethleemites were Jews;
the wisemen Gentiles. This first entertainment of Christ was a presage of the
sequel: The Gentiles shall come from far to adore Christ, whiles the Jews
reject him. Those Easterlings were great searchers of the depths of Nature,
professed Philosophers; Messiah, there needed yet another light. If the Star
had not besides had the commentary of a revelation from God, it could have led
the wisemen only into a fruitless wonder. Give them to be the offspring of
Balaam, yet the true prediction of that false Prophet was not enough warrant.
If he told them the Messiah should arise as a Star out of Jacob, he did not
tell them that a Star should arise far from the posterity of Jacob, at the
birth of the Messiah. He that Balaam, did also put this illumination into the
heart of the Sages. The Spirit of God is free to breathe where he lists: Many
shall come from the East and the West to seek Christ, when the Children of the
Kingdom shall be shut out. Even then God did not so confine his election to
the pale of the Church, as that he did not sometimes look out for special
instruments of his glory. Whither do these Sages come, but to Jerusalem? where
should they hope to hear of the new King, but in the mother City of the
Kingdom? The conduct of the Star was first only general to Judaea; the rest is
for a time left to inquiry: they were not brought thither for their own sakes,
but for Jewrie's, for the worlds; that they might help to make Judaea, to
report and inquire. Their wisdom could not teach them to imagine that a King
could be born to Judaea of that note and magnificence, that a Star from heaven
should publish him to the earth, and that his subjects should not know it: and
therefore as presupposing a common notice, they say, Where is he that is born
King of the Jews? There is much deceit in probabilities, especially when we
meddle with spiritual matters. For God uses still to go a way by himself.

If we judge according to reason and appearance, who is so likely to understand
heavenly truths as the profound Doctors of the world? These God Bethleem, they
had received that intelligence of Christ which they did vainly seek from the
learned Scribes of Jerusalem. The greatest Clerks are not alwaiess the wisest
in the affairs of God: these things go not by discourse, but by revelation.

No sooner has the Star brought them within the noise of Jerusalem, then it is
vanished out of sight. God would have their eyes lead them so far, as till
their tongues might be set on work to win the vocal attestation of the chief
Priests and Scribes to the fore-appointed place of our Saviors nativity. If
the Star had carried them directly to Bethleem, the learned Jews had never
searched

Little did the Sages think this question would have troubled Herod: they had
(I fear) concealed their message, if they had suspected this event. Sure, they
thought it might be some Son or grandchild of him which then held the Throne,
so as this might win favor from Herod, rather then an unwelcome fear of
rivalty. Doubtless they went first to the Court; where else should they ask for
a King: The more pleasing this (...) if it had fallen upon Herod's own loins,
the more grievous it was to light upon a stranger. Herod had not overmuch
affected greatness, he had not upon those indirect terms aspired to the Crown
of Jewry: so much the more therefore did it trouble him to hear the rumor of a
successor, and that not of his own. Settled greatness cannot abide either change
or partnership. If any of his subjects had moved this question, I fear his head
had answered it. It is well that the name of forrainers could excuse these
Sages. Herod could not be brought up among the Jews, and not have heard many
and confident reports of a Messiah that Israel; and now when he hears the fame
of a King born, whom a Star from Heaven signifies and attends, he is netled
with the news. Every thing affrights the guilty. Usurpation is full of
jealousies and fear; no less full of projects and imaginations: it makes us
think every bush a man, and every man a thief.

Why art thou troubled (O Herod?) A King is born; but such a King, as whose
Scepter may ever concur with lawful Sovereignty; yea such a King, as by whom
Kings do hold their Scepters, not lose them. If the wisemen tell thee of a
King, the Star tells thee he is heavenly. Here is good cause of security, none
of fear. The most general enmities and oppositions to good arise Herod were
troubled, (as Tyranny is still suspicious) why was all Jerusalem troubled with
him? Jerusalem, which now might hope for a relaxation of her bonds, for a
recovery of her liberty and right? Jerusalem, which now only had cause to
lift up her drooping head in the joy and happiness of a Redeemer? Yet not
Herod's Court, but even Jerusalem was troubled; so had this miserable City
been overtoiled with change, that now they were settled in a condition quietly
evil, they are troubled with the news of better.

To turn the causes of joy into sorrow, argues extreme dejectedness, and a
distemper of judgment no less then desperate. Fear puts on a visor of
devotion. Herod calls his learned counsel, and as not doubting whether the
Messiah should be born, he asks where he shall be born. In the disparition of
that other light, there is a perpetually-fixed Star shining in the writings of
the Prophets, that guides the chief Priests and Scribes directly unto Bethleem.
As yet envy and prejudice had not blinded the eyes and perverted the hearts

Herod feared, but dissembled his fear, as thinking it a shame that strangers
should see there could any power arise under him worthy of his respect or awe.
Out of an unwillingnesse therefore to discover the impotency of his passion, he
makes little ado of the matter, but only, after a privy inquisition into the
Time, imployes the informers in the search of the Person; Go and search
diligently etc. It was no great journey from Jerusalem to Bethleem: how easily
might Herod's cruelty have secretly suborned some of his bloody Courtiers to
this inquiry and execution? If God had not meant to mock him before he found
himself mocked of the wisemen, he had rather sent before their journey, then
after their disappointment. But that God in whose hands all hearts are did
purposely besot him, that he might not find the way to so horrible a mischief.

There is no Villan^ (...) but it will mask it self under a show of Piety.
Herod will also worship (...) Babe. The courtesy of a false Tyrant is death. A
crafty hypocrite never means so ill as when he speaks fairest. The wisemen

He that led Israel by a Pillar of fire into the Land of Promise, leads the
wisemen by a Star to the Promised seed. All his directions partake of that
light which is in him: For God is light. This Star moves both slowly and low,
as might be fittest for the pace, for the purpose of these Pilgrims. It is the
goodness of God that in those means wherein we cannot reach him, he descends
unto us. Surely when the wisemen saw the Star stand still, they

All their way afforded nothing so despicable as that Babe whom they came to
worship. But as those which could not have been wisemen unless they Bethleem,
do also see his Roialty further off, in the despised estate of his infancy: A
Roialty more then humane. They well knew that Stars did not use to attend
earthly Kings; and if their aim had not been higher, what was a Jewish King to
Persian strangers? Answerable therefore hereunto was their adoration. Neither
did they lift up empty hands to him whom they worshipped, but presented him with
the most precious commodities of their Country, Gold, Incense, Myrrh; not as

The Purification.
Adam, that was scowred away by sanctification in the womb: and yet the Son
would be circumcised, and the Mother purified. He that came to be sin for us,
would in our persons be legally unclean, that by satisfying the Law he might
take away our uncleanness. Though he were exempted from the common Mary. Here
was neither convenience of place, nor of necessaries for so painful a work, in
the stable of Bethleem; yet he that made and gave the Law, will rather keep it
with difficulty, then transgress it with ease.

Why would thou, O blessed Savior, suffer that sacred foreskin to be cut
off, but that by the power of thy circumcision the same might be done

There was shame in thy Birth, there was pain in thy Circumcision. After a
contemptible welcome into the world, that a sharp rasor should pass through
thy skin for our sakes, (which can hardly endure to bleed for our own) it was
the praise of thy wonderful mercy in so early humiliation. What pain or
contempt should we refuse for thee, that have made no spare of thy self for us?
Now is Bethleem left with too much honor, there is Jerusalem, to perform her
holy Rites for her self, for her Son; to purify her self, to present her Son.
She goes not to her own house at Nazareth, she goes to God's House at
Jerusalem. If purifying were a shadow, yet thanksgiving is a substance. Those
whom God has blessed with fruit of body and safety of deliverance, if they
make not their first journey to the Temple of God, they partake more of the
unthankfulness of Eve then Marie's devotion.

Her forty days therefore were no sooner out then Mary comes up to the holy
City. The rumor of a new King borne at Bethleem was yet fresh at Jerusalem,
since the report of the wisemen: and what good news had this been for any
pick-thank to carry to the Court? Here is the Babe whom the Star signified,
whom the Sages inquired for, whom the Angels proclaimed, whom the Shepherds
talked of, whom the Scribes and high Priests notified, whom Herod seeks after.
Yet unto that Jerusalem which was troubled at the report of his Birth is Christ
come, and all tongues are so locked up, that he which sent from Jerusalem to
Bethleem to seek him finds him not, who (as to countermine Herod) is come from
Bethleem to Jerusalem. Dangers that are aloof off, and but possible, may not
hinder us from the duty of our devotion. God saw it not yet time to let loose
the fury of his adversaries, whom

Well might the Blessed Virgin have wrangled with the Law, and challenged an
immunity from all ceremonies of purification; What should I need purging, which
did not conceive in sin? This is for those mothers whose births are unclean:
mine is from God, which is Purity it self. The Law of Moses reaches only to
those women which have conceived seed: I conceived not this seed, but the Holy
Ghost in me. The Law extends to the mothers of those sons which are under the
Law: mine is above it. But as one that cared more for her peace then her
privilege, and more desired to be free Caesar: like the mother of him whom it
behoved to fulfill all righteousness. And if she were so officious in
ceremonies, as not to

The law of Purification proclaims our uncleanness. The mother is not allowed
after her childbirth to come unto the Sanctuary, or to touch any hallowed
thing, till her set time be expired. What are we whose very birth infects the
mother that bears us? At last she comes to the Temple; but with Sacrifices,
either a Lamb and a Pigeon, or Turtle, or (in the meaner estate) Adam, yet he
sinned in Adam, and is sinful in himself. But, oh the unspeakable mercy of our
God! we provide the sin, he provides the remedy. Behold an expiation welnear as
early as our sin; the blood of a young lamb, or dove, yea rather the blood

Such is the favorable respect of our wise God, that he would not have us

Bethleem, she could not without charge travel from Bethleem to Jerusalem. Her
Offering confesses her penury. The best are not ever the wealthiest. Who can
despise any one for want, when the mother of Christ was not rich enough to
bring a Lamb for her Purification? We may be as happy in russet as in tissue.

While the Blessed Virgin brought her Son into the Temple with that pair of
doves, here were more doves then a pair. They for whose sake that offering

The Blessed Virgin had more business in the Temple then her own; she Moses had
never written Law of God's special propriety in the firstborn, this Son of
God's Essence and Love

He that was the Lord of all creatures (ever since he struck the firstborn of
the Egyptians) requires the first male of all creatures, both man and beast, to
be dedicated to him: wherein God caused a miraculous event to second Nature,
which seems to challenge the first and best for the Maker. By this Rule God
should have had his service done only by the heirs of Israel. But since God,
for the honor and remuneration of Levi, had chosen out that Tribe to minister
unto him, now the firstborn of all Israel must be presented to God as

How glorious did the Temple now seem, that the Owner was within the walls of
it? Now was the hour and guest come, in regard whereof the Second Temple should
surpass the first. This was his House built for him, dedicated to him: there
had he dwelt long in his spiritual Presence, in his typical. There was nothing
either placed or done within those walls Jerusalem is now every where. There is
no Church, no Christian heart, which is not a Temple of the living God: there
is no Temple of God wherein Christ is not presented to his Father. Look upon
him (O God) in whom thou art well pleased; and in him and for him be well
pleased with us.

Under the Gospel we are all firstborn, all heirs; every soul is to be holy
unto the Lord; we are a royal generation, an holy Priesthood. Our Baptism as it
is our Circumcision and our sacrifice of purification, so is it also our
presentation unto God. Nothing can become us but holiness. O

HEROD and the Infants.
WEll might these wisemen have suspected Herod's secrecy. If he had meant
well, what needed that whispering? That which they published in the streets, he
asks in his privy chamber: yet

Jerusalem, could not be silent when they found him at Bethleem. If they had
returned by Herod, I fear they had come short home. He that meant death to the
Babe for the name of a King, could mean no other to those

Well did these wisemen know the difference, as of Stars, so of dreams: they
had learned to distinguish between the natural and Divine; and once
apprehending God in their sleep, they follow him waking, and return another
way. They were no subjects to Herod; his command pressed them so Herod, there
could be no question whom to obey. They say not, We are in a strange country,
Herod may meet with us, it can be no less then death to mock him in his own
territories; but cheerfully put themselves upon the way, and trust God with the
success. Where men command with God, we must obey men for God, and God in men;
when against him, the best obedience is to deny obedience, and to turn our
backs upon Herod.

The wisemen are safely arrived in the East, and fill the world full of
exspectation as themselves are full of wonder. Joseph and Mary are returned
Jerusalem where the wisemen had inquired for his Birth. The City was
doubtless still full of that rumor, and little thinks that he whom they talk
of was so near them. From thence they are, at least in their way to Nazareth,
where they purpose their abode. God prevents them by his Angel; and sends them
for safety into Egypt. Joseph was not wont to be so full of visions. It was
not long since the Angel appeared unto him to justify the innocence of the
Mother, and the Deity of the Son: now he appears for the preservation of both,
and a preservation by flight. Could Joseph now choose but think, Is this the
King that must save Israel, that needs to be saved by me? If he be the Son of
God, how Joseph having been once tutored by the Angel, and having heard what
the wisemen said of the Star, what Simeon and Anna said in the Temple; labors
not so much to reconcile his thoughts, as to subject them; and as one that knew
it safer to suppress doubts then to assoil them, can believe what he
understands not, and can wonder where he cannot comprehend.

Oh strange condition of the King of all the word! He could not be born in a
baser estate, yet even this he cannot enjoy with safety. There was no Bethleem;
there will be no room for him in Judaea. He is no sooner come to his own, then
he must fly from them; that he may save them, he must avoid them. Had it not
been easy for thee (O Savior) to have acquit thy self from Herod a thousand
ways? What could an arm of flesh have done against the God of Spirits? What
had it been for thee to have sent Herod five years sooner unto his place? what
to have commanded fire from Heaven on those that should have come to apprehend
Jury to Egypt. As thou would be born mean and miserable, so thou would live
subject to humane vexations; that thou, which have taught us how good it is to
bear the yoke even in our youth, might sanctify to us early afflictions. Or
whether (O Father) since it was the purpose of thy wisdom to manifest thy Son
by degrees unto the world, was it thy will thus to hide him for a time under
our infirmity? And what other is our condition? we are no sooner born thine
then we are persecuted.

Even of those whose mature age is full of trouble, yet the infancy is
commonly quiet: but here life and toil began together. O Blessed Virgin! even
already did the sword begin to pierce thy soul: thou which were forced to bear
thy Son in thy womb from Nazareth to Bethleem, must now bear him in thy arms
from Jury into Egypt: yet could thou not complain of the way whilst thy
Savior was with thee. His presence alone Egypt a Paradise, the way more
pleasing then rest. But whither then? O whither do thou carry that blessed
burden, by which thy self and the world are upholden? To Egypt, the
slaughterhouse of God's people, the furnace of Israel's ancient affliction,
the sink of the world. Out of Egypt have I called my Son (says God.) That thou
calledst thy Son out of Egypt, O God, is no marvel: It is a marvel that thou
calledst him into Egypt; but that we know all earths are thine, and all places
and men are like figures upon a table, such as thy disposition makes them. What
a change is here? Israel, the firstborn of God, flies out of Egypt into the
promised Land of Judaea; Christ, the firstborn of Judaea into Egypt. Egypt is
become the Sanctuary, Judaea the Inquisition-house of the Son of God. He that
is everywhere the same, makes all places alike to his: He makes the fiery
furnace a gallery of pleasure, the Lions den an house of defense, the Whales
belly a lodging chamber, Egypt an harbor.

He flees that was able to preserve himself from danger; to teach us how
lawfully we may flee from those dangers we cannot avoid otherwise. It is a
thanklesse fortitude to offer our throat unto the knife. He that came to die
for us, fled for his own preservation, and has bid us follow him; When they
persecute you in one City, flee into another. We have but the use of our

It was warrant enough for Joseph and Mary that God commands them to flee: yet
so familiar is God grown with his approved servants, that he gives them the
reason of his commanded flight; ( For Herod will seek the young child to
destroy him.) What wicked men will do, what they would do, is known unto God
beforehand. He that is so infinitely wise to know the designs of his enemies
before they are, could as easily prevent them that they might not be: but he
lets them run on in their own courses, that he may fetch glory to

Good Joseph having this charge in the night, stays not till the morning; no
sooner had God said Arise, then he starts up and sets forward. It was not
diffidence, but obedience that did so hasten his departure. The charge was
direct, the business important. He dares not linger for the light, but breaks
Egypt. How knew he this occasion would abide any delay? We cannot be too speedy
in the execution of God's commands; we may be too late. Here was no treasure to
hide, no hangings to take down, no lands to secure: the poor Carpenter needs
do no more but lock the doors and away. He goes lightly that wants a load. If
there be more pleasure in abundance, there is more security in a mean estate.
The Bustard or the Ostridge, when he is pursued, can hardly get upon his wings;
whereas the Lark mounts with ease. The rich has not so much advantage of the
poor in enjoying, as the poor has of the rich in leaving.

Joseph come down into Egypt. Egypt was beholden to the name, as that whereto
it did owe no less then their universal preservation. Well might it repay this
act of Hospitality to that name and blood. The going down into Egypt had not so
much difficulty, as the staying there: their absence from their Country was
little better then a banishment. But what was this other then to serve a
prentiship in the house of bondage? To be any where save at home was irksome:
but to be in Egypt so many years amongst idolatrous Pagans, must needs be
painful to religious hearts. The Command of their God and the Presence of
Christ makes amends for all. How long should they have thought it to see the
Temple of God, if they had

Herod was subtle in mocking the wisemen, whiles he promised to worship him
whom he meant to kill: now God makes the wisemen to mock him, in disappointing
his expectation. It is just with God to punish those which would beguile others
with illusion. Great spirits are so much more impatient of disgrace. How did
Herod now rage and fret, and vainly wish to have met with those false spies,
and tell with what torments he would revenge their treachery,

The Tyrants suspicion would not let him rest long. Ere many days he sends to
inquire of them whom he sent to inquire of Christ. The notice of their secret
departure increases his jealousy; and now his anger runs mad, and his fear
proves desperate. All the Infants of Bethleem shall bleed for this one; and
(that he may make sure work) he cuts out to himself large measures both of time
and place. It was but very lately that the Star appeared, that the wisemen
re-appeared not. They asked for him that was born, they did not name when he
was born. Herod, for more security, over-reaches their time, and setches into
the slaughter all the Children of two years age. The Priests and Bethleem must
be the place of the Messia's nativity. He fetches in all the Children of the
coasts adjoining; yea his own shall for the time be a Bethleemite. A tyrannous
guiltiness never thinks it self safe, but ever seeks to assure it self in the
excess of cruelty. Doubtless he which so privily inquired for Christ, did as
secretly brew this massacre. The mothers were set with their children on their
laps, feeding them with the breast, or talking to them in the familiar language
of their love; when suddenly the Executioner rushes in, and snatches them from
their arms, and at once pulling forth his Commission and his knife, without
regard to shrieks or tears, murders the innocent Babe, and leaves the
passionate mother in a mean between Herod? what wringing of hands? what
condoling? what exclaiming was now in the streets of Bethleem?

O bloody Herod, that could sacrifice so many harmless lives to thine
ambition! What could those Infants have done? If it were thy person whereof
thou were afraid, what likelihood was it thou could live till those sucklings
might endanger thee? This news might affect thy Successors; it could not
concern thee, if the heat of an impotent and furious envy had not made thee

He for whose sake thou killedst so many, shall strike thee with death; and
then what would thou have given to have been as one of those Infants whom
thou murtheredst? In the mean time, when thine executioners returned and told
thee of their unpartial dispatch, thou smiledst to think how thou had
defeated thy rival, and beguiled the Star, and deluded the Prophecies;
whiles God in Heaven and his Son on earth laugh thee to scorn, and make thy
rage an occasion of further glory to him whom thou meantest

He that could take away the lives of other, cannot protract his own. Herod is
now sent home. The coast is clear for the return of that holy Family: now God
calls them from their exile. Christ and his Mother had not stayed so long out
of the confines of the reputed visible Church, but to teach us continuance
under the Cross. Sometimes God sees it good for us not to sip of the cup of
affliction, but to make a diet-drink of it, for constant and common use. If he
allow us no other liquor for many years, we must take it off cheerfully, and
know that it is but the measure of our betters.

Joseph and Mary stir not without a command; their departure, stay, removal
Egypt had been more tedious unto them, they durst not move their foot till they
were bidden. It is good in our own business to follow reason or custom: but
in God's business, if we have any other guide but himself, we presume, and
cannot expect a blessing.

O the wonderful dispensation of God in concealing (...) himself from men!
Christ was now some five years old; he bears (...) as an infant, and knowing
all things, neither takes nor gives notice of ought concerning his removal and
disposing, but appoints that to be done by his Angel which the Angel could not
have done but by him. Since he would take our nature, he Amen.



Christ among the Doctors. Christ Baptized. Christ Tempted. Simon Called. The
Marriage in Cana. The good Centurion.


To the Honorable General,
Most Honored Sir,
THE store of a good Scribe is (according to our Savior) both old and new. I
would (if I durst) be ambitious of this only honor. Having therefore drawn
forth those not frivolous thoughts out of the Old Testament, I fetch these
following from the New. God is the same in both; as the body differs not with
the age of the suit, with the change of robes. The old and new wine of holy
Truth came both out of one vineyard; yet here may we safely say to the Word of
his Father, as was said to the Bridegroom of Cana, The authority of both is
equally sacred: the use admits no less difference then is betwixt a Savior
fore shadowed and come. The intermission of those military employments which
have wone you just honor, both in foreign nations and at home, is in this
only gainful, that it yields you leisure to these happy thoughts, which shall
more fully acquaint you with him that is at once the God of Hosts and the
Prince of Peace. To the furtherance whereof these my poor labors shall do no
thankless offices. In lieu of your noble favors to me both at home and where
you have merited command, nothing can be returned but humble acknowledgments,
and hearty prayers for the increase of your Honor, and all Happiness to your
self and your thrice-worthy and virtuous Lady, by him

JOS. HALL.

Christ among the Doctors.
EVen the Spring shows us what we may hope for of the tree in Summer. In his
nonage therefore would our Savior give us a taste of his future proof; lest if
his perfection should have showed it self without Whence has this man his
wisdom and great works? What would they have said if he had suddenly leapt
forth into the clear light of the world? The Sun would dazzle all eyes, if he
should break forth at his first rising into his full strength: now

The Parents of Christ went up yearly to Jerusalem at the Feast of the
Passover: the Law was only for the males. I do not find the Blessed Virgin
bound to this voyage: the weaker sex received indulgence from God. Yet she
knowing the spiritual profit of that journey, takes pains voluntarily to
measure that long way every year. Piety regards not any distinction of sexes or
degrees, neither yet does God's acceptance: rather does it please the mercy of
the Highest more to reward that service which, though he like in all, yet out

The child Jesus in the minority of his age went up with his Parents to the
holy solemnity, not this year only, but in all likelihood others also: He in
the power of whose Godhead and by the motion of whose Spirit all others
ascended thither, would not himself stay at home. In all his examples he meant
our instruction. This pious act of his nonage intended to lead our first years
into timely Devotion. The first liquor seasons the vessel for a long time
after. It is Israel could not want houshold-businesses at home: those secular
affairs could not either keep them from repairing to Jerusalem, or send them
away immaturely. Worldly cares must give place to the sacred. Except we will
depart unblest, we must attend God's services till we may receive his
dismission.

It was the fashion of those times and places, that they went up, and so
returned Nazareth went and came together. Good fellowship does no way so well
as in the passage to Heaven: much comfort is added by society to that journey
which is of it self pleasant. It is an happy word, Come, let us go up to the
house of the Lord. Mutual encouragement is none of the least benefits of our
holy assemblies. Many sticks laid together make a good fire, which if they lie
single lose both their light and heat.

The Feast ended, what should they do but return to Nazareth? God's services
may not be so attended as that we should neglect our particular callings.
Himself calls us from his own House to ours, and takes pleasure to see a painful
Client. Nazareth, then our going up to Jerusalem.

I cannot think that the Blessed Virgin or good Joseph could be so negligent of
their Divine charge, as not to call the child Jesus to their setting forth from
Jerusalem. But their back was no sooner turned upon the Temple, then his face
was toward it. He had business in that place when theirs was ended: there he
was both worshipped and represented. He, in whom the Godhead dwelt bodily,
could do nothing without God: his true Father led him away from his supposed.
Sometimes the affairs of our ordinary vocation may not grudge to

But, O Blessed Virgin, who can express the sorrows of thy perplexed Soul, when
all that evening search could afford thee no news of thy Son Jesus? Was not
this one of those swords of Simeon which should pierce through thy tender
breast? How did thou chide thy credulous neglect, in not observing so
precious a charge, and blame thine eyes for once looking beside this object of
thy love? How did thou, with thy careful Husband, spend that restless night
in mutual expostulations Herod's command at his birth, had now by the secret
instigation of Archelaus surprised him in his childhood: or it may be thou
thoughtest thy Divine Son had now withdrawn himself from the earth, and
returned to his heavenly Glory, without warning: or peradventure thou studiedst
with thy self whether any carelessness on thy behalf had not given occasion to
this absence.

O dear Savior, who can miss, and not mourn for thee? Never any soul conceived
thee by faith, that was less afflicted with the sense of thy desertion then
comforted with the joy of thy presence. Just is that sorrow, and those tears
seasonable, that are

In vain is Christ sought among his kindred according to the flesh: So far are
they still from giving us their aid to find the true Messiah, that they lead
us from him. Back again therefore are Joseph and Mary gone to seek him at
Jerusalem. She goes about in the City, by the streets and by the open places,
and seeks him whom her for the time, and found him not. Do we think she spared
her search? The evening of her return she hastes to the Inn where she had left
him: where missing him, she inquires of every one she met, Have you not seen
him whom my soul loves? At last, the third day, she finds him in the Temple.
One day was spent in the journey toward Galilee; another in the return to
Jerusalem; the third day recovers him. He who would rise again the third day,
and be found amongst the living, now also would the third day be found of his
Parents, after the sorrow of his absence. But where were thou, O blessed Jesu,
for the space of these three days? where did thou bestow thy self, or who
tended thee whiles thou were thus alone at Jerusalem? I know, if Jerusalem
should have been as unkind to Bethleem, thou could have commanded the Heavens
to harbor thee; and if men did not minister to thee, thou could have
commanded the service of Angels. But since the form of a Servant called thee to
a voluntary homeliness, whether it pleased thee to exercise thy self thus early
with the difficulties of a stranger, or to provide miraculously for thy self, I
inquire not, since thou revealest not: only this I know, that hereby thou
intendedst to teach thy Parents that thou could live without them, and that
not of any indigency, but out of a gracious dispensation, thou would
ordinarily depend upon their care.

In the mean time thy Divine wisdom could not but foreknow all these corroding
thoughts wherewith the heart of thy dear Mother must needs bleed through I am
with you to the end of the world: but even whiles thou art really present, thou
think good to be absent unto our apprehensions. Yet if thou leave us, thou will not forsake us; if Israel, there is thy resting place for ever. Oh all ye
that are grieved with the want of your Savior, see where you must seek him. In
vain shall ye hope to find him in the streets, in the Taverns, in the
Theaters: seek him in his holy Temple: seek him with piety, seek him with
faith; there shall ye meet Israel the deep mysteries of God, but because he was
not yet called by his Father to the public function of a Teacher, he contents
himself to Israel? First he hears, then he asks. How much more does it concern
us to be hearers ere we offer to be teachers of others? He gathers that hears;
he spends that teaches: if we

When he has heard, he asks; and after that he answers. Doubtless those very
questions were instructions, and meant to teach more then to learn. Never had
these great Rabbis heard the voice of such a Tutor, in whom they might see the
wisdom of God so concealing it self, that yet it would be known to be there.
No marvel then if they all wondered at his understanding and answers. Their eyes
saw nothing but humane weakness, their ears heard Divine sublimity of matter:
betwixt what they saw and what they heard, they could not but be distracted
with a doubting admiration. And why did ye not (O ye Jewish teachers) remember,
That to us a Child is born, and unto us a Son is given, and the government is
upon his shoulder, Why did ye not now bethink your selves what the Star, the
Sages, the Angels, the Shepherds, Zachary, Simeon, Anna, had premonished you?
Fruitless is the wonder that ends not in faith. No light is sufficient where
the eyes are held through unbelief or prejudice.

The Doctors were not more amazed to hear so profound a childhood, then the
Parents of Christ were to see him among the Doctors: the joy of finding him did
strive with the astonishment of finding him thus. And now not Joseph, (he knew
how little right he had to that Divine Son) but Mary breaks forth into a loving
expostulation, Son, why have thou dealt so with us? That she How is it that ye
sought me? Know ye not that I must go about my Fathers business? Immediately
before the Blessed Virgin had said, Thy father and I sought thee with heavy
hearts. Wherein both according to the supposition of the world, she called
Joseph the Father of Christ, and according to the fashion Joseph before her
self. She well knew that Joseph had nothing but a name in this business, she
knew how God had dignified her beyond him; yet she says, Thy father and I
sought thee. The Son of God stands not upon contradiction to his Mother, but
leading her thoughts from his supposed father to his true, from earth to
Heaven, he answers, Knew ye not that I must go about my Fathers business? It
was honor enough to her, that he had vouchsafed to take flesh of her: it was
his eternal honor that he was God of God, the everlasting Son of the heavenly
Father. Good reason therefore was it that the respects to flesh should give
place to the God of Spirits. How well contented was holy Mary with so just an
answer? how does she now again in Behold the servant of the Lord, be it
according to thy word?

We are all the Sons of God in another kind. Nature and the World thinks we
should attend them. We are not worthy to say, we have a Father in Heaven, if we
cannot steal away from these earthly distractions, and employ our selves in the
services of our God.

Christ's Baptism.
JOHN did every way forerun Christ, not so much in the time of his Birth, as in
his office. Neither was there more unlikeliness in their Disposition and
carriage, then similitude in their Function. Both did preach and baptize: only
John baptized by himself, our Savior by his Disciples: our Savior wrought
miracles by himself, by his Disciples; John wrought none by either. Wherein
Christ meant to show himself a Lord, and John a servant: and John meant to
approve himself a true servant to him whose harbinger he was. He that leapt in
the womb of his mother, when his Savior (then newly conceived) came in
presence, bestir'd himself when he was brought forth into the light of the
Church, to the honor and service of his Savior: he did the same before Preach
and Baptize. The Gospel ran always in one tenor, and was never but like it
self. So it became the Word of him in whom there is no shadow by turning, and
whose Word it is, I am Jehova, I change not.

It was fit that he which had the Prophets, the Star, the Angel to foretell his
coming into the world, should have his Usher to go before him, when he would
notify himself to the world. John was the voice of a Crier; Christ was the
Word of his Father: it was fit this Voice should make a noise to the world, ere
the Word of the Father should speak to it. John's note was still, Repentance;
the Axe to the root, the Fan to the floor, the Chafe to the fire: wild Honey,
his speech was stinging Locusts. Thus must the way be made for Christ in every
heart. Plausibility is no fit preface to Regeneration. If the heart of man had
continued upright, God might have been entertained without contradiction; but
now violence must be offered to our corruption, ere we can have room for Grace.
If the great Way-maker do not cast down hills and raise up valleys in the
bosoms of men, there is no passage for Christ. Never

That Savior of ours who from eternity lay hid in the Counsel of God, who in
the fullness of time so came, that he lay hid in the womb of his mother for the
space of forty weeks, after he was come, thought fit to lie hid (...) Nazareth
for the space of thirty years, now at last begins to show himself to the world,
and comes from Galilee to Jordan. He that was God always, and might have been
perfect man in an instant, would by degrees rise to the perfection both of his
Manhood, and execution of his Mediatorship; to teach us the necessity of
leisure in spiritual proceedings: that many Suns and successions

His Baptism gives virtue to ours. His last action (or rather passion) was his
baptizing with blood: his first was his baptization with water: both of them
wash the world from their sins. Yea, this latter did not only wash the souls
of men, but washes that very water by which we are washed: from hence is that
made both clean and holy, and can both cleanse and hallow

John durst not baptize unbidden: his Master sent him to do this service; and
behold, the Master comes to his servant, to call for the participation of

This seemed too great an honor for the modesty of John to receive. If his
mother could say, when her blessed cousin the Virgin Mary came to visit her,
Whence is this to me, that the mother of my Lord should come to me? how much
more might he say so, when the Divine Son of that mother came to call for a
favor from him? I have need to be baptized of thee, and come thou to me? O
holy Baptist, if there were not a greater born of woman then thou; yet Adam,
yet are they so tainted with Adam, that unless the second Adam cleanse them by
his Baptism, they are hopeless. There is no less use of Baptism unto all, then
there is certainty of the need of Baptism. John baptized without, Christ
within. The more holy a man is, the more sensible he is (...) his unholiness.
No carnal man could have said, I have need to be baptized of thee; neither can
he find what he is the better for a little Font-water. The sense of our
wretchedness and the valuation of our spiritual helps, is the best trial of our
regeneration. Our Savior does not deny that either John has need to be
baptized of him, or that it is strange that he should come to be John; but he
will needs thus far both honor John and disparage himself, to be baptized of
his Messenger. He that would take flesh of the Virgin, education from his
Parents, sustenance from his creatures, will take Baptism from John. It is the
praise of his Mercy, that he will stoop so low as to be beholden to his
creatures, which from him receive their Being, and power both to take and give.

Yet no so much respect to John, as obedience to his Father, drew him to this
point of humiliation: Thus it behooves us to fulfill all righteousness. The
Counsels and Appointments of God are Righteousness it self. There needs no
other motive, either to the servant or the Son, then the knowledge of those
John yields to this honor which his Savior puts upon him, in giving Baptism
to the Author of it. He baptized others to the remission of their sins: now he
baptizes him, by whom they are remitted both to the Baptizer and to others.

No sooner is Christ baptized, then he comes forth of the water. The element is
of force but during the use: it turns common when that is past: Neither is the
water sooner pow^ed on his head, then the Heavens are opened, and the Holy
Ghost descends upon that head which was baptized. The Heavens


NO sooner is Christ come out of the water of Baptism, then he enters into the
fire of Tentation. No sooner is the Holy Spirit descended upon his head in the
form of a Dove, then he is led by the Spirit to be tempted. No sooner does God
say, This is my Son, then Satan says, If thou be the Son of God. It is not in
the power either of the gift or seals of Grace, to deliver us from the assaults
of Satan; they may have the force to repel evil suggestions, they have none to
prevent them: yea, the more we are engaged

The voice from Heaven acknowledged Christ to be the Son of God. This Divine
Testimony did not allay the malice of Satan, but exasperate it: Now that
venomous Serpent swells with inward poison, and hasts to assail Thou art my Son,
and let Satan do his worst.

All the time of our Saviors obscurity I do not find him set upon: now that
he looks forth to the public execution of his Divine Office, Satan bends his
forces against him. Our privacy, perhaps, may sit down in peace:

We have reason to be comforted with nothing so much as with resistance. If we
were not in a way to do good, we should find no rubs: Satan has no cause to
molest his own, and that whiles they go about his own service. He desires
nothing more, then to make us smooth paths to sin; but when we would turn our
feet to Holiness, he blocks up the way with Tentations.

Who can wonder enough at the sauciness of that bold spirit, that dares Adam
had not been tempted, much less the second. It is not the presenting of Adam
was tempted and vanquished: the second Adam, to repay and repair that foil,
does vanquish in being tempted. Now have we not

Where then wast thou tempted, O Blessed Jesu? or whither wentest thou to meet
with our great Adversary? I do not see thee led into the marketplace, or any
other part of the City, or thy home-stead of Nazareth, but into Woe to him that
is alone, for if he fall, there is not a second to lift him up. Those that out
of an affectation of Holiness seek for solitude in rocks and caves of the
deserts, do no other then run into the mouth of the danger of Tentation, whiles
they

But, O the depth of the Wisdom of God! How came thou, O Savior, to be thus
tempted? That Spirit whereby thou wast conceived as man, and which was one with
thee and the Father as God, led thee into the wilderness to be tempted of
Satan. Whiles thou taughtest us to pray to thy Father, Lead us not into
temptation, thou meantest to instruct us, that if the same Spirit led us not
into this perilous way, we go not into it. We have still the same Pilate, Thou
could have no power over me, except it were given thee from above. The Spirit
led thee; it did not drive thee: here was a sweet invitation, no compulsion of
violence. So absolutely conformable was thy will to thy Deity, as if both thy
Natures had but one volition. In this first draught of thy bitter potion, thy
Soul said in a real subjection, Not my will, but thy will be done. We imitate
thee, O Savior, though we cannot reach to thee. All thine are led by thy
Spirit: Oh teach us to forget that we have wills of our own. The Spirit led
thee; thine invincible strength did not animate thee into this combat uncalled.

Forty days did our Savior spend in the Wilderness, fasting and solitary, all
which time was worn out in Temptation; however the last brunt, because it was
most violent, is only expressed. Now could not the adversary complain of
disadvantage, whiles he had the full scope both of time and place to do his
worst. And why did it please thee, O Savior, to fast forty days and forty
nights, unless, as Moses fasted forty days at the delivery of the Law, and
Elias Moses and Elias, through the miraculous difference betwixt thee and us
but sin, thou that could have fasted without

Who can be discouraged with the scantnesse of friends or bodily provisions,
when he sees his Savior thus long destitute of all earthly comforts, both of
society and sustenance? Oh the policy and malice of that old Serpent! when he
sees Christ bewray some infirmity of nature in being hungry, then he lays
sorest at him by temptations. His eye was never off from our Savior all the
time of his sequestration; and now that he thinks he espies any one part to lie
open, he drives at it with all his might. We have to do with an Adversary no
less vigilant then malicious, who will be sure to watch all opportunities of
our mischief, and where he sees any advantage of weakness, will not neglect
it.

When our Savior was hungry, Satan tempts him in matter of Food; not then, of
Wealth or Glory: He well knows both what baits to fish withal, and when and
how to lay them. How safe and happy shall we be, if we shall bend our greatest
care where we discern the most danger?

In every Temptation there is an appearance of good, whether of the body, of
mind, or estate. The first is the lust of the flesh, in any carnal desire; the
second, the pride of heart and life; the third, the lust of the eyes. To all
these the first Adam is tempted, and in all miscarried; the second Adam is Adam
in his innocent estate, will now tread the same steps in his temptations of the
second. The stones must be made bread; there is the motion to a Carnal
appetite. The guard and attendance of Angels must be presumed on; there is a
motion to Pride. The Kingdoms of the Earth and the glory of them must be
offered; there to Covetousness and Ambition.

Satan could not but have heard God say, This is my welbeloved Son, he had
Zachary, Simeon, Anna, he well knew the Predictions of the Prophets; yet now
that he saw Christ fainting with hunger, as not comprehending how infirmities
could consist with a Godhead, he can say, If thou be the Son of God. Had not
Satan known that the Son of God was to come into the World, he had never said,
If thou be the Son of God. His very supposition convinces him: The ground of
his Temptation answers it self. If therefore Christ seemed to be a mere man,
because after forty days he was hungry; why was he not confessed more then a
man, in that for forty days he hungered not? The motive If thou be the Son of
God. Satan could not choose another suggestion of so great importance. All the
work of our Redemption, of our Salvation, depends upon this one Truth, Christ
is the Son of God. How should he else have ransomed the World? how should he
have done, how should he have suffered that which was satisfactory to his
Fathers wrath? how should his actions or Passion have been valuable to the sin
of all the World? What marvel is it if we that are sons by Adoption be
assaulted with the doubts of our interest in God, when the natural Son, the Son
of his Essence is thus tempted? Since all our comfort consists in this point,
here must needs be laid the chief battery; and here must be

To turn Stones into Bread, had been no more faulty in it self then to turn
Water into Wine: But to do this in a distrust of his Fathers Providence, to
abuse his power and liberty in doing it, to work a Miracle of Satan's choice,
had been disagreeable to the Son of God. There is nothing Teach me, O Lord, the
way of thy Statutes: O take not from me the words of Truth. Let them be my
Songs in the house of my pilgrimage: So shall I make answer to my Blasphemers.
What needed Christ to have answered Satan at all, if it had not been to teach
us that Temptations must not have their way; but must be answered by
resistance, and resisted by the Word?

I do not hear our Savior aver himself to be a God, against the blasphemous
insinuation of Satan; neither do I see him working this miraculous Conversion,
to prove himself the Son of God: but most wisely he takes away the ground of
the Temptation. Satan had taken it for granted, that lives not by usual food
only, but by every word that proceeds from the mouth of God. He can either
sustain without bread, as he did Moses and Elias; or with a miraculous bread,
as the Israelites with Manna; or send ordinary means miraculously, as food to
his Prophet by the Ravens; or miraculously multiply ordinary means, as the Meal
and Oil to the Sareptan Widow. All things are sustained by his Almighty Word.
Indeed we live by food, but not by any virtue that is without God; without the
concurrence of whose Providence, bread would

What so necessary dependence has the blessing upon the creature, if our
Prayers hold them not together? As we may not neglect the means, so we may not
neglect the procurement of a blessing upon the means, nor be unthankful to the
hand that has given the blessing.

In the first assault Satan moves Christ to doubt of his Fathers Providence,
and to use unlawful means to help himself: in the next, he moves him to presume
upon his Fathers protection, and the service of his blessed

That Blessed Savior of ours that was content to be led from Jordan into the
Wilderness, for the advantage of the first Temptation, yields to be led from
the Wilderness to Jerusalem, for the advantage of the second. Jerusalem was
the glory of the World, the Temple was the glory of Jerusalem, the Pinnacles,
the highest piece of the Pinnacle, there is Christ content to be set for the
opportunity of Tentation. O Savior of men, how can we wonder enough at this
Humility of thine, that thou would so Pilate, or the Jews that persecuted
thine innocence, but limbs of this Devil? And why are we then amazed, to see
thee touched and locally transported by the head, when we see thee yielding thy
self over to be crucified by the members? If Satan did the worse and greater
mediately by their hands, no marvel if he do the less and easier immediately
by his own; yet neither

Methinks I see Christ hoised upon the highest battlements of the Temple, whose
very roof was an hundred and thirty Cubits high; and Satan standing by him with
this speech in his mouth: Well then, since in the matter of nourishment thou will needs depend upon thy Father's Providence, that he can without means
sustain thee, take now further trial of that Providence in thy miraculous
preservation; Cast thy self down from this height. Behold, thou art here in
Jerusalem, the famous and holy City of the World; here thou art, on the top of
the pinnacle of that Temple which is dedicated to thy Father, and, if thou be
God, to thy self. The eyes of all men are now fixed upon thee: there cannot be
devised a more Cast thy self down. And why did thou not, O thou malignant
spirit, endeavor to cast down my Savior by those same presumptuous hands that
brought him up, since the descent is more easy

Why did Satan carry up Christ so high, but on purpose that his fall might be
the more deadly? So deals he still with us; he exalts us, that we may be
dangerously abased: he puffs them up with swelling thoughts of their own
worthiness, that they may be vile in the eyes of God, and fall into
condemnation.

Height of place gives opportunity of Tentation. Thus busy is that Wicked one
in working against the members of Christ. If any of them be in eminence above
others, those he labors most to ruinate. They had need to stand fast, that
stand high. There is both more danger of their falling, and more hurt in their
fall.

He that had presumed thus far, to tempt the Lord of Life, would fain now dare
him also to presume upon his Deity: If thou be the Son of God, cast There is
not a more tried shaft in all his quiver then this; a persuasion to men, to
bear themselves too bold upon the favor of God. Thou art the Elect and
Redeemed of God; sin, because Grace has abounded; sin, that it may abound.
Thou art safe enough though thou offend: be not too much an adversary to thine
own liberty. False spirit! it is no liberty to sin, but servitude rather;
there is liberty, but in the freedom from sin. Every one of us that has the
hope of Sons, must purge himself, even as he is pure that has redeemed us. We
are bought with a price, therefore must we glorify God in our body and
spirits; for they are God's. Our Sonship teaches us awe and obedience; and
therefore because we are Sons, we will not cast our

How idly do Satan and wicked men measure God by the crooked line of their
own misconceit? Iwis, Christ cannot be the Son of God, unless he cast himself
down from the Pinnacle, unless he come down from the Cross. God is not
merciful unless he honor them in all their desires; not just, unless he take
speedy vengeance where they require it. But when they have spent their folly
upon these vain imaginations, Christ is the Son of God, though he stay on the
top of the Temple. God will be merciful, though we miscarry; and just, though
sinners seem lawless. Neither will he be any other then he is, or measured by
any rule but himself.

It is written, He shall give his Angels charge over thee? How still in that
Wicked one does Subtilty strive with Presumption? Who could not but over-wonder
at this, if he did not consider, that since the Devil dared to touch the sacred
Body of Christ with his hand, he may well touch the Scriptures of God with his
tongue? Let no man henceforth marvel to hear Heretics or Hypocrites quote
Scriptures, when Satan himself has not spared to cite them. What are they the
worse for this, more then that holy Body which is transported? Some have been
poisoned by their meats and drinks; yet either these nourish us, or nothing. It
is not borrowed it. How many thousand souls are betrayed by the abuse of that

What can be a better act then to speak Scripture? It were a wonder if Satan
should do a good thing well. He cites Scripture then, but with mutilation and
David would not doubt to eat that sheep which he pulled out of the mouth of the
Bear or Lion. He shall give his Angels charge over thee: Oh comfortable
assurance of our protection. God's children never go unattended. Like unto
great Princes, we walk ever in the midst of our guard; though invisible, yet
true, careful, powerful. What creatures are so glorious as the Angels of
Heaven? yet their Maker has set them to serve us. Our Adoption makes us at
once great and safe. We may be contemptible

Is our Savior distasted with Scripture, because Satan mis-laies it in his
dish? Does he not rather snatch this sword out of that impure hand, and beat
Satan with the weapon which he abuses? It is written, Thou shall not tempt the
Lord The Scripture is one, as that God whose it is: Where it carries an
appearance of difficulty or inconvenience, it needs no light to clear it but
that which it has in it self. All doubts that may arise from it are fully
answered by collation. It is true that God has taken this care and given this
charge of his own: he will have them kept, not in their sins: they may trust
him, they may not tempt him: he meant to encourage their Faith, not their
Presumption. To cast our selves upon any immediate Providence when means fail
not, is to disobey, in stead of believing God. We may challenge God on his
Word, we may not strain him beyond it: we may make account of what he promised,
we may not subject his Promises to unjust examinations; and where no need

Yet again, for all this, do I see him setting upon the Son of God. Satan is
not foiled when he is resisted. Neither diffidence nor presumption can fasten
upon Christ; he shall be tried with Honor. As some expert Fencer that
challenges at all weapons, so does his great Enemy. In vain shall we plead our
skill in some, if we fail in any. It must be our wisdom to be prepared for
all kind of assaults: as those that hold Towns and Forts do not only defend
themselves from incursions, but from the Cannon and the Pionier. Still does
that subtle Balac did by his instigation, himself does now immediately, change
places in hope of prevailing. If

Wherefore is Christ carried up so high, but for prospect? If the Kingdoms of
the earth and their glory were only to be presented to his imagination, the
Valley would have served; if to the outward sense, no Hill could suffice.
Circular bodies though small, cannot be seen at once. This show was made to
both; diverse Kingdoms lying round about Judea were represented to the eye, the

If there be any pomp, majesty, pleasure, bravery in the world, where should
it be but in the Courts of Princes, whom God has made his Images, his Deputies
on earth? There is soft raiment, sumptuous feasts, rich jewels, honorable
attendance, glorious triumphs, royal state; these Satan lays out to the
fairest show. But oh the craft of that old Serpent! Many a care attends
Greatness: No Crown is without thorns: High seats are never but uneasy. All

But oh presumption and impudence, that Hell it self may be ashamed of! The
Devil dares say to Christ, All these will I give thee, if thou will fall down
and worship me: That beggarly spirit, that has not an inch of earth, can offer
the whole world to the maker, to the owner of it. The slave of God would be
adored of his Creator. How can we hope he should be sparing of false boasts and
of unreasonable promises unto us, when he dares offer Kingdoms to him by whom
Kings reign?

Tentations on the right hand are most dangerous. How many that have been
hardened with Fear, have melted with Honor? There is no doubt of that

False liars and vainglorious boasters see the top of their pedigree; if I may
not rather say, that Satan does borrow the use of their tongues for a time:
Whereas faithful is he that has promised, who will also do it, Fidelity and
truth is the issue of Heaven.

If Idolatry were not a dear sin to Satan, he would not be so importunate to
compass it. It is miserable to see how he draws the world insensibly into this
sin, which they profess to detest. Those that would rather hazard the furnace
then worship Gold in a Statue, yet do adore in it the stamp, and find no fault
with themselves. If our hearts be drawn to stoop unto an over-high respect of

Never did our Savior say, Avoid Satan, till now. It is a just indignation
that is conceived at the motion of a rivaltie with God. Neither yet did Christ
exercise his Divine power in this command, but by the necessary force of
Scripture drives away that impure Tempter; It is written, Thou shall worship
the The rest of our Saviors answers were more full and direct then that they
could admit of a reply; but this was so flat and absolute, that it utterly
daunted the courage of Satan, and put him to a shameful flight, and made him
for the time weary of his trade.

The way to be rid of the troublesome solicitations of that Wicked one, is
continued resistance. He that forcibly drove the Tempter from himself, takes
him off from us, and will not abide his assaults perpetual. It is our exercise
and Trial that he intends, not our Confusion.

Simon called.
AS the Sun in his first rising draws all eyes to it; so did this Sun of
Righteousness when he first shone forth into the world. His miraculous cures
drew Patients, his Divine doctrine drew Auditors; both together drew the
admiring multitude by troops after him. And why do we not still follow thee, O
Savior, through deserts and mountains, over land and seas, that we may be both
healed and taught? It was thy word that Draw us, and we shall run after thee.
Thy word is still the same, though proclaimed by men; thy virtue is still the
same, though exercised upon the spirits of men. Oh give us to hunger after
both, that by both our souls may be satisfied.

I see the people not only following Christ, but pressing upon him: even very
unmannerliness finds here both excuse and acceptance. They did not keep their
distances in an awe to the Majesty of the Speaker, whiles they were ravished
with the power of the Speech; yet did not our Savior check their

The throng of Auditors forced Christ to leave the shore, and to make Peter's
ship his pulpit. Never were there such nets cast out of that fisher-boat
before. Whiles he was upon the Land, he healed the sick bodies by his touch;
now that he was upon the Sea, he cured the sick Souls by his doctrine; and is
purposely severed from the multitude, that he may unite them to him. He that
made both Sea and Land, causes both of them to conspire to the opportunities

Simon was busy washing his nets. Even those nets that caught nothing must be
washed, no less then if they had sped well. The nights toil does not excuse
his days work. Little did Simon think of leaving those nets which he so
carefully washed; and now Christ interrupts him with the favor and blessing of
his gracious presence. Labor in our calling (how homely soever) makes us
capable of Divine benediction. The honest fisherman, when he saw the people
flock after Christ, and heard him speak with such power, could not but conceive
a general and confuse apprehension of some excellent worth in such a Teacher,
and therefore is glad to honor his ship

Simon has no sooner done this service to Christ, then Christ is preparing for
his reward: when the Sermon is ended, the ship-room shall be paid for
abundantly: neither shall the Host exspect any other play master then himself.
Lanch forth into the deep, and let down your Nets to make a draught. That ship
which lent Christ an opportunity of catching men upon the shore, shall be
requited with a plentiful draught of fish in the deep. It had been as easy for
our Savior to have brought the fish to Peter's ship, close to the shore; yet
as choosing rather to have the ship carried to the shole of fish, he bids Lanch
forth into the deep. In his Miracles he loves ever to meet Nature in her
bounds; and when she has done her best, to supply the rest by his overruling
Lanch out into the deep.

Rather in a desire to gratify and obey his guest, then to pleasure himself,
will Simon bestow one cast of his net. Had Christ enjoined him an harder task,
he had not refused; yet not without an allegation of the unlikelihood of
success, Master, we have travailed all night, and caught nothing; yet at thy
word I will let down the Net. The night was the fittest time for the hopes of
their trade; not unjustly might Simon misdoubt his speed by day, when he They
conceive mischief, and bring forth iniquity; they hatch Cockatrices eggs, and
weave the Spiders web: he that eats of their eggs dies, and that which is
trodden upon breaks out into a Serpent; their webs shall be no garment,
neither shall they cover themselves with their labors.

O ye sons of men, how long will ye love vanity, and follow after lies? Yet if
we have thus vainly misspent the time of our darkness, let us at the command of
Christ cast out our new-washen nets: our humble and penitent obedience shall
come home laden with blessings. And when they had so done, they enclosed a
great multitude of fishes, so that their Net brake. What a difference there is
betwixt our own voluntary acts and those that are done upon command; not more
in the grounds of them, then in the issue? those are oft-times fruitless,
these ever successful. Never man threw out his Net at the word of his Savior,
and drew it back empty. Who would not obey thee, O Christ, since thou do so
bountifully requite our weakest services? It was The Kingdom of Heaven is like
a draw-net cast into the Sea, which when it is full, men draw to land. The very
first draught that Peter made after the complement of his Apostleship, enclosed
no less then three thousand Souls. O powerful Gospel, that can fetch sinful
men from out of the depths of natural corruption! O happy souls, that from the
blind and muddy cells of our wicked nature, are drawn forth to the glorious
liberty of the sons of God! Simon's Net breaks with the store. Abundance is
sometimes no less troublesome then want. The Net should Simon both with
blessing and admiration. How happily is that Net broken, whose rupture draws
the fisher to Christ? Though the net brake, yet the fish escaped not: He that
brought them thither to be taken, held them there till they were taken. They
beckned to their partners in the other ship, that they should come and help
them. There are other ships in partnership with Peter, he does not fish all the
Lake alone. There cannot be a better improvement of society then to help us
Simon slacken his hand, because he had assistants. What shall we say to those
lazy fishers, who can set others to the Drag, whiles themselves look on at
ease; caring only to feed themselves with the fish, not willing to wet their
hands with the Net? What shall we say to this excess of gain? The Nets break,
the ships sink with their burden. Oh happy complaint of too large a capture! O
Savior, if those Apostolical vessels of thy first rigging were thus overlaid,
ours flote and totter with a ballasted

Simon was a skillful Fisher, and knew well the depth of his trade; and now
perceiving more then Art or Nature in this draught, he falls down at the knees
of Jesus, saying, Lord, go from me, for I am a sinful man. Himself is caught
in this Net. He does not greedily fall upon so unexspected and profitable a
booty, but he turns his eyes from the draught to himself, from the Act to the
Author, acknowledging vileness in the one, in the other Majesty: Go from me,
Lord, for I am a sinful man.

It had been pity the honest Fisherman should have been taken at his word. O
Simon, thy Savior is come into thine own ship to call thee, to call others by
thee unto blessedness, and do thou say, Lord, go from me? As if the Patient
should say to the Physician, Depart from me, for I am sick. It was the voice of
astonishment, not of dislike; the voice of humility, not of coffeehouse:
yea, because thou art a sinful man, therefore has thy Savior need to come to
thee, to stay with thee; and because thou art humble in the acknowledgment of
thy sinfulness, therefore Christ delights to abide with thee, and will call
thee to abide with him. No man ever fared the worse for abasing himself to his
God. Christ has left many a soul for froward and unkind Simon could not
devise how to hold Christ faster, then by thus suing to him to be gone, then by
thus pleading his unworthiness.

O my Soul, be not weary of complaining of thine own wretchedness; disgrace thy
self to him that knows thy vileness; be astonished at those mercies which have
shamed thine ill deservings. Thy Savior has no power to go away from a
prostrate heart. He that resists the proud, heartens the lowly: Fear not, for I
will make thee henceforth a Fisher of men. Lo, this Humility is rewarded with
an Apostleship. What had the Earth ever more glorious then a Legacy from
Heaven? He that bade Christ go from him, shall have Simon had no skill of: it
could not but be enough to him, that Christ said, I will make thee; the Miracle
showed him able to make good his word. He that has power to command the Fishes
to be taken, can easily enable the hands to take them.

What is this Divine Trade of ours then but a spiritual Piscation? The World is
a Sea; Souls, like fishes, swim at liberty in this Deep; the Nets of wholesome
Doctrine draw up some to the shore of Grace and Glory. How much skill, and
toil, and patience is requisite in this Art? Who is sufficient for these
things? This Sea, these Nets, the Fishers, the Fish, the Vessels are all thine,
O God; do what thou will in us and by us. Give us ability and grace to take;
give men will and grace to be taken; and take thou glory by that which thou
have given.


WAS this then thy first Miracle, O Savior, that thou wroughtest in Cana of
Galilee? And could there be a greater Miracle then this, that having been
thirty years upon earth, thou did no miracle till now? that thy Divinity did
hide it self thus long in flesh? that so long thou would lie obscure in a
corner of Galilee, unknown to that world thou came to redeem? that so long
thou would strain the patient expectation of those, who ever since thy Star
waited upon the revelation of a Messiah? We silly wretches, if we have but a
dram of virtue, are ready to set it out to the best show: thou, who receivedst
not the Spirit by measure, would content thy self with a willing obscurity;
and concealedst that power that made the world, in the roof of an humane
breast, in a cottage of Nazareth. O Savior, none of thy miracles is more
worthy of astonishment then thy not doing of miracles. What thou did in
private, thy wisdom thought fit for secrecy: but if thy Blessed Mother had not
been acquainted with some domestical wonders, she had not now expected a
miracle abroad. The Stars are not seen by day; the Sun it self is not seen by
night. As it is no small art to hide Art, so is it no small glory to conceal
glory. Thy first public Miracle graceth Galilean marriage. He that was the
Author of Matrimony and sanctified it, does by his holy presence honor the
resemblance of his eternal

The glorious Bridegroom of the Church knew well how ready men would be to
place shame even in the most lawful conjunctions; and therefore his first work
shall be to countenance his own Ordinance. Happy is that Wedding where Christ
is a guest. O Savior, those that marry in thee, cannot marry without thee.
There is no holy Marriage whereat thou art not (however invisible, yet) truly
present by thy Spirit, by thy gracious benediction. Thou make marriages in
Heaven, thou blessest them from Heaven. O thou that have betrothed us to thy
self in Truth and Righteousness, do thou consummate that happy Marriage
Galilee. I find him not at the magnificent Feasts or triumphs of the Great. The
proud pomp of the World did not agree with the state of a servant. This poor
needy Bridegroom wants drink for his guests. The Blessed Virgin (though a
stranger to the house) out of a charitable compassion, and a friendly desire to
maintain the decency of an hospital entertainment, inquires When the wine
failed, the mother of Jesus said unto him, They have no wine. How well does it
beseem the eyes of piety and Christian love, to look Israelite, and feels those
wants whereof he complains not. They are made for themselves, whose thoughts
are only taken up with their own store or indigence.

There was wine enough for a meal, though not for a Feast; and if there were
not wine enough, there was enough water: yet the Holy Virgin complains

To whom should we complain of any want, but to the Maker and Giver of all
things? The Blessed Virgin knew to whom she sued: She had good reason to know
the Divine nature and power of her Son. Perhaps the Bridegroom was not so
needy, but if not by his purse, yet by his credit, he might Mary knew a nearer
way: she did not think best to lade at the shallow Channel, but runs rather to
the Wellhead, where she may dip and fill the Firkins at once with ease. It may
be she saw that the train of Christ (which unbidden followed unto that Feast,
and unexspectedly added to the number of the guests) might help forward that
defect, and therefore she justly solicits her Son JESUS for a supply. Whether
we want Bread, or Water, or Wine, necessaries or comforts, whither should we
run, O Savior, but to that infinite munificence of

But what is this I hear? A sharp answer to the suit of a Mother? Oh woman,
what have I to do with thee? He whose sweet mildness and mercy never sent away
any suppliant discontented, does he only frown upon her that bare him? He that
commands us to honor Father and Mother, does he disdain her whose flesh he
took? God forbid: Love and Duty does not exempt Parents from due admonition.
She solicited Christ as a Mother, he answers her as a Woman. If she were the
Mother of his flesh, his Deity was eternal. She O woman, what have I to do
with thee? my hour is not come. In all bodily actions his style was, O Mother:
in spiritual and heavenly, O Woman. Neither is it for us in the holy if we
have known Christ heretofore according to the flesh, henceforth know we him so
no more.

O Blessed Virgin, if in that heavenly glory wherein thou art thou can take
notice of these earthly things, with what indignation do thou look upon the
presumptuous superstition of vain men, whose suits make thee more then a
solicitor of Divine favors? Thy Humanity is not lost in thy Motherhood, nor in
thy Glory: The respects of Nature reach not so high as Heaven. It is far from
thee to abide that honor which is stolen from thy Redeemer.

There is a Marriage whereto we are invited, yea wherein we are already In thy
presence, O Savior, there is fullness of joy, and at thy right hand are
pleasures for evermore. Blessed are they that are called to the marriage-supper
of the Lamb.

Whatsoever he says unto you, do it. How well does it beseem the Mother of
Christ to agree with his Father in Heaven, whose voice from Heaven said, This
is my well-beloved Son, hear him? She that said of her self, Be it unto me
according to thy word, says unto others, Whatsoever he says to you, do it.
This is the way to have Miracles wrought in us, obedience to his Word. The
power of Christ

This very poor house was furnished with many and large vessels for outward
purification; as if sin had dwelt upon the skin, that superstitious people
sought Holiness in frequent washings. Even this rinsing fouled them with the
uncleanness of a traditional will worship. It is the Soul which needs
scowring; and nothing can wash that but the blood which they desperately wished
upon Purge thou us, O Lord, with hyssop, and we shall be clean; wash us, and we
shall be whiter then snow.

The Waiters could not but think strange of so unseasonable a command, Fill the
water pots. It is wine that we want, what do we go to fetch water? Does this
Holy man mean thus to quench our Feast, and cool our stomachs? If there be no
remedy, we could have sought this supply unbidden. Yet so far has the charge
of Christ's Mother prevailed, that in stead of carrying flagons of wine to the
table, they go to fetch pails-full of water from the Cisterns. It is no
pleading of unlikelihoods against the command of an Almighty

He that could have created wine immediately in those vessels, will rather turn
water into wine. In all the course of his Miracles, I do never find him making
ought of nothing; all his great works are grounded upon former existences. He
multiplied the bread, he changed the water, he restored the withered limbs, he
raised the dead, and still wrought upon that which was, and did not make that
which was not. What does he in the ordinary way of nature, but turn the watery
juice that arises up from the root into wine? He will only do this now suddenly
and at once, which he does usually by sensible degrees. It is ever duly
observed by the Son of God, not to do more miracle

How liberal are the provisions of Christ? If he had turned but one of those
vessels, it had been a just proof of his power, and perhaps that quantity had
served the present necessity: now he furnishes them with so much wine as would
have served an hundred and fifty guests for an entire Feast. Even the measure
magnifies at once both his power and mercy. The munificent hand of God regards
not our need only, but our honest affluence. It is our sin and our shame, if we
turn his favor into wantonness. There must be first a filling, ere there be a
drawing out. Thus in our vessels, the first care must be of our receipt; the
next, of our expense. God would have us Cisterns, not Channels. Every man at
the beginning does set forth good wine, and when men have well drunk, then that
which is worse: but thou have kept the good wine until now. The same bounty
that expressed it self in the quantity of the Wine, shows it self no less in
the Make haste, O my Beloved, and be thou like to a Roe, or to a young Heart
upon the Mountain of Spices.

The good Centurion.
Even the bloody trade of War yielded worthy Clients to Christ. This Roman
Captain had learned to believe in that Jesus* whom many Jews despised. No
Nation, no trade can shut out a good heart from God. If he were a forreiner for
birth, yet he was a domestic in heart.He could not change his blood, he could
overruled his affections. He loved that Nation which was chosen of God; and if
he were not of the Synagogue, yet he built a Synagogue; where he might not be a
party, he would be a Benefactor. Israelitish Captain came to Elias in Carmel,
but with his Cap in his hand, with much suit, much submission, by others, by
himself: he sends first the Elders of the Jews, whom he might hope that their
Nation and place might make gracious: then, left the employment of others might
argue neglect, he seconds them in person. Cold and fruitless are the motions
of friends, where

Great variety of Suitors resorted to Christ; one comes to him for a Son,

But why did thou not, O Centurion, rather bring thy Servant to Christ for
cure, then sue for him absent? There was a Paralytick, whom Faith and Charity
brought to our Savior, and let down through the uncovered roof in his Bed: why
was not thine so carried, so presented? Was it out of the strength I will come
and heal thee. I did not hear the Centurion say either, Come, or, Heal him: The
one he meant, though he said not; the other he neither said nor meant. Christ
over-gives both his words and intentions. It is the manner of that Divine
munificence, where he meets with a faithful Suitor, to give more then is
requested; to give when he is not requested. The very insinuations of our
necessities are no less violent then successful. We think the measure of
humane bounty runs over, when we obtain but what we ask with importunity: that
infinite Goodness keeps within bounds, when it overflows the desires of our
hearts.

As he said, so he did. The Word of Christ either is his act, or concurs with
it. He did not stand still when he said, I will come, but he went as he spoke.
Come down ere he dye, our Savior stirred not a foot: the Centurion did but
complain of the sickness of his servant, and Christ unasked says, I will come
and heal him. That he might be far from so much as seeming to honor wealth
and despise meannesse, he that came in the shape of a Servant, would go down
to the sick Servants pallet, would not go to the Bed of the rich Rulers Son.
It is the basest motive of respect, that arises merely from outward
Greatness. Either more Grace or more Need may justly challenge our favorable
regards, no less then private Obligations.

Even so, O Savior, that which thou offeredst to do for the Centurion's I
will cure them; but addedst also, I will come and cure them. Thy self came
down accordingly to this miserable World, and have personally healed us; so as
now we shall not die but live, and declare thy works, O Lord. And oh that we
could enough praise that love and mercy which has so graciously abased thee,
and could be but so low dejected before thee, as thou have stooped low unto us;
that we could be but as lowly subjects of thy goodness, as we are unworthy.

O admirable return of Humility! Christ will go down to visit the sick Lord, I
am not worthy that thou should come under my roof: the Jewish Elders, that
went before to mediate for him, could say, He is worthy that thou should do
this for him; but the Centurion, when he comes to speak for himself, I am not
worthy. They said, He was worthy of Christ's Miracle; he says he is unworthy
of Christ's presence. There is great difference betwixt others valuations and
our own. Sometimes the world under-rates him that finds reason to set an high
price upon himself. Sometimes again, it overvalues a man that knows just cause
of his own humiliation. If others mistake us, this can be no warrant for our
error. We cannot be wise, unless we receive the knowledge of our selves by
direct Lord, I am not worthy.

Many a one, if he had been in the Centurion's coat, would have thought well
of it; a Captain, a man of good ability and command, a founder of a Synagogue,
a Patron of Religion: yet he overlooks all these, and when he casts his eye
upon the Divine worth of Christ and his own weakness, he says, I am not
worthy: Alas, Lord, I am a Gentile, an Alien, a man of blood; thou art holy,
thou art omnipotent. True Humility will teach us to find out the best of
another, and the worst piece of our selves: Pride contrarily shows us nothing
but matter of admiration in our selves, in others of contempt. Whiles he
confessed himself unworthy of any favor, he approved himself worthy of all. Had
not Christ been before in his heart, he could not have thought himself unworthy
to entertain that Guest within his house. Under the low roof of an humble
breast does God ever delight to dwell: The state of his Palace may not be
measured by the height, but by the depth. Brags and bold faces do oft-times
carry it away with men: nothing prevails with God but our voluntary

It is fit the foundations should be laid deep, where the building is high. The
Centurion's Humility was not more low then his Faith was lofty: that reaches up
into Heaven, and in the face of humane weakness descries Omnipotence: Only
say the word, and my Servant shall be whole.

Had the Centurion's roof been Heaven it self, it could not have been worthy to
be come under of him whose Word was Almighty, and who was the Almighty Word of
his Father. Such is Christ confessed by him that says, Only say the word.
None but a Divine Power is unlimited: neither has Faith any other bounds then
God himself. There needs no footing to remove Mountains

Whereupon then was the steady confidence of the good Centurion? He saw how
powerful his own word was with those that were under his command, (though
himself were under the command of another) the force whereof extended even to
absent performances; well therefore might he argue, that a free and unbounded
power might give infallible commands, and that the most obstinate Disease must
therefore needs yield to the beck of the God of Nature. Weakness may show us
what is in strength; by one drop of water we may see Do this, and it is done:
these mutual respects draw on each other; cheerful and diligent service in
the one calls for a due and favorable care in the other: they that neglect to
please, cannot complain to be neglected. Oh that I could be but such a Servant
to mine heavenly Master! Alas! every of his commands says, Do this, and I do
it not: every of his inhibitions says, Do it not, and I do it. He says, Go
from the World; I run to it: he says, Come to me; I run from him. Woe is me!
this is not service, but enmity. How can I look for favor, while I return
Rebellion? It is a gracious Master whom we serve; there can be no

What can be more mavelous then to see Christ marvel? All marvelling
supposes an ignorance going before, and a knowledge following some accident
unexpected: now who wrought this Faith in the Centurion, but he that wondered at
it? He knew well what he wrought, because he wrought what he would; yet he
wondered at what he both wrought and knew, to teach us, much more to admire that
which he at once knows and holds admirable.

He wrought this Faith as God, he wondered at it as man: God wrought, and man
admired: he that was both, did both, to teach us where to bestow our Behold,
thou art fair, my Love, behold, thou art fair, and there is no spot in thee.
My Sister, my Spouse, thou have wounded my heart, thou have wounded my heart
with one of thine eyes.

Our Wealth, Beauty, Wit, Learning, Honor, may make us accepted of men, but it
is our Faith only that shall make God in love with us. And why are we of any
other save God's Diet, to be more affected with the least measure

Neither was that plant more worth of wonder in it self, then that it grew in
such a soil, with so little help of Rain and Sun. The weakness of means adds
to the praise and acceptance of our proficiency. To do good upon a little is
the commendation of thrist: it is small thank to be full-handed in a large
estate: As contrarily, the strength of means doubles the revenge of our
neglect. It is not more the shame of Israel then the glory of the Centurion,
that our Savior says, I have not found so great faith in Israel. Had Israel
yielded any equal Faith, it could not have been unespied of these All-seeing
eyes: yet

Our Savior did not mutter this censorious testimony to himself, not whisper
it to his Disciples, but he turned him about to the people, and spoke it in
their ears, that he might at once work their shame and emulation. In all other
things, except spiritual, our self-love makes us impatient of equals; much
less can we endure to be out-stripped by those who are our professed
inferiors. It is well if any thing can kindle in us holy ambitions. Dull and

He that both wrought this Faith and wondered at it, does now reward it; Go thy
ways, and as thou have believed, so be it unto thee. Never was any Faith
unseen of Christ, never was any seen without allowance, never was any allowed
without remuneration. The measure of our receipts in the matter of favor, is
the proportion of our belief. The infinite Mercy of God (which is ever like it
self) follows but one Rule in his gift to us, the Faith that he gives us. Give
us, O God, to believe, and be it to us as thou will, it shall be to us above
that we will.

So be it unto thee. The Servants health is the benefit of the Master, and the
Masters Faith is the health of the Servant. And if the Prayers of an earthly
Master prevailed so much with the Son of God for the recovery of a Servant, how
shall the intercession of the Son of God prevail with his Father in Heaven for
us that are his impotent Children and Servants upon Earth? What can we want, O
Savior, whiles thou suest for us? He that has given thee for us, can deny
thee nothing for us, can deny us nothing for thee. In thee we are happy, and
shall be glorious. To thee, O thou mighty Redeemer of Israel, with thine
eternal Father, together with thy Blessed Spirit, one God infinite and
incomprehensible, be Amen.

Contemplations.
THE THIRD BOOK,
Containing The Widows son raised. The Rulers son healed. The dumb Devil
ejected. Matthew called. Christ among the Gergesens; or Legion, and the
Gadarene Herd.


To my right Worthy and Worshipful friend, Mr JOHN GIFFORD OF Lancrasse in
Devon, Esquire.
SIR,
I Hold it (as I ought) one of the rich mercies of God, that he has given me
favor in some eyes which have not seen me; but none, that I know, has so much
demerited me unknown, as your worthy Family. Ere therefore you see my face,
see my hand willingly professing my thankful obligations. Wherewith may it
please you to accept of this parcel of thoughts, not unlike those fellows of
theirs, whom you have entertained above their desert. These shall present unto
you our Savior, magnifying his mercies to men in a sweet variety; healing the
Diseased, raising the Dead, casting out the Devil, calling in the Publican, and
shall raise your heart to adore that infinite goodness. Every help to our
Devotion deserves to be precious; so much more, as the decrepit age of the
World declines to an heartlesse coldness of Piety. That God to whose Honor
these poor Labors are meant, bless them in your hands, and from them to all
Readers. To his Protection I heartily commend you, and the Right virtuous
Gentlewoman, your worthy Wife, with all the Pledges of your happy affection, as
whom you have deserved to be

Your truly thankful

The Widows son raised.
THE favors of our beneficent Savior were at the least contiguous. No sooner
has he raised the Centurion's Servant from his bed, then he raises the Widows
Son from his Biere.

The fruitful clouds are not ordained to fall all in one field. Nain must
partake of the bounty of Christ as well as Cana, or Capernaum. And if this Sun
were fixed in one Orb, yet it diffuseth heat and light to all the world. It is
not for any place to ingrosse the messengers of the Gospel, whose errand is
universal. This immortal seed may not fall all in one furrow.

Nain stood under the hill of Hermon, near unto Tabor: but now it is watered
with better dews from above, the Doctrine and Miracles of a Savior.

Not for state, but for the more evidence of the work, is our Savior attended
with a large train; so entering into the gate of that walled City, as if he
meant to besiege their Faith by his Power, and to take it. His Providence has
so contrived his journey, that he meets with the sad pomp of a Funeral. A woeful
Widow attended with her weeping neighbors is following her only Son to the
grave. There was nothing in this spectacle that did not command compassion.



But more, a young man, the only Son, the only child of his mother. No
condition can make it other then grievous for a well-natur'd mother to part
with her own bowels: yet surely store is some mitigation of loss. Amongst many
children one may be more easily missed; for still we hope the surviving may
supply the comforts of the dead: But when all our hopes

When God would describe the most passionate expression of sorrow that can fall
into the miserable, he can but say, oh daughter of my people, gird thee with
sackcloth, and wallow thy self in the ashes, make lamentation and bitter
mourning as for thine only Son. Such was the loss, such was the sorrow of this
disconsolate mother; neither words nor tears can suffice to discover it.

Yet more, had she been aided by the counsel and supportation of a loving
yoke fellow, this burden might have seemed less intolerable. A good Husband may
make amends for the loss of a Son; had the root been left to her Jairus for a
Daughter, the neighbors for the Paralytick; here he seeks up the Patient, and
offers the cure unrequested. Whiles we have to do with the Father of Mercies,
our afflictions are the most powerful suitors. No tears, no prayers can move
him so much as his own commiseration. O God, none of

Here was a conspiration of all parts to mercy. The Heart had compassion; the
Mouth said, Weep not; the Feet went to the Bier; the Hand touched the coffin;
the Power of the Deity raised the dead. What the Heart felt was secret to it
self: the Tongue therefore expresses it in words of comfort, Weep not. Alas!
what are words to so strong and just passions? To bid her not to weep that had
lost her only Son, was to persuade her to be miserable, and not feel it; to
feel, and not regard it; to regard, and yet to smother it. Concealment does not
Young man, I say unto thee, Arise. The Lord of life and death speaks with
command. No finite power could have said so without presumption, or with
success. That is the voice that shall one day call up our vanished bodies from
those Elements into which they are resolved, and raise them out of their dust.
Neither sea, nor death, nor hell can offer Let them be repaired, then, Let them
be made.

I do not see our Savior stretching himself upon the dead corpse, as Elias and
Elisha upon the sons of the Sunamite and Sareptan, nor kneeling down and
praying by the Bier, as Peter did to Dorcas; but I hear him so speaking to the
dead as if he were alive, and so speaking to the dead, that by the word he
makes him alive, I say unto thee, Arise. Death has no power to bid that man
Arise. Immediately he that was dead sat up. So at the sound of the last
Trumpet, by the power of the same voice we shall arise out of the dust, and
stand up glorious: This mortal shall put on immortality; this corruptible,
incorruption. This body shall not be buried, but sown; and at our day shall
therefore spring up with a plentiful increase of glory. How comfortless, how
desperate should be our lying down, if it were not for this assurance of
rising? And now, behold, lest our weak faith should stagger at the assent to so
great a difficulty, he has already, by what he has done, given us tastes of
what he will do. The power that can raise one man, can raise a thousand, a
million, a world: no power can raise one man, but that which is infinite;
Elias, another by Elisha living, a third by Elisha dead: By the hand of the
Mediator of the New Testament he raised here the son of the Widow, the daughter
of Jairus, Lazarus, and, in attendance of his own Resurrection, he made a
jail-deliver of holy prisoners at Jerusalem. He raises the daughter of Jairus
from her bed, this Widows son from his Coffin, Lazarus from his grave, the dead
Saints of Jerusalem from their rottenness; that it might appear no degree of
death can hinder the efficacy of his overruling command. He that keeps the
keys of Death cannot only make way for himself through the common Hall and
outer-rooms, but through the inwardest and

Methinks I see this young man, who was thus miraculously awaked from his
deadly sleep, wiping and rubbing those eyes that had been shut up in death; and
descending from the Bier, wrapping his winding sheet about his loins, cast
himself down in a passionate thankfulness at the feet of his Almighty restorer,
adoring that Divine power which had commanded his Soul back again to her
forsaken lodging: and though I hear not what he said, yet I dare say they were
words of praise and wonder which his returned Soul first uttered. It was the
mother whom our Savior pitied in this act, not the son; (who now forced from
his quiet rest, must twice pass through the gates of A great Prophet is raised
up amongst us, and God has visited his people. A Prophet was the highest name
they could find for him, whom they saw like themselves in shape, above
themselves in power. They were not yet acquainted with God manifested in the
flesh. This Miracle might well have assured them of more then a Prophet: but he
that raised the

The Rulers Son cured.
Galilee done any Miracle but here. To him that has shall be given.

We do not find Christ often attended with Nobility: here he is. It was some
great Peer, or some noted Courtier that was now a suitor to him for his dying
son. Earthly Greatness is no defense against Afflictions. We men forbear

This Noble Ruler listens after Christ's return into Galilee. The most eminent
amongst men will be glad to hearken after Christ in their necessity. Happy was
it for him that his son was sick; he had not else been acquainted with his
Savior, his Soul had continued sick of ignorance and unbelief. Why else does
our good God send us pain, losses, opposition, but that he may be sought to?
Are we afflicted? whither should we go but to Cana to seek Christ? whither but
to the Cana of Heaven, where our water It is good for me that I was afflicted?

It was about a days journey from Capernaum to Cana: Thence hither did this
Courtier come for the cure of his sons Fever. What pains even the greatest can
be content to take for bodily health? No way is long, no labor tedious to the
desirous. Our Souls are sick of a spiritual Fever, laboring under the cold fit
of Infidelity, and the hot fit of Self-love; and we sit still at home, and see
them languish unto death.

This Ruler was neither faithless nor faithful. Had he been quite faithless,
Come down, and heal my son ere he die.

Come down? as if Christ could not have cured him absent. Ere he die? as if
that power could not have raised him being dead. How much difference was here
betwixt the Centurion and the Ruler? That came for his Servant, this for his
Son. This son was not more above the servant, then the Faith which sued for the
servant surpassed that which sued for the son. The one can say, Master, come
not under my roof, for I am not worthy; only speak the word, and my servant
shall be whole. The other can say, Master, either come under my roof, Heal my
son had been a good suit; for Christ is the only Physician for all diseases:
but, Come down and heal him, was to teach God how to work.

It is good reason that he should challenge the right of prescribing to us, who
are every way his own: it is presumption in us to stint him unto our forms. An
expert workman cannot abide to be taught by a novice; how much less shall the
all-wise God endure to be directed by his creature? This is more Recipe to the
Physician. That God would give us grace is a beseeming suit: but to say, Give
it me by prosperity, is a saucy motion.

As there is faithfulness in desiring the End; so modesty and patience in
referring the Means to the author. In spiritual things God has acquainted us
with the means whereby he will work, even his own Sacred Ordinances. Upon
these, because they have his own promise, we may call absolutely for a
Blessing: In all others there is no reason that beggars should be chusers. He
who does whatsoever he will, must do it how he will. It is for us to receive,
not to appoint.

He who came to complain of his son's sickness, hears of his own; Except ye see
signs and wonders, ye will not believe. This Nobleman was (as is like) of
Capernaum: There had Christ often preached; there was one of his chief
residencies. Either this man had heard our Savior often, or might have done: yet
because Christ's Miracles came to him only by hearsay (for as yet we find
none at all wrought where he preached most) therefore the man believes not
enough; but so speaks to Christ as to some ordinary Physician, Come down and
heal. It was the common disease of the Jews, Incredulity; which no receipt could
heal but Wonders. A wicked and adulterous generation seeks signs. Had they not
been wilfully graceless, there was already Messiah: the miraculous conception
and life of the Forerunner, Zacharie's dumbness, the attestation of Angels,
the apparition of the Star, the journey of the Sages, the vision of the
Shepherds, the testimonies of Anna and Simeon, the Prophecies fulfilled, the
Voice from Heaven at his Baptism, the Divine words that he spoke; and yet they
must have all made up with Miracles: which though he be not unwilling to give
at his own times, yet he thinks much to be tied unto at theirs. Not to believe
without signs, was a sign of stubborn hearts.

It was a foul fault and a dangerous one, Ye will not believe. What is it that
Capernaite, that had heard the Sermons of so Divine a Teacher? The greater
light we have, the more shame it is for us to stumble.

Oh what shall become of us that reel and fall in the clearest Sunshine that
ever looked forth upon any Church? Be merciful to our sins, O God, and say any
thing of us rather then, Ye will not believe.

Our Savior tells him of his unbelief. He feels not himself sick of that Go thy
way, thy son lives. If we should measure our hopes by our own worthiness,
there were no exspectation of blessings: but if we shall measure them by his
bounty and compassion, there can be no doubt of prevailing. As some tender
mother that gives the breast to her unquiet child in stead of the rod, so
deals he with our perversnesses.

How God differences men according to no other conditions then of their Faith!
The Centurion's servant was sick, the Ruler's son. The Centurion does not sue
unto Christ to come; only says, My servant is sick of a Palsy: Christ
answers him, I will come and heal him. The Ruler sues unto Christ that he would
come and heal his son: Christ will not go; only says, Go Outward things
carry no respect with God. The Image of that Divine Majesty shining inwardly
in the Graces of the Soul is that which wins love from him in the meanest
estate. The Centurion's Faith therefore could do more then the Ruler's
Greatness; and that faithful man's servant has more regard then this great man's
son.

The Ruler's request was, Come and heal: Christ's answer was, Go thy way, thy
Son lives. Our merciful Savior meets those in the end whom he crosses in the
way. How sweetly does he correct our prayers, and whiles he does not give us
what we ask, gives us better then we asked!

Justly does he forbear to go down with this Ruler, lest he should confirm Thy
Son lives; giving a greater demonstration of his Omnipotency then was craved.
How often does he not hear to our will, that he may hear us to our advantage? The
chosen Vessel would be rid of Tentations, he hears of a supply of Grace: The
sick man asks Release, receives Patience; Life, and receives Glory. Let us ask
what we think best: let him give what he knows best.

With one word does Christ heal two Patients, the son and the father; the sons
Fever, the fathers Unbelief. That operative word of our Savior

Great men cannot want Clients; their Example swaies some, their Authority
more: they cannot go to either of the other worlds alone. In vain

The Dumb Devil ejected.
THat the Prince of our Peace might approve his victories perfect, wheresoever
he met with the Prince of Darkness he foiled him, he ejected him. He found him
in Heaven; thence did he throw him headlong; and verified his Prophet, I have
cast thee out of mine holy mountain. How art thou fallen from Heaven, O Lucifer?
He found him in the heart of man; (for in that closet of God did the evil
spirit after his exile from Heaven shroud himself: Sin gave him possession,
which he kept with a willing violence) thence he casts him by his Word and
Spirit. He found him tyrannizing in the bodies of some possessed men, and with
power commands the unclean spirits to depart.

This act is for no hand but his. When a strong man keeps possession, none
Sampson to a Dalilah; but in violent, ever the mightiest carries it. A
spiritual nature must needs be in rank above a bodily: neither can any power be
above a Spirit, but the God of Spirits.

No otherwise is it in the mental possession, Wherever sin is, there Satan is:
as on the contrary, whosoever is born of God, the seed of God remains in him.
That Evil one not only is, but rules in the sons of disobedience: Oh cleanse
thou me from my secret sins, and keep me that presumptuous sins prevail not
over me. O Savior, it is no Paradox to say, that thou castest out more Devils
now then thou did whiles thou were upon earth. It was thy word, When I am
lifted up, I will draw all men unto me. Satan weighs down at the feet; thou
pullest at the head, yea at the

Nothing can be said to be dumb, but what naturally speaks: nothing can speak
naturally, but what has the instruments of speech; which because spirits want,
they can no otherwise speak vocally then as they take voices to themselves, in
taking bodies. This Devil was not therefore dumb It is not you that speak,
faith our Savior, but the spirit of your Father that speaks in you.

As it is in bodily Diseases, that they do not infect us alike; some seize upon
the humors, others upon the spirits; some assalt the brain, others the heart
or lungs: so in bodily and spiritual possessions; in some the evil spirit takes
away their senses, in some their lims, in some their inward faculties; like as
spiritually they affect to move us unto several sins, one to lust, another to
covetousness, or ambition, another to cruelty: and their names have
distinguished

O subtle and tyrannous spirit, that obstructs all ways to the Soul, that
keeps out all means of Grace both from the door and windows of the heart; yea
that stops up all passages whether of ingress or egress: of ingress at the eye
or ear, of egress at the mouth, that there might be no capacity of redress!

What holy use is there of our tongue but to praise our Maker, to confess our
sins, to inform our brethren? How rife is this Dumb Devil every where,

For what end has man those two privileges above his fellow creatures, Reason
and Speech, but that as by the one he may conceive of the great works of his
Maker, which the rest cannot, so by the other he may express what he conceives
to the honor of the Creator both of them and himself? And why are all other
creatures said to praise God, and bidden to praise him, but because they do it
by the apprehension, by the expression of man? If the Heavens declare the glory
of God, how do they it but to the eyes, and by the tongue of that man for whom
they were made? It is no small honor Lord, open thou my lips, and my mouth
shall show forth thy praise.

Praise is not more necessary then complaint; praise of God, then complaint If
we confess our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our sins, and to
cleanse us from all unrighteousness.

That cunning manslayer knows there is no way to purge the sick soul but
upward, by casting out the vicious humor wherewith it is clogged; and
therefore holds the lips close, that the heart may not disburden it self by so
wholesome evacuation. When I kept silence, my bones consumed: For day and night
thy hand, O Lord, was heavy upon me; my moisture is turned into the

We have a tongue for God, when we praise him; for our selves, when we pray and
confess; for our brethren, when we speak the truth for their information; which
if we hold back in unrighteousness, we yield unto that dumb Devil. Where do we
not see that accursed spirit? He is on the Bench, when the mute or partial
Judge speaks not for truth and innocence. He is in the Pulpit, when the
Prophets of God smother, or halve, or adulterate the message of their Master.
He is at the Bar, when irreligious Jurours dare lend an oath to fear, to
hope, to gain. He is in the Market, when godless It is time for thee, Lord, to
work, for they have destroyed thy Law.

That it might well appear this impediment was not natural; so soon as the man
is freed from the spirit, his tongue is free to his speech. The effects of
spirits as they are wrought, so they cease at once. If the Son of God do but
remove our spiritual possession, we shall presently break forth into the praise
of God, into the confession of our vileness, into the profession

But what strange variety do I see in the spectators of his Miracle, some
wondering, others censuring, a third sort tempting, a fourth applauding? There
was never man or action but was subject to variety of constructions. What man
could be so holy as he that was God? What act could be more worthy then the
dispossessing of an evil spirit? Yet this man, this act passes these
differences of interpretation. What can we do to undergo but one opinion? If
we give alms and fast, some will magnify our charity and devotion, others
will tax our hypocrisy: If we give not, some will condemn our
hard-heartedness, others will allow our care of justice. If we came neither
eating nor drinking; they say, He has a Devil: The Son of man came eating and
drinking; they say, This man is a glutton, a friend of Publicans and sinners:
and here one of his holy acts carries away at once wonder, censure, doubt,
celebration. There is no way safe for a man but to square his actions by the
right rule of justice, of charity; and I pass very little to be judged of you,
or of man's day.

I marvel not if the people marvelled; for here were four wonders in one: the
blind saw, the deaf heard, the dumb spoke, the Demoniack is delivered. Wonder
was due to so rare and powerful a work, and if not this, nothing. We can cast
away admiration upon the poor devices

But whom do I see wondering? The multitude. The unlearned beholders follow that
act with wonder, which the learned Scribes entertain with This people that
knows not the Law is accursed? Yet the Mercy of God makes an advantage of their
simplicity; in that they are therefore less subject to cavillation and
incredulity: as contrarily, his Justice causes the proud knowledge of others
to lie as a block in their way to the ready assent unto the Divine power of the
Messiah. Let the pride of glorious adversaries disdain the poverty of the
clients of the Gospel: it shall not repent us to go to Heaven with the vulgar,
whiles their great ones go in state to perdition.

The multitude wondered. Who censured but Scribes, great Doctors of the Law, of
the divinity of the Jews? What Scribes but those of Jerusalem, the most
eminent Academie of Judaea? These were the men who out of their deep reputed
judgment cast these foul aspersions upon Christ. Great wits ofttimes mislead
both the owners and followers. How many shall once wish they had been born
dullards, yea idiots, when they shall find their wit to have barred them out
of Heaven? Where is the Scribe? where is the disputer of this world? Has not
God made the wisdom of the world foolishness? Say the world what it will, a
dram of holiness is worth a pound of wit. Let others censure with the Scribes:
let me wonder with the multitude.

What could malice say worse? He casts out Devils through Beelzebub the
Prince of Devils. The Jews well knew that the Gods of the heathen were no
other then Devils; amongst whom for that the Lord of Flies (so called, whether
for the concourse of flies to the abundance of his sacrifices, or for his aid
implored against the infestation of those swarms) was held the chief, therefore
they style him The Prince of Devils. There is a subordination of spirits, some
higher in degree, some inferior to others. Our Savior himself tells us of the
Devil and his Angels. Messengers are inferior to those that send them. The
seven Devils that entered into the The King of Gods, The Lord of Lords; the
Prince of Devils. They labor for Confusion that call for Parity. What should
the Church do with such a for me as is not exempliied in Heaven, in Earth, in
Hell?

One Devil (according to their supposition) may be used to cast out another.
How far the command of one spirit over another may extend, it is a secret of
infernal state, too deep for the inquiry of men. The thing it self is apparent;
upon compact and precontracted composition, one gives way to other for the
common advantage. As we see in the Commonwealth of Cheaters and Cut-purses,
one does the fact, another is feed to bring it

One malicious miscreant sets the Devil on work to the inflicting of disease or
death; another upon agreement, for a further spiritual gain, takes him off:
There is a Devil in both. And if there seem more bodily favor, there is no
less spiritual danger in the latter: In the one Satan wins the agent, the
suitor in the other. It will be no cause of discord in Hell, that one Devil
gives ease to the body which another tormented, that both may triumph in the
gain of a Soul. Oh God, that any creature which bears thine Image Is is not
because there is not a God in Israel, that men go to inquire of the God of
Ekron? Can men be so sottish to think that the vowed enemy of their Souls can
offer them a bait without an hook? What evil is there in the City which the
Lord has not done? what is there which he cannot as easily redress? He wounds,
he heals again. And if he will not, It is the Lord, let him do what seems good
in his eyes. If he do not deliver us, he will crown our faithfulness in a
patient perseverance. The wounds of God are better then the salves of Satan.

Was it possible that the wit of Envy could devise so high a slander? Beelzebub
Beelzebub was a Devil to the Jews, therefore they accuse him for a conjurer:
Beelzebub was the chief of Devils, therefore they accuse him for on
Arch-exorcist, for the worst kind of Magician. Some professors of this black
Art, though their work be devilish, yet they pretend to do it in the name of
Jesus, and will presumptuously seem to do that by command which is secretly
transacted by agreement. The Scribes accuse Christ of a direct compact with the
Devil, and suppose both a league and familiarity, which by the Law of Moses (in
the very hand of a Saul) was no other then deadly. Yea so deep does this wound
reach, that our Savior searching it

Yea (which is yet more) how plain is it that these men forced their tongue to
speak this slander against their own heart? Else this Blasphemy had been only
against the Son of man, not against the Holy Ghost: but now that the searcher
of hearts finds it to be no less then against the Blessed Spirit of God, the
spite must needs be obstinate; their malice does wilfully cross Blessed are we
when men revile us, and say all manner of evil of us, for the name of Chirst.
For them, What reward shall be given to thee, thou false tongue? Even sharp
arrows with hot burning coals; yea those very coals of hell from which thou
were inkindled.

There was yet a third sort that went a midway betwixt wonder and censure.
Though thou have cast out this dumb Devil, yet this is no sufficient argument
of thy Divine power. We have yet seen nothing from thee like those ancient
Miracles of the times of our forefathers. Joshuah caused the Sun to stand
still; Elias brought fire down from heaven; Samuel astonished the people with
thunder and rain in the midst of harvest: If thou would command our belief,
do somewhat like to these. The casting out of a Devil shows thee to have some
power over Hell; show us now that thou have no less power over Heaven. There is
a kind of unreasonableness of desire and insatiableness

No son can be more like a father then these Jews to their progenitors in the
desert: that there might be no fear of degenerating into good, they also of old
tempted God in the Wilderness. First, they are weary of the Egyptian bondage,
and are ready to fall out with God and Moses for their stay in those fornaces.
By ten miraculous Plagues they are freed: and going Egyptians follow them; the
Sea is before them: now they are more afflicted with their liberty then their
servitude. The Sea yields way, the Egyptians are drowned: and now that they are
safe on the other shore, they tempt the Providence of God for water. The Rock
yields it them: then, no less for bread and meat. God sends them Manna and
Quails: they cry out of the food of Angels. Their present enemies in the way
are vanquished: they whine at the men of measures in the heart of Canaan.
Nothing from God but Mercy; nothing from them but Temptations.

Their true brood both in nature and in sin had abundant proofs of the Messiah;
If thou be the Christ. The gracious heart is credulous: Even where it sees not,
it believes; and where it sees but a little, it believes a great deal. Neither
does it presume to prescribe unto God what and how he shall work, but takes
what it finds, and unmovably rests in what it takes. Any miracle, no miracle
serves enough for their assent who have built their Faith upon the Gospel of
the Lord Jesus.

Matthew called.
THE number of the Apostles was not yet full: One room is left void for a
future occupant. Who can but expect that it is reserved for some eminent
person? and behold Matthew the Publican is the man. Oh the strange election of
Christ! Those other Disciples whose calling is recorded, were from the
Fisher-boat; this from the Toll-booth: They were unlettered, this infamous. The
condition was not in it self sinful: but Romans imposed on God's free people
were odious, so the Collectors, the Farmers of them abominable. Besides that it
was hard to hold that seat without oppression, without exaction. One that best
knew it branded it with poling and sycophancy. And now behold a griping
Publican called to the Family, to the Apostleship, to the Secretaryship of God.
Matthew the Publican busy in his Counting House, reckoning up the sums of his
Rentals, taking up his arrerages, and wrangling for denied duties, and did so
little think of a Savior, that he did not so much as look at his passage: but
Jesus, as he passed by, saw a man sitting at the receipt of custom, named
Matthew. As if this prospect had been sudden and casual, Jesus saw him in
passing by. O Savior, before the world was thou saw that man sitting there;
thou saw thine own passage; thou saw his call in thy Follow me. Thou that
said once to Jerusalem, Thy birth and nativity is of the land of Canaan: Thy
father was an Amorite, Now also, when thou passedst by, and saw Matthew
sitting at the receipt of custom, said to him, Follow me. The life of this
Publican was so much worse then the birth of that forlorn Amorite, as Follow me
was more then Live. What can thou see in us, O God, but ugly deformities,
horrible sins, despicable miseries? yet does it please thy mercy Live, and,
Follow me.

The just man is the first accuser of himself: whom do we hear to blazon the
shame of Matthew but his own mouth? Matthew the Evangelist tells us of Matthew
the Publican. His fellows call him Levi, as willing to lay their finger upon
the spot of his unpleasing profession: himself will not smother nor blanch it a
whit, but publishes it to all the world in a thankful recognition of the mercy
that called him; as liking well that his baseness should serve for a fit foil
to set off the glorious luster of his Grace by whom he was elected. What
matters it how vile we are, O God, so thy glory may arise in our abasement?

Follow me; spoken by the same tongue that said to the corpse at Nain, Young
man, I say to thee, Arise. He that said at first, Let there be light, says
now, Follow me. That power sweetly inclines which could forcibly command: the
force is not more unresistible then the inclination. When the Sun shines upon
the Ice-icles, can they choose but melt and fall? When it looks into a dungeon,
can the place choose but be enlightened? Do we see the Jet drawing up straws to
it, the Lodestone iron, and do we marvel if the Omnipotent Savior, by the
influence of his Grace, attract the heart of a Publican? He arose and followed
him. We are all naturally averse from thee, O God: do thou but bid us Follow
thee, draw us by thy

It was not a more busy then gainful trade that Matthew abandoned to follow
Christ into poverty: and now he cast away his Counters, and struck Matthew to a
Discipleship; Matthew invites him to a Feast. The joy of his call makes him
begin his abdication of the world in a banquet.

Here was not a more cheerful thankfulness in the inviter, then a gracious
humility in the guest. The new servant bids his Master, the Publican his
Savior; and is honored with so blessed a presence. I do not find where Jesus
Simon the Pharisee entertains him, and has his table honored with the public
remission of Zachaeus entertains him; Salvation came that day to his house,
with the Author of it. That presence made the Publican a Son of Abraham.
Matthew is recompensed for his feast with an Apostleship. Martha and Mary
entertain him, and besides Divine instruction receive their Brother from the
dead. O Savior, whether thou feast us or we feast thee, in both of them is
Blessedness.

Where a Publican is the Feast-master, it is no marvel if the guests be
Publicans and sinners. Whether they came alone out of the hope of that mercy
which they saw their fellow had found; or whether Matthew invited them to be
partners of that plentiful grace whereof he had tasted, I inquire

What a table-full was here? The Son of God beset with Publicans and sinners.

What sinner can fear to kneel before thee, when he sees Publicans and sinners
sit with thee? Who can fear to be despised of thy meekness and mercy, which
did not abhor to converse with the outcasts of men? Thou did not despise
the Thief confessing upon the Cross, nor the sinner weeping upon thy feet, nor
the Canaanite crying to thee in the way, nor the blushing Adulteress, nor the
odious Publican, nor the forswearing Disciple, nor the persecutor of Disciples,
nor thine own executioners: how can we be unwelcome to thee, if we come with
tears in our eyes,

The squint-eyed Pharisees look across at all the actions of Christ: where
They said to his Disciples, Why eats your Master with Publicans and sinners?
They durst not say thus to the Master, whose answer (they knew) would soon have
convinced them: This wind (they hoped) might shake the weak faith of the
Disciples. They speak where they may be most likely to hurt. All the crew of
Satanical instruments have learnt this craft of their old Tutor in Paradise. We
cannot reverence that man whom we think unholy. Christ had lost the hearts of
his followers, if they had entertained the least suspicion of his impurity;
which the murmr of these envious Pharisees. would fain insinuate: He cannot
be worthy to be followed that is unclean; He cannot but be unclean that eats
with Publicans and sinners. Proud and foolish Pharisees! ye fast whiles Christ
eats; ye fast in your houses whiles Christ eats in other men's; ye fast with
your own whiles Christ feasts with sinners: but if ye fast in pride, while
Christ eats in humility; if ye fast at home for merit or popularity, while
Christ feasts with sinners for compassion, for edification, for conversion,
your fast is unclean, his feast is holy: ye shall have your portion with
hypocrites, when those Publicans and sinners shall be glorious.

When these censurers thought the Disciples had offended, they speak not to
them but to their Master, Why do thy Disciples that which is not lawful? now,
when they thought Christ offended, they speak not to him, but to the The whole
need not the Physician, but the sick. According to the two qualities of pride,
scorn and overweening, these insolent Pharisees over-rated their own
holiness, contemned the noted unholinesse of others: As if themselves were not
tainted with secret sins, as if others could not be cleansed by repentance. The
searcher of hearts meets with their arrogance, and finds by Whose stripes we
are healed, by whose death we live, happy are they that are under thy hands,
sick, as of sin, so of sorrow for sin. It is as unpossible they should die, as
it is unpossible for thee to want either skill, or power, or mercy. Sin has
made us sick unto death: make thou us but as

Christ among the Gergesens; or Legion, and the Gadarene Herd.
I Do not any where find so furious a Demoniack as amongst the Gergesens:
Satan is most tyrannous where he is obeyed most, Christ no sooner sailed over
the lake, then he was met with two possessed Gadarenes: The extreme rage of the
one has drowned the mention of the other. Yet in oft-times Satan caught him,
then sometimes in the same violence he caught him not. It was no thank to that
malignant one, who as he was indefatigable in his executions, so unmeasurable
in his malice; but to the merciful overruling of God, who in a gracious
respect to the weakness of his poor creatures, limits the spightfull attempts
of that immortal enemy, and takes off this Mastive, whiles we may take breath.
He who Blessed be our strong Helper, that has not given us over to be a prey
unto their teeth. Or if some scope have been given to that envious one to
afflict us, has it been with favorable limitations, it is thine only mercy, O
God, that has chained and muzled up this band-dog, so as that he may scratch
us with his paws, but cannot

Neither do I here see more matter of thanks to our God, for our immunity from
the external injuries of Satan, then occasion of serious inquiry into his power
over us for the spiritual. I see some that think themselves safe from this
ghostly tyranny, because they sometimes find themselves in good moods, free
from the suggestions of gross sins, much more from the commission. Vain men,
that feed themselves with so false and frivolous comforts! will they not see
Satan, through the just permission of God, the same to the Soul in mental

The possessed is bound, as with the invisible fetters of Satan, so with the
material chains of the inhabitants. What can bodily forces prevail against a
spirit? Yet they endeavor this restraint of the man, whether out of charity or
justice: Charity, that he might not hurt himself; Justice, that he might not
hurt others. None do so much befriend the Demoniack as those that bind him.
Neither may the spiritually possessed be otherwise handled: for though this act
of the enemy be plausible, and to appearance pleasant, yet there is more danger
in this dear and smiling tyranny. Two sorts of chains are fit for outrageous
sinners; good laws, unpartiall executions; That they may not hurt, that they
may not be hurt to eternal death.

These iron chains are no sooner fast then broken. There was more then an
humane power in this disruption. It is not hard to conceive the utmost of
Nature in this kind of actions. Sampson does not break the cords and ropes
like a thread of towe, but God by Sampson. The man does not break these chains,
but the Spirit. How strong is the arm of these evil angels! how far
transcending the ordinary course of Nature! They are not called Powers for
nothing. What flesh and blood could but tremble at the palpable inequality of
this match! if herein the merciful protection of our God did not the rather
magnify it self, that so much strength met with so much malice has not
prevailed against us. In spite of both we are in safe hands. He that so easily
brake the iron fetters,

Alas! it is no otherwise with the spiritually possessed. The chains of
restraint are commonly broken by the fury of wickedness. What are the respects
of civility, fear of God, fear of men, wholesome laws, careful executions, to
the desperately licentious, but as cobwebs to an hornet? Let these wild
Demoniacks know that God has provided chains for them that will hold, even
everlasting chains under darkness. These are such as must hold the Devils
themselves (their masters) unto the judgment of the great Day; how much more
those impotent vassals? Oh that men would suffer themselves to be bound to

It was not for rest that these chains were torn off, but for more motion. This
prisoner runs away from his friends, he cannot run away from his Jailer. He is
now carried into the Wilderness; not by mere external force, but by internal
impulsion: carried by the same power that unbound him, for the opportunity of
his Tyranny, for the horror of the place, for the affamishment of his body,
for the avoidance of all means of resistance. Solitary Deserts are the delights
of Satan. It is an unwise zeal that moves us to do that to our selves in an
opinion He dwells in the assembly of his Saints, yea there he has a delight to
dwell. Why should not we account it our happiness that we may have leave to
dwell where the Author of all Happiness loves to dwell?

There cannot be any misery incident unto us, whereof our gracious Redeemer is
not both conscious and sensible. Without any entreaty therefore of the
miserable Demoniack, or suit of any friend, the God of spirits takes pity of
his distress; and from no motion but his own, commands the evil Spirit to come
out of the man. Oh admirable precedent of mercy, preventing our requests,

Satanian heretics, and the present Indian Savages, sacrificing to him that he
hurt not: Others by covenant, conditioning their service upon his assistance,
as Witches and Magicians: Others by insinuation of implicit compact, Scaeva
and modern Exorcists, unwarrantably charging him by an higher name then their
own. None ever offered to deal with Satan by a direct and primary command but
the God of Spirits. The great Archangel, when the strife was about the body of
Moses, commanded not, but imprecated rather, The Lord rebuke thee, Satan. It is
only the God that made this Spirit an Angel of light, that can command him now
that he has made himself the Prince of darkness.

The Devil saw Jesus by the eyes of the Demoniack: for the same saw that spoke:
but it was the ill spirit that said, I besecch thee torment me not. It was sore
against his will that he saw so dreadful an object. The overruling power of
Christ dragged the soul spirit into his presence. Guiltiness would fain keep
out of sight. The limbs of so woeful an head shall once call on the Hills and
Rocks to hide them from the face of the Lamb: such Lion-like terror is Jesus,
cried out. I could marvel that he fell down, that he worshipped him. That
which the proud spirit would have had Christ to have done to him in his great
Duel, the same he now does unto Christ, fearfully, servilely, forcedly. Who
shall henceforth brag of the external homage he performs to the Son of God,
when he sees Satan himself fall down and worship? What comfort can there be in
that which is common serves the Lord in fear, and rejoices in him with
trembling. What it does is in way of service: In service to his Lord, whose
Sovereignty is his comfort and protection: in the fear of a son, not of a
slave; in fear tempered with joy; in a joy, but allayed with trembling: whereas
the prostration of wicked men and Devils is only an act of form, or of force;
as to their Judge, as to their tormentor, not as to their Lord; in mere
servility, not in reverence; in an uncomfortable dullness, without

Whosoever marvels to see the Devil upon his knees, would much more marvel to hear
what came from his mouth, Jesu, the Son of the most high God. A confession,
which if we should hear without the name of the Author, we should ask from what
Saint it came. Behold the same name given to Christ by the Devil, which was
formerly given him by the Angel, Thou shall call his name Jesus. That awful
name whereat every knee shall bow, in Heaven, in earth and under the earth, is
called upon by this prostrate Devil. And lest that should not import enough,
(since others have been honored by this name in The Son of the most high God.
The good Syrophenician and blind Bartimaeus could say, The Son of David. It was
well to acknowledge the true descent of his pedigree according to the flesh:
but this infernal Spirit looks aloft, and fetches his line out of the highest
Heavens, The Son of the most high God. The famous confession of the prime
Apostle Thou art the Christ, the Son of the living God: and what other do I
hear from the lips of a fiend? None more Divine words could fall from the
highest Saint. Nothing hinders but that the veriest miscreant on earth, yea the
foulest Devil in Hell, may speak holily. It is no passing of judgment upon
loose sentences. So Peter should have been cast for a Satan, in denying,
forswearing, cursing; and the Devil should have been set up for a Saint, in
confessing Jesus the Son of the most high God. Fond hypocrite, that please
thy self in talking well, hear this Devil; and when thou can speak better
then he, look to fare better: but in the mean time know, that a smooth tongue
and a foul heart carries away

Let curious heads dispute whether the Devil knew Christ to be God. In this I
dare believe himself, though in nothing else: he knew what he believed, what he
believed that he confessed, Jesus the Son of the most high God. To the
confusion of those semi-Christians, that have either held doubtfully, or
ignorantly mis-known, or blasphemously denied what the very Devils have
professed. How little can a bare speculation avail us in these cases of
Divinity? So far this Devil has attained, to no ease, no comfort. Knowledge
alone does but puff up; it is our love that edifies. If there be not a sense
of our sure interest in this Jesus, a power to apply his merits and obedience,
we are no whit the safer,

This piece of the clause was spoken like a Saint, Jesus, the Son of the most
high God: the other piece like a Devil, What have I to do with thee? If the
disclamation were universal, the latter words would impugn the former: for
whiles he confesses Jesus to be the Son of the most high God, he withal
confesses his own inevitable subjection. Wherefore would he beseech, if he were
not obnoxious? He cannot, he dare not say, What have thou to do with me? but,
What have I to do with thee? Others indeed I have vexed, thee I fear. In
respect then of any violence, of any personal provocation, What have I to do
with thee? And do thou ask, O thou evil spirit? what have thou to do with
Christ, whiles thou vexest a servant of Christ? Have thou thy name from
knowledge, and yet so mistakest him whom thou confessest, as if nothing could
be done to him but what immediately concerns his own person? Hear that great
and just Judge sentencing upon his dreadful Tribunal; Inasmuch as thou did
it unto one of these little ones, thou did it unto me. It is an idle
misprision to sever the sense of an injury done to any of the Members from the
Head.

He that had humility enough to kneel to the Son of God, has boldness enough
to expostulate, Art thou come to torment us before our time? Whether it were
that Satan, who uses to enjoy the torment of sinners, whose music

There are tortures appointed to the very spiritual natures of evil Angels. Men
that are led by Sense, have easily granted the body subject to torment, who yet
have not so readily conceived this incident to a spiritual substance.
intentional torment incident to Spirits, and a real. For, as in Blessedness
the

Besides which, I hear the Judge of men and Angels say, Go ye cursed into
everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels: I hear the Prophet
say, Tophet is prepared of old. If with fear and without curiosity we may look
upon those flames, why may we not attribute a spiritual nature to that more
then natural fire? In the end of the world the Elements shall be dissolved by
fire: and if the pure quintessential matter of the sky, and the element of
fire it self shall be dissolved by fire, then that last fire shall be of
another nature then that which it consumes. What hinders then but that the
Omnipotent God has Praise the Lord, O my Soul, and all that is within me
praise his holy Name, who forgiveth all thy sins, and heals all thine
infirmities; who redeemeth thy life from destruction, and crowns thee with
mercy and compassions.

There is no time wherein the evil spirits are not tormented: there is a time
wherein they exspect to be tormented yet more. Art thou come to torment us
before our time? They knew that the last Assizes are the prefixed term of
their full execution; which they also understood to be not yet come. For though
Before the time. Even the very evil spirits confess, and fearfully attend a
set day of universal Sessions. They believe less then Devils, that either
doubt of or deny that day of final retribution.



I beseech thee, torment me not. The world is well changed since Satan's first
onset upon Christ. Then he could say, If thou be the Son of God; now, Jesu, the
Son of the most high God: then, All these will I give thee if thou will fall
down and worship me; now, I beseech thee, torment me not. The same power, when
he lists, can change the note of the Tempter to us. How happy are we that have
such a Redeemer as can command the Devils to their chains? Oh consider this, ye
lawless sinners, that have said, Let us break his bonds, and cast his cords
from us. However the Almighty suffers you for a judgment to have free scope to
evil, and ye can now impotently resist the revealed will of your Creator, yet
the time shall

Nature teaches every creature to wish a freedom from pain. The foulest
spirits cannot but love themselves; and this love must needs produce a
deprecation of evil. Yet what a thing is this, to hear the Devil at his
prayers? I beseech thee, torment me not. Devotion is not guilty of this, but
fear. There is no grace in the suit of Devils, but nature; no respect of Glory
to their Creator, but their own ease. They cannot pray against sin, but against
torment for sin. Lead me not into pain: only the good heart can say, Lead me
not into temptation. If we can as heartily pray against sin, for the avoiding
of displeasure, as against punishment, when we have displeased, there is true
Grace in the Soul. Indeed, if we could fervently pray against Sin, we should
not need to pray against Punishment, which is no other then the inseparable
shadow of that body: but if we have not labored against our Sins, in vain do
we pray against Punishment. God must be just; and the wages of sin is death.

Jacob's Well wondered to see Christ talk with a woman, well may we wonder to
see him talking with an unclean Spirit. Let it be no presumption, O Savior, to
ask upon what grounds thou did this wherein we may not follow thee. We know
that sin was excepted in thy conformity of thy self to us: we know there was no
guile found in thy mouth, no possibility So on the other, God and man might do
that safely which mere man The Lord rebuke thee, Satan.

It was the presupposition of him that knew it, that not only men but spirits
have names. This then he asks, not out of an ignorance or curiosity; nothing
could be hid from him who calls the Stars and all the hoasts of Heaven by
their names: but out of a just respect to the glory of the Miracle he was
working, whereto the notice of the name would not a little avail. For if
without inquiry or confession our Savior had ejected this evil spirit, it had
passed for the single dispossession of one only Devil; whereas now it appears
there was a combination and hellish champertie in these powers of darkness,
which were all forced to veil unto that Almighty command.

Before, the Devil had spoken singularly of himself, What have I to do with
thee? and, I beseech thee torment me not. Our Savior yet, knowing that there
was a multitude of Devils lurking in that breast, who dissembled their
presence, wrests it out of the Spirit by this interrogation, What is thy name?
Now can those wicked ones no longer hide themselves: He that asked the
question, forced the answer. My name is Legion. The author of discord has
borrowed a name of war: from that military order of discipline by which the
Jews were subdued does the Devil fetch his denomination, They were many, yet
they say, My name, not, Our name; though many, they speak as one, they act as
one, in this possession. There is a mavelous accordance even betwixt evil
spirits. That Kingdom is not divided, for then it could not stand. I wonder

What a fearful advantage have our spiritual enemies against us? If armed
troops come against single straglers, what hope is there of life, of victory?
How much does it concern us to band our hearts together in a communion of
Saints? Our enemies come upon us like a torrent: Oh let us not run asunder like
drops in the dust. All our united forces will be little enough to

Legion imports Order, number, conflict. Order, in that there is a distinction
of regiment, a subordination of Officers. Though in Hell there be confusion of
faces, yet not confusion of degrees. Number: Those that have reckoned a Legion
at the lowest, have counted it six thousand: others have more then doubled it.
Though here it is not strict, but figurative, yet the letter of it implies
multitude. How fearful is the consideration of the number of Apostate Angels?
And if a Legion can attend one man, how many must we needs think are they, who
all the world over are at hand to the punishment of the wicked, the exercise of
the good, the tentation of both? It cannot be hoped there can Though we walk
through the valley of the shadow of death, we shall fear no evil. Thou, O Lord,
shall stretch forth thine hand against the wrath of our enemies, and thy right
hand shall save us.

Conflict. All this number is not for sight, for rest; but for motion, for
action. Neither was there ever hour since the first blow given to our first
Parents, wherein there was so much as a truce betwixt these adversaries. As
therefore strong frontier Towns, when there is a peace concluded on both parts,
break up their garrison, open their gates, neglect their Bulwarks; but when
they hear Elisha's servant, when his eyes were opened, saw troops of spiritual
soldiers, which before he discerned not. If the eyes of our Souls be once
enlightened by supernatural knowledge and the clear beams of Faith, we shall as
plainly descry the invisible powers of wickedness, as now our bodily eyes see
Heaven and Earth. They are, though we see them not: we cannot be safe from
them, if we do not acknowledge, not oppose them.

The Devils are now become great suitors to Christ; That he would not command
them into the deep; that he would permit their entrance into the swine. What is
this deep but hell, both for the utter separation from the face of God, day,
this deep they tremble at: what shall I say of those men that fear it not? It
is hard for men to believe their own unbelief. If they were persuaded of this
fiery dungeon, this bottomless

This degree of torment they grant in Christ's power to command; they knew his
power unresistible: had he therefore but said, Back to hell whence ye came,
they could no more have stayed upon earth, then they can now climb into
Heaven. O the wonderful dispensation of the Almighty, who though he could
command all the evil spirits down to their dungeons in an instant, so as
cheerfully cast our selves upon that Providence which keeps the Keys even

Their other suit has some marvel in moving it, more in the grant; That they
might be suffered to enter into the Herd of Swine. It was their ambition of
some mischief that brought forth this desire: that since they might not vex the
body of man, they might yet afflict men in their goods. The Malice of these
envious spirits reaches from us to ours: It is sore against their wills if we
be not every way miserable. If the Swine were Legally unclean for the use of
the table, yet they were naturally good. Had not Satan known them useful for
man, he had never desired their ruin. But as Fencers will seem to fetch a blow
at the leg, when they intend it at the head; so does this Devil, Gadarens: by
this means he hoped well (and his hope was not vain) to work in these Gergesens
a coffeehouse at Christ, an unwillingnesse to entertain him, a desire of his
absence; he meant to turn them into Swine by the loss of their Swine. It was
not the rafters or stones of the house of Job's children that he bore the
grudge to, but to the owners; nor to the lives of the children so much, as the
Soul of their Father. There is no Affliction wherein he does not strike at the
heart; which whiles it holds free, all other damages are light: but a wounded
spirit (whether with sin or sorrow) who can bear? Whatever becomes of goods or
limbs, happy are we if (like wise soldiers) we guard the vital

They sue for a sufferance; not daring other then to grant that without the
permission of Christ they could not hurt a very Swine. If it be fearful to
think how great things evil spirits can do with permission; it is comfortable
to think how nothing they can do without permission. We know they want not
malice to destroy the whole frame of God's work; but of all, man; of all men,
Christians: but if without leave they cannot set upon an Hog, what can they do
to the living Images of their Creator? They cannot offer us so much as a
suggestion without the permission of our Savior. And can he

It is no news that wicked spirits wish to do mischief: it is news that they
are allowed it. If the owner of all things should stand upon his absolute
command, who can challenge him for what he thinks fit to do with his creature?
The first Fool of the Ass is commanded under the Law to have his neck broken.
What is that to us? The creatures do that they were made for, if they may
serve any way to the glory of their Maker. But seldom ever does God leave his
actions unfurnished with such reasons as our weakness may reach unto. There
were Sects amongst these Jews that denied Spirits. They could Gadarens see from
what a multitude of Devils they were delivered; and how easy it had been for
the same power to have allowed these Spirits to seize upon their Persons as
well as their Swine. Neither did God this without a just purpose of their
castigation. His Judgments are righteous, where they are most secret. Though
we cannot accuse these inhabitants of ought, yet he could; and thought good
thus to mulct them. And if they had not wanted Grace to acknowledge it, it was
no small favor of God that he would punish them in their Swine, for that which
he might have avenged upon their Bodies and Souls. Our Goods are furthest off
us: If but in these we

Sometimes it pleases God to grant the suits of wicked men and spirits, in no
favor to the suitors. He grants an ill suit, and withholds a good: He grants
an ill suit in Judgment, and holds back a good one in Mercy. The Israelites
ask meat; he gives Quails to their mouths, and leanness to their My grace is
sufficient for thee. We may not evermore measure favors by condescent. These
Devils doubtless receive more punishment for that harmfull act wherein they are
heard. If we ask what is either unfit to receive or unlawful to beg, it is a
great favor of our God to be denied.

Those spirits which would go into the Swine by permission, go out of the man
by command: they had stayed long, and are ejected suddenly. The immediate works
of God are perfect in an instant, and do not require the aid of time for their
maturation.

No sooner are they cast out of the man, then they are in the Swine. They The
Herd was carried with violence from a steep-down place into the lake, and was
choked. It is no small force that could do this: but if the Swine had been so
many Mountains, these spirits, upon God's permission, had thus transported
them. How easily can they carry those Souls which are under their power to
destruction? Unclean beasts that wallow in the mire of sensuality, brutish
Drunkards transforming themselves by excess, even they are the Swine whom the
Legion carries headlong to the pit of perdition.

The whole multitude of the Country about besought him to depart. The multitude
is a beast of many

There was not a Gadarene found that either dehorted his fellows, or opposed
the motion. It is a sign of people given up to judgment, when no man makes

The Gadarenes sue to Christ for his departure. It is too much favor to
attribute this to their modesty, as if they held themselves unworthy of so
Divine a Guest. Why then did they fall upon this suit in a time their other
Demoniacks should be dispossessed with like loss. I cannot blame Gadarenes
that they feared. This power was worthy of trembling at. Their fear was unjust:
They should have argued, This man has power over men, beasts, devils, it is
good having him to our friend; his presence is our safety and protection. Now
they contrarily mis-infer, Thus powerful is he, it is good he were further
off. What miserable and pernicious misconstructions do men make of God, of
Divine Attributes and actions? God is omnipotent, able to take infinite
vengeance of sin; Oh that he were not: He is provident; I may be careless: He
is merciful; I may sin: He is holy; Let him depart from me, for I am a sinful
man. How witty Sophisters are natural men to deceive their own Souls, to rob
themselves of a God? O Savior, how worthy are Depart from me, ye wicked.

Contemplations.
THE FOURTH BOOK,
Containing The faithful Canaanite. The deaf and dumb man cured. Zacheus. John
Baptist beheaded. The five loaves and two fishes. The walk upon the waters. The
bloody issue healed. Jairus and his daughter. The motion of the two fiery
Disciples repelled. The ten Lepers. The pool of Bethesda. Christ transfigured.
The woman taken in adultery. The thankful Penitent. Martha and Mary. The
beggar that was born blind, cured. The stubborn Devil ejected. The Widows
mites. The ambition of the two sons of Zebedee. The tribute-money paid. Lazarus
dead. Lazarus raised. Christ's procession to the Temple. Christ betrayed. The
Agony. Peter and Malchus; or, Christ apprehended. Christ before Caiaphas.
Christ before Pilate. The Crucifixion. The Resurrection. The Ascension.




To the READER.
THose few spare hours which I could either borrow or steal from the many
employments of my busy Diocese, I have gladly bestowed upon these, not more
recreative then useful, Contemplations, for which I

J. E.

The faithful Canaanite.
IT was our Saviors trade to do good: Therefore he came down from Heaven to
earth, therefore he changed one station of earth for another. Nothing more
commends Goodness then generality and diffusion; whereas reservednesse and
close-handed restraint blemish the glory of it* Jerusalem, then at Capernaum,
soon after in the utmost verge of Galilee; never but doing good.

But as the Sun, though he daily compass the world, yet never walks from under
his line, never goes beyond the turning points of the longest and shortest day;
so neither did thou, O Savior, pass the bounds of thine own peculiar
people. Thou would move, but not wildly; not out of thine own sphere:
wherein thy glorified estate exceeds thine humbled, as far as Heaven is above

Neither yet did thou want outward occasions of thy removal: perhaps the very
importunity of the Scribes and Pharisees, in obtruding their Traditions, drove
thee thence; perhaps their unjust offense at thy Doctrine. There is no readier
way to lose Christ then to clog him with humane ordinances, then to Lord, if
thou had been here, my Soul had not died. Thou art now with us, O Savior,
thou art with us in a free and plentiful fashion; how long, thou know: we
know our deservings and fear. Oh teach us how happy we are in such a guest; and
give us grace to keep thee. Had thou walked within the Phoenician borders, we
could have told how to have made glad constructions of thy mercy in turning to
the Gentiles; thou that could touch the Lepers without uncleanness,
could not be defiled with aliens: but we know the partition wall was not yet
broken down; Galilee; as not ever confined to the heart of Jewry, thou would
sometimes bless the outer skirts with thy presence. No angle is too obscure
for the Gospel: the land of Zabulon and the land of Nepthali, by the way of the
Sea beyond Jordan, Galilee of the Gentiles, the people which sat in darkness
saw great light. The Sun is not scornful, but looks with the same face upon
every plot of earth; not only the stately palaces and pleasant gardens are
visited by his beams, but mean cottages, but neglected boggs and mores. God's
word is like himself, no accepter of persons; the Kern, the rude Scythian, the
savage Indian are alike to it. The Mercy of God will be sure to find out those
that belong to his Election in the most secret corners of the world, like as
his Judgments will fetch his enemies from under the hills and rocks. The good
Shepherd walks the wilderness to seek one sheep strayed from many. If there be
but one Syrophoenician soul to be gained to the Church, Christ goes to the
coasts of Tire and Sidon to fetch her. Why are we weary to do good, when our
Savior underwent this perpetual toil in healing bodies and winning Souls?
There is no life happy but that which is spent in a continual drudging for
edification.

It is long since we heard of the name or nation of Canaanites. All the Country
Phoenicians which were anciently ejected out of Canaan, that title is revived
to her. God keeps account of pedigrees after our oblivion; that he may magnify
his mercies by continuing them to thousands of the generations of the just, and
by renewing favors upon the unjust. No Nation carried such brands and scars of
a Curse as Canaan. To the shame of those careless Jews, even a faithful
Canaanite is a suppliant to Christ, whiles they neglect so great Salvation. She
does not speak, but cry. Need and desire have raised her voice to an
importunate clamor. The God of mercy is light of hearing; yet he loves a loud
and vehement solicitation; not to make himself O Lord, thou Son of David. What
Proselyte, what Disciple could have said more? O blessed Syrophoenician, who
taught thee this abstract of Divinity? What can we Christians confess more
then the Deity and the Humanity, the Messiaship of our glorious Savior? His
Deity as Lord, David. Of all the famous progenitors of Christ two are singled
out by an eminence, David and Abraham; a King, a Patriarch: and though the
Patriarch were first in time, yet the King is first in place; not so much for
the dignity of the Person, as the excellence of the Promise, which as it was
both later and fresher in memory, so more honorable. Abraham was promised
multitude and blessing of seed; to David ^^rpetuity of dominion. So as when God
promises not to destroy his people, it is for Abraham's sake; when not to
extinguish the Kingdom, it is for David's sake. Had she said, The Son of
Abraham, she had not come home to this acknowledgment. Abraham is the Father of
the faithful; David of the Kings of Juda and Israel. There are many faithful;
there is but one King: so as in this title she does proclaim him the perpetual
King of his Church, the rod or flower which should come from the root of Jesse,
the true and only Savior of the world. Whosoever would come unto Christ to
purpose, must come in the right style; apprehending a true God, a true Man, a
true God and Man: any of these Have mercy on me. It was her daughter that was
tormented, yet she says, Have mercy on me. Perhaps her possessed child was
senseless of her misery: the parent feels both her sorrow and her own. As she
was a good woman, so a good mother. Grace and good nature have taught her to
appropriate the afflictions of this divided part of her own flesh. It is not in
the power of another skin, to sever the interest of our own loins or womb. We
find some fouls that burn themselves, whiles they endeavor to blow out the
fire from their young. And even Serpents can receive their brood into their
mouth to shield them from danger. No creature is

On me therefore in mine; for my Daughter is grievously vexed with a Devil. It
was this that sent her to Christ: It was this that must incline Christ to her.
I doubt whether she had inquired after Christ, if she had not been vexed with
her daughters spirit. Our Afflictions are as Benhadad's best counselors, that
sent him with a cord about his neck to the merciful King of Israel. These are
the files and whetstones that set an edge on our Devotions; without which they
grow dull and ineffectual: neither are they stronger motives to our suit then
to Christ's mercy. We cannot have a better spokes-man unto God then our own
misery. That alone sues and pleads and importunes for us. This which

All Israel could not example the Faith of this Canaanite; yet she was thus
tormented in her daughter. It is not the truth or strength of our Faith that
can secure us from the outward and bodily vexations of Satan: against the
inward and spiritual that can and will prevail: it is no more antidote against
the other then against fevers and dropsies. How should it, whenas it may fall
out that these sufferings may be profitable? and why should we exspect that the
love of our God shall yield to forelay any benefit to the Soul? He is an ill
patient My grace is sufficient for thee.

Millions were in Tire and Sidon, whose persons, whose children were untouched
with that tormenting hand. I hear none but this faithful Woman say, My
daughter is grievously vexed of the Devil. The worst of bodily afflictions are
an insufficient proof of Divine displeasure. She that has most Grace,
complains of most discomfort.

Who would now expect any other then a kind answer to so pious and faithful a
petition? And behold, he answered her not a word. O holy Savior, was
miserable? If thy ears were open, could thy bowels be shut? Certainly it O
Lord, thou son of David, but from thee, but by thee. None calls Jesus the
Lord but by the holy Ghost. Much more therefore did thou hear the words of
thine own making; and well were thou pleased to hear what thou thoughtest good
to forbear to answer. It was thine own grace that sealed up thy lips.

Whether for the trial of her patience and perseverance, for^ silence carried
a semblance of neglect; and a willing neglect lays strong siege to the best
fort of the Soul. Even calm tempers when they have been stirred have bewrayed
impetuousness of Passion. If there be any dregs in the bottom of the glass, O
Lord, thou son of David: yet silence is thy answer. When we have made our
prayers, it is an happy thing to hear the report of them back from Heaven: but
if we always do not so, it is not for us to be dejected, and to accuse either
our infidelity or thy neglect; since we find here a faithful suitor met with
a gracious Savior, and yet he answered her not a word. If we be poor in
spirit, God is rich in mercy; he cannot send us away empty: yet he will not
always let us feel his condescent, crossing us in our will, that he may
advance our benefit.

It was no small fruit of Christ's silence that the Disciples were hereupon
moved to pray for her: not for a mere dismission; it had been no favor to have
required this, but a punishment; (for if to be held in suspense be miserable,
to be sent away with a repulse is more but for a merciful grant. They saw much
passion in the woman, much cause of passion: they saw great discouragement on
Christ's part, great constancy on hers. Upon all these, they feel her misery,
and become suitors for her unrequested. It is our duty in case of necessity to
intercede for each other; and by how much more familiar we are with Christ, so
much more to improve our interest for the relief of the distressed. We are
bidden to say, Our Father, not mine: yea, being members of one body,

That which urged them to speak for her, is urged to Christ by them for her
obtaining; She cries after us. Prayer is as an arrow: if it be drawn up but a
little, it goes not far; but if it be pulled up to the head, it flies strongly,
and pierces deep. If it be but dribbled forth of careless lips, it falls down
at our foot; the strength of our ejaculation sends it up into Heaven, and
fetches down

Christ would not answer the woman, but does answer the Disciples. Those that
have a familiarity with God shall receive answers, when strangers shall Jesus
his bosom could receive that intelligence which was concealed from the rest.
But who can tell whether that silence or this answer be more grievous? I am not
sent but to the lost sheep of the house of Israel. What is this answer but a
defense of that silence and seeming neglect? Whiles he said nothing, his
forbearance might have been supposed to proceed from the necessity of some
greater thoughts: but now, his answer professes that silence to have proceeded
from a willing resolution not to answer: and therefore he does not vouchsafe so
much as to give to her the answer, but to her solicitors; that they might
return his denial from him to her, who had undertaken to derive her suit to I
am not sent but to the lost sheep of the house of Israel. Like a faithful
Ambassador, Christ has an eye to his commission. That may not be violated,
though to an apparent advantage: whither he is not sent, he may not go. As he,
so all his have their fixed marks set: at these they aim, and think it not
safe to shoot at rovers. In matter of morality it is not for us to stand only
upon inhibitions, avoiding what is forbidden, but upon commands, endeavoring
only what is enjoined. We need no other rule of our life then the intention of
our several stations. And if he that was God, would take no further scope to
himself then the limits of his commission, how much does it concern us frail
men to keep within compass? or what shall become of our lawlesness,

Israel was Jacob's name; from him derived to his posterity: till the division
of the Tribes under Jeroboam, all that nation was Israel: then the Father's
name went to the most (which were ten Tribes,) the name of the Son Juda to the
best, which were two. Christ takes no notice of this unhappy division: he
remembers the ancient name which he gave to that faithful wrestler. It was
this Christ with whom Jacob strove; it was he that wrencht his hip, and changed
his name, and dismissed him with a blessing; and now he cannot forget his old
mercy to the house of Israel. To that only does he profess himself sent. Their
first brood were shepherds, now they are sheep; and those not guarded, not
empastured, Israel, not of Esau; sheep, not goats, not wolves; lost sheep, not
securely impaled in the confidence of their safe condition. Woe were to us if
thou were not sent to us. He is not a Jew which is one without. Every Israelite
is not a true one. We are not of thy fold, if we be not sheep: thou will not
reduce us to thy fold, if we be not lost in our own apprehensions. O Lord, thou
have put a fleece upon our backs, we have lost our selves enough: make us so
sensible of our own wanderings, that we may find thee sent unto us, and may be
happily found of thee.

Has not this poor woman yet done? Can neither the silence of Christ nor Lord,
help me. She which could not in the house get a word of Christ, she that saw
her solicitors (though Christ's own Disciples) repelled, yet she comes. Before
she followed, now she overtakes him; before she sued aloof, now she comes close
to him: no contempt can cast her off. Faith is an undaunted Grace; it has a
strong heart, and a bold forehead: even very denials cannot dismay it, much
less delays. She came not to face, not to expostulate, but to prostrate her
self at his feet: Her tongue worshipped him before, now her knee. The eye of her
Faith saw that Divinity in

Her first suit was for mercy, now for help. There is no use of mercy but in
helpfulness. To be pitied without aid, is but an addition to misery. Who can
blame us, if we care not for an unprofitable compassion?

The very suit was gracious. She says not, Lord, if thou can, help me, as
the father of the Lunatic; but professes the power whiles she beggs the act,

Who now can expect other then a fair and yielding answer to so humble, so
faithful, so patient a suppliant? What can speed well, if a prayer of Faith
from the knees of Humility succeeds not? And yet behold, the further she goes,
the worse she fares: her discouragement is doubled with her suit. It is not
good to take the childrens bread and to cast it to dogs. First, his silence
implied a contempt; then his answer defended his silence; now his speech
expresses and defends his contempt. Lo, he has turned her from a woman to a
dog, and (as it were) spurns her from his feet with an harsh repulse. What
shall we say? is the Lamb of God turned Lion? Does that clear fountain of mercy
run blood? Herod sox; most worthily, he was crafty and wicked: the Scribes and
Pharisees a generation of Vipers; they were venomous and cruel: Judas a Devil;
he was both covetous and treacherous. But here was a woman in distress, and
distress challenges mercy: a good woman, a faithful suppliant, a Canaanitish
Disciple, a Christian Canaanite; yet rated and whipped out for a dog by thee who
were all goodness and mercy? How different are thy ways from ours? Even thy
severity argues favor. The Trial had not been so sharp, if thou had not
found the Faith so strong, if thou had not meant the issue so happy. Thou
had not driven her away as a dog, if thou had not intended to admit

The time was when the Jews were children, and the Gentiles dogs: now the case
is happily altered; the Jews are the dogs, (so their dear and Divine
countryman calls the Concision) we Gentiles are the children. What certainty
is there in an external profession, that gives us only to seem, not to be; at
least the being that it gives is doubtful and temporary? We may be children to
day, and dogs to morrow. The true assurance of our condition is in the decree
and covenant of God on his part, in our Faith and Obedience on ours. How they
of children became dogs, it is not hard to say; their presumption, their Romans
11. 33.
O the depth! That which at the first singled them out from the nations of the
world, has at last singled us out from the world and them. It is not in him
that wills, nor in him that runs, but in God that has mercy. Lord, how
should we bless thy Goodness, that we of dogs are Children? how should we
fear thy Justice, since they of Children are dogs? Oh let not us be
high-minded, but tremble. If they were cut off who crucified thee in thine
humbled estate, what may we expect who crucify thee daily in thy glory?

Now what ordinary patience would not have been over-strained with so
contemptuous Son of David? Did I fly upon thee otherwise then with my prayers
and tears? And if this term were fit for my vileness, yet does it become thy
lips? Is it not sorrow enough to me that I am afflicted with my daughters
misery, but that thou (of whom I hoped for relief) must add to mine affliction
in an unkind reproach? But here is none of all this. Contrarily, her Humility
grants all, her patience overcomes all, Truth, Lord, yet the dogs eat of the
crumbs which fall from their masters Table. The reply is not more witty then
faithful. O Lord, thou art Truth it self; thy words can be no other then
truth: thou have called me a dog, and a dog I am: give me therefore the favor
and privilege of a dog, that I may gather up some crumbs of mercy from under
that table whereat O woman (says my Savior) great is thy Faith. He sees the
root, we the stock. Nothing but Faith could thus temper the heart, thus
strengthen the Soul, thus charm the tongue. O precious Faith! O acceptable
perseverance! It is no marvel if that chiding end in favor: Be it to thee even
as thou will. Never did such Grace go away uncrowned. The

The Deaf and Dumb man cured.
Tire and Sidon was not without a Miracle; neither was his regresse: as the Sun
neither rises nor sets without light. In his entrance he delivers the daughter
of the faithful Syrophoenician; in his egresse he cures the deaf and dumb. He
can no more want work, then that work can want success. Whether the Patient
were naturally deaf and perfectly dumb, or imperfectly dumb and accidentally
deaf, I labor not. Sure I am that he was so deaf that he could not hear of
Christ; so dumb that he could not speak for himself. Good neighbors supply his
ears, his tongue; they bring him to Christ. Behold a Miracle led in by charity,
acted by power, led out by modesty.



There are some deaf and dumb upon necessity, some others upon affectation.

They do not only lend their hand to the deaf and dumb, but their tongue also:
they say for him that which he could not wish to say for himself. Doubtless
they had made signs to him of what they intended, and finding him forward in
his desires, now they speak to Christ for him. Every man lightly has a tongue
to speak for himself; happy is he that keeps a tongue for other men. We are
charged not with Supplications only, but with Intercessions. Herein is both the
largest improvement of our love, and most effectual. No distance

That gracious Savior who is wont to exceed our desires, does more then

He that would be healed of his spiritual infirmities, must be sequestered from
the throng of the world. There is a good use, in due times, of Solitariness.
That Soul can never enjoy God that is not sometimes retired. The modest
Bridegroom of the Church will not impart himself to his Spouse before company.
Or perhaps this secession was for our example of a willing and careful
avoidance of vainglory in our actions. Whence also it is that our Savior
gives an after-charge of secrecy. He that could say, He that does evil hates
the light, eschueth the light even in good. To seek our own glory is not glory.

Is there a spiritual Patient to be cured? Aside with him. To undertake him
before the face of the multitude, is to wound, not to heal him.

Reproof and good counsel must be like our Alms, in secret, so as (if possible)
one ear or hand might not be conscious to the other. As in some cases
Confession, so our Reprehension must be auricular. The discreet Surgeon that
would cure a modest Patient, whose secret complaint has in it more shame then
pain, shuts out all eyes save his own. It is enough for the God of Justice to
Thou did it secretly, but I will do it before all Israel, and before this
Sun. Our limited and imperfect wisdom must teach us to apply private
redresses to private maladies. It is the best remedy that is least seen, and
most felt.

What means this variety of ceremony? O Savior, how many parts of thee are
here active? Thy finger is put into the ear, thy spittle touche^h the tongue,
thine eyes look up, thy lungs sigh, thy lips move to an Ephphatha. Thy word
alone, thy beck alone, thy wish alone, yea the least act of velleity from thee
might have wrought this cure. Why would thou employ so much of thy self in
this work? Was it to show thy liberty in not always equally exercising the
power of thy Deity? in that one-while thine only command shall raise

It did not content thee to put one finger into one ear; but into either ear
would thou put a finger: Both ears equally needed cure, thou would apply
the means of cure to both. The Spirit of God is the finger of God. Then do
thou, O Savior, put thy finger into our ear, when thy Spirit inables us to
Jesu, that can open our ears, and make passage through our ears into our
hearts. Let that finger of thine be put into our ears, so shall our deafness
be removed, and we shall hear not the loud thunders of the Law, but the gentle
whisperings of thy gracious motions to our Souls.

We hear for our selves, but we speak for others. Our Savior was not content

There are those whose ears are open, but their mouths are still shut to God:
they understand, but do not utter the wonderful things of God. There is but
half a Cure wrought upon these men: their ear is but open to hear their own
judgment, except their mouth be open to confess their Maker and Redeemer. O
God, do thou so moisten my tongue with thy Graces, that it may run smoothly as
the pen of a ready writer) to the praise of thy Name. Whiles the finger of our
Savior was on the tongue, in the ear of the Patient, his eye was in Heaven.
Never man had so much cause to look up to Heaven as he: there was his home,
there was his throne. He only was from Heaven, heavenly. Each of us has a
good mind homeward, though we meet with better sights abroad: how much more
when our home is so glorious above the region of our peregrination? But thou, O
Savior, had not only thy dwelling there, but thy seat of Majesty. There the
greatest Angels adored thee: it is a wonder that thine eye could be ever any
where but there. What does thine eye in this but teach ours where to be fixed?
Every good gift and every perfect gift O our father which art in Heaven. There
let us look up to thee. Oh let not our eyes or hearts grovell upon this earth;
but let us fasten them above the hills, whence comes our salvation. Thence let
us acknowledge all the good we receive; thence let us expect all the good we
want.

Why our Savior looked up to Heaven (though he had Heaven in himself) Who is
weak, and I am not weak? who is offended, and I burn not?

Christ was not silent whiles he cured the dumb; his Ephphatha gave life to all
these his other actions. His sighing, his spitting, his looking up to Heaven
were the acts of a man: But his command of the ear and mouth to open was the
act of God. He could not command that which he made not. His word is
imperative, ours supplicatory. He does what he will with us; we do by him what
he thinks good to impart. In this mouth the word cannot be severed from the
success. Our Savior's lips are no sooner opened in his Ephphatha, then the
mouth of the dumb and the ears of the deaf are opened. At once behold here
celerity and perfection. Natural agents work by leisure, by degrees; nothing is
Tell no man.

Those tongues which interceded for his cure, are charmed for the concealment
of it. O Savior, thou know the grounds of thine own commands. It is not for
us to inquire, but to obey: we may not honor thee with a forbidden
celebration. Good meanings have oft-times proved injurious. Those men whose
charity employed their tongues to speak for the dumb man, do now employ the
same tongues to speak of his cure, when they should have been dumb. This
charge, they imagine, proceeds from an humble modesty in Christ; which the
respect to his Honor bids them violate. I know not how we itch


NOW was our Savior walking toward his Passion: his last journey had most
wonders. Jericho was in his way from Galilec to Jerusalem: he balks it not
though it were outwardly cursed; but as the first Joshua saved a Rahab there,
so there the second saves a Zacheus; that an Harlot, this a Publican. The
traveller was wounded as he was going from Jerusalem to Jericho: this man was
taken from his Jericho to the true Jerusalem, and was healed. Not as a
passenger did Christ walk this way, but Jericho: what would become of us, if
thou should stay till we seek thee alone? Even when thou have found us, how
hardly do we follow thee? The work must be all thine: we shall not seek thee,
if thou find us not; we shall not follow thee, if thou draw us not.

Zacheus to be won. As in a drought, when we see some weighty cloud hovering
over us, we say there is rain for some grounds, wheresoever it falls. The
Ordinances of God bode good to some Souls; and happy are they on whom it lights.

How justly is Zacheus brought in with a note of wonder? It is both great and
good news to hear of a Convert. To see men perverted from God to the world,
from truth to heresy, from piety to profaneness, is as common as lamentable;
every night such stars fall: but to see a sinner come home to God, is both
happy and wondrous, to men and Angels. I cannot blame that Philosopher,
fearfully and wonderfully made. But how much greater is the Miracle of our
spiritual regeneration; that a son of wrath, a child of Satan, should be
transformed into the Son and heir of the ever-living God? O God, thou workest
both; but in the one our spirit animates us, in the other thine own.

Yet some things which have wonder in them for their worth, lose it for their
frequence; this has no less rarity in it then excellence. How many painful
Peter's have complained to fish all night, and catch nothing? Many Professors
and few Converts has been ever the lot of the Gospel. God's Jericho, may be
thronged, and yet but one Zacheus. As therefore in the Lottery, when the great
prize comes, the trumpet sounds before it; so the news of a Convert is
proclaimed with, Behold Zacheus. Any Penitent had been worthy of a shout; but
this man by an eminence; a Publican, a chief of the Publicans, rich.

No name under Heaven was so odious as this of a Publican; especially to this
Nation, that stood so high upon their freedom, that every impeachment of it
seemed no less then damnable: insomuch as they ask not, Is it fit, or
needful, but, Is it lawful to pay tribute unto Caesar? Any office of exaction
must needs be heinous to a people so impatient of the yoke. And yet not so much
And behold, Zacheus a Publican. We are all naturally strangers from God; the
best is indisposed to Grace: yet some there are whose very Calling gives them
better advantages. But this catchpole-ship of Zacheus carried extortion in the
face, and in a sort bade defiance to his Conversion: yet behold, from this
Toll-booth is called both Zacheus to Matthew to be an Apostle. We are in the
hand of a cunning workman, that of the knottiest and crookedst timber can make
rafters and seeling for his own house; that can square the marble or flint as
well as the freest stone. Who can now plead the disadvantage of his place, when
he sees a Publican come to Christ? No Calling can prejudice God's gracious
election.

To excel in evil must needs be worse. If to be a Publican be ill, surely to
be an Arch-publican is more. What talk we of the chief of Publicans, when he
that professed himself the chief of Sinners is now among the chief of Saints?
Who can despair of mercy, when he sees one Jericho send both an Harlot and a
Publican to Heaven?

The trade of Zacheus was not a greater rub in his way then his wealth. He that
sent word to John for great news, that the poor receive the Gospel, said also,
How hard is it for a rich man to enter into Heaven? This bunch of the Camel
keeps him from passing the needles eye; although not by any malignity that is
in the creature it self (Riches are the gift of God) but by reason of those
three pernicious hang-byes, Cares, Pleasures, Pride, which too commonly attend
upon Wealth. Separate these, Riches are a blessing. If we can so possess them
that they possess not us, there can be no danger, much benefit in abundance.
All the good or ill of wealth or poverty is in the mind, in the use. He that
has a free and lowly heart in riches, is poor; he that has a proud heart
Zacheus had never been so famous a Convert, if he had been poor; nor so liberal
a Convert, if he had not been rich. If more difficulty, yet more glory was in
the conversion of rich Zacheus.

It is well that wealthy Zacheus was desirous to see Christ. Little do too many
rich men care to see that sight: the face of Caesar in their coin is more
pleasing. This man leaves his bags, to bless his eyes with this prospect. Yet
can I not praise him for this too much; it was not (I fear) out of Faith, but
Curiosity. He that had heard great same of the man, of his Miracles, would
gladly Herod longed for this, and was never the better. Only this I find,
that this Curiosity of the eye, through the mercy of God, gave occasion to the
Belief of the heart. He that desires to see Jesus, is in the way to enjoy him:
there is not so much as a remote possibility in the man that cares not to
behold him. The eye were ill bestowed, if it were only to betray our Souls:
there are no less beneficial glances of it. We are not worthy of this useful
casement of the heart, if we do not thence send forth beams of holy desires,
and thereby re-conveigh profitable and saving Objects.

I cannot marvel if Zacheus were desirous to see Jesus. All the world was not
worth this sight. Old Simeon thought it best to have his eyes closed up Have I
not seen the Lord Jesus? And yet, O Savior, many a one saw thee here, that
shall never see thy face above; yea, that shall call to the hills to hide them
from thy sight. And if we had once known thee according to the flesh,
henceforth know we thee so no more. What an happiness shall it be so to see
thee glorious, that in seeing thee we shall partake of thy glory? Oh blessed
vision, to which all others are but penal and despicable! Let me go into the
mint-house, and see heaps of gold, I am never the richer; let me go to the
picturers,

Zacheus see Jesus, but he could not. It were strange if a man should not find
some let in good desires: somewhat will be still in the way betwixt us and
Christ. Here are two hindrances met; the one internal, the other external; the
stature of the man, the prease of the multitude; the greatness of the prease,
the smalness of the stature. There was great thronging in the streets of
J^richo to see Jesus; the doors, the windows, the bulks were all full. Here are
many beholders, few Disciples. If gazing, if profession were Godliness, Christ
could not want clients: now amongst all these wonderers, there is but one
Zacheus. In vain should we boast of our forwardness to see and hear Christ in
our streets, if we receive him not into our hearts.

Zacheus. Alas! how common a thing it is, by the interposition of the throng of
the world to be kept from the sight of our Jesus? Here a carnal Fashionist
says, Away with this austere scrupulousness, let me do as the most. The
throng keeps this man from Christ. There a superstitious misbeliever says,
What tell you me of an handful of reformed? the whole world is ours. This man
is kept from Christ by the throng. The covetous Mammonist says, Let them that
have leisure be devout; my employments are many, my affairs great. This man
cannot see Christ for the throng. There is no perfect view of Christ but in an
holy secession. The Spouse found not her Beloved till she was past the company;
then she found him whom her Zacheus been but of the common pitch, he might
perhaps have seen Christ's face over his fellows shoulders: now his stature adds
to the disadvantage; his Body did not answer to his Mind; his desires were
high, whiles his body was low. The best is, however smalness of stature was
disadvantageous in a level, yet it is not so at height. A little man, if his
eye be clear, may look as high Pygmee may from the lowest valley see the Sun or
Stars as fully as a Giant upon the highest mountain. O Savior, thou art now in
Heaven: the smalness of our person or of our condition cannot let us from
beholding thee. The Soul has no stature; neither is Heaven to be had with
reaching: only clear thou the eyes of my Faith, and I am high enough.

I regard not the Body: the Soul is the man. It is to small purpose that the
body is a Giant, if the Soul be a dwarf. We have to do with a God that
measures us by our desires, not by our statures. All the streets of Jericho
(however he seemed to the eye) had not so tall a man as Zacheus.

Thou shall not follow a multitude to do evil: we do evil if we lagge in
good. It is held commonly both wit and state for a man to keep his pace: and
that man escapes not censure, who would be forwarder then his fellows. Indeed
for a

Tell me, ye fashionable Christians, that stand upon terms of equality, and so
to run that we may obtain. We obtain not, if we outrun not the multitude.

So far did Zacheus overrun the stream of the people, that he might have
Jesus could pass by. I examine not the kind, the nature, the quality of this
Plant; what Tree soever it had been, Zacheus would have tried to scale it, for
the advantage of this prospect. He has found out this help for his stature,
and takes pains to use it. It is the best improvement of our wit, to seek out
the aptest furtherances for our Souls. Do you see a weak and studious
Christian, that being unable to inform himself in the matters of God, goes to
the cabinet of Heaven, the Priests lips, which shall preserve knowledge? there
is Zacheus in the Sycomore. It is the truest wisdom that helps forward our
Salvation. How witty we are to supply all the deficiencies of Nature? If we be
low, we can add cubits to our stature; if ill-coloured, Zacheus stood still on
the ground, he had never seen Christ; had he not climbed the Sycomore, he had
never climbed into Heaven. O Savior, I have not height enough of my own to see
thee: give me what Sycomore thou will; give me grace to use it, give me an
happy use of that grace.

The more I look at the mercy of Christ, the more cause I see of astonishment.
Zacheus climbs up into the Sycomore to see Jesus: Jesus first sees him,
preventing his eyes with a former view. Little did Zacheus look that Jesus
Jesus should throw up his eyes into the Sycomore, and take notice of that small
despised morsel of flesh, ere Zacheus could find space to distinguish his face
from the rest, was utterly beyond his thought or exspectation. All his hope is
to see, and now he is seen. To be seen and acknowledged is much more then to
see. Upon any solemn occasion many thousands see the Prince, whom he sees not;
and if he please to single out any one whether by his eye or by his tongue,
amongst the prease, it passes for an high favor. Zacheus would have thought it
too much boldness to have asked what was given him. As Jonathan David, so does
God to us, he shoots beyond us. Did he not prevent us with mercy, we might
climb into the Sycomore in vain. If he give Grace to him that does his best, it
is the praise of the giver, not the earning of the receiver. How can we do or
will without him? If he see us first, we live; and if we desire to see him, we
shall be seen of him. Whoever took pains to climb the Sycomore, and came down
disappointed? O Lord, what was there in Zacheus, that thou should look up at
him? a Publican, a sinner, an arch-extortioner; a dwarf in stature, but a Giant
in oppression; a little man, but a great Sycophant; if rich in coin, more rich
in sins and treasures of wrath. Yet it is enough that he desires to see thee:
all these disadvantages cannot hide The eye of the Lord is upon the just; and
he is just that would be so; if not in himself, yet in thee. O Savior, when
Zacheus was

It was much to note Zacheus, it was more to name him. Methinks I see how
Zacheus startled at this, to hear the sound of his own name from the mouth of
Christ: neither can he but think, Does Jesus know me? Is it his voice, or some
others in the throng? Lo, this is the first blink that ever I had of him. I
have heard the fame of his wonderful works, and held it happiness enough for me
to have seen his face; and does he take notice of my person, of my name?
Zacheus knew himself, the more does he wonder that Christ should know him. It
was slander enough for a man to be a friend to a Publican; yet Christ gives
this friendly compellation to the chief of Publicans, and honors him with this
argument of a sudden intireness. The favor is great, but not singular: Every
elect of God is thus graced. The Father knows the childs name: as he calls the
stars of Heaven by their names, so does he his Saints, the stars on earth; and
it is his own rule to his Israel, I have called thee by thy name, thou art
mine. As God's children do not content themselves with a confused knowledge of
him, but aspire to a particular apprehension and sensible application; so does
God again to them: it is not enough that he knows

Had our Savior said no more but, Zacheus, come down, the poor man would have
thought himself taxed for his boldness and curiosity: it were better to be
unknown, then noted for miscarriage. But now the next words comfort him; For I
must this day abide at thine house. What a sweet familiarity was here? as if
Christ had been many years acquainted with Zacheus, whom Zacheus his heart
inviting him, though his mouth did not. Desires are the language of the Soul;
those are heard by him that is the God of spirits.

We dare not do thus to each other, save where we have eaten much salt; we
scarce go where we are invited: though the face be friendly, and the
entertainment great, yet the heart may be hollow. But here, he that saw the
heart, and foreknew his welcome, can boldly say, I must this day abide at thine
house. What a pleasant kind of entire familiarity there is betwixt Christ and
a good heart? If any man open, I will come in, and sup with him. It is much for
the I will so sup with him, that he shall sup with me. Earthly state consists
in strangeness, and affects a stern kind of majesty aloof. Betwixt God and us
though there be infinite more distance, yet there is a gracious affability and
familiar intireness of conversation. O Savior, what do thou else every day
but invite thy self to us in thy Word, in thy Sacraments? who are we that we
should entertain thee, or thou us? dwarfs in Grace, great in nothing but
unworthiness. Thy praise is worthy to be so much the more, as our worth is
less. Thou that biddest thy self to us, bid us be fit to receive thee, and in
receiving thee, happy.

Jesus still prevent the Publican, as in his sight, notice, compell^tion, so in
his invitation too? That other Publican, Levi, bad Christ to his house, but it
was after Christ had bidden him to his Discipleship: Christ had never been
called to his feast, if Levi had not been called into his family. He loved us
first, he must first call us; for he calls us out of love. As in the general
calling of Christianity, if he did not say, Seek ye my face, we could never
say, Thy face, Lord, will I seek: so in the specialties of our main benefits

If Nathanael, when Christ named him, and gave him the memorial token of his
being under the fig tree, could say, Thou art the Son of God; how could Zacheus
do less in hearing himself upon this wild fig tree named by the same lips? How
must he needs think, If he knew not all things, he could not know me; and if he
knew not the hearts of men, he could not have known my secret desires to
entertain him? He is a God that knows me, and a merciful God that invites
himself to me. No marvel therefore, if upon this thought Zacheus Zacheus; but,
I will abide at thine house to day. Neither did Zacheus upon this intimation
sit still and say, When the prease is over, when I have done some errands of my
office; but he hasts down to receive Jesus. The notice of such a guest would
have quickened his speed without a command. God loves not slack and lazy
executions. The Angels of God are described with wings: and we pray to do his
will with their forwardness. Yea even to Judas Christ says, What thou do,
do quickly. O Savior, there is no day wherein thou do not call us by the
voice of thy Gospel: what do we still lingering in the Sycomore? How unkindely
must thou needs take the delays of our Conversion? Certainly, had Zacheus
staid still in the Tree, thou had balked his house as unworthy of thee. What
construction can thou make of our wilful dilations, but as a stubborn
contempt? How can thou but come to us in vengeance, if we come not down to
entertain thee in a thankful obedience?

Yet do I not hear thee say, Zacheus, cast thy self down for have; this was the
counsel of the Tempter to thee; but, Come down in have. And he did accordingly.
There must be no more have then good speed in our performances: we may offend
as well in our heady acceleration, as in our delay. Moses ran so fast down the
hill that he stumbled spiritually, and brake the Tables of God. We may so fast
follow after Justice, that we outrun Charity. It is an unsafe obedience

The speed of his descent was not more then the alacrity of his entertainment.
He made have, and came down, and received him joyfully. The life of hospitality
is cheerfulness. Let our cheer be never so great, if we do not read our welcome
in our friends face as well as in his dishes, we take no pleasure in it.

Can we marvel that Zacheus received Christ joyfully? Who would not have been
glad to have his house, yea himself, made happy with such a guest? Had we been
in the stead of this Publican, how would our hearts have leapt within us for
joy of such a presence? How many thousand miles are

Zacheus was not more glad of Christ then the Jews were discontented. Four
vices met here at once, Envy, Scrupulousness, Ignorance, Pride. Their eye was
Zacheus: yea that very Mercy which they see, torments them.

What a contrariety there is betwixt good Angels and evil men? The Angels
rejoice at that whereat men pout and stomach: men are ready to cry and burst
for anger at that which makes music in Heaven. Oh wicked and foolish elder
brother, that feeds on hunger and his own heart without doors, because his
younger brother is feasting on the fat calf within!

Besides Envy they stand scrupulously upon the terms of Traditions. These sons
of the earth might not be conversed with; their threshold was unclean; Touch me
not, for I am holier then thou. That he therefore, who went for a David's
weakness to abstain from good words whiles the wicked were in place. Let
Justice be done in spite of the world; and in spite of Hell, Mercy.

Ignorance was in part guilty of these scruples: they thought Christ either too
holy to go to a Sinner, or in going made unholy. Foolish men! to whom came he?
To you righteous? Let himself speak: I came not to call the righteous, but
sinners to repentance. Whither should the Physician go but to the sick? the
whole need him not. Love is the best attractive of us; and he to whom much is
forgiven, loves much.



Pride was an attendant of this Ignorance: so did they note Zacheus for a
Sinner,

Thus they stumbled, and fell; but Zacheus stood. All their malicious murmur
could not dishearten his Piety and Joy in the entertaining of Christ. Before
Zacheus lay down as a Sinner, now he stands up as a Convert: sinning is
falling, continuance in sin is lying down, Repentance is rising and standing
up. Yet perhaps this standing was not so much the site of his Constancy or of
his Conversion, as of his Reverence. Christ's affability has not made him
unmannerly; Zacheus stood. And what if the desire of more audibleness raised
him to his feet? In that smalness of stature it was not fit he should lose
ought of his height. It was meet so noble a proclamation should want no
advantage of hearing. Half to the poor; fourfold to the wronged.

This hand sowed not sparingly. Here must needs be much of his own that was
well gotten, whether left by patrimony, or saved by parsimony, or gained by
honest improvement. For when he had restored fourfold to every one whom he had
oppressed, yet there remained a whole half for pious uses: and this he so
distributes, that every word commends his bounty. I give; and what is more
Zacheus did neither cast away, nor return, nor sell, but give. I do give; not,
I will. The prorogation of good makes it thankless. The alms that smell of the
hand, lose the praise. It is twice given that is given quickly. Those that
defer their gifts till their deathbed, do as good as say, Lord, I will give
thee something when I can keep it no longer. Happy is the man that is his own
executor. I give my goods; not another. It is a thankless vanity to be liberal
of another Zacheus meant to give of his extortions, he had not been so careful
of his restitution: now he restores to others, that he may give of his own; I
give half my goods. The Publicans heart was as large as his estate; he was not
more rich in goods then in bounty. Were this example binding, who should be
rich to give? who should be poor to receive? In the straight beginnings of the
Church those beneficences were requisite, which afterward in the larger
elbow-room thereof would have caused much confusion. If the first Corinthians,
every first day of the week to lay aside some pittance for charitable purposes.
We are no Disciples, if we do not imitate Zacheus so far as to give liberally,
according to the proportion of our estate.

Giving is sowing: the larger seeding, the greater crop. Giving to the poor is
foeneration to God: the greater bank, the more interest. Who can fear to be too
wealthy? Time was when men faulted in excess: Proclamations were fain to
restrain the Jews; Statutes were fain to restrain our Ancestors. Now there
needs none of this: Men know how to shut their hands alone. Charity is in more
danger of freezing then of burning. How happy were it for the Church, To the
poor; not to rich heirs. God gives to him that has; we to him that wants. Some
want because they would, whether out of prodigality or idleness; some want
because they must: these are the fit Subjects of our beneficence, not those
other. A poverty of our own making deserves no pity. He that sustains the lewd,
feeds not his belly but his vice. So then this living Legacy of Zacheus is
free, I give; present, I do give; just, my goods, large, half my goods; fit, to
the poor.

Neither is he more bountiful in his gift, then just in his restitution: If I
have take naught from any man by false* accusation, I restore, it fourfold.

It was proper for a Publican to pill and pole the subject, by devising
complaints, and raising causless vexations, that his mouth might be stopped with
fees, either for silence or composition. This had Zacheus often done. Neither
is this If a note of doubt, but of assertion. He is sure of the fact, he is not
sure of the persons: their challenge must help to further his justice. The true
penitence

His Satisfaction is no less liberal then his gift. Had not Zacheus been
careful to pay the debts of his fraud, all had gone to the poor. He would have
done that voluntarily, which the Young man in the Gospel was bidden to do, and
refusing went away sorrowful. Now he knew that his misgotten gain was not for
God's Corban; therefore he spares half, not to keep, but to restore. Zacheus
his good cheer. In vain had he feasted Christ, given to the poor, confessed his
extortions, if he had not made restitution. Woe is me for the paucity of true
Converts. There is much stolen goods; little brought home. Men's hands are like
the fishers Flew, yea like Hell it self, which admits of no return. O God, we
can never satisfy thee; our score is too great, our abilities too little: but
if we make not even with men, in vain shall we look for mercy from thee. To
each his own had been well; but four for one was munificent. In our
transactions of commerce we do well to beat the bargain to the lowest; but in
cases of moral or spiritual payments to God or men, now there must be a
measure, pressed, shaken, running over. In good

Oh mercy and justice well repaid! This day is Salvation come to thine house.
Lo, Zacheus, that which thou give to the poor, is nothing to that which thy
Savior gives to thee. If thou restorest four for one, here is more then
thousands of millions for nothing: were every of thy pence a world, they could
hold no comparison with this bounty. It is but dross that thou give, it is
Salvation that thou receivest. Thou gave in present, thou do not receive in
hope; but, This day is Salvation come to thine house. Thine ill-gotten metalls


THree of the Evangelists have (with one pen) recorded the death of the great
harbinger of Christ, as most remarkable and useful. He was the forerunner of
Christ, as into the world, so out of it: yea, he that made way for Christ into
the world, made way for the name of Christ into the Court of Herod. This Herod
Antipas was son to that Herod who was, and is ever infamous for the massacre at
Bethle^m. Cruelty runs in a blood. The murderer of John the forerunner of
Christ is well descended of him who would have murdered Christ, and, for his
sake, murdered the Infants. Herod heard the fame of Jesus; not till he had
taken off the head of John Baptist. The father of this Herod inquired for
Christ too soon; this too late. Great men should have the best intelligence. If
they improve it to all other uses of either frivolous or civil affairs, with
neglect of spiritual, their judgment shall be so much more as their helps and
means were greater. Whether this Herod were taken up with his Arabian wars
against Arethas his father in law, or whether he were employed in his journey
Rome, I inquire not: but if he were at home, I must wonder how he could be so
long without the noise of Christ. Certainly, it was a sign he had a very
irreligious Court, that none of his Followers did so much as report to him the
Miracles of our Savior; who doubtless told him many a vain tale the while. One
tells him of his brother Philip's coffeehouse; another relates the news of
the Roman Court; another, the angry threats of Arethas; another flatters him
with the admiration of his new mistress, and disparagement of the old: no man
so much as says, Sir, there is a Prophet in your Kingdom that does wonders.
There was not a man in his country that had not been astonished with the fame
of Jesus; yea all Syria and the adjoining regions Herod's Court hears nothing.
Miserable is that Greatness which keeps men from the notice of Christ. How
plain is it from hence, that our Savior kept aloof from the Court? The austere
and eremitical harbinger of Christ, it seems, preached there often, and was heard
gladly, though at last, to his cost; whiles our Savior, who was more sociable,
came not there. He sent a message to that Fox, whose den he would not approach.
Whether it were that he purposely forbore, lest he should give that Tyrant
occasion to revive and perose his fathers suspicion; or whether for that he
would not so much honor a place so infamously graceless and disordered; or
whether by his example to teach us the avoidance of outward pomp and glory.
Surely Herod John Baptist. And now his un-intelligence was not more strange
then his misconstruction; This is John Baptist, whom I beheaded. First he
doubted, then he resolved: he doubted upon others suggestions; upon his own
apprehensions he resolved thus. And though he thought good to set a face on it
to strangers, unto whom is was not safe to bewray his fear; yet to his
domestics he freely discovered his thoughts; This is John Baptist. The
troubled Conscience will many a time open that to familiars, which it hides
from the eyes of others. Shame and fear meet together in guiltiness. How could
he imagine this to be John? That common conceit of transanimation could have no
place here; there could be no Herod himself professes, He is risen from the
dead? He that was a Jew by profession, and knew the story of Elisha's bones, of
the Sareptan's and Shunamite's son, and in all likelihood had now heard of our
Saviors miraculous resuscitation of others, might think this power reflected
upon himself. Even Herod, as bad as he was, believed a Resurrection. Leudness
of life and practice may stand with orthodoxy in some main points of Religion.
Who can doubt of this, when the Devils believe and tremble? Where shall those
men appear whose faces are Christian, but their

Oh the terrors and tortures of a guilty heart! Herod's Conscience told him he
had offered an unjust and cruel violence to an innocent; and now he thinks that
John's ghost haunts him. Had it not been for this guilt of his bosom, why
might he not as well have thought that the same God whose hand is not shortened,
had conferred this power of Miracles upon some other? Now it could be no body
but John that does these wonders: and how can it be (thinks he) but that this
revived Prophet, who does these strange things, will be revenged on me for his
head? He that could give himself life, can more easily take mine: how can I
escape the hands of a now-immortal and impassible

A wicked man needs no other tormentor (especially for the sins of blood) then
his own heart. Revel, O Herod, and feast, and frolic; and please thy self with
dances, and triumphs, and pastimes: thy sin shall be as some Fury that shall
invisibly follow thee, and scourge thy guilty heart with secret lashes, Deliver
me from blood-guiltiness, O God.

What an honor was done to John in this misprision? While that man lived, the
world was apt to think that John was the Christ: now that John is dead, Herod
thinks Christ to be John. God gives to his poor conscionable servants a kind
of reverence and high respect, even from those men that malign them most; so as
they cannot but venerate whom they hate. Contrarily, no wit or power can shield
a lewd man from contempt.

John did no Miracle in his life, yet now Herod thinks he did miracles in his
Resurrection; as supposing that a new supernatural life brought with it a Herod
and these Jews? They can imagine and yield John risen fron the dead, that never
did miracle, and rose not; whereas Christ, who did infinite miracles, and rose
from the dead by his almighty power, is not yielded by them to have risen.
Their over-bountiful misconceit of the servant, is not so injurious as their
niggardly infidelity to the Master. Both of them shall convince and confound
them before the face of God. But, oh yet more blockish Herod! Thy conscience
affrights thee with John's resurrection, and flies in thy face for the cruel
murder of so great a Saint; yet where is thy repentance for so foul a fact? Who
would not have exspected that thou should hereupon Adam, when he found his
heart to strike him for his disobedience, should have run to meet God upon his
knees, and have sued for pardon of his offense: In stead of that, he runs to
hide his head among the bushes. The case is still ours; we inherit both his sin
and his senslesness. Besides the infinite displeasure of God, wickedness makes
the heart incapable of Grace, and impregnable of the means of

Even the very first act of Herod's cruelty was heinous. He was foul enough
with other sins; he added this above all, that he shut up John in prison. The
violence offered to God's messengers is branded for notorious. The Sanctity and
austere carriage of the man won him honor justly from the multitude, and
aggravated the sin: but whatever his person had been, his mission was sacred (
he shall send his messenger; the wrong redounds to the God that sent him. It is
the charge of God, Touch not mine anointed, nor do my Prophets any harm. The
precept is perhaps one, for even Prophets were anointed; but at least next to
violation of Majesty, is the wrong to a Prophet. But what? do I not Herod heard
John gladly? How is it then? Did John take the ear and heart of Herod, and does
Herod bind the hands and feet of John? Does he wilfully imprison whom he
gladly heard? How inconstant is a carnal heart to good resolutions? How little
trust is to be given to the good motions of unregenerate persons? We have known
when even mad dogs have fawned upon their master, yet he has been too wise to
trust them but in chains. As a true friend loves always, so a gracious heart
always affects good: neither can be altered with change of occurrences. But
the carnal man, like an hollow Parasite or a fawning Spaniel, flatters only
for his own turn; if that be once either served or crossed, like a churlish
curre, he is ready to snatch

What then might be the cause of John's bonds, and Herod's displeasure? For
Herodias sake his brother Philips wife. That woman was the subject of Herod's
lust, and the exciter of his revenge. This light huswife ran away with her
Husbands brother; and now doting upon her incestuous lover, and finding John to
be a rub in the way of her licentious adultery, is impatient of his liberty,
and will not rest till his restraint. Resolved sinners are mad upon their lewd
courses and run furiously upon their gainsayers. A Bear robbed of her whelps is
less impetuous. Indeed those that have determined to love their sins more then
their Souls, whom can they care for? Though Herod was wicked enough, yet had
it not been upon Herodias's instigation, he had never imprisoned John.

Importunity of lewd solicitors may be of dangerous consequence, and many times
draws greatness into those ways which it either would not have thought of, or
abhorred. In the remotion of the wicked is the establishment of the throne.

Yet still is this Dame called the wife of Philip. She had utterly left his
bed, and was solemnly coupled to Herod; but all the ritual ceremonies of her
new Nuptials cannot make her other then Philip's wife. It is a sure rule, That
which is originally faulty can never be rectified. The ordination of Marriage
is one for one; They twain shall be one flesh. There cannot be two heads to one
body, nor two bodies to one head. Herod was her Adulterer, he was not her
Husband: Herod's Harlot, Philip's Wife. Yet how does Herod dote on her, that
for her sake he loads John with irons? Whither will not the fury of inordinate
Lust transport a man? Certainly John was of late in Herod's favor. That
rough-hewn Preacher was for a Wilderness, not for a Court: Herod's invitation
drew him thither, his reverence and respects encouraged him there. Now the love
of his Lust has carried him into an hate of Gods Messenger. That man can have
no hold of himself or care of others, who has given the rains to his unruly
concupiscence. He that has once fixed his heart upon the face of an Harlot,
and has beslaved himself to a bewitching Beauty, casts off at once all fear of
God, respect to Laws, shame of the World, regard of his estate,

Herodias her self had first plotted to kill the Baptist; her murderers were
suborned, her ambushes laid. The success failed, and now she works with Herod
for his durance. Oh mavelous hand of the Almighty! John was a mean man for
estate, solitary, guardless, unarmed, impotent: Herodias a Queen, so great that
she swayed Herod himself; and not more great then subtle; and not more great
or subtle then malicious; yet Herodias laid to kill John, and could not. What
an invisible, and yet sure, guard there is about the poor It is better to trust
in the Lord, then to trust in Princes.

It is not more clear who was the Author, then what was the motive of this
imprisonment, the free reproof of Herod's Incest; It is not lawful, etc. Both
the offenders were netled with this bold reprehension. Herod knew the
reputation John carried; his Conscience could not but suggest the foulness of
his own fact: neither could he but see how odious it would seem to persecute a
Prophet for so just a reproof. For the color therefore of so tyrannical an
act, he brands John with Sedition: these presumptuous taxations are a disgrace
and disparagement to Authority. It is no news with wicked Tyrants, to cloak

The fact of Herod was horrible and prodigious; to rob his own Brother of the
partner of his bed; to tear away part of his flesh, yea his body from his
head. So as here was at once in one act, Adultery, Incest, Violence. Adultery,
that he took another wife; Incest, that he took his Brother's; Violence, that
he thus took her, in spite of her Husband. Justly therefore might John say, It
is not lawful for thee. He balked not one of Herod's sins, but reproved Herod
that could daunt the homely, but faithful, messenger of God: as one that came
in the spirit of Elias, he fears no faces, spares no wickedness. There must
meet in Gods ministers Courage and Impartiality. Impartiality, not to make
difference of persons; Courage, not to make spare of the sins of the greatest.
It is an hard condition that the necessity of our Calling casts upon us, in
some cases to run upon the pikes of displeasure. Prophecies were no Burdens, if
they did not expose us to these dangers. We must connive at no evil: Every sin
unreproved becomes ours.

Herod is inwardly vexed with so peremptory a reprehension: and now he seeks to
kill the author. And why did he not (...) He feared the people. The time was,
when he feared John no less then now (...) hates him: he once reverenced him as
a just and holy man, whom now he h^art-burns as an enemy* neither was it any
counterfeit respect, sure the man was then in earnest. What shall we say then?
was it that his inconstant heart was now fetched off by Herodias, and wrought to
a disaffection? or was it with Herod as with Salomon's Sluggard, that at once
would and would not? His thoughts are distracted with a mixed voluntary
contradiction of purposes: as an holy man, and honored of the people, he would
not kill John; he would John should be murdered. What a self-conflicting and
prodigious creature is a wicked man left over to his own thoughts? whiles on
the one side he is urged by his Conscience, on the other by his lustful desires
and by the importunity of Satan. There is no peace, says my God, to the
wicked: and after all his inward broils, he falls upon the worst; so as his
yieldance is worse then his fight. When God sees fit, Herod's tyranny shall
effect that which the wi^e Providence of the Almighty has decreed for his
Servants glory. In the mean while, rubs shall be cast in his way; and this for
one, He feared the people. Herod fears the people, he fears not God. Tell me
then, Herod, what could the people do at the worst? Perhaps, mutiny against
thee, raise arms and tumults, disturb the Government, it may be, shake it off.

What could God do? yea, what not? stir up all his creatures to plague thee,
and when he has done, tumble thee down to Hell, and there torment thee
everlastingly. O fond Herod, that fear where no fear was, and fear not
where there is nothing but terror!

How God fits lewd men with restraints? If they be so godless as to regard his
creature above himself, he has external buggs to affright them withal;

No man is so great as to be utterly exempted from fear. The Jews feared Herod;
Herod feared the Jews: the healthful fear sickness; the free servitude: the
people fear a Tyrants oppression and cruelty; the Tyrant fears the peoples
mutiny and insurrection. If there have been some so great as to be above

Why did Herod fear the people? They held John for a Prophet. And this opinion
was both common and constant: even the Scribes and Pharisees durst not say, his
Baptism was from men. It is the wisdom and goodness of God, ever to give his
children favor somewhere. If Jezebel hate Elias, Ahab shall for the time
honor him: and if Herod hate the Baptist, and would kill him, yet the people
reverence him. Herod's malice would make him away; the peoples reputation keeps
him alive. As wise Princes have been content to maintain Herod and his subjects
for his own holy ends. Else certainly, if all wicked men should conspire in
evil, there could be no being upon earth; as contrarily, if evil spirits did
not accord, Hell could not stand. Oh the unjust and fond partiality of this
people! They all generally applaud John for a Prophet, yet they receive not his
message. Whose Prophet was John, but of the Highest? what was his errand, but
to be the way-maker unto Christ? what was he but the Voice of that Eternal Word
of his Father? what was the found of that Voice but, Behold the Lamb of God: He
that comes after me is greater then I, Yet they honor the servant, and reject
the Master: they contemn that Prince whose Ambassador they reve^ence. How could
they but argue, John is a Prophet; he speaks from God; his words must be true;
he tells us this is the Lamb of God, the Messiah that should ^ome to redeem the
World: this must then needs be he; we will look for no other? Yet this perverse
people receives John, and rejects Jesus. There is ever an absurdity in
unbelief, whiles it separates those relations and respects which can never in
Nature be disjoined. Thus it readily apprehends God as merciful in pardoning,
not as just in punishing; Christ as a Savior, not as a Judge. Thus we
ordinarily (in a contrariety to these Jews) profess to receive the Master, He
that despises you, despises me.

That which Herod in policy durst not, in wine he dares do: And that which
God had restrained till his own time, now in his own time he permits to be
done. The day was, as one of the Evangelists styles it, convenient: if for the
purpose of Herodias, I am sure for God's; who having determined to glorify
himself by John's martyrdom, will cast it upon a time when it may be most
notified, Herod's birthday. All the Peers of the Country, perhaps of the
neighbor Nations, are now assembled. Herodias could not have found out a time
more fit to blazon her own shame and cruelty then in such a confluence. The
wise Providence

Herod's birthday is kept; and so was Pharaoh's: both of them with blood.
These personal stains cannot make the practice unlawful. Where the man is good,
the Birth is memorable.

What blessing have we, if life be none? and if our life be a blessing, why
should it not be celebrated? Excess and disorder may blemish any Solemnity; but
that cleaves to the act, not to the institution.

Herod's birthday was kept with a feast, and this Feast was a Supper. It was

Those that are drunken, are drunk in the night. There is a kind of shame in
Sin, even where it is committed with the stiffest resolution, at least there
was wont to be: if now Sin be grown impudent, and Justice bashful, woe be to us.

Herod's Birthday, besides the Feast, there is music and dancing, and that by
Salome the daughter of Herodias. A meet Daughter for such a Mother, bred
according to the disposition of so immodest a Parent. Dancing in it self, as it
is a set, regular, harmonious motion of the body, cannot be unlawful, more then
walking or running; Circumstances may make it sinful. The wanton gesticulations
of a Virgin in a wild assembly of Gallants warmed with wine, could be no other
then riggish and unmaidenly. It is not so frequently seen that the child
follows the good Qualities of the Parent; it is seldom seen that it follows not
the evil. Nature is the soil; good and ill Qualities are the herbs and weeds:
the soil bears

Herodias and Salome have what they desired. The dance pleased Herod well:
those indecent motions that would have displeased any modest eye, (though what
should a modest eye do at Herod's Feast?) over-pleased Herod. Well did
Herodias know how to fit the tooth of her Paramour, and had therefore purposely
so composed the carriage and gesture of her Daughter, as it might take best:
although doubtless the same action could not have so pleased from another.
Herod saw in Salome's face and fashion, the image of her whom he doted

What a strange transportation was this? Whatsoever thou shall ask: half a
Kingdom for a dance? Herod, this pastime is over-pay'd for; there is no
proportion in this remuneration; this is not bounty, it is prodigence. Neither
does this pass under a bare Promise only, but under an Oath, and that solemn
Herod's gross impotence, and yet second it with a worse giving away their
precious Souls for a short pleasure of sin? What is half a Kingdom, yea a whole
World, to a Soul? So much therefore is their madness greater, as their loss is
more.

So large a boon was worthy of a deliberation. Salome consults with her Mother
upon so ample and ratified a promise. Yet so much good nature and filial
respect was in this wanton Damsel, that she would not carve her self of her
option, but takes her Mother with her. If Herodias were infamously

Oh that we could be so officious to our good and Heavenly Father, as she was
to an earthly and wicked Mother; not to ask, not to undertake ought without his
allowance, without his directions: that when the world shall offer us
whatsoever our heart desires, we could run to the Oracles of God

Oh the wonderful strength of malice! Salome was offered no less then half the
Kingdom of Herod, yet chooses to ask the head of a poor Preacher. Nothing is so
sweet to a corrupt heart as revenge; especially when it may bring with it a
full scope to a dear sin. All worldlings are of this diet: they had rather sin
freely for a while and dye, then refrain and live happily,

What a suit was this? Give me here in a Charger the head of John Baptist. It
is not enough for her to say, Let John's head be cut off; but, Give me it in a
Charger. What a service was here to be brought into a Feast, especially to a
Woman? a dead man's head swimming in blood. How cruel is a wicked heart, that
can take pleasure in those things which have most horror?

Oh the importunity of a galled conscience! Herodias could never think her self
safe till John was dead; she could never think him dead till his head were off;
she could not think his head was off, till she had it brought her in a platter:
a guilty heart never thinks it has made sure enough. Yea, even after the head

Herod was sorry, and no doubt in earnest; in the midst of his cups and
pleasance. I should rather think his jollity counterfeited then his grief. It
is true, Herod was a fox; but that subtle beast dissembles not always: when he
runs away from the dogs, he means as he does. And if he were formerly willing
to have killed John, yet he was unwillingly willing; and so far as he was
unwilling to kill him as a Prophet, as a just man, so far was he sorry that
he must be killed. Had Herod been wise, he had not been perplexed. Had he been
so wise as to have engaged himself lawfully and within due limits, he had

But here the act was not past, though the word were past. It was his
misconceived intanglement that caused this sorrow; which might have been
remedied by flying off. A threefold cord tied him to the performance. The
conscience of his Oath, the respect to his guests, a loathness to discontent
Herodias and her daughter. Herod had so much religion as to make scruple of an
Oath; not so much as to make scruple of a Murder. No man casts off all Justice
and Piety at once; but whiles he gives himself over to some sins, he sticks at

But, oh fond Herod! what needed this unjust scrupulousness? Well and safely
might thou have shifted the bond of thine Oath with a double evasion. One,
that this generality of thy promise was only to be construed of lawful acts
and motions: That only can we do, which we can justly do; Unlawfulness is in

In the mean while, if an Herod made such conscience of keeping an unlawful
Oath, how shall he in the day of judgment condemn those Christians which make
no conscience of Oaths lawful, just, necessary? Woe is me, one sels an oath for
a bribe, another lends an oath for favor, another casts it away

Next to his Oath is the respect to his Honor. His guests heard his deep
engagement, Herod's table? Had they had but common civility, finding Herod
perplexed, they had acquitted him by their disswasions, and would have
disclaimed the exspectation of so bloody a performance: but they rather
Herodias) make way for so slight and easy a condescent. Even godly Princes
have complained of the iniquity of their heels: how much more must they needs
be ill attended, that give encouragements and examples of leudness?

Neither was it the least motive that he was loath to displease his Mistress.
The Damsel had pleased him in her dance; he would not discontent her in
breaking his word. He saw Herodias in Salome: the suit, he knew, was the
mothers, though in the daughters lips: both would be displeased in falling off;
both would be gratified in yielding. Oh vain and wicked Herod! He cares not to
offend God, to offend his Conscience; he cares to offend a wanton Mistress.

A good heart will rather fall out with all the world then with God, then with
his Conscience.

The misgrounded sorrow of worldly hearts does not withhold them from their
intended sins. It is enough to vex, not enough to restrain them. Herod was
sorry, but he sends the executioner for John's head. One act has made Herod a
Tyrant, and John a Martyr. Herod a Tyrant, in that without all legal
proceedings, without so much as false witnesses, he takes off the head of a
man, of a Propher. It was Lust that carried Herod into Murder. The proceedings
of sin are more hardly avoided then the entrance. Whosoever gives himself leave to

John a Martyr, in dying for bearing witness to the Truth; Truth in Life, in
Judgment, in Doctrine. It was the holy purpose of God, that he which had
baptized with water should now be baptized with blood. Never did God mean that
his best Children should dwell always upon earth: should they stay here,
wherefore has he provided Glory above? Now would God have John delivered from
a double prison; of his own, of Herod's; and placed in the glorious liberty of
his sons. His head shall be taken off, that it may be crowned with glory.
Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of his Saints.

Herod, but) of the Baptist! Now does John enter into his joy; and in this name
is this day ever celebrated of the Church. This blessed Forerunner of Christ
said of himself, I must decrease. He is decreased indeed, and now grown shorter
by the head; but he is not so much decreased in stature, as increased in glory.
For one minutes pain he is possessed of endless joy; and as he came before his
Savior into the world, so is he gone before him into Heaven.

The head is brought in a Charger. What a dish was here for a Feast? How
prodigiously insatiable is the cruelty of a wicked heart! O blessed service fit
for the table of Heaven! It is not for thee, O wicked Herod, nor for thee,
malicious Herodias; it is a dish precious and pleasing to the God of Heaven, to
the blessed Angels, who looked upon that head with more delight in his constant
fidelity, then the beholders saw it with horror, and Herodias with contentment
of revenge.

It is brought to Salome as the reward of her dance; she presents it to her
Mother as the dainty she had longed for. Methinks I see how that chaste and holy
countenance was tossed by impure and filthy hands; that true and faithful
Herod's guests.

Oh the wondrous judgments and incomprehensible dispositions of the holy,
wise, Almighty God! He that was sanctified in the womb, born and conceived with
so much note and miracle, ( what manner of child^ shall this be?) lived with so
much reverence and observation, is now, at midnight, obscurely murdered in a
close prison, and his head brought forth to the insultation and irrision of
Harlots and Ruffians. O God, thou know what thou have to do with thine own.
Thus thou suffer thine to be misused and slaughtered here below, that thou

The five Loaves and two Fishes.
WHat flocking there was after Christ which way soever he went? How did the
Kingdom of Heaven suffer an holy violence in these his followers? Their
importunity drove him from the land to the sea. Tiberias, they followed him
with their eyes; and when they saw which way he bent, they followed him so fast
on foot, that they prevented his landing. Whether it were that our Savior
stayed somewhile upon the water (as that which yielded him more quietness, and
freedom of respiration;) or whether the foot-passage (as it often falls out) were
the shorter cut, by reason of the compasses of the water and the many elbows of
the land, I enquire not: sure I am, the wind did not so swiftly drive on the
ship, as desire and zeal drove on these eager clients. Well did Christ see them
all the way; well did he know their steps, and guided them: and now he
purposely goes to meet them, whom he seemed to flee. Nothing can please God

Judaea was not large, but populous: it could not be but there must be amongst
so many men many diseased: it is no marvel if the report of so miraculous and
universal sanations drew customers. They found three advantages

That our Savior might approve himself every way beneficent, he that had

This is a desert place, and the time is now past: Send the multitude away,
that they may go into the villages and buy themselves victuals. How well it
becomes even spiritual guides to regard the bodily necessities of God's people?
This is not directly in our charge, neither may we leave our sacred
ministration to serve Tables. But yet, as the bodily father must take care for
the Soul of his child; so must the spiritual have respect to the Body. This is
all that the world commonly looks after; measuring their Pastors more by their
dishes then by their doctrine or conversation: as if they had the charge

The place was desert; the time, evening. Doubtless our Savior made choice of
both these, that there might be both more use and more note of his Miracle. Had
it been in the morning, their stomach had not been up; their feeding had been
unnecessary. Had it been in the Village, provision either might have been made,
or at least would have seemed made by themselves. But now that it was both
desert and evening, there was good ground for the Disciples to move, and for
Christ to work their sustentation. Then only may Cast thy burden upon the
Lord, and he shall sustain thee. If it be not a burden, it is no casting it
upon God. Hence it is that Divine aid comes ever in the very upshot and
exigence of our trials; when we have been exercised, and almost tired with long
hopes, yea with despairs of success: that it may be both more longed for ere it
come, and when it comes more welcome.

Oh the Faith and Zeal of these clients of Christ! They not only follow him
from the City into the Desert, from delicacy to want, from frequence to
solitude;

Nothing is more hard for an healthful man to forget then his belly; within few
hours this will be sure to solicit him, and will take no denials. Yet such
sweetness did these hearers find in the spiritual repast, that they thought
not on the bodily: the Disciples pitied them, they had no mercy on themselves.
By how much more a man's mind is taken up with Heavenly things, so much less
shall he care for earthly. What shall earth be to us, when we are all Spirit?
And in the mean time, according to the degrees of our intellectual elevations,
shall be our neglect of bodily contentments.

The Disciples think they move well: Send them away, that they may buy Here was
a strong Charity, but a weak Faith. A strong Charity, in that they would have
the people relieved; a weak Faith, in that they supposed they could not
otherwise be so well relieved. As a man when he sees many ways lie before him,
takes that which he thinks both fairest and nearest; so do they: this way of
relief lay openest to their view, and promised most. Well might they have
thought, It is as easy for our Master to feed them, as to heal them; there is
an equal facility in all things to a supernatural power: Send them away. In all
our projects and suits we are still ready to move for that which is most
obvious, most likely, when sometimes that is less agreeable to the will of God.

The All-wise and Almighty arbiter of all things has a thousand secret means
to honor himself in his proceedings with us. It is not for us to carve boldly
for our selves; but we must humbly depend on the disposal of his Wisdom and
Mercy.

Our Saviors answer gives a strange check to their motion; They need not
depart. Not need? They had no victuals; they must have; there was none to be
had. What more need could be? He knew the supply which he intended, Give ye
them to eat. Nothing gives what it has not. Had they had victuals, they had
not called for a dismission; and not having, how should they give? It was thy
wisdom, O Savior, thus to prepare thy Disciples for the intended Miracle: Thou
would not do it abruptly, without an intimation both of the purpose of it,
and the necessity. And how modestly do thou undertake it, without noise,
without ostentation? I hear thee not say, I will give them to eat; but, Give
ye: as if it should be their act, not thine. Thus sometimes it pleases thee to
require of us what we are not able to perform; either that thou may show us
what we cannot do, and so humble us; or that thou majest

Thou bidst us, impotent wretches, to keep thy royal Law. Alas! what can we
Sinners do? there is not one letter of those thy Ten words that we are able to
keep. This charge of thine intends to show us not our strength, but our
weakness. Thus thou would turn our eyes both back to what we might have
done, to what we could have done; and upwards to thee in whom we have done it,
in whom we can do it. He wrongs thy Goodness and Justice that Egyptian
taskmasters, requiring the brick, and not giving the straw. But in bidding us
do what we cannot, thou inablest us to do what thou biddest. Thy Precepts
under the Gospel have not only an intimation of our duty, but an habilitation
of thy power: as here, when thou badest the Disciples to give to the multitude,
thou meantest to supply unto them what thou commandedst to give.

Our Savior has what he would; an acknowledgement of their insufficiency: We
have here but five loaves and two fishes. A poor provision for the family of
the Lord of the whole earth: Five loaves, and those barley; two fishes,
Israelites, that rainedst down those showrs of Manna round about their camp:
and do thou take up (for thy self and thy meiny) with five barley loaves, and
two little fishes? Certainly this was thy will, not thy need: to teach us, that
this body must be fed, not pampered. Our belly may not be our master, much less
our God; or if it be, the next word is, whose glory is their shame, whose end
damnation. It is noted as the crime of the rich glutton, that he fared
deliciously every day. Philoxenus, or an Apitius, or Vitellius, or those other
monsters of the palate? the true sons of those first Parents that killed
themselves with their teeth?

Neither was the quality of these victuals more course then the quantity But of
five loaves and two fishes; and well might, in respect of so many thousand
mouths. A little food to an hungry stomach, does rather stir up appetite then
satisfy it: as a little rain upon a droughty soil does rather help to scorch
then refresh it. When we look with the eye of Sense or Reason upon any Object,
we shall see an impossibility of those effects which Faith can easily
apprehend, and Divine power more easily produce. Carnal minds are ready to
measure all our hopes by humane possibilities; and when they fail, to despair
of success: where true Faith measures them by Divine power, and therefore can
never be disheartened. This Grace is for things not seen, and whether beyond
hope, or against it.

Bring them hither to me. How much more easy had it been for our Savior to
fetch the loaves to him, then to multiply them? The hands of the Disciples
shall bring them, that they might more fully witness both the Author, and
manner of the instant Miracle. Had the loaves and fishes been multiplied
without this bringing, perhaps they might have seemed to have come by the
secret provision of the guests; now there can be no question either of the act,
or of the agent. As God takes pleasure in doing wonders for men, so he loves to
be acknowledged in the great works that he does. He has no reason to part with
his own glory; that is too precious for him to lose, or for his creature to
embezel. And how justly

There need no more words. I do not hear the Disciples stand upon the terms of
their own necessity; Alas! Sir, it is too little for our selves; whence shall
we then relieve our own hunger? Give leave to our Charity to begin at home. But
they willingly yield to the command of their Master; and put themselves upon
his Providence for the sequel. When we have a charge from God, it is not for us
to stand upon self-respects; in this case there is no such sure

He that is the Master of the Feast marshals the guests; He commanded the
multitude to sit down on the grass. They obey, and exspect. Oh marvelous Faith!
So many thousands sit down, and address themselves to a meal, when they saw
nothing but five poor barley loaves and two small fishes. None of them say, Sit
down? to what? Here are the mouths, but where is the meat? We can soon be set,
but whence shall we be served? Ere we draw our knives, Give us our daily bread,
when we have it in our cupbord. But when we have nothing, when we know not how
or whence to get any thing, then to depend upon an

The guests are set full of expectation. He that could have multiplied the

He could as well have multiplied the loaves whole; why would he rather do it
in the breaking? Was it to teach us that in the distribution of our goods we
There is that scatters, and yet increases, says Solomon: Yea there is no
man but increases by scattering. It is the grain thrown into the several
furrows of the earth, which yields the rich interest unto the Husbandman: that
which is tied up in his sack, or heaped in his granary, decreaseth by keeping.
He that sows liberally shall reap liberally.

Away with our weak distrust. If Wealth came by us, giving were the way to
want: now that God gives to the giver, nothing can so sure enrich us as our
beneficence. He multiplied the bread not to keep, but to give; He gave it to
the Disciples. And why not rather by his own hand to the multitude, that
Israelites see and hear that thou could deliver that dreadful message with
thine own mouth, Moses. Use of means derogates nothing from the efficacy of the
principal Agent, yea adds to it. It is a strange weakness of our spiritual
eyes, if we can look but to the next hand. How absurd had these guests been, if
they had termined the thanks in the servitours, and had said, We have it from
you, whence ye had it is no part of our care: we owe this favor to you; if you
owe it to your Master, acknowledge your obligations to him, as we do unto you.
But since they well knew that the Disciples might have handled this bread long
enough ere any such effect could have followed, they easily find to whom they
are beholden. Our Christian wisdom must teach us, whosoever be the means, to
reserve

He gave the bread then to his Disciples, not to eat, not to keep, but to
distribute. It was not their particular benefit he regarded in this gift, but
the good of many.

In every Feast each servitour takes up his dish, not to carry it aside into a

Accordingly the Disciples set this fare before the guests. I do not see so
much as Judas reserve a share to himself, whether out of hunger or distrust.
Had not our Savior commanded so free a distribution, their self-love would
easily have taught them where to begin. Nature says, First thy self, then thy
friends: either extremity or particular charge gives Grace occasion to alter
the

I know not now whether more to wonder at the miraculous eating, or the
miraculous leaving. Here were a whole host of guests, five thousand men; and in
all likelihood no fewer women and children. Perhaps some of these only looked
on. Nay, they did all eat. Perhaps every man a crum, or a bit. Nay, they did
eat to satiety; all were satisfied. So many must needs make clean work; of so
little there could be left nothing. Yea, there were fragments remaining.
Perhaps some crumbs or crusts, hardly to be discerned, much less gathered. Nay,
twelve baskets full: more remained then was first set down.

Howsoever, here is a marvelous provision made, a marvelous bounty of that

Those that depend upon God, and busy themselves in his work, shall not want a
due purveyance in the very desert. Our straight and confined beneficence
reaches so far as to provide for our own: those of our Domestics which
labor in our service do but justly expect and challenge their diet; whereas
day-labourers are oft-times at their own finding. How much more will that God
who is infinite in mercy and power, take order for the livelihood of those that
attend him? We see the birds of the air provided for by him; how rarely have
we found any of them dead of hunger? yet what do they but what they are
carried unto by natural instinct? How much more Israelites be fed with Manna,
Eliah by the Ravens, the Widow by her multiplied meal and oil, Christ's clients
in the wilderness with loaves and fishes? O God, whiles thou do thus promerit
us by thy Providence, let not us wrong thee by distrust.

God's undertakings cannot but be exquisite; those whom he professes to feed
must needs have enough. The measure of his bounty cannot but run over. Does he
take upon him to prepare a table for his Israel in the desert? the bread shall
be the food of Angels, the flesh shall be the delicates of Princes, Manna and
Quails. Does he take upon him to make wine for the marriage feast of Cana?
there shall be both store and choice; the vintage yields poor stuff to this.
Will he feast his Auditors in the wilderness? if they have not dainties, they
shall have plenty; They were all satisfied. Neither yet, O Savior, is thy hand
closed. What abundance of heavenly doctrine do thou set before us? how are we
feasted, yea pampered with thy celestial delicacies? Not according to our
meanness, but according to thy state, are we fed. Thrifty and niggardly
collations are not for Princes. We are full of thy goodness; oh, let our

I do gladly wonder at this Miracle of thine, O Savior, yet so as that I
forget not mine own condition. Whence is it that we have our continual
provision? One and the same munificent hand does all. If the Israelites were
fed with Manna in the desert, and with corn in Canaan, both were done by the
same power and bounty. If the Disciples were fed by the loaves multiplied, and
we by the grain multiplied, both are the act of one Omnipotence. What is this
but a perpetual miracle, O God, which thou workest for our preservation?
Without thee, there is no more power in the grain to multiply then in the loaf:
it is thou that give it a body at thy pleasure, even to every it is thou that
give fullness of bread and cleanness of teeth. It is no reason thy goodness
should be less magnified because it is universal.

One or two baskets could have held the five loaves and two fishes; not less
then twelve can hold the remainders. The Divine munificence provides not for
our necessity only, but for our abundance, yea superfluity. Envy and ignorance,
whiles they make God the author of enough, are ready to impute the surplussage
to another cause; as we commonly say of wine, that the liquor is God's, the
excess Satan's.

Thy table, O Savior, convinces them, which had more taken away then set

Those fragments were left behind. I do not see the people, when they had
filled their bellies, cramming their pockets, or stuffing their wallets; yet
the place was desert, and some of them doubtless had far home.

It becomes true Disciples to be content with the present, not too solicitous
for the future. O Savior, thou did not bid us beg bread for to morrow,

Even these fragments (though but of barley loaves and fish-bones) may not be
left in the desert, for the compost of that earth whereon they were increased;
but by our Saviors holy and just command are gathered up. The liberal
housekeeper of the world will not allow the loss of his orts: the childrens
bread may not be given to dogs: and if the crumbs fall to their share, it is
because their smalness admits not of a collection. If those who out of
obedience or due thrift have thought to gather up crumbs, have found them
pearls, I wonder

Who gathered up these fragments but the twelve Apostles, every one his

It was our Saviors just care that those offals should not perish: but he well
knew that a greater loss depended upon those scraps; a loss of glory to the
omnipotent worker of that Miracle. The feeding of the multitude was but

Here was not any morsel or bone that was not worthy to be a relick; every the
least parcel whereof was no other then miraculous. All the ancient monuments of
Gods supernatural power and mercy were in the keeping of Aaron and his sons.
There is no servant in the Family but should be thriftily careful for his
Masters profit; but most of all the Steward, who is particularly charged

The Walk upon the Waters.
ALL elements are alike to their Maker. He that had well approved his power on
the Land, will now show it in the Air and the Waters; he that had preserved
the multitude from the peril of hunger

Where do we ever else find any compulsion offered by Christ to his Disciples?
He was like the good Centurion; he said to one, Go, and he goes. When he did
but call them from their nets they came; and when he sent them by paires into
the Cities and Country of Ju^aea to preach the Gospel, they went. There was
never errand whereon they went unwillingly: only now he constrained them to
depart. We may easily conceive how loath they were to leave him; whether out of
love, or of common civility. Peter's tongue did but (when it was) speak the
heart of the rest; Master, thou know that I love thee. Who could choose but
be in love with such a Master? and who can willingly part from what he loves?
But had the respects been only common and ordinary, how unfit might it seem to
leave a Master now toward night, in a wild place, amongst strangers,
unprovided of the means of his passage? Where otherwise therefore he needed but
to bid, now he constrains. O Savior, it was ever thy manner to call all men
unto thee; Come to me, all that labor and are heavy laden. When did thou
ever drive any one from thee? Neither had it been so now, but to draw them
closer unto thee, whom thou seemedst for the time to abdicate. In the mean
while, I know not whether more to excuse their unwillingness, or to applaud
their obedience. As it shall be fully In thy presence (O Savior) is the
fullness of joy. Once, when thou askedst these thy Domestics whether they also
would depart, it was answered thee by one tongue for all, Master, whither
should we go from thee? thou have the words of eternal life. What a death was
it then to them to be compelled to leave thee? Sometimes it pleases the Divine
goodness to lay upon his servants such commands as savor of harshness and
discomfort; which yet both in his intention and in the event are no other then
gracious and sovereign. The more difficulty was in the charge, the more praise
was in the obedience. I do not hear them stand upon the terms of capitulation
with their Master, nor pleading importunately for their stay; but instantly

Neither will the multitude be gone without a dismission. They had followed him
whiles they were hungry, they will not leave him now they are fed. Fain would
they put that honor upon him, which to avoid he is fain to avoid them: gladly
would they pay a Kingdom to him as their shot for their late

Besides this reservedness, it was devotion that drew Jesus aside. He went
alone up to the mountain to pray. Lo, thou, to whom the greatest throng was a
solitude in respect of the fruition of thy Father, thou who were incapable of
distraction from him with whom thou were one, would yet so much act

The evening was come; the Disciples looked long for their Master, and loath
they were to have stirred without him: but his command is more then the
strongest wind to fill their sails, and they are now gone. Their expectation
made not the evening seem so long as our Saviors devotion made it seem short
to him. He is on the mount, they on the sea: yet whiles he was in the mount
praying, and lifting up his eyes to his Father, he fails not to cast them
about upon his Disciples tossed on the waves. Those all-seeing eyes admit of no
limits. At once he sees the highest Heavens, and the midst

How much more do thou now, O Savior, from the height of thy glorious
advancement behold us thy wretched servants tossed on the unquiet sea of this
World, and beaten with the troublesome and threatening billows of Affliction?
Thou foresawest their toil and danger are thou dismissedst them, and purposedly
sendest them away that they might be tossed. Thou that could prevent our
sufferings by thy power, wilt permit them in thy wisdom, that thou may
glorify thy mercy in our deliverance, and confirm our Faith by the issue

How do all things now seem to conspire to the vexing of thy poor Disciples?
The night was sullen and dark, their Master was absent, the sea was boistrous,
the winds were high and contrary. Had their Master been with them, howsoever
the elements had raged, they had been secure. Had their Master been away, yet
if the sea had been quiet or the winds fair, the passage might have been
endured. Now both season, and sea, and wind, and their Master's desertion had
agreed to render them perfectly miserable. Sometimes the Providence of God has
thought good so to order it, that to his best servants there appears no
glimpse of comfort; but so absolute vexation, as if My God, my God, why have
thou for saken me? Yet in all these extremities of misery, our gracious God
intends nothing but his greater glory and ours; the Triumph of our Faith, the
crown of our Victory.



At their entrance into the ship, at the arising of the tempest, at the
shutting in of the evening, there was no news of Christ: but when they have
been all the night long beaten not so much with storms and waves as with their
own thoughts, now in the fourth watch, (which was near to the morning) Jesus
came unto them, and purposely not till then; that he might exercise their
patience; that he might inure them to wait upon Divine Providence in cases of

O Savior, our extremities are the seasons of thine aid. Thou came at last;
but yet so, as that there was more dread then joy in thy presence. Thy

Thou God of Elements passedst through the air, walkedst upon the waters.
Whether thou meantest to terminate this Miracle in thy body, or in the waves
which thou trodest upon; whether so lightning the one, that it should make no
impression in the liquid waters, or whether so consolidating the other, that
the pavemented waves yielded a firm causey to thy sacred feet to walk on, I
neither determine nor inquire: thy silence rules mine; thy power was in either
miraculous; neither know I in whether to adore it more. But withal give me
leave to wonder more at thy passage then at thy coming. Wherefore came thou
but to comfort them? and wherefore then would thou pass by them,

O Savior, we may not always measure thy meaning by thy semblance: sometimes
what thou most intendest, thou show least. In our Afflictions thou turnest
thy back upon us, and hidest thy face from us, when thou most mindest our
distresses. So Jonathan shot the arrows beyond David, when he meant them to
him. So Joseph calls for Benjamin into bonds, when his heart

If thou pass by us whiles we are struggling with the tempest, we know it is
not for want of mercy. Thou can not neglect us; Oh let not us distrust thee.

What Object should have been so pleasing to the eyes of the Disciples as their
Master; and so much the more as he showed his Divine power in this miraculous
walk? But lo, contrarily, they are troubled: not with his presence, but with
this form of presence.

The supernatural works of God, when we look upon them with our own

And why are they thus troubled? They had thought they had seen a Spirit. That
there have been such apparitions of Spirits, both good and evil, has ever been
a Truth undoubtedly received of Pagans, Jews, Christians; although

But say it had been what they mistook it for, a Spirit; why should they
Elisha's servant, seen more with them then against them; a sure, though
invisible, guard of more powerful Spirits, and themselves under the protection
of the God of Spirits: so as they might have bidden a bold defiance to all the
powers of Darkness. But, partly their Faith was yet but in the bud; and partly
the presentation of this dreadful Object was sudden, and without the respite
of a recollection and settlement of their thoughts.

Oh the weakness of our frail Nature, who in the want of Faith, are affrighted
with the visible appearance of those adversaries whom we profess daily to
resist and vanquish, and with whom we know the Decree of God has matched us in
an everlasting conflict! Are not these they that ejected Devils by their
command? Are not these of them that could say, Master, the evil spirits are
subdued to us? Yet now when they see but an imagined spirit, they fear. What
power there is in the eye to betray the heart!

Whiles Goliath was mingled with the rest of the Philistin host, Israel camped
boldly against them; but when that Giant stalks out single between the two
armies, and fills and amases their eyes with his hideous stature, now they

Neither is our weakness more conspicuous then thy mercy, O God, in restraining
these spiritual enemies from these dreadful and ghastly representations of
themselves to our eyes. Might those infernal Spirits have liberty to appear how
and when and to whom they would, certainly not many would be left in their
wits, or in their lives. It is thy power and goodness to frail mankind that
they are kept in their chains, and reserved in the darkness of their own
spiritual being, that we may both oppugn and subdue them unseen.

But oh the deplorable condition of reprobate souls! If but the imagined sight
of one of these Spirits of darkness can so daunt the heart of those which are
free from their power, what a terror shall it be to live perpetually in the
sight, yea under the torture, of thousands, of legions, of millions of Devils?
Oh the madness of wilful sinners, that will needs run themselves headily into
so dreadful a damnation!

It was high time for our Savior to speak: What with the Tempest, what with
the Apparition, the Disciples were almost lost with fear. How seasonable are
his gracious redresses? Till they were thus affrighted, he would not speak;
when they were thus affrighted, he would not hold his peace. If his Be of good
cheer, it is I: yea it is his word only which must make his presence both known
and comfortable. He was present before; they mistook him, and feared: there
needs no other erection of their drooping hearts but, It is I. It is cordial
enough to us in the worst of our afflictions, to be assured of Christ's presence
with us. Say but, It is I, O Savior, and let evils do their worst; thou
need not say any more. Thy voice was evidence enough; so well were thy
Disciples acquainted with the tongue of thee their Master, that, It is I, was
as much as an hundred names. Thou art the good Shepherd; we are not of thy
Flock, if we know thee not by thy voice from a thousand. Even this one is a
great word, yea an ample style, It is I. The same tongue that said to Moses, I
am has sent thee, says now to the Disciples, It is I; I your Lord and Master,
I the commander of winds and waters* I the sovereign Lord of Heaven and earth,
I the God of Spirits. Let Heaven be but as one scroll, and let it be written
all over with titles, they cannot express more then, It is I. Oh sweet and
seasonable word of

No sooner has Jesus said, I; then Peter answers, Master. He can instantly
name him that did not name himself. Every little hint is enough to Faith. The
Church sees her Beloved as well through the Lattice, as through the open
Window. Which of all the Followers of Christ gave so pregnant testimonies upon
all occasions of his Faith, of his Love to his Master, as Peter? The rest were
silent, whiles he both owned his Master, and craved access to him in that
liquid way. Yet what a sensible mixture is here of Faith and Distrust? It is
Faith that said, Master; it was Distrust (as some have construed it) that said,
If it be thou. It was Faith that said, Bid me come to thee; (implying that his
word could as well enable as command) it was Faith that durst step down upon
that watery pavement: it was Distrust that upon the sight of a mighty wind
feared. It was Faith, that he walked; it was Distrust, that he sunk; it was
Faith that said, Lord, save me. Oh the imperfect composition of the best Saint
upon earth; as far from pure Faith, as from mere Infidelity! If there be pure
earth in the center, all upward is mixed with the other elements: contrarily,
pure Grace is above in the glorified Spirits; all below is mixed with
infirmity, with corruption. Our best is but as the Air; which never was, never
can be at once fully enlightened: neither is there in the same Region one
constant state of Adam set his tooth in the Apple, till our mouth be full of
mould, it never was, it never can be other with us. Far be it from us to settle
willingly upon the dregs of our Infidelity; far be it from us to be
disheartened with the sense of our defects and imperfections: We believe; Lord,
help our unbelief.

Whiles I find some disputing the lawfulness of Peter's suit; others
quarrelling If it be thou: let me be taken up with the wonder at the Faith, the
fervor, the Heroical valor of this prime Apostle, that durst say, Bid me come
to thee upon the waters. He might have suspected that the Voice of his Master
might have been as easily imitated by that imagined Spirit as his Person; he
might have feared the blustering tempest, the threatening billows, the yielding
nature of that devouring element: but as despising all these thoughts of
misdoubt, such is his desire to be near his Master, that he says, Bid me come
to thee upon the waters. He says not, Come thou to me: this had been Christ's
act, and not his. Neither does he say, Let me come to thee: this had been his
act, and not Christ's. Neither does he say, Pray that I may come to thee, as if
this act Bid me come to thee. I know thou can command both the waves and me:
me to be so light that I shall not bruise the moist surface of the waves; the
waves to be so solid that they shall not yield to my weight. All things obey
thee: Bid me come to thee upon the waters.

It was a bold spirit that could wish it, more bold that could act it. No
sooner has our Savior said, Come, then he sets his foot upon the unquiet Sea;
Peter know that he who bade him, could uphold him; and therefore he both sues
to be bidden, and ventures to be upholden. True Faith tasks it self with
difficulties, neither can be dismayed with the conceits of ordinary
impossibilities? It is not the scattering of straws or casting of mole-hills,
whereby the virtue of it is described, but removing of mountain. Like some
courageous Leader, it desires the honor of

Peter sues, Jesus bids. Rather will he work Miracles, then disappoint the suit
of a faithful man. How easily might our Savior have turned over this strange
request of his bold Disiple, and have said, What my Omnipotence can do is no
rule for thy weakness? It is no less then presumption in a mere man, to hope
to imitate the miraculous works of God and man. Stay thou in the ship, and
wonder; contenting thy self in this, that thou have a Master to whom the land
and water is alike. Yet I hear not a check, but a Call; Come. The suit of
Ambition is suddenly quashed in the Mother of the Zebedees. The

True Faith rests not in great and good desires, but acts and executes
accordingly. Peter does not wish to go, and yet stand still^ but his foot
answers his tongue, and instantly chops down upon the waters. To sit still and
wish, is for sluggish and cowardly spirits.

Formal volitions, yea velleities of good, whiles we will not so muc^^^ step
out of the ship of our Nature to walk unto Christ, are but the faint motions of
vain Hypocrisy. It will be long enough ere the gale of good wishes can carry
us to our Haven. Ease slays the foolish. O Savior, we have thy command to
come to thee out of the ship of our natural corruption: Let no Sea affray us,
let no tempest of Temptation withhold us. No way can be but safe, when thou art
the End.

Lo, Peter is walking upon the waves: two hands uphold him; the hand of
Christ's Power, the hand of his own Faith; neither of them would do it alone.
The hand of Christ's Power laid hold on him; the hand of his Faith laid hold
Peter did here, who when he saw the wind boistrous, was afraid, and beginning
to sink, cried, saying, Lord, save me.

When he wished to be bidden to walk unto Christ, he thought of the waters; Bid
me to come to thee on the waters: he thought not of the winds which raged on
those waters; or if he thought of a stiff gale, yet that tempestuous and

So soon as he began to fear, he began to sink: whiles he believed, the Sea was
brass; when once he began to distrust, those waves were water. He cannot sink,
whiles he trusts the power of his Master; he cannot but sink when he misdoubts
it. Our Faith gives us as courage and boldness, so success too: our infidelity
lays us open to all dangers, to all mischiefs.

It was Peter's improvidence not to foresee, it was his weakness to fear, it
was the effect of his fear to sink; it was his Faith that recollects it self,
and breaks through his infidelity, and in sinking could say, Lord, save me. His
foot Lord, save me.

It is a notable both sign and effect of true Faith, in sudden extremities to
ejaculate holy desires; and with the wings of our first thoughts to fly up
instantly to the throne of Grace for present succor. Upon deliberation it is
possible for a man that has been careless and profane, by good means to be
drawn to holy dispositions: but on the sudden a man will appear as he is;
whatever is most rife in the heart will come forth at the mouth. It is good to
observe how our surprisals find us: the rest is but forced; this is natural.
Out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks. O Savior, no evil can be
swifter then my thought: my thought shall be upon thee, ere I can be seized
upon by the speediest mischief: at least, if I overrun not evils, I shall
overtake them.

It was Christ his Lord whom Peter had offended in distrusting; it is Christ
his Lord to whom he sues for deliverance. His weakness does not discourage him
from his refuge. O God, when we have displeased thee, when we have sunk in thy
displeasure, whither should we fly for aid but to thee whom we have provoked?
Against thee only is our sin; in thee only is our help. In vain shall all the
powers of Heaven and earth conspire to relieve us, if thou Lord, save us.

The mercy of Christ is at once sought and found; Immediately Jesus stretched
forth his hand, and caught him. He does not say, Had thou trusted me, I would
have safely preserved thee, but since thou will needs wrong my power and care
with a cowardly diffidence, sink and drown: but rather, as pitying the
infirmity of his fearful Disciple, he puts out the hand for his relief. That
hand has been stretched forth for the aid of many a one that has never asked
it; never any asked it, to whose succor it has not been stretched. With what
speed, with what confidence should we fly to that sovereign bounty, from

Jesus gave Peter his hand; but withal he gave him a check: O thou of little
faith, why doubtedst thou? As Peter's Faith was not pure, but mixed with some
distrust; so our Saviors help was not clear and absolute, but mixed with some
reproof. A reproof, wherein there was both a censure and an expostulation; a
censure of his Faith, an expostulation for his Doubt: both of them sore and
heavy.

By how much more excellent and useful a grace Faith is, by so much more
shameful is the defect of it; and by how much more reason here was of
confidence, by so much more blameworthy was the Doubt. Now Peter had a double
reason of his confidence; the command of Christ, the power of Christ:

When I saw Peter stepping forth upon the waters, I could not but wonder at his
great Faith; yet behold, ere he can have measured many paces, the Judge of
hearts taxes him for little Faith. Our mountains are but moats to God. Would my
heart have served me to dare the doing of this that Peter did? Durst

The first steps were confident, there was fear in the next. Oh the sudden
alteration of our affections, of our dispositions! One pace varies our
spiritual condition. What hold is there of so fickle creatures, if we be left
never so little to our selves? As this lower world wherein we are is the region
of mutability; so are we (the living pieces of it) subject to a perpetual
change. It is for

As well as our Savior loves Peter, yet he chides him. It is the fruit of his
favor and mercy that we escape judgment, not that we escape reproof. Had not
Peter found grace with his Master, he had been suffered to sink in silence; now
he is saved with a check. There may be more love in frowns then in smiles: whom
he loves he chastises. What is chiding but a verbal castigation? and what is
chastisement but a real chiding? Correct me, O Lord, yet in thy judgment, not
in thy fury. Oh let the righteous God smite me (when I offend) with his
gracious reproofs; these shall be a precious oil that shall not break my

The bloody Issue healed.
THE time was, O Savior, when a worthy woman offered to touch thee, and was
forbidden: now a meaner touches thee with approbation and encouragement. Yet as
there was much difference in that Body of thine which was the Object of that
touch, (being now mortal and passible, then impassible and immortal) so there
was in the Agents; this a stranger,

The same actions vary with time and other circumstances; and accordingly
receive their dislike or allowance.

Doubtless thou had herein no small respect to the faith of Jairus, unto
whose house thou were going. That good man had but one only Daughter, which
lay sick in the beginning of his suit, ere the end, lay dead. Whiles she lived,
his hope lived; her death disheartened it. It was a great work that thou
meantest to do for him; it was a great word that thou said to him, Fear not;
believe, and she shall be made whole. To make this good, by the touch of the
verge of thy garment thou revivedst one from the verge of death. How must
Jairus needs now think? He who by the virtue of his garment can pull this woman
out of the paws of death which has been twelve years dying; can as well by the
power of his word pull my daughter (who has been twelve years living) out of
the jaws of death which has newly seized on her. It was fit the good Ruler
should be raised up with this handsel of thy Divine power, whom he came to
solicit.

That thou might lose no time, thou curedst in thy passage. The Sun stands
not still to give his influences, but diffuses them in his ordinary motion. How
shall we imitate thee, if we suffer our hands to be out of ure with good? Our
life goes away with our time: we lose that which we improve not.

The Patient labored of an Issue of blood; a Disease that had not more pain
then shame, nor more natural infirmity then Legal impurity. Time added to her
grief; twelve long years had she languished under this woeful complaint.
Besides the tediousness, diseases must needs get head by continuance; and so
much more both weaken Nature and strengthen themselves, by how much

Yet more, to mend the matter, Poverty (which is another disease) was
superadded to her sickness: She had spent all she had upon Physicians. Whiles
she had wherewith to make much of her self, and to procure good tendance,
choice diet, and all the succors of a distressed languishment, she could not
but find some mitigation of her sorrow: but now want began to pinch her no
less then her distemper, and helped to make her perfectly miserable.

Yet could she have parted from her substance with ease, her complaint had she
suffered many things from them; many an unpleasing potion, many tormenting
incisions and divulsions did she endure from their hands: the Remedy was equal
in trouble to the Disease.

Yet had the cost and pain been never so great, could she have hereby purchased
health, the match had been happy; all the world were no price for this
commodity: but alas! her estate was the worse, her body not the better; her
money was wasted, not her disease. Art could give her neither cure nor hope. It
were injurious to blame that noble Science, for that it always speeds not.

It were pity but that this woman should have been thus sick; the nature, the
durablenesse, cost, pain, incurablenesse of her disease both sent her to seek
Christ, and moved Christ to her cure. Our extremities drive us to our Savior;
his love draws him to be most present and helpful to our extremities. When we
are forsaken of all succors and hopes, we are fittest for his redress. Never
are we nearer to help, then when we despair of help. There is no fear, no
danger but in our own insensiblenesse.

If I may but touch the hem of his garment, I shall be whole. The shame of her
disease stopped her mouth from any verbal suit. Had she been acknown of her
infirmity, she had been shunned and abhorred, and disdainfully put back of all
the beholders (as doubtless where she was known, the Law forced her to live
apart.) Now she conceals both her grief, and her desire, and her faith; and
only speaks (where she may be bold) within her self, If I may but touch the hem
of his garment, I shall be whole.

I seek not mysteries in the virtue of the hem rather then of the garment.
Israel, that they should be marked, not only in their skin, but in their cloths
too: those fringes and ribands upon the borders of their garments were for holy
memorials of their duty, and Gods Law. But that hence she supposed to find
more virtue and sanctity in the touch of the hem then of the coat, I neither
dispute nor believe. It was the site, not the signification that she intimated;
not as of the best part, but the utmost. In all likelihood, if there could have
been virtue in the garment, the nearer to the body, the more. Here was then the
praise of this woman's Faith, that she promises her self cure by the touch of
the utmost hem. Whosoever would look to receive any benefit from Christ, must
come in Faith: It is that only

Yea the endeavor and issue of all both humane and spiritual things depends
upon our Faith. Who would commit a plant or seed to the earth, if he did not
believe to have it nursed in that kindly bosom? What Merchant would put
himself upon the guard of an inch-board in a furious Sea, if he did

According to her resolution is her practice. She touched, but she came behind
to touch; whether for humility, or her secrecy rather, as desiring to steal a
cure unseen, unnoted. She was a Jewesse, and therefore well knew that her touch
was (in this case) no better then a pollution; as hers, perhaps, but not of
him. For on the one side, Necessity is under no positive law; on the other, the
Son of God was not capable of impurity. Those may be defiled with a touch that
cannot heal with a touch: he that was above Law is not comprised in the Law. Be
we never so unclean, he may heal us; we cannot infect him. O Savior, my Soul
is sick and foul enough with the Spiritual impurities of sin: let me by the
hand of Faith lay hold but upon the hem of thy garment, (thy

Who would not think but a man might lade up a dish of water out of the Sea
unmissed? Yet that water (though much) is finite; those drops are within
number: that Art which has reckoned how many corns of sand would make up a
World, could more easily compute how many drops of water would make up an
Ocean; whereas the mercies of God are absolutely infinite, and beyond all
possibility of proportion: And yet this bashful soul cannot steal one drop of
mercy from this endless, boundless, bottomless Sea of Divine bounty, but it
is felt and questioned; And Jesus said, Who touched me?

Who can now say that he is a poor man that reckons his store, when that

Who now can forbear the Disciples reply? Who touched thee, O Lord? the
multitude. Do thou ask of one, when thou art preased by many? In the midst of
a throng, do thou ask, Who touched me?

Yea but yet some one touched me: All thronged me; but one touched me. How
riddle-like soever it may seem to sound, they that thronged me touched me not;
she only touched me that thronged me not, yea that touched me not. Even so, O
Savior, others touched thy body with theirs; she touched thy hem with her
hand, thy Divine power with her Soul.

Those two parts whereof we consist (the bodily, the spiritual) do in a sort
partake of each other. The Soul is the man, and has those parts, senses,
actions which are challenged as proper to the Body. This spiritual part has
both an hand, and a touch; it is by the hand of Faith that the Soul touches:
yea this alone both is, and acts all the spiritual senses of that immaterial
and Divine

What reason had our Savior to challenge this touch? Some body touched me. The
multitude (in one extreme) denied any touch at all: Peter (in another extreme)
affirmed an over-touching of the multitude. Betwixt both, he who felt it can
say, Some body touched me. Not all, as Peter; not none, as the multitude; but
some body. How then, O Savior, how does it appear that some body touched thee?
For I perceive virtue is gone out from me. The effect proves Virtue is gone out
from me. Nothing could please thee better, then to feel virtue fetched out from
thee by the Faith of the receiver. It is the nature and praise of good to be
communicative: none of us would be other then liberal of our little, if we did
not fear it would be lessened by imparting. Thou that know thy store so
infinite, that participation does only glorify and not diminish it, can not
but be more willing to give then we to receive. If we take but one drop of
better to give then to receive, can not but give gladly. Fear not, O my Soul,
to lade plentifully at this Well, this Ocean of Mercy, which, the more thou
take, over flows the more.

But why then, O Savior, why did thou thus inquire, thus expostulate? Was it
for thy own sake; that the glory of the Miracle might thus come to light, which
otherwise had been smothered in silence? Was it for Jairus his sake; that his
depressed heart might be raised to a confidence in thee, whose

It was within her self that she said, If I may but touch: none could hear this
voice of the heart, but he that made it. It was within her self that the Cure
was wrought: none of the beholders knew her complaint, much less her recovery;
none noted her touch, none knew the occasion of her touch. What a pattern of
powerful Faith had we lost, if our Savior had not called this act to trial?
As her modesty hid her disease, so it would have hid her virtue. Christ will
not suffer this secrecy. Oh the marvelous, but free, dispensation of Christ!
Who has touched me? for I perceive virtue is gone out from me. As we see in
the great work of his Creation, he has placed some Stars in the midst of
Heaven, where they may be most conspicuous; others he has set in the Southern
obscurity, obvious to but few eyes: in the Earth, he has planted some flowers

O God, if thou have intended to glorify thy self by thy Graces in us, thou will find means to fetch them forth into the notice of the World; otherwise
our very privacy shall content us, and praise thee.

Yet even this great Faith wanted not some weakness. It was a poor conceit in
this Woman, that she thought she might receive so sovereign a remedy from
Christ without his heed, without his knowledge. Now that she might see she had
trusted to a power which was not more bountiful then sensible, Some body has
touched me, for I perceive virtue is gone out from me. As there was an error in
her thought, so in our Saviors words there was a correction. His mercy will
not let her run away with that secret offense. It is a great favor of God to
take us in the manner, and to shame our closeness. We scour off the rust from
a Weapon that we esteem, and prune the Vine we care for. O God, do thou ever
find me out in my Sin; and do not pass over my least infirmities without a
feeling controlment.

Neither doubt I but that herein, O Savior, thou did graciously forecast

Well might the Woman think, He who can thus cure, and thus know his cure, can
as well know my name, and descry my person, and shame and punish my
ingratitude. With a pale face therefore and a trembling foot she comes, and
falls down before him, and humbly acknowledges what she had done, what she had
obtained; But the Woman finding she was not hid, etc.

Could she have perceived that she might have slily gone away with the Cure,
she had not confessed it: So had she made God a loser of Glory, and her self an
unthankful receiver of so great a Benefit.

Might we have our own wills, we should be injurious both to God and our
selves. Nature lays such plots as would be sure to befool us; and is witty in
nothing but deceiving her self. The only way to bring us home, is to find we
are found, and to be convinced of the discovery of all our evasions: As some
unskilful Thief that finds the owners eye was upon him in his pilfring, lays
down his stolen commodity with shame. Contrarily, when a man is possessed with
a conceit of secrecy and cleanly escape, he is emboldened in his lewdness. The
Adulterer chooses the twilight, and says, No eye shall see me; and joys in the
sweetness of his stolen waters. O God, in the deepest darkness, in my most
inward retiredness, when none sees me, when I see not my self,

It is no unusall thing for kindness to look sternly for the time, that it may
Who touched me? When the woman comes in trembling, and confessing both her act
and success, he clears up his brows, and speaks comfortably to her; Daughter,
be of good cheer, thy faith has made thee whole; go in peace. O sweet and
seasonable word, fit for those merciful and Divine lips; able to secure any
heart, to dispell any fears! Still, O Savior, thou do thus to us: when we
fall down before thee in an awful dejectedness, thou rearest us up with a
cheerful and compassionate encouragement; when thou find us bold and
presumptuous, thou love to take us down; when humbled, it is enough to have
prostrated us. Like as Bethel worries the disobedient Prophet, guards the poor
Ass that stood quaking before him: Or like some mighty wind, that bears over
a tall Elm or Cedar with the same breath that it raises a stooping Reed: Or
like some good Physician, who finding the body obstructed and surcharged with
ill humors, evacuates it, and when it is sufficiently pulled down, raises it up
with sovereign Cordials.

And still do thou so to my Soul; if at any time thou perceivest me stiff and
rebellious, ready to face out my sin against thee, spare me not; let me smart,
till I relent. But a broken and contrite heart, thou will not, O Lord, O Lord,
do not reject.

In the midst of the sorrows of my heart, thy comforts, O Lord, thy comforts
only have power to refresh my soul. Her cure was Christ's act, yet he gives the
praise of it to her; Thy faith has made thee whole. He had said before, Virtue
is gone out from me; now he acknowledges a virtue inherent in her. It was his
virtue that cured her, yet he graciously casts this work upon her Faith. Not
that her Faith did it by way of merit, by way of By faith we are justified, by
faith we are saved. Thou only, O Savior, can heal us; thou will not heal us
but by our Faith: not as it issues from us, but as it appropriates thee. The
sickness is ours, the remedy is ours: the sickness is our own by nature, the
remedy ours by thy grace, both working and accepting it. Our Faith is no less
from thee then thy Cure is from our Faith.

Oh happy dismission, Go in peace! How unquiet had this poor soul formerly
been? She had no outward peace with her Neighbors; they shunned Go in peace.
Even so, Lord, it was for thee Go in peace.

JAIRUS and his Daughter.
HOw troublesome did the peoples importunity seem to Jairus? That great man
came to sue unto Jesus for his dying Daughter; the throng of the multitude
intercepted him. Every man is most sensible of his own necessity. It is no
straining courtesy in the challenge of our interest in Christ: there is no
unmannerlinesse in our strife for the greatest share in his presence and
benediction.

That only Child of this Ruler lay a dying when he came to solicit Christ's
Thy daughter is dead, trouble not the Master. When we have to do with a mere
finite power, this word were but just. He was a Prophet no less then a King,
that said, Whiles the child was yet alive, I fasted and wept; for I said, Who
can tell whether God will be gracious to me that the child may live? But now
he is dead, wherefore should I fast? Can I bring him back again? I shall go to
him, but he shall not return to me. But since thou have to do with an
Omnipotent agent, know now, O thou faithless messenger, that death can be no
bar to his power. How well would it have become thee to have said, Thy daughter
but who can tell whether thy God and Savior will not be gracious to thee that
the child may revive? Cannot he in whose hands are the issues of death, bring
her back again?

Here were more Manners then Faith; Trouble not the Master. Infidelity is all
for ease, and thinks every good work tedious. That which Nature accounts
troublesome, is pleasing and delightful to Grace. Is it any pain for an hungry
man to eat? O Savior, it was thy meat and drink to do thy Fathers will; and
his will was that thou should bear our griefs and take away our sorrows. It
cannot be thy trouble which is our happiness, that we may still sue to thee.

The messenger could not so whisper his ill news, but Jesus heard it. Jairus
hears that he feared, and was now heartlesse with so sad tidings. He that
resolved not to trouble the Master, meant to take so much more trouble to
himself, and would now yield to a hopeless sorrow. He whose work it is to
comfort the afflicted, rouzeth up the dejected heart of that pensive father;
Fear not, believe only, and she shall be made whole. The word was not more
cheerful then difficult. Fear not? Who can be insensible of so great an evil?
Where death has once seized, who can but doubt he will keep his hold? No less
hard was it not to grieve for the loss of an only Child, then not to fear the
continuance of the cause of that grief.

In a perfect Faith there is no Fear: by how much more we fear, by so much
less we believe. Well are these two then coupled, Fear not, believe only. O
Savior, if thou did not command us somewhat beyond Nature, it were no thank
to us to obey thee. While the child was alive, to believe that it might
recover, it was no hard task; but now that she was fully dead, to believe she
should live again, was a work not easy for Jairus to apprehend, though easy
for thee to effect: yet must that be believed, else there is no capacity of so
great a Mercy. As Love, so Faith is stronger then death; making those bonds no
other then (as Sampson did his withes) like threads of tow. How much natural
impossibility is there in the return of these Bodies from the dust of

The sum of Jairus his first suit was for the Health, not for the Resuscitation
of his Daughter: now that she was dead, he would, if he durst, have been glad
to have asked her Life. And now, behold, our Savior bids him expect both Thy
daughter shall be made whole: alive from her death, whole from her disease.

Thou did not, O Jairus, thou daredst not ask so much as thou receivest. How
glad would thou have been, since this last news, to have had thy Daughter
alive, though weak and sickly? Now thou shall receive her not living only, but
sound and vigorous. Thou do not, O Savior, measure thy gifts by our
petitions, but by our wants and thine own mercies.

This work might have been as easily done by an absent command; the Power of
Christ was there whiles himself was away: but he will go personally to the
place, that he might be confessed the Author of so great a Miracle. Give place,
for the Had she been dead, she had but slept; now she was not dead, but asleep,
because he meant this nap of death should be so short, and her awakening so
speedy. Death and Sleep are alike to him, who can cast whom he will into the
sleep of Death, and awake when and whom he pleases out of that deadly sleep.

Before the people and domestics of Jairus held Jesus for a Prophet; now they
took him for a Dreamer. Not dead, but asleep? They that came to mourn cannot
now forbear to laugh. Have we piped at so many Funerals, and seen and lamented
so many Corpses, and cannot we distinguish betwixt Sleep and Death? The eyes
are set, the breath is gone, the limbs are stiff and cold.

There were witnesses enough of her death, there shall not be many of her
restoring. Three choice Disciples and the two Parents are only admitted to the

What did these scorners think and say, when they saw him putting the minstrels
and people out of doors? Doubtless the maid is but asleep; the man fears lest
the noise shall awake her; we must speak and tread softly that we disquiet her
not: What will he and his Disciples do the while? Is it not to be feared they
will startle her out of her rest? Those that are shut out from the
participation of God's counsels, think all his words and projects no better
then foolishness. But art thou, O Savior, ever the more discouraged He took
her by the hand, and called, saying, Maid, arise: and her spirit came again,
and she arose straightway.

How could that touch, that Call be other then effectual? He who made Arise ye
dead, said now, Maid, arise. Death cannot but obey him who is the Lord of life.
The Soul is ever equally in his hand who is the God of Spirits: it cannot but
go and come at his command. When he says, Maid, arise, the now-dissolved
spirit knows his office, his place, and instantly reassumes that room which by
his appointment it had left.

O Savior, if thou do but bid my Soul to arise from the death of Sin, it
cannot lie still; if thou bid my Body to arise from the grave, my Soul cannot
but glance down from her Heaven, and animate it. In vain shall my sin or my
grave offer to withhold me from thee.

The Maid revives: not now to languish for a time upon her sickbed, and by
some faint degrees to gather an insensible strength; but at once she arises
from her death and from her couch, at once she puts off her fever with her
dissolution, she finds her life and her feet at once, at once she finds her
feet and her stomach. He commanded to give her meat. Omnipotency does not use
to go the pace of Nature. All God's immediate works are (like himself)
perfect. He that raised her supernaturally, could have so fed her. It was never
the purpose of his Power, to put ordinary Means out of office.

The Motion of the two fiery Disciples repelled.
THE time drew on wherein Jesus must be received up. He must take death in his
way. Calvary is in his passage to mount Olivet. He must be lift up to the
Cross, thence to climb into his Heaven. Yet this comes not into mention; as if
all the thought of Death were swallowed up in this Victory over Death. Neither,
O Savior, is it otherwise with us, the weak members of thy mystical body. We
must die, we shall be glorified. What if Death stand before us? we look beyond
him at that transcendent Glory. How

The strongest receipt against Death is the happy estate that follows it; next
to that is the fore-exspectation of it and resolution against it. He steadfastly
set his face to go to Jerusalem: Jerusalem the nest of his enemies, the
Amphitheater of his conflicts, the fatal place of his death. Well did he know
the plots and ambushes that were there laid for him, and the bloody issue of
those designs: yet he will go, and goes resolved for the worst. It is a sure
and wise way to send our thoughts before us, to grapple with those evils which
we know must be incountred. The enemy is half overcome that is well prepared
for.

The way from Galilee to Judaea lay through the Region of Samaria, if not the
City. Christ now toward the end of his Preaching could not but be attended
with a multitude of followers: It was necessary there should be purveyors and
harbingers to procure lodgings and provision for so large a troup. Some of his
own retinue are addressed to this service: they seek not for palaces and
delicates, but for house-room and victuals. It was he whose the Samaritanes: He
that filled and comprehended Heaven, sends for shelter in a Samaritane Cottage.
It was thy choice, O Savior, to take upon thee the shape, not of a Prince, but
of a Servant. How can we either neglect means, or despise homeliness,

We know well in what terms the Samaritanes stood with the Jews; so much more
hostile as they did more symbolize in matter of Religion: no Nations were
mutually so hateful to each other. A Samaritane's bread was no better then
Swines-flesh; their very fire and water was not more grudged then infectious.
The looking toward Jerusalem was here cause enough of repulse. No enmity is so
desperate as that which arises from matter of Religion. Agreement in some
points, when there are differences in the main, does but advance hatred the
more.

Lord, will thou that we command fire to come down from Heaven and consume
them, as Elias did?

The Sons of Thunder would be lightning straight; their zeal, whether as
kinsmen or Disciples, could not brook so harsh a refusal. As they were
naturally more hot then their fellows, so now they thought their Piety bade
them be impatient.

Yet they dare not but begin with leave, Master, will thou? His will must lead
theirs; their choler cannot drive their wills before his: all their motion

A mannerly preface leads in a faulty suit; Master, will thou that we command
fire to come down from Heaven and consume them? Faulty, both in presumption,
and in desire of private revenge. I do not hear them say, Master, will it
please thee, who art the sole Lord of the Heavens and the Elements, to command
fire from Heaven upon these men? but, Will thou that we command? As if, Egypt
could bring forth Frogs and Blood; they could not bring Lice: ordinary
Corruption can do that which they could not.



I grant, Faith has done as great things as ever Presumption undertook; but
there is great difference in the enterprises of both. The one has a warrant,
either by instinct or express command; the other none at all. Indeed, had
these two Disciples either meant, or said, Master, if it be thy pleasure to
command us to call down fire from Heaven, we know thy word shall enable us to
do what thou requirest; if the words be ours, the power shall be thine; this
had been but holy, modest, faithful: but if they supposed there needed nothing

Yet had they thus overshot themselves in some pious and charitable motion, the
fault had been the less: now the act had in it both cruelty, and private
revenge. Their zeal was not worthy of more praise, then their fury of censure.
That fire should fall down from Heaven upon men, is a fearful thing to think
of, and that which has not been often done. It was done in the case Sodom,
when those five unclean Cities burned with the unnatural fire of hellish Lust:
it was done two several times at the suit of Elijah: it was done (in an height
of trial) to that great pattern of Patience. I find it no more, and tremble
at these I find.

But besides the dreadfulness of the judgment it self, who can but quake at the
thought of the suddenness of this destruction, which sweeps away both Body
and Soul in a state of unpreparation, of unrepentance; so as this fire should
but begin a worse, this Heavenly flame should but kindle that of Hell?

Thus unconceivably heavy was the revenge: but what was the offense? We have
learned not to think any indignity light that is offered to the Son of
Samaritans reviled Christ and his train, had they violently assaulted him, had
they followed him with stones in their hands and blasphemies in their mouths,
it had been a just provocation of so horrible a vengeance: Now the wrong was
only negative, they received him not: And that, not out of any particular
quarrel or dislike of his Person, but of his Nation only; the men had been
welcome, had not their Country distasted. All the charge that I hear our
Savior give to his Disciples in case of their rejection, is, If they receive
you not, shake off the dust of your feet. Yet this was amongst their own, and
when they went on that sacred errand of publishing the Gospel of Peace. These
were Israel. This measure was not to Preachers, but to Travelers; only a mere
inhospitality to misliked guests. Yet no less revenge will serve them then
fire from Heaven.

I dare say for you, ye holy sons of Zebedee, it was not your spleen, but your
zeal, that was guilty of so bloody a suggestion: your indignation could not but
be stirred to see the great Prophet and Savior of the world so unkindly
repelled: yet all this will not excuse you from a rash Cruelty, from an
inordinate Rage.

Even the best heart may easily be miscarried with a well-meant Zeal. No
affection is either more necessary or better accepted. Love to any Object
cannot

But there is nothing so ill as the corruption of the best. Rectified zeal is
not more commendable and useful, then inordinate and misguided is hateful and
dangerous. Fire is a necessary and beneficial element; but if it be once
misplaced, and have caught upon the beams of our houses or stacks of our corn,
nothing can be more direful.

Thus sometimes Zeal turns Murder, ( They that kill you shall think they do
God service) sometimes Frenzy, sometimes rude Indiscretion. Wholesome and
blessed is that zeal that is well grounded and well governed: grounded upon the
word of Truth, not upon unstable fancies; governed by wisdom

No motion can want a pretense. Elias did so; why not we? He was an holy
Prophet: the occasion, the place abludes not much: there wrong was offered to a
servant, here to his Master; there to a man, here to a God and man. Elias then
did it, why not we? There is nothing more perilous then to draw all the
actions of Holy men into examples: For as the best men have their weaknesses;
so they are not privileged from letting fall unjustifiable actions, Besides
that, they may have had perhaps peculiar warrants signed from Heaven, whether
by instict, or special command, which we shall expect in vain. There must be
much caution used in our imitation of the best patterns, (whether in respect of
the persons, or things;) else we shall make our selves Apes, and our acts
sinful absurdities.

It is a rare thing for our Savior to find fault with the errous of zeal,
even where have appeared sensible weaknesses. If Moses in a sacred rage and
indignation Ye know not of what spirit ye are. The faults of uncharitableness
cannot be swallowed up in zeal. If there were any color to hide the blemishes
of this misdisposition, it should be this crimson die. But he that needs not
our Lie, will let us know he needs not our Injury, and hates to have a good
cause supported by the violation of our Charity. We have no reason to disclaim
our Passions: Even the Son of God chides sometimes, yea where he loves. It
offends not that our Affections are moved: but that they are inordinate.

Ye know not of what spirit ye are. Another man would not perhaps have felt it;
a Disciple does. Tender hearts are galled with that which the carnal mind
slighteth. The spirit of Elias was that which they meant to assume and imitate:
they shall now know their mark was mistaken. How would they have hated to think
that any other but God's Spirit had stirred them up to this passionate motion?
now they shall know it was wrought by that ill spirit whom they professed to
hate.

It is far from the good Spirit of God to stir up any man to private revenge or
thirst of blood. Not an Eagle, but a Dove, was the shape wherein he chose to
appear. Neither would thou, O God, be in the whirlwinde, or in came to
thine own, thine own received thee not. Did thou call for fire from Heaven
upon them? did thou not rather send down water from thy compassionate eyes,
and weep for them by whom thou must bleed? Better had it been for us never to
have had any spirit, then any but thine. We can be no other then wicked, if our
mercies be cruelty.

But is it the name of Elias (O ye Zelots) which ye pretend for a color of
your impotent desire? Ye do not consider the difference betwixt his Spirit and
yours. His was extraordinary and heroical, besides the instinct or secret Elias
is no fit pattern for Disciples, but their Master. The Son of Man came not to
destroy men's lives, but to save them.

Then are our actions and intentions warrantable and praiseworthy, when they
accord with his. O Savior, when we look into those sacred Acts and monuments
of thine, we find many a life which thou preservedst from perishing, some that
had perished by thee recalled; never any by thee destroyed. to him who came to
take life from thee. I find some whom thou did scourge

Good Princes make wholesome Laws for the well-ordering of their people: there
is no authority without due coercion. The violation of these good Laws is
followed with death, whose end was preservation, life, order: and this not so
much for revenge of an offense past, as for prevention of future mischief.

How can we then enough love and praise thy mercy, O thou preserver of Abaddon,
a murderer from the beginning.

The Ten Lepers.
THE Samaritanes were tainted, not with Schism, but Heresy, but Paganism;

Ten Lepers are here met: those that are excluded from all other society, seek
the company of each other. Fellowship is that we all naturally affct, though
even in Leprosy. Ever Lepers will flock to their fellows: where shall we find
one spiritual Leper alone? Drunkards, profane persons, Heretics

Jews and Samaritanes could not abide one another, yet here in Leprosy they
accord; here was one Samaritane Leper with the Jewish: community of passion
has made them friends, whom even Religion disjoined. What virtue there is in
misery, that can unite even the most estranged hearts!

I seek not mystery in the number. These Ten are met together, and all meet
Christ: not casually, but upon due deliberation; they purposely waited for this
opportunity. No marvel if they thought no attendance long to be delivered from
so loathsome and miserable a disease. Great Naaman could be Syria to Judaea, in
hope of leaving that hateful guest behind him. We are all sensible enough of
our bodily infirmities. Oh that we could be equally weary of the sicknesses and
deformities of our better part. Surely our spiritual maladies are no less then
mortal, if they be not healed; neither can they heal alone. These men had died
Lepers if they had not met with Christ.

Oh Savior, give us grace to seek thee, and patience to wait for thee; and
then we know thou will find us, and we remedy.

Where do these Lepers attend for Christ, but in a village? and that, not in
the street of it, but in the entrance, in the passage to it. The Cities, the

These Lepers that came to seek Christ, yet finding him, they stand afar off;
whether for reverence, or for security. God had enacted this distance. It was
their charge, if they were occasioned to pass through the streets, to cry out,
I am unclean. It was no less then their duty to proclaim their own
infectiousnesse:

How happy were it, if in those wherein there is more peril, there were more
remoteness, less silence? O God, we are all Lepers to thee, overspred with
the loathsome scurf of our own corruptions: It becomes us well, in the
conscience of our shame and vileness, to stand afar off. We cannot be too
awful of thee, too much ashamed of our selves.

Yet these men, though they be far off in the distance of place, yet they are
near in respect of the acceptance of their Prayer. The Lord is near unto all
that call upon him in truth. O Savior, whiles we are far off from thee, thou
art near unto us. Never do thou come so close to us, as when in an holy
bashfulnesse

He that stands near may whisper; but he that stands afar off must cry aloud:
so did these Lepers. Yet not so much distance as passion strained their
throats. That which can give voice to the Dumb, can much more give loudness to
the Vocal.

All cried together: these ten voices were united in one sound; that their Jews
and Samaritanes) agree in one joint supplication. Even where there are ten
tongues, the word is but one; that the condescent may be universal. When we
would obtain common favors, we may not content our selves with private and
solitary Devotions, but must join our spiritual forces together, and set upon
God by troops. Two are better then one; because they have a good reward for
their labor. No faithful Prayer goes away unrecompensed: but where many good
hearts meet, the retribution

It was not the sound, but the matter, that carried it with Christ: if the
sound were shrill, the matter was faithful; Jesu Master, have mercy upon us.
No word can better become the mouth of the miserable. I see not where we can
meet with fitter patterns. Surely, they were not verier Lepers then we: why do
we not imitate them in their actions, who are too like them in our condition?
Whither should we seek but to our Jesus? How should we stand aloof in regard of
our own wretchedness? how should we lift up our voice in the fervor Jesu
Master, have mercy upon us.

Oh gracious prevention of mercy, both had and given ere it can be asked!
Jesus, when he saw them, said, Go show your selves to the Priests. Their
disease is cured ere it can be complained of; their showing to the Priest
presupposes them whole; whole in his grant, though not in their own
apprehension. That single Leper that came to Christ before, ( Mat. 8. Luke 5.)
was first cured Alas, to what purpose is this? Show our selves to the Priests?
What can their eyes do? They can judge whether it be cured, (which we see yet
it is not) they cannot cure it. This is not now to do: Jesus would have
vouchsafed to call us to him, and to lay his hands upon us, and to have healed
us. These thoughts had kept them Lepers still. Now shall their Faith and
Obedience be proved by their submission both to this sudden command, and that
Divine ordination.

That former Leper was charged to show himself to the chief Priest, these to
the Priests; either would serve: the original command runs, either to Aaron or
to one of his Sons. But why to them? Leprosy was a bodily sickness; what is
this to spiritual persons? Wherefore serve Physicians, if the Priests must
meddle with diseases? We never shall find those Sacred persons to pass their

Neither was it only the peculiar judgment of the Priest that was here
intended, but the thankfulness of the Patient: that by the sacrifice which he
should bring with him, he might give God the glory of his sanation. O God,
whomsoever thou curest of this spiritual Leprosy, it is reason he should
present thee with the true Evangelical sacrifices, not of his praises only,
but of reasonable and living. We are still leprous if we do not first see our
selves foul, and then find our selves thankfully serviceable.

The Lepers did not, would not go of themselves, but are sent by Christ; Go
and show your selves. And why sent by him? Was it in obedience to the Law? was
it out of respect to the Priesthood? was it for prevention of cavils? was it
for conviction of gainsayers? or was it for confirmation of the Miracle? Christ
that was above the Law would not transgress it; he knew this was his charge by
Moses. How justly might he have dispensed with his own? but he will not: though
the Law does not bind the Maker, he will voluntarily bind Consummatum est;
yet would not anticipate that approaching end, but holds the Law on foot till
his last pace. This was but a branch of the Ceremonial; yet would he not slight
it, but in his own person gives example of a studious observation.

How carefully should we submit our selves to the Royal laws of our Creator,

Whiles I look to the Persons of those Priests, I see nothing but corruption,
nothing but professed hostility to the true Messiah. All this cannot make thee,
O Savior, to remit any point of the observance due to their Places. Their
Function was sacred, whatever their Persons were: though they have not the
grace to give thee thy due, thou will not fail to give them theirs. How justly
do thou expect all due regard to thine Evangelicall Priesthood, who gave so
curious respect to the Legal? It were shame the Synagogue should be above the
Church; or that Priesthood which thou meantest speedily to abrogate,

Had this duty been neglected, what clamours had been raised by his emulous
adversaries? What scandalls? though the fault had been the Patients, not the
Physicians. But they that watched Christ so narrowly, and were apt to take so
poor exceptions at his Sabbath-cures, at the unwashen hands of his Disciples,
how much more would they have calumniated him if by his neglect the Law of
Leprosy had been palpably transgressed? Not only evil must be avoided, but
offense; and that not on our parts, but on others. That offense is ours, which
we might have remedied.

Messiah? How can these Jews but either believe, or be made inexcusable in not
believing? When they shall see so many Lepers come at once to the Temple, all
cured by a secret will, without word or touch, how can they choose but say, This
work is supernatural; no limited power could do this? How is he not God, if
his power be infinite? Their own eyes shall be witnesses and Judges of their
own conviction.

The Cure is done by Christ more exquisitely then by Art or Nature; yet it is
not publicly assured and acknowledged, till according to the Mosaicall Law
certain subsequent rites be performed. There is no admittance into the wash us
with that, and we shall be whiter then snow. This act of showing to the Priest
was not more required by the Law then pre-required of these Lepers by our
Savior, for the trial of their Obedience. Had they now stood upon terms with
Christ, and said, We will first see what cause there will be to show our selves
to the Priests; they need not see our leprie, we shall be glad they should see
our Cure: do thou work that which we shall show, and bid us show what thou have
wrought: till then excuse us: it is our grief and shame to be seen too

It has been ever God's wont by small Precepts to prove men's dispositions.
Obedience is as well tried in a trifle, as in the most important charge; yea so
much more, as the thing required is less: for oft-times those who would be
careful in main affairs, think they may neglect the smallest. What command
soever we receive from God or our Superiors, we must not scan the weight of the
thing, but the authority of the commander. Either difficulty or slightness are
vain pretenses for Disobedience.

These Lepers are wiser; they obeyed, and went. What was the issue? As they
went, they were healed. Lo, had they stood still, they had been Lepers; whom we
serve, to reward our worthless endeavors with infinite requitals.

Yet besides this recompense of Obedience, O Savior, thou would herein have
respect to thine own just Glory. Had not these Lepers been cured in the way,
but in the end of their walk, upon their showing to the Priests, the Miracle
had lost much light: perhaps the Priests would have challenged it to
themselves, and have attributed it to their prayers; perhaps the Lepers might
have thought it was thy purpose to honor the Priests as the instruments of
that mavelous Cure. Now there can be no color of any others participation,
since the Leprosy vanishes in the way. As thy Power, so thy Praise admits of
no partners.

And now, methinks, I see what an amazed joy there was amongst these Lepers,
when they saw themselves thus suddenly cured: each tells other what a change
he feels in himself; each comforts other with the assurance of his outward
clearness; each congratulates others happiness, and thinks, and says how
joyful this news will be to their friends and families. Their society now
serves them well to applaud and heighten their new felicity.

The Miracle indifferently wrought upon all, is differently taken. All went
forward (according to the appointment) toward the Priests, all were obedient;
one only was thankful. All were cured, all saw themselves cured: their sense
was alike, their hearts were not alike. What could make the difference It is
not in him that wills nor in him that runs, but in God that has mercy. O
God, if we look not up to thee, we may come, and not be healed; we may be
healed, and not be thankful.

This one man breaks away from his fellows to seek Christ. Whiles he was a
Leper, he consorted with Lepers; now that he is healed, he will be free. He
says not, I came with these men, with them I will go; if they will return, I
will accompany them; if not, what should I go alone? as I am not wiser then
they, so I have no more reason to be more thankful. There are cases wherein
Singularity is not lawful only, but laudable. Thou shall not follow a
multitude to do evil. I and my house will serve the Lord. It is a base and
unworthy thing for a man so to subject himself to others examples, as not
sometimes to resolve to be an example to others. When either evil is to be done
or good neglected, how much better is it to go the right way alone, then

Oh noble pattern of Thankfulness! what speed of retribution is here? No
sooner does he see his Cure, then he hasts to acknowledge it: the Benefit shall
not die, not sleep in his hand. Late professions of our obligations favor of
dullness and ingratitude. What a laborious and diligent officiousness is here?
He stands not still, but puts himself to the pains of a return. What an hearty
recognition of the blessing? His voice was not more loud in his suit then in
his thanks. What an humble reverence of his Benefactour? He falls down at his
feet: as acknowledging at once beneficence and unworthiness. It were happy for
all Israel, if they could but learn of this Samaritane.

This man is sent with the rest to the Priests. He well knew this duty a branch
of the Law of Ceremonies, which he meant not to neglect: but his heart told him
there was a Moral duty of professing thankfulness to his Benefactor, which
called for his first attendance. First therefore he turns back, ere he will
stir forward. Reason taught this Samaritane (and us in him) that ceremony

It is not for nothing that note is made of the Country of this thankful
Leper; He was a Samaritane: The place is known and branded with the infamy of a
Paganish mis-religion. Outward disadvantage of place or parentage cannot block
up the way of God's Grace and free election; as contrarily the privileges of
birth and nature avail us nothing in spiritual occasions.

How sensible were thou, O Savior, of thine own beneficence? Were there not
ten cleansed? but where are the nine? The trouping of these Lepers together did
not hinder thy reckoning. It is both justice and wisdom in thee to keep
forgives iniquities: but for his mercies, there is no reason he should forget
them; they are worthy of more then our memory. His favors are universal over
all his works; there is no creature that tastes not of his bounty; his Sun and
Rain are for others besides his friends: but none of his good turns escapes
either his knowledge or record. Why should not we (O God) keep a book of our
receipts from thee, which agreeing with thine may declare thee bounteous, and us
thankful?

Samaritane returned, nine Israelites were healed and returned not. Had they
been all Samaritanes, this had been faulty; but now they were Israelites, their
ingratitude was more foul then their Leprosy. The more we are bound to God,
the more shameful is our unthankfulness. There is scarce one in ten that is
careful to give God his own: this neglect is not more general then
displeasing. Christ had never missed their presence, if their absence had not
been hateful and

The Pool of Bethesda,
Meditated on in a Sermon preached at the Court before King James of Blessed
memory.
To the Reader.
THe Reader may be pleased to understand, that my manner has still been,
first, to pass through all these Divine Histories by way of Sermons, and then
after to gather the quintessence of those larger discourses into these forms
of Meditations which he sees: Only I have thought good upon these two
following heads (for some good reasons)

The Pool of Bethesda.
O Therwhere ye may look long, and see no Miracle; but here behold two Miracles
in one view: the former, of the Angel curing Diseases; the later, of the God of
Angels, Christ Jesus, preventing the Angel in his Cure. Even the first Christ
wrought by the Angel; the second immediately by himself. The first is
incomparable, for (as Montanus truly observes) there is no one miraculum
perpetuum but this one, in the whole Book of God. Be content to spend this hour
with me in the porches of Bethesda, and consider with me the Topography, the
Aitiology, the Chronography of Seneca said, the Jews did Septimam aetatis
partem perdere, lose the seventh part of their life. Monthly, the New moons,
Numb. 18. Anniversary, Easter, Pentecost, and the September-feasts. The
Churches, both the Purim by Mardocheus; and the Encaenia by Judas Maccabaeus,
which yet Christ honored by his solemnization, John 10. Surely God did this for
the cheerfulness of his people in his service: hence the Church has laudably
imitated this example. To have no Feasts is sullen: to have too many is
Paganish and Superstitious. Neither would God have cast the Christian Easter
upon the just time of the Jewish Pasch, and their Whitsontide upon the Jewish
Pentecost; if he would not have had these Feasts continued. And why should the
Christian Church have less power then the Jewish Synagogue? Here was not a
mere Feriation, but a Feasting; they must appear before God cum muneribus with
gifts. The tenth part of their increase must be spent upon the three solemn
Feasts, besides their former tithes to Levi, Deuteronomy. 14. 23. There was no
holy day wherein they feasted above six hours: David, when he would keep
holy day to the Ark, allows every Israelite a cake of bread, a piece of flesh,
a bottle of wine; not a dry dinner ( prandium caninum) not a mere drinking, of
wine without meat, but to make up a perfect feast, Bread, Flesh, Wine, 2. Sam.
6. The true Purims of this Island are those two Feasts of August and November.
He is no true Israelite that keeps them not, as the days which the Lord has
made. When are joy and triumphs seasonable if not at Feasts? but not excess.
Pardon me, I know not how Feasts are kept at the Court: but, as Job, when he
thought of the banquets of his Sons, says, It may be they have sinned; so let
me speak at peradventures, If Ely, Non est bona fama, filii, It is no good
report, my sons. Do ye think that S: Paul's rule, Non in comessationibus and
ebrietate, not in surfeiting and drunkenness, was for work-days only? The
Jews had a conceit, that on their Sabbath and. Feast-days the Devils fled from
their Cities ad montes umbrosos, to the shadie mountains. Let it not be said,
that on our Christian Feasts they should e montibus aulam petere: and that he
seeks, and finds not, loca arida, but madida. God forbid that Christians should
sacrifice to Bacchus in stead of the ever-living God: and that on the day when
you should have been blown up by treacherous fire from earth to Heaven, you
unum necessarium one thing necessary, says Christ. Homo cbrius, superflua
creatura, A drunken man is a superfluous creature, says Ambrose. How ill do
those two agree together? This I have been bold to say out of caution, not of
reproof.

Irenaeus, and Beza with him, thinks, upon the warrant of John 4. 35. where our
Savior had said, Yet four months, and then comes harvest: or whether
Pentecost, which was fifty days from the shaking of the sheaf (that was Easter
Sunday) as Cyrill, Chrysostom, Theophylact, Euthymius, and some later: or
whether one of the September Feasts, as some others. The excellency of the
Feast makes for Easter; the Feast (...). the number of Interpreters for
Pentecost; the number of Feasts for September. For as God delighted in the
number of seven, the seventh day was holy, the seventh year, the seventh seven
year: so he showed it in the September; the first day whereof was the Sabbath
of Trumpets, the tenth dies expiationum, and on the fifteenth began the Feast
of Tabernacles for seven days. It is an idleness to seek that which we are
never the better when we have found. What if Easter? what if Tabernacles? what
if Pentecost? what loss, what gain is this? Magna nos molestia Johannes
liberasset, si unum adjecisset verbum, John had eased us of much trouble, if he
had added but one word, says Maldonat. But for us, God give them sorrow which
love it: this is one of Saint Paul's (...) vain disputations, that he forbids
his Timothy; yea, (which is the subject thereof) one of them which he calls
(...), foolish and unlearned questions, 2 Timothy 2. 23. Quantum mali facit nimia
subtilitas? how much mischief is done by too much subtilitie? says Seneca.
These are for some idle Cloisterers that have nothing to do but to pick straws
in Divinity: Like to Appian the Grammarian, that with long discourse would pick
out of Homer's first verse of his Iliads, and the first word ((...)) the number
of the books of Iliads and Odysses; or like Didymus (...), that spent some of
his four thousand books about, which was Homer's Country, who was Aeneas's
true mother, what the age of Hecuba, how long it was betwixt Homer and Orpheus;
or those wise Critics of whom Seneca speaks, that spent whole volumes, whether
Homer or Hesiod were the elder. Non profuturam scientiam as he said. Let us be
content with the learned ignorance of what God has concealed; and know, that
what he has concealed, will not avail us to know.

Rather let us inquire why Christ would go up to the Feast. I find two silken
cords that drew him up thither. 1 His Obedience. 2 His desire of manifesting
his Glory.

First, It was a general law, All males must appear thrice a year before the
Lord. Behold, he was the God whom they went up to worship at the Feast; yet he
goes up to worship. He began his life in obedience, when he came in his Mothers
belly to Bethleem at the taxation of Augustus, and so he continues Of whom do
the Kings of the earth receive tribute? of their own, or of strangers? Then
their Sons are free. Yet he that would pay tribute to Caesar, will also pay
this tribute of Obedience to his Father. He that was above the Law, yields to
the Law: Legi satisfacere voluit, etsi non sub Lege, He would satisfy the Law,
though he were not under the Law. The Spirit of God says, He learned Obedience
in that he suffered. Surely also he taught obedience in that he did. This was
his (...) to John Baptist, It becomes us to fulfill all Righteousness. He will
not abate his Father one Ceremony. It was dangerous to go up to that Jerusalem
which he had left before for their malice: yet now he will up again. His
Obedience drew him Gedeon made to Israel, he makes still to us, As ye see me
do, so do ye. Whatsoever therefore God injoyns us, either immediately by
himself, or mediately by his Deputies, if we will be Christians, we must so
observe, as those that know themselves bound to tread in his steps that said,
In the volume of thy Book it is written of Psalm. 40. 6. I will have obedience
(says God) and not sacrifice. But where Sacrifice is Obedience, he will have
Obedience in sacrificing. Therefore Christ went up to the Feast.

The second motive was the manifestation of his Glory. If we be the light of
the world, which are so much snuff, what is he that is the Father of lights?
It was not for him to be set under the bushel of Nazareth, but upon the table
of Jerusalem. Thither and then was the confluence of all the Tribes. Many a
time had Christ passed by this man before, when the streets were empty; for
there he lay many years; yet heales him not till now. He that sometimes
modestly steals a Miracle with a Vide ne cui dixeris, that no man might know
it; at other times does Wonders upon the Scaffold of the World, that no man
might be ignorant, and bids proclaim it on the house tops. It was fit the world
should be thus publicly convinced, and either wone by belief, or lost by
inexcusableness. Good the more common it is, the better. I will praise thee,
says David, in Ecclesia magna, in the great Congregation. Glory is not got in
corners. No man (say the envious kinsmen of Christ) keeps close, and would be
famous. No, nor that would have God celebrated. The best opportunities must be
taken in glorifying him. He that would be Crucified at the Feast, that his
Death and Resurrection might be more famous; will at the Feast do Miracles,
Flos campi, non horti, the flower of the field, and not of the garden, says
Bernard. God cannot abide to have his Graces smothered in us. I have not hid
thy righteousness within my heart, says the Psalmist. Absolon when he would be
insigniter improbus notoriously wicked, does his villainy publicly in the eyes
of the Sun, under no curtain but Heaven. He that would do notable service to
God, must do it conspicuously. Nicodemus gained well by Christ, but Christ got
nothing by him, so long as, like a night-bird, he never came to him but with
owls and bats. Then he began to be a profitable Disciple, when he durst oppose
the Pharisees in their condemnation of Christ, though indefinitely:

This is enough for the Chronography; the Topography follows. I will not here
stand to show you the ignorance of the Vulgar translation, in joining probatica
and piscina together, against their own fair Vatican copy, with other Ezra: nor
to show how ill piscina in the Latin answers the Greek (...). ours turn it a
pool, better then any Latin word can express it: nor to show you (as I might)
how many public Pools were in Jerusalem: nor to discuss the use of this Pool,
whether it were for washing the beasts to be sacrificed, or to wash the
entrails of the Sacrifice; whence I remember Hierom fetches the virtue of the
water, and in his time thought he discerned some redness, as if the blood spilt
four hundred years before could still retain his first tincture in a liquid
substance; besides that it would Bethsida, or Bethzida, or Bethsheda, or
Bethesda. If either you or my self knew not how to be rid of time, we might
easily wear out as many hours in this Pool five Porches. Neither will I run
here with S. Austin into Allegories; that this Pool was the people of the Jews,
Aquae multae, populus multus, and these five Porches the Law in the five books
of Moses: nor stand to confute Adrichomius, which out of Josephus would
persuade us that these five Porches were built by Solomon, and that this was
stagnum Solomonis, for the use of the Temple. The following words show the use
of the Porches; for the receipt of impotent, sick, blind, halt, withered, that
waited for the moving of the water. It should seem it was walled about to keep
it from Cattle, and these five valuted entrances were made by some Benefactors

Jerusalem was grown a City of blood, to the persecution of the Prophets, to a
wilful despite of what belonged to her peace, to a profanation of God's
Temple, to a mere formality in God's services: and yet here were public works
of Charity in the midst of her streets. We may not always judge of the truth
of Piety by charitable actions. Judas disbursed the money for Christ; there was
no Traitor but he. The poor traveller that was robbed and wounded Jerusalem and
Jericho, was passed over first by the Priest, then the Levite; at last the
Samaritan came and relieved him: His Religion was naught, yet his act was good,
the Priests and Levites Religion good, their uncharity ill. Novatus himself was
a Martyr, yet a Schismatic. Faith is the soul, and good works are the breath,
says S. James: but as you see in a pair of bellows there is a forced breath
without life; so in those that are puffed up with the wind of oftentation,
there may be charitable works without Faith. The Church of Rome, unto her four
famous Orders of Jacobins, Franciscans, Augustines and Carmelites, has added a
fifth of Jesuits; and, like another Jerusalem, for those five Leprous and
lazarly Orders has built five porches; Digna est, nam struxit Synagogam, She
is worthy, for she has built a Synagogue. Are we more orthodox, and shall not
we be as charitable? I am ashamed to think of rich Noblemen and Merchants that
dye and give nothing to our five porches of Bethesda. What shall we say? Have
they made their Mammon their God, in stead of making friends with their
Ambrose's good Usurers) part with that which they cannot hold, that they may
get that which they cannot lose? Can they begin their will, In Dei nomine,
Amen; and give nothing to God? Is he only a Witness, and not a Legatee? Can we
bequeath our Souls to Christ in Heaven, and give nothing to his Lims on earth?
And if they will not give, yet will they not lend to God? He that gives to the
poor, Foeneratur Deo, lends to God. Will they put out to any but God? and then,
when in stead of giving security, he receives with one hand and pays with
another, receives our bequest and gives us glory? Oh damnable niggardliness of
vain men, that shames the Gospel, and loses Heaven! Let me show you a Bethesda
Bethesda so far from building, that they are pulled down. It is a wonder if
the demolished stones of God's House have not built some of yours, and if some
of you have not your rich Suits guarded with Souls. There were wont to be
reckoned three wonders of England, Ecclesia, Foemina, Lana, The Churches, the
Women, the Wool. Foemina may pass still; who may justly challenge wonder Lana,
if it be wonderful alone, I am sure it is ill joined with Ecclesia: The Church
is fleeced, and has nothing but a bare pelt left upon her back. And as for
Ecclesia, either men have said with the Babylonians, Down with it, down with it
even to the ground; or else in respect of the Maintenance, with Judas, ut quid
perditio haec? why was this wast? How many remorseful souls have sent back,
with Jacob's sons, their money in their Sacks mouths? How many great Testators
have in their last Will returned the anathematized peculium of Impropriations
to the Church, choosing rather to impair their heir then to burden their Souls?
Dum times ne pro te patrimonium tuum perdas, ipse propatrimonio tuo peris,
says Cyprian, Whiles thou fear to lose thy Patrimony for thy own good, thou
perishest with thy patrimony. Ye great men, spend not all your time in building
Castles in the air, or houses on the sand; but set your hands and purses to
the building of the porches of Bethesda. It is a shame for a rich Christian to
be like a Christmas-box, that receives all, and nothing can be got out till it
be broken in pieces; or like unto a drowned man's hand, that holds whatsoever it
gets. To do good and to distribute, forget not; for with such Sacrifices God
is well pleased.

This was the place, what was the use of it? All sorts of Patients were at the
bank of Bethesda: where should Cripples be but at the Spittle? The all that did
either morbo laborare or vitio corporis, complain of sickness or impotency,
were there. In natural course, one receipt heales not all diseases, no nor one
Agent; one is an Oculist, another a Bone-setter, another a Chirugion: But all
diseases are alike to the supernatural power of God.

Hippocrates, though the Prince of Physicians, yet swears by Aesculapius he
will never meddle with cutting of the Stone. There is no Disease that Art will
not meddle with: there are many that it cannot cure. The poor Haemorrhoissa was
eighteen years in the Physicians hands, and had purged away both her body and
her substance. Yea some it kills in stead of Physicians and dead men. But
behold here all Sicknesses cured by one hand, and by one water. O all ye that
are spiritually sick and diseased, come to the Pool of Bethesda, the blood of
Christ. Do ye complain of the Blindness of your Ignorance? here ye shall
receive clearness of Sight: of the distemper of Passions? here Ease: of the
superfluity of your sinful Humors? here Evacuation: of the impotency of your
Obedience? here Integrity: of the Dead witheredness of good Affections? here
Life and Vigor. Whatsoever your infirmity be, come to the Pool of Bethesda, and
be healed.

All these may be cured; yet shall be cured at leisure; all must wait, all must
Bethesda must be waited on. He is worthy of his Crutches that will not stay
God's leisure for his Cure. There is no virtue, no success without patience.
Waiting is a familiar lesson with Courtiers: and here we have all need of it.
One is sick of an overflowing of the Gall, another of a Tumor of Pride, another
of the Tentigo of Lust, another of the Vertigo of Inconstancy, another of the
choking Squinancy of Curses and Blasphemies; one of the Boulimy of Gluttony,
another Bethesda of God, attend diligently upon his Ordinances: we could
Quantis laboribus agitur ut longiore tempore laboretur! multi cruciatus
suscipiuntur corri, ut panci dies adjiciantur incerti, What toil do we take
that we may toil yet longer! we endure many certain pains for the addition of
a few uncertain days, says Austin. Why will we not do thus for the Soul?
Without waiting it will not be. The Cripple (Act. 3. 4.) was bidden, (...),
look up to us. He looked up. It was cold comfort that he heard, Silver and Gold
have I none: but the next clause made amends for all, Surge and ambula, rise
and walk: and this was, because (...), he attended expecting, verse 5. Would we
be cured? It is not for us to snatch at Bethesda, Nilus; nor to draw water and
away, as Rebecca; nor to set us a while upon the banks, as the Israelites by
the rivers of Babylon: but we must dwell in God's house, wait at Bethesda. But
what shall I say to you Courtiers, but even as Saint Paul to his Corinthians,
Ye are full, ye are rich, ye are strong without us? Many of you come to this
place not as to Bethel, the House of God, or Bethesda, the house of effusion;
but as to Bethaven, the house of vanity. If ye have not lost your old wont,
there are more words spoken in the outer closet by the hearers, then in the
Chapel by the Preacher; as if it were Closet, quasi close set, in an Exchange,
like communication of News. What, do ye think of Sermons as matters of
formality, as very Pelagian note, Quid nunc mihi opus est Deo? What need have I
of God? What should I say to this but, Increpa, Domine. As for our household
Sermons, our Auditors are like the fruit of a tree in an unseasonable year; or
like a wood new felled, that has some few spires left for standers some poles
distance; or like the tithe sheaves in a field when the corn is gone, (...),
etc. as he said. It is true, ye have more Sermons and more excellent then all
the Courts under Heaven put together: but, as Austin Quid mihi proderit bona
res non utenti been? What am I the better for a good thing if I use it not
well? Let me tell you, all these forcible means not well used, will set you
the further off from Heaven. If the Chapel were the Bethesda of promotion,
what thronging would there be into it? Yea if it were but some mask-house,
wherein a glorious (though momentany) show were to be presented, neither white
staves nor halberts could keep you out. Behold here, ye are offered the honor
to be (by this seed of Regeneration) the Sons of God. The Kingdom of heaven,
the Crown of glory, the Scepter of Majesty, in one word, Eternal life is here
offered and performed to you. O let us not so far forget our selves, as in the
Ordinances of God to contemn Bethesda of God; that when the Angel shall descend
and move the Water, our Souls may be cured, and through all

The first Part of the Meditations upon the
In a Sermon preached at Havering-Bower before K. James of Blessed memory.
THere is not in all Divinity an higher speculation then this of Christ
transfigured. Suffer me therefore to lead you up by the hand into Mount Tabor
(for nearer to Heaven ye cannot come while ye are upon earth that you may see
him glorious upon earth, the Region of his after six days; the Place, an high
hill apart; the Attendants, Peter, James, John; the Company, Moses and Elias:
which when we have passed, on the top of the hill shall appear to us that sight
which shall once make us glorious, and in the mean time happy.

All three Evangelists accord in the Terminus a quo, that it was immediately
after those words, There be some of them that stand here, which shall not taste
of death till they have seen the Son of Man come in his Kingdom. Wherein,
methinks, the act comments upon the words. Peter, James and John, were these
some: they tasted not of death, till they saw this Heavenly image of the
Royalty of Christ glorified. But the Terminus quo disagrees a little. Matthew
and Mark say, after six; Luke, post fere octo: which as they are easily
reconciled by the usual distinction of inclusive and exclusive, necessary for
all computations, and Luke's about eight; so methinks, seem to intimate God's
seventh day, the Sabbath: why should there be else so precise mention of six
God teaches both by words and acts, says Hilary, that after six Ages of the
world should be Christ's glorious appearance, and our transfiguration with him.
But I know what our Saviors farewell was, (...), it is not for us to know.
above that we ought, faith S. Paul: we may not super sapere, as Tertullian's
phrase is.

For the Place, tradition has taken it still for Tabor: I list not to cross it
without warrant. This was an high Hill indeed; thirty furlongs high, says
Josephus; mira rotundi^ate sublimis, says Hierome: and so steep, that some of
our English travelers, that have desired to climbit of late, have been glad to
give it up in the midway, and to measure the rest with their eyes, Doubtless
this Hill was a Symbol of Heaven, being near it as in situation, in
resemblance. Heaven is expressed usually by the name of God's hill: and Nature
or this appellation taught the Heathens to figure it by their Olympus. All
Divine Sinai was the Law delivered: on the hill of Moriah was Isaac to be
sacrificed; whence Abraham's posie is (...) in monte providebitur: on the hill
of Rephidim stood Moses with the rod of God in his stretched hand, and figured
him crucified upon the hill, whom Joshua figured victorious in the valley: on
the hills of Ebal Gerizim were the Blessings and Curses: on Carmel was Eliah's
sacrifice. The Phrontisteria, Schools or Universities of the Prophets, were
still Ramah and Gibeah, excelsa, High places. Who knows not that on the hill of
Sion stood the Temple? I have looked up to the hills, says the Psalmist. And
Idolatry, in imitation, had their hill-altars. On the Mount of Olives was
Christ wont to send up his Prayers, and sent up himself. And here Luke says,
he went up to an high hill to pray; not for that God makes difference of
places, to whose immensity Heaven it self is a valley: (It was an heathenish
conceit of those Aramites, that God is Deus montium, the God of the mountains)
but because we are commonly more disposed to good by either the freedom of our
scope Aaron and Hur were in the mountain with Moses, and held up his hands.
Aaron (say some Allegorists) is mountainous; Hur, fiery: Heavenly Meditation
and the fire of Charity must lift up our prayers to God. As Satan carried up
Christ to an high hill to tempt him, so he carries up himself to be freed from
temptation and distraction. If ever we would be transfigured in our
disposition, we Venite, ascendamus; Oh come, let us climb up to the hill, where
God sees or is seen, says devout Bernard. O all ye cares, distractions,
thoughtfulness, labors, pains, servitudes, stay me here with this ass, my
body, till I with the boy, that is, my Reason and Understanding, shall worship
and return, says the same Father, wittily alluding to the journey of Abraham
for his sacrifice.

Wherefore then did Christ climb up this high hill? Not to look about him, but,
says S. Luke, (...) to pray; not for prospect, but for devotion; that his
thoughts might climb up yet nearer to Heaven. Behold how Christ entered upon all
his great works with Prayers in his mouth. When he was to A Jove principium:
and which of those verse-mongers ever durst write a ballad without imploring of
some Deity? which of the heathens durst attempt any great enterprise,
insalutato without invocation and sacrifice? Saul himself would play the
Priest, and offer a burnt-offering to the Lord, rather then the Philistines
should fight with him unsupplicated; as thinking any devotion better then none;
and thinking it more safe to sacrifice without a Priest, then to fight without
Prayers. Ungirt, unblest, was the old word; as not ready till they were girded,
so not till they had prayed. And how dare we rush into the affairs of God or
the State? how dare we thrust our selves into actions either perilous or
important, without ever lifting up our eyes and hearts unto the God of Heaven?
Except we would say (as the devilish malice of Surius slanders that zealous
Luther) Nec propter Deum haec res coepta est, nec propter Deum etc. This
business was neither begun for God, nor shall be ended for him. How can God
bless us if we implore him not? how can we prosper if he bless us not? How can
we hope ever to be transfigured from a lump of corrupt flesh, if we do not
ascend and pray? As the Samaritane woman said weakly, we may seriously, The
well of mercies is deep: if thou have nothing to draw with, never look to taste
of the waters of life. I fear the worst of men, Turks, and the worst Turks, the
Moors, shall rise up in Judgment against

Ye have seen the Place, see the Attendants. He would not have many, because he
would not have it yet know to all: hence was his intermination, and sealing up
their mouths with a Nemini dicite, Tell no man. Not none, because he would not
have it altogether unknown; and afterward would have it known to all. Three
were a legal number; in ore duorum aut trium, in the mouth of two or three
witnesses. He had eternally possessed the glory of his Father without any
witnesses: in time the Angels were blessed with that sight; Enoch and Elias.
Now in his humanity he was invested with glory, he takes but three witnesses,
and those earthly and weak, Peter, James, John. And why these? We may be too
curious. Peter, because the eldest; John, because the dearest; James, because
next Peter the zealousest: Peter, because he loved Christ most; John, because
Christ most loved him; James, because next to both he loved, and was loved
most. I had rather to have no reason, but, quia complacuit, because it so
pleased him. Why may we not as well ask why he chose these twelve from others,
as why he chose these three out of the twelve? If any Romanists will raise from
hence any privilege to Peter, (which we could be Pompeian spirits cannot
abide. As good no privilege as any partners. And withal, they must see him
more taxed for his error in this act, then honored by his presence at the act;
whereas the Beloved Disciple saw and erred not. These same three which were
witnesses of his Transfiguration in the mount, were witnesses of his Agony in
the garden; all three, and these three alone, were present at both: but both
times sleeping. These were arietes gregis, the Bell-wethers of the flock, as
Austin calls them. Oh weak devotion of three great Disciples! These were Paul's
three pillars, (...), Gal. 2. 9. Christ Chrysostom would fain excuse it to be
an amazedness, not a sleep; not considering that they slept both at that Glory,
and after in the Agony. To see that Master praying, one would have thought
should have fetched them on their knees; especially to see those Heavenly
affections look out at his Eyes; to see his Soul lifted up in his Hands in that
transported fashion to Heaven. But now the hill has wearied their ^ims, their
body clogs their Soul, and they fall asleep. Whiles Christ saw Divine visions,
they dreamed dreams; whiles he was in another world, quia incessanter pecco,
because I continually sin, Bernard's reason) might have moved them to pray
rather then their Master: and behold, in stead of fixing their eyes upon
Abraham's or Elihu's ecstatical sleep, Job 33. not the sleep of the Church, a
waking sleep; but the plain sleep of the eyes: and that not (...), a slumbring
sleep, which David denies to himself, Psalm. 132. but (...), a sound sleep,
which Solomon forbids Prove. 6. 4. yea rather (...), the dead sleep of Adam or
Jonas, and, as Bernard had wont to say when he heard a Monk snort, they did
carnaliter seu seculariter dormire. Prayer is an ordinary receipt for sleep. How
prone are we to it, when we should mind Divine things? Adam slept in Paradise
and lost a Rib: but this sleep was of God's giving, and Eutychus slept, and
fell. While Satan lulls us asleep (as he does always rock the cradle when we
sleep in our Devotions) he ever takes some good from us, or puts some evil in
us, or indangers us a deadly fall. Away with this spiritual Lethargy. Bernard
had wont to say that those which sleep are dead to men, those that are dead are
asleep to God. But I say, those that sleep at Church are dead to God: so we
preach their Funeral Sermons in stead of hortatory. And as he was wont to say,
he lost no time so much as that wherein he slept; so let me add, there is no
loss of time so desperate as of holy time. Think that Christ says to thee at
every Sermon, as he did to Peter, Etiam Petre dormis? A slumbring and a drowsy
heart do not become the business and presence of him that keeps Israel, and
slumbers not.

These were the Attendants; see the Companions of Christ. As our glory is not
consummate without Society; no more would Christ have his: therefore his
Transfiguration has two Companions, Moses, Elias. As S. Paul says of himself,
Whether in the body or out of the body, I know not, God knows: so say I of
these two. Of Eliah there may seem less doubt, since we know that his body was
assumed to Heaven, and might as well come down for Christ's glory as go up for
his own; although some grave Authors, as Calvin, Oecolampadius, have held his
body with Enoch's, resolved into their elements: sed ego non credulus illis.
Enoch translatus est in carne, and Elias carneus raptus est in coelum, etc.
Enoch was translated in the flesh, and Elias being yet in the flesh was taken
into Heaven, says Hierome in his Epistle ad Pammachium.

And for Moses; though it be rare and singular, and Austin makes much scruple
of it: yet why might not he after death return in his body to the glory of
Christ's Transfiguration, as well as afterward many of the Saints did to the
glory of his Resurrection? I cannot therefore with the Gloss think, there is
any reason why Moses should take another, a borrowed body, rather then his own.
Heaven could not give two fitter Companions, more admirable to the Horeb; both
of them Types of Christ; both of them fasted forty days; both of them for the
glory of God suffered many perils; both divided the waters; both the Messengers
of God to Kings; both of them mavelous, as in their life, so in their end, A
Chariot of Angels took away Elias; he was sought by the Prophets, and not
found: Michael strove with the Devil for the body of Moses; he was sought for
by the Jews, and not found: and now both of them are found here together on
Tabor. This Elias shows himself to the Royal Prophet of his Church; this Moses
shows himself to the true Michael: Moses the publisher Elias the chief of the
Prophets, show themselves to the God of the Law and Prophets. Alter populi
informator aliquando, alter reformator quandoque, One the informer once of the
people, the other the reformer sometimes, says Tertull. in 4. adver.
Marcionem. Alter initiator Veteris Testamenti, alter consummator Novi, One the
first Register of the Old Testament, the other the shutter up of the New. I
verily think, with Hilary, that these two are pointed at as the Forerunners of
the second coming of Christ, as now they were the Enoch into the place of
Moses. Look upon the place, Apoc. 11. 5. Who but Elias can be he of whom is
said, If any man will hurt him, fire proceeds out of his mouth and devoureth
his enemies, alluding to 2 Kings 1? Who but Elias of whom is said, He has
power to shut the Heaven, that it rain not in the days of his prophesying,
alluding to 1 Kings 18? Who but Moses of whom it is said, He has power to turn
the waters into blood, and smite the earth with all manner of plagues, alluding
to Exodus 7, and 8? But take me aright; let me not seem a friend to the
Publicans of Rome, an abettor of those Alcoran-like Fables haerere in cortice,
stick in the bark, taking all concerning that Antichrist according to the
letter. Odi, and arceo. So shall Moses and Elias come again in those Witnesses,
as Elias is already come in John Baptist: their Spirits shall be in these
Witnesses, whose Bodies and Spirits were witnesses both of the present Glory
and future Passion of Christ. Doubtless many thousand Angels saw this sight,
and were not seen; these two both saw and were seen. O how great an Happiness
was it for these two great Prophets, in their glorified flesh to see their
glorified Savior, who before his Incarnation had spoken to them? to speak to
that Man God of whom they were glorified, and to become Prophets not to men,
but to God? Moses his face so shone before, when he spoke to him without a body
in Mount Sinai, in the midst of the flames and clouds; how did it shine now,
when himself glorified, speaks to him a man, in Tabor, in light and majesty?
Elias hid his face before with a mantle when he passed by him in the Rock: now
with open face he beholds him present, and in his own glory adores his. Let
that impudent Marcion, who ascribes the Law and Prophets to another God, and
devises an hostility betwixt Christ and them, be ashamed to see Moses and Elias
not only in colloquio, but in consortio claritatis, not only in conference,
but in a partnership of brightness (as Tertull. speaks) with Christ; whom if he
had misliked, he had his choice of all the Quire of Heaven; and now in sordibus
and tenebris, in rags and darkness? Sic inalienos demonstrat illos, dum secum
habet; sic relinquendos docet quos sibi jungit; sic destruit quos de radiis
suis exstruit. So does he show them far from strangeness to him, whom he has
with him; so does he teach them to be forsaken, whom he joins with himself; so
does he destroy those whom he graces with his beams of glory, says that
Father. His act verifies his word. Think not that I come to destroy the Law or
the Prophets; I am not come to destroy, but to fulfill them, Mat. 5. 17. Oh
what consolation, what confirmation was this to the Disciples, to see such
examples of their future Glory? such witnesses and adorers of the eternal Deity
of their Master? They saw in Moses and Elias Abraham, that if one came to them
from the dead, they will amend: Abraham answers, they have Moses and the
Prophets, let them hear them. Behold, here is both Moses and the Prophets; and
these too come from the dead: how can we now but be persuaded of the happy
state of another world, unless we will make our selves worse then the damned?
See and consider that the Saints of God are not lost, but departed; gone into a
far country with their Master, to return again richer and better then they
went. Lest we should Elias only, that was rapt into Heaven, see here Moses
matched with him, that died and was buried. And is this the state of these two
Saints alone? Shall none be seen with him in the Tabor of Heaven but those
which have seen him in Horeb and Carmel? O thou weak Christian, was only one
or two lims of Christ's body glorious in the Transfiguration, Moses and Elias
were more excellent parts, Tongue, or Hand; let us be but Heels or Toes, his
body is not perfect in glory without ours. When Christ, which is our life,
shall appear, then shall we also appear with him in glory, Colos. 3. 4. How
truly may we say to death, Rejoice not mine enemy, though I fall, yet shall I
rise, yea I shall rise in falling? We shall not all sleep, we shall be changed,
says Saint Paul to his Thessalonians. Elias was changed, Moses slept; both
appeared: to teach us, that neither our sleep nor change can keep us from
appearing with him. When therefore thou shall receive the sentence of death on
Mount Nebo, or when the fiery Chariot shall come and sweep thee from this vale
of mortality,

The second Part of the Meditations upon the
In a Sermon preached at White Hall before K. James of Blessed memory.
IT falls out with this Discourse as with Mount Tabor it self; that it is more
easily climbed with the eye, then with the foot. If we may not rather say of
it, as Josephus did of Sinai, that it does not only ascensus hominum, but
aspectus fatigare, weary not only the steps but the very sight of men. We had
thought not to spend many breaths in the skirts of the hill, the Circumstances;
and it has cost us one hours journey already: and we were glad to rest us, ere
we can have left them below us. One pause more (I hope) will Moses and Elias
did with Christ in their apparition. For they were not, as some sleepie
attendants, (like the three Disciples in the beginning) to be there and see
nothing; nor, as some silent spectators, mute witnesses, to see and say
nothing: but, (as if their Glory had no whit changed their profession) they are
Prophets still, and foretold his departure, as S. Luke tells us. Foretold, not
to him which knew it before, yea which told it them; they could not have known
it but from him; he was (...), the Word of his Father: they told but that which
he before had told his Disciples; and now these Heavenly witnesses tell it over
again, for confirmation. Like as John knew Christ before; he was Vox clamantis,
the voice of a crier, the other Verbum Patris, the Word of his Father; there is
great affinity betwixt vox and verbum; yea this voice had uttered it self
clearly, Ecce agnus Dei, Behold the Lamb of God: yet he sends his Disciples
with an Art thou he? that he might confirm to them by him, that which he both
knew and had said of him. So our Savior follows his Forerunner in this, that
what he knew and had told his Disciples, the other Elias, the typical John
Baptist, and Moses must make good to their belief.

This (...) departure of Christ was (...) a word both hard and harsh; hard to
believe, and harsh in believing. The Disciples thought of nothing David did so
fill their eyes, that they could not see his Cross: and if they must let down
this Pill, how bitter must it needs be? His presence was their joy and life; it
was their death to think of his loss. Now therefore that they might see that
his Sufferings and Death were not of Chrysostom^, that Christ never lightly
spoke of his Passion, but immediately before and after he did some great
Miracle. And here answerably, in the midst of his miraculous Transfiguration,
the two Saints speak of his Passion. A strange opportunity: In his highest
Exaltation to speak of his Sufferings; to talk of Calvary in Tabor; when his
Head shone with I have said, ye are Gods: if ye were transfigured in Tabor,
could ye be more? but ye shall die like men: there is your (...). It was a
worthy and witty note of Hierome, that amongst all trees, the Cedars are bidden
to praise God, which are the tallest: and yet Dies Domini super omnes Cedros
Libani, Esaias 2. Ye gallants, whom a little yellow earth and the webs of that
curious worm have made gorgeous without, and perhaps proud within, remember
that ere long, as one worm decks you without, so another worm shall consume you
within; and that both the earth that you pranck up, and that earth wherewith
you pranck it, is running back into dust. Let not your high estate hide from
you your fatal humiliation; let not your Purples hide from you your
Winding Sheet: But even on the top of Tabor think of the depth of the Grave:
think of your departure from men, while ye are advanced above men.

We are now ascended to the top of the Hill. Let us therefore stand, and see,
and wonder at this great sight: as Moses, to see the bush flaming, and not
consumed; so we, to see the Humanity continuing it self in the midst of these
beams of Glory. Christ was (...), says S. Paul, in the form of a servant; now
for the time he was truly (...) transformed: That there is no cause why
Maldonat should so inveigh against some of ours, yea of his own, as Jansenius,
who translates it Transformation: for what is the external form but the figure?
and their own Vulgar (as hotly as he takes it) reads it Philip. 2. 7. (...),
formam servi accipiens. There is no danger in this ambiguity. Not the
substantial form, but the external fashion of Christ was Bernard distinguishes)
contemptam, splendidam, Divinam, changes here the first into the second. This
is one of the rarest occurrences that ever befell the Savior of the World. I am
wont to reckon up these four principal Wonders of his life, Incarnation,
Tentation, Transfiguration, and Agony: the first in the Womb of the Virgin,
the second Bernard makes three kinds of wonderful changes: Sublimitas in
humilitatem, Height to lowliness, when the Word Contemptibilitas in Majestatem,
when Christ transformed himself before his Disciples; Mutabilitas in
Aeternitatem, when he rose again, and ascended to Heaven to reign for ever. Ye
see this is one of them: and as Tabor did rise out of the valley of Galilee, so
this Exaltation did rise out of the midst of Christ's Humiliation. Other
marvels do increase his dejection, this only makes for his Glory; and the
glory of this is matchable with the humiliation of all the rest. That Face
wherein before (says Esaias) there was no form* nor beauty, now shines as the
Sun: That Face which men hid their faces from in contempt, now shines so, that
mortal eyes could not choose but hide themselves from the luster of it, and
immortal receive their beams from it. He had ever in vultu sidereum quiddam, as
Hierome speaks, a certain heavenly Majesty and port in his countenance, which
made his Disciples follow him at first sight; but now here was the perfection
of supercelestial brightness. It was a Miracle in the Three Children, that they
so were delivered from the flames, that their very garments smelt not of the
fire: it is no less Miracle in Christ, that his very garments were died
Celestial, and did savor of his Glory: like as Aaron was so anointed on his
head and beard, that his skirts were all perfumed. His clothes therefore shined
as snow, yea (that were but a waterish white) as the Light it self, says S.
Mark and Matthew, in the most Greek Copies. That seamless coat, as it had no
welt, so it had no spot. The King's Son is all Herod put him on in mockage
(...), Luke 23. not a white, but a bright robe (the ignorance whereof makes a
show of disparity in the Evangelists:) but God the Father, to glorify him,
clothes his very garments with Heavenly splendour. Behold thou art fair (my
beloved) behold thou art fair; and there is no spot in thee. Thine head is as
fine gold, thy mouth is as sweet things, and thou art wholly delectable. Come
forth, ye daughters of Sion, and behold King Solomon, with the Crown wherewith
his Father crowned him in the day of the O Savior, if thou were such in Tabor,
what art thou in Heaven? If this were the glory of thy Humanity, what is the
presence of thy Godhead? Let no man yet wrong himself so much as to magnify
this happiness as another, and to put himself out of the participation of this
glory. Christ is our head, we are his members. As we all were in the First
Adam, both innocent and sinning; so are we in the Second Adam, both shining in
Tabor, and bleeding sweat in the Garden. And as we are already happy in him, so
shall we be once in our selves by and through him. He shall change our vile
bodies, that they may be like his glorious body. Behold our Pattern, and
rejoice; Like his glorious body. These very bodies that are now cloddie like
think that ever they had faces to daub with these beastly pigments, in
comparison All the days of our appointed time we will therefore wait, till our
changing shall come.

Now from the Glory of the Master, give me leave to turn your eyes to the Error
of the Servant, who having slept with the rest, and now suddenly awaking,
knows not whether he slept still. To see such a light about him, Peter slept
waking, and I know not whether more erred in his speech or in his sleep. It was
a shame for a man to sleep in Tabor, but it is more a shame for a man to dream
with his eyes open. Thus did Peter; Master, it is good for us to be here. Let
us make us three Tabernacles. I could well say with Optatus in this or any
other occasion, Ipsius Sancti Petri beatitudo veniam tribuat, dubito dicere
peccasse tantam sanctitatem, Let blessed Peter pardon me, I fear to say so
great Holiness offended. Yet since our adversaries are so over-partial to this
worthy Marcion in honor of Peter, to leave out the story of Malchus, as
Epiphanius notes: It shall be our blame, if we do not so note, that we benefit
our selves even by his imperfections. S. Mark's Gospel is said to be Peter's. O
blessed Apostle, can it be any wrong to say of thee that which thou have
written of thy self, not for insultation, not for exprobration? God forbid but
that men Master, favor thy self. Which though some Parasites of Rome would
fain smooth up, that he in this showed his love to Christ, as before his Faith,
out of S. Hierome and S. Austin; yet it must needs be granted, which Bernard
says, diligebat spiritum carnaliter, he loved the spirit in a carnal fashion.
Let them choose whether they will admit Christ Peter worthy of chiding: Except
perhaps, with Hilary, they will stop where they should not; Vade post me,
spoken to Peter in approbation; Satana, non sapis quae Dei sunt, spoken to
Satan in objurgation, Carnally presuming; Though all men, yet not I. If he had
not presumed of his strength to stand, he had not fallen. And as one yawning
makes many open mouths; so did his vain resolution draw on company: Likewise
said the other Disciples. For his weak Denial; ye all know his simple negation,
lined with an oath, faced with an imprecation. And here, that no man may need
to doubt of an error, the Spirit of God says, he knew not what he said: not
only (...), as Mark, what he should say; but (...), says Luke, what he did
speak: Mark gives the reason, (...) they were amazedly affrighted. Amazedness
may abate an error of speech, it cannot take it away. Besides astonishment,
here was a fervor of spirit; a love to Christ's glory, and a delight in it: a
fire, but misplaced, on the top of the chimney, not on the hearth; Praematura
devotio, as Ambrose speaks, a devotion, but rash and heady. Moses and Elias had
told him, and that which he wished? For how should Christ both depart at
Jerusalem, and stay in the Mount? Or if he would have their abode there, to
avoid the sufferings at Jerusalem, how did he yet again sing over that Come
behind me, Satan? Or if it had been fit for Christ to have stayed there, how
weakly does he (which Chrysostom observes) equalize the servant with the
Master, the Saints with God? In a word, the best and the worst that can be said
here of Peter is, that which the Psalmist says of Moses, (...) effutiit
labiis, he spoke unadvisedly with his lips, Psalm. 106. 33.

Yet if any earthly place or condition might have given warrant to Peter's
motion, this was it. Here was a Hill, the Emblem of Heaven; here were two
Saints, the Epitome of Heaven; here was Christ, the God of Heaven. And if Peter
might not say so of this, how shall we say of any other place, Bonum est Will
ye say of the Country, Bonum est esse hic? there is melancholy dullness,
privacy, toil. Will you say of the Court, Bonum est esse hic? there dwells
ambition, secret undermining, attendance, serving of humors and rimes. Will ye
say of the City, Bonum est esse hic? there you find continual tumult, usury,
couzenage in bargains, excess and disorder. Get you to the Wilderness, and say,
It is good to be here. Even there evils will find us out. In nemore habit at
Lupus, says Bernard, In the wood dwells the Wolf: weariness and sorrow dwell
every where. The rich man wallows amongst his heaps, and when he is in his
Counting House, beset with piles of bags, he can say, Bonum est esse hic: He
worships these molten Images; his Gold is his God, his Heaven Tertullian notes,
Aurum ipsum quibusdam gentibus ad vincla servire, That some Countries make
their very fetters of gold: yea so does he, whilst he admires it, making
himself the slave to his servant, Damnatus ad metalla, as the old Roman
punishment was. Coacta servitus miserabilior, affectata miserior, Forced
bondage is more worthy of pity, affected bondage is more miserable. And if
God's hand touch him never so little, can his Gold bribe a disease, can his
bags keep his head from aching, or the Gout from his joints? or does his
loathing stomach make a difference betwixt an earthen and silver dish? O vain
desires, and impotent contentments of men, who place happiness in that which
does not only not save them from evils, but help Bonum est esse hic. How are
their sleeps broken with cares? how are their hearts broken with losses? Either
Riches have wings, which in the clipping or pulling fly away, and take them to
Heaven: or else their Souls have wings ( Stulte, hac nocte, Thou fool, this
night) and fly from their riches to Hell. Non Dominus, sed colonus, says
Seneca, Not the Lord, but the farmer. So that here are both perishing riches,
and a perishing Soul. Uncertainty of riches (as S. Paul to his Timothy) and
certainty of misery. And yet these vain men say, Bonum est esse hic.

Bernard's phrase) that has Assuerus his proclamation made before him, which
knows he is not only (...), a certain great man, as Simon affected, but (...),
the man, which Demosthenes was proud of, that sees all heads bare, and all
knees bent to him, that finds himself out of the reach of envy, on the pitch
of admiration, says, Bonum est esse hic. Alas! how little thinks he of that
which that good man said to his Eugenius, Non est quod blandiatur celsitudo,
ubi solicitudo major; what care we for the fawning of Henry the seventh's
Emblem in all his buildings, (in the windows) was still a Crown in a bush of
Thorns: I know not with what historical allusion; but sure, I think, to imply
that great places are not free from great cares. Saul knew what he did, when he
hid himself among the stuff. No man knows the weight of a Scepter, but he
that swaieth it. As for subordinate greatness, it has so much less worth as it
has more dependence. How many sleepless nights, and restless days, and busy
shifts does their ambition cost them that affect eminence? Certainly, no men
are so worthy of pity as they whose height thinks all other worthy of contempt.
High places are slippery; and as it is easy to fall, so the ruin is deep,
Altiorem locum sortitus es, non tutiorem; sublimiorem, sed non sccuriorem,
says Bernard; Thou have got an higher place, but not a safer; a loftier, but
not more secure. Aulae culmen lubricum, The slippery ridge of the Court, was
the old title of Honor. David's curse was, fiat via eorum tenebrae and
lubricum, Let their way be made dark and slippery. What difference is there
betwixt his curse and the happiness of the Ambitious, but this, That the way of
the one is dark and slippery, the way of the other lightsome and slippery; that
dark, that they may fall, this light, that they may see and be seen to fall?
Please your selves then, ye great ones, and let others please you in the
admiration of your height. But if your goodness do not answer your greatness,
Sera querela est, quoniam elevans allisisti me, It is a late complaint, Thou
have lift me up to cast me down. Your ambition has but set you up a scaffold,
that your misery might be more notorious. And yet these clients of Honor say,
Bonum est esse hic.

The pampered Glutton, when he sees his table spread with full bowls, with
costly dishes and curious sawces, the dainties of all three elements, says,
Bonum est esse hic. And yet eating has a satiety, and satiety a weariness: his
heart is never more empty of contentment, then when his stomach is fullest of
Delicates. When he is empty, he is not well till he be filled; when he is full,
he is not well till he have got a stomach: Et momentanea blandimenta gulae
stercoris fine says Hierome, And condemns all the momentany pleasures of his
maw to the dunghill. And when he sits at his feasts of marrow and fat things,
(as the Prophet speaks) his table, according to the Psalmists imprecation, is
made his snare; a true snare every way. His Soul is caught in it with excess;
his estate with penury; his Body with diseases. Neither does he more plainly
tear his meat in pieces with his teeth, then he does himself: and yet this vain
man says, Bonum est esse hic.

The petulant Wanton thinks it the only happiness that he may have his full
scope to filthy dalliance. Little would he so do, if he could see his Strumpet
as she is, her eyes the eyes of a Cockatrice, her hairs snakes, her painted
face Peter did of the hill of Tabor, Bonum est esse hic.

And if the best of earth cannot do it, why will ye seek it in the worst? How
dare any of you great one seek to purchase contentment with Oppression,
Sacrilege, Bribery, out-facing innocence and truth with power, damning your
own Souls for but the humoring of a few miserable days? Filii hominum, etc. But
that which moved Peter's desire (though with imperfection) shows what will
perfect our desire and felicity: for if a glimpse of this Heavenly glory did so
ravish this worthy Disciple, that he thought it happiness enough to stand by
and gaze upon it; how shall we be affected Tabor, there is Heaven; here were
but two Saints, there many millions of Saints and Angels; here was Christ
transfigured, there he sits at the right hand of Majesty; here was a
representation, there a gift and possession of Blessedness. Oh that we could
now forget the world, and fixing our eyes upon this better Tabor, say, Bonum
est esse hic. Alas! this life of ours, if it were not short, yet it is
miserable; and if it were not miserable, yet it is short. Tell me, ye that have
the greatest command on earth, whether this vile world have ever afforded you
any sincere contentation. The world is your servant: if it were your Parasite,
yet could it make you heartily merry? Ye delicatest Courtiers, tell me, Tabor,
but mourning in darkness, and in stead of that Heavenly brightness, clothed
with sackcloth and ashes. Then and there we shall have tabernacles not made
with hands, eternal in the heavens, where we shall see how sweet the Lord is:
we shall see the triumphs of Christ; we shall hear and sing the Hallelujahs of
Saints. Quae nunc nos angit vesania, vitiorum sitire absinthium, etc. says
that devour Father. Oh how has our corruption bewitched us, to thirst for this
wormwood, to affect the shipwracks of this world, to dote upon the misery of
this fading life; and not rather to fly up to the felicity of Saints, to the
society of Angels, to that blessed contemplation wherein we shall see God in
himself, God in us, our selves in him! Vae nobis qui vivimus plangere quae
pertulimus, dolere quae sentimus, timere quae exspectamus! Complaint of evils
past, sense of present, fear of future, have shared our lives amongst them.
Then shall we be semper laeti, semper satiati, always joyful, always
satisfied with the vision of that God in whose presence there is fullness of
joy, and at whose right hand are pleasures for evermore. Shall we Cleombrotus
abandoning his life, and casting himself down from the rock, upon an uncertain
noise of immortality; and shall not we Christians abandon the wicked
superfluities of life, the pleasures of sin, for that life which we know more
certainly then this? What stick we at, my beloved? Is there a Heaven, or is
there none? have we a Savior there, or have we none? We know there is a
Heaven, as sure as that there is an earth below us; we know we have a Savior
there, as sure as there are men that we converse with upon earth; we know there
is happiness, as sure as we know there is misery and mutability upon earth. Oh
our miserable sottishness and infidelity, if we do not contemn the best offers
of the world, and lifting up our eyes and hearts to Heaven, say, Bonum est esse
hic!

Even so, Lord Jesus, come quickly. To him that has purchased and prepared
this Glory for us, together with the Father and Blessed Spirit, one
Incomprehensible God, be all praise for ever. Amen.

The Prosecution of the Transfiguration.
BEfore, the Disciples eyes were dazzled with Glory; now the brightness of that
glory is shaded with a Cloud. Frail and feeble eyes of mortality cannot look
upon an Heavenly luster. That Cloud imports both Majesty and Obscuration.
Majesty; for it was the testimony of God's presence of old: the Cloud covered
the Mountain, the Tabernacle, the Oracle. He that makes the clouds his Chariot,
was in a cloud carried up into Heaven. Where have we mention of any Divine
representation, but a Cloud is one

Had they too long gazed upon this resplendent spectacle, as their eyes had
been blinded, so their hearts had perhaps grown to an over-bold familiarity
Sinai, it was so in Sion, it was so in Olivet; it shall never be but so. The
natural day and night do not more duly interchange, then this light and cloud.
Above we shall have the light without the cloud, a clear vision and fruition of
God without all dim and sad interpositions: below we cannot be free from these
mists and clouds of sorrow and misapprehension.

But this was a bright cloud. There is difference betwixt the cloud in Tabor,
Sinai: This was clear, that darksome. There is darkness in the Law, there is
light in the Grace of the Gospel. Moses was there spoken to in darkness; here
he was spoken with in light. In that dark cloud there was terror; in this
there was comfort. Though it were a Cloud then, yet it was bright; and though
it were bright, yet it was a Cloud. With much light there was some shade. God
would not speak to them concerning Christ out of darkness: neither yet would he
manifest himself to them in an absolute brightness. All his appearances have
this mixture. What need I other instance then in these two Saints? Moses spoke
often to God mouth to mouth: yet not so immediately, but that there was ever
somewhat drawn as a curtain betwixt God Horeb, or smoke in Sinai: so as his
face was not more veiled from the people, then God's from him. Elias shall be
spoken to by God, but in the Rock, and under a Mantle. In vain shall we hope
for any revelation from God, but in a cloud. Worldly hearts are in utter
darkness, they see not so much as the least glimpse of these Divine beams, not
a beam of that inaccessible light: The best of his Saints see him here but in a
cloud, or in a glass. Happy are we, if God have honored us with these Divine
representations of himself. Once, in his light we shall see light.

I can easily think with what amazedness these three Disciples stood compassed
in that bright Cloud, exspecting some miraculous event of so Heavenly This is
my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased, hear him. They need not be told
whose that voice was; the place, the matter evinced it. No Angel in Heaven
could, or durst have said so. How gladly does Peter afterward recount it? For
he received from God the Father honor and glory, when there came such a voice
to him from the excellent glory, This is my beloved Son, etc.

It was only the ear that was here taught, not the eye. As of Horeb, so of
Sinai, so of Tabor might God say, Ye saw no shape nor image in that day that
the Lord spoke unto you. He that knows our proneness to idolatry, avoids those
occasions which we might take to abuse our own fancies.

Twice has God spoken these words to his own Son from Heaven; once in his
Baptism, and now again in his Transfiguration. Here not without some
oppositive comparison; not Moses, not Elias, but This. Moses and Elias were
Servants, this a Son: Moses and Elias were sons, but of grace and choice; this
is that Son, the Son by nature. Other sons are beloved as of favor, and free
election; this is The Beloved, as in the unity of his essence. Others are so
beloved, that he is pleased with themselves; this so beloved, that in and for
him he is pleased with mankind. As the relation betwixt the Father and the Son
is infinite, so is the Love. We measure the intention of Love by the extention:
the love that rests in the person affected alone, is but straight: true Love
descends (like Aaron's Ointment) from the head to the skirts; to children,
friends allies. O incomprehensible large love of God the Father to the Son,
that for his sake he is pleased with

This one voice proclaims Christ at once the Son of God, the Reconciler of

The light caused wonder in the Disciples; but the voice astonishment: They are
all fallen down upon their faces. Who can blame a mortal man to be thus affected
with the voice of his Maker? Yet this word was but plausible The Lion shall
roar, who shall not be afraid? How shall those that have slighted the sweet
voice of thine invitations, call to the rocks to hide them from the terror of
thy Judgments?

The God of mercies pities our infirmities. I do not hear our Savior say, Ye
lay sleeping one while upon the earth, now ye lie astonished: Ye could neither
wake to see, nor stand to hear; now lie still and tremble. But he graciously
touches and comforts them, Arise, fear not. That voice which shall once raise
them up out of the earth, might well raise them up from it. That

They looking up, saw no man save Jesus alone: and that doubtless in his wonted
form. All was now gone, Moses, Elias, the Cloud, the Voice, the Glory: Tabor it
self cannot be long blessed with that Divine light and those shining

Moses and Elias are gone, only Christ is left. The glory of the Law and the
Prophets was but temporary, yea momentany; that only Christ may remain to us
entire and conspicuous. They came but to give testimony to Christ; when that is
done, they are vanished.

Neither could these raised Disciples find any miss of Moses and Elias, when
they had Christ still with them. Had Jesus been gone, and left either Moses
Elias, or both, in the Mount with his Disciples, that presence (though
glorious) could not have comforted them. Now that they are gone, and he is
left, they cannot be capable of discomfort. O Savior, it matters not who is
away, whiles thou art with us. Thou art God all-sufficient; what can we want
when we want not thee? Thy presence shall make Tabor it self an Heaven; yea,
Hell it self cannot make us miserable with the fruition of thee.

The Woman taken in Adultery.
WHat a busy life was this of Christ's? He spent the night in the mount of
Olives, the day in the Temple: whereas the night is for a retired repose, the
day for company; His retiredness was for prayer, his companiableness was for
preaching. All night he watches in the Mount; all the morning he preaches in
the Temple. It was not for pleasure that he was here upon earth; his whole time
was penal and toilsome. How do we resemble him, if his life were all pain and
labor, ours all pastime?

He found no such fair success the day before. The multitude was divided in
their opinion of him; messengers were sent and suborned to apprehend him: yet
he returns to the Temple. It is for the sluggard or the coward to plead a Lion
in the way: upon the calling of God, we must overlook and contemn all the
spite and opposition of men. Even after an ill harvest we must sow; and after
denials we must woe for God.

This Sun of Righteousness prevents that other, and shines early with wholesome
doctrines upon the Souls of his hearers. The Auditory is both thronged, and
attentive. Yet not all with the same intentions: If the people came to learn,
the Scribes and Pharisees came to cavil and carp at his teaching. they bring to
him a woman taken in the flagrance of her Adultery.

And why the Woman rather? since the Man's offense was equal, if not more;
because he should have had more strength of resistance, more grace not to
tempt. Was it out of necessity? Perhaps, the man knowing his danger, made use
of his strength to shift away, and violently brake from his apprehenders. Or
was it out of cunning? in that they hoped for more likely matter to accuse
Christ in the case of the woman, then of the man: for that they

Or was it rather out of partiality? Was it not then, as now, that the weakest
soonest suffers; and impotency lays us open to the malice of an enemy? Small
flies hang in the webs, whiles wasps break through without control.

Out of these grounds is the woman brought to Christ: Not to the mount of
Olives, not to the way, not to his private lodging; but to the Temple: and that
not to some obscure angle; but into the face of the assembly.

They pleaded for her death; the punishment which they would onwards inflict
was her shame: which must needs be so much more, as there were more eyes to be
witnesses of her guiltiness. All the brood of sin affects darkness and secrecy,
but this more properly; the twilight, the night is for the adulterer.

Methinks I see this miserable Adulteress how she stands confounded amidst that
gazing and disdainful multitude; how she hides her head, how she wipes her
blubbered face and weeping eyes. In the mean time it is no dumb show that is
here acted by these Scribes and Pharisees; they step forth boldly to her
accusation; Master, this Woman was taken in adultery in the very act. How
plausibly do they begin? Had I stood by and heard them, should All this is done
but to tempt him. Even the falsest hearts will have the plausiblest mouths:
like to Solomon's Curtezan, their lips drop as an honeycomb, and their mouth is
smoother then oil; but their end is bitter as wormwood.

False and hollow Pharisees! he is your Master whom ye serve, not he whom ye
tempt: only in this shall he be approved your Master, that he shall pay your
wages, and give you your portion with hypocrites.

The act of Adultery was her crime: to be taken in the very act, was no

They that complain of the act, urge the punishment; Now Moses in the Law Where
did Moses bid so? Surely the particularity of this execution was without the
book: Tradition and Custom enacted it, not the Law.

Indeed Moses commanded death to both the offenders, not the manner of death to
either. By analogy it holds thus: It is flatly commanded in the case of a
Damsel betrothed to an Husband, and found not to be a Virgin; in the case of a
Damsel betrothed, who being defiled in the city, cried not: Tradition and
custom made up the rest; obtaining out of this ground, that all Adulterers
should be executed by lapidation. The antienter punishment was burning; death
always, though in diverse forms. I shame to think that

What a mis-citation is this? Moses commanded. The Law was God's, not Moses's.
If Moses were employed to mediate betwixt God and Israel, the Law is never the
more his: He was the hand of God to reach the Law to Israel, the hand of Israel
to take it from God. We do not name the water from the pipes, but from the
spring. It is not for a true Israelite to rest in the Moses, he cannot be thus
named without a shameful undervaluing of the royal Law of his Maker. There is
no mortal man whose authority may not grow into contempt: that of the
ever-living God cannot but be ever sacred and inviolable. It is now with the
Gospel, as it was then with the Law: the word is no other then Christ's, though
delivered by our weakness; whosoever be the Crier, the Proclamation is the
King's of Heaven. Whiles it goes for ours, it is no marvel if it lie open to
despite.

How captious a word is this, Moses said thus, what say thou? If they Moses
said so, why do they affirm it? and if they be sure, why do they question that
which they know decided? They would not have desired a better advantage, then a
contradiction to that received Lawgiver. It is their profession, We are
Moses's disciples; and, We know that God spoke to Moses. It had been quarrel
enough to oppose so known a Prophet. Still I find it the drift of the enemies
of truth to set Christ and Moses together by the ears; in the matter of the
Sabbath, of Circumcision, of Marriage and Divorce, of the use of the Law, of
Justification by the Law, of the sense and extent of the Law, and where not?
But they shall never be able to effect it: they two are fast and indissoluble
friends on both parts for ever; each speaks Moses faithful as a Servant, Christ
as a Son. A faithful servant cannot be but officious to the Son. The true use
we make of Moses is, to be our Schoolmaster to teach us, to whip us unto
Christ; the true use we make of Christ is, to supply Moses. By him all that
believe are justified from all things from which they could not be justified by
the Law of Moses. Thus must we hold in with both, if we will have our part in
either: so shall Moses bring us to Christ, and Christ to glory.

Had these Pharisees out of simplicity and desire of resolution in a case of
doubt, moved this question to our Savior, it had been no less commendable

O Savior, whither should we have recourse but to thine Oracle? Thou art the
Word of the Father, the Doctor of the Church. Whiles we hear from others, What
say Fathers? what say Councils? let them hear from us, What say thou?

But here it was far otherwise: they came not to learn, but to tempt; and to
tempt that they might accuse. Like their Father the Devil, who solicits to sin
that he may plead against us for yieldance. Fain would these colloguing
adversaries draw Christ to contradict Moses, that they might take advantage of
his contradiction.

On the one side they saw his readiness to tax the false glosses which their
presumptuous Doctors had put upon the Law, with an, I say unto you: on the
other, they saw his inclination to mercy and commiseration in all his courses,
so far as to neglect even some circumstances of the Law, as to touch the Leper,
to heal on the Sabbath, to eat with known sinners, to dismiss an infamous (but
penitent) offender, to select and countenance two noted Publicans: and hereupon
they might perhaps think that his compassion might draw him to cross this
Mosaical institution.

What a crafty bait is here laid for our Savior? Such as he cannot bite at,
and not be taken. It seems to them impossible he should avoid a deep prejudice
Moses in sentencing this woman to Death, or else he will cross Moses in
dismissing her unpunished. If he command her to be stoned, he loses the honor
of his clemency and Mercy; if he appoint her dismission, he loses the honor of
his Justice. Indeed strip him of either of these, and he can be no Savior.



Silence and neglect shall first confound those men, whom after his answer will
send away convicted. In stead of opening his mouth, our Savior bows his body;
and in stead of returning words from his lips, writes characters on the ground
with his finger. O Savior, I had rather silently wonder at thy gesture, then
inquire curiously into the words thou wrotest, or the mysteries of thus
writing: only herein I see thou meantest to show a disregard to these malicious
and busy cavillers. Sometimes taciturnity and contempt are the best answers.
Thou that have bidden us Be wise as give us this noble example of thy
prudence. It was most safe that these tempters should be thus kept fasting with
a silent disrespect, that their eagerness might justly draw upon them an
ensuing shame.

The more unwillingness they saw in Christ to give his answer, the more
pressive and importunate they were to draw it from him. Now, as forced by their
so zealous irritation, our Savior rouzeth up himself, and gives it them home,
with a reprehensory and stinging satisfaction; He that is without sin among
you, let him first cast a stone at her. As if his very action had said, I was
loath to have shamed you; and therefore could have been willing not to have
heard your ill-meant motion: but since you will Moses has justly from God
imposed the penalty of death upon such heinous offenses, but what then would
become of you? If death be her due, yet not by those your unclean hands: your
hearts know you are not honest enough to accuse.

Lo, not the bird, but the fouler is taken. He says not, Let her be stoned;
Moses. Now he so answers, that both his Justice and Mercy are entire; she
dismissed, they shamed.

It was the manner of the Jews, in those heinous crimes that were punished
with Lapidation, that the witnesses and accusers should be the first that
should lay hands upon the guilty: well does our Savior therefore choke these
accusers with the conscience of their so foul incompetency. With what face,
with what heart could they stone their own sin in another person?

Honesty is too mean a term. These Scribes and Pharisees were noted for found
folly in the Angels, has much more found wickedness in these glorious
Professors. It is not for nothing that his eyes are like a flame of fire. What
secret is there which he searches not? Retire your selves, O ye foolish
sinners, into your inmost closets, yea (if you can) into the center of the
earth; his eye follows you, and observes all your carriages: no bolt, no bar,
no darkness can keep him out. No thief was ever so impudent as to steal in the
very face of the Judge. O God, let me see my self seen by thee, and I shall not
dare to offend.



One time or other shall that just God lay our sins in our dish, and make us
possess the sins of our youth. These things thou did, and I kept silence; and
The penitent man's sin lies before him for his humiliation; the impenitents, for
his shame and confusion.

The act of sin is transient, not so the guilt; that will stick by us, and
return upon us, either in the height of our security, or the depth of our
misery, when we shall be least able to bear it. How just may it be with God to
take us at advantages, and then to lay his arrest upon us when we are laid up
upon a former suit?

It is but just there should be a requisition of innocence in them that
prosecute the vices of others. The offender is worthy of stoning, but who shall

Well did our Savior know how bitter and strong a pill he had given to these
false Justiciaries; and now he will take leisure to see how it wrought. Whiles
therefore he gives time to them to swallow it, and put it over, he returns to
his old gesture of a seeming inadvertencie. How sped the receipt?

I do no see any one of them stand out with Christ, and plead his own
innocence; and yet these men (which is very remarkable) placed the fulfilling
or violation of the Law only in the outward act. Their hearts misgave them,
that if they should have stood out in contestation with Christ, he would have
utterly shamed them, by displaying their old and secret sins; and have so
convinced them by undeniable circumstances, that they should never have clawed
of the reproach: And therefore when they heard it, being convicted by their own
conscience, they went out one by one, beginning at the eldest, even unto the
last.

There might seem to be some kind of mannerly order in this guilty departure:
one by one may seem to carry a show of a deliberate and voluntary discession.
The eldest first: The ancienter is fitter to give then take example; and the
younger could think it no shame to follow the steps of a grave foreman.

O wonderful power of Conscience! Man can no more stand out against it, then it
can stand out against God. The Almighty, whose substitute is set in our bosom,
sets it on work to accuse. It is no denying when that says we are guilty; when
that condemns us, in vain are we acquitted by the world. With what bravery did
these Hypocrites come to set upon

No sooner do these Hypocrites hear of their sins from the mouth of Christ,
then they are gone. Had they been sincerely touched with a true remorse, they
would have rather come to him upon their knees, and have said, Lord, we know
and find that thou know our secret sins; this argues thy Divine
Omniscience. Thou that art able to know our sins, art able to remit But now
instead hereof, they turn their back upon their Savior, and haste away.

An impenitent man cares not how little he has either of the presence of God,
or of the mention of his sins. O fools! if ye could run away from

Christ is left alone. Alone in respect of these complainants; not alone in
respect of the multitude: there yet stands the mournful Adulteress. She might
have gone forth with them; no body constrained her to stay: but that which sent
them away, stayed her, Conscience. She knew her guiltiness was publicly
accused, and durst not be by her self denied: as one that was therefore
fastened there by her own guilty heart, she stirs not till she may receive a
dismission.

Our Savior was not so busy in writing, but that he read the while the guilt
he lifts up himself, and says, Woman, where are thy accusers?

How well was this sinner to be left there? Could she be in a safer place then
before the Tribunal of a Savior? Might she have chosen her refuge, whither
should she rather have fled? O happy we, if when we are convinced in our selves
of our sins, we can set our selves before that Judge who is our surety, our
Advocate, our Redeemer, our ransom, our peace.

Doubtless, she stood doubtful betwixt hope and fear; Hope, in that she saw
her accusers gone; Fear, in that she knew what she had deserved: and now Woman,
where are thy accusers?

Wherein our Savior intends the satisfaction of all the hearers, of all the
beholders: that they might apprehend the guiltiness, and therefore the
unfitness, of the accusers; and might well see there was no warrantable ground
of his further proceeding against her.

Two things are necessary for the execution of a Malefactor, Evidence,
Sentence; the one from Witnesses, the other from the Judge. Our Savior asks
for both. The accusation and proof must draw on the sentence; the sentence must
proceed upon the evidence of the proof; Where are thy accusers? has Had
sentence passed legally upon the Adulteress, doubtless our Savior would not
have acquitted her: For as he would not intrude upon others offices, so he
would not cross or violate the justice done by others. But now, finding the
coast clear, he says, Neither do I condemn thee.

What, Lord? Do thou then show favor to foul offenders? Art thou rather
pleased that gross sins should be blanched, and sent away with a gentle
connivency? Far, far be this from the perfection of thy Justice. He that hence
argues Adulteries not punishable by death, let him argue the unlawfulness of
dividing of inheritances, because in the case of the two wrangling brethren Who
made me a divider of inheritances? Thou declinedst the office, thou did not
dislike the act, either of parting lands, or punishing offenders. Neither was
here any absolution of the woman from a sentence of death, but a dismission of
her from thy sentence; which thou knew not proper for thee to pronounce.
Herein had thou respect to thy calling, and to the main purpose of thy coming
into the world; which was neither to be an arbiter of Civil Causes, nor a judge
of Criminal, but a Savior of mankind; not to destroy the Body, but to save
the Soul. And this was thy care in this miserable Offender; Go, and sin no
more. How much more does it concern us to keep within the bounds of our
vocation, and not to dare to trench upon the functions Why will ye die, O house
of Israel?

But, O Son of God, though thou would not then be a Judge, yet thou will once
be: Thou would not in thy first coming judge the sins of men, thou will come
to judge them in thy second. The time shall come when upon that just and
glorious Tribunal thou shall judge every man according to his works. Go ye
cursed, let us now hear thee say, Go, sin no more.

The thankful Penitent.
ONE while I find Christ invited by a Publican, now by a Pharisee. Wherever
he went, he made better cheer then he found, in an happy exchange of spiritual
repast for bodily.

Who knows not the Pharisees to have been the proud enemies of Christ; men
over-conceited of themselves, contemptuous of others; severe in show,
Hypocrites in deed; strict Sectaries, insolent Justiciaries? Yet here one of
them invites Christ; and that in good earnest. The man was not (like his
fellows) captious, not ceremonious: had he been of their stamp, the omission of
washing the feet had been mortal. No profession has not yielded some good:
Nicodemus and Gamaliel were of the same strain. Neither is it for nothing, that
the Evangelist having branded this Sect for despising the counsel of God
against themselves, presently subjoyns this history of Simon the Pharisee, as
an exempt man. O Savior, thou can find out good Pharisees,

At the best, yet he was a Pharisee, whose table thou here refusedst not. So
did thou in wisdom and mercy attemper thy self, as to become all things to
all men, that thou might win some. Thy harbenger was rough, as in clothes,
so in disposition; professedly harsh and austere: thy self were mild and
sociable. So it was fit for both. He was a preacher of Penance; thou the author
of comfort and Salvation: He made way for Grace; thou gave it. Thou have
bidden us to follow thy self, not thy forerunner. That then which Politics
and time-servers do for earthly advantages, we will do for spiritual;

There sat the Savior, and, Behold, a woman in the City that was a sinner. I
marvel not that she is led in with a note of wonder; wonder, both on her part,
and on Christ's. That any sinner, that a sensual sinner obdured in a notorious
trade of evil, should voluntarily, out of a true remorse for her leudness, seek
to a Savior, it is worthy of an accent of admiration. The noise of the Gospel
is common; but where is the power of it? it has store of hearers, but few
Converts. Yet were there no wonder in her, if it were not with reference to the
power and mercy of Christ; his power that thus drew the sinner; his mercy

A sinner? Alas, who was not? who is not so? Not only in many things we sin
all; but in all things we all let fall many sins. Had there been a woman not a
sinner, it had been beyond wonder. One man there was that was not a sinner;
that was a sinner. An action does not give denomination, but a trade. Even the
wise Charity of Christians (much more the mercy of God) can distinguish between
sins of infirmity, and practice of sin; and esteem us not by a transient act,
but by a permanent condition.

The woman was noted for a luxurious and incontinent life. What a deal of
variety there is of sins? That which fails cannot be numbered. Every sin
continued deserves to brand the Soul with this style. Here one is picked out
from the rest: she is not noted for Murder, for Theft, for Idolatry: only her
Lust

Wantons may flatter themselves in the indifferency or slightness of this
offense; their Souls shall need no other conveiance to Hell then this: which
cannot be so pleasing to Nature as it is hateful to God, who so speaks of it
as if there were no sins but it, a Woman that was a sinner.

She was a sinner, now she is not; her very presence argues her change. Had she
been still in her old trade, she would no more have endured the sight of
Christ, then that Devil did which cried out, Art thou come to torment me? Her
eyes had been lamps and fires of Lust, not fountains of tears; her hairs had
Simon will be ever the Leper, and Matthew the Publican. How carefully should we
avoid those actions which may ever stain us?

What a difference there is betwixt the carriage and proceedings of God and
men? The mercy of God, as it calls those things that are not as if they were,
so it calls those things that were as if they were not; I will remember your
iniquities no more. As some skillful Surgeon so sets the bone, or heals the
sore, that it cannot be seen where the complaint was. Man's word is, that which
is done cannot be undone: but the omnipotent goodness of God does (as it Take
away my iniquity, and thou shall find none. What we were in our selves, we are
not to him; since he has changed us from our selves.

O God, why should we be niggardly, where thou art liberal? why should we be
reading those lines which thou have not only crossed, but quite blotted, yea
wiped out?

It is a good word, she was a sinner. To be wicked is odious to God, Angels,
Saints, men; to have been so, is blessed and glorious. I rejoice to look back,
and see my Egyptians lying dead upon the shore, that I may praise the Author of
my deliverance and victory. Else, it matters not what they were, what I was. I
am, regardest the present. He befriends and honors us that says, Such ye
were, but ye are washed.

The place adds to the hainousness of the sin; In the City. The more public
the fact is, the greater is the scandal. Sin is sin, though in a desert.
Others eyes do not make the act more vile in it self; but the offense is
multiplied by the number of beholders.

I hear no Name of either the City or the Woman; she was too well known in her
time. How much better is it to be obscure, then infamous? Herein, I doubt not,
God meant to spare the reputation of a penitent Convert. He who hates not the
person, but the sin, cares only to mention the sin, not the person.

The worst of this woman is past, She was a sinner; the best is to come, She
sought out Jesus: where? In the house of a Pharisee. It was the most
inconvenient place in the world for a noted sinner to seek Christ in.

No men stood so much upon the terms of their own Righteousness; no If this man
were a Prophet, he would surely know what manner of woman this is? Neither
could she fore-imagine less, when she ventured to press over the threshold of
a Pharisee. Yet not the known austerity of the man, and her mis-welcome to the
place, could affright her from seeking her Savior even there. No disadvantage
can defer the Penitent Soul from a speedy recourse to Christ. She says not, If
Jesus were in the street, or in the field, or in the house of some humble
Publican, or any where save with a Pharisee, I would come to him; now I will
rather defer my access, then seek him where I shall find scorn and censure:
but, as not fearing the frowns of that overlie Host, she thrusts her self into
Simon's house to find Jesus. It is not for the distressed to be bashful; it
is not for a believer to be timorous. O Savior, if thy Spouse miss thee, she
will seek thee through the streets; the blows of the watch shall not daunt her.
If thou be on the other side of the water, a Peter will leap into the Sea, and
swim to thee: if on the other side of the fire, thy blessed Martyrs will run
through those flames to thee. We are not worthy of the comfort of thy presence,
if

The Place was not more unfit then the Time: a Pharisees house was not more
unproper for a sinner, then a Feast was for humiliation. Tears at a Banquet are
as Jigs at a Funeral. There is a season for all things. Music had been more
apt for a Feast then mourning.

The heart that has once felt the sting of sin and the sweetness of remission,
has no power to delay the expressions of what it feels, and cannot be confined
to terms of circumstance.

Whence then was this zeal of her access? Doubtless she had heard from not to
appear before the Lord empty. What then brings she? It was not possible she
could bring to Christ a better present then her own Penitent Soul; yet, to
testify that, she brings another, delicate both for the vessel and the
contents, A box of Alabaster; a solid, hard, pure, clear marble, fit for the
receipt of so precious an ointment: the ointment pleasant and costly; a
composition of many fragrant Odors, not for medicine but delight.

The Soul that is truly touched with the sense of its own sin, can think
nothing too good, too dear for Christ. The remorsed sinner begins first with
the burnt-offerings, and calves of a year old; thence he ascends to Hecatombs,
thousands of rams; and above that yet, to ten thousand rivers of oil; and, yet
higher, could be content to give the first-fruit of his body to expiate the sin
of his Soul. Any thing, every thing is too small a price for peace. O Savior,
since we have tasted how sweet thou art, lo, we bring thee the

Yet here I see more then the price. This odoriferous persume was that
wherewith she had wont to make her self pleasing to her wanton Lovers; and now
she comes purposely to offer it up to her Savior.

As her love was turned another way from sensual to Divine, so shall her
Ointment also be altered in the use: that which was abused to Luxury, shall As
we have given our members servants to iniquity to commit iniquity, so shall we
now give our members servants unto righteousness in holiness. If the dames of
Israel, that thought nothing more worth looking on then their own faces, have
spent too much time in their glasses; now they shall cast in those metalls to
make a Laver for the washing off their uncleanness. If I have spent the prime
of my strength, the strength of my wit, upon my self and vanity; I have
bestowed my Alabaster-box amiss: Oh now teach me, my God and Savior, to
improve all my time, all my abilities to thy glory. This is all the poor
recompense can be made thee for those shameful dishonors thou have

The Woman is come in; and now she does not boldly face Christ, but, as
unworthy of his presence, she stands behind. How could she in that site wash
his feet with her tears? Was it that our Savior did not sit at the Feast
(after our fashion) but, according to the then-Jewish and Roman fashion, lay on
the one side? Or was it that this phrase does not so much import posture as
presence? Doubtless, it was bashfulnesse and shame arising from the conscience
of her own former wickedness that placed her thus. How well is the case
altered? She had wont to look boldly in the face of her Lovers: now she dares
not behold the awful countenance of her Savior. She had wont to send her
alluring Thou have an whores forehead, thou can not blush: there cannot be a
greater sign of whorishness then impudence. This woman can now blush; she has
put off the Harlot, and is turned true Penitent. Bashfulness is both a sign,
and effect of Grace. O God, could we but bethink how wretched we are in Nature,
how vile through our sins, how glorious, holy and powerful a God thou art,
(before whom the brightest Angels hide their faces) we could not come but with
a trembling awfulness into thy presence.

She began to wash his feet with tears. We hear when she began, we hear not
when she ended. When the grapes are pressed, the juice runs forth: so when the
mind is pressed, tears distill; the true juice of penitence and sorrow. These
eyes were not used to such clouds, or to such showrs; there was nothing in them
formerly but sunshine of pleasure, beams of Lust: Now they are resolved into
the drops of grief and contrition. Whence was this change, but from the secret
working of God's Spirit? He caused his wind to blow, and the waters flowed; he
smote the rock, and the waters gushed out. O God, smite

Never were thy feet, O Savior, bedewed with more precious liquor then this of
remorsefull tears. These cannot be so spent, but that thou keep them in thy
bottle; yea thou returnest them back with interest of true comfort: They that
sow in tears, shall reap in joy. Blessed are they that mourn. Lo this wet
seed-time shall be followed with an harvest of happiness and glory.

That this service might be complete, as her eyes were the Ewre, so her hair
was the Towell for the feet of Christ. Doubtless at a Feast there was no want
of the most curious linen for this purpose. All this was nothing to her: to
approve her sincere Humility, and hearty devotion to Christ, her hair shall be
put to this glorious office. The hair is the chief ornament of womanhood: the
feet, as they are the lowest part of the body, so the meanest for account, and
homeliest for employment: and lo, this Penitent bestows the chief ornament of
her head, on the meanest office to the feet of her Savior. That hair which she
was wont to spread as a net to catch her amorous companions, is honored with
the employment of wiping the beautiful feet of him that brought

Never was any hair so preferred as this. How I envy those locks that were
graced with the touch of those Sacred feet; but much more those lips that
kissed them? Those lips that had been formerly inured to the wanton touches of
her lascivious Lovers, now sanctify themselves with the testimony of her
humble homage and dear respects to the Son of God. Thus her ointment, hands,
eyes, hair, lips are now consecrated to the service of Christ her Savior, whom
she had offended. If our satisfaction be not in some kind proportionable

All this while I hear not one word fall from the mouth of this woman. What
need her tongue speak, when her eyes spoke, her hands spoke, her gesture, her
countenance, her whole carriage was vocal? I like this silent speaking well,
when our actions talk, and our tongues hold their peace. The common practice is
contrary; Men's tongues are busy, but their hands are still. All their Religion
lies in their tongue; their hands either do nothing, or ill: so as their
profession is but wind, as their words. Wherefore are words but for expression
of the mind? If that could be known by the eye or by the hand, the language of
both were alike. There are no words amongst spirits; The Heavens declare the
glory of God. All tongues cannot speak so loud as they that have none. Give me
the Christian that is seen, and not heard. The noise that our tongue makes in a
formality of profession, shall (in the silence of our hands) condemn us for
Hypocrites.

The Pharisee saw all this, but with an evil eye. Had he not had some Grace, he
had never invited such a guest as Jesus; and if he had had Grace enough, he had
never entertained such a thought as this of the guest he invited: If this man
were a Prophet, he would have known what manner of woman it is that touches
him; for she is a sinner.

How many errors in one breath? Justly (O Simon) has this one thought lost
thee the thank of thy Feast. Belike, at the highest, thou judgedst thy guest
but a Prophet; and now thou doubtest whether he were so much. Besides this
undervaluation, how unjust is the ground of this doubt? Every Prophet knew not
every thing; yea no Prophet ever knew all things. Elisha knew the very secrets
of the Assyrian privy-chamber: yet he knew not the calamity of his worthy
Hostess. The finite knowledge of the ablest Seer reaches but so far as it will
please God to extend it. Well might he therefore have been a Prophet, and in
the knowledge of greater matters not have known this.

Unto this, how weakly did thou, because of Christ's silent admission of the

Lastly, how strong did it savor of the leven of thy profession, that thou
supposest (were she what she was) that it could not stand with the knowledge
and holiness of a Prophet to admit of her least touch, yea of her presence?
Whereas on the one side, outward conversation in it self makes no man unclean
or holy, but according to the disposition of the patient; on the other, such
was the purity and perfection of this thy glorious guest, that it was not
possibly infectible, nor any way obnoxious to the danger of others sin. He that
said once, Who touched me? in regard of virtue issuing from him, never said,

The Pharisee spoke; but it was within himself: and now, behold, Jesus
answering, said.

What we think, we speak to our hearts, and we speak to God; and he equally
hears, as if it came out of our mouths. Thoughts are not free. Could men know
and convince them, they would be no less liable to censure then if Simon
speaks, Jesus answers.

Jesus answers him, but with a Parable. He answers many a thought with
Judgment; the blasphemy of the heart, the murder of the heart, the adultery of
the heart are answered by him with real vengeance. For Simon, our Savior saw
his error was either out of simple ignorance or weak mistaking: where he saw
no malice then, it is enough to answer with a gentle conviction. The convictive
answer of Christ is by way of Parable. The wisdom of God knows how to
circumvent us for our gain; and can speak that pleasingly by a prudent
circumlocution, which right-down would not be digested. Had our Savior Simon,
whether do thou or this sinner love me more? the Pharisee could not for shame
but have stood upon his reputation, and in a scorn of the comparison have
protested his exceeding respects to Christ. Now, ere he is aware, he is fetched
in to give sentence against himself for her whom he condemned. O Savior, thou
have made us fishers of men; how should we learn of thee, so to bait our hooks,
that they may be most likely to take? Thou the great householder of thy Church
have provided victuals for thy family, thou have appointed us to dress them:
if we do not so cook them as that they may fit the palats to which they are
intended, we do both lose our labor and thy cost. The Parable is of two
Debtors to one Creditor;

Truth, from whose mouth soever it falls, is worth taking up. Our Savior face
and his speech to the poor Penitent; as one that cared more for a true
humiliation

With what a dejected and abashed countenance, with what earth-fixed eyes, do
we imagine the poor woman stood, when she saw her Savior direct his face and
words to her?

She that durst but stand behind him, and steal the falling of some tears
upon his feet, with what a blushing astonishment does she behold his sidereall
countenance cast upon her? Whiles his eye was turned toward this Penitent, his
speech was turned to the Pharisee concerning that Penitent, by him mistaken:
See thou this Woman? He who before had said, If this man were a Prophet, he
would have known what manner of Woman this is; now hears, See saw but her
outside: Jesus lets him see that he saw her heart; and will thus convince the
Pharisee that he is more then a Prophet, who knew not her conversation only,
but her Soul. The Pharisee that went all by appearance, shall by her deportment
see the proof of her good disposition: it shall happily shame him to hear the
comparison of the wants of his own entertainments with the abundance of hers.

It is strange that any of this formal Sect should be defective in their
Lotions. Simon had not given water to so great a guest; she washes his feet
with her tears. By how much the water of the eye was more precious then the
water of the earth, so much was the respect and courtesy of this Penitent
above the

A kiss of the cheek had wont to be pledge of the welcome of their guests.
Simon neglects to make himself thus happy: she redoubles the kisses of her
humble thankfulness upon the blessed feet of her Savior. The Pharisee omits
ordinary oil for the head: she supplies the most precious and fragrant oil to
his feet.

Now the Pharisee reads his own taxation in her praise; and begins to envy
where he had scorned.

It is our fault, O Savior, if we mistake thee. We are ready to think, so thou
have the substance of good usage, thou regardest not the complements and
ceremonies; whereas now we see thee to have both meat and welcome in the
Pharisees house, and yet hear thee glance at his neglect of washing, kissing,
anointing. Doubtless, omission of due circumstances in thy entertainment may
deserve to lose our thanks. Do we pray to thee? do we hear thee preach to us?
now we make thee good cheer in our house: but if we perform not these things
with the fit decency of our outward carriages, we give thee not thy water, thy
kisses, thy oil. Even meet rituall observances are requisite for thy full
welcome.

Yet how little had these things been regarded, if they had not argued the
woman's thankful love to thee, and the ground of that love, sense of her
remission, and the Pharisees default in both?

Love and action do necessarily evince each other. True love cannot lurk long
unexpressed: it will be looking out at the eyes, creeping out of the mouth,
breaking out at the fingers ends, in some actions of dearnesse; especially
those wherein there is pain and difficulty to the agent, profit or pleasure to
the affected. O Lord, in vain shall we profess to love thee, if we do nothing
for thee. Since our goodness cannot reach up unto thee, who art our glorious
head; O let us bestow upon thy feet (thy poor Members here below)

O happy word! Her sins, which are many, are forgiven her. Methinks I see how
this poor Penitent revived with this breath; how new life comes into her eyes,
new blood into her cheeks, new spirits into her countenance: God said, Let the
earth bring forthgrasse, the herb that bears seed, and the fruit-tree
yielding fruit; all runs out into flowers, and blossoms, and leaves, and
fruit. Her former tears said, Who shall deliver me from this body of death?
Now her cheerful smiles say, I thank God through Jesus Christ my Lord.

Seldomeever do we meet with so perfect a Penitent; seldom do we find so
gracious a dismission. What can be wished of any mortal creature but
Remission, Safety, Faith, Peace? All these are here met to make a contrite Soul
happy. Remission, the ground of her Safety; Faith, the ground of her Peace;
Safety and Salvation, the issue of her Remission; Peace, the blessed fruit of
her

O Woman, the persume that thou broughtest is poor and base in comparison of
those sweet savours of rest and happiness that are returned to thee. Well was
that ointment bestowed, wherewith thy Soul is sweetened to all Eternity.

Martha and Mary.
The foxes have holes, and the birds have nests: he that had all, possessed
nothing. One while I see him in a publican's house, then in a Pharisee's; now I
find him at Martha's. His last entertainment was with some neglect, this with
too much solicitude. Our Savior was now in his way; the Sun might as soon
stand still as he.

The more we move, the liker we are to Heaven, and to this God that made it.
His progress was to Jerusalem, for some holy Feast. He whose Devotion
neglected not any of those sacred Solemnities, will not neglect the due
opportunities of his bodily refreshing: as not thinking it meet to travel and
preach Bethanie. There dwelt the two devout Sisters, with their Brother his
Friend Lazarus; their roof receives him. O happy house into which the Son of
God vouchsafed to set his foot! O blessed women, that had the grace to be the
Hostesses to the God of Heaven! How should I envy your felicity herein, if I
did not see the same favor (if I be not wanting to my self) lying open to me?
I have two ways to entertain my Savior, in his Members, and in himself. In
his Members, by Charity and Hospitablenesse; what I do to one of those his
little ones, I do to him: In himself, by Faith; If any man open, he will come
in and sup with him.

Bethany; but here shall be thy rest for everlasting.

Martha (it seems) as being the elder Sister, bore the name of the Housekeeper;
Mary was her assistant in the charge. A Blessed pair; Sisters not more in
Nature then Grace, in Spirit no less then in flesh. How happy a thing is it
when all the parties in a family are jointly agreed to entertain Christ?

Jesus entered into the house then he falls to preaching: that no time may be
lost, he stays not so much as till his meat be made ready; but whiles his
bodily repast was in hand, provides spiritual food for his Hosts. It was his
meat and drink to do the will of his Father: he fed more upon his own diet
then he could possibly upon theirs; his best cheer was to see them spiritually
fed. How should we, whom he has called to this sacred Function, be instant in
season and out of season? We are, by his sacred ordination, the Lights

Both the Sisters for a time sat attentively listening to the words of Christ.
Household occasions call Martha away: Mary sits still at his feet, and hears.
Whether shall we more praise her Humility, or her Docility? I do not see her
take a stool and sit by him, or a chair and sit above him; but, as desiring to
show her heart was as low as her knees, she sits at his feet. She was lowly
set, richly warmed with those Heavenly beams. The greater submission, the more
Grace. If there be one hollow in the valley lower then another, thither the
waters gather.

Martha's house is become a Divinity-school: Jesus, as the Doctor, sits in the
chair; Martha, Mary, and the rest, sit as Disciples at his feet. Standing
implies a readiness of motion; Sitting, a settled composedness to this holy
attendance.

Had these two Sisters provided our Savior never such delicates, and waited on
his trencher never so officiously, yet had they not listened to his
instruction, they had not bidden him welcome; neither had he so well liked his
Entertainment.

This was the way to feast him; to feed their ears by his Heavenly Doctrine:
his best cheer is our proficiency; our best cheer is his Word. O Savior,

Though Martha was for the time an attentive hearer, yet now her care of
Christ's entertainment carries her into the Kitchen; Mary sits still. Neither
was Mary more devout then Martha busy: Martha cares to feast Jesus, Mary, to
be feasted of him. There was more solicitude in Martha's active part; more
piety in Mary's sedentary attendance: I know not in whether more zeal. Good
Martha was desirous to express her joy and thankfulness for the presence of
so blessed a Guest, by the actions of her careful and plenteous entertainment.
I know not how to censure the Holy woman for her excess of care to welcome

I do not see her come to her Sister, and whisper in her ear the gread need of
her aid; but she comes to Jesus, and in a kind of unkind expostulation of
her neglect, makes her moan to him, Lord, do thou not care that my sister
has left me to serve alone? Why did she not rather make her first address to
her Sister? Was it for that she knew Mary was so tied by the ears with those
adamantine chains that came from the mouth of Christ, that until his silence
and dismission she had no power to stir? Or was it out of an honor and respect
to Christ, that in his presence she would not presume to call off her Sister
without

Howsoever, I cannot excuse the holy Woman from some weaknesses. It was a fault
to measure her Sister by her self, and apprehending her own act to be good, to
think her Sister could not do well if she did not so too. Whereas Goodness
has much latitude. Ill is opposed to Good, not Good to Good. Neither in things
lawful or indifferent are others bound to our examples. Mary might hear,
Martha might serve, and both do well. Mary did not censure Martha for her
rising from the feet of Christ, to prepare his meal: neither should Martha have
censured Mary for sitting at Christ's feet, to feed her Soul. It was a fault,
that she thought an excessive care of a liberal outward entertainment Lord,
do thou not care? What say thou, Martha? do thou challenge the Lord of
Heaven and earth of incogitancy and neglect? Do thou take upon thee to
prescribe unto

Yet I must needs say here wanted not fair pretenses for the ground of this thy
expostulation. Thou, the elder Sister, workest; Mary, the younger, sits still.
And what work was thine but the hospital receipt of thy Savior and his train?
Had it been for thine own paunch, or for some carnal friends, it had been less
excusable; now it was for Christ himself, to whom thou could never be too
obsequious.

But all this cannot deliver thee from the just blame of this bold
subincusation; Lord, do thou not care? How ready is our weakness upon every
slight coffeehouse to quarrel with our best friend, yea with our good God;
and the more we are put to it, to think our selves the more neglected, and to
challenge God for our neglect? Do we groan on the bed of our sickness, and
languishing in pain complain of long hours and weary sides? straight we think,
Lord, do thou not care that we suffer? Does God's poor Church go to wrack,
whiles the ploughers ploughing on her back, make long furrows? Lord, do thou
not care? But know thou, O thou feeble and distrustful Soul, the more thou
do, the more thou suffer, the more thou art cared for: neither is God
ever so tender over his Church as when it is most exercised. Every

It could not but trouble devout Mary to hear her Sisters impatient complaint;
a complaint of her self to Christ, with such vehemence of passion, as if there
had been such strangeness betwixt the two Sisters, that the one would do
nothing for the other without an external compulsion from a Superior. How can
she choose but think, If I have offended, why was I not secretly taxed for it in
a sisterly familiarity? What if there have been some little omission? must the
whole house ring of it before my Lord and all his Disciples? Yet I hear not a
word of reply from that modest mouth. O holy Mary, I admire thy patient
silence: thy Sister blames thee for thy Piety; the Disciples (afterward) blame
thee for thy Bounty and cost: not a word falls from thee in a just vindication
of thine honor and innocence, but in an humble taciturnity thou leavest thine
answer to thy Savior.

How should we learn of thee, when we are complained of for well-doing to seal
up our lips, and to expect our righting from above?

And how sure, how ready art thou, O Savior, to speak in the cause of the
Martha, Martha, thou art careful and troubled about many things; but one thing
is needful, and Mary has chosen the better part.

What needed Mary to speak for her self, when she had such an Advocate?
Doubtless Martha was, as it were, divided from her self with the multiplicity
of her careful thoughts: our Savior therefore doubles her name in his
compellation; that in such distraction he may both find and fix her heart. The
good woman made full account that Christ would have sent away her Sister with a
check, and her self with thanks: but now her hopes fail her; and though she be
not directly reproved, yet she hears her Sister more approved then she; Martha,
Martha, thou art careful and troubled about many things. Our Savior

This glance toward a reproof implies an opposition of the condition of the
two Sisters. Themselves were not more near in Nature, then their present One is
opposed to many, necessary to superfluous, solicitude to quietness: Thou art
careful and troubled about many things, one thing is necessary. How far then
may our care reach to these earthly things? On the one side, O Savior, thou
have charged us to take no thought what to eat, drink, put on; on the other,
thy chosen Vessel has told us, that he that provides not for his family has
denied the faith, and is worse then an Infidel. We may, we must care for many
things; so that our care be for good, and well. For good, both in kind and
measure; well, so as our care be free from distraction, from distrust. From
distraction, that it hinder us not from the necessary duties of our general
Calling; from distrust, that we misdoubt not Gods providence

Alas! how much care do I see every where, but how few Martha's? Her care was
for her Saviors entertainment, ours for our selves. One finds perplexities in
his Estate, which he desires to extricate; another beats his brains for the
raising of his House: One busies his thoughts about the doubtful condition (as
he thinks) of the Times, and casts in his anxious head the imaginary events of
all things, opposing his hopes to his fears; another studies how to avoid the
cross blows of an Adversary. Martha, Martha, thou art careful and troubled
about many things. Foolish men! why do we set our hearts upon the

Thou have bidden us, O God, to cast our cares upon thee, with promise to care
for us. We do gladly unload our selves upon thee: O let our care be to depend
on thee, as thine is to provide for us.

Whether Martha be pitied or taxed for her sedulity, I am sure Mary is praised
for her devotion: One thing is necessary. Not by way of negation, as if nothing
were necessary but this: but by way of comparison, as that nothing is so
necessary as this. Earthly occasions must veil to spiritual. Of those three
main grounds of all our actions, Necessity, Convenience, Pleasure, each
transcends

Oh the vanity of those men who neglecting that one thing necessary, affect
many things superfluous! Nothing is needless with worldly minds but this one
which is only necessary, the care of their Souls. How justly do they lose that
they cared not for, whiles they over-care for that which is neither worthy nor
possible to be kept?

Neither is Marie's business more allowed then her self: She has chosen the
good part. It was not forced upon her, but taken up by her election. Martha
might have sat still as well as she: She might have stirred about as well as
Martha. Marie's will made this choice, not without the inclination of him who
both gave this will and commends it. That will was before renewed;

The stability or perpetuity of good adds much to the praise of it. Martha's
Mary's shall not be taken away from her. The act of her hearing was transient,
the fruit permanent; she now hears that which shall stick by her for ever.

What could thou hear, O Holy Mary, from those Sacred lips, which we hear not
still? That Heavenly Doctrine is never but the same, not more subject to change
then the Author of it. It is not impossible that the exercise of the Gospel
should be taken from us; but the benefit and virtue of it is as inseparable
from our Souls as their Being. In the hardest times that shall stick closest to
us; and till death, in death, after death shall make us happy.


THE man was born blind. This Cure requires not Art, but Power; a power no
less then infinite and Divine. Nature presupposes a matter, though formlesse;
Art looks for matter formed to our hands: God stands not upon either. Where
there was not an Eye to be healed, what could an Oculist do? It is only a God
that can create. Such are we,

The blind man sat begging. Those that have eyes and hands and feet of their
own may be able to help themselves; those that want these helps must be
beholden to the eyes, hands, feet of others. The impotent are cast upon our
mercy: Happy are we, if we can lend lims and senses to the needy. Affected
beggary is odious: that which is of God's making justly challenges relief.

Where should this blind man sit begging, but near the Temple? At one gate
sits a cripple, a blind man at another. Well might these miserable souls
suppose that Piety and Charity dwelt close together: the two Tables were

Never did Jesus move one foot but to purpose. He passed by; but so as that his
Virtue stayed: so did he pass by, that his eye was fixed. The blind man could
not see him; he sees the blind man. His goodness prevents us, and yields
better supplies to our wants. He saw compassionately; not shutting his eyes,
not turning them aside, but bending them upon that dark and disconsolate
Object. That which was said of the Sun, is much more true of him that Nothing
is hid from his light: but of all other things Miseries (especially of his own)
are most intentively eyed of him. Could we be miserable unseen, we had reason
to be heartlesse. O Savior, why should we not imitate thee in this merciful
improvement of our Senses? Woe be to those eyes that care only to gaze upon
their own beauty, bravery, wealth; not abiding to glance upon the sores of
Lazarus, the sorrows of Joseph, the dungeon of Jeremy, the blind Beggar at the
gate of the Temple.

The Disciples see the blind man too, but with different eyes: our Savior for
pity and cure, they for expostulation; Master, who did sin? this man or his
Parents, that he is born blind? I like well that whatsoever doubt troubled
Priests lips but to preserve knowledge? What use is there of the tongue of the
learned, but to speak a word in season? Thou teach us still; and still we
doubt, and ask, and learn.

In one short question I find two Truths and two Falsehoods; the Truths
implied, the Falsehoods expressed. It is true, that commonly man's suffering is
for

Our Savior sees, and yet will wink at so foul a misprision of his Disciples.
I hear neither chiding nor conviction. He that could have enlightened their
Neither this man, nor his Parents. We learn nothing of thee, O Savior, if not
meekness. What a sweet temper should be in our carriage toward the weaknesses
of others judgment? how should we instruct them without bitterness, and without
violence of Passion exspect the meet seasons of their better information? The
tender Mother or Nurse does not rate her little one for that he goes not well;
but gives him her hand, that he may go better. It is the spirit of lenity that
must restore and confirm the lapsed.

The answer is direct and punctual; neither the sin of the man nor of his
Parents

It was fit so great a work should be ushered in with a preface. A sudden and
abrupt appearance would not have beseemed so glorious a demonstration of
Omnipotence. The way is made; our Savior addresses himself to the Miracle:

The matter used was clay. Could there be a meaner? could there be ought more
unfit? O Savior, how often had thou cured blindnesses by thy word alone? how
often by thy touch? How easily could thou have done so here? Was this to show
thy liberty, or thy power? Liberty, in that thou can at pleasure use variety
of means, not being tied to any; Power, in that thou could make use of
contraries? Had thou pulled out a box and applied some medicinal ointment to
the eyes, something had been ascribed to thy skill, more to the natural power
of thy receipt: now thou made use of clay, which had been enough to stop up
the eyes of the seeing, the virtue must be all in thee,

How clearly did thou hence evince to the world, that thou who of clay
could make eyes, were the same who of clay had made man? since there is no
part of the body that has so little analogy to clay as the eye; this
clearness is contrary to that opacity. Had not the Jews been more blind then
the man whom thou curedst, and more hard and stiff then the clay which thou
mollifiedst, they had, in this one work, both seen and acknowledged thy Deity.

What could the clay have done without thy tempering? It was thy spittle Siloe
shall but wash off that clay which this inward moisture made powerful. The
clay thus tempered, must be applied by the hand that made it, else it avails
nothing.

What must the blind man needs think, when he felt the cold clay upon the

Yet with these contrarieties must the Faith be exercised, where God intends
the blessing of a Cure.

It was never meant that this clay should dwell upon those pits of the eyes: it
is only put on to be washed off; and that not by every water; none shall do
it but that of Siloam, which signifies Sent; and if the man had not been sent
to Siloam, he had been still blind. All things receive their virtue from
Divine Jordan would as well have healed Blindness, and Siloam Leprosy.

That the man might be capable of such a Miracle, his Faith is set on work; he
must be led with his eyes daubed up to the pool of Siloam. He washes and sees.
Lord, what did this man think when his eyes were now first given him?
Jerusalem? Every thing did not more please then astonish him. Lo, thus shall we
be affected, and more, when the scales of our mortality being done away, we
shall see as we are seen; when we shall behold the blessedness of that other
world, the glory of the Saints and Angels, the infinite Majesty of the Son of
God, the incomprehensible brightness of the all-glorious Deity. O my Soul, that
thou could be taken

It could not be but that many eyes had been witnesses of this man's want of
eyes. He sat begging at one of the Temple gates: not only all the City, but
all the Country must needs know him; thrice a year did they come up to
Jerusalem; neither could they come to the Temple and not see him. His very
blindness made him noted. Deformities and infirmities of body do more easily
both draw and fix the eye then an ordinary symmetry of parts.

Besides his Blindness, his Trade made him remarkable; the importunity of his
begging drew the eyes of the passengers. But of all other, the Place most
Judaea, or in some blind lane of Jerusalem, perhaps he had not been heeded of
many; but now that he took up his seat in the heart, in the head of the chief
City, whither all resorted from all parts, what Jew can there be that knows not
the blind beggar at the Temple gate? Purposely did our Savior make choice of
such a Subject for his Miracle; a man so poor, so public: the glory of the
work could not have reached so far, if it had been done to the wealthiest
Citizen of Jerusalem. Neither was it for nothing that the act and the man is
doubted of and inquired into by the beholders; Is not this he that sat begging?
Some said, It is he; others said, It is like him. No truths have received so
full proofs as inward light, and looking them cheerfully in the face, doubted
whether this Is this the man? others, It is

The late-blinde man hears, and now sees himself questioned; and soon resolves
the doubt, I am he. He that now saw the light of the Sun, would not hide the
light of Truth from others. It is an unthankful silence, to smother the works
of God in an affected secrecy. To make God a loser by his bounty to us, were a
shameful injustice. We our selves abide not those sponges that suck up good
turns unknown. O God, we are not worthy of our spiritual eyesight, if we do
not publish thy mercies on the house top, and praise thee in the great
congregation.

Man is naturally inquisitive: we search studiously into the secret works of
Nature; How were thine eyes opened? The first improvement of humane Reason is
inquisition, the next is information and resolution: and if the meanest events
pass us not without a question, how much less those that carry in them wonder
and advantage?

He that was so ready to profess himself the Subject of the Cure, is no
niggard of proclaiming the Author of it; A man that is called Jesus made clay,
and The blind man knew no more then he said, and he said what he apprehended,
A man. He heard Jesus speak, he felt his hand; as yet he could look no further:
upon his next meeting he saw God in this man. In matter of Knowledge, we must
be content to creep ere we can go. As that other recovered blind man saw
first men walk like trees, after like men; so no marvel if this man saw first
this God only as man, after this man as God also. Onwards he thinks him a
wonderful man, a mighty Prophet. In vain shall we either exspect a sudden
perfection in the understanding of Divine matters, or censure those that want
it.

How did this man know what Jesus did? He was then stone-blinde; what



It is the preposterous Religion of the Vulgar sort to claw and adore those
which have tyrannically usurped upon their Souls, though with neglect, yea with
contempt, of God in his word, in his works. Even unjust authority will never
want soothing up in whatsoever courses, though with disgrace and opposition

Our Savior had picked out the Sabbath for this Cure. It is hard to find out
any time wherein Charity is unseasonable. As Mercy is an excellent Grace, so
the works of it are fittest for the best day. We are all born blind: the Font
is our Siloam: no day can come amiss, but yet God's day is the properest for
our washing and recovery.

This alone is quarrel enough to these scrupulous wranglers, that an act of
Mercy was done on that day wherein their envy was but seasonable.

I do not see the man beg any more when he once had his eyes; no Burger in
Jerusalem was richer then he. I hear him stoutly defending that gracious author
of his Cure against the cavils of the malicious Pharisees: I see him as a
resolute Confessor suffering excommunication for the name of Christ, and
maintaining the innocence and honor of so Blessed a benefactor: I hear him
read a Divinity Lecture to them that sat in Moses his chair, and convincing
them of blindness, who punished him for seeing.

How can I but envy thee, O happy man, who of a Patient, provest an Advocate
for thy Savior; whose gain of bodily sight made way for thy Spiritual eyes;
who have lost a Synagogue, and have found Heaven; who being abandoned of
Sinners, art received of the Lord of Glory?


HOW different, Matthew. 17. 14. compared with Mar. 9. 14.
how contrary are our conditions here upon earth? Whiles our Savior is
transfigured on the Mount, his Disciples are perplexed in the valley. Three of
his choice Followers were with him above, ravished with the miraculous proofs
of his Godhead: nine other were troubled with the business of a stubborn Devil
below.

Tabor. Their zeal and devotion brought them thither; their patient
perseverance held them there. We are not worthy the name of his clients, if we
cannot painfully seek him, and submissely wait his leisure.

He that was now awhile retired into the Mount, to confer with his Father, and
to receive the attendance of Moses and Elias, returns into the valley to the
multitude. He was singled out awhile for prayer and contemplation; now he was
joined with the multitude for their miraculous cure and Heavenly instruction.
We that are his spiritual agents must be either preparing in the mount, or
exercising in the valley; one while in the mount of Meditation, in the valley

Moses when he came down from the hill, heard Music in the valley; Christ when
he came down from the hill, heard discord. The Scribes (it seems) were setting
hard upon the Disciples: they saw Christ absent, nine of his train left in the
valley, those they fly upon. As the Devil, so his Imps, watch close for all
advantages. No subtle enemy but will be sure to attempt that part where is

They that durst say nothing to the Master, so soon as his back is turned fall
foul upon his weakest Disciples. Even at the first hatching the Serpent was
thus crafty, to begin at the weaker vessel: experience and time has not
abated his wit. If he still work upon silly Women laden with diverse lusts, upon
rude and ungrounded Ignorants, it is no other then his old wont.

Our Savior upon the skirts of the hill knew well what was done in the plain;
and therefore hasts down to the rescue of his Disciples. The clouds and

Doubtless there were many eager Patients in this throng; none made so much
noise as the father of the Demoniack. Belike upon his occasion it was that the
Scribes held contestation with the Disciples. If they wrangled, he fues, and
that from his knees. Whom will not need make both humble and eloquent? The case
was woeful, and accordingly expressed. A son is a dear name; but this was his
only son. Were his grief ordinary yet, the sorrow were the less; I be sought
thy Disciples to cast him out, but they could not: therefore, Lord, have thou
mercy on my Son. The despair of all other helps sends us importunately to the
God of power. Here was his refuge; the strong man had gotten possession, it was
only the stronger then he that can eject him. O God, spiritual wickednesses
have

What bowels could choose but yearn at the distress of this poor young man?
Phrensy had taken his brain: that Disease was but health in comparison of the
tyrannical possession of that evil spirit, wherewith it was seconded. Out of
Hell there could not be a greater misery: his Senses are either berest, or else
left to torment him; he is torn and racked, so as he foams and gnashes, he
pines and languishes; he is cast sometimes into the fire, sometimes into the
water. How that malicious Tyrant rejoices in the mischief done to the creature
of God? Had earth had any thing more pernicious then fire and water, thither
had he

How many think of this case with pity and horror, and in the mean time are
insensible of their own fearfuller condition?

It is but oftentimes that the Devil would cast this young man into a temporary
fire; he would cast the sinner into an eternal fire, whose everlasting burnings
have no intermissions. No fire comes amiss to him; the fire of Affliction, the
fire of Lust, the fire of Hell. O God, make us apprehensive of the danger of
our sin, and secure from the fearful issue of sin.

All these very same effects follow his spiritual possession. How does he tear
and rack them whom he vexes and distracts with inordinate cares and sorrows?
How do they foam and gnash whom he has drawn to an impatient repining at God's
afflictive hand? How do they pine away who hourly decay and languish in Grace?



But all this while what part has the Moon in this man's misery? How comes the
name of that goodly Planet in question? Certainly these diseases of the brain
follow much the course of this queen of moisture. That power which she has in
humors is drawn to the advantage of the malicious spirit; her predominancy is
abused to his despite: whether it were for the better opportunity of his
vexation, or whether for the drawing of envy and discredit upon so noble a
creature. It is no news with that subtle enemy to fasten his effects upon
those secondary causes which he usurps to his own purposes.

He that knew all things, asks questions; How long has he been so? Not to
inform himself; (That Devil could have done nothing without the knowledge,
without the leave of the God of Spirits) but that by the confession of the
Parent he might lay forth the woeful condition of the child; that the thank
and glory of the Cure might be so much greater, as the complaint was more
grievous. He answered, From a child.

O God, how I adore the depth of thy wise and just and powerful dispensation?
I have loved Jacob, and Esau have I hated, ere the children had done good or
evil, thoughtest also good, ere this Child could be capable of good or evil,
to yield him over to the power of that Evil one. What need I ask for any other
reason then that which is the rule of all Justice, thy Will? Yet even these
weak eyes can see the just grounds of thine actions. That child, though an
Israelite, was conceived and born in that sin which both could and did give
Satan an interest in him. Besides, the actual sins of the Parents deserved this
revenge upon that piece of themselves. Rather, O God, let me magnific this
Mercy, that we and our s escape this Judgment, then question thy Justice, that
some escape not. How just might it have been with thee,

Do I wonder to see Satan's bodily possession of this young man from a child,
when I see his spiritual possession of every son of Adam from a longer date;
not from a child, but from the womb, yea in it? Why should not Satan possess
his own? we are all by nature the sons of wrath. It is time for us to renounce
him in Baptism, whose we are till we be regenerate. He has right to us in our
first birth; our new birth acquits us from him, and cuts off all his claim. How
miserable are they that have nothing but Nature? Better had it been to

And if this poor soul from an infant were thus miserably handled, having done
none actual evil; how just cause have we to fear the like Judgments, who by
many foul offenses have deserved to draw this executioner upon us? O my Soul,
thou have not room enough for thankfulness to that good God, who has not
delivered thee up to that malignant Spirit.

The distressed Father sits not still, neglects not means; I brought him to thy
Disciples. Doubtless the man came first to seek for Christ himself; finding
him absent, he makes suit to the Disciples. To whom should we have recourse in
all our spiritual complaints but to the agents and messengers of God? The They
could not cast him out. No doubt the Disciples tried their best, they laid
their wonted charge upon this dumb spirit; but all in vain. They that could
come with joy and triumph to their Master, and say, The Devils are subject to
us, find now themselves matched with a stubborn and refractory spirit. Their
way was hitherto smooth and fair; they

The man complained not of their impotence: it were fondly injurious to accuse
them for that which they could not do: had the want been in their will, they
had well deserved a querulous language; it was no fault to want power. Only he
complains of the stubbornness, and laments the invinciblenesse of that evil
spirit.

I should wrong you, O ye blessed Followers of Christ, if I should say that, as
Israel, when Moses was gone up into the Mount, lost their belief with their
guide; so that ye, missing your Master (who was now ascended up to his Tabor)
were to seek for your Faith. Rather the Wisdom of God saw reason to check your
over-assured forwardness; and both to pull down your hearts by a just
humiliation in the sense of your own weakness, and to raise up your hearts to
new acts of dependence upon that sovereign power from which your limited virtue
was derived.

What was more familiar to the Disciples then ejecting of Devils? In this only
it is denied them. Our good God sometimes finds it requisite to hold us

Who could now but expect that our Savior should have pitied and bemoned the
condition of this sad father and miserable son, and have let fall some words of
comfort upon them? In stead whereof I hear him chiding and complaining, O
faithless and perverse generation, how long shall I be with you? how
Complaining, not of that woeful father and more woeful son; it was not his
fashion to add affliction to the distressed, to break such bruised reeds; but
of those Scribes, who upon the failing of the success of this suit, had
insulted upon the disability of the Followers of Christ, and depraved his
power: although perhaps this impatient father, seduced by their suggestion,
might slip into some thoughts of distrust.

There could not be a greater crimination then faithless and perverse:
faithless, in not believing; perverse, in being obstinately set in their
unbelief. Doubtless these men were not free from other notorious crimes: all
were drowned in their Infidelity. Moral uncleanness or violences may seem

What an happy change is here in one breath of Christ? How long shall I suffer
you? Bring him hither to me. The one is a word of anger, the other of favor.
His just indignation does not exceed or impeach his Goodness. What a sweet
mixture there is in the perfect simplicity of the Divine Nature? In the midst
of judgment he remembers mercy, yea he acts it. His Sun shines in the midst of
this storm. Whether he frown or whether he smile, it is all to one purpose,
that he may win the incredulous and disobedient. Whither should the rigor of
all our censures tend but to edification, and not to destruction? We Depart
from me; in the mean time it is for us to invite all that are spiritually
possessed to the participation of mercy, Bring him hither to me.

O Savior, distance was no hindrance to thy work: why should the Demoniack

The possessed is brought; the Devil is rebuked and ejected. That stiff spirit
The Lord rebuke thee, Satan, and then thou can not but flee.

The Disciples, who were not used to these affronts, cannot but be troubled at
their mis-successe: Master, why could not we cast him out? Had they been
conscious of any defect in themselves, they had never asked the question.
Little did they think to hear of their Unbelief. Had they not had great Faith,
they could not have cast out any Devils; had they not had some want of Faith,
they had cast out this. It is possible for us to be defective in some Graces,
and not to

Although not so much their weakness is guilty of this unprevailing, as the
strength of that evil spirit; This kind goes not out but by prayer and fasting.
Weaker spirits were wont to be ejected by a command; this Devil was more sturdy
and boisterous. As there are degrees of statures in men, so there are degrees
of strength and rebellion in spiritual wickednesses. Here bidding will not
serve, they must pray; and praying will not serve without fasting. They must
pray to God that they may prevail; they must fast to make their prayer more
servent, more effectual. We cannot now command, we can fast and pray. How good
is our God to us, that whiles he has not thought fit to continue to

The Widow's mites.
THE sacred wealth of the Temple was either in stuff, or in coin. For the one
the Jews had an house, for the other a chest. At the concourse of all the males
to the Temple thrice a year upon occasion of the solemn

Those things we delight in, we love to behold: The eye and the heart will go
together. And can we think, O Savior, that thy Glory has diminished ought of
thy gracious respects to our beneficence? or that thine acceptance of our
Charity was confined to the earth? Even now that thou ^ittest at the right hand
of thy Fathers glory, thou ^eest every hand that is stretched out to the relief
of thy poor Saints here below. And if vanity have power to stir up our
Liberality out of a conceit to be seen of men, how shall Faith encourage our

And do thou, O God, see what we give thee, and not see what we take

The Jews were now under the Roman pressure; they were all tributaries, He saw
a poor widow casting in two mites. It was misery enough that she was a Widow.
The married woman is under the careful provision of an Husband; if she spend,
he earns: in that estate four hands two mites; or, in our language, two
half-farthing-tokens. Alas, good woman, who was poorer then thy self? wherefore
was that Corban, but for the relief of such as thou? who should receive, if
such give? Thy mites were something to thee, nothing to the Treasury. How ill
is that gift bestowed, which dis-furnisheth thee, and adds nothing to the
common stock? Some thrifty neighbor might perhaps have Jesus publishes and
applauds her bounty: He called his Disciples, and said unto them, Verily I say
unto you, this woman has cast in more then they all. Whiles the rich put in
their offering, I see no Disciples called; it was enough that Christ noted
their gifts alone: but when the Widow comes with her two mites, now the
domestics of Christ are summoned to assemble, and taught to admire this
munificence; a solemn preface makes way to her praise, and her Mites are made
more precious then the others Talents. She gave more then they all. More, not
only in respect of the Mind of the giver, but of the proportion of the gift,
as hers. A mite to her was more then pounds to them: Pounds were little to
them, two mites were more then they all. God does not so much regard what is
taken out, as what is left* O Father of mercies, thou look at once into the
bottom of her heart and the bottom of her purse; and esteemest her gift
according to both. As thou see not as man, so thou valuest not as man: Man
judges by the worth of the gift, thou judge by the mind of the giver and
the proportion of the remainder. It were wide with us if thou should go by
quantities. Alas, what have we but mites, and those of thine own lending? It is
the comfort of our meannesse, God loves a liberal giver, but a cheerful. If I
had more, O God, thou should have it; had I less, thou would not despise
it, who acceptest the gift according to that a man has, and not according to
that he has not.

Yea, Lord, what have I but two mites, a Soul, and a Body? mere mites, yea,

The ambition of the two Sons of Zebedee.
Zebedees; therein well approving both her Wisdom and her Faith: Wisdom, in
the fit choice of her opportunity; Faith, in taking such an opportunity.

The suit is half obtained that is seasonably made. To have made this motion at
the entry into their attendance, had been absurd, and had justly seemed to
challenge a denial. It was at the parting of the Angel, that Jacob would be
blessed. The double spirit of Elijah is not sued for till his ascending.

But, oh the admirable Faith of this good woman! When she heard the discourse
Herod come and tender his Scepter unto Christ, or the Elders of the Jews come
upon their knees with a submissive profer of their allegiance, she might have
had some reason to entertain the thoughts of a Kingdom: but now whiles the
sound of betraying, suffering, dying, was in her ear, to make account of and
suit for a room in his Kingdom, it argues a belief able to triumph over all
discouragements.

It was nothing for the Disciples, when they saw him after his conquest of
death and rising from the grave, to ask him, Master, will thou now restore the
but for a silly woman to look through his future Death and Passion, at his
Resurrection and Glory, it is no less worthy of wonder then praise.

To hear a man in his best health and vigor to talk of his confidence in God,
and assurance of Divine favor, cannot be much worth: but if in extremities we
can believe above hope, against hope, our Faith is so much more noble as our
difficulties are greater.

Never sweeter persume arose from any altar, then that which ascended from
Job's dunghill, I know that my Redeemer lives.

What a strange style is this that is given to this woman? It had been as
Zebedee, or the sister of Mary or of Joseph, or (as her name was) plain Salome:
but now, by an unusual description, she is styled The mother of Zebedee's
children. Zebedee was an obscure man; she, as his wife, was no better; the
greatest honor she ever had or could have, was to have two such sons as James
and John; these give a title to both their Parents. Honor ascends as well as
descends. Holy Children dignifie the loins and womb from whence they proceed,
no less then their Parents traduce honor unto them. Salome might be a good
wife, a good huswife, a good woman, a good neighbor: all these cannot ennoble
her so much as the mother of Zebedee's children.



The suit was the sons, but by the mouth of their mother: it was their best
policy to speak by her lips. Even these Fishermen had already learned craftily
to fish for promotion. Ambition was not so bold in them as to show her own
face: the envy of the suit shall thus be avoided, which could

It is not discommendable in parents to seek the preferment of their children.
Why may not Abraham sue for an Ismael? So it be by lawful means, in a moderate
measure, in due order, this endeavor cannot be amiss. It is the neglect of
circumstances that makes these desires sinful. Oh the madness of those
Parents that care not which way they raise an house; that desire rather to
leave their children great, then good; that are more ambitious Salome, that thy
first plot was to have thy sons Disciples of Christ, then after to prefer them
to the best places of that attendance. It is the true method of Divine
prudence, O God, first to make our children happy with the honor of thy
service, and then to endeavor their meet advancement upon earth.

The mother is but put upon this suit by her sons; their heart was in her lips.
They were not so mortified by their continual conversation with Christ, hearing
his Heavenly doctrine, seeing his Divine carriage, but that their minds were
yet roving after temporal Honors. Pride is the inmost coat, which we

The near kindred this woman could challenge of Christ might seem to give her
just color of more familiarity; yet now that she comes upon a suit, she
submits her self to the lowest gesture of suppliants. We need not be taught
that it is fit for petitioners to the Great, to present their humble
supplications upon their knees. O Savior, if this woman so nearly allied to
thee according to the flesh, coming but upon a temporal occasion to thee, being
as then compassed Zebedee, what is it that thou cravest of thine omnipotent
kinsman? A certain thing. Speak out, woman; what is this certain thing that
thou cravest? How poor and weak is this supplicatory anticipation to him that
knew thy thoughts ere thou utteredst them, ere thou entertainedst them? We are
all in this tune; every one would have something; such perhaps as we are
ashamed to utter. The Proud man would have a certain thing; Honor in the
world: the Covetous would have a certain thing too; Wealth and abundance:

How this suit sticks in her teeth, and dare not freely come forth, because it
is guilty of its own faultiness? What a difference there is betwixt the
prayers of Faith, and the motions of Self-love and infidelity? Those come forth
with boldness, as knowing their own welcome, and being well assured, both of
their warrant and acceptance; these stand blushing at the door, not daring

He that knew all their thoughts afar off, yet, as if he had been a stranger
What would thou? Our infirmities do then best shame us, when they are fetched
out of our own mouths: Like as our Prayers also serve not to acquaint God with
our wants, but to make us the more capable of his mercies.

The suit is drawn from her; now she must speak. Grant that these my two sons
may sit, one on thy right hand, the other on thy left, in thy Kingdom.

It is hard to say, whether out of more pride or ignorance. It was as received
as erroneous a conceit among the very Disciples of Christ, that he should raise
up a Temporal Kingdom over the now-tributary and beslaved people of Israel. The
Romans were now their masters; their fancy was, that their Messiah should
Emmaus could say, We trusted it had been he that should have delivered Israel;
and when, after his Resurrection, he was walking up mount Olivet toward
Heaven, his very Apostles could ask him, if he would now restore that
long-exspected Kingdom. How should we mitigate our censures of our Christian
brethren, if either they mistake, or know not some secondary truths of
Religion, when the domestic Attendants of Christ, who heard him every day till
the very point of his Ascension, misapprehended the chief cause of his coming
into the world, and the state of his Kingdom? If our Charity may not bear with
small faults, what do we

These Fishermen had so much Courtship to know, that the right hand and the
left of any Prince were the chief places of Honor. Our Savior had said that
his twelve Followers should sit upon twelve thrones, and judge the twelve
Tribes of Israel. This good woman would have her two sons next to his person;
the prime Peers of his Kingdom. Every one is apt to wish the best to his own.
Worldly Honor is neither worth our suit, nor unworthy our acceptance. Salome,
had thy mind been in Heaven, had thou intended this desired preeminence of
that celestial state of Glory, yet I know not how to justify thine ambition.
Would thou have thy sons preferred to the Father of the faithful, to the
blessed Mother of thy Savior? That very wish were presumptuous. For me, O God,
my ambition shall go so high as to be a Saint in Heaven, and to live as holily
on earth as the best; but for precedence of Heavenly honor, I do not, I dare
not affect it. It is enough for me, if I may lift up my head amongst the heels
of thy Blessed Ones.

The mother asks, the sons have the answer. She was but their tongue, they
shall be her ears. God ever imputes the acts to the first mover, rather then

It was a sore check, Ye know not what ye ask. In our ordinary communication to
speak idly, is sin; but in our suits to Christ to be so inconsiderate, as not
to understand our own petitions, must needs be a foul offense.

As Faith is the ground of our Prayers, so Knowledge is the ground of our
Faith. If we come with indigested requests, we profane that Name we invoke.

To convince their unfitness for Glory, they are sent to their impotency in
Suffering; Are ye able to drink of the cup whereof I shall drink, and to be
baptized with the Baptism wherewith I am baptized? O Savior, even thou who
were one It is finished. And can we repine at those unpleasing draughts of
Affliction that are

As thou must be drenched within, so must thou be baptized without. Thy
Baptism is not of water, but of blood; both these came from thee in thy
Passion: we cannot be thine, if we partake not of both. If thou have not
grudged thy precious blood to us, well may thou challenge some worthless
drops from us.

When they talk of thy Kingdom, thou speak of thy bitter Cup, of thy bloody
Baptism. Suffering is the way to reigning. Through many tribulations must we
enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. There was never wedge of gold that did not
first pass the fire; there was never pure grain that did not undergo the
flail. In vain shall we dream of our immediate passage from the pleasures and
jollity of earth to the glory of Heaven. Let who will hope to walk upon Roses
and Violets to the throne of Heaven; O Savior, let me trace thee by the track
of thy Blood, and by thy red steps follow thee to thine eternal rest and
Happiness.

I know this is no easy task; else thou had never said, Are ye able? Who I
can do all things through thee that strengthenest me.

The motion of the two Disciples was not more full of infirmity then their
answer, We are able. Out of an eager desire of the Honor, they are apt to
undertake the condition. The best men may be mistaken in their own powers.
Alas, poor men! when it came to the issue, they ran away, and I know not
whether one without his coat. It is one thing to suffer in speculation, another
in practice. There cannot be a worse sign then for a man in a carnal
presumption to vaunt of his own abilities. How justly does God suffer that man
to be foiled purposely, that he may be ashamed of his own vain self-confidence?
O God, let me ever be humbly dejected in the sense of mine own insufficiency;
let me give all the Glory to thee, and take nothing to my self but my

Oh the wonderful mildness of the Son of God! He does not rate the two
Disciples, either for their ambition in suing, or presumption in undertaking:
but leaving the worst, he takes the best of their answer; and omitting their
errors, incourages their good intentions; Ye shall drink indeed of my cup, and
be baptized with my baptism: but to sit on my right hand and my left, is not
mine to give, but to them for whom it is prepared of my Father. I know not
whether there be more mercy in the concession, or satisfaction in the denial.
Were it not an high Honor to drink of thy Cup, O Savior, thou had not
fore-promised it as a favor. I am deceived if what thou grantest were much
less then that which If we suffer with thee, we shall also reign together with
thee. What greater promotion can flesh and blood be capable of, then a
conformity to the Lord of Glory? Enable thou me to drink of thy Cup, and then
set me where thou will.

Not mine to give? Whose is it, if not thine? If it be thy Fathers, it is
thine. Thou, who art Truth, have said, I and my Father are one. Yea, because
thou art one with the Father, it is not thine to give to any save those for
whom it is prepared of the Father. The Father's preparation was thine, his gift
is thine; the Decree of both is one. That eternal counsel is not alterable upon
our vain desires. The Father gives these Heavenly honors to none but by thee;
thou give them to none but according to the Decree of thy Father. Many
degrees there are of celestial Happiness. Those supernal Mansions are not all
of an height. That Providence which has varied our stations Jerusalem, and
place me wheresoever thou please.

The Tribute money pai'd.
ALL these other Histories report the Power of Christ; this shows both his
Power and Obedience: his Power over the creature; his Obedience to civil
Powers. Luc. 4. 31. compared with 38.
Capernaum was one of his own Cities; Peter's house: to that Host of his
therefore do the Toll-gatherers repair for the Tribute. When that great
Disciple said, We have left all, he did not say, We have abandoned all, or
sold, or given away all: but we have left, in respect of managing, not of
possession; not in respect of right, but of use and present fruition; so left,
that upon just occasion we may resume; so left, that it is our due, though not
our business. Doubtless he was too wise to give away his own, that he might
borrow of a stranger. His own roof gave him shelter for the time, and his
Master with him. Of him, as the Householder, is the Tribute required; and by and
for him is it also paid. I inquire not either into the occasion, or the sum.
Israelite to the use of the Tabernacle and Temple, were now diverted to the
Roman Exchequer. There was no necessity that the Roman Lords should be tied to
the Jewish reckonings; it was free for them to impose what payments they
pleased upon a subdued people: when great Augustus commanded the world to be
taxed, this rate was set. The mannerly Collectors demand it first of him with
whom they might be more bold; Does not your Master pay tribute? All Capernaum
knew Christ for a great Prophet; his Doctrine had ravished them, his Miracles
had astonished them: yet when it comes to a money-matter, his share is as deep
as the

Peter had it ready what to answer. I hear him not require their stay till he
should go in and know his Masters resolution; but, as one well acquainted with
the mind and practice of his Master, he answers, Yes.

There was no truer play master of the Kings dues then he that was King of
Kings. Well did Peter know that he did not only (...), but preach tribute.
Herodians laid twigs for him, as supposing that so great a Prophet would be all
for the liberty and exemption of God's chosen people, he choaks them with their
own coin, and told them the stamp argued the right; Give unto Caesar the things
that are Caesar's.

O Savior, how can thy servants challenge that freedom which thy self had
not? who that pretends from thee can claim homage from those to whom thou
gave it? If thou by whom Kings reign forbarest not to pay tribute

That demand was made without doors. No sooner is Peter come in, then he is
prevented by his Master's question, What think thou, Simon, of whom do the
Kings of the earth receive tribute? of their own children, or of strangers?
This very interrogation was answer enough to that which Peter meant to move: he
that could thus know the heart, was not in true right liable to humane
exactions.

But, O Savior, may I presume to ask what this is to thee? Thou have said, My
Kingdom is not of this world; how does it concern thee what is done by Juda
and David: what should I plead that which thou wavest? It is thy Divine Royalty
and Sonship which thou here justly urgest; the argument is irrefragable and
convictive. If the Kings of the earth do so privilege their children that they
are free from all tributes and impositions; how much more shall the King of
Heaven give this immunity to his only and natural Son? so as in true reason I
might challenge an exemption for me and my train. Thou might, O Savior, and
no less challenge a Then are the children free. He that has right to all,
needs not pay any thing; else there should be a subjection in Sovereignty, and
men should be debtors to themselves. But this right was thine own peculiar, and
admits no partners; why do thou speak of children, as of more, and extending
this privilege to Peter, say, Lest we scandalize them? Was it for that thy
Disciples, being of thy robe, might justly seem interessed in the liberties of
their Master? Surely no otherwise were they children, no otherwise free. Away
with that fanatical conceit, which challenges an Lest an offense might be
taken. Surely had there followed an offense, it had been taken only, and not
given, Woe be to the man by whom the offense comes: It comes by him that
gives it; it comes by him that takes it when it is not given: no part of this
blame could have cleaved unto thee either way.

Yet such was thy goodness, that thou would not suffer an offense unjustly
taken at that which thou might justly have denied. How jealous should we be
even of others perils? how careful so to moderate out power in the use of
lawful things, that our Charity may prevent others scandals? to Temit of our
own right for another safety? Oh the deplorable condition of those wilful m^^,
who care not what blocks they lay in the way to Heaven, not forbearing by a
known lewdness to draw others into their own

To avoid the unjust offense even of very Publicans, Jesus will work a Miracle.
Peter is sent to the sea; and that not with a net, but with an hook. The
Disciple was now in his own trade. He knew a net might enclose many fishes, an
hook could take but one: with that hook must he go angle for the

Oh that Omnipotent power which could command the fish to be both his Treasurer
to keep his Silver, and his Purveyour to bring it! Now whether, O Savior, thou
causedst this fish to take up that shekel out of the bottom of the sea, or
whether by thine Almighty word thou made it in an instant in the mouth of
that fish, it is neither possible to determine, nor necessary to inquire. I
rather adore thine infinite Knowledge and Power, that could make use of
unlikeliest means; that could serve thy self of the very fishes of the sea,
Peter, that whiles he would be tributary to Caesar, the very fish of the sea
was tributary to him. How should this encourage our dependence upon that
Omnipotent hand of thine, which has Heaven, earth, sea at thy disposing? Still
thou art the same for thy members which thou were for thy self the Head. Rather
then offense shall be given to the world by a seeming neglect of thy dear
Children, thou will cause the very fowls of Heaven to bring them meat, and the
fish of the sea to bring them money.

LAZARUS Dead.
OH the Wisdom of God in penning his own Story! The Disciple whom Jesus loved
comes after his fellow-Evangelists, that he might Lazarus that had been so long
dead. As a stream runs still the stronger and wider, the nearer it comes to the
Ocean whence it was derived; so did thou, O Savior, work the more
powerfully, the nearer thou drewest to thy Glory. This was, as one of thy last,
so of thy greatest Miracles; when thou were ready to die thy self, thou
raisedst

This alone was a sufficient eviction of thy Godhead, O blessed Savior: none
but an infinite power could so far go beyond Nature, as to recall a man four
days dead from, not a mere privation, but a settled corruption. Earth must
needs be thine, from which thou raisest his body; Heaven must needs be thine,
from whence thou fetchest his Spirit. None but he that created man, could thus
make him new.

Lazarus, whom Jesus loved, is sick. What can strength of Grace or dearness of
respect prevail against disease, against dissolution?

It was a stirring message that Mary sent to Jesus, He whom thou love is
sick: as if she would imply, that his part was no-less deep in Lazarus then
hers. Neither does she say, He that loves thee is sick; but, he whom thou
love: Lazarus his affection to Christ, but the mercy and favor of Christ to
him. Even that other reflection of love had been no weak motive; for, O Lord,
thou have said, Because he has set his love upon me, therefore will I deliver
him. Thy goodness will not be behind us for love, who professest to love them
that love thee. But yet the argument is more forcible from thy love to us;
since thou have just reason to respect every thing of thine own, more then
ought that can proceed from us. Even we weak men, what can we stick at where we
love? Thou, O infinite God, art Love it self. Whatever thou have done for us is
out of thy love: the ground and motive of all thy mercies is within thy self,
not in us; and if there be ought in us worthy of thy Jesus well heard the first
groan of his dear Lazarus; every short breath that he drew, every sigh that he
gave was upon account: yet this Lord of Life lets his Lazarus sicken, and
languish, and die; not out of neglect or impotence, but out of power and
resolution. This sickness is not to death. He to whom the issues of death
belong, knows the way both into it and out of it. He meant that sickness should
be to death in respect of the present condition, not to death in respect of the
event; to death in the process of Nature, not to death in the success of his
Divine power, that the Son of God might be glorified thereby. O Savior, thy
usual style is, the Son of man; thou that would take up our infirmities, were
That the Son of God might be glorified. Though thou would hide thy Divine
glory, yet thou would not smother it. Sometimes thou would have thy Sun
break forth in bright gleams, to show that it has no less light even whiles it
seems kept in by the clouds. Thou were now near thy Passion; it was most
seasonable for thee at this time to set forth thy just title. Neither was this
an act that thy Humanity could challenge to it self; but far transcending all
finite powers. To die, was an act of the Son of man; to raise from death, was
an act of the Son of God.

Neither did thou say merely, that God, but, that the Son of God might be God
cannot be glorified unless the Son be so. In very natural Relations, the wrong
or disrespect offered to the child reflects upon the father, as contrarily the
parents upon the child; how much more where the love and respect is infinite?
where the whole effence is communicated with the intireness of relation?

O God, in vain shall we tender our Devotions to thee indefinitely, as to a
glorious and incomprehensible Majesty, if we kiss not the Son, who has most
justly said, Ye believe in the Father, believe also in me.

What an happy family was this? I find none upon earth so much honored; Jesus
loved Martha, and her sister, and Lazarus. It is no standing upon terms Mary
was confessed to have chosen the better part; here Martha is named first, as
most interessed in Christ's love: for ought appears all of them were equally
dear. Christ had familiarly lodged under their roof. How fit was that to
receive him, whose in-dwellers were hospital, pious, unanimous* Hospital, in
the glad entertainment of Jesus and his train; Pious, in their Devotions;
Unanimous, in their mutual Concord. As contrarily he bal^s and hates that house
which is taken up with uncharitableness, profaneness, contention.

But, O Savior, how does this agree? thou lovedst this Family: yet hearing How
long, Lord? What need we instance,

Here thou would knowingly delay, whether for the greatning of the Miracle,
or for the strengthening of thy Disciples Faith.

Had thou gone sooner, and prevented the death, who had known whether
strength of Nature, and not thy miraculous power, had done it? Had thou
overtaken his death by this quickening visitation, who had known whether this
had been only some ^ualm or ecstasy, and not a perfect dissolution? Now this
large gap of time makes thy work both certain and glorious.

And what a clear proof was this beforehand to thy Disciples, that thou were
Lazarus on the fourth? The more difficult the work should be, the more need it
had of an omnipotent confirmation.

He that was Lord of our times and his own, can now, when he found it
seasonable, Vide Chap. 10. ver. 31, 39.
say, Let us go into Judaea again. Why left he it before? was it not upon the
heady violence of his enemies? Lo, the stones of the Jews drove him thence: the
love of Lazarus and the care of his Divine glory drew him back thither.

We may, we must be wise as serpents, for our own preservation; we must be
careless of danger when God calls us to the hazard. It is far from God's purpose
Judaea be all snares, all crosses; O Savior, when thou call us, we must put
our lives into our hands, and follow thee thither.

This journey thou have purposed and contrived; but what need thou to
acquaint thy Disciples with thine intent? Where did thou ever (besides here)
make them of counsel with thy voyages? Neither did thou say, How think you if
I go? but, Let us go. Was it for that thou, who knew thine own strength,
knew also their weakness? Thou were resolute, they were timorous: they were
sensible enough of their late peril, and fearful of more; there was need to
fore-arm them with an exspectation of the worst, and preparation for

The Disciples were dearly affected to Lazarus; they had learned to love where
their Master loved: yet now when our Savior speaks of returning to that region
of peril, they pull him by the sleeve, and put him in mind of the violence
offered unto him; Master, the Jews of late sought to stone thee, and go thou
thither again?

No less then thrice in the fore going Chapter did the Jews lift up their hands
to murder him by a cruel lapidation. Whence was this rage and bloody attempt of
theirs? Only for that he taught them the truth concerning his Divine nature,
suffer with him with whom we shall once reign.

However the Disciples pleaded for their Masters safety, yet they aimed at
their own; they well knew their danger was inwrapped in his. It is but a
cleanly color that they put upon their own fear. This is held but a weak and
base Passion; each one would be glad to put off the opinion of it from himself,
and to set the best face upon his own impotency.

Are there not twelve hours in the day, which are duly set and proceed

The journey then holds to Judaea; his attendants shall be made acquainted with
the occasion. He that had formerly denied the deadliness of Lazarus Lazarus our
friend sleeps. What a sweet title is here both of death, and of Lazarus?
Death is a sleep; Lazarus is our friend. Lo, he says not, my friend, but ours;
to draw them first into a gracious familiarity and communion of friendship with
himself: for what does this import but, Ye are my friends, and Lazarus is both
my friend and yours? Our friend.

Oh meek and merciful Savior, that disdainest not to stoop so low, as that
whiles thou thoughtest it no robbery to be equal unto God, thou thoughtest it
Our friend Lazarus. There is a kind of parity in Friendship. There may be Love
where is the most inequality; but friendship supposes pairs: yet the Son of God
says of the sons of men, Our friend Lazarus. Oh what an high and happy
condition is this for mortal men to aspire unto, that the God of Heaven should
not be ashamed to own them for friends! Neither says he now abruptly, Lazarus
our friend is dead; but, Lazarus our friend sleeps.

O Savior, none can know the estate of life or death so well as thou that art
the Lord of both. It is enough that thou tellest us death is no other then

Who is afraid after the weary toiles of the day, to take his rest by night?
or what is more refreshing to the spent traveller then a sweet sleep? It is our
infidelity, our impreparation that makes death any other then advantage. Even
so, Lord, when thou see I have toiled enough, let me sleep in peace: and when
thou see I have slept enough, awake me, as thou did thy Lazarus; But I go
to awake him. Thou said not, Let us go to awake him: Lazarus out of this
sleep but he that made Lazarus. Every mouse or gnat can raise us up from that
other sleep; none but an Omnipotent power from this. This sleep is not without
a dissolution. Who can command the Soul to come down and meet the body, or
command the body to piece with it self and rise up to the Soul, but the God
that created both? It is our comfort and assurance (O Lord) against the terrors
of death and tenacity of the grave, that our Resurrection depends upon none but
thine Omnipotence.

Who can blame the Disciples if they were loath to return to Judaea? Their last
entertainment was such as might justly dishearten them. Were this (as literally
taken) all the reason of our Saviors purpose of so perilous a voyage, they
argued not amiss, If he sleep, he shall do well. Sleep in sickness is a good
sign of Recovery. For extremity of pain bars our rest: when Nature If he
sleep, he shall do well: How many have dyed in Lethargies? how many have lost
in sleep what they would not have forgone waking? Adam slept and lost his rib;
Sampson slept and lost (...) strength; Saul slept and lost his weapon;
Ishbosheth and Holofe^^^ slept and lost their heads. In ordinary course it
holds well; here they mistook and erred. The misconstruction of the words of
Christ led them into an unseasonable and erroneous suggestion. Nothing can be
more dangerous then to take the speeches of Christ according to the sound of
the Letter: one error will be sure to draw on more; and if the first be never
so slight the last may be

Wherefore are words but to express meanings? why do we speak but to be
understood? Since then our Savior saw himself not rightly construed, he
delivers himself planly, Lazarus is dead. Such is thy manner, O thou eternal
Word of thy Father, in all thy sacred expressions. Thine own mouth is thy best
commentary: what thou have more obscurely said in one passage, thou
interpretest more clearly in another. Thou art the Sun, which give us that
light whereby we see thy self.

But how modestly do thou discover thy Deity to thy Disciples? not upon the
first mention of Lazarus his death, instantly professing thy Power and

The absence of our Savior from the deathbed of Lazarus was not casual, but
voluntary; yea, he is not only willing with it, but glad of it; I am glad for
your sakes that I was not there. How contrary may the affections of Christ and
ours be, and yet be both good? The two worthy Sisters were much grieved at our
Saviors absence, as doubting it might savor of some neglect;

The difference of the affections arises from the difference of the Objects,
which Christ and they apprehend in the same occurrence. Why are the Sisters
sorrowful? because upon Christ absence Lazarus died. Why was Jesus glad he was
not there? for the benefit which he saw would accrue to their

O God, why should not we conform our diet unto thine? When we ly in pain and
extremity, we cannot but droop under it; but do we find our selves

O strange consequence! Lazarus is dead; nevertheless, Let us go unto him.
Must they not needs think, What should we do with a dead man? What should
separate, if death cannot? Even those whom we loved dearliest, we avoid love
stronger then Death! Behold here a friend whom the very Grave cannot sever.

Even those that write the longest and most passionate dates of their amity,
subscribe but, your friend till death; and if the ordinary strain of humane
friendship will stretch yet a little further, it is but to the brim of the
grave: thither a friend may follow us, and see us bestowed in this house of our
Age; but

In the mouth of a mere man this word had been incongruous, Lazarus is in
thine, O almighty Savior, it was not more loving then seasonable; since I may
justly say of thee, thou have more to do with the dead then with the living:
for, both they are infinitely more, and have more inward communion with thee,
and thou with them. Death cannot hinder either our passage to thee, or thy
return to us. I joy to think the time is coming, when thou shall come to every
of our graves, and call us up out of our dust, and we shall hear thy voice, and
live.

LAZARUS Raised.
GReat was the opinion that these devout Sisters had of the Power of Christ: as
if Death durst not show her face to him, they suppose his presence had
prevented their Brothers dissolution. And now the news of his approach begins
to quicken some late hopes in them. Martha was ever the more active: She that
was before so busily stirring in her house to entertain Jesus, was now as
nimble to go forth of her house to meet him; She in whose face joy had wont to
smile upon so Blessed a Guest, now salutes him with the sighs and tears and
blubbers and wrings of a disconsolate Jesus his feet; and can now give good
account of her Faith in the Power and Godhead of Christ, in the certainty of a
future Resurrection. This Conference has yet taught her more, and raised her
heart to an expectation of some wonderful effect. And now she stands not still,
but hastes back into the Village to her Sister; carried thither by the two
wings of her own hopes and her Saviors commands. The time was, when she would
have called off her Sister from the feet of that Divine Master, to attend the
household occasions; now she runs to fetch her out of the house to the feet of

Doubtless Martha was much affected with the presence of Christ; and as she was
overjoyed with it her self, so she knew how equally welcome it would be to her
Sister: yet she does not ring it out aloud in the open Hall, but secretly
whispers this pleasing tidings in her Sisters ear, The Master is come and
Whether out of modesty, or discretion. It is not fit for a woman to be loud and
clamorous: nothing beseems that Sex better then silence and bashfulness; as not
to be too much seen, so not to be heard too far. Neither did Modesty more
charm her tongue then Discretion; whether in respect to the guests, or to
Christ himself. Had those guests heard of Christ's being there, they had either
out of fear or prejudice withdrawn themselves from him; neither durst they have
been witnesses of that wonderful Miracle, as being overawed with that Jewish
edict which was out against him: or perhaps they had withheld the Sisters from
going to him, against whom they knew how highly their Governors were incensed.
Neither was she ignorant Jerusalem: She knew they were within the smoke of that
bloody City, the nest of his enemies; she holds it not therefore fit to make
open proclamation of Christ's presence, but rounds her Sister secretly in the
ear. Christianity does not bid us abate any thing of our wariness and honest
policies; yea it requires us to have no less of the Serpent then of the Dove.

There is a time when we must preach Christ on the housetop; there is a time
when we must speak him in the ear, and (as it were) with our lips shut.
Secrecy has no less use then Divulgation. She said enough, The Master is What
an happy word was this which was here spoken? what an high favor is this that
is done; that the Lord of Life should personally come and call for Mary? yet
such as is not appropriated to her. Thou come to us still, O Savior, if not
in thy bodily presence, yet in thy spiritual; thou call us still, if not in
thy personal voice, yet in thine Ordinances. It is our fault, if we do not as
this good woman, arise quickly, and come to thee. Her friends were there about
her, who came purposely to condole with her; her heart was full of heaviness:
yet so soon as she hears mention of Christ, she forgets friends, Brother,
grief, cares, thoughts, and hasts to his presence.

Jesus standing in the place where Martha left him. Whether it be noted to
express Marie's speed, or his own wise and gracious resolutions; his presence
in the Village had perhaps invited danger, and set off the intended witnesses
of the work: or it may be to set forth his zealous desire to dispatch the
errand he came for; that as Abraham's faithful servant would not receive any
courtesy from the house of Bethuel, till he had done his Masters business
concerning Rebeccah, so thou, O Savior, would not so much as enter into the
house of these two Sisters in Bethany, till thou had effected this glorious
work which occasioned thee thither. It was thy meat and drink to do the will
of thy Father; thy best Entertainment was within thy self. How do we follow

So good women were well worthy of kind friends. No doubt Bethany, being not
two miles distant from Jerusalem, could not but be furnished with good
acquaintance from the City: these knowing the dearness, and hearing of the
death of Lazarus, came over to comfort the sad Sisters. Charity together with
the common practice of that Nation calls them to this duty. All our distresses
exspect these good offices from those that love us; but of all others Death, as
that which is the extremest of evils, and makes the most fearful havoc in
families, cities, kingdoms, worlds. The complaint was grievous, I looked It is
some kind of ease to sorrow, to have partners; as a burden is lightened by many
shoulders; or as clouds scattered into many drops, easily vent their moisture
into air. Yea the very presence of friends abates grief. The peril that arises
to the heart from Passion is the fixedness of it, when, like a corrosiving
plaster, it eats in into the sore. Some kind of remedy it is, that it may
breathe out in good society.

These friendly neighbors seeing Mary hasten forth, make haste to follow
Martha went forth before; I saw none go after her: Mary stirs; they are at her
heels. Was it for that Martha being the elder Sister, and the huswife of the
family, might stir about with less observation? or was it that Mary was the
more passionate, and needed the more heedy attendance? However their care and
intentiveness is truly commendable; they came to comfort her, they do what
they came for. It contents them not to sit still and chat within doors, but
they wait on her at all turns. Perturbations of Mind are diseases: good
keepers do not only tend the Patient in bed, but when he sits up, when he tries
to walk; all his motions have their careful assistance. We are no true friends,
if our endeavors of the redress of distempers in them

It was but a loving suspicion, She is gone to the grave to weep there. They
well knew how apt passionate minds are to take all occasions to renew their
sorrow; every Object affects them. When she saw but the Chamber of her dead
Brother, straight she thinks, there Lazarus was wont to lie, and then she wept
afresh; when the Table, There Lazarus was wont to sit, and then new tears
arise; when the Garden, There Lazarus had wont to walk, and now again she
weeps. How much more do these friends suppose the Passions would be stirred
with the sight of the Grave, when she must needs think, There is Lazarus? O
Savior, if the place of the very dead corpse of our friend have power to draw
which were dead and art alive) is thy body and thy Soul present, and united to
thy glorious Deity. Thither, O thither let our access be; not to mourn there,
(where is no place for sorrow) but to rejoice with joy unspeakable and
glorious, and more and more to long for that thy beatifical presence.

Their indulgent love mistook Marie's errand; their thoughts (how kind soever)
were much too low: whiles they supposed she went to a dead Brother, she went to
a living Savior. The world has other conceits of the actions and

Both the Sisters met Christ; not both in one posture: Mary is still noted as
for more Passion, so for more Devotion; she that before sat at the feet of
Jesus, now falls at his feet. That presence had wont to be familiar to her, and
not without some outward homeliness; now it fetches her upon her knees, in an
awful veneration: whether out of a reverend acknowledgment of the secret

Even before all her neighbors of Jerusalem does Mary thus fall down at the
feet of Jesus; so many witnesses as she had, so many spies she had of that
forbidden observance. It was no less then Excommunication for any body to
confess him: yet good Mary, not fearing the informations that might be given by
Thou art the Christ, the Son of God. Those that would give Christ his right,
must not stand upon scrupulous fears. Are we naturally timorous? Why do we not
fear the denial, the exclusion of the Almighty? Without shall be the fearful.

Lord, if thou had been here, my brother had not died. The Sisters are both
in one mind, both in one speech; and both of them in one speech bewray both
strength and infirmity: strength of Faith, in ascribing so much power to
Christ, that his presence could preserve from death; infirmity, in supposing
the necessity of a presence for this purpose. Why, Mary, could not thine
Omnipotent Savior as well in absence have commanded Lazarus to live? Is his
hand so short, that he can do nothing but by contaction? If his Power were
finite, how could he have forbidden the seizure of death? if infinite, how
could it be limited to place, or hindered by distance? It is a weakness of
Faith to measure success by means, and means by

This was Mary's moan; no motion, no request sounded from her to her Savior.
Her silent suit is returned with a mute answer; no notice is taken of her
error. Oh that mavelous mercy that connives at our faulty infirmities! All
the reply that I hear of is, a compassionate groan within himself. O blessed
Jesu, thou that were free from all sin, would not be free from strong
affections. Wisdom and Holiness should want much work, if even vehement
passions might not be quitted from offense. Mary wept; her tears drew on tears
from her friends; all their tears united drew groans from thee. Even in thine
Heaven thou do no less pity our sorrows: thy glory is free from groans, but
abounds with compassion and mercy: if we be not sparing of our tears, thou
can not be insensible of our sorrows. How shall we imitate thee, if, like our
looking-glass, we do not answer tears, and weep on them that weep upon us?

Lord, thou knew (in absence) that Lazarus was dead, and do thou not Where
have ye laid him? Not out of need, but out of will: that as in thy sorrow, so
in thy question thou might depress thy self in the opinion of the beholders
for the time, that the glory of thine instant Miracle might be the greater, the
less it was exspected. It had been all one to thy Omnipotence to have made a
new Lazarus out of nothing; or in that remoteness to have commanded Lazarus,
wheresoever he was, to come forth: but thou were neither willing to work more
miracle then was requisite, nor yet unwilling to fix the minds of the people
upon the exspectation Where have you laid him?

They are not more glad of the question, then ready for the answer; Come and
see. It was the manner of the Jews, as likewise of those Egyptians among whom
they had sojourned, to lay up the dead bodies of their friends with great
respect; more cost was wont to be bestowed on some of their graves then on
their houses: as neither ashamed then, nor unwilling to show the decency of
their sepulture, they say, Come and see. More was hoped for from Christ then a
mere view; they meant and exspected that his eye should draw him on to some
further action. O Savior, whiles we desire our spiritual resuscitation, how
should

Never was our Savior more submisly dejected then now immediately before he
would approve and exalt the Majesty of his Godhead. To his groans and inward
grief he adds his tears. Anon they shall confess him a See how he loved him.
Never did any thing but love fetch tears from Christ. But they do foully
misconstrue Christ in the other; Could not he that opened the eyes of him that
was born blind, have caused that even this man should not have died? Yes, know
ye, O vain and importune questionists, that he could have done it with ease. To
open the eyes of a man born blind was more then to keep a sick man from dying:
this were but to uphold and maintain Nature from decaying; that were to create
a new sense, and to restore a deficiency in Nature. To make an eye was no whit
less difficult then to make a man: he that could do the greater might well
have done the less.

It is not improbable that Jesus, who before groaned in himself for compassion
of their tears, now groaned for their incredulity. Nothing could so much
afflict the Savior of men as the sins of men. Could their external wrongs to
his body have been separated from offense against his Divine person, their

With these groans, O Savior, thou came to the grave of Lazarus. The door of
that house of Death was strong and impenetrable. Thy first word was, Take away
the stone. Oh weak beginning of a mighty Miracle! If thou meantest to raise the
dead, how much more easy had it been for thee to remove the gravestone? One
grain of Faith in thy very Disciples was enough to remove mountains; and do
thou say, Take away the stone? I wis, there was a greater Lazarus then the
stone of his Tomb; the weight of Death and Corruption: a thousand rocks and
hills were not so heavy a load as this alone: why then do thou stick at this
shovel-full? Yea, how easy had it been for thee to have brought up the body of
Lazarus through the stone, by causing that marble to give way by a sudden
rarefaction? But thou thoughtest best to make use of their hands rather:
whether for their own more full conviction; for had the stone been taken away
by thy Followers, and Lazarus thereupon walked forth, this might have appeared
to thy malignant enemies to have been a set match betwixt thee, the Disciples
and Lazarus: or whether for the exercise of our Faith, that thou might teach
us to trust thee

It was ever thy just will that we should do what we may. To remove the stone
or to untie the napkin was in their power; this they must do: to raise the
dead was out of their power; this therefore thou will do alone. Our hands must
do their utmost, ere thou will put to thine.

O Savior, we are all dead and buried in the grave of our sinful Nature. The
Lazarus could remove his; we can add more weight to our graves. O let thy
faithful agents by the power of thy Law, and the grace of thy Gospel take off
the stone, that thy voice may enter into the grave of miserable corruption.

Martha, that she would not have Christ annoyed with the ill sent of that stale
carcass? or was it out of distrust of reparation, since her brother had passed
all the degrees of corruption, that she says, Lord, by this time he stinketh,
for he has been dead four days? He that understood hearts, found somewhat
amiss in that intimation; his answer had not endeavored to rectify that which
was utterly faultless. I fear the good woman meant to object this as a likely
obstacle to any further purposes or proceedings of Christ. Weak faith is still
apt to lay blocks of difficulties in the way of the great works of God.

Four days were enough to make any corpse noisome. Death it self is not

They that laid their hands to the stone doubtless held now still awhile, and
looked one while on Christ, another while upon Martha, to hear what issue of
resolution would follow upon so important an objection: when they find a light
touch of taxation to Martha, Said not I to thee, that if thou would believe,
thou should see the glory of God? That holy woman had before professed her
belief, as Christ had professed his great intentions; both were now forgotten:
and now our Savior is fain to revive both her memory and Faith; Said not I to
thee? The best of all Saints are subject to fits of unbelief and oblivion; the
only remedy whereof must be the inculcation of Gods merciful promises of their
relief Faithful art thou which have promised, who wilt also do it.

In spite of all the unjust discouragements of Nature we must obey Christ's
command. Whatever Martha suggests, they remove the stone, and may now see and
smell him dead, whom they shall soon see revived. The sent of the corpse is not
so unpleasing to them, as the perfume of their obedience is sweet to Christ.
And now when all impediments are removed, and all hearts ready for the work,
our Savior addresses to the Miracle.

His eyes begin; they are lift up to Heaven. It was the malicious
mis-suggestion Beelzebub: the beholders shall now see whence he exspects and
derives his power; and shall by him learn whence to exspect and hope for all
success. The heart and the eye must go together: he that would have ought to
do with God, must be sequestered and lifted up from earth.

His Tongue seconds his Eye; Father. Nothing more stuck in the stomach of the
Jews, then that Christ called himself the Son of God; this was imputed to him
for a Blasphemy, worthy of stones. How seasonably is this word spoken in the
hearing of these Jews, in whose sight he will be presently approved so? How can
ye now, O ye cavillers, except at that title which ye shall see irrefragably

I hear of no Prayer, but a Thanks for hearing. Whiles thou said nothing, O
Savior, how does thy Father hear thee? Was it not with thy Father and thee, as
it was with thee and Moses? Thou said, Let me alone Moses, when he spoke not.
Thy will was thy Prayer. Words express our hearts to men, Lazarus should rise,
he was now raised. It was not for thee to pray vocally and audibly, lest those
captious hearers should say, thou did all by entreaty, nothing by power. Thy
thanks overtake thy desires; ours require time and distance: our thanks arise
from the Echo of our prayers resounding from Heaven to our hearts; Thou,
because thou art at once in earth and Heaven, and know the grant to be of
equal paces with the request, most justly thankest in praying.

Now ye cavilling Jews are thinking straight, Is there such distance betwixt I
knew that thou hear me always; but I said this for their sakes, that they
might believe.

Merciful Savior, how can we enough admire thy goodness, who make our belief
the scope and drift of thy doctrine and actions! Alas, what were thou the
better if they believed thee sent from God? what were thou the worse if they
believed it not? Thy perfection and glory stands not upon the slippery terms of
our approbation or dislike; but is real in

O Savior, whiles thou spak'st to thy Father, thou liftedst up thine eyes; now
thou art to speak unto dead Lazarus, thou liftedst up thy voice, and criedst
aloud, Lazarus, come forth. Was it that the strength of the voice might answer
to the strength of the affection? since we faintly require what we care not to
obtain, and vehemently utter what we earnestly desire. Was it that the
greatness of the voice might answer to the greatness of the work? Was it that
the Lazarus his Soul was called from far? the speech must be loud that shall
be heard in another world. Was it in relation to the estate of the body of
Lazarus, whom thou had reported to sleep; since those that are in a deep and
dead sleep cannot be awaked without a loud call? Or was it in a representation
of that loud voice of the last Trumpet, which shall sound into all graves, and
raise all flesh from their dust?

Even so still, Lord, when thou would raise a Soul from the death of sin and
grave of corruption, no easy voice will serve. Thy strongest commands, thy

How familiar a word is this, Lazarus, come forth? no other then he was wont to
use whiles they lived together. Neither does he say, Lazarus, revive; but, as
if he supposed him already living, Lazarus, come forth: To let them know, that
those who are dead to us, are to and with him alive; yea in a more entire and
feeling society, then whiles they carried their clay about them. Why do I fear
that separation which shall more unite me to my Savior?

Neither was the word more familiar then commanding, Lazarus, come forth, Here
is no suit to his Father, no adjuration to the deceased, but a flat and
absolute Come forth. O Savior, that is the voice that I shall once hear
sounding into the bottom of my grave, and raising me up out of my dust; that
is the voice that shall pierce the rocks, and divide the mountains, and fetch
up the dead out of the lowest deeps. Thy word made all; thy word shall repair
all. Hence, all ye diffident fears; he whom I trust is Omnipotent.



There lies Lazarus bound in double fetters: One Almighty word has loosed
both; and now he that was bound came forth. He whose power could not be hindered
by the chains of death, cannot be hindered by linen bonds: He Lazarus into the
body, guided the body of Lazarus without his eyes, moved the feet without the
full liberty of his regular paces: no doubt the same power slackned those
swathing-bands of death, that the feet might have some little scope to move,
though not with that freedom that followed after. Thou did not only, O
Savior, raise the body of Lazarus, but the Faith of the beholders. They cannot
deny him dead, whom they saw rising; they see the signs of death, with the
proofs of life. Those very swathes convinced him to be the man that was raised.
Thy less Miracle confirms the greater; both confirm the Faith of the beholders.
O clear and irrefragable example of our Sadducees, with what face can ye deny
the Resurrection of the body, when ye see Lazarus after four-days death rising
up out of his grave? And if Lazarus did thus start up at the bleating of this
Lamb of God, that was now every day preparing for the slaughterhouse; how
shall the dead be rouzed up out of their graves by the roaring of that glorious
and immortal Lion, whose voice shall shake the powers of Heaven, and move the
very foundations of the earth?

With what strange amazedness do we think that Martha and Mary, the Jews and
the Disciples looked to see Lazarus come forth in his winding sheet, shackled
with his linen fetters, and walk toward them? Doubtless fear and Lazarus was
encumbred; yet he will not do it but by their hands. He that said, Remove the
stone, said, Loose Lazarus. He will not have us exspect his immediate help in
that we can do for our selves. It is both a laziness, and a presumptuous
tempting of God, to look for and extraordinary and supernatural help from God,
where he has enabled us

What strange salutations do we think there were betwixt Lazarus and Christ
that had raised him; betwixt Lazarus and his Sisters and neighbors and friends?
what amazed looks? what unusual complements? For Lazarus was himself at once:
here was no leisure of degrees to reduce him to his wonted perfection; neither
did he stay to rub his eyes, and stretch his benumbed lims, nor take time to
put off that dead sleep wherewith he had been seized; but instantly he is both
alive, and fresh, and vigorous: if they do but let him go, he walks so as if
he had ailed nothing, and receives and gives mutual gratulations. I leave them
entertaining each other with glad embraces, with discourses of

Christ's Procession to the Temple.
NEver did our Savior take so much state upon him as now that he was going
toward his Passion: other journies he measured on foot, without noise or
train; this with a Princely equipage and loud acclamation. Wherein yet, O
Savior, whether shall I more wonder at thy Majesty, or thine Humility; that
Divine Majesty which lay hid under so humble appearance, or that sincere
Humility which veiled so great a glory? Thou, O Lord, whose chariots are twenty
thousand, even thousands of Angels,

Thou would not lose ought of thy right; thou that wast a King, would be
proclaimed so: but that it might appear thy Kingdom was not of this world,
thou that could have commanded all worldly magnificence, thoughtest fit to
abandon it.

In stead of the Kings of the earth, who reigning by thee might have been

Justly did thy Followers hold the best ornaments of the earth worthy of no
better then thy treading upon; neither could they ever account their garments
so rich, as when they had been trampled upon by thy carriage. How happily did
they think their backs disrobed for thy way? How gladly did they spend Hosanna
to the Son of David: Blessed is he that comes in the name of the Lord. Where
now are the great Masters of the Synagogue, that had enacted the ejection of
whosoever should confess Jesus to be the Christ? Lo here bold and undaunted
clients of the Messiah, that dare proclaim him in the public road, in the open
streets. In vain shall the impotent enemies of Christ hope to suppress his
glory: as soon shall they with their hand hide the face of the Sun from shining
to the world, as withhold the beams of his Divine truth from the eyes of men by
their envious opposition. In spite of all Jewish malignity, his Kingdom is
confessed, applauded, blessed.

O thou fairer then the children of men, in thy Majesty ride on prosperously,
because of truth and meekness and righteousness: and thy right hand shall teach
thee terrible things.

In this Princely (and yet poor and despicable) pomp does our Savior enter
into the famous City of Jerusalem; Jerusalem noted of old for the seat of
Kings, Priests, Prophets: of Kings, for there was the throne of David; of
Priests, for there was the Temple; of Prophets, for there they delivered their
errands, and left their blood. Neither know I whether it were more wonder for a
Prophet to perish out of Jerusalem, or to be safe there. Thither would Jesus
come as a King, as a Priest, as a Prophet: acclamed as a King; teaching
Jerusalem without any remarkable change, because without any semblance of
State; now that he gives some little glimpse of his Royalty, the whole City was
moved. When the Herod was troubled and all Jerusalem with him; and now that the
King of the Jews comes himself (though in so mean a port) there is a new
commotion. The silence and obscurity of Christ never troubles the world; he may
be an underling without any stir: but if he do but put forth himself never so
little to bear the least sway amongst men, now their blood is up; the whole
City is moved. Neither is it otherwise in the private economy of the Soul. O
Savior, whiles thou do, as it were, hide thy self, and lie still in the
heart, and take all terms contentedly from us, we entertain thee with no
other then a friendly welcome; but when thou once beginnest to ruffle with our
Corruptions,

Although, doubtless, this commotion was not so much of tumult, as of wonder.
As when some uncouth sight presents it self in a populous street, men run, and
gaze, and throng, and inquire; the feet, the tongue, the eyes walk; one
spectator draws on another, one asks and presses another; the noise increases
with the concourse, each helps to stir up others exspectation: such was this of
Jerusalem.

What means this strangeness? Was not Jerusalem the Spouse of Christ? My
breath was grown strange to my own wife, though I entreated her for the
childrens sake of my own body? Even of thee is that fulfilled, which thy chosen
Vessel said of thy Ministers, Thou art made a gazing-stock to the world, to
Angels, and to men.

As all the world was bound to thee for thy Incarnation and residence upon the
face of the earth, so especially Judaea, to whose limits thou confinedst thy
self; and therein, above all the rest, three Cities, Nazaret, Capernaum,
Jerusalem, on whom thou bestowedst the most time, and cost of preaching, and
Nazaret they would have cast thee down headlong from the mount: In Capernaum
they would have bound thee: In Jerusalem they crucified thee at last, and now
are amazed at thy presence. Those places and persons that have the greatest
helps and privileges afforded to them, are not always the most answerable in
the return of their thankfulness. Christ's being amongst us does not make us
happy, but his welcome. Every day may we hear him in our streets, and yet be as
new to seek as these Citizens of Jerusalem; Who is this?

Was it a question of applause, or of contempt, or of ignorance? Applause
Jerusalem knew not Christ, who was so ordinary a guest, so noted a Prophet
amongst them. Questionless this question was asked of that part of the train
which went before this Triumph, whiles our Savior was not yet in sight, which
ere long his presence had resolved. It had been their duty to have known to
have attended Christ, yea to have published him to others: since this is not
done, it is well yet that they spend their breath in an inquiry. No Who is
this? as not thinking it could concern them who passed by, whiles they might
sit still. Those Greeks were in some way to good, that could say to Philip, We
would see Jesus. O Savior, thou have been so long amongst us, that it is our
just shame if we know thee not. If we have been slack hitherto, let our zealous
inquiry make amends for our neglect. Let outward pomp and worldly glory draw
the hearts and

The attending Disciples could not be to seek for an answer; which of the
Prophets have not put it into their mouths? Who is this? Ask Moses, and he
shall tell you, The seed of the Woman that shall break the Serpents head. Ask
our Father Jacob, and he shall tell you, The Shiloh of the tribe of Judah. Ask
David, and he shall tell you, The King of glory. Ask Esaias, he shall tell you,
Immanuel, Wonderful, Counselor, The mighty God, The everlasting Father, The
Prince of peace. Ask Jeremy, and he shall tell you, The righteous Branch. Ask
Daniel, he shall tell you, The Messiah. Ask John the Baptist, he shall tell
you, The Lamb of God. If ye ask the God of the Prophets, he has told you, This
is my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased. Yea, if all these be too good for
you to consult with, the Devils themselves have been forced to say, I know who
thou art, even that Holy One of God. On no side has Christ left himself
without a testimony; and accordingly the Multitude here have their answer
ready, This is Jesus, the Prophet of Nazaret in Galilee.

Ye undervalue your Master, O ye well-meaning Followers of Christ: A Prophet?
yea, more then a Prophet? John Baptist was so, yet was but the harbinger of
this Messiah. This was that God by whom the Prophets were both sent and
inspired. Of Nazaret, say you? ye mistake him: Bethleem was the place Nazareth
were honored by his preaching, there was no reason he should be dishonored by
Nazareth. No doubt, he whom you confessed, pardoned the error of your
confession. Ye spoke but according to the common style: the two Disciples in
their walk to Emmaus, after the Death and Resurrection of Christ, give him no
other title. This belief passed current with the people; and thus high even the
vulgar thoughts could then rise: and, no doubt, even thus much was for that
time very acceptable to the Father of Mercies. If we make profession of the
Truth according to our knowledge, though there be much imperfection in our
apprehension and delivery, the mercy of our

But oh the wonderful hand of God in the carriage of this whole business! The
people proclaimed Christ first a King; and now they proclaim him a Prophet.
Roman bands run into arms upon the one? why did not the Scribes and Pharisees
and the envious Priesthood mutiny upon the other? They had made Decrees against
him, they had laid wait for him; yet now he passes in state through their
streets, acclamed both a King and Prophet, without their reluctation. What can
we impute this unto, but to the powerful and overruling arm of his Godhead?
He that restrained the rage of Herod and his Courtiers upon the first news of a
King born, now restrains all the opposite powers of Jerusalem from lifting up a
finger against this last and public avouchment of the Regal and Prophetical
Office of Christ. When flesh and blood have done their worst, they can be but
such as he will

With this humble pomp and just acclamation, O Savior, do thou pass
Jerusalem to the Temple. Thy first walk was not to Herod's Palace, or to the
Marketplaces or Burses of that populous City, but to the Temple; whether it
were out of duty, or out of need: As a good Son when he comes from far, his
first alighting is at his Fathers house; neither would he think it other then
preposterous, to visit strangers before his friends, or friends before his
Father. Besides that the Temple had more use of thy presence: Both there was
the most disorder, and from thence, as from a corrupt spring, it issued forth
into all the channels of Jerusalem. A wise Physician inquires first into the
state of the head, heart, liver, stomach, the vital and chief parts, ere he
asks after the petty symptoms of the meaner Aaron's head sweetens his utmost
skirts. Contrarily, the distempers of the Temple cannot but affect the Secular
state. As therefore the good Husbandman, when he sees the leaves grow yellow,
and the branches unthriving, looks presently to the root; so did thou, O holy
Savior, upon sight of the disorders spread over Jerusalem and Judaea, address
thy self to the rectifying of the Temple.

Israelites came many of them from far; it was no less from Dan to Beersheba
then the space of an hundred and threescore miles; neither could it be without
much inconvenience for them to bring their Bullocks, Sheep, Goats, Lambs, meal,
oil, and such other holy provision with them Jerusalem: Order was taken by the
Priests, that these might for money be had close by the Altar; to the ease of
the offerer, and the benefit of the seller, and perhaps no disprofit to
themselves. The pretense was fair, the practice unsufferable. The great owner
of the Temple comes to vindicate the reputation and rights of his own house;
and in an indignation at that so foul abuse, lays fiercely about him, and with
his three-stringed scourge whips out those Sacrilegious chapmen, casts down
their tables, throws away their baskets, scatters their heaps, and sends away
their customers with smart and horror.

With what fear and astonishment did the repining offenders look upon so take
upon him our stripes, and to undergo the chastisements of our peace? Is this
that quiet Lamb, which before his shearers opens not his mouth? See now how
his eyes sparkle with holy anger, and dart forth beams of indignation in the
faces of these guilty Collybists: see how his hands deal strokes and ruin.
Yea, thus, thus it became thee, O thou gracious Redeemer of men, to let the
world see, thou have not lost thy Justice in thy Mercy; that there is not more
lenity in thy forbearances, then rigor in thy just severity; that thou can
thunder, as

This was not thy first act of this kind; at the entrance of thy public work
thou beganst so as thou now shuttest up, with purging thine House. Once before
had these offenders been whipped out of that holy place* which now they dare
again defile. Shame and smart is not enough to rec^^^m obdur'd offenders.
Gainful sins are not easily checked, but less easily mastered. These bold
flies, where they are beaten off, will alight again. He that is filthy will be
filthy still.

Often yet had our Savior been (besides this) in the Temple, and often had seen
the same disorder; he does not think fit to be always whipping. It was enough
thus twice to admonish and chastise them before their ruin. That God who hates
sin always, will not chide always, and strikes more seldom; but he would
have those few strokes perpetual monitors; and if those prevail not, he smites
but once. It is his uniform course, first the Whip, and if that speed not, then
the Sword.

There is a reverence due to God's House for the Owners sake, for the services
sake. Secular and profane actions are not for that Sacred roof, much less the
beauty of Holiness?

The fairest pretenses cannot bear out a sin with God. Never could there be
more plausible colors cast upon any act; the convenience, the necessity of
provisions for the Sacrifice: yet through all these do the fiery eyes of our
Savior see the foul Covetousness of the Priests, the Fraud of the
Money Changers, the intolerable abuse of the Temple. Common eyes may be cheated
with easy pretexts; but he that looks through the heart at the face, justly
answers our Apologies with scourges.

None but the hand of public authority must reform the abuses of the Moses,
Who made thee a Judge or a Ruler? We must all imitate the zeal of our Savior;
we may not imitate his correction. If we strike uncalled, we are justly
stricken for our arrogation, for our presumption. A tumultuary remedy may prove
a medicine worse then the disease.

But what shall I say of so sharp and imperious an act from so meek an Agent?
Why did not the Priests and Levites (whose this gain partly was) abett these
money changers, and make head against Christ? why did not Who has resisted thy
will? Men's

The Fig Tree cursed.
WHen in this State our Savior had rid through the streets of Jerusalem, that
evening he lodged not there. Whether he would not, that after so public an
acclamation of the people he might avoid Hosanna was better ^heap then an
Entertainment; and perhaps the envy of so stomached a Reformation discouraged
his hosts. However he goes that evening Jerusalem. O unthankful Citizens! Do ye
thus part with your no less meek then glorious King? His title was not more
proclaimed in your streets then your own ingratitude. If he have purged the
Temple, yet your hearts are foul. There is no wonder in men's unworthiness;
there is more then wonder in thy mercy, O thou Savior of men, that would yet
return thither where thou were so palpably disregarded. If they gave thee not
thy Supper, thou give them their Breakfast: If thou may not spend the night
with them, thou will with them spend the day. O love of unthankful Souls, not
discourageable by the most hateful indignities, by the basest repulses! What
burden can thou shrink under, who can bear the weight of ingratitude?

Martha, Mary and Lazarus kept not so poor an house, but that thou might
have eaten something at Bethany. Whether thine have out-ran thine appetite; or
whether on purpose thou forbarest repast, to give opportunity to thine ensuing
Miracle, I neither ask, nor resolve. This was not the first time that thou wast
hungry. As thou would be a man, so thou would suffer those infirmities that
belong to Humanity. Thou came to be our High priest; it was thy act and
intention, not only to intercede for thy people, but to transfer unto thy self
as their sins, so their weaknesses and complaints. Thou know to pity what
thou have

But what shall we say to this thine early hunger? The morning, as it is
privileged from excess, so from need; the stomach is not wont to rise with the
body. Surely, as thy occasions were, no season was exempted from thy want: thou
had spent the day before in the holy labor of thy Reformation; after a
supperless departure thou spentest the night in Prayer; no meal refreshed thy
toil. What do we think much to forbear a morsel, or to break a sleep for thee,
who did thus neglect thy self for us?

As if meat were no part of thy care, as if any thing would serve to stop the

O Savior, I had rather wonder at thine actions then discuss them. If I should
say that as man, thou either knew not or consideredst not of this
fruitlesness, it could no way prejudice thy Divine Omniscience; this infirmity
Lazarus was dying, was dead, yet would not seem to take notice of his
dissolution, that thou might the more glorify thy Power in his
resuscitation. It was thy willing and determined disappointment for a

But why did thou curse a poor tree for the want of that fruit which the
season yielded not? If it pleased thee to call for that which it could not
give, the Plant was innocent; and if innocent, why cursed? O Savior, it is
fitter for us to adore then to examine. We may be saucy in inqui^^g after thee,
and fond in answering for thee.

If that season were not for a ripe fruit, yet for some fruit it was. Who

Besides that, I have learned that thou, O Savior, were wont not to speak
only, but to work Parables. And what was this other then a real Parable of
thine? All this while had thou been in the world; thou had given many
proofs of thy Mercy (the earth was full of thy Goodness) none of thy Judgments:
now, immediately before thy Passion, thou thoughtest fit to give this Let the
earth bring forth the herb yielding seed, and the tree yielding the fruit of
its own kind, should now say, Let this fruitless tree wither? All this yet
was done in figure: In this act of thine I see both an Emblem, and a
Prophecy. How did thou herein mean to teach thy Disciples how much thou
hate an unfruitful profession, and what judgments thou meantest to bring
upon that barren generation?

That which was the fault of this tree, is the punishment of it, fruitlesness:
Let no fruit grow on thee hence forward for ever. Had the boughs been appointed
to be torn down, and the body split in pieces, the doom had been more easy; and
that juicy plant might yet have recovered, and have lived to recompense this
deficiency: now it shall be what it was, fruitless. Woe be to that Church or
Soul that is punished with her own Sin. Outward plagues are but favor in
comparison of Spiritual judgments.

That Curse might well have stood with a long continuance; the Tree might have
lived long, though fruitless: but no sooner is the word passed, then the

O God, what creature is able to abide the blasting of the breath of thy
displeasure? Even the most great and glorious Angels of Heaven could not stand
one moment before thine anger, but perished under thy wrath everlastingly. How
irresistible is thy Power? how dreadful are thy Judgments? Lord, chastise my
fruitlesness, but punish it not; at least, punish it, but curse it not, lest I
wither and be consumed.

Christ betrayed.
Lazarus, and Lazarus whom Christ raised, to the envious Priests, Scribes,
Elders of the Jews, that they consult to murder both: Whiles either of them
lives, neither can the glory of that Miracle die, nor the shame of the
oppugners.

Those malicious heads are laid together in the Parlour of Caiaphas. Happy had
it been for them, if they had spent but half those thoughts upon their own

Who is so fit to work this feat against Christ as one of his own? There can be
no Treason where is not some Trust. Who so fit among the domestics as he that
bare the bag, and over-lov'd that which he bare? That heart which has once
enslaved it self to red and white earth, made be may any thing. Who can trust
to the power of good means, when Judas, who heard Christ daily, whom others
heard to preach Christ daily, who daily saw Christ's Miracles, and daily
wrought Miracles in Christ's name, is (at his best) a Thief, Judas were
Christ's domestic, yet he was Mammon's servant: he could not but hate that
Master whom he formally professed to serve, whiles he really served that master
which Christ professed to hate. He is but in his trade, whiles he is bartering
even for his Master; What will ye give me, and I will deliver him unto you?
Said thou not well, O Savior, I have chosen you twelve, and one of you is a
Devil? Thou that knew to distinguish betwixt men and spirits, call Judas
by his right name. Lo, he is become a tempter

Wretched Judas! whether shall I more abhor thy treachery, or wonder at thy
folly? What will they, what can they give thee valuable to that head which thou
proferest to sale? Were they able to pay, or thou capable to receive all those
precious metalls that are laid up in the secret cabins of the whole earth, how
were this price equivalent to the worth of him that made them? Had they been
able to have fetched down those rich and glittering spangles of Heaven, and to
have put them into thy fist, what had this been to weigh with a God? How basely
therefore do thou speak of chaffering for him whose the world was? What will
ye give me? Alas, what were they? what had they, miserable All the kingdoms of
the earth, and the glory of them are mine; and I give them to whom I please:
all these will I give thee. Had he now made that offer to thee in this woeful
bargain, it might have carried some color of a temptation: and even thus it
had been a match ill made. But for thee to tender a trade of so invaluable a
commodity to these pelting petty chapmen for thirty poor silverlings, it was no
less base then wicked.

How unequal is this rate? Thou that valuedst Mary's ointment which she
bestowed upon the feet of Christ at three hundred pieces of silver, sellest thy
Master, on whom that precious odor was spent, at thirty. Worldly hearts are

And I will deliver him unto you. False and presumptuous Judas! it was more
then thou could do; thy price was not more too low then thy undertaking was
too high. Had all the powers of Hell combined with thee, they could not have
delivered thy Master into the hands of men. The act was none but his

The bargain is driven, the price pai'd. Judas returns, and looks no less
smoothly upon his Master and his fellows then as if he had done no differvice.
What cares he? his heart tells him he is rich, though it tell him he is false.
He was not now first an Hypocrite. The Passover is at hand; no man is Judas.

Oh the sottishness and obdurenesse of this son of Perdition! How many proofs
had he formerly of his Master's Omniscience? There was no day wherein he saw
not that thoughts and things absent came familiar under his cognizance: yet
this Miscreant dares plot a secret villainy against his person, and face it: if
he cannot be honest, yet he will be close. That he may be notoriously impudent,
he shall know he is descried: whiles he thinks fit to conceal his treachery,
our Savior thinks not fit to conceal the knowledge of that treacherous
conspiracy; Verily, I say unto you that one of you shall betray me. Who would
not think but that discovered wickedness should be ashamed of it self? Judas
(think we) blush, and grow pale again, and cast down his guilty eyes, and turn
away his troubled countenance at so galling an intimation? Custom of sin
steels the brow, and makes it incapable of any relenting impressions. Could the
other Disciples have discerned any change in any one of their faces, they had
not been so sorrowfully affected with the charge. Methinks I see how
intentively they bent their eyes upon each other, as if they would have looked
through those windows down into the bosom; with what self-confidence, with
what mutual jealousy they perused each others foreheads: and now, as rather
thinking fit to distrust their own innocence then their Masters assertion, each
trembles to say, Lord, is it I? It is possible there may Lord, is it I?

In the mean time, how fair has Judas (all this while) carried with his
fellows? Had his former life bewrayed any falsehood or misdemeanor, they had
soon found where to pitch their just suspicion: now Judas goes for so honest a
man, that every Disciple is rather ready to suspect himself then him. It is
true, he was a thief; but who knows that besides his Maker? The outsides of

Oh the headstrong resolutions of wickedness, not to be checked by any
opposition! Who would not but have thought, if the notice of an intended evil
could not have prevented it, yet that the threats of judgment should have
affrighted the boldest offender? Judas can sit by, and hear his Master say, Woe
be to the man by whom the Son of man is betrayed; it had been better for that
man never to have been born, and is no more blank'd then very innocence; but
thinks, What care I? I have the money; I shall escape the shame: the fact shall
be close, the match gainful: it will be long ere I get so much by my service;
if makes a covenant with death, and with Hell an agreement. O Judas, did thou
ever hear ought but truth fall from the mouth of that thy Divine Master? Can
thou distrust the certainty of that dreadful menace of vengeance? How then
durst thou persist in the purpose of

As if that shameless man meant to outbrave all accusations, and to outface his
own heart, he dares ask too, Master, is it I? No Disciple shall more zealously
abominate that crime then he that fosters it in his bosom. Whatever the
Searcher of hearts knows by him, is locked up in his own breast: to be
perfidious is nothing, so he may be secret: his Master knows him for a Traitor,
it is not long that he shall live to complain; his fellows think him honest:
all

Had our Savior only had this knowledge at the second hand, this boldness
had been enough to make him suspect the credit of the best intelligence: Who
could imagine that a guilty man dared thus brow-beat a just accusation? Now he
whose piercing and unfailing eyes see things as they are, not as they seem, can
peremptorily convince the impudence of this hollow questionist with a direct
affirmation; Thou have said. Foolish traitor! could thou think that those
blear eyes of thine would endure the beams of the Sun, or that counterfeit

Curiosity of Knowledge is an old disease of humane nature: besides, Peter's
John is highest in grace. Blood, affection, zeal, diligence have indeared him
above his fellows. He that is dearest in respect, is next in place: in that
form of side-sitting at the Table, he leaned on the bosom of Jesus. Where is
more love, there may be more boldness. This secrecy and entireness
privileges John to ask that safely, which Peter might not without much
inconvenience and peril of Peter's thought into words. Love shuts out fear.
O Savior, the confidence of thy Goodness emboldens us not to shrink at any
suit. Thy love shed abroad in our hearts bids us ask that which in a stranger
were no better then presumption. Once, when Peter asked thee a question
concerning John, What shall this man do? he received a short answer, What is
that to thee? Now, when John asks thee a question (no less seemingly curious)
at Peter's instance, Who is it that betraies thee? however thou might have
returned him the same answer, (since neither of their persons was any more
concerned) yet thou condescendest to a mild and full (though secret)
satisfaction. There was not so much Peter of moving that question concerning
John; the indefinite assertion of treason amongst the Disciples was a most just
occasion of moving John's question for Peter and himself. That which therefore
was timorously demanded, is answered graciously; He it is to whom I shall give
a sop, when I have dipped it. And he gave the sop to Judas. How loath was our
Savior to name him whom he was not unwilling to design? All is here expressed
by dumb signs; the hand Peter asked the question of John, does our Savior
shape an answer to John: what a beck demanded, is answered by a sop.

O Savior, I do not hear thee say, Look on whomsoever I frown, or to
whomsoever I do a public affront, that is the man; but, To whomsoever I shall
give a sop. Surely a by-stander would have thought this man deep in thy books,
and would have construed this act as they did thy tears for Lazarus, See how he
loves him. To carve a man out of thine own dish, what could it seem to argue
but a singularity of respect? Yet, lo, there is but one whom thou hate, one
only Traitor at thy board; and thou give him a sop. The Judas, and have
stomached his own preterition? So foolish are they, who measuring God's
affection by temporal benefits, are ready to applaud prospering wickedness, and
to grudge outward blessings to them which are incapable of any better.

After the sop, Satan entered into Judas. Better had it been for that
treacherous Disciple to have wanted that morsel: Not that there was any
malignity in the bread, or that the sop had any power to convey Satan into the
receiver, or that by a necessary concomitance that evil spirit was in or with
it. Favors Judas, comparing his Master's words and John's whisperings with the
tender of this sop, and finding himself thus denoted, was now so much the more
irritated to perform what he had wickedly purposed. Thus Satan took advantage
by the sop of a further possession. Twice before had that evil spirit made a
palpable entry into that lewd heart. First, in his Covetousness and Theft;
those sinful habits could not be without that author of ill: then in his
damnable resolution, and plot of so heinous a conspiracy After the sop Satan
entered. As in every gross sin which we entertain, we give harbor to that evil
spirit; so in every degree of growth in wickedness, new hold is taken by him
of the heart. No sooner is the foot over the threshold, then we enter into the
house: when we pass thence into the inner rooms, we make still but a perfect
entrance. At first Satan entered, to make the house of Judas's heart his own;
now he enters into it as his own. The first purpose of sin opens the gates to
Satan; consent admits him into the entry; full resolution of sin gives up the
keys to his hands, and puts him into absolute possession. What a plain
difference there is betwixt the regenerate and evil heart? Satan lays siege to
the best What thou do, do quickly. Why do we startle at our petty wrongs,
and swell with anger, and break into furious revenges upon every occasion, when
the pattern of our Patience lets not fall one harsh word upon so soul and
bloody a Traitor? Yea, so fairly is this carried, that the Disciples as yet can
apprehend no change; they innocently think of commodities to be bought: when
Christ That thou do, do quickly. It is one thing to say, Do what thou
intendest, and another to say, Do quickly what thou do. There was villainy
in the deed; the speed had no sin, the time was harmless, whiles the man and
the act was wicked. O Judas, how happy had it been for

That steely heart yet relents not; the obfirmed Traitor knows his way to the
High Priest's hall and to the garden; the watchword is already given, Hail
Master, and a kiss. Yet more Hypocrisy? yet more presumption upon so
overstrained a lenity? How knew thou, O thou false Traitor, whether that
Sacred cheek would suffer it self to be defiled with thine impure touch? Thou
well foundst thy treachery was unmasked; thine heart could not be so false to
thee as not to tell thee how hateful thou were. Go, kiss and adore those
silverlings which thou art too sure of; the Master whom thou have sold is not
Hail; and those lips that have passed the compact of his death, dare offer to
kiss him whom they had covenanted to kill. It was God's charge of old, Kiss
the Son, lest he be angry. O Savior, thou had reason to be angry with this
kiss; the scourges, the thorns, the nails, the spear of thy Murderers were not
so painful, so piercing, as this touch of Judas: all these were in this one
alone. The stabs of an Enemy cannot be so grievous as the skin-deep wounds of a
Disciple.


WHAT a Preface do I find to my Savior's Passion? an Hymn, and an Agony: a
cheerful Hymn, and an Agony no less sorrowful. An Hymn begins, both to
raise and testify the courageous resolutions of his Suffering; an Agony
follows, to show that he was truly sensible of those extremities wherewith he
was resolved to grapple. All the Disciples bore their part in that Hymn; it was
fit they should all see his comfortable and Divine Magnanimity wherewith he
entered into those Judas and his train, whom they then saw attended with Moses
and Elias? how could they be discouraged to hear the reproaches of base men,
when they had heard the voice of God to him from that excellent glory, This is
my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased?

He began to be sorrowful and very heavy. Many sad thoughts for mankind had
he secretly hatched, and yet smothered in his own breast; now his grief is too
great to keep in: My soul is exceeding sorrowful, even unto death. O Savior,
what must thou needs feel when thou said so? Feeble minds are apt to bemone
themselves upon light occasions; the grief must needs be violent that causes a
strong heart to break forth into a passionate complaint. Woe is me, what a word
is this for the Son of God? Where is that Comforter which thou promisedst to
send to others? where is that thy Father of all mercies and God of all comfort,
in whose presence is the fullness of joy, and at whose right hand there are
pleasures for evermore? where are those constant and cheerful resolutions

But to whom do thou make this moan, O thou Savior of men? Hard is Peter, or
James, or John thus bewailed himself to thee, there had been ease to their Soul
in venting it self; thou had been both apt to pity them, and able to relieve
them: but now in that thou lamentest thy case to them, alas! what issue could
thou exspect? They might be astonished with thy grief; but there is neither
power in their hands to free thee from those sorrows, nor power in their
compassion to mitigate them. Nay, in this condition what could all the Angels
of Heaven (as of themselves) do to succor thee? What strength could they have
but from thee? What creature can help when thou complainest? It must be only
the stronger that can aid the weak.

Old and holy Simeon could fore-say to thy Blessed Mother, that a sword should
pierce through her Soul; but, alas! how many swords at once pierce thine? Every
one of these words is both sharp and edged; My Soul is exceeding sorrowful,
even unto death. What humane Soul is capable of the conceit of the least of
those sorrows that oppressed thine? It was not thy body that suffered now: the
pain of body is but as the body of pain; the anguish of the Soul is as the Soul
of anguish. That, and in that thou sufferedst: where are they that dare so far
disparage thy Sorrow, as to say thy Soul suffered only in sympathy with thy
body; not immediately, but by participation; not in its self, but in its
partner? Thou best knew what thou feltest, and thou that feltest thine own
pain can My Soul is sorrowful; as if it had been before assaulted, now
possessed with grief. Nor yet this in any tolerable moderation; changes of
Passion are incident to every humane Soul: but, Exceeding sorrowful. Yet there
are degrees in the very extremities of evils: those that are most vehement, may
yet be capable of a remedy, at least a relaxation; thine was past these hopes,
Exceeding sorrowful unto death.

What was it, what could it be, O Savior, that lay thus heavy upon thy Divine
Soul? Was it the fear of Death? was it the fore-felt pain, shame, torment of
thine ensuing Crucifixion? Oh poor and base thoughts of the narrow

What can it avail thee, O Savior, to tell thy grief to men? who can ease
thee, but he of whom thou said, My Father is greater then I? Lo, to him thou
O Father, if it be possible, let this cup pass from me.

Was not this that prayer (O dear Christ) which in the days of thy flesh thou
offeredst up with strong crying and tears to him that was able to save thee
from death? Surely this was it. Never was cry so strong; never was God thus
solicited. How could Heaven choose but shake at such a Prayer from the Power
that made it? How can my heart but tremble to hear this suit from the Captain
of our Salvation? O thou that said, I and my Father are one, do thou suffer
ought from thy Father but what thou would, what thou determinedst? was this
Cup of thine either casual or forced? would thou wish for what thou knew
thou would not have possible? Far, far be these mis-raised thoughts
Nevertheless not as I will, but as thou will. As man thou had a Will of
thine own: no humane Soul can be perfect without that main faculty. That will,
which naturally could be content to incline toward an exemption from miseries,
gladly vails to that Divine will whereby thou art designed to the chastisements
of our peace. Those pains which in themselves were grievous, thou embracest as
decreed: so as thy fear has given place to thy love and obedience. How should
we have known these evils so formidable, if thou had not in half a thought
inclined to deprecate them? How could we have avoided so formidable and deadly
evils, if thou

Whiles thy Mind was in this fearful agitation, it is no marvel if thy Feet
were not fixed. Thy place is more changed then thy thoughts. One while thou
walk to thy drouzy Attendants, and stirrest up their needful vigilance;
then thou returnest to thy passionate Devotions, thou fallest again upon thy
face. If thy body be humbled down to the earth, thy Soul is yet lower; thy
prayers are so much more vehement as thy pangs are; And being in an agony he
prayed more earnestly, and his sweat was as it were great drops of blood
falling down to the ground. O my Savior, what an agony am I in, whiles I
think of thine?

O Savior, so willing was that precious blood of thine to be let forth for us,
that it was ready to prevent thy Persecutors; and issued forth in those pores,
before thy wounds were opened by thy Tormentors. O that my heart could bleed
unto thee with true inward compunction for those sins of mine which are guilty
of this thine Agony, and have drawn blood of thee both in the Garden and on
the Cross. Woe is me: I had been in Hell, if thou had not been

But, O ye blessed Spirits which came to comfort my conflicted Savior, how did
ye look upon the Son of God, when ye saw him laboring for life under these
violent temptations? with what astonishment did ye behold him bleeding whom ye
adored? In the Wilderness, after his Duel with Satan, ye came and ministered
unto him; and now in the Garden, whiles he is in an harder combat, ye appear to
strengthen him. O the wise and mavelous dispensation of the Almighty! Whom
God will afflict, an Angel shall relieve; the Son shall suffer, the Servant
shall comfort him; the God of Angels droupeth, the

Blessed Jesu, if as Man thou would be made a little lower then the Angels;
how can it disparage thee to be attended and cheared up by an Angel? Thine
Humiliation would not disdain comfort from meaner hands. How free was it for
thy Father to convey seasonable consolations to thine humbled Soul, by
whatsoever means? Behold, though thy Cup shall not pass, yet it shall be
sweetened. What if thou see not (for the time) thy Fathers face? yet thou In the
midst of the sorrows of my heart thy comforts shall refresh my Soul. Whatsoever
be the means of my supportation, I know and adore the Author.

Peter and Malchus: or, Christ Apprehended.
WHerefore, O Savior, did thou take those three choice Disciples with thee
from their fellows, but that thou expectedst some comfort from their presence?
A seasonable word may sometimes fall from the meanest attendant; and the very
society of those we trust carries in it some kind of contentment. Alas! what
broken reeds are men? Whiles thou art sweating in thine Agony, they are
snorting securely. Admonitions, threats, entreaties cannot keep their eyes
open. Thou tellest them of danger, they will needs dream of ease; and though
twice rouzed (as if they had purposed this neglect) they carelessly sleep out
thy sorrow and their own peril. What help have thou of such Followers? In the
mount of thy were heard in that which thou fearedst. An Angel supplies men;
that Spirit was vigilant whiles thy Disciples were heavy. The exchange was
happy.

No sooner is this good Angel vanished, then that domestic Devil appears:
Judas comes up, and shows himself in the head of those miscreant troops. He
whose too much honor it had been to be a Follower of so Blessed a Master,
affects now to be the leader of this wicked rabble. The Sheeps fleece is now
cast off; the Wolf appears in his own likeness. He that would be false to his
Master, would be true to his Chapmen: Even evil spirits keep touch with
themselves. The bold Traitor dare yet still mix Hypocrisy with Villainy; his
very salutations and kisses murder. O Savior, this is no news to thee. All
those who under a show of Godliness practice impiety, do still betray thee
thus. Thou who had said, One of you is a Devil, did not now say, Avoid
Satan; but, Friend, wherefore art thou come? As yet, Judas, it was not too
late. Jesus is taken. Wretched Traitor! why would thou for this purpose be
thus attended? and ye foolish Priests and Elders! why sent you such a band, and
so armed for this apprehension? One messenger had been enough for a voluntary
prisoner. Had my Savior been unwilling to be taken, all your forces (with all
the Legions of Hell to help them) had been too little: since he was willing to
be attached, two were too many. When he did but say, I am he, that easy breath
alone routed all your troops, and cast them to the earth, whom it might as
easily have cast down

Those Disciples that failed of their vigilance, failed not of their courage:
they had heard their Master speak of providing swords, and now they thought it
was time to use them: Shall we smite? They were willing to fight for him Peter
was most forward; in stead of opening his lips, he unsheaths his sword; and in
stead of Shall I? smites. He had noted Malchus, a busy servant of the High
priest, too ready to second Judas, and to lay his rude hands upon the Lord of
Life: against this man his heart rises, and his hand is lift up. That ear
which had too-officiously listened to the unjust and cruel charge of his
wicked Master, is now severed from that worse head which it had mis-served.

I love and honor thy zeal, O blessed Disciple: Thou could not brook wrong
done to thy Divine Master. Had thy life been dearer to thee then his safety,
thou had not drawn thy sword upon a whole troup. It was in earnest Though all
men, yet not I; and, Though I should die with thee, yet I will not deny thee.
Lo, thou art ready to die upon him that should touch that Sacred person; what
would thy life now have been in comparison of renouncing him? Since thou were
so fervent, why did thou not rather fall upon that treachour that betrayed
him, then that Sergeant that arrested him? Surely the sin was so much greater,
as the plot of mischief is more then the execution; as a Domestic is nearer
then a Stranger; as the treason of a Friend is worse then the forced enmity of
an Hireling. Was it that the guilty wretch upon the fact done subduced himself,
and shrouded his false head under the wings of darkness? Was it that thou
could not so suddenly apprehend the odious Judas were more faulty, yet
Malchus was more imperiously cruel? Howsoever, thy Courage was awaked with thy
self; and thy heart was no less sincere then thine hand was rash. Put up again
thy sword into his place; for all they that take the sword shall perish with
the sword. Good intentions are no warrant for our actions. O Savior, thou
can at once accept of our meanings, and censure our deeds. Could there be an
affection more worth encouragement then the love to such a Master? Could there
be a more just cause wherein to draw his Peter from thy check: thy meek tongue
smites him gently, who had furiously smote thine enemy; Put up thy sword.

It was Peter's sword; but to put up, not to use: there is a sword which Peter
may use; but it is of another metal. Our weapons are, as our warfare,
spiritual: if he smite not with this, he incurs no less blame then for smiting
with the other; as for this material sword, what should he do with it that is
not allowed to strike? When the Prince of Peace bade his Followers sell their
coat and buy a sword, he meant to insinuate the need of these arms, not their
improvement; and to teach them the danger of the time, not the manner of the
repulse of Behold, here are two swords; he answered, It is enough: he said not,
Go buy more. More had not been enough, if a bodily defense had been intended:
David's tower had been too straight to yield sufficient furniture of this
kind. When it comes to use, Peter's one sword is too much: Put up thy sword.
Indeed there is a temporal sword; and that sword must be drawn, else wherefore
is it? but drawn by him that bears it; and he bears it that is ordained to be
an avenger, to execute wrath upon him that does evil; for he bears not the
sword in vain. If another man draw it, it cuts his fingers; and draws so much
blood of him that unwarrantably wields it, as that he who takes the sword shall
perish with the sword. Can I choose but wonder how Peter could thus strike
unwounded? how he, whose first blow made the fray, could escape hewing in
pieces from that band of Ruffians? This could not have been, if thy power, O
Savior, had not restrained their rage; if thy seasonable and sharp reproof had
not prevented their revenge.

Now, for ought I see, Peter smarts no less then Malchus: neither is Peter's
ear less smitten by the mild tongue of his Master, then Malchus his ear by
the hand of Peter. Weak Disciple! thou have zeal, but not according to
knowledge: The cup which my Father has given me, shall I not drink it? Thou
drawest thy sword to rescue me from suffering. Alas! if I suffer not, what
would become of thee? what would become of mankind? where were that eternal
and just Decree of my Father, wherein I am a Lamb slain from the beginning of
the world? Do thou go about to hinder thine own and the whole worlds
Redemption? Did I not once before call thee Satan for suggesting to me this
immunity from my Passion? and do thou now think to favor me with a real
opposition to this great and necessary work? Can thou be so weak as to
imagine that this Suffering of mine is not free and voluntary? Can

O gracious Savior, whiles thou thus smitest thy Disciple, thou healest him
whom thy Disciple smote. Many greater Miracles had thou done; none that
bewraied more mercy and meekness then this last Cure: of all other this ear
of Malchus has the loudest tongue to blazon the praise of thy Clemency and
Goodness to thy very enemies. Wherefore came that man but in an hostile manner
to attach thee? Besides his own, what favor was he worthy of for his Masters
sake? And if he had not been more forward then his fellows, Malchus, could thy
ear be whole, and not thy heart broken and contrite with remorse for rising up
against so merciful and so powerful an hand? Could thou choose but say, O
blessed Jesu, I see it was thy Providence that preserved my head, when my ear
was smitten; it is thine Almighty Power that has miraculously restored that
ear of mine which I had justly forfeited: this head of mine shall never Could
thy fellows see such a demonstration of Power and Goodness with unrelenting
hearts? Unthankful Malchus, and cruel soldiers! ye were worse wounded, and
felt it not. God had struck your breasts with a fearful obduration, that ye
still persist in your bloody enterprise. And they that had laid hold on Jesus,
led him away, etc.


THat Traitor whom his own cord made (soon after) too fast, gave this charge
concerning Jesus, Hold him fast. Fear makes his guard cruel: they bind his
hands, and think no twist can be strong enough for this Sampson. Fond Jews, and
Soldiers! if his own will had not tied him faster then your cords, though
those Manicles had been the stiffest cables or the strongest iron, they had
been but threads of tow. What eyes can but run over Annas, then from thence to
the house of Caiaphas, from him to Pilate, from Pilate to Herod, from Herod
back again to Pilate, from Pilate to his Calvarie: whiles in the mean time the
base rabble and scum of the incensed multitude runs after him with shouts and
scorns? The act of death has not in it so much misery and horror, as the pomp
of death.

And what needed all this pageant of Cruelty? wherefore was this state and
lingering of an unjust execution? Was it for that their malice held a quick
dispatch

This attachment, this convention of the innocent was a true night-work; a deed
of so much darkness was not for the light. Old Annas and that wicked Bench of
gray headed Scribes and Elders can be content to break their sleep to do
mischief: Envy and malice can make noon of midnight. It is resolved he shall
die; and now pretenses must be sought that he may be cleanly murdered. All evil
begins at the Sanctuary: The Priests and Scribes and Caiaphas: False witnesses
are sought for, and hired: they agree not, but shame their suborners. Woe is
me, what safety can there be for Innocence, when the evidence is wilfully
corrupted? What State was ever so pure, as not to yield some miscreants, that
will either sell or lend an oath? What a brand has the wisdom of God set upon
falsehood, even dissonance and distraction? whereas Truth ever holds together,
and jars not whiles it is it self. O Savior, what a perfect innocence was in
thy Life, what an exact purity in thy Doctrine, that malice it self cannot so
much as devise what to slander? It This fellow said, I am able to destroy the
Temple of God, and build it again in three days. Perjured wretches! Were these
the terms that you heard from that Sacred mouth? Said he formally thus as ye
have deposed? It is true, he spoke of a Temple, of destroying, of building, of
three days; but did he speak of that Temple, of his own destroying, of a
material building in that space? He said, Destroy ye: Ye say, I am able to
destroy. He said, this Temple of his body: Ye say, the Temple of God. He said,
I will make up this Temple of my body in three days: Ye say, I am able in
three days to build this material Temple of God. The words were his, the
sentence yours: The words were true, the evidence false. So whiles you report
the words and misreport the sense, ye swear a true falsehood, and are truly
forsworn. Where the resolutions are fixed, any color will serve. Had those
words been spoken, they contained no crime; had he been such as they supposed
him, a mere man, the speech had carried a semblance of ostentation, no
semblance of Blasphemy: yet how vehement is Caiaphas for Jesus held his peace.
Where the asker is unworthy, the question captious, words bootlesse, the best
answer is silence.

Erewhile his just and moderate speech to Annas was returned with a buffet on
the cheek, now his silence is no less displeasing. Caiaphas was not more
malicious then crafty: what was in vain attempted by witnesses, shall be drawn
out of Christ's own mouth; what an accusation could not effect, an adjuration I
adjure thee by the living God, that thou tell us whether thou be the Christ,
the Son of God. Yea, this was the way to screw out a killing answer. Caiaphas,
thy mouth was impure, but thy charge is dreadful. Now if Jesus hold his peace,
he is cried down for a profane disregarder of that awful Name; if he answer,
he is ensnared: an affirmation is death; a denial worse then death. No,
Caiaphas, thou shall well know it was not fear that all this while stopped that
Gracious mouth: thou speak to him that cannot fear those faces he has made:
he that has charged us to confess him, cannot but confess himself; Jesus
says unto him, Thou have said. There is a time to speak, and a time to keep
silence. He that is the Wisdom of his Father, has here given us a pattern
Caiaphas, to complain of a speechless prisoner: now thou shall hear more then
thou demandedst; Hereafter shall ye see the Son of man sitting on the right
hand of power, and coming in the clouds of Heaven. There spoke my Savior; the
voice of God, and not of man. Hear now, insolent High Priest, and be
confounded. That Son of man whom thou see, is the Son of God whom thou can
not see: That Son of man, that Son of God, that God and man whom thou now see
standing despicably before thy Consistorial seat in a base dejectedness, him
shall thou once with horror and trembling see majestically

Go now, wretched Hypocrite, and rend thy garments; whiles in the mean time
thou art worthy to have thy Soul rent from thy body, for thy spightfull
Blasphemy against the Son of God. Onwards thy pretense is fair, and such as
cannot but receive applause from thy compacted crew; What need have we of
witnesses? behold, now ye have heard his Blasphemy. What think ye? And they
answered and said, He is guilty of death.

What heed is to be taken of men's judgment? So light are they upon the balance,
that one dram of prejudice or forestalment turns the scales. Who were these but
the grave Benchers of Jerusalem, the Synod of the choice Rabbis of Israel? yet
these pass sentence against the Lord of Life; sentence of that death of his,
whereby (if ever) they shall be redeemed from the murder of their sentence.

O Savior, this is not the last time wherein thou have received cruel dooms
from them that profess Learning and Holiness. What wonder is it if thy weak
members suffer that which was endured by so perfect an head? What care we to be
judged by man's day, when thou, who art the Righteous Judge of the Prophecy
unto us, thou Christ, who it is that smote thee. O dear Jesu, what a beginning
is here of a Passion? There thou standst bound, condemned, spat upon,
buffetted, derided by malicious sinners. Thou art bound, who came to loose
the bands of death; thou art condemned, whose sentence must acquit the world;
thou art spat upon, that art fairer then the sons of men; thou art buffeted, in
whose mouth was no guile; thou art derided, who art clothed with Glory and
Majesty.

In the mean while, how can I enough wonder at thy infinite Mercy, who in the
midst of all these woeful indignities could find a time to cast thine eyes
back upon thy frail and ungrateful Disciple; and in whose gracious ear
Peter's Peter, had thy slip been sudden, thy fall had been more easy:
Premonition aggravates thy offense; that stone was foreshewed thee whereat thou
stumbledst: neither did thy warning more add to thy guilt, then thine own
fore-resolution.

Yet a single denial had been but easy; thine (I fear to speak it) was lined
with swearing and execration. Whence then, oh whence was this so vehement and
peremptory disclamation of so gracious a Master? What such danger had attended
thy profession of his attendance? One of thy fellows was known to the
high priest for a Follower of Jesus; yet he not only came himself into Art not
thou also one of this man's Disciples? Thou also supposes the first acknowledged
such; yet what crime, what danger was urged upon that noted Disciple? What
could have been more to thee? Was it that thy heart misgave thee thou might
be called to account for Malchus? It was no thank to thee that that ear was
healed; neither did there want those that would think how near that ear was to
the head. Doubtless, that busy fellow himself was not far off, and his
fellows and kinsmen would have been apt enough to follow thee (besides thy
Discipleship) Peter, that buffetedst thy Master more then those Jews; it was to
thee that he turned the cheek from them, as to view him by whom he most
smarted: he felt thee afar off, and answered thee with a look; such a look as
was able to kill and revive at once. Thou have wounded me (may thou now say)
O my Savior, thou have wounded my heart with one of thine eyes: that one Eye
of thy Mercy has wounded my heart with a deep remorse for my grievous sin,
with Oh that mine eyes were fountains, and my cheeks channels that shall never
be dried! And Peter went out, and wept bitterly.

Christ before Pilate.
WEll worthy were these Jews to be tributary; they had cast off the yoke of
their God, and had justly earned this Roman servitude. Tiberius had befriended
them too well with so favorable a Governor as Pilate. Had they had the power
of life and death in their hands, they had not been beholden to an Heathen for
a Legal murder. I know not whether they more repine at this slavery, or please
themselves to think how cleanly they can shift off this blood into another
hand. These Israel flock from their own Consistory to Pilate's Judgment-hall.
The Sentence had been theirs, the Execution must be his; and now they hope to
bear down Jesus with the stream of that frequent confluence.

But what ailes you, O ye Rulers of Israel, that ye stand thus thronging at the
door? why do ye not go in to that public room of Judicature, to call for that
Justice ye came for? Was it for that ye would not defile your selves with the
contagion of an Heathen roof? Holy men! your Consciences would not suffer you
to yield to so impure an act; your Passover must be kept, your persons must be
clean: whiles ye exspect Justice from the man, ye abhor the pollution of the
place. Woe to you Priests, Scribes, Elders, Hypocrites; can Pilate's walls, but
your hearts are impure. Is Murder your errand, and do you stick at a local
infection? God shall smite you, ye whited walls. Do ye long to be stained with
blood, with the blood of God? and do ye fear to be defiled with the touch of
Pilate's pavement? Does so small a gnat stick in your throats, whiles ye
swallow such a Camel of flagitious wickedness? Go out of your selves, ye
false dissemblers, if ye would not be unclean. Pilate, onwards, has more cause
to fear lest his walls should be defiled with the presence of so prodigious
Monsters of Impiety.

That plausible Governor condescends to humor their Superstition: They Pilate
begins justly, What accusation bring you against this man? It is no judging of
Religion by the outward demeanor of men; there is more Justice amongst Romans
then amongst Jews. These malicious Rabbis thought it enough that they had
sentenced Jesus; no more was now exspected but a speedy execution. If he were
not a malefactor, we would not have delivered him up unto thee. Civil Justice
must be their hangman. It is enough conviction that he is delivered up to the
secular powers. Themselves have judged, these other must kill. Pilate and
Caiaphas have changed places: this Pagan speaks that Law and Justice which that
High priest should have done; and that High priest speaks those murdering
Pilate, who we are? Is this the honor that thou give to our sacred
Priesthood? Is this thy valuation of our Sanctity? Had the basest of the vulgar
complained to thee, thou could but have put them to a review. Our Place and
Holiness looked not to be distrusted. If our scrupulous Consciences suspect thy
very walls, thou may well think there is small reason to suspect our
Consciences. Upon a full hearing, ripe deliberation, and exquisitely-judicial
proceeding, we have sentenced this Malefactor to death: there needs no more
from thee but thy command of Execution. Oh monster, whether of Malice or
Unjustice! Must he then be a Malefactor If we had not been Malefactors, we had
never delivered up this innocent man unto thee.

It must needs be notoriously unjust which very Nature has taught Pagans
Pilate sees and hates this bloody suggestion and practice. Do ye pretend
Holiness, and urge so injurious a violence? If he be such as ye accuse him,
where is his conviction? If he cannot be legally convicted, why should he die?
Do you think I may take your complaint for a crime? If I must judge for you,
why have you judged for your selves? Could ye suppose that I would condemn any
man unheard? If your Jewish Laws yield you this liberty, the Roman Laws yield
it not to me. It is not for me to judge after your laws, but after our own.
Your prejudgment may not sway me. Since ye have gone so far, be ye your own
carvers of Justice; Take ye him and judge him according to your law.

Pilate, how happy had it been for thee, if thou had held thee there? thus
thou had washed thy hands more clean then in all thy basins. Might Law have
been the rule of this Judgment, and not Malice, this blood had not been shed.
How palpably does their tongue bewray their heart? It is not lawful for us to
put any man to death. Pilate talks of Judgment, they talk of Death. This was
their only aim: Law was but a color, Judgment was but a ceremony; Death was
their drift, and without this nothing. Blood-thirsty Priests and Elders! it is
well that this power of yours is restrained: no Innocence could have been safe,
if your lawless will had had no limits. It were pity this sword should be in
any but just and sober hands. Your fury did not always consult Stephen, to
Paul and Barnabas, and your deadly attempts against this Blessed Jesus whom ye
now persecute? How lawful was it for you to procure that death which ye could
not inflict? It is all the care of Hypocrites to seek umbrages and pretenses
for their hateful purposes; and to make no other use of Laws (whether Divine
or humane) but to serve turns.

Where death is fore-resolved, there cannot want accusations. Malice is not so
barren as not to yield crimes enough. And they began to accuse him, saying, We
found this fellow perverting the nation; and forbidding to give tribute unto
Casear, saying that he himself is Christ and King.

What accusations said thou, O Pilate? Heinous and capital. Thou might
have believed our confident intimation: but since thou will needs urge us to
particulars, know that we come furnished with such an indictment as shall make
thine ears glow to hear it. Besides that Blasphemy whereof he has been
condemned by us, this man is a Seducer of the people, a raiser of Sedition, an
usurper of Sovereignty. O impudent suggestion! What marvel is it, O Savior, if
thine honest servants beloaded with slanders, when thy most innocent person
escaped not so shameful criminations? Thou a perverter of the Nation, who
taughtest the way of God truly? Thou a forbidder of Tribute, who payedst it,
who prescribedst it, who provedst it to be Caesar's due? Thou a

Now Pilate startles at the Charge. The name of Tribute, the name of Caesar is
in mention: These potent spells can fetch him back to the common Hall, and call
Jesus to the Bar. There, O Savior, standst thou meekly to be judged, who shall
once come to judge the quick and the dead. Then shall he before whom thou
stoodst guiltless and dejected, stand before thy dreadful Majesty guilty and
trembling.

Caesar, is justly tender and awful; the least whisper of an Usurpation or
disturbance is entertained with a jealous care. Pilate takes this intimation at
the first bound; Art thou then the King of the Jews? He felt his own freehold
now touched, it was time for him to stir. Daniel's Weeks were now famously
known to be near expiring. Many arrogant and busy spirits (as Judas of
Galilee, Theudas, and that Egyptian Seducer) taking that advantage, had raised
several Conspiracies, set up new titles to the Crown, Pilate supposed some such
business now on foot, and therefore asks so curiously, Art thou the King of
the Jews?

He that was no less Wisdom then Truth, thought it not best either to affirm
or deny at once. Sometimes it may be extremely prejudicial to speak all truths.
To disclaim that Title suddenly which had been of old given him by the
Prophets, at his Birth by the Eastern Sages, and now lately at his Procession
by the acclaming multitude, had been injurious to himself; to profess and
challenge it absolutely, had been unsafe, and needlessly provoking. By wise and
just degrees therefore does he so affirm this truth, that he both Pilate shall
know him a King; but such a King as no King needs to fear, as all Kings ought
to acknowledge and adore: My Kingdom is not of this world. It is your
mistaking, O ye earthly Potentates, that is guilty of your fears. Herod hears
of a King born, and is troubled; Pilate hears of a King of the Jews, and is
incensed. Were ye not ignorant, ye could not be jealous: Had ye learned to
distinguish of Kingdoms, these suspicions would vanish.

There are Secular Kingdoms, there are Spiritual; neither of these trenches
upon other: your Kingdom is Secular, Christ's is Spiritual; both may, both
must stand together. His Laws are Divine, yours civil: His Reign is eternal,
by him ye Kings reign: your Scepters are his; but to maintain, not to wield,
not to resist. O the unjust fears of vain men! He takes not away your earthly
Kingdoms, who gives you Heavenly; he discrowns not the Body, who

The charge is so fully answered, that Pilate acquits the prisoner. The Jewish
Masters stand still without; their very malice dares not venture their
pollution in going in to prosecute their accusation. Pilate has examined him
within; and now comes forth to these eager complainants, with a cold answer to
their over-hot expectation; I find in him no fault at all. O noble testimony
of Christ's Innocence from that mouth which afterward doomed him to death!
What a difference there is betwixt a man as he is himself, and as he is the
servant of others wills? It is Pilate's tongue that says, I find in him no
fault at all: It is the Jews tongue in Pilate's mouth that says, Let him be
crucified. I find in him no fault at all. In spite of Malice, Innocence shall
find abettors. Rather then Christ shall want witnesses, the mouth of Pilate
shall be opened to his justification. How did these Jewish blood-suckers stand
thunder-stricken with so unexspected a word? His absolution was their death;
his acquital their conviction. No fault, when we have found Crimes? no fault at
all, when we have condemned him for capital offenses? How palpably does Pilate
give us the lie? How shamefully does he affront our authority and disparage our
justice?

I tremble to think how just Pilate as yet was, and how soon after depraved;
yea how merciful together with that Justice. How sain would he have Jesus,
whom he found faultlesse? Corrupt custom, in memory of their deliverance from
Egyptian bondage, allowed to gratify the Jews with the free delivery of some
one prisoner. (Tradition would be incroaching: the Paschal Lamb was monument
enough of that happy rescue: men affect to have something of their own.) Pilate
was willing to take this advantage of dismissing Jesus. That he might be the
more likely to prevail, he proposes him with the choice and nomination of so
notorious a Malefactor as he might justly think incapable of all mercy;
Barabbas, a Thief, a Murderer, a Seditionary; infamous for all, odious to all.
Had he propounded some other innocent prisoner, he might have feared the
election would be doubtful; he cannot misdoubt Then they all cried again, Not
him, but Barabbas.

O Malice beyond all example shameless and bloody! Who can but blush to think
that an Heathen should see Jews so impetuously unjust, so savagely cruel? He
knew there was no fault to be found in Jesus; he knew there was no Crime that
was not to be found in Barabbas: yet he hears (and blushes to hear) them say,
Not him, but Barabbas. Was not this (think we) out of similitude of condition?
Every thing affects the like to it self; every thing affects the preservation
of that it likes. What wonder is it then if ye Jews, who prosesse your selves
the murderers of that Just One, favor a Barabbas? O Savior, Barabbas? Have
thou said, Not Heaven, but Earth; not Sovereignty, but Service; not the
Gentile, but the Jew? and do they say, Not him, but Barabbas? Do ye thus
requite the Lord, O ye foolish people and unjust? Thus were thine ears and
thine eyes first crucified; and through them was thy Soul wounded even to
death, before thy death; whiles thou saw their rage, and heardst their noise
of Crucify, crucify.

Pilate would have chastised thee. Even that had been a cruel mercy from They
cried the more, Crucify him, Crucify him.

As their clamor grew, so the Presidents Justice declined. Those Graces that
lie loose and ungrounded, are easily washed away with the first tide of
Popularity. Thrice had that man proclaimed the Innocence of him whom he now
inclines to condemn, willing to content the people. Oh the foolish aims of
Ambition! Not God, not his Conscience come into any regard; but the People.
Pilate, where now is thy self and thy people? whereas a good conscience would
have stuck by thee for ever, and have given thee boldness before the face of
that God which thou and thy people shall never have the Happiness to behold.

The Jews have played their first part; the Gentiles must now act theirs. Cruel
Pilate, who knew Jesus was delivered for envy, accused falsely, maliciously
pursued, has turned his proffered chastisement into scourging; Then Pilate took
Jesus and scourged him. Woe is me, dear Savior; I feel thy lashes; I shrink
Gethsemani with the drops of thy bloody sweat, do now bedew the pavement of
Pilate's Hall with the showrs of thy blood. How fully have thou made good thy
word, I gave my back to the smiters, and my cheeks to them that plucked off the
hair; I hid not my face from shame and spitting? How can I be enough sensible
of my own He was wounded for our transgressions, he was bruised for our
iniquities, the chastisement of our peace was upon him, and with his stripes
are we healed. O blessed Jesu, why should I think strange to be scourged with
tongue or hand, when I see thee bleeding? what lashes can I fear either from
Heaven or earth, since thy scourges have been born for me, and have sanctified
them to me? Now, dear Jesu, what a world of insolent reproaches, indignities,
tortures, art thou entering into? To an ingenuous and tender disposition scorns
are torment enough; but here pain helps to perfect thy misery, their despite.

Who should be actors in this whole bloody execution, but grim and barbarous
Soldiers, men inured to cruelty, in whose faces were written the characters of
Murder, whose very trade was killing, and whose looks were enough to prevent
their hands? These, for the greater terror of their concourse, are called
together; and whether by the connivence or the command of their wicked
Governor, or by the instigation of the malicious Jews, conspire to anticipate
his death with scorns, which they will after inflict with violence.

O my Blessed Savior, was it not enough that thy Sacred body was stripped of
thy garments, and waled with bloody stripes, but that thy Person must be made
the mocking-stock of thine insulting enemies, thy Back disguised with

In the mean time, whither, O whither do thou stoop, O thou coeternal Son of
thine eternal Father? whither do thou abase thy self for me? I have sinned,
and thou art punished; I have exalted my self, and thou art dejected; I have
clad my self with shame, and thou art stripped; I have made my self naked, and
thou art clothed with robes of dishonor; my head has devised evil, and thine
is pierced with thorns; I have smitten thee, and thou art smitten for me; I
have dishonored thee, and thou for my sake art scorned; Thou

Thus disguised, thus bleeding, thus mangled, thus deformed art thou brought
forth, whether for compassion, or for a more universal derision, to the furious
multitude, with an Ecce homo, Behold the man: look upon him, O ye merciless
Jews; see him in his shame, in his wounds and blood, and now see whether ye
think him miserable enough. Ye see his Face blew and black with buffeting, his
Eyes swollen, his Cheeks beslabbered with spittle, his Skin torn with scourges,
his whole Body bathed in blood; and would ye yet have more? Behold the man; the
man whom ye envied for his greatness, whom ye feared Caesar's hand? Behold the
man.

Yea, and behold him well, O thou proud Pilate, O ye cruel Soldiers, O ye

What an inward war do I yet find in the breast of Pilate? His Conscience bids
him spare, his Popularity bids him kill. His Wife warned by a Dream, warns him
to have no hand in the blood of that just man; the importunate

In the height of this strife, when Conscience and moral Justice were ready to
sway Pilate's distracted heart to a just dismission, I hear the Jews cry out,
If thou let this man go, thou art not Caesar's friend. There is the word that
strikes it dead: it is now no time to demur any more. In vain shall we hope
that a carnal heart can prefer the care of his Soul to the care of his safety
and honor, God to Caesar. Now Jesus must die: Pilate hasts into the Judgment
hall; the Sentence sticks no longer in his teeth, Let him be crucified.

He took water and washed his hands before the multitude, saying, I am innocent
of the blood of this just person: see ye to it. Now all is safe I wis: this is
expiation enough; water can wash off blood, the hands can cleanse the heart:
protest thou art innocent, and thou can not be guilty. Vain Hypocrite! can
thou think to escape so? Is Murder of no deeper dye? Can thou dream waking
thus to avoid the charge of thy wives dream? Is the guilt of the blood of the
Son of God to be wiped off with such ease? What poor shifts do foolish sinners
make to beguile themselves? Any thing will serve to charm the Conscience, when
it lists to sleep.

Pilate thinks to wash off the guilt of thy blood with water, I know there is
nothing that can wash off the guilt of this his sin but thy blood. Oh do thou
wash my Soul in that precious bathe, and I shall be clean, Oh Pilate, if that
very blood which thou sheddest do not wash off the guilt of thy bloodshed, thy
water does but more defile thy Soul, and intend that fire wherewith thou
burnest.

Little did the desperate Jews know the weight of that blood, which they were
so forward to wish upon themselves and their children. Had they deprecated
their interest in that horrible murder, they could not so easily have avoided
the vengeance: but now that they fetch it upon themselves by a willing

The Crucifixion.
THe sentence of Death is past, and now who can with dry eyes behold the sad
pomp of my Saviors bloody execution? All the streets are full of gazing
spectators, waiting for this ruefull sight. At last, O Savior, there thou
come out of Pilate's gate, bearing that which shall soon bear thee. To expect
thy Cross was not torment enough; thou must carry it. All this while thou
shall not only see, but feel thy death before it come; and must help to be an
agent in thine own Passion. It was not out of favor, that laid upon thee the
iniquity of us all: It was thine own Mercy that caused thee to bear our sins
upon the Cross, and to bear the Cross (with the curse annexed to it) for our
sins. How much more voluntary must that needs be in thee, which thou requirest
to be voluntarily undertaken by us? It was thy charge, If any man will come
after me, let him deny himself, and take up his cross and follow me. Thou
did not say, Let Let him take up his cross, as his free burden: free in
respect of his heart, not in respect of his hand: so free, that he shall
willingly undergo it, when it is laid upon him; not so free as that he shall
lay it upon himself unrequired. O Savior, thou did not snatch the Cross out
of the Soldiers hands, and cast it upon thy shoulder; but when they laid it on
thy neck, thou underwentest it. The constraint was theirs, the will was thine.
It was not so heavy to them, or to Simon, as it was to thee; they felt nothing
but the wood, thou feltest it clogged with the load of the sins of the whole
world. No marvel if thou faintedst under that sad burden; thou that bear up
the whole earth by thy word, did sweat, and pant, Jesu, how could I be
confounded in my self to see thee, after so much loss of blood and
over-toilednesse of pain, languishing under that fatal tree? And yet why should
it more trouble me to see thee sinking under thy Cross now, then to see thee
anon hanging upon thy Cross? In both thou would render thy self weak and
miserable, that thou might so much the more glorify thy infinite mercy in
suffering.

It is not out of any compassion of thy misery, or care of thine ease, that
Simon of Cyrene is forced to be the porter of thy Cross; it was out of their
own eagerness of thy dispatch: thy feeble paces were too slow for their
purpose; Jerusalem, when thou come once past the gates, an helper shall be
deputed to thee: the expedition of thy death was more sweet to them, then the
pain of a lingering passage. What thou said to Judas, they say to the
Executioner, What Whiles thou yet live, they cannot be quiet, they cannot be
safe: to hasten thine end, they lighten thy carriage.

Had thou done this out of choice which thou did out of constraint, how I
should have envied thee, O Simon of Cyrene, as too happy in the honor to be
the first man that bore that Cross of thy Savior, wherein millions of blessed
Martyrs have (since that time) been ambitious to succeed thee? Thus to bear thy
Cross for thee, O Savior, was more then to bear a crown from thee. Could I be
worthy to be thus graced by thee, I should pity all other glories.

Whiles thou thus passest, O dear Jesu, the streets and ways resound Hosanna
in the streets, did not also bear their part in these public condolings?
Though it had not concerned thy self, O Savior, thine ears had been still more
open to the voice of grief then of Daughters of Jerusalem, weep not for me, but
weep for your selves and for your children. Who would not have thought, O
Savior, that thou should have been wholly taken up with thine own sorrows?
The expectation of so bitter a Death had been enough to have overwhelmed any
Soul but thine: yet even now can thy gracious eye find time to look beyond
thine own miseries, at theirs; and to pity them, who, insensible of their own
ensuing condition, mourned for thine now present. They see thine extremity,
thou foreseest theirs; they power out their sorrow upon thee, thou divertest it
upon themselves. We silly creatures walk blindefolded in this vale of tears,
Calvary, thou can foresee and pity the vastation of thy Jerusalem; and give
a sad Prophecy of the imminent destruction of that City which lately had cost
thee tears, and now shall cost thee blood. It is not all the indign cruelty of
men that can rob thee of thy Mercy.

Jerusalem could not want Malefactors, though Barabbas was dismissed. That all
this execution might seem to be done out of the zeal of Justice, two He was
taken from prison and from judgment; He was cut out of the land of the living;
He made his grave with the Wicked. O blessed Jesu, it had been disparagement
enough to thee to be forted with the best of men (since there is much sin in
the perfectest, and there could be no sin in thee;) but to be matched with the
scum of mankind, whom vengeance would not let to live, is such an indignity as
confounds my thoughts. Surely there is no Angel in Heaven but would have
Thieves happy; their presence could no more blemish him then your own. Jesu,
led to that loathsome and infamous hill, which now thy last blood shall make
Sacred: now thou set thy foot upon that rising ground which shall prevent
thine Olivet, whence thy Soul shall first ascend into thy Glory.

There whiles thou art addressing thy self for thy last Act, thou art presented
with that bitter and farewell-potion wherewith dying Malefactors were wont to
have their senses stupefied, that they might not feel the torments of their
execution. It was but the common mercy of men to alleviate the death of
Offenders; since the intent of their last doom is not so much pain, as
dissolution.

That draught, O Savior, was not more welcome to the guilty then hateful unto
thee. In the vigor of all thine inward and outward senses, thou would
encounter the most violent assaults of death, and scornedst to abate the least
touch of thy quickest apprehension. Thou well knew that the work thou
wentest about would require the use of all thy powers; it was not thine ease
that thou soughtest, but our Redemption; neither meantest thou to yield to thy
last enemy, but to resist and to overcome him: which that thou might do the
more gloriously, thou challengedst him to do his worst; and in the mean time
would not disfurnish thy self of any of thy powerful faculties. This
greatest combat that ever was shall be fought on even hand: neither Jesu, lies
all our health and salvation. I know not whether I do more suffer in thy pain,
or joy in the issue of thy Suffering.

Now, even now, O Savior, art thou entering into those dreadful lists, and now
art thou grapling with thy last enemy; as if thou had not suffered till now,
now thy bloody Passion begins: a cruel expoliation begins that violence. Adam
entered into his Paradise, so do thou (the Second Adam) into thine, naked; and
as the First Adam was clothed with Innocence when he had no clothes, so were
thou (the Second) too: and more then so; thy nakedness, O Savior, clothes our
Souls not with Innocence only, but with Beauty. Had not thou been naked,

Shame is succeeded with Pain. Oh the torment of the Cross! Methinks I see and
feel, how having fastened the transverse to the body of that fatal Tree, and
laid it upon the ground, they racked and strained thy tender and

There now, O dear Jesu, there thou hangest between Heaven and earth, naked,
bleeding, forlorn, despicable, the spectacle of miseries, the scorn of men. Be
abashed, O ye Heavens and earth, and all ye creatures wrap up your selves
Tabor, which now begins to be overclouded with death? Are these the Ears that
heard spoke as never man's spoke, full of grace and power, that called out dead
Lazarus, that ejected the stubbornest Devils, that commanded the cure of all
diseases, which now are swollen with blows, and discolored with blewnesse and
blood? Is this the Face that should be fairer then the sons of men, which the
Angels of Heaven so desired to see, and can never be satisfied with seeing,
that is thus foul with the nasty mixtures of sweat, and blood, and spittings
on? Are these the Hands that stretched out the Heavens as a curtain, that by
their touch healed the lame, the deaf, the blind, which are now bleeding

Even the most hostile dispositions have been only content to kill; Death has
sated the most eager malice: thine enemies, O Savior, held not themselves
Jesu, how shall I enough admire and celebrate thy infinite Mercy, who made so
happy an use of this Jewish despite, as to improve it to the occasion of the
Salvation of one, and the comfort of millions? Is not this, as the last, so the
greatest specialty of thy wonderful compassion, to whiles he was yet in his
blood, thou said, This Soul shall live. Ere yet the intoxicating Potion could
have time to work upon his brain, thy Spirit infuses Faith into his heart. He
that before had nothing in his eye but present death and torture, is now lifted
up above his Cross in a blessed ambition; Lord, remember me when thou come
into thy Kingdom. Is this the voice of a Thief, or of a Disciple? Give me
leave, O Savior, to borrow thine own words; Verily He saw thee hanging
miserably by him, and yet styles thee Lord; he saw thee dying, yet talks of thy
Kingdom; he felt himself dying, yet talks of a future remembrance. O Faith
stronger then death, that can look beyond the Cross at a Crown; beyond
dissolution at a remembrance of Life and Glory! Which of thine eleven were
heard to speak so gracious a word to thee in these thy last pangs? After thy
Resurrection and knowledge of thine impassible condition it was not strange for
them to talk of thy Kingdom; but in the midst of thy shameful death, for a
dying malefactor to speak of thy reigning, and to implore thy remembrance of
himself in thy Kingdom, it is such an improvement of Faith as ravisheth This
day shall thou be with me in Paradise. Before I wondered at thy Faith; now I
envy at thy Felicity. Thou cravedst a remembrance; thy Savior speaks of a
present possession, This day: thou suedst for remembrance as a favor to the
absent; thy Savior speaks of thy presence with him: thou spakest of a
Kingdom; thy Savior of Paradise. As no Disciple could be more faithful, so
no Saint could be happier. O Savior, what a precedent is this of thy free and
powerful grace? Where thou will give, what unworthiness can

Now, O ye cruel Priests and Elders of the Jews, ye have full leisure to feed
your eyes with the sight ye so much longed for; there is the blood ye
purchased: and is not your malice yet glutted? Is not all this enough, without
your taunts and scoffs and sports at so exquisite a misery? The people, the
passengers are taught to insult, where they should pity. Every man has a scorn
ready to cast at a dying innocent. A generous nature is more wounded with the
tongue, then with the hand. O Savior, thine ear was more painfully pierced
then thy brows, or hands, or feet. It could not but go deep into thy Soul, to
hear these bitter and girding reproaches from them thou came to save.

But, alas! what sleabitings were these in comparison of those inward torments
which thy Soul felt in the sense and apprehension of thy Fathers wrath for the
sins of the whole world, which now lay heavy upon thee for satisfaction? This,
oh this was it that pressed thy Soul as it were to the nethermost hell. Whiles
thine eternal Father looked lovingly upon thee, what did thou, My God, my
God, why have thou forsaken me? Oh what pangs were these, dear Jesu, that drew
from thee this complaint? Thou well knew nothing could be more

How is it then with thee, O Savior, that thou thus astonishest men and Angels
with so woeful a quiritation? Had thy God left thee? Thou not long since said,
I and my Father are One: Are ye now severed? Let this thought be as far from
my Soul, as my Soul from Hell. No more can thy Blessed Father be separated from
thee, then from his own Essence. Adam, stoodst for mankind upon this Tree of
the Cross, as the First Adam stood and fell for mankind under the Tree of
Offense. Thou barest our sins; thy Father saw us in thee, and would punish us
in thee, thee for us: how could he but withhold comfort where he intended
chastisement? Herein therefore he seems to forsake thee for the present, in
that he would not deliver thee from that bitter Passion which thou would
undergo for us. O Savior, had thou not been thus forsaken, we had perished;
thy dereliction is our safety: and however our narrow Souls are My God. He is
so thy God as he cannot be ours: all our right is by Adoption, thine by Nature;
thou art one with him in eternal Essence, we come in by Grace and merciful
election: yet whiles thou shall enable me to say, My God, I shall hope never to
sink under thy desertions.

But whiles I am transported with the sense of thy Sufferings, O Savior, let
me not forget to admire those sweet Mercies of thine which thou powredst out
upon thy Persecutors. They rejoice in thy death, and triumph in thy misery, and
scoff at thee in both: In stead of calling down fire from Heaven Father,
forgive them, for they know not what they do. They blaspheme thee, thou
prayest for them; they scorn, thou pitiest; they sin aganst thee, thou prayest
for their forgiveness; they profess their malice, thou pleadest their
ignorance. O compassion without example, without measure, fit for the Son of
God, the Savior of men! Wicked and foolish Jews! ye would be miserable, he
will not let you: ye would fain pull upon your selves the guilt of his blood,
he deprecates it: ye kill, he sues for your remission and life. His tongue
cries louder then his blood, Father, forgive them. O Savior, thou could not
but be heard. Those who out of ignorance and simplicity thus persecuted thee,
find Peter's speech, it was thy prayer, that was thus effectual. Now they have
grace to know and confess whence they have both forgiveness and salvation, and
can recompense their blasphemies with thanksgiving. What sin is there, Lord,
whereof I can despair of the remission, or what offense can I be unwilling to
remit, when thou prayest for the forgiveness of thy murderers and blasphemers?

There is no day so long but has his evening. At last, O blessed Savior, thou
art drawing to an end of these painful sufferings, when spent with toil and
torment thou criest out, I thirst. How should thou do other? O dear Jesu, how
should thou do other then thirst? The night thou had spent in watching, in
prayer, in agony, in thy conveyance from the Garden to Jerusalem, from Annas to
Caiaphas, from Caiaphas to Pilate, in thy restless answers, in buffetings and
stripes; the day in arraignments, in haling from place to place, in scourgings,
in stripping, in robing and disrobing, in bleeding, in tugging under thy Cross,
in woundings and distension, in pain and passion: All my bones are out of
joint; my heart is like wax, it is melted in the midst of my bowels: My
strength is dried up like a potsherd, and my tongue cleaves to my jaws; and
thou have brought me into the dust of death? Had it not been to make up that
word whereof one jot cannot pass, though thou had felt this thirst, yet thou
had not bewrayed it. Alas! what could it avail to bemoan thy wants to
insulting enemies, whose sport was thy misery? How should they pity thy

Thou that not long since proclaimedst in the Temple, If any man thirst, let
him come to me and drink: He that believes in me, out of his belly shall flow
rivers of living waters, now thy self thirstest: Thou in whom we believe,
complainest to want some drops; thou had the command of all the waters both
above the firmament and below it, yet thou would thirst. Even so, Lord, thou
that would dye for us, would thirst for us. O give me to thirst after those
Samaritan, thou gave better then that thou askedst. Oh give me to thirst
after that more precious Water; and so do thou give me of that water of life,
that I may never thirst again.

Blessed God, how marvelously do thou contrive thine own affairs? Thine
enemies whiles they would despite thee, shall unwittingly justify thee and
convince themselves. As thou fore said, In thy thirst, they gave thee vinegar
to drink. Had they given thee Wine, thou had not taken it; the night before
thou had taken leave of that comfortable liquor, resolving to drink no more
Jesu, whether this last draught of thine were more pleasing to thee or more
distastful: Distastful in it self (for what liquor could be equally harsh?)
pleasing, in that it made up those Sufferings thou were to endure, and those
Prophesies thou were to fulfill.

Now there is no more to do, thy full consummation of all predictions, of all
types and ceremonies, For the full explication whereof, I refer my Reader to
my Passion Sermon, wherein the particularities are largely discussed.
of all sufferings, of all satisfactions is happily both effected and
proclaimed; nothing now remains but a voluntary, sweet and Heavenly

And now, O blessed Jesu, how easily have carnal eyes all this while mistaken
the Heavens declare thy righteousness, O Lord, and the earth shows forth thy
power. The Sun pulls in his light, as not abiding to see the sufferings of his
Creator; the Earth trembles under the sense of the wrong done to her Maker; the
Rocks ren^, the veil of the Temple tears from the top to the bottom;
shortly, all the frame of the world acknowledges the dominion of that Son of
God whom man despised.

Not a bone of him shall be broken.

Still the infallible Decree of the Almighty leads you on to his own ends,
through your own ways. Ye saw him already dead, whom ye came to dispatch:
those bones therefore shall be whole, which ye had had no power to break. But
yet, that no piece either of your cruelty or of Divine prediction may remain
unsatisfied, he whose bones may not be impaired, shall be wounded in his flesh;
he whose Ghost was yielded up, must yield his last blood; One of the soldiers
with a spear pierced his side, and forthwith there came out blood Malice is
wont to end with life; here it overlives it. Cruel man! what means this so late
wound? what commission had thou for this bloody act? Pilate had given leave
to break the bones of the living, he gave no leave to gore the side of the
dead: what wicked supererogation is this? what a superfluity of maliciousness?
To what purpose did thy spear pierce so many hearts in that one? why would
thou kill a dead man? Methinks the Blessed Virgin, and those other passionate
associates of hers, and the Disciple whom Jesus loved, together with the other
of his fellows, the friends and followers of Christ, and especially he that was
so ready to draw his sword upon the troup of his Masters apprehenders, should
have work enough to contain themselves within wound has a mouth to speak the
Messiahship of my Savior, and the truth They shall look at him whom they have
pierced. Behold now the Second Adam sleeping, and out of his side formed the
Mother of the living, the Evangelical Church. Behold the Rock which was
smitten, and the waters of life gushed forth. Behold the fountain that is set
open to the house of David, for sin and for uncleanness; a fountain not of
water only, but of blood too. O Savior, by thy water we are washed, by thy
blood we are redeemed. Those two Sacraments which thou did institute alive,
flow also from thee dead, as the last memorials of thy Love to thy Church: the
water of Baptism, which is the laver of Regeneration; the blood of the new
Testament shed for remission of sins: and these, together with the Spirit that
gives life to them both, are the

It could not be but that the death of Christ, contrived and acted at Jerusalem
in so solemn a Festival, must needs draw a world of beholders: The Romans, the
Centurion and his band, were there as actors, as supervisors of the Execution.
Those strangers were no otherwise engaged, then as they that would hold fair
correspondence with the Citizens where they were engarisoned: their freedom
from prejudice rendered them more capable of an ingenuous construction Now when
the Centurion and they that were with him that watched Jesus saw the
Earthquake, and the things that were done, they feared greatly, and glorified
God, and said, Truly this was the Son God.

What a marvelous concurrence is here of strong and irrefragable convictions?
Meekness in suffering, Prayer for his murderers, a faithful resignation of his
Soul into the hands of his Heavenly Father, the Sun eclipsed, the Heavens
darkened, the earth trembling, the graves open, the rocks rent, the veil of the
Temple torn; who could go less then this, Truly this was the Son of God? He
suffers patiently; this is through the power of Grace; many good men have done
so through his enabling. The frame of Nature suffers with him;

I wonder not that these men confessed thus; I wonder that any Spectator
confessed it not: these proofs were enough to fetch all the world upon their
knees, and to have made all mankind a Convert. But all hearts are not alike; no
means can work upon the wilfully-obdured. Even after this the Soldier pierced
that Blessed side; and whiles Pagans relented, Jews continued impenitent. Yet
even of that Nation, those beholders whom envy and partiality had not
interessed in this slaughter, were stricken with just astonishment, and smote
their breasts, and shook their heads, and by passionate gesture spoke what
their tongues durst not. How many must there needs be, in this universal
Messiah; so they could not but be ravished with wonder at those powerful
demonstrations of the Deity of him in whom they believed; and strangely
distracted in their thoughts, whiles they compared those Sufferings with that
Omnipotence. As yet their Faith and Knowledge was but in the bud or in the
blade. How could they choose but think, Were he not the Son of God, how could
these things be? and if he were the Son of God, how could he die? His
Resurrection, his Ascension, should soon after perfect their

But above all other, O thou Blessed Virgin, the Holy Mother of our Lord, how
many swords pierced thy Soul, whiles standing close by his Cross thou Gabriel
had reported to thee from God in the message of thy blessed Conception of that
Son of God? How did thou think of the miraculous formation of that thy Divine
burden by the power of the Holy Ghost? How did thou recall those prophecies of
Anna and Simeon concerning him, and all those supernatural works of his, the
irrefragable proofs of his Godhead? and laying all these together, with the
miserable infirmities of his Passion, how were thou crucified with him? The
care that he took for thee in the extremity of his torments, could not choose
but My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? what a cold horror possessed
thy Soul? I cannot now wonder at thy qualms and swoonings; I could rather
wonder that thou survivedst so sad an hour. But when recollecting thy self,
thou saw the Heavens to bear a part with thee in thy mourning, and feltest
the earth to tremble no less then thy self, and foundst that the dreadful
concussion of the whole frame of Nature proclaimed the Deity of him that would
thus suffer and dye, and remembredst his frequent predictions of drinking this
bitter cup, and of being baptized thus in blood; thou beganst to take heart,
and to comfort thy self with the assured Jonas for his type, and had
fore-promised in three days to raise up the ruined Temple of his Body, had
doubtless given more full intimation unto thee, who had so great a share in
that sacred body of his. The just shall live by Faith. Lo, that Faith of thine
in his ensuing Resurrection, and in his triumph over death, gives thee life,
and chears up thy drouping Soul, and bids it in an holy confidence to triumph
over all thy fears and sorrows; and him whom thou now see dead and despised,
represents unto thee living, immortal, glorious.


GRace does not ever make show where it is. There is much secret riches both in
the earth and sea, which never eye saw. I never heard any news till now of
Joseph of Arimathea: yet was he eminently both rich, and wise, and good; a
worthy, though close Disciple of our Savior. True Faith may be wisely
reserved, but will not be cowardly. Now he puts forth himself and dares beg the
Body of Jesus. Pilate's heart tells him he has done too much already, in
sentencing an innocent to death: no doubt that Centurion had related unto him
the miraculous symptoms of that Passion. He that so unwillingly condemned
Innocence, could rather have wished that just man alive, then have denied him
dead. The body is yielded, and taken down; and now, that which hung naked upon
the Cross, is wrapped in fine linen; that which was soiled with sweat and
blood, is curiously washed and embalmed. Now even Nicodemus comes in for a
part, and fears not the envy of a good profession. Death has let that man
loose, whom the Law formerly overawed with restraint. He hates to be a
night-bird Joseph that rich Councellor lent thee his: lent it so, as it should
never be restored: thou took'st it but for a while; but that little touch of
that Sacred Corpse of thine made it too good for

O happy Joseph, that had the honor to be Landlord of the Lord of life! how
well is thy house-room repai'd with a mansion not made with hands, eternal in
the heavens? Thy Garden and thy Tomb were hard by Calvary, where thou could
not fail of many monitions of thy frailty. How often had thou seasoned that new
Tomb with sad and savory meditations? and had often said within thy self, Here
I shall once lie down to my last rest, and wait for my Resurrection? Little
did thou then think to have been disappointed by so Blessed a guest; or that
thy grave should be again so soon empty, and in that emptiness incapable of any
mortal in-dweller. How gladly

Thus purely wrapped and sweetly embalmed lies the precious body of our Savior
in Joseph's new vault. Are ye now also at rest, O ye Jewish Rulers? Is your
malice dead and buried with him? Has Pilate enough served your envy and
revenge? Surely it is but a common hostility that The chief Priests and
Pharisees came together unto Pilate, saying, Sir, we remember that this
Deceiver said whiles he was yet alive, After three days I will rise again:
Command therefore that the Sepulcher be made sure till the third day; lest his
Disciples come by night, and steal him away, and say to the people, he is risen.

How full of terrors and inevitable perplexities is guiltiness? These men were
not more troubled with envy at Christ alive, then now with fear of his
Resurrection. And what can now secure them? Pilate had helped to kill him; but
who shall keep him from rising? Wicked and foolish Jews! how fain Lazarus was
still in your ey: That man was no phantasme; his death, his reviving was
undeniable; the so fresh resuscitation of that dead body after four days
dissolution was a manifest conviction of Omnipotence. How do ye vainly wish
that he could deceive you in the fore-reporting of his own Resurrection?
Without a Divine power he could have raised neither Lazarus nor himself: with
and by it, he could as well raise himself as Lazarus. What need we other
witnesses then your own mouths? That which he would do, ye confess he
foretold; that the truth

All this while the devout Mary's keep close, and silently spend their Sabbath
in a mixture of grief and hope. How did they wear out those sad hours in
bemoaning themselves each to other; in mutual relations of the patient
sufferings, of the happy expiration of their Savior, of the wonderful events
both in the Heavens and earth that accompanied his Crucifixion, of his frequent
and clear Predictions of his Resurrection? And now they have gladly agreed (so
soon as the time will give them leave) in the dawning of the Sunday morning to
visit that dear Sepulcher. Neither will

Love is restless and fearless. In the dark of night these good Women go to
buy their spices, and ere the daybreak are gone out of their houses toward
the Tomb of Christ to bestow them. This Sex is commonly fearful; it was much
for them to walk alone in that unsafe season: yet, as despising all fears and
dangers, they thus spend the night after their Sabbath. Might they have been
allowed to buy their Perfumes on the Sabbath, or to have visited that holy Tomb
sooner, can we think they would have staid so long? can we Lord of the Sabbath,
who now kept his Sabbath in the Grave? Sooner they might not come, later they
would not, to present their last homage to their dead Savior. Had these holy
women known their Jesus to be alive, how had they hasted, who made such speed
to do their last offices to his sacred Corpse? For us, we know that our
Redeemer lives; we know where he is. O Savior, how cold and heartless is our
love to thee, if we do not have to find thee in thy Word and Sacraments; if
our Souls do not fly up to thee in all holy Affections into thy Heaven?

Of all the Women Mary Magdalen is first named, and in some Evangelists

Joseph laid him: even there they leave him not, but, ere it be daylight,
return to pay him the last tribute of their duty. How much stronger is Love
then death? O Blessed Jesu, why should whom thou love, thou love to the
end, yea in it, yea after it: even when we are dead, not our Souls only, but
our very dust is dearly respected of thee. What condition of thine should
remove our affections from thy person in Heaven, from thy lims on earth?

Well did these worthy Women know what Joseph of Arimathea and Nicodemus had
done to thee; they saw how curiously they had wrapped thee, how

When on the Friday-evening they attended Joseph to the intombing of Jesus,
they marked the place, they marked the passage, they marked that inner
gravestone which the owner had fitted to the mouth of that tomb; which all
their care is now to remove; Who shall roll away the That other more weighty
load wherewith the vault was barred, the seal, the guard set upon both, came
not perhaps into their knowledge; this was the private plot of Pilate and the
Priests, beyond the reach of their thoughts.

I do not hear them say, How shall we recover the charges of our Odors? or, How
shall we avoid the envy and censure of our angry Elders, for honoring him whom
the Governors of our Nation have thought worthy of condemnation? The only
thought they now take is, Who shall roll away the stone? Neither do they stay
at home and move this doubt, but when they are well forward on their way,
resolving to try the issue. Good hearts cannot be so Jesu, thou who art clearly
revealed in Heaven, art yet still both hid and sealed up from too many here on
earth: Neither is it some thin veil that is spread between thee and them, but an
huge stone; even a true stone of offense lies rolled upon the mouth of their
hearts. Yea, if a second weight were superadded to thy Grave here, no less then
three spiritual bars are interposed betwixt them and thee above; Idleness,
Ignorance, Unbelief. Who shall roll away these stones, but the same power that
removed thine? O Lord, remove that our Ignorance, that we may know thee; our
Idleness, that we may seek thee; our Unbelief, that we may

How well it succeeds when we go faithfully and conscionably about our work,
and leave the issue to God? Lo, now God has removed the cares of these holy
Women, together with the gravestone. To the wicked that falls out which they
feared, to the Godly that which they wished and cared for, yea more. Holy cares
ever prove well; the worldly dry the bones, and disappoint the hopes. Could
these good Visitants have known of a greater stone sealed, of a strong watch
set, their doubts had been doubled: now God goes beyond their thoughts, and at
once removes that which both they did and might have feared: The stone is
removed, the seal broken, the watch fled. Pharaoh, the Worms for Herod. There
is no wisdom nor counsel against the Lord.

The earth trembled at the presence of the Lord, at the presence of the God of
Jacob. When thou our true Sampson awakedst, and foundst thy self tied with
these Philistian cords, and rousedst up, and brakest those

Good cause had the earth to quake, when the God that made it powerfully calls
for his own flesh from the usurpation of her bowels. Good cause had she to open
her graves and yield up her dead in attendance to the Lord of Life, whom she
had presumed to detain in that cell of her darkness. What a seeming impotence
was here, that thou, who art the true Rock of thy Church, should lie
obscurely shrouded in Joseph's rock? thou that art the true cornerstone of thy
Church, should be shut up with a double stone, the one of thy grave, the
other of thy vault? thou, by whom we are sealed should be sealed up in a
blind cavern of earth? But now what a demonstration of power does both the
world and I see in thy glorious Resurrection? The rocks tear, the graves open,
the stones roll away, the dead rise and appear, the Soldiers flee and tremble,
Saints and Angels attend thy rising. O Savior, thou laiest down in weakness,
thou risest in power and glory; thou laiest down like a man, thou risest like a
God.

What a lively image have thou herein given me of the dreadful Majesty of the
general Resurrection and thy second appearance? Then not the earth only, but
the powers of Heaven shall be shaken: not some few graves shall be all that
sleep in their graves shall awake, and stand up from the dead before thee: not
some one Angel shall descend; but thou, the great Angel of the Covenant,
attended with thousand thousands of those mighty Spirits. And if these stout
Soldiers were so filled with terror at the feeling of an Earthquake and the
sight of an Angel, that they had scarce breath left in them for the time to
witness them alive; where shall thine enemies appear, O Lord, in the day of thy
terrible appearance, when the earth shall reel and vanish, and the elements
shall be on a flame about their ears, and the Heavens shall wrap up as a scroll?

Israelites with plagues, the Assyrians with the sword; why an Angel appeared
to comfort thee after

Thou did raise thy self, the Angels removed the stone. They that could
Lazarus, thou badst others let him loose. Works of Omnipotency thou reservest
to thine own immediate performance; ordinary actions thou do by subordinate
means.

Although this act of the Angels was not merely with respect to thee; but
partly to those devout Women, to ease them of their care, to manifest unto them
thy Resurrection. So officious are those glorious Spirits, not only to thee
their Maker, but even to the meanest of thy servants, especially in the
furtherance of all their spiritual designs. Let us bring our Odours, they will

How glorious did this Angel of thine appear? The terrified Soldiers saw his
face like lightning, both they and the Women saw his garments shining, bright,
and white as snow: such a presence became his errand. It was fit that, as in
thy Passion the Sun was darkened, and all Creatures were clad with heaviness, so
in thy Resurrection the best of thy Creatures should testify their joy and
exsultation in the brightness of their habit; that as we on Festival-dayes
mirth in Heaven at the conversion of one sinner, how much more when a world of
sinners is perfectly ransomed from death, and restored to Salvation? Certainly,
if but one or two appeared, all rejoiced, all triumphed. Neither could they but
be herein sensible of their own happy advantage, who by thy mediation are
confirmed in their glorious estate; since thou by the blood of thy Cross and
power of thy Resurrection have reconciled things not in earth only, but in
Heaven.

But, above all other, the Love of thee their God and Savior must needs
heighten their joy, and make thy Glory theirs. It is their perpetual work to
praise thee: how much more now when such an occasion was offered as never had
been since the world began, never could be after? when thou the God of Spirits
had vanquished all the spiritual powers of darkness, when thou the Lord of
Life had conquered death for thee and all thine, so as they may now boldly
insult over their last enemy, O death, where is thy sting? O grave, where is
thy victory?

Certainly, if Heaven can be capable of an increase of joy and felicity, never
had those Blessed Spirits so great a cause of triumph and gratulation Jesu,
should we men, whose flesh thou did assume, unite, revive, for whose sake and
in whose stead thou did vouchsafe to suffer and die, whose arrerages thou
payedst in death, and acquittedst in thy Resurrection, whose Souls are
discharged, whose Bodies shall be raised by the power of thy rising; how much
more should we think we have cause to be over-joyed with the happy memory of
this great work of thy Divine Power and unconceiveable Mercy?

Lo now, how weak soever I am in my self, yet in the confidence of this
victorious Resurrection of my Savior I dare boldly challenge and defy you, O
all

Is it Sin that threats me? Behold, this Resurrection of my Redeemer publishes
my discharge. My Surety was arrested and cast into the prison of his Grave: had
not the utmost farthing of mine arrerages been paid, he

Is it the Wrath of God? Wherefore is that but for sin? If my sin be defraied,
that quarrel is at an end: and if my Savior suffered it for me, how can I fear
to suffer it in my self? That infinite Justice hates to be twice paid. He is
risen, therefore he has satisfied. Who is he that condemns? It is Christ
that died; yea rather, that is risen.

Is it Death it self? Lo, my Savior that overcame death by dying, has
triumphed over him in his Resurrection. How can I now fear a conquered enemy?
What harm is there in the Serpent, but for his sting? The sting of death is
sin: that is pulled out by my powerful Redeemer, it cannot now hurt me; it may
refresh me to carry this cool Snake in my bosom.

O then, my dear Savior, I bless thee for thy Death; but I bless thee more for
thy Resurrection. That was a work of wonderful Humility, of infinite Mercy;
this was a work of infinite Power: In that was humane Weakness; in this Divine
Omnipotence: In that thou did die for our sins; in this thou did rise again
for our Justification.

And now how am I conformable to thee, if when thou art risen I lie still in
the grave of my Corruptions? How am I a lim of thy body, if whiles thou if I be
risen with thee, why do I not seek the things above, where thou sit at the
right hand of God?

The Vault or Cave which Joseph had hewn out of the rock was large, capable of
no less then ten persons: upon the mouth of it Eastward was

Into this Cave the good Women (finding the stone rolled away) descended to
seek the body of Christ; and in it saw the Angels. This was the Goal to which
Peter and John ran, finding the spoils of death, the grave clothes wrapped up,
and the napkin that was about the head folded up together and laid in a place
by it self: and as they came in haste, so they returned with wonder.



Who would not but have tried masteries with you in this case, and have made
light touches of the earth to have held paces with you? Your desire was equal;
but John is the younger, his lims are more nimble, his breath more free: he
first looks into the Sepulcher, but Peter goes down first. O Our Master is not
subduced, but risen. Had he been taken away by others hands, this fine linen
had not been left behind: Had he not himself risen from this bed of earth, he
had not thus wrapped up his night-cloaths, and laid them sorted by themselves.
What can we doubt, when he foretold us he would rise? O Blessed Jesu, how wilt
knew not the Scriptures, that thou must rise again from the dead? They went
away more astonished then confident; more full of wonder as yet then of belief.

There is more strength of zeal (where it takes) in the weaker Sex. Those holy
Women, as they came first, so they staid last: especially devout Mary Magdalene
stands still at the mouth of the Cave weeping. Well might those tears have been
spared, if her Knowledge had been answerable to her Affection, her Faith to her
Fervor. Withal, (as our eye

Holy desires never but speed well. There she sees two glorious Angels, the one
sitting at the head, the other at the feet where the body of Jesus had lain.
Their shining brightness showed them to be no mortal creatures: besides that
Peter and John had but newly come out of the Sepulcher, and both found and left
it empty in her sight, which was now suddenly filled with those celestial
guests. That white linen wherewith Joseph had shrouded the Sacred body of
Jesus, was now shamed with a brighter whiteness.

Yet do I not find the good Woman ought appalled with that inexspected glory.
So was her heart taken up with the thought for her Savior, that she seemed not
sensible of whatsoever other Objects. Those tears which she did let drop into
the Sepulcher, send up back to her the voice of those Angels, Woman, why
weepest thou? God and his Angels take notice of every tear of our Devotion. The
sudden wonder has not dried her eyes, nor charmed her tongue: She freely
confesses the cause of her grief to be the missing of her Savior; They have
taken away my Lord, and I know not where they have laid him. Alas, good Mary,
how do thou lose thy tears? of whom do thou complain, but of thy best
friend? who has removed thy

Sense may be no judge of the bewailed absence of Christ. Do but turn back
thine eye, O thou Religious Soul, and see Jesus standing by thee, though thou
knewst not that it was Jesus. His habit was not his own. Sometimes it pleases
our Savior to appear unto his not like himself: his holy disguises are our
trials. Sometimes he will seem a Stranger, sometimes an Enemy; sometimes he
offers Mary took him for a Gardener. Devout Magdalene, thou art not much
mistaken. As it was the trade of the First Adam to dress the Garden of Eden, so
was it the trade of the Second to tend the Garden of his Church. He diggs up
the soil by seasonable Afflictions, he sows in it the seeds of Grace, he plants
it with gracious motions, he waters it with his Word, yea with his own blood,
he weeds it by wholesome censures. O Blessed Savior, what is it that thou
neglectest to do for this selected enclosure of thy Church? As in some respect
thou art the true Vine, and thy Father the Husbandman; so also in some other we
are the Vine, and thou art Magdalene: break up the fallows of my Nature,
implant me with Grace, prune me with meet corrections, bedew me with the former
and latter rain; do what thou will to make me fruitful.

Still the good Woman weeps, and still complains, and passionately inquires
Joseph, that he could no longer contain himself from the notice of his
brethren) thy compassion causes thee to break forth into a clear expression of
thy self by expressing her name unto her self; Mary. She was used as to the
name, so to the sound, to the accent. Thou spakest to her before, but in the
tone of a stranger; now of a friend, of a Master. Like a good Shepherd, thou
call thy sheep by their What was thy call of her, but a clear pattern of our
Vocation?

As her, so thou call us; first, familiarly, effectually. She could not
begin with thee otherwise then in the compellation of a stranger; it was thy
mercy to begin with her. That correction of thy Spirit is sweet and useful, Now
after ye have known God, Gal. 4. 9.
or rather are known of him. We do know thee, O God, but our active knowledge
is after our passive; first we are known of thee, then we know thee that
knew us. And as our Knowledge, so is our Calling, so is our Election; thou
beginnest to us in all, and most justly say, You have not chosen me, but I
have chosen you. When thou would speak to Woman, whom seek thou? now when
thou would be known to her, thou call her by her name, Mary. General
invitations and common mercies are for us as men; but where thou give Grace
as to thine elect, thou come close to the Soul, and winnest us with dear and
particular intimations.

That very name did as much as say, Know him of whom thou art known and
beloved, and turns her about to thy view and acknowledgment; She turned her
self, and says unto him, Rabboni, which is to say, Master. Before, her face
was toward the Angels: this word fetches her about, and turns her face to
thee, from whom her misprision had averted it. We do not rightly apprehend
Rabboni, and falls down before thee, in a desire of an humble amplexation of
those Sacred feet which she now rejoices to see past the use of her Odours.

Where there was such familiarity in the mutual compellation, what means such
strangeness in the charge; Touch me not, for I am not yet ascended to my
Father? Thou were not wont, O Savior, to make so dainty of being touched: It
is not long since these very same hands touched thee in thine anointing;
Simon's house touched thee. What speak I of these? The multitude touched thee,
the Executioners touched thee; and even after thy Resurrection thou did not
stick to say to thy Disciples, Touch me, and see, and to invite Thomas to put
his fingers into thy side: neither is it long after this before thou suffer
the three Mary's to touch and hold thy feet. How then say thou, Touch me not?
Was it in a mild taxation of her mistaking? as if thou had said, Thou know
not that I have now an Immortal body, but so demeanest thy self toward me as
if I were still in my wonted condition; know now that the case is altered:
howsoever indeed I have not yet ascended to my Father, yet this body of mine
which in touching thee, as if she must use this speed in preventing thine
Ascension, If we have heretofore known thee after the flesh, henceforth know we
thee so no more. That thou livedst here in this shape, that color, this
stature, that habit, I should be glad to know; nothing that concerns thee can
be unuseful. Could I say, here thou satest, here thou layest, here

No sooner art thou risen then thou speak of ascending; as thou did lie
down to rise, so did thou rise to ascend: that is the consummation of thy*
Glory, and ours in thee. Thou that forbadst her touch, injoynedst her errand;
Go to my brethren, and say, I ascend unto my Father and your Father, to my God
and your God.

The annunciation of thy Resurrection and Ascension is more then a private
fruition; this is for the comfort of one, that for the benefit of many. To sit
still and enjoy is more sweet for the present; but to go and tell is more
gainful in the sequel. That great Angel thought himself (as he well might)
highly honored, in that he was appointed to carry the happy news unto the
Blessed Virgin (thy Holy Mother) of her conception of thee her Savior: how
honorable must it needs be to Mary Magdalen, that she must be the messenger of
thy second birth, thy Resurrection, and instant Ascension? How beautiful do the
f^et of those deserve to be, who bring the glad tidings of peace and Salvation?
What matter is it, O Lord, if men despise where thou will

To whom then do thou send her? Go tell my Brethren. Blessed Jesu, who are
those? were they not thy Followers? yea, were they not thy forsakers? yet still
thou stilest them thy Brethren. O admirable Humility! O infinite Mercy! How
do thou raise their titles with thy self? At first they were thy Servants,
then Disciples, a little before thy death they were thy Friends; now after thy
Resurrection they were thy Brethren. Thou that were exalted infinitely higher
from mortal to immortal, descendest so much lower to call them Brethren, who
were before Friends, Disciples, Servants. What do we stand upon terms of our
poor inequality, when the Son of God stoops so low as to call us Go tell my
Brethren. It is not in the power of the sins of our infirmity to unbrother us:
when we look at the acts themselves, they are heinous; when at the persons,
they are so much more faulty as more obliged; but when we look at the mercy of
thee who have called us, now, who shall separate us? When we have sinned, thy
dearness has reason to aggravate our sorrows; but when we have sorrowed, our
Faith has no



It is fit I should mark thy order; First, my Father, then yours. Even so,
Lord, He is first thine, and in thine only right ours. It is in thee that we
are adopted, it is in thee that we are elected; without thee, God is not only
a stranger, but an enemy to us. Thou only can make us free, thou only

With what joy did Mary receive this errand? with what joy did the Disciples
welcome it from her? Here was good news from a far Country, even as far as the
utmost regions of Death.

Those Disciples whose flight scattered them upon their Masters apprehension,
are now, at night, like a dispersed Covie met together by their mutual call:
their assembly is secret; when the light was shut in, when the doors were shut
up. Still were they fearful, still were the Jews malicious. The assured tidings
of their Masters Resurrection and Life has filled their hearts with joy When
the doors were shut where the Disciples were assembled, for fear of the Jews,
came Jesus, and stood in the midst, and said, Peace be unto you. O Savior, how
thou came in thither I wonder, I inquire not: I know not what a Glorified
body can do; I know there is nothing that thou can not do. Had not thine
entrance been recorded for strange and supernatural, why was thy standing in
the midst noted before thy passage into the room? why were the doors said to be
shut whiles thou came in? why were thy Disciples amazed to see thee ere they
heard thee? Doubtless, they that

They were glad when they had seen the Lord. Had they known thee for no other
then a mere man, this re-appearance could not but have affrighted them; since
till now by thine Almighty power this was never done, that the long-since dead
rose out of their graves, and appeared unto many: But when they recounted the
miraculous works that thou had done, and thought of Lazarus so lately raised,
thine approved Deity gave them confidence, and thy presence joy.

We cannot but be losers by our absence from holy Assemblies. Where were thou,
O Thomas, when the rest of that Sacred Family were met together? We have seen
the Lord; was not this enough? would no eyes serve thee but thine own? were thy
ears to no use for thy Faith? Except I see in his hands the print of
Suspicious man, who is the worse for that? Whose is the loss if thou believe
not? Is there no certainty but in thine own senses? Why were not so many and so
holy eyes and tongues as credible as thine own hands and eyes? How little were
thou yet acquainted with the ways of Faith? Faith comes by hearing, These are
the tongues that must win the whole world to an assent; and do thou the first
man detrect to yield? Why was that word so hard to pass? Had not that thy
Divine Master foretold thee with the rest that he must be crucified, and the
third day rise again? Is any thing related to be done but that which was
fore-promised?

It is a whole week that Thomas rests in this sullen unbelief; in all which
time doubtless his ears were beaten with the many constant assertions of the
holy Women (the first witnesses of the Resurrection) as also of the two
Disciples walking to Emmaus, (whose hearts burning within them, had set their
tongues on fire in a zealous relation of those happy occurrences) with the
assured reports of the rising and re-appearance of many Saints in attendance of
the Lord and giver of life: yet still he struggles with his Israel, that
could be content to leave the ninety and nine to go fetch one stray in the
wilderness, how careful were thou to reduce this stragler to his fellows? Right
so were thy Disciples re-assembled, such was the season, the place the same, so
were the doors shut up, when (that

Blessed Jesu, how thou pittiest the errors and infirmities of thy servants?
Even when we are froward in our misconceits and worthy of nothing but
desertion, how thou followest us, and overtakest us with mercy; and in thine
abundant compassion wilt reclaim and save us, when either we meant not or would
not? By how much more unworthy those eyes and hands Emmaus, O fools and slow of
heart to believe all that the Prophets have spoken! but this was under the
disguise of an unknown traveller, upon the way, when they were alone: Now thou
speak with thine own tongue, before all thy Disciples, in stead of rebuking,
thou only exhortest; Be not faithless, but faithful.

Behold, thy Mercy no less then thy Power has melted the congealed heart Then
Thomas answered and said unto him, My Lord, and my God. I do not hear that when
it came to the issue, Thomas employed his hands in this trial: his eyes were
now sufficient assurance; the sense of his Masters Omniscience in this
particular challenge of him spared (perhaps) the labor of a further
disquisition. And now how happily was My Lord, my God?

I hear not such a word from those that believed. It was well for us, it was
well for thee, O Thomas, that thou distrustedst: else, neither had the world
received so perfect an evidence of that Resurrection whereon all our Salvation
depends; neither had thou yielded so pregnant and divine an astipulation to
thy Blessed Savior. Now thou do not only profess his Resurrection, but his
Godhead too, and thy happy interest in both. And now, if they be blessed that
have not seen and yet believed; blessed art thou also that having seen, have
thus believed: and blessed be thou, O God, who

The Ascension.


Thy death had troubled the hearts of many Disciples, who thought that Messiah;
and thoughts of diffidence were apt to seize upon the holiest breasts. So long
therefore would thou hold footing upon earth, till the world were fully
convinced of the infallible evidences of thy Resurrection; of all which time
thou only can give an account: it was not for flesh and blood to trace the
ways of Immortality; neither was our frail, corruptible, sinful nature a meet
companion for thy now-glorified Humanity; the glorious angels of Heaven were
now thy fittest attendants. But yet how often did it please thee graciously to
impart thy self this while unto men; and not only to appear unto thy Disciples,
but to renew unto them the familiar forms of thy wonted conversation, in
conferring,

Who can be too rigorous in censuring the ignorances of well-meaning
Christians, when he sees the domestic Followers of Christ, even after his
Resurrection, mistake the main end of his coming in the flesh? Lord, will thou
at this time restore again the Kingdom to Israel? They saw their Master now
out of the reach of all Jewish envy; they saw his power illimited and
irresistible; they saw him stay so long upon earth, that they might imagine he
of Israel for the King of Heaven? And even yet, O Blessed Savior, I do When he
had spoken these

Oh happy parting, fit for the Savior of mankind, answerable to that Divine
conversation, to that succeeding Glory! O blessed Jesu, let me so far imitate
thee, as to depart hence with a blessing in my mouth; let my Soul, when it is
stepping over the threshold of Heaven, leave behind it a legacy of Peace and
Happiness.

It was from the mount of Olives that thou tookst thy rise into Heaven. Thou
might have ascended from the valley; all the globe of earth was alike to
thee: but since thou were to mount upward, thou would take so much

What hill was this thou chosest but the mount of Olives? Thy Pulpit shall I
call it, or thine Oratory? The place from whence thou had wont to shower down
thine Heavenly Doctrine upon the hearers; the place whence thou had wont to
sent up thy Prayers unto thy Heavenly Father; the place that shared with the
Temple for both: In the daytime thou were preaching in the Temple, in the
night praying in the mount of Olives. On this very hill was the bloody sweat of
thine Agony; now is it the mount of thy Triumph.

Whither then, O Blessed Jesu, whither did thou ascend? whither but home into
thine Heaven? From the mountain were thou taken up; and what Lazarus; when she
shook at thy Passion, and gave up her dead Saints: The Sea acknowledged thee,
in that it became a pavement to thy feet and (at thy command) to the feet of
thy Disciple; in that it became thy Treasury for thy Tribute-money: Hell found
and acknowledged thee, in that thou conqueredst all the powers of darkness;
even him that had the power of death, the Devil. It now only remained that, as
the Lord of the Air, thou should pass through all the regions of that
yielding element; and, as Lord of Heaven, thou should pass through all the
glorious contignations thereof; that so every knee might bow to thee both in
Heaven, and in Earth, and under the earth.

David, he had right to the Kingdom of Israel immediately upon his anointing;
but yet many an hard brunt did he pass ere he had the full possession of it in
his ascent to Hebron. I see now, O Blessed Jesu, I see where thou art; even
far above all Heavens, at the right hand of thy Father's Glory. This is the
far country into which the Nobleman went to receive for himself a Kingdom;
far off to us, to thee

How then, O Blessed Savior, how did thou ascend? Whiles they beheld, he was
taken up, and a cloud received him out of their sight. So wast thou taken up,
as that the act was thine own, the power of the act none but thine. Thou that
descendedst wast the same that ascendedst: as in thy descent there was no use
of any power or will but thine own, no more was there in thine ascent. Still
and ever were thou the Master of thine own acts. Thou laidst down thy own life,
no man took it from thee; Thou raisedst up thy self from Elias ascended to
Heaven, but he was fetched up in a Chariot of fire; that it might appear hence,
that man had need of other helps, who else could not of himself so much as lift
up himself to the Aerie Heaven, much less to the Empyreal. But thou, our
Redeemer, neededst no Chariot, no carriage of Angels: thou art the Author of
life and motion; they move in and from thee. As thou therefore did move thy
self upward, so, by the same Divine power, thou will raise us up to the
participation of thy Glory. These vile bodies shall be made like to thy
glorious

Elias had but one witness of his rapture into Heaven: S. Paul had none, no not
himself; for whether in the body or out of the body he knew not. Thou, O
Blessed Jesu, would neither have all eyes witnesses of thine Ascension, nor
yet too few. As after thy Resurrection thou did not set thy self upon the
pinnacle of the Temple, nor yet publicly show thy self within it, as making
thy presence too cheap; but made choice of those eyes whom thou would bless
with the sight of thee; thou were seen indeed of five hundred at once, but they
were Brethren: So in thine Ascension, thou did not carry Jerusalem
promiscuously forth with thee to see thy glorious departure, but only that
selected company of thy Disciples which had attended thee in thy life. Those
who immediately upon thine ascending returned to Jerusalem, were an hundred and
twenty persons: a competent number of witnesses, to verify that thy miraculous
and triumphant passage into thy Glory. Lo, those only were thought worthy to
behold thy Majestical Ascent, which had been partners with thee in thy
Humiliation. Still thou will have it thus with us,

O my Soul, be thou now (if ever) ravished with the contemplation of this
comfortable and blessed farewell of thy Savior. What a sight was this, how full
of joyful assurance, of spiritual consolation? Methinks I see it still with
their eyes, how thou my glorious Savior did leisurely and insensibly rise up
from thine Olivet, taking leave of thine acclaming Disciples now left below
thee, with gracious eyes, with Heavenly Benedictions. Methinks I see Eliah gave
assurance to his servant Elisha, that if he should behold him in that rapture,
his Masters Spirit should be doubled upon him; what an accession of the Spirit
of joy and confidence must needs be to thy happy Disciples in seeing thee thus
gradually rising up to thy Heaven? Oh how unwillingly did their intentive eyes
let go so Blessed an Object! How unwelcome was that Cloud that interposed it
self betwixt thee and them, and closing up it self, left only a glorious
splendor behind it, as the bright track of thine Ascension? Of old here below
the Glory of the Lord appeared in the Cloud;

But oh, what tongue of the highest Archangel of Heaven can express the welcome
of thee the King of Glory into those Blessed Regions of Immortality? Surely the
Empyreal Heaven never resounded with so much joy: God ascended with jubilation,
and the Lord with the sound of the Trumpet. It is not for us weak and finite
creatures, to wish to conceive those incomprehensible, spiritual, Divine
gratulations that the Glorious Trinity gave to the victorious and now-glorified
Humane nature. Certainly, if when he brought his onely-begotten Son into the
world, he said, Let all the Angels worship him; much more now that he ascends
on high, and has led captivity And if the Holy Angels did so caroll at his
Birth, in the very entrance into that estate of Humiliation and in firmity;
with what triumph did they receive him now returning from the perfect
achievement of man's Redemption? And if when his Type had vanquished Goliath,
and carried the head into Jerusalem, the damsels came forth to meet him with
dances and timbrels; how shall we think those Angelical Spirits triumphed in
meeting of the great Conqueror of Hell and Death? How did they sing, Lift up
your heads, ye gates, and be ye lift up, ye everlasting doors, and the King of
glory shall come in?

Surely, as he shall come, so he went: and behold he shall come with thousands
of his Holy Ones; thousand thousands ministered unto him, and ten thousand
thousands stood before him: From all whom methinks I hear that blessed
applause, Worthy is the Lamb that was killed, to receive power, and riches, and
wisdom, and strength, and honor, and glory, and praise: Praise, and honor,
And why do not thou, O my Soul, help to bear thy part with that happy Quire
of Heaven? Why art not thou rapt out of my bosom with an ecstasy of joy, to
see this Humane nature of ours exalted above all the Powers of Heaven, adored
of Angels, Archangels, Cherubin, Seraphim, and all those mighty and glorious
Spirits, and sitting there crowned with infinite Glory and Majesty?

Although little would it avail thee that our Nature is thus honored, if the
benefit of this Ascension did not reflect upon thee. How many are miserable
enough in themselves, notwithstanding the Glory of their humane nature Draw me,
and I shall run after thee. Even so, O Blessed Jesu, how ambitiously should we
follow thee with the paces of Love and Faith, and aspire toward thy Glory?
Thou that art the way, have made the way to thy self and us; Thou did humble
thy self, and becamest obedient to the death, even to the death of the Cross.
Therefore has God also highly exalted thee; and upon the same terms will not

Amongst those millions of Angels that attended this triumphant Ascension of
thine, O Savior, some are appointed to this lower station, to comfort thine
astonished Disciples, in the certain assurance of thy no-less glorious Return;
Two men stood by them in white apparel. They stood by them, they were not of
them; they seemed Men, they were Angels: Men for their familiarity; two, for
more certainty of testimony; in white, for the joy

The Angels formerly celebrated thy Nativity with Songs: but we do not find
they then appeared in white: thou were then to undergo much sorrow, many
conflicts; it was the vale of tears into which thou were come down. So soon as
thou were risen, the women saw an Angel in the form of a young man, clothed in
white; and now, so soon as thou art ascended, Two men clothed in white stand
by thy Disciples: thy task was now done, thy victory achieved, and nothing
remained but a Crown, which was now set upon thy head. Justly therefore were
those blessed Angels suited with the robes of light and joy. And why should our
garments be of any other color? why should those whom he has given thee, may
be with thee. To every bleeding Soul thou say still as thou did to Peter,
Whither I go thou can not follow me now, but thou shall follow me hereafter.
In assured hope of this Glory, why do I not rejoice, and beforehand walk in
white with thine Angels, that at the last I may walk with thee in white?

Little would the presence of these Angels have availed, if they had not been
Ye men of Galilee, why stand ye gazing into heaven? What a question was this?
Could any of those two hundred and forty eyes have power to turn themselves off
to any other Object then that Cloud, and that point of Heaven where they left
their ascended Savior? Surely every one of them were so fixed, that had not
the speech of these Angels called them off, there they had set up their rest
till the darkness

It was not the purpose of these Angels to check the long looks of these
faithful Disciples after their ascended Master; it was only a change of eyes
that they intended, of Carnal for Spiritual, of the eye of Sense for the eye of
Faith. This same Jesus which is taken up from you into heaven, shall so come in
like manner as ye have seen him go into Heaven. Look not after him, O ye weak
Disciples, as so departed that ye shall see him no more; if he be gone, yet he
is not lost; those Heavens that received him, shall restore him; neither can
those Blessed Mansions decrease his Glory. Ye have seen him

Ye cannot, O ye Blessed Spirits, wish other then well to mankind. How happy a
diversion of eyes and thoughts is this that you advise? If it be our sorrow to
part with our Savior, yet to part with him into Heaven it is our comfort and
felicity: if his absence could be grievous, his return shall be happy and
glorious.

Even so, Lord Jesus, come quickly. In the mean while it is not Heaven that can
keep thee from me, it is not earth that can keep me from thee. Raise thou up my
Soul to a life of Faith with thee: let me ever enjoy thy conversation, whiles I
exspect thy return.


Preached before His Majesty, upon His gracious Command, at His Court of
Whitehall, Jan. 29. 1625. and upon the same Command
Psalm. 68. verse. 19, 20. Blessed be the Lord, who loadeth us daily with
benefits, even the God of our Salvation. Selah.
He that is our God is the God of Salvation; and unto God the Lord belong

YEa, blessed be the Lord, who has added this unto the load of his other
Mercies to his unworthy servant, that the same Tongue which was called not long
since to chatter out our Public Mournings, in the Solemn Fast of this place,
is now employed in a Song of Praise; and the same Hand which was here lifted up
for Supplication, is now lift up in Thanksgiving. Ye that then accompanied me
with your tears and sighs, accompany me now, I beseech you, (in this happy
change of note and time) with your joyful Smiles and Acclamations to the GOD
that has

It is not more natural for the Sun, when it looks upon a moist and
wellfermented earth, to cause Vapors to ascend thence, then it is for Greatness
and Goodness, when they both meet together upon an honest heart, to draw up
holy desires of gratulation. The worth of the Agent does it not alone, without
a ^it disposition in the Subject. Let the Sun cast his strongest beams upon a
flint, a pumice, he fetches out no stream: Even so the Greatness and Goodness
of the Almighty beating upon a dry and hard heart, prevails nothing. Here all
three are happily met: In God, infinite Greatness, infinite Goodness; such
Greatness, that he is attended with thousand thousands receives Gifts even for
the rebellious: In David, a Gracious heart, that in a sweet sense of the great
Goodness of his God breaths out this Divine Epiphonema, Blessed be the Lord,
who loadeth us daily with benefits, even the God of our Salvation, etc.

Wherein, methinks, the sweet Singer of Israel seems to raise his note to the
emulation of the Quire of Heaven in the melody of their Allelujahs: yea,
David's Song, and your hearts and tongues for your own. And first, in this
Angelical strain your thoughts cannot but observe, without me, the Descant, and
the Ground. The Descant of Gratulation, Blessed be the Lord: wherein is both
Applause, and Excitation; an Applause given to God's Goodness, and an
Excitation of others to give that Applause. The Ground is a threefold respect.
Of what God is in himself, God and Lord: Of what God is and does to us, which
loadeth us daily with benefits: Of what he is both in himself The God of our
Salvation; which last, (like to some rich Stone) is set off with a dark foyl,
To God the Lord belong the issues from death. So in the first, for his own
sake, in the second, for our sakes, in the third, for his own and ours; as God,
as Lord, as a Benefactor, as a Savior and Deliverer, Blessed be the Lord.

It is not hard to observe that David's Allelujahs are more then his Hosannas;
his thanks more then his suits. Oft-times does he praise God when be begs
nothing: seldom ever does he beg that favor for which he does not raise up
his Soul to an anticipation of Thanks: neither is this any other then the
universal under-song of all his Heavenly Ditties, Blessed be the Lord. Praised
(as Barac to bless, is derived Berec the knee, which is bowed in blessing; and
the crier before Joseph proclaimed Abrech, calling for the honor of the knee
from all beholders, Genesis 41. 43. Every slight trivial acknowledgement of worth
is a Praise: Blessing is in a higher strain of gratitude, that carries the
whole sway of the heart with it in a kind of Divine rapture. Praise is in
matter of complement; Blessing of Devotion.

The Apostle's Rule is, that the less is blessed of the greater, Abraham of the
King of Salem; The Prophets charge is, that the greater should be blessed of
the yea the greatest of the least, God of man. This agrees well: Blessing is an
act that will bear reciprocation; God blesses man, and man blesses God. God
blesses man imperatively; man blesses God optatively: God blesses man in the
acts of Mercy; man blesses God in the notions, in the expressions of thanks:
God blesses man when he makes him good and happy; man blesses God when he
confesses how good, how gracious, how glorious he is; so as the blessing is
wholly taken up in agnition, in celebration: in the one we acknowledge the
Bounty of God to us; in the other we magnify him vocally, really, for that
Bounty.

Oh see then what high account God makes of the affections and actions of David
wonders that God should so vouchsafe to bless man: how much more must we needs
wonder at the mercy of God, that will vouchsafe to be blessed by man, a worm,
an atome, a nothing? Yet both S. James tells us that with the tongue we bless
God; and the Psalmist calls for it here as a service of dear acceptance,
Blessed be the Lord. Even we men live not (Cameleon-like) with the air of
thanks, nor feed ere the fatter with praises; how much less our Maker? O God,
we know well that whatsoever men or Angels do or do not, thou can not but
be infinitely Blessed in thy self; before ever any creature was, thou did
equally that humblest thy self to behold the things that are done in Heaven and
earth, humblest thy self also to accept the weak breath of our Praises, that
are sent up to thee from earth to Heaven. How should this encourage the vows,
the endeavors Quare verbis parcam? gratuita sunt, Why do we spare thanks that
cost us nothing? as that wise heathen. O give unto the Lord, ye mighty, give
unto the Lord the praises due to his name; offer to God the sacrifice of
thanksgiving: and still let the foot of our song be, Blessed be the Lord.

This for the Descant of gratulation; the Ground follows. His own sake has
reason to be first: God will be blessed both as Jah, and Adonai; the one Deist
would confess, that as a pure, simple, infinite, absolute being, God is to be
blessed: for if Being be good, and these two be convertible, Nature must needs
teach him, that an absolute and infinite Being must needs be absolutely and
infinitely good. But what do I blur the Glory of this Day with mention of those
Monsters, whose Idol is Nature, whose Religion is secondary Atheism, whose true
region is the lowest Hell? Those damned Ethnicks cannot, will not conceive of
God as he is, because they impiously sever his Essence from his inward
Relations. We Christians can never be so heavenly affected to God as we ought,
till we can rise to this pitch of Piety, to bless God for what he is

Neither is it for us only to bless him as an absolute God, but as a Sovereign
Lord too, whose Power has no more limit then his Essence; the great Moderator
of Heaven and earth, giving laws to his creature, overruling all things,
marshalling all events, crushing his enemies, maintaining his Church, adored by
Angels, trembled at by Devils. Behold here a Lord worthy to be blessed. We
honor, as we ought, your conspicuous Greatness, O ye eminent Potentates of the
earth: but, alas! what is this to the great Lord of Heaven? when Jerusalem, had
not only Hosanna in their

Neither must we bless God as a Sovereign Lord only, but (which is yet a more
feeling relation) as a munificent Benefactor, Who loadeth us daily with
benefits. Such is man's self-love, that no inward worth can so attract his
praises as outward beneficence. Whiles thou make much of thy self, every one
shall speak well of thee; how much more whiles thou make much of them? Here
God has met with us also. Not to perplex you with scanning the variety
David's, to abound; see here, I beseech you, a fourfold gradation of Divine
Bounty. First, here are Benefits. The word is not expressed in the Original,
but necessarily implied in the sense: for there are but three loads whereof man
is capable from God, Favors, Precepts, Punishments; the other two are out of
the road of Gratulation. When we might therefore have exspected Judgments,
behold hold Benefits. And those, secondly, not sparingly handfulled out to us,
but dealt loadeth with benefits. Whom, thirdly, does he load, but us? Not
worthy and well-deserving subjects, but us (...) Rebels. And lastly this he
does, not at one doal and no more, (as even churls rare Feasts use to be
plentiful,) but (...), successively, unweariedly, perpetually. One favor were
too much, here are Benefits; a sprinkling were too much, here is a load; once
were too often, here is daily largition. Cast your eyes therefore a little upon
this threefold exaggeration of Beneficence: the measure, a load of benefits;
the subject, unworthy us; the time, daily. Who daily loadeth us with benefits.

Where shall we begin to survey this vast load of Mercies? Were it no more but
that he has given us a world to live in, a life to enjoy, air to breath in,
Oh the height, and depth, and breadth of the rich mercies of our God! Oh the
boundless, toplesse, bottomless load of Divine benefits, whose immensity
reaches from the center of this earth to the unlimited extent of the very
Empyreal Heavens! Oh that men would praise the Lord for his goodness, and
declare the wonders that he does for the children of men.

These Mercies are great in themselves, our unworthiness does greaten them
more. To do good to the well-deserving were but retribution; He ladeth us, who
are no less rebellious to him then he is beneficial to us. Our straight and
shallow bounty picks out the worthiest and most capable Subject; the
Interrogate quis dignus, Ask who is worthy, that is, (as Hierom interprets it)
of the honor to receive such guests. Should God stand upon those terms with
us, what should become of us? See, and wonder, and be ashamed, O ye Christian
hearers. God loads us, and we load him; God loads us with Benefits, we load him
with our Sins. Behold, I am pressed under you, says God, as a cart is pressed
that is full of sheaves, Amos 2. 13. He should go away laden with our thanks,
with the presents of our duty; and we shamefully clog him with our continual
provocations. Can there be here any danger of self-sacrificing with Sejanus,
and not rather the just danger of us.

The overlong interruption of favors loses their thanks, and the best
benefits ladeth us daily: Every day, every minute renews his favors upon us;
Semper largitor, semper donator, as Hierome. To speak strictly, there is no
time present; nothing is present but an instant, and that can no more be called
Time then a prick can be called a Line: yet how swift soever the wings of Time
are, they cannot cut one instant, but they must carry with them a successive
renovation of God's gracious kindness to us.

This Sun of his does not rise once in an age, or once in a year, but every
minute since it was created rises to some parts of the earth, and every day to
us. Neither does he once hurl down upon our heads some violent drops Non mihi
sufficit, says that Father, It is not enough that he has given me once, if he
give me not always. To days Ague makes us forget yesterstaies health: Former
meals do not relieve our present hunger. This cottage of ours ruins straight,
if it be not new daubed every day, new repaired. The liberal care of our God
therefore tiles over one benefit with another, that it may not rain through.
And if he be so unwearied in his Favors, why are we weary of our Thanks? Our
bonds are renewed every day to our God; why not our payments? Not once in a
year, or moon, or ex plenitudine and lacrymis, as it is in the Original, Exodus
22. 29. of our plenty and tears, that is, (as Cajetan) of a dear or cheap year
must we return: more or less may not miss our thanks. We need daily, we beg
daily, ( Give us this day) we receive daily; why do we not daily retribute to
our God, and act as some read it, Blessed be the Lord daily, who loadeth us
with his benefits.

It is time now to turn your eyes to that mixed respect, that reaches both to
The God of our Salvation. The Vulgar's salutaria, following the Septuagint,
differs from our Salvation but as the Means from the End. With the Hebrews
Salvation is a wide word, comprising all the favors of God that may tend to
preservation; and therefore the Psalmist elsewhere extends this act both to man
and beast; and, as if he would comment upon himself, expounds (...) save, by
(...) prosper, Psalm. 118. 25. It is so dear a title of God, that the Prophet
cannot have enough of it; the interposition of a Selah cannot bar the
redoubling of it in my Text.

Every deliverance, every preservation fathers it self upon God: yet as the

Of this Salvation is he the God by Preordination, by Purchase, by Gift. By
Preordination, in that he has decreed it to us from eternity, (...), Romans 8.
30. By Purchase, in that he has bought it for us, and us to it, by the price
of his blood, (...), 1 Cor. 6. 20. By Gift, in that he has feoft us in it,
(...), The gift of God is eternal life, Romans 6. 23. Since therefore he decreed
the God of our Salvation. Who can, who dates arrogate to himself any
partnership in this great work? What power can dispose of the Souls final
condition, but the same that made it? Who can give Eternity, but he that only
has it? What but an infinite Merit can purchase an infinite Glory? Cursed be
that spirit that will offer to share with his Maker. Down with your Crowns, O
ye glorious Elders, at the foot of him that sits on the Throne, with a Non
nobis, Domine, Not unto us, O Lord, not unto Away with the proud incroachment
of the Merits of the best Saints, of Papal Largesses. Only our God is the God
of our Salvation.

How happy are we the while? All actions are according to the force of the
Agent: weak Causes produce feeble Effects, contingent casual, necessary
certain. Our Salvation therefore being the work of an infinitely-powerfull
cause, cannot be disappointed. Lo the beauty of Solomon's Al-chum; who has
resisted his will? When we look to our own fleshie hands, here is nothing but
discouragement; when we look to our spiritual enemies, here is nothing but
terror: but when we cast up our eyes to the Mighty God, here is nothing but
God is the God of our Salvation. Let those infernal Lions roar and ramp upon
us; let the gates of Hell do their worst; let the World be a cheater, our
Flesh a traitor, the Devil a tyrant; Faithful is he that has promised, who
will also do it. God is the God of our Salvation.

How much more then in these outward temporal occasions, when we have to do
with an arm of flesh? Do the enemies of the Church rage and snuff, Benhadad of
the Syrians shall come with his hempen collar to the King of Israel: The very
winds and waves shall undertake those Mahumetan or Marian powers that shall
rise up against the inheritance of the God of Salvation.

Salvation is rateable according to the danger from which we are delivered:
Since Death therefore is the utmost of all terribles, needs must it be the
highest improvement of Salvation, that to our God belong the issues from death.
Death has here a double latitude, of kind, of extent: The kind is either
temporal, or eternal; the extent reaches not only to the last complete act of
dissolution, Jesus, who conquered Death by dying, and triumphed over Hell by
suffering, and carries the keys both of death and hell, Revel. 1. 18? He is
the God, the Author and Finisher of our Salvation, to whom belong the issues
from death.

Look first at the temporary: he keeps it from us, he fetches us from it.

It is true, there is a Statutum est upon it, die we must; Death knocks equally
at the hatch of a Cottage and gate of a Palace: but our times are in God's
hand; the Lord of life has set us our period, whose Omnipotence so contrives
all to him alone belong the issues from death.

Go on then, blessed Sovereign, go on courageously in the ways of your God:
the invisible guard of Heaven shall secure your Royal head; the God of our
Salvation shall make you a third glorious instance to all posterities, that
unto him belong the issues from death.

Thus God keeps death from us: it is more comfort yet that he fetches us from
it. Even the best head must at last lie down in the dust, and sleep in death.
Oh vain cracks of valor! thou bragst thy self able to kill a man; a worm has
done it, a fly has done it. Every thing can find the way down unto death;
none but the Omnipotent can find the way up out of it: He finds,

Death might seize, it cannot hold: Gustavit, non deglutivit: It may nibble at
us, it shall not devour us. Behold the only Sovereign Antidote against the
sorrows, the frights of death. Who can fear to lay himself down and take a nap
in the bed of death, when his heart is assured that he shall awake glorious in
the morning of his resurrection? Certainly it is only our infidelity that makes
death fearful. Rejoice not over me, O my last enemy; though I fall, I shall
rise again. O Death, where is thy sting? O Grave, where is thy victory?

Cast ye one glance of your eyes upon the second and eternal death; the Ex
inferno nulla redemptio is as true as if it were Canonical. Father Abraham
tells the damned Glutton in the Parable, there is (...) a great gulf, that bars
all return. Those black gates of Hell are barred without by the irreversible
Decree of the Almighty.

Those bold Fabulists therefore, whose impious Legends have devised Trajan
fetched thence by the prayers of Gregory, and Falconella by Tecla's, suspending
the final sentence upon a secundum praesentem injustitiam, take a course to
cast themselves into that pit whence they have presumptuously feigned the
deliverance of others.



Wherein let me first bless the God of our Salvation, that has put it into
the heart of his chosen Servant to set up an Altar in this sacred
threshing-floor, and to offer up this days Sacrifice to his name, for the stay
of our late mortal contagion. How well it becomes our Gideon to be personally
exemplary, as in the beating of this Earthen pitcher in the first public act
of Humiliation, so in the lighting of this Torch of public joy, and sounding
the Trumpet of a bless the Lord, the God of our Salvation, that loadeth us
daily with benefits; the God to whom belong the issues of death. Let us bless
him in his infinite Essence and Power; bless him in his unbounded and just
Sovereignty; bless him in his mavelous Beneficence, large, continual,
undeserved; bless him in his Preservations; bless him in his Deliverances. We
may but touch at the two last.

How is our Earth ready to sink under the load of his Mercies? What Nation
under Heaven has not envied and wondered at our Blessings? I do not carry
Elizabeth, the Pope and the then-King of Spain were casting Lots for the Crown,
and palpably plotting for their severally-designed Successors, as appears in
the public posthume Letters of Cardinal D' Ossat, a witness beyond exception.
Three several Rome for the defeating of the Title and Succession of our late
Sovereign of dear and blessed memory, and his Royal Issue. Yet in spite of
Rome and Hell, God brought him in, and set him peaceably upon this just Throne
of his Forefathers; and may he perpetuate it to the fruit of those loins till
world and time shall be no more. Amen.

If I must follow the times, let me rather balk that hellish Sulphur-mine then
not search it; and yet who can look at that any otherwise then the Jews do at
the Rainbow, with horror and astonishment? What do I tell you of our long
Peace, our full Plenty, our wholesome Laws, our easefull Government, Spain,
Religion out of the dust. For the one, what a winter was there in all good
hearts when our Sun was gone so far Southward? how cheerful a Spring in his
return? For the other, who saw not how Religion began (during those
purposely-protracted Treaties) to droop and languish, her friends to sigh, her
enemies to insult, daring to brave us with challenges, to threaten our ruin?
The Lord looked down from Heaven, and visited this poor Vine of his, and has
shaken off these Caterpillars from her then-wasting leaves; now we live, and it
flourishes.

These would have been great favors of God even to the best Nation, but more
to us, who have answered Mercies with Rebellions. O God, if proud disguises, if
gluttonous pamperings, if drunken healths, if wanton dalliances, if bloody
oaths, if merciless oppressions may earn Blessings from thee, too many of us
have supererogated. Woe is me, these are the measures thou have had from too
many hands. That thou should therefore enlarge thy bounty to an unworthy,
unkind, disobedient generation, it is more then we can wonder at; and we could
almost be ready to say with Peter, Lord, depart from us, for we are sinful men.

Yet the wise Justice of the Almighty meant not to cocker us up with mere Ecce
in pace amaritudo amarissima; the comfort of our Peace was allayed with the
bitterness of death. He saw that in this common Plethorie it was fit for us to
bleed; he saw us Eeles that would not be caught, but when the waters were
troubled: He therefore sent his destroying Angel abroad, who laid about him on
all sides. What slaughter, what lamentation, what horror was there in the
streets of our mother City? More then twenty thousand Families run from their
houses, as if those had been on fire over their heads, and seek shelter in Zoar
and the mountains. Some of them are overtaken by the pursuer, London are the
Red Cross and the Sword; what house almost wanted these? Here was the Red Cross
upon the door, the Sword Lord, have mercy upon us.

What could we hear but alarms of death? what could we see but Trophies of
death? Here was nothing but groaning and crying, and dying and burying: Carts
were the Biers, wide pits were the Graves, men's clothes were their Coffins, and
the very Exequies of friends were murderous. The carcasses of the dead might
say, with the sons of the Prophets, Behold the place where we lie is too
straight for us. New Dormitories are bought for the dead, and furnished;
neither might the corpses be allowed to lie single in their earthen beds, but
are piled up like fagots in a stack, for the society of their future
Resurrection. thousands fell at his side, and ten thousands at his right hand.
And if we take all together, (the mother and the daughters) surely the number
was not much short of David's, though his time were shorter. It is not without
reason that from the Hebrew word (...) which signifies the Plague, is derived
(...) which signifies a Desert: Certainly the Plague turns the most populous
City into a Desert. Oh the woeful desolation of this place! It was almost come
to Herba tegit Trojam. And if some infrequent passenger crossed our streets, it
was not without his medicated Posie at his nose, and his Zedoary or Angelica in
his mouth. Every room seemed a Pesthouse, every sent mortal. Here should he
meet one pale ghost Golgotha to all beholders; and this proud Queen of our
British Cities sat in the dust of her compassion, howling in the rags of her
sackcloth, not mourning more then mourned for, pitied no less then forsaken;
when the God of our Salvation looked down upon her deep afflictions, and
miraculously proved unto us, that unto him belong the issues from death.

Ninive-like Humiliation. What pithie, what passionate Prayers were injoined to
his disconsolate Church? With what holy eagerness did we devour those Fasts?
How well were we pleased with the austerity of that pious Penitence? What loud
cries did beat on all sides at the gates of Heaven? and with what
inexspectable, unconceivable mercy were they answered? How suddenly were those
many thousands brought down to one poor unity, not a number? Other evils were
wont to come on horseback, to go away on foot; this mortality did not post but
fly away. Methought, like unto the great ice, it sunk at once. Only so many
are stricken as may hold us awful, and so few as may

Oh how soon is our Fasting and mourning turned into Laughter and joy? How
boldly do we now throng into this House of God, and fearlesly mix our breaths
in a common Devotion? This is the Lord's doing, and it is marvailous in our
eyes. O thou that hear the prayer, to thee shall all flesh come. And let all
flesh come to thee with the voice of Praise and Thanksgiving.

It might have been just with thee, O God, to have swept us away in the common
destruction: what are we better then our brethren? Thou have let us live that
we may praise thee. It might have been just with thee to have in the midst of
judgment thou have remembered mercy: Our sins have not made thee forget to be
gracious, nor have shut up thy loving kindness in displeasure. Thou have
wounded us, and thou have healed us again; thou have delivered us, and been
merciful to our sins for thy names sake.

Oh that we could duly praise thy Name in the great Congregation! Oh that

In the mean time let us call all our fellow creatures to help us bear a part
in the Praise of our God: Let the Heavens, the Stars, the winds, the waters,
the dews, the frosts, the nights, the days; let the Earth and Sea, the
mountains, wells, trees, fishes, fouls, beasts; let men, let Saints, let Angels
bless the Lord, praise him, and magnify him for ever. Blessed, blessed for
ever be the Lord, who loadeth us daily with benefits; even the God of our
Salvation, to


Esaias 5. verse. 4, 5.
And now go to, I will tell you what I will do to my Vineyard; I will take
away the hedge thereof.

IT is a piece of a Song (for so it is called Verse. 1.) Alas! what should Songs
do to an heavy heart, Prove. 25. 20. or Music in a day of Mourning? Howling
and lamentation is fitter for this occasion. Surely, as we do sometimes weep
for joy; so do we sing also for sorrow. Thus also does Esay's Lacrymae; fit for
that Sheminith, gravis symphonia, 1 Chronicles. 15^2
as Tremelius turns it, which some sad Psalms were set unto. Psalm. 6. 1.
Both the Ditty and the Tune are doleful. There are in it three passionate
strains; Psalm. 12. 1.
Favors, Wrongs, Revenge; Blessings, Sins, Judgments. Favors and Blessings
from God to Israel; Sins (which are the highest Wrongs) from Israel to God;
Judgments, by way of Revenge from God to Israel. And each of those follow upon
other. God begins with Favors to his people, they answer him with their Sins,
he replies upon them with Judgments: and all of these are in their height. The
Favors of God are such, as he asks, What could be more? The Sins are
aggravated by those Favors: what worse then wild and disappointment? And the
Judgments must be aggravated to the proportion of their Sins: what worse then
the Hedge taken away, the Wall broken, the Vineyard trodden down, and eaten up?
Let us follow the steps of God and his Prophet in all these; and when we have
passed these in Israel, let us seek to them at home. What should I need to
crave attention? the business is both Gods and our own.

God and we begin with Favors; Favors not mean and ordinary, not expressed in
a right-down affirmation, but in an expostulatory and self-convincing Question,
What could have been done more to my Vineyard that I have not done to it? Every
word is a new obligation. That Israel is a Vineyard is no

Israel is no vast Desert, no wild Forest, no moorish Fen, no barren Heath, no
thornie Thicket, but a Vineyard; a Soil of use and fruit. Look where you will
in God's Book, ye shall never find any lively member of Gods Church compared
to any but a fruitful tree: Not to a tall Cypress, the Emblem of
unprofitable Israel: that is a Vineyard; there is place for none but Vines; and
true Vines are fruitful. He that abides in me brings forth much fruit,
says our Savior, John 15. 5.

And of all fruits, what is comparable to that of the Vine? Let the Vine it
self speak in Jonathan's Parable, Jud. 9. 13. Should I leave my Wine which
cheareth God and man? How is this? God cheared with Wine? It is an high
Hyperbole; yet seconded by the God of truth: I will drink no more of the fruit
of this Vine, till I drink it new with you in my Father's kingdom, Mat. 26. 29.
It must needs be an excellent liquor which is used to resemble the joys of
Heaven. Yea, the Blood of the Son of God, that celestial Nectar, which tomorrow
Vitis vera, the true Vine; this is his juice.

Alas! would God we had not too much cause to complain of the pleasure of this
fruit: Religion, Reason, Humanity savor not to the palate of many in
comparison of it. Wine is a mocker, says Solomon. How many thousands does it
daily cheat of their Substance, of their Patrimony, of their Health, of their
Wit, of their Sense, of their Life, of their Soul? Oh that we had the grace to
be sensible of our own scorn and danger. But this is the honor of the fruit,
and the shame of the man: the excess is not more our Sin, then the delicacy is
the praise of the Grape. For sweetness of verdure then all plants will yield
Israel. Their Persons are (...), Romans 12. 1. Their Love is better then wine,
Cant. 4. 10. Their Alms are (...) a sweetsmelling savor, Philip. 4. 18. Their
Prayers as evening Incense, of a most fragrant composition: and for the rest of
their words, the roof of their mouth is like the best Wine, Cant. 7. 9.
Acceptance has wont to be the encouragement of forwardness. Honorable and
beloved, how should this hearten us in our holy stations, in our conscionable
actions? Whiles we continue Vines, it is not in the power of our imperfections
to lose our thanks. The delicatest Grape cannot be so relishsome to the palate
of man, as our poor weak obediences Thou have ravished my heart, my Sister, my
Spouse, thou have ravished my heart, says Christ of his Church, Cant. 4. 9.
The Vine is a noble plant, but a feeble and tender one. Other trees grow up
alone out of the strength of their own sap; this grovels on the ground, and
rots if it have not an Elm to prop it: like as Man, the best creature, is in
his birth most helpless, and would presently die without outward succors.
Such is the Israel of God; the worthiest piece of Gods Creation, yet of it self
impotent to good: here is no growth, no life but from that Divine Hand. Without
me ye can do nothing. They are no Vines that can stand alone: Those proud
spirits, as they have no need of God, so God has no interest in them. His
Israel

As a Vineyard, so God's Vineyard. The Church shall be sure not to be
Masterlesse. There is much wast ground that has no owner; our Globe can tell
us of a great part of the World that has no name but Incognita, not known
whether it have any inhabitant: but a Vineyard was never without a Possessor;
Noah the true Janus planted one, there was no news of any. Come into some wild
Indian Forest all furnished with goodly Trees, you know not whether ever man
were there; God's hand we are sure has been there, perhaps not man's: but if
you come into a well-dressed Vineyard, where you see the Hillocks equally
swelling, the Stakes pitched in a just height and distance, and the Vines
handsomely pruned, now it is easy to say (as the Philosopher did when he found
Figures) Here has been a man, yea a good husband. There is an universal
Providence of God over the World; but there is a special eye and hand of God
over his Church. In this God challenges a peculiar interest: that is his (as
we heard worthily this day) in a double right, of Confederation, of Israel is
my Son, yea my firstborn, says God to Pharaoh. Thou have brought a Vine out
of Egypt, thou have cast out the Heathen and planted it, says the Psalmist,
80. 8.

Oh the blasphemous diffidence of foolish men! Can we, dare we impute ill
husbandry to the God of Heaven? Has God a Vineyard, and shall he not tend it?
shall he not mightily protect it? Go on, ye Foxes, ye little Foxes, to spoil
the tender Grapes; go on, ye Boars of the Wood, to waste this Vineyard, and ye
wild beasts of the field to devour it: our sins, our sins have given this
scope to your violence and our calamity: But ye shall once know that this
Vineyard has an Owner, even the mighty God of Jacob; every cluster that
return, we beseech thee, O God of Hosts: look down from Heaven, and visit this
Vine, and the Vineyard which thy right hand has planted, and the branch that
thou made strong for thy self.

Ye have seen Israel a Vineyard, and God's Vineyard: now cast your eyes upon
the favors that God has done to his Vineyard Israel; such as that God appeals
to their own hearts for Judges, What could have been done more to my Vineyard
that I have not done? Mark, I beseech you: He does not say, What could have
been done more then has been done? but, more, that I have not done? the Vine,
and his Father the Husbandman, here makes Israel the Vine, and himself the
Husbandman. Nothing is, nothing can be done to his Church that passes not his
hands. My Father still works, says he, and I work. This work, this care
knows no end, no limits. Many a good Husband over-tasks himself, and undertakes
more then his eye can overlook, or his hand sway; and therefore is fain to
trust to the management of others; and it speeds thereafter. But the owner of
this Vineyard is every where, and works wherever he is: nothing can pass his
eye, every thing must pass his hand. This is the difference betwixt Solomon's
Vineyard and his that is greater then Solomon: Solomon lets out his Vineyard to
Keepers, Cant. 8. 11. Christ keeps his in his own hand. He uses indeed the
help of men, but as Tools rather then as Agents; he works by them, they cannot
work but by him. Are any of you Great ones Benefactors to his Church? (a rare
style I confess in these not dative but ablative times) ye are but as the
hands of the Sub-almoners of Heaven: God gives by you. Are any great Potentates
of the earth secret or open persecutors of his Church? Ashur is the rod of my
wrath, says God: they are but as God's pruning^ Knives, to make his Vine bleed
out her superfluous juice: God cuts by them. He is the Author of both, men are
the instruments. To him must we return the praise What could I have done more
that I have not done? as our former Translation reads it, with a reference to
his absolute power; according whereto we know that he can do more then he
does, more then he will do: but, (...), Quid faciendum? What could have been
done more, in respect of the exigence of the occasion? Would God set his
Omnipotent Power upon it, we know he could Israel, he could make all Israel
Saints, he could have made Devils men, men Angels. But God uses not to proceed
according to the rule of an absolute Omnipotency, but according to the
Oeconomie of his most holy, most wise, most just Decrees; whereby he has
chalked out unto men those ways and helps of Salvation, which he sees fit for
the attainment of that End^ these are they wherein he has not been failing to
his Israel.

Of these he says, What could have been done more that I have not done? See
what notice God takes and what reckonings he keeps of all the good that he does
to any Church or people; he files up all his Blessings: he is bountiful, not
profuse; open-handed, but not so as that his largess makes him respectlesse
Fortune, blindfolded; or, like an Almoner in a throng, he knows not to whom; he
notes both the man and the favor. In our gifts, our left hand may not know
what our right hand does; because our weakness is subject to a proud
self-conceit, and a mis-opinion of too much obligation in the Receiver: but he
whose infinite Goodness is not liable to any danger of those infirmities which
follow our sinful nature, sets all his Mercies on the score, and will not balk
one of the least. He that could say to Israel, I took thee from among the Pots,
and to David, I took thee from following the Ewes great with Lamb: do ye not
think he still says to his Anointed, I brought you from weak in the Cradle, to
strong in the Ferula to a Pastoral staff; to another, I brought thee from the
Bench of Justice to the seat of Honor; to another, I delivered thee from the
Sword of thine enemy, from the bed of thy Sickness, from the walls of thy
restraint, from the Powder-mine; I made thee Noble, thee Rich, thee Potent; I
made this Country populous, that City wealthy, this Kingdom strong? Be sure,
if we be forgetful, God will not misreckon his own Mercies.

Our favors are (like our selves) poor and impotent, worthy to be scribled

Honorable and beloved, why do not we keep one part of the Tally as he keeps
the other, that so we may hold even reckonings with our munificent God? How
should we meditate continually of the gracious and wonderful works of his
bounty, knowing that God has so done his great works, that they ought to be
had in perpetual memory? How should we gratefully recount his favors, and call
the world about us with the sweet Singer of Israel, Come hither, and hear, all
ye that fear God, and I will tell you what he has done Psalm. 66. 16?

O God, it is a just quarrel that thou have against us for our unthankfulness;
the familiarity of thy Blessings has drawn them into neglect. Alas! thy
Mercies have not been sown, but buried in us: we have been gulphs to swallow
them, not Repositories to keep them. How worthily do we smart, because we
forget? How justly are thy Judgments seen upon us, because thy Mercies are not?
Psalm. 3^. 23.
Away with this wretched ingratitude. Oh love the Lord, all ye his Saints; for
the Lord preserves the faithful, and plentifully rewards the proud-doer.

What then is it, O Lord, what is it that thou have done, then which more

Vineyard but upon a very fruitful Hill? A double advantage, an Hill, and very
fruitful. Hills are held best for Vines, the declivity whereof gives much
strength to the reflection; so as the most generous Vines are noted to grow upon
the Hills. Yet there are barren hills; nothing but heaps of unprofitable sands:
this is a fruitful hill, yea superlatively fruitful, the horn of the son of
oil, as it is in the Original; that is, by an Hebraisme, an hill eminently fat
and fertile.

But what would it avail the ground to be fruitful, if it be unfenced, that
the wild Boar or the Foxes may spoil it? as good no fruit as to no purpose. an
Hedge, and, lest that should not be sufficient, a Wall.

But to what purpose should it be fenced with stones without, if it be choked
with stones within? As therefore, Thirdly, the stones were laid together in the
Wall for defense; so they were gathered off from the soil to avoid offense.

But to what purpose is the fruitfulness, fencing, stoning, if the ground
yield a plentiful crop of Briers, Thistles, Weeds? Injussa virescunt gramina,
ill weeds grow fast. Here is therefore, Fourthly, the main favor to this
Vineyard, that the owner has planted it with choicest Vines. It is the praise
of the Earth, to foster any Plant that is put into the bosom of it; it is the
chief care

Now all this provision of soil, fencing, stoning, planting, were nothing
without a continual oversight: the wise Owner therefore, Fifthly, builds, not a
Bower, not a Banqueting House for pleasure, but a Tower for survay; and that
not in some obscure Angle, but in the midst of the Vineyard, that he may view
the carriage of his Laborers, and descrie the first danger of the annoiances.

Lastly, to what purpose were all this choice, fencing, stoning, planting,
oversight; if when the Grapes are grown to their due ripeness, they should not
be improved to any useful Vintage? This must be done by the Wine Press: set
up. And now what can remain, but the setting under of Vessels to receive the
comfortable juice that shall flow from these so-well-husbanded clusters?

All this has God done for his Vineyard; what could have been done more?

Not to dwell in the mists of Allegories; God himself has read this riddle.
The Vineyard of the Lord of Hoasts is the house of Israel: Verse. 7.
And the house of Israel is his Church. The Church is God's Hill, conspicuous
for his wonderful favors (though not ever) even to the eye of the world; not
an hidden unheeded Valley. A fruitful Hill, not by Nature, but by Grace.
Nature was like it self in it, in the world: God has taken it in from the
barren Downs, and

Thus chosen he has fenced it about with the hedge of Discipline, with the
wall of his Almighty Protection.

Thus fenced he has ordained, by just Censures to pick out of it those stones
of offense which might hinder their holy proceedings, and keep down the growth
of the Vines; whether scandalous Men, false Opinions, or evil Occurrences.

Thus cleared, he has planted it with the choicest Vines of gracious motions,
of wholesome Doctrines.

Thus planted, he has overlooked it from the Watchtower of Heaven, in a
careful inspection upon their ways, in a provident care of their preservation.

What could have been done more that I have not done?

Certainly it is not in the power of any humane apprehension to conceive

These are the favors wherewith God has begun to Israel; now turn your ears
to the answer that Israel returns to God: see the Mercies of a good God
requited with the Rebellions of a wicked people. Wherefore, when I looked that
it should bring forth Grapes, brought it forth wild Grapes? A woeful issue of
such Blessings; wild Grapes, and that with the disappointment of God's
exspectation.

Two usual faults does God find with any vicious Tree; No fruit, Ill fruit:
the one in omission of good, the other in commission of sin. The Fig Tree in
the way is cursed for the one, Israel here taxed for the other.

What then are these wild, or, as Pagnine renders it, Uvae putidae, rotten
Grapes? God has not left it to our guess, but has plainly told us v. 7. in
an I looked for (...) judgment, and behold (...) a wound or scab, that is,
oppression: I looked for (...) Justice, and behold (...) clamor. Generally,
whatever disposition or act uncultured Nature does or would produce of it self,
that is a wild grape: Particularly, the Holy Ghost has here instanced in
several sins so styled; a self-greatning oppression, verse. 8. a settled
drunkenness and wilful debauchednesse, verse. 11. a determined resolution of
wicked courses, verse. 18. a nicknaming of good and evil, verse. 20. a
self-conceitednesse in their own ways, verse. 21. Bribery in their Judges, v.
23. Pride in their women, chapter 3. v. 16. obdured Infidelity in all, chapter 6. v.
10. Wild grapes indeed, such as corrupted Nature yields without a correction,
without an alteration: In me, that is, in my flesh, there dwells no good,
faith the chosen Vessel. Wild grapes for the harshnesse and sowrnesse of the
taste, for the odiousness of their verdure to the palate of the Almighty. The
best fruits of Nature are but glorious Sins, the worst are horrible
Abominations. Such are the wild grapes of Israel: which yet could not have
been so ill, if God had not been put into an exspectation of better, and if
this exspectation had not been crossed with disappointment: Wherefore, when I
looked that it should bring forth Grapes, brought it forth wild Grapes? Had
Woe be to thee Chorazin, woe be to thee Bethsaida. Son of man, what shall be
done to the Vine of all trees? Woe be to thee, O Vineyard of Israel: I will
take away the hedge thereof, and it shall be eaten up; I will break down the
wall, and it shall be trodden down.

My speech should now descend to the woeful vengeance that God threats to and
inflicts upon his Israel: A fit Theme for so heavy a day. The Hedge of good
Government and wholesome Laws shall be trodden down; the Wall of Divine
Protection shall be broken: the Beasts of the field and forest shall be let in,
the Grapes devoured, the Trees bruised and trampled upon, the roots Israel, to
the scorn and hissing of all Nations, to the just terror of the World; whiles
that dearling people which was once the example of God's Mercy, is now become
the fearful spectacle of his Fury and Revenge, surviving only in some few
abhorred and despised Vagabonds, to show that there was once such a Nation. But
the time and occasion call my thoughts homeward, and invite me rather to spend
the rest of my hour in paralleling Israel's Blessings, Sins, threats of
Judgment with our own: Wherein our Interest shall be a sufficient motive of our
attention. Gather you together therefore, gather you, O Nation not worthy to be
loved, and cast back your eyes upon those incomparable favors wherewith God
has provoked Israel. How has he chosen us out of all the Earth, and divided
us from the rest of the World, that we might be a singular pattern and strange
wonder of his Bounty? What should I speak of the wholesome temper of our Clime;
the rich provision of all useful Commodities? so as we cannot say only as
Sanchez did, I have moisture enough within my own shell; but as David did,
Poculum exuberans, My cup runs over, to the supply of our neighbor Nations.
What speak I of the populousness of our Cities, defencednesse of our shoars?
These are nothing to that Heavenly treasure of the Gospel which makes us the
Vineyard of God, and that sweet Peace which gives us the happy fruition of
Albion do we call it? nay (as he rightly) Polyolbion, richly blessed. O God,
what, where is the Nation that can emulate us in these favors?

How has he fenced us about with the hedge of good Discipline, of wholesome
Laws, of gracious Government; with the brazen wall of his Almighty and
miraculous protection? Never Land had more exquisite Rules of Justice, whether
mute or speaking. He has not left us to the mercy of a rude Anarchie, or a
Tyrannical violence, but has regulated us by Laws of our own asking, and
swai'd us by the just Scepters of moderate Princes.

Never Land had more convincing proofs of an Omnipotent Tuition whether Purim.
Besides the many particularities of our deliverances filed up by the pen of one
of our worthy Prelates.

How has he given us means to remove the rubs of our growth, and to gather
away the stones of false Doctrine, of Heretical pravitie, of mischievous
machinations that might hold down his truth? And, which is the head of all, how
has he brought our Vine out of the Egypt of Popish Superstition, and planted
it? In plain terms, how has he made us a truely-orthodox Church, eminent for
purity of Doctrine, for the grave and reverend solemnity of true Sacraments,
for the due form of Government, for the pious and Religious England, Many
Daughters have done virtuously, Prove. 31. 29.
but thou excellest them all.

How has the vigilant eye of his Providence out of his tower of Heaven watched
over this Island for good? Not an hellish Pionier could mine under ground, but
he espied him; not a dark Lantern could offer to deceive midnight, but he
descries it; not a Plot, not a purpose of evil could look out, but

Lastly, how infinitely has his loving care labored to bring us to good? What
sweet opportunities and encouragements has he given us of a fruitful
obedience? And when his Fatherly counsels would not work with us, how has he
scruzed us in the Wine Press of his Afflictions; one while with a raging
Pestilence, another while with the insolence and prevalence of Enemies; one

Lay now all these together, And what could have been done more for our
Vineyard, O God, that thou have not done? Look about you, Honorable and
Christian hearers, and see whether God has done thus with any Nation. Oh
never, never was any people so bound to a God. Other neighboring Regions would
think themselves happy in one drop of those Blessings which have poured down
thick upon us. Alas! they are in a vaporous and marish vale, whiles we Palatine
Vine, late inoculated with a precious bud of our Royal Stem; that Vine not long
since rich in goodly clusters, now the insultation of Boars and prey of Foxes!
Oh for those poor distressed Christians in France, Bohemia, that groan now
under the tyrannous yoke of Antichristian oppression! How glad would they be of
the crumbs of our Feasts? how rich would they esteem themselves with the very
gleanings of our plentiful crop of Prosperity? How do they look up at us as
even now militantly-triumphant, whiles they are miserably wallowing in dust and
blood; and wonder to see the Sunshine upon our Hill, whiles they are drenched
with storm and tempest in the Valley?

What are we, O God, what are we, that thou should be thus rich in thy
Mercies to us, whiles thou art so severe in thy Judgments unto them? It is too
much, Lord, it is too much that thou have done for so sinful and rebellious a

Cast now your eyes aside a little, and after the view of God's Favors, see
some little glimpse of our requital. Say then, say, O Nation not worthy to be
beloved, what fruit have ye returned to your beneficent God? Sin is impudent;
but let me challenge the impudent forehead of sin it self. Are they not sour
and wild Grapes that we have yielded? Are we less deep in the Sins of Israel
then in Israel's Blessings? Complaints, I know, are unpleasing, however just;
Jer. 15. 10.
but now not more unpleasing then necessary. Woe is me, my mother, that thou
have born me a man of contention. I must cry out in this sad day of the sins of
my people.

The searchers of Canaan, when they came to the brook of Eshcol, they cut down
a branch with a cluster of Grapes, and carried it on a staff between two, to
show Israel the fruit of the Land, Numb. 13. 23. Give me leave, in the search
of our Israel, to present your eyes with some of the wild Grapes that grow
there on every hedge: And what if they be the very same that grew in this
degenerated Vineyard of Israel?

Where we meet first with Oppression; a Lordly sin, and that challenges
precedencie, as being commonly incident to none but the Great, (though a poor
Oppressor (as he is unkindly, so he) is a monster of mercilesness.) Oh the loud
shrieks and clamours of this crying sin! What grinding of faces, what



Drunkenness is the next; not so odious in the weakness of it, as in the
strength. Oh woeful glory! strong to drink. Woe is me, how is the World turned
Beast? What bouzing and quaffing and whiffing and healthing is there on every
bench? and what reeling and staggering in our streets? What drinking by the
Yard, the Die, the Douzen? what forcing of pledges? what quarrels for measure
and form? How is that become an excuse of villainy, which any villainy might
rather excuse, I was drunk? How has this torrent, yea

Let no Popish Eaves-dropper now smile to think what advantage I give by so
deep a censure of our own Profession. Alas! these sins know no difference of
Religions. Would God they themselves were not rather more deep in these

But where am I? How easy is it for a man to lose himself in the sins of the
time? It is not for me to have my habitation in these black Tents; let me pass
through them running. Where can a man cast his eye not to see that which may
vex his Soul?

Here Bribery and Corruption in the seats of Judicature, there Perjuries at the
Bar; here Partiality and unjust Connivency in Magistrates, there disorder in
those that should be Teachers; here Sacrilege in Patrons, there Simoniacal

Yet alas! were these the sins of Ignorance, of Infirmity, they might be more
worthy of pity then hatred. But oh the high hand of our presumptuous offenses!
We draw iniquity with the strings of vanity up to the head, up to the sit in
darkness and the shadow of death, as too many Pagan and Popish Regions do,
these works of darkness would be less intolerable: but now that the beams of
the glorious Gospel have shined thus long, thus bright in our faces, Oh me,
what can we plead against our own confusion? O Lord, where shall we appear,
when thy very Mercies aggravate our Sins and thy Judgments?

How should thou expect fruit from a Vineyard so chosen, so husbanded? and
woe worth our wretchedness that have thus repai'd thee. Be confounded in thy
self, O my Soul, be confounded, to see these deplored retributions. Are these
grapes for a God? Do ye thus requite the Lord, O foolish people and Has he for
this made us the mirror of his Mercies to all the World, that we should so
shamefully turn his graces into wantonness? Are these the fruits of his
Choice, his Fencing, his Reforming, his Planting, his Watchtower, his
Winepresse? O Lord, the great and dreadful God, keeping the covenants and
mercies to them that love thee; we have sinned and committed iniquity, and have
rebelled by departing from thy precepts and from thy Judgments. O Lord,
righteousness belongs to thee, but unto us confusion of faces, as at this We
know, we acknowledge how just it may be with thee to pull up our Hedges, to
break down our Wall, to root up our Vine, to destroy and depopulate our Nation,
to make us the scorn and Proverb of all Generations. But, O our God, Dan. 9.
16, 19.
Let thine anger and thy fury be turned away from thy Jerusalem, thy holy
mountain. O Lord hear, O Lord forgive, O Lord hearken and do. Defer not for
thine own sake, O our God: for thy City and thy people are called by thy Name.

But, alas! what speak I of not deferring to a God of mercy, who is more
forward to give then we to crave, and more loath to strike then we to smart,
and when he must strike complains, Why will ye die, O house of Israel? Let turn
unto him with all our heart, with Fasting and with weeping and with mourning.
Oh that we could truly and effectually abandon all those abominable Sins that
have stirred up the Anger of our God against us; and in this our day, this day
of our solemn Humiliation, renew the Vows of our holy and conscionable
obedience. Lord God, it must be thou Convert us unto thee, and we shall be
converted. Lord, hear our Prayers, and regard our tears, and reform our Lives,
and remove thy Plagues, and renew thy loving countenance, and continue and add
to thine old mercies. Lord, affect us with thy favors, humble us for our sins,
terrify us with thy Judgments; that so thou may hold on thy favors, and
forgive our sins, and remove thy Judgments; even for the Son of thy Love Jesus
Christ the righteous. To whom, etc.

Postscript.
SInce it seemed good to that Great Court to call this poor Sermon (amongst
others of greater worth) into the public light; I have thus submitted to their
pleasure.

This work preceded (some little) in time that which it now follows in place;
not without good reason. Authority sends forth that; this Will: and my Will
has learned ever to give place to Authority. Besides my desire to save the
labor of Transcriptions, I found it not unfit the World should see what
Preparative was given for so stirring a Potion: neither can there be so much
need in these languishing times of any discourse, as that which serves to
quicken our Mortification; wherein I so much rejoice to have so happily met
with those Reverend Bishops, who led the way, and followed me, in this Holy
Service. The God of Heaven make all our endeavors

A SERMON PREACHED To his Majesty, on the Sunday before the Fast,
By the B. of EXCESTER.
I am crucified with Christ. Nevertheless I live, etc.
HE that was once tossed in the confluence of two Seas, Acts 27. 41. was once
no less straightened in his resolutions betwixt life and death, Phil. 1. 23.
Neither does my Text argue him in any other case here. As there he knew not
whether he should choose, so here he knew not whether he had. I am crucified,
there he is dead; yet I live, there yet not I, there he lives not; but Christ
in me, there he more then lives. This holy correction makes my Text full of
wonders, full of sacred riddles. 1. The living God is dead upon the Cross,
Christ crucified, 2. S. Paul, who died by the sword, dies on the Cross. 3. S.
Paul, who was not Paul till after Christ's death, is yet crucified with Christ.
4. S. Paul thus crucified yet lives. 5. S. Paul lives not himself whiles he
lives. 6. Christ, who is crucified, lives in Paul, who was crucified with him.

See then here both a Lent and an Easter: A Lent of Mortification, I am
crucified with Christ; an Easter of Resurrection and life, I live, yet not I,
but Christ lives in me. The Lent of my Text will be sufficient (as proper) for
this season; Christ crucified, S. Paul crucified, S. Paul crucified with
Christ. In all which your Honorable and Christian patience shall as much
shorten my way, as my care shall shorten the way to your patience.

Christ's Cross is the first lesson of our infancy, worthy to be our last, and
all. The great Doctor of the Gentiles affected not to fly any higher pitch.
Grande crucis Sacramentum, as Ambrose. This is the greatest wonder that ever
earth or heaven yielded. 1. Tim.3.16.
God incarnate was (...) but God suffering and dying was so much more, as Death
is more penal then Birth. The Godhead of man and the blood of God are two such
Miracles, as the Angels of

Ruffin tells us, that among the Sacred Characters of the Egyptians the Cross
was anciently one, which was said to signify eternal life; hence their
Learneder sort were converted to and confirmed in the Faith. Surely we know
that in God's Hieroglyphics Eternal Life is both represented and exhibited to
us by the Cross. That the Cross of Christ was made of the Tree of Life, a
slip whereof the Angels gave to Adam's son out of Paradise, is but a Jewish
Legend; Galatine may believe it, not we: but that it is made the Tree of Life
to all believers, we are sure. This is the only scale of Heaven; never man
ascended thither but by it. By this Christ himself climbed up to his own glory.
Dominus regnavit a ligno, as Tertullian translates that of the Psalm. Father,
glorify thy name; that is, says he, Duc me ad crucem, Lift me up to the tree,
not of my shame, but of my triumph. Behold, we preach Christ crucified (says
Saint Paul) to the Jews a stumbling block, to the Greeks foolishness; but to
them which are called, Christ the power of God, and the wisdom of God, 1 Cor.
1. 23. Foolish men! that stumble at power, and deride wisdom. Upbraid us now,
ye fond Jews and Pagans, with a Crucified Savior: It is our glory, it is our
happiness, in loco pudoris, in our foreheads; and if we had any place more
high, more conspicuous, more honorable, there we would advance it. O blessed
Jesu, when thou art thus lifted up on thy Cross, thou drawest all hearts unto
thee: there thou leadest captivity captive, and give gifts unto men. Ye are
deceived, O ye blind Jews and Painims, ye are deceived; it is not a Gibbet, it
is a Throne of Honor to which our Savior is raised; a Throne of such Honor,
as to which Heaven and earth and hell do, and must vail. The Sun hides his
awful head, the Calvary of thy Passion, then on the Tabor of thy
Transsiguration, or the Olivet of thine Ascension: and cannot so effectuously
bless thee for Pater, clarifica, Father, glorify me, as for, My God, my God,
why have thou forsaken me? since it is no news for God to be great and glorious;
but for the Eternal and ever-living God to be abased, Hosannas of men, all
Allellujahs of Saints and Angels come short of this Majestic humiliation.
Blessing, honor, glory and power be unto him that sits upon the throne, and to
the Lamb for ever and ever, Revel. 5. 13. And ye (Honorable and beloved) as
ever ye hope to make music in Heaven, learn to tune your harps to the note and
ditty of these Heavenly Elders. Rejoice in this, and rejoice in nothing but
this Cross: not in your transitory Honors, Titles, Treasures, which will at
the last leave you inconsolately sorrowful; the world is crucified to you, and
you to the world. Oh clip and embrace this precious Cross with both your arms,
and say with that blessed Martyr, Amor meus crucifixus est, My Love is
crucified. Those that have searched into the monuments of Jerusalem, write that
our Savior was crucified with his face to the West: which howsoever
spightfully meant of the Jews, (as not allowing him worthy to look on the Holy
City and Temple) yet was not without a mystery. Oculi ejus super Gentes
recipient, His eyes look to the Gentiles, etc. says the Psalmist. As Christ
therefore on his Cross looked toward us sinners of the Gentiles; so let us
look up to him. Let our eyes be lift up to this Brazen Serpent, for the cure of
the deadly stings Nazarites that pass by, out of this dead Lion seek and find
the true honey of unspeakable and endless comfort.

And ye great Masters of Israel, whose lips profess to preserve knowledge,
leave all curious and needlesie disquisitions, and with that Divine and
extatical Doctor of the Gentiles, care only to know, to preach, Christ and him
crucified.

But this, though the sum of the Gospel, is not the main drift of my Text: I
may not dwell in it, though I am loath to part with so sweet a meditation. From
Christ crucified turn your eyes to Paul crucified: you have read him dying by
the Sword; hear him dying by the Cross, and see his moral, spiritual,

Our Apostle is two men, Saul and Paul; the old man and the new: in respect of
the Old man he is crucified, and dead to the law of sin, so as that sin is dead
in him; neither is it otherwise with every regenerate. Sin has a body, as well
as the man has; Who shall deliver me from this body of death? Romans 7. 24. a
body that has lims and parts; Mortify your earthly members, says our
Apostle, Colos. 3. 5. Not the lims of our humane body, which are made of earth,
(so should we be hosles naturae, as Bernard) but the sinful lims that are made
of corruption, Fornication, uncleanness, inordinate affection, etc. The (...)
of sin is wicked devices; the heart of sin, wicked desires; the hands and
(...), I am crucified. S. Paul speaks not this singularly of himself, but in
the person of the Renewed: sin does not, cannot live a vital and vigorous life
in the Regenerate. Wherefore then (say you) was the Apostles complaint, (...),
etc. Wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from this body of death?
Mark, I beseech you; it was the body of sin, not the life of sin; a body of
death, not the life of that body: or if this body had yet some life, it was
such a life as is left in the

Sin and Grace cannot more stand together in their strength, then life and
death. In remiss degrees all contraries may be lodged together under one roof.
S. Paul swears that he dies daily, yet he lives: so the best man sins hourly,
Esau would be carrying away a Blessing: no man is willing to sit out. Ye shall
have strong drinkers, as Esaias calls them, Esaias 5. 22. neighing stallions of
lust, as Jeremy calls them, Jer. 5. 8. mighty hunters in oppression, as Nimrod,
Genesis 10. 9. rotten talkers, Ephesians. 4. 29. which yet will be challenging as deep
a share in Grace as the conscionablest. Alas! how many millions do miserably
delude themselves with a mere pretense of Christianity? Aliter vivunt, aliter
loquuntur, as he said of the Philosophers. Vain Hypocrites! they must know that
every Christian is a crucified man. How are they dead to their fins, that walk
in their sins? how are death of body and Soul. If ye will needs do so, walk
on, ye falsly-dead, God is not mocked: Ye must either kill, or die. Kill your
sins, or else they will be sure to kill your Souls: apprehend, arraign, condemn
them, fasten them to the tree of shame, and, if they be not dead already, break
their legs and arms, disable them to all offensive actions as was done to the
Thieves in the Gospel; so shall you say with our Blessed Apostle, I am
crucified.

Neither is it thus only in matter of notorious crime and gross wickedness,
but thus it must be in the universal carriage of our lives, and the whole
Julian could cast upon Constantine, that (...) led him to (...) delicacie to
intemperance, the very same do they cast upon us. They tell us of their strict
Lents, frequent Fastings, Canonical hours, sharp Penances, their bashful
shrists, their painful scourgings, their solitary Cells, their woolward and
barefoot walks, their hard and tedious pilgrimages; whiles we (they say) deny
nothing to back or belly, fare full, lie soft, sit warm, and make a wanton of
the Quis requisivit? Baal's Priests did more then they, yet were never the
holier. But for our selves, in the fear of God see that we do not justify
their crimination. Whiles they are in one extreme, placing all Religion in the
outside, in Touch not, taste not, handle not: let us not be in the other, not
regarding the external acts of due Humiliation. It is true that it is more ease
to afflict the body then to humble the Soul; a dram of remorse is more then an
ounce of pain. O God, if whippings and hair-cloaths and watchings would
satisfy thy displeasure, who would not sacrifice the The sacrifice of God is a
broken spirit; a Yet it is as true, that it is more easy to counterfeit
mortification of spirit then humiliation of body; there is pain in the one,
none in the other. He that cares not therefore to pull down his body, will much
less care to humble his Soul; and he that spares not to act meet and due
penalties upon the Flesh, gives more color of the Souls humiliation. Dear
Christians, it is not for us to stand upon niggardly terms with our Maker: he
will have both; he that made both, will have us crucified in both. The old man
does not lie in a lim or faculty; but is diffused through the whole extent of
Body and Soul, and must be crucified in all that it is. (...), says the chosen
vessel, I beat down my body; my Solomon's sense. Think not that ye can climb up
to Heaven with full panches, reaking ever of Indian smoke and the surfeits of
your gluttonous crammings and quaffings. Oh easy and pleasant way to Glory!
from our bed to our glass, from our glass to our board, from our dinner to
our pipe, from our pipe Dives: He fared sumptuously every day; he made neither
Lents nor Embers; (...), as he said, every day was gaudie and festival, in rich
suits, in dainty morsels, and full draughts; Intus mulso, foris oleo, Wine
within, oil without, as he said: now all the world for a drop, and it is too
little. Vae saturis, woc to the full, says our Savior: but even Nature it
self could abominate bis de die saturum, one that is full twice a day. One of
the sins of our Sodom is fullness of bread. What is the remedy? It is an old
word, that Hunger cures the diseases of Gluttony. Oh that my words could
prevail so far with you, Honorable and He is not worthy of the name of a man
that would be a whole day in pleasure: what and we always? In fasting often,
says S. Paul: what and we never? I fast twice a week, says the Pharisee: and
we Christians when? I speak not of Popish mock-fasts, in change, not in
forbearance; in change of courser cates of the land for the curious dainties of
the water, of the flesh of beasts for the flesh of fish, of untoothsome morsels
for sorbitiunculoe delicatoe, as Hierome calls them. Let me never feast, if
this be fasting. I speak of a true and serious maceration of our bodies, Paul,
neither if we eat not are we the better, neither if we eat are we the worse, 1
Cor. 8. 8.) yet in the effect it is; singular Sanctitatis aratrum, as that
Father terms it. The plow bears no Corn, but it makes way for it; it opens the
soil, it tears up the briers, and turns up the furrows: Thus does holy
Abstinence, it chastises the flesh, it lightens the spirit, it disheartens our
vicious dispositions, it quickens our Devotion. Away with all factious
Combinations. Every man is master of his own maw: Fast at home and spare not;
leave public exercises of this kind to the command of Sovereign powers. Blow
says Joel, 2. 15. Surely this trumpet is for none but Royal breath. And now
(that what I meant for a suit, may be turned to a just gratulation) how do we
bless the God of Heaven, that has put it into the heart of his Anointed to
set this sacred Trumpet to his lips? Never was it, never can it be more
seasonable then now: now that we are fallen into a war of Religion, now that
our friends and Allies groan either under miscarriage or danger, now that our
distressed neighbors implore our help in blow the Trumpet in Zion, to
sanctify a Fast, to call a solemn Assembly. The miraculous success that God
gave to your Majesty and your Kingdom in this holy exercise, may well
encourage an happy iteration. How did the public breath of our Fasting-prayers
cleanse the air before them? How did that noisome Pestilence vanish suddenly
away, as that which could not stand before our powerful Humiliations? If we be
not straightened in our own bowels, Jer. 6. 26.
the hand of our God is not shortened. O Daughter Fast and pray, and prosper.
And in the mean time, for us, let us not think it enough to forbear a meal, or
to hang down our heads like a bulrush for a day; but let us break the bands of
wickedness, and in a true contrition of Soul vow and perform better Obedience.
Oh then, as we care to avert the heavy Judgments of God from our selves and our
Land, as we desire to traduce the Gospel with peace to our posterity, let each
man humble one; let each man rend his heart with sorrow for his own sins and
the sins of his people: shortly, let every man ransack his own Soul and life,
and offer an holy violence to all those sinful corruptions which have stirred
up the God of I am crucified.

Ye have seen Christ crucified, S. Paul crucified; see now both crucified
together, I am crucified with Christ. It is but a cold word this, I am
crucified; it is the company that quickens it. He that is the Life, gives it
life, and makes both the word and act glorious; I am crucified with Christ.

Alas! there is many a one crucified, but not with Christ. The Covetous, the
Ambitious man is self-crucified; he plaits a crown of thorny cares for his own
head; he pierces his hands and feet with toilsome and painful undertakings; he
drencheth himself with the vinegar and gall of discontentments; he Christ.

The Envious man is crucified by his own thoughts; he needs no other gibbet
then another man's prosperity; because another person or counsel is preferred
to his, he leaps to hell in his own halter. This man is crucified; but it is
Achitophel's Cross, not Christ's.

The Desperate man is crucified with his own distrust; he pierces his own
heart with a deep, irremediable, unmitigable, killing sorrow; he paies his
wrong to God's Justice with a greater wrong to his Mercy, and leaps out of an
inward Hell of remorse to the bottomless pit of damnation. This man is Judas's
Cross, not Christ's.

The Superstitious man is professedly mortifi^d. The answer of that Eremite in
the story is famous, Why do thou destroy thy body? Because it would destroy
me. He uses his body therefore not as a servant, but a slave, not as a slave,
but an enemy. He lies upon thorns, with the Pharisee; little ease is his
lodging, with Simeon the Anachoret; the stone is his pillow, with Jacob; the
tears his food, with exiled David; he lanceth his flesh, with the Baalites; he
digs his grave with his nails; his meals are hunger, his breathings sighs, his
linen hair-cloath, lined and laced with cords and wires; lastly, he is his own
willing tormentor, and hopes to merit Heaven by self-murder. This man is Christ.

The Felon, the Traitor is justly crucified, the vengeance of the Law will not
let him live. The Jesuitical Incendiary, that cares only to warm himself by the
fires of States and Kingdoms, cries out of his suffering. The world is too
little for the noise of our Cruelty, their Patience; whiles it judges of our
Jesus, they shall not have his Society. This is not Christ's Cross, it is the
cross of Barabbas, or the two malefactors, (...), Mark 15. 7.

All these and many more are crucified, but not, as S. Paul was here, with
Christ. How with Christ? In partnership, in person. In Partnership of the
suffering; every particularity of Christ's Crucifixion is re-acted in us. Christ
is the model, we the metal; the metal takes such form as the model gives it: so
are we spread upon the Cross of Christ in an unanswerable extension of all
parts, Francis: This is no news; S. Paul and every believing Christian has
both the lathes and wounds and transfixions of his Jesus wrought upon him. The
Crown of thorns pierces his head, when his sinful conceits are mortified; his
lips are drencht with gall and vinegar, when tharp and severe restraints are
given to his tongue; his hands and feet are nailed, when he is by the power of
God's Spirit disabled to the wonted courses of sin; his body is stripped, when
all color and pretenses are taken away from him; shortly, his heart is
pierced, when the lifeblood of his formerly-reigning corruptions is let out.
He is no true Christian

Woe is me, how many fashionable ones are not so much as pained with their
sins? It is no trouble to them to blaspheme, oppress, debauch: yea rather it is
a death to them to think of parting with their dear Corruptions: the world has
bewitched their love. That which Erasmus says of Paris, that after a man has
acquainted himself with the odious sent of it ( hospitibus magis ac magis
adlubescit) it grows into his liking more and more; is too true of the world
and sensual minds. Alas! they rather crucify Christ again, then are crucified
with Christ. Woe to them that ever they were: for being not dead with Christ,
they are not dead in Christ; and being not dead in Christ, they cannot for the
wages of sin is death; death in their person, if not in their surety.
Honorable and beloved, let us not think it safe for us to rest in this
miserable and deadly condition. As ye love your Souls, give no sleep to your
eyes nor peace to your hearts, till ye find the sensible effects of the Death
and Passion of Christ your Savior within you, mortifying all your corrupt
affections and sinful actions, that ye may truly say with S. Paul, I am
crucified with Christ.

Six several times do we find that Christ shed blood; in his Circumcision, in
his Agony, in his Crowning, in his Scourging, in his Affixion, in his
Transfixion. The instrument of the first was the Knife; of the second,
vehemence of

In his Circumcision, when we draw blood of our selves by cutting off the
foreskin of our filthy (if pleasing) Corruptions, Col. 2. 11. In his Agony,
when we are deeply affected with the sense of God's displeasure for sin, and
terrified with the frowns of an angry Father. In his Crowning with thorns, when
we smart and bleed with reproaches for the name of Christ; when that which the
world counts Honor, is a pain to us for his sake; when our guilty thoughts
punish us, and wound our restless heads with the sad remembrance of our sins.
In Canticles) or our Consciences with deep sorrow.

In all these we bleed with Christ, and all these (save the first only) belong
to without bloodshed there was no remission, Heb. 9. 22. so it is still and
ever in the New. If Christ had not thus bled for us, no remission; if we do not
thus bleed with Christ, no remission.

There is no benefit where is no partnership. If Christ therefore bled with his
Agony, with his Thorns, with his Whips, with his Nails, with his Spear, in so
many thousand passages as Tradition is bold to define; and we never bleed,
either with the Agony of our sorrow for sin, or the Thorns of holy cares for
displeasure, or the Scourges of severe Christian rigor, or the Nails of holy
constraint, or the Spear of deep remorse; how do we, how can we for shame say,
crucified with Christ?

Divine S. Austin, Epist. 120. ad Honoratum.
in his Epistle or Book rather to Honoratus, gives us all the dimensions of the
Cross of Christ. The Latitude he makes in the transverse; this (says he)
pertains to good Works, because on this his hands were stretched. The Length
was from the ground to the transverse; this is attributed to his longanimity
and persistance, for on that his Body was stayed and fixed. The Height was in
the head of the Cross above the transverse; signifying the exspectation of
supernal things. The Depth of it was in that part which was pitched below within
the earth; importing the profoundness of his free Grace, which is the ground of
all his beneficence.

In all these must we have our part with Christ. In the Transverse of his
Cross, by the ready extension of our hands to all good Works of Piety, Justice,
Charity: in the Arrectary or beam of his Cross, by continuance and
uninterrupted perseverance in good: in the Head of his Cross, by an high
elevated hope, and looking for of Glory: in the Foot of his Cross, by a lively
and firm Faith, fastening our Souls upon the affiance of his free Grace and
Mercy. And thus shall we be crucified with Christ upon his own Cross.

Yet lastly we must go further then this, from his Cross to his Person. So did
S. Paul, and every Believer, die with Christ, that he died in Christ: For as in
the first Adam we all lived, and sinned; so in the second all Believers died,

The first Adam brought in death to all mankind, but at last actually died for
none but himself; the second Adam died for mankind, and brought life to all
Believers. See thou thy Savior therefore hanging upon the Cross? all mankind
hangs there with him; as a Knight or Burgess of Parliament voices his whole
Borough or Country. What speak I of this? The arms and legs take the same lot
with the head: Every Believer is a lim of that body; how can he therefore but
die with him, and in him? That real union then which is betwixt Christ and us,
makes the Cross and Passion of Christ ours; so as the thorns pierced our heads,
the scourages blooded our backs, the nails wounded our hands Who shall lay any
thing to the charge of Gods elect? It is God that justifies? Who shall condemn?
It is Christ that died; yea rather that is risen To thee, O Blessed Jesu,
together with thy Coeternal Father and Holy Spirit, three Persons in one
infinite and incomprehensible Deity, be all Praise, Honor and Glory now and
for ever. Amen.

ONE OF THE SERMONS Preached to the LORDS OF THE High Court of Parliament, In
their solemn Fast held on Ashwednesday, Feb. 18. And, by their Appointment,
published, by the B. of EXCESTER.
Acts 2. 37, 38, 40. 37. Now when they heard this, they were pricked in their
hearts, and said to Peter and the rest of the Apostles, Men and brethren, what
shall we do?

38. Then said Peter unto them, Repent and be baptized, etc.

40. And with many other words did he testify, and exhort them, saying, Save
your selves from this untoward generation.


WHO knows not that Simon Peter was a Fisher? That was his trade both by Sea
and Land: if we may not rather say, that as Simon he was a Fisherman, but as
Peter he was a Fisher of men: he that called him so, made him so. And surely
his first draught of Fishes which, as Simon, he made at our Saviors Command,
might well be a trade Type of the first draught of men which, as Peter, he made
in this place: for as then the nets were ready to crack, and the ship to sink
with store; so here, when he threw forth his first drag-net of Heavenly
Doctrine and reproof, three thousand Souls were drawn up at once. This Text was
as the sacred Cord that drew the Net together, and pulled up this wondrous
shoal of Converts to God. It is the sum of Saint Peter's Sermon, if not at a
Fast, yet at a general Humiliation, which is more and better; for wherefore
fast we but to be humbled? and if we could be duly humbled without fasting, it
would please God a thousand times better then to fast formally without true
Humiliation. Indeed for the time, this was a Feast, the Feast of Pentecost; but
for the estate of these Jews it was dies cinerum, a day of contrition, a day of
deep hunger and thirst after righteousness; Men and Brethren, what shall we
do? Neither doubt I to say that the Festivity of the season added not a little
to their Humiliation: like as we are never so apt to take cold as upon a sweat;
and that wind is ever the keenest, which blows cold out of a warm coast. No
day could be more afflictive then an Ashwednesday that should light upon
Messiah, and their bloody measure offered to that Lord of Life: and now
Compuncti cordibus, they were pricked in their hearts. Wise Solomon says, The
words of the wise are like goads and nails: here they were so. Goads, for they
were compuncti pricked: yea, but the goad could not go so deep, that passes
but the skin; they were Nails, driven into the very heart of the Auditors, up
to the head; the great Master of the Assembly, the divine Apostle had set them
home, they were pricked in their hearts. Never were words better bestowed. It
is an happy blood-letting that saves the life; this did so here. We look to the
figne commonly in Phlebotomy: it is a sign of our idle and ignorant
Superstition. S. Peter here saw the sign to be in the Heart, and he strikes
happily; Compuncti cordibus, they were pricked in their hearts, and said, Men
and brethren, what shall we do?

Oh what sweet Music was this to the Apostles ear? I dare say none but Men and
Brethren, what shall we do? Oh when, when shall our eyes be blessed with so
happy a prospect? How long shall we thunder out God's fearful judgments
against wilful sinners? How long shall we threaten the flames of Hell to those
impious wretches, who crucify again to themselves the Lord of life, ere we can
wring a sigh or a tear from the rocks of their Peter did of his other fishing,
Master, we have travailed all the night, and have caught nothing. Surely it may
well go for night with us, whiles we labor and prevail not. Nothing? not a
Soul caught? Lord, what is become of the success of thy Gospel? Who has
believed our report, or to whom is the arm of the Lord revealed? O God, thou
art ever thy self, thy Truth is eternal, Hell is where it was; if we be less
worthy then thy first Messengers, yet what excuse is this to the besotted
world, that through obduredness and infidelity it will needs perish? No man
will so much as say with the Jews, What have I done? or with Saint Peter's
Auditors, What shall I do? Oh foolish sinners! shall ye live here always? care
Men and Brethren, what shall we do? This from the general view of the
occasion; we descend to a little more particularity.

Luke, the beloved Physician, describes Saint Peter's proceeding here much
after his own trade, as of a true spiritual Physician; who finding his Country
men compuncti cordibus. Where we might show you the incision, the vein, the
lancet, the orifice, the anguish of the stroke. compuncti, they were pricked.
The Vein, in their hearts. Smile not now, ye Physicians, if any hear me this
day, as if I had passed a solecisme, in telling you these men were pricked in
the vein of the heart; talk you of your Cephalica and the rest, and tell us of
another cistern from whence these tubuli sanguinis are derived: I tell you
again (with an addition of more incongruities still) that God and his Divine
Physician do still let blood in the median vein of the heart. The Lancet is the
keen and cutting reproof of their late barbarous Crucifixion of their Holy and
most innocent and benign Savior. The Orifice is the ear, when they heard
this. Whatever the local distance be of these parts, spiritually the ear is the
very surface of Men and brethren, what shall we do?

There is none of these which my speech might not well take up, if not as an
house to dwell in, yet as an Inn to rest and lodge in: But I will not so much
as bait here; only we make this a through-fare to those other sacred
prescriptions of saving remedies, which are three in number. The first is,
Evacuation of sins by a speedy repentance, (...). The second, the sovereign
Bath or Laver of Regeneration, Baptism. The third, dietetical and
prophylactical Save your selves from this untoward generation. But ere I pitch
upon this most useful and seasonable particularity, let me offer to your
thoughts the speedy application of these gracious remedies. The blessed Apostle
does not let his Patients languish under his hand in the heats and colds of
hopes and fears; but so soon as ever the word is out of their mouths, Men and
brethren, what shall we do? he presently administreth these sovereign
receipts, Repent, be baptized, save your selves. In acute diseases wise
Physicians will lose no time; only delay makes some distempers deadly. It is
not for us to let good motions freeze under our fingers. How many gleeds have
serving the time; that is, observing it: not for conformity to it when it is
naught, (fie on that baseness: no, let the declining time come to us upon true
and constant grounds, let not us stoop to it in the terms of the servile
yieldance of Optatus his Donatists, Omnia pro tempore, nihil pro veritate) not,
I say, for conformity to it, but for advantage of it. The Emblem teaches us to
take occasion by the fore-lock, else we catch too late. The Israelites must go
forth and gather their Manna so soon as it is fallen; if they stay but till the
Sun have raught his noon-point, Peter had learnt this of his Master; when the
shoal was ready, Christ says, Laxate retia, Luke 5. 14. what should the net
do now in the ship? When the fish was caught, Christ says, Draw up again;
what should the net do now in the Sea? What should I advise you, Reverend
Fathers and Brethren, ( the Princes of our Israel, as the Doctors are called,
Judges 5. 9.) to speak a word in season? what should I presume to put into your
hands these apples of gold with pictures of silver? What should I persuade you
(to these (...)) to wing your words with speed, when the necessity of
endangered Souls calls for them? Oh let us row hard whiles the tide of Grace
serves; when we see a large door and effectual opened unto us, let us in
season, out of season; and carefully watch for the best advantages of
prevailing: and when the iron of men's hearts is softened by the fire of God's
Spirit, and made flexible by a meet humiliation, delay not to strike, and make
a gracious impression, as S. Peter did here, Repent, be baptized; Save your
selves from this untoward generation.

Now to the main and all-sufficient Recipe for these feeling distempers; Save
your selves. This is the very extracted quintessence of Saint Peter's long
Sermon, in which alone is included and united the sovereign virtue of
Repentance, of Baptism, of whatsoever help to a converting Soul: so as I shall
not need to speak explicitly of them, whiles I enlarge my self to the treating
of this universal remedy, Save your selves from this untoward generation.

Would you think that Saint Luke has given me the division of this, whether
Text, or Sermon of Saint Peter? Ye shall not find the like otherwhere; here it
is clearly so: (...) he testifies, he exhorts. He testifies, what he thinks of
the times; he exhorts, or beseeches, (as the Syriack turns it) Austin well,
refer to this one Divine sentence. The parts whereof then are, in S. Luke's
division, Peter's reprehensory Attestation, and his Obtestation. His
reprehensory Attestation to the common wickedness, (...) His Obtestation of
their freedom and indemnity, (...), Save your selves.

To begin with the former. What is a generation? what is an untoward
generation? Either word has some little mist about it. The very word
generation has begot multiplicity of senses: without all perplexedness of
search, we will single out the properly-intended for this place. As times, so
we in them, are in continual passage; every thing is in motion: the Heavens do
not more Suidas under-reckons it by seven years; but the ordinary rate is an
hundred. It is a clear Text, Genesis 15. 16. But in the fourth generation they
shall come hither again: when is that? (to the shame of Galatinus, who clouds
it with the fancy of the four kinds or manners of man's existence) Moses himself
interprets it of four hundred years, verse. 13. Uncertain; so Solomon, One
generation passes, another comes. The very term implies transitoriness. It is
with men as with Rasps, one stalk is growing, another grown up, a third
withered, and all upon one root: Or as Orimur, morimur. After the acting of a
short part upon this stage, ye must withdraw for ever. Make no other account
but, with Abraham, to serve your generation, and away. Ye can never more fitly
hear of your Mortality then now that ye are under that roof which covers the
monuments of your dead and forgotten Progenitors.

What is an untoward generation? (...); It is promiscuously turned froward,
perverse, crooked. The opposition to (...) is, (...). All is as one, what ever
swerves from the right is crooked. The Law is a right line; and what credendis,
or agendis, in matter of Faith, or matter of Fact. The first, when we do not
believe or do what we ought; the second, when we misbelieve or mis-live.

The first is an untowardness of Omission, the second of Commission. The
omissive untowardness shall lead the way; and that first, in matter of Belief.
This is it whereof our Savior spoke to the two Disciples in their Emmaus, O
fools and slow of heart to believe! whereof the Proto-martyr Stephen to his
auditors, (...). The stiff neck, the uncircumcised ear, the fat heart, the
blinded eye, the obdurate soul ( quae nec movetur precibus, nec cedit minis, as
Bernard) are wont to be the expressions of this untowardness.

Messiah, most justly are they in this first kind (...), a froward generation.
And so is any Nation under Heaven that follows them in the steps of their
peevish incredulity, more or less shutting their eyes upon the glorious light
of Saving Truth; like that sullen Tree in the Indies, which, they say, closes
it self against the beams of the rising Sun, and opens only The time of that
ignorance God regarded not, but now, says Saint Paul to the Athenians, Act.
17. 30. If I had not come and spoken to them, they should have had no sin,
says our Savior, Joh. 15. 22. Those that walk in Cimmerian, in Egyptian
darkness, it is neither shame nor wonder if they either err or stumble; but
for a man to stumble the Sun in the face, or to grope by the walls at noon in
the midst of Goshen, is so much more hateful as the occaecation is more willing.

The fear of God is not before their eyes. God looked to see if there were any
that looked after God, and behold there was none. The righteous is perished
from the children of men. Behold the tears of the oppressed, and none
comforted them. The Prophets are full of these querulous notes, there is not a
page of them free; yea hardly shall ye meet with one line of theirs, which does
not brand their Israel with this defect of Holiness.

From the negative, cast your eyes upon the positive crookedness or
untowardness. an untoward generation. That which makes a man crooked or
untoward makes a Generation so; for what is a Generation but No, not one, says
the Psalmist, by way of servent aggravation: All seek their own, says the
Apostle; all, in comparison. But never times were so overgrown with iniquity,
as that God has not left himself some gracious remainders: when the thievish
Chaldaeans and Sabaeans have done their worst, there shall be a messenger, to
say, I am escaped. Never was harvest or vintage so curiously inned, that some
gleanings were not left in the field; some clusters among the leaves. But these
few if they may give a blessing to the the degrees of evil. 3. The warrant of
the free censure of ill-deserving Times

It were happy if the injury of a wicked man could be confined to his own
bosom, that he only should fare the worse for his sins; (...), etc. as the
Greek rule runs; if it were but self-doe, self-have, as the old word is. But as
his lewdness is (like some odious sent) diffused through the whole room where
he is; so it reaches to earth and Heaven, yea to the very times and
generations upon which he is unhappily fallen. Doubtless there were many worthy
Saints in these very times of St. Peter; there was the Blessed Mother of
Christ, the paragon of Sanctity; there was a beavy of those devout and holy
dames that attended the Doctrine, bewailed the Jerusalem, Acts 1. 15. the five
hundred brethren that saw Christ after his glorious and victorious
Resurrection; besides those many thousands that believed through their word in
all the parts of Judaea and Galilee: yet for all that, the Apostle brands this
with (...), an untoward generation.

It is not in the virtue of a few to drown the wickedness of the more. If we
come into a field that has some good plenty of corn, and some store of weeds,
though it be red with poppy, or yellow with carlock, or blew with Lot cannot
make his City to be no Sodom. Wickedness as it helps to corrupt, so to shame a
very Age. The Orator Tertullus, when he would plead against Paul, says, We
have found this man (...) a pestilence, Act. 24. 5. Foolish Tertullus! that
mistook the Antidote for the Poison, the remedy for the disease. But had S.
Paul been such as thy misprision supposed him, he had been such as thy unjust
crimination the plague of thy people. A wicked man is a perfect contagion; he
infects the world with sin, the very Age with infamy. Malus vir, malum
publicum, is not a more old then true word. Are there then in any Nation under
Heaven lewd miscreants, whose hearts are Atheists, whose tongues are
^lasphemers, whose bodies are a Stews, whose lips are nothing but a Factory of
close villainy? let them please themselves, and let others (if ye will) applaud
them for their beneficial contributions to the public affairs, in the style of
bonus civis, a good Patriot, as men whose parts may be useful to the
weal-publick; yet, I say, such men are no better then the bane of their
Country, the stain of their Age. Turpis est pars, quae suo toti non convenit,
Gerson well; it is an ill member for which all the body fares the worse. Hear
this then, ye glorious sinners, that brag of your good affections and faithful
services to your dear Country: your hearts, your heads, your purses, your hands
(ye say) are pressed for the public good; yea, but are your hearts Godless? are
your lives filthy? let me tell you, your sins do more disservice to your
Nation then your selves are worth: All your valor, wisdom, subsidiary helps
cannot counterpoise one dram of your wickedness. Talk what ye will: Sin is a
shame to any people, says wise Solomon; ye bring both a curse and a dishonor
upon your Nation. It may thank you for the hateful style of (...) a froward
generation. This for our first Observation.

Never Generation was so straight, as not to be distorted with some powerful
sins; but there are differences and degrees in this distortion. Even in the
very first world were Giants, as Moses tells us, Genesis 6. 4. which as our
Mythologists add, did (...), bid battle to Heaven.

Babel-builders: after them followed beastly Sodomites. It were easy to draw
down the pedigree of evils through all times, till we come to these last, which
the holy Ghost marks out for perilous. Yet some Generation is more eminently
sinful then other: as the Sea is in perpetual agitation, yet the Spring-tides
rise higher then their fellows. Hence Saint Peter notes this his Generation
with an emphasis of mischief, (...) here is a transcendencie of evil. What Age
may compare with that which has embrued their cruel hands in the blood of the
Son of God? That roaring Lion is never still, but there are times wherein he
rages more; as he did and does, in the first, in the last days of the Gospel.
Epiphanius observes) (...), there was neither diversity of opinion, nor mention
of Heresy, nor act of Idolatry; (...), only piety and impiety divided the
world: whereas now in the last (which is the wrangling and techy Peter's
example here warrants, the censure of ill-deserving times: which I must crave
leave of your Honorable and Christian patience with an holy and just freedom
to prosecute.

It is the peevish humor of a factious eloquence to aggravate the evils of
Peter and all his true Evangelical successors, when they meet with a froward
Generation, to call it so.

How commonly do we cry out of those querulous Michaiahs that are still
prophesying evil to us, and not good? No theme but sins, no sauce but vinegar.
Might not one of these galled Jews of S. Peter's Auditory have started up, and
have thus challenged him for this tartness, What means this hard censure? why
do you slander the time? Solomon was a wise man, and he Say not thou, What is
the cause that the former days were better then these? for thou do not
inquire wisely concerning this: this is but a needless rigor, this is but an
envious calumny. The Generation were not untoward, if your tongue were not
uncharitable. The Apostle fears none of these currish oblatrations; but
contemning all impotent misacceptions, calls them what he finds them, A froward
generation. And well might he do so; his great Master did it before him, an
evil and adulterous generation; and the Harbinger of that great Master fore-ran
him in that censure, O generation of Vipers, Mat. 3. 7. and the Prophets led
the same way to him in every page. And why do not we follow Peter in the same
steps wherein Peter followed Christ, and Christ a man in whose mouth are no
reproofs. Oh let us be thankful for our Blessings, wherein, through the mercy
of God, we outstrip all the nations under Heaven; but withal let us bewail our
sins, which are so much more grievous, because ours. Would to

For the Multitude, where is the man that makes true conscience of any

Cannot we remember since Oaths were so geason and uncouth, that

Neither do they more exceed in number then Magnitude. Can there be a greater
sin then Idolatry? Is not this (besides all the rest) the sin of the present
Romish Generation? One of their own confesses (as he well may) that were not
the Bread transubstantiate, their Idolatry were more gross then the heathenish.
Lo, nothing excuses them but an impossible Figment. Know,

Neither are the sins of men more great then Audacious: yea it is their
impudency that makes them heinous; bashful offenses rise not to extremity of
evil. The sins of excess as they are opera tenebrarum, so they had wont to They
that are drunken, are drunk in the night, says the Apostle: now they dare,
with Absolom's beastliness, call the Sun to record. Saint Bernard tells us of a
Demon meridianus, a noon-Devil, out of the Vulgar mis^translation of the 90
Psalm. Surely, that ill spirit walks about busily, and haunts the licentious
conversation of inordinate men.

Unjust Exactions of griping Officers had wont to creep in under the modest
cloak of voluntary courtesy, or fair considerations of a befriended
expedition: now they come like Elie's sons, Nay but thou shall give it me now,
and if not, I will take it by force, 1 Samuel 2. 16.

The legal Thefts of professed Usurers and the crafty compacts of sly
Oppressors Domine, quando fient haec? Master, when shall these things be? Yea
their self-flattering incredulity dares say to their Soul, as Peter did to his
Master, Favor thy self, for these things shall not happen to thee.

Neither, lastly, would sin dare to be so impudent, if it were not for
Impunity; it cannot be but cowardly where it sees cause of fear. Every hand is
not to be laid upon evil. If an Error should arise in the Church, it is not
Deus omen, etc. If folly, if villainy be committed in our Israel, it is not for
every man to be an Officer. Who made thee a Judge? was a good question, though
ill asked. But I would to God we had more cause to complain of the presumption
of them who meddle with what they should not, then the neglect of them who
meddle not with what they should. Woe is me, the floodgates of evil are (as it
were) lift loves Justice, and hates Iniquity. It is the partiality or flackness
of the subordinate inferior executions that is guilty of this prevalence of
sin. What can the head do where the hands are wanting? to what use is the
water derived from the cistern into the pipes, if the cock be not turned? What
availes it if children are brought to the birth, if they want a midwifty to
deliver them? Can there possibly be better Laws then have in our times been
enacted against Drunkenness? where or when are they executed? Can there be a
better Law made for the restraint of too-too common Oaths? who urges, who
pays that just mulct? Can there be better Laws against wilful Recusancy,
against Simony, against Sacrilege? how are they eluded by fraudulent evasions?
Against neglect of Divine Service? yet how are they slighted? Against the
lawless wandering of lazy Vagabonds? yet how full are our streets, how empty
our Correction-houses? Lastly, (for it were easy to be endless) can there be
better Laws then are made for the punishment of Fornications, Adulteries, and
all other fleshly inordinatenesses? how does bribery and corruption smother
these offenses, as if the sins of men served only to enrich covetous Officers?
Now put all these together, the Multitude, the Magnitude, the Boldness, the
Impunity of sin, and tell me whether all these do not make this of ours
generationem pravam, a froward generation. So as we may too well take up Esay's
complaint, Ab sinful nation, a people laden with iniquity, a seed of evil
doers, children that are corrupters, Esa. 1. 4. Honorable and beloved, how
should we be humbled under the hand of our God, in the sense of our many,
great, bold and lawless sins? What sackcloth, what ashes can be enough for us?
Oh that our faces could be covered with rend our hearts, and not our garments.
Be afflicted, and mourn, and weep, and thus Save your selves from this froward
generation.

And so from St. Peter's Attestation to their wickedness, we descend to his
Obtestation of their redress, Save your selves. We must be so much shorter in
the remedy, as we have been longer in the disease. The remedy is but of a short
sound, but of a long extent, (...). I urge not the passiveness of this advice,
that it is not, Save your selves, but, Be ye saved. God is jealous of ascribing
to us any power unto good: we have ability, we have will enough to undo our
selves, scope enough to hell-ward; neither motion posse, and velle, and posse
velle, power to will, and will to do. This Saving comprises in it three great
duties; Repentance for our sin, Avoidance of sinners, Reluctation to sin and
sinners.

Repentance. Perhaps, as St. Chrysostom and Cyrill think, some of these were
the personal Executioners of Christ. If so, they were the worst of this
Generation; and yet they may, they must save themselves from this Generation by
their unfeigned Repentance: howsoever they made up no small piece of the evil
times, and had need to be saved from themselves by their hearty contrition.
Surely those sins are not ours whereof we have truly repented. Jordan to cure
our Leprosy, the Siloam to cure our Blindness, the Pool of Bethesda to cure
all our Lameness and defects of Obedience. Alas! there is none of us but have
our share in the common sins; the best of us has helped to make up the
frowardness of our Generation. Oh that we could un-sin our selves by our
seasonable repentance. Cleanse your hands, ye sinners, and purge your hearts,
ye doubleminded.

Avoidance is the next; avoidance of all unlawful participation. There is a
participation Natural, as to live in the same air, to dwell in the same earth,
to eat of the same meat: this we cannot avoid, unless we would go out of the
world, as St. Paul tells his Corinthians. There is a Civil participation, in
matter of commerce and humane necessary conversation: this we need not avoid
with Jews, Turks, Infidels, Heretics. There is a Spiritual participation in
moral things, whether good or evil: In these lies this (...). And yet not
universally neither; we are not tied to avoid the services of God and holy
duties for the commixture of lewd men, as the foolish Separatists have fancied:
it is participation in evil that we are here charged to avoid. Israelites must
hye them from the Tents of Corah; and, Come out of her my people. Chiefly, they
are the sins from which we must save our selves, not the men; if not rather
from the men for the sins. Have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of
darkness, says St. Paul, Ephesians. 5. 11. commenting upon this (...) of St. Peter.

There is nothing more ordinary with our Casuists, then the nine ways of
participation; which Aquinas, and the Schools following him, have shut up in
two homely verses, Jussio, consilium, etc. The sum is, that we do not Paul's
hour, midnight: but I spare you, and would be loath to have any Eutychus.
Shortly, if we would save our selves from the sin of the time, Jezabel did to
the Elders of Jezreel; we may not advise it, as Jonadab did to Amnon; we may
not consent to it, as Bathsheba did to David; we may not sooth it, as Zidkijah
did to Ahab; we may not further it, as Joab did to David; we may not forbear to
dissuade it, as Hirah the Adullamite to Judah; to resist it, as partial
Magistrates; to reveal it, as treacherous Confessaries.

But of all these, (that we may single out our last and utmost remedy) here
must be a zealous reluctation to evil. All those other negative carriages of
not commanding, not counselling, not consenting, not soothing, not abetting,
not sharing, are nothing without a real oppugnation of sin. Would we then Ye
have not yet resisted unto blood, striving against sin, Heb. 12. 4. Lo here is
a truly heroical exercise for you great Ones; to strive against sin, not ad
sudorem only, as Physicians prescribe, but ad sanguinem. Ye cannot better
bestow your selves then (in a loyal assistance of Sacred Authority) upon the
debellation of the outrageous wickedness of the times. These are the Dragons,
and Giants, and Monsters, the vanquishing whereof has moralized the Histories
of your famous Progenitors. Oh do ye consecrate your hands and Save your Souls
from this untoward generation.

Now what need I waste the time in dehorting your Noble and Christian ingenuity
from participation of the Epidemical sins of a froward Generation? It is enough
motive to you, that sin is a base, sordid, dishonorable thing. But withal let
me add only one disswasive from the danger, employed in the very word Save,
for how are we saved but from a danger? The danger both of Corruption, and
Confusion.

Corruption. Ye see before your eyes that one yawing mouth makes Paul made that
verse of the Heathen Poet Canonical, Evil conversation corrupts good manners.
What woeful experience have we every day of those, who by this means from a
vigorous heat of zeal have declined to a temper of lukewarm indifferency, and
then from a careless mediocrity to all extremity of debauchedness; and of
hopeful beginners, have ended in incarnate Devils? Oh the dangerous and
insensible insinuations of sin! If that crafty Tempter can hereby work us but
to one dram of less detestation to a familiarly-inured evil, he promises
himself the victory. It is well noted by Saint Ambrose, of that chaste
Patriarch Joseph, a Lily among Thorns, (by the mighty Protection of her
Omnipotent Husband) yet take thou heed how thou walk amongst those Thorns
for that Lily. Shortly, would thou not be tainted with wickedness? abhor
the pestilent society of lewd men; and by a seasonable subduction, thus Save
thy self from a froward generation.

The last and utmost of all dangers is Confusion. That charge of God by Moses
is but just, Numb. 16. 26. Depart, I pray you, from the tents of Lo, the very
station, the very touch is mortal. Indeed what reason is there to hope or to
plead for an immunity? if we share in the work, why should we not take part of
the wages? The wages of sin is death. If the Stork be taken damage faisant with
the Cranes, she is enwrapped in the same net, and cannot complain to be
surprised. Qui cum lupis est, cum lupis ululet, as he said, He that is with
wolves, let him howl with wolves. If we be fratres we must look to be involved
in the same curse. Be not deceived, Honorable and beloved, here is no
exemption of Greatness: nay, contrarily, Eminence of place aggravates both the
sin and the judgment. When Ezra heard that the hand of the Princes and Rulers
had been chief in that great offense, then he rent his clothes and tore his
hair, Ezra 9. 3.

Certainly this case is dangerous and fearful, wheresoever it lights. Hardly
are those sins redressed that are taken up by the Great: Easily are those sins
diffused that are warranted by great Examples. The great Lights of Heaven, the
most conspicuous Planets, if they be eclipsed, mighty men shall be mightily
tormented. Of all other men therefore be ye most careful to keep your selves
untainted with the common sins, and to renew your covenant with God. No man
cares for a spot upon a plain russet riding-suit; but we are curious of a rich
robe, every mote there is an eyesore. Oh, be ye careful to preserve your
Honor from all the foul save ye your selves from this untoward Generation; so
shall ye help to save your Nation from the imminent Judgments of our just God;
so shall ye save your Souls in the day of the appearance of our Lord Jesus
Christ: to whom, with the Father and the Holy Ghost, one infinite God, be all
Honor and Glory ascribed now and for ever. Amen.

THE HYPOCRITE.
Set forth in A SERMON at the Court, February 28. 1629.
Being the third Sunday in LENT.
By Jos. Exon.
To my ever most worthily Honored Lord, the Earl of NORWICH.
My most Honored Lord,
I Might not but tell the world, that this Sermon which was mine in the Pulpit,
is Yours in the Press: Your Lordship's will (which shall never be other then a
command to me) fetches it forth into the Light before the fellows. Let me be
branded with the Title of it, if I can think it worthy of the public view, in
comparison of many accurate pieces of others, which I see content themselves
daily to die in the ear. Howsoever, if it may do good, I shall bless your
Lordship for helping to advance my gain.

Your Noble and sincere true-heartedness to your God, your King, your Country,
your Friend, is so well known, that it can be no disparagement to your Lordship
to patronize this Hypocrite; whose very inscription might cast a blur upon some
guilty reputation. Go on still (most noble Lord) to be a great Example of
Virtue and Fidelity to an hollow and untrusty Age. You shall not want either
the Acclamations or Prayers of

Your Lordships ever devoted in all true Duty and Observance, Jos. Exon.

THE HYPOCRITE.
2 Timothy 3. 5. Having a Form of Godliness, but denying the Power thereof.
IT is an unperfect Clause, you see, but a perfect Description of an Hypocrite;
and that an Hypocrite of our own times, the last: which are so much the worse,
by how much they partake more of the craft and diseases of age.

The Prophets were the Seers of the Old Testament, the Apostles were the Seers
of the New; those saw Christ's day and rejoiced, these foresaw the reign of
Antichrist and complained. These very times were as present to Paul as to us:
our Sense does not see them so clearly as his Revelation. I am with you in the
Spirit, (says he to his absent Colossians) rejoicing and beholding your order:
he does as good as say to them, I am with you in the Spirit lamenting, and
beholding your misdemeanors. By these Divine Optics he sees our formal Piety,
real Wickedness: both which make up the complete Hypocrisy in my Text; Having
a form of Godliness, but denying the power thereof.

I doubt not but some will be ready to set this sacred Prognostication to
another Meridian. And indeed we know a Generation that loves themselves too
well, much more then Peace and Truth; so covetous, that they would Peter's net;
proud boasters of their own merits, perfections, supererogations: it would be
long (though easy) to follow all. We know where too many Treasons are hatched;
we know who in the height of mind exalts himself above all that is called God;
we know where pleasure has the most delicate and debauched Clients; we know
where Devotion is professedly formal, and lives impure: and surely, were we
clearly innocent of these crimes, I should be the first that would cast this
stone at Rome. But now that we share with them in these sins, there is no
reason we should be sejoyned in the Censure. Take it among ye therefore, ye
Hypocrites of all professions, for it is your own, Ye have a form of Godliness,
denying the power

What is an Hypocrite but a Player, the Zani of Religion (as ye heard lately?)
A Player acts that he is not; so do ye, act good and are wicked. Here is a
semblance of good, a form of Godliness; here is a real evil, a denial of the
power of Godliness. There is nothing so good as Godliness, yea there is nothing
good but it; nothing makes Godliness to be good, or to be Godliness, but the
power of it: for it is not, if it work not, and it works not, if not
powerfully. Now the denial of good must needs be evil; and so much more evil,
as the good which is denied is more good: and therefore the denial of the power
of Godliness must needs be as ill as the form or show of Godliness having, the
other denying; having the form, denying the power.

As all sin is originally from the Devil, so especially Hypocrisy: he is the
father of Lies; and what is Hypocrisy but a real Lie? that is his Darling: and
these two are well put together, (...), 1 Timothy 4. 2. in Hypocrisy speaking
Lies. Now as all things are more eminent in their Causes and originals Satan is
transformed into an Angel of light, says the Apostle; not he was, but he is;
so transformed, that he never did, never will put off that counterfeit. And as
all his Imps are partakers of the Satanical nature; so in every Hypocrite there
is both the Angel and the Devil: the seeming Angel is the form of Godliness,
the real Devil is the denial of the power of Godliness. It must be in another
sense that that Father said, Innocentis tempore posterior est quam malitia. I
am sure the Angel of light was before the Satan; and now because he is Satan,
he puts on the Angel of light. Such shall

First then, here is a form, and but a form of Godliness. A form does well; but
if it be but a form, it is an immaterial shadow of Piety. Such was this of
these men; for they were unnatural, traitors, heady, high-minded, (...). Learn
of me, for I am meek; No Creature is more humble then God.
Nulla creatura humilior Deo, as Laurentius well: if they had Pleasure for
their Idol, they could not have the Lord for their God. So as even without God,
they had yet a form of Godliness. Godliness is a thing much talked of, little
understood. Whiles the ancient School had wont to say, that it is not
practical, not speculative, but affective, their meaning was, that it is in all
these, in the heart, in the brain, in the hand; but most in the heart. It is
Speculative in the knowledge of God; Practical in form of Godliness. To this
outside of Godliness then belongs all that glorious Pageant of fashionable
profession which we see made in the World, whether in words, gesture, carriage.

First here is a world of good Words, whether to God, or of him. Here are words
of sacred complement with God: for the Hypocrite courts God in his Prayers; no
man speaks fairer, no man louder then he. Here is Readiness benedictus; Lord, I
thank thee; here is the colloguing Jews Domine, Domine, Lord, Lord.

And as to him, so of him. Here are words of religious protestation for God,
like to the Jews Templum Domini, The Temple of the Lord.
or Herod's (...), Mat. 2. 8. I will worship the Babe. The man's secret fire of
zeal smoaks forth into the holy breath of a good confession. Here are words of
fervent excitation to the frozen hearts of others; yea, if need be, words of
deep censure of the cold moderation which he apprehends in his wiser Brethren:
Neat in words, if foul in fact.
so as he is comptus in verbo, if turpis in facto, as Bernard.

Yet more, here is a perfect Scene of pious Gestures; knees bowed, hands

Yet this is not all to make up a perfect form of Godliness, here is a smooth
face of holy carriage in Actions. Devout Saul will be saving the fattest of the
Amalekitish flocks and herds for sacrifice to the Lord his God. Good man! he
will not have God take up with the worst. Every man is not of this diet; too
many think any offall good enough for their Maker: but here is one that Absalom
would go to pay his vow in Hebron? The fair Prince of Israel was courteous
before, now he will be Godly too. It was Piety that he would make a Vow to
God. Our Gallants have somewhat else to do then to make holy vows: at every
word they protest and vow, and perhaps swear; but all like themselves, vainly
and idly: But Absalom makes a solemn and religious Vow. It was more piety that
he would perform it. This is not every man's care: too many care not how much
they run upon God's Hebron: Blood was in his thoughts whiles the Sacrifice was
in his mouth. The old word is, Full of courtesy, full of craft: when ye see
too glittering pretenses in unapproved persons, suspect the inside. Had you but
seen a Jews Fast, you would say so; Esa. 58. 6. Here was nothing but drooping
and ash-strawed heads, torn garments, bare Herod's formality, you would have
said it yet more: mark a little, and see Herod turned Disciple to John Baptist.
What, Saul among the Prophets? Herod among the Disciples? Surely so; for he
hears him. Tush, hears him? what is that? There are those that hear and would
not, forced to hear by compulsion of Laws; who may say to Authority, as the
Psalmist says to God, Aurem perforasti mihi, Mine ear have thou boared: their
ear is a Protestant, while their heart is a Recusant. There are those that hear
and hear not; that come fashionably, and hear perfunctorily, whose ears are
like the Psalmists Idols, for form only, not for use. There are those Heavy
ear.
who is so deaf as the wilful? there is auris aggravata, Esai. 59. 1. there is
auris surda, Deaf ear.
Mic. 7. 16. But Herod hears (...), gladly, with pleasure: he heard because he
loved to hear. Yea so does many a hollow heart still: ye shall have such an one
listen as if he were totus auris, all ear, as if he would latch every word from
the Preachers mouth ere it could get out: perhaps it is new, perhaps witty,
perhaps elegant, or some way pleasing. Yea there are some not only willing,
but greedy hearers, they have aures bibulas, they hear hungrily and thirstily;
but it is but to catch advantages; somewhat they hope may fall to pay the
Preacher. Herod is better then so, (...), he observed, he respected, he
countenanced this rough hewn Chaplain. Yea, so does Herod is better then so,
(...), he did too, and did many things. Lo here, he does not hear, but do: and
not some things, but many. It may be this Camel-hair'd Monitor told him of some
outrageous disorders in his Court; those he was willing to amend: perhaps he
told him of some bribery of his Officers, unjust or hard measures offered by
oppressive Ministers to his poor Subjects; those he was ready to reform: (...)
he did many things. One would think Bernard should not need Abailardus with
intus Herodes, Herod within, John without.
foris Johannes; his very outside was generally good, else he had not done
many things. Here was a form of godliness, but let me tell you, an higher form
then many of us (for ought I see) care to climb up unto. There is hearing, and
talking, and professing enough in the world; but where is the doing? or if
there be doing, yet it is small doing (God wot.) Some things we may be drawn to
do, not many; one good deed in a life is well; one fault amended meriteth: to
do many is not incident to many. So as too many of us are upon a form of
Godliness; but it is a lower form then Herod's, who heard, and heard gladly,
and observed his teacher, and did, and did many things; yet a gross Hypocrite
still, because he did but many. Either all, or none at all.


What should I weary you with instances? Do you see an Ananias and Sapphira
making God their heir of their half-shared Patrimony? Do you see a griping
Usurer build Schools and Hospitals with ten in the hundred? Do you see a man
whose stomach insatiably craves new superadditions upon the indigested morsels
of his last hours Lecture, and yet nauseates at the public Prayers of the
Church? Do you see a superstitious Votary looking rusully from his knees upon
his adored Crucifix, and, as Isaac the Syrian prescribes, living like a dead
man in a solitary Sepulcher, yet making no bones of killing Kings?

Nay, to ascend unto an higher key of pretended Holiness, Do ye see some of the
elect Manichees lying upon hard Mats, which S. Austin says were therefore
called Mattarii? Do ye see the penances of the three super-mortified Orders of
the Mahumetan Saints? Do ye see an illuminate Elder of the Anabaptists rapt in
divine ecstasies? Do ye see a stigmatical Friar lashing himself

All these and many others of the same kind are Swans, which under white
feathers have a black skin. These have a form of Godliness, and are the worse
for it. For as it is the most dangerous and killing flattery that is brought in
under a pretense of liberty; so it is the most odious and perilous Impiety that
is hid under a form of Godliness.

These men, I say, have a form, and nothing else save a form of Godliness.
Chaos like without form. As not Civility, so Godliness cannot be without due
form: ye cannot think Gods Service to be all lining, no outside; a form there
must be. It was a Law written in Greek and Latin Letters over the gate of the
first peculiar partition of the Temple, which was atrium Judaeorum, Every
stranger that passes into the Holy place must die. If he had not the mark of a
Jew upon his flesh, it was capital to tread in those holy Courts. The Temple
was the type of the Church: If we have not so a form of Godliness, procul, o
procul: without shall be dogs; and, if a Beast touch the Mount, it shall dye.
What shall we say to those Gallants that hate to have so much as a form of
Godliness? there cannot be a greater disparagement cast upon them, then the
very semblance of Devotion. To say Grace at meals, to bow a knee in Prayer, to
name God other then in an Oath, to once mention Religion, is a base, mortified,
pusillanimous tenderness. What talk ye of a Sermon? a Play if you will: What
speak you of weeping for sins? talk of drinking healths, singing of rounds,
courting of Dames, revels, matches, games, any thing save goodness. What should
we say of these men? even this, He that has but a form is an Hypocrite; but
Tophet be not for them, it can challenge no guests.

Thus much for the form of Godliness, which is the Angel of Hypocrisy: our
speech descends to the Devil in Hypocrisy, which is the denial of the power
of Godliness. But whiles I am about to represent unto you the ugly face of that
wicked one, God meets us in the way, and stays my thoughts and speech power of
Godliness, ere we fall upon the denial of that power. What power then is this
of Godliness? what does it? what can it do? The weakness of it is too
apparent. If we look to the Author of it Christ Jesus, alas! he is (...), a But
or mark for opposition to shoot at; whereas true Power is an Al-chum, that bars
resistance, Prove. 30. If to the Means of Godliness, here is the foolishness of
preaching, 1 Cor. 1. 21. If to the Effects of Godliness, here is weak Grace,
strong corruption, Romans 7. If to the Opposites of Godliness, here is a Law
fighting. Fighting? perhaps so it may be, and be foiled: nay, but here is
(...), a conquering and captivating Law, Romans 7. 23. whereby I am not only
made a slave, but sold for a slave, (...), Romans 7. 14. So then here is an
opposed Savior, a foolish preaching, a feeble grace, a dominearing corruption;
and where then is the power of Godliness all this while? Know, O thou foolish
man, that God is (...), the strong God; and yet there is a Devil. He could call
in the Being of that malignant Spirit, but he will not; he knows how to
magnify his Power by an opposite. Christ will be spoken against, not for
impotence to resist, but for the glory of his prevailing: so we have seen a
well-tempered Target shot at to show the impenetrableness

Preaching is foolishness, but it is stultitia Dei; and the foolishness of God
is wiser then the wisdom of men. Grace is weak where Corruption is strong;
but where Grace prevails, Sin dares not show his head. Sin sights and subdues
his own Vassals; but the power of Godliness foils it in the Renewed; so as if
it live, yet it reigns not. Great then is the power of Godliness: great every
way; great in respect of our enemies, great in respect of our selves; of our
enemies, the Devil, the World, the Flesh.

So great first, that it can resist the Devil; and it is no small matter to
resist the powers and Principalities of Hell: whom resist, steadfast in the

Resist? Alas, what is this? The weak may perhaps resist the strong, the Whelp
the Lion: We may resist the Spirit of God himself: Semper restitistis, says
Saint Stephen of the Jews. Lo here is resistance to God; and not for a brunt,
but perpetual, ye have always resisted. So the Ship resists the Rock against
which it is shattered; so the crushed Worm turns toward the foot that treads
it. Yea, but here is a prevalent resistance; Resist the Devil, and he shall
flee from you, James 4. 7. Lo, Godliness can make a Coward of the great Prince
of Darkness. He shall flee. But if, Parthian-like, he shall shoot fleeing, as
he does; lo, this shall quench all the fiery darts of Satan, Ephesians. beat down
the strong holds of sin about his ears; this can enter, and bind the strong
man. Shortly, it can conquer Hell, yea make us more then Conquerors. Lo, to
conquer is not so much as to make another a Conqueror; but more then a
Conqueror is yet more. Is there any of you now that would be truly great and
victorious? it is the power of Godliness that must do it. Pyrrhus his word
concerning his Soldiers was, Tu grandes, ego fortes. Surely if our Profession
make us great, our Faith must make us valiant and successful. I tell you, the
conquest of an evil spirit is more then the conquest of a world of men. O then,
what is it to conquer Legions?

And as it foils Satan, so the World: No marvel, for if the greater, much more
the less. The World is a Subject, Satan a Prince, the Prince of this world. The
world is a bi^got, Satan is a God, The God of this World. If the Prince, if the
God be vanquished, how can the subject or suppliant stand out? What do we talk
of an Alexander or a Caesar conquering the world? Alas! what spots of earth
were they which they bragged to subdue? Insomuch that Rome, which in two
hundred forty three years had gained but some fifteen miles about, in Seneca's
time, when her Dition was at the largest, had the neighboring Germany for the
bounds of it. Lo here a full conquest of the whole world. The whole world is
set in evil.
Mundus totus in maligno. To conquer the whole material world the power of
Godliness only can do; this is the victory that overcomes the world, even your
Faith. And now, what can the Flesh do without the World, without the Devil?
Surely were it not for the Devil, the World and the Flesh were both good; and
if it were not for the Devil and the World, the Flesh were our best friend: now
they have debauched it, and turned it traitor to God and the Soul; now this
proud Flesh dares war against Heaven. Godliness does (...), beat it black and
blew; yea, kill it dead ( Mortify your earthly members, Colos. 3. 5.) so as it
has not a lim to stir, not a breath to draw. Anacharsis his charge was too
hard for another, but performable by a Christian, Sampson was a strong man, yet
two of them he could not rule: the power of Godliness can rule all. Oh then the
great power of Godliness that can trample upon the Flesh, the World, the Devil;
Super aspidem, upon the Aspe, the Dragon, the Lion; or, as the Psalmist, Psalm.
91. 13. upon that roaring Lion of

And as great in respect of our Enemies, so no less great in respect of our
Selves; great, and beneficial. What wonders are done by Godliness? Is it not a
great wonder to make a Fool wise, to make the Blind see? This Godliness can
do, Psalm. 19. 7, 8. Let me be bold to say, we are naturally like Solomon's
child, Folly is bound to our heart, Prove. 22. 15. In things pertaining to God
(...), We were foolish, says Saint Paul, Titus 3. 3. Would any of us that are
thus born Naturals (to God) be wise to Salvation? That is the true Wisdom
indeed; all other is but folly, yea madness, to that. The vain deceit, as Saint
Paul, Colos. 2. 8. Triobolaris and vilis, as Chrysostom. It is only Godliness
must do it. Please your selves how you list without this, ye great Politicians
of the world, the wise God has put the py'd coat upon your backs, and past
upon you his (...), Romans 1. 22. If ye were Oracles to men, ye are Idiots to
God. Wickedness blinds the understanding.
Malitia occaecat intellectum, as he said: ye quick-sighted Eagles of the
world, without this ye are as blind as Beetles to Heaven. If ye would have
eyes to see him that is invisible, the hand of your Omnipotent Savior must
touch you, and at his bidding you must wash off your worldly clay with the
Siloam

Is it not a wonder to raise the dead? We are all naturally not sick, not
qualming, not dying, but dead in sin, Colos. 2. 13. yea, with Lazarus,
quatriduani, and ill-senting; yea (if that will add any thing) as St. Jude's
trees, or (as they say of acute Scotus) twice dead. Would ye arise? It is only
Godliness that can do it. Ye are risen up through the faith in the operation
of God, Col. 2. 12. This only can call us out of the grave of our sins. Arise
thou that sleep, and stand up from the dead, and christ shall give thee
life. Christ is the Author, Godliness is the means. All ye that hear me this
day, either ye are alive, or would be: Life is sweet; every one challenges it.
Do ye live willingly in your sins? Let

Is it not a wonder to cast out Devils? I tell you, the corporal possession of
ill spirits is not so rare, as the spiritual is rise. No natural man is free.
One has the spirit of error, 1 Timothy 4. 1. another the spirit of fornications,
Ose 4. 12. another the spirit of fear, 2 Timothy 1. 7. another the spirit of
slumber, another the spirit of giddiness, another the spirit of pride: all have
spiritum mundi, the spirit of the world, 1 Cor. 2. 12. Our story in Guliel.
Neubrigensis tells us of a Countryman of ours, one Kettle of Farnham, in King
Henry the Second's time, that had the faculty to see spirits; by the same token
that he saw the Devils spitting over the Drunkards shoulders into their pots:
the same faculty is recorded of Antony the Eremite, and Sulpitius reports the
same of Saint Martin. Surely there need none of these eyes to discern every
natural man's Soul haunted with these evil Angels. Let me assure you, all ye
that have not yet felt the power of Godliness, ye are as truly (though
spiritually) carried by evil spirits into the deeps of your known wickedness,
as ever the Gadarene hogs were carried by them down the precipice into the Sea.
Would you be free from this hellish tyranny? only the power of Godliness can
do it. 2 Timothy 2. 26, 27. Is peradventure and Repentance is, you know, a main
part of Godliness. If ever therefore ye be dispossessed of that Evil one, it is
the power of Godliness that must do it.

What speak I of power? I had like to have ascribed to it the acts of
Omnipotency: And if I had done so, it had not been much amiss; for what is
Godliness but one of those rays that beams forth from that Almighty Deity?
what but that same Dextra Excelsi, The right hand of the most High.
whereby he works mightily upon the Soul? Now, when I say the man is strong, is
it any derogation to say his arm is strong? Faith and Prayer are no small
pieces of Godliness; and what Jannes and Jambres, the Egyptian Sorcerers, may
juggle away the Staff, and bring a Serpent into the room of it; none but a
Divine power (which Moses wrought by) could change the Rod into a Serpent, or
the Serpent into a Rod. Nothing is above Nature but the God of Nature; nothing
can change Nature but that which is above it: for Nature is regular in her
proceedings, and will not be crossed by a finite power, since all finite Agents
are within her command. Is it not a manifest change of the nature of the Wolf
to dwell quietly with the Lamb, of the Leopard to dwell with the Kid; of the
Lion to eat straw with the Ox, of the Aspe to play with the child? How shall
this be? It is an idle conceit of the Hebrews, that savage beasts shall forgo
their hurtful natures under the Messiah. No, but rational beasts shall alter
their dispositions. The ravenous Oppressor is the Wolf, the tyrannical
Persecutor is the Leopard, the venomous Heretic is the Aspe; these shall turn
innocent and useful by the power of Godliness: for then the earth shall be full
of the knowledge of the Lord, Esaias 11. 6, etc. Is it not a manifest change of
nature for the Ethiopian to turn white, for the Leopard to turn spotless? This
is done when those do good which are accustomed to evil, Jer. 13. 23. And this
Godliness can do. Is it not a manifest change of nature for Camel to pass
through a needles eye? this is done when through the power of Godliness ye
Great and rich men get to Heaven. Lastly, it is an easy thing to turn men into
beasts (a cup too much can do it;) but to turn beasts into men, men into
Saints, Devils into Angels, it is no less then a work of Omnipotency. And this
Godliness can do.

But to rise higher then a change: Is it not an act of Omnipotency to create?
Nature can go on in her track whether of continuing what she actually finds to
be, or of producing what she finds to be potentially in pre-existing Causes;
but to make new matter transcends her power. This Godliness can do: here is
(...) a new Creature, 2 Cor. 5. 17. There is in Nature no predisposition Novus
homo, Ephesians. 4. 24. How is this done? by Creation: and how is he created? in
righteousness and holiness; Holiness to God, Righteousness to men; both make up
Godliness. A Regeneration is here a Creation. Progenuit is expressed by
Creavit, Jam. 1. 18. and this by the word of truth. Old things are passed,
says the Apostle, all must be new. If we will have ought to do with God, our
bodies must be renewed by a glorious Resurrection ere they can enjoy Heaven;
our Souls must be renewed by Grace ere we can enjoy God on earth. Are there any
of us pained with our heart of stone? We may be well enough: the stone of and
give us an heart of flesh, Ezec. 11. 19. Are there any of us weary of carrying
our old Adam about us? a grievous burden I confess, and that which is able to
weigh us down to Hell: do we groan under the load, and long to be eased? none
but the Almighty hand can second Adam which is from heaven, heavenly; without
which there is no possibility of Salvation: for flesh and blood cannot inherit
the Kingdom of God. In a word, would we have this earth of ours translated to
Heaven? it is only the power of godliness can do it.

And as this power of Godliness is great, so no less beneficial: beneficial
every way, both here and hereafter. Here it frees us from evil, it feoffes us
in good. Godliness is an Antidote against all mischief and misery: yea such is
the power of it, that it not only keeps us from evil, but turns that evil to
good; All things work together to the best to them that love and fear God,
Paul's Viper befriended him; Saint Martin's Ellebore nourished him; Saluti
fuere pestifera, as Seneca speaks. And what can hurt him that is blessed by
Crosses, and is bettered by Sins? It feoffes us in good, Wealth, Honor,
Contentment. The Apostle puts two of them together, Godliness is great gain
with contentment, 1 Timothy 6. 6. Here are no ifs or ands; but gain, great gain,
and gain with self-sufficiencie or contentment. Wickedness may yield a gain,
such as it is, for a time; but it will be gravel in the throat, gain far from
contentment. Length of days are in the right hand of true wisdom, and in her
left hand riches and honor, Prove. Godliness has the promises of this life and
of that which is to come, says the Apostle: the promise, that is enough; Gods
promises are his performances; with men to promise and to pay are two things,
they are one with God. To them that by patient continuing in well-doing seek
glory and honor and immortality, eternal life, Romans 2. 7. Briefly (for I could
dwell here always) it is Godliness that only can give us the beatifical sight
of God. The sight? yea the fruition of him, yea the union with him; not by
apposition, not by adhesion, but by a blessed participation of the divine
nature,

To sum up all then; Godliness can give wisdom to the fool, eyes to the
blind, life to the dead; it can eject Devils, change the course of Nature,
create us anew, free us from evil, feoffe us in good, honor, wealth,
contentment, everlasting happiness. O the wonderful, O the beneficial power of
Godliness! And now what is the desire of my Soul, but that all this could make
you in love with Godliness; that in stead of the ambitions of Honor, the
tradings for Wealth, the pursuit of Pleasure, your hearts could be set on fire
with the zealous affectation of true Godliness? Alas! the least overture of any
of Caesar that said, I have been all things, and am never the better. It is not
your Bags, ye wealthy Citizens, that can keep the Gout from your joints, or
Care from your hearts: It from all miseries, (which if they kill, yet they
cannot hurt us) that can improve Simon Macchabaeus with three years labor
took down the top of mount Acra in Jerusalem, that no hill might stand in
competition of height with the Temple of God; so let us humble and prostrate
all other desires to this one, that true Godliness may have the sway in us.

Neither is this consideration more fit to be a whetstone to our zeal, then a
touchstone to our condition. Godliness? why, it is an herb that grows in every
soil. As Platina observes that for 900 years and upwards, none of those Popes
to whom Sanctity is ascribed in the abstract, were yet held Saints after
Celestine the 5, which gave up the Pontifical Chair after six Months weary
sitting in it: so on the contrary, we may live Ages ere we hear a man profess
himself God-less, whiles he is abominably such. He is too bad that will not be
thought Godly; as it is a brazen-faced Curtezan that would not be held honest.

That which Lactantius said of the Heathen Philosophers, that they had many
Scholars, few followers, I cannot say of the Divine; we have enough to learn,
enough to imitate, but few to act. Be not deceived, Godliness is not impotent;
wherever Godliness is there is power. Has it then prevailed to open our eyes,
to see the great things of our peace? has it raised us up from to the wicked
says God, what have thou to do to take my Covenant in thy mouth, seeing thou
hate to be reformed? Psalm. 50. 16.

Ye have heard the power of Godliness; hear now the denial of this power. How
then is it denied? Surely there is a verbal, there is a real denial; and rebus
and verbis, as Hilary. It is a mistaking of Logicians, that Negation is the
affection of a Proposition only: No; God and Divinity find it more in power is
as stoutly challenged by some men in words, as truly denied in actions. As one
says of the Pharisees answer concerning John's Calling, They told truth, and
yet lied.
verum dicebant, and mentiebantur; so may I of these men. It is not in the
power of words to deny so strongly as deeds can: both the hand and the tongue
interpret the heart, but the hand so much more lively, as there is more
substance in acts then sounds. As he said, Spectamur agendo; we are both seen
and heard in our actions. He that says there is no God, is a vocal Atheist; he
that lives as if there were no God, is a vital Atheist: he that should say
Godliness has no power, is a verbal Atheist; he that shall live as if
Godliness had no power, is a real Atheist: they are Atheists both. We would fly
upon a man Diagoras, though (as Anselm well) no man can do this interius, from
within; we would burn a man that should deny the Deity of Christ with Arrius;
we would rend our cloths at the blasphemy of that man who, with the Epicures
and Apelleians, should exempt the cares and operations of God from the things
below; we would spit at a man that durst say, power in Godliness. These
monsters (if there be such) hide their ugly heads, and find it not safe to look
on the light. Faggots are the best language to such miscreants. But these real
denials are so much more rife and bold, as they can take the advantage of their
outward safety and unconvincibleness.

Their words are honey, their life poison, as Bernard said of his Arnoldus. And
these actions make too much noise in the world. That which S. Chrysostom says
of the Last day, that men's works shall speak, their tongues shall be silent; is
partly true in the mean time; their works cry out, whiles their tongues
whisper. There is then really a double denial of the power of Godliness; the
one in not doing the good it requires, the other in doing the evil it forbids:
the

In the former, what power has Godliness if it have not made us good? A feeble
Godliness it is that is ineffectual: If it have not wrought us to be devout to
God, just to men, sober and temperate in the use of God's creatures, humble in
our selves, charitable to others, where is the Godliness? where is the power?
If these were not apparently done, there were no form of Godliness; if these be
not soundly and heartily done, there is a palpable denial of the power of
Godliness. Hear this then, ye ignorant and seduced souls, that measure your
Devotions by number, not by weight; or that leaning upon your idle elbow,
yawningly patter out those Prayers whose sound or sense ye understand have a
form of Godliness, but deny the power of it.

Hear this, ye that wear out the floor of God's house with your frequent
attendance; ye that have your ears open to God's Messengers, and yet shut to
the cries of the Poor, of the Orphan, of the Labourer, of the distressed
Debtor; ye that can lift up those hands to Heaven in your fashionable Prayers,
which ye have not reached out to the relief of the needy members of your
Laurentius, Magis delinquit dives non largiendo superflua, quam pauper rapiendo
necessaria, The rich man offends more in not giving his superfluities, then the
poor man in stealing necessaries) ye that have a fluent tongue to talk unto
God, but have no tongue to speak for God, or to speak in the cause of the dumb:
ye have a form of Godliness, but deny the power thereof.

Shortly, ye that have no fear of God before your eyes, no love to Goodness, no
care of Obedience, no conscience of your actions, no diligence in your
Callings; ye have denied the power of Godliness. This very privative denial
shall, without your repentance, damn your Souls. Remember, oh remember Ye have
not given, Ye have not visited: But the positive denial is yet more
irrefragable. If very Privations and silence speak, much more are Actions
vocal. Hear this then, ye vizors of Christianity, who notwithstanding all your
civil smoothness, when ye are once moved, can tear Heaven with your
Blasphemies, and bandy the dreadful name of GOD in your impure mouths by your
bloody Oaths and Execrations; ye that dare to exercise your saucy wits in
profane scoffs at Religion; ye that presume to whet your lawless tongues, and
lift up your rebellious hands against lawful Authority whether in Church or
State; ye that grind faces like edge-tools, and spill blood like water; ye
that can Sodomitical Aretinismes; ye that can quaff your drunken carouses till
you have drowned your Reason in a deluge of deadly Healths; ye whose foul hands
are belimed with Briberie, and besineared with the price of blood; ye whose
Sacrilegious throats have swallowed down whole Churches and Hospitals, whose
maws have put over whole Parishes of sold and affamished Souls; ye whose
faction and turbulency in novel Opinions rends the seamlesse Coat, not
Melanchthon, that Schism is no less sin then Idolatry, and there cannot easily
be a worse then Idolatry; either of them both are enough to ruin any Church
under Heaven (now the God of Heaven ever keep this Church of ours from the
mischief of them both) ye whose tongues trade in Lies, whose very profession is
Fraud and cozenage; ye cruel Usurers, false Flatterers, lying and envious
Detractors; in a word, ye, whoever ye are, that go resolutely forward in a
course of any known sins, and will not be reclaimed: ye, ye are the men that
spit God in the face, and deny flatly the power of Godliness. Woe is me, we
have enough of these Birds every where at home. I appeal your eyes, your ears;
would to God they would convince me of a

But what of all this now? The power of Godliness is denied by wicked men: How
then? what is their case? Surely inexplicably, unconceivably fearful. The
wrath of God is revealed from Heaven against all ungodliness, says the
Apostle. How revealed? say you; wherein differ they from their neighbors,
unless it be perhaps in better fare? no gripes in their Conscience, no
afflictions in their life, no bands in their death: Impunitas ausum, ausus
excessum parit, as Bernard, Their impunity makes them bold, their boldness
outrageous. Alas, wretched Souls! The world has nothing more woeful then a
Sinners welfare. It is for slaughter that this Ox is fatned: Ease slays the
simple, and the prosperity of fools Prove. 1. 32. This bracteata felicitas which
they enjoy here, is but as Carpets spread over the mouth of Hell: For if they
deny the power of Godliness, the God of power shall be sure to deny them;
Depart from me ye workers of iniquity, I know you not. There cannot be a worse
doom then Depart from me; that is, depart from peace, from blessedness, from
life, from hope, from possibility of being any other then eternally,
exquisitely miserable. Qui te non habet, Domine Deus, totum perdidit, He who
has not thee, O Lord God, has lost all, as Bernard truly. Dying is but
departing; but this departing is the worst dying; dying in Soul, ever dying: so
as if there be an Ite, depart, there must needs be a maledicti, depart ye
cursed; cursed that ever they were born, the power of Godliness! what tears can
be enough to bewail their everlasting burnings? what heart can bleed enough at
the thought of those tortures which they can neither suffer, nor avoid? Hold
but your finger for one minute in the weak flame of a farthing Candle, can
flesh and blood endure it? With what horror then must we needs think of Body
and Soul frying endlesly in that infernal Tophet? Oh think of this ye that
forget God, and contemn Godliness; with what confusion shall ye look upon the
frowns of an angry God rejecting you, the ugly and merciless Fiends snatching
you Perhorrescite minas, formidate supplicia, as Chrysostom. Certainly, my
beloved, if wicked sinners did truly apprehend an Hell, there would be more
danger of their despair and distraction then of their security. It is the
Devil's policy, like a Raven, first to pull out the eyes of those that are dead
in their sins, that they may not see their imminent damnation. But for us; tell
me, ye that hear me this day, are ye Christians in earnest, or are ye not? If
ye be not, what do ye here? If ye

But what an unpleasing and unseasonable subject am I fallen upon, to speak of
Hell in a Christian Court, the emblem of Heaven? Let me answer for my self
with devout Bernard, Sic mihi contingat semper be are amicos terrendo
salubriter, non adulando fallaciter, Let me thus ever bless my friends with
wholesome frights, rather then with plausible soothings. Sumenda sunt amara
salubria, says Saint Austin: Bitter wholesome is a safe receipt for a
Christian: and what is David's plague, non appropinquabit, It shall not come
nigh thee. If we do not make a league with Hell and Death, yet with our selves
against them. Fallit peccatum falsa dulcedine, as Saint Austin, Sin deceives us
with a false pleasure. The pleasure of the world is like rhat Colchian honey,
whereof Xenophon's soldiers no sooner tasted, then they were miserably
distempered; those that took little were drunk, those that took more were mercy
and plenteous redemption, and pull you Bernard borrows of Saint Gregory, make a
man both good and safe, To repent of evil, To abstain from evil. Would ye
escape the wrath of God, the fire of Hell? Oh wash you clean, and keep you so.
There is no Laver for you but your own tears, and the blood of your Savior:
Bathe your Souls in both of these, and be secure. Consider how many are dying
now which would give a world for one hour to repent in. Oh be ye careful then
to improve your free and quiet hours in a serious and hearty contrition for
your sins: say to God with the Psalmist, Deliver me from the evilman, that is,
from my self, as that Father construes it. And for the sequel, in stead denying
the power of Godliness, resolve to deny your selves, to deny all ungodliness
and worldly lusts, and to live soberly, righteously and godly in this present
world; that having felt and approved the power of Godliness in the
illuminating our eyes, in raising us from our sins, in ejecting our
corruptions, in changing our lives, and creating our hearts anew, we may at the
last feel the happy consummation of this power, in the full possessing of us in
that eternal Blessedness and Glory which he has prepared for all that love
him. To the perfect fruition whereof he bring us that has dearly bought us,
Jesus Christ to whom, etc.

THE
Cant. 6. 9. My Dove, my Undefiled is One.
OUR last days discourse was (as you heard) of War and dissipation; this shall
be of Love and unity. Away with all profane thoughts: Every syllable in this
Bridal-song is Divine. Who doubts that the Bridegroom is Christ, the Bride his
Church? the Church, whether at large in all the Faithful, or abridged in every
faithful Soul. Christ Columba, a Dove; she is perfecta, undefiled. Her
Entireness is praised by her Propriety in respect of him, Columba mea, my Dove;
by her Unity in respect of her self, Una, one alone. My Dove, my undefiled is
but one. So as the beautiful Sincerity, the dear Propriety, the indivisible
Unity of the whole Church in common, and of the Epitome thereof every
Regenerate Soul, is the matter of my Text, of my speech. Let your holy
attention follow me, and find your selves in every particular.

The two first titles, Columba and perfecta, are in effect but one. This
creature has a pleasing Beauty, and an innocent Simplicity: Columba imports
the perfecta the other; yea, each both: for what is the Perfection which can be
attained here, but Sincerity? and what other is our honest Sincerity, then
those graceful proportions and colors which make us appear lovely in the eyes
of God?

The undefiled then interprets the Dove, and convertibly: for therefore is the
Church undefiled, because she is a Dove; she is, as Christ bade her, (...)
innocent, Mat. 10. 16. and therefore is she Christ's Dove, because she is
undefiled with the gall of spiritual bitterness.

Had ye rather see these Graces apart? Look then first at the Loveliness, then
at the Harmlesness of the Church, of the Soul.

Every thing in the Dove is amiable; her Eyes, Cant. 1. 15. her Feathers, Psalm.
68. 13. and what not? So is the Church in the Eyes of Christ: And therefore the
vulgar Translation puts both these together, My dove, my fair one.
Columba mea, formosa mea, Cant. 2. 10. which Lucas Brugensis confesses not to
be in the Hebrew, yet adds, Ne facile omittas.

Thy Dove, O God? yea, why not thy Raven rather? I am sure she can say of her
self, I am black: And if our own hearts condemn us, thou art greater. Alas!
what can thou see in us but the Pustles of Corruption, the Morphews of
Deformity, the hereditary Leprosy of Sin, the Pestilential spots of Death? and
do thou say, My Dove, my undefiled? Let malice speak her worst. The black,
but she shies she is comely: and that is fair that pleases. Neither does God
look upon us with our eyes, but with his own; He sees not as man sees. The
Kings daughter is all glorious within: finite eyes reach not thither. The
skin-deep Beauty of earthly faces is a fit object for our shallow sense, that
can see nothing but color.

Blessed is the man whose sin is covered, Psalm. 32. 1. If we be foul, yet thou,
O Savior, art glorious: Thy Righteousness beautifies us, who are blemished by
our own Corruptions. But what? shall our borrowed Beauty blemish the whiles
thine infinite Justice? shall we taint thee to clear our selves? Do thou
justify the wicked? do thou feather the Raven with the wings of the Dove?
whiles the cloth is fair, is the skin nastie? Is it no more but to thy Dove,
thy undefiled. In spite of all the blemishes of her outward administrations,
Gods Church is beautiful; in spite of her inward weaknesses, the faithful
Soul is comely; in spite of both, each of them is a Dove, each of them
undefiled. It is with both, as he said long since of Physicians, The None of
their unwilling infirmities can hinder the God of Mercies from a gracious
allowance of their integrity. Behold thou art all fair. But let no idle
Donatist of Amsterdam dream hence of an Utopical perfection. Even here is the
Dove still; but Columba seducta, or fatua (as Tremelius reads it) Ephraim,
Ephraim is a silly seduced Dove, Ose 7. 11. The rifeness of their familiar
excommunications may have taught them to seek for a spotlesness above: And if
their furious censures had left but one man in their Church, yet that one man
would have need to excommunicate the greater half of himself, the Old man in
his own bosom. Our Church may too truly speak of them in the voice of God, Woe
to them, Ose 7. 13. It is not in the power of their uncharity to make the rest
of God's Church, and ours, any other then what it is, The Dove of Christ, the
undefiled.

The Harmlesness follows. A quality so eminent in the Dove, that our Savior
has hereupon singled it out for an Hieroglyphick of Simplicity. Whence it was,
questionless, that God of all fowls chose out this for his Sacrifice; Sin ex
aliqua volucri, Levit. 1. 14. And before the Law, Abraham was appointed no
other ( Genesis 15. 9.) then a Turtle and a Pigeon: neither did the Holy Virgin
offer any other at her Purifying then this emblem of her self and her blessed
Babe. Shortly, hence it was that a Dove was employed for the messenger of the
Illyricus and some ancients have guessed) the sellers of Doves were whipped out
of the Temple, as Simoniacal chafferers of the Holy Ghost. The Church then is a
Dove. Not an envious Partridge, not a careless Ostridge, not a stridulous Jay,
not a petulant Sparrow, not a deluding Lapwing, not an unclean-sed Duck, not a
noisome Crow, not an unthankful Swallow, not a death-boding Schrich-owl; but
an harmless Dove, that fowl in which alone envy it self can find nothing to
tax. Hear this then, ye violent spirits, that think there can be no Piety that
Who is this that comes from Edom, with died garments from Bozrah? and
straight, Wherefore art thou red in thine apparel, Esaias 63. 1, 2. but it has
been with her own blood shed by others, not with others blood shed by her hand.
She has learned to suffer what she hates to inflict. Do ye see any Faction
with knives in their hands, stained with massacres; with firebrands in their
hands, ready to kindle the unjust stakes, yea woods of Martyrdom; with pistols
and poniards in their hands, ambitiously affecting a canonization by the death
of God's Anointed; with matches in their hands, ready to give fire unto that
powder which shall blow up King, Prince, State, Church; with thunderbolts of
censures, ready to strike down into Hell whosoever refuses to receive novell
opinions into the Articles of Faith? If ye find these dispositions and Columba
perfecta, yea, perfecta columba, a true Dove for her quiet Innocence. For us,
let our Dove-ship approve it self in meekness of Suffering, not in actions of
Cruelty. We may, we must delight in blood; but the blood shed for us, not shed
by us. Thus let us be Columba in foraminibus petrae, In the wounds of Christ.
Cant. 2. 14. a Dove in the clifts of the rock; that is, in vulneribus Christi,
(as the Gloss) in the gashes of him that is the true Rock of the Church. This
is the way to be innocent, to be beautiful, a Dove, and undefiled.

The Propriety follows; My Dove. The Kite, or the Crow, or the Sparrow, and
such like are challenged by no owner; but the Dove still has a Master. ferae
naturae: but the Church is Christ's, domestically, entirely his; My Dove, not
the worlds, not her own. Not the worlds; for, If ye were of the world, says
our Savior, the world would love his own: but because ye are not of the world,
but I have chosen you out of the world, therefore the world hates you, Joh.
15. 19. Not her own; so S. Paul 1 Cor. 6. 19, 20. Ye are not your own, for ye
are bought with a price. Justly then may he say, My Dove. Mine, for I made her;
there is the right of Creation: Mine, for I made her again; there is the right
of Regeneration: Mine, for I bought her; there is the right of Redemption:
Mine, for I made her mine; there is the right of spiritual and inseparable
Union. O God, be we thine, since we are thine: we are thine My beloved is mine,
and I am his, Cant. 2. 16.

My Dove; mine, as to love, so to defend. That inference is natural, I am
thine, save me: Interest challenges protection. The Hand says, It is my Head,
therefore I will guard it; the Head says, It is my Hand, therefore I will
devise to arm it, to withdraw it from violence: The Soul says, It is my Body,
therefore I will cast to cherish it; the Body says, It is my Soul, therefore I
would not part with it. The Husband says, Bone of my bone, and flesh of my
flesh, and therefore (...) he makes much of her, Ephesians. 5. 29. And as she is
desiderium oculorum, the delight of his eyes to him, Ezec. 24. 16. so is he
operimentum oculorum, the shelter of her eyes to her, Genesis 20. 16. In all cases
it is thus. So as if Columba mea, my Dove, she cannot but say of him, Adjutor
meus, my helper. Neither can it be otherwise save where is lack either of love
or power. Here can be no lack of either: not of Love; he says, Whosoever touches
Israel touches the apple of mine eye: not of power; Our God does whatsoever he
will both in heaven and earth.

He that sits in Heaven laughs you to scorn, the Lord has you in derision. O
Virgin Daughter of Sion, they have despised thee: O daughter of Jerusalem they
have shaken their heads at thee. But whom have ye reproched and blasphemed? and
against whom have ye exalted your voice, and lift up your eyes on high? Even
against the Holy one of Israel, who has said, Columba mea, my Dove.

Yea, let all the spiritual wickednesses in heavenly places, all the legions of
Hell troup together, they shall as soon be able to pluck God out of his throne
of Columba mea, my Dove.

From the Propriety, turn your eyes to the best of her Properties, Unity. Let
me leave Arithmeticians disputing whether Unity be a number. I am sure, it is
both the beginning of all numbering numbers, and the beginning and end of all
numbers numbered. All Perfection rises hence, and runs hither; and every thing
the nearer it comes to perfection, gathers up it self the more toward Unity;
as all the virtue of the Loadstone is recollected into one point. Jehovah our
God is one; from him there is but one World, one Heaven in that world, one Sun
in that Heaven, one uniform face of all that glorious Vault: one Baptism one
Faith; Cor unum, viam unam: and all these make up Columbam unam, one Dove. It
would perhaps Richier, the late eyesore of the Sorbon, has made (methinks) an
equal arbitration, That the State is Monarchical, the Regiment Aristocratical.
The State absolutely Monarchical in Christ, dispensatively Monarchical in
respect of particular Churches; forasmuch as that power which is inherent in
the Church, is dispensed and executed by some prime Ministers, like as the
faculty of Seeing given to the man, is exercised by the Eye, which is given for
this use to man. And if, for the Aristocratical Regiment, there be in the
native Senate of the Church (which is a General Council) a power to enact
Canons for the wielding of this great body, (as more eyes see more then one)
yet how can this consist without Unity? Concilium is not so much a concalando,
as Calepine has mistaken, as a conciliando, or, as Isidore, a ciliis oculorum,
which ever move together. In this Aristocracy there is an Unity; for, as that
old word was long since, Episcopatus unus est, cujus a singulis in solidum pars
tcnetur. In a word, no Regiment, no State can have any form, but deformity,
without Unity.

Neither is there more Perfection then Strength in Unity. Large bodies, if of a
stronger composition, yet because the spirits are diffused, have not that vigor
and activity which a well-knit body has in a more slender frame. The praise of
the invincible strength of Jerusalem was not so much in the natural walls, the
hills round about it, as in the mutual compactednesse within it self. And
Solomon tells us, it is the twisted Cord that is not easily broken. The Rule of
Vegetius that he gives for his best stratagem is, (that which our Jesuits know
too well) to set strife where we desire ruin. Our Savior says that of every
City which one said anciently of Carthage, That division was the best engine to
batter it. A City divided cannot stand. On the contrary, of every happy
Leviathan's scales, una uni conjungitur; one is joined to another, that the
wind cannot pass between them: they stick together that they cannot be
sundred, Job 41. 16, 17.

That there is Perfection and Strength in Unity cannot be doubted; but how
agrees this Unity to Christ's Dove, his Church? It shall be thus absolutely in
patria, at home; but how is it in via, in the passage? Even here it is One too:
not divided, not multiplied. To begin with the former. It has been a stale
quarrel that has been raised from the divisions of the Christian world, worn
thredbare even by the pens and tongues of Porphyrie, Libanius, Celsus, Julian:
Valens the Emperor was puzzled with it, till Themistius, that memorable
Christian Philosopher, in a notable Oration of his convinced this idle cavil,
telling the Emperor, He should not wonder at the dissensions of Christians;
that these were nothing in comparison of the differences of the Gentile
Philosophers, which had above three hundred several Opinions in agitation at
once; and that God meant by this variety of judgments to illustrate his own
Glory, that every man might learn so much more to adore his Majesty, by how
much harder it is rightly to apprehend him. The justice of this exception has
been confessed and bewailed of old by the ancient Fathers: St. Chrysostom
shall speak for all; Deridiculo facti sumus and Gentibus and Judaeis, (says
he) whiles the Church is torn into a thousand pieces. Little do these fools,
that stumble at these contentions, know the weight of S. Paul's Oportet, There
must be heresies: little are they acquainted with Gods fashions in all his
works. Has he not set contrary motions in the very Heavens? Are not the
Elements (the main stuff of the world) contrary to each other in their forms
and qualities? Has he not made the natural Day to consist of light and
darkness? the Year of seasons contrarily tempered? yea all things (according
to the guess of that old Philosopher) ex lite and amicitia? And shall we need
to teach God how to frame his Church? Will these wise censurers accuse the
Heavens of misplacing,

Can they commend it in a wise Scipio, that he would not have Carthage (though
their greatest enemy) destroyed, ut timore libido premeretur, libido pressa non
luxuriaretur, that riot might be curbed with fear, as S. Austin expresses it;
and shall not the most wise God have leave to permit an exercise to keep his
Roe, or young Heart ((...)) upon the hills of Division, Cant. 2. 17.

But yet when all is done, in spite of all dissentions, the Church is Columba
una, one Dove. The word is not more common then equivocal: whether ye consider
it as the aggregation of the outward, visible, particular Churches of Christian
professors, or as the inward, secret, universal company of the Elect, it is
still One. To begin with the former. What is it here below that makes the one
Lord, One Faith, One Baptism. One Lord, so it is one in the Head; One Faith, so
it is one in the Heart; One Baptism, so it is one in the Face. Where these are
truly professed to be, though there may be differences of administrations and
ceremonies, though there may be differences in opinions, yet there is Columba
una: all those are but diversly-coloured feathers of the same Columba una. Were
there not much latitude in this Faith, how should we fetch in the ancient
Jewish Church to the unity of the Christian? Theirs and ours is but one Dove,
though the feathers, according to the color of that fowl, be changeable. It is
a fearful account then that shall once be given before the dreadful Tribunal
of the Son of God, the only Husband of this one Church, by those men who, not
like the children of faithful Abraham, divide the Dove, multiplying Articles
of Faith according to their own fancies, and casting out of the bosom of the
Church those Christians that differ from their either false or unnecessary
conclusions. Thus have our great Lords of the Seven hills dared to do, whose
faction has both devoured their Charity and scorned ours, to the great
prejudice of the Christian world, to the irreparable damage of the glorious
Gospel of our Lord Jesus. The God of Heaven judge in this great case betwixt
them and us; us, who firmly holding the foundation of Christian Religion in all
things according to the ancient, Catholic, Apostolic Faith, are rejected,
censured, condemned, accursed, killed, for refusing their gainful Novelties.
In the mean time we can but lament their fury no less then their errors, and
send out our hopeless wishes that the seamlesse coat might be darn'd up by
their hands that tore it.

From them, to speak to our selves, who have happily reformed those errors of
theirs, which either their ambition or profit would not suffer them to part
with; since we are one, why are we sundred? One says, I am Luther's for
Consubstantiation; another, I am Calvin's for Discipline; another, I am
Arminius's for Predestination; another, I am Barrow's or Brown's for
Separation. What frenzy possesses the brains of Christians thus to squander
themselves into Factions? It is indeed an envious cavil of our common
adversaries, to make these so many Religions. No; every branch of different
Opinion does not constitute a several Religion: were this true, I durst boldly
say, old Rome had not more Deities then the modern Rome has Religions. These
things, though they do not vary Religions and Churches, yet they trouble the
quiet unity of the Church. Brethren, since our Religion is one, why are not our
tongues one? why do we not bite in our singular conceits, and bind our tongues
to the common Peace? But if from particular visible Churches (which perhaps you
may construe to be the threescore Queens here spoken of) you shall turn your
eyes to the true, inward, universal company of Gods Elect and secret ones,
there shall you more perfectly find Columbam unam, one Dove: for what the
other is in profession, this is in truth; that one Baptism is here the true
Laver of Regeneration; that one Faith is a saving reposal upon Christ; that one
Lord is the Savior of his Body. No natural body is more one then this
mystical: one Head rules it, one Spirit animates it, one set of joints moves
it, one Food nourishes it, one Robe covers it. So it is one in it self, so one
with Christ, as Christ is one with the Father; That they may be one, even as we
are one; I in them, and thou in me, John 17. 22. Oh blessed Unity of the Saints
of God, which none of the makebates of Hell can ever be able to dissolve!

And now, since we are thus and every other way one, why are we not united in
Love? why do we in our ordinary conversation suffer slight weaknesses to
Mephibosheth was a cripple; yet the perfect love of Jonathan either cures or
covers his impotency. We can no more want infirmities, then not be men; we
cannot stick at infirmities if we be Christians. It is but a poor love that
cannot pass over small faults; even quotidianae incursionis, as that Father
speaks. It is an injurious niceness to condemn a good Face in each other for a
little mole. Brethren, let us not aggravate, but pity each others weaknesses;
and since we are but one Body, let us have but one Heart, one Way: And if we be
the Dove of Christ, and his Dove is one, oh let us be so one with each other as
he is one with us.

And as the Church and Commonwealth are twins, so should this be no less
Divisum est cor eorum, Their heart is divided, was the judgment upon Israel,
ose 10. 2. Oh how is every good heart divided in sunder with the grief for the
late divisions of our Reuben? We do not mourn, we bleed inwardly for this
distraction. But I do willingly smother these thoughts; yea my just sorrow
choaks them in my bosom, that they cannot come forth but in sighs and groans.
O thou that art the God of peace, unite all hearts in Love to each other, in
loyal Subjection to their Sovereign Head. Amen.

As the Church is one in not being divided; so she is but one in not being
multiplied. Here is unus, uni, unam, as the old word is. He, the true Husband
of the Church, who made and gave but one Eve to the first Adam, will take Adam.
There are many particular Churches; all these make up but one universal: as
many distinct lims make up but one entire body, many grains one bach, many
drops and streams one Ocean.

So many Regions as there are under Heaven that do truly profess the Christian
name, so many National Churches there are; in all those Nations there are many
Provincial, in all those Provinces many Diocesan, in all those Dioceses many
Parochial Churches, in all those Parishes many Christian Families, in all those
Families many Christian Souls: now all those Souls, Families, Parishes,
Dioceses, Provinces, Nations make up but one Catholic Church of Christ upon
earth. The God of the Church cannot abide either Conventicles of Separation,
Roman is an absurd Donatian Solecism: This is to seek Orbem in urbe, as that
Council said well. Happy were it for that Church; if it were a sound lim
(though but the little toe) of that mighty and precious body, wherein no
believing Jew or Indian may not challenge to be jointed. Neither difference of
time, nor distance of place, nor rigor of unjust censure, nor any unessential
error can bar our interest in this blessed Unity. As this flourishing Church
of great Britain (after all the spightfull calumniations of malicious men) is
one of the most conspicuous members of the Catholic upon earth; so we in her
Communion do make up one body with the holy Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles,
Amen.

THE FASHIONS OF THE WORLD; Laid forth in a SERMON at Grayes-Inne on Candlemas
day.
By J. H.
Romans 12. 2. Fashion not your selves like to this World; but be ye changed by
the renewing of your mind, etc.
THAT which was wont to be upbraided as a scorn to the English, may be here
conceived the Emblem of a Man; whom ye may imagine standing naked before you
with a pair of sheers in his hand ready to cut out his own fashion. In this
deliberation, the World offers it self to him with many a gay, misshapen,
fantastical dress: God offers himself to him with one only fashion, but a
new one, but a good one. The Apostle (like a friendly monitor) advises him
where to pitch his choice; Fashion not your selves like to this world; but be
ye changed by the renewing of your mind.

How much Christianity crosses Nature, we need no other proof then my Text.
There is nothing that Nature affects so much as the Fashion, and no fashion so
much as the worlds; for our usual word is, Do as the most. And behold that is
it which is here forbidden us, Fashion not your selves like to this world.

All fashions are either in Device, or Imitation. There are vain heads that
think it an honor to be the founders of Fashions: there are servile fools that
seek only to follow the Fashion once devised. In the first rank is the World,
which is nothing but a mint of Fashions; yet (which is strange) all as old as
mis-beseeming. We are forbidden to be in the second: If the World will be so
vain as to mis-shape it self, we may not be so foolish as to follow it.

Let us look a little (if you please) at the Pattern here damned in my Text,
The world. As in extent, so in expression the World has a large scope; yea
there are more Worlds then one. There is a world of creatures, and within that
there is a world of men, and yet within that a world of believers, and yet
within all these a world of corruptions. More plainly, there is a good world,
an evil world, an indifferent. A good world, as of the creatures in regard of
their first birth, so of men in regard of their second, a world of renewed
Souls; in the first act of their renovation believing, Joh. 17. 20. upon their
belief reconciled, 2 Cor. 5. 19. upon their reconcilement saved, Joh. 3. 16.

An evil world, yea set in evil, 1 John 5. 19. a world of corrupt
unregeneration, that hates Christ and his, Joh. 15. 18. that is hated of
Christ, Jam. 4. 4.

An indifferent world, that is good or evil as it is used; whereof St. Paul,
Let those that use the world be as not abusing it, 1 Cor. 7. 31. This
indifferent world is a world of commodities, affections, improvement of the
creature;

The good world is a world of Saints, whose Souls are purified in obeying the
truth through the Spirit, 1 Pet. 1. 22. To this world we may be fashioned. The
evil world is a world of mere men and their vicious conditions. God has made
us the lords of the indifferent world; himself is the Lord of the good; Satan
is lord of the evil, Princeps hujus Seculi. And that is most properly the
world, because it contains the most, as it is but a chaffe-heap wherein some
grains of wheat are scattered. To this evil world then we may not fashion our
selves in those things which are proper to it as such: in natural, in civil
actions we may,

There is no material thing that has not his form; the outward form is the
fashion; the fashion of outward things is variable with the times; so as every
external thing, clothes, building, plate, stuff, gesture is now in, now out of
fashion: but the fashions of Morality, whether in good or evil, are fixed and
perpetual. The world passes and the fashion of it; but the evil of the
fashions of the world is too constant and permanent, and must be ever the
matter of our detestation, Fashion not your selves like to this world.

But because evils are infinite, as wise Solomon has observed; it will be
requisite to call them to their heads, and to reduce these forbidden fashions
to the several parts whereto they belong. I cannot dream with Tertullian, that
the Soul has a Body; but I may well say that the Soul follows the body; and as
it has parts ascribed to it according to the outward proportion, so are these
parts suited with several fashions. Let your patient attention follow me
through them all.

Begin with the Head, a part not more eminent in place then in power. What is
the head-tire of the world? Surely, as outwardly we see in this Castle of the
Body the flag of vanity hanged out most conspicuously in feathers, perukes,
Psalm. 94. 11. or evil thoughts, Esa. 59. 7. To this head refer novelties of
device, Heresies, capricious, superstitious conceits, whereof the instances
would have no end. And these errors of the Mind are either in false Principles
or false Conclusions: and both whether in matter of Speculation or Practice.

It is a world to see what false Maxims the world lays down to it self; all
which are as so many grounds of disguises of this great and graceless head. I
do not tell you that the fool has said, there is no God; or, has pent up that
pudenda mysteria, which vain Dames use, but hide:) I speak of received and
current Axioms, which the world takes for granted, and fears not to aver; such
as these, We must do according to custom; If it be (...), an ill weed well
rooted, we may not pull it up; Wrongs may not be offered, they may be returned;
There can be no better Justice then retaliation; The Lie must be answered with
a blow, the Challenge with a combat; Our Honor must be tendered, whatever
becomes of our Soul; Reason must be done in drinking, though without reason; We
may lie for an advantage; We Solomon, The thoughts of the wicked are an
abomination to the Lord, Prove. 15. 26. These dresses, perhaps, seem not
uncomely to carnal eyes; but God tells us how he likes them: they are as
naught as old; he spits at them in a just detestation, and will spit at us for
them. Say not now therefore, Thought is free: No; it is so far from that, as
that it may be unpardonable, as Simon Peter intimates to Simon Magus, Acts 8.
22. Away then with all the false positions and misconclusions, all the
fantastical or wicked thoughts of the world: It is filthy, let it be filthy
still. Let not us fashion our Heads like unto the world.



The first are eyes full of Adulteries, 2 Pet. 2. 14. every glance whereof is
an act of beastliness: (...) says our Savior, Mat. 5. 28. the very sight is
a kind of constupration. The same word in the Greek ((...)) signifies both the
apple of the eye and a virgin: I may not now discuss the reason. Sure

The ancient Philosophers before Aristotle, that held the Sight to be by
sending out of beams, imagined the Eye to be of a fiery nature; wherein they
were the rather confirmed, for that they found, that if the Eye take a blow,
fire seems to sparkle out of it. But certainly how waterish soever better
experience has found the substance of the Eye, it is spiritually fiery; fiery
both actively and passively. Passively, so as that it is inflamed by every
wanton beam; actively, so as that it sets the whole heart on fire with the
inordinate flames of concupiscence. What should a Christian do with a
burning-glasse Ezec. 6. 9.) Out with it, if it thus offend thee, as thou lookst
to escape the fire of hell. For this flame, like that unnatural one of Sodom,
shall burn downward, and never leave till it come to the bottom of that
infernal Tophet. Make covenants with your eyes, O ye Christians, as Job did;
and when ye have done, hold them close to your covenants once made: and if they
will needs wilfully break, take the forfeit to the utmost. How much better were
it for a man to be blind, then to see his own damnation? Thus fashion not your
eye to the Uncleanness of the world.

The Covetous follows. Even this is a lust of the eye too, 1 John 2. 16. Libido
as Ambrose calls it. As the eye in its own nature is covetous, in that it is
not satisfied with seeing, Eccles. 1. 8. so the eye of the covetous has a more
particular insatiablenesse. Non satiatur oculus divitiis, The eye is not
satisfied with riches, Eccles. 4. 8. And yet these riches can go no further
then his eye; the owner has nothing but their sight, 5. 11. Hence wise Solomon
parallels Hell and destruction with the eye; neither are satisfiable, Prove. 27.
20. He that is a true glutton of the world, may fill his belly, his eye never.
For it is in these desires as in Drunkenness, his drought increases with his
draughts, and the more he has the less he thinks he has, and the more he
would have. This disease is popular and, as the Prophet tells us, a minimo ad
maximum, Jer. 6. 13. love of money, is the root of all evil, 1 Timothy 6. 10. From
hence come Simonies in the Spiritualty, Sacrilege in the Laity, immoderate
fees in Lawyers, unreasonable prices in Merchants, exactions in Officers,
oppressions in Landlords, encroachments in neighborhood, falsehood in servants,
and lastly cozenages in all sorts. But, woe to him that increases that which
is not his, and to him that ladeth himself with thick clay, says Abacuc 2. 6.
Was there ever a more not his, first; and then if it were his, it is but
densissimum lutum, thick clay; it may load him, it cannot ease him. Away
therefore with those two greedy daughters of the Horseleach, that cry still,
Give, give, Prove. 30. 15. Give is for Christians; but Give, give, is for
worldlings; as it was the doubling of the stroke upon the Rock that offended.
If we be Christians, we are richer then the world can make us. Having therefore
food and raiment, let us be therewith content, 1 Timothy 6. 8. But if thou will
needs enlarge thy boundless desires, take this with thee, there is somewhat as
unsatiable as thine eye; The grave and hell never say, It is enough, Prove. 30.
16. Thus fashion not your eye to the Covetousness of the world.

The next is the Proud looks. There is a generation, O how lofty are their
eyes! and their eyelids are lifted up, Prove. 30. 13. There is? nay, where is
there any other? The world is all such? admiring it self, scorning all others.
And if ever, now is that of the Prophet verified, The child shall behave
himself proudly against the ancient, and the base against the honorable, Esa.
3. 5. One prides himself in his bags, another in his gay coat; one in his
titles, another in his fame; one in agility, another in skill; one in strength,
another in beauty: Every one has something to look big upon. Oh fools, either
ignorant, or forgetful of what ye are, of what ye shall be! go on to wonder
at your poor miserable glory and greatness: ye are but lift up for a fall: your
height is Him that has a proud heart will I not suffer, faith God, Psalm. 101.
5. Fashion not your eye therefore to the Pride of the world.

The last is the Envious eye; by an eminence called Oculus nequam, an evil eye.
Is thine eye evil, because I am good? says the Householder, Mat. 20. 15. As if
Envy had engrossed all malignity. into her own hands. This cast of the eye the
World learned of the Devil, who, when himself was fallen, could not abide that
man should stand. Far be it from us to learn it of the World. As happy is, this
vice is executioner enough to it self: Putredo ossium invidentia, Envy is the
rotting of the bones, Prove. 14. 30. And where other earthly torments die The
wicked shall see it, and shall be grieved, (and frendens contabescet,) and
shall gnash and pine, Psalm. 112. 10. Fashion not your eye therefore to the Envy
of the world.

We have done with the Eye in the Uncleanness, Covetousness, Pride, Envy of it:
we might have taken the Forehead in our way; that is the seat of Impudency; it
is frons aerea, a brow of brass, Esa. 48. 4. yea meretricia, an whores
forehead, that refuses to be ashamed, Jer. 3. 4. yea (...), giant-like,
confronting Heaven, which Ecclesiasticus prays to be delivered from, Ecclus.
2. 3. 5. that can boldly bear out a sin committed, either out-facing the fact,
as Gehezi, Saul. This is the fashion of the world, by lies, imprecations,
perjuries to outbrave the most just reproof; A wicked man hardneth his face,
Prove. 21. 29. This fashion is not for us Christians. If we cannot be
guiltless, we cannot be shameless: at least we can blush at our sins. The dye
of our Repentance strives with the crimson of our Offense; and we can out of
the true remorse of our Souls say with the Prophet, We lie down in our shame;
and our confusion covers us; for we have sinned against the Lord our God,
Jer. 3. 25. Thus, fashion not your Forehead to the Impudence of the world.

We pass to the Ear; wherein there is a double fashion to be avoided. First,
there is a Deaf ear, shut up against all instruction, like the Adder's against
the Psalm. 58. 5. How shut up? A filme or foreskin is grown over it, which
hinders the way of the voice: Jer. 6. 10. Behold, their ear is uncircumcised,
and they cannot hearken. Hence it is that we preach in vain, we labor in vain:
to what purpose do we tear our throats, and spend our lungs, and force our
sides, in suing to a deaf world: Who has believed our report, or to whom is
the If ever we will hear the voice of the Son of God and live, we must
therefore have our ears opened, this our foreskin must be pierced. Aurem
perforasti mihi, Thou have dug my ear, as the word originally sounds, Psalm.
40. 6. The finger of our Omnipotent Savior must do it, and his Ephphatha,
Mar. 7. 34. Let the deaf world perish in their infidelity and disobedience; but
for us, let us say with Samuel, Speak, Lord, for thy Servant hears.

Secondly, there is an Itching ear, 2 Timothy 4. 3. that out of a wanton
curiosity affects change of doctrine. How commonly do we see a kind of
Epicurisme in the ear? which when it has fed well of many good dishes, longs
to surfeit of a strange composition. Yea there is an appetitus caninus, that
passing by Jesuit at a Vespers. Oh foolish Israelites! who has bewitched you,
that loathing the Manna of Angels, your mouth should hang toward the Egyptian
garlic? God has a medicine in store for this itch, if we prevent him not:
Tinnient aures, says he, Jer. 19. 3. If our ears itch after strange doctrine,
others ears shall tingle at our strange Judgments. The God of Mercy prevent
it: and since we accurse our selves if we speak any other words then our
Masters, say you to Christ speaking by us, Master, whither shall we go from
thee? thou have the words of eternal life. Thus fashion not your Ear to the
deafness,

The ill fashions of the Tongue call me to them; whereof the variety is no
less infinite then of words forbidden and offensive. The Eye and the Ear are
receivers, but the Tongue is a spender; and it lays out according to the store
of the heart: For, out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks, says
our Savior. No words can express the choice of ill words. I will limit my
speech to three ill fashions of the Tongue, Falsehood, Maliciousness, Obscenity.

1. The world has a False tongue in his head: false every way; in broaching of
errors, in sophistry of their maintenance, in deceits and cozenages of
contracts, in lies, (whether assertory, which breed misreports, or promissory,
Diminutae sunt veritates, Truth is minished from the children of men? Yea, let
it be from the children of men, it is a shame it should be thus with
Christians; Let us speak truth every man to his neighbor. Far, far be it
from any of you to have a mercenary tongue, either sold or let out to speak for
injury, for oppression. Where the justice of the cause seems to hang in an even
poise, there exercise the power of your wit and eloquence in pleadings: but
where the case is foul, thy silver perish with thee; resolving that the richest
fee is a good conscience; and therefore, with the Apostle, that ye can do
nothing against the truth, but for the truth. Thus fashion not your Tongue to
the falsehood of the world.

2. The world has a tongue as Malicious as false; he carries poisons, arrows,
swords, razors in his mouth, whether in reviling the present, or backbiting the
absent. What have our tongues to walk in but this round of detraction? Bar
this practice, there would be silence at our bords, silence at our fires-side,
silence in the Tavern, silence in the way, silence in the Barbers-shop, in the
Mill, in the Market, every where; yea very Gossips would have nothing to
whisper. Lord, what a wild licentiousness are we grown to in this kind?
Every man's mouth is open to the censures, to the curses of their betters;
neither is it cared how true the word be, but how sharp. Every Fiddler sings
Libels openly; and each man is ready to challenge the freedom of David's
Ruffians, Our tongues are our own, who shall control us? This is not a fashion
for Christians, whose tongues must be ranged within the compass, as of Truth,
so of Diis non detrahes, Thou shall not revile the Gods, nor curse the ruler of
thy people, Exodus 22. 28. No, not in thy bedchamber, no, not in thy thoughts,
Eccles. 10. 20. And for our equals, God has said it, Whosoever privily slandereth
his Neighbor, him will I cut off, Psalm. 101. 5.

The spightfull tongue as it is a fire, and is kindled by the fire of hell,
Jam. 3. 6. so shall it be sure once to torment the Soul that moves it with
flames unquenchable. Thus, fashion not your Tongue to the maliciousness of the
world.

3. As the world has a spightfull tongue in his anger, so a Beastly tongue in
his mirth. No word sounds well that is not unsavory: The only minstrell
cantiones cinaedicae, which are too bad even for the worst of red Lattices: yea
even those mouths which would hate to be palpably foul, stick not to affect the
witty jests of ambiguous obscenity. Fie upon these impure brothelries. Oh that
ever those tongues which dare call God Father, should suffer themselves thus to
be possessed by that unclean spirit: that ever those mouths which have received
the Sacred body and blood of the Lord of Life, should endure these dainty
morsels of the Devil! For us, Let no corrupt communication proceed out of our
mouth, but that which is edifying and gracious, Ephesians. 4. 29. and such as may
become those tongues which shall once sing Allelujahs

From the Tongue we pass to the Palate, which (together with the gulf, whereto
it serves, the throat and the paunch) is taken up with the beastly fashion of
Gluttony and excess, whether wet or dry, of meats or liquors; surfeits in the
one, drunkenness in the other: insomuch as that the vice has taken the name
of the part, Gula; as if this piece were for no other service. The Psalmist
describes some wicked ones in his time by, Sepulcrum patens guttur eorum, Their
throat is an open Sepulcher, Psalm. 5. 9. How many have buried all their Grace
in this tomb? how many their Reputation? how many their Wit? how many their
Humanity? how many their Houses, Lands, Livings, Paul tells his Philippians,
that their false teachers made their belly their God. Oh God, what a Deity is
here? what a nasty Idol? and yet how adored every where? The Kitchins and
Taverns are his Temples; the Tables his Altars. What fat Sacrifices are here of
all the beasts, fouls, fishes, of all three Elements? what pouring out, yea
what pouring in of drink offerings? what incense of Indian smoke? what
curiously-perfumed cates, wherewith the nose is first feasted, then the maw?

More then one of the Ancients, as they have made Nebuzaradan principem
Coquorum, Jer. 52. 12. the chief Cook of Nebuchadnezzar, so they have found a
Jerusalem. Surely gluttonous excess destroies that which should be the Temple
of the Holy Ghost; and is enough to bring a fearful vastation both upon Church
and State. I could even sink down with shame to see Christianity every where so
discountenanced with beastly Epicurisme: what street shall a man walk in, and
not meet with a Drunkard? what rode shall he pass, and not meet some or other
hanging upon the stirrup, waving over the pummel? Saint Peter's argument from
the third hour of the day, and Saint Paul's from the night, would be now a non
sequitur; Day is night, night is day, no hour is Paul, Whose belly is their
God, whose end is damnation. Oh woeful, woeful condition of that damned glutton
in the Gospel! Oh the flames of that delicious tongue, which begged for a drop,
but should in vain have been quenched with rivers, with Oceans! As ye desire to
be freed from those everlasting burnings, Joel 1. 5. Return your superfluous
liquors into tears of repentance, which only can quench that fire; and for the
sequel, put your knife to your throats: Take heed lest at any time your hearts
be overtaken with surfeiting and drunkenness, Luke 21. 34. Thus fashion not
your selves to the Excess of the world.

From the pampered Belly we pass to the proud Back of the world: whereon he is
blind that sees not a world of fashions; in all which, the price of the stuff
strives with the vanity of the form. There is a Luxury in very Clothes, which
it is hard to look besides. O God, how is the world changed with us since our
Breeches of fig leaves and Coats of skin? The Earth yields Gold, Deuteronomy. 22. 5.
What shall we say to the Dames, yea to the Hermaphrodites of our time, whom it
troubles that they may not be all man? But if Sexes be known by clothes, what
is become of Degrees? Every base Terrivague wears Artaxerxes his coat: soft
raiments are not for Courts, Peasants degenerate into Gallants, and every
Midianitish Camel must shine with gold, Judge. 8. 26. But oh the mad disguises
of the world, especially in that weaker Sex, They that glister in scarlet,
shall once embrace danghils, Lam. 4. 5. Yea it were well if no worse. Let us
that are Christians affect that true bravery which may become the blessed
Spouse of Christ; The Kings Daughter is all glorious within; and say, with the
Prophet, My soul shall be joyful in my God, for he has clothed me with the
garments of salvation; he has covered me with the robe of righteousness, Esaias
61. 10. Thus fashion not your Back to the disguise of the world.

We had like to have forgotten the Neck and Shoulders of the world, which have
an ill fashion of stiffnesse and inflexible obstinatenesse, stubbornly refusing
to stoop to the yoke of the Law, of the Gospel. This is every where the
complaint of God; They have hardened their necks, Exodus 32. 9. Amongst all
fashions of the world this is the worst; and that which gives an height to all
other wickednesses. Let all the other parts be never so faulty, yet if there be
a readiness to relent at the Judgments of God, and a meek pliablenesse to his
Corrections, there is life in our hopes. But if our iron sinews will not bow
at all, bearing up themselves with an obdured resolution of sinning, the case
is desperate: what can we think other, then that such a soul is branded for
Hell? He that being often reproved hardneth his neck, shall suddenly be
destroyed, and that without remedy, Prove. 29. 1. Fashion not your Neck
therefore to the stiffnesse of the world.

But the Cyclopean furnace of all wicked fashions, the Heart, calls my speech
to it; which I could not have forborne thus long, were it not that besides the
importunity of these other parts, I have heretofore at large out of this place
displaied to you and the world the wicked fashions thereof. Shortly yet, (for
we may not utterly balk them) all the corrupt desires and affections of the
Soul are so many ill fashions of the Heart to be avoided. These affections are
well known: inordinate Love, uncharitable Hate, immoderate Grief, intemperate
Joy, unjust Fears, unsound Hopes, and whatsoever either distemper or misplacing
of these Passions. If we love the world more then God, if we hate any enemy
more then Sin, if we grieve at any loss more then of the favor of God, if we
joy in any thing more then the writing of our names in dote upon vanity, and
follow after lies; let our Affections and conversation be above, where Christ
Jesus sits at the right hand of God. Let the base earthworms of this world
be

Affections easily break forth into Actions; and Actions perfect our Desires.
Let us from the heart look to the Hands and Feet, the instruments of motion and
execution of the world. Fashion not your selves lastly therefore to the
practice and carriage of the world. The World makes a God of it self, and would
be serving any God but the true one. Hate ye this cursed Idolatry, and say with
Joshua, I and my house will serve the Lord.

The World would be framing Religion to Policy, and serving God in his own
forms. Hate ye this Will Worship, Superstition, Temporizing, and say with
David, I esteem all thy precepts to be right, and all false ways I utterly
abhor, Psalm. 119. 128.

The World cares not how it rends and tears the Sacred Name of their Maker with
Oaths and Curses and Blasphemies. Oh hate ye this audacious Profanesse, yea
this profane Devilisme, and tremble at the dreadful Majesty of the name of the
Lord our God.

The World cares not how it slights the Ordinances of God, violates his Days,
neglects his Assemblies. Hate ye this common Impiety; say with the Oh how sweet
is thy Law, how amiable thy Tabernacles!

The Word is set to spurn at Authority, to despise Gods Messengers, to scorn
the nakedness of their spiritual Fathers. Hate ye this lawless Insolency,
and say, Quam speciosi pedes! How beautiful are the feet of them that preach
the Gospel of peace! Esa. 52. 7. Romans 10. 15.

The World is set upon Cruelty, Oppression, Violence, Rapine, Revenge, sieging,
sacking, cutting of throats. Hate ye this bloody Savagenesse: Put on (as the
elect of God, holy and beloved) bowels of mercies, kindness, meekness, long
suffering, Colos. 3. 12.

The World is a very brothel, given over to the prosecutions of noisome and

The World is a cheater, yea (to speak plain) a thief; every where abounding
with the tricks of legal fraud and cozenage, yea with sly stealths, yea with
open exortions. Hate ye this Injustice, and with quietness work, and eat your
own bread, 2 These. 3. 12. Thus, fashion not your selves to the actual
Wickednesses of the world. All these are the unfruitful works of darkness;
they are not for our fellowship, they are for our abomination and reproof.

And now I have laid before you some patterns, if not models, of the ill
fashions of the World, in the thoughts, dispositions, affections, actions
thereof Whosoever will be a friend to the world, is an enemy to God, Jam. 4. 4.
Oh then, if we love our Souls, let us hate those fashions that may draw us into
the detestation of the Almighty; for our God is a consuming fire.

Besides misbeseeming, it is a just plea against any Fashion that it is
painful* For though there be some Pain allowed in all Pride, yet too much we
endure not: and behold these Fashions shall pinch and torture us to death; to
an everlasting death of body and Soul. The ill guest in the Parable was thus
clad, Mat. 22. 12. the King abhorres his suit, and after expostulation gives
the Bind him hand and foot, and take him away, and cast him into utter
darkness, where shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth. Oh, fear and tremble at
the exspectation of this dreadful doom, all ye that will needs be in the
fashion of the world. If ye be so foolish as to flatter your selves here in the
conceit of your Liberty, there shall be binding; in the conceit of a lightsome
and resplendent Magnificence, there shall be darkness; in the conceit of
Pleasure and Contentment, there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth.

Lastly, commonnesse and age are the usual disparagements of Fashions. The
best may not go like every body: where a Fashion is taken up of the basest, it
is disdained of the eminent. Behold, these are the fashions, if not of all, I
am

As common, so old fashions are in disgrace. That man would be shouted at that
should come forth in his great-grandfires suit, though not rent, not
discolored. Behold, these are the overworn and misshapen rags of the old man:
Away with them to the frippery of darkness, yea to the brokery of Hell: Let us
be for a change. Old things are passed, all things are become new. As we look
to have these bodies once changed from vile to glorious, so let us now change
the fashions of our bodies and Souls from corrupt and worldly, to spiritual
and heavenly; and loathing all these misbelieving, painful, common, old put on
the Lord Jesus Christ; that being clad with Amen.

THE
By Jos. HALL.
Romans 12. 2. But be ye changed ( or transformed by the renewing of your minds,
etc.
THE true method of Christian practice is first destructive, then astructive;
according to the Prophet, Cease to do evil, learn to do good. This our
Apostle observes; who first unteacheth us ill fashions, and then teaches good.
We have done with the negative duty But be ye changed, or transformed, by the
renewing of your minds. All of them points of high and singular importance; and
such as do therefore call for your best and carefullest attention.

Nothing is more changing then the fashion of the world: Mundus transit, The
world passes away, 1 John 2. 17.
says S. John. Yet here, that we may not fashion our Job resolves to wait all
the days of his appointed time, for that changing; so this change contrarily
waits for As a vesture shall thou change them, and they shall be changed: how
much more these sublunary bodies that are never themselves? We know the
Elements are in a perpetual transmutation; so are those bodies that are
compounded of them: as he said of the River, we cannot step down twice into the
same stream. And every seven years (as Philosophy has observed) our bodies are
quite changed from what they were. And as there is a natural change in our
favors, color, complexion,

It is a rule in Policy, Not to alter a well-setled evil. I am sure it holds
not in the Economy of the Soul, wherein length of prescription pleads rather
for a speedy removal: no time can prejudice the King of Heaven. In some cases
indeed change is a sign of a weak unsetledness: It is not for a wise man, like
Shel-fish, to rise or fall with the Moon; rather, like unto the Heaven, he must
Basil to the Governor, Utinam sempiterna sit hoec mea desipientia, Let me dote
thus alw aies. It was not for nothing that Socrates had the reputation of
Wisdom: that famous Shrew of his, Xantippe, could say, she never but saw him
return with the countenance that he went out with. Give me a man that in the
changes of all conditions can frame himself to be like an Auditors counter, and
can stand either for a thousand, or an hundred, or (if need be) for one: this
man comes nearest to him in whom there is no shadow of turning. But in case of
present ill, there can be no safety but in change. I cannot blame the Angels
and Saints in Heaven, that they would not change; I bless them that they
cannot, because they are not Paul's words, Such ye were. What an enemy would
upbraid by way of reproach, is the greatest praise that can be, Faults that
were. Oh happy men that can hear, Ye were profane, unclean, idolatrous,
oppressive, riotous! Their very sins honor them; as the very Devils that Mary
Magdalen had, are mentioned for her glory; since we do not hear of them, but
when they were cast out. As there Cistercian, Spanish Deist, whom we saw walk
in and pollute our streets) men that out of sullenness or affection are
habited as the Gibeonites were out of craft; so there are spiritually such,
natural men, yea natural fools, that please themselves in a false constancy,
and brag they are no changelings, whose glory is their shame, whose end (if
they go on so) is damnation. Let the great Bridegroom come in, and find one of
these crept into his Feast, he shall be sure to send him out with a mischief;
How came thou in hither? Bind him hand and foot, and cast him into utter
darkness, there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth, Mat. 22. 13. Away with
this frippery Old things are passed: if ever we look to have any party in God,
in Heaven, we must be changed.

But secondly, every change will not serve the turn. The word is not (...)
alteration, nor (...), but Metamorphosis; a word whose sound we are better
acquainted with then the sense: the meaning is, There must be a change in our
very form. There is no motion, no action we pass through without a change; as
there is no step wherein we change not our Meridian, so there is no Caelum, non
animum, was an old word; and we know the Body is the same, whiles the Suits are
diverse. And again, there are changes that reach to the very forms, whence all
actions arise; as when of evil we are made good, of carnal spiritual: This is
the Metamorphosis that is here called for. Indeed it has been a not more
ancient then true observation, that the change of some things makes all things
seem changed: as when a man comes into an house wherein the partitions are
pulled down, the roof raised up, the floor paved, bay-windows set out, the
outside rough-cast, he shall think all the frame new, and yet the Tabor. His
Deity was the same, his Humanity the same, the same Soul, the same body; yet he
was (...), (it is the very word that the Holy Ghost uses both there and here)
in that the Deity did put a glorious splendour upon his humane body which before
it had not. Thus it must be in our Transformation, onwards; the Spirit of God
does thus alter us through Grace, whiles we are yet for essence the same. Can a
Leopard change his spots, says the Prophet. See, I beseech you, how this
change is not easy, though not substantial. The spots are not of the essence
of that beast; the blackness is not of the essence of an Ethiopian: yet how
hard these are to put off, we know.

Our Mythologists tell us of many strange Metamorphoses, of men turned into
Beasts, Birds, Trees; wherein doubtless they had moral allusions: Let me tell
you of a Metamorphosis as strange as theirs, and as true as theirs fabulous.
They tell us of men turned into Swine by Circe; I tell you of Swine turned into
men, when Drunkards and obscene persons turn sober and well-governed. They tell
you of men turned into Stones, and of stones turned into men, immediately
Abraham. They tell us of a Lycaon turned into a Wolf; I tell you of a Wolf
turned into a man, when a ravenous Oppressor turns merciful. They tell us of
men turned into Oaks and Rocks; I tell you of the oaky, rocky, flinty hearts of
men turned into flesh, as Ezekiel speaks. They tell us of an Actaeon turned
into the beast which he loved to hunt, and devoured of those beasts wherewith
he was wont to hunt; I tell you of a voluptuous beast abandoning those
pleasures which had wont to spend him. They tell us of a self-loving man turned
to a Flower; I tell you of a fading transitory creature changed into the image
of the Son of God. They tell us of a Proteus turned into Jupiter and other
Deities turned into the shape of beasts, for the advantage of their Lust; I
tell of men naturally of a bestial disposition made the Sons of God, partakers
of the Divine nature, as the Apostle speaks. These changes are not imaginary,
as in the case of Lycanthropie and delusions of juggling Sorcerers, but real
and unfeigned; truly wrought by God, truly felt by us, truly seen by others.
Not that we can always judge of these things by the mere outsides: for even
Satan himself is transformed into an Angel of light; neither do any faces look
fairer then the painted: But ex fructibus is

Be ye transformed; not some pieces of you, but the whole. There are those
which are changed in the face (that look civil at least, if not Saint-like;)
but their mouths are full of cursing, and bitterness, and blasphemies. There
are those whose tongues are smooth-filed, abounding not only with plausible
words, but holy and seemingly gracious too; when their right hand is a right
hand of wickedness. If they have the faces and tongues of men, they have the
talons of Grisons, full of rapine, cruelty, oppression. There are those whose
one half (the upper part) is man, the lower is still, Centaur-like, no other,
no better then their feet are yet swift to shed blood upon their own private
revenge. Let not these men say they are transformed. Let the first say their
face is changed; let the next say their tongue is changed; let the other say
their breasts or hands are changed: but unless face, and tongue, and breast,
and hand, and foot, and all be changed, the man is not changed. God be
merciful to us; the world is full of such monsters of Hypocrisy, who care
only for an appearing change of some eminent and noted part, neglecting the
whole: as some sorry Tap-house white-limes and glazes the front toward the
street, and sets out a painted

But (as all motions have their terms) what is that into which we must be
transformed? I see transformations enough every where; God knows, too many. I
see zealous Professors transformed to key-cold worldlings, reformed Catholics
turned to Romish Factionists: I see men transformed into women, in their
effeminate dispositions and demeanours; women transformed to men, in their
affectation of masculine boldness and fashions: I see men and women Cypran said
of painted faces, it is no marvel if God know them not, for they have made
themselves quite other from what he made them. That whereinto we must be
transformed, is the image of God, 2 Cor. 3. 18. consisting in holiness and
righteousness, Ephesians. 4. 24. That Image we once had and lost; and now must
recover by our transformation. Oh blessed change, that of the Sons of men, we
Job said he would wait for: but of this change we must say, I will not suffer
mine eyes to sleep nor mine eyelids to slumber, until an happy change have
wrought this heart of mine (which by Nature is no better then a stie of unclean
devils) to be an habitation for the God of Jacob. Woe be to the man whose any
Misanthropie to say, that as all those things which are perfections in
creatures flesh and blood cannot inherit the kingdom of God; and fores canes,
without shall be Dogs, Revel. 22. 15. When they shall be vanished he that is
filthy will be filthy still. In spite of both Law and Gospel, men have obdured
their selves against the counsel of God: they have an iron neck, Esa. 48. 4. an
uncircumcised care, Jer. 6. 10. a brawny heart, Mark 3. 5. Say God and man what
they will, these enchanted creatures will rather be beasts still, then return
to men. If we will not change, be sure God will not; He After thine hardness
and heart that cannot repent, thou treasurest up unto thy self wrath against
the day of wrath and revelation of the righteous judgment of God, Romans 2. 5.
Far, far be this obstinacy from us (Honorable and beloved.) For God's sake, for
your Souls sake yield your selves willingly into the hands of God, and say,
Convert me, O Lord, and I shall be converted. As we love our selves, and fear
hell, let us not content our selves with the shape, with the faculties of men,
but let us be transformed; and think that we were only made men, that we might
pass through the estate of humanity to Regeneration. This for the
Transformation: See now that this transformation must be by Renewing.

The same Spirit that by Solomon said, There is nothing new under the Sun,
says by S. Paul, All things are become new. Nothing is so new that it has not
been: All things must be so new as they were. This (...) renovation, implies
that which once was, and therefore was new before. That God who is the Ancient
of days, does not dislike any thing for mere Age; for Time is his: and
continuance of Time is so much more excellent as it comes nearer to the
duration of Eternity. Old age is a crown of glory. Neither is ought old in
relation to God, but to us; neither is age faulty in respect of Nature, but of
corruption: for as that word of Tertullian is true, Primum verum, the first is
true; so may I as truly say, Primum bonum, the first is good. Only now, as our
Nature Behold, God says, I make all things new, a new Heaven and a new earth,
Esaias 65. 17. The year renews; and to morrow (we say) is a new day: we renew our
clothes when they are worn, our leases when they grow toward expiring; only
our hearts we care not to renew. If all the rest were old, so that our Heart
were new, it were nothing. Nothing but the main of all is neglected. What
should I need any other motives to you then the view of the estate of both
these? Look first at the old; Put off, concerning the former conversation, the
old man, which is corrupt according to the deceitful lusts, Ephesians. 4. 22. Lo,
the old Being freed from sin, and made servants to God, ye have your fruit in
holiness, and the end everlasting life, Romans 6. 22. Holiness is a lovely thing
of it self: there is a beauty of Holiness, Gloria Sanctitatis, as the Vulgar
turns it, Psalm. 144. and goodness does amply reward it self: Yet this Holiness
has besides infinite recompense attending it. Holiness is life begun; eternal
life is the consummation of Holiness: Holiness is but the way; the end whereto
it leads is everlasting life. As therefore we would avoid the annoiance and
danger of our sinful corruptions, as we would ever aspire to true and endless
blessedness, Oh let us be transformed by renewing. But how is this renewing
wrought, and wherein does it consist? Surely as there Whosoever is in Christ is
a new Creature, 2 Cor. 5. 17. it is by Regeneration, Except a man be born
again, he cannot see the Kingdom of God, Joh. 3. 3. it is by Resuscitation,
Even when we were dead in sins, has he quickened us together with Christ,
Ephesians. 2. 5. From whence arises this double Corollary.

1. That we can give (of our selves) no active power to the first act of our
Conversion; no more then Adam did to his first Creation, no more then the child
does to his own Conception, no more then the dead man to his raising

2. That there must be a Privation of our old corrupt forms, and a reducing us
from our either nothing, or worse, to an estate of Holiness and new Obedience.
This is that which is every where set forth unto us by the Mortification of our
earthly members, and putting off the old man, on the one part; and by the first
resurrection, and putting on the new, on the other. Nothing is more familiar
then these resemblances. But of all Similes, none does so fitly (methinks)
express the manner of this renewing as that of the Snake, which by leaving his
old slough in the streights of the Rock, glides forth glib and nimble. I
remember Holcot urges the Similitude thus; In librum Sapientia.
To turn off the Snakes skin foraminis angustia, the streightness of the
passage; else he must needs draw the old skin through with him: the latter is
stabilitas saxi, the firmness of the stone; else in stead of leaving the skin
he shall draw the stone away with him. So must it be in the business of our
renovation: First, we must pass through the straight way of due Penitence;
secondly, we must hold the firm and stable purpose of our perseverance in good.
True sorrow and contrition of heart must begin the work, and then an unmoved
constancy of endeavor must finish it. Whosoever thou art therefore, if thy
heart have not been touched, yea torn and rent in pieces, with a sound
Humiliation for thy sins, the old slough is still upon thy back; thou art

But because now we have a conceit that man (as we say of fish) unless he be
new, is naught; every man is ready to challenge this honor of being renewed:
and certainly there may be much deceit this way. We have seen plate or other
vessels that have looked like new, when they have been but new gilded

If we be renewed by Creation, here must be a clean Heart. Cor mundum crea,
Psalm. 51. 10. For as at the first God looked on all his works, and found them
very good; so still, no work of his can be other then like himself, holy and
perfect. If thy heart therefore be still full of unclean thoughts, wanton
desires, covetousness, ambition, profaneness, it is thine old heart of Satan's
marring: it is no new heart of God's making; for nothing but clean can come
from under his hands. But if we plead the closeness of the heart, which may
therefore seem impervious even to our own eyes, see what the Apostle says,
Ephesians. 2. 10. We are his workmanship created unto good works. The cleanness of
the heart will show it self in the goodness of the Hands. But if our hands may
deceive us, as nothing is more easily counterfeited then a good action, yet
Whosoever are led by the Spirit of God, they are the Sons of God, Romans 8. 14.
Yet if in both of these life could be counterfeited, death cannot. That
therefore from our Creation and Regeneration we may look to our Resuscitation,
and from thence back to our grave; Mortify your members which are on earth,
Col. 3. 5. There is a death of this body of sin, and what manner of death?
Those that are Christ's, have crucified the flesh with the affections and
lusts, Gal. 5. 24. Lo, as impossible as it is for a dead man to come down from
his gibbet,

Our last head is the subject of this Renewing, The Mind. There are that would
have this Renovation proper to the inferior (which is the affective) part The
Mind is the man; and the Body, as the The God of peace sanctify you wholly,
that your whole spirit and soul and body may be preserved blameless to the
coming of our Lord Jesus.

First then the Mind, then the Body. All defilement is by an extramission (as
our Savior tells us.) That which goes into the body defiles not the man; so
as the spring of corruption is within. That must be first cleansed, else in
vain do we scour the channels. Ye shall have some Hypocrites that pretend to
begin their renewing from without. On foul hands they will wear white

Neither is the Body more renewed without the Mind, then the renewing of the
Mind can keep it self from appearing in the renewing of the Body. The Soul lies
close, and takes advantage of the secrecy of that Cabinet whereof

He is no Christian that is not renewed; and he is worse then a beast that is
no Christian. Every man therefore lays claim to that renovation whereof he
cannot be convinced; yea there want not those, who though they have a ribaldish
tongue and a bloody hand, yet will challenge as good a Soul as the best.
Hypocrite, when the Conduit-head is walled in, how shall we judge of the
spring, but by the water that comes out of the pipes? Corrupt nature has
taught us so much craft as to set the best side outward. be transformed in the
renewing of our minds; and let the renewing of our Minds bewray it self in the
renewing of our Bodies. Wherefore Jesus Christ so long amongst us, if we be
still our selves? What has it wrought upon us, if we be not changed? Never
tell me of a Popish Transubstantiation of men; of an invisible, insensible,
unfeisible change of the person, whiles the species of his outward life and
carriage are still the same. These are but false Hypocritical juglings to mock
fools withal. If we be transformed and renewed, let it be so done, that not
only our own eyes and hands may see and feel it, but others too; that the
bystanders may say, How is this man changed from himself? He was a blasphemous
Swearer, a profane Scoffer at goodness; now he speaks with an awful reverence
of God and holy things: He was a Luxurious wanton; It has been an old (I say
not how true) note that has been went to be set on changed to the likeness of
the glorious body of our Lord Jesus Christ, and of an eternal participation of
his infinite glory. Whereto he who ordained us graciously bring us, even for
the merits of his Son, our Savior Jesus Christ, Amen.


By Jos. HALL.
A man's Pride shall bring him low; but Honor shall uphold the humble in
spirit.
THat which was the ordinary Apophthegm of a greater then Solomon, (He that
exalts himself shall be brought low, but he that humbles himself shall be
exalted, which our Savior used thrice in terminis, often in sense) is here the
Aphorism of wise Solomon. Neither is it Mercerus, that our Savior in that
speech of his alludes hither.

I need not tell you how great, how wise Solomon was. The Great are wont to be
most haunted with pride; the Wise can best see the danger of that Pride which
haunts the great: Great and wise Solomon therefore makes it one of his chief
common-places, the crying down of Pride: a Vice not more general then
dangerous; Ecclus. 10. 13.
as that which his witty Imitator can tell us is initium omnis peccati, the
beginning of all sin. Now Pride can never be so much spighted as by honoring
her contemned rival, Humility. Nothing could so much vex that insolent Agagite,
as to be made a Lacky to a despised Jew. Besides her own Solomon torments her
with the advancement of her abased Opposite.

My Text then is like unto Shushan, in the streets whereof Honor is proclaimed
to an humble Mordecai; in the Palace whereof is erected an engine of death to a
proud Haman; A man's Pride shall bring him low; but Honor shall uphold the
humble.

The Propositions are Antithetical; wherein Pride is opposed to Humility,
Honor to Ruin. Hear, I beseech you, how wise Solomon has learned of his
Father David to sing of Mercy and Judgment: Judgment to the Proud, Mercy to
the Humble; both together with one breath. The Judgment

It is the noted course of God to work still by contraries: as indeed this is
the just praise of Omnipotence, to fetch light out of darkness, life out of
death, order out of confusion, Heaven out of Hell, honor out of humility,
humiliation out of pride; according to that of the sacred Way-maker of Christ,
Every hill shall be cast down, every valley raised. But in this particular
above all Mary in her Magnificat, to pull down the mighty from their seat, and
to exalt the humble and meek. For God has a special quarrel to the Proud as
those that do more nearly contest with his Majesty, and scramble with him for
his Glory. He knows the Proud afar off, and has a special favor in store
for the Humble, as those that are vessels most capable of his Mercy, because
they are empty. This in common: we descend to the several parts.

The Judgment begins first, as that which is fit to make way for Mercy.
Therein there are two strains; one is the Sin, the other is the Punishment. The
Sin is a man's Pride. A man's, not for the distinction of one Sex from another,
Eve that inherits not her childs-part in this sin. Neither is this Feminine
Pride less odious, less dangerous. Rather the weakness of the Sex gives power
and advantage to the vice; as the fagot-stick will sooner take fire then the
log.

Secondly, for the intimation of the reflex action of Pride. A man's Pride
therefore is the Pride of himself. Indeed the whole endeavor, study, care of
the proud man, is the hoising of himself; yea, this Himself is the adequate
subject of all sinful desires. What does the Covetous labor but to enrich
himself? the Voluptuous but to delight himself? the Proud but to exalt himself?
I am not as others, nor as this Publican. He thinks he is made of better clay
then the common lump; it is others happiness to serve him. He magnifies every
act that falls from him, as that proud Nebuchadnezzar, Is not this great Babel
that I have built? yea his own very excretions are sweet and fragrant, whiles
the perfumes of others are rank and ill-sented.

To God, secondly. For whereas Piety makes God our Alpha and Omega, the
beginning and the end; the beginning to which we ascribe all, the end

Which must needs be so much more odious to God, as it conforms us more to the
enemy of God, of whom we say commonly, As proud as the Devil. For that
once-glorious Angel looking upon his own excellency wherewith he was invested
in his creation, began to be lift up in himself, made himself his own Alpha and
Omega, acknowledging no essential dependence upon God as his beginning, no
necessary reference to God as his end; and therefore was tumbled down into that
bottomless dungeon, and reserved in everlasting chains This is it which some
think Saint Paul alludes to, when he charges that a Bishop should not be a
novice, left he should be puffed up, and fall (...), into the condemnation of
the Devil, 1 Timothy 3. 6.

Now there are so many kinds of Pride as there are imaginary causes of
selfexaltation; and there are so many causes imagined hereof, as there are
things reputed more precious and excellent in the eyes of the world. I might
send you to Hugo's Chariot of Pride, drawn with four horses, (that Age knew no
more) and the four wheels of it, if I listed to mount Pride curiously: but I
will show you her on foot. To speak plainly therefore, These five things are
wont commonly

Those that are tainted with the first, are State-proud; Bladders puffed up with
the wind of Honor. Thus Ninive, Behold I sit as a Queen; I am, and there is
none else: Thus the insolent officer of Sennacherib, Who art thou, that as that
Father said, Pride is an usual neighbor to greatness. How hard is it for
eminent Persons, when they see all heads bare, all knees bowed to them, not to
be raised up in their conceits, not to applaud their own glory, and to look
overly upon the ignoble multitude, as those which are Terrae filii, mushroms,
worthy of nothing but contempt? Hence it is that proud ones are incompatible
with each other. Look upon other Vices, ye shall see one Drunkard hug another,
one debauched Wanton love another, one Swearer, one Profane beast delight in
another: but one Proud man cannot abide another; as one twig cannot bear two
Red-breasts. Both would be best: Caesar will not endure an equal, nor Pompey

The second are Purse-proud. Vermis divitiarum superbia, as St. Austin wittily,
Pride is in the Purse, as the worm in the Apple. Thus Nabal, because he has
money in his bags and stock on his ground, sends a scornful message to poor
David, though a better man then himself; Many servants run away from their
Masters now adays. How many examples meet us every where of this kind; of them
which having scraped together a little money more then their neighbors, look
big upon it, and scorn the need of the better deserving, and bluster like a
tempest, and think to bear down even good causes before them? Secundas fortunas
decent superbiae, as the Comedian, Pride becomes the wealthy. Thus Solomon
notes in his time that the rich speaks with commands; the words weigh according
to the Purse.

The third are the Skin-proud; for Beauty goes no deeper: such as with Jezebel
lick themselves, and with Narcissus dote upon their own Faces; thinking it a
wrong in any that sees them, and admires them not; spending all their thoughts
and their time in fashions and complexion, as if their Soul lay in their hide;
despising the ordinary forms of vulgar persons, yea of the most beneficial
nature. Elatus erat animus tuus propter pulcritudinem, Thine heart was lifted
up because of thy beauty, says Ezekiel 28. 17.

The fourth are the Sinew-proud, which presume upon their own Strength Elatum
cor robore, says the same Ezekiel 28. 5. As Goliath, who dares in the
confidence of his own arm challenge the whole host of God, and scorns the
dwarfs and shrimps of Israel.

The fifth is the Skill-proud, puffed up with the conceit of Knowledge; as
Knowledge is indeed of a swelling nature. There is much affinity betwixt
Knowledge and Pride: both came out of one Country; for Pride is also natione
coelestis, as Hierom well: and since she cannot climb up thither again, she
will be mounting as high as she can toward it.

Every smatterer thinks all the Circle of Arts confined to the closet of his
breast; and, as Job speaks of his haughty friends, that all wisdom lives in
him, Hence is that curiosity of knowing vain querks of speculation; hence
singularity of opinion hating to go in the common track; hence impatience of
contradiction; hence contempt of the mediocrity of others. Out of this
impatience Zidkijah could smite Michaiah on the ear, and, as buffeting him
double, say, Which way went the Spirit of God from me to thee? Out of this
contempt the Scribes and Pharisees could say, Turba haec, this Laity, that
knows not the Law, is accursed.

But besides these five a man may be proud of any thing, yea of nothing, yea of
worse then nothing, Evil. There may be as much Pride in rags as in tissues.
Diogenes tramples upon Plato's pride, but with another pride. And we commonly
should be better. Let this then be the just (...) or Test of true or false
Religion; Bonaventure, whom the Romanists honor for a Saint, Hoc piarum
mentium est, etc. This is the part of pious Souls, to ascribe nothing to
themselves, all to the Grace of God. So as how much soever a man attributes to
the Grace of God, he shall not swerve from Piety in detracting from Nature; but
if he substract never so little from the Grace of God, and give it to Nature,
he indangers himself, and offends.

In the safety of this proof our Doctrine triumphs over the Romish in all those
Points wherein it opposes ours. Ours stands ever on Gods side, exalting
Solomon's (...). Insolent men, that will be climbing to Heaven by ladders of
their own making, with Acesius in Jerome! what other issue can they exspect
from the jealous God but a fearful precipitation? Neither doubt I but this is
one main ground of the Angels proclamation in the Apocalypse, Cecidit, cecidit
Babylon, It is fallen, it is fallen, Babylon the great City.

Thus from the Sin, which is Pride, we descend to the Punishment, which A man's
Pride shall bring him low. How can a bladder sink? Yet Pride, though it be
light in respect of the inflation, is heavy in respect of the offense: The
guiltiness is as a millstone to which it is tied, that will bear it down to the
bottom of the deep. As therefore there is a reflex action in the Sin, so is
there in the Punishment; it shall ruin it self. No other hands shall need to
be used in the Judgment besides her own. As the lightning has ever a spite
at the high spires and tall pines, striking them down or firing them, when the
shrubs and cotages stand untouched: so has the God that made it, at a
selfadvanced Greatness; whether out of a scorn of rivality, or a just
punishment of theft; for the Proud man both in a cursed emulation makes himself
his own Solomon. Down, whither? to the dust, to Hell; by others, by God
himself, temporally here, eternally hereafter. Insomuch as Aesop himself (we
have it in Stobaeus) when he was asked what God did, answers, Excelsa deprimit,
extollit humilia. Besides the odionsness of a proud man amongst men, commonly
God is even with him here. How many have we known that have been fastidious of
their Diet, which have come to leap at a crust, to beg their bread, yea to rob
the hogs with the Prodigal? How many that have been proud of their Beauty have
been made (ere they died) the loathsome spectacles of deformity? That of Esaias
strikes Because the daughters of Sion are haughty, and walk with stretched-out
necks and wanton eyes, etc. Therefore the Lord will smite with a scab the crown
of the head of the daughter of Zion, Esaias 3. 16. How many, that from the height
of their overweening have been brought to Benhadad's halter, or have been
turned to graze with Nebuchadnezzar? The Lord roots up the house of the proud,
Prove. 15. 25. But if they escape here (as sometimes they do) hereafter they
shall not: For the proud man is an abomination to the Lord, Prove. 16. 5. God
cannot endure him, Ps. 101. 5. And what of that? Tu perdes superbos, Thou shall
destroy the proud, Ps. 119. 21. The very Heathens devised the proud Giants
struck with thunder from Heaven. And if God spared not the Angels whom he
placed in but for their pride threw them down headlong to the nethermost hell;
how much less shall he spare the proud dust and ashes of the sons of men, and
shall cast them from the height of their earthly altitude to the bottom of
that infernal dungeon? Humility makes men Angels, Pride made Angels Devils, as
that Father said; I may well add, makes Devils of men. (...) Menander, Never
soul escaped the revenge of Pride, never shall escape it. So sure as God is
just, Pride shall not go unpunished. I know now we are all ready to call for a
Basin, with Pilate, and to wash our hands from this foul sin. Honorable and
beloved, this Vice is a close one, it will cleave fast to you; yea so close,
that ye can hardly discern it from a piece of your selves: this is it that
aggravates the danger of it. For, as Aquinas notes well, some sins are more
dangerous propter vehementiam impugnationis, for the fury of their assault, as
the sin of Anger; others for their correspondence to Nature, as the sins of
Lust; others propter latentiam sui, for their close sculking in our bosom, as
this sin of Pride. Oh let us look seriously A man's pride shall bring him low.

The humble in spirit. Not he that is forcibly humbled by others, whether God
or man; (so a wicked Ahab may walk softly and droop for the time, and be never
the better: What thank is it if we bow when God sets his foot upon us?) but he
that is voluntarily humble in spirit. And yet there are also vicious kinds of
this self-humility.

As first, when man having only God supra se, and therefore owing religious
worship to him alone, worships Angels or Saints that are but juxta se. It is
the Paul gives to his Colossians, Let no man deceive you in a voluntary
humility, and worshipping of Angels: much less then of stocks and stones. These
very walls, if they had eyes and tongues, could testify full many of these
impious and Idolatrous cringes and prostrations. So as if wood or stone could
be capable of pollution, here was enough; till this abused frame was happily
washed by the clear streams of the Gospel, and re-sanctified by the Word and
Prayer. This is a Superstitious Humility.

2. When a man basely subjects himself to serve the humors of the Great by
gross supparasitation, by either unjust or unfit actions and offices; yielding
himself a slave to the Times, a pander to Vice. This is a Servile Humility.

To be proud of Humility, as a Father said well, is worse then to be
superciliously and openly proud. This is an Hypocritical Humility.

4. When out of pusillanimity or inordinateness a man prostitutes himself to
those unworthy conditions and actions of sinful pleasure that mis-beseem a man,
a Christian. This is a Brutish Humility. All these self-humiliations are
thankless and faulty. It will be long enough ere the Superstitious, Servile,
Hypocritical, Brutish Humility shall advance us other then to the scaffold of
our

The True Humility is, when a man is modestly lowly in his own eyes, and
sincerely abased in his heart and carriage before God. And this
self-humiliation is either in respect of Temporal or Spiritual things. Of
Temporal, when a man thinks any condition good enough for him; and therefore
does not unduly intrude himself into the preferments of the world, whether in
Church or Commonwealth. When he thinks meanly of his own parts and actions,
highly

Of Spiritual, when he is vile in himself, especially in respect of his sins,
and therefore abhors himself in sackcloth and ashes: when the Grace that he
has he can acknowledge, but not over-rate; yea he takes it so low as he may do
without wrong to the giver: when for all Blessings he can awfully look up to
his Creator and Redeemer, ascribing all to him, referring all to him, depending
for all upon him; so much more magnifying the Mercy of God, as he is more
sensible of his own Unworthiness.

This is the true, though short, character of Humility. A plain Grace, ye The
humble in spirit shall enjoy honor, as in the former Translation; or, Honor
shall uphold the humble in spirit, as in the latter. In both, Honor is the
portion of the humble; for the raising of him in the one, for the preserving of
him in the other.

Honor, from whom? From God, from men. Even the good man of the house will
say, Friend, sit up higher. For though with vain men he is most set by that can
most set our himself: yet with the wiser, the more a man dejects himself, the
more he is honored. It cannot stand with the justice of the truly-vertuous A
broken heart, O God, thou will not despise, says the Psalmist; and, Pullati
extolluntur salute, The mourners are exalted with safety, says Eliphaz in Job
5. 11. The Lord lifts up the meek, says David, out of good proof; and needs
must he rise whom God lifts. What should we need any other precedent of this
Virtue, or other example of this Reward, then our Blessed Savior himself? all
other are worthy of forgetfulness in comparison: Who being in the form of God,
thought it not robbery to be equal with God; but made himself of no
reputation, and took upon him the form of a servant, etc. and being found in
fashion as a man, he humbled himself, and became obedient O God, what an
incomprehensible dejection was here! that the living God should descend from
the highest Glory of Heaven, and put upon him the rags of our Humanity; and
take on him not the man only, but the servant, yea the malefactor; abasing
himself to our infirmities, to our indignities, to be reviled, spat upon,
scourged, wounded, crucified: yea all these are easy tasks to that which
follows; to be made a mark of his Fathers wrath in our stead, so as in the
bitterness of his Soul he is forced to cry out, My God, My God, why have thou
forsaken me? What heart of man, yea what apprehension of Angels can be capable
of fadoming the depth of this Humiliation?

Answerable to thy dejection, O Savior, was thine exaltation; as the
conduit-water rises at least as high as it falls. Now is thy name above every
name; that at the name of JESUS every knee should how, of things in Heaven, in
earth, under the earth. Neither meanest thou to be our Savior only, but our
pattern too. I do not hear thee say, Learn of me for I am Almighty, I am
Omniscient; but, Learn of me that I am meek. If we can go down the steps of
thine Humiliation, we shall rise up the stairs of thy Glory. Why do we not then
say, I will be yet more vile for the Lord? Oh cast down your crowns with the
twenty four Elders ( Apoc. 4. 10.) before the Throne of God: Humble your seves
in the sight of the Lord, and he shall lift you up, Jam. 4. 10.

Indeed there is none of us but has just cause to be humbled, whether we
consider the wretchedness of our Nature or of our Estate. What is the best
flesh and blood but a pack of dust made up together into a stirring heap, which
in the dissolution molders to dust again?

When I consider the Heavens, and see the Sun, the Moon and the Stars as they
what a Worm? what an Ant? what a nothing? who besides his homeliness is still
falling asunder; for even of the greatest and best-composed is that of the
Psalm verified, Universa vanitas omnis homo, Every man is all vanity.

Alas then, what is it we should be proud of? Is it Wealth? What is the richest
metal but red and white earth? And that whereof too we may say, as the Sons of
the Prophets of their hatchet, Alas, Master, it was but lent. What speak I of
this, when our very breath is not our own? The best praise of Coin is, that it
is current, it runs from us; yea it is volatile, as wise Solomon, Riches have
wings: and if they leave not us, we must them. We and (according to the
proclamation of that great King) we must carry nothing with us but our
winding sheet; yea rather that must carry us.

Is it our Land? How long is that ours? That shall be fixed when we are gone,
and shall change, as it has done, many Masters. But withal, where is it? I
remember what is reported of Socrates and Alcibiades, (Aelian tells the story.)
Socrates saw Alcibiades proud of his spacious fields and wide inheritance, he
calls for a Map, looks for Greece, and finding it, asks Alcibiades where his
lands lay. When he answered they were not laid forth in the Map. Why (said
Socrates) art thou proud of that which is no part of the earth? What Licinius,
as much as a Kite could fly over, yea if all the whole Globe were ours, six or
seven foot will serve us at the last.

Is it our Honor? Alas, that is none of ours; for Honor is in him that gives
it, not in him that receives it. And if the Plebeians will be stubborn or
uncivil and respectless, where is Honor? and when we have it, what a poor
puff is this? how windy, how unsatisfying? Insomuch as the great Emperor
could say, I have been all things, and am never the better. Have ye Esau said
of his birthright, ye shall say ( mutat is mutandis) of all these ceremonies
of Honor, What are these to me, when I am ready to dye for pain?

Is it Beauty? What is that? or wherein consists it? Wherein, but in mere
opinion? The Aethiopians think it consists in perfect Blackness; we Europeans,
in white and red: and the wisest say, That is fair that pleases. And what Face
is it that pleases all? Even in the worst some eyes see features that please;
in the best some others see lines they like not. And if any Beauty could have
all voices, what were this but a wast and worthless approbation? Grant it to be
in the greatest exquisiteness, what is it but a Blossom in May, or a Flower in
August, or an Apple in Autumn, soon fallen, soon withered? Should any of you,
glorious Dames, be seized upon with the nasty pustles of the small Pox, alas!
what pits do those leave behind them to bury your Beauties in? Or if but some
languishing Quartan should arrest you, how is the delicate skin turned tawnie?
How does an unwelcome Dropsy saccus stercorum, as Bernard speaks, which if we
do not find noisome, others shall? Well may I therefore ask, with
Ecclesiasticus, Quid superbit terra and cinis? Why is this earth and ashes
proud? though it were as free from sin as it is from perfection. But now when
wickedness is added to vanity, and we are more abominable

Surely therefore, whenever you see a Proud man, say there is a Fool; ((...)
etc.) the heathen Menander could say so: for if he were not a mere stranger in
himself, he could be no other then confounded in himself. We see our own
outward filthiness in those loathsome excretions which the purest nature puts
forth: but if we could as well see our inward Spiritual beastliness, we could
not but be swallowed up of our confusion.

It falls out with men in this case as with some old foul and wrinkled dames,
that are soothed up by their Parasites in an admiration of their Beauty, to
whom We lie down in our shame, and our confusion covers Jer. 3. 25. Thus if
we be humbled in spirit^ we shall be raised unto true Honor; even such Honor
as have all his Saints. To the participation whereof, that God who has
ordained, graciously bring us, for the sake of Jesus Christ the Righteous: to
whom, with the Father and the Holy Ghost, one infinite God, be all Honor and
Glory now and for ever. Amen.


By Jos. HALL.
The chief Priests answered, We have no King but Caesar.
THere cannot be a more loyal speech as it may be used; One Sun is enough for
Heaven, one King for earth: But as it is used, there cannot be a worse. For in
so few words, these Jews flatter Caesar, reject Christ, oppose Christ to
Caesar. First, pretending they were Caesar's subjects; secondly, professing
they were not Christ's subjects; thirdly, arguing, that they could not be
Christ's subjects because they were Caesar's. The first by way of affirmation,
Caesar is our King: the second by way of negation, No King but Caesar: the
third by way of implication, Christ is not our King, because Caesar is.

The first was a truth; Caesar was indeed now their King, but against their
wills. Conquest had made his name unwelcome. They say true then, and yet they
flatter. Wonder not at this; a man may flatter, yea lie, in speaking truth,
when his heart believes not the title that his tongue gives. So it was with
these Jews; they called him King, whom they malign'd as an Usurper. For Judas
Gaulonites and Sadducus the Pharisee had soothed them, hated him as an enemy,
whom they were forced to fear as their King, holding it no better then a sinful
vassalage to stoop unto an Heathen scepter. Ye know the question moved upon the
Tribute-money, Matthew. 22. 17. Is it lawful to pay tribute to Caesar? Lo, they
say not, Is it needful? but, Is it lawful? The Herodians were a Faction that
had never moved this question, unless the Pharisees and their scrupulous
clients had denied it. They make it a difficulty not of purse, but of
conscience, Licetne? Is it lawful? Yet here, Regem habemus Caesarem, Caesar is
our King.

Samuel: They had learned of Nature and experience the best form of Government
((...)) but they would have had him of their own. As God said of the great
Prophet, so they are glad to hear him say of their King, De numero fratrum
tuorum, From among thy brethren. Propriety is in nothing more pleasing then in
matter of Government. It is a joy to think we have a King of our own; our own
blood, our own Religion; according Edomitish blood that made Herod so hateful,
though otherwise of no small merit. Now Caesar, though he were their King
actually in regard of power, yet they held him no better then an Intruder in
regard of right. For at first here was no more but (...), and (...) a
partnership and league of love betwixt the Romans and Jews, as 1 Maccab. 8. 20.
but after, when Pompey had vanquished Hyrcanus Aristobulus, now Judaea was glad
to turn tributary, and of a friend became a vassal, as ye see in the taxation
of Augustus, Luke 2. 1. and so continued with no small regret. Caesar therefore
was to them a Pagan for Religion, a Tyrant for Usurpation; at the best, an
alien from the Commonwealth of Israel; and therefore (as they imagined) not
capable of being the head of Israel. This of the Romans is taken for that
regnum Gentium, the Kingdom of the Gentiles, Hagg. 2. 22. by an Antonomasie;
which was therefore so much more hated, as it was more prevalent and imperious.
And ye know their fearful suggestion, Venient Romani, the Romans will come,
Joh. 11. 48. It was observed of old by Hierome, and since by Galatinus and
others, indeed who could look beside it? Thalmud and the ancient Rabbis,
wheresoever they find the name of Edom or Idumaea in the Old Testament, there
they think straight Rome understood; and this was with them that Onus Duma,
Esaias 21. 11.
in the Prophet Esaias. A misprision that arises (as Jerome guesses aright) by
occasion of the letters of Duma and Roma; for the Hebrew R and D are so like
that they can hardly be distinguished, and the same letter in the Hebrew forms
both O and U. Hence they gave out Caesar for an Idumaean, and branded all that
Nation with the curses of Edom. Absurdly, as we well know; for Edom, or Esau,
was Isaac's Son, whereas we Europeans came of Japhet. But this shows their good
will both to Caesar and his Country; no Nation under Heaven was more odious to
Remember, O Lord, the children of Edom, Psalm. 137. 7. Yet here, Regem habemus
Caesarem, Caesar is our King. Neither was this the note of the chief Priests
only, which had learned to flatter by art; but of the hollow multitude, who
had said (verse. 12.) If thou let this man go, thou art not Caesar's friend. As
if all were now grown fond of that Sovereignty which they hated.

This is enough to let our Caesar see that fair tongues are not always true.
In the Psalm which our late Augustus of ever-Blessed Memory chose for the
Anniversaries of his deliverance both from the Cowries and the Powder, ( Psalm.
18.) ye find this clause (verse. 45.) strange children shall dissemble with me;
which Strangers shall submit themselves to me. Marvel not at the difference;
the Hebrews take the word (...) for both, either mentientur or humiliabuntur,
to signify either curtefie or craft: wherefore? but to show us that estranged
hearts, whiles they submit, do but dissemble; and none more submiss then the
falsest; some whereof, whiles with deep protestations of fidelity they were
writing quodlibetical invectives against the perfidiousness of some
busiospirits of their own Faction, we have seen fall foul upon a convicted
Treason. It was not for nothing that under the picture of that lame Soldier
which at last has shouldred into the Calender, was written, Cavete vobis,
Principes, Look to your selves, ye Great Ones. Believe Actions, believe not
Judas could say, Hail, Master; and these colloguing Jews, Regem habemus
Caesarem, We have Caesar for our King. Do ye not mark how this note is changed?
The chief Priests said here, Non habemus Regem nisi Caesarem, We have no King
but Caesar: Now there is an Non habemus Regem Caesarem; yea Caesar is his
Esculer, or his Lacky. The exemption of the Spiritualty from Caesar, the
subjection of Caesar to the head of the Spiritualty, are points that would have
been as strange to the chief Priests of those times as they are familiar to
ours. But, O Souls not unworthy of a proud insultation, that thus willingly
abase their Crowns to a tyrannous Mitre!

It was too good a word this for Jews, Regem habemus, we have a King: That
which they held their misery, was more happiness then they could deserve, to be
Subjects. The very name of a King carries protection, order, peace: For Rex
judicio, etc. The King by judgment establishes the Land, says Solomon, Prove.
29. 4. Who knows not that, Judge. 17. 6. In those days there was no King in
Israel: and what of that? Every one did that which was right in his own eyes.
Anarchy is lawless, dissolute, confused. What other is the King then the Head
of the body, the Eye in the head, the Ball in that eye? Lucernam aptavi uncto
meo, I have prepared a light for mine anointed, Psalm. 132. 17. without which
the whole State must needs, like a blinded Polyphemus, reel, and stagger, and
grovel. If Solomon note it as a wonder in the Locusts, That they have no King,
and yet go forth by bands; S. John notes it in the infernal Locusts, that they
have a King, and his name is Abaddon, Revel. 9. 11. Not to speak of Heaven or
Earth then, even Hell it self stands not without a Government; the very region
of Confusion

There are Nations, I doubt not, that may say, Dedisti Regem in ira, Thou have
given us a King in thine anger, Hos. 13. 11. But for us, we may say, ut ros
super herbam, His favor is as the dew upon the grass, Prove. 19. 12. and shall
justly shut up with old David, Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, who has thus
replenished our Throne, as our eyes see it this day, 1 Kings 1. 48. And if we
do in the joy of our hearts say, Habemus Regem; why should not he with equal
reflection of joyful heart say, Habemus Subditos. Tribute, Honor, Fear,
Prayers, Love, Life is not too dear for our Caesar.

Caesar is our King: the Negation follows, We have no King but Caesar. The
negative as it is universal, excluding all; so it specially singles out Christ,
whom Pilate had lately named for their King. None, therefore not this Jesus. A
Rebellious protestation, and no better then Blasphemy in the mouth of Jews, of
Priests: For could they be ignorant of the Kingdom of the Messiah? yea of this
Messiah? Was not this King of the Jews Fore-figured by Melchisedec King of
Salem? sedec, we know, is Justice, salem is Peace; the fruit of his Justice is
Peace. Fore-prophesied to be the Prince of Peace? Esaias 9. 6. the government is
upon his shoulder, says that Evangelical Seer: yea, which of the Prophets is
silent of this Style? Constituted? Behold, Psalm. 2. 6. Acknowledged by the
Sages? Where is be that is born King of the Jews? We have seen his star, Mat.
2. 2. Ushered in by the Angel Gabriel? The Lord shall give him the throne of
his Father David, Luke 1. 32. Anointed? he is Christus Domini, and Christus
Dominus; anointed with the oil of gladness above his fellows. Proclaimed?
Behold, thy King comes to thee, says Zachary: Hosanna, Blessed be the
Kingdom that comes in the name of the Lord, said the Children in the streets.
Enthronized? Thy throne, O God, is for ever, and the scepter of thy Kingdom is
a right scepter. Honored with due homage? The Kings of the earth shall bring
presents to thee, says the Psalmist.

Nolumus hunc, No King but Caesar. And were they not well served, think we? Did
or could ever any eye pity them? Because they say, Christ is not our King, but
Caesar, therefore Christ shall plague them by Caesar; that very Roman
Government which they honored in a corrivality and opposition to Christ, shall
revenge the quarrel of Christ in the utter subversion of these Oh foolish
people and unjust! do ye thus requite the Lord? Did he empty himself of his
Celestial Glory, and put on weak Manhood and all the symptoms of wretched
Mortality; and do ye despise him for this Mercy? Is he so vile to you, because
he was so vile for you? Did his Love make him humble, that his Humility should
make him contemptible? Did he choose you out of all the kingdoms of the earth,
and do ye wilfully reject him? Hear therefore, ye despisers, and tremble; hear
the just doom of him who will be your Judge, if he shall not be your Savior:
Those mine enemies that would not I should reign over them, bring them hither,
and slay them before me, Luke 19. 27.

Lord, it is done as thou have commanded, and yet there is room. Do we think
Disrumpamus vincula, Let us break his bonds, and cast his cords from us. What
are his bonds but his Laws; his cords but Religious institutions? These fly
about men's ears like rotten tow, binding none but the impotent. The bounds of
his Kingdom are the ends of the earth. It is an hard word (yet I must say it;)
Oh that there were not more Traitors in the world then Subjects! Tell not me
what men's Tongues say; their Lives say loud enough, Nolumus hunc, Christ is no
King for us. Obedience is the true touchstone of Loyalty; not Protestations,
not outward Cringes, not disbursement of Tribute. We have all solemnly sworn
allegiance to the God of Heaven; we are ready Jesus; we stick not, perhaps, to
give obedientiam bursalem, as Gerson calls it, to God: but when it comes once to
the denial of our selves, to the mortifying of our corruptions, to the
strangling of the children of our own accursed wombs, to the offering up our
bodies and Souls as a reasonable and lively sacrifice; hic Rhodus, hic saltus.
Kings rule by their Laws. Be not deceived; if slips of weakness mar not our
Fealty, certainly continuance in wilful sins cannot stand with our Subjection.
Quomodo legis? How read thou then? as our Savior asks. What says thy
Lawgiver in Sinai? Thou shall have no other Gods but me. If now thou rear up
in thy bosom altars to the Astaroth of Honor, to the Tammuz of Lust, to the
Mammon of Wealth, Thou shall not take the Name of the Lord thy God in vain. If
now thine unhallowed tongue will not be beaten out of the hellish track of
Oaths, Blasphemies, profane Scoffs, thou have defied Christ. God says, Thou
shall keep holy the Sabbath day. If now thou shall spend it altogether upon thy
self, or else think, with that wise Heathen, thou do septimam oetatis
partem perdere, thou defiest Christ. God says, Thou shall not commit adultery.
If now, like an enraged stallion, thou neighest after every object of impure
Lust, thou have defied Christ. God says, Non in comessationibus and ebrietate,
Not in surfeiting and drunkenness. If now we shall pour our health and our
reason down our throats, and shall sacrifice our Souls to our Nolumus hunc?
But, O foolish Rebels that we are! do we think thus to shake off the yoke of
Christ? In spite of men and devils, he will be their King who do most grin and
gnash at his Sovereignty. Feel, O ye wilful sinners, if ye will not learn, that
as he has a golden Scepter, Virgam directionis, Psalm. 45. 6. so he has also
an iron Scepter, Psalm. 2. 9. Virgam furoris, Esaias 10. 5. Beauty and Bands,
Zach. 11. 10, 14. If ye will not bow under the first, yea must break under the
second. He shall break you in pieces like a Potters vessel, to mammocks, to
dust. Ye shall find that the Prince of darkness can no more avoid his own
torment, then he can cease from yours; and every knee, not only in Heaven and
in earth, but under the earth too, shall mal-gre bow to Jesus whom they have
scornfully rejected with Nolumus hunc, Christ is no King to us.

But I persuade my self better things of you all that hear me this day: There
is none of you (I hope) but would be glad to strew his garments, his
olive-boughs, yea his myrtles and laurels, yea crown and scepter under the
Hosanna altissimo. Oh then if you be in earnest, take the Psalmists counsel,
Osculamini filium: Give him the kiss of Homage, of Obedience. Let me have leave
to say that this charge is there given to the great Princes and Rulers of the
earth; they who honor others with a kiss of their hand, must honor themselves
with the humble kiss of his: No Power can exempt from this sweet Subjection.
Ecce servus tuns, Behold, I am thy servant, faith David; yea and, vilior ero, I
will be yet more vile for the Lord. Tremble before his footstool, O ye Great
ones, that binds Kings with chains and Nobles with fetters of iron, Psalm.
149. 8. Your very Height inforces your Obedience; the detrectation where of
has no other, but, Potentes potenter punientur, as that wise Tekoan said. Do
ye not see how awful, how submiss the Angels of Heaven are? Before his throne
they hide their faces with their wings; and from his throne, at his command,
they wait upon base and sinful flesh. It was a great praise that was given to
Placilla the Wife of Theodosius in Theodoret's history, Neque enim imperii
principatu extollebatur, etc. Her throne had not over-carried her thoughts, but
inflamed her holy desires the more; for the largeness of Gods blessing so much
more intended her love to the giver. Let me be bold to say, we have seen, we
have seen the incomparable favors of God to your Sacred Majesty; we that were
witnesses both of the weakness of

Thus much of the Negation, Christ is not our King. The Implication follows,
Christ is not our King, because Caesar is. The Anabaptist and the Jew are so
cross, that I wonder how one Amsterdam can hold them both: The Anabaptist
says, Caesar is not our King, because Christ is; the Jew says, Christ is not
our King, because Caesar is: Both of them equally absurd. Could there be a more
ignorant Paralogisme then this wherewith the foolish Jews beguiled themselves?
as if these two, Christ and Caesar, had been utterly incompatible. This
senseless misprision was guilty of all the plots against Christ. Herod no
sooner hears of a King of the Jews, then he startles up, and is straight
jealous of his Crown: the Jews hear of a King, and they are jealous of Caesar's
Crown: the Caesar's following hear of a King, and they are jealous of the Jews;
for, as Suetonius tells us in the Life of Vespasian, Percrebuerat in Orient
toto vetus and constans opinio, esse in fatis at Judaei hoc tempore rerum
potirentur, It was an old and constant This was on all hands an ignorant, an
injurious scrupulosity. O vain men! could they but have known that this was he
that truly said, Per me Reges regnant, By me Kings reign, they had concluded,
Caesar could be no King but from him: Earthly jurisdiction is derived from this
Heavenly. It is he that makes this a Monarch, that a Prince, that other a Peer;
Omnis potestas, All power is given to him both in Heaven and earth, and from
him to men. Caesar has his Crown from Christ; so far is Christ from pulling
the Crown from Caesar.

There were two points of State, which if they had known, would have secured
Caesar's. Subordination, for Christ is the founder of all just Sovereignty, he
can be no enemy to it. Plainly, Christ is Caesar's Lord, Caesar is Christ's
Deputy: The deputed power is not against the Original, but as by it, so for it.
As Caesar was Christ's Lord in forma servi; (ye know his charge, Give to Caesar
the things that are Caesar's; and the liquid cofer of the Sea shall rather
yield the Didrachma then he will not pay it, Matthew. 17. 27.) so Christ Caesar's
Lord in the Sovereignty of his Deity; Solus supra Caesarem Deus, qui fecit
Caesarem, None above Caesar, but the God that made Caesar, as that Father said.
There can be no Contrariety in Subordination. So is Caesar to Christ, as Earth
is to Heaven; under, not against it. All the life and motion of any earthly
creature is from the influences of Heaven; without which this whole Globe were
nothing but a dull and drossie clod.

And as here is Subordination one way, so Diversity another. Pilate questioned
our Savior punctually of his kingdom, Art thou a King? He denies not, but
distinguishes; My kingdom is not of this world, Joh. 18. 36. Lo, Christ's
kingdom was not of this world; Caesar's was not of the other: here can be no
Audite Judaei, audite Gentes, as S. Austin wittily, Hear, O Jews, hear, O
Gentiles, I hinder not your Dominion in this world, for mine is of another.
Fear not Herod 's vain fear, who killed the Infants to rid Christ (timendo
magis quam irascendo crudelior) more cruel in his fear then in his rage. My
Kingdom, he says, is not of this world. Oh come then to that Kingdom which
is not of this world; come in believing, and do not tyrannize in fearing. Thus
he. This King came not into the world to subdue Kings by fighting, but to win
them by dying, as Fulgentius well. Neither does he take away mortal Kingdoms
who gives Heavenly, as the Christian Poet said aright.

Upon both these grounds therefore, it is a blasphemous inconsequence, Caesar
Caesar, because Christ. Religion does not cross Policy, but perfects it rather.
Give me leave, I beseech you, to press this Point a little.

It is Religion that teaches us that God has ordained Kingly Sovereignty,
Romans 13. 1. ordained it immediately. That Position was worthy of a Red Hat,
Potestas Principis dimanavit a populo, Pontificis a Deo, Bellarm. Recogn.
in the Recognition of the book de Laicis; purposely raised to depress the
Dignity of Kings, to advance the Priesthood. I am sure, Samuel (when it was)
said, Ecce, prafecit vobis Jehova Regem, Behold, God has set a Kiog over you,
1 Samuel 12. 13. And Kings are wont to have no less title then Unctus Jehove, the
Anointed of the Lord; not unctus populi, the anointed of the people, 1 Samuel 24.
6. 2 Samuel 1. 14. Daniel could say of God, He removes Kings, and sets up
Kings, Dan. 2. 21. What need I persuade Christian Kings and Princes, that they
hold their Crowns and Scepters as in fee from the God of Heaven? Cyrus himself
had so much Divinity, Ezra 1. 2.

It is Religion that teaches us that the same power which ordained Caesar,
injoyns all faithful Subjection to Caesar; not for fear, but for conscience,
Romans 13. 5. Tribute to whom tribute, honor to whom honor; yea all devout
prayers for a Nero himself, 1 Timothy 2. 2. curbing both the tongue and the heart,
Thou shall not curse the King in thy thoughts, nor the rich in thy Bedchamber,
Nuntius crudelis, Prove. 17. 21. yea, no less then Hell and Damnation, Romans 13.
2.

Cursed be they that say Religion is only to keep men in awe; and cursed be he
that says there is any so sure way to keep men in awe as Religion. Go ye crafty
Politics, and rake hell for reasons of State; ye shall once find that there is
no wisdom, nor understanding, nor counsel against the Lord. It was a true and
well-grounded resolution of Constantius, That they cannot be faithful to their
King, who are perfidious to their God.

Let the great Caesar's of the world then know, that the more subject they
Caesar's rival, but Caesar's Lord and Patron. Caesar rules by his Laws, Christ
by Religion. If Execution be the Life of Laws, I am sure Religion veni
opitulari, come and help, as Macedonia in the Acts; woe be to the power that
fails it; and blessed, thrice blessed from Heaven be that hand that shall raise
her on her feet, and wipe off her tears, and stretch out it self mightily for
her

For us, blessed be God, we live here in the warm Zone, where the hot beams of
the Sun of Righteousness beat right down upon our heads. But what need I tell
your Sacred Majesty that in the North-west part of your Dominions, there are
some that live in the frozen and dark Climate of Ignorance and Superstition,
whose eyes have seldom (if ever) been blessed with so much as an oblique
irradiation of the Gospel? I know the bowels of your Princely compassion cannot
but be stirred with the misery of these poor Cimmerian souls, that have not so
much light as to wish more. Oh may it please your Gracious Jesus Christ, may it
please you to forbid their impuration by the noisome fogs and mists of those
mis-opinions, whose very Principles are professedly rebellious; as being well
assured that the more your Majesty shall advance the Spiritual Kingdom of
Christ, the more he shall advance the strength and glory of your Temporal: the
more Caesar. And may he still and ever be yours, and you his, till earth and
time be no more; till

THE
By JOS. HALL, Dean of Worcester, etc.
Psalm. 68. 30. Rebuke the company of Spear men, the multitude of the Bulls,
with the Calves of the people, till every one submit himself with pieces of
silver: Scatter thou the people that delight in war.
THE same Psalm that lately yielded us a Song of Thanksgiving, now affords us
a Prayer for Victory: Such variety of spiritual Flowers grows in every bed of
this Divine Garden. Our occasions cannot change so often, as God can fit us with
change of notes. The last verse before my Text, was a prediction of Kings
bringing Presents to God; this is a Prayer for dissipation of enemies. It is
not for nothing that the Psalmist interrupts his Prophecy with a Petition.
Hostility blocks up the way to Devotion. Even the Laws of God are silent in the
clashing of Arms; rebuke the company of spear-men, the multitude of Bulls,
with the calves of the people; and scatter the people that delight in war. May
it please you, first, to see the Enemies, then the Defeat. The Enemy is
described by a threefold title. 1. Fera arundinis, the company of the
spear-men, or, beasts of the reeds. 2. The multitude of Bulls, with the calves
of the people. 3. The people that delight in war. The Defeat Increpa, and
Dissipa, Rebuke, and Scatter. Rebuke is for the two first; yet not absolutely,
but with limitation, ( Till they submit themselves with pieces of silver.)
Dissipation is for the last; Scatter the people that delight in war. Those
that will be unjustly warring are worthy of rebuke; but those that delight in
war are fit for nothing but confusion.

a Beast, and a Company? Is it because the Multitude is bellua multorum
capitum, a beast of many heads? Or is it because of the sociable nature even of
brute creatures, which still affect to herd and flock together? For, lest any
man stumble at the word, that which is here translated fera, is by the same
hand turned pecus, ver. 11.

Both the senses do well, a Beast, or a Company: The one implies the qualities
of the Churches Enemies, that they are of a fierce and bestial disposition; the
other, their number and combination. For the former, Who can express the savage
Cruelty of the enemies of the Gospel? Look into the ancient story Marian
times? what should I bring you into the holy inquisition, and show you there
all the bloody engines of torture, an Hell upon earth? what should I present
you Spanish Cruelties which were exercised upon our men in the Indies during
the late war? Death was but a sport in respect of the torments in dying. Lo
here, a Beast; yea, not Bestia, but Fera, a Savage beast; yea worse then
either. Did ever man do thus to beast? If a Baptista Porta have devised a way
to roast a Foul quick; or some Italian executioner of gluttony have beaten a
Swine dead with gentle blows, to make a Cardinals morsel; every ingenuous man
is ready to cry out of this barbarous Tyranny, yea the very Turks would punish
it with no less then death: yea if a Syracusan boy shall but pick out a Crows
eyes, those Pagans could mulct him with

As the enemies of the Church are Fera, a Beast, so they are coetus, a
Compaany, My name is Legion, for we are many; a Legion of many thousands: yea,
Gad, for an host comes; an Host of many Legions: yea, a combination of many
Hoasts: Gebal, and Ammon, and Amalek, the Philistines with them that dwell at
Tire, Ashur also is joined to them. Here is (...), the Church of the malignant:
a Church? yea a world; mundus in malign. Divide the world (with our Learned
Breerwood) into thirty parts, nineteen of them are Pagans; and they are
enemies. Of those eleven that remain six are Mahumetans; and they are enemies.
Of those other five that remain, there is an Antichristian Faction that
challenges universality; and they are enemies. Stand Lord, how many are they
that rise up against me? Yet when all is done, (that no man may be discouraged)
if we have but our eyes opened with Elisha's servant, to see the host of
Heaven glittering about us, we shall boldly say, There are more with us then
against us.

Yet if these that are against us were many, and not united, it were nothing.
coetus; their heads, their hearts, their hands are laid together. And why do
not we learn wit and will of those that hate us? why are we several, whiles
they are conjoined? why should partial Factions and private fancies distract
us, when the main Cause of God is on foot? Beleague your selves, ye Christian
Princes and Potentates; combine your selves, ye true-hearted Christians, and be
gathered by the voice of Gods Angel to a blessed and victorious Armageddon.

But why fera arundinis, the beast of the reeds? I do not tell you of S.
Jerome's bestia calami, the beast of the quill, that is, writers for falsehood;
though these, these are the great Incendiaries of the world, and well worthy of
the deepest increpation. Here doubtless, either the beasts of the reeds are the
beasts that lie among the reeds; (as Cassiodorus has given us an hint, Leones
domestica canneta reliquerunt, The Lions have lest the reedy thickets) or else
the reed is here the spear, or dart. We know some regions yield groves of
reeds; ye would think them so many saplings or samplars at the least;
arborescere solent calami, as Calvin. These were of use in war for darts or
spears. The vant-gard therefore of David's enemies are Spear-men or Darters;
for they were wont to dart their spears (as you see in Saul, 1 Samuel 20. 33.)
And why this? In a sword-fight we come to close handblows; Ephesians. 6. 16. Much
and lamentable experience has this State (if ever any) had of these
mischievous engines of commotion, that have been Alps and Pyrenees. What is
the remedy, but the same which is against the Devil, the shield of prevention?
Stir up your vigilant care, O ye great Leaders of Israel, by the strict
execution of wholesome laws, to avoid the dint of these murderous subornations.
And when ye have done your best, it must be the Lord of hoasts, the great
protector of Israel, that must break the bow, and knap the spear in sunder,
Psalm. 46. 9.

Their second title is Bulls, for their ferocity, for their strength. The Lion
is a more Lordly beast, but the Bull is stronger; and, when he is enraged, more
impetuous. Such are the Enemies of the Church. How furiously do Let us break
their bonds, and cast their cords from us. Who is the Lord, that I should let
Israel go? Where is the God of Hamath, and of Arpad? where are the Gods of
Sepharvaim, Hena and Ivah? have they delivered Samaria out of my hand? who are
they among the Gods of the Countries, that have delivered their country says
proud Rabshakeh, 2 Kings 18. 34. Hark how this Assyrian Bull roars out
Blasphemy against the Lord of Hoasts; and all the rest of that wild herd have
no less grass on their horns: stay but a while, and ye shall see him with'd,
and halter'd, and staked, and baited to death. Here only is the comfort of the
Israel, who says to the raging Sea, Here shall thou stay thy proud waves, can
tame at pleasure these violent beasts, or break their necks with their own
fury. So let thine enemies perish, O Lord.

These Bulls are seconded with their own brood, the Calves of the people.

Who are they, but those which follow, and make up the herd? the credulous
seduced multitude, which not out of choice, but example, join in opposition to
God. Silly calves, they go whither their dams lead them, to the field or to the
slaughterhouse. Blind obedience is their best guide. Are they bidden to adore
a God which they know the baker made? they fall Turselline considently?) they
must go, and adore those wandering walls. Are they bidden to forswear their
Allegiance, and to take arms against their Lawful and native Sovereign? they
rush into the battle without either fear or wit; though for the aid of a sure
enemy, which would make them all (as he threatened in Eighty eight) alike good
Protestants. Very calves of the people, whose simplicity were a fitter subject
for pity, then their fury can be of malice; were Hear now this, O foolish
people and without understanding, which have eyes and see not, which have ears
and hear not, Jer. 5. 20. How long will ye suffer your selves to be befooled
and beslaved with the tyranny of Superstition? God has made you men, why will
ye abide men to make you vitulos populorum, the calves of the people? We must
leave you as ye are, but we will not leave praying for your happy change; that
God would consecrate you to himself, as the calves of his altar, that ye may be
offered up to an holy, lively, reasonable, acceptable sacrifice in your blessed
Conversion. Amen.

The last and worst title of these enemies is, The people that delight in war.

War is to the State as Ignis and Ferrum, the Knife and the Searing-iron, to
the body; the last and most desperate remedy: always evil, if sometimes
necessary; it is not for pleasure, it is for need. It must needs be a cruel
heart that delights in war. He that well considers the fearful effects of
war, the direption of goods, the vastation of Countries, the sacking and
burning of Cities, the murdering of men, ravishing of women, weltring of the
horse and rider in their mingled blood, the shrieks and horror of the dying,
the ghastly Chrysostom, that war to any Nation is as a tempest to the Sea,
tossing and clashing of the waves together. And fain would I hear of that
Mariner that takes delight in a Storm. The executioners David could send this
message to Joab, The sword devoures at random, so, and such, 2 Samuel 11. 25.
Victory is not more sweet then uncertain. And what man can love to perish?
Aquinas requires to a lawful war are met, Supreme Authority, a warrantable
Cause, a just Intention; a Supreme Authority in commanding it, a warrantable
Cause in undertaking it, a just Intention in executing it; it is no other then
Bellum Domini, Gods war; God made it, God owns it, God blesses it. What talk
I Lacedamonians had no other statues of their Deities but armed. Yea, what
speak I of these Puppets? the true God rejoices in no title more then of the
Lord of Hoasts. In these cases say now, Blessed be the Lord who teaches my
hands to war and my fingers to fight. But if Ambition of enlarging the bounds
of dominion, Covetousness of rich booties, emulation of a rival Greatness,
shall unsheath our swords; now every blow is Murder. Woe to those hands that are
thus imbrued in blood: Woe to those Tyrants that are the authors of this lavish
effusion; every drop whereof shall once be required of their guilty Souls. God
thinks he cannot give a worse Epithet to those Wicked and blood-thirsty men.
David might not be allowed to build God an House, because he had a bloody hand;
the cause was holy, yet the color offends. How hateful must those needs be to
the God of Mercies that delight in Blood? the true brood of him that is the
manslayer from the beginning. There are strange diets of men, as of other
creatures; whereof there are some that naturally feed on poison and fatten with
it; and it may be there are Cannibals that find man's blood sweet: yet I think
it would be hard to find a man that will profess to place his felicity in a
cruel hazard. So does he that delights in war: and if no man (for shame) will
be known to do simply and directly so, yet in effect men bewray this
disposition, osores pacis, haters of peace, as the Psalmist calls them, Ps.
120. 7. stubbornly repelling the fair motions and meet conditions thereof: if,
secondly, they take up slight and unjust causes of war, as it is noted by
Suetonius of Julius Caesar (which this Island had experience of) that he would
refrain from no occasion of war if never so unjust; contrary to the better
temper and resolution of wiser Romans then himself, who would rather save one
Subject then kill a thousand Enemies: if, thirdly, they give wilful
provocations of this public revenge by gross, open, intolerable injuries; as
Hanun did to David; such are encroachments upon their neighbour-territories,
violating the just covenants of league and commerce by main violences:
Benjamites in case of the Sodomitical villainy of their Gibeah. Where all, where
any of these are found, well may we brand that people with delight in war.
And since they will needs delight in war, God shall fit them accordingly.
With the froward thou shall show thy self froward, Ps. 18. 26. He shall delight
in warring against them. He shall rouse up himself as a Giant refreshed with
new wine. Therefore thus says the Lord of Hoasts, the mighty one of Israel,
Ah, I will ease me of my adversaries, and revenge me of mine enemies, Es. 1. 24.

These are the Enemies. The Defeat follows, Rebuke and scatter. The two aeque
nor aqualiter. Some are Calves, simple, though violent; some others are Bulls,
fierce and furious; some other Lions from among the reeds, ravenous and
devouring: all these, though cruel, yet perhaps are not malicious; an increpa
is enough for them. Saul breathing out threatenings against the Church, and
tossing upon his horn many worthy Christians; had it not been pity he had been
destroyed in that height of his rage? an increpation brought him home: God had
never such a Champion. Now, certamen bonum certavi, I have fought a good fight,
says he justly of himself, 2 Timothy 4. 7. This increpa then is, Discountenance
them, dishearten them, discomfit them, disband them. Put them down, O Lord, and
let them know they are but men: humble them to the very dust, but not to the
dust of death; to correction, as Habacuc speaks, not to a full destruction;
only till they humbly bring pieces of silver, till they come in with the
tributes of peaceful submission, of just satisfaction. The end of all inquire
of Abel ere we infer it, ( offeres ei pacem, Deuteronomy. 20. 10.) so when we hear
of Abel we must stint it. War to the State is Physic to the body. This is no
other then a civil evacuation, whether by potion or phlebotomy. What is the end
of Physic but health? when that is once recovered, we have done with the
Apothecary. He wantons away his life foolishly that, when he is well, will take
Physic to make him sick. It is far from us to wish the confusion of the
ignorant and seduced enemies of God's Church, those that follow Absalom with an
upright heart: No, we pity them, we pray for them. Oh that they would come in
with their pieces of silver, and tender their humble obediences to the apparent
Truth of God, and Jap^^t to dwell in the tents of Sem! Father, forgive them,
for they know not what they do. O thou sword of the Lord, how long will it be
ere thou be quiet? put up thy self into thy scabbard, rest and be still, Jer.
47. 6.

But for those other that delight in war, Dissipa, Domine, Scatter them, O
Lord. Confusion is but too good for them; bring them to worse then nothing. The
perfection and suddenness of this dissipation is expressed emphatically in the
beginning of this Psalm by a double Metaphor; as smoke before the wind, as wax
before the fire, so scatter them. Of all light bodies nothing is more volatile
then smoke, of all solid none more flitting then wax: As wind is to the smoke,
them that offend on malicious wickedness.

Two thoughts only remain now for us. The first, that it must be God only who
must rebuke and scatter. The second, that it is our Prayer only that must
obtain from God this rebuke, this dissipation. Both which when I have touched

It is God only that must do it; for vain is the help of man. And how easy
is it for the Almighty to still the enemy and avenger? They are as a potters
vessel to his iron Scepter; as the thorns or wax to his fire; as chaff or smoke
to his wind. To our weakness the opposite powers seem strong and unconquerable;
the Canaanitish was reach up to Heaven; and who can stand before the sons of
Anak? When we see their Bulwarks, we would think they roll Pelion upon Ossa
with the old Giants; when we see their Towers, we would think they would scale
Heaven with the builders of Babel; when we see their Mines, we would think they
would blow up the earth. Let the wind of Gods Power but Egypt had long made
slaves of God's people, and now will make slaughter of them; following them
armed at the heels into the chanel of the Sea. Stand still, and see the
Salvation of the Lord; for the Egyptians which you have seen to day, ye shall
see no more for ever, Exodus 14. 13.

The great Host of proud Benhadad will carry away all Samaria in their
Sennacherib comes crowing over poor Jerusalem, and he will lend them two
thousand horses, if they can set riders on them; and scorns their King, and
defies their God: Stay but till morning, all his hundred fourscore and five
thousand shall be dead corpses. Vain fools! What is a finite power in the hands
of an infinite? Where there is an equality of force, there may be hard tugging;
but where brass meets with clay, how can that brittle stuff escape unshattered?
Let this cool your courages, and pull down your plumes, O ye insolent enemies
of God. When ye look to your own sword, there is no rule with you; Mihi
perfacile est, etc. It is easy for me (says Uldes to destroy all the earth
that the Sun looks upon: but when God takes you to task, what toys, what
nothings ye are? Behold, we come against you in the Name of the Lord of Hoasts:
It is he that shall rebuke and scatter you.

He will do it; but he will do it upon our Prayers. Not that our poor
Petitions can put mercy into God, who is infinitely careful for the good of his
Church above all possible reaches of our desires; but that we may be raised up
to a meet capacity of Mercy. God cannot hate his enemies or love his own ever
the more upon our entreaties; yet he will be sued to for the particular effects
of both, if ever we look to taste of his Mercy in either. If we have not a heart
to Amalek, that he commanded it to be rooted out of the earth; so did he love
Israel as the apple of his eye: Yet unless Moses hold up his hand, Amalek shall
prevail against Israel. These are our best, our surest weapons, even our
Prayers; and blessed be God that has put it into the heart of his Anointed to
seek his face in these powerful Humiliations. We sought him against the
Pestilence, and prevailed almost miraculously against that destroying Angel;
why should we not hope to find him against unseasonable Clouds, against the
opposite powers of flesh and blood? Here is your safety, here is your assurance
of victory, O ye great Princes and Potentates of the earth: if ye trust to the
arm of flesh it will fail you. Flaminius was;) let your counsel be vigilant,
your munition ready, your troops trained and valiant; yet if there be not
Devotion enough in our bosom to make God ours, in vain shall we hope to stand
before our enemies. This only (whatsoever the profane heart of Atheous men may
imagine) this is the great Ordnance which can batter down the walls of our
enemies, yea the very black gates of Hell it self; in comparison whereof all
humane powers are but paper-shot. Yea this is that Petar which only can
thundering Legion.

What is it that made us so happily successful in Eighty eight beyond all hope,
beyond all conceit, but the fervency of our humble Devotions? That Invincible
Navy came on dreadfully floating like a moving wood in the sight of our coast;
those vast Vessels were as so many lofty Castles raised on those liquid
foundations: Then straight, as if those huge bottoms had been stuffed with
Tempests, there was nothing but thunder and lightning and smoke, and all the
terrible apparitions of death. We, what did we? we fought upon our knees, both
Prince and people. Straight God fought for us from Heaven. Our Prayers Spain,
the Terror of England. And is the hand of our God shortened? Is he other then
what he was? We may be (as we are) weakened and effeminated yesterday, and to
day, and the same for ever. If we be not wanting to him in our Prayers, he
cannot be wanting to our Protection.

Look up to him (O dear Christians) that is the God of our Salvation. Behold,
the Lions out of their reeds, the Bulls out of their forests, and these in
banded multitudes conspire against us; and the misled Calves of the people are
apt enough to back their attempts. Neither is this a fair hostility; our
enemies are those that hate peace, and delight in war, offering insolent
provocations to our State, in dis-inheriting part of the Royal Issue, violating
their faiths, maintaining their unjust affronts, ambitiously aspiring to undue
Sovereignty. What put not your trust in Princes, nor in the sons of men, whose
breath is in their nostrils. O put not your trust, ye Princes and Peers, in
your sword, in your bow; in your powers and confederacies. Trust only to the
great God of hoasts, who alone can but blow upon all the proudest preparations
of your enemies, and scatter them to the lowest Hell. Come to him in your
humble devotions, with an Increpa and Dissipa; he shall soon make your enemies
to lick the dust.

But what shall I say (Honorable and Beloved?) we have prayed, and have not
been heard; and thou, O Lord, have not of late gone forth with our hoasts: yea
thou have rebuked us, in stead of our enemies. Alas! we can more grieve then

Israel in the hot chase of all their victory, is foiled more then once by a
Canaanite. Whence was this? There was a pad in the straw, an Achan in the camp.
Theft and Sacrilege fought against Israel more then the men of Ai: the wedge
of Gold wounded them more then the enemies steel; the Babylonish garment
disarmed and stripped them: Israel had sinned, and must flee. Alas, my
brethren, what do we pray for victory over our enemies, when our sins (which
are our deadliest enemies) conquer us? To what purpose are our Prayers loud,
when our sins are louder? to what purpose are our Bodies this day empty, if our
Souls be full of wickedness? whiles we provoke God to his face with our Oh that
my people had hearkened to me, and Israel had walked in my ways (faith God;) I
should soon have subdued their enemies, and turned my hand against their
adversaries: The haters of the Lord should have submitted themselves to him;
but their time should Psalm. 81. 13, 14, 15.

Oh then cleanse your hands, ye sinners, and purge your hearts, ye
double-minded; wash your hands in innocence, and then compass the Altar of God.
Then shall the God of our righteousness hear in his holy Heavens, and rise up
mightily for our defense; then shall he be a wall of brass about our Island;
then shall he wound the head of our enemies, and make the tongues of our dogs
red with their blood; then shall he cover our heads in the day of battle, and
make this Nation of ours victoriously glorious to the ends of the world, even
to all ages and times; then shall he be known to be our God, and we shall be
known to be his people for ever: Which he of his infinite mercy vouchsafe to
grant us for Jesus Christ the Righteous; to whom, etc.

St. PAUL'S
IN TWO SERMONS
By J. H.
1 Cor. 15. 32. If after the manner of men I have fought with beasts at
Ephesus, etc. (...).
OUR Savior foretold us that these last days should be quarrelsome; all the
world does either act or talk of fighting: Give me leave therefore to fall upon
the common Theme of the times, and to tell you of an holy Combat. Saint Peter
tells us Paul's Epistles: this may well go for one of them, which is the
relation of his Conflict at Ephesus. There are that have held it literal, and
those not mean nor only modern Authors. Nicephorus tells us a sound tale of S.
Paul's commitment to prison by Hieronymus the Governor of Ephesus, Nic. l. 2.
^. 25.
his miraculous deliverance for the Christening of Eubula and Artemilla, his
voluntary return to his Jail, his casting to the Lion, of the beast couching
at the feet of the Saint, of the hail-storm sending away the beholders with
broken heads and the Governor with one ear shorn off, of the Lions escape to
the mountains. It is a wonder in what mint he had it. Act. 19. 29.
There was indeed a Theater at Ephesus for such purposes; and, Christianos was
a common word, as we find in Tertullian. Ignatius, Tecla, Prisca, and many
other blessed Martyrs were corn allotted to this mill. But what is this to S.
Paul's Combat? It is one thing to be cast to the beasts as an offender, another
thing to fight with beasts as a Champion; a difference which I wonder the sharp
eyes of Erasmus saw not. Those were forced by the sentence of condemnation,
these Voluntaries as in the Jogo de toros; those were brought to suffer, these
came to kill; those naked, these armed. Can any man be so senseless as to think
that S. Paul (tricubitalis ille, as Chrysostom calls him) would put himself
into the Theater with his sword and target to maintain a duel with the Lion?
Thus he must do, else he did not according to the Letter (...). Luke should in
his Acts omit this passage more memorable then all the rest that he has
recorded? Indeed S. Paul, who had reason to keep the best register of his Luke
has not particularized: he tells us of five scourgings, 2 Cor. 11. 24.
three whippings, three shipwracks; whereas S. Luke tells us but of one
shipwreck Act. 27. of one scourging, Act. 16. 23. But so eminent an occurrence
as this could not have passed in silence; at least amongst that catalogue of
less dangers his own Pen would not have smothered it. Yea let me be bold to say
that this not only was not done, but could not be. Paul was a Citizen of Rome;
if that privilege saved him from lashes, Act. 22. 25. much more from the
beasts; their contemptible jaws were no death for a Roman. I am with those
Fathers, ( Tertullian, Chrysostom, Jerome, Theophylact, others) who take this
metaphorically of men in shape, beasts Tim. 4. 17. I was delivered out of the
mouth of the Lion, that is, Nero: and with that of the Psalmist, Ne tradas
bestiis animas confitentes tibi, Give not unto the beasts the souls that
confess thee, as the Vulgar reads, Psalm. 74. 19.

Who then were these beasts at Ephesus? Many and great Authors take it of
Demetrius his Faction and their busy tumult, Acts 19. Neither will I strictly
examine with S. Chrysostom, whether S. Paul sent away this former Epistle from
Ephesus before those broils of their Diana and her Silver-smiths, as may seem
to be gathered by conferring of S. Luke's journal with S. Paul's Epistle.
Others take it of those Ephesian Conjurers, Acts 19. Tertullian hits it home,
Asiatick pressure, whereof S. Paul speaks 2 Cor. 1. 8. That text glosses upon
this at large; turn your eyes to that Commentary of S. Paul: For we would not
have you ignorant of our trouble which came to us in Asia, that we were pressed
out of measare above strength; insomuch as that we despaired of life. But we
had the sentence of death in our selves. Lo here the Beasts; lo here the
Combat. Ephesus was the mother-City of Asia; there S. Paul spent three years
with such perpetual and hot bickerings, that his very life was hopeless. As
some great Conqueror therefore desires to have his prime and most famous
victory engraven in his last Monument, so does our Apostle single out this
Ephesian; I fought with beasts

My Text then shall be this one word (...). But as this word is a compound, so
it compounds my Text and discourse of two parts: the first comprehends the
Beasts wherewith S. Paul conslicts; the latter the conflicts that he had with
those Beasts. Both of them worthy of your most careful attention. My first
subjects is harsh, and therefore will need a fair construction.

The world is a wide Wilderness, wherein we converse with wild and savage
creatures; we think them men, they are beasts. It is contrary to the delusions
of Lycanthropy: there, he that is a man thinks himself a beast; here, he that
is a Timon-like or Cynick humor, I were fallen out with our creation. I know
what the Psalmist says, Thou have made man little lower then the Angels (Psalm.
8. 5.) there is but paulo minus; I know some of whom it is said sicut Angeli,
as the Angels of God; yea yet more, there are those of whom it is said, Dii
estis, ye are Gods; besides these, every renewed man is a Saint, his
Regeneration advances him above the sphere of mere Humanity: but let him be but
a very man, that is, a man corrupted, I dare say, though he be set in honor,
he is more then compared to the beast that perishes. Far be it from us then to
cast mire into the face of our Creator: God never made man this quarrel: we
cannot challenge a worse enemy then what we were, and

Let degenerated Nature then fee her best Advocate at this bar; he can but
plead Shape, Speech, Ratiocination to make himself no beast: and if these prove
but some juggling mists to make him seem other then he is, he shall be forced to
grant himself other then he seems, a beast.

To begin with the first. The true essence of Humanity lies not in the outside:
God has hid the Form of every creature deeper, much more of him that should be
reasonable. Let us give leave to holy Austin's credulity, that a man was by a
piece of an enchanted Cheese turned into an Ass: tell me now, ye Philosophers,
what creature ye will call this. His Soul is the same, the Shape is Cleanthes,
which Epiphanius mentions, that the Soul is the man. What is the Body then but
the Habit of this Spirit, which it may change or put off without change, as
under diverse suits we still wear the same skin? If we had been on the Scaffold
to see a man challenging the dogs in the disguise of a Bears-hide, would we
have Indian shores men have been seen with the faces of beasts; and ye know the
old verse, Simia quam similis? Yea both our stories and the Netherlandish tell
us of Sea Monsters that have been taken up in the full form of men: if the
outside seemed humane, whiles the inside was mute and reasonless, who would
honor that creature with the style of man? What should I tell you that evil
spirits have not seldom appeared in the shipes of men, as that Devil of Endor
in Samuel's likeness? If the outward Figure could have made the man, the
Prophet had survived his death. To these let me add, that the Shape is changed
with disease Ego non sum ego. What shall we say of the proud Monarch of
Babylon, Nebuchadnezzar, during the seven years of his transformation? His
outward Shape was not changed, his heart was; it was the word of his Vision,
Let his heart be changed from man's, and let a beasts heart be Dan. 4. 16. What
was he now for the time but a beast even in his own sense? His diet was with
the oxen, his hair like Eagles feathers, his nails like birds claws; all was,
obbrutescebat animus, his heart was bestial in a case of humane flesh. It is
not therefore the Shape that can forbid man to be a beast. And it was not for
nothing that the Cynick sought in the full streets for a man, and would not
allow that acclamation to Doxippus in the Olympian games, Doxippus viros vicit.

Let us see what Speech and Reason can do, Ratio and Oration. Every living
creature has a peculiar sound whereby to express it self; and that not without
some variety of signification and change of note. If man only speak
articulately Apollonius Tyaneus could construe them in their sense, it is all
one as if he listened to his Gossips. But besides the natural tone, have we not
heard Birds taught so to imitate the Hyaena, that learns the Shepherds name,
and calls him forth to his cost, so cunningly counterfeiting the voice that the
man paies his blood for his credulity? A dumb man is no less a man then a
pratler. Balaam's Ass was a beast still, and yet not only spoke, but spoke in a
man's voice, 2 Pet. 2. 16. Besides that, man when he comes to his best, shall
have no use of Speech; (although there want not some, as Gerson, Salmeron and
others, that hold a vocal Quire in Heaven.) The Angels praise God and
understand each other, without use of a tongue; once we shall be like them. It
is not Speech therefore that makes the man, since man shall be most himself
when he shall

It is Reason that mainly differenceth man from beast, and the improvement of
it in a free deduction of consequences and conclusions: that Divine power
dwells only in the immortal Soul of man, and is not communicable to the lower
form of creatures. Let me have leave still to put you in mind that I speak not
of man created in innocence; I speak not of man as renewed by Grace, and by
that initiated in Glory: I speak of man as depraved by sin. Now he has indeed
the light of Reason, but so dim and duskie, that we may well say he looks
through horn, not through Crystal: He that was an Eagle, is now an Owl to this
Sun. As his best Graces are lost, so his second become like the beast that
perishes, not in frailty only, but in ignorance; for it follows, This their
way is their folly, Psalm. 49. 13.

Besides, we see the outside of those creatures we call brute, we see not what
is within them. Not to speak of the excellency of their Common sense and
strength of Memory; surely their Fantasy yields such inferences as would seem
to evince an inferior and mungrel kind of Ratiocination. Who that should see
Plutarch's Crow coming to the pail to drink, and finding it not full enough for
her reach, carrying stones to raise up the water; who that should see the
Beavers framing their den, or some Birds building their Lactantius dares say,
De Ira Dei, l. 1. c. 7.
(I dare not) Ista non facerent, nisi inesset illis intelligentia and
cogitatio? It is true, our reasonable Soul is furnished with higher powers; but
For the natural man perceives not the things of the spirit of God, neither can
he know them, because they are spiritually discerned, 1 Cor. 2. 14. And in that
person it is that Agar the Son of Jakeh speaks, I am more brutish then man, I
have not the understanding of a man, Prove. 30. 2. Why this? I have not the
knowledge of the holy, verse. 3. The word is remarkable; no other Jumentum, a
Beast; the same that Ezekiel uses, when he says, I will give thee over into
the hands of brutish men, Ezec. 21. 31. and the Psalmist, when he says, Oh ye
foolish, or brutish, among the people, when will ye understand? So as,
notwithstanding this muddy and imperfect Reason, God sees a kind of brutality
in the natural man. Whereto it may please you to add, that in a man debauched
Reason is so much worse then brutishness, by how much wickedness is worse
heinous then simplicity; and if want of

And now that we see it apparent that he is so, let us a little inquire how he
became so. Certainly, God made man upright, as in shape, so in disposition:
What wrought this miserable Metamorphosis? What could do it but Sorcery? and
what Witch could this be but the old Circe of the world,

And now what variety think you is there of several kinds? no wilderness
affords so many. Nero is a Lion, 2 Timothy 4. 17. Herod a Fox, Luke 13. 32. the
Jewish false-teachers Dogs, Phil. 3. 2. David's persecutors Bulls of Basan, and
Unicorns, Ps. 22. 12, 21. the Egyptian enemies Dragons, Ps. 74. 13. the
Scribes and Pharisees Serpents, Vipers, Mat. 23. 33. the Babylonian Monarch an
Eagle-winged Lion, the Persian a Bear, the Macedonian a Leopard, Dan. 7. 4, 5,
6. the enemies of the Church wild Boares, Ps. 80. 13. Greedy Judges evening
Wolves, Zeph. 3. 3. Schismatics Foxes cubs, Cant. 2. 15. The time and my
breath would fail me if I should reckon up all the several kinds of beasts in
the skins of men. Surely as there is thought to be no beast

Look into all herds and droves, and see if you can find so very a beast as
the Drunkard. It was S. Austin's reason of old, Those beasts will drink no more
then they think enough; and if the Panther (which they say is the drunkennest
beast) or the Swine be overtaken with unaccustomed liquor, it is upon Noah
himself may be at first mistaken.) But man's Reason foretells him that those
intoxicating draughts will bereave him of Reason, yet he swills them down
wilfully; as if it were a pleasure to forgo that whereby he is a man. The
beast when he has his load, may frisk a little, and move inordinately, and
then lie down in an ordinary posture of harmless rest: but for the Drunkard,
his tongue reel^ straight either into railing or ribaldry, his hands into
swaggering and bloomed; all his motions are made of disorder and mischief, and
his rest is no less odious then his moving. See how he lies wallowing in his
own filthy excretions, in so loathsome a fashion as were enough to make the
beholder hate to be a man. Sus ad volutabrum. All the world cannot reclaim an
habituated Drunkard; that which the beasts know not how to do, his wit
projects when he is sober how he may be drunk; and, which St. Chrysostom well
observes, as more transcending all humors of beasts, how he may force others to
his own shameful Lacedaemonians scorned in their very Slaves, that which our
former times had wont to disdain in Beggars, let not that stain the honor of a
Christian Court. Or if any such should hear me this day, Awake ye drunkards and
weep, and howl ye drinkers of wine, Joel 1. 5. return back your superfluous
liquor into tears: or if ye will not weep, ye shall howl, if ye will not weep
with penitents, ye shall howl with hell hounds; and ye that now pour down
vessels more to make then quench thirst, shall one day in vain wish to give all
the world for but one drop of water to cool that flaming tongue which a whole
Ocean cannot so much as moisten.

Messalina, may be wearied, cannot be satisfied. Those beasts affect not to go
in any other then the ordinary road of Nature: but these prodigies of
Sodomitical lewdness, as St. Paul speaks to his Romans (even then infamous, for
this not-to-be-named villainy) burn in lust one toward another, and man with
man work that which is unseemly. In that impure City beasts Roman Dame gave of
old for their filly innocence, because they are beasts.

Look into all the cribbs and troughs of brutish diet, and see whether you can
find such a beast as a Glutton. Those irrational creatures take that simple
provision which Nature yields them but to a sufficiency; not affecting
curiosity of dressings, varieties of mixtures, surcharges of measures: whereas
the liquorous palate of the Glutton ranges through seas and lands for uncouth
delicacies, kills thousands of creatures for but their tongues or giblets,
makes but one dish of the quintessence of an hundred fouls or fishes, praises
that for

Look into all the caves and dens of the wildest desert, see if there be any
such Tiger or Wolf as an Enemy, as an Usuring oppressor. Even the savagest
beasts agree with themselves, else the wilderness would soon be unpeopled of
her four-footed inhabitants. Cruel man falls upon his own kind, and spills
that blood which, when both are shed, he cannot distinguish from his own.

It were too easy for me to prosecute the rest, and in every vicious man to
Laertius, (...), Thrice man, in stead of thrice miserable, God and his Angels
and good men look upon thee with no less scorn then thou look naturam vincat
institutio, as Ambrose) and let it be thine holy ambition to be advanced to the
blessed participation of the Divine nature, and thereby to be more above thy
self then the beast is below thee. Fight with thy self till thou have beaten
away the beast; and wrestle with God till his blessing have sent the Angel away
with thee.

But from the common view of these beasts may it please you to cast down your
eyes to the specials. There are beasts of Game, there are beasts of Service:
neither of these are for this place. They are harmful beasts with which this
fight is maintained, and yet not every harmful beast neither. Ye know the
Philosopher, when he was asked which was the harmfullest of all beasts,
answered, Of tame, the Flatterer; of wild, the Detractor. We have nothing to
do with the former; and never may that pestilent beast have ought to do with
this Presence: those Serpents that swell up the Soul with a plausible poison,
that kill a man laughing and sleeping, those Dogs that worry their masters,
those Vultures that feed on the eyes, on the hearts of teeth are spears and
arrows, his tongue a sharp sword, Ps. 57. 4. (It was a great vaunt that the
witty Captain made of his sword, that it was sharper then Slander) and, which
is most dangerous, this beast is a close one, mordet in silentio, bites without
noise, Eccles. 10. 11. He carries the poison of Aspes under his tongue, as
David speaks; and in lingua diabolum, as Bernard. Deliver my soul, O God, from
lying lips, and from a deceitful tongue. St. Paul was vexed with two kinds of
them; 1 the Sophisters, 2 the Idolaters: 1 the wrangling adversaries of the
Gospel, 2 the superstitious abettors of Diana, Act. 19. Both of them had foenum
in

The first, after three months confutation, not only remained refractary, but
blasphemous, (...), railing on Christianity, and that openly before the
multitude. What beasts were these every way? Beasts, in that they would not be
convinced by the clear and irrefragable demonstrations of truth, by the
undeniable Miracles of the Apostles; in that as they had no Reason, so they
would hear none. Beasts, in that they bellowed out blasphemies against the
sacred name of Christ. In analogy whereto let me safely and not uncharitably
say, that whosoever he is that wilfully stands out against a plain evidence of
truth, and sharpens his tongue against the way of Tit. 1. 14.) that do not
only turn their backs upon that bright-shining truth whose clear beams have
these hundred years glared upon their faces; but also spend their clamorous
mouths in barking against this glorious light. What marts of invectives, what
Bulls of censure, what thunderbolts of Anathemas do we still receive from these
spightful enemies of peace? What does this argue but the litter of the Beast?
Revel. 13.

The latter were the superstitious Demetrians, the doting Idolaters of Diana:
Beasts indeed, as for their sottishness, so for their violence and impetuosity.

Their Sottishness is notable even in their ringleader Demetrius. Do you hear
his exception against St. Paul? verse. 26. No other then this; He says that
they are not Gods that are made with hands. Did ever any Ephesian beast bray
out such another challenge? Is it possible that humane reason should be so
brutified as to think a man may make his own God, as to seek a Deity Athenian
(not the gross Theban) wits were fain to be taught that the Godhead is not like
to gold, or silver, or stone. And would to God the modern Superstition were
less foppish. Hear this, ye seduced souls that are taught to worship a
pastry-God. Ergo adeo stolidi opifices ab se fabrefieri Deos credunt? says our
Jesuit Lorinus of these Ephesians, These so foolish workmen think they can
make their Gods. And why not of Gold as well as of Grain? why not the Smith as
well as the Baker? Change but the name, the absurdity is but one. To hold
Averroes, Sit anima mea cum Philosophis. I remember their learned Montanus upon
Luke 22. 19. construes that Hoc est corpus meum, thus, Verum corpus meum in hoc
Sacramento panis continetur sacramentaliter, and etiam corpus meum mysticum, My
true body is sacramentally contained in this Sacrament of bread, as also my
body mystical; and withal, as willing to say something if he durst speak out,
adds, cujus arcanam Now the God of Heaven make good this honest Prophecy, and
open the eyes of poor misled souls, that they may see to distinguish betwixt a
slight corruptible wafer, and an incomprehensible immortal God. And if from
this (...) Bread-worship, I should lead you to their (...) Cross-worship, and
from thence to their (...) Image Worship, you would find reason enough why
that man of Sin, the author of these Superstitions, should be called the Beast.

Ephesians was answerable: for here was (...) Trouble, verse 23. then (...)
Concourse, verse 40. then (...) Confusion, and that in the whole City, verse
29, and more then that, (...) a furious rushing into the Theater, and then
(...) a boisterous snatching of those that were conceived opposites, besides
all their shouting, and outcries, and savage uproar. What should I need to
tell you, that this furious prosecution is no other then an ordinary symptom of
Idolatry? and to make it good, what should I need to lay before your eyes all
those turbulent effects that in our days have followed malicious Superstition,
those instigations of public Invasions, those conspiracies against maligned
Lacedaemonians?) In all these we too well feel that we have to do with the
beast; with S. John's beast, no whit short of S. Paul's.

God knows how little pleasure I take in displaying the enormities of our
Fellow Christians. Although, to say as it is, not the Church, but the Faction,
is it that by their practice thus merits the title of savageness. Of that
Faction let me say with sorrow of heart, that their wilful opposition to truth,
their

And now ye see by this time that in the generality natural and vicious men are
no other then beasts; that specially all contentious adversaries to the Truth
and impetuous Idolaters are beasts of S. Paul's Theater. Wherefore then serves
all this, but to stir us up to a threefold use; of holy Thankfulness, of Pity,
of

The two first are those duo ubera Sponsa, the two breasts of Christ's Spouse,
as Bernard calls them, Congratulation and Compassion.

The former, of Thankfulness to our good God that has delivered us, as from
the wretchedness of our corrupt Nature, so from blind and gross misdevotion,
yea from the tyranny of Superstition. Alas! what are we better, what other then
our neighbors, that our Goshen should be shined upon, whiles their Egypt is
covered with darkness? What are we that we should be renewed in the spirit of
our minds, and be created according to the Image of God, whiles they continue
in the woeful deformation of their bestial corruptions? Non nobis, Domine, Not
unto us, Lord, not unto us, but to thy Name let the praise be given of this thy
gracious sequestration; and thou that only have done it, take to thy self the
glory and improvement of thine own work.

Of Pity and yearning of bowels; whether to those careless unregenerates made a
covenant with death, an agreement with hell; or whether to our poor seduced
brethren, that are nursed up in an invincible ignorance of Truth, and are held
down with the imperious sway of Antichristian usurpation. Alas! it is too true
which our learned Spalatensis (why should I not call him ours, who sealed up
that truth of ours, which his pen had so stoutly maintained, with his last
blood?) has observed and published, Nam and plebem rudiorem, etc. that the
ruder multitude under the Papacy are carried commonly with more inward
religious affection toward the Blessed Virgin, or At tu, Domine, usque quo? How
long, Lord, how long will thou suffer the world to be deluded with these foul
and pernicious impostures? how long shall thy Church groan under the heavy
yoke of their sinful impositions? O thou that art the great Shepherd, look down
and visit thy wandering flock; and at last let loose those silly sheep of thine
that are fast entangled in the briars of Antichristian exaction. And we, why do
not we as heartily labor to reclaim them, as they to withdraw us? why should
they

Of Indignation lastly, as on the one side, at those practical revolters, that
having begun in the spirit will needs end in the flesh; that having made a show
of godliness, deny the power of it in their lives, returning with that impure
beast to their own vomit; so on the other, at those speculative relapsers, that
have out of policy or guiltiness abandoned a known and received truth. Pity is
for those silly creatures that could never be blessed with Divine Reason
Gryllus, that was once a man, to quit his humanity, and to be in love with four
feet, what stomach can but rise at so affected a transformation? The Cameleon
is for a time beautiful with all pleasing varieties of colors, in the end no
skin is more nasty. Woe is me, the swept house is repossessed with seven Devils:
This recidivation is desperate: although Avolent, quantum volent, paleoe istae
levis fidei, as that Father said, Let this light chafe fly whither it will;
it shows it to be but chafe. God's heap shall be so much the purer: and, in
the mean time, what do they make themselves fit for, but the fire? What shall
we say to these absurd changes? Our forefathers thought themselves in Heaven
when first the bright beams of the Gospel brake forth in their eyes; and shall
we, like those fond subterraneous people that Rubruquis speaks of, curse those
glorious beams of the Sun now risen up Egypt? Revertimini filii aversantes,
Return ye backsliding children, return to the fountains of living waters which
ye have exchanged for your broken cisternes. Recordamini priorum, as Esaias
speaks 46. 9. But if their will do lie still in their way, it were happy for
them if authority would deal with them as confident riders do with a startling
horse, spur them up, and bring them back to the block they leaped from. But if
still their obstinacy will needs, in spite of contrary endeavors, feoffe them
in the filii desertores, it is a fearful word that God speaks to them, Vae eis
quoniam vagantur a me, Woe to them, for they have wandered from me, Ose 7. 13.
Now the God of Heaven reclaim them, confirm us, save both them and us in the
day of the Lord Jesus: to whom, with the Father and the Holy Ghost, one
infinite God, be given all Praise, Honor and Glory, now and for ever. Amen.

St. PAUL'S COMBAT.
1 Cor. 15. 32. (...).
I Have carried you into S. Paul's Theater at Ephesus, I have showed you his
Beasts; you must now see his Fight. It was his charge to Timothy Paul fought,
and that wherein we must follow him as Teachers, as Christians.

Here he says, I have fought; afterward, in imitation of him that saw his own
works and approved them, he says, I have fought a good fight; doubtless, as
with principalities and powers elsewhere, so even with these beasts at Ephesus.

Let it please you to see, first, the person of the combatant; then, secondly,
the manner of the fight.

In the former ye may not look at S. Paul as a common soldier, but as a
selected Champion of God; not merely as Paul, but as an Apostle, as a public I
have fought with beasts.

There is no trained man in the whole troup of God but must have his bout with
the beasts of the Time. Vita hominis militia super terram; we are here in a
militant Church. As we have all received our press-money in Baptism, so we
must every one according to our engagement maintain this fight against the
world. But if a man be (...), as S. Paul, singled out to a public calling, now
he must think himself made for combats, because for victories: for Bellum
durius contra victores, as Gregory speaks.

It was the charge of the Apostle, that a Bishop should be no striker, Clericus
percussor is an old brand of irregularity: But if in this kind he strike not, I
must say of him as S. Paul to Ananias, God shall smite thee, thou whited wall.
Jer. 15. 10.
All his whole life must be spent in these blows: he must be, as Jeremy speaks
of himself, Epist. 23.
(...), a man of strife and contention; there is no beast comes in his way but
he must have a fling at him. When Gregory Nazianzen speaks of Basil designed to
the Bishopric of Caesarea, If any man, says he, pretend his weakness, non
athletem, sed doctorem creabitis. But in this spiritual sense, if he be a
Doctor in the Chair, he must be a Champion in the Theater. No S. Martin may
plead here, I am Christ's Soldier, I may not fight; yea therefore must he
fight, because he is Christ's Soldier. Paul in proportion; so must he be a
follower of him, as he is of Christ. Will it please you to see him first
qualified, then armed.

Qualified first, with Holiness, Skill, Courage. Holiness: For he must be a
irreprehensible; otherwise he is a beast himself, and had need of some body to
bait him. Woe be to those Champions of God that take upon them to wield the
sword of the Spirit with unclean hands. That divine weapon is not so fit to
wound any as their own Souls. Ex ore tuo, serve nequam. Let me say truly, It
were an happy and hopeful thing, that even our external and secular Wars should
be managed with pure and innocent hands. I shall tell you that which perhaps
few of you have either known or considered, that of old a soldier was a sacred
thing; and it is worth your notice what in former times was the manner of our
Ancestors in consecrating a Soldier or a Knight to the wars. Some six hundred
years Ingulphus, the manner was this; Anglorum erat consuetudo, quod qui
militiae legitimae consecrandus esset, etc. He that should be devoted to the
trade of war, the evening before his consecration came to the Bishop or Priest
of the place, and in much contrition and compunction of heart made a confession
of all his sins; and, after his absolution, spent that night in the Church, in
watching, in prayers, in afflictive devotions: on the morrow being to hear
Divine Service, he was to offer up his Sword upon the Altar, and after the
Gospel, the Priest was with a solemn benediction to put it about his neck; and
then after his communicating of those sacred mysteries, he was to remain miles
legitimus. Thus he; who tells us how that Heward came thus to his uncle, one
Brandus, the devout Abbot of Peterborough, for his consecration; and that this
Custom continued here in England till the irreligious Normans by their scorns
put it out of countenance, accounting such a one non legitimum militem, sed
equitem socordem, and Quiritem degenerem. This was their ancient and laudable
manner (some shadow whereof we retain, whiles we hold some Orders of Knighthood
Religious.) And can we wonder to hear of noble victories achieved by them, of
Giants and Monsters slain by those hands that had so pious an initiation? These
men professed to come to their combats as David did to Goliath, in the name of
the Lord; no marvel if they prospered. Alas! now, Nulla etc. ye know the rest:
the name of a soldier is misconstrued by our Gallants as a sufficient warrant
of debauchedness; as if a Buff-Jerkin were a lawful cover for a profane heart.
Woe is me for this sinful degeneration. How can we hope that bloody hands of
lawless Ruffians should be blessed with palms of triumph; that adulterous eyes
should be shaded with garlands of victory; that profane and atheous
instruments, if any such be employed in our wars, should return home loaded
with success and honor? How should they prosper whose sins fight against them
more then all the swords of enemies; whose main adversary is in their own
bosom and in Heaven? If the God of Heaven be the Lord of hosts, do we think
him so lavish that he will grace impiety? Can upon the Bridles of the horses in
Zachary must be written, Holiness to the Lord: how much more upon the
foreheads of his Priests, the Leaders of his spiritual war? With what face,
with what heart can he fight against beasts that is a beast himself?

It is not Holiness yet that can secure us from blows: Job's Behemoth, as he is
construed, durst set upon the holy Son of God himself. To our Holiness
therefore must be added Skill; skill to guard, and skill to hit; skill in
choice of weapons, places, times, ways of assault or defense: else we cannot
but be wounded Thou teach my hands to war and my fingers to fight. The title
that is given to David's Champions was not dispositi ad clypeum, as Montanus
has it ((...)) but disponentes, such as could handle the shield and the
buckler, 1 Chronicles. 12. 8. Alas, what is to be looked for of raw, untaught,
untrained men, (if such should be called forth of their shops on the sudden)
that know not so much as their files or motions or postures, but either slight
or filling of ditches? He that will be a Petus in Jovius his history, Servilius
in Plutarch, to come off an untouched victor from frequent challenges, had need
to pass many a guard and Veny in the fence-school. So skilful must the man of
God be, that he must know (as S. Paul) even (...), the very plots and devices
of that great challenger of hell. We live in a knowing age; and yet how many
teachers are very novices in the practick part of this (...), and therefore are
either born down, or tossed up with the vices of the Time? whose miscarriages
would God it were as easy to remedy as to lament.

Lastly, what is Skill in our weapon without an heart and hand to use it?
Rabshakeh could say, Counsel and strength are for the war, 2 Kings 18. 20. tu
pulsas, ego vapulo. What are men in this case but lepores galeati, or as
Sword-fishes, that have a weapon, but no heart? Hear the spirit of a right
Champion of Heaven; I am ready not to be bound only, but to die for the name
of the Lord Jesus. Here was a man fit to grapple with beasts. It is the word of
the sluggish Coward, There is a Lion or a Bear in the way. What if there be? If
thou will be a Sampson, a David, encounter them. There is no great glory to be
looked for but with hazard and difficulty. When the Soldier said, The enemy is
strong, it was bravely answered of the Captain, The victory shall be so much
more

I have showed you the man Qualified; I should stay to show you him Armed;
armed with Authority without, with Resolution within: but I long to show you
the Fight.

A Fight it must be; which I beseech you observe in the first place. Neither
does he say, I played with beasts, except you would have it in Joab's phrase;
as neither did the beasts play with him, except, as Erasmus speaks, Ludus exiit
in rabiem: He says not, I humor'd their bestiality; I struck up a league or a
truce with the vices of men: No, S. Paul was far from this; he was at a
perpetual defiance with the wickedness of the times, and, as that valiant
Commander said,

The world wanted not of old plausible spirits, that, if an Ahab had a mind to
go up against Ramoth, would say, Go up and prosper, and would have horns of
iron to push him forward. S. Paul was none of them, neither may we. He has
indeed bidden us ( if it be possible) to have peace with all men; not with
beasts. If wickedness shall go about to glaver with us, Is it peace, Jehu? we
must return a short answer, and speak blows. Far, far be it from us to fawn
upon vicious Greatness, to favor even Court-sins. If here we meet with bloody
Oaths, with scornful Profaneness, with Pride, with Drunkenness, we must fly in
the face of it with so much more fierceness as the eminence of the sin may make
it more dangerously-exemplary: quo grandius nomen, eo grandius scandalum, as
Bernard. Let the clearest water mix with the best earth, it makes but mire. If
we be the true Sons of Thunder, even the tallest Cedar-sins must be blasted
with our Lightning, and riven with our bolts. Cato would not (they say) have a
dumb soldier; I am sure Christ will not. Woe be to us if we preach not the
Gospel: yea, woe be to us if we preach not the Law too; if we do not lash the
guilt of the Great with the scorpions of Judgment. What stand we upon bulk? if
the Sin be an Elephant, harnessed, and carrying Castles upon his back, we must
with Eleazar creep under his belly, and wound that vast enemy with the hazard
of our own crushing. It is the charge of God, Cry aloud, spare not, lift up thy
voice like a trumpet, and show my Es. 58. 1. The words are Emphatical, whereof
the first signifies a straining of the throat with crying; and the next (the
trumpet) implies a sound of war. This same bellu^ cum vitiis, war with sins,
must be (...), incapable of so much as a truce, yea as a respiratio. As that
undaunted soldier therefore held first with his right hand, and when Profecto
stabimus, and pugnabimus usque ad mortem, We will stand, and fight it out to
the very death, as Bernard speaks.

The manner of the Fight follows, and that must needs vary according to the
diverse fashions of the onset. For all beasts assail not alike: one fights with
his tusks, another with his paws, another with his horn, another with his heel,
another with his sting; one rampeth upon us, another leaps in to us, a third
either rusheth us down, or casts us upward, a fourth galls us afar, a fifth
Paul's opposition suit them, so must ours, whether for defense or for offense.
The beasts of Opinion were either Idolatrous Ethnicks, or refractary Jews; the
one worshipping Diana for their Goddess, the other refusing the true Messiah
for their Savior. The one he beats with the downright blows of right Reason;
the other he hews with the two-edged sword of the Spirit, the Exodus 19. 13. If
a beast touch the Mount he shall be shot through. Their subtilty he declined by
a wise evasion, their violence he repelled with an irresistible force. The
particularities would be infinite; neither do any of you exspect that I should
turn the Pulpit into a Fence-school or a Paris-garden. Only let me reduce S.
Paul's practice herein to some few useful rules, as to express his
beast-combat, so to direct our own. Whereof the first (to begin with the beasts
of Opinion) was and shall be, To fight still at the head. When he comes to the
Theater of Ephesus, he deals not with collateral matters of a secondary nature,
but flies upon the main heads of the highest contradiction, Messiah. No doubt,
Ephesus was full of curious and nice scruples: the wise Apostle waves all
these; and, as some magnanimous Mastive, that scorns to set upon every Curre
that barks at him in the way, he reserves himself for these Lions and Tigers of
Error. Oh how happy were it for Christendom, if we that profess to sit at S.
Paul's feet (as he at Gamaliel's) could learn this wit of him! It is true which
Chromatius has, Non sunt parva quae Dei sunt, None of Gods matters are slight:
but yet there is a difference, and that would be observed. The working brains
of subtle man have been apt to mince Divinity into infinite Atoms of
speculation; and every one foolish and unlearned disquisitions, 2 Timothy 2. 23.
that have set the whole Christian world together by the ears. Ex utraque part
sunt qui pugnare cupiunt, as Tully said of his time, There are enough on both
sides that would fight. The main Fort of Religion is worth not our sweat, but
our blood: thus must we strive pro aris: so even Heresy shall be found (as
Chrysostom observes) not more dangerous then profitable. But if it be only
matter of rite, or of unimporting consequence, ( de venis capillaribus, as he
said) Oh what ^adness is it in us to draw the world into sides, and to pour out
the primae formae feram) which he comes to bait, and run after a Mouse?
Melanchthon cites and approves that saying of Dionysius of Corinth in Eusebius,
that Schism is no less sin then idolatry. And if the Fish be the better where
the seas are most unquiet, I am sure the Souls are worse where the Church is
tumultuous. I cannot skill of these Swans eggs that are never hatched without
thunder, nor of that unnatural brood that eats through the the unity of the
spirit in the bond of peace. Justly did Agesilaus lament the state of Greece,
that had lost as many soldiers in domestic wars as might have made them
Masters of the world. Let me say, Had all our swords and pens been happily bent
against the common enemy of Christendom, long ago had that Mahumetan Moon
waned to nothing, and given way to the glorious Sun of the Gospel.

Our second rule must be, When we do smite, to strike home: It is S. Paul's, I
so fight, (...) as not beating the air, 1 Cor. 9. 26. Here is not a blow lost,
non verberat ictibus auras. How does he cut the throat of the Ephesian beast,
Idolatry, whiles he argues, They are not Gods that are made with Diana cannot
hammer out a reply to this charge. It is no flourishing when we come to this
combat. Weak proofs betray good causes. Demonstrations must have place here,
not Probabilities. How powerfully does he convince the unbelieving Jews of
Ephesus and Rome, out of Moses and the Prophets, Act. 28. 23. This, this is the
weapon whereby our grand Captain vanquished the great challenger of the
bottomless pit, Scriptum est. All other blades are but Lead to this Steel.
Councils, Fathers, Histories are good helps; but ad pompam rather then ad
pugnam. These Scriptures are they whereof S. Augustine justly, Hac fundamenta,
haec firmamenta. What do we multiply volumes, and endlesly go about the bush?
That of Tertullian is most Aufer ab haereticis quaecunque Ethnici sapiunt, ut
de Scripturis solis questiones suas sistant, and stare non poterunt, Take from
Heretics what they borrow of Pagans, and hold them close to the trial by the
Scriptures alone, they cannot stand. Bring but this fire to the wildest beast,
his eye will not endure it; he must run away from it: for these kind of
creatures are all (as that Father) Lucifugae Scripturarum. What worlds of
volumes had been spared, how infinite distractions of weak and wavering souls
had been prevented, if we had confined our selves to S. Paul's fence?

Our third rule must be, To redouble our strokes uncessantly, unweariably, not
giving breath to the beast, not fainting for want of our own. S. Paul laid
Ephesus; two years more in the school of Tyrannus, Act. 19. 8, 9. and
accordingly gives us our charge, State ergo, Stand close to it, Ephesians. 6. 14. If
when we have dealt some few unsuccessful blows, we throw up the bucklers, or
lean upon our pummels, we lose our life with the day. I could, as the case
might stand, easily be of the mind of that soldier, who when he heard
Xenophantus by his music stirring up Alexander to the fight, wished rather to
hear a Musician that could take him off: but since we have to do with an enemy
which nec victor nec victus novit quiescere, as Annibal said of Marcellus,
there is no way but to fight it out. Ye have not yet resisted unto blood, faith
the Apostle: If need be, we must do so. Serpens, sit is, ardor arena, Dulcia
virtuti, as he said. Oh be constant to your own holy resolutions, if ever ye
look for an happy victory. Well did the dying Prophet chide the King of Israel,
that he struck but thrice; Thou should have smitten often, then thou should
have smitten Syria till thou had consumed it, 2 Kings 13. 19. Let neither
buggs of fear, nor suppalpations of favor weaken your hands from laying load
upon the beast of Error: Fight zealously, fight indefatigably, and prevail. In
the battails of Christ, as S. Chrysostom observes, the issue is so assured
that the crown goes before the victory; but when ye once have it, hold fast
that you have, that no man take your crown, Revel. 3. 11.

Our last rule is, To know our distance; and where we find invincible
resistance, to come off fairly. So did S. Paul in the Theater of the Ephesian
Synagogue, when after three months disputation some were hardened, and in stead
of believing blasphemed the way of God, (...), he departed, and separated, Act.
19. 9. Those beasts we cannot master, we must give up: If Babylon will not
Paul: but now let the world know, we have not left her, she has abandoned us;
Non fugimus, sed fugamur, as Casaubon cites from our late Learned Sovereign. It
is her violence, not our choice, that has excluded us: Because we could not
but leave her errors, she has ejected our persons. This schism shall one day
before that great Tribunal of Heaven fall heavily upon those perverse spirits,

Let this suffice for the beasts of Opinion, which are Errors. Turn your eyes
now (if you please) to S. Paul's fight with the beast of Practice, Vices. And
in the first place, see how the Ephesian beasts fought with S. Paul, Act. 19.
28, 29. Ye find them as so many enraged Bulls, scraping the earth with their
feet, and digging it with their horns, snuffing up the air with their raised
nostrils, rushing furiously into the Theater, tossing up Gaius and Aristarchus,
Paul's companions, into the air, and with an impetuous violence carrying all
before Eliah cry out against the murders and Idolatries of Ahab? the beast has
him in chase for his life, and earths him in his cave. Does Michaiah cross the
designs of the false Prophets in the expedition of Ramoth? the beast with the
iron-horns pusheth him in the face, and beats him down into the dungeon. Does
John Baptist bend his Non licet against Herodias's incest? the beast flies in
his throat, and with one grasp tears his head from his shoulders. So it ever
was, so it ever will be. Am I become your enemy because I tell you the truth?
says S. Paul. Stetisse lego judicandos Apostolos, says Bernard. If still
therefore Sagittant in obscura luna rectos cord, as St. Chrysostom reads that
in the Psalm.

In the mean time what does S. Paul? Does he give in? does he give out? No,
here was still (...), Ephesians. 6. 20. He traverses his ground indeed for his
advantage, from Ephesus to Macedonia; but still he galls the beast wherever he
is: as Idolaters, so all sorts of flagitious sinners, felt the weight of his
hand, the dint of his stroke; all which, wheresoever he finds them, he
impartially pierces through with the darts of denounced Judgment, that is the
verbum asperum and sagitta volans in Psalm. 91. the curse of the Law, Gal. 3.
13. See how Ephesus; No whoremonger, nor unclean person, nor covetous man,
which is an Idolater, has any inheritance in the Kingdom of God, Ephesians. 5. 5.
and, For these things comes the wrath of God upon the children of
disobedience, verse 6. Tribulation and anguish to every soul that does evil: In
flaming fire rendering vengeance to those that know not God and obey him not.
And why do not we, in imitation of this noble champion of God, strike through
the loins of wickedness wherever we find it, that, if it be possible, it may
rise up no more? Why do not we spend the whole quiver of Gods threatened
vengeance upon wilful sinners? And thus must we bait the beast.

Is it a Drunken beast we are committed with? Woe to them that rise up early
Esa. 5. 11. Woe to him that gives his neighbor drink to make him drunk, Abac.
2. 15. The cup of the Lords right hand shall be turned to that man, and vomitus
ignominiosus ad gloriam, verse 16. Oh it is a bitter cup, this of the Lords
right hand, whereof he shall wring out the dregs unto that soul; so as in stead
of quaffing the excessive healths of others, he shall drink up his own death
and eternal confusion.

Is it a Gluttonous beast? Woe to him, his God is his belly, his glory shall be
in shame, and his end damnation, Phil. 3. 19. Whiles the flesh is yet between
his teeth, ere it be chewed, the wrath of the Lord is kindled against him,
Numb. 11. 33. Yea, but it goes down sweetly. Oh fool, the meat in thy belly
shall be turned into the gall of Asps within thee, Job 20. 14. Vae saturis, Woe
be to the full, for they shall hunger; they shall famish to death, and dye
famishing, and live dying, and have enough of nothing but fire and brimstone.

Is it a Ravenous beast, a Covetous oppressor? His tooth, like a mad dogs,
envenomes and emphrensies; so says Solomon, that knew the nature of all
beasts, Oppression makes a wise man mad, Eccles. 7. 7. Tabifici sunt, Ps. 79.
7. Woe be to you that join house to house, Es. 5. 8. Woe be to the mighty sins of
them treadings are upon the poor, that afflict the just, that take bribes, and
turn away the poor in the gates, Amos 5. 11, 12. Therefore the Lord, the God of
Hoasts says thus, Wailing shall be in all their streets, and they shall say in
all highways, Alas, alas! verse 16. They have robbed their poor Tenants, and
oppressed the afflicted in the gate, therefore the Lord will plead their cause,
and spoil the soul of those that spoiled them.

Is it an Unclean beast? Whosoever commits adultery with a woman destroys his
own soul, Prove. 6. 32. A fornicator in the body of his flesh will never cease
till he have kindled a fire, Ecclus. 23. 16. His fire of lust flames up into a
fire of disease, and burns down into the fire of Hell.

Is it a Foul-mouthed beast that bellows out Blasphemies and bloody Oaths?
There is a word that is clothed about with death; God grant it be not found in
the heritage of Jacob, Ecclus. 23. 12. A man that uses much swearing shall be
filled with iniquity, and the plague shall never depart from his house, verse.
11.

Thus must we lay about us, spiritu or is, yea gladio spiritus, and let drive
at the Beast of what kind soever. But if we shall still find that which blind
Homer saw, (...), that the worse has the better, and that this spiritual edge
shall either turn again, or (through our weak wieldance) not enter the stubborn
and thick hide of obdured hearts; give me leave, most Gracious Sovereign, and
ye honorable Peers, to whom is committed the sword of either Jesus, which we
profess, may not be either shamed or braved by insolent wickedness; that
Justice and Peace may flourish in our Land, and that your Crown may long and
happily flourish upon that Royal head, until it shall receive a late and
blessed exchange for a Crown of Glory and Immortality in the highest Heavens.
Amen.

THE OLD RELIGION.

A TREATISE, Wherein Is laid down the true State of the difference betwixt the
REFORMED and ROMAN CHURCH, and the blame of this Schism is cast upon the true
Authors.

Serving for the Vindication of our Innocence, for the settling of wavering
minds, for a Preservative against Popish Insinuations.

With an ADVERTISEMENT for such Readers as formerly stumbled at some passages
in the Book.

By JOS. HALL, B. of Exon.

LONDON, Printed by James Flesher, in the year M DC LXI.

TO
THE truth of my heart gives me boldness to profess before him who only knows
it, that the same God who has called me to the oversight of your Souls, has
wrought in me a zealous desire of your Salvation. This desire cannot but incite
me to a careful prevention of those dangers which might threaten the
disappointment Luther's revolt; I have (I hope) fully cleared this coast, so as
out of the right apprehension of these differences my Reader shall evidently
see the vanity of this cavil, and find cause to bless God fox the safety of
his station in so pregnant and undeceivable a truth.

For me, I shame not to profess, that I have passed my most and best hours in
quiet Meditations; wherein I needed not bend mine edge against any Adversary
but Satan and mine own corruptions. These controversary points I have rather
crossed in my way, then taken along with me. Neither am I ignorant what
incomparably-clear beams (in this kind) some of the worthy Lights of our Church
have cast abroad into all eyes, to the admiration of present and future times;
no corner of truth has lain unsearch'd, no plea unargued: the wit of man
cannot make any essential additions either to our proofs or answers. But as in
the most perfect discovery, where Lands and Rivers are specially described,
there may be some small obscure inlets reserved for the notice of following

It is a large body, I know, and full of ordinate variety, to which I How
direct my words: Let me a while in these lines sever them, whom I would never
abide really disjoined.

Ye, my dear fellow laborers (as my immediate Charge) may well challenge

carried about with every wind of Doctrine, that are not well ballasted with
solid informations? Whence it was that his said late Majesty (of happy memory)
gave public order for bestowing the latter part of Gods Day in familiar
Catechizing; then which nothing could be devised more necessary and behoveful
to the Souls of men. It was the Ignorance and ill-disposedness of some
cavillers that taxed this course, as prejudicial to Preachings; since, in
truth, the most useful of all Preaching is Catechetical. This the bread of
Angels. And if herein we be curious to satisfy their roving appetite, our
favor shall be no better then injurious. So we have seen an undiscreet
Schoolmaster, whiles he affects the thanks of an overweening Parent, mar
the progress of a forward child, by raising him to an higher form and Author,
ere he have well learned his first rules; whence follows an empty ostentation,
and a late disappointment. our fidelity and care of profit

From these tender Pastures let me lead you (and you others) to the still
Waters. Zeal in the Soul is as natural heat in the body; there is no life of
Religion without it: But as the kindliest heat, if it be not tempered with a
due equality of moisture, wastes it self and the body; so does Zeal, if it be
not moderated with discretion and charitable care of the common good. It is
hard to be too vehement in contending for main and evident truths; but
litigious and immaterial verities may soon be overstriven

The Church of England, in whose Motherhood we have all just cause to pride our
selves, has in much Wisdom and Piety delivered her judgment concerning all
necessary points of Religion, in so complete a body of Divinity as all hearts
may rest in: These we read, these we write under, as professing not their
truth only, but their sufficiency also. The voice of God our Father in his
Scriptures, and (out of these) the voice of the Church

And ye worthy Christans, whose Souls God has entrusted with our spiritual
Guardianship, be ye alike minded with your Teachers. The motion of their
tongues lies much in your ears: your modest desires of receiving needful and
wholesome Truths shall avoid their labor after frivolous and quarrelsome
Athenian shops, How many things are here that we have no need of? Take the
nearest cut you can, ye shall find it a side-way to Heaven; ye need not
lengthen it with undue circuitions. I am deceived if (as the times are) ye
shall not find work enough to bear up against the oppositions of professed
hostility. It is not for us to squander our thoughts and hours upon useless
janglings; wherewith if we suffer our selves to

Dear Brethren, whatever become of these worthless driblets, be sure to look
well to the freehold of your Salvation. Error is not more busy then Roman
Church of this day; whom we have long pitied, and labored to cure in vain. If
she will not be healed by us, let us not be infected by her. Let us be no less
jealous of her contagion, then she is of our remedies. Hold fast that precious
Truth which has been long taught you by faithful Pastors, confirmed by clear
evidences Crown and rejoicing in the day of our Lord Jesus; to whose
all-sufficient Grace I commend you all, and vow my self

Your common Servant in him whom we all rejoice to serve,

The Contents.
CHAP. I. THE extent of the Differences betwixt the Churches. Page 375 CHAP.
II. The Original of the Differences. 376 CHAP. III. The Reformed unjustly
charged with Noveltie, Heresy, Schism. 378 CHAP. IV. The Roman Church guilty
of this Schism. 380 CHAP. V. The Newness of the Article of Justification by
inherent Righteousness. 381 Sect. 2. This Doctrine proved to be against
Scripture. 383 Sect. 3. Against Reason. 384
CHAP. VI. The Newness of the Doctrine of Merit. 385 Sect. 2. Against
Scripture. 386 Sect. 3. Against Reason. ibid.
CHAP. VII. The Newness of the Doctine of Transubstantiation. 387 Sect. 2.
Against Scripture. 389 Sect. 3. Against Reason. 390
CHAP. VIII. The Newness of the Half-Communion. 391 Sect. 2. Against Scripture.
392 Sect. 3. Against Reason. ibid.
CHAP. IX. The Newness of Missal Sacrifice. 393 Sect. 2. Against Scripture.
ibid. Sect. 3. Against Reason. 394
CHAP. X. The Newness of Image Worship. ibid. Sect. 2. Against Scripture. 396
Sect. 3. Against Reason. 397
CHAP. XI. The Newness of Indulgences and Purgatory. ibid. Sect. 2. Against
Scripture. 399 Sect. 3. Against Reason. 400
CHAP. XII. The Newness of Divine Service in an unknown tongue. ibid. Sect. 2.
Against Scripture. 402 Sect. 3. Against Reason. ibid.
CHAP. XIII. The Newness of a full, forced Sacramental Confession. 403 Sect. 2.
Not warranted by Scripture. 404 Sect. 3. Against Reason. ibid. Sect. 4. The
Novelty of Absolution before Satisfaction. 405
CHAP. XIV. The Newness of the Romish Invocation of Saints. ibid. Sect. 2.
Against Scripture. 406 Sect. 3. Against Reason. 407
CHAP. XV. The Newness of Seven Sacraments. 408 Sect. 2. Besides Scripture. 409
Sect. 3. Against Reason. ibid.
CHAP. XVI. The Newness of the Romish Doctrine of Traditions. ibid. Sect. 2.
Against Scripture. 411 Sect. 3. Against Reason. 412
CHAP. XVII. The Newness of the universal ibid. Sect. 2. The Newness of
challenged Infallibility. 414 Sect. 3. The Newness of the Popes Superiorities
to Councils. 415 Sect. 4. The new presumption of Papal Dispensation. ibid.
Sect. 5. The new challenge of popes domineering over Kings and Emperors.
CHAP. XVIII. The Epilogue both of Exhortation and Apology. 417


THE first blessing that I daily beg of my God for his Church is, our Saviors
Legacy, John 14. 27.
Peace; that sweet Peace which in the very name of it comprehends all happiness
both of estate and disposition. As that Mountain whereon Christ ascended,
Adrichom. desc. Hiero. foi. fig. 192.
though it abounded Faciunt favos and vespae, faciu^t Ecclesias and Marcionita.
Tertull. advers. Marcion. lib. 4. cap. 5.
even Wasps have their Combs, and Heretics their Assemblies, (as Tertullian)
so as all are not of the Church that have Peace; yet so essential is it to the
Church in S. Ecclefiae nome^ consensus concordiaeque est. Chrylost. com. in Ep.
ad Gai.
Chrysostom's opinion, that the very name of the Church implies a consent and
concord. No marvel then if the Church laboring here below, make it her daily
suit to her glorious Bridegroom in Heaven, Da pacem, Give Peace in our time, O
Lord. The means of which happiness are soon seen, not so soon attained; even
that which Sit inter nos una fides, and illico pax scquetur. Hier. advers. Ruff.
Hierome has Ruffinus, Una fides: Let our Belief-be but one, and our hearts
will be but one.

But since, as Erasm. Epist. lib. 20. Pau^o Decimario.
Erasmus has too truly observed, there is nothing so happy in these humane
things wherein there are not some intermixtures of distemper, and Saint 1 Cor.
11. 19.
Paul has told us there must be Heresies, and the Spouse in Solomon's Song
compares her blessed Husband to a young Heart upon the Mountain of Bether, that
is, Division; yea rather, as under Victor. Pe^sar. Atric. lib. 5.
Gensericus and his Vandals the Christian Temples flamed higher then the Towns,
so for the space of these last hundred years there has been more combustion in
the Church then in the Civil State: my next wish is, that if differences in
Religion cannot be Roman Church, as if they were not worth our Contention, as
if our Martyrs had been rash and our quarrels trifling; Spalat. de histor.
Eccles. to^n. ult. lib. 7.
others again do so aggravate them, as if we could never be at enough defiance
with their Opinions, nor at enough distance from their Communion. All these
three are dangerous extremities; the two former whereof shall (if my hopes fail
me not) in this whole Discourse be Rome an unavoidable imputation of many no
less foul and enormous then novel Errors, Melancht. Postil. de Baptismo Christ:
to the stopping of the mouths of those Adiaphorists, whereof Melanchthon seems
to have long ago prophesied, Metuendum est, etc. It is to be feared (says he)
that in the last Age of the World this error will reign amongst men, that
either Religions are nothing, or differ only in

The third comes now in our way. Diog. Laert.
That (...) Laertius speaks of Menedemus, that in disputing his very ears would
spark^^^, Hooker Eccles.
is true of many of ours, whose zeal transports them to such a detestation of
the Roman Church, Pol. lib. 4. ^. 3.
as if it were all Error, no Church; affecting nothing more then an utter
opposition to their Doctrine and Ceremony, because theirs; like as Commentar.
in Euang.
Maldonat professes to mislike and avoid many fair interpretations, not as
false, but as Calvin's. These men have not learned this in S. Augustine's
School, Sape Patres nostri and salubcrrimam consuc^udinem (...), ut quiequid
divin^ra ac i^gi^imum, etc. Aug. Neque pr^p^^r palca^ relinquimus aream Domini,
neque prop^er pisces malos rumpimus r^tia Domini. Aug. Epi. 48. Sic
Anabaptistae accusant Paedobaptismum Papismi. Clifton. contr. Smith. Si^
N^ariani Trinitatem arg^^nt ut articulum Papae. Prolaeus Fa^cic. cap. 1.
who tells us that it was the rule of the Fathers, as well before Cyprian and
Agrippinus as since, that whatsoever they found in any Schism or Heresy
warrantable and Neither for the chaff do we leave the floor of God, neither for
the bad Fishes do we break his nets. Rather, as the Priests of Mercury had
wont to say, when they eat their Figs and Honey, (...), etc. All truth is
sweet: it is indeed Gods, not ours, wheresoever it is found; the Kings Coin is
current, though it be found in any impure Chanel.

For this particular, they have not well heeded that charitable profession of
zealous Luther, No^ fatemur s^b Papatu plurimum esse boni Christiani, im^ omne
bonum Christianum; dico insuper and imo vero, verum nucle^m Christianitatis.
Luther. in Ep. ad 2. pleb. de Anabap. cit. a Cromero de falls. relig. Lutheran.
Aliud est credere quod Papa credit, aliud credere quod est Papae. Prolaeus
ibid. ubi supr.
Nos fatemur, etc. We profess (says he) that under the Papacy there is much
Christian good, yea all, etc. I say moreover that under the Papacy is true
Christianity, yea the very kernel of Christianity, etc. No man I trust
Maronaean wine, which if it be mixed with twenty times so much water, holds his
strength. Eusebius. de vita Constant. lib. 3. cap. 25.
The Sepulcher of Christ was overwhelmed by the Pagans with earth and rubbish,
and more then so, over it they built a Temple to their impure Venus; yet still
in spite of malice there was the Sepulcher of Christ. And it is a ruled case
of Justin. Tit. 1.. 4. Annot. in leg. 12. Tab.
Papinian, that a Sacred place loses not the Holiness with the demolished
walls: No more does the Roman lose the claim of a true visible Church, by her
manifold and deplorable

CHAP. II.
IT is too true, Magistris utentes Ambitione and Avaritia. Ber. ad Henric.
Senonens. Quae fuerant vitia, mores fiunt. Gers. de Negligentia Praelatorum, Ex
Senec. Gravam. Germ.
that those two main Elements of evil, (as Timon called them) Ambition and
Covetousness, which Bernard professes were the great Masters of that Clergy in
his times, having palpably corrupted the Christian World both in doctrine and
manners, gave just cause of scandal and complaint to godly minds; which
(though long smothered) at last brake forth into public contestation,
augmented by the fury of those guilty defendants which loved their reputation
more then Peace: But yet so as the Complainants ever professed a joint
allowance of Matthew. 13. 25.
evil spirit, which had taken the advantage of the public sleep for his Tares.
Shortly then, according to the prayers Per disciplinam and metum, nunquam
spont^ Sen.
Seneca wisely) have sometimes been amended by correction and fear, never of
themselves. As therefore their own President was stirred up in the Corrigenda
and refer manda est Ecclesiastica disciplina, quae ja^diu depravata atque
corrupt etc. Orat. praesid Conc. Trid ses 11.
Council of Trent to cry out of their corruption of Discipline; so was the
Spirit of Luther, somewhat before that, stirred up to tax their corruption of
Doctrine. But, as Primordia ^uncta pavida sunt. Cass.
all beginnings are timorous, how Luther offered 95. Conclus. to be disputed at
Wittenb. Jo. Tecclius offers the contrary Propos. at Francf. vid hist. Conc.
Tr^. 1. Luther. etc.
calmly did he enter? and with what submiss Supplications did he sue for
redress? Ita venio, beatissime Pa^cr, etc. and adhuc prostratus rogo, etc. Ep.
ad Leon 10.
I come to you, (says he) most holy Father, and humbly prostrate before you,
beseech you that, if it be possible, you would be pleased to set your helping
hand to the work. Entreaties prevail nothing; the Eckius, and the undiscreet
carriage of Cajetan (as Ib. Luth. Jo. Eckius, and Sylv. Prierius cont. Luth.
Vid. hist. Council. Trid.
Luther there professes) forced him to a public opposition. At last, (as Saepe
saluti fuerc pestifera. Senec.
sometimes even Poisons turn Medicinal) the furious prosecution of abused
Authority increased the Zeal of Truth; like as the repercussion of the flame
intends it more: and as Zeal grew in the Plaintiff, James Hogostrot a Dominican
Inquisitor stirs up Pope Leo to capital punishments of Luth. and his followers.
Ibid. hist Conc.
so did Rage in the Defendant; so as now that was verified of A primordio
justitia vim patitur; statim ut coli Deus coepit, invidiam religio sortita est.
Tert. Scorpiac. advers. Gnostic. cap. 8.
Tertullian, A primordio, etc. From the beginning Righteousness suffers
violence; and no sooner did God begin to be worshipped, but Religion was
attended with Envy. The masters of the Pythonisse are angry to part with a
gainful (though evil) guest. Am I become your enemy, because I told you the
truth? says Saint Paul: yet that truth is not more

The proud offenders, impatient of reproof, Bapt, Porta, Leonis Bulla, anno
1518.
try what fire and faggot can do for them: and now, according to the old word,
Punitis ingeniis gliscit author it as. Erasm. Godesch. Rosemund.
suppressed spirits gather more authority; as the Egyptian violence rather
adds to God's Israel. Insomuch as Erasmus could tell the Rector of Lovan,
that by burning Luther's Books, they might rid him from the Libraries of men,
not from their Hearts.

The ventilation of these points diffused them to the knowledge of the
Rotterdam professes) Non defuisse magnos Theologos qui non verebantur
affirmar^, nihil osse in Luthero quin per probatos authors defendi possit.
Erasmus lib. Epist. 15. Godeschalco Rosemund. etc.
Non defuisse, that there wanted not great Divines which durst confidently
affirm, that there was nothing in Luther which might not be defended by good
and allowed Authors.

Nothing does so whet the edge of wit as contradiction. Now he who at first,
like the blind man in the Gospel (it is Theod. Beza contra Andraeam, etc. vid.
histor. Council Trid. l 2.
Beza's comparison) saw men like trees, upon more clear light, sees and wonders
at those gross Superstitions and Tyrannies wherewith the Church of God had been
long abused. And now, as the first Hue and Cry raises a whole Country, the
World was awakened with the noise, and startling up, saw, and stood amazed to
see, Hul. Zuingl. in Eccl. Zurich. opponit se Tratii Samps. Mediola. Francis.
Hugo Constantien. Epis. opponit se Zuinglio ibid.
Abettors to his Truth. The contention grows, Books fly abroad on both parts.
Straight Bulla secunda Leonis Papae, Anno 1520.
Bulls bellow from Rome, nothing but Death and Damnation to the opposites;
Excommunications are thundered out from their Capitoline powers against all the
partakers of this (so called) Heresy; the flashes of public Anathemas strike
them down to Hell.

The condemned reprovers stand upon their own integrity, call Heaven and Earth
to record, how justly they have complained, how unjustly they are censured; in
large Volumes defending their innocence, and challenging an undeniable

Anno 1518. vid. hist. Conc. Trid. lib. 1.
Profer is made at last of a Synod at Trent; but neither free, nor general,
Tres salvi conductus concessi Protestantibus; sed quam frustra vid. Junii
animadversiones in Bellar.
safety of access, or possibility of indifferency. That partial meeting (as it
was Vid. Ep. Epi. Quinque Eccles. in hist. Council. Trid.
prompted to speak) condemns us unheard: right so as Judicandi potestas apud
accusatores erat. Ruffin. hist. l. 1. cap. 17.
Ruffinus reports it in that case of Athanasius, Judicandi potestas, etc. The
power of judging was in the accusers; contrary to the rule of their 2. q.
Multo, etc. 3. q. 7. Nullus debet.
own Law, Non debet, etc. The same party may not be the Judge, Accuser,
Witness; contrary to that just rule of Theodericus, reported by Sententia non
praesentibus partibus dicta, nullius momenti est. Cassiod. de Amic. cap. 5.
Nullus ante rectam cognitionem causae debet privari suo jure. Rodrigu^z Cas.
cons. cap. 241.
Cassiodore, Sententia, etc. The sentence that is given in the absence of the
parties is of no moment. We are still where we were, opposing, suffering: in
these terms we stand. What shall we say then? if men would either not have
deserved, or have patiently endured reproof, this breach had never been. Woe
Bernard shall clearly acquit us before God and his Angels, Cum carpuntur vitia,
and inde scandalum oritur, ipse sibi scandali causa est qui fecis quod argui
debet, non ille qui arguit. Bern. ad Hugo. de S. Vict. Epist. 78.
Came carpuntur vitia, etc. When faults are taxed, and scandal grows, he is the
cause of the scandal who did that which was worthy to be reproved, not he that
reproved the ill-doer.

CHAP. III.
BE it therefore known to all the world, that our Church is only Reformed or
Nos vetera instauramus, nova non prodimus. Erasm. Godeschalco, etc. Vide
Fregevillii Pontique Reform. An. 1588.
Repaired, not made new: there is not one Stone of a new foundation laid by us;
yea the old Walls stand still; only the overcasting of those ancient stones
with the untempered mortar of new inventions displeases us. Plainly, set aside
the Corruptions, and the Church is Haeresia non ta^ docet credere nova, quam
vetera non credere: magis enim haereses in non credendo. Joan. Lensaeus
Bellidavus de Christ. libert. l. 12. c. 7.
Ablative or Negative Religion; for so much as we join with all true Christians
in all affirmative positions of ancient Faith, only standing upon the denial
of some late and undue additaments to the Christian belief. Or if those
Additions be reckoned for ruins; it is a sure Rule which Durand. Ration. lib.
1.
Durandus gives concerning Material Churches, appliable to the Spiritual, That
if the Wall be decayed, not at once, but successively, it is judged still the
same Church, and (upon reparation) not to be re-consecrated, but only Fisher.
contra D. White, and D. Featly.
those mouths stop themselves, which loudly call for the names of the
Professors of our Faith in all succession of times till Luther looked forth
into the World. Had we gone about to broach any new positive Truths, unseen,
unheard of former times, well and justly might they challenge us for a
deduction of this line of Doctrine from a pedigree of Predecessors: Now that
we only disclaim their superfluous and novel opinions and practices, which
have been by degrees thrust upon the Church of God, retaining inviolably all
former Articles of Christian Faith, how idle is this plea, how worthy of
hissing out? Who sees not now that all we need to do is, but to show that all
those points which we cry down in Roman Church, are such as carry in them a
manifest brand of Newness and Absurdity. This proof will clearly justify our
refusal. Let them see how they shall once, before the awful Tribunal of our
last Judge, justify their Accusatio non debet admitti quae non procedit ex
charitate 4. q. 5.
uncharitableness, who cease not upon this our refusal to eject and condemn us.

Rome is sick; ingenuous Nec inficior Romans Ecclesiam a prisco suo decore and
splendore non paru^ diversam, multisque morbis and vitiis deformata^. Cass. de
Offi. boni viti, etc.
Cassander confesses so, Nec inficior, etc. I deny not (says he) that the
Roman Church is not a little changed from her ancient beauty and brightness,
and that she is deformed with many diseases and vicious distempers. Utilia vero
et noleti ingere^da. Ber. de vit. solit.
Bernard tells us how it must be dieted; profitable, though unpleasing,
medicines must be poured into the mouth of it. Luther and his associates did
this office, as Erasmus acknowledges; Luther, porrexit orbi pharmacum
violentu^ and amarum: Id quale quale sit, optarim ut aliquid b^nae sanitatis,
etc. ^rasm. Georgio Sax. Duci, l. 21. Novis morbis novis obviandu^
medicamentis. Bern Ep. 161.
Lutherus porrexit, Luther, says he, gave the World a potion violent and
bitter: whatever it were, I wish it may breed some good health in the body of
Christian people so miserably foul with all kinds of evils. Never did Luther
mean to take away the life of that Church, but the sickness; wherein (as
Socrates Dulcior est religiosa castigatio, qua^ blanda romissio. Ambr. in obit.
Theod. ser. 6.
Ambrose worthily) Dulcior est, Sweeter is a religious chastisement then a
smoothing remission.

This that was meant to the Churches health, proves the Physicians disease; so
did the bitterness of our wholesome draughts offend, that we are beaten out of
doors: neither Non sugimus, sed fugamur. Casaub. ad Peron.
did we run from that Church, but are driven away, as our late Sovereign
professes by Casaubon's hand. We know that of Qui ab Eccl. and communicne,
etc. Cytil. orat. de exitu Animae.
Cyrill is a true word, Those which sever themselves from the Church and
communion, are the enemies of God, and friends of Devils; and that which
Oportebat quidem nibil non far, ne Ecclesiam Dei scinderes. Dion. ad Novat.
Eusebius. lib. 8. c. 44, etc.
Dionysius said to Novatus, Any thing must rather be born, then that we should
Far, far was it from our thoughts to tear the seamless coat; or with this
precious Oil of Truth to break the Churches head.

We found just faults, else Qui statum conturbat Ecclesiae, ab ejus liminib.
arceatur. 2 Epi. Alexand. Pap.
let us be guilty of this disturbance. If now Choler, unjustly, exasperated
with an wholesome reprehension, have broken forth into a furious persecution of
the gainsayers, the sin is not ours: if we have defended our innocence with
blows, the sin is not ours. Let us never prosper in our good Cause, if all the
water of Tyber can wash off the blood of many thousand Christian Souls that
has been shed in this quarrel from the hands of the Romish Prelacie. Surely,
as it was observed of old, that none of Levi were the professed followers of
our Savior; so it is too easy to observe, that of late times this Tribe has
exercised the bitterest enmity upon the followers of Christ. Suppose we had
offended in the undiscreet managing of a just reproof: it is a true rule of
Ingenia generosa doceri cupiunt, cogi non ferunt; cogere tyrannorum est, cogi
tantum asinorum. Erasm. Rosemund. ubi supra.
Erasmus, that generous spirits would be reclaimed by teaching, not by
compulsion; and, as Cavendum est ne cum rem dubiam emendare volumus, majora
vulnera faciamus. Alip. August. Epist. 239.
Alipius wisely to his Augustine, Heed must be taken, lest whiles we labor to
redress a doubtful complaint, we make greater wounds then we find. Oh how happy
had it been for Gods Church, if this care had found any place in the hearts of
her Governors; who regarding more the entire preservation of their own Honor,
then Truth and Peace, were all in the harsh language of war, (...), smite,
kill, burn, persecute! Had they been but half so charitable to their modern
reprovers as they profess they are to the foregoing, how had the Church
flourished in an uninterrupted Unity? Index expuigat. Bell. jussu Phil. 2.
Antuerp. Offic. Plant. In Catholicis veteribus alios plurimos, etc.
In the old Catholic Writers (say they) we bear with many Errors, we
extenuate and excuse them, we find shifts to put them off, and devise some
commodious senses for them. Guiltiness, which is the ground of this favor,
works the quite contrary courses against us. Alas! how are our Writings racked
and wrested to envious senses, how misconstrued, how perverted, and made to
speak odiously on purpose to work distaste, to enlarge quarrel, to draw on the
deepest censures!

Woe is me, this cruel uncharitableness is it that has brought this miserable
Magdeb. (...) e^. 2
Mountain Vesuvius being dispersed far and wide bred a grievous Pestilence in
the Regions round about; so the ashes that fly from these unkindly flames of
discord have bred a woeful infection and death of Souls through the whole
Christian world.

CHAP. IV.
IT is confessed by the Quae jamdiu depravata atque corrupta, harum ipsarum
haresiu^ magna exparte caus^ origoque exstitit. Orat, praes. Cont. Trid. sess.
11. Petrus Oxon. sum. Conc. sub Sixto 4.
President of the Tridentine Council, that the depravation of the discipline
and manners of the Roman Church was the chief cause and original of these
dissentions. Let us cast our eyes upon the Doctrine, and we shall no less find
the guilt of this fearful Schism to fall heavily upon the same heads.

For first, (to lay a sure ground) Nothing can be more plain, then that the Si
authorit as quaratur, Orbis major est Urbc, ubicunque fucrit Episcopus, five
Romans five Evgabii. Hieron. Evagrio, Walden. doctr. fid. Tom. 1. lib. 2. Pighius
Hierar. Eccl. lib. 6. 3. Turrecremat. and alii, V. Mort. Appel. lib. 4. cap.
2.. 6. Answer of the Bishop of St. David's Chapl. to Fisher.
Roman is a particular Church, as the Fathers of Basil well distinguish it,
not the universal; though we take in the Churches of her subordination or
correspondence. This truth we might make good by authority, if our very senses
did not save us the labor.

Secondly, Nec Papa nec Episcopus proprie potest propositionem, etc. Gers. An
liceat in causis fidei, etc. Nil. Thessal. Orat. de dissens.
No particular Church (to say nothing of the universal since the Apostolic
times) can have power to make a Fundamental point of Faith: It may explain or
declare, it cannot create Articles.

Thirdly, Only an error against a point of Faith is Heresy.

Fourthly, Those Points wherein we differ from the Romanists are they Rome has
made Fundamental, and of Faith.

Fifthly, The Reformed therefore, being by that Church illegally condemned for
those Points, are not Heretics.

Is propri^ haereticus dicitur, qui suo ipsius judicio condemnatus, sua sponte
scipsum ^yicit ab Ecclesia. Hosius de legitim. Judic. reru Eccle. l. 2.
He is is properly an Heretic (says Hosius) who being convicted in his own
judgment, does of his own accord cast himself out of the Church. For us, we are
neither convicted in our own judgment, nor in the lawful judgment of others: we
have not willingly cast our selves out of the Church, but however we are said
to be violently ejected by the undue sentence of malice, hold our selves close
to the bosom of the true Spouse of Christ, never to be removed; as far
therefore from Heresy as Charity is from our Censurers. Only we stand
convicted Subesse Romano, etc. Ext. de major. et obed, unam, etc.
Boniface; or Sylv. Prior. Epit. resp. ad Luth. l. 2. cap. 7.
Sylvester Prierius, Quicunque non, etc. Whosoever does not rely himself upon
the Doctrine of the Roman Church and of the Bishop of Rome as the infallible
rule of Faith, from which even the Scripture it self receives her force, he is
an Heretic. Whence follows, that the Church of Rome condemning and ejecting
those for Heretics which are not, is the Author of this woeful breach in the
Church of God.

I shall therefore, I hope, abundantly satisfy all wise and indifferent
Readers, if I shall show that those Points which we refuse and oppose, are no
other then such as by the confessions of ingenuous Nilus imputat divisiones
orbis Christiani prasumptioni Romanoe Eccl. quae susceperit in se absque Gracis
definire de rebus fidei, and contra sentientes anathemate ferire. Orat. de
Diffens. Eccles.
Authors of the Roman part have Ego si percgrinum dogma induxero, ipse peccavi,
Bern. in Cant^ Ser. 30.
Bernard, and that which might become the mouth of any Pope or Council, Ego si
peregrinum, etc. If I shall offer to bring in any strange opinion, it is my
sin. It was the wise Ordinance of the Thurians, as Cir. de Modest. Annot. in
leg. 12 Tab.
Diodorus Siculus reports, that he who would bring in any new Law amongst them
to the prejudice of the old, should come with an Halter about his neck into the
assembly, and there either make good his project, or die. For however in humane
constitutions, (...). Modest. Annot. Ibid.
(...) etc. the later orders are stronger then the former: yet in Divinity,
Primum verum, The first is true, as Tertullian's rule is; the old way is the
according to the Prophet. Here we hold us: and because we dare not make more
Articles then our Creeds, nor more sins then our Ten Commandments, we are
indignely cast out.

Let us therefore address our selves roundly to our promised task, and make
good the Novelty and Unreasonableness of those Points we have rejected. Out of
too many Controversies disputed betwixt us, we select only some principal; and
out of infinite varieties of evidence, some few irrefragable testimonies.


TO begin with Justification. The Tridentine Fathers in Card. de Monte praes.
Conc. Orat. sua ses. 11. professes what they meant to have dispatched in 15
days, cost seven months work.
their seven months debating of this point have so cunningly set their words,
that the Error which they would establish might seem to be either hid or
shifted; yet at the last they so far declare themselves, as to determine that
the Unica formalis causa est justitia Dei, non qua ipse justus est, sed qua nos
justos facit, etc. Conc. Trid. Sess. 6.
only formal cause of our Justification is God's Justice, not by which he
himself is Just, but by which he makes us just; Secundum propriam cujusque
dispositionem and cooperationom. Ibid.
according to each man's predisposition of himself and cooperation. And withal
they denounce a flat Si quis dixerit, etc. per eam ipsam formaliter justos
esse, vel solae imputatione justitiae Christi, vel sola remissione peccatorum,
etc. Anathema sit. Can. 10, 11.
Anathema to all those who dare to say, that we are formally justified by
Christ's Righteousness, or by the sole imputation of that Righteousness, or by
the sole remission of our sins, and not by our inherent Grace diffused in our
hearts by the holy Ghost. Which terms they have so craftily laid together, as
if they would cast an aspersion upon their Adversaries of separating the
necessity of Sanctification from the Nunquam remittetur culpa, quin suni^^
in^undatur justitia. Bellar. l. 2. de Justif. c. 13. Perfecta sunt opera Dei,
ex Deuter. 32. Bellar. lib. 2. de Justific. cap. 14. Justitiam in nobis
recipientes, unusquisque suam secundum mensuram quam Spiritus sanctus partitur
singulis prout vult, and secundum propriam cujusque dispositionem. Cone. Trid.
ubi supra.
These two acts of Mercy are inseparable. But this Justice being wrought in us
by the Holy Spirit according to the model of our weak receipt, and not
according to the full power of the infinite agent, is not so perfect as that it
can bear us out before the Tribunal of God.

Tridentine curse.

Heat now the History of this Doctrine of Justification, related by their
Andrew Vega (de Justif. lib. 7. cap. 24.) Magnafuit, etc. Some Ages since
(says he) there was a great concertation amongst Divines what should be the
formal cause of our Justification. Some thought it to be no created Justice
infused into man, but only the favor and merciful acceptance of God. In
which opinion the Master of Sentences is thought by some to Vienna: and the
School-Doctors, after the Master of Sentences, delivered this not as probable
only, but as certain. Afterward, when some defended the opposite part to be
more probable, it seemed good to the holy Synod of Trent thus to determine it.
So as till the late Council of Trent (by the confession of Vega himself) this

It is not the Logic of this Point we strive for, it is not the ^orense vocab.
Justif verbum (...) in alia significatione usurpant patres. Chemn. exam. De
justis. Causa formalis propter qud homo dicitur justus cord Deo, Bell. l. 2 de
Just. c. 1. Yet in the next chapter he corrects this propter in Chemnitius, and
expresses it otherwise, l. 2. c. 2.
Grammar; it is the Divinity. What is that whereby we stand acquitted before
the Righteous Judge, whether our inherent Justice, or Christ's imputed Justice
apprehended by Faith? The Divines of Trent are for the former, all Antiquity
with us for the latter. A just Volume would scarce contain the pregnant
Testimonies of the Fathers to this purpose.

Saint Chrysoft. in Con. hom. 2. O miscricor diae magnitudinem, etc. repenteque
justus apparet. Chrysoft. in Galat. c. 3. Crux sustulit execrationem, ^ides
invexit justitiam, justitia vero gratia^ spiritus allexit.
Chrysostom tells us it is the wonder of Gods Mercy, that he who has sinned
confesses, is pardoned, secured, and suddenly appears Just. Just? but how? The
Cross took away the Curse, (says he most sweetly,) Faith brought in
Righteousness, and Righteousness drew on the Grace of the Spirit.

Saint Amb. de Jacob. and vita beata. Non operibus justificamur, sed side,
quonia^ carnalis infirmitas, etc. Ib. cap. 3. Non g'oriabor quia men^, etc.
Similiter de Cain and Ab. l. 1. c. 9. de Fuga. c. 3. and 7.
Ambrose tells us that our carnal infirmity blemisheth our works; but that
uprightness of our Faith covers our errors, and obtains our pardon: And
professes that he will glory, not for that he is Righteous, but for that he is
Redeemed; nor for that he is void of sins, but for that his sins are forgiven
him.

Saint Hieron. adv. Pelag. lib. 1. Tunc justi sumus cum imperfectos nos, etc.
Jerome tells us, then we are just when we confess our selves sinners; and that
our Righteousness stands not in any Merit of ours, but in the mere Mercy of
God; and that the acknowledgement of our imperfection is the

Saint Gregor. in Ezech. hom. 7. ad finem, Justus igitur advocatus noster, etc.
Gregory tells us that our Just Advocate shall defend us Righteous in his
Judgment, because we know and accuse our selves unrighteous; and that our
confidence must not be in our acts, but in our Advocate.

But the sweet and passionate speeches of Saint Austin and S. Bernard would
fill a book alone; neither can any Reformed Divine either more disparage our
inherent Righteousness, or more magnify and challenge the imputed. It shall
suffice us to give a taste of both.

Ergo, Fratres, omnes de plenitudine ejus accepimus, de plenitudine
misericordiae, etc. Quid? remissionem peccatorum, ut justificaremur exside.
August. Tract. 3. in Joan.
We have all therefore, Brethren, received of his fullness; of the fullness of
his Mercy, of the abundance of his Goodness have we received: What? Remission
says that Divinest of the Fathers. And soon after, Omnes qui ex Adam cum
peccato, peccatores; omnes qui per Christum justificati, justi, non in se, sed
in illo. Nam in se, si interroges, Adam sunt; etc. Ib. Aug.
All that are from sinful Adam, are sinners; all that are justified by Christ,
are just, not in themselves, but in him: for in themselves, if ye ask after
them, they are Adam; in him, they are Christ's. And elsewhere, Laetamini, etc. O
qui laetamini in vob^^ O impii, O superbi, qui laetamini in vobis! jam
credentes in eum qui justificas impium, etc. Aug. 2. Enar. in Ps. 31.
Rejoice in the Lord and be glad, O ye Righteous. O wicked, O proud men that
rejoice in your selves! now believing in him who justifies the wicked, your
Faith is imputed to you for Righteousness. Rejoice in the Lord, why? Because
now ye are just. And whence are ye just? Not by your own Merits, but by his
Grace. Whence are ye just? Because ye

Quis accusavit, etc. Sufficit mihi ad omnem justitiam solum habere propitium
cui soli peccavi. Omne quod. etc. Non peccare Dei justitia; hominis justitia
est indulgentia Dei, Bern. in Cant. Ser. 23.
Who shall lay anything to the charge of Gods Elect? It suffices me for all
Righteousness, that I have that God propitious to me against whom only I have
sinned. All that he has decreed not to impute unto me, is as if it had not
been. Not to sin is Gods Justice; man's Justice is Gods indulgence, says devout
Bernard.

How pregnant is that famous Profession of his! Et si miscricordia Domini, etc.
Nunquid justitias meas, Domine? memorabo justitiae tuae solius, etc.
And if the mercies of the Lord be from everlasting and to everlasting, I will
also sing the mercies of the Lord everlastingly. What shall I sing of mine own
righteousness? No, Lord I will remember thy Righteousness alone, for that is
mine too: Thou art made Non est pallium breve, etc.
It is no short Cloak, that it should not cover twain. Thy Righteousness is
Righteousness for ever; and what is longer then Eternity? Behold, thy large and
everlasting mercy will largely Et te pariter and me operiet largiter larga and
aterna justitia, etc. Ber. sup. Cant. sermon 61.
cover both thee and me at once: in me it covers a multitude of sins; in thee,
Lord, what can it cover but the treasures of Pity, the riches of Bounty? Thus
he.

What should I need to draw down this Truth through the times of Anselme,
Lombard, Bonaventure, Gerson?

The Manual of Christian Religion set forth in the Provincial Council of Colen
shall serve for all. Bellar. de Justif. l. 2. c. 1. and l. 3. c. 3.
Bellarmine himself grants them herein ours; and they are worth our
entertaining. That Book is commended by Quiliber abomnib. cruditioribus
Theologis etiam per Italiam and Galliam summopere commendatus ^uit, etc. Cass.
Consult. Art 4.
Cassander, Italy and France, as that which notably sets forth the sum of the
judgment of the Ancients concerning this and other Points of Christian
Religion. Nos dicimus hominem per fidem donum justificationis tum demum
accipere, etc. Enchir. Colon.
Nos dicimus, etc. We say that a man does then receive the gift of
Justification by Faith, when being terrified and humbled by repentance, he is
again raised up by Faith, believing that his sins are forgiven him for the
Merits of Christ, who has promised Remision of sins to those that believe in
him; and when he feels in himself new desires, so as detesting evil, and
resisting the infirmity of his flesh, he is inwardly inkindled to an endeavor
of good, although this desire of his be not yet perfect. Thus they in the voice
of all Antiquity, and the then present Trent has created this Opinion of
Justification a Point of Faith.

Sect. 2. The Error hereof against Scripture.
YET if age were all the quarrel, it were but light: For though Newness in
Divine Truths is a just cause of suspicion; yet we do not so shut the hand of
our munificent God, that he cannot bestow upon his Church new Illuminations in
some parcels of formerly-hidden Verities. It is the charge both of their Canus
and Cajetan, Can. loc. com. lib 7. cap. 7. ^es. haec de Cajet.
that no man should detest a new sense of

Yea, if we may believe Quo juniores, eo perspicaciores. Salmer. in Romans 5.
Disput. 51.
Salmeron, the latter Divines are so much more quick-sighted; they, like the
Dwarf sitting on the Giants shoulder, overlook him that is far taller then
themselves. This Position of the Roman Church is not more new then faulty.
Hareses non tam novitas qua^ veritas revincit. Tertul. de Veland. Virgin.
Not so much Novelty as Truth convinces Heresies, as Tertullian. We had been
silent, if we had not found this Point (besides the lateness) erroneous:
erroneous both against Scripture and Reason. Against Scripture, which every
where teaches, as, on the one side, the imperfection of our Inherent
Righteousness, so, on the other, our perfect

The former Job saw from his dunghill; Job 9. 2, 3.
How should a man be justified before God? If he will contend with him, he
cannot answer one of a thousand. Whence it is that wise Solomon asks, Prove. 20.
9.
Who can say, My heart is clean; I am pure from sin? Eccles. 7. 20.
And himself answers, There is not a just man upon earth, which does good, and
sins not. A Truth which (besides his experience) he had learned of his
Father David, Psalm. 143. 2.
who could say, Enter not into Judgment with thy Servant, (though a man after
God's own Heart) for in thy sight shall no man living be justified: and 130. 3.
and, If thou, Lord, should mark iniquities, O Lord, who shall Esaias 64. 6.
For we are all as an unclean thing (we, says the Prophet Esaias, including even
himself) and all our Righteousness are as filthy rags. And was it any better
with the best Saints under the Gospel? Romans 7. 23.
I see (says the chosen Vessel) in my members another law warring against the
law of my mind, and leading me captive to the law of sin, Jam. 32.
which is in my members. So as In many things we sin all. And, If we say that
we have no sin, 1 John 1. 8.
we do but deceive our selves, and there is no truth in us.

The latter is the sum of Saint Paul's Sermon at Antioch; Be it known Acts 13
38, 39.
men and brethren, that through this Man is preached to you forgiveness of
sins; and by him all that believe are justified. They are justified, but how?
Freely, Romans 3 24.
by his Grace. What Grace? Inherent in us, and working by us? No: By Grace are
ye saved through Faith; Ephesians 2 8* 9.
and that not of your selves, it is the gift of God. Not of works, lest any man
should boast. Works are ours; but this is Righteousness of God, Romans 3 22. and
4. 5.
which is by the faith of Jesus Christ, to all them that believe. And how does
this become ours? By his gracious imputation: Not to him that works, but
believes in him who justifies the wicked, is his faith imputed for
righteousness.

Lo, it is not the Act, not the Habit of Faith that justifies; it is he that
justifies 2 Cor. 5. 21.
whom our Faith makes ours, and our sin his: He was made sin for us, that we
might be made the righteousness of God in him. Lo, so were we made his
Righteousness, as he was made our sin. Imputation does both; it is that which
enfeoffes our sins upon Christ, and us in his Righteousness; which both covers
and redresses the imperfection of ours. That distinction is clear and full;
Philip. 3. 9.
That I may be found in him, not having mine own righteousness, which is of the
Law, but that which is through the Faith of Christ, the righteousness which is
of God by Faith. S. Paul was a great Saint; he had a Righteousness of his own,
(not as a Pharisee only, but as an Apostle) but that which he dares not trust
to, but forsakes, and cleaves to God: not that essential Romans 5. 1.
Thus being justified by faith, we have peace with God through our Lord Jesus
Christ. For what can break that peace but our sins? and those are remitted: and
8. 33.
For who shall lay any thing to the charge of God's elect? it is God that
justifies. And in that Remission is grounded our Reconciliation: For Cor. 5.
19, 21*
God was in Christ reconciling the world to himself, not imputing their sins
unto them: but contrarily, imputing to them his own righteousness, and their
Faith for righteousness. Romans 3. 28. and 4 6, 7.
We conclude then, that a man is justified by faith. And, Blessed is he to whom
the Lord imputes righteousness without Ad hac vide Genesis 15. 6.
Blessed are they whose iniquities are forgiven, and whose sins covered.

Let the vain Sophistry of carnal minds deceive it self with idle subtilties,
Esa. 45. 25 and 50. 8. and 53. 11.
and seek to elude the plain Truth of God with shifts of wit; we bless God for
so clear a light, Ro^. 3. 20, 26, 30. and 4. 2, 3, 9, 16. and 5. 9* 18, 19 and
8. 1. and 10. 5, 10.
and dare cast our Souls upon this sure evidence of God, attended with the
perpetual attestation of his ancient Church.

Sect. 3. Against Reason. 1 Cor. 4. 4. Gal. 2. 16. and 3. 6, 11, 12, 14.

LAstly, Reason it self fights against them. Nothing can formally make us Just
but that which is perfect in it self: Non majue est creare coelum and terra^
quam peccatores justificare. Gers. Trac. sup. Magnif. 10.
How should it give what Nostra, siqua est, humilis, etc. Our poor Justice
(says Bern. deverbis Esai. sermon. 5.
Bernard) if we have any, it is true, but it is not pure: For how should it be
pure, where we cannot but be faulty? Thus he. The challenge is unanswerable.

To those that say they can keep God's Law, let me give S. Hierad Ctes.
Hierome's answer to his Ctesiphon; Profer quis impleverit, Show me the man
that has done it. For, as that Hieron, de filio prodigo.
Father elsewhere, In thy sight shall none living be justified: He said not, no
man, but, none living, not Evangelists, not Angels, not Thrones, not Dominions.
Ber. in Cant. ser. 73.
If thou shall mark the iniquities even of thine says S. Bernard, Who shall
abide it? To say now that Justitia actualis imperfecta, etc. non desinit tamen
esse vera justitia, and suo quodam modo perfecta. Bellar. de Justif. lib. 2.
cap. 14.
our actual Justice, which is imperfect through the admixtion of venial sins,
cease not to be both true, and (in a sort) perfect Justice, is to say, there
may be an unjust Justice, or a just Injustice; that even muddie water is clear,
or a leprous face beautiful.

Austin's true observation, He that is renewed from day to day, is not all
renewed, so much he must needs be in his old corruption. August. ad Hier. Ep.
29.
And, as he speaks to his Hierome of the degrees of Charity, There is in some
more, in some less, in some none at all; but the fullest measure which can
receive no increase is not to be found in any man while he lives here: and so
long as it may be increased, surely that which is less then it ought, is
faulty; from which faultiness it must needs follow, that there is no just man
upon earth which does good, and sins not; and thence in Gods sight shall
none living be justified. Thus he. To the very last hour our Prayer must be,
Forgive us our trespasses. Our very daily endeavor therefore

In short therefore, since this Doctrine of the Roman Church is both new and
erroneous, against Scripture and Reason, we have justly refused to receive it
into our Belief; and for such refusal are unjustly ejected.

CHAP. VI. Conc. Tri ses. 6. c. 16. c. 31. si quis, etc. augmentum gratiae,
vitam aeterna^, and ipsius vitae aeternae cons^^utionem, Anathema sit.


MErit is next; wherein the Council of Trent is no less peremptory: If any man
shall say that the good works of a man justified do not truly merit eternal
life, let him be Anathema.

It is easy for Error to shroud it self under the ambiguitie of words. The
word Merit has been of large use with the Ancients, who would have abhorred
the present sense: with them it sounded no other then O felix culpa quae talem
meruis habere salvatore^ Ecclesia canit in benedictione Ceroi. Sal. in 1. Tim.
1. Apostoli a sui^ civibus occids merucru^t. Aug in Psalm. 35. Major est mea
iniquitas qud ut veniam merear, Genesis 3. Vulg. Tral. Vide Mort. appell.
Obtaining or Impetration; not, as now, earning in the way of condign wages, as
if there were an equality of due proportion betwixt our Works and Heaven,
Scotus, Tolet, Pererius, Costerus, Weston, and the rest of that strain.

Far, far was the gracious humility of the Ancient Saints from this so high a
presumption. Let S. Manct sempiterna requies, etc. Basil. in Ps. 114. (...),
etc.
Basil speak for his fellows; Eternal rest remains for those who in this life
have lawfully striven; (...), etc. not for the Merits of their deeds, but of
the grace of that most munificent God in which they have trusted. Why did I
name one, when they all with full consent (as Veteres omnes summo consensu
tradunt, etc. Cassan. Consul. de bonies quaest. Neque ab hac, etc. Scholastici
scrip^ores and recentiores Ecclesiastici, etc.
Cassander witnesses) profess to repose themselves wholly upon the mere Mercy
of God and Merit of Christ, with an humble renunciation of all worthiness in
their own works? Yea that unpartial Author Thomas of Aquine, Durand, Adrian de
Trajecto, (afterward Pope) Clictoveus; and delivers it for the voice of the
then present Church. And before him Thom. Wald. to. 6. facr. Tit. 1. cap. 7. T.
Wald. praeclarus Wiclifistarum impugnator. And. Veg. 1. 7. de ^a^sis Justif.
cap.
Thomas Waldensis, the great Champion of Pope Martine against the miscalled
Heretics of his own name, professes him the sounder Divine and truer Catholic
which simply denies any such Merit, and ascribes all to the mere Grace of God,
and the will of the giver. What should I need to darken the air with a cloud
of witnesses, their Gregory Ariminensis, their Brugensis, Marsilius, Pighius,
Eckius, Ferus, Stella, Faber Stapulensis? Let their famous Preacher Royard. to.
5. Dominic. 11. post Pent^cost.
Royard shut up all, Quid igitur is qui Merita praetendit,

Let Bellarmine's Tutissimum est, etc. ground it self upon S. Bernard's
experimental resolution, Periculosa habitatio est, Perilous is their
dewlling place who trust in their own Merits; perilous, because ruinous. All
these and many more teach this, not as their own Doctrine, but as the Churches.
Either they and the Church, whose voice they are, are Heretics with us; or we
Orthodox

The Noveltie of this Roman Doctrine is accompanied with Error, against
Scripture, against Reason.

Sect. 2. Against Scripture.
THat God does graciously accept and munificently recompense our good Works,
even with an incomprehensible Glory, we doubt not, we deny not; but this either
out of the riches of his Mercy, or the justice of his Promise: But that we can
earn this at his hands out of the intrinsecal worthiness Luke 17. 9, 10.
and commanded by his Master to attendance? Does he thank that Servant because
he did the things that were commanded him? I trow not: So likewise ye, when ye
shall have done all things which are commanded you, say, We are unprofitable
servants. Unprofitable perhaps (you will say) in respect of meriting thanks;
Romans 4. 4.
not unprofitable in respect of meriting wages: For to him that works is the
reward not reckoned of grace, but of debt. True, therefore herein our case
differs from servants, that we may not look for God's reward as of Debt,
Ephesians. 2. 8.
but as of Grace; By Grace are ye saved through Faith: neither is Romans 11. 6.
but God's gift. Both it cannot be. For if by Grace, then it is no more of
Works (even of the most Renewed;) otherwise Grace is no more Grace: but if it
be of Works, then it is no more Grace; otherwise Work should be no more Work.
Now, Tit. 3. 5.
not by works of Righteousness which we have done (at our best) but according
to his Mercy he saves us. Were our Salvation of Works, then should Eternal
life be our wages; Romans 6. 25.
but now, The wages of sin is Death, but the gift of God is Eternal life
through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Sect. 3. Against Reason.
IN very Reason, where all is of mere Duty, there can be no Merit; for how can
we deserve reward by doing that, which if we did not we should offend? It is
enough for him that is obliged to his task, that his work is well taken. Now
all that we can possibly do, and more, is most justly due unto God by the bond
of our Creation, of our Redemption, by the charge of his Royal Law, and that
sweet Law of his Gospel: Nay, alas! we are far from being able to compass so
much as our duty; In many things we sin all. It is enough that in our Glory we
cannot sin: though their Faber Stapulensis would not yield so much, and taxes
Thomas for saying so: Origin held the very good Angels might offend. Alex.
Pesaut. in 1. 2ae. qu. 4. artic 4. disp. 4.
Then is our Grace consummate: till then our best abilities are full of
Imperfection. Gloria est gratia consummata. P. Ferius Specim. Schol. Ort. c. 13.
Therefore that conceit of Merit is not more arrogant then absurd.

We cannot merit of him whom we gratify not: we cannot gratify a man with his
own. All our good is God's already, his gift, his propriety: What have we that
we have not received? 1 Cor. 4. 7.
Not our talent only, but the improvement also is his mere bounty. There can
be therefore no place for Merit.

In all just Merit there must needs be a due proportion betwixt the act Pesaut
in 3.
weak, imperfect Obedience, (such is ours at the best) and an infinite, Tho. q.
1. a^t. 2. Valor physicus and entitativus operum Christi, etc.
full and most perfect Glory? The old Schools dare say, that the natural and
entitative value of the Works of Christ himself was finite, though the moral
value was infinite. What then shall Absit ut justi vitam aeternam exspe^tent
sicut pauper elcemosynam. Ruard. Tap. ^x A^t. Colon. Aug. de verb. Apo. se^. 2.
Ruard. Tapperus) to exspect Heaven as a poor man does an Alms: rather,
according to S. Austin's charge, Non sit caput turgidum, etc. Let not the head
be proud, that it may receive a Crown. We do with all humility and
self-dejection look up to the bountiful hands of that God who crowns us in
mercy and compassion.

This Doctrine then of Merit being both New and Erroneous, has justly merited
our reproof and detestation; and we are unjustly censured for our censure
thereof.


THE Point of Transubstantiation is justly ranked amongst our highest
differences. Fons Idol^maniaru^ Transub. Melancht. ad amicum, 1544 Boxhorn.
Isag. ad concord. l. 3.
Upon this quarrel, Fox Acts and Mon. passim.
in the very last Age, how many Souls were sent up to Heaven in the midst of
their flames; as if the Sacrament of the Altar had been sufficient ground of
the bloody Sacrifices?

The definition of the Tridentine Council is herein (beyond the wont) Si quis
dixerit in sacrosanctae, etc. Conc. Tri. de Transub. c 4. Can. 2.
If any man shall say that in the Sacrament of the Sacred Eucharist there
remains still the substance of Bread and Wine, together with the Body and Blood
of our Lord Jesus Christ, and shall deny that mavelous and singular
conversion of the whole substance of Bread into the Body, and the whole
substance of Wine into Blood, the (Species) semblances or shows only of Bread
and Wine remaining; (which said Conversion the Catholic Church does most fitly
call Transubstantiation) let him be accursed. Thus they.

Now let us inquire how old this piece of Faith is. In Synaxi s^ro
Transubstantiationem definivit Ecclesia. Diu satis erat credere, sive sub panc
consecrato, sive quccunque modo, adesse verum corpus Christi. Erasm. Annot. in
1 Cor. 7.
In Synaxi sero, etc. It was late ere the Church defined Transubstantiation
(says Erasmus:) For of so long (says he) held sufficient to believe that the
true Body of Christ was there, whether under the consecrated Bread, or
howsoever. And how late was this? Scotus shall tell us; Ante Council.
Lateranense, Before the Council of Lateran, Transubstantiation was no point of
Faith; as Cardinal Bellar. de Euc. lib. 3. cap. 23. Ibid. Bellar.
Bellarmine himself confesses his Opinion, with a minime probandum. And this
Council was in the year of our Lord 1215. Let who list believe that this Subtle
Doctor had never heard of the Roman Council under Gregory the Seventh, which
was in the year one thousand seventy nine; or that other under Nicolas the
Second, which was in the year one thousand and threescore; or that he had not
read those Fathers which the Cardinal had good hap to meet with. Certainly his
Confitente etia^ ^uarez.
and therefore dares confidently say (wherein Gabriel Biel seconds him) Non
admodum antiquam, that this Doctrine of Transubstantiation is not very ancient.
Saltem ab annis quingentis d^gma Transub. sub anathemat^ stabilitum. Bell. de
Euch. lib. 3. cap. 21.
Surely, if we yield the utmost time wherein Bellarmine can plead the
determination of this point, we shall arise but to ( saltem ab annis
quingentis, etc.) five hundred years ago: so long, (says he) at least, was
this opinion of Transubstantiation upon pain of a curse established in the
Church. The Church, but what Church? The Roman, I wis, not the Greek. That
word of Peter Martyr is true, That the Greeks ever abhorred from this Opinion
of Transubstantiation: Council. Floren^ess ult.
Insomuch as at the shutting up of the Florentine Grecians, that amongst other
differences they would also accord de Divina panis Transmutatione, concerning
the Divine Transmutation of the Bread; wherein notwithstanding they departed,
as formerly, dissenting. How palpably does the Cardinal shuffle in this
business, whiles he would persuade us, that the Greeks did not at all differ
from the Romans in Binius himself, that after the Greeks had given in their
answer, Se firmiter credere verbis illis Dominicis Sacramentu^ fieri. Ibid.
sess. ult.
That they do firmly believe that in those words of Christ the Sacrament is
made up, (which had been sufficient satisfaction, if that only had been the
question) the Pope urges them earnestly still, ut de Divina panis
Transmutatione, etc. that in the Synod there might be treaty had of the Divine
Transmutation of the Bread; and when they yet stiffly denied, he could have been
content to have had the other three questions, of Unleavened bread, Purgatory,
and the Popes Power, discussed, Jeremias of Constantinople has expressed the
judgment of the Greek Church; Act. Theol. Wittemberg. anno 1584.
Etenim vere, For the Body and Blood of Christ are truly Mysteries; not that
these are turned into man's body, but that (the better prevailing) we are turned
into them: yielding a change, but Mystical, not Substantial.

As for the Ancients of either the Greek or Latin Church, they are so far from
countenancing this Opinion, that our learned Whitak. cont. Dur. lib. 2. fol.
220.
Whitaker durst challenge his Duraeus, Si vel unum, etc. If you can bring me
but one testimony of sincere Antiquity, whereby it may appear that the Bread is
transubstantiate into the Flesh It is true that there are fair flourishes made
of a Ignat. ad Smyrn. Iren. lib. 5. contr. haeres. Tertul. de resur. Orig. hom.
5. in diver. loc Cypr. de Coen. Do. Bas. in reg. br. q. 172. Greg. Nyss. in
Cat^ch. Cyril. Hierosol. Cat. mist. 4. Hilar. l. 8. de Trin. Ambr. de sacr.
libr. 4. cap. 4 and 5. Greg. Naz. in Epit. Gorgon. Epiph. in Anc. Chrysostom.
hom. 24 in 1 Cor. Cyril. Alex. Epist. ad Coelesyrium, Aug. in Psalm. 33. Hier.
ad Hedib. Theol. dial. 3. Leo sermon. 6. de Jejun. Damase. l. 4. de fide Orthod.
Theophylact. in Luc. 22.
large Jury of Fathers giving their verdict this way, whose very names can
hardly find room in a margin: Scarce any of that sacred rank are missing. But
it is as true, that their witnesses are grossly abused to a sense that was
never intended; they only desiring in an holy excess of speech to express the
Et quidem mutatur; est enim alia elementi natura, Sacramentialia. Eliens.
contr. Bellarm.
Sacramental change that is made of the elements in respect of use, not in
respect of substance; and passionately to describe unto us the benefit of that
Sacrament in our blessed Communion with Christ, and our lively incorporation
into him.

Insomuch as Cardinal Bell. de Euch. lib. 2. c. 4.
Bellarmine himself is fain to confess a very high Hyperbole in their speeches.
Non est novum, It is no unusual thing (says he) with the Ancients, and
especially Irenaeus, Hilary, Nyssen, Cyril, and others, to say that our bodies
are nourished by the holy Eucharist.

Neither do they use less height of speech (as our Learned Bish. Morton's
Appell.
Bishop has particularly observed) in expressing our participation of Christ
in Baptism, wherein yet never any man pleaded a Transubstantiation.

Neither have there been wanting some of the Classical Leaders of their
Schools, which have confessed more probability of ancient evidence for
Consubstantiation then for this change. Certainly, neither of them both entered
ever into the thoughts of those Holy men, however the sound of their words
Gelas. Pap. de duabus Christ. nature. Biblioth. Patr. tom. 4.
Gelasius above a thousand years since, Et tamen, etc. Yet there cease not to
be the very substance of Bread and Wine? What can be more plain then that of S.
Aug. in Ps. 98. Non hoc ipsum corpus quod videtis, etc. neque hunc ipsum
sanguinem, etc. sacramentum vobis aliquod com. etc.
Augustine, It is not this Body which you see, that you shall eat, neither is
it this Blood which my Crucifiers shall spill, that you shall drink: it is a
Sacrament that I commend unto you; which being spiritually understood, shall
quicken you? Or that other, Ubi fiagitium, etc. August. de doct. Christ. l. 3.
c. 16.
Where a flagitious act seems to be commanded, there the speech is figurative;
as, when he says, Except ye eat the flesh of What should I urge that of
Tertul. contra Marcion. lib. 4.
Tertullian (whose speech Rhenanus confesses to have been condemned after in
Berengarius) My Body, that is, the figure of my Body? That of Theod. Dial. 2
and 3. (...), etc
Theodoret, The mystical signs after consecration lose not their own nature?
Carnale est dubitare quo modo de coelo descendit, etc. and quo modo possit
carnem sua^ dare ad mand^candum; Haec, inquam, omnia carnalia, quae mystice and
spiritualiter intelligenda sunt, Chrysostom* in cap. 6 Joan. hom. 46.
Chrysostom, It is a carnal thing to doubt how Christ can give us his flesh to
eat; whenas this is mystically and spiritually to be understood? And soon
after inquiring what it is to understand carnally, he thus explicates it;
Similiter ut res dicuntur, neque aliud quippiam excogitare, etc. Ibid. in
illud, Siquis dixerit contra filium hominis.
It is to take things simply as they are spoken, and not to conceive of any
other thing meant by them. This wherein we are is a beaten path, trod with the
feet of our holy Martyrs, and traced with their blood. What should I need to
produce their familiar and ancient Advocates, who have often wearied and worn
this bare, Athanasius, Contr. Tryphon.
Justine, Homil. 7. in Levit.
Origin, De Coen. Domini.
Cyprian, In Epitaph. Caesarii, and ad cives Nazianz.
Nazianzen, Libr. de Baptismo.
Basil, In Esai. 66.
Hierome, Libr. 8 de Trinitar.
Hilary, In Joan. lib. 3. cap. 34.
Cyril, Homil. 27.
Macarius, Lib. de Corp. and Sanguin. etc.
Bertram, besides those whom I formerly cited? Of all others (which I have not
found Albin. in Jo. cap. 6.
Albinus, or Alcuinus, Beda's learned Scholar (who lived in the time of Charles
the Great) seems to me most full and pregnant: Hoc est ergo, This is therefore
to eat that flesh, and to drink that blood, to remain in Christ, and to have
Christ remaining in us: so as he that remains not in Christ, and in whom Christ
remains not, without doubt does not spiritually eat his flesh, although
carnally and visibly he Dentibus premat, etc.
chew the Sacrament of his body and blood with his teeth; but rather he eats
and drinks the Sacrament of so great a thing unto his own Judgment, because he
presumed to come unclean unto those Sacraments of Christ, which none can take
worthily but the clean. Thus he.

Sicut etiam ante nos intellexerunt homines Dei. Ib.
common voice of all his Predecessors. And a little after, upon those words,
The flesh profits nothing, he adds, The flesh profits nothing, if ye
understand the flesh so to be eaten as other meat, as that flesh which is
bought in the Shambles. This is the ordinary language of Antiquity, whereof we
may truly say as the Disciples did of Christ, John 16. 29.
Behold, now thou speak plainly, and speak no Parable. At last Ignorance
and misunderstanding brought forth this Monster of Opinion, which Superstition
nursed up, but fearfully and obscurely, and not without much scope of contrary
judgments; till after Pope Nicolas had made way for it in his proceedings
against Berengarius (by so gross an expression as the Gloss is fain to put a
caveat upon) Anno 1060. the Laterane Council authorized it for a matter of
Faith, Anno 1215.

Thus young is Transubstantiation. Let Scripture and Reason show how erroneous.

Sect. 2. Transubstantiation against Scripture.
Joh. 6. 55, 51.
This is my Body, said also of the same body, My flesh is meat indeed, long
before there can be any plea of Transubstantiation; and, I am the bread that
came down from Heaven: so was he Manna to the Jews as he is bread to us. 1 Cor.
12. 27.
And S. Paul says of his Corinths, Ye are the body of Christ; yet not meaning
any transmutation of substance.

And in those words wherein this powerful conversion is placed, he says only,
Matthew. 26. 26.
This is, not, This is transubstantiate: and if whiles he says, This is, he
should have meant a Transubstantiation, Mark. 14. 22.
then it must needs follow that his This is, implies it already done. He adds,
This is my body. His true natural humane Body was there with them, took the
Bread, brake it, gave it, ate it; if the Bread were now the Body of Christ,
either he must have two bodies there, or else the same body is by the same body
taken, broken, eaten, and is (the while) neither taken, nor broken, nor eaten.
Luke 22. 19.
Yet he adds, which is given for you. This was the body which was given for
them, betrayed, crucified, humbled to the death; not the glorious Do this in
remembrance of me. Remembrance implies an absence; neither can we more be said
to remember that which is in our present sense, then to see that which is
absent.

Besides, that the great Doctor of the Gentiles tells us that after
consecration, it is bread which is broken and eaten; 1 Cor. 11, 23, 24: 26.
neither is it less then five times so called after the pretended change.

Shortly, Heb. 2. 17.
Christ as man was in all things like to us except sin; and our humane body
shall be once like to his glorious body. The glory which is put Acts 3. 21.
in a thousand distant places. He is locally above; for the heavens must
receive him till the times of the restitution of all things. He is not at once
in many distant places of the earth; Matthew. 28. 6.
for the Angel even after his Resurrection says, He is not here, for he is
risen.

Sect. 3. Transubstantiation against Reason.
NEver did or can Reason triumph so much over any prodigious Paradox as
Manichees, refuse to believe Christ unless he bring Reason; we are not they who
think to lade the Sea with an egge-shell, August. de util. cred. cap. 14.
to fadome the deep Mysteries of Religion with the short reach of natural
apprehension. We know there are wonders in Divinity fit for our adoration, not
fit for our comprehending: But withal we know, that if some Theological Truths
be above right Reason, yet never any against it; for all Verity complies with
it self, (...).
as springing from one and the same Fountain.

This Opinion therefore we receive not, not because it transcends our conceit,
but because we know it crosses both true Reason and Faith. It implies manifest
contradiction, in that it referres the same thing to it self in opposite
relations; Quod cum affirmatur negatur, impossible est, and implicat
contradictione^, Cassan in impl. contradict.
so as it may be at once present and absent, near and far off, below and above.

It destroies the truth of Christ's humane body, in that it ascribes Quantity
to it without extension, without Spatia locorum toll corporibus. Aug. Epist.
57.
locality; turning the flesh into spirit, and bereaving it of all the
properties of a true body; those properties which (as Nicetas in Naz. Orat. de
Pentec. quidem ne cogitatione (...), etc. Sic and Aug. Tollc ipsa corpo^^
qualitatibus, etc.
Nicetas truly) cannot so much as in thought be separated from the essence of
the body: insomuch as Nam si vere sectionem and partitionem divinanatura
reciperet etc. Cyrill. Alex.
Cyril can say, If the Deity it self were

It gives a false body to the Son of God, making that every day of Bread by the
power of words, which was made once of the substance of the Virgin by the Holy
Ghost.

It so separates Accidents from their Subjects, that they not only can subsist
without them, but can produce the full effects of Substances; so as bare
Accidents are capable of Accidents; so as of them Substances may be either made
or nourished.

It utterly overthrows (which learned Resp. ad Epist. viri docti.
Cameron makes the strongest of all reasons) the nature of a Sacrament; Tom. 2.
Dialog. de Trin. lib. 2.
in that it takes away at once the Sign, and the Analogy betwixt the Sign
and the thing signified: The Sign, in that it is no more Bread, but accidents;
the Analogy, in that it makes the Sign to be the thing signified.



Since then this Opinion is both New, and convinced to be grossly Erroneous by
Scripture and Reason, justly have we professed our deterstation of it; and for
that are unjustly ejected.

CHAP. VIII.
THE Novelty of the Half-Sacrament, or dry Communion, delivered to the Laity,
Constable. Synod. sess. 13.
is so palpable, as that the Patrons of it, in the presumptuous Council of
Constance, profess no less. Licet Christus, etc. Although Christ, (say they)
after his Supper, instituted and administered this venerable Sacrament under
both kinds of Bread and Wine, etc. Licet in primitiva, etc. Although in the
Primitive Church this Sacrament were received by the faithful under both kinds;
Non obstance, etc. Yet this custom, Inter alia, propter periculum effusionis.
Jo. de Burgo, 4 partis cap. 8.
some dangers and scandals, was upon just reason brought in, that Laics should
receive only under one kind: and those that stubbornly oppose themselves
against it, shall be ejected, and punished as Heretics. Now this Council was
but in the year of our Lord God 1453. Yea but these Fathers of Constance,
however they are bold to control Christ's Law by Custom, yet they say it was
consuetudo diutissime observata, Ibid.
a custom very long observed.

True, but the full age of this Diutissime is openly and freely calculated by
Cassander: Cassan. consult. de uttraque spec. sacr. etc.
Satis constat, It is apparent enough, that the Western or Roman Church, for a
thousand years after Christ, in the solemn and ordinary Dispensation of this
Sacrament, gave both kinds of Bread and Wine to all the members of the Church.
A point which is manifest by innumerable ancient Testimonies both of Greeks and
Latins. And this they were induced to do by the example of Christ's
institution. Quare non temere, etc. It is not therefore (says he) without
cause, that most of the best Catholics, and most conversant in the reading of
Ecclesiastical Writers, are inflamed with an earnest desire of obtaining the
Cup of the Lord; that the Sacrament may be reduced to that ancient custom and
use, which has been for many Ages perpetuated in the universal Church. Thus
he. We need no other Advocate.

Yea, their Vasquez draws it yet lower, Negare non, etc. We cannot deny 1260.

Thus it was in the Roman Church: but as for the Greek, the World knows it did
never but communicate under both kinds. These open Confessions spare us the
labor of quoting the several testimonies of all Ages: else it had been easy
to show how in the Liturgy of Saint Basil and Chrysostom, Liturg. Basil. and
Chrylost.
the Priest was wont to pray, Vouchsafe, O Lord, to give us thy Body and thy
Blood, and by us to thy people; Vide Cassand. consult. ubi sup.
how in the order of Rome, the Archdeacon taking the Chalice from the Bishops
hand, confirms all the receivers with the blood of our Lord: In Epist. ad
Phil.
Ignatius's (...), One Cup distributed to all, to have descended along through
the clear records of S. Cyprian, Lib. 1. Ep. 2.
Hierome, Ambrose, Lib. de Coen.
Augustine, Dom. Quaest in Levi^. 57.
Leo, Gelafius, Paschasius and others, to the very time of Hugo and Lombard,
and our Halensis; and to show how S. Cyprian would not deny the blood of Christ
to those that should shed their blood for Christ; how Saint Austin (with him)
makes a comparison betwixt the blood of the Legal Sacrifices, which might not
be eaten, and this blood of our Saviors Sacrifice,

But what need allegations to prove a yielded truth? So as this halfing of the
Sacrament is a mere novelty of Rome, and such a one as their own Pope Great.
decret. de consecrat. dict. 2 c. 12. comperimus, Divisio unius ejusdemque
Mysterii non ^inc grandi sacrilegio potest pervenire.
Gelasius sticks not to accuse of no less then Sacrilege.

Sect. 2. Half-Communion against Scripture.
NEither shall we need to urge Scripture, when it is plainly confessed by the
last Councils of Lateran and Trent, that this practice varies from Christ's
institution. Yet the Tridentine Fathers have left themselves this evasion, Etsi
Christus Dominus, etc. non tamen illa institutio and traditio eo tendunt ut
omnes Christi fideles statuto Domini ad utramque speciem accipiendam
astringa^tur, etc. Council. Trid. sess. 5. sub Pio. An. 1562. c. 1.
and so delivered it to his Apostles, notwithstanding he has not by any
command enjoined it to be so received of the Laity: Not considering that the
charge of our Savior is equally universal in both; to whom he said, Take and
eat, to the same also he said, Drink ye all of this; so as by the same reason
our Savior has given no command at all unto the Laity to eat or drink; and so
this Blessed Sacrament should be to all Gods people (the Priests only
excepted) arbitrary and unnecessary. But the great Doctor of the Gentiles is
the best Commenter upon his Master, who writing to the Church of God at
Corinth, 1 Cor. 1. 2. Nihil differt sacerdos a subdito quandofruendum est
mysteriis. Chrysostom.
to them that are sanctified in Christ Jesus, 1 Cor. 11. 28.
with all that in every place call upon the Name of Jesus Christ, so delivers
the institution of Christ, as that in the use of the Cup he makes no
difference; six times conjoining the mention of drinking with eating; and
fetching it in with an (...), equality of the manner, and necessity of both,
charges all Christians indifferently, Probet seipsum, Let every man examine
himself, etc. and so let him eat of that bread, and drink of that cup.

Sect. 3. Half-Communion against Reason.
IN this practice Reason is no less their enemy. Gal. 3. 15.
Though it be but a man's testament, (says Saint Paul.) How much less shall
flesh and blood presume to alter the last Will of the Son of God; and that in
so material a Point as utterly destroys the institution? For, Doct. White
cont. Fisherum.
as our Learned Bishop of Carlisle argues truly, half a Man is no Man, half a
Sacrament is no Sacrament.

And as well might they take away the Bread as the Cup; both depend upon the
same ordination: It is only the command of Christ that makes the Bread
necessary; the same command of Christ equally enjoynes the Cup; both do either
stand or fall upon the same ground.

The pretense of Concomitancie is so poor a shift, that it hurts them rather;

And could this Mystery be hid from the eyes of the Blessed Authors of this
Sacrament? Will these men be wiser then the wisdom of his Father? If he knew
this, and saw the Wine yet useful, who dares abrogate it? and if he had not
seen it useful, why did he not then spare the labor and cost of so needless an
element?

Lastly, the Blood that is here offered unto us, is that which was shed for

Shortly then, this mutilation of the Sacrament being both confessedly late,
and extremely injurious to God and his people, and contrary to Scripture and
Reason, is justly abandoned by us; and we for abandoning it unjustly censured.


IT sounds not more prodigiously that a Priest should every day make his God,
then that he should sacrifice him. Antiquity would have as much abhorred the
sense as it has allowed the word. Nothing is more ordinary with the Fathers,
then to call Macarium in altar insultasse, mensam Domini evertisse. Socrat.
lib. 1. c. 10.
Gods Table an Altar, the holy Elements Chrysostom. in Psalm. 95.
Chrysostom reckons ten kinds of Sacrifice, and at last (as having forgotten
it) adds the eleventh. All which we well allow; and indeed many Sacrifices are
offered to God in this one: but a Conc. Tri. Ses. 6. c. 2. Can. 1. Verum,
proprium, propitiatorium, etc.
true, proper, propitiatory Sacrifice for quick and dead, (which the Tridentine
Fathers would force upon our belief) would have seemed no less strange a
Soloecisme to the ears of the Ancients then it does to ours. In li. sen. Prof.
hom. 17. ad Heb.
Saint Augustine calls it a Designation of Christ's offering upon the Cross;
Saint Chrysostom (and Theophylact after him) a Remembrance of his Sacrifice;
Emissenus, a daily Celebration in mystery of that which was once offered in
payment; and Prece mystica consecratur nobis in memoria Dominica Passionis.
Lom. sent. lib. 4. d. 12.
Lombard himself, Cassand, consult. de sacrificio. Et ibid. hoc autem
sacrificium exemplar est illius. Chrysostom ubi supr.
Cassander cites from Saint Ambrose or Chrysostom, may be in stead of all: In
Christ is the Sacrifice once offered able to give Salvation. What do we
therefore? Do we not offer every day? Surely, if we offer daily, it is done for
a recordation of his death. This is the language and meaning of Antiquity, the
very same which the Tridentine Synod condemns in us. Si quis dixerit Missa
Sacrificium tantum esse laudis and gratiarum actionis, etc. Sess. 6. cap. 9.
If any man shall say that the Sacrifice of the Mass is only a Sacrifice of
praise and thanksgiving, or a bare commemoration of the Sacrifice offered upon
the Cross, let him be accursed.


HOw plain is the Scripture, Hebr. 7. 27.
whiles it tells us, that our High Priest needs not daily, as those High
Priests (under the Law) to offer up sacrifice, first for his own sins, then for
the peoples; for this he did once, when he offered up himself? The
contradiction of the Trent-Fathers is here very remarkable. Conc. Trid. Ses. 6.
cap. 2.
Christ (say they) who on the Altar of the Cross offered himself in a bloody
Sacrifice, is now this true Propitiatory Sacrifice in the Mass made by himself:
He is one and the same Sacrifice, and one and the same offerer of that
Sacrifice, by the Ministry So then, they say, that Christ offered up that
Sacrifice then, and this now: Saint Paul says, he offered up that Sacrifice and
no more. Saint Paul says, our High Priest needs not to offer daily Sacrifice:
They say, these daily Sacrifices must be offered by him. Saint Paul says that
he offered himself but once for the sins of the people: They say, he offers
himself daily for the sins of quick and dead. And if the Apostle in the Spirit
of Prophecy foresaw this Error, and would purposely forestal it, he could not
speak more directly then when he says, We are sanctified through the offering
of the Body of Jesus Christ once for all. Heb. 10. 10, 11, 12, 13, 14.
And every High Priest stands daily ministering and offering oftentimes

Now let the vain heads of men seek subtle evasions in the different manner of
this offering, Sola offerendi rations diversa. Ibid. Conc. Tr.
bloody then, unbloody now. The Holy Ghost speaks punctually of the very
substance of the act, and tells us absolutely, there is but one Sacrifice

That I may not say they build herein what they destroy; for an unbloody
Sacrifice, Hebr. 9. 22.
in this sense, can be no other then figurative and commemorative. Is it really
propitiatory? Without shedding of blood there is no remission. If therefore
sins be remitted by this Sacrifice, it must be in relation to that blood which
was shed in his true personal Sacrifice upon the Cross; and what relation can
be betwixt this and that but of representation and remembrance? Cassan. Consul.
de sacrif.
in which their moderate Cassander fully rests.

Sect. 3. Missal Sacrifice against Reason.
IN Reason there must be in every Sacrifice (as Cardinal Bellarmine grants) a
destruction of the thing offered; and shall we say that they make their Savior
to crucify him again? Bellar. lib. 1 de Missa, cap. 3.
No, but to eat him; for, Consumptio seu manducatio quae fit a Sacerdote, The
consumption or manducation which is done of the Priest is an essential part of
this Sacrifice, says the same Author: For in the whole action of the Mass
there is (says he) no other real destruction but this.

Suppose we then the true humane flesh, blood and bone of Christ, God and man,
really and corporally made such by this Transubstantiation, whether is more
horrible, to crucisie, or to eat it?

By this rule it is the Priests teeth, and not his tongue, that makes Christ's
body a Sacrifice. By this rule it shall be hostia an host, when it is not a
Sacrifice; and a reserved host is no Sacrifice, howsoever consecrated. And what
if a mouse or other vermin should eat the Host? Jo. de Burg. 4 partis cap. 8.
de Ministratione Euch.
(it is a case put by themselves) who then sacrifices?

To stop all mouths; Laics eat as well as the Priest, there is no difference
in their manducation, Salmer. Tom. 9. Tract. 29. An Euchar. sit proprie
sacrificium.
but Laics sacrifice not; and (as Salmeron urges) the 1 Cor. 9. 13.
Are not they which eat of the Sacrifices, partakers of the Altar? And in the
very Canon of the Mass, Ut quotquot, etc. the prayer is, That all we which in
the participation of the Altar have taken the sacred Body and Blood of thy Son,
etc. Wherein it is plain, says he, that there is a distinction betwixt the
Host, and the eating of the Host.

Lastly, sacrificing is an act done to God: if then eating be sacrificing, the
Priest eats his God to his God; Quorum Deus venture. Whiles they in vain study
to reconcile this new-made Sacrifice of Christ already in Heaven with Jube haec
praferri, Command these to be carried by the hands of thine holy Angels we
conclude, That this proper and propitiatory Sacrifice of the Mass, as a new,
unholy, unreasonable Sacrifice, is justly abhorred by us, and we for abhorring
it unjustly ejected.

CHAP. X. The Newness of Image Worship.
AS for the setting up and worshipping of Images, we shall not need to climb
so high as Arnobius, Epist. Epiphan. Inter opera Hieron.
or Origin, or the Council of Eliberis, Anno 305. or to that fact and history
of Epiphanius, (whose famous Epistle is honored by the Translation of Hierome)
of the picture found by him in the Church of the Village of Anablatha, though
out of his Fisher's evasion, Quae (...) religionem (...) (...) etc.
that it was sure the Picture of some profane Pagan? when as Epiphanius
himself there says, it had Imaginem quasi Christi, vel Sancti cujusdam, the
Image as it were of Christ, or some Saint. Surely therefore the Image went for
Christ's, or for some noted Saints; neither does he find fault with the
irresemblance, but with the Image, as such.

That of Agobardus is sufficient for us; Biblio. Patr. tom. 9.
Nullus antiquorum Catholicorum, None of the ancient Catholics ever thought
that Images were to be worshipped

The decision of Gregory the Great (some 600 years after Christ) which he gave
to Serenus Bishop of Massilia, Greg. Epist. l. 9. Epi. 9. Indict. 4*
is famous in every man's mouth and pen; El quidem quia eas ador ari vetuisses,
etc. We commend you (says he) that you forbade those Images to be worshipped;
but we reprove your breaking of them: adding the reason of both, For that they
were only retained for history and instruction, not for adoration. Cassan.
Consul. 21. (...) cultu Imag.
Which ingenuous Cassander so comments upon, as that he shows this to be a
sufficient declaration of the judgment of the Roman Church in those times,
Videlicet ideo haberi picturas, etc. That Images are kept And the same Author
tells us that Sanioribns scholiasticis displicet, etc. The sounder Schoolmen
disliked that opinion of Thomas Aquine, who held, that the Image is to be
worshipped with the same adoration which is due to the thing represented by it;
reckoning up Durand, Holcot, Biel. Not to spend many words in a clear case:
What the judgment and practice of our Ancestors in this Island was concerning
this point, appears sufficiently by the relation of Roger Hoveden our
Historian, who tells us that in the year 792. Rog. Hoveden. Part. Annal. 1.
Ann. 792. fol 3.
Charles the King of France sent into this Isle a Synodal Constantinople,
wherein there were diverse offensive passages; but especially this one, that by
the unanimous consent of all the Doctors of the East, and no fewer then 300:
Bishops, it was decreed that Images should be worshipped, quod Ecclesia Dei
execratur, says he, which the Church of God abhorres. Against which Error
Albinus (says he) wrote an Epistle marvellously confirmed by authority of
Divine Scriptures; and in the person of our Bishops and Princes exhibited it,
together with the said Book, unto the French King. This was the settled
resolution of our Predecessors: And if since that time prevailing Superstition
have incroached upon the ensuing succession of the Church, (...), let the old
rules stand, as those Fathers determined;

But, Vide Binnium in vita Constant. P.
good Lord, how apt men are to raise or believe lies for their own advantage?
Urspergensis and other friends of Idolatry tell us of a Council held at London
in the days of Pope Constantine, Anno 714. wherein the worship of Images was
publicly decreed; the occasion whereof was this: Egwin the Monk (after made
Bishop) had a Vision from God, wherein he was admonished to set up the Image of
the Mother of God in his Church. The matter was debated, and brought before the
Pope in his See Apostolic: there Egwin was sworn to the truth of his Vision.
Thereupon Pope Constantinus sent his Legate Boniface into England, who called a
Council at London; Egwin's Vision, there was an act made for Imageworship. A
figment so gross, that even their Baronius and Binnius fall foul upon it, with
a facile inducimur, etc. we are easily induced to believe it to be a lie. Their
ground is, that it is destitute of all testimony of Antiquity; and besides,
that it does directly cross the report of Beda, who tells us that our English,
together with the Gospel, received that use of Images from their Apostle
Augustine: and therefore needed not any new Vision for the entertainment Beda
Eccl. hist. Ang. lib. 1. cap. 25, etc.
Let us enquire then a little into the words of Beda; At illi, but they,
(Augustine and his fellows) non daemoniaca, etc. came armed not with the power
of Devils, but of God, bearing a silver Cross for their Standard, and the Image
of our Lord and Savior painted in a Table, and singing Letanies both for the
Salvation of themselves, and of them whom they came to convert. Thus he.

This shows indeed, that Augustine and his fellows brought Images into England,
unknown here before; (a point worthy of good observation:) but how little this
proves the allowed Worship of them, will easily appear to any Reader, if he
consider that Gregory the first and Great was he that sent this Augustine into
England; whose judgment concerning Images is clearly published by himself to
all the world in his forecited Epistle, absolutely condemning their Adoration
( Augustine should have been an ill Apostle, if he had herein gone contrary to
the will of him that sent him;) if withal he shall consider, that within the
very same Century of years the Clergy of England, by Albinus Bede's Scholar,
sent this public declaration of their earnest disavowing both of the doctrine
and practice of Image Worship.

Sect. 2. Image Worship against Scripture.
AS for Scripture, we need not to go further then the very Second
Commandment; the charge whereof is so inevitable, that it is very ordinarily
(doubtless in the guiltiness of an apparent check) left out in the devotional
Books to the people. Azorius Iast. lib* 9. c^6. cites for this opinion, Alex.
p. 3. q. 30. memb. 3. art. 3. Alber. 3. d. 9. art. 4. Bonav. 3. d. 9. 1. q.
Richard. 3. d. 9. art. 2. q. 1. Palud. 3. d 9 q. 1. Marsil. 3. q. 8. Henric.
quodl. 10. q. 6. Cent. 2. cap. 5.
Others, since they cannot raze it out, would fain limit it to the Jews,
pretending that this precept against the worship of Images was only Temporal
and Ceremonial, and such as ought not to be in force under the Times of the
Gospel.

Wherein they recall to my thoughts that which Epiphanius the son of Carpocrates
answered, when his Lust was checked with the command of Non concupisces; True,
said he, that is to be understood of the Heathen, whose Wives and

Some more modest spirit are ashamed of that shift, and fly to the distinction
of Idols and Images: (...) saepe simula^rum ver. Act. 7. 41. and 15. 20. 1 Cor.
12. 2. 1 John 5. 21. Levit. 26. 1.
a distinction without a difference; of their making, not of Gods; of whom we
never learned other, then that as every Idol is an Image of something, so every
Image worshipped turns Idol: the Language differs, not the thing it self.

To be sure, God takes order for both, Ye shall make you no Idol nor graven
Image, neither rear you up any standing image, neither shall you sct up any
image of stone in your Land to bow down to it. Yea, as their own Vulgar turns
it, Deuteronomy. 16. 22.
Non facies tibi, etc. statuam, Thou shall not set thee up a Statue The Book of
God is Esaias 42. 17. and 45. 16. Mic. 5. 13. Abac. 2. 18, 19. Zach. 10. 2. Esa.
2. 8. and 30. 22. and 41. 7, 22, 23, 24. 29. and Esaias 44. 12. Jer. 7^ 18. and 8
9. and 10 8. Ezec. 6. 4, 13. and 20. 28, 32. and 23. 7. Ose 8. 4, 5. Mich. 1. 7.
full of his indignation against this practice.

We may well shut up all with that curse in Mount Geresim, Deuteronomy. 27. 15.
Cursed be the man that makes any graven or molten image, an abomination unto
the Lord; the work of the hands of the craftsman, and puts it in a secret
place. And all the people shall say Amen. Surely their Durand. Rat^. 1. c. 3.
Ex his and similibus authoritatibus reprobatur nimius imaginum usus.
Durandus, after he has cited diverse Scriptures against Idols, as Exodus 20.
Levit. 26. Deuteronomy. 4. Numb, 25, etc. at last concludes, Ex his and similibus,
etc. By these and the like authorities is condemned the too much use of Images.

Now because many eyes are bleared with a pretense of worshipping these Jeremy,
Baruch 6. (canonical to them, though not to us) and compare the estate and
usage of those ancient Idols with the present Images of the Roman Church; and
if he do not find them fully paralleled, let him condemn our quarrel of
injustice.

1 Pet 4 3. We turn ^t well abominable Ideluries Greg Vol. l. 2. Apol. de Idol.
c 7.
when they run for shelter under that Text which professedly taxes them. (...)
etc. in illicitis idolorum cultibus, says S. Peter, in unlawful Idolatries;
speaking of the Gentiles: Therefore, says Valentia, there is a lawful worship
of Idols. As if that were an Epithet of favor, which is intended to
aggravation. So he that should call Satan an unclean Devil, Neque absurd
prosecto putave^ is B. Petrum insinuavisse cultum ai^que^ simulacroruam rectum
^sse, etc. cont. Hebrandum.
should imply that some Devil is not unclean; or, deceivable lusts, some lusts
deceitlesse; or, hateful wickedness, some wickedness not hateful. The man had
forgot that the Apostle spoke of the heathenish Idolatry; wherein himself
cannot plead any color of lawfulness. May this therefore befriend them, to
call Idolatry abominable, the Scripture

Sect. 3. Against Reason.
WHat need we seek any other Reason of God's prohibition then his will? and yet
God himself has given abundant reason of his prohibition of Images erected to
himself.

Esaias 40. 18
To whom will ye liken God? or what likeness will ye compare unto him? Deuteronomy. 4
15.
Ye saw no manner of similitude in the day that the Lord spoke to you in Horcb.
Esaias 42. 8.
I am the Lord, that is my name, and my glory will I not give to another, nor
my praise to molten images. The holy jealousy of the Almighty will not abide
any of his honor divided with his creature; and Siquis puram creaturam prepter
quameumque excellentia^ colit cultu and honor majori quam puro humano, cultus
hic jam accdit ad cultum religiosum, and per conseq. ad divinu^. Spalat. de
Rep. Eccl. 1. 7. c. 12. Sed neque Elias adorandus est, etiamfi in vivis sit,
neque Johannes ad^andus, etc. Epiph. cont. Collyrid. bae^. 79.
whatever worship more then mere humane is imparted to the creature, sets it in
rivaltie with our Maker.

The man is better then his picture; and if religious worship will not be
allowed to the Person of man or Angel, how much less to his Image? Not to man;
Acts 10. 26.
Saint Peter forbids it: not to Angel; Revel. 19. 10.
himself forbids it. What Diog. Laert.
Cynick had wont to speak unto statues) to use himself to repulses?

This courtesy was too shameful in the Pagans of old, how much more
intolerable in Christians? And as for that last shift of this unlawful
devotion, that they worship not the Image, but by it the Per illa colitur Deus.
Less. de Jure etc. de Relig. l. 2. 36. dub.
Person represented; Haec a Paganis afferri solebat, This (says Cassand. Co^s.
A^t. 21.
Cassander, out of the evidence of Arnobius and Lactantius, to whom he might
have added Saint Augustine) was the very evasion of the old Heathen; Nec
valebat tunc illa ratio, Neither would this color then serve: how can it hope
now to pass and find allowance?

The Doctrine therefore and Practice of Image Worship, as late as erroneous,
Nos non dice Martyrum relaquias, etc. Hier. ad Ripariam.
S. Hierome's profession, worship not the relics of Martyrs, nor Sun, nor
Moon, nor Angels, nor Archangels, nor Cherubim, nor Seraphin, nor any name that
is named in this world or in the world to come: and unjustly are we hereupon
ejected.

CHAP. XI. The Newness of Indulgences and Purgatory.
Indulgences or Pardons, as they are now of use in the Roman Church; the
intolerable abuse whereof gave the first hint to Luther's inquiry. Histor:
Council. Trid. lib. 1.
Pope Le^ had gratified his fister Magdalen with a large Monopoly of Germane
Pardons; Aremboldus her Factour was too covetous, and held the market too high:
The height of these over-rated Wares caused the Chapmen to inquire their worth.
They were found, as they are, both for age and dignity. For age so new, as that
De vanit. scient. c. 16.
Cornelius Agrippa, and De invent. rer. l. 8. c. 1. Dies Indulgent. referuntur
ad paenitentias pro vita injunctas. Gers. reg. moral.
Polydore Virgil, and Machiavel (and who not?) tell us, Boniface the Eighth,
who lived Anno 1300. was the first that extended Indulgences to Purgatory, the
first that devised a Jubilee for the full utterance of them. The Indulgences of
former times were no other then relaxations of Canonical Penances, which were
enjoined to heinous sinners; whereof Burchard the Bishop of Worms sets down
many particulars, about the year 1020. For example, if a man had committed
wilful murder, he was to fast forty days together in bread and water, (which
the common people calls a Lent) and to observe a course of Penance for seven
years after. Now these years of Penance and these Lents were they which the
Pardons of former times were used Greg. de Val. and Bellarm. l. 2. de Indulgent.
that Gregory of Valence is forced to confess, that not so much as Gratian or
Peter Lombard (which wrote about 400 years before him) ever made mention of the
name of Indulgence.

Well therefore might Durand and Antonine grant it not to be found either in
the Scriptures or in the writings of the ancient Doctors: and our B. Fisher

Just and warrantable is that challenge of Learned Chemnitius, Chemn. Exam. de
Indulgent. c. 4.
that no testimony can be produced of any Father or of any ancient Church, that
either such Doctrine or Practice of such Indulgences was ever in use until
toward 1200 years after Christ. Talium indulgentiarum: Some there were in the
time immediately foregoing; but such as now they were not. Ibidem.
Besides Eugenius his time which was too near the Verge; for the words of
Chemnitius are, For well-near a thousand two hundred years.
Per annos ferme mill ducentos. Bellarmine instances in the third Council of
Lateran, about the year 1116. wherein Pope Paschal the second gave Indulgences
of Conrad. Urspergensis. Secondly, that this Indulgence of his is no other but
a relaxation of Canonical Penance. For he adds, (which Bellarmine purposely
concealeth) iis qui de capitalibus, etc. to those that should do Penance for
capital sins, he released forty days Penance. So as this instance helps
nothing; neither are the rest, which he has raked together within the compass
of a few preceding years, of any other alloy.

Neither has that Cardinal offered to cite one Father for the proof of this
Practice, the birth whereof was many hundred years after their expiration; but
Bellaum. l. 2. de Indul. cap. 17.
Neque mirum, etc. Neither may it seem strange if we have not many ancient
Authors that make mention of these things in the Church, which are preserved
only by use, not by writing. So he. He says, Not many Authors; he shows not
one. And if many matters of rite have been traduced to the Church without
notice of Pen or Press; yet let it be shown what one Doctrine or Practice of
such importance as this is pretended to be has escaped the report and
maintenance of some Ecclesiastic Writer or other, and we shall willingly yield
it in this. Till then, we shall take this but for a mere color, and resolve
that our honest Rossensis deals plainly with us, who tells us, Quamdiu nulla
fuer at de Purgatorio cura, etc. So long as there was no Thus their Martyr, not
partially for us, but ingenuously out of the power of truth, professes the
Novelty of two great Articles of the Roman Creed, Purgatory and Indulgences.
Indeed, both these now hang on one string: although there was a kind of
Purgatory dreamed of before their Pardons came into play. That device peeped
out fearfully from Origin, and pulled in the head again, as in Aug. ^nc^. c.
69. De Civi^ Dei, l. 21. c. 26. Quicquid s^ quod illo signis^catur; (...)
braha. Confess. l. 9. c. 3. Ser, de Temp. 232. Qui cum Christo reg^are non
meruerit, cum diabelo absque dubitatione peribit, etc. ib, and the like, De
civit. Dei, lib. 21. c. 25.
S. Austin's time doubting to show it; Tale aliquod, etc. That there is some
such thing (says he) after this life, it is not utterly incredible, and may be
made a question. And elsewhere, I reprove it not, for it may perhaps be true.
And yet again, as retracting what he had yielded, he resolves, Let no man
deceive himself, my brethren; there are but two Before whom Cypr. con^.
Demetriam, ad finem.
S. Cyprian is peremptory, Quando isthinc excessum fuerit, When we are once
departed hence, there is now no more place of repentance, no effect of
satisfaction; here is life either lost or kept. And -- Hic etiam nobis est
prompta modela; Post autem clausa est omnis medicina salai^. Naz. Car. de rebus
suis, Carm. 1. fig. 13
Gregory Nazianzen's verse sounds to the same sense. And Ambr. de obitu
Theodos. ad medium, etc.
S. Ambrose can say of his Theodosius, that being freed from this earthly
warfare, Fruitur nunc luce perpetua, etc. he now enjoies everlasting light,
during tranquillity, and triumphs in the troops of the Saints. But what strive
we in this? We may well take the word of their Martyr, our Roffensis, for both:
And true Eras. Epist. l. 20. Hier. Agathio.
Erasmus for the ground of this defense; Mirum in modum, etc. They do
marvellously affect the fire of Purgatory, because it is most profitable for
their Kitchins.

Sect. 2. Indulgences and Purgatory against Scripture.
THese two then are so late come strangers, that they cannot challenge any
notice taken of them by Scripture; neither were their names ever heard of in
the language of Canaan: yet the wisdom of that all-seeing Spirit has not left
us without preventions of future Errors, in blowing up the very grounds of
these humane devices.

Esaias 43. 25.
I, even I, am he that blotteth out thy transgressions for mine own sake, and
will not remember thy sins. Lo, can the Letter be read that is blotted out?
Can there be a back-reckoning for that which shall not be remembered I have done
away thy transgressions as a Cloud. Esaias 44. 22.
What sins can be less then transgressions? Psalm. 51. 7.
What can be more clearly dispersed then a Cloud? Wash me, and I shall be
whiter then snow. Who can tell where the spot was, when the skin is rinsed? 1
John 1. 9.
If we confess our sins, he is faithful to forgive our sins, and to cleanse
Lo, he cleanses us from the guilt, and forgives the punishment. What are our
sins but debts? What is the infliction of punishment, but an exaction of
payment? What is our remission, but a striking off that score? Mat. 6. 12
And when the score is struck off, what remains to pay? Remitte debita, Forgive
our debts, is our daily Prayer. Our Savior tells the Paralitick, Thy sins are
forgiven thee; Man. 2. 5.
in the same words implying the removing of his Disease. If the sin be gone,
the punishment cannot stay behind. We may smart by way of chastisement after
the freest remission, not by way of revenge; for our amendment, not for God's
satisfaction.

The Second ground is, a middle condition betwixt the state of eternal life
Verily, (...), etc.
verily I say unto you, he that hears my Word and believes in him that sent
me, has everlasting life, and comes not into judgment (as the Vulgar it self
terms it) but is passed from death unto life. John 5. 24.
Behold, a present possession, and immediate passage, no judgment intervening,
no torment.

How was this hid from the great Doctor of the Gentiles, who putting himself
into the common case of the believing Corinthians, 2 Cor. 5. 1.
professes, We know that if once our earthly house of this Tabernacle be
dissolved, we have a building of God, not made with hands, eternal in the
Heavens? The dissolution of the one is the possession of the other; here is no
interposition of time, of estate.

The Wise man of old could say, Wisd. 3. 1, 3.
The souls of the righteous are in the hand of God; and there shall no torment
touch them. Upon their very going from us they are in peace. Revel. 14. 13.
(...), as S. John heard from the heavenly voice, From their very dying in the
Lord is their blessedness.

Sect. 3. Indulgences against Reason.
IT is absurd in Reason, to think that God should forgive our Talents, and
arrest us for the odd Farthings. Neither is it less absurd to think that any
living soul can have superfluities of Satisfaction; whenas all that man is
capable to suffer cannot be sufficient for one (and that the least) sin of his
own, the wages whereof is eternal death: or that those superfluities of humane
satisfaction should piece up the infinite and perfectly-meritorious
superabundance of the Son of God: or that this supposed treasure of Divine and
humane satisfactions should be kept under the key of some one sinful man:
Collegia clericorum and conventus religiosorum aspergunt and incensant corpus
Papae, and absolvunt. Sacr. Cerem.
or that this one

Lastly, Guilt and Punishment are Relatives, and can no more be severed then a
perfect forgiveness and a remaining compensation can stand together.

This Doctrine therefore of Papal Indulgences, as it led the way to the further
discovery of the corruptions of the degenerated Church of Rome, so it still

CHAP. XII. The Newness of Divine Service in an unknown tongue.
THat Prayers and other Divine offices should be done in a known tongue,
understood of the people, is not more available to edification (as their Cajet.
in 1 Cor. 14. Ex has Pauli doctrina habetur, quod melius ad aedificationem
Ecclesiae est ora^iones publicas, quae audiente populo dicuntur, dici lingua
communi clcricis and populo, quam dici Latin.
Cajetan liberally confesses) then consonant to the practice of all Antiquity;
insomuch as Lyr. ibid.
Lyranus freely, In the Primitive Church, blessings and all other services were
done in the vulgar tongue.

What need we look back so far, when even the Council. Later. Anno 1215.
Lateran Council, which was but in the year 1215. under Innocent the third,
makes this Decree, Quoniam in plerisque, Because in many parts within the same
City and Diocese, people are mixed of diverse languages, having under one Faith
diverse Rites and fashions, we strictly command that the Bishops of the said
Cities or Dioceses provide fit and able men, who, according to the diversities
of their Rites and Languages, may celebrate Divine Services, and administer the
Sacraments of the Church to them, Cardinal Bellarmine's evasion is very
gross, That in that place Innocentius and the Council speak only of the Greek
and Latin tongue: For then (says he) Constantinople was newly taken by the
Romans, by reason whereof there was in Greece a mixture of Greeks and Latins;
insomuch as they desired that in such places of frequence two Bishops For who
sees not that the Constitution is general, Plerisque partibus, for very many
parts of the Christian world, and Populi diversarum linguarum, People of sundry
languages; not, as Bellarmine cunningly, diversae linguae, of a diverse
language? And if these two only Languages had been meant, why had it not been
as easy to specify them, as to intimate them by so large a circumlocution?
The Synod is said to be universal, comprehending all the Patriarchs, Grecians
and Romans; or, that all these Fathers were careless of the rest? especially,
since the end which they profess to propose unto themselves herein is, the
instruction of the people, of what Nation or Language soever; which end as it
was never meant to be limited to two sorts of people, so could it never be
attained without this liberty of Language fitted to their understanding. To
which may be added, that the Greeks and Latins, of all other, had the least
need of this provision, since it was famously known that they had their several
Services already of received and current use, before this Constitution was
hatched.

Neither is it of any moment which he adds, That in Italy it self this Decree
was not extended to the use of Vulgar tongues: for that it is evident that S.
Thomas (who lived soon after) composed in Latin the Office of the Feast of
Corpus Christi, not in the Italian; although the same Aquinas confesses that
the vulgar tongue of Italy at that time was not Latin. For what child cannot
easily see, that if their great Doctor would write an Office for the public
use (as is intended) of the whole Church, he would make choice to write it in
Italian (in those times especially) but a broken and corrupt Latin, differing
more in Idiome and termination then in the substance of speech? That which
Radevicus about the year 1170. records for the voice of the people, in the
election of Pope Victor, Papa Vittore S. Pietro l'elege, makes good no less;
for what such difference is betwixt this, and Papam Victorem Sanctus Petrus
elegit? So as this instance does nothing at all infringe that just Decree of
the Roman Fathers. Nec lingua vulgaris popalo subjiracta est, sed popalus ab ca
rec^ssit. Eras. decl. ad Censur. Purif. (...). 12. sect. 14.
Howsoever, that observation of Erasmus is true, and pregnant to this purpose,
Nec lingua vulgaris, etc. Neither was the vulgar (i. the Latin) withdrawn from
the people, but the people went off from it.

And as for our Ancestors in this Island, our Venerable E^^a Histor (...).
Beda witnesses that in England the Scriptures were read by them in five
Languages, according to the number of the Books wherein the Law of God was
written, namely English, Scottish, British, Pictish, and Latin; which, says
he, in meditation of the Scriptures is made common to all the rest. A point
which the said Author specifies for a commendation of the well-instructednesse
of those people: not as purposing to intimate that the use of the Latin did
thrust out the other four, for he there tells us that in all four they did not
only search, but confess

Sect. 2. Against Scripture.
AS for Scriptures; were this practice so old as it is pretended, the rule is,
Longaevae consuetudinis, Longaevae consuetudinis non est vilis authoritas,
dummo^o canonibus non sit contraria. 11. did. consu^^. etc.
etc. The authority of an ancient Custom is not to be slighted, so long as it
is not against the Canons. Nothing can be more against the Canons of the
blessed Apostle then this; who, did he live in these our days, and would bend
his speech against the use of a Language not understood in Gods service, could
not speak more directly, more punctually, then he does to his Corinths. How
does he tell us, that the speaking in a strange tongue edifies not the Church,
1 Cor. 14. 5. 6.
profits not the hearers, produces a necessary ignorance Verse 9.
makes me a Barbarian to him that speaks, and him that speaks a Barbarian
to me? 11.
How does he require him that speaks in an unknown tongue to pray that he may
interpret? 13.
And if he must pray that he may do it, how much more must he practice it when
he can do it? How does he tell us that in a strange-languaged Prayer the
understanding is unfruitful? 14.
that it is better to speak five words with understanding, 19.
that we may teach others, 23.
then ten thousand words in an unknown tongue? that those which speak with
strange tongues are but as mad men to the unlearned, or unbelievers.

Sect. 3. Against Reason.
IN which Scriptures (besides Authority) the Apostle has comprised
unanswerable and convincing Reasons against this Romish abuse: Amongst the rest
is intimated that utter frustration of the use of the tongue in Gods service.
For it is a true Rule which Salmeron cites out of Lactantius, Salmeron in illa,
Ves estis sal terrae^ ex Lactant.
Nihil valet ex se, etc. That thing is to no purpose which avails not unto the
end whereto it serves. Silence does as much express the thought, as a language
not understood. In this sense is that of Laurentius too well verified, Laurent.
Presb. Pisan. Paradox. Euangelic.
Sacerdos imperitus mulier sterilis, A Priest unable to express himself is a
barren woman; incapable of bringing forth children Quid prodest ^ons siga^us?
As good no tongue as no understanding. What good does a Well sealed up? as
Ptolomy said of the Hebrew Text.

Wherefore do we speak, if we would not be understood? It was an holy
resolution of S. Augustine, that he would rather say Ossum in false Latin, to
be understood of the people, then Os in true, not to be understood. This
practice, however it may seem in it self slight and unworthy of too much
contention, yet in regard of that miserable blindness and mis-devotion which it
must needs draw in after it, is so heinous, as it may well deserve our utmost
opposition. The unavoidablenesse of which effects has carried some of their
Casuists into an opinion of the unnecessarinesse of devotion in these holy
businesses; so as Jac. Graph. decis. aur. Sylv. quaest. 80. art. 9.
He that wants devotion sins not; another, Though it be convenient that the
Communicant should have actual devotion, yet is it not necessary. Alas! what
service is this which poor souls are taught to take up with, which God must be
content to take from hood-winked suppliants? This Doctrine, this Practice, thus
new, thus prejudicial to Christians, we bless God that we have so happily
discarded; and for our just refusal are unjustly ejected.


THE necessity of a particular, Conc^^. Trident. S^ quis dix^rit in Sa^ram.
Poeni^^^^iae ad (...), etc.
secret, full Sacramental Confession of all our sins to a Priest, upon pain of
non-remission, is an Act or Institution of the Roman Church: For as for the
Greek Church, it owns not either the Doctrine or Practice. So the Gloss of the
Canon Law directly, Confessio apud Graecos, (...) etc. Se^^. 14.
etc. Confession is not necessary amongst the Grecians,

That Gloss would tell us more, Gless. Great. de Poenitentia, did. 5. c. In
poenitentia.
and so would Gratian himself, if their tongues were not clipped by a guilty
expurgation. But in the mean time the Gloss of that Canon (hitherto allowed)
plainly controlls the Decree of that late Council: For if the necessity of
Confession be only a Tradition, (...)
and such a one as has not been deduced to the Greek Church, then it stands
not by the Law of God, which is universal, not making differences of places or
times; like an high-elevated Star which has no particular aspect upon one
Region.

That there is a lawful, In noti^ ibid.
commendable, beneficial use of Confession was never denied by us; but to set
men upon the rack, and to strain their Souls up to a praecepti and medii) and
of a strict particularity, and that by a screw of Jus divinum, Gods Law, is so
mere a Roman Novelty, that many ingenuous Authors of their own have willingly
confessed it.

Amongst whom Cardinal Bellarmine himself yields us In Annor, Hi^ro. ad Ocean.
Erasmus and In not. Tertul. de poeni^^n. etc.
Beatus Rhenanus, Bellar. de poeni^. l. 3. c. 1
two noble Witnesses; whose joint Tenet he confesses to be, Confessionem
secretam, etc. That the secret Confession of all our sins is not only not
instituted or commanded Jure divino, by Gods Law; but that it was not so much
as received into use in the Ancient Church of God. To whom he might have added,
out of Maldonat's account, omnes Decretorum, etc. all the Interpreters and,
amongst the Schoolmen, Scotus.

We know well those sad and austere Exomologeses which were publicly used in
the severe times of the Primitive Church: whiles these took place, what use was
there of private? These obtained even in the Western or Latin Church till the
days of Leo, De presby^ poenitentiari^s, vide Socrat. l. 5. c. 19.
about 450. years: in which time they had a grave public Penitentiary for this
purpose. Afterward (whether the noted inconveniences of that practice, or
whether the cooling of the former fervor occasioned it) this open Confession
began to give way to secret; which continued in the Church, but with freedom,
and without that forced and scrupulous strictness which the latter times have
put upon it. It is very remarkable which Learned Rhenanus has, Beatus Rhenanus
Argum. in (...) de poenit. (...) etc.
Caeterum Th. ab Aquino, etc. But (says he) Thomas of Aquine and Scotus (men
too acute) have made confession at this day such, as that Joh. Geilerius a
grave and holy Divine, which was for many years Preacher at Strasburgh, had
wont to say to his friends, that according to their rules it is an impossible
thing to confess: adding, that the same Geilerius being familiarly conversant
with some religious Votaries, both Carthusians and Franciscans, learned of them
with what torments the godly minds of some men were afflicted, by the rigor of
that Confession which they were not able to answer; and thereupon he published
a book in Dutch, entitled The sickness of Confession. The same therefore
which Rhenanus writes of his Geilerius, he may well apply unto us, Itaque etc.
Geilerius therefore did not dislike Confession, but the serupulous anxiety
which is taught in the Sums of some late Divines, more fit indeed for some
other place then for Libraries. Thus he. What would that ingenuous Author have
said, if he had lived to see those volumes of Cases which have been since
published, able to perplex a world; and those peremptory Decisions of the
Fathers of the Society, whose strokes have been with Scorpions in comparison of
the Rods of their Predecessors? To conclude, This bird was Lateran, (Anno
1215.) fully plumed in the Council of Trent, and now lately has her feathers
imped by the modern Casuists.

Sect. 2. Romish Confession not warranted by Scripture.
SInce our quarrel is not with Confession it self, which may be of singular
use and behoof, but with some tyrannous strains in the practice of it, which
are the violent forcing and perfect fullness thereof: it shall be sufficient
for us herein to stand upon our negative, That there is no Scripture in the
whole Book of God wherein either such necessity, or such entireness of
Confession is commanded.

Indeed, John 20. 23.
our Savior said to his Apostles and their successors, Whose sins ye remit,
they are remitted; and whose sins ye retain, they are retained. But did he say,
No sin shall be remitted but what ye remit? or, No sin shall be remitted by you
but what is particularly numbered unto you? James 5. 16.
S. James bids, Confess But would they have the Priest shrieve himself to the
penitent, as well as the penitent to the Priest? This act must be mutual, not
single. Acts 19. 18.
Many believing Ephesians came and confessed, and showed their deeds. Many; but
not all, not Omnes utriusque sexus. They confessed their deeds; some that were
notorious, not all their sins.

Contrarily rather, John 20. 21.
so did Christ send his Apostles, as the Father sent him; he was both their
warrant and their pattern. But that gracious Savior of ours many a time gave
absolution where was no particular confession of sins: Only the sight of the
Paralyticks Faith setcht from him, Matt. 9. 2.
Son be of good cheer, thy sins be forgiven thee; the noted Sinner in Simon's
house, approving the truth Thy sins are forgiven thee.

Sect. 3. Against Reason.
IN true Divine Reason this supposed duty is needless, dangerous, impossible.
Needless, in respect of all sins, not in respect of some: for however in the
cases of a burdened Conscience nothing can be more useful, more sovereign; yet
in all our peace does not depend upon our lips. Romans 5. 1.
Being justified by faith, me have peace with God through Jesus Christ our
Lord.

Dangerous, Chrysostom. in Psalm. 50.
in respect both of exprobration, as Saint Chrysostom worthily, and of
infection; Sayr. Summa Cas. Navar.
for Delectabile carnis (as a Casuist confesses,) Fleshly pleasures, the more
they are called into particular mention, the more they move the appetite. I do
willingly conceal from chaste eyes and ears what effects have followed this
pretended act of Devotion in wanton and unstaied Confessors.

Impossible; for who can tell how often he offends? He is poor in sin that can
count his stock; and he sins always that so presumes upon his innocence, as to
think he can number his sins; and if he say of any sin, as Lot of Zoar, Is it
not a little one? Isaac. Sir. Presb. Antiochen. de Contemp^mundi, etc.
as if therefore it may safely escape the reckoning. It is a true word of Isaac
the Syrian, Qui delicta, etc. He that thinks any of his offenses

This Doctrine and Practice therefore, both as new and unwarrantable, full of
Usurpation, Danger, Impossibility, is justly rejected by us; and we for so
doing unjustly ejected.


LEst any thing in the Roman Church should retain the old form, how absurd is
that innovation which they have made in the order of their Penance and
Absolution? Cassand. consult. Art. de Confess.
The ancient course, as Cassander and Lindanus truly witness, was, that
Absolution and Reconciliation and right to the Communion of the Church was not
given by imposition of hands unto the Penitent, Lindan. Panop. lib. 4.
till he had given due satisfaction by performing of such penal acts as were
enjoined Cassand. Ibid.
yea, those works of Penance (says he) when they were done out of Faith, and
an heart truly sorrowful, and by the motion of the Holy Spirit, preventing the
mind of man with the help of his Divine Grace, were thought not a little
available to obtain remission of the sin, and to pacify the displeasure of God
for sin: Not that they could merit it by any dignity of theirs, but that
thereby the mind of man is in a sort fitted to the receipt of God's Grace. But
now, immediately upon the Confession made, the hand is laid upon the Penitent,
and he is received to his right of Communion, and after his Absolution, certain
works of piety are enjoined him, for the chastisement of the flesh, and
expurgation of the remainders of sin. Thus Cassander. In common apprehension
this new order Resp. ad F^herum.
and (as our learned Bishop of Carlisle) like Easter before Lent. But for this,
Ipsi viderint; it shall not trouble us how they nurture their own child.

CHAP. XIV. The Newness of the Romish Invocation of Saints.
OF all those Errors which we reject in the Church of Rome, there is
Invocation of Saints: Spalat. de Resp. Eccl. l. 7. c. 12.. 16.
which yet, as it has been practiced and defended in the later times, should
in vain seek either example or patronage amongst the Ancient. However there
might be some grounds of this Devotion secretly muttered, and at last expressed
in Panegyric forms; yet until almost 500 years after Christ it was not in any
sort admitted into the public service. Rex Jacob. Praemonit. ad Principes, etc.
It will be easily granted that the Blessed Virgin is the prime of all Saints;
neither could it be other then injurious that any other of that Heavenly
Society should have the precedence of her: Now the first that brought her name
into the public Devotions of the Greek Church is noted by Nicephorus to be
Petrus Niceph. lib. 15. cap. 28.
or Fullo, a Presbyter of Bithynia, afterward the Usurper of the Sea of
Antioch, much about 470 years after Christ; who (though a branded Heretic)
found out four things (says he) very useful and beneficial to the Catholic
Church; Ecclesiae Catholicae commodissima, ibid.
whereof the last was, Ut in omni precatione, etc. That in every Prayer the
Mother of God should be named, and her Divine name called upon. The phrase is
very remarkable wherein this rising Superstition is expressed.

And as for the Latin Church, we hear no news of this Invocation in the
public Letanies till Gregorie's time, Jos. Sca^ig. Notis in Novum Test.
about some 130 years after the former.

And in the mean time some Fathers speak of it fearfully and doubtfully. How
could it be otherwise, when the common opinion of the Ancients, even Austin's
age, did put up all the Souls of the Faithful, except Martyrs, in some blind
receptacles, whether in the Center of the earth or elsewhere, where they might
in candida exspectare diem Judicii, as Tertullian has it four several times?
And Stapl. lib. de author. scr.
Stapleton himself sticks not to name diverse of them thus foully mistaken.

Others of the Fathers have let fall speeches directly bent against this
Invocation. Chrysostom. hom. de poenitent. hom. 4. Which place the Margin of the
Latin Edition of Venice, set forth by the authority of the Inquisition, tells
us, (and we must believe it) makes nothing against Invocation of Saints.
Non opus est patronis, etc. There is no need of any Advocates to God,
Chrysostom: and most plainly Vide ibid.
elsewhere, Homines si quando, etc. If we have any suit to men (says he) we
must fee the porters, and treat with jesters and parasites, and go many times
a long way about. In God there is no such matter; he is exorable without any of
our Mediators, without money, without cost, he grants our petitions: It is
enough for thee to cry with thine heart alone, to power out thy tears, and
presently thou have won him to mercy. Thus he.

And those of the Ancients that seem to speak for it, lay grounds that
overthrow it. Howsoever it be, all holy Antiquity would have both blushed and
spit at those forms of Invocation which the late Clients of Rome have broached
to the world. If perhaps they speak to the Saints tanquam deprecatores,) as
Spalat. lib. 7. c. 12.. 26.
Spalatensis yields, moving them to be competitioners with us to the throne of
Grace, not properly, but improperly, as Gul. Altis. in 4. sent. etc.
Altissiodore construes it: how would they have digested that blasphemous
Psalter of our Lady imputed to Bonaventure, and those Dea, primas Coeli, etc.
praecipe Angelis ut nos custodiant. In Rosar. Canon. Reg. Anonym. Dividunt
coram Patre inter se Matter and filius pietatis ^fficia, and condunt inter se
reconciliationis nostrae inviolabile testamentum. Arnold. Carnot. de Laudibus
5. Virg.
styles of mere Deification which are given to her, and the division of all
offices of Piety to mankind betwixt the Mother and the Son? How had their
ears glowed to hear, Christus oravit, Franciscus exoravit, Christ prayed,
Francis prevailed? How would they have brooked that which Lud. Vives in Aug. de
Civitar. D^i lib. 8. c. ult.
Ludovicus Vives freely confesses, Multi Christiani, etc. Many Christians
worship div^s divasque the Saints of both sexes, no otherwise then God himself?
Or that which Nam and plebem rudiorem religiose, etc. Et magis plurimos interne
religioso affectu crga B. Virgin. etc. quam (...) Christum. Spalat. de Re Eccl.
lib. 7. cap. 12.. 28.
Spalatensis professes the ignorant multitude are tarried with more entire
religious affection to the Blessed Virgin, or some other Saint, then to Christ
their Savior? These foul Superstitions are not more heinous then new, and such
as wherein we have justly abhorred to take part with the practicers of them.

Sect. 2. Invocation of Saints against Scripture.
AS for the better side of this mis-opinion, even thus much color of Antiquity
were cause enough to suspend our censures (according to that wise and moderate
resolution of learned Ego certe ab Antiquitate non recedo nisi coactus. Zanch.
in Coloss.
Zanchius;) were it not that the Scriptures are so flatly opposite unto it, as
that we may justly wonder at that wisdom which has provided Antidotes for a
disease that of many hundred years after should have no being in the World. The
ground of this Invocation of Saints is their notice of our earthly condition,
and special Devotions. Job 14. 20, 21.
And behold, thou prevailest ever against man, and he passes: thou changest
his countenance, and sendest him away. His sons come to honor, and he knows it
not; and they are brought low, and he perceives it not, says Job. Eccles. 9.
5, 6.
The dead know nothing at says wise Solomon: Also their love and their hatred
and their envy is now perished; neither have they any more a portion for ever
in any thing that is done under the Sun. No portion in any thing, therefore not
in our miseries, nor in our allocutions. If we have a portion in them, for
their love and Prayers in common for the Church, they have no portion in our
particularities, whether of want or complaint. Esaias 63. 16.
Abraham our Father is ignorant of us (says Esaias) and Israel acknowledges us
not. Lo, the Father of the Faithful above knows not his own children, till
they come into his bosom; and he that gives them their names, 2 King. 22. 20.
is to them as a stranger. Wherefore should good Josiah be gathered to his
Fathers, as Hulda tells him, but that his eyes might not see all the evil which
Jerusalem?

We cannot have a better Commenter then S. Augustine; August. de cura pro mort.
gerend. cap. 13.
If (says he) the Souls of the dead could be present at the affairs of the
living, etc. surely my good Mother would no night forsake me, whom, whiles she
lived, she followed both by land and sea. Far be it from me to think that an
happier life has made her cruel, etc. But certainly that which the holy
Psalmist tells us is true; My Father and my Mother have forsaken me, but the
Lord took me up. If therefore our Parents have left us, how are they present or
do interesse themselves in our cares or businesses? And if our Parents do not,
who else among the dead know what we do, or what we suffer? Esaias the Prophet
says, Thou art our Father, for Abraham is ignorant of us, and Israel knows us
not. If so great Patriarchs were ignorant what became of that people which came
from their loins, and which upon their belief was promised to descend from
their stock, how shall the dead have ought to do either in the knowledge or
aid of the affairs or actions of their dearest survivers? How do we say that
God provides mercifully for them who die before the evils etc. How is it then
that God promised to good King Josiah for a great blessing, that he should die
beforehand, that he might not see the evils which he threatened to that place
and people? Hiero. in Eccl. 3. ad fin.
Thus that divine Father. With whom agrees Saint Hierome, Nec enim possumus,
etc. Neither can we, (says he) when this life shall once be dissolved, either
enjoy our own labors, or know what shall be done in the World afterward.

But could the Saints of Heaven know our actions, yet our hearts they cannot:
This is the peculiar skill of their Maker. Psalm 7. 9.
Thou art the searcher of the hearts and reins, Psalm. 44. 21. and 139. 1. 4,
etc.
O righteous God: God only knows abscondita animi, the hidden Prove. 15. 11. and
17. 3. and 24. 12. Jer. 11. 20. and 17. 10 and 20. 12.
Now the Heart is the seat of our Prayers: the Lips do but vent them to the
ears of men: Moses said nothing, when God said, Let me alone, Moses. O
therefore thou that hear the prayers, to thee shall all flesh come.
Solomon's argument is irrefragable; 1 Kings 8 39.
Hear thou in Heaven thy dwelling place, and do, and give to every man
according to his ways, whose heart thou know: For thou, even thou only,
know the hearts of all the children of men. He only should be implored that
can hear; he only can hear the Prayer that knows the heart.

Yet could they know our secretest desires, it is an Honor that God
challenges as proper to himself, Psalm. 50. 15.
to be invoked in our prayers; Call upon me in the 1 Timothy 2. 5.
and I will deliver thee, and thou shall glorify me. There is one God, and one
mediator betwixt God and man, the man Jesus Christ. One and no more; Ephesians. 2.
18.
not only of redemption, but of intercession also: for through him (only) we
have access by one Spirit unto the Father: and he has invited us to himself,
Come to me all ye that labor and are heavy laden.

Sect. 3. Against Reason.
HOw absurd therefore is it in Reason, when the King of Heaven calls us to him,
to run with our Petitions to the Guard or Pages of the Court? Had Heb: 7 25.
and not to come immediately to the Throne of Grace? That one Mediator is able
(and willing also) to save them to the utmost that come unto God by him, seeing
he ever lives to make intercession for them.

Besides, how uncertain must our Devotions needs be, when we can have no
possible assurance of their audience? for who can know that a Saint hears him?
whatsoever is not of faith is sin.

As for that heavenly glass of Saint Gregorie's, Hug de Sancto Vict de sacr. l
1.
wherein the Saints see us and Hugo de S. Victore) it is as pleasing a fiction,
as if we imagined therefore to see all the corners of the earth, because we see
that Sun which sees them. And the same eyes that see in God the particular
necessities of his Saints below, see in the same God such infinite Grace and
Mercy for their relief, as may save the labor of their reflecting upon that
Divine mirror in their special intercessions.

The Doctrine therefore and Practice of the Romish Invocation of Saints, both
as new and erroneous, against Scripture and Reason, we have justly rejected;
and are thereupon ejected as unjustly.

CHAP. XV. The Newness of Seven Sacraments.
THE late Council of Florence indeed insinuates this number of Seven
Sacraments, S^mma Caranzae, etc.
as Suarez contends: but the later Council of Trent determines it, Council.
Trident. Sess. 7. Can. 1.
Si quis dixerit aut plura, etc. If any man shall say, that there are either
more or fewer sacraments then seven, viz. Baptism, Confirmation, etc. or that
any of these is not truly and properly a Sacrament, let him be

It is not more plain that in Scripture there is no mention of Sacraments, then
that in the Fathers there is no mention of Seven. Cardinal Bellarmine's
evasion, that the Scripture and Fathers wrote no Catechism, is poor and
ridiculous: no more did the Councils of Florence and Trent, and yet there the
number is reckoned and defined.

So as the word Sacrament may be taken, (for any holy, significant rite) there
may be as well seventy as seven; so strictly as it may be, and is taken by us,
there can no more be seven then seventy. This determination of the Cassand.
consult. Art. 13. de number. Sacram.
Cassander is forced to confess, Nec temere, etc. You shall not easily find
any man before Peter Lombard, Which has set down any certain and definite
number of Sacraments. And this observation is so just, that upon the challenges
of our Writers, no one Author has been produced by the Roman Doctors for the
disproof of it elder then Hugo, and the said Master of Sentences. But, Clem.
recognit. l. 1. Justin. Apol. 2. Tertull. de Coron. Milit. and ad Scap^lam.
numbers are ceremonies. Both Luther, de captivit. Babylon.
Luther and In loc. com. Cassand ibid. Thus all Antiquity runs upon two.
Philip Melanchthon profess they stand not much upon them. It is the number
numbered (which is the thing it self mis-related into that sacred order) that we
stick at. There we find that none but Christ can make a Sacrament; for none
but he who can give Grace, Cypr. l. 2. Ep. 1.
can ordain a Sign and Seal of Grace. Now it is evident enough that these
adscititious Sacraments were never of Christ's institution. Cyril. Hierosol^^
Catech. Ambros. August. etc.
So was Alexander of Hales and Holcot; so was not Matrimony, as Durand; so was
not Extreme Unction, as Hugo, Lombard, Bonaventure, Halensis, Suar. Tom. 4.
disp. 39. s. 2.
Altissiodore, by the confession of their Suarez. These were ancient Rites,
Vide Mort.
but they are new Sacraments: All of them have their allowed and profitable use
in Gods Church, Appell. l. 2. cap. 26.. 5.
though not in so high a nature; except that of Extreme Unction, which as it is
an apish mis-imitation of that extraordinary course which the Apostolic times
used in their cures of the sick, so it is grossly mis-applied to other purposes
then were intended in the first institution. Then it was Ungebant and sanabant;
the oil miraculously conferring bodily Mark 6. 13.
but now, James 5. 14.
Non nisi in mortis articulo adhibetur, it is not used but upon the very point
of death, Fran. Jun. Animad. in Bellar. l. de verb. Dei 4.
as Cajetan and Cassander confess, and all experience manifests; and by Felix
the Fourth drawn to a necessity of address to eternal life.


NOT to scan particulars, which all yield ample exceptions, but to wind them
all up in one bottom. Whosoever shall look into the Scripture, shall find it
apparent, that as in the time of man's Innocence there were but Two Sacraments,
the Tree of Life; and the Tree of Knowledge: so before and under the Law,
however they had infinite Rites, yet in the proper sense they had but Two
Sacraments, the same in effect with those under the Gospel; the one, the
Sacrament of Initiation, which was their Circumcision, paralleled by that 1
Cor. 10. 1, 2, 3, 4.
has compared both; Moreover, brethren, I would not have you ignorant how that
all our fathers were under the cloud, and all passed through the sea; and all
were baptized in the cloud, and in the sea; and all did eat the same spiritual
meat, and all did drink the same spiritual drink: for they drank of that
spiritual Rock that followed them, and that Rock was Christ. What is this in
any just construction, but that the same two Sacraments of Hoc facite, Do
this, is our warrant for the one; and Ite baptizate, etc. Go teach and
Baptize, for the other. There is deep silence in the rest.

Sect. 3. Against Reason.
IN Reason it must be yielded, that no man has power to set to a seal but he
whose the writing is. Sacraments then being the seals of Gods gracious
evidences, Rome.

Lastly, The Sacraments of the new Law (as Saint Austin often) flowed out of
the side of Christ: None flowed thence but the Sacrament of water, which is
Baptism, and the Sacrament of blood in the Supper; whereof the Author This cup
is the new Testament in my blood, which is shed for you. The rest never flowing
either from the side or from the lips of Christ, are as new and mis-named
Sacraments justly rejected by us, and we thereupon as unjustly censured.

CHAP. XVI. The Newness of the Doctrine of Tradition.
Rome is the over-valuing of Traditions, Council. Trident. Sess. 4.
which the Tridentine Synod professes to receive and reverence with no less
pious affection then the Books of the Old and New Testament; In his rebus de
quibus nihil certi statuit Scriptura divina, mos populi Dei vel instituta a
majerum pro lege tenenda sun^. Aug. Ep. 86.
and that not in matter of Rite and History only, but of Faith and Manners
also: wherein as they are not unwilling to cast a kind of imputation of
imperfection upon the written Word, so

Both which are Points so dangerously envious, as that Antiquity would have
abhorred their mention. Neither is any thing more common with the holy Fathers
of the Church, then the magnifying the complete perfection of Scripture, in all
things needful either to be believed or done.

What can be more full and clear then that of Saint Austine? Aug. l. 2. de
doctrina Christ. c. 9. In his quae aperte posita sunt in Scriptura, inveniuntur
illa omnia quae continent fidem moresque vivendi.
In his quae aperte, etc. In these things which are openly laid forth in
Scripture, are found all matters that contain either Faith or Manners.

Cardinal Bellarm. l. 4. de verb. Dei, c. 11.
Bellarmine's elusion is not a little prejudicial to his own Cause. He tells us
that Saint Austin speaks of those Points which are simply necessary to
Salvation for all men; all which he acknowledges to be written by the Apostles:
But besides these, there are many other things (says he) which we have only by
Tradition. Will it not therefore hence follow, that the common sort of
Christians need not look at his Traditions? that commonly men may be saved
without them? that Heaven may be attained though there were no Traditions? Who
will not now say, Let me come to Heaven by Scripture, go you whither you will
by Traditions? To which add, that agreat, yea the greater part (if we may
believe some of their own) of that which they call

As for this place, S. Augustine's words are full and comprehensive, expressing
all those things which contain either Faith or Manners, whether concerning
Governors or people. If now they can find out any thing that belongs not
either to belief or action, we do willingly give it up to their Traditions: but

What can be more direct then that of holy Athanasius? Athanas. lib. 4. cot.
Get. Initio, (...), etc.
(...). etc. The Holy Scriptures inspired by God are in themselves
all-sufficient to the instruction of truth; and, if Chemnitius construe it, all
truth? This needs not raise a cavil; the word signifies no less: for if they
be all-sufficient to instruction, they must needs be sufficient to all
instruction in the truth intended. Tertul. lib. adv. Hermogen.
Tertullian professes openly, Adoro Scripturae plenitudinem, etc. I adore the
fullness of Scripture. Let the skill of Hermogenes show where it is written; if
it be not written, let him fear that woe which is propounced against those that
add or detract. Sufficient per se vertit Nannius.
Thus he. Who can but fear that the Cardinal shifts this evidence For (says
he) Tertull. speaks of that one point, That God created all things of nothing,
and not of a pre-existent matter, as Hermogenes dreamed: now because this Truth
is clearly expressed in Scripture, therefore the fullness of Scripture as
concerning this Point is adored by Tertullian; and for that Hermogenes held an
opinion contrary to Scripture, he is said to add unto Scripture, and to incur
that malediction. Now let any Reader of common sense judge, whether the words
of Tertullian be not general, without any limitation; and if the first clause
could be restrained, the second cannot, Scriptum esse doceat, etc. Whatsoever
therefore is not written, by this rule may not be obtruded to our belief.
Neither does he say, If it be written against; but, If it be nusquam legi, that
the words are no where read, as if this were quarrel enough, without a flat
contradiction to what is read.

So as the Cardinals Gloss merely corrupts the Text. How easy were it for me
to tire my Reader with the full suffrages of Origin, Cyprian, Chrysostom, and,
in a word, with the whole stream of Antiquity, which though they give a meet
place to Traditions of Ceremony, of History, of Interpretation, of some
immaterial Verities, yet reserve the due honor to the Sacred monuments of
Divine Scriptures? Our learned Chemnitius has freely yielded seven sorts of
Traditions, such as have a correspondence with or an attestation from the
written Word; the rest we do justly (together with him) disclaim, as unworthy
to appear upon that awful Bench amongst the inspired Penmen of God.


IT is not to be imagined that the same word of God, which speaks for all other
Truths, should not speak for it self: how fully does it display its own
sufficiency and perfection? 2 Timothy 3. 16.
All Scripture (says the Chosen Vessel) is given by inspiration of God; and is
profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction in
righteousness. Bellar. deverb Dei, lib. 4. c. 10.
Profitable, says the Cardinal, but not sufficient. Many things may avail to
that end whereto they suffice not; so meat is profitable to nourish, but
without natural heat it nourishes not. Thus he. Hear yet what follows; That
the man of God may be perfected, 2 Timothy 3. 17.
and thoroughly furnished unto all good works. Lo, it is so profitable to all
these services, that thereby it perfects a Divine; much more an ordinary
Christian. That which is so profitable as to cause perfection, is abundantly
sufficient, and must needs have full perfection in it self: That which can
perfect the Teacher, is sufficient for the Learner. The Scriptures can perfect
the man of God, both for his calling in the instruction of others, 2 Timothy 3. 15.
and for his own glory. Thou have known the Scriptures from a child (says S.
Paul to his Timothy) which are able (not profitable only to make thee wise unto
salvation, through faith which is in Christ Jesus. It is the charge therefore
of the Apostle, not to be wise above that which is written. The same with wise
Solomon's, Prove 30. 5, 6.
The whole word of God is pure: Add thou not unto his words, Lo, he says
not, Oppose not his words, but, Add not to them: Even Addition detracts from
the majesty of that Word. For the Law of the Lord is perfect, converting the
Soul; Psalm. 19. 7, 3.
the Testimony of the Lord is sure, making wise the simple: The Statutes of the
Lord are right, rejoicing the heart; the Commandment of the Lord is pure,
enlightening the eyes.

As for those Traditions which they do thus lift up to an unjust competition
with the written Word, our Savior has beforehand humbled them into the dust;
In vain do they worship me, Matthew. 15. 9.
teaching for doctrines the commandments of men: making this a sufficient
cause of abhorring both the persons and the services Bellarmine would shift it
off with a distinction of Traditions; These were such, says he, quas
acceperunt a recentioribus, etc. as they had received from some later hands,
whereof some were vain, some other pernicious; not such as they received from
Moses and the Prophets. Epiph. in haeres. Ptolom.
And the Authors of these rejected Traditions he cites from Epiphanius to be R.
Akiba, R. Juda, and the Asamoneans; from Hierome, to be Sammai, Hillel, Akiba.
But this is to cast a mist before the eyes of the simple: Hieron. in c. 8. Isa.
and in Epist. ad Algas. ^. 10.
For who sees not that our Saviors challenge is general, to Traditions thus
advanced, not to these or those Traditions? And where he speaks of some Matthew.
5. 21, 27, 33.
he had forgotten that our Savior upon the Mount tells him, (...), that these
faulted Traditions were of old. And that he may not cast these upon his Sammai
and Hillel, let him remember that our Savior cites this out of Esaias though
with some more clearness of expression) who far overlooked the time of those
pretended Fathers of mis-traditions. That I may not say, how much it would
trouble him to show any dogmatical Traditions that were derived from Moses and
the Prophets; in parallel whereof

Sect. 3. Traditions against Reason.
EVen the very light of Reason shows us that as there is a God, so that he is a

Lastly, we think him not an honest man, whose tongue goes against his own
hand. How heinous an imputation then do they cast upon the God of Truth, which
plead Traditions derived from him contrary to his written Word? Such apparently
are the worship of Images, the mutilation of the Sacrament, Purgatory,
Indulgences, and the rest which have passed our agitation. Since therefore the
authority of Romish Traditions is (besides Novelty) Erroneous, against
Scripture and Reason, we have justly abandoned it, and are thereupon

As for those other dangerous and important Innovations, concerning Scriptures,
their Canon enlarged, their faulty Version made authentical, their fountains
pretended to be corrupted, Serious Disswasive, etc.
their mis-pleaded Obscurity, their restraint from the Laity, we have already
largely displayed them in another place.

CHAP. XVII. The Newness of the universal Headship of the Bishop of Rome.
THose transcendent Titles of Headship and Universality, which are challenged
to the Bishop and See of Rome, Hareseos matter est principatus cupiditas, Chrysostom.
in Gal. 5.
are known to be the upstart brood of noted ambition. Simple and holy Antiquity
was too modest either to require, or tolerate them. Who knows not the
profession of that holy Martyr in the Council of Carthage, Neque enim quisquam
nostrum Episcopum Episcoporum se constituit, aut tyrannico terrore ad
obscquendi necessitatem suos adigit. Orat. Cyp in Syn.
Neque enim, etc. There is none of us that makes himself a Bishop of Bishops,
or by a tyrannous fear compels his underlings to a necessity of obedience? but
perhaps, at Rome it was otherwise. Hear then with what zeal their own Pope
Greg. Epist. lib. 4 Epist. 32, and 34. Et lib. 6. Ep. 24. N^vum, scelestum,
profanum, etc. Et lib. 4. Epist. 38 39, etc.
Gregory the Great inveighs against the arrogance of John Bishop of
Constantinople, for giving way to this John, and Cyriacus after him) a new
name, a wicked, profane, insolent as if he could never have branded it enough.

And lest any man should cavil that this style is only cried down in the
Bishops of Constantinople, which yet might be justly claimed by the Bishops of
Rome; Gregory himself meets with this thought, and answers beforehand, Nunquam
pium virum, Nunquam (...) virum (...) esse, etc. nullum (...), etc.
etc. That never any godly man, never any of his Predecessors used those
Titles; and more then so, That whosoever shall use this proud style, he is the
very forerunner of Antichrist. If in a foresight of this Usurpation Gregory
should have been hired to have spoken for us against the Pride of Pelag. 2.
omnibus Epi^copis, Flicite a Joan. and Decret. p. 1. did. 96. c. 4. Null^^,
etc.
(as quoted by Gratian out of the Epistle of Pope Pelagius the second)
Universalis autem nec etiam Romanus Pontifex appelletur, Not the Bishop of Rome
himself may be called Universal.

Yet how famously is it known to all the World, that the same Gregorie's next
Successor save one, Boniface the third, obtained this title of Universal
Bishop from the Emperor Phocas? which the said Emperor gave him in a spleen
against Cyriacus Patriarch of Constantinople, Ba^on An. 606.
for delivering Constantina the Wife of Mauritius and her Children; or (as some
others relate it) upon a Rome, and by strong hand ever since maintained.

This qualification their Register Platina confesses was procured not without
great contention. Plat. in (...) B^nif. 3.
And Otho Frisingensis fully and ingenuously writes thus; Gregoriu^ (...) ad
Deminum, etc.
Gregory departed hence to the Lord: after whom (the next save one) Boniface
obtained of Phocas, Aquo, etc. ut ipsius authoritate, etc.
that by his authority the Roman Church might be called the head of all
Churches; for at that time the Sea of Constantinople (I suppose, because of the
seat of the Empire translated thither) wrote her self the first. Thus their
Bishop Otho. Otho Frising. lib. 5. cap. 8.
Now if any man shall think that hence it will yet follow, that the Sea of Rome
had formerly enjoyed this Honor, however the Constantinopolitan for the
present shouldred with her for it; let him know the ground of both their
challenges, which (as it was supposed by Otho, so) is fully for the
satisfaction of any indifferent judgment) laid forth in the General Council
of Chalcedon. Council 5. Genesis Act 15.
The same (say those Fathers) we determine of the privileges of the most holy
Church of Constantinople, called new Rome: For the Fathers have justly
heretofore given privilege to the Throne of old Rome, because that City was
then the Governesse of the world; and upon the same consideration were the
hundred and fifty Bishops (men beloved of God) moved to yield equal
privileges to the Throne of new Rome, rightly judging that this City, which is
honored with the Empire and Senate, and is equally privileged with old Thus
they. And this act is subscribed, Bonifacius Presbyter Ecclesiae Romanae statui
and subscripsi, I Boniface, Presbyter of the Church of Rome, have so determined
and subscribed; Et coeteri, etc. And the rest of the Bishops of diverse
Provinces and Cities subscribed. What can be more plain? This Headship of the
Bishop was in regard of the Sea; and this headship of the Sea was in regard of
the preeminence of the City; Sever. Bin. in notis Council. Chal^e^.
which was variable, according to the changes of times, or choice of Emperors.
But Binius wrangleth here. Can we blame him, when the freehold of their Great
Mistress is so nearly touched? This Act (says he) was not Synodicall, as that
which was closely How can this plea stand with his own confessed subscription?
Besides that their Caranza, Caranz Epitom. Council.
in his Abridgement, shows, that this Point was long and vehemently canvassed
in that Council, between Lucentius and Boniface, Legates of the Roman Church,
and the rest of the Bishops; and at last so concluded as we have related; Seeds
Apostolica Nobis praesentibus humiliari non deber.
not indeed without the protestation of the Nobis proesentibus, etc. The
Apostolic See must not in our presence be abased. Notwithstanding this act
then carried: and after this, Pope Simplicius, succeeding to Hilarious, Ibid.
made a Decree to the same purpose, not without allusion to this contention for
precedence, that Constantinop^litano Episcopo damnato, Ecclesiarum omnium
primam esse Romanam, Caranz. Epit.
Rome should take place of Constantinople. Yea so utterly unthought of was this
absolute Primacy and Headship of old, as that when the Roman Dition was brought
down to a Dukedom, and subjected to the Exarchate of Ravenna, the Archbishop
of Ravenna, upon the very same grounds, Council. Carthag. 3. Can. 26.
stuck not (as Blondus tells us) to strive with the Bishop of Rome for Priority
of place. So necessarily was the rising or fall of the Episcopal Chair annexed
to the condition of that City wherein it was

But in all this, we well see what it is that was stood upon, an arbitrable
precedence of these Churches in a priority of order; and according thereunto
Decr. p. 1. d. 99. (...) privilegiu^ concessum a Justiniano. Sanc^mus Senioris
Romae Papam primum esse omnium sacerdotum.
the Bishop of Rome is determined to be primae sedis Episcopus, the Bishop of
the first See. A style which our late Learned Sovereign professed with
Justinian not to grudge unto the modern Bishops of that See. But as for a
Primacy of Sovereignty over all Churches, Praerog. ante alios residendi. Cod.
de sacros. Eccl. decernimus.
and such an Headship as should inform and inliven the body, and govern it with
Influentia vitae. Capistran. Influentia regiminis. August.
infallible influences, it is so new and hateful, as that the Church in all
Ages has opposed it to the utmost; neither will it be endured at this day by
the Greek Church, notwithstanding the colorable Joseph of Constantinople in
the late Florentine Council, and the letters of union subscribed by them Anno
1539.

Yea, Triumph.
so far is it from that, Bin. in Council. Florent.
as that their Emperor Michael Palaeologus, for yielding a kind of subjection
of the Eastern Bishops to the Roman, would not be allowed the honor of
Christian Burial, P. Aemil. hist. Gall.
as Aemilius has recorded. And in our time, Basilius the Emperor of Russia
(which challenges no small part in the Greek Church) threatened to the Pope's
Legate (as I have been informed) an infamous death and burial, if he offered to
set foot in his Dominions, out of a jealous hate of this Usurpation.

Sect. 2. The Newness of challenged Infallibility.
THE particularities of this new arrogation of Rome are so many, that they
cannot be pent up in any straight room. I will only instance in some few.

The Pope's Infallibility of Judgment is such a Paradox, as the very Histories
of all times and proceedings of the Church does sufficiently convince. For, to
what purpose had all Councils been called even of the remotest Bishops, to what
purpose were the agitations of all controversal causes in those Assemblies, (as
Erasmus justly observes) if this Opinion had then obtained? Or how Rome were
opposed by other Sees, by the Successors of their own, by Christian Academies,
if this conceit had formerly passed for current with the World? How came it to
pass that whole Councils have censured and condemned some Bishops of Rome for
manifest Heresies, if they were persuaded beforehand of the impossibility of
those Errors? Multi Pontifices in errores and hareses lapsi esse leguntur.
Conc. Basil. in Ep. Synod.
Not to speak of Honorius, of Liberius, and others; the Council of Basil shall
be the voice of common observation; Multi Pontifices, etc. Many Popes (say
they) are recorded to have fallen into Errors and Heresies. Either all stories
mock us, or else this parasitical dream of impeccancy in judgment is a mere
stranger. And his disguise is so foul, that it is no marvel if Errare non
Aventin. l. 7.
I cannot err, seemed to Eberhardus, Bishop of Saltzburgh, no other then the
suit of an Antichrist.


HOW bold and dangerous a Novelty is that which Cardinal Bellarmine, and with
him the whole Society, and all the late Fautors of that See (after the
Florentine Synod) stick not to avouch, Bella rm. ^. 2 de Conc. cap. 17.
Summus Pontifex, etc. The Pope is absolutely above the whole Church, and above
a General Council, so as he acknowledges no Judges on earth over himself? How
would this have relished with those well-near a thousand Fathers in the Council
of Constance, Council. Constable. Sess. 4 and 5.
who punctually determined thus, Ipsa Synodus, etc. The Synod lawfully
assembled in the Holy Caranz. Anno 1415.
has immediately power from Christ; whereunto every man, whosoever he be, of
what state or dignity soever, although he be the Pope himself, is bound to obey
in those things which pertain to Faith, or to the extirpation of Schism? And
fifteen years after that, Anno 1431.
the General Council of Basil, wherein was President Julianus Cardinal of
Saint Angelo, the Popes Legate, defined the same matter in the same words. It
is no marvel if Cardinal Bellarmine, and some others of that strain, reject
these as unlawful Councils: but they cannot deny, first, that this Decree was
made by both of them; secondly, that the Divines there assembled were (in their
allowance) Catholic Doctors, and such as in other Roman Church, insomuch as
they were the men by whose sentence John Husse and Hierome suffered no less
then death: and yet even so lately did these numerous Divines in the voice of
the Church define the Superiority of a Council above the Pope. What speak we of
this, when we find that the Bishops of the East excommunicated in their
assembly Julius the Bishop of Rome himself, Sozom. lib. 3. c. 11.
amongst others, without scruple, as Solzomen reports?

How ill would this Doctrine or practice now be endured? Insomuch as Gregory of
Valence dares confidently say, that whosoever he be that makes a Council
superior to the Pope, fights directly (though unawares) against that Peter's
and the Roman Bishops Primacie in the Church.

Sect. 4. The new presumption of Papal Dispensations.
FRom the opinion of this supereminent Power has flowed that common course of
Dispensations with the Canons and Decrees of Councils, which has been of late
a great eyesore to moderate beholders. F. Vict. Relect. de potest. Papae and
Council. page 151.
Franciscus a Victoria makes a woeful complaint of it, professing to doubt
whether in the end of the year, there be more that have leave by this means to
break the laws then Tempore Conciliorum antiquorum, etc. In the time of the
ancient Councils, Popes were like to the other Fathers of those Councils, so as
there was no need of any act for holding them back from this immoderate license
of dispensing; yea, if we do well turn over the laws and histories of the
Ancient, we shall find that Popes did not presume so easily and commonly to
dispense with Decrees of Councils, but observed them as the Oracles of God
himself; yea, not only did they forbear to do it ordinarily, but (says he)
by little and little are we grown to this intemperance of dispensations, and to
such an estate, as that we can neither abide our mischiefs, nor our remedies.
Thus that learned Spaniard, in an honest confession of the degenerate courses
of the late Popes from the simple integrity of their Predecessors.

What should I add unto these the presumptuous Dispensations with Vows
Pontificalis authoritas a juramento fidelitatis absolvit.
with the Laws of God himself, with the Law of Nature? a privilege ordinarily
both yielded and defended by flattering Canonists, and that which meets with us
at every turn in Hostiensis, Decr. p. 2. 15. q. 6. Alius. Almain, de po^est.
Eccles. and Laica cap. 12. (...) was the rule of old. Diatrib. Papa Antichrist.
lib. 4. cap. 9.
Archidiaconus, Felinus, Capistranus, Triumphus, Angelus de Clavasio, Petrus de
Ancorano, Panormitan, as is largely particularized by our learned Bishop of
Derry.

Sect. V. The new challenge of Popes domineering over Kings and Emperors.
I May well shut up the Scene with that notorious Innovation of the Popes
subducing himself from the due Obedience of his once-acknowledged Lord and
Sovereign, and endeavoring to reduce all those Imperial powers to his homage
and obedience.

The time was, Greg. lib. 4.
when Pope Gregory could say to Mauritius, Ep. 32. and serenissimis jussionibus
obedientiam praebco. Ibid.
Vobis obedientiam praebere desidero, I desire to give you due obedience; and
when Pope Leo came with cap and knee to Theodosius for a Synod to be called,
with Clementia vestra concedat, as Cardinal Cusanus cites it from the History.
The time was, when Nemo Apostolicae, etc. No man did offer to take upon him the
steering of the Apostolic Bark, till the authority of the Emperor had
designed him; as their Hier. Balb. de Cor.
Balbus out of their own law. That of Pope Ecce serenissimus dominus Imperator
fieri simiam Leonem jussit, etc.
Gregory is plain enough, Ecce serenissimus, etc. Behold (says he, speaking of
his own advancement to the Bishopric of Rome) our gracious Lord the Emperor
has commanded an Ape to be made a Lion; and surely at his command it may be
called a Lion, but it cannot be one: so as he must needs lay all my faults and
negligences not upon me, but upon his own piety, Gregor. Ep. 5. Qui virtutis
ministerium infirmo commisit, ibid.
which has committed this Ministry of power to so weak an Agent.

The time was, when the Popes of Rome dated their Apostolic letters with the
style of Guicciard. l. 4. hist. Imperante Carolo D. nos^ro.
the reign of their Lords the Emperors: now, ever since Pope Paschal, they
care only to note the Paschalis Anno Euangelii 1070. primus, omissis
Imperatoris annis, sui Pontificatus annos subscripsit. In da^. Apostolatus
nostri Anno 1. dein Pontificatus. Lib. Sacr. Cerem.
year of their own Apostleship or Papacy.

The time was, when the holy Bishops of that See professed to succeed Saint
Peter in homely simplicity, in humble obedience, in piety, in zeal, in
preaching, in tears, in sufferings: now since, the case is altered; the world
sees and blushes at the change; for now, Greg. l. 1. de major. and obed. cx
Innoc.
Quanta inter Solemn and Lunam, etc. Look how much the Sun is bigger then the
Moon, so much is the Papal power greater then the Imperial; now Papa est
Dominus Imperatoris, The Pope is the Emperors Lord (says their Capist. 77.
Capistranus;) and the Emperor is subject to the Pope as his minister or
servant, says Aug. Triumph. qu. 44. 1.
Triumphus: and lest this should seem the fashionable word of some clawing
Canonist only, hear what Pope Vide diatr. Derens. Ep. l. 4. c. 3.. 2. Unde
habet Imperator Imperii^ nisi a nobis? Imperator quod habet, totum habet a
nobis. Ecce in potes^ate nostra est ut demus illud cui volumus. Hadrian. Ep.
apud Avent. l. 6.
Adrian himself says, Unde habet, etc. Whence has the Emperor his Empire but
from us? all And to the same purpose is that of Pope Innoc. 4. in cap. Licet de
^o^o compet.
Innocent the Fourth, Imperator est advocatus, etc. The Emperor is the Popes
Advocate, and swears to him, and holds his Empire of him. But perhaps this
place is yet too high for an Emperor; a lower will serve: Lib. sacr. Cerem.
fit Canonicus, etc. The Emperor is (of course) made a Canon, and brother of
the Church of Lateran. Yet lower, he shall be the Sewer of his Holiness Table,
and set on the Etiam Imperator aut Rex aquam ad lavandas ejus manus far
debet; primum item fer^^lum, etc. ibid.
first dish, and hold the Basin for his hands. Yet lower, he shall be the
Train-bearer to the Pope in his walking In processionibus, etc. ibid.
Processions; he shall be the Quirie of his Stable, and hold his Stapham equi
Papalis tenet, etc. ibid.
stirrup in getting upon his horse; he shall be, lastly, his very Sellam ipsam
cum Pontifice hum^ris suis aliquantuium portare debet, Ibid.
Porter to carry

Augustus ab Augendo, as Alm. de pe test. Eccl.
Almain derives him, when he suffers himself thus to be diminished? Although
there is more wonder in the others exaltation. Papae! Men are too base to enter
into comparison with him. His authority is more then of the Saints in Heaven,
says Cassand. 4. patte, Consi 7. C. de Libellis 20. did.
one; yet more, he excels the Angels in his Jurisdiction, says another; yet
more once, The Pope seems to make one and the same Consistory with God himself;
and, which comprehends all the rest, Aug. Triumph. de pot. Eccl. q. 13.
Tu es omnia, and super omnia, Thou art all, and above all, as the Council of
Lateran under Julius.

Oh strange alteration, Vid. Derens. ubi supra.
that the great Commanders of the World should be made the drudges of their
subjects; Cassand. Glor. mundi 4. part. Cons. 7.
That Order and Sovereignty should lose Gold and silver have I none, I^^oc. and
Host. in cap. 1 de Trans^.
should thus trample upon Crowns; That a poor silly Worm of the Earth should
raise up it self above all that is called God, and offer to crawle into the
glorious Throne of Heaven!

CHAP. XVIII. The Epilogue both of Exhortation and Apology.
Roman Church, yea rather in that Soul of Religion which informs both. And if
thereupon all our endeavor (as we protest before God and his holy Angels) has
been and is only to reduce Rome to it self, that is, to recall it to that
original Truth, Piety, Sincerity, which made it long famous through the World
and happy, how unjustly are we ejected, persecuted, condemned?

But if that Ancient Mistress of the World shall stand upon the terms of her
Ambrose with his Symmachus.

That eloquent Patron of Idolatry had pleaded hard for the old Rites of
Heathenism, and brings in Ancient Rome speaking thus for her self; Optimi
principes, Inter Epistclas Ambros^i l. 2. Epist. 11.
etc. Excellent Princes, the Fathers of your Country, reverence ye my years,
into which my pious Rites have brought me. I will use the Ceremonies of my
Ancestors, neither can I repent me. I will live after mine own fashion, because
I am free. This Religion has brought the World under the subjection of the
Laws; these sacred Devotions have driven Hannibal from our walls, from Sera
tamen and contumeltos^ est em^n (...) senectutis. ibid. Ambros. Epist. lib. 2.
Ep. 1^.
yet late and shameful is the amendment of age. To which that holy Father no
less wittily and elegantly answers by way of retortion, bringing in Rome to
speak thus rather; I am not ashamed in mine old age to be a Convert with all
the rest of the World. It is surely true that in no age it is too late to
learn. Let that old age blush that cannot mend it self. It is not the gravity
of years, but of manners, that deserves praise. Nullus pudor est ad meli^ra
trans^re, ibid.
It is no shame to go to the better. And when Symmachus urges, Majorum
servandus est ritus, We must observe the Rites of our forefathers: Dicant
igitur, (says Saint Ambrose) Let them as well say, that all Thus he, most
aptly to the present occasion; whereto, did that blessed Father now live, he
would doubtless no less readily apply it. Nec erubescas mutare sententiam,
Non es tantae authoritatis ut errasse te pudeat, etc.
Never blush to change, Ruffinus, never blush Oh that this meek ingenuity could
have found place in that once-famous and Orthodox Church of Christ; Hier. Apol.
adver. Ruffin.
how had the whole Christian World been as a City at unity in it self, and
triumphed over all the proud hostilities of Paganism? But since we may not be
so happy, we must sit down and mourn for our desolations, for our divisions. In
the mean time we wash our hands in innocence. There are none of all these
instanced particulars (besides many more) wherein the Church of Rome has not
sensibly erred in corrupt additions to the Faith; so as herein we may justly
(before Heaven and earth) warrant our disagreement of judgment from her. The
rest Cato in Tully gives of unpleasing Friendship, they have not ripped it in the
seam, but torn it in the whole cloth.

Perhaps I shall seem unto some to have spoken too mildly of the estate of that
debauched Church: There are that stand upon a mere nullity of her Being, not
resting in a bare depravation. For me, I dare not go so far: If she be foul,
if deadly diseased, (as she is) these qualities cannot utterly take off

Our Divines indeed call us out of Babylon, and we run; so as here is an
actual separation on our parts. True, but from the Corruptions, (wherein there
is a true confusion) not from the Church. Their very charge implies their
limitation: as it is Babylon, we must come out of it; as it is an outward
visible Church, Fr. Jun. de Ecclesia.
we neither did nor would. This Dropsy, that has so swollen up the body, does
not make it cease to be a true body, but a sound one. The true Principles of
Christianity which it maintains, Capitis autem male sani and deli^^ contagia
vitanda sunt, ne and ipsi artus pes^ilenti humore labesecrent. Fr. Pic.
Mirandula, Theor. 23.
maintain life in that Church; the Errors which it holds together with those
Principles, struggle with that life, and threaten an extinction. As it is a
visible Church then, we have not detracted Babylon, we can have nothing to do
with it. Like as in the course of our life, we freely converse with those men
in civil affairs with whom we hate to partake in wickedness.

But will not this seem to savor of too much indifferency? What need we so
vehemently labor to draw from either part, and triumph in winning Proselytes,
and give them for lost on either side, and brand them for Apostates that are
won away, if (which way soever we fall) we cannot light out of a true visible
Church of Christ? what such necessity was there of Martyrdom, what such danger
of relapses, if the Church be with both?

Let these Sophisters know, that true Charity needs not abate any thing of
zeal. If they be acquainted with the just value of Truth, they shall not
enquire so much into the Persons as into the Cause. Whatever the Church be, if
the Errors be damnable, our blood is happily spent in their impugnation; and
we must rather choose to undergo a thousand deaths, then offend the Majesty of
God, in yielding to a known falsehood in Religion: neither does the outward
Visibility of the Church abate ought of the heinousness of mis-opinions, or
the vehemence of our oppositions. Were it Saint Peter himself, if he halt in
Judaizing, Saint Paul must resist him to his face: neither is his fault less,
because an Apostles; yea, let me say more. Were the Church of Rome and ours
Samaritan Idolatry was more odious to the Jews then merely Paganish. If the
dearest daughter of God upon earth should commit spiritual whoredom, Maldon.
in 4. Joan.
her uncleanness is so much more to be hated as her obligations

Oh the woeful and dangerous condition of those Souls, which shutting their
eyes against so clear a light, either willingly sit down in palpable darkness,
or fall back from the sincerity of the Gospel into these miserable enormities
both of Practice and Doctrine! It is not for me to judge them; that I leave
unto that high and awful Tribunal, before which I shall once appear with them.
But this I dare say, that if that righteous Judge shall punish either their
obstinacy or relapses with eternal damnation, he cannot but be justified in his
judgments, Nehem. 9. 33.
Thou, O God, art just in all that is befaln us; for thou have done right, but
we have done wickedly.

For us, as we would save our Souls, let us carefully preserve them from the
contagion of Romish Superstition; let us never fear that our discretion can
hate Error too much; let us awaken our holy zeal to a serious and servent
opposition, joined with a charitable endeavor of reclamation; shortly, let us
hate their Opinions, strive against their Practice, pity their mis-guiding,
neglect their censures, labor their recovery, pray for their Salvation.


Reader,
Nothing can be so well said or done, but may be ill taken. Whiles I thus
sincerely plead for Truth, the well-meaning ignorance of some mistakers has
passed as deep, as unjust censures upon me, as if Preferment Roman Church then
I either did or ought. Wherein as I pity their Uncharitableness, so I
earnestly desire to rectify their Judgment; lest their prejudice may turn
more to their sin then to my wrong.

The main ground of the Exception is, That I yield the Church of Rome a true
visible Church; wherein the harsh noise of a mis-construed phrase offends their
ear, and breeds their quarrel. For this (belike) in their apprehension seems
to sound no less then as if I had said, The Church of Rome is a true-believing
Church, or a true part of the mystical body of Christ: a sense which is as far
wide from my words or thoughts, as from truth it self. Wherefore serves this
Book but to evince Visible refers to outward Profession, True to some
essential Principles of Christianity, neither of them to soundness of Belief?
So as these two may too well stand together, A true visible Church, in respect
of outward Profession of Christianity; and an Heretical, Apostaticall,
Antichristian Synagogue, in respect of Doctrine and Practice. Grant the
Romanists to be but Christians, how corrupt soever, and we cannot deny them the
name of a Church. Outward Visibility gives them no claim either to Truth or
Salvation.

Shortly then, in two things I must crave leave to vindicate my self: One, that
I do no whit differ from my self; the other, that I differ not from the
Judgment

It is a grievous challenge, this of Inconstancy: for though, whiles we are
here in this region of Mutability, our whole man is subject to change, yet we
do all herein affect a likeness to the God of Truth, in whom there is no
shadow by turning; especially in Religion, so much more as that does more
assimilate and unite us to that unchangeable Deity. No peace with Rome; Et,
Roma irreconci^iabilis, Sect. 1.
Lo, (say they) the man that once wrote, No peace with Rome, now cries nothing
but Peace with Rome, whiles he proclaims it a true visible Church, and allows
some Communion with it. Alas, brethren, why will ye suffer a rash and ignorant
Zeal thus to lie palpably in your way to Truth? Be but pleased to cast your
eyes upon the first Chapter of that Book of mine (which is thus objected to me
in a causeless exprobration) that which long since I wrote, of the
Irreconcilablenesse of Rome, and see if that Section be not a full expression
of the same Truth (and that in the same words) which I have here published.
There shall you find taught, That there is no other difference betwixt us and
Rome, then betwixt a Church miserably corrupted, and happily purged; betwixt a
sickly, languishing, dying Church, and one that is healthful, strong, and
flourishing: That Valdus, Wiclef, Luther, did never go about to frame a new
Church, which was not, but to cleanse, restore, reform that Church which was:
That they meant only to be Physicians to heal, not Parents to beget a Church.
There you shall find, That we are all the same Church by virtue of our outward
Vocation, whosoever all the world over worship Jesus Christ the only Son of
God, the Savior of the world, and profess the same common Creed; that some of
us do this more purely, others more corruptly; that in the mean time we are
all Christians, but sound Christians we are not. There ye shall find this very
Objection so fully answered, as if it had been either formerly moved, or so
long since prevented: the words are these;

But how harshly does this sound to a weak reader, and more then seems to need
Cyprian speaks) nor bond of Unity, be conjoined. That which Rome holds with
us, makes it a Church; Roman Church, she is ours, she is Gods: look on her
back, she is quite contrary, Antichristian. More plainly, Rome does both hold
the Foundation, and destroy it; she holds it directly, destories it by
consequent: In that she holds it, she is a true Church, howsoever impured; in
that she destroies it, (what semblance soever she makes) she is a Church of
malignants. If she did altogether hold it, she should be sound and Orthbox; if
altogether she destroyed it, she should be either no Church, or devilish: but
now that she professes to hold those things directly which by inferences she
closely overthrows, she is a truly visible

Thus I wrote well-near twenty years agone, without clamor, without censure.
And since that, in my Latin Sermon to the Convocation, did I very ought from
this hold? Columba Noae, etc.
Did I not there call heaven and earth to record of our innocence in separating
from the Roman Church? Did I not cast the fault upon their violence, not our
will? Did I not profess, Lubentes quidem discessimus, etc. We willingly indeed
departed from the Communion of their Errors, but from the Communion of the
Church we have not departed. Let them abandon their Errors, and we embrace the
Church: Let them cast away their Soul-killing Traditions, and false appendances
of their new Faith, we shall gladly communicate with them

This I freely both taught and published, with the allowance, with the applause
of that most Reverend Synod; and now, does the addition of a Dignity bring envy
upon the same Truth? Might that pass commendably from the pen or tongue of a
Doctor, which will not be endured from the hand of a Bishop? My brethren, I am

That I differ not from my self, you have seen; see now that I differ not from
our learned, judicious, approved Divines.

That the Latin or Western Church subject to the Romish Tyranny (unto the very
times of Luther) was a true Church, in which a saving profession of the truth
of Christ was found, and wherein Luther himself received his Append. to the
Book of the Church, 3 part. chap. 2.
Ordination, and power of Ministry, our Learned Doctor Field has saved me the
labor to prove, by the suffrages of our best and most renowned Divines;
amongst whom he sites the Testimony of Calvin, Bucer, Melanchthon, Beza,
Mornay, Deering. And if since that time it be foully corrupted, so as now that
acute Author is driven to the distinction of Vere Ecclesia, and Vera Ecclesia;
yet at last he thus concludes, But will some man say, Is the Roman Church at
this day no part of the Church of God? Surely a^ Austine notes that the
societies of Heretics, Aug. de Baptis. contr. Donatist. lib. 1. c. 8, and 10.
in that they retain the profession of many parts of heavenly truth, and the
ministration of the Sacrament of Baptism, are so far still conjoined with the
Catholic Church, Roman Church is still in some sort a part of the visible
Church of God; but no otherwise then other societies of Heretics are, in that
it retains the profession of some parts of heavenly truth, and ministers the
true Sacrament of Baptism to the Salvation of the Souls of many thousand
infants, etc. Thus he.

Junius, Jun. de Eccl. lib. sing. c. 17.
distinguishing betwixt the Church and Papacy, determines the Church of Rome
to be a truely-living (though sick) Church, whereof the Papacy is the disease,
marring the health, threatening her life; and punctually resolves, Ecclesia
Papalis qua id habet, etc. The Popish Church in

Doctor Raynolds makes it his Position, These. Rain. 5.
That the Church of Rome is neither the Catholic Church, nor a sound member of
the Catholic; yielding it a member, whiles he disproves it sound.

Paraeus, Par. in Romans 16.
Accusant nos, etc. They accuse us ( says he) that we have made a division in
departing from the Church; Nos vero, etc. But we have not departed from the
Church, but from the Papacy.

Master Hooker is most pregnant for this point: Hook. 3 Book of Eccles. pol. c.
1.
Apparent it is ( says he) that all men are of necessity either Christians,
or not Christians. If by One Lord, one Faith, one Baptism.
and Christians by external profession they are all, whose mark of recognisance
has in it those things which we have mentioned; yea although they be impious
Idolaters, wicked Heretics, persons Excommunicable, yea and cast out for
notorious improbitie. Thus he; and going on, he shows how it is possible for
the self-same men to belong to the Synagogue of Satan, and to the Church of
Jesus Christ. The passages are too long to transcribe, and the Books are
obvious.

Doctor Crakenthorp, Crak. desen. Eccles. Angel. c. 16.
in his learned answer to Spalatensis, defends heretical Churches to be truly
members of the Catholic Church, though unsound ones; Alphonsus; and descending
to this particular, concludes, Haec tamen ipsa tua Romana, etc. This your
Roman Church must be accounted both to be in the Church, and to be a Church:
not simply, not according to the integrity of Faith, not according to any
inward virtue, not so effectually that it should avail to Salvation for a man
to be in it; but yet a Church it is in some respects, according to the external
profession of Faith and of the Word of God, according Thus he fully to my words
and meaning.

I might swell up the bulk with many more, Pet. Baro Conc. ad clerum. Bunnie
treat. of Purif. D. Some against Penrie. Peter Mart. Epistle.
a Catalogue whereof Brierley has for his own purpose fetched up together. I
will only shut up this Scene with out late most Learned Sovereign, King James;
who in the Conference at Hampton Court, with the acclamation of all his
judicious hearers, avowed, that no Church ought further to separate it self
from the Church of Rome in Doctrine or Ceremony, Answer to Machiavel, p. 8. D.
Covel Fregevil. polit. ^ef. B. of S. David's Chap. D. Williams of the Church.
Confer page 75.
then she has departed from her self when she

Well therefore does my Reader see that I have gone along with good company in
this assertion. Although I am not ignorant that Zanc. miscell. de Eccles.
Whitak. C^uaes. 6. c. 1. page 444, 445. in qu^r. Perk. in 1. ad Galat. Camero^.
some worthy Divines of ours speak otherwise, in the height of Zeal denying the
Church of Rome to be a true Church, to be a Church at all; whose contradiction
gives color to this offense. But let my Reader know, that however their words
are opposite, yet not their judgment; a mutual understanding shall well
accord us in the matter, however the terms sound contrary. Our old word is,
Things are as they are taken: The difference is in the acception of True and
Church; both which True, they mean right believing, and by Church, Zanch. ubi
supra. In quo purum Dei verbum Orthodoxe intellectium and sincere pradica^um,
Sacramenta sol^ and legitime juxta institutu^ Christi administrata, etc.
a company of Faithful which have the Word of God rightly understood and
sincerely preached, and the Sacraments duly administered, it is no marvel if
they say the Church of Rome is neither true nor Church; who would, who can say
otherwise? But whiles we mean by a true Church, a multitude of Christians
professing to agree in the main Principles of Religion, how can they but
subscribe to us, and in this sense yield the Church of Rome both a Church, and
truly visible? So as shortly, in a large sense of True Church, these Divines
cannot but descend to us; in a strict sense of both, we cannot but ascend to
them: in fine, both agree in the substance, M. Perk. Ref. Cath.
Certainly in effect Master Perkins says no other, whiles he defines his
Reformed Catholic to be one that holds the same necessary Heads of Religion
with the Roman Church, yet so as he pares off and rejects all Errors in
Doctrine whereby the same Religion is corrupted: wherein that well-allowed
Author speaks home to my meaning, though in other terms. That the Roman Church
holds the necessary Heads of Religion, gives it a right, in my sense, to a true
Visibilitie; that it holds foul Errors, whereby the Doctrine is corrupted,
makes it false in belief, whiles it has a true Being.

This then may give sufficient light to that passage in my sixth page, whereat
Luther out of Cromerus, I find also alleged by Doctor Field out of Luther
himself; Append. ubi supra.
the words are, that under the Papacy is the very kernel of Christianity, much
good, yea all. Know, Reader, the words are Luther's, not mine: neither does he
say, in the Papacy, but, under it; under it, indeed, to trample upon, not to
possess; or if to possess, yet not to enjoy. Their fault is not in defect of
necessary Truths, but in excess of superfluous additions. Luther explicates
himself; For his Kernel is the several Articles of Christian belief; his all
good, is Scriptures, Sacraments, Creeds, Councils, Fathers; all these they
have, but (God knows) miserably corrupted. That they thus have them, is no whit

It was an ill descant that a nimble Papist made upon those words of Luther,
which yield them the kernel of Christianity, If we have the kernel (says he)
let them take the shell. Soft, friend, you are too witty: Luther did not give

Neither think to go away with an idle misprision, We are a true visible
Church, what need we more? why should we wish to be other then we are? Alas,
poor souls! a true Visibility may and does stand with a false Belief. Ye may be
of a true visible Church, and yet never the nearer to Heaven. It is your
interest in the true mystical body of Christ that must save your Souls, not in
the outwardly visible: your Errors may be, and are, no less damnable,

Thus, in a desire to stand but so right as I am in all honest judgments, I
have made this speedy and true Apology; beseeching all Readers in the fear of
God (before whose bar we shall once give an account of all our overlashings)

THE
AN
By JOS. EXON.
TO THE Right Honorable and Truly Religious,
My ever Honored Lord;
I Confess my Charity led me into an Error. Your Lordship well knows how apt I
am to be overtaken with these better deceits of an overkinde Roman Church. The
issue proves all otherwise: I find, to my grief, that the misunderstanding
tenacity of some zealous spirits has made it a quarrel. It cannot but trouble
me to see that the Position which is so familiarly current with the best
Reformed Divines, and which has been so often and long since published by me
without contradiction, yea not without the approbation and applause of the
whole representative body of the Clergy of this Kingdom, should now be
quarrelled,

The Searcher of all hearts knows how far it was from my thoughts to speak
ought in favor of the Roman Synagogue: If I have not sufficiently branded
that Strumpet, Obj.
I justly suffer. Luther's broad word is by me already Resp.
Do you not yield some kind of Communion with these clients of Antichrist?
What is, if this be not, Favor? Mark well, Christian Reader, and the Lord give
thee understanding in all things. To begin with the latter: No man can say but
the Church of Rome holds some Truths; those Truths are God's, and in his right
ours; why should not we challenge our own wheresoever we find it? If a very
Devil shall say of Christ, Thou art the Son of the living God, we will snatch
this Truth out of his mouth as usurped, and in spite of him, proclaim it for
our own. Indeed, there is no communion betwixt light and darkness; but there is
communion betwixt light and light: Now all Truth is Light, and therefore
symbolizeth with it self. With that light therefore whose glimmering yet
remains in their darkness, our clearer light will and must hold communion. If
they profess Three Persons in one Godhead, Two Natures in one Person of Christ;
shall we detrect to join with them in this Christian Verity? We abhor to have
any Communion with them in their Errors, in their Idolatrous or Superstitious
practices; these are their own, not ours. If we durst have taken their part in
these, this breach had not been. Now, who can but say that we must hate their
evil, and allow their good? It is no countenance to their Errors that we
embrace our own Truths; it is no disparagement to our Truths that they have
blended them with their Errors. Here can be no difference then, if this
Communion be not mistaken: No man will say that we may sever from their common
Truths; no man will say that we may join with them in their hateful Errors.

For the former, He that says a Thief is truly a man, does he therein favor
that Thief? He that says a diseased, dropsied, dying body is a true (though
corrupt) body, does he favor that Disease, or that living carcass? It is no
other, no more that I say of the Church of Rome. Trueness of Being and outward
Visibility are no praise to her; yea these are aggravations to her falsehood.
The advantage that is both sought and found in this Assertion is only ours, as
we shall see in the sequel, without any danger of their gain. I say then, that
she is a True Church; but I say withal, she is a false Church: True in
Existence, but false in Belief. Let not the homonymie of a word breed jarres,
where the sense is accorded. If we do not yield her the true Being of a Church,
why do we call her the Church of Rome? What speak we of? or where is the
Subject of our question? Who sees not that there is a Moral Trueness, and a
Natural? He that is morally the falsest man, is in Nature as truly a man as the
honestest; and therefore in this regard as true a man. In the same sense
therefore that we say the Devil is a true (though false) Spirit, that a Cheater
is a true (though false) man, we may and must say, that the Church of Rome is a
true (though false) Church. Certainly, there has been a true Error and
mistaking of the sense that is guilty of this quarrel. As for the Visibility
there can be no question. Would God that Church did not too much fill our eye,
yea the world. There is nothing wherein it does more pride it self then in a
glorious conspicuity, scorning in this regard the obscure paucity of their
opposers.

But you say, Obj.
What is this but to play with ambiguities? That the Church Rome is it self,
that is, a Church, that it is visible, that it is truly existent, there can be
no doubt: but is it still a part of the truly existent visible Church of
Christ? Resp.
Surely, no otherwise then an Heretical and Apostatical Church is and may be.
Reader, whosoever thou art, for God's sake, for thy Souls sake, mark where thou
treadest; else thou shall be sure to fall either into an open gulf of
Uncharitableness, or into a dangerous precipice of Error. There is no fear nor
favor to say, that the Church of Rome, under a Christian Face, has an
Antichristian Heart; overturning that Foundation by necessary inferences, which
by open profession it avoweth. That Face, that Profession, those avowed
Principles are enough to give it claim to a true outward Rome justly odious and
execrable to God, to Angels and Men; but cannot utterly dis-church it, whiles
those main Principles maintain a weak life in that crazie and corrupted body.

But is not this language different from that whereto our ears and eyes have
been inured, from the mouths and pens of some Reverend Divines and Professors
of our Church? Know, Reader, that the stream of the famous Doctors, both at
home and abroad, has run strongly my way: I should have feared and hated to go
alone: what reason is there then to single out one man in a Zanchius, whose
pregnant testimonies compared together, shall plainly teach us how easy a
reconcilement may be made betwixt these two seemingly-contrary Opinions. That
worthy Author, in his Profession of Christian Religion, which he wrote and
published in the Seventieth year of his age, having defined the Church of
Christ in general, and passed through the Properties of it, at last, descending
to the sub-division of the Illas igitur, etc. Those Churches therefore do we
acknowledge for the true Churches of Christ, in which, first of all, the pure
Doctrine of the Gospel is preached, heard, admitted; and so only admitted,
that there is neither place nor ear given to the contrary. For both these are
the just Property of the flock or sheep of Christ; namely, both to hear the
voice of their own Pastor, and to reject the voice of strangers, John 10. 4. In
which, secondly, the Sacraments instituted by Christ are lawfully, and (as much
as may be) according to Christ's institution, administered and received; and
therefore, in which the Thus he: wherein who sees not how directly he aims both
at the justifying of our Churches, and the cashiering of the Roman, which is
palpably guilty of the violation of these wholesome Rules? And indeed it must
needs be said, if we bring the Roman Church to this touch, she is cast for a
mere counterfeit; Zanchy is my professed Adversary, and has directly condemned
my Position, of the Trueness and Visibility of the Roman Church. Have but
patience, I beseech you, to read what the same excellent Author writes in his
golden Preface to that noble Work, De where this question is clearly and
punctually decided. There you shall find, that having passed through the woeful
and gloomy offuscations of the Church of God in all former Ages, he descending
to the darkness of the present Babylon, concludes thus, to have no less ceased
to be the Church of Christ, then those Eastern Deinde non potuit Satan, etc.
Moreover, Satan could not in the very Roman Church do what he listed, as he
had done in the Eastern; to bring all things to such pass as that it should no
more have the form of a Christian Church: for, in spite of Satan, that Church
retained still the chief Foundations of the Faith, although weakened with the
Doctrines of men; it retained the public Preaching of the Word of God, though
in many places mis-understood, and mis-construed; Israel, even after that all
things were in part profaned by Jeroboam and other impious and idolatrous
Kings, upon the defection made by them from the Church and Tribe of Juda. For
neither do I assent to them which would have the Church of Rome Mahumetan. What
Church was ever more corrupt then the Church of the Ten Tribes? yet we learn
from the Scriptures that it was still the Church of God. And how does Saint
Paul call that Church wherein Antichrist (he says) shall sit, the Temple of
God? Neither is it any Baptism at all, that is administered out of the Church
of Christ. The Wife that is an Adulteress does not cease to be a Wife, unless
being despoiled of her marriage-ring, she be manifestly divorced. The Church of
Rome therefore is yet the Church of Christ; but what manner of Church? Surely
so corrupted and depraved, and with so great tyranny oppressed, that you can
neither with a good Conscience partake with Thus he again: wherein you see he
speaks as home for me as I could devise to speak for my self, and as appositely
professes to oppose the contrary.

Look now how this Learned Author may be reconciled to his own pen; and by the
very same way shall my pen be reconciled with others. Either he agrees not with
himself, or else in his sense I agree with my gainsayers. Nothing is more
plain, then that he in that former speech, and all other Classick Authors that
speak in that Key, mean by a True Church, a sound, pure, Ibid. Praefat. de not.
Dei.
right-believing Church; so as their vera is rather verax. Zanchie explicates
the term, whiles he joines veram and puram together; so as in Rome is a true
Church, I say he calls evil good, and is no better then a teacher of lies. But
if we measure the true Being of a Visible Church by the direct maintenance of
Fundamental Principles, though by consequences indirectly overturned, and by
the possession of the Word of God and his Sacraments, though not without foul
adulteration; what judicious Christian can but with me subscribe to Learned
Zanchius; that the Church of Rome has yet the true Visibility of a Church of
Christ? What should I need to press the latitude and multiplicity of sense of
the word Church? there is no one term that I know in all use of Speech so
various. If in a large sense it be taken to comprehend the Society of all that
profess Christian Religion through the whole world, howsoever impured, who can
deny this title to the Roman? If in a strict sense it be taken (as it is by
Zanchius here, and all those Divines who refuse to give this style to the
Synagogue of Rome) for the Company of Elect Faithful men gathered into one
mystical Body under one Head Christ, washed by his Blood, justified by Roman
Church? Both these sentences then are equally true, The Church of Rome is yet a
true Church in the first sense; The Church of Rome long since ceased to be a
true Church in the second. As those friendly Soldiers therefore of old said to
their fellows, (...); why fight we? Stay, stay, dear brethren, for Gods sake,
for his Churches sake, for your Souls sake, stay these busy and unprofitable
litigations; put up on both sides your angry pens; turn your Swords into Siths,
to cut down the rank corruptions of the Roman Church, and your Babylon. There
are enemies enough abroad, let us be friends at home. But if our sense be the
same, you will ask why our terms vary, and why we have chosen to fall upon
that manner of expression which gives advantage to the Adversary, offense to
our own. Christian Reader, let me beseech thee in the bowels of Christ to weigh
well this matter, and then tell me why such offense, such advantage should be
rather given by my words, then by the same words in the mouth of Luther, of
Calvin, of Zanchie, Junius, Plessee, Hooker, Andrews, Field, Crakenthorp,
Bedell, and that whole cloud of Learned and Pious Authors who have without
exception used the same The whiles they despited the Lord of that Temple? Is
the Sea-weed ever the less vile, because it is dragged up together with good
fish? They are of the visible Church, such as it is: what is this but to say,
they are neither Jews, nor Turks, nor Pagans; but misbelievers, damnably
Heretical in opinion, shamefully Idolatrous in practice? Let them make their
best of this just Eulogie, and triumph in this style; may we never prosper if
we envy them this glory. Our care shall be, that besides the Church sensible,
Epist. l. 2. resp. ad Catabaptist.
(as Zuinglius distinguishes) we may be of the Church spiritual; and not
resting in a fruitless Visibility, we may find our selves lively lims of the
mystical body of Christ: which only condition shall Lord, Lord, and is barred
out of those blessed gates with an I know you not.

Neither may the Reader think that I affect to go by-waies of speech: no, I
had not taken this path, unless I had found it both more beaten and fairer. I
am not so unwise, to teach the Adversary what disadvantage I conceive to be
given to our most just Cause by the other manner of explication. Let it suffice
to say, that this form of defense more fully stops the Adversaries mouth in
those two main and envious Scandals which he casts upon our holy Religion,
Defection from the Church and Innovation; then

Thus far have I (Right Honorable) in a desire of peace, poured out my self
into a plain explication and easy accordance. Those whom I strive to satisfy,
are only mistakers; whose censures if some man would have either laughed out or
despised, yet I have condescended to take off by a serious deprecation and just
defense.

It is an unreasonable motion to request minds prepossessed with Prejudice to
hear Reason. Whole Volumes are nothing to such as have contented themselves
only to take up Opinions upon trust, and will hold them because they know
where they had them. In vain should I spend my self in beating upon such
anviles; but for those ingenuous Christians

Alas, my Lord, I see, and grieve to see it; it is my Rochet that has
offended, and not I; in another habit I long since published this and more
without dislike; it is this color of innocence that has bleared some
over-tender eyes. Wherein I know not whether I should more pity their Error,
or applaud my own Sufferings. Although I may not say with the Psalmist, What
has the righteous done? let me (I beseech your Lordship) upon this occasion
have leave to give a little vent to my just grief in this point.

The other day I fell upon a Latin Pamphlet, homely for style, tedious for
length, zealously uncharitable for stuff, wherein the Author (only wise in
this, that he would be unknown) in a grave fierceness flies in the face of our
English Prelacie; not so much inveighing against their Persons, (which he could
be content to reverence) as their very Places. I blessed my self to see the case
so altered. Heretofore the Person had wont to bear off many blows from the
Function; now the very Function wounds the Person. In what case are we, when
that which should command respect brands us? What black Art has raised up this
spirit of Aerius from his pit? Woe is me, that zeal should breed such monsters
of conceit. It is the Honor, the

All the revenge that I would wish to this uncharitable Censurer should

For me, I need not appeal to Heaven, eyes enough can witness how few free
hours I have enjoyed since I put on these Robes of Sacred Honor. Insomuch as I
could find in my heart, with holy Gregory, to complain of Waltham, where I had
so sweet leisure to enjoy God, your Lordship, and my self. But I have followed
the calling of my God, to whose service I am willingly sacrificed; and must
now, in an holy obedience to his Divine Majesty, with what cheerfulness I may,
ride out all the storms of Envy, which unavoidably will alight upon the least
appearance of a conceived

Your Lordships truly devoted in all hearty Observance and Duty,


MY Lord, may your leisure serve you to read over this poor sheet of Paper, and
to censure it. Your Name is left out in the Catalogue of some other famous
Divines mentioned in the body of it, that you might not be forestalled. I
suffer for that wherein your self, amongst many renowned Orthodox Doctors of
the Church, are my partner. As if you had not already said it enough, I beseech
your Lordship, say once more what you think of the true Being and Visibility
Roman Church. Your excellent and zealous Writings have justly wone you a
constant reputation of great Learning and no less Sincerity, and have placed
you out of the reach of suspicion: No man can, no man dare misdoubt your
decision. If you find any one word amiss in this Explication, spare me not; I
shall gladly kiss your Rod, and hold your utmost severity a favor. But if you
here meet with no other then the words of a commonly-professed Truth, acquit me
so far as to say, there is no reason I should suffer alone. And let the wilful
or ignorant mistakers know that they wound Innocence, and through my sides
strike their best friends. I should not herein desire you to tender my Fame, if

Your much devoted and loving Brother

TO THE
RIght Reverend, and as dearly beloved, Brother, I have (I confess) been too
long in your Lordships debt for these Letters, which are now to Apologize for
me, that although I had my payment ready and in numeratis at the first reading
of your Reconciler, yet I reserved my Answer until I had perused the two other
Books and seconds, that so I might return my payment cum foenore.

In that your Lordships Tractate I could not but observe the lively Image of
your self; that is (according to the general interpretation of all sound Jesus
preserve us to the glory of his saving Grace.

Your Lordships Covent. and Litchfield.


MY Lord, I send you this little Pamphlet for your censure. It is not credible
how strangely I have been traduced every where for that which I conceive to be
the common Opinion of Reformed Divines, yea of reasonable men; that is, for
affirming the true Being and Visibility of the Roman Church. You see how
clearly I have endeavored to explicate this harmless Position; yet I perceive
some tough misunderstandings will not be satisfied. Your Lordship has with
great reputation spent many years in the Divinity-Chair of the famous
University of Cambridge. Let me therefore beseech you, whose Learning and
Sincerity Rome; and yet I doubt not but your own ears can witness what I have
suffered. Yea as if this calumny Dort, where (howsoever sickness bereaved me of
the hours of a conclusive Subscription) yet your Lordship heard me with equal
vehemence to the rest crying down the unreasonableness of that way. God so love
me as I do the tranquillity and happiness of his Church; yet can I not so
overaffect it, that I would sacrifice one dram of Truth to it. To that good God
do I appeal as the witness of my sincere heart to his whole Truth, and
no-less-then-ever-zealous

Your much devoted and faithful Brother

TO THE
My LORD;
YOU desire my Opinion concerning an Assertion of yours, whereat Roman Church
remains yet a True Visible Church.] The occasion which makes this an
ill-sounding Proposition in the ears of Protestants (especially such as are not
thoroughly acquainted with School Distinctions) is the usual acception of the
word True in our English Tongue. For though men skilled in Metaphysics hold it
for a Maxim, Ens, Verum, Bonum convertuntur: yet with us, he which shall
affirm such a one is a true Christian, a true Gentleman, a true Scholar, or the
like, he is conceived not only to adscribe Trueness of Being unto all these,
but those due Qualities or requisite Actions whereby they are made commendable
or praiseworthy Roman Church is no more a True Church in respect of Christ, or
those due Qualities and proper Actions which Christ requires, then an arrant
Whore is a true and loyal Wife unto her Husband. I durst upon mine oath be one
of your Compurgators, that you never intended to adorn that Strumpet with the
title of a true Church in this meaning. But your own Writings have so fully
cleared you herein, that suspicion it self cannot reasonably suspect you in
this Point. I therefore can say no more concerning your mistaken Proposition
then this, If in that Treatise wherein it was delivered, the Antecedents or
Consequents were such as served fitly to lead the Reader into that ex abrupto,
or stands solitary in your Discourse, you cannot marvel though, by taking the
word True according to the more ordinary acception, your true meaning was
mistaken. In brief, your Proposition admits a true sense; and in that sense is
by the best Learned in our Reformed Church not disallowed. For the Being of a
Church does principally stand upon the gracious action of God, calling men out
of Darkness and Death unto the Participation of Light and Life in Christ Jesus.
So long as God continues Jews lost not her Being of a Church when she became an
Idolatrous Church. And thus under the government of the Scribes and Pharisees,
who voided the Commandments of God by their own Traditions, there was yet
standing a true Church, in which Zacharias, Elizabeth, the Virgin Mary, and our
Savior himself was born, who were members of that Church, and yet participated
not in the Corruptions thereof. Thus to grant that the Roman was and is a True
Visible Christian Church, (though in Doctrine a False, and in Practice an
Idolatrous Church) is a true Assertion, and of greater use and necessity in our
Reconciler is so well explicated, as if any shall continue in traducing you in
regard of that Proposition so explained, I think it will be only those who are
better acquainted with wrangling then reasoning, and deeper in love with Strife
then Truth. And therefore be no more troubled with other men's groundless
suspicions, then you would be in like case with their idle Dreams. Thus I have
enlarged my self beyond my first intent. But my love to your self, and the
assurance of your constant love unto the Truth, enforced me thereunto. I

Your loving Brother, JO. SARUM.
Jan. 30. 1628.
TO THE
WOrthy Master Doctor Prideaux, all our little world here takes notice of your
Worth and Eminency, who have long furnished the Divinity Chair in that famous
University with mutual grace and honor. Let me entreat you upon the perusal
of this sorry sheet of Paper, to impart your self freely to me in your Censure;
and to express to me your clear Judgment concerning the true Being and
Visibility of the Roman Church. You see in what sense I Reconcilement might
have stilled all tongues and pens concerning this ill-raised brabble: but I see
to my grief how much men care for themselves more then peace. I suffer, and the
Church is disquieted; your Learning and Gravity will be ready to

Your very loving Friend and


Right Reverend Father in GOD;
UPon the receipt of your Reconciler, which it pleased you to send me, I took
occasion (as my manifold distractions would permit) to Roman Church. Wherein I
must profess that I could not but wonder at the needless Exceptions against
your Tenet, you affirming no new thing in that passage misliked in your Old
Religion. And this your Advertisement (afterward) so fully and punctually
clears, and your Reconciler so acquitteth it, with such satisfying
ingenuitie, that I cannot imagine they have considered it well, or mean well,
that shall persist to oppose it. For who perceives not, that your Lordship
leaves no more to Rome then our best Divines ever since the Reformation have
granted? If their speeches have been sometimes seemingly different, their
meaning Advertisement, and by others,) they do an ill office to our Church (in
my opinion) who set them at odds in this Point that are so excellently
reconciled; and give more advantage to the Adversary by quarrelling with our
Worthies, then the Adversary is like to get by our acknowledgement, that they
are such a miserable

What I have thought long since in this behalf, it appears in my Lecture De
Visibilitate Ecclesiae; and as often as this has come in question in our
public Disputes, we determine here no otherwise then your Lordship has stated
it. And yet we trust to give as little advantage to Popery as those that do
detest it; and are as circumspect to maintain our received Doctrine and
Discipline, without the least Scandal to the weakest, as

That distinction of Rome's case before and since the Council of Trent, holds
not to dis-Church it, but shows it rather to be more incurable now then
heretofore.

Neither find I any particulars objected, which those Worthy men have not
sufficiently cleared that have justified your Assertion. Not to trouble
therefore your weightier affairs with my needless interposition: as that
Controversy about the Altar ( Josuah 22.) had presently a fair end upon the
full understanding of the good meaning on both sides; so I trust in God this
shall have: In which I am so persuaded, that if it were to be discussed pro or
con, without prejudice to the Truth, according to the full stating which your
Advertisement and Reconciler have afforded. And thus, with tender of my due
Observance and Prayers for your happiness, I rest

Your Lordships
From Exon Coll. Martii 9. No.

WOrthy Master Doctor Primerose, You have been long acknowledged a great Light
in the Reformed Churches of France, having for many years shined in your Orb,
the famous Church of Bordeaux, with notable effects and singular approbation
both for Judgment and Sincerity; both which also your Learned Writings have
well approved; so as your Sentence cannot be liable to the danger of any
suspicion: Roman Church as it is by me explicated; and withal to impart your
knowledge of the common Tenet of those foreign Divines with whom you have so
long conversed concerning this Point, which (if I mistake not) only a stubborn
ignorant will needs make litigious. It grieves my Soul to see the Peace of the
Church troubled with so absurd a misprision. In expectation of your Answer I
take leave, and commend you and your holy Labors to the blessing of our God.
Farewell. From

Your loving Brother and Fellow Laborer, JOS. EXON.

TO THE
Right Reverend Father in God,
I Have been so busied about my necessary Studies for preaching on Sunday,
Roman Church as it is by your Lordship explicated, and what is the common
Tenet of the foreign Divines with whom I have so long conversed beyond the Seas
concerning that Point. I might answer in two lines, that I have read your
Reconciler, and judge your Opinion concerning that Point to be learned, sound
and true. Though that if I durst favor an officious lie, I would willingly
give my Suffrage to those Divines, which out of a most fervent Zeal to God and
perfect hatred to Idolatry, hold that the Roman Church is in BA^EL, in nothing
BETHEL. And as they which seek to set right a crooked Tree, bow it the clean
contrary way to make it straight; so to recover and pull out of the fire of
eternal Damnation the Roman Christians, I would gladly pourtray them with
sable colors, and make their Religion more black in their own eyes then they
are in ours, the hellish-coloured faces of the flat-nosed Ethiopians, or to the
Spaniard the monstrous Sambenit of the Inquisition.

But fearing the true reproach cast by Job in his friends teeth, Will ye speak
wickedly for God, Job 13. 7.
and talk deceitfully for him? and knowing that we must not speak a lie, no not
against the Devil which is the Father of lies; I say that the Roman Church is
both BABEL and BETHEL; and as God's Temple was in Christ's the house of Prayer,
Matthew. 21. 13.
and a den of thieves, so she is in our days God's Temple and the habitation
of Devils, 2 These. 2. 4.
the hold of every foul spirit, and a cage of every unclean and hateful bird.
Rev. 18. 1, 2.
Which I prove thus:

The Church is to be considered three manner of ways. First, according to Gods
right which he keeps over her, and maintains in her by the common and
external Calling of his Word and Sacraments. Secondly, according to the pure
Preaching of the Word, and external Obedience in hearing, receiving, and
keeping the Word sincerely preached. Thirdly, according to the election of
Grace, and the personal Calling, which has perpetually the inward working of
the Holy Ghost joined with the outward Preaching of the Word, Acts 16. 14.
as in Lydia. Thence comes 1 Pet. 3. 21.
by the Resurrection of Jesus Christ.

To begin with the last Consideration: These only are Gods Church which are
Jews inwardly in the spirit, Romans 2. 28, 29.
as well as outwardly in the letter, whose praise is not of men, John 1. 47.
but of God; who are Nathanaels, and true Israelites, in whom there is no
guile; 2 Timothy 2. 19.
invisible to all men, visible to God alone, who knows them that are his; 1
Cor. 2. 12.
and each of them to themselves, because they have received the Spirit which is
of God, that they might know the things which are freely given them of God,
Rev. 2. 17.
and the white stone and new name, which no man knows saving he that
receives it. Of this Church, called by the Apostle the people which God
foreknew, Romans 11. 2. there is no controversy amongst our Divines.

In the second Consideration these only are the true visible Church of God,
amongst whom the Word of God is truly preached without the mixture of humane
Traditions, the holy Sacraments are celebrated according to their first
institution, and the people consents to be led and ruled by the word of God.
Exodus 19. 7, 8. 24. 3, 7.
As when Moses laid before the faces of the people, all the words which the
Lord commanded Exodus 34. 27.
The Lord said unto Moses, Write thou these words: for after the tenor of these
words I have made a covenant with thee and with Israel. Deuteronomy. 26. 17* 18.
And Moses said to the people; Thou have avouched this day the Lord to be thy
God, and to walk in his ways, and to keep his Statures and his Commandments
and his Judgments, and to hearken unto his voice: And the Lord has avouched
thee this day to be his peculiar people, as he has promised thee, and that
thou should keep all his Commandments. This condition of the Commandment
God did often inculcate into their ears by his Prophets: Jer. 7. ^3. 11. 4.
As when he said to them by Jeremiah, This thing commanded I

So in the Gospel Christ says, John 10. 27, 5.
My sheep hear my voice, and I know them, and they follow me: But a stranger
will they not follow, but will fly from him; for they know not the voice of
strangers: where he gives the first mark of the Visible true and pure Church,
to wit, the pure Preaching and Hearing of Christ's voice. 1 John 4. 6.
As likewise St. John says, He that knows God, hears us: Hereby know we
the Spirit of Truth, and the spirit of Error.

Again, John 13. 35.
the Lord says, By this shall all men know that ye are my Disciples, pointing
out the Concord and holy agreement which is among the Brethren, as another mark
of the Orthodox Church. As likewise when he says, Let your light so shine
before men, that they may see your good works, and glorify your Father which
is in Heaven, Matt. 5. 16.
he shows that good Works are the visible mark of the true Orthodox Church.
The true Preaching and reverend Hearing of the Gospel is a visible mark of our
Faith and Hope; our Concord in the Lord is a mark of our Charity; our good
Works are real and sensible testimonies of our inward Faith, Hope and Charity.
Where we find these three Signs, we know certainly that there is Christ's true
Church; and judge charitably, that is probably, that every one in whom we see
these outward tokens of Jesus. I say charitably, because outward marks may be
outwardly counterfeited by Hypocrites; as it is said of Israel, Ps. 78. 36. 37.
They did flatter with their mouth, and they lied unto him with their tongues;
For their heart was not right with him, neither were they steadfast in his
Covenant: and of many of those that followed our Savior, John 2. 23, 24.
Many believed in his Name, when they saw the Miracles which he did: But Jesus
did not commit himself unto them, because he knew all men.

Therefore when the people of Israel departed from the Covenant, and by their
Idolatry brake, as much as in them lay, the contract of Marriage between them
Moses, Thy people which thou broughtest out of the Land of Egypt have corrupted
themselves, Exodus 32. 7.
and not my people. And Moses, to show that on their part they had broken the
Covenant, 32. 19.
broke the Tables of the Covenant. When under Achaz they did worse, Esaias 1^ 4,
10, 21.
Isaiah called them children that are corrupted, their Prince and Governors,
Rulers of Sodom, themselves people of Gomorrah, their holy City an Harlot.
Mi^h. 2. 7. 8.
And God about the same time cried unto them by Micah, Thou that art named the
house of Jacob, thou that wast of late my people: and Hosea, Ho^^^ ^. 9.
Ye are not my people, and I will not be your God. After the same manner Christ
said to the Jews, which gloried and made their boast that God was their Father,
John 8^ 42, 44.
If God were your Father, ye would love me: Ye are of your father the Devil,
and the lusts of your father ye will do.

If we speak of the Romish Church according to this Distinction, defining the
Church by the keeping of the Covenant in pureness of Doctrine and Holiness of
life, God himself has stripped her of that glorious name, calling spiritually
Sodom, Rev. 11. 8.
Egypt, and Babylon: Sodom, in the pollution of her most filthy life; 14. 8.
Egypt, in the abominable multitude of her filthy Idols; Babylon, in the cruel
and bloody oppression and persecution of the Saints. And because she was to
call her self as falsely as arrogantly, the Mother Church, the Angel calls her
The Mother of Harlots and abominations of the Earth: 17. 5.
Because also she was to bring and magnify her self in the multitude of her
Saints, 6.
he says that she is drunk with the blood of the Saints, and with the blood of
the Martyrs of Jesus. And taking from her the name of the Church, which she
challenges privatively to all other Christian Congregations, 18. 2.
he names her, as I have already said, The habitation

In the first sense Moses said to God, Exodus 32. 11.
Why does thy wrath wax hot against Thy people? because although they had
broken the Covenant on their part by the works of their hands, God had not as
yet broken it on his part. Jeremiah in the greatest heat of their monstrous
Idolatries prayed after the same manner, Jer. 14. 2^.
Do not abhor us, for thy Names sake, do not disgrace the Throne of thy glory:
Remember, break not thy Covenant with us: and Esaiah, Esaias 64. 8, 9.
Thou art our Father, we are ALL thy people. For so long as God calls a people
to him by his Word and Sacraments, and honors them David lose his right by the
Rebellion of the people under his son Absalom? And therefore when the King
subdueth these Traitors, he carries himself toward them, both in forgiving
and in punishing, as their lawful and natural Prince, and not as a Conqueror
of new Subjects. So as a Strumpet Agar, when she fled from her Mistress Sarai,
was still Sarai's maid, Genesis 16. 8.
as she confessed, saying, I flee from the face of my mistress Sarai: In like
manner a rebellious, fugitive and whoring Church, is still a true Church, so
long as God keeping the right of a King, of a Master, of a Husband over her,
gives her not the bill of divorcement, but consents that his Name be called
upon her, and she still calls her self his Kingdom, Esaias 58. 1.
his Maid, his Wife. Thus God calls the Jews His people, even then when he
said they were not his people, because he had not broken the band of Marriage
with them, and put them away by divorcement. Therefore 50. 1.
Where are the letters of your Mothers divorcement, whom I have put away?
Meaning, he had not given unto them a writing of divorcement, but did still
acknowledge them to be his Spouse, notwithstanding their manifold and most
filthy whoredoms with false gods, which he charged them with, Jer. 3. 2, 3, 4,
14.
saying unto them by Jeremiah, Thou have polluted the Land with thy whoredoms
and with thy wickedness: Thou have a whores forehead, and refusest to be
ashamed. Will thou not for this time cry unto me, My Father, thou art the Guide
of my youth? Turn, O backsliding children, says the Lord, for I am married
unto you; or, according to the French Translation, I have the right of an
husband over you. So after he Lo-ruhama and Lo-hammi, Hos. ^. 6, 9.
saying he would no more have mercy upon them, and that they were not his
people, he calls them his people; 4. 12.
My people, says he, asks counsel at their stocks, and their stuff
answers them.

But after that God had scattered them among the Medes and other Nations
Assyria, and broken his Covenant with them, they became not only in the
second, but also in the first sense, Jesrehel, and no more Israel, Loruhama,
and no more Ruhama, Lohammi, and no more Hammi. Then was fulfilled the
Prophecy, Hos. 2. 2.
Plead with your Mother, plead: for she is not my wife, neither am I her
husband. So the Jews, which were Gods people in the midst of their Idolatry,
since they have denied Christ to be the Messiah, the Mediator between God and
them, and have crucified the Lord of Glory, are no more Gods people, although
they beg still that name. They are, says Christ, Rev. 3. 9.
the Synagogue of Satan: They say they are Jews, and are not, Romans 11. 17.
but do ly. For seeing God has broken them off, and grafted the

To apply this to the Roman Church, which has adulterated and corrupted the
whole service of God, and is more adulterous then was at any time Juda or
Ephraim, and therefore is not a true visible Church in the second sense; I say
she is one in some sort in the first. In her God does still keep his true word
in the Old and New Testament, as the contract of his Marriage with her. In her
is the true Creed, the true Decalogue, the true Lords Prayer, which Luther
calls the kernal of Christianity. In her Christ is preached, though sits
in the Temple of God, 2 Thessalonians. 24.
which is the Church. Its granted that she is Babylon in the second sense: Rev.
18. 4.
and God's people is commanded to come out of Babylon. What is Gods people but
Gods Church, which forsakes her successively; as of old the typical people
came out of the typical Babylon, not at once, but at many several times? If
then we apply unto her Gods commandment, exhorting her to come out of Babylon,
either we understand not what we say, or we acknowledge her to be Gods people,
that is, Gods Church, though Idolatrous, Rebellious and Disobedient. Neither
shall she cease to be Gods people in this sense till the coming of that blessed
day, when the air shall rebound with the shouting of the Saints, Rev. 14. 8.
Babylon is fallen, she is fallen, that great City, because

I say then, that as Jerusalem was at the same time the holy City, and a
Harlot; the Temple was Bethel and Bethaven, Gods House and a house of Iniquity;
the Jews were Gods people and no people, Gods children and the Devils; Ephraim
was Hammi and Lo-hammi, in diverse respects: even so the Romish Church is both
Bethel and Babel; Bethel from God, calling her to the communion of his grace in
Christ by his Word and Sacrament of Baptism; Babel from her self, because she
has made a gallimaufrey of the Christian Religion, confounding pell-mell her
own Traditions with Gods Word, her own Merits with Christ's, the blood of
Martyrs with the blood of John 1, 29.
Purgatory with the same blood which purges us from all sin, 1 John 1. 7.
Justification by Works with Justification by Faith only, Gal. 2. 16.
Praying to the Creatures with praying to the Creator, Idols of men, women,
beasts, Angels, with Gods worship, the mediation of Saints with the mediation
of him who is the surety of the New Testament, Heb. 7. 22, 25.
and is able to save to the uttermost all those that come unto God by him,
seeing he ever lives to make Nay, as Calvin said truly, in the Romish Church
Christ is scarcely known among the Saints, of whom some are in Heaven, as the
Apostles, etc. some on Earth, as the Pope; some in Hell, as Saint Dominick, the
firebrand of the war against the Albigeois, Saint Garnet, whom Tyborn sent to
his own place, to be rewarded of the Gunpowder Treason; some did never die,
because they had never the honor to live, as Saint Christopher, Saint
Katharine, Saint Ur^ule, Saint Longin, who was a Spear, Saint Eloi, who was two
couple of sharp nails, and many more of the same stuff. In a word, the
roaring of the Gamards of Bahal is so loud in that Church, that Christ's voice
is scant heard in her; and yet heard both in the mouth of these Babylonian
builders, which understand not one another, and in the mouths of the people
halting between Christ and the Pope their Bahal. And therefore in that behalf
not the true, but a true Christian Church.

This testimony is the praise of the most wonderful patience of God, who
suffers so long that common hackney to bear his name. It is her shame: As it
is the shame of a Queen married to a good husband, to be convicted of running
up and down after strangers. Its a vantage to us in our employment for her
Conversion. For as when Agar had confessed truly, that she was Sarah 's maid,
the Angel took her at her word, Genesis 16. 9.
saying, Return to thy Mistress, and submit thy self to her, and persuaded her:
Even so we take the Roman Church by the Moses, when the people had committed
Idolatry, took his Tabernacle, Exodus 33. 7.
and pitched it without the Camp, afar off from the Camp, breaking off all
Communication with those which had broken the Covenant of the Lord their God,
till they repented; as God said to Jeremiah of the Jews, Ezec 16. 25.
which had opened their legs to every one that passed by, and multiplied their
whoredoms, Cast them out of my sight, and let them go forth: Jer. 15.1, 19.
but return not thou unto them; as Hosea said of Ephraim, Hos. 4. 17.
Ephraim is joined to Idols, let him alone: So Christ says unto us, Come out
of Babylon my people, Rev. 18. 4.
that ye be not partakers of her sins, and that ye receive not of her plagues.
Her sins are a spiritual Leprosy: and we run away from leprous men, though
true men, and our nearest and dearest Friends, crying what they are loath to
cry, Lev. 13. 45.
Unclean, unclean, lest their breath should infect us. Her sins are Infidelity,
not negative, but privative, not in whole, but in part; as S. Paul, a believing
Jew, was in unbelief when he persecuted the Church: 2 Co^ 6. 14 15, 1^, 17, 18.
and S. Paul says unto us, Be ye not unequally yoked together with
unbelievers, etc. Come out from among them, and be ye separate, says the A
faithful Subject will not take a Traitor, though a Subject, by the hand, nor I
a Papist in matter of his Religion: neither will honest women go unto the
stews with the greatest Lady, though she be a great ones Wife.

This I have ever taught privately, preached publicly, published in printed
Books against Papists during these thirty three years of my Ministry in the
French Churches, without any advantage to our Adversaries, without any
contradiction of our Divines, without any exception taken against it by our
Churches, or any particular among the Brethren, which all in their name preach
and publish the Reformed Churches, and our Religion the Reformed Religion. For
as the good Kings of Juda did not build a new Temple, call to God a new people,
set up a new Religion, but repurge and cleanse the old Temple, restore the
ancient Religion, exhorted Gods people to shake off the new inventions of the
new-patched Religion, and to return to the Lord Moses had traced unto them in
the Law; Neh. 3. and 4.
and as Zorobabel, Esdras, Nehemiah, Jeshuah, builded the walls of Jerusalem
upon the ancient Foundation, every man building next himself: even so the
Protestant Divines have every one next himself, not builded a new Church upon a
new Foundation, but repurged the ancient Church of Idolatry, Superstition,
false Interpretations of the Scriptures and Traditions of men, whereof she was
fuller then ever Augeas his Stable was full of muck; but beaten down, and
burned with the fire of Gods Word the walls of Wood, 1 Cor. 3. 12.
Hay, Stubble, which the Babylonian builders had raised upon the old
Foundation, which is Christ Jesus, and edified upon it a fair Palace of Silver,
Gold, precious Stones. This same is French Church of this City of London.

If any self-conceited Christian thinks this an advantage rather then a
disparagement and disgrace to that punk the Roman Church, and takes thereby
occasion to persevere to be her Bawd or Stallion, and to run a whoring with
her, I say with the Psalmist, Psalm. 36. 3.
The wicked has left off to be wise, and to do good; and with the Angel, Rev.
22. 11.
He that is unjust, let him be unjust still: and he which is filthy, let him be
filthy still. For neither must an honest heart speak a lie for the good that
may come of it; nor conceal in time and place a necessary Truth for any evil
that may ensue of it. If it harden more and more the flinty hearts of some unto
death, it will soften and melt the iron hearts of others unto life; that seeing
among us the 2 Cor. 3. 18.
they may come unto us, and beholding with open face, as in a glass, the glory
of the Lord, may be changed with us into the same image, from glory to glory,
even as by the Spirit of the Lord.

Which last effect I pray with my heart your Reconciler may have with those
that are children of Peace. And so recommending your Lordship, with all your
learned, eloquent, sound and useful Labors to Gods most powerful blessing,
and my self to

Your Lordships most humble and affectionate Servant, GILBERT PRIMROSE.
From London the 26. of February, 1629.
To my Worthy and much respected Friend,
MAster Cholmley, I have perused your Learned and full Reply to Master Burton's
Answer: wherein you have in a judicious eye abundantly righted your self, and
cleared a just Cause, so as the Reader would wonder where an Adversary might
find ground to raise an opposition. But let me tell you, were i^ a Book
written by the Pen of an Angel from

Silence has sometimes quieted such like mis-raised brabbles, never
interchange

As for those Personal aspersions that are cast upon you by Malice, be
persuaded to despise them. These Western parts, where your reputation is
deservedly precious, know your zeal for Gods Truth no less fervent (though
better governed) then the most fiery of your Censurers. No man more hates
Popish Superstition; only your fault is, that you do not more hate Error then
Injustice, and cannot abide wrong measure offered to the worst enemy. Neither
be you troubled with that idle exprobration of a Prebendary retribution; who
would care for a contumely so void of truth? God knows that worthless gift was
conferred upon you ere this task came into either of Tiverton, the four-parted
division of that charge, and your forced confinement to your own day by public
authority, both Spiritual and Temporal, must needs acquit you, and cry down
the wrong of an accuser. As for



For the main business, there wants not confidence on either side: I am
appealed to by both, an unmeet Judge, considering my so deep engagements. But
if my umpierage may stand, I award an eternal silence to both parts. Sit down
in peace then, you and your worthy Second, whose young ripeness

Your loving Friend and ancient Colleague,

OCCASIONAL
Set forth by R. H.
TO
Right Honorable,
FInding these Papers amongst others lying aside in my Fathers Study, where of
I conceived good use might be made, in regard of that spiritual advantage
which they promised, I obtained of him good leave to send them abroad; whereto
he professed himself the more easily induced, for that his continual and
weighty employments in this large and busy Diocese will not yet afford him
leisure to dispatch those his other fixed Meditations on the History of the New
Testament. In the mean time, the expressions of these voluntary and sudden
thoughts of his shall testify how fruitfully he is wont to improve those short
ends of time which are stolen from his more important avocations; and (unless
my hopes fail me) the pattern of them may prove not a little Sulpitius reports
of S. Martin, that seeing a Sheep newly shorn, he could say, Lo here is one
that has performed that command in the Gospel; having two Coats, she has
given away one: and seeing an Hogherd freezing in a thin suit of skins, Lo
(said he) there is Adam cast out of Paradise: and seeing a Meadow part rooted
up, part whole, but eaten down, and part flourishing, he said, The first was
the state of Fornication, the second of Marriage, the third of Virginity. But
what do I seek any other Author then the Lord of Life himself? who upon the
drawing of water from the Well of Shilo on the day of the great Hosanna, took
occasion to speak of those Living waters which should John 7. 38. and upon
occasion of a bodily Feast, Luke 14. entered into that Divine discourse of God's
gracious invitation of us to those spiritual viands of Grace and Glory. Thus,
methinks, we should still be climbing up in our thoughts from Earth to Heaven,
and suffer no Object to cross us in our way without some spiritual Use and
Application. Thus it pleased my Reverend

These, as they are, I send forth under your Honorable Name, out of those many
Respects which are in an hereditary right due to your Lordship, as being
apparent Heir to those two singular Patrons of my justly-Reverenced Father; the
eminent Virtue of which your Noble Parents in a gracious Succession yields to
your Lordship an happy Example, which to follow is the only way to true
Honor. For the daily increase whereof here, and the everlasting Crown of it
hereafter, his Prayers to God

Your Lordships devoted in all humble observance,

Occasional MEDITATIONS.

I Have heedlesly lost (I confess) many good thoughts; these few my Paper has
preserved from vanishing; the example whereof may perhaps be more useful then
the matter. Our active Soul can no more forbear to think, then the Eye can
choose but see when it is open. Would we but keep our wholesome Notions
together, mankind would be too rich. To do well, no

The TABLE of these MEDITATIONS following.
MED. I. Upon the sight of the Heavens moving. Page 452 MED. II. Upon the sight
of a Dial. ib. MED. III. Upon the sight of an Eclipse of the Sun. ib. MED. IV.
Upon the sight of a gliding Star.453 MED. V. Upon a fair Prospect. ib. MED. VI.
Upon the frame of a Globe casually broken. 454 MED. VII. Upon a Cloud. ib. MED.
VIII. Upon the sight of a Grave dug up. ib. MED. IX. Upon the sight of Gold
melted. 455 MED. X. Upon the sight of a Pitcher carried. ib. MED. XI. Upon the
sight of a Tree full blossomed. ib. MED. XII. Upon the report of a man suddenly
struck dead in his Sin. ib. MED. XIII. Upon the view of the Heaven and the
Earth. 456 MED. XIV. Upon occasion of a Red-breast coming into his Chamber. ib.
MED. XV. Upon occasion of a Spider in his Window. ib. MED. XVI. Upon the sight
of a Rain in the Sunshine. 457 MED. XVII. Upon the length of the way. ib. MED.
XVIII. Upon the Rain and Waters. ib. MED. XIX. Upon the same Subject. 458 MED.
XX. Upon occasion of the Lights brought in. ib. MED. XXI. Upon the same
occasion. 459 MED. XXII. Upon the blowing of the Fire. ib. MED. XXIII. Upon the
barking of a Dog. ib. MED. XXIV. Upon sight of a Cock-fight. ib. MED. XXV. Upon
his lying down to rest. 460 MED. XXVI. Upon the kindling of a Charcole fire.
ib. MED. XXVII. Upon the sight of an humble and patient Beggar. 461 MED.
XXVIII. Upon the sight of a Crow pulling off wool from the back of a Sheep. ib.
MED. XXIX. Upon the sight of two Snails. ib. MED. XXX. Upon the hearing of the
street-Cries in London. 462 MED. XXXI. Upon the Flies gathering to a galled
Horse. ib. MED. XXXII. Upon the sight of a dark Lantern. ib. MED. XXXIII. Upon
the hearing of a Swallow in the Chimney. ib. MED. XXXIV. Upon the sight of a
Fly burning it self in the Candle. 463 MED. XXXV. Upon the sight of a Lark
flying up. ib. MED. XXXVI. Upon the singing of the Birds in a Spring morning.
ib. MED. XXXVII. Upon a Coal covered with Ashes. 464 MED. XXXVIII. Upon the
sight of a Blackmore. ib. MED. XXXIX. Upon the small Stars in the Galaxie or
milkie Circle in the Firmament. ib. MED. XL. Upon the sight of Boys playing.
465 MED. XLI. Upon the sight of a Spider and her Web. ib. MED. XLII. Upon the
sight of a Natural. ib. MED. XLIII. Upon the Loadstone and the Jett. 466 MED.
XLIV. Upon hearing of Music by night. ibid. MED. XLV. Upon the fanning of
Corn. ib. MED. XLVI. Upon Herbs dried. 467 MED. XLVII. Upon the quenching of
Iron in Water. ib. MED. XLVIII. Upon a fair-coloured Fly. ib. MED. XLIX. Upon
a Glowworm. ib. MED. L. Upon the shutting of one eye. 468 MED. LI. Upon a
Spring Water. ib. MED. LII. Upon Gnats in the Sun. ib. MED. LIII. Upon the
sight of Grapes. ib. MED. LIVE. Upon a Corn-field overgrown with Weeds. 469
MED. LV. Upon the sight of Tulips and Marigolds, etc. in his Garden. ib. MED.
LVI. Upon the sound of a cracked Bell. ib. MED. LVII. Upon the sight of a Blind
man. ib. MED. LVIII. Upon a Beech-tree full of Nuts. 470 MED. LIX. Upon the
sight of a piece of Money under the Water. ib. MED. LX. Upon the first rumor
of the Earthquake at Lime, wherein a Wood was swallowed up with the fall of two
Hills. ib. MED. LXI. Upon the sight of a Dormouse. 471 MED. LXII. Upon Bees
fighting. ib. MED. LXIII. Upon Wasps falling into a Glass. ib. MED. LXIV. Upon
a Spring in the wild Forest. 472 MED. LXV. Upon the sight of an Owl in the
twilight. ibid. MED. LXVI. Upon an Arm benumbed. 473 MED. LXVII. Upon the
Sparks flying upward. ib. MED. LXVIII. Upon the sight of a Raven. ib. MED.
LXIX. Upon a Worm. 474 MED. LXX. Upon the putting on of his Clothes. ibid. MED.
LXXI. Upon the sight of a great Library. ibid. MED. LXXII. Upon the red Cross
on a Door. 475 MED. LXXIII. Upon the change of Weather. ib. MED. LXXIV. Upon
the sight of a Marriage. ib. MED. LXXV. Upon the sight of a Snake. 476 MED.
LXXVI. Upon the Ruins of an Abbey. ib. MED. LXXVII. Upon the discharging of a
Piece. 477 MED. LXXVIII. Upon the tolling of a Passing Bell. ib. MED. LXXIX.
Upon a Defamation dispersed. 478 MED. LXXX. Upon a ring of Bells. ib. MED.
LXXXI. Upon the sight of a full Table at a Feast. ib. MED. LXXXII. Upon the
hearing of a Lute well played on. 479 MED. LXXXIII. Upon the sight and noise of
a Peacock. ib. MED. LXXXIV. Upon a penitent Malefactor. ibid. MED. LXXXV. Upon
the sight of a Lilly. 480 MED. LXXXVI. Upon the sight of a Coffin stuck with
Flowers. ib. MED. LXXXVII. Upon the view of the World. ib. MED. LXXXVIII. Upon
the stinging of a Wasp. 481 MED. LXXXIX. Upon the Arraignment of a Felon. ib.
MED. XC. Upon the Crowing of a Cock. 482 MED. XCI. Upon the variety of
Thoughts. ib. MED. XCII. Upon the sight of an Harlot carted. ibid. MED. XCIII.
Upon the smell of a Rose. 483 MED. XCIV. Upon a cancelled Bond. ib. MED. XCV.
Upon the report of a great loss by Sea. ib. MED. XCVI. Upon sight of a bright
Sky full of Stars. 484 MED. XCVII. Upon the rumors of Wars. ib. MED. XCVIII.
Upon a Child crying. 485 MED. XCIX. Upon the beginning of a Sickness. ibid.
MED. C. Upon the challenge of a Promise. 486 MED. CI. Upon the sight of Flies.
ib. MED. CII. Upon the sight of a fantastical Zelot. ib. MED. CIII. Upon the
sight of a Scavenger working in the Canell. 487 MED. CIV. Upon a pair of
Spectacles. ib. MED. CV. Upon Moats in the Sun. ib. MED. CVI. Upon the sight of
a Bladder. ib. MED. CVII. Upon a man Sleeping. 488 MED. CVIII. Upon the sight
of a Deaths-head. ib. MED. CIX. Upon the sight of a Left Handed man. ib. MED.
CX. Upon the sight of an old unthatched Cottage. 489. MED. CXI. Upon the sight
of a fair Pearl. ib. MED. CXII. Upon a Screen. ib. MED. CXIII. Upon a Bur-leaf.
ib. MED. CXIV. Upon the Singing of a Bird. ib. MED. CXV. Upon the sight of a
man Yawning. 490 MED. CXVI. Upon the sight of a Tree lopped. ib. MED. CXVII.
Upon a Scholar that offered violence to himself. ib. MED. CXVIII. Upon the
coming in of the Judge. 491 MED. CXIX. Upon the sight of an Heap of stones.
ibid. MED. CXX. Upon sight of a Bat and Owl. ib. MED. CXXI. Upon the sight of
a well-fleeced Sheep. 492 MED. CXXII. Upon the hearing of Thunder. ib. MED.
CXXIII. Upon the sight of an Hedg-hog. ib. MED. CXXIV. Upon the sight of a
Goat. 493 MED. CXXV. Upon the sight of the Blind and the Lame. ib. MED. CXXVI.
Upon the sight of a Map of the World. ib. MED. CXXVII. Upon the sight of
Hemlock. 494 MED. CXXVIII. Upon a Flower-de-luce. ib. MED. CXXIX. Upon the
sight of two Trees, one high, the other broad. ib. MED. CXXX. Upon the sight of
a Drunken man. ibid. MED. CXXXI. Upon the whetting of a Sith. 495 MED. CXXXII.
Upon the sight of a Looking-glass. ibid. MED. CXXXIII. Upon the shining of a
piece of Rotten wood. ib. MED. CXXXIV. Upon an Ivy tree. 496 MED. CXXXV. Upon
a Quartan ague. ib. MED. CXXXVI. Upon the sight of a loaded Cart. ibid. MED.
CXXXVII. Upon the sight of a Dwarf. 497 MED. CXXXVIII. Upon an importunate
Beggar. ibid. MED. CXXXIX. Upon a Medicinal potion. ib. MED. CXL. Upon the
sight of a Wheel. 498
Occasional
I. Upon the sight of the Heavens moving.
I Can see nothing stand still but the Earth; all other things are in motion.

What should we rather imitate then this glorious frame? O God, when we pray
that thy will may be done in Earth as it is in Heaven, though we mean chiefly
the Inhabitants of that place, yet we do not exclude the very Place of those
Blessed inhabitants from being an example of our Obedience. The motion of this
thy Heaven is perpetual; so let me ever be acting somewhat of thy will: the
motion of thy Heaven is regular, never swerving from the due points; so let

Man is a little World; my Soul is Heaven, my Body is Earth: if this Earth be
dull and fixed, yet, O God, let my Heaven (like unto thine) move perpetually,
regularly, and in a constant subjection to thine Holy Ghost.

II. Upon the sight of a Dial.
IF the Sun did not shine upon this Dial, no body would look at it: in a
cloudy day it stands like an useless post, unheeded, unregarded; but when once
those beams break forth, every passenger runs to it, and gazes on it.

O God, whiles thou hidest thy countenance from me, methinks all thy Creatures
pass by me with a willing neglect: indeed, what am I without thee? And if thou
have drawn in me some lines and notes of able endowments; yet, if I be not
actuated by thy Grace, all is in respect of use no bettter then nothing. But
when thou renewest the light of thy loving countenance upon me, Those that
honor me, I will honor: now every line and figure which it has pleased thee
to work in me, serve for useful and profitable direction.

O Lord, all the glory is thine: give thou me light, I shall give others
information; both of us shall give thee praise.

III. Upon the sight of an Eclipse of the Sun.
LIght is an ordinary and familiar Blessing; yet so dear to us, that one hours
interception of it sets all the world in a wonder. The two great Luminaries of
Heaven, as they impart light to us, so they withdraw light from each other. The
Sun darkens the full Moon, in casting the shadow of the earth upon her opposed
face; the new Moon repays this blemish to the Sun, in the

O God, if we be so afflicted with the obscuring of some piece of one of thy
created lights for an hour or two, what a confusion shall it be that thou, who
art the God of these Lights, (in comparison of whom they are mere darkness)
shall hide thy face from thy creature for ever? O thou that art the Sun of
Righteousness, if every of my sins cloud thy face, yet let not my grievous
sins eclipse thy light. Thou shinest always, though I do not see thee: but,
Oh, never suffer my sins so to darken thy visage that I cannot see thee.


HOw easily is our sight deceived? how easily does our sight deceive us? We saw
no difference betwixt this Star and the rest; the light seemed alike, both
whiles it stood, and whiles it fell: now we know it was no other then a base
slimy Meteor gilded with the Sunbeams; and now our foot can tread upon that
which ere while our eye admired. Had it been a Star, it had still and ever
shined; now the very fall argues it a false and elementary Apparition.

Thus our Charity does and must mis-lead us in our Spiritual judgments.

O God, if my Charity make me apt to be deceived by others, let me be sure not
to deceive my self. Perhaps some of these apostating Stars have thought
themselves true: let their mis-carriage make me heedfull; let the inward

V. Upon a fair Prospect.
WHat a pleasing variety is here of Towns, Rivers, Hills, Dales, Woods, Medows,
each of them striving to set forth the other, and all of them to delight the
eye? So as this is no other then a natural and real Landscap drawn by that
Almighty and skillful hand in this table of the Earth for the pleasure of our
view: no other creature besides Man is capable to

But there is a sight, O my Soul, that without all variety offers thee a truer
and fuller delight, even this Heaven above thee: All thy other Prospects end in
this. This glorious circumference bounds, and circles, and inlightens all that
thine eye can see: whether thou look upward, or forward, or about thee, there
thine eye alights, there let thy thoughts be fixed. One inch of this lightsome
Firmament has more Beauty in it then the whole face of the Earth: And yet this
is but the floor of that goodly fabric, the outward curtain of that glorious

Come down no more, O my Soul, after thou have once pitched upon this

VI. Upon the frame of a Globe casually broken.
IT is hard to say whether is the greater, Man's Art, or Impotence. He that
cannot make one spire of grass, or corn of sand, will yet be framing of
Worlds; he can imitate all things, who can make nothing. Here is a great World
in a little room, by the skill of the workman, but in less room by
mis-accident. Had he seen this, who upon the view of Plato's Book of
Commonwealth

Whatever become of the Material world, (whose decay might seem no less to
stand with Divine Providence then this Microcosme of individual man) sure I
am, the frame of the Moral world is and must be dis-joynted in the last times:
Men do and will fall from evil to worse. He that has made all times has told
us that the last shall be perilous. Happy is he that can stand upright when the
world declines, and can endeavor to repair the common ruin with a constancy
in goodness.

VII. Upon a Cloud.
WHether it were a natural Cloud wherewith our ascending Savior was
intercepted from the eyes of his Disciples upon mount Olivet, I inquire not:
this I am sure of, that the time now was when a Cloud surpassed the Sun in
glory. How did the intentive eyes of those ravished beholders envy that happy
Meteor; and since they could no more see that glorious Body, fixed themselves
upon that Celestial Chariot wherewith it was carried up? The Angels could tell
the gazing Disciples (to fetch them off from that astonishing prospect) that
this Jesus should so come again as they had seen him He went up in a Cloud, and
he shall come again in the clouds of Heaven to his last Judgment.

O Savior, I cannot look upward, but I must see the sensible monuments both of
thine Ascension and Return. Let no cloud of Worldliness or Infidelity hinder
me from following thee in thine Ascension, or from expecting thee in thy Return.

VIII. Upon the sight of a Grave dug up.
THE Earth, as it is a great devourer, so also it is a great preserver too:

We are here but laid up for custody; Balmes and Sere-cloths and Leads cannot
do so much as this lap of our common Mother; when all these are dissolved into
her dust (as being unable to keep themselves from corruption) she receives and
restores her charge. I can no more withhold my body from the earth, then the
earth can withhold it from my Maker.

O God, this is thy Cabinet or Shrine, wherein thou please to lay up the
precious relics of thy dear Saints until the Jubilee of Glory. With what


THis Gold is both the fairest and most solid of all Metals; yet is the soonest
melted with the fire: others, as they are courser, so more churlish, and hard
to be wrought upon by a dissolution.

Thus a sound and good heart is most easily melted into sorrow and fear by the
sense of Gods Judgments; whereas the carnal mind is stubborn and remorslesse.
All Metals are but earth, yet some are of finer temper then others; all hearts
are of flesh, yet some are, through the power of Grace, more capable of

O God, we are such as thou will be pleased to make us. Give me a heart that
may be sound for the truth of Grace, and melting at the terrors of thy Law; I
can be for no other then thy Sanctuary on earth, or thy Treasury of Heaven.

X. Upon the sight of a Pitcher carried.
THus those that are great and weak are carried by the ears up and down of
Flatterers and Parasites: Thus ignorant and simple hearers are carried

In all disquisitions of hidden Truths, a wise man will be led by the ears,
not carried; that implies a violence of Passion over-swaying Judgment: but in
matter of civil occurrence and unconcerning rumor, it is good to use the Ear,
not to trust to it.

XI. Upon the sight of a Tree full blossomed.


Neither is it otherwise in our Christian profession; a sudden and lavish
ostentation of Grace may fill the eye with wonder, and the mouth with talk, but
will

XII. Upon the report of a man suddenly struck dead in his Sin.
I Cannot but magnify the Justice of God, but withal I must praise his Mercy.
It were woe with any of us all, if God should take us at advantages. Alas!
which of us has not committed sins worthy of a present revenge? had we been
also surprised in those acts, where had we been? O God, it is more then The
wages of Sin is Death, and it is but Justice to pay due wages. Blessed be thy
Justice, that have made others Examples to me: blessed be thy Mercy, that have
not made me an Example unto others.

XIII. Upon the view of the Heaven and the Earth.
WHat a strange contrariety is here? The Heaven is in continual motion, and
yet there is the only place of Rest; the Earth ever stands still, and yet here
is nothing but Unrest and unquietness. Surely, the end of that Heavenly motion
is for the benefit of the Earth; and the end of all these Earthly turmoils is
our reposall in Heaven. Those that have imagined the Earth to turn about, and
the Heavens to stand still, have yet supposed that we may stand or sit still on
that whirling Globe of earth: how much more may we be perswased of our perfect
Rest above those moving Spears?

It matters, not, O God, how I am vexed here below a while, if ere long I may
repose with thee above for ever.

XIV. Upon occasion of a Red-brest coming into his Chamber.
PRetty Bird, how cheerfully do thou sit and sing, and yet know not where
thou art, nor where thou shall make thy next meal, and at night must shroud thy
self in a Bush for lodging? What a shame is it for me, that see before me so
liberal provisions of my God, and find my self set warm under my own roof, yet
am ready to droop under a distrustful and unthankful

Surely thou came not hither without a Providence: God sent thee, not so much
to delight, as to shame me; but all in a conviction of my s^llen unbelief, who
under more apparent means am less cheerful and confident. Reason and Faith
have not done so much in me, as in thee mere instinct of Nature. Want of
foresight makes thee more merry, if not more happy, here, then the foresight
of better things makes me.

O God, thy Providence is not impaired by those Powers thou have given

XV. Upon occasion of a Spider in his Window.
THere is no vice in man whereof there is not some Analogy in the brute
Creatures. As amongst us men, there are Thieves by Land, and Pirates by Sea,
that live by spoil and blood; so is there in every kind amongst them variety
of natural Sharkers, the Hawk in the Air, the Pike in the River, the Whale in
the Sea, the Lion and Tiger and Wolf in the Desert, the Arabian has spread out
his tent for a prey; how heedfully he watches for a Passenger. So soon as ever
he hears the noise of a Fly afar off, how he hastens to his door? and if that
silly heedlesse Traveller do but touch upon the verge of that unsuspected walk,
how suddenly does he seize upon the miserable booty; and after some strife,
binding him fast with those subtle cords, drags the helpless Captive after
him into his cave?

What is this but an Emblem of those Spiritual Free-booters that lie in wait
for our Souls? They are the Spiders, we the Flies: they have spread their nets
of Sin; if we be once caught, they bind us fast, and hale us into Hell.

O Lord, deliver thou my Soul from their crafty ambushes; their poison is
greater, their webs both more strong and more insensibly woven. Either teach me
to avoid Tentation, or make me to break through it by Repentance. Oh let me not
be a prey to those Fiends that lie in wait for my destruction.


SUch is my best condition in this life; If the Sun of Gods Countenance shine
upon me, I may well be content to be wet with some Rain of Affliction. How often
have I seen the Heaven overcast with Clouds and Tempest, no Sun appearing to
comfort me? yet even those gloomy and stormy seasons have I rid out patiently,
only with the help of the common light of the day; at last those beams have
broken forth happily, and cheared my Soul.

It is well for my ordinary state, if through the mists of mine own dullness and
Light is sown for the Righteous, and joy for the upright in heart.

XVII. Upon the Length of the way.
HOW far off is yonder great mountain? My very eye is weary with the

It is thus in our passage to Heaven. My weak nature is ready to faint under
the very conceit of the length and difficulty of this Journey; my eye does not
more guide then discourage me: Many steps of Grace and true Obedience shall
bring me insensibly thither. Only let me move, and hope; and God's

O Lord, give me to possess my Soul with patience, and not so much to regard
speed, as certainty. When I come to the top of thine Holy hill, all these weary
paces and deep sloughs shall either be forgotten, or contribute to my
Happiness in their remembrance.

XVIII. Upon the Rain and Waters.
WHat a sensible interchange there is in Nature betwixt union and division?
Many Vapors rising from the Sea meet together in one

So it either is, or should be, with Spiritual Gifts. O God, thou distillest
thy Graces upon us, not for our reservation, but conveyance: those manifold
Faculties thou let fall upon several men, thou would not have drenched up
where they light; but would have derived, through the channels of their
special

Take back, O Lord, those few drops thou have rained upon my Soul, and return
them into that great Ocean of the Glory of thine own Bounty, from whence they
had their beginning.

XIX. Upon the same Subject.
MAny Drops fill the Channels, and many channels swell up the Brooks, and many
brooks raise the Rivers over the banks: the Brooks are not out till the Channels
be empty, the Rivers rise not whiles the small Brooks are full; but when the
little Rivulets have once voided themselves into the main streams, then all is
overflown. Great matters arise from small beginnings: many littles make up a
large bulk. Yea what is the World but a composition of atoms? We have seen it
thus in Civil Estates: the empairing of the Commons has often been the raising
of the Great; their streams have run

Neither is it otherwise in my whether outward or Spiritual condition. O God,
thou have multiplied my drops into streams. As out of many Minutes thou have
made up my Age, so out of many Lessons thou have made up my competency of
Knowledge: thou have drained many beneficient friends to make me competently
Rich; by many holy motions thou have wrought me to some measure of Grace.

Oh, teach me wisely and moderately to enjoy thy Bounty, and to reduce thy
streams into thy drops, and thy drops into thy clouds, humbly and thankfully

XX. Upon occasion of the Lights brought in.
WHat a change there is in the room since the Light came in? yea in our selves?
All things seem to have a new form, a new life; yea, we are not the same we
were. How goodly a creature is Light, how pleasing, how agreeable to the
spirits of man? No visible thing comes so near to the resembling of the nature
of the Soul, yea of the God that made it. As contrarily,

And if the light of a poor Candle be so comfortable, which is nothing but a
little inflamed air gathered about a moistened snuff, what is the light of
the glorious Sun, the great lamp of Heaven? But much more what is the light of
that infinitely-resplendent Sun of Righteousness, who gave that light to the
Sun, that Sun to the world? And if this partial and imperfect Darkness be so
that sit in darkness and the shadow of death, shut up from the light of the
saving knowledge of thee the only true God? But how am I swallowed up with
horror, to think of the fearful condition of those damned Souls that are for
ever shut out from the presence of God, and adjudged to exquisite and
everlasting darkness? The Egyptians were weary of themselves in their three
days darkness; yet we do not find any pain that accompanied their continuing
night. What shall we say to those woeful Souls,

O thou who art the true Light, shine ever through all the blind corners of my
Soul; and from these weak glimmerings of Grace, bring me to the perfect
brightness of thy Glory.


AS well as we love the Light, we are wont to salute it at the first coming in
with winking or closed eyes: as not abiding to see that without which we cannot
see. All sudden changes (though to the better) have a kind of trouble
attending them. By how much more excellent any Object is, by so much more is
our weak sense mis-affected in the first apprehending of it.

O Lord, if thou should manifest thy glorious presence to us here, we should
be confounded in the sight of it. How wisely, how mercifully have thou

XXII. Upon the blowing of the Fire.
WE beat back the flame, not with a purpose to suppress it, but to raise it
higher, and to diffuse it more.

Those Afflictions and repulses which seem to be discouragements, are indeed
the merciful incitements of Grace. If God did mean Judgment to my Soul, he
would either withdraw the fuel, or power water upon the fire, or

O God, if thy bellows did not sometimes thus breath upon me in spiritual
repercussions, I should have just cause to suspect my estate: those few weak
gleeds of Grace that are in me, might soon go out, if they were not thus
refreshed. Still blow upon them, till they kindle; still kindle them, till they
flame up to thee.


WHat have I done to this Dog that he follows me with this angry clamor? Had I
rated him, or shaken my staff, or stooped down for a stone, I had justly drawn
on this noise, this snarling importunity. But why do I wonder to find this
unquiet disposition in a brute creature, when it is no news with the reasonable?

Have I not seen Innocence and Merit bayed at by the quarrelsome and envious
Vulgar, without any provocation save of good offices? Have I not felt (more
then their tongue) their teeth upon my heels, when I know I have deserved

O God, let me rather die then willingly incur thy displeasure; yea, then
justly offend thy godly-wise, judicious, conscionable servants: but if humor or
faction or causeless prejudice fall upon me for my faithful service to thee,
let these bawling cuts tire themselves, and tear their throats with loud and
false censures, I go on in a silent constancy; and if my ear be beaten, yet my
heart shall be free.

XXIV. Upon sight of a Cock-fight.
peace with all others, they are at war with themselves; the very sight of each

Since Man's sin brought Debate into the World, Nature is become a great
quarreller. The seeds of discord were scattered in every furrow of the
Creation, and came up in a numberless variety of Antipathies; whereof yet none
is mote odious and deplorable then those which are betwixt creatures of the
same kind. What is this but an image of that woeful hostility which is
exercised betwixt us Reasonables, who are conjoined in one common Humanity, if
not Religion? We fight with and destroy each other more then those creatrures

O thou that art the God of Peace, compose the unquiet hearts of men to an
happy and universal Concord, and at last refresh our Souls with the multitude
of Peace.

XXV. Upon his lying down to rest.
WHat a circle there is of humane actions and events? We are never without some
change, and yet that change is without any great variety: we sleep, and wake,
and wake, and sleep; and eat, and evacuate, labor in a continual interchange:
yet has the infinite Wisdom of God so ordered it, that we are not weary of
these perpetual iterations, but with no less appetite enter into our daily
courses, then if we should pass them but once in our life. When I am weary of
my days labor, how willingly

Why am I not more desirous to be unclothed of this body, that I may be clothed
upon with Immortality? What is this but my closest garment, which when it is
once put off, my Soul is at liberty and ease? Many a time have I lain down here
in desire of rest, and after some tedious changing of sides have risen
sleeplesse, disappointed, languishing. In my last uncasing, my Body shall not
fail of repose nor my Soul of joy; and in my rising up, neither of them shall
fail of Glory.

What hinders me, O God, but my Infidelity, from longing for this happy
dissolution? The world has misery and toil enough, and Heaven has more then
enough Blessedness to perfect my desires of that my last and glorious change. I
believe, Lord, help my unbelief.

XXVI. Upon the kindling of a Charcole fire.
THere are not many Creatures but do naturally affect to diffuse and enlarge
themselves: Fire and Water will neither of them rest contented with their own
bounds: those little sparks that I see in those coals, how they

It is thus morally both in good and evil; either of them dilates it self to
their Neighborhood: but especially this is so much more apparent in evil, by
how much we are more apt to take it. Let but some spark of Heretical Opinion be
let fall upon some unstable, proud, busy spirit, it catches instantly,

O God, out of an holy envy and emulation at the speed of evil, I shall labor
to enkindle others with these Heavenly flames, it shall not be my fault if they

XXVII. Upon the sight of an humble and patient Beggar.
SEE what need can do. This man, who in so lowly a fashion croucheth to that
Passenger, has in all likelihood as good a stomach as he to whom he thus
abaseth himself; and if their conditions were but altered, would look as high,
and speak as big to him, whom he now answers with a plausible and dejected
reverence.

It is thus betwixt God and us. He sees the way to tame us, is to hold us short

O God, thou only know what I would do if I had health, ease, abundance:
do thou in thy Wisdom and Mercy so proportion thy gifts and restraints, as
thou know best for my Soul. If I be not humbled enough, let me want; and so
order all my estate, that I may want any thing save thy self.

XXVIII. Upon the sight of a Crow pulling off wool from the back of a Sheep.


Meekness of spirit commonly draws on injuries. The cruelty of ill natures
usually seeks out those, not who deserve worst, but who will bear most.
Patience and mildness of Spirit is ill bestowed where it exposes a man to
wrong and insultation. Sheepish dispositions are best to others, worst to
themselves. I could be willing to take injuries; but I will not be guilty of
provoking them by lenity. For harmlesness let me go for a Sheep; but whosoever
will be tearing

XXIX. Upon the sight of two Snails.
THere is much variety even in creatures of the same kind. See there two
Snails: one has an house, the other wants it; yet both are Snailes, and it is
a question whether case is the better. That which has an house has more
shelter, but that which wants it has more freedom. The privilege of that
cover is but a burden: you see if it have but a stone to climb over, with what
stresse it draws up that beneficial load; and if the passage

Surely it is always an ease, and sometimes an happiness, to have nothing. No
man is so worthy of Envy as he that can be cheerful in want.

XXX. Upon the hearing of the street-Cries in London.
WHat a noise do these poor souls make in proclaiming their commodities? Each
tells what he has, and would have all hearers take notice of it; and yet (God
wot) it is but poor stuff that they set out with so much ostentation. I do not
hear any of the rich Merchants talk of what bags he has in his chests, or what
treasures of rich wares in his storehouse; every man rather desires to hide
his Wealth, and when he is urged, is ready to dissemble his ability.

No otherwise is it in the true Spiritual Riches: He that is full of Grace and

O God, if the confessing of thine own Gifts may glorify thee, my modesty
shall not be guilty of a niggardly unthankfulness; but for ought that concerns
my self, I cannot be too secret. Let me so hide my self, that I may not wrong
thee; and wisely distinguish betwixt thy Praise and my own.

XXXI. Upon the Flies gathering to a galled Horse.
HOw these Flies swarm to the galled part of this poor Beast; and there sit
feeding upon that worst piece of his flesh, not meddling with the other sound
parts of his skin.

Even thus do malicious tongues of Detractors: if a man have any infirmity in
his person or actions, that they will be sure to gather unto and dwell upon;
whereas his commendable parts and well-deservings are passed by without
mention, without regard. It is an envious self-love and base cruelty that
causes this ill disposition in men. In the mean time this only they have
gained; it must needs be a filthy Creature that feeds upon nothing but
Corruption.

XXXII. Upon the sight of a dark Lantern.
THere is light indeed, but so shut up as if it were not; and when the side is
most open, there is light enough to give direction to him that bears it, none
to others: He can discern another man by that light which is cast before him,
but another man cannot discern him.

Right such is reserved Knowledge; no man is the better for it but the owner.
There is no outward difference betwixt concealed skill and ignorance: and when
such hidden knowledge will look forth, it casts so sparing a light, as

O God, as all our light is from thee, the Father of lights, so make me no
niggard of that poor Rush-candle thou have lighted in my Soul: make me more
happy in giving light to others, then in receiving it into my self.

XXXIII. Upon the hearing of a Swallow in the Chimney.
HEre is music, such as it is; but how long will it hold? When but a cold
morning comes in, my guest is gone, without either warning or thanks. This
pleasant season has the least need of cheerful notes; the dead of Winter
shall want, and wish them in vain.

Thus does an ungrateful Parasite: no man is more ready to applaud and

XXXIV. Upon the sight of a Fly burning it self in the Candle.
Solomon says the Light is a pleasant thing; and so certainly it is: but there
is no true outward Light which proceeds not from Fire. The light of that fire
then is not more pleasing then the fire of that light is dangerous; and that
pleasure does not more draw on our sight then that danger forbids our approach.
How foolish is this Fly, that in a love and admiration of this light will know
no distance, but puts it self heedlesly into that flame wherein it perishes?
How many bouts it fetched, every one nearer then other, ere it made this last
venture? and now that merciless fire taking no notice of the affection of an
over-fond Client, has suddenly consumed it.

Thus do those bold and busy Spirits who will needs draw too near unto that
inaccessible light, and look into things too wonderful for them: So long do

O Lord, let me be blessed with the knowledge of what thou have revealed, let
me content my self to adore thy Divine Wisdom in what thou have not revealed;
so let me enjoy thy Light, that I may avoid thy Fire.

XXXV. Upon the ^ight of a Lark flying up.
HOw nimbly does that little Lark mount up singing toward Heaven in

It is no otherwise with the Souls of men in flying up to their Heaven: some
are hindered by those powers which would seem helps to their soaring up thither:
great Wit, deep Judgment, quick Apprehension, send men about with no small
labor for the recovery of their own encumbrance; whiles the good affections of
plain and simple souls raise them up immediately to the fruition of

XXXVI. Upon the singing of the Birds in a Spring morning.
HOw cheerfully do these little Birds chirp and sing out of the natural joy
they conceive at the approach of the Sun and entrance of the Spring; as if
their life had departed, and returned with those glorious and comfortable beams?

hides his face, it is troubled, and silently mourns away that sad Winter of
Affliction: when he returns, in his presence is the fullness of joy; no Song is
cheerful enough to welcome him.

O thou who art the God of all consolation, make my heart sensible of the sweet
comforts of thy gracious presence; and let my mouth ever show forth thy praise.

XXXVII. Upon a Coal covered with Ashes.
NOthing appears in this heap but dead Ashes: here is neither light, nor smoke,
nor heat; and yet, when I stir up these embers to the bottom, there are found
some living gleeds, which do but contain fire, and are apt to propagate it.

Many a Christians breast is like this hearth; no life of Grace appears there
for the time, either to his own sense, or to the apprehension of others;
whiles the season of Temptation lasts, all seems cold and dead: yet still at
the worst, there is a secret coal from the Altar of Heaven raked up in their
bosom,

XXXVIII. Upon the sight of a Blackmore.
LO, there is a man whose hue shows him to be far from home, his very skin
bewrays his Climate; it is night in his face, whiles it is day in ours. I am
black, but comely.

This is our color Spiritually; yet the eye of our gracious God and Savior
Moses marries a Black-more, Christ his Church. It is not for us to regard the
skin, but the Soul. If that be innocent, pure, holy, the blots of an outside
cannot set us off from the love of him who has said, Behold, thou art fair, my
Sister, my Spouse; if that be foul and black, it is not in the power of an
Angelical brightness of our hide to make us other then a loathsome eyesore
to the Almighty.

O God, make my inside lovely to thee: I know that beauty will hold; whiles
weather, casualty, age, disease may deforme the outer man, and mar both
color and feature.

XXXIX. Upon the small Stars in the Galaxie or milkie Circle in the Firmament.
WHat a clear lightsomnesse there is in yonder Circle of the Heaven above the
rest? What can we suppose the reason of it, but that the light of many smaller
Stars is united there, and causes that constant brightness? And yet those small
Stars are not discerned, whiles the splendour which arises from them is so
notably remarkable.

In this lower Heaven of ours, many a man is made conspicuous by his good

XL. Upon the sight of Boys playing.
EVery age has some peculiar contentment. Thus we did, when we were of these
years. Methinks I still remember the old fervor of my young pastimes. With what
eagerness and passion do they pursue these Childish sports? Now that there is
a handful of cherry-stones at the stake, how near is that boys heart to his
mouth, for fear of his play-fellows next cast?

We cannot but now smile to think of these poor and foolish pleasures of our
Childhood: there is no less disdain that the Regenerate man conceives of the
dearest delights of his Natural condition. He was once jolly and jocund in the
fruition of the world; Feasts and Revels and Games and dalliance were his life;
and no man could be happy without these; and scarce any man but himself: but
when once Grace has made him both good and wise, how scornfully does he look
back at these fond felicities of his Carnal estate? now he finds more

O God, thou art not capable either of bettering, or of change: let me enjoy
thee, and I shall pity the miserable fickleness of those that want thee, and
shall be sure to be constantly happy.

XLI. Upon the sight of a Spider and her Web.


Just like to this is a learned and witty Heretic; fine conceits and elegant
expressions fall from him, but his Opinions and secretly-couched Doctrines are
dangerous and mortal. Were not that man strangely foolish, who because he
likes the artificial drawing out of that web, would therefore desire to handle
or eat the Spider that made it? Such should be our madness, if our wonder at
the skill of a false Teacher should cast us into love with his Person, or
^amiliarity with his Writings. There can be no safety in our Judgment or
Affection,

XLII. Upon the sight of a Natural.
O God, why am not I thus? What has this man done, that thou have denied Wit
to him? or what have I done, that thou should give a competency of it to me?
What difference is there betwixt us but thy

Neither is it otherwise in matter of Grace. The unregenerate man is a
Spiritual fool: no man is truly wise but the Renewed. How is it that whiles I
see another man besotted with the vanity and corruption of his Nature, I have
attained to know God and the great Mystery of Salvation, to abhor those sins

If ought be not ill in me, O Lord, it is thine. Oh let thine be the Praise,
and mine the Thankfulness.

XLIII. Upon the Loadstone and the Jett.
AS there is a civil commerce amongst men for the preservation of humane
society, so there is a natural commerce which God has set amongst the other
Creatures for the maintenance of their common Being. There is scarce any thing
therefore in Nature which has not a power of attracting some other. The Fire
draws Vapors to it, the Sun draws the Fire; Plants draw moisture; the Moon
draws the Sea; all Purgative things draw their proper Humors. A Natural
instinct draws all Sensitive creatures to affect their own kind; and even in
those things which are of imperfect mixtion we see this experimented. So as the
senseless Stones and Metals are not void of this active virtue: the Loadstone
draws Iron; and the Jett, rather then nothing,

Methinks I see in these two a mere Emblem of the hearts of men and their
Spiritual attractives. The Grace of Gods Spirit, like the true Loadstone

I am thine Iron, O Lord; be thou my Loadstone. Draw thou me, and I shall run
after thee: Knit my heart unto thee, that I may fear thy Name.

XLIV. Upon hearing of Music by night.
How sweetly does this Music sound in this dead season? In the daytime

Thus it is with the glad tidings of Salvation. The Gospel never sounds so
sweet as in the Night of Per^ecution or of our own private Affliction. It is
ever the same, the difference is in our disposition to receive it.

O God, whose praise it is to give Songs in the night, make my Prosperity
conscionable, and my Crosses cheerful.

XLV. Upon the fanning of Corn.
SEE how in the fanning of this Wheat, the fullest and greatest grains lie ever
the lowest; and the lightest take up the highest place.

It is no otherwise in Morality: those which are most humble, are fullest of
Grace; and oft-times those have most conspicuity, which have the least
substance. To affect obscurity or submission, is base and suspicious: but that


HEre were a goodly field of Corn, if it were not over-laid with Weeds: I do
not like these reds and blews and yellows amongst these plain stalks and ears:
This beauty would do well elsewhere. I had rather to see a plot less fair and
more yielding.

In this Field I see a true picture of the World, wherein there is more glory
then true substance; wherein the greater part carries it from the better;
wherein the native sons of the Earth outstrip the adventitious brood of

LV. Upon the sight of Tulips and Marigolds, etc. in his Garden.
THese Flowers are true Clients of the Sun: how observant they are of his
motion and influence? At Even they shut up, as mourning for his departure
without whom they neither can nor would flourish; in the Morning

Thus does the good heart unto God. When thou turnedst away thy face I was
troubled, says the man after Gods own heart. In thy presence is life, yea the
fullness of joy. Thus does the Carnal heart to the world; when that withdraws
his favor he is dejected, and revives with a smile. All is in our choice;
whatsoever is our Sun will thus carry us.

O God, be thou to me such as thou art in thy self: thou shall be merciful in
drawing me; I shall be happy in following thee.


WHat an harsh sound does this Bell make in every ea^e? The metal is good
enough; it is the rift that makes it so unpleasingly jarring.

How too like is this Bell to a scandalous and ill-lived Teacher? His Calling
is honorable, his noise is heard far enough; but the flaw which is noted in
his Life marres his Doctrine, and offends those ears which else would take
pleasure in his teaching. It is possible that such a one, even by that
discordous noise, may ring in others into the triumphant Church of Heaven; but
there is no remedy for himself but the fire, whether for his reforming, or

LVII. Upon the sight of a Blind man.
HOW much am I bound to God that has given me eyes to see this man's want of
eyes? With what suspicion and fear he walks? How does his hand and staff
examine his way? With what jealousy does he receive every morsel, every
draught; and yet meets with many a post, and stumbles at many a stone, and
swallows many a fly? To him the world is as if it were not, or as if it were
all rubs and snares and downfalls; and if any man

Many a one is thus Spiritually blind; and because he is so, discerns it not;
and not discerning, complains not of so woeful a condition. The god of this
world has blinded the eyes of the Children of disobedience; they walk on in
the ways of death, and yield themselves over to the guidance of him who seeks
for nothing but their precipitation into Hell. It is an addition to the misery
of

Whatever become of these outward Senses, which are common to me with the
meanest and most despicable creatures, O Lord, give me not over to that
Spiritual darkness, which is incident to none but those that live without thee,
and must perish eternally, because they want thee.

LVIII. Upon a Beech-tree full of Nuts.
HOW is this Tree overladen with mast this year? It was not so the last;

So have I seen pregnant Wits (not discreetly governed) overspend themselves in
some one masterpiece so lavishly, that they have proved either barren, or poor
and flat in all other Subjects. True Wisdom as it serves to gather due sap
both for nourishment and fructification, so it guides the seasonable and
moderate bestowing of it in such manner, as that one season may not be a
glutton whiles others famish. I would be glad to attain to that measure and
temper, that upon all occasions I might always have enough, never too much.

LIX. Upon the sight of a piece of Money under the Water.
I Should not wish ill to a Covetous man, if I should wish all his Coin in the
bottom of the River. No pavement could so well become that stream; no sight
could better fit his greedy desires: for there every piece would seem double,
every teston would appear a shilling, every Crown an Angel. It is the nature of
that Element to greaten appearing quantities: whiles we look through the air
upon that solid body, it can make no other representations.

Neither is it otherwise in Spiritual Eyes and Objects. If we look with Carnal

Let me labor for that power and staiedness of Judgment, that neither my
Senses may deceive my Mind, nor the Object may delude my Sense.

LX. Upon the first rumor of the Earthquake at Lime, wherein a Wood was
swallowed up with the fall of two Hills.
GOod Lord, how do we know when we are sure? If there were Man or Beast in that
Wood, they seemed as safe as we now are; they had nothing but Heaven above
them, nothing but firm Earth below them: and yet in what a dreadful pitfall
were they instantly taken? There is no fence for Gods hand. A man would as soon
have feared that Heaven would fall upon

Certainly the God that did this, would have the use of it reach further then
the noise: this he did, to show us what he could, what he might do. If our
hearts do not quake and rend at the acknowledgment of his infinite Power, and
fear of his terrible Judgments, as well as that Earth did, we must exspect to
be made warnings, that would take none.


AT how easy a rate do these Creatures live that are fed with rest? So the
Bear and the Hedgehog (they say) spend their whole winter in Sleep, and rise
up fatter then they lay down. How often have I envied the thriving drowsiness of
these Beasts, when the toil of thoughts has bereaved me of but one hours
sleep, and left me languishing to a new task? And yet, when I have well
digested the comparison of both these conditions, I must needs say, I had
rather wast with work then batten with ease; and would rather choose a life
profitably painful, then uselesly dull and delicate. I cannot tell whether I

For me, let me rather complain of a Mind that will not let me be idle, then
of a Body that will not let me work.

LXII. Upon Bees fighting.
WHat a pity it is to see these profitable, industrious Creatures fall so
furiously upon each other, and thus ^^ing and kill each other in the very mouth
of the Hive? I could like well to see the Bees do this

There is no more perfect resemblance of a Commonwealth, whether Civil or
Sacred, then in an Hive. The Bees are painful and honest Compatriots,
laboring to bring Wax and Honey to the maintenance of the public State; the
Wasps and Droans are unprofitable and harmfull Hangbyes, which live upon the
spoil of others labors; whether as common Barretors, or strong Thieves, or
bold Parasites, they do nothing but rob their Neighbors. It is an happy

O God, who art at once the Lord of Hosts and Prince of Peace, give us War with
Spiritual wickedness, and Peace with our Brethren.


SEE you that narrow-mouthed Glass which is set near to the Hive? mark how
busily the Wasps resort to it, being drawn thither by the smell of that sweet
liquor wherewith it is baited; see how eagerly they creep into the mouth of it,
and fall down suddenly from that slippery steepness into that watery trap, from
which they can never rise; there, after some vain labor

Idle and ill-disposed persons are drawn away with every Temptation, they have
both leisure and will to entertain every sweet allurement to sin, and wantonly
prosecute their own wicked Lusts till they fall into irrecoverable damnation:
Whereas the diligent and laborious Christian, that follows hard and
conscionably the works of an honest Calling, is free from the danger of these
deadly inticements, and lays up honey of comfort against the Winter of evil.
Happy is that man who can see and enjoy the success of his labor: but however
this

LXIV. Upon a Spring in the wild Forest.
LO here the true pattern of Bounty. What clear crystal streams are here, and
how liberally do they gush forth and hasten down with a pleasing murmur into
the Valley? Yet you see neither Man nor Beast that takes part of that wholesome
and pure water. It is enough that those may dip who will; the refusal of
others does no whit abate of this proffered

Thus bountiful Housekeepers hold on their set ordinary provision, whether
they have Guests or no: Thus conscionable Preachers power out the living Waters
of wholesome Doctrine, whether their Hearers partake of those blessed means of
Salvation, or neglect their holy Endeavors. Let it be our comfort, that we
have been no niggards of these celestial streams; let the world give an account
of the improvement.

LXV. Upon the sight of an Owl in the twilight.
WHat a strange Melancholic life does this creature lead; to hide her head all
the day long in an Ivy-bush, and at night, when all other Birds are at rest, to
fly abroad and vent her harsh notes? I know not why the Ancients have sacred
this Bird to Wisdom, except it be for her safe closeness and singular
perspicacity; that when other domestical and airy creatures are blind, she
only has inward light to discern the least objects for her own advantage.

Surely thus much wit they have taught us in her, That he is the wisest man
that would have least to do with the multitude; That no life is so safe as the
obscure; That retiredness, if it have less comfort, yet less danger and
vexation;

Had this Fowl come forth in the daytime, how had all the little Birds flocked
wondering about her, to see her uncouth visage, to hear her untuned notes? She
likes her estate never the worse, but pleases her self in her own quiet
reservednesse.

It is not for a wise man to be much affected with the censures of the rude and
unskilful Vulgar; but to hold fast unto his own well-chosen and well-fixed
resolutions. Every fool knows what is wont to be done; but what is best to be


HOW benumbed and (for the time) senseless is this Arm of mine become, only
with too long leaning upon it? Whiles I used it to other services, it failed me
not; now that I have rested upon it, I find cause to complain.

It is no trusting to an arm of flesh; on whatsoever occasion we put our
confidence therein, this reliance will be sure to end in pain and
disappointment.

O God, thine arm is strong and mighty; all thy Creatures rest themselves

LXVII. Upon the Sparks flying upward.
IT is a feeling comparison (that of Job) of man born to labor, as the sparks
to fly upward. That motion of theirs is no other then natural: neither is it
otherwise for man to labor; his Mind is created active, and apt to some or
other Ratiocination, his Joints all stirring, his Nerves made for helps of
moving, and his occasions of living call him forth to action. So as an idle man

Out of my Obedience to thee, O God, I desire ever to be employed. I shall
never have comfort in my toil, if it be rather a purveyance for my self, then a

LXVIII. Upon the sight of a Raven.
I Cannot see that Bird but I must needs think of Eliah, and wonder no less at
the Miracle of his Faith then of his Provision. It was a strong belief that
carried him into a desolate retiredness to exspect food from Ravens. This fowl,
we know, is ravenous; all is too little that he can forage for himself; and the
Prophets Reason must needs suggest to him, that in a dry barren Desert bread
and flesh must be great dainties: yet he goes aside to exspect victuals from
bring him bread and flesh in the Morning, and bread and flesh in the Evening.
Not one of those hungry Ravens could swallow one morsel of those viands which
were sent by them to a better mouth. The River of Cherith sooner failed him,
then the tender of their service. No doubt, Eliah's stomach was often up before
that his incurious diet came: when exspecting from the mouth of his Cave, out
of

O God, how infinite is thy Providence, Wisdom, Power? We creatures are not
what we are, but what thou will have us; when thy turn is to be served, we have
none of our own. Give me but Faith, and do what thou will.

LXIX. Upon a Worm.
IT was an homely expression which God makes of the state of his Church, Fear
not, thou Worm Jacob. Every foot is ready to tread on this despised creature.
Whiles it kept it self in that cold obscure Cell of the Earth (wherein it was
hidden) it lay safe, because it was secret; but now that it has put it self
forth of that close Cave, and has presented it self to the light of the Sun,
to the eye of Passengers, how is it vexed with the scorching beams, and wrings
up and down in an helpless perplexity, not finding where to shroud it self?
how obnoxious is it to the fowls of the air, to the feet of men and

He that made this creature such, and calls his Church so, well knew the
answerableness of their condition. How does the world overlook and contemn that
little flock whose best guard has ever been secrecy? And if ever that
despicable number have dared to show it self, how has it been scorched, and
trampled upon, and entertained with all variety of Persecution?

O Savior, thy Spouse fares no otherwise then thy self: to match her fully,
thou have said of thy self, I am a Worm, and no man. Such thou were in thine
humbled estate here on earth; such thou would be. But as it is a true word,
that he who made the Angels in Heaven made also the worms on earth; so it

LXX. Upon the putting on of his Clothes.
WHat a poor thing were Man if he were not beholden to other creatures? The
Earth affords him flax for his linen, bread for his belly, the Beasts his
ordinary Clothes, the Silkworm his bravery, the

O God, the more we are sensible of our own indigence, the more let us wonder
at thine All Sufficiency in thy self; and long for that happy condition wherein
thou (which art all perfection) shall be all in all to us.

LXXI. Upon the sight of a great Library.
WHat a world of Wit is here packed up together? I know not whether this sight
does more dismay or comfort me. It dismaies me, to think that here is so much
that I cannot know; it comforts me, to think that this variety yields so good
helps to know what I should. There is no truer word then that of Solomon, There
is no end of making many Books: this sight verifies it; there is no end;
indeed, it were pity there should. God has given to man a busy Soul; the
agitation whereof cannot but through time and experience work out many hidden
Truths: to suppress these would be no

No Law binds us to read all; but the more we can take in and digest, the
better-liking must the Minds needs be.

Blessed be God that has set up so many clear Lamps in his Church: now none
but the wilfully blind can plead darkness. And blessed be the memory of those
his faithful Servants that have left their blood, their spirits, their

LXXII. Upon the red Cross on a Door.
OH sign fearfully significant! This sickness is a Cross indeed, and that a
bloody one; both the form and color import Death. The Israelites doors whose
lintels were besprinkled with blood were passed over by the destroying Angel;
here the destroying Angel has smitten, and has left this mark of his deadly
blow. We are wont to fight cheerfully under this Ensign

O God, there thou fightest for us, here against us; under that we have fought
for thee, but under this (because our sins have fought against thee) we are
fought against by thy Judgments. Yet, Lord, it is thy Cross, though an heavy
one: It is ours by merit, thine by imposition. O Lord, sanctify thine
Affliction, and remove thy Vengeance.

LXXIII. Upon the change of Weather.
I Know not whether it be worse that the Heavens look upon us always with

Neither is it otherwise in the state of the Mind: If our thoughts should be
always volatile, changing, inconstant, we should never attain to any good
habit of the Soul, whether in matter of Judgment or Disposition; but if they
should be always fixed, we should run into the danger of some desperate
extremity. To be ever thinking, would make us mad; to be ever thinking of our
Crosses or Sins, would make us heartlesly dejected; to be ever thinking of
Pleasures

O God, howsoever these Variations be necessary for my Spiritual condition, let
me have no weather but Sunshine from thee. Do thou lift up the light of thy
countenance upon me, and stablish me ever with thy free spirit.

LXXIV. Upon the sight of a Marriage.
right in himself over to his feebler consort; so as now her weakness is his,

It is thus, O Savior, with thee and thy Church: We are not our own, but
thine, who have married us to thy self in truth and righteousness. What
powers, what indowments have we but from and in thee? And as our holy boldness
dares interesse our selves in thy Graces, so thy wonderfully-compassionate
mercy vouchsafes to interesse thy self in our Infirmities: thy poor Church
suffers on Earth, thou feel in Heaven; and, as complaining of our stripes,
can say, Why persecutest thou me? Thou again art not so thine own, as that

O gracious Savior, as thou can not but love and cherish this poor and
unworthy Soul of mine which thou have mercifully espoused to thy self; so give
me Grace to honor and obey thee, and forsaking all the base and sinful
rivalty of the World, to hold me only unto thee whiles I live here, that I may
perfectly enjoy thee hereafter.

LXXV. Upon the sight of a Snake.
I Know not what horror we find in our selves at the fight of a Serpent.
Other creatures are more loathsome, and some no less deadly then it; yet there
is none at which our blood rises so much as at this. Whence should this be,
but out of an instinct of our old enmity? We were stung in Paradise, and cannot
but feel it. But here is our weakness; it was not the body of the Serpent that
could have hurt us without the suggestion of sin, and yet we love the sin
whiles we hate the Serpent. Every day are we wounded with the sting of that old
Serpent, and complain not; and so much more deadly is that Israelites found
themselves stung by those fiery Serpents in the Desert; and the sense of their
pain sent them to seek for Cure. The World is our Desert; and as the sting of
Death is Sin, so the sting of Sin is Death. I do not more wish to find ease
then pain; if I complain enough, I cannot fail of cure.

O thou which art the true brazen Serpent, lifted up in this wilderness, raise
up mine eyes to thee, and fasten them upon thee; thy Mercy shall make my Soul
whole, my wound sovereign.

LXXVI. Upon the Ruins of an Abbey.
IT is not so easy to say what it was that built up these walls, as what it
was that pulled them down; even the wickedness of the Possessours. Every stone
has a tongue to accuse the Superstition, Hypocrisy, Idleness, Luxury of the
late owners. Methinks I see it written all along in Capital letters upon these
heaps, A fruitful Land makes he barren for the iniquity of them that dwell
therein. Perhaps there wanted not some Sacrilege in the Demolishers. In all
the carriage of these businesses, there was a just hand, that knew how to make
an

It is not for us to be high-minded, but to fear. No Roof is so high, no Wall
so strong, as that Sin cannot level it with the Dust. Were any pile so close

LXXVII. Upon the discharging of a Piece.
GOod Lord, how witty men are to kill one another? What fine devices the
Destroier? It is easy to take

O God, there are enough that bend their thoughts to undo what thou have made;
enable thou me to bestow my endeavors in reprieving or rescuing that which
might otherwise perish. O thou who art our common Savior, make thou me both
ambitious and able to help to save some other besides my self.


HOw doleful and heavy is this summons of Death? This sound is not for our
ears, but for our hearts; it calls us not only to our Prayers, but to our
preparation: to our prayers for the departing Soul; to our preparation for our
own departing. We have never so much need of Prayers as in our last Combat;
then is our great Adversary most eager, then are we the weakest, then Nature is
so over-laboured that it gives us not leisure to make use of gracious motions.
There is no preparation so necessary ^s for this Conf^ict: all our Life is
little enough to make ready for our last hour. What am I

O thou that art the God of comfort, help thy poor Servant that is now
struggling with his last enemy. His sad Friends stand gazing upon him, and
weeping over him, but they cannot succor him; needs must they leave him to do
this great work alone: none but thou, to whom belong the issues of death, can
relieve his distressed and over-matched Soul. And for me, let no man die
without me; as I die daily, so teach me to die once; acquaint me beforehand Oh
teach me so to number my days, that I may apply my heart to true wisdom.

LXXIX. Upon a Defamation dispersed.
WEre I the first or the best that ever was slandered, perhaps it would be
somewhat difficult to command my self patience. Grief is wont to be abated
either by partners or precedents; the want whereof dejects us beyond measure,
as men singled out for patterns of misery. Now whiles I find this the common
condition of all that ever have been reputed virtuous, why am I troubled with
the whisperings of false tongues? O God, Si Christus Judam passus est, cur non
ego patior Birrhichioncm? Dial. de S. Martino, Sever. Sulp^
the Devil slandered thee in Paradise; O Savior, men slandered thee on earth
more then men or Devils can reproach me. Thou art the best, as thou

O thou glorious pattern of reproached Innocence, if I may not die for thee,
yet let me thus bleed with thee.

LXXX. Upon a ring of Bells.
WHiles every Bell keeps due time and order, what a sweet and harmonious sound
they make? all the neighbor Villages are cheared

It is thus in Church and Commonwealth: when every one knows and keeps their
due ranks, there is a melodious consort of Peace and contentment; but when
distances and proportions of respects are not mutually observed, when either
States or persons will be clashing with each other, the discord is grievous and
extremely prejudicial: such confusion either notifieth a fire

For me, I do so love the Peace of the Church and State, that I cannot but with
the charitable Apostle say, Would to God they were cut off that trouble them;
and shall ever wish either no jarres, or no clappers.

LXXXI. Upon the sight of a full Table at a Feast.
WHat great Variety is here of Flesh, of Fish, of both, of either; as if both
Nature and Art did strive to pamper us? Yet methinks enough is better then all
this: Excess is but a burden, as to the Provider, so to the Guest. It pities
and grieves me to think what toil, what charge has gone to the gathering of
all these Dainties together; what pain so many poor creatures have been put to
in dying for a needless Sacrifice to the Belly; what a Penance must be done by
every Accumbent, in sitting out the passage through all these dishes; what a
task the Stomach must be put to in the concoction of so many mixtures. I am not
so austerely scrupulous as to deny the lawfulness of these abundant provisions
upon just occasions: I find my Savior himself

Might I have my option, O God, give me rather a little with peace and Give me
the Bread of sufficiency. Let me have no perpetual Feast but a good
Conscience; and from these great preparations (for the health both of Soul and
Body) let me rise rather hungry then surcharged.

LXXXII. Upon the hearing of a Lute well played on.
THere may be (for ought we know) infinite inventions of Art, the possibility

It is no marvel if we cannot fore-imagine what kind and means of Harmony God
will have used by his Saints and Angels in Heaven, when these poor matters seem
so strange to our conceits, which yet our very Senses are convinced of.

O God, thou know infinite ways to glorify thy self by thy Creatures,

LXXXIII. Upon the sight and noise of a Peacock.
I See there are many kinds of Hypocrites: of all Birds this makes the fairest
show, and the worst noise; so as this is an Hypocrite to the Eye. There are
others, as the Blackbird, that looks foul and sooty, but sings well: this is
an Hypocrite to the Ear. There are others that please us well both in

No outward Beauty can make the Hypocrite other then odious.

For me, let my Profession agree with my words, my words with my actions, my
actions with my heart; and let all of them be approved of the God of Truth.


I Know not whether I should more admire the Wisdom or the Mercy of God in his
proceedings with Men. Had not this man sinned thus notoriously, he h^d never
been thus happy: whiles his courses were fair and civil, yet he was graceless;
now his miscarriage has drawn him into a just Affliction, his Affliction has
humbled him. God has taken this advantage of his Humiliation for his
Conversion. Had not one foot slipped into the mouth of Hell, he had never been in
this forwardness to Heaven.



O God, it is no thank to our selves or to our sins that we are bettered with
evil; the Work is thine, let thine be the Glory.

LXXXV. Upon the sight of a Lilly.
THis must needs be a goodly Flower that our Savior has singled out to
compare with Solomon; and that not in his ordinary dress, but in all his
Royalty. Surely the earth had never so glorious a King as he, Nature yielded
nothing that might set forth Royal magnificence that he wanted; yet he that
made both Solomon and this Flower says, that Solomon in all his Royalty was
not clad like it.

What a poor thing is this earthly Bravery that is so easily overmatched? How
ill judges are we of outward Beauties, that contemn these goodly Plants All
flesh is Grass, and all the glory of man as the flower of Grass. As we cannot
be so brave, so we cannot be more permanent.

O God, let it be my ambition to walk with thee hereafter in white. Could I put
on a robe of Stars here, with proud Herod, that glittering garment could not
keep me from Lice or Worms. Might I sit on a Throne of Gold within an house of
Ivory, I see I should not compare with this Flower; I might be as transitory, I
should not be so beautiful. What matters it whether I go for a Flower or a
Weed here? whethersoever, I must wither. Oh thou which art Solomon, do thou
cloth me with thy perfect Righteousness, so shall I flourish for ever in the
Courts of the House of my God.

LXXXVI. Upon the sight of a Coffin stuck with Flowers.
TOO fair appearance is never free from just suspicion. Whiles here was nothing
but mere Wood, no Flower was to be seen here; now that this Wood is lined with
an unsavory Corpse, it is adorned with this sweet variety. The Fur whereof
that Coffin is made, yields a natural redolence alone; now that it is stuffed
thus noisomely, all helps are too little to

The case is the same Spiritually; an over-glorious outside of Profession
implies some inward filthiness that would fain escape notice. Our uncomely
parts have more comeliness put on. Too much Ornament imports extreme deformity.

For me, let my show be moderate, so shall I neither deceive applause, nor
merit too deep censure.

LXXXVII. Upon the view of the World.
IT is a good thing to see this material World; but it is a better thing to
think of the intelligible World. This thought is the sight of the Soul, whereby
it discerns things like it self, Spiritual and Immortal; which are so much
beyond the worth of these sensible Objects, as a Spirit is beyond a Body, a
pure substance beyond a corruptible, an infinite God above a finite Creature.

O God, how great a word is that which the Psalmist says of thee, that thou
abasest thy self to behold the things both in Heaven and Earth? It is our glory
to look up even to the meanest piece of Heaven; it is an abasement to thine


HOW small things may annoy the greatest? Even a Mouse troubles an Elephant, a
Gnat a Lion, a very Flea may disquiet a Giant. What weapon can be nearer to
nothing then the sting of this Wasp? Yet what a painful wound has it given
me? that scarce-visible point how it envenomes, and ranckles, and swells up the
flesh? The tenderness of the part adds much to the grief.

And if I be thus vexed with the touch of an angry File, Lord, how shall I be
able to endure the sting of a tormenting Conscience? As that part is both

Thus pained, wherein do I find ease but in laying honey to the part infected?
That Medicine only abates the anguish. How near has Nature placed the remedy
to the offense?

Whenever my Heart is stung with the remorse for sin, only thy sweet and
precious Merits, O blessed Savior, can mitigate and heal the wound: they have
virtue to cure me, give me Grace to apply them; that sovereign receipt It is
good for me that I was thus afflicted.

LXXXIX. Upon the Arraignment of a Felon.
WIth what terror does this Malefactor stand at that Bar? his Hand trembles,
whiles it is lift up for his trial; his very Lips quake, whiles he says, Not
guilty; his Countenance condemns him before the Judge; and his fear is ready to
execute him before his Hangman. Yet this Judge is but a weak man, that must
soon after die himself; that Sentence

O God, with what horror shall the guilty Soul stand before thy dreadful
Tribunal in the day of the great Assizes of the World? whiles there is the
presence of an Infinite Majesty to daunt him, a fierce and clamorous Conscience
to give in evidence against him, Legions of ugly and terrible Devils waiting to
seize upon him, a gulf of unquenchable Fire ready to receive him; whiles the
Glory of the Judge is no less confounding then the Cruelty of the Tormenters;
where the Sentence is unavoidable, and the Execution everlasting.

XC. Upon the Crowing of a Cock.
How harshly did this note sound in the ear of Peter, yea pierced his very
heart? Many a time had he heard this Bird, and was no whit moved with the
noise; now there was a Bird in his bosom that crowed louder then this, whose
shrill accent conjoined with this astonished the guilty Disciple. The weary
Labourer when he is awakened from his sweet sleep by this natural Clock of the
Household, is not so angry at this troublesome Bird, nor so vexed at the hearing
of that unseasonable sound, as Peter was when this Fowl awakened his sleeping
Conscience, and called him to a timely repentance. This Cock Peter's ear.

But, O Savior, could thou find leisure, when thou stoodst at the Bar of
that unjust and cruel Judgment, amidst all that bloody rabble of Enemies, in
the sense of all their fury, and the exspectation of thine own Death, to listen
unto this Monitor of Peter's Repentance; and upon the hearing of it, to cast
back thine eyes upon thy Denying, Cursing, Abjuring Disciple? O Mercy without

O God, thou art still equally merciful. Every Elect Soul is no less dear
unto thee. Let the sound of thy faithful Monitors smite my ears, and let the
beams of thy merciful eyes wound my heart, so as I may go forth and weep
bitterly.

XCI. Upon the variety of Thoughts.
WHen I bethink my self how Eternity depends upon this moment of

O thou who art one and infinite, draw in my heart from all these straggling

XCII. Upon the sight of an Harlot carted.
WIth what noise and tumult and zeal of solemn Justice is this sin punished?
The Streets are not more full of beholders then clamors:

David's Adultery with Basins, but as for his numbering of the people we should
have past it over as venial; the wise Justice of the Almighty found more
wickedness in this which we should scarce have accused. Doubtless there is
more mischief in a secret Infidelity, which the World either cannot know or
cares not to censure, then in the foulest Adultery. Public sins have more
Shame, private may have more Guilt.



XCIII. Upon the smell of a Rose.
SMelling is one of the meanest and least useful of the Senses; yet there is
none of the Five that receives or gives so exquisite a contentment as it.
Methinks there is no earthly thing that yields so perfect a pleasure to any
Sense, as the odor of the first Rose does to the Sent.



XCIV. Upon a cancelled Bond.


No otherwise is it with the severe Law of my Creator: Out of Christ it stands
in full force, and binds me over either to perfect Obedience, which I cannot
possibly perform, or to exquisite torment and eternal Death, which I am never
able to endure; but now that my Savior has fastened it cancelled to his Cross
(in respect of the rigor and malediction of it) I look upon it as the monument
of my past danger and bondage; I know by it how much was

O Savior, take thou Glory, and give me Peace.

XCV. Upon the report of a great loss by Sea.
THe Earth and the Water are both of them great givers, and both great takers:
As they give matter and sustentation to all Sublunary creatures, so they take
all back again, insatiably devouring at last the fruits of it never gave: it
yields us no precious Metalls, and yet in an instant fetches away

O God, how venturous we are where we have reason to distrust, how
incredulously fearful where we have cause to be confident? Who ever relied
upon thy gracious Providence and sure Promises, O Lord, and has miscarried?
Yet here we pull in our Faith, and make excuses for our Diffidence. And if
Peter have tried those waves to be no other then solid pavement under his feet,

O Lord, teach me to doubt, where I am sure to find nothing but uncertainty;
and to be assuredly confident, where there can be no possibility of any cause
of doubting.

XCVI. Upon sight of a bright Sky full of Stars.
I Cannot blame Empedocles if he professed a desire to live upon earth only
that he might behold the face of the Heavens; surely (if there were no other)

But the employment of a Christian is far more noble and excellent; Heaven is
open to him, and he can look beyond the veil, and see further above those Stars
then it is thither, and there discern those Glories that may answer so rich a
pavement. Upon the clear sight whereof, I cannot but wonder if the chosen
Vessel desired to leave the earth in so happy an exchange.

O God, I bless thine Infiniteness for what I see with these bodily eyes: but
if thou shall but draw the curtain, and let me by the eye of Faith see the
inside

XCVII. Upon the rumors of Wars.
GOod Lord, what a shambles is Christendom become of late? How are men killed
like flies, and blood poured out like water? Surely the cruelty and ambition of
the Great have an heavy reckoning to make for so many thousand Souls. I condemn
not just Arms; those are as necessary as the unjust are hateful; even Michael
and his Angels fight, and the style of God is the Lord of Hoasts. But woe be to
the man by whom the offense comes. Usurpation of others Rights, violation of
Oaths and Contracts, and lastly erroneous Zeal, are guilty of all these public
Murders. Private men's injuries are washed off with tears, but wrongs done to
Princes and public States are hardly wiped off but with blood. Doubtless that
fearful Comet did not more certainly portend these Wars, then these Wars
presage the approach of the end of the World. The earth was never without some
broils since it was peopled but with three men; but so universal a combustion
was never in the Christian world since it was.

O Savior, what can I think of this, but that as thou would have a general


IT was upon great reason that the Apostle charges us not to be children in
Understanding. What fools we all once are? Even at first we cry and smile we
know not wherefore; we have not wit enough to make signs what hurts us, or
where we complain; we can wry the mouth, but not seek the breast; and if we
want help, we can only lament, and sprawl, and die. After, when some months
have taught us to distinguish a little betwixt things and persons, we cry for
every toy, even that which may most hurt us; and when

But again, it was upon no less reason that the Apostle charges us to be Those
little Innocents bear no grudge, they are sooner pleased then angry; and if any
man have wronged them, let them but have given a stroke unto the Nurse to beat
the offender, it is enough; at the same instant they put forth their hand for
reconcilement, and offer themselves unto those arms that trespassed. And when
they are most froward, they are stilled with a pleasant Song. The old word is,
that An old man is twice a child: but I say, happy is he that is thus a child
always. It is a great imperfection to want Knowledge; but, of the two, it is
better to be a child in Understanding then a man in Maliciousness.


IT was my own fault, if I looked not for this: All things must undergo their
changes. I have enjoyed many fair days; there was no reason I should not at
last make account of clouds and storms. Could I have done well, without any
mixtures of sin, I might have hoped for entire Health: But since I have
interspersed my Obedience with many sinful failings and enormities, why do I
think much to interchange Health with Sickness? What I now feel I know; I am
not worthy to know what I must feel. As my times, so my measures are in the
hands of a wise and good God. My comfort is, he that sends

It is the Lord, let him do whatsoever he will.

C. Upon the challenge of a Promise.
IT is true, an Honest man's word must be his master; when I have promised, I am
indebted, and debts may be claimed, must be paid: but yet there is a great
deal of difference in our engagements; some things we promise because they are
due, some things are only due because they are promised. These latter, which
are but the mere engagements of Courtesy, cannot so absolutely bind us, that
notwithstanding any intervention of unworthiness or misbehaviour in the person
exspectant, we are tied to make our word good, though to the cutting of our own
throats. All favorable promises presuppose a capacity

O God, thy Title is the God of Truth, thou can no more cease to be faithful
then to be. How often have thou promised, that no good thing shall be wanting to
thine? and yet we know thy dearest children have complained of want. Is thy
word therefore challengeable? Far, far be this wicked presumption from our
thoughts. No: These thy promises of outward Favors are never but with a
subintelligence of a condition of our capableness, of our expedience. Thou
see that Plenty or Ease would be our bane; thy Love forbears to satisfy us

CI. Upon the sight of Flies.
WHen I look upon these Flies and gnats and worms, I have reason to think, What
am I to my infinite Creator more then these? And if

I will thank my God for what I am, for what I have; and never quarrel with
him for what I want.

CII. Upon the sight of a fantastical Zelot.
IT is not the intent of Grace to mould our Bodies anew, but to make use of
them as it finds us. The Disposition of men much follows the temper of their
bodily Humors. This mixture of Humors wrought upon by Grace, causes that
strange variety which we see in professions pretendedly Religious. When Grace
lights upon a sad Melancholic Spirit, nothing is affected but Sullenness and
extreme Mortification, and dislike even of lawful Freedom; nothing but
Positions and Practices of severe Austerity: when contrarily upon the
Cheerful and lively, all draws toward Liberty and Joy; those thoughts

It is the greatest improvement of Christian wisdom to distinguish (in all
professions) betwixt Grace and Humor; to give God his own Glory, and men their
own Infirmities.


THE wise Providence of God has fitted men with spirits answerable to their
condition. If mean men should bear the minds of great Lords, no servile works
would be done; all would be Commanders, and none could live: If contrarily
Great persons had the low spirits of drudges, there could be no order, no
obedience; because there should be none to command. Now out of this discord of
dispositions God has contrived an excellent harmony of Government and Peace:
since the use which each sort must needs have

As Inferiors then must bless God for the Graces and Authority of their
betters; so must Superiors no less bless him for the Humility and
Serviceablenesse of the meaner; and those which are of the mid rank must bless
him for both.

CIV. Upon a pair of Spectacles.


Many such glasses my Soul has and uses. I look through the glass of the
Creatures at the power and wisdom of their Maker: I look through the glass of
the Scriptures at the great Mystery of Redemption, and the glory of an Heavenly
inheritance: I look through Gods Favors at his infinite Mercy, through his
Judgments at his incomprehensible Justice.

But as these Spectacles of mine presuppose a faculty in the Eye, and cannot
give me Sight when I want it, but only clear that sight which I have; no more
see as I am seen.

CV. Upon Moats in the Sun.


Even so light and busy spirits are in continual agitation to little purpose,
whiles great deep wits sit still, and stir not but upon extreme occasions.

Were the motion of these little Atoms as useful as it is restless, I had
rather be a Moat then a Mountain.

CVI. Upon the sight of a Bladder.


It is no otherwise in Ages and Dispositions: inform the Child in Precepts of
Learning and Virtue whiles years make him capable, how pliably he yields, how
happily is he replenished with Knowledge and Goodness? let him alone till time
and ill example have hardened him, till he be settled in an Habit of

CVII. Upon a man Sleeping.
I Do not more wonder at any man's Art then at his who professes to think of
nothing, to do nothing. And I do not a little marvel at that man who says he
can sleep without a Dream: for the Mind of man is a restless thing: and though
it give the Body leave to repose it self, as knowing it is a mortal and earthly
piece; yet it self being a Spirit, and therefore active and

Since my Mind will needs be ever working, it shall be my care that it may

CVIII. Upon the sight of a Deaths-head.
I Wonder at the practice of the ancient both Greeks and Romans, whose use was
to bring up a Deaths-head in the mids of their Feasts, on purpose to stir up
their Guests to drink harder and to frolic more: the sight whereof, one would
think, should have rather abated their courage, and have tempered their jollity.

But however it was with them who believed there was nothing after death,

For me, methinks this Head speaks no other language then this, Lose no time;
thou art dying: Do thy best; thou may do good but a while, and shall fare
well for ever.

CIX. Upon the sight of a Left Handed man.
IT is both an old and easy observation, that however the Senses are alike
strong and active on the right side and on the left, yet that the lims on the
right side are stronger then those of the left, because they are more exercised
then the other: upon which self-same reason it must follow, that a Left Handed
man has more strength in his left Arm then in his right.

Neither is it otherwise in the Soul: our Intellectual parts grow vigorous
with employment, and languish with disuse. I have known excellent Preachers and
pregnant Disputants that have lost these Faculties with lack of action; and
others but meanly qualified with Natural gifts, that have attained to a
laudable measure of abilities by improvement of their little.



CX. Upon the sight of an old unthatched Cottage.
THere cannot be a truer Emblem of crazie Old age: Moldred and clay Walls, a
thin, uncovered Roof, bending Studds, dark and broken Windows; in short, an
House ready to fall on the head of the indweller.

The best Body is but a Cottage: if newer and better timbered, yet such as

One of the chief cares of men is to dwell well. Some build for themselves,
fair, but not strong; others build for Posterity, strong, but not fair, not
high: but happy is that man that builds for Eternity, as strong, as fair, as
high as the glorious contignations of Heaven.

CXI. Upon the sight of a fair Pearl.
WHat a pure and precious creature is this, which yet is taken out of the

Gods great works go not by likelihoods: how easily can he fetch glory out of
obscurity, who brought all out of nothing?

CXII. Upon a Screen.


But how happy am I, if the interposition of my Savior, my best Friend in
Heaven, may screen me from the deserved Wrath of that great God who is a
consuming fire?

CXIII. Upon a Burre-leaf.


So have I seen none make greater Profession of Religion then an Ignorant man;
whose indiscreet forwardness yields no fruit, but a factious disturbance to
the Church wherein he lives. Too much Show is not so much better then none at
all, as an ill Fruit is worse then none at all.

CXIV. Upon the Singing of a Bird.


Frequent practice (if it be voluntary) argues a delight in that which we do;
and delight makes us more apt to practice, and more capable of perfection in

O God, if I take pleasure in thy Law, I shall meditate of it with comfort,
speak of it with boldness, and practice it with cheerfulness.

CXV. Upon the sight of a man Yawning.
IT is a mavelous thing to see the real effects and strong operation of
Consent or Sympathy even where there is no bodily touch: so one sad man puts
the whole company into dumps; so one man's Yawning affects and stretches the
jaws of many beholders; so the looking upon blear eyes taints

From hence it is easy to see the ground of our Saviors expostulation with
his persecutor, Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? The Church is persecuted
below, he feels it above and complains. So much as the person is more
apprehensive, must he needs be more affected.

O Savior, thou can not but be deeply sensible of all our miseries and
necessities. If we do not feel thy wrongs and the wants of our Brethren, we
have no part in thee.

CXVI. Upon the sight of a Tree lopped.
IN the lopping of these Trees, Experience and good Husbandry has taught men
to leave one bough still growing in the top, the better to draw up the sap from
the root.

The like wisdom is fit to be observed in Censures; which are intended
altogether for reformation, not for destruction. So must they be inflicted,
that the Patient be not utterly discouraged, and stripped of hope and comfort;
but that, whiles he suffers, he may feel his good tendered, and his amendment
both aimed at and expected.

O God, if thou should deal with me as I deserve, thou should not only

CXVII. Upon a Scholar that offered Violence to himself.
HAD this man lain long under some eminent coffeehouse, it had been easy to
find out the motive of his miscarriage. Weak Nature is easily over-laid with
Impatience; it must be only the power of Grace that can

What a poor thing is Life, whereof so slight occasions can make us weary? What
impotent wretches are we when we are not sustained? One would think this the
most impossible of all motions: naturally every man loves himself; and Life is
sweet, Death abhorred. What is it that Satan can despair to persuade men unto,
if he can draw them to an unnatural abandoning of life, and

Why should I doubt of prevailing with my own heart, by the powerful
overruling of Gods Spirit, to contemn life and to affect death for the sake of
my Savior (in exchange of a few miserable moments for eternity of joy) when I
see men, upon an unreasonable suggestion of that evil Spirit, cast away their

CXVIII. Upon the coming in of the Judge.
THE construction of men and their actions is altogether according to the
disposition of the lookers on. The same face of the Judge without any inward
alteration is seen with terror by the guilty, with joy and confidence by the
oppressed innocent: like as the same lips of the Bridegroom drop both myrrh
and honey at once; honey to the well-disposed heart, myrrh

For a man to affect either to do or speak that which may be pleasing to all
men, is but a weak and idle ambition, when we see him that is infinitely Good,
appear terrible to more then he appears lovely. Goodness is it self with
whatever eyes it is looked upon. There can be no safety for that man that
regards more the censure of men, then the truth of being. He that seeks to win
all hearts, has lost his own.


UNder such a pile it was that the first Martyr was buried: none of all the
ancient Kings had so glorious a Tomb; here were many stones, and every one
precious. Jacob leaned his head upon a stone, and saw that Heavenly vision of
Angels ascending and descending: Many stones light upon Steven's head in the
instant of his seeing the Heavens opened, and Jesus standing at the right hand
of God. Lo, Jacob resting upon that one stone, saw but the Angels: Steven being
to rest for once under those many stones, saw the Jacob saw the Angels moving;
Steven saw Jesus standing. As Jacob therefore afterward, according to his Vow,
made there an altar to God; so Steven now in the present gathers these stones
together, of which he erected an holy altar, whereon he offered up himself a
blessed Sacrifice unto God. And if there be a time of gathering stones, and a
time of casting them away; this was the time wherein the Jews cast, and Steven
gathered up these stones for a monument of eternal Glory.

O blessed Saint, thou did not so clearly see Heaven opened, as Heaven saw
thee covered; thou did not so perfectly see thy Jesus standing, as he saw
thee lying patiently, courageously under that fatal heap. Do I mistake it, or
are

CXX. Upon sight of a Bat and Owl.
THese Night-birds are glad to hide their heads all; and if by some violence
they be unseasonably forced our of their secrecy, how are they followed and
beaten by the birds of the day?

With us men it is contrary, the Sons of Darkness do with all eagerness of
ma^ice pursue the children of the Light, and drive them into corners, and make
for the night, being accordingly shaped, foul and ill-favored; so we know

CXXI. Upon the sight of a Well-fleeced Sheep.
WHat a warm Winter-coat has God provided for this quiet innocent creature?
as, indeed, how wonderful is his Wisdom and Goodness in all his purveiances?
Those creatures which are apter for motion, and withal most fearful by
nature, has he clad somewhat thinner,

Neither is it otherwise in that one kind of Man, whom he meant for the

I desire not to comprehend; O Lord, teach me to do nothing but wonder.

CXXII. Upon the hearing of Thunder.
THere is no Grace whereof I find so general a want in my self and others as
an awful fear of the infinite Majesty of God. Men are ready to affect and
profess a kind of Familiarity with God, out of a pretense of love;

I blush at the sauciness of vain men, that will be circumscribing the
powerful acts of the Almighty within the compass of Natural Causes;
forbearing to wonder at what they profess to know. Nothing but Ignorance can
be

CXXIII. Upon the sight of an Hedgehog.
I Marvelled at the first reading, what the Greeks meant by that Proverb of
theirs, The Fox knows many pretty wiles, but the Hedg-hog knows one great one.
But when I considered the Nature and practice of this creature, I easily found
the reason of that speech, grounded upon the care and shift that it makes for
its own preservation. Whiles it is under covert, it knows

If thou be wise, thou shall be wise for thy self. The main care of any
creature is self-preservation; whatsoever does that best, is the wisest. These
creatures that are all body, have well improved the instincts of Nature, if
they can provide for their bodily safety; Man, that is a reasonable Soul, shall
have done nothing, if he make not sure work for the better part.

O God, make me Soule-wise; I shall never envy their craft that pity my
simplicity.


THis creature is in an ill name: it is not for any good qualities, that God
has made choice of the Goat to resemble the wicked and reprobate Soul. It is
unruly, and salacious, and noisome.

I cannot see one of them, but I presently recall to my thoughts the woeful
condition of those on the left hand, whom God has set aside to so fearful a
Damnation. They are here mixed with the Flock, their color differs nothing
from the Sheep; or if we do discern them by their rougher coat and odious sent,
we sever our selves from them: but the time shall come when he shall sever them

CXXV. Upon the sight of the Blind and the Lame.
HEre is a true natural commerce of Senses. The Blind man has Legs, the Lame
man has Eyes: the Lame man lends his Eyes to the Blind,

Though it be not in other cases so sensible, yet surely this very traffic of
Faculties is that whereby we live, neither could the world subsist without it:
one man lends a Brain, another an Arm; one a Tongue, another an Hand. He that
knows wherefore he made all, has taken order to improve every part to the
benefit of the whole.

What do I wish ought that is not useful? And if there be any thing in me

CXXVI. Upon the sight of a Map of the World.
WHat a poor little spot is a Country? A man may hide with his thumb the great
Territories of those that would be accounted Monarchs. In vain should the great
Cham or the great Mogul or Prester John seek here for his Court; it is well if
he can find his Kingdom amongst

It is not easy for a man to be known to that whole Land wherein he lives: but
if he could be so famous, the next Country perhaps never hears of his Name:
and if he can attain to be talked of there, yet the remoter parts cannot take
notice that there is such a thing: and if they did, all speak of nothing else,

Oh the narrow bounds of earthly Glory! Oh the vain affectation of humane
applause! Only that man is happily famous, who is known and recorded in Heaven.

CXXVII. Upon the sight of Hemlock.
THere is no creature of it self evil; misapplication may make the best so: and
there is a good use to be made of the worst. This Weed which is too well proved
to be poisonous, yet to the Goat is medicinal, as serving by

Our ignorance may not bring a scandal upon Gods workmanship; or if it do, his
Wisdom knows how to make a good use even of our injury. I cannot say but the
very venom of the creatures is to excellent purpose; how much more their
beneficial qualities? If ought hurt us, the fault is ours, in mistaking the
evil for good: in the mean time we owe praise to the Maker, and to the creature
a just and thankful allowance.

CXXVIII. Upon a Flower-de-luce.
THis Flower is but unpleasingly fulsome for sent, but the root of it is so
fragrant, that the delicatest Ladies are glad to put it into their sweet bags:
contrarily, the Rose-tree has a sweet flower, but a savourlesse root; and the
Saffron yields an odoriferous and cordial spire, whiles both the flower and
the root are unpleasing. It is with Vegetables as with Metalls.

God never meant to have his best always in view; neither meant he to have all
eminences concealed. He would have us to know him to be both secretly rich, and
openly bountiful. If we do not use every Grace in its own kind, God loses the
thanks, and we the benefit.

CXXIX. Upon the sight of two Trees, one high, the other broad.
THose Trees that shoot up in height are seldom broad; as contrarily, those
Trees that are spreading are seldom tall: it were too much ambition in that
Plant which would be both ways eminent.

Thus it is with men. The Covetous man, that effects to spread in Wealth,
seldom cares to aspire unto height of Honor; the Proud man, whose heart is
set upon Preferment, regards not (in comparison thereof) the growth of his
Wealth: there is a poor shrub in a valley, that is neither tall nor broad, nor

Let me never envy their diet that had rather be unsafe then inglorious.

CXXX. Upon the sight of a Drunken man.
REason is an excellent Faculty, and indeed that which alone differenceth us
from brute creatures; without which what is Man but a two-legged Beast? And as
all precious things are tender and subject to miscarriage, so is this above
others; the want of some little Sleep, the violence of a Fever or one Cup too
much puts it into utter distemper. What can we make of this

Surely, the Natural Bestiality is so much less odious then the Moral, as
there is difference in the causes of both: that is of Gods making, this of our
own. It is no shame to the Beast that God has made him so; it is a just shame
to a Man that he has made himself a Beast.

CXXXI. Upon the whetting of a Sith.


I would so interchange, that I neither be dull with Work, nor idle and wanton

CXXXII. Upon the sight of a Looking-glass.
WHen I look in another man's face, I see that man* and that man sees me as I do
him: but when I look in my Glass, I do not see my self; I see only an Image or
Representation of my self: howsoever it is like me, yet it is not I. It is for
an ignorant Child to look behind the Glass, to find out the Babe that he
sees: I know it is not there; and that the resemblance varies according to the
dimnesse or different fashion of the

At our best, we do but thus see God here below: One sees him more clearly,
another more obscurely; but all in a Glass. Hereafter we shall see him, not as
he appears, but as he is: so shall we see him in the face, as he sees us: the
face of our glorified Spirits shall see the glorious face of him who is the God
of Spirits. In the mean time, the proudest Dame shall not more plie her Glass,
to look upon that face of hers which she thinks beautiful, then I shall gaze
upon the clearest glass of my Thoughts, to see that face of God which I know
to be infinitely fair and glorious.


How bright does this Wood shine? When it is in the fire it will not so beam
forth as it does in this cold darkness. What an Emblem is here of our future
estate? This piece, whiles it grew in the tree, shone not at all; now that it
is putrified, it casts forth this pleasing luster.

Thus it is with us: whiles we live here, we neither are nor seem other then
miserable; when we are dead once, then begins our Glory, then does the Soul
shine in the brightness of Heavenly glory; then does our good Name shine upon
earth in those beams which before Envy had either held in or over-cast.



CXXXIV. Upon an Ivie-tree.
BEhold a true Emblem of false Love: here are kind embracements, but deadly:
how close does this Weed cling unto that Oak, and seems to hug and shade it?
but in the mean time draws away the sap, and at last kills it.

Such is an Harlots love, such is a Parasites. Give me that love and friendship
which is between the Vine and the Elm, whereby the Elm is no whit worse, and
the Vine much the better. That wholesome and noble Plant does not so close
wind it self about the tree that upholds it, as to gall the bark, or to

As God, so wise men, know to measure love, not by profession and complement,
(which is commonly most high and vehement in the falsest) but by reality of
performance. He is no Enemy that hurts me not: I am not his Friend whom I
desire not to benefit.

CXXXV. Upon a Quartan ague.
I Have known when those things which have made an healthful man sick,

Thus have I also seen it in the sickness of the Soul: the same God whose
Justice is wont to punish sin with sin, even his Mercy does so use the matter,
that he cures one sin by another. So have we known a Proud man healed by the
shame of his uncleanness; a Furious man healed by a rash bloodshed. It matters
not greatly what the medicine be, whiles the Physician is infinitely powerful,
infinitely skillful.

What danger can there be of my safety, when God shall heal me as well by evil
as by good?

CXXXVI. Upon the sight of a loaded Cart.
IT is a passionate expression wherein God bemoans himself of the sins of
Israel, Ye have pressed me as a cart is pressed with sheaves. An empty Cart
runs lightly away; but if it be soundly laden, it goes sadly, sets hard,
groans under the weight, and makes deep impressions, the wheels creak and the
axel-tree bends, and all the frame of it is put unto the utmost stresse.

He that is Omnipotent can bear any thing but too much Sin; his Justice will
not let his Mercy be overstrained. No marvel if a guilty Soul say, Mine
iniquity is greater then I can bear; when the Infinite God complains of the
weight of men's sins. But let not vain men think that God complains out of the
want of Power, but out of the abundance of Mercy: He cannot be the worse for
our sins, we are. It grieves him to be over-provoked to our Punishment. Then
does he account the Cart to crack, yea to break, when he is urged to break
forth into just Vengeance.

O Savior, the sins of the whole World lay upon thee, thou sweatedst blood
under the load: what would become of me if I should bear but one sheaf of


AMongst all the bounteous gifts of God, what is it that he has equally
bestowed upon all? except it be our very Being, whiles we are. He has not
given to all men the same stature of body, not the same strength of Wit, not
the same capacity of Memory, not the same Beauty of parts, not the same measure
of Wealth or Honor.

Thus has he done also in matter of Grace: there are spiritual Dwarfs, there
are Giants; there are perfect men, children, babes, embryos. This inequality

I shall be glad and ambitious to add cubits to my height; but withal it
shall comfort me to know, that I cannot be so low of stature as not to reach
unto Heaven.

CXXXVIII. Upon an importunate Beggar.


Why do I not thus to my God? I am sure I want no less then the neediest;

CXXXIX. Upon a Medicinal potion.
HOW loathsome a draught is this? how offensive, both to the eye, and to the
scent, and to the taste? yea the very thought of it is a kind of sickness: and
when it is once down, my very disease is not so painful

Such are the chastisements of God and the reproofs of a Friend; harsh,
troublesome, grievous: but in the end they yield the peaceable fruit of
Righteousness.

Why do I turn away my head, and make faces, and shut mine eyes, and stop my
nostrils, and nauseate and abhor to take this harmless potion for Health,

CXL. Upon the sight of a Wheel.
THE Prophet meant it for no other then a fearful imprecation against Gods
enemies, O my God, make them like unto a wheel; whereby what could he intend to
signify, but instability of condition and sudden violence of Judgment? Those
spoaks of the wheel that are now up, are sooner then sight or thought whirled
down, and are straight raised up again on purpose to be depressed: Neither can
there be any motion so rapid and swift as the Circular.

It is a great favor of God that he takes leisure in his affliction, so
punishing

O Lord, rebuke me not in thine anger. I cannot deprecate thy rebuke; my sins
call for correction: but I deprecate thine anger; thou rebukest even where thou
love. So rebuke me, that whiles I smart with thy Rod, I may rejoice in thy
Mercy.



BE not deceived any longer, dear Christian Souls: be ye free, that ye may be
safe. There is a certain Sacred Tyranny that miserably abuses you, and so
cunningly beguiles you, that you choose rather to err and perish. God has
given you Reason, and above that Faith; do not so far wrong your selves as to
be made the mere slaves of another will, and to think it the safest way to be
willingly blind. Lay aside for a while all prejudice and superstitious
side-taking; and consider seriously these few words, which my sincere love to
your Gerson's word) will needs make Faith of Opinion, and too impotently
favoring her own passions, has not ceased to persecute with fire and sword
the dear and holy servants of God; and at last (notwithstanding all the vain
thunderbolts of a proud and lawless fury) make much of those your
truly-Christian and religious brethren, who according to the just liberty of
Faithful men, refuse and detest those false and upstart Points of a
new-devised Faith.

But if any of you (which God forbid) had still rather to be deceived, and dote
upon his received Errors, and (as angry Curres are wont) shall bark and bay at
so clear a light of Truth; my Soul shall in silence and sorrow pity that man
in vain. I wis, we have had disputing enough, if not too much. Away from
henceforth with

Certain Catholic PROPOSITIONS which a devout
I. EVery true Christian is in that very regard properly capable of Salvation,
and (for matter of Faith) goes on in the ready way to Heaven.

II. Whosoever being duly admitted into the Church of God by lawful Baptism,
believes and maintains all the main and essential Points of Christian Faith,
is for matter of belief a true Christian.

III. The Sum of the Christian Faith are those Principles of Christian
Religion and Fundamental Grounds and Points of Faith, which are undoubtedly
contained and laid down in the Canonical Scriptures, whether in express
terms or by necessary consequence, and in the Ancient Creeds universally
received, and allowed by the whole Church of God.

IV. There cannot be now-a-dayes any new Rule of Faith.

V. As there cannot be any new Rule of Faith, so there cannot now be any new
Faith. It is not therefore in the power of any creature under Heaven to make
any Point to be of Faith which before was not so, or to cause any Point not to
be of Faith which formerly was so.

VI. He cannot be an Heretic who does not obstinately deny something which is
truly a Point of Faith; or hold some Point contrary to the foresaid Articles of
Christian Faith.

VII. There are and may be many Theological Points, which are wont to be
believed and maintained, and so many lawfully be, of this or that particular
Church, or the Doctors thereof, or their Followers, as godly Doctrines and
Probable Truths; besides those other Essential and main matters of Faith,
without any prejudice at all of the common Peace of the Church.

VIII. Howsoever it may be lawful for Learned men and particular Churches to
believe and maintain those Probable, or (as they may think) Certain Points

IX. Notwithstanding any such unjust Anathema denounced against any such Person
or Church, whosoever holds those Principles and Essential Points of Christian
Faith, however he be in place far remote from all the Visible Churches of
Christ, and neither know not or receive not those other Positions of
Theological determination, is thoroughly capable (in such condition) of
Christian

X. The Church of Rome is only, and at the best, a Particular Church.



XII. Those issues of Controversy in regard whereof the Reformed Catholics
are wont to be condemned and anathematized by the Roman Church, I perceive
some Readers have unheedily and unjustly stumbled at this Proposition, as if I
had herein slighted the Differences betwixt us and the Roman Church; from
which I am so far, as that I have ever professed to hold them to be, on their
parts, no less then damnable Errors, and such as by consequence do raze the
Foundation. If these words have seemed to sound otherwise, it is nothing but
the Readers inconsiderate mistaking; who, if he please to bend his second and
more serious thoughts upon the place, will easily see that my intention is
herein only to show how unjustly the Church of Rome does charge us with Heresy
in denying their Doctrine, forasmuch as those Positions of theirs which we are
condemned for refusing, are far from being Principles of Faith, but are things
of their own devising and imposing. For example, they condemn us for rejecting
the doctrine of Transubstantiation, and refusing to hold that the substance of
the Bread is (by the force of the words) truly and really turned into the very
Flesh, Blood and Bone of Christ. Now, I say, this their doctrine of
Transubstantiation is far from being any Principle of Faith, but only a point
of their own Divinity, devised and maintained by themselves. They condemn us
for refusing to pray to Saints, or to worship Images: I say, that this
Doctrine, that Saints ought to be invoked or Images worshipped, is far from
being a Principle of Faith; but only one of their own Theological Positions,
devised and imposed by themselves. The like may be and must be said of all
their other Points obtruded on the Church; wherein I hope no wise Reformed
Catholic will think he has reason to dissent from me, or to misdoubt my
Proposition.
are





XV. Out of all which Premises it necessarily follows, that the Roman
Church, which upon these grounds sticks not to exclude true Christians
(differing from them in matter of such Doctrines) from the Church of God and
eternal Salvation, is justly guilty of great insolency, and horrible breach

XVI. There is no less danger in adding to the Articles of Christian Faith,
then in diminishing them or detracting from them.

XVII. Those Points which the Roman Church is wont to add, and forcibly to
put upon all Catholics (as well the Reformed as those whom they

XVIII. The Reformed Catholics do justly complain, and prove that those Points
which the Roman Church imposes and urges as the meet additions both of Faith
and Divine worship, are neither safe, nor agreeable to the holy Word of God;
and plead it to be utterly unjust, that those accessory Points, of their
devising or determining, wherein every Church should be left free and

XIX. It argues a palpable self-love in the Roman Church, and must needs at
the last draw down a grievous Judgment from God upon her, that this Particular
Church will needs make her self incapable of any better condition; in that she
vainly brags that she cannot err, and fearfully accurseth and sends down to
hell all those that profer her the least endeavor of the means of her remedy
and redress.

XX. Upon all these grounds, it is plain that the Reformed Catholics are in a
safe estate, and that contrarily the Roman are in a miserable error and
fearful danger; and lastly, that it is only through their default, that the
Church of God is not reduced to an happy Purity and Peace.

2 Timothy 2. 7. Consider what I say, and the Lord give you understanding in all
things. AN ANSWER TO POPE URBAN'S INURBANITIE: Expressed in a BREEVE sent to
LEWIS the French King, exasperating him against the Protestants in France.

Written in Latin by the Right Reverend Father in God, JOSEPH Lord Bishop of
Excester.

Translated into English by his Son, ROBERT HALL, Master of Arts in Excester
College in Oxford.

LONDON, Printed by JAMES FLESHER, 1661.

A BREEVE of Pope Urban the Eighth, sent to Lewis the
OUR most dear Son in Christ, we send you greeting and Apostolical Benediction.
The voice of rejoicing and Salvation is in the tabernacles of the righteous;
let the wicked see this and fret, and let the most Christian King fights for
Religion, the Lord of hosts fights for the King. We verily in this
Mother-City of the world triumph with holy joy, we congratulate this your
Majesty's Victory, the trophies whereof are erected in Heaven, the glory
whereof the generation that is to come shall never cease to speak of. Now at
the length this Age has seen the Tower of ROCHEL, no less impregnable by the
obstinacy of treachery then strength of nature, surrendered to the King and
Saint Peter. Neither is any so foolish as to ascribe this glorious Victory
rather to happiness then to virtue. By your long siege of many months you have
taught us, that Europe owes your French Legions no less commendation French
Vineyard shall by You be utterly discomfited. The Church desires that this
Diadem of perfect renown be put upon that helmet of Salvation, wherewith the
Lord mighty in battle seems to cover the head of Your Majesty: for we
believe shortly that all tumults being appeased in France, the glistering
Ensign of Lewis the Conqueror shall shine to the captive Daughter of Sion,
rehearsing French Trophies, and beholding the brightness of your lightning
lance. God, who performs the desire of them that fear him, prosper our
desires, and the prayers of the Catholic Church. Our Nuntio, who was an
eyewitness of Your Princely glory in your tents, will be a faithful
Interpreter of our Pontifical gratulation to your Majesty, on whom we most
lovingly bestow our Apostolical Benediction.

Given at Rome, at S. Mary the greater, under the Seal of the Fisher, the eight
and twentieth day of November, in the year of our Lord 1628. and the sixth year
of our Pontificate.


SIR,
Tourvall, a Frenchman, showed me erewhile a Latin printed Epistle of Pope
Urbane, written (as their manner is) in a swelling and bloody style, and lately
sent to Lewis the French King: wherein after the good Pope had loudly chaunted
forth a song of Triumph for his Majesty's Victory over Rochel, abundantly
congratulating both the King and Nation; he thence proceeds in most barbarous
manner to that bloody word, (...), Smite, Cast down, earnestly urging and
enforcing the utter extirpation of all the Heretics (as he calls them)
stabling in France. When I had read it, I could not contain my self, but must
suddenly vent mine indignation in these few lines. I take up pen in hand
therefore, and do not

From your Friend

TO
WHY may not the meanest Bishop be bold to expostulate with a Pope? I crave no
leave, neither need I; I take our ancient Rome and Eugubium, or between my Ex
and the channel of Tiber. Hear now therefore (Pope Urbane) that which ere long
thou shall hear with horror and confusion of face before that dreadful
Tribunal of Christ. These bloody blots of thine little beseem the Shepherd of
a Christian Flock. What, is it for thee like a grim Herald to give the Summons
to War? Is it for thee to excite Christian Princes (already too much gorged
with blood) to the profligation and fearful slaughter of their own Subjects?
Were the Keys for this cause committed to thy charge, that thou should open
the Iron gates of War, and the Pale gates of Death? Tell me, thou shadow of S.
Peter, did French Protestants for Malchus, whose ears while thou would have
cut off, thy sword by a light mistake glanced upon their throats? Or was it
lately voiced to thee from heaven concerning these wretched Animals stabling in
France, Arise, Pope Urbane, Kill and eat? Art thou the Pilot of the Churches
peace, and talkest of nothing but glittering helmets, swords and spears,
instruments of war and bloodshed? What noise could the howling of the She-Wolf
of thy Romulus have made, if this direful note of thine become the
Bell-weather of S. Peter's fold? Well, since thou will bespaul, bedribble the
ashes of unhappy Rochel, and scatter with thy disdainful breath the despised
dust of that forlorn City; yet withal call to mind a little, how not many
Ages are Lewis broke open the gates of Rome, demolished the walls, dispersed
and slew the inhabitants, and shut up thy great Predecessor laden with bitter
scoffs and execrations in his blind dungeon. Neither shall many years run on
again, (unless my presaging thoughts too much deceive me,) before the Angel
shall shout forth, and the amazed world shall congratulate the fall of thy
Babylon. Rochel's case shall ere long be thine own, (O thou most accursed
City.) Blessed shall he be that rewards thee as thou have rewarded us; yea
happy he that shall take thy little ones, and dash out their brains against the
stones. In the mean time, sport thy self at our miseries, laugh at our tears,
make merry at our sighs, sing at our groans,

But alas, poor souls! we are mistaken all this while: it is nothing else but
pure Piety (forsooth) which we ignorantly condemn for Cruelty; it is the zeal
French Territories. O forehead! O bowels! For us, we call God, Angels, Saints
to witness of this foul calumniation. I wis, those whom thou falsely brandest
for Heretics, thou shall one day hear when the Church shall embrace them for
her children, Christ for the spiritual Members of his mystical body. For what
(I beseech you) do we hold which the Scriptures, Councils, Fathers, Churches
and Christian Professors have not in all Ages taught and published? To say the
truth, All that which we profess, your own most approved Authors have still
maintained: whence then is this Anathemas, there to fry in perpetual
Torments? Is it for this, that a stall and shambles are thought good enough for
such brutish animals? Good God! See the justice and charity of these Popelings!
This is nothing but a mere injury of the Times; it was not wont to be Heresy
heretofore that is so now-a-daies. If it had been our Happiness Romish
Transcendency, Image Worship, Transubstantiation, Sacrifice of the Mass,
Purgatory, single or half-Communion, Nundination of Pardons, and the rest of
this rabble were known to the Christian world; surely, Heaven had been as open
to us as to other Devout Souls of that purer Age, that took their happy flight
from hence in the Orthodox Faith of Christ Jesus. But now that we are reserved
to that dotage of the world, wherein a certain new brood of Articles are sprung
up, it is death to us (forsooth) and to be expiated by no less punishment then
the perpetual torments of Hellfire. Consider this, O ye Christians
wheresoever dispersed upon the face of the whole earth; consider,

Awake therefore now, O ye Christian Princes, and You especially (King Lewis)
in whose ears these wicked counsels are so spightfully and bloodily whispered;
rouse up your self and see how cruel Tyranny seeks to impose upon your Majesty
in a most mischievous manner, under a fair pretense of Piety and Devotion. They
are your own native Subjects whom these malicious foreigners require to the
slaughter; yea they are Christ's: and will you imbrue your hand and sword in the
blood of those for whom Christ has shed his; yea who have willingly lavished
their own in the behalf of You and your great Father? Lewis the Just; If we did
adore any other God, any other Christ but thine, if we aspired to any other
Heaven, embraced any other Creed, any other Baptism, lastly, if we made
profession of a new Church built upon other foundations, there were some cause
indeed why thou should condemn such Heretics stabling in France to the
revenging sury of thy flames. If this thy people have wilfully violated any
thing established by our common God, or lawfully Jesus. But they err (you will
say) from the Faith. From what faith? (I beseech you.) Not the Christian
surely, but the Romish. What a strange thing is this? Christ does not condemn
them, the Pope does. If that great Chancellor of Paris were now alive, he
would freely teach his Sorbon, (as he once did) that it is not in the Popes
power (that I may use his own word) to hereticate any Proposition. Yea, but an
Oecumenicall Council besides has done it. What Council? That of Trent. I am
deceived France, or deserved to be so hereafter. Consult with your own late
Authors of most undoubted credit; they will tell you plainly how unjust that
Council was, yea how no Council at all: It was only the Popes act, whatsoever
was decreed or established by that packed Conclave, envassalled to the Seven
hills. Consider lastly, (I beseech you) how the Reformed Christians stand in no
other terms to the Papists, then the Papists do to the Reformed; Heresy is
with equal vehemence upbraided on both sides. But do we deal thus roughly
with the followers of the Roman Religion? Did we ever rage against the Popish
Faith with fire and sword? Was ever the crime of a poor misled conscience
capital to any soul? Henry) carry thy self alike toward thy faithful
Subjects, who most innocently profess the Reformed Religion? Why should it
prejudice any of them with thee to have served their God according to the holy
Scriptures, and the practice of the Ancient Church? To conclude then, Let it be
but lawful for thy people to be truly Religious. And thou, Pope Urban, return
at last to thy self, and consider how well this bloody advice of thine suits
Rome, but rather for the bloody prizes of the Theater. Beautiful are the feet
of them that preach peace, (says the Prophet:) But we may say far otherwise of
thee, Cursed are the hands of them that denounce war. The least noise of an
hammer must not be heard in Gods Temple: But you (Good man) would fill the holy
Church of God with loud alarms, clashing of bloody weapons and fearful groans
of dying men. Give ear therefore now at last, thou who proudly scornest the
sentence of any mortal Judge. That which once our famous Robert, the holy and
learned Bishop of Lincoln, is said to have done to


CHarissime in Christo Fili noster, Salutem and Apostolicam Benedictionem. Rex
Christianissimus pro Religione, militat Deus exercituum pro Rege. Nos certe in
hac Orbis patria sacro gaudio triumphamus, gratulamur Majestati tuae victoriam,
cujus trophaea constituuntur in Coelo, cujus gloriam generatio ventura nunquam
conticescet. Rupellam Arcem non minus obstinatione perfidiae quam naturae
munimentis inexpugnabilem, vidit tandem haec aetas Regi and B. Petro subditam.
Neque sane quisquam adeo desipit, ut tam gloriosam palmam acceptam referat
felicitati potius quam virtuti. Diuturna tot mensium obsidione docuisti Europam
Gallicis Legionibus te regnante debere non minorem constantiae laudem quam
celeritatis. Gallica vinea stabulantium propediem profligatum iri. Diadema hoc
perfecti decoris imponi cupit Ecclesia illi galeae salut is,qua armatum
Majestatis tuae caput ipse protegere videtur Dominus potens in praelio.
Speramus enim fore ut Gallia omni pacata, illucescant coruscationes Ludovici
Triumphatoris captivae Filiae Sion Francica trophaea commemoranti, and intuenti
splendorem fulgurantis hastae tuae. Vota nostra atque Catholicae Ecclesiae
secundet Deus, qui voluntatem timentium se faciet. Interea Nuncius noster, qui
Regalis gloriae spectator in castris adfuit, luculentus erit Pontificiae
gratulationis Interpres Majestati tuae, cui Apostolicam Benedictionem
amantissime impertimur.

Romae apud S. Mariam majorem, sub annulo Piscatoris, die vigesimo
INURBANITATI PONTIFICIAE RESPONSIO JOS. EXONIENSIS.


MOnstrabat mihi modo Tourvalus noster, gente Gallus, Epistolam, Latino
idiomate typis editam, Urbani Papae, pro more, tumidam and Ludovico Galliarum
Regi pridem datam; in qua, ubi bonus Pontifex Io Paean canore cecinisset
Rupellensi victoriae, Regi simul ac Genti abunde gratulatus, descendit illico,
satis inclementer, ad saevum illud (...), and Haereticorum in Gallia
stabulantium profligationem acriter urget and impellit. Continere manum non
potui, quin me subito in chartas darem; arripio calamum; responsionem non
meditor, sed effundo. Quicquid est, habe, Vir venerande, and lege; and vel igni
trade, vel luci. Vale.

A tuo

URBANO VIII. Pontifici ROMANO, JOSEPHUS EXONIENSIS Sanam mentem and Charitatem.
Eugubio Roma, aut Isca meus a Tiberi. Audi modo, Pontifex Urbane, quod brevi
pro tremendo Christi Tribunali pallidus exaudies. Pastorem Christiani gregis
parum decent hae sanguinea liturae. Tune ut ad arma, tristis Praco, conclames?
Tune ut Christianos Principes, nimio quam plenos cruoris, ad profligationem
suorum clademque horrendam acriter instiges? Ideone tibi creditae Claves, ut
ferratas belli portas eburneasque Ditis inferni aperires? Euge, Petri umbra,
numquid hi tibi Malchi videntur, Gallia stabulantibus dictum tibi pridem
coelitus, Occide and Manduca? Tune pacifice Rector Ecclesiae, ut coruscantes
galeas, hastas, gladios loquaris? Qualem vero sonum edere potuisset Lupa tui
Romuli, si ista Petri caulam non dedeceat truculenta vox? Conspue quantum
lubet, and coming cineres infelicis Rupellae, and diffla superbo spiritu
conculcatissimum miserrimae Urbis pulverem: recognosce interim paululum, quam
non multa transierunt secula ex quo heareditarium Ludovici, jam tui, sceptrum
Romae portas confregerit, comminuerit moenia, cives dissiparit, Praecessoremque
tuum, sannis dirisque onustum, caeco carcere mulctarit. Sed neque tot deinceps
excurrent anni (nisi me praesaga cecidisse Babylonem, and clamabit Angelus, and
gratulabundus Orbis obstupescet. Tuae erunt aliquando hae vices, Urbium
perditissima. Felicem sane illum, qui paria tibi quaeque retulerit, quique
parvulorum tuorum capita saxis identidem illiserit. Fruere tu interea miseriis
hisce nostris, arride lacrymis, exhilarare suspiri is, ejulatibus accine,
applaude cruciatibus: est qui de coelo suo prospicit justus ultor, cujus nos
una and exosculamur virgam, and inhiamus vindictae. Causam tu nostram age, o
Deus, imo tuam, tuam

Fallimur vero miselli, Pietas est, ilicet, quam nos Crudelitatis insimulamus;
Zelus est domus Dei quo, bonus Pontifex, ita totus accenderis, ut Haereticorum
ad Gallia stabulantium extirpationem and optaveris and suaseris importunius. O
frontem! O viscera! Deum, Angelos, Sanctos, testes appellamus hujus tam atrocis
contumeliae. Nempc, quos tu Haereseos stigmate falso inuris, audies demum ubi
Ecclesia filios, Christus membra salutaverit. Ecquid enim (per Deum immortalem)
docemus nos, quod non Scriptura, non Concilia, non Patres, non Ecclesiae
Catbedraeque Christianoe unanimiter semper tenuerunt? Nimirum, quae nos
profitemur, vestri ipsorum probatissimi Authors tenent universa. Quid ergorei
est? Sunt revera quaedam nupera Opinionum assumenta, quae vos avitae fidei
superadjecta voluistis: ista nos piissime rejicimus, and constanter usque
recusamus: Humana sunt, vestra sunt; denique aut dubia sunt, aut iniqua. Ideone

Evigilate, Christiani Principes, Tuque in primis, Ludovice Rex, cui ista tam
inurbane crudeliterque insusurrata sunt; evigila demum, and vide quam tibi, sub
praetextu Pietatis, dira feritas pessimis modis imponere studuerit. Tui sunt
isti quos ad caedem deposcunt alienigenae; Christi sunt. Tune vero ut manum
gladiumve imbueres illorum sanguine pro quibus Christus profudit suum? qui suum
pro te ac magno Parente tuo lubentissime prodegerunt? Auditu, quaeso, qui
justus audire soles apud tuos Monarcha: Sinos alium a tuo Deum, Christum alium
coleremus, si aliud ambiremus coelum, si Symbolum aliud, aliud Baptisma, si
novam Gallia stabulantes flammis ultricibus destinares: si quid populus tuus
vel a communi Deo sancitum, vel a te legitime institutum violarit, non
deprecamur hercle vindictam; vapulent qui meruerunt, aequum est. Noli interim
saevire in Dei tui servos, in cives tuos, quos ipsa Religio praestat fideles:
noli sinere ut Sorbonam (quod olim fecit) suam, quam non sit penes Pontificem,
Propositionem Tridentinum. Fallor si hoc in Galliis obtinere potuerit hactenus,
meruitve. Consule tuos integerrimae pridem fidei authors, dicent illi tibi.
quam iniquum, quam nullum fuerit: unius erat Pontificis quicquid a coetu illo
(multicipiti Romae mancipio) factum sancitumve. Cogita denique, obsecro, quam
non alio in loco ^^nt Reformati Pontificiis, quam Pontificii Reformat^: atque
acriter exprobrari solet Haresis utrinque. Siccine vero agitur apud nos Romanae
Religionis asseclis? Unquamve gladio aut incendio saevitum istic in Fidem
Pontificiam? Eccui unquam capitale fuit hoc misere hallucinantis conscientiae
crimen? Est ubi comperies (raro tamen admodum) audacem forte aliquem
Sacrificum, Urbane Pontifex, and recole quam haec Purpuram tuam probe deceat
atrox sententia. Non pedum profecto, sed ensem gestarit oportet, qui istud
exaraverit; neque piscatorium est hoc rete, sed the atricum and myrmillonicum.
Speciosi pedes Evangelizantium pacem, inquit Propheta; nos hic de te paulo
aliter, odiosae manus praeconizantium Robertus noster sanctus pariter and
doctus Lincolniensis Episcopus Praecessori tuo fecisse dicitur, id ego tibi
nunc facio: Fas mihi sit indicere tibi verendum Omnipotentis Dei Tribunal, pro
quo tremens horrensque tibi anima brevi sistetur, sanguinolenti istius consilii
rationem

Reverendissimo in Christo Patri, Viro incomparabili
HEU quantum potuit terrae pelagique parari
Hoc quem civiles fuderunt sanguine dextrae
Gallorum? Sed paci intercedit inurbanae frontis homo URBANUS VIII. Pontifex
Romanus; qui Exhalans foedos foedo de pectore ructus, bullante diro cruore
BULLA, ferocibus minaciis venosa, and saeva adulatione tumente, optimo Regi,
sed praepropero ac fervido in Martem ingenio, in fidissimos cives, qui nisi
fuissent non esset ipse, funesta inflat classica; BREVI que grandiloquo and
cruento sub Annulo Piscatoris asperrimam studiis belli gentem iterum in brevia
and Syrtes civilis, hoc est, creperi and periculosissimi belli, cerebrosus and
imperitus Nauclerus adigit and impingit: nulla Regis, nulla Regionum Quas Sol
exoriens curru fugiente vaporat, nulla Religionis majore cura sed magis ut Regi
and Regno anxias and inexplicabiles sollicitudines conficiat; ut humanissimos
cives, non in piscatoria PETRI navicula -- lentos incurvans gurgite remos,
Evangelici hami felici piscatu ex undoso turbarum civilium salo Piscator
hominum humaniter ducat ad salutem, sed in ANTICHRISTI praetoria navi
gubernacula tenens, BULLARUM and BREVIUM enormi harpagone Pirata nefarius
Christianos inhumaniter praedetur ad caedem. Ut solenni Pontificum Romanorum
Neronis decessoris sui instar, laetificum cum Spintriis suis Trojae pereuntis
excidium canat: -- sic sua quemque Inscribit facies. --
Verum -- Ut multos mensesque diesque,
Non tamen aetatem tempestate hac scelerosi
Laetabuntur.


Nam ecce quam opportune Tu, Praesul Amplissime, coelestis and infracti
pectoris miserandae sortis onagrum in arce Tarpeia stabulantem, and sono
intempestivo rudentem, styli tui acumine, veluti clavis and fustibus,
compescis: Tu Bestiae bipedis e limo and e fimo erepentis lunata cornua
elegantis libelli malleo retundis: Tu rufo Draconi Aere ciere viros, Martemque
accendere cantu nimis quam bono, incestum and clamosum os suggillas: Tu Papam
superbientem, and sublime caput coelo audaci nisu inferentem, cujus ad nutum
Intereunt, labuntur, eunt rursum omnia vorsum, modestissimo scripto humilitatem
and modestiam doces: Tu marculum, qui duri robora ferri in Orthodoxorum
perniciem Multorum magnis tuditantium ignibu^ tundit, Cyclopum Polyphemo
extorques, and pausam tuditandi facere jubes: Tutrepidantia jampridem BALYLONIS
moenia a coenosis magni illius exitialium mendaciorum architecti congesta
caementariis, -- Qui nihil amplius unquam

Rugosi passique senes eadem omnia quaerunt,
variorum librorum multis vigiliis feliciter elucubratorum, velut oscillo
penduli impetus hactenus arietasti, vexasti, dissipasti: Tandem, optimae notae
libello, non ad ostentationem sed ad utilitatem composito, and mitissima
responsione, sulphareas omnium calamitatum fornaces, quas NEBUCHADNETSAR
Romanus adversus Christi Confessores immitissimo edicto accendi jubet, pro
virili tua part a Christi Ecclesia prohibes and depellis: Tu Leonum
famelicorum dentes, quos indomitae illius belluae consiliarii atque administri
in Danielis nostros exacuunt, Verbi Divini forfice comprehendis, concutis, and
confringis; omnium malorum Fecialis and Pater Patratus, Principes rerum
potentes in arma feralia exequiali and tragico carmine movet and protrudit: Tu
pacis aeternae praeco ab armis discordibus revocas, and ad piam Christi pacem,
Christianaeque Charitatis tranquillum portum fortiter occupandum, suavissimae
scriptionis dulci and docto celeusmate fidus celeustes provocas.

Frustra omnia, illum si spectes qui, Nequam and magnus homo, laniorum immane'
canes ut, distento and fulmineo rictu Christianorum sanguini inhiat, cuique
cibus cadavera, potus cruor est: quibus dum se ingurgitat, toto orb Christiano
tristibus Io Paean, Io Triumph nobis obganniens, velut Gallinaceu' cum victor
se gallus honest
Sustulit in digitos, primoresque erigit ungues,
Coquelico canora voce in fimeto occinit. Ut illa Meretrix purpurata, Martyrum
sanguine ebria, quae Reges quos philtris suis intoxicavit, BULLARUM aculeatarum
majoribus stimulis in cruda adversum Christum praelia suscitat; ut ille
desperatae salutis homo, peccati and per ditionis Filius, tuum illud RESIPISCE
discat, spes nulla superest.

Nam si TU hos fluctus undasque e gurgite salso

Ventum, inquam, tollas.
Illi enim neque est cor quo paveat, neque jecur quo amet, neque fell quo sibi
irascatur, neque frons qua erubescat: Illi Ganeae, illis ingluviosis quibus
cingitur raso capite ministris, -- solis vivere fas est Occipite caeco, -- and
edictis vetare, -- ne quisquam hic faxit oletum, and sacra capita reprehendat.

Nam vos Romulidae vobis ignoscitis, and quae

Presbyteros.
At Tu, Antistes Dignissime, eos libera ad URBANUM responsione liberas doces
audire voces, and ingratiis discere, in Anglia and mutire fas esse, and sine
scrobe alta voce exclamare, Auriculas Asini Papam and Cardinales habere.

Quantum autem ego fideli erga me amicitiae tuae debeam, Reverende Pater, quod
mihi homini privato tantus Eruditione, Pietate, Dignitate Praesul, Responsionem
illam inscribere voluisti, nec rudi calamo exprimere, nec lingua inexplanata
expromere, nec impari mente consequi possum: Scilicet, ut Episcopum decet, tui
semper similis es, id est optimus; Honores novos adeptus veterem

Quod vero electissimum Scriptum meo arbitrio stare aut cadere, prodire aut
latere, maligna ignis flamma extingui, aut praeclara doctorum luce frui,
publici juris, aut in mei solius bonis esse jubes; id vero Modestiae est tuae,
quae inter multas and claras Virtutes quae in te maximae sunt and clarissimae,
in scriptis, in voce, in vultu, in oculis, in composito mentis habitu, in tota
vita tua fulgentibus velut inter ignes Luna minores. Macte ista morum
suavitate, qua operto vivens ostio, facta tua omnia ad Pietatis and rectae
Rationis obrussam exigis: Macte isto viri boni charactere, qui Index ipse sui
totum se explorat ad unguem,
Quid proceres, vanique ferat quid opinio vulgi
Securus.
Teque ipsum semper verens, omnium quotquot te novere, quique tuos in scriptis
and nitida oratione pellucentes mores videre, amorem tibi conciliasti. Macte
iterum atque iterum praeclarae Eruditionis gloria, altissima rerum Divinarum
and Humanarum scientia, literatissimis variarum disciplinarum monumentis,
Senecae, clarissimi and doctissimi Theologi nomen comparasti; Quod vivet seclis
innumerabilibus.

Sed age, eat Qui dono meus est bonus libellus,
Qui Auro est carior aureus libellus:
Eat pedibus celer per Alpium aeternis horrentium nivibus invias rupes, per
Apennini ardua and praerupta juga viam sibi faciat, Arcem Sanctangeli velox
conscendat; Angelo Satanae, Urbi (...) secure procul extra teli jactum
incubanti in faciem narret, esse in Anglia Episcopos haud paucos, qui inhumanae
Romae horrendae lac ferinum immulgenti, personam alienam detrahere, bestiam
ovium sanguinis sitientem a Christi caulis arcere; Ecclesiae laeta and pura
pascua a turpi spumantium Aprorum dente, and foedo lutulentarum Suum rostro
pura and intemerata conservare; Aesopicam corniculam PETRI and PAULI plumis
insolescentem furtivis coloribus nudare; Cuculi Romani, qui Christianos omnes
pro Currucis habet, ova in ipso Dei Templo posita pertundere; Meretricem
Babylonicam Christiani nominis cerussa and minio fucatam traducere, and
possint, quia Doctissimi, and velint, quia Integerrimi, and faciant, quia
Vigilantissimi. Atque ut odor illa morte in mortem sit quia RESIPISCERE
dedidicit, Dignus principio exitus exodiumque sequetur.

Interea temporis, veni, Domine Jesu, veni: Antichristum se truci in unctos
tuos rabie efferentem comprime: Hostibus tuis, qui asperum paternae
castigationis tuae vinum nobis plenis cyathis educendum dedere, acinosas and
pannosas indignationis tuae faeces plenis doliis exhauriendas invitis and
reluctantibus porrige: Captivam Sionis Filiam ferreo Aagyptiacae servitutis
jugo oppressam liberali causa manu assere: LUDOVICI Regis fulgentes hastas,
coruscantes enses, arma mortali fulgore crispantia, tormentorum bellicorum
horrisona fulmina in ipsum Pseudoprophetam and lutosos BABYLONIS muros
converte, ut fatidicum vatem very, nescium, sua sibi mala laeva mente vere
profatum esse pudeat and poeniteat: Ecclesiis transmarinis solidam pacem
subdolis ereptamartibus restitue: Damna nos voti, and hanc qua Major Britannia
tuo solius beneficio fruitur pacem and tranquillitatem nobis fidam, posteris
vero nostris perpetuam praesta: Huic autem aureo libello da ut vivat vigeatque
Antichristo Principum invidiam conflaturus, Ecclesiae tuae almam pacem
coagmentaturus: Immortali aevo summa cum pace fruatur.

AMEN.
The End.

