MATERIALS FOR UNION, Proposed to Public Consideration, With Indifferency To
All Parties.

By -- M. A. Pem. Col. Oxon.

Let Your Moderation be known unto all Men. The Lord is at hand.

Printed, And are to be Sold by the Booksellers in OXFORD, 1681.

Materials FOR Union.
WHereas there are Three Parties of Protestants in the Nation, the
Episcopalian, the Presbyterian, and the Independent (or Congregational Men,
which are of diverse sorts) who do, and will ever differ in their Opinions
about the Church, and Discipline of it, in the Question, which is of Christ's
Institution; or, Whether the One, or the Other, is most consonant to Scripture:
it is not our Disputes about the Church as Particular (which are rather to be
mutually forborne, and every Party left herein to their own Persuasion) but a
Common Agreement in what we Can Agree, and that is in the Church as National,
must Heal our Divisions.

It is here we must lay the Foundation-Stone of Union.

When the Parliament then shall set about This Business to purpose, A Bill
should be brought in for Declaring the Constitution of Our Church of England.

A Parliament is the Representative of the whole People of England, and I doubt
not, but by Consent and Agreement, they might Make a New Constitution of the
CHURCH, as it is National; and much more may they Declare the Constitution of
it.

The Papists are for one Universal Organical Church throughout the world,
whereof the Pope is Head by Christ's Appointment; and whosoever consequently is
not of this Roman Catholick-Church, and Governed by him, must be Damned. There
are some of our late Prelatists are for the same Church, but under the Diocesan
Bishops of the whole Earth, who being Convened in a General Council, are the
Head that must give Laws to it; and whosoever refuse to be Governed by the Laws
of these General Councils, are Schismatics. I am much rather therefore, in my
mind, for the Notion (which is that in the Embryo the Revered Dean of St. Paul's
seems to me to aim at, if it could be once well formed) of an Independent
National Church Political, but not to be held, as the Congregationalist
supposes his Particular Independent One, and They their Catholic, to be of
Divine, but of Humane Institution; for it is manifestly a thing Accidental to
the Church of Christ, that the Supreme Magistrate, and the whole Body of a
Nation, are Christian.

It should be declared then in such a Bill or Act of Parliament, that the
Church of England consists of the KING as the Head, and all the several
Assemblies of the Protestants as the Body.

A Discrimination between the Tolerable and Intolerable, is never to be
gainsaid by any Wise Man.

It is not for me, or any One person, but a Convocation, or Parliament, to
prescribe the Terms of National Communion; but I would have all our Assemblies
that are Tolerable, to be made Legal by such an Act, and thereby parts of the
National Church, as well as the Parochial Congregations.

That the Bishops should be declared Ecclesiastical Officers under the KING,
acting Circa Sacra only, by Virtue of His Authority and Commission.

As Jehoshophat appointed Officers for Government in the Matters of God, and
the Kings Matters: So should the Bishops be in Our Ecclesiastical, as the
Judges are in Civil Matters, the Substitutes of His Majesty, and Execute His
Jurisdiction.

Upon this Account, if any of the Eminent among the Non-conformists were Chosen
to be Bishops, they could not refuse it.

Let Dr. Owen and Mr. Baxter be the Two next that are called to this Function
upon such an Act, and commanded to Hold it, and then would UNION indeed
Commence.

Their Work in general, should be to Supervise the Churches of both sorts in
their Diocesses, that they all Walk according to their own Order, agreeably to
the Gospel, and the Peace of one another.

I am sensible unto what Distress a Congregational Minister may be brought in
the exercise of Discipline over some potent, turbulent, and refractory Members;
and what Relief he might find in such an External Ecclesiastical Officer as
this.

This shall Advance, and not Lessen, the outward Power and Honor of the
Bishops.

I humbly Motion a Third Clerk for the Convocation, to be added to the Two in
every Diocese, and chose out of the Non-conformists for the Unanimous
prosecution of Holiness and Concord throughout all the Churches: And the two
Provinces of Canterbury and York should Unite in this Convocation, for the
making them one National Church, and not two Provincial ones in a diverse
Assembly.

I should expect then such Canons to be made, as would render us all happy in
the satisfaction of both Parties.

An Act of Parliament to this purpose, would make the Church of England to be
in Earnest, such a Church, as the Churchmen would have us still think it, the
Best Constituted, the most Exemplary, and the most Glorious of any that is, or
indeed, that well can be in this World.

And thus I have offered my Mite to the Sanctuary; that is, so much as I have,
and what I think fit for Cultivation by Others, whom GOD shall make
Wise-hearted, and Concerned, for the Welfare of Syon.

There is Room also here left for the farther Invention of Such, in regard to
many the like things as these: For they that will, may see something more in a
few Sheets, in part Entitled, Animadversions upon the Debate between Dr.
Stillingfleet and Mr. Baxter, Concerning the National Church, and Head of it.
Unto which this Paper may be Stitched.

THE END.

