THE HISTORY OF THE HOUSES OF DOUGLAS AND ANGUS.

Written by Master DAVID HUME of GODSCROFT.

EDINBURGH, Printed by EVAN TYLER, Printer to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty. 1644.

The Author to the Reader.
I Know (Reader) that he who undertakes to write, makes himself a mark of
censure for men to level at. For to please all men, shall then only be
possible, when all men shall be of one mind; til then, we look for as many
dislikings, as there is diversities of opinions, each man condemning what is
not according to his own humor and palate. Some will storm or scorn (perhaps)
our writing as an un-necessary scribbling, and paper blurring: others will
quarrel at the subject, that we should write a History; others that such, so
composed, and formal of a private family, with such commendation. Again, some
will accuse us of partiality; and some will even question the truth of it.
Neither will there be wanting such as will blame the form and fashion of the
work, as too short, or too long; and many (I doubt not) will carp at the Style,
the Phrase, the Periods, the Diction and Language. In all these particulars, to
satisfy all men, is more then we can hope for: yet thus much shortly of each
of them, to such as will give ear to reason: That I write, and of this
subject, I am constrained to do it; not by any violence or compulsion, but by
the force of duty, as I take it: for being desired to do it by those I would
not refuse, I thought my self bound to honor that name, and in, and by it, our
King and Country. And so I have done what I can, and should have been glad to
have done more, if it had lain in my power. As for the writing of a History I
could never have dreamed that I should have needed to make Apology for it:
neither did I ever hear it accounted profane, till I had done. Then by chance
I lighted on a certain Author who excuses himself for so doing, and promises
to do so no more. It may be neither shall I. Yet dare I not promise so much:
neither see I any reason why I should: for if by profane, they mean that
History makes men profane, and leads to profanitie and atheism; then
certainly we may justly say, that it is nothing less. For in it we see and
behold, as in a Glass, Gods Providence guiding and ruling the World, and men's
actions, which arrive often to unexpected events, and sometimes even to such
ends as are quite contrary to the Actors intentions. In History also we see
men, and our selves in them, our virtues or vices, which is the second point of
wisdom: this leads us also to God. But if (by profane) they mean whatsoever is
not Scripture, and would have men to read and write nothing but what belongs
unto it; then must we condemn all humane learning and knowledge, all Arts and
Sciences, which are the blessings of God, and in which Moses and Paul were
trained up, and well seen. It is true, there is no knowledge comparable to that
of holy Scripture, and we cannot be too conversant about it; yet there is no
kind of knowledge but is useful, and may and ought to be esteemed and
embraced* Our last end should ever be to God and Christ: but to speak always
of him directly, is neither required nor possible. As he is the end, so the way
to this end is by speaking of him, or of things which may lead us to him: yet
is it not necessary at all times to speak of such things professedly as lead us
that way. He is our end in himself, and for himself, and happy were we if in
him we could terminate all our desires. Virtue leads to him, and is to be
embraced as such: but to obtrude it at first for that consideration, and on
that respect, it may be doubted whether or not that be always the right Method
and best way of proceeding. The other may happen to prove more available with
some, which is, to learn first to be enamoured and to love honor; then virtue
for honor; then virtue for it self; then to account nothing virtue without
God, who not being to be found but in Christ, must needs be sought for above
all things. Now History is, as it were, the A B C. of this Method, and the
beautiful Picture; by looking on which, our desire of honor is kindled, and
so of virtue, which only brings true honor with it. Neither is it needful to
proclaim this intention to the world: yea, I know not whether to say thus much
be not even too much. It is enough to set the object before them, and to
furnish them matter for their thoughts to work upon: as for the measure of
praise we give them, if after thou have read and weighed, thou shall think it
too much, all that I can say, is, that I think it but their due, and speak as I
think, and according to the scantling of my own judgment. Touching partiality,
I deny it not, but am content to acknowledge, my interest. Neither do I think
that ever any man did set pen to paper without some particular relation of
Kindred, Country, or such like. The Romans in writing the Roman, the
Grecians in writing their Greek Histories; friends writing to, of, or for
friends, may be thought partial as Contrymen and friends. The virtuous may
be deemed to be partial toward the virtuous, and the godly toward the godly
and religious: All Writers have some such respect, which is a kind of
partiality. I do not refuse to be thought to have some, or all of these
respects, and I hope none will think I do amiss in having them. Pleasing of
men, I am so far from shunning of it, that it is my chief end and scope: But
let it please them to be pleased with virtue, otherwise they shall find nothing
here to please them. If thou find any thing here besides, blame me boldly.
And why should any be displeased that will be pleased with it? would to God I
could so please the world, I should never displease any. But if either of these
(partiality or desire to please) carry me besides the truth; then shall I
confess my self guilty, and esteem these as great faults, as it is faulty and
blameworthy to forsake the truth. But otherwise so the truth be stuck unto,
there is no hurt in partiality and laboring to please. And as for truth, clip
not, nor champ not my words (as some have done elsewhere) and I believe the
worst affected will not charge me with lying. I have ever sought the truth in
all things carefully, and even here also, and that painfully in every point:
where I find it assured, I have set it down confidently; where I thought there
was some reason to doubt, I tell my Author: So that if I deceive, it is my
self I deceive, and not thee; for I hide nothing from thee, that I my self
know, and as I know it; leaving place to thee, if thou know more or better.
Which if thou do, impart and communicate it; for so thou should do, and
so is truth brought to light, which else would lie hid and buried. My pains
and travel in it have been greater then every one would think, in correcting my
errors; thine will not be so much. And both of us may furnish matter for a
third man to find out the truth more exactly, than either of us has yet done.
Help therefore, but carp not. Concerning the manner and form, this is partly
the cause why I have used this, which I do here follow, that all things being
laid open, and exposed to thy view, thou may have to choose on, or to find
somewhat of thine own; and where I could not resolve a doubt, thou may see
it, and have some mean (perhaps) to solve it better. I have also in many places
interposed my judgment of men's actions: I think it the life of History, and
without which it were little better, than an old wifes tale. It is true, it
were not so needful. if all men were alike judicious: but seeing they are not
so, it is absolutely necessary; that so those who read carelessly and sleepingly
may be awaked; who mind only pleasure, may have profit thrust upon them;
that the dull may be quickened, and the judicious have his judgment sharpened,
and a finer edge put upon it, by this whet-stone. I know there are that think
otherwise, and that all should be left to the collection and discretion of the
Reader: But this is my opinion, and I know no Writer of note, or account, but
interposeth his censure of things. What name you give this piece, I am very
indifferent; Call it History, Chronicle, Comentarie, Annals, Journal lives, or
(if you please) discourses or exercitations, it matters not much. Let who will,
for me, define, divide, and dispute of the nature, of the bounds and Marches of
Airts, and writings, and of their Laws, this kind is my lot or choice at this
time. For the same cause or reason (that men may not take any thing upon mere
trust, I sift the judgment of others, and am content that thou likewise canvase
mine. I do it without partiality, or respecting any man's person: though
otherwise, and in other things I reverence them never so much, yet I cannot but
respect reason more: where they bring not that strong enough to satisfy, I do
not conceal or dissemble it, I do not refuse the same measure from others: if
thou do not like my reason, reject it, but let reason be thy rule, for it is
mine according to my capacity. For the Language it is my Mother Tongue, that
is, Scottish: and why not, to Scottish-men? Why should I contemn it? I never
thought the difference so great, as that by seeking to speak English, I would
hazard the imputation of affectation. Every tongue has the own virtue and
grace. Some are more substantial, others more ornate and succinct. They have
also their own defects and faultiness, some are harsh, some are effeminate,
some are rude, some affectate and swelling. The Romans spoke from their heart,
The Grecians with their lips only, and their ordinary speech was complements;
especially the Asiatick Greeks did use a loose and blown kind of phrase. And
who is there that keeps that golden mean? For my own part, I like our own, and
he that writes well in it, writes well enough to me. Yet I have yielded
somewhat to the tyranny of custom, and the times, not seeking curiously for
words, but taking them as they came to hand. I acknowledge also my fault (if it
be a fault) that I ever accounted it a mean study, and of no great commendation
to learn to write, or to speak English, and have loved better to bestow my
pains and time on foreign Languages, esteeming it but a Dialect of our own,
and that (perhaps) more corrupt. I say the same of the Style: I follow no
rules, but according to my disposition for the time, so it is high or low, long
or short, sweet or sharp, as was my humor for that hour. As in Poesy, so in
Prose; who can choose? Or how many are there that care for these things, or can
discern? The Age is too secure for Writers to be too curious. And thus much
shall suffice to have spoken of these things, and to satisfy (I hope) the
candide Reader. As for those who delight to carp, we say no more to them, but
only this, That as they take a liberty to themselves to judge others, so
there will be found some that will pay them home in their own coin. Farewell.

A CATALOGUE OF THE Lives contained in this History.
PART. I.
Of the House of DOUGLAS.
1. SHolto fol. 1. 2. William, father of the Scoti in Italy. 5. 3. William the
first Lord, created at the Parliament of Forfair. 10. 4. John the second Lord.
11. 5. William the third Lord. 12. 6. Archbald the fourth Lord. ibid. 7.
William, maker of the Indenture with the Lord Abernethie. ibid. 8. Hugh, whom
his foes found never sleeping. 15. 9. William the Hardic. 16. 10. Good Sir
James, slain in Spain. 20. 11. Archbald Lord Galloway, slain at Halidoun. 53.
12. Hugh the ninth Lord. ibid. 13. William Lord Liddisdale, the flower of
Chivalry. 62. 14. William the first Earl. 79. 15. James, slain at Otterburne.
92. 16. William Lord Nithsdale. 108. 17. Grimme Archbald. 111. 18. Archbald
Tine-man. 114. 19. Archbald Earl of Wigton. 133. 20. William, slain in
Edinburgh Castle. 144. 21. Gross James. 157. 22. William, slain in Stirlin.
161. 23. James put into Lindores. 194.

PART. II.
Of the House of ANGUS.
OF the House of Angus before it came to the name of Douglas. 205, 1. William
Earl of Douglas, and Angus. 207. 2. George his son. 208. 3. William. 209. 4.
James. 210. 5. George the second. ibid. 6. Archbald, called Bell the Cat. 219.
Of George Master of Angus, and son to Archbald the first. 237. 7. Archbald that
married the Queen. 238. 8. David. 277. 9. James, Earl Morton, Regent. 278. 10.
Archbald the third, called good Earl Archbald. ibid.

THE PREFACE.
Of the DOUGLASSES in general: that is, Of their 1 Antiquity, (to which is
joined their Original) 2 Nobility and descent, 3 Greatness, 4 and Valor of
the Family and Name of DOUGLAS.

I Think it will not be amiss to place here before the door (as it were) and
entry into this discourse and Treatise (like a Sign or Ivie-bush before an
Inn) an old verse, which is common in men's mouths.

So many, so good, as of the Douglasses have been, Of one surname were never in
Scotland seen.

This saying being ancient, and generally received, will serve to invite the
curious and candid Reader, and like a charm will fright away malignant
spirits, and detractors, who labor to lessen and extenuate what they cannot
deny. Neither is this a public fame only roavingly scattered, and soon
vanishing, but such as has continued from age to age, and which is authorized
and confirmed by all Writers, and which is most of all true in it self, (as
shall appear by this discourse) and nothing immodest or immoderate. For if we
consider these two together jointly (so many and so good) that is, their number
and their worth, we shall find none that can match them in both these put
together. There may be found of other names some as good, but not so many. And
again, though there be as many, yet are they not so good. This truth I have not
heard impugned, but it has hitherto been embraced without all contradiction
(even of calumny it self) I know not if without envy. But let that monster
eat her own heart, and tear her own bowels: and that she may do so yet more,
we will give her further occasion to do it, by enlarging this comparative
thus; So many, so good, etc, of subjects race were never in Europe seen: And
yet farther, In the world were never seen. This is not any rhetorical
amplification, or poetical hyperbol^, but a positive and measured truth. If
any, after he has read and pondered their actions, and paralleld them with
those whose names any History has transmitted to the knowledge of posterity:
If any man (I say) shall find after due search and straight judgment, either in
this our country, or in this our Isle of Britain, or in this fourth part of
the world, Europe; or throughout the whole Universe, such valor to have
continucd in any one house or name (that were Subjects, and not Kings, or
Princes) and to have been so heredivary to all of them; and as if it had been
intailed, descending by succession (...) (...) to son, and from brother to
brother, (the successor still striving to out go his predecessor) in that
height of excellency, and for so many generations: Then (...) this saying be
suspected as partial, or branded with an untruth. Otherwise be contented to
bear witness to the truth, or at least give others leave to do it, and receive
thou it as such, without murmuring, or impatiencie. Now as they have surpassed
all other names, so if we compare them amongst themselves, it will prove a hard
and difficult judgment to determine who deserves the prize and has been most
excellent. There bath been twenty persons and more, who have possessed the chief
houses, and principal families of Douglas and Angus from William (to go no
higher) who died in Berwick a prisoner, besides those worthy branches (the Lord
of Niddisdaill, Liddisdaill, Galloway, Ormond murray, Balvain, Dalkeith, etc.
There is none almost, whose life and the times afforded occasion of action, but
has made himself singularly conspicuous by some notable exploit or other, as
is to be seen in their several lives. For the present we will only take a
general view of them in gross, according to these heads: 1. Antiquity (which
includes their original) 2. Nobility. 3. Greatness. 4. Valor. And first, we
will consider them without any comparison in themselves simply, and absolutely,
then we will compare them with others both within, and without the Country;
and so I hope the truth of our assertion shall appear clear and evident unto
the eyes of all those, that will not obstinately shut their eyes against so
bright shining a light.

To begin then with their Antiquity and Original, so far as we can learn and
Their Antiquity and Original.
find either in History, or Monument, by evident or tradition, which we will
set down here in order of time, as we have gathered and collected them. 1. And
first, we have that tradition which is most ancient of all others in the days
of Solvathius King of Scotland in the year 767. when Donald Bane usurped the
title of King, and had in a battle almost defeated the Kings army, a certain
Nobleman (called afterward Sholto Douglas) came in to their succor, and
overthrew the said Donald, whom he slew in the field and scattered his army, as
is set down at length in his life. 2. The. second witness of their Antiquity
and Original is brought from beyond sea, out of Italy, in the family of the
Scoti of Plaisance which is proved to have sprung from the Douglases at large
in the life of William the fourth man of that name. The time is in the days of
Charlemaign in the year 779. or (as our Writers) 800. or 801. In the reign of
Achaius King of Scotland. 3. Our third witness is a public Monument out of a
Monastery (which were the Registers of those times) the Monastery of
Icolmekill, which tell that Malcolme Kenmore at the Parliament of Forfair in
the year 1057. or 1061. (did not advance to that dignity, for they had the
equivalent of it before) but adorned with the new style of Lord, is some of the
name of Douglas, which style was then first brought into this Country by
imitation of other Nations. 4. Our fourth witness is in the year 1133. The
foundation of the Abbey of Lesmie Hagoe confirmed by King David, wherein it is
expressly bounded by the Barronie of Douglasdaile. Now seeing this is but a
confirmation, the dotation must have gone before in some other Kings days. 5.
The fifth witness is in the days of King William (Nephew to this David) who
began his reign in the year 1163. He erected the town of Air into a free
brough Royal, and amongst the witnesses of their Charter are Alexander and
William Douglasses. 6. The sixth is a mortmain, and dotation granted to the
Bishop of Murray, where the same names are inserted ( William and Alexander
Douglasses) for witnesses. It is not certain whether these be the same that
were witnesses in the former Charter of Air, but it is likeliest they were the
same. In what year of King Williams reign this was we have not yet learned,
but he reigned till the year 1214. 7. The seventh is, the Indenture made
between William Lord Douglas, and Hugh Lord Abernethie in the days of King
Alexander the third, 1259. Some forty five years after this last King William,
the particulars of this Indenture are set down in the life of the said William,
who is the ninth man of the name of Douglas. 8. Eighthly, we have also (though
much later) in the days of King Robert Bruce, and good Sir James Douglas,
mention made of two Douglasses, (besides Sir James) one James Douglas of
Lowden, and Andrew Douglas in the public rolls (three rolls marked, 1. 16.)
King Robert gives to James of Lowdon a confirmation of the lands of
Caldercleere, and Kinnaule, and Carnewath: To Andrew Douglas he gives
Corsewell, which was fallen into his hands by the forfeiture of the Earl of
Winton, or Wigton. Now what these two were, and whether or not they were in
kin to the Lords of Douglas we know not. Only I have heard it reported that
the lands of Lowden were gotten from the Lords of Douglas; and Calder-cleere is
known to have been given off from their estate. Now howbeit these two be not
very ancient, yet it may be gathered that the name of Douglas was ancient, even
then being propagated into so many branches, which could not have been done of
a sudden, but in process of time: These things do confute those Authors who
reckon the Original of the Douglasses from good Sir James, or at the most from
his father William: Because our Writers, Major, Boethius, and Buchanan, name
none before them. But they intending, and minding more the general History of
the Country, then the descent, or beginning of particular houses, may perhaps
be excused herein; yet it does not follow, that there were none before, because
they have past them in silence. And so much shall suffice to have spoken of
their Antiquity, and Original as far as we know. I say expressly as far as we
know; for certainly we do not yet know them fully; We do not know them in the
fountain, but in the stream, not in the root, but in the stock and stem; for
we know not who was the first mean man, that did by his virtue raise himself
above the vulgar to such eminent place and state, as our Sholto behoved to have
been of, before he wan the battle, and got the name of Douglas, which has
drowned his former name: for none but some great man of great friendship and
dependence could have been able to have overcome this Donald Bane, (Being
already victor) and changed the fortune of the day: And William indeed was
created a Lord at Forfair, but we hear not that he was raised from a mean
estate, or enriched by the Kings liberality; wherefore we may justly think he
had the same place in effect before, but under some other name, as of Thane,
Abthane; or some such title.

The next point we propound to speak of is their Nobility. There is great
contest 2 Of their Nobility.
among men, who should be most Noble; but where will true Nobility be found so
entire? In what subjects race is it so full and perfect, according to all the
acceptions, and significations thereof? They define it to be a lifting or
raising up above the vulgar: and what name, I pray, has been so elcvated, and
has so transcended all other, as this of the Douglasses? They add this
condition, that it be for true worth; and has there been any so worthy? Those
that will distinguish it into several kinds, make five sorts of it; 1 Nobility
of virtue; 2 of degrees; 3 of Offices and Employment; 4 of Birth and descent; 5
Lastly of Fame and renown.

1. Of all these the first is the ground, without which the rest are never well
1. Of Virtue.
built, and are but shadows without the substance: virtus nobilitat, virtue
does ennoble, is a saying, which is no less true then ancient; for it makes
him in whom it does reside, truly noble by its own power beyond all exception.
It has not the dependence on Kings or Princes to give or take it away: It is
ever the self, whether exalted, or not exalted; regarded, or neglected;
respected, or disrespected. Nay, it does ever carry along with it such respect
and regard, as no baseness of place, of birth, of means or employment, can
stain or lessen; making lowness it self to overtop whatsoever is highest in
the eyes of the world. It adds honor to whatsoever place, majesty to
whatsoever estate, sufficiency to whatsoever means, splendor to whatsoever
obscurity: which no contempt of tongues, no detracting speeches, no dis-esteem
of presuming pride, is able to impair or darken. Where honor and virtue do
meet, there honor is an external addition and confirmation of the inward
testimony in the mind of the virtuous: but where virtue is wanting, outward
honors are but false ensigns, lying inscriptions of empty boxes. That this
name was vertuonsly noble, and nobly virtuous, the deduction of their lives
will sufficiently show.

2. As for the second, Nobility of Degrees, of Dignities and Titles given by 2.
Of Degrees.
Kings and Princes; such as are these of Knights, Barons, Lords, Earls, Dukes,
etc. all these they had conferred upon them both at home and in foreign
Countries. This kind of Nobility is in account amongst men; because although
oftentimes it proceeds merely from the Princes favor upon small or no desert,
yet it is supposed to be grounded upon virtue, or that it should always be
grounded thereon: Now in the Douglasses it was ever so, for they were never
greater then they deserved: and whatever titles of honor they had, were rather
thrust upon them, then ambitiously sought and hunted after: Nay, we read of
grimme Archibald, that he rejected and refused the title of Duke.

3. The third sort is very like and near unto this, if it be not a part of it
consisting 3. Of Offices and employment.
in public offices and employment either in peace or war, such as to be
Wardens of the Marches, Lievetenants, Governors, Leaders, and Conductors of
armies: This was almost proper, and (in a manner) hereditary to the house, in
which places also they so behaved themselves, that for their good services done
to the King, and Country, their Family and Posterity do enjoy (at this hour)
many privileges and immunities granted to them in their Charters, such as 1.
Regalities, (and exemptions thereby.) 2. The first place and vote in
Parliament, Counsel, or meeting, and convention of the States. 3. The leading
of the vantguard in the day of battle: 4. And the bearing of the Crown at
riding in Parliament.

4. The fourth is Nobility of blood, and Descent. This some do place only in
4. Of blood.
the descent of the right line masculine without interruption, and esteem him
most Noble, whose extraction proceeds from most of this kind. Others again
will have it to be on both sides; and certainly it seems to stand with reason
that both should be regarded, seeing every ground is not (...) for Noble seed,
and every stock will not serve to ingraffe a generous imp. However, we shall
find the Douglasses Noble also in this way, in their descent on both sides, in
their affinity and alliance, being come of Kings, and Kings of them: and first
of all King Robert Bruce and William the Hardy (or Long leg) were of kin by
the house of Carrick. For Martha Countess of Carrick and this William wore
Cousin Germans, his mother having been sister to her father the Earl of
Carrick that died in Syria. Now Martha was mother to King Robert, and hereby
King Robert and Good Sir James were Cousin Germans once removed. But this was
ere Bruce was King, while he was yet but a private man. 2. Secondly therefore,
Robert Stuart (the first of the Stuarts that was King, and who was grandchilde
to Robert Bruce) gave his eldest daughter in marriage to Earl James, slain at
Otterburne. 3. The same King Robert gave another of his daughters to William
Lord of Nithisdale. 4. The Duke of Rothsay, Prince of Scotland (son to King
Robert the third) married Marjorie daughter to Archbald the Grim. 5. Archbald
(the third of that name, and first Duke of Turaine) had to wife Margaret Stuart
daughter to the same King Robert (the third) as the black book of Scoone
expressly witnesses, which calls him, Gener Regis, the Kings son-in-law.
Ballandine (the Translatour of Boethius) calls him the Kings Mengh, or Allie,
and king James the second claims Stuarton from James the last Earl of
Douglas in the conditions of peace sent to him. Now Stuarton is known to have
been the proper inheritance of John Stuart, and after him of Walter, then of
Robert (the first king of the Stuarts) and so of Robert the third, which (in
all likelihood) he has given with his daughter (as her dowry) to this
Archbald. 6. Also John Earl of Buchan (the kings brothers son) married a
daughter of this Archbald, whom he has had apparently by some other wife. 7.
Then Alexander, son to the Earl of Buchan, married Isabel Douglas Countess of
Mar, daughter to William the first Earl of Douglas. 8. William the first
Earl married Margaret Stuart daughter to Thomas Earl of Angus, who was uncle
to king Robert the second, and first king of the Stuarts. 9. George Douglas,
son to the same William who was the first Earl of Angus of the name of
Douglas, married Mary Stuart, daughter to king Robert the third, and sister to
king James the first. 10. James Douglas Lord of Dalkeith married a daughter of
king James the second. 11. Archbald brother to William the eighth Earl of
Douglas married the inheritrix of Murray, who was Niece to king Robert the
second, and so became Earl of Murray. 12. Archbald Earl of Angus, the second
of that name, married Margaret Queen of Scotland, relict of king James the
fourth, and eldest daughter to king Henry the seventh, sister to king Henry the
eighth of England, and mother to king James the fifth of Scotland: by her he
had Lady Margaret Douglas. 13. Lady Margaret Douglas, his daughter, was
married to Matthew Stuart Earl of Lennox, who was also of the blood Royal.
14. Henry Stuart Lord Darnely (son to Lennox and Lady Margaret) married Mary
Queen of Scotland, only daughter and heir to king James the fifth: She bare
to him James the sixth of Scotland, and now happily the first king of Great
Britain, France, and Ireland. And so much for Nobility in blood and alliance.

5. The fifth and last kind of Nobility is that of fame and renown. Those 5.
Of Fame.
that take upon them to derive and deduce the Pedigree and Etymology of words,
do think that this signification is most proper, as being chiefly employed in
the word Nobilis, quasi Notabilis; so that those are said to be most Noble* who
are least obscure, who are most eminent and conspicuous in the eyes of the
world, and most praised and blazed by Fame in their own and foreign Countries.
This kind of Nobility has ever accompanied their virtue, as a shadow
follows the body, and that both at home and abroad. And so we have done with
their Nobility, which is the second point we propounded to be treated of.

The third maine head to be considered, is their Greatness, concerning which
3. Greatness.
in general our Chronicles do witness, that those of the name of Douglas,
together with their Friends, Vassals, and Dependers, were able to make an Army
of thirty thousand, or forty thousand men.

This also does argue their greatness, that it was thought an honor and
credit to have dependence on them. Histories do testify that the Hamiltouns
and Flemmings thought it no disparagement to follow them. Humes were their
Pensioners and Vassals, even the chief houses of them. This is verified by a
bond of a thousand nobles (a great sum in those days) made by Archbald Earl
of Wigtoun, and Long Willie (who was after his fathers death Earl of Douglas)
to Alexander Hume of Hume, dated at Bothwell 1423. The same Earl also (for his
father was Duke of Turaine) gave the lands of Wedderburne to David Hume brother
to the said Alexander (propter multiplicia sua servitia) for his many good
services. This Charter of Wedderburne is anterior to the gift of Alexanders
pension some eight or nine years, being dated in the year 1414. The Lawders
of Basse, and Loganes of Rastarigge, were their Messengers into France, and
other parts. Gray, Salton, Seaton, Oliphant, were their followers also. Neither
could any man of ordinary pitch of power, have brought such aid to a foreign
Prince, as this same Earl of Wigtoun transported over into France, (five
thousand, or as some say ten thousand) which he levied and carried over at his
own proper cost, all brave and choice gentlemen. If for this he were rewarded
with the Duchy of Turaine, it was but the just recompense of his service, and
no more then he deserved, and would but countervaile his charges. Wherefore I
wonder with what indifferent judgment Du Serres (Author of the French
Inventarie) does grudge at it, and can call it mercenarie. Certainly the kings
of France have thought it their due, or else they would not have continued it
so long for five or six generations, that is, until the Earls of Douglas were
forfeited. Few subjects of foreign Princes have been so much respected, and
so rewarded. It is also an evidence of their power and greatness, that Henry
the sixth of England did contract and covenant with George the second (Earl of
Angus) for his aid and assistance against Edward the fourth, and made an
Indenture, wherein he promises to give him lands erected into a Duchy, lying
betwixt Humber and Trent. Edward the fourth made James the last Earl of
Douglas Knight of the Garter, even when he was banished, so much did he honor
and respect his name and virtue. So Henry the second of France made Archbald
the second (Earl of Angus) one of the Order of Saint Michael, or the Cockle.
Their magnificence and stately entertainment, and courage at home and abroad,
does likewise show their greatness. William the fourth of that name, and sixth
Earl, being but a very young man, not above fourteen or fifteen years of age,
bad for his ordinary train a thousand horse; he dubbed Knights, had his
Counselors and Officers of State, like a Prince: and William the fifth was
admired for his train and magnificence, as he passed through Flanders, France,
and Italy, in his journey to Rome. Our Writers indeed blame him for it, and
call it pride, ambition and ostentation in him: but however that be, It was an
evident proof of Greatness.

The last and main point that we are to treat of is, their valor. Let their 4.
Their (...) lour.
deeds and actions speak for this property. But to take a general view of it:
The common Epethite in the mouths of the common people has appropriate unto
them this virtue: who never speak of them, but with the addition of doughty,
the doughty Douglas. And from hence indeed chiefly their greatness and honors
did spring; and we shall find none of them but were both skillful commanders,
and stout soldiers, being no less endowed with personal valor, then
discretion and judgment to direct, and conduct. That brave matchless Roman (
Scipio Africanus) when he was taxed for not hazarding his person, and fighting
with his own hand, thought it enough to answer ( Imperatorem matter me peperit,
non bellatorem) My mother bare me a Commander, not a fighter: but our Douglases
were both maximi Imperatores, nec minus strenui bellatores, wise Commandars,
and hardy fighters and warriers; they had both good heads, and good hearts and
hands. In the beginning ere Rome came to its greatness, it is said of the
first Captains (Decorum erat tum ipsis ducibus capescere pugnam) That it was no
disparagement, but honorable for the Leaders themselves to sight with their
own hand; None were more ready and forward to fight then the Douglasses, only
Wallace is thought to have gone beyond any of them. But he is but one, and that
singular and extraordinary, without any second, at least of his own name; and
our comparison stands between name and name, where the number is as well to be
remembered as the worth. So many so valorous of one surname, is that which we
have undertaken to prove. Besides, none of the Douglasses did ever encounter
with Wallace to try who was the better man, and if we parrallell their actions
done apart, what act o^ Wallace can be produced more admirable, then that of
Archbald Tineman at the battle of Shrewsburie, where with his own hand he s^ew
Blunt the King of Englands Standardbearer, and three more, who were apparelled
like Kings, and at last unhorst the King himself, whom he had also stain, if he
had not been rescued by his son Henry the fifth. In an English manuscript I
have seen it thus expressed,

And there with fiery courage he assails
Three all as Kings adornd in royal ways,
And each successive after other quails,
Still wondering whence so many Kings did rise:
Till doubting, lest his hands or eye sight fails,
With these confounded, on the fourth he flies,
And him unhorses too, whom had he sped,
He then all Kings in him had vanquished.
For Henry had divided as it were
The person of himself into four parts,
To be less known, and yet known every where. etc.
It is written also of William Lord of Niddisdail, that he was exceeding both
stout and strong, beyond any that lived in his days, so that whomsoever he
struck but once with mace, sword, or spear, he needed never to double his
stroke, eveblow carried death with it. Also James (slain at Otterburne) his
personal valor and strength is very highly extolled by the writers of these
times, who besides that he had the better of Percie in their duel at
Newcastle, he himself was the chief cause of the victory that got the honor
of the day at Otterburn (where he lost himself, but wan the field) by his own
personal valor. They tell how he fought with a huge iron mace, that was
heavier then any ordinary man of those days could weild, and more then two or
three of such as now live. Qualia nunc hominum producit corpora tellus. We
might add unto these Archbald Bell the Cat (Earl of Angus) who in a duel
with Spence cut off his thigh (through bone and all) at a blow, and diverse
others, as Archbald of Kilspindie, whom King James the fifth called always his
gray steel, for his valor and ability of body; but these shall suffice here
for a taste of their valor.

But we will not content our selves with a general and absolute commendation,
we will also descend to the comparative, which we desire may be as far from
envy, as we hope it shall be found near to truth. To begin then first at
home, there is no subjects race in this Country that can match them in these
of which we have spoken, Antiquity, Nobility, Greatness, and Valor or worth:
in these (I say) jointly: that is, there is none so Ancient, and withal so
Noble, Great, and Valorous. No name is or ever was in this Country of which
there can be reckoned so many and so worthy, for so stands our comp^rison. The
Grahames are very Ancient, (in the days of Ferguse the second, anno 424.) and
very Noble, but have never attained to that degree of Greatness as the
Douglasses have done. The Hayes also are a very old and honorable name (in the
reign of Kenneth the third, anno 976.) but not so anci^nt as our Douglasses by
two hundred years, for they began in the reign of Solvathius anno 767. These
two ( Hayes and Douglasses) do agree in this, that they are (as the Grahames
also are) natural Scots borne; but there is great odds between them other
ways: For the Hayes have not reached to that pitch of greatness either in
degree or estimation, and account of men by many stages, as the Douglasses have
attained. Other names which now are great, are nothing so ancient, and besides
are come from other Countries, such as Hammilto^* Gordons, Campbels: The
Campbels from France, and the other two out of England. The Hammiltouns came in
King Robert Bruces time, the Gordons in Mackolme Kenmores. The Murrayes are
more ancient, and before all these, yet they are strangers, and not of the
first blood of the Scots, and there was but one of them great and remarkable,
who was Governor of Scotland; few or none Nobilitated till of late: but none
of all those names comes near that number of Nobles and Worthies (by lineall
or laterall descent) and as it were of hereditarie virtuous succession and race
of men, which we find of the Douglasses. There have been some great and
worthy of other names, but if they enter into comparison, they will be found
(rari nantes in gurgite vasto) but few, one or two eminent of a name, or of the
chief house: it will also appear that their honors (most of them) have
flowed more from their Princes favor, then their own great deserving, or
great service against the enemy. The Cummins were the most numbrous and
powerful of any that ever were in Scotland before or since (as some of our
Writers say) yet their greatness has rather been in lands and possessions,
or friends, then in deeds of arms, and prowess of Chivalrie, having done
little or nothing of note, and worthy of renown. John Cummin indeed fought
three battles at Roseline in one day against the English, in which we find
nothing reported of his personal valor: whereas the Douglasses did ever show
themselves in person to be singularly valorous. Besides, he was but one man,
the rest are buried in silence, and there is nothing to be found of them all
(though all their actions were put together) that deserves to be compared with
the deeds of any one man amongst many of the Douglasses. Moreover, as there was
no great action in them, they were scarce good Patriots, using their power to
the disadvantage of their Country, and the opposing of the Liberties thereof,
in King Robert Bruces days, rather then for the good and standing of the
Kingdom, which the Douglasses did ever. We find also that they were not very
careful to keep their promises, and thought the breach of their words and
faith (so it were for their advantage) a point of good wisdom and policy, a
foul and base quality, and, which is ever incident to mean and base spirits,
being directly opposite to true generositie and magnanimity, which is the
sountaine and wellspring of upright dealing and truth in word and action,
which were ever found in our noble Douglasses.

For other Countries, to begin with our nearest neighbors of England, the most
renowned name for deeds of arms amongst them, is that of the Percies of
Northumberland, between whom and the Douglasses there has ever been a noble
and generous emulation with various success, but for the most part to the
Douglasses advantage; so that we may say (Contendisse Decorum) of the Percies.
But they come far short of that number of worthies, that we have in ours.
Besides the Percies have not been so loyal Subjects, having often taken arms
against their lawful Princes, and being guilty of diverse rebellions, plots,
conspiracies, according to which Sir Josseline Percie said merrily of the
powder treason, that it had not been a right treason, unless a Pereie had had
a hand in it.

But to go higher, even to the Mistress and Empress of the world, Rome it
self: the Fabii and Cornelii were the most numerous families, and out of these
two houses proceeded more Commanders, and brave Captains, then out of any that
I have read, or can remember of amongst them. Now the first mention that we
have of them is where they are both named, in the year 267. from the building
of Rome, twenty years after the banishing of their King Tarquinius; at which
time Quintus Fabius, and Servius Cornelius, were Consuls together: from that
time till Quintus Fabius Consul in theyeare 740. for the space of 437. years,
we find of the Fabii about some 24. persons that were Consuls, Tribunes,
Decemviri, Dictatours, Generals, and Leaders of Armies; but for their valor
or prowess, personal courage, or proper worth, the three first are only
famous, Q. Fabius, M. Fabius and Caeso Fabius. These three being brothers, and
Marcus Fabius being Consul, fought against the Hetrusci (in the year 269.) and
Q. Fabius being slain, Marcus and Caeso having encouraged the army (that was
discouraged by the death of their brother Quintus) leaping over the dead corpse
of their brother, assaulted the enemy in their own persons, and by their
valor and example stayed their men from flying, restored the battle, and at
last obtained the victory: we read also of one Ambustus Fabius, whose 3. sons
were sent in an embassage to the Gauls to request the^ not to trouble the
Clusinii (in the year, 364. 63.) These three when they could not prevail, nor
persuade them to desist from invading the Clusinii did join with the Clusinii
against the Gauls, in which conflict Quintus Fabius (one of Ambustus three
sons) slew with his own hands in sight of both armies the Captain of the Gauls,
and carried away his spoil: But he quickly stained that honor, he and his two
brothers, by their misgovernment at the battle of Allia against the same
Gauls, where they fled shamefully without striking a stroke, and by their
misguiding gave occasion to the sacking of Rome. The last is Fabius the
Dictatour, who fought against Hanniball, famous for his conduct, but not so for
any personal valor. So the Cornelii from the same 267. until 734. when P.
Scipio was Consul, 736. when Lentulus was reckoning both these Cornelians, with
the house of Africane the younger (a Cornelian by adoption, but an Emiliane
borne) they are about three and thirty persons in these 167. years, who were in
great place Consuls, Dictatours and the like, as the Fabii: some of them were
also famous for their conduct in war, having been brave Leaders, and
Generals of armies (as the two Africanes, their brother Lucius, their father
and their uncle Publius, and Cneus) but for personal valor there are not many
eminent, Only Aulus Cornelius Cossus, who slew Tolumnius King of the Veiens,
and Africane the first (if it were he) who rescued his father at the battle of
are remarked for their personal valor. Now neither of these two families
does equal the Douglasses; who in fewer years, viz. from the 1309. until
1588. about 300. years, brought forth 27. persons, all singular for their
valor, and some of them far beyond any of these, as may be seen. This
advantage these Romans had, that living in the continent of Italy, and in a
Common wealth which did so flourish, and was so great, their actions and decds
were more conspicuous, being acted in a more large and ample theater, then
those of our men, who were pent up in a narrow and obscure corner of an Island;
and had neither the Carthaginians nor Hanniball to fight against, whose
overthrow would have given a greater splendor to their actions. And moreover
they have had good Heralds to sound their praises aloud, and trumpet them
abroad in the world, when as ours Omnes occiderunt illacrimabiles, caruere quia
vate sacro. And yet even by this which we have been able to collect of them,
our proposition will appear to be sufficiently proved; with which as we began,
so will we conclude: So many so good, etc. in the world, were never seen of one
name and family.

Touching which assertion, I will earnestly entreat this favor of the
courteous Reader, that he would be pleased to consider what has been said in
an even balance and indifferent judgment, setting aside all prejudice and
pre-conceived opinion of any worth in any Nation; and if he do not approve of
our conclusion, and assent to it, let him calmely and modestly impart his
reasons, and he shall find me one that shall be most willing and ready to
retract what has been said, and to give place to the truth, if I be not able
to satisfy him in reason. For my own part, I protest I speak as I think, and
no more then I think; according to my reading and knowledge of men, and
according to the measure of my judgment and understanding, without prejudice
of any, who upon more knowledge and out of better judgment, shall find things
to be otherwise then I have thought. In the mean time we will set down here,
what we have said of them else where, speaking to King James at his return into
Scotland out of England, in the year, 1617.

Atque haec inter tot diademata celsa, corollam
Annumerare tuis titulis fas ducis, and unum
Privatam (verum magnis a regibus ortam,
Regibus affinem magnis regumque gerentem,
Sepe vicem, bellique domique and quod satis unum est,
Gignentem Celsum generoso semine regem,
Regem, quo tellus majorem non videt, unus
Qui terna imperii tractas sceptra alma Britanni)
Duglasiam, Angusiamque domum virtute secundam
Haud ulli quas prisca aut Roma, aut Graecia jactat
Seu numero heroum, seu robore mentis and armis,
Sive fide in patriam; sceptrorum ut millia sceptris
Accumulesque tuis, numeresque in stemmate reges
Latus quotcunque orbis habet: non ultima laus haec
Duglasius etiam duxisse haeroibus ortum.
And thou have thought it not unfit to set
Amongst thy many Crowns this Coronet;
A private family, and yet they be
Derived from Kings, and often did supply
The place of absent Kings in war and peace,
And what may be esteemed a greater grace,
That from their loins thy Royal self did spring
Thy self, then whom earth sees no greater King.
You Britains threefold Scepter justly weeld,
Douglas nor Angus will to no house yield,
Nor the most famed of Greece, or ancient Rome,
For numbers of brave men, nor are overcome
In strength of mind, or arms, or faithful love
To their dear Country: should your state improve,
And you enjoy a thousand Scepters more,
And draw your stock from all the numerous store
Of Kings the whole world holds, it would not be
Thy least praise, that a Douglas lives in thee.
THE HISTORY OF THE HOUSE and RACE of DOUGLAS and ANGUS.
Of SHOLTO DOUGLAS the first that bare the name of DOUGLAS, and of whom all
that bear that name are descended.
TOuching the original of this illustrious Family and Name of Douglas, we must
not look for an exact and infallible demonstration; things of this nature are
not capable of it. Great Antiquity is commonly accompanied with much
incertainty, and the originalls even of Cities, Countries and Nations, are
grounded (for the most part) upon no surer foundation, then conjecturall
proofs, whose beginnings are more easily known, and better remembered then those
of private families. In such cases we use to take that for truth which comes
nearest to it amongst diverse narrations; and must rest on that which is most
probable and apparent. Quis rem tam veterem pro certo affirmet? says the
Historian in a matter not unlike. And we will say with the same Author, Cura
non deesset, si qua ad verum via inquirentem ferret: nunc famae standum est,
Live. lib. 7. d^ lacu Curtio.
ubi certam derogat vetustas fidem. The beginning of our Nation, yea of both
Nations (Scots and English) such as they now are, or of those that were before
(Picts and Brittans) is not yet sufficiently cleared: neither is it as yet
fully known from what people they are sprung, or how they got their name of
Scots, English, Picts and Britans; although the learned have bestowed their
pains, andimploied their pens on this subject, to the wearying, but not
satisfying of the Reader. As for Scotland, Mr Cambden grants so much, and mocks
those that have labored in it: yet has he himself bestowed his time and pains
to as small purpose in behalf of his contrymen the Brittans: Neither has he
done any thing, save that by his fruitles attempt (notwithstanding all his
bragging) he has made it appear, that to go about it is but to labor in vain;
he himself (after all his travel) remaining no less Sceptick, (and to use his
own words) Scotizing, then others. And even Rome it self (the mistress of the
world) though the noontide of her Empire be clear and bright, like the Sun
in her strength, yet how misty is the morning and dawning thereof. Darkness
triumphs over the reigns and triumphs of her first kings; which are covered
over with such uncertain obscurity, or rather drowned in so profound and deep
night of darkness, that all her children (though they have beaten their
brains, and spent much lamp-oyl in searching of it) could never clear their
mothers nativity, or vindicate their father Romulus birth from the fable of the
incestuous vestall, nor his nursing from being beholding to a she Wolf. Detur
haec venia Antiquitati, ut miscendo humana divinis primordia urbium Livius.
augustiora faciat. If he had said, that Writers must have leave to be obscure
or uncertain in setting down the original of Cities, it could not well have
been denied him; but for men to invent, and to thrust their intentions upon
others to be believed, because they know not what else to say Detur haec venia
nobis, to believe no more then is probable. Neither will that serve his turn,
Jam hoc gentes humanae patiantur aequo animo, ut imperium patiuntur. They may
command our bodies, who cannot command our souls, or our belief; and now we
have shaken off the yoke of the one, and so we do reject the other. There is
no less uncertainty in Plutarches Theseus and Numa. Wherefore we must be
contented in the original of a private family with what others are forced to
content themselves in the beginnings of Cities, Nations, Kingdoms, and
Empires; which are like to some rivers, whose streams and outlets are known,
but their springs cannot be found out, as they report of Nilus. Yet this our
Narration does better deserve credit, then those of Romulus, Numa, Theseus,
etc. seeing it contains nothing that is impossible, nothing that is fabulous or
incredible: for here are neither gods for their fathers, nor ravening beasts
their nurses. And albeit that the Chronicle of our Country now extant makes no
mention of their beginning, yet what we find there does rather confirm then
confute our deduction thereof. And indeed it is no wonder that they are silent
in this point; If we consider how Edward the first of England (surnamed
Longshanks) whom his country men term ( Scotorum malleus) the hammer of the
Scots, because that he deceiving the trust, and abusing the power of
Arbitratour which was given him to decide the right to the Crown of Scotland
between Bruce and Balioll, did so handle the matter, that setting the together
by the ears, after they had well beaten and battered each other, he himself
fell upon them both, and so hammered and bruised them, that he did thereby
overrun all the low and plain champion Country. If we then consider, I say,
how he had to make the Scots malleable and pliable to his unlimited ambition,
after he had thus cut off the flower of the Scottish Nobility, destroyed also
all the laws of the realm, both civil and ecclesiastical, burnt the public
Registers, together with private Monuments, Evidents, Charters, and Rights of
lands; we shall have greater cause to wonder: that any thing escaped so
powerful a King, intending the full conquest of the Country; and who had so
jealous an eye over any thing that might encourage his new vassals to rebels,
then that we have no more left us. Nay although he had not done this of set
purpose, and with intention to root out all memorialls of Nobility out of the
minds of the Scots, and to embase their spirits, by concealing from them their
descent and qualities; yet even the common chance and accidents of war were
enough to excuse this defect: for the Lord Douglas lands lying in the south
parts of Scotland, hard upon the borders of England, this calamity did chiefly
afflict him, so that his houses were burnt, his castles razed, himself taken
prisoner, and so all monuments of his original lost or destroyed. Let us
remember also, besides all this, the quality and condition of those times, in
which there was great scarsity of Writers, and learned men able to preserve the
memory of things by their pens, all being set on war, unless it were some few
cloystred Monks and Friars, who were both careless and illiterate droans.
Notwithstanding all this, as no destruction is so general, and so far spread,
but something does escape the fury of it; and though all monuments had been
defaced, yet some men being preserved, what was written in their minds and
memories remaining unblotted out, they remembered what they had heard from their
predecessors, and delivered it to posterity from age to age. By which means we
have (as it were) some boords or planks preserved out of this shipwreck, which
may perhaps keep us from being lost in this deepth of Antiquity, if it do not
bring us safe to land.

According then to the constant and general tradition of men, thus was their
original. During the reign of Solvathius King of Scotland, one Donald Bane
(that is, Donald the white, or fair) having possessed himself of all the western
Islands (called Ebudes, or Hebrides) and intitling himself King thereof, aspired
to set the crown of Scotland also upon his head. For effectuating whereof, he
gathered a great army; wherein he confided so much, that he set foot on the
nearest continent of Scotland, to wit, the province of Kintyre and Lorne. The
Kings Lievetenants Duchal and Culen, governors of Athole and Argyle make head
against him with such forces as they could assemble on the sudden. Donald
trusting to the number of his men did bid them battle, and so prevailed at
first, that he made the Kings army to give ground, and had now almost gained
the day, and withal the Kingdom, that lay at stake both in his own conceit,
and the estimation of his enemies. In the mean time a certain Noble man,
disdaining to see so bad a cause have so good success, out of his love to his
Prince, and desire of honor, accompanied with his sons and followers, made an
onset upon these prevailing rebels with such courage and resolution, that he
brought them to a stand; and then heartning the discouraged fliers both by word
and example, he turns the chase, and in stead of victory they got a defeat;
for Donalds men being overthrown and fled, he himself was slain. This fact was
so much the more noted, as the danger had been great, and the victory
unexpected. Therefore the King being desirous to know of his Lievetenants the
particulars of the fight, and inquiring for the Author of so valiant an act,
the Nobleman being there in person, answer was made unto the King in the Irish
tongue (which was then only in use) Sholto Du glass, that is to say, Behold
yonder black, gray man, pointing at him with the finger, and designing him by
his color and complexion, without more ceremony or addition of titles of
honor. The King considering his service and merits in preserving his Crown,
and delighted with that homely designation, rewarded him royally with many
great Lands, and imposed upon himself the name of Douglas, which has
continued with his posterity until this day. And from him the Shire and County
which he got, is called still Douglasdale, the River that vvatereth it, Douglas
River, the Castle which he built therein, Douglasse castle. This narration,
besides that it is generally received, and continued as a truth delivered from
hand to hand, is also confirmed by a certain manuscript of great antiquity,
extant in our days in the hands of one Alexander Mackduffe of Tillysaul, who
dwelt at Moore alehouse near Straboguie. There (at his dwelling house) William
Earl of Angus (who died at Paris 1616) being confined to the North (in the
year 1595) did see and peruse it. Neither does this relation cross or disagree
with any thing set down in our Histories: for although they do not mention this
man, nor his fact, yet they all speak of this usurper, and of his attempt and
overthrow in the days of Solvathius (about the year 767.) Hollinshed and
Beetius affirm, that this Donald was Captain or Governor of the Isle of Tire.
Some do call him Bane mack Donalde, but Buchana^ calls him expressly
Donaldus Banus, an easy error in so great affinity of name. There is another
of the same name called likewise Donald Bane, who did also usurp the title of
the Kingdom, and was in like manner defeated in the reign of King Edgar (in
the year 1000) but that being 333. years after this, and not much less after
the Emperor Charles Le maigne, in whose time they had now propagated and
spread themselves in Italy (as shall be showed anon) It cannot agree either
with this History of our Sholto, or with that Donald whom he defeated; this
last seeming to be rightlier named Mack Donald, as descended, and come of the
former, who was Donalde: wherefore there is nothing here either fabulous, or
monstrous; nothing incredible or contrary to it self or to reason; but all
things very harmoniously answering one unto another; our tradition with the
manuscript, and both of these agreeing with our own and foreign Histories.
And thus concerning Sholto Douglas the root, and original of the name and
family.

Of Hugh Douglas, son to Sholto: And first of the name of Hugh.
TO Sholto succeeded his son Hugh, of whom we have nothing to write, but that
he assisted his father at the overthrow of Donald Bane the usurper, there being
nothing else recorded of him.

Of his son Hugh the second.
UNto the former Hugh did succeed his eldest son named also Hugh: for he had
two sons, Hugh and William. Hugh the elder lived at home in his native country
as a Noble man, borne to a great inheritance, whose actions by the iniquity of
time are buried in silence, and therefore we will insist no longer thereon. His
younger brother William (as is the custom of younger brothers) went abroad
into foreign Countries to seek adventures of arms, if so he might make
himself a fortune that way. Of him therefore we will speak next.

Of William Douglas father of the honorable family of the SCOTI in Italy.
THis William was son to the first Hugh, and grandchilde to Sholto, younger
brother to the second Hugh: he it is that was father to the noble family of
the Scoti in Placenza in Italy, which fell out thus, as it is related by the
Italian Historians, agreeing with ours.

Achaius king of Scotland having succeeded to Solvathius, did enter into league
with Charlemaigne, which league has continued betwixt the Scots and French
without breach on either side ever since until these our days; whereupon when
the Emperor Charles went into Italy to repress the insolences of Desiderius
King of the Lombards committed against the Sea of Rome, Achaius as his
confederate did send him four thousand choice men under the conduct of his
brother William, a pious and valarous young Prince.

Amongst other of his Captains that went with him, this William Douglas was one
of the chief, and had the leading of the men of arms. The Emperor having
restored Pope Leo the third to the dignity of his Seat, as he returned through
Tuscanie, amongst other his notable acts, he restored also the Commonwealth of
Florence to their former liberty; in which exploit the valor and actions of
the Scottish Prince William were much remarked: the Florentines to show their
thankfulness to the Emperor took to their Arms the Red Lilly, a part of the
French Arms, the color only being changed: And in memory of the valor of
Prince William they did institute public plays yearly, in which they crowned
a Lion with great ceremony and pomp, ordaining also that certain Lions should
be kept upon the charges of the common Thesaurarie, because William had a Lion
for his Arms, which is also the Arms of the Kings of Scotland. They have also
a prophecy in Florence, which says,

While crowned Lions live in Florence field, B^et. lib. 10. page 195. Holl. p.
164. Scot. Chr^. Anno 787.

To foreign Arms their State shall never yield.
This Prince William, brother to Achaius King of Scotland, passed into
Germany, and gave himself wholly to the wars, where for his service by his
sword, having obtained large Territories, he led a single life all his days,
and thinking to make Christ his heir, he founded and doted fifteen Abbacies
for those of the Scottish Nation. It is he (says Major) who is named in songs
made of him, Scottish Gilmore. Now while as the Emperor and Prince William
were in their return from Italy toward France, William Douglas in his voyage
through Plaisance did fall into a heavy disease, and not being able to go
along with the Emperor, stayed at Plaisance till he recovered his health. And
then considering the toil and danger of so long a journey, as it would be into
his own Country, he resolved rather to remain there, then to hazard his
person any more, which such travel would have greatly endangered: wherefore to
gain the good will of the Citizens of Plaisance, and to strengthen himself
(being a stranger) by a good alliance, he took to wife a daughter of Antonio
Sp^no, one of the most eminent and honorable houses in that City: by her he
had many children, of whom are descended those of the most noble Family of the
Scoti, who are so called by reason of this William, their Ancestour, who was a
Scottishman, the name of his Country being better known, and more remarkable,
then either his own proper name, or the name of his Family. This original of
the Scoti in Plaisance is collected and confirmed, 1. by the testimony of the
Italian Writers; 2. by the tree and genealogy of that family; 3. and by their
Coat of Arms which they give, being the same with the ancient Coat of the
Douglasses, with some difference.

1 Touching our Authors, they are such as have written the History of
Plaisance, which is followed forth by Umbertus Locatus, and Franciscus
Sansovinus. This last ( Sansovinus) in the first book of his History, De primo
origin delle case illustri d' Italia, writes thus: Quando Carolo Magno fece
l' Impresa in Italia contra Desiderio Re de Longobardi (l' anno 779) hebbe per
suo Conduttiere di huomini di armi un Gulielmo Scozzese della Familia di Conti
di Duglasi, etc. as we have set down before. Only he calls it the 779 year,
which (...) Writers call 800, or 801. There he shows how this House was
illustrious from the very first beginning thereof: And for their rank they held
in that City, he declares that it was one of the four Families which did
distribute the Offices of the City, which were these; Scotta, Landra,
Anguiscola, Fontona. And they grew at last so numerous, and so famous both for
Letters and Arms, that having purchased many Rents, and great Lands and
Territories, together with many Friends and Alliance, they acquired the
Sovereignty of that City, and became absolute Lords and Princes thereof. So
that from them when they were Princes of Plaisance did spring the Counts or
Earls of 1 Vegelino, 2 Agazano, 3 and Sarmetti. They have been allied with
the chief Families in those Provinces, the 1 Rangoni, 2 Fieshi, 3 Ressi, 4
Pallavicini, 5 Lodroni, 6 Strozzi, 7 Conti d' Arco: and the like. Then he
reckons diverse particular persons, and namely (which does serve to confirm
this deduction) Donatus Scotio Bishop of Bobio, (who lived in the year 846, or
48. who built a Monastery without the walls of Plaisance, which he dedicated
to the memory and honor of Saint Bride (Patroness of Douglas) in remembrance
that he was a Douglas, as is probable. He built also a Church within the
walls, which he gave to the Friars of the Monastery of Bobio, who were of
Saint Colme (or Columbanus) Order, who was Abbot of Icolm^kill an Island
amongst the Scottish Hebrides. And this he did (says Sansovino) Non solamente
per l' amor de Dio, ma anchora perch San Columbano fu di Hibernia Isola de
Scotia: Not only for the love of God, but because Saint Colme (or Columbanus)
was of Ireland, an Island of Scotland, so he thought being a forreigner, being
the Scots and Irish are mutually descended each of other. Then coming to speak
of their worth and valor, he reckons up above six and twenty persons who were
ever valorous in whatsoever fortune good or bad, and have been in great
employments continually for the space of two hundred eighty five years
together, under the Emperor Henry the fourth, Charles the fourth, and
Sigismund: Also under John King of Bohemia, and Duke John Maria, in diverse
places, at Pavie, Candie, in Cyprus, in Albania, Famagusta, at the Isle of Thin
against the Turks, in all which services they behaved themselves valarously,
and discharged their places with credit and honor. There were some also famous
for learning, as Christophero Doctor of the Laws, and Bishop of Cavaillon (in
Provence of France) and Fiderico an excellent Jurisconsult, and who has
written learnedly. At last he relates how they were overthrown by the Duke of
Millain, who besieged Alberto Vochio, the elder, and forced him to render upon
composition, by which he gave diverse Castles, Lands, and Territories, and
diverse Jurisdictions, with a competent estate and means. And here he reckons up
above ten or twelve Castles which they still possess, all famous and
honorable, with the greatest privileges that can be.

2. As for the Tree and Genealogy of these Scoti, in it we have first this our
1 William Douglas, 2 then David, 3 Lanfrancus, who had four sons, 1
Johannes, 2 Raynaldus, 3 Ruffinus, 4 Rollandus. Johannes had Alber^s, who begat
four sons; 1 Petrus, of whom we find no succession; 2 Nicholaus, of whom are
descended the houses of Fombii, Guardamilii, and Cassaligii; 3 Franciscus, or
Francus, of whom are the Counts of Volgolino, Angazano, and Sarmetto, and those
of Gragnani; 4 Jacobus, father of the Family of the Castri sti Johannis.
Lanfrancus second son Raynaldus was Progenitor to the Gravahi and Varsii. 3
Ruffinus his third son was Author of the Momaghi, Magnani, and domorum del
Boscho. 4 Of Rollandus his fourth son are descended the Passano, and Aygveriae.
These, with their offspring, have multiplied and spread themselves into diverse
parts of Italy. Also they are found in the Marquisate of Salluce in France, in
Guienne, and about Bourdeaux, where they are known by the names of Honglas,
having corrupted the original name, as strangers are wont to do. There are
also of these Scoti in the town of Antwerp in Brabant, amongst which Petrus
and Cornelius Scoti, inhabitants and merchants there of the best sort, who
being lately challenged and interrupted by the Magistrates thereof, for
presuming to set up the Douglasses Arms upon the tombs of their fathers, did
send over into Scotland, in the year 1619. a messenger of purpose ( Alexander
Seaton by name) with their several letters signed with the names of Scoti,
alias Douglassi, directed unto the Right Honorable William Earl of Angus,
Lord Douglas, etc. acknowledging their descent from his House, and entreating
his Honors testimonial thereupon. Upon which request, the said Earl having
examined the matter by his Evidents, and other Records, found their claim to
be just and right, was moved to send them by the same messenger an authentic
Patent of their Pedigree under the broad Seal of Scotland, as likewise under
the hands and several seals of William Earl of Angus, William Earl of Morton,
dated the 16. day of March 1621. In which patent the said Petrus and Cornelius
extraction from this William father of the Scoti, and grandchild to Sholto, is
deduced particularly, as may be seen in the public Register of Scotland. 3. As
for the ancient arms of the house of Douglas, they were three mullets (or
stars) only in a field azure, until good Sir James did add the crowned
Heart, because King Robert Bruce did concredit to him the carrying of his heart,
and burying of it at Jerusalem. The Italian Douglasses (or Scoti) having come
off before him, kept the field coat unaltered, as may be seen in their Tombs
and other Monuments: for in Plaisance, in Saint Lawrence Church, where there
are above twelve several Monuments and Tombs of that Family (it being their
burial place) whereof some are of marble, surrounded with iron grates, there
is an ancient Monument of a noble Lady near unto the high altar, bearing these
three mullets, with this inscription, Margareta Scota Contessa de Burla: but
now the Italian Douglasses, or Scoti, give but two mullets, and between two
they have drawn a beam argent, which begins at the right hand, and ends at the
left. The reason of this difference is given in this letter sent by the Conte
de Agazano to this present Earl of Angus, which we will set down in his own
words and language, as he sent it written, and signed with his own hand, and
sealed with his seal.

Illmo Sigr mio Essmo,
QUando ^o hebbi l' honor de vedere in Orleans vuestra illustrissima signoria
gli promessi fargli havere l' Arbore de la famiglia Scota de Piacenza discesa
d' illustrissima casa di Douglas. Ma perch non ho fin (...) havuto comodita
sicura di mandarlo, non ho pagato primo questo debito. (...) dunque con l'
occasion di un gentil. huomo, mio amico, qui passa in Inghilterra non ho
voluto tardare piu a mandarle come faccio detto arbore o Genca loigia; pregando
us illma honorarmi, come mi promise dell' arbore de la casa. Douglas in
Scotia, almeno quella part che la rigidezza di tempi passati di guerri in quel
regno havera permesso di poter conservare la memoria, et io gli ne restero
obligatissimo. L' arma antiqua di Scoti en Piaienza era conform a L' antiche
de Douglasso, come se vedo in ditta citta ne la chiesa de santo (...), Ma al
tempo che Ghelfi, and Ghibellini guerregiavano in Italia: Li Scoti come
partiali di Francesi furon elletti capi di Gelphi in Piabenza. Et perch tutte
le cose d' numero non paro si intendevano Ghibellini, furono donque necessitati
di rendere il numero delle tree stelle o vero a quattro o vero a due. Ma
giudacando che accrescerne non conveniva: Si resolvettero Levarne un^, a la
piazza della quale per memoria missero. La sbarra bianca che commiciando de le
part destra va a finire a la sinistra, che si la sbarra comminciasse a la
sinistra, and finisse a la destra, saria Ghibellini. Il champo che solea essere
rizo fu d' Arrigo. 4. Imperatore dato insieme col Cimere d' un Pellicano, il
Cimere a quei Scoti soli che le Portano di present, and il campo a tutta la
familia generallmente. Ho giudicato been fare questa poca digressione, accio us
Illam hebbi qualche notitia perch su seguita la mutatione. Mi sara caro ch'
ella si compiaccia screvermi la ricevuta di detta Arbore, all arma del quale
manca la corona sopra, che ci deve essere in loco del cimere. Et volendo mi
honorare di suc lettere, in viandore all Illustrissimo and Essmo Sr Duca di
Nevers mio capitano sicure, and io ne tenero obligo particulare a us illma; a
la quale per fine, insieme con Li Signori suoi fratelli, and figlioli bacio le
mani, conpiegarle da N. S. ogni prosperita*

Di Paris le 8. Maggio. 1622. Di us illma Devotissimo Servitre and parente Il
Conte Marc Antonio Scoto d' Agazano


My honorable Lord, William Douglas.
WHen I had the honor to see you at Orleans, I promised to send you the Tree
of the Family of the Scoti of Plaisance; which is descended of the illustrious
house of Douglas: But because I have not hitherto had a convenient opportunity
of sending it safely, I have not yet paid this debt: Now therefore having found
the occasion of this Gentleman my friend* who was to go into England I would
delay no longer to send, the Tree or Genealogy: which I have done, beseeching
your Lordship as you promised me to honor me with the Tree of the house of
Douglas in Scotland; at least, so much of it as the iniquity of times past,
and the wars in that kingdom have suffered to remain undefaced, and
undestroyed, and I shall rest your Lordships obliged for this favor.

The old arms of the Scoti in Plaisance, were conformed to the old arms of
the Douglas, as may be seen in the foresaid City, in the Church of Saint
Lawrance. But when the Ghelfs, and Ghibellins did war one against another in
Italy, the Scoti as partners of the French, were chosen to be heads of the
Ghelfs in Plaisance. And because all things of an odd or unequal number were
taken for Ghibelline, they were constrained to change the number of three
stars, into either four or two. But esteeming that it was not fit to
increase the number, they resolved to take one from them: in the place of which
(in memory of it) they put a white or argent bar, which beginning at the right
hand is drawn along, and ends at the left: for if it had begun at the left, and
ended at the right hand, it had been Ghibelline. The field which was given by
the Emperor Henry the fourth, together with a Pelican for the crest, which is
the Crest of the Scoti only, who carry it at this hour, and the field of the
whole Family generally.

I have thought good to make this short digression, that your Lordship might
have some knowledge wherefore this change was made in our coat: your Lordship
should do me a singular favor if you would be pleased to write unto me of the
receipt of this Tree, in the arms of which the Coronet is wanting, because the
Crest is the place where it should be, and to honor me with your letters which
you may send to my noble Captain the Duke of Nivers, and so they shall come
safe to me; for which favor I shall be particularly obliged to your Lordship.
So kissing your Lordships hands, together with these of your brethren and
children, I pray the Lord to bless you with all happiness and prosperity.

Paris 8. May 1622. Your Lordships humble servant and Cosen, Mark Antonio
Scoto Count d' Agazano.


This Tree was received by the Earl of Angus, who did also send to him the
Tree of the house of Douglas.

Now besides all this which we have said, the Evidents and Monuments, Charters
and Writs of privilege of their house, do witness the same: for in the
privileges granted to them by the Emperor Henry the fourth, and Sigismond, as
also by Giovanni Maria Duke of Millain, the surname of Douglas is expressly
inserted with the titles of Earls given to three several persons of that
house, first Francisco created Conte de vigolino; Giovanni (his brother) Conte
d' Agazano, by the said Duke, and to Alberto expressly entitled Conte de
Douglas and Vigolino, by Sigismond the Emperor.

Now after all this, I hope we may justly say with John Leslie Bishop of Rosse;
Unde certissima conjectura assequimur illam perantiquam familiam quibus (Scoti
cognomen) confirmabit jam usus loquendi, Placentiae florentem ex nobilissima
nostrorum Duglassiorum comitum prosapia oriundam fuisse: that the Scoti in
Plaisance are come of the Douglasses in Scotland. And thus much for William the
second, son to Hugh the first, and grandchilde to Sholto.

Of William the first Lord, created Lord of Douglas at the Parliament of
Forfaire.
NOw to return home again to the Scottish Douglasses, we find that King
Malcolme Kenmore in a Parliament held at Forfair in Angus, in the year 1057.
as the manuscript, Major and Buchanan have it, but according to Boethius, 1061.
did create many Earls, Barons (or Lords) and Knights, amongst whom there is
Gulielmus a Douglas, who was made a Barron: the words are these: Malcolmus
Scotorum Rex 86(...) (...) (...) anno 1061. Inde Forfarum generale indixit
Concilium, v^lens ut (...) quod antea non fuerat, aliarum more gentium a
praedis suis cognomina caperent: quosdam vero etiam comites (vulgo Earls)
quosdam (...) (vulg Lords) alios Milites, aut Equites Auratos (vulgo martial
Knights) creavit Makduffum Fifae Thanum, Fifae Comitem, Patritium Dumbarum,
Marchiarum comitem: alios quoque viros praestantes, Montethiae, Atholiae,
Marriae, Cathanesiae, Rossiae, Angusiae, dixit comites. Johannem Souls,
Davidem Dardier ab Abernethie, Simonem a Tueddell, Gulielmum a Douglas,
Gillespium Cameron, Davidem Bri^hen, Hugonem a Caldella, Barons, cum diversis
aliis, Equites Auratos, perplures pauci vero Thani relicti. In English thus,
Malcolme the 86t. King of Scots, being crowned at Scone in the year 1061,
conveened a Parliament at Forfaire, where, according to the custom of other
Nations, he ordained that Noblemen should have their titles to be distinguished
by their possessions, and lands, which had not been the custom of this
Country in former times. And so he created some Countes or Earls, others
Barons or Lords, and others Cavalliers or Martial Knights: he made Mackdusfe
Earl of Fife, who had been Thane of Fife; Patrick Dumbarre, Earl of March:
he made also others of the Nobility Earls of Monteeth, Athole, Mar, Murray
Cathnes, Rosse, Anguse. John Souls, David Dardier of Abernethie, Simon of
Tweddale, William of Douglas, Gilespie Cameron, David Briechen, Hugh of Calder,
were made Barons or Lords: others more he knighted likewise a great many, so
that few Thanes were left. This note of these very words were extracted out of
the Register and Monuments of Icolmekill, and sent to George Buchanan, when he
was in writing his history of Scotland; whereof John Read, (Buchanans
servitour, and amanuensis) having reserved a copy, did communicate it to
diverse afterward. Now here this William being ranked amongst the Nobility, who
were chosen out to receive these new honors, could be no mean man: but in all
likelihood, the chief and principal of that name; and so the eldest descended
of Sholto, and his son Hugh the first, and his grandchilde Hugh the second,
by lineall succession. This is al we have of him, save that it is a received
general report and tradition, that his two sons, John and William, were
Knights at the same Parliament, which is an argument that he has been a man of
good esteem, and eminent place.

Of John, the second Lord of Douglas.
WIlliam did leave behind him two sons, John and William, both Knights: The
eldest was Sir John of Douglasburn, which is a parcel of ground and manor
lying betwixt Ettrick forest, and Peebles. The other was William of
Glendinning, which is about the upmost parts of West-Teviotdale near to
Ewesdale. Now whether this John did succeed to his father in the Lordship, as
being his eldest son and heir, who was designed (during his fathers life time
only) by the title of Douglasburn, or whether he had an elder brother, and so
both he and Sir William were but cadets of the house of Douglas, we cannot
affirm: But thus much they say, that these two brothers were men of great power
and authority, and very worthy and valiant gentlemen. They affirm also that Sir
William of Glendinning had two sons, Alexander and William, of whom are
descended those of Cressewall, Strabrock, Pompherston, Pittendrigh, and
Calder-Cleer.

Of William the second of that name, and third Lord of Douglas.
WE have but little mention of this man, only in a Charter granted to the town
of Air by King David, first son to King Malcolme Kenmore, he is inserted a
witness without any other title or designation: Then Gulielmus de Douglas,
William of Douglas. This Charter was given the 25. or 27. year of his Reign,
the year of God 1151. two years before his death, which was 1153.

Of Archbald the fourth Lord of Douglas, and first of that name.
THere is as little mention made of this Archbald, as of the former William: we
find him only inserted witness in a second Charter granted to the town of
Air, by Alexander the second son to King William, in the 22. of his reign,
and of our redemption, 1236.

Of the third William, and fifth Lord of Douglas, maker of the Indenture with
the Lord Abernethie.
THis William is found in an Indenture made betwixt him, and the Lord
Abernethie, which the Earls of Angus have yet extant, amongst their other
evidents and rights of their lands. The date of this Indenture is on
Palmesunday, in the year 1259.. in the reign of Alexander the third: the
place, the Castle of Edinburgh: It is a contract of marriage, in which the
father called there William Lord Douglas, does contract his son Hugh Douglas
to Marjory Abernethie, sister to Hugh Lord Abernethie, The sum and contents
thereof, are that the marriage shall be solemnized on Pasche day, that all
things may be perfected before Ascension day. The conditions are these, for the
Lord Abernethies part, that he shall give with his sister to Hugh Douglas,
viginti carictas terrae (perhaps it should be Carrucatas terrae) twenty plough
gate of land in the town of Glencors. And for the Lord Douglas part, that he
shall give to his son Hugh Douglas and Marjory his wife 20. Carrucatas in feudo
de Douglas, twenty plough gate of land in the few of Douglas. The witnesses are
Alexander Cumine, Earl of Buchan, Raynold Cumin, John of Dundie-Moore, and one
Douglas, whose Christian name was worn away, and could not be read. This should
seem to be that Indenture which Sir Richard Metellane of Lithington, father to
John Lord of Thirlestane, sometime Chancellor of Scotland, of worthy memory,
does mention in his manuscript, where he has carefully collected some memories
of the house of Douglas. He says that Sir John Ballandine of Achnoute Knight,
did show to John Lesly Bishop of Rosse, one Indenture that makes mention of
Douglassas 80. years before that Lord William (the Hardy) who was
contemporary with William Wallace, and this Indenture is very near so long
before his time. But he says that the Lord Abernethie, who does there
indenture with the Lord Douglas, was father to Marjory, and our Indenture ^akes
him brother to her. It may be there have been two Indentures; one before this
made by her father, which not being accomplished during his life, has been
renewed by his son or brother, or that they have mistaken it, for there is no
other save this only (which does clearly call him her brother) amongst their
writs and evidents. Upon this there was drawn up a Charter without date of
either time or place; only it appears by the tenor thereof, that it was made
after the Indenture. The giver is the same Lord William to Hugh his son and
heir: the lands disposed to him are, Glaspen, Hartwood, Kennox and
Carmackhope, and Leholme; together with the lands says he, ( quae sunt in
calumnta inter me and haeredes Johannis Crawford) that are in suit of law
betwixt me and the heirs of John Crawforde, without any detriment. Then the
cause of his giving is set down, that they may be a dowry to Marjorie
Abernethie his sons wife, and sister to Hugh Lord Abernethie. Ever after this
he intitles his son, Dominus Hugo de Douglas, Sir Hugh of Douglas. It has an
express caveat, that if after the marriage be solemnized, the said Sir Hugh of
Douglasdale shall happen to die, or if he shall ( aliquo malo suo genio)
through some devilish or wicked disposition abstain from copulation with her,
she shall brook and enjoy these lands, although the said Lord William should
be alive: And if the said Marjory shall outlive the said Lord William, thought
her husband Hugh should die before him, yet he shall have the third part of his
lands in Douglasdale, excepting the third of so much as the said Lord William
shall leave to his wife. There is in it another very strange point, and as it
were a provision in case of divorcement, or not consummating the marriage: viz.
that if the said Sir Hugh, or Lord Hugh (Dominus Hugo) be then (after his
fathers death) living lord and heir, or have an heir by any other wife, the
said Marjory shall possess the lands notwithstanding, all the days of the
said Hughs life. Now he could not have an heir by another wife, unless he
were first divorced from her. There is also one clause more touching her
security, That if the Lord Abernethie, or his counsel shall desire any other
security reasonable by Charter or handwrite, that they shall cause make the
conveyance as they think good, and Lord William shall sign it, and set his
seal to it. The seal at this is longer then broad, fashioned like a heart, the
letters thereon are worn away, and not discernable save only ( Wll) and the
arms seem to be three Stars or Mullets at the upper end thereof: but I
cannot be bold to say absolutely they were so. This I have set down the more
particularly and punctually, that by these circumstances the truth may be more
clear and free from all suspicion of forgery and invention. I have done it
also, that though every one be not curious or taken with these things, such as
are (of which number I prefesse my self to be one) may find something to please
their harmless desire of the not unpleasant, and some way profitable
knowledge of Antiquity.

By this Indenture it is clear that this William is not the same with William
Hardy, who died in prison, and was father to good Sir James, because his name
was William, and had a son Hugh, as the other also had: for if we do but
suppose that Hugh contracted to Marjory Abernethie were 25. years of age at
the making of the ^ndenture (1259.) and that his father Lord William were
twenty five years elder then his son Hugh, fifty in all: then must he have
been when he married the young English Lady (by whom he had diverse children)
and when he assisted William VVallace, when he surprised the Castles of
Sanquhaire and Disdeir, and performed other warlike exploits, being still in
action till the 1300. about 90. or 100. years of age, which carries no
likelihood with it that one so old, should be so able of his body. Besides this
Lord William the Author of this Indenture had for his eldest son and heir
this Hugh contracted to Marjory Abernethie, but the eldest son and heir to
that Lord William wanted good Sir James, who died in Spain: for all our
Histories do tell how that the Bishop of Saint Andrews did suit King Edward for
good Sir James to restore him to his fathers lands and inheritance, but King
Edward refused to do it: and in a Charter given by King Robert Bruce in the
fifteenth year of his reign, Bervici super Twedam, at Berwick upon Tweed, of
the Lordship of Douglas, these express words are contained, Jacobo Domino de
Douglas, Filio and Heredi Guliclmi de Douglas. This good Sir James dying
without heir male lawfully gotten of his own body, his brother Hugh succeeded
to him in the year 1342. in which year the same Hugh does give a Charter of
the said lands and Lordship, to wit, Douglasdale, together with the lands of
Carmichel, Selkrick, etc. To his Nephew William son to Archbald his brother,
which William did succeed to Hugh, he having no heirs male, he was afterward
Earl of Douglas. Now it is against all reason to think that he that was
contracted to Marjory Abernethy (1259.) should be the same with this Hugh who
gives this Charter (1342.) seeing he must be now 106. or 107. years of age,
which is not probable.

This William had to wife Martha sister of Alexander Earl of Carrict, who
bare to him two sons, Hugh his eldest, and William the Hardy: by their
alliance with the house of Carrick, besides that he was not a little
strengthened, they being great men and powerful, it fell out that his posterity
became of kindred to King Robert Bruce: for Fergus Lord of Galloway had two
sons; the elder Gilbert, and Ethred the younger. At his death he ordained
that the Lordship of Galloway should be divided betwixt them, which was done
accordingly; and the division was ratified and confirmed by King William, who
did then reign: but the King being afterward taken prisoner at Anwick be the
English, Gilbert nothing contented with the division, having got Ethred his
brother into his hands, caused put out his eyes, and possessed himself of the
whole Lordship, and kept it till he died, which was before the Kings return out
of England, before which Ethred also was dead. These two brothers left each of
them a son behind him; Gilbert left Alexander, and Ethred Rowland. This
Rowland finding his faction the stronger, thrust out his cosen Alexander, and
seized upon the whole estate himself alone, and at the Kings return took a new
gift thereof of the King, who gave also to Alexander, Gilberts son, in
recompense and lieu thereof, the Earldom of Carrick: This Alexander had but
one sister named Martha, who was married to this Lord William Douglas, he went
into Syria with Edward Prince of Wales, who was brother in law to King
Alexander, the third, sent by the King and State at the Popes request, to fight
against the Sarasins. There went with him the Earl of Athole, and many brave
Knights and Gentlemen: in which expedition he died; leaving only one daughter
his heir, Martha Countess of Carrick. She was married to Robert Bruce, son
to Robert Bruce (who is known by the name of Robert the Noble) and to Isabel
second daughter to David Earl of Huntington. To this Robert, the Countess of
Carrick bare Robert Bruce, who was afterward King of Scotland. So then we see
how Martha Countess of Carrick, and William the Hardy were Cousin germans;
and her son King Robert Bruce, and good Sir James Cousins once removed: so
that not only the thralled liberties of Scotland, and his private losses, did
oblige Sir James to fide with King Robert, and to stick so constantly to him,
but this tie of blood and consanguinity also, being so near a kinsman. We are
also to observe here, that Martha Countess of Carrick, was also the nearest,
just and rightful heir to the Lordship of Galloway, being descended of the
elder brother Gilbert, and therefore to be preferred before Allane, who was
descended of the younger brother Ethred by Rowland his ^ather: and after her
and her heirs, her fathers sister married to this Lord William was next heir
to both the Earldom of Carrict, and Lordship of Galloway. Whether this title
did move the Douglasses to seek the Lordship of Galloway, as they did
afterward, and helped them to obtain it the more easily of the King, or of
others descended of Allane, and of his heirs, I leave it to be considered. How
ever that be, we may see by the matching with this honorable house of Carrick,
Galloway and Abernethy, the chief Peers in this Realm as then, that the house
of Douglas was of no small esteem and account long before good Sir James, and
that they mistake things far, and are but ill versed in Antiquity that think
he was the first that did raise that name to Nobility or greatness, this
Williams marriage having preceded his time 80. years at least.

Of Sir Hugh (the third of that name) and sixth Lord of Douglas.
WIlliam had to his eldest son and lawful successor, Sir Hugh Douglas, who
as we have said was married to Marjorie Abernethie, daughter to Alexander, and
sister to Hugh Lord of Abernethie. This house of Abernethie were friends and
followers of the Cummins, and did assist and party them in all their
enterprises, as we may see by their joining with them at Kinrosse when they
took King Alexander the third. Their credit and favor with their Princes
appears by this; That Lord William Abernethie got of King William the Abacie of
Aberbrothock, or (as it may be thought rather, for the writing was dim and
hard to discern) the Collegiate Church lands of Abernethie, paying thence
yearly twenty pound. This Hugh Abernethie obtained also of King Alexander the
third, a Charter of the lands of Lenrie, and a pension of fifty pound sterling
by year: likewise he got from the same King a confirmation of the lands of
Hulkstone and Lilestone. In these gifts the Cummins still are witnesses, and
with them styled Patrick Earl of Dumbarre. We find also a gift of twenty
pound land granted by Isabell Countess of Stratherne Relict of Walter Cummin,
and her husband John Russell. In the days of Balioll this house was so
powerful, that thy were able to make their party good against the Earl of
Fife, whom they slew, and were winked at by Balioll: with this house did Sir
Hugh match, as his father had done with Carrict and Galloway, which as it was
an honorable alliance for him, so does it also argue that the house of Douglas
even then was noble and honorable, and in the rank amongst the greatest, as we
have said.

How long this Sir Hugh Lord Douglas did live after his contract and marriage,
we cannot find: but it is clear that he had no children that survived and
outlived their father, because his brother William was his heir and
successor. Neither can we relate any his particular actions; only fame and
tradition have given him a received testimony of activitie, watchfulness and
diligence, by terming him good Sir Hugh Douglas, whom his foes found never
sleeping. He with his wife are buried in Saint Brides Church in Douglas.

Of William the Hardy (or Long leg) the fourth William and seventh Lord of
Douglas.
TO Hugh did succeed his brother William, who for his valor and courage is
distinguished by the addition of William the hardy; he is named also William
long leg, by reason of his tall and goodly; stature, having been a very
personable man. He was twice married: first to the Lord Keeths sister, by whom
he had two sons, James and Hugh, as is evident by a Charter of re^ignation
made by his son Hugh to his nephew William the first Earl of Douglas: his
next wife was an English Lady called Ferrar, or Ferrais, of which name we find
the Earls of Darbie to have been in the days of King Henry the third: She
bare also two sons, Archbald Lord of Galloway, and John, of whom are descended
the Lords of Dalkeith, Maines, and Loghleven.

Concerning himself, we find in the English Chronicle, that when King Edward
the first took in the town of Berwick (in the year 1295.) he was Captain of
the Castle there, and not being able to resist and hold out, the Town being in
the enemies hands, he rendered the place, with himself also a prisoner, where
he remained until the wars were ended, by the yielding of John Balioll to
King Edward. During the time of his captivity he was to marry this English
Lady, that so he might be drawn to favor the Kings pretensions in conquering
of Scotland. But his matching did not alter his affection toward his native
Country, nor brake his constancy in performing his duty to it.

Wherefore when he heard that William VVallace was risen up, and had taken
open banner against the English, he joined with him, by which accession of
forces, Wallace Army was much increased and strengthened; yet they were not
always together, but according to the occasion, and as opportunity did offer,
they did divide their companies; and went to several places, where they hoped
to get best advantage of the enemy, and where there needed no great Army, but
some few companies at once. In these adventures Lord William recovered from the
English the Castles of Disdiere and Sanwheire. The manner of his taking the
Castle of Sanwheire is said to have been thus: There was one Anderson that
served the Castle, and furnished them with wood and fuel, who had daily
access to it upon that occasion. The Lord Douglas directs one of his trustiest
and stoutest servants to him to deal with him, to find some mean to betray
the Castle to him, and to bring him within the gates only. Anderson either
persuaded by entreatie, or corrupted for money, gave my Lords servant (called
Thomas Dickson) his apparel and carriages, who coming to the Castle, was let
in by the Porter for Anderson. Dickson presently stabbed the Porter, and giving
the signal to his Lord who lay near by with his Companies, set open the
gates, and received them into the court. They being entered, killed the
Captain, and the whole English Garrison, and so remained masters of the place.
The Captains name was Beuford, a kinsman to his own Lady Ferrais, who had
oppressed the Country that lay near to him very insolently. One of the English
that had been in the Castle escaping, went to the other garrisons that were in
other Castles and Towns adjacent, and told them what had befallen his
fellows, and withal informed them how the Castle might be recovered*
whereupon joining their forces together, they came and besieged it. The Lord
Douglas finding himself straightned, and unprovided of necessaries for his
defense, did secretly convey his man Dickson out at a postern or some hidden
passage, and sent him to William Willace for aid: Wallace was then in the
Lennox, and hearing of the danger Douglas was in, made all the haste he could
to come to his relief. The English having notice of Wallace approach, left the
siege, and retired toward England; yet not so quickly but that Wallace
accompanied with Sir John Grahame, did overtake them, and killed 500. of their
number, ere they could pass Dalswynton. By these and such like means Wallace
with his assistance having beaten out the English from most part of their
strengths in Scotland, did commit the care and custody of the whole Country,
from Drumlenrigge to Air, to the charge of the Lord Douglas. Now howbeit there
be no mention of these things in our Chronicle, yet seeing the book of Wallace
(which is more particular in many things) speaks of them, and the Charter of
the house of Siminton descended lineally of the said Thomas Dickson, who for
this and his other like services done to this Lord, and afterward to his son
good sir James, got the 20. mark land of Hisleside, which his posterity does
enjoy still, holding of the Lords of Douglas and Angus, and there is no doubt
to be made, but he has done much more in his assistance he gave Wallace, then
is recorded or extant any where, there being no likelihood that in those so
busy times, these so valiant and brave warriers did lie idle, though the
particulars lie buried in deep silence. And certainly it was not for naught
that his lands were burnt by Robert Bruce himself, his wife and children taken
prisoners, and brought to the King of England: his wife and children were taken
by Bruce himself, by the Lord Clifford. King Edward required him to take his
oath of fidelity to the Crown of England, and become his subject, which he
utterly refusing to do, his lands were given to the Lord Clifford, and himself
committed prisoner, and so he continued to the hour of his death. During which
time he never abated any thing of his magnanimous courage and constancy, but
showed himself worthy of his noble progenitors, and no ways short of whatever
worth either they had, or fame has bestowed on them: So did he also well
deserve to be predecessor to such successors, and father to such posterity;
who (as we shall hear hereafter) did follow this virtuous example and pattern.
How praiseworthy is it in him, that neither the danger of his own person (being
in the hands and power of his enemy) nor the example of so many as did yield to
the victorious Conqueror, there being few or none beside William Wallace that
stood out against him, no not the desperate case and estate of his Country
brought to so low an ebb, could break his resolution to remain firm to his
native soil: Notwithstanding, that by all appearance all was irrecoverably
lost, so that his standing out against the King could bring no help to it, and
certain enmity (for ought could be seen) to himself and his posterity for ever.

Setting aside all these regards (which are so common, and so highly accounted
of in this our last age) not measuring duty by profit, or commodity, nor
following the common rules of that wisdom which now reigns in the world,
which is to respect and prefer our particular before all other things; but
weighing matters in another balance, and squaring his actions by what was
generous and right, rather then that which was gainful and advantageous for
himself: he has left an example of true wisdom, virtue and honesty* and* of
true magnanimity unto others: he dies a free man in despite of his enemies,
though a prisoner, and bears witness of the liberty of his Country, that it
did not serve, but was oppressed, convincing the Tyrant of that time of
violence, and the Advocates and Proctors, which either he then had, or since
have pleaded for him in that debate, of most impudent and manifest lying. And
there are some even in our days scarce yet ashamed of so shameful an
assertion, as to affirm that Scotland, and some of their Kings have yielded
obedience, and homage, to a foreign Prince, acknowledging him for their
Sovereign. But the truth hereof is, that it has been oppressed, but never
served; it has been overcome, and overrunne, but it never yielded: And in the
own time through constancy and courage, did at last overcome the overcomer,
and shake off the yoke of forrainers in spite of all their force and fraud;
whereof as the Lord Douglas in this catastrophe of his life is a pregnant
witness, so has he left behind him an honorable memory of an invincible
mind, and a lesson for tyrants to teach, and let them see how weak a thing
tyranny is, and how small power and force it has when it meets with true
courage, though it were but of one man, who overcomes their force and falsehood,
with truth and constancy: And certainly this Lords virtue and merits are such,
as, how ever those that come after him did fall into more happy times, and had
better occasions to show themselves, and to make their actions more conspicuous
toward their Country: yet, there is no reason why he should be thought
inferior to any one of them, because his fortune was harder then theirs: Nay,
he ought rather to be preferred so much the more, as he was more assailed, and
compassed about with difficulties, and did wrestle with the necessities of the
times without shrinking, or succumbing under the burden: Besides it was he that
planted and laid the foundation, upon which they builded so honorable
interprises, and did perfect what they had begun.

Some write that he being cited by King Edward, with others of this Country,
appeared upon the citation, and that he was not apprehended by fraud or force,
but came of his own accord to Berwick: which if he did, it has not been to
confess, or acknowledge any servitude, or homage, as due to Edward, or the
English, but to plead for the liberty of his Country, and to protest and
testify against his usurpation. Others say, that he and the Bishop of Glasgow
being

(to avoid the imputation of disloyalty and treason, of which he would not be
partaker) he came and yielded himself to the King, which if it be true, was a
very honorable and generous fact, remarkable and rare to be found, that no
love of his Country, nor hatred of tyranny (so strong and powerful motives)
could draw him to be partaker of any dishonest action, though against his
enemy. Methinks such noble carriage might have procured more noble dealing at
King Edwards hands, and have wrung more favor from him, which since it did
not, it may be taken as an argument, as want of goodness in himself, who had
neither judgment to discern in virtue, nor a heart to honor it in others: But
for my own part I think it most likely that he was taken by one means or
other, and brought in against his will; but whether he were brought in with
his will, or came in against his will, that word of yielding (which they
ascribe to him) is either very impertinent, or else very warily to be
understood; to wit, for the yielding of his person only, not of the liberty of
his Country, which he never yielded: neither for the acknowledging of any
English authority over it or himself which he never would do, but choose rather
to die in prison in Hogs tower in Berwick. There are that say he was sent from
Barwick to Newcastle, and from thence carried to York, in the Castle whereof
he died, and was buried in a little Chapel at the south end of the bridge
which is now altogether decayed. His death (which is reckned of some to have
fallen out in the year 1307.) must have been sooner in the year 1302. for his
son Sir James returned into Scotland in the year 1303. when Edward was at
Stirling, where the Bishop of Saint Andrews did recommend him to the King: Now
Sir James came not home till he heard news of his fathers death. It is also
said of this Lord, that he had the Isle of Man, whether as heritable
possessour, or as Governor only it is not known; but it is well known that
this Island belonged to the Crown of Scotland, and that the Douglasses have had
more then an ordinary interest therein; Douglas Castle, and Douglas Haven,
which carry their names to this day, do bear sufficient witness. But whether
from this man or some other, is not so easy to determine peremptorily.

Of good Sir James, the first James, and, eighth Lord of Douglas.
THe next is James, commonly called good Sir James, whom men account as the
first, of whom the house of Douglas received the beginning of their greatness,
which came at last to exceed others so far, that it did almost pass the
bounds of private subjects. He was as we have said already, son to the same
William by his first wife the Lord Keeths sister: his education in his youth is
said to have been in virtue and letters; first at Glasgowe, aftetwards at
Paris: for his father being encombred with wars, and last imprisoned, his
uncle Robert Keeth conveyed him away to Paris in the time of Philip le ^ll,
where he remained exercising himself in all virtuous exercise, and profited so
well, that he became the most complete, and best accomplished young noble man
in the Country, or elsewhere. Being certified of his fathers death, the love
of his native soil made him to return into Scotland, to order the course of
his life, by the counsel and advice of his friends. But when he came home,
finding his patrimony disposed by King Edward to the Lord Clifford, and his
friends scattered and dispersed, having by his mother some relation of kindred
to William Lambert Archbishop of Saint Andrews, he addressed himself to him,
who did receive him kindly, and entertain him nobly* And when King Edward the
first was come to Stirling in his last journey (at what time he in a manner
overanne all Scotland, and destroyed the monuments thereof) the Archbishop
going thither to salute him, carried this young man along with him: and taking
his opportunity, presented him to King Edward, humbly entreating him to take
him into his protection, and to restore him into his fathers inheritance, and
employ him in his service, as a youth of great hope and expectation, and such
as might be useful and stedable if he should be pleased to use him. The King
demanded what he was, and having understood what his name and lineage was, and
that he was son to Lord William, did absolutely refuse to do him any
courtesy, or favor, nay he could not abstain from reproachful and
contumelious words against the obstinacy and treason (so was he pleased to
nickname virtue) of his father, saying, that he had no service for him, nor for
any such traitors son as his father was; that he had given his lands to better
men then himself, and those that had done him better service then he was able
to do; and though they had not been given, yet would he never have given them
to him. So implacable he was, and such pride had he conceived, with contempt of
the deprest estate of this supplicant, little remembering the variableness of
the estate of man; and little knowing or considering, what weight and (...) may
be in one man alone, in whatsoever condition, to (...) sometimes, and to help
even to disappoint and overthrow the (...) of the (...) Monarchs. It came even
so to pass in this man, who did this Kings son and successor such a piece
of shrewd service, as he had never the like in all his life: which had been
more shrewd, if the (...) of his horses, and the undutifulnesse of some Scots,
that received him into their Castle of (...), when he fled from Bannockburne,
had not stood him in better steed, then all his huge Host and rich Kingdom,
wherewith he was so puffed up. Whereby Princes and great men may learn, not to
despise the meannesse and most afflicted state of any, nor to loose the reins
neither to unjust actions, or reproachful words.

Sir James being thus rebuked, what could he do against a King, a Monarch, a
victorious and triumphant King? to whom all had yielded, with whom all went
right well, in his ruff, in his highest pitch, in his grandor, compassed about
with his guards, with his armies: to control him, he was not able; to plead
for justice, it would avail him nothing; to reply, could profit him less: a
Prince, his victors word is a law, nay more then a law for the time. There was
no contesting, no contradicting, were his speeches never so unjust: he behoved
to swallow this pill (how bitter soever) there was no remedy but patience. Nay,
the Archbishop must be silent also, and dares not mutter one word, wherefore
home he goes with this scorn, to expect a better time of replying: not in
words, but deeds, and of showing what service he was able to have done to him.
The occasion of which though it were over long in coming in respect of his
desire, yet did fall out, not very long after: for within two or three years
(1305.) Robert Bruce came into Scotland, not yet a King (save in courage) but
having right to be King of the Country, whom Edward had served in the same
kind, and who had received the like answer and scorn in a Petition not unlike,
for both did crave their fathers inheritance, Sir James only a Lordship, and
the Bruce a whole Kingdom, which was but his due, and he had done him better
service then Sir James. He had fought against his own Country for him, spent
the blood of his friends, and his own, in hope of it; with great loss to
himself, and example to others not to do the like. But neither duty, nor
desert, nor promise could oversway his ambition, and master it so far, as to
suffer him to perform what he had promised: and not content to have fed this
Prince with the food of fools, fair hopes, and after so much employment and
many notable services, to frustrate him, he must needs also embitter all, with
a flouting answer to his demand. To such a height of pride had prosperity
raised him, that no modesty could keep him from loosing the reins to an
unbridled tongue, which does never beseem a man, much less a Prince: wherefore
as hatred and despite did animate him against Sir James, for his fathers
refusing to serve him: so ambition did work the same affection in him against
Robert, though he had served him; both were refused of their suits, both their
petitions were rejected; the one with spite, the other with derision. What
(says King Edward, being urged with his promise of giving the Kingdom of
Scotland to Bruce) N'avons nous antr^ chose a fair, que de conquerir des
royaumes pour vous? speaking in French, Have we nothing else to do, but to
conquer Kingdoms for you? Kings, Potentates, Victors, should not be pressed
with their promises: So they think, and so men say; laws are not made for
them, which they leap over at their pleasure. And it might be thought so
perhaps, if their power were perfect, and if there were not a more absolute and
over ruling power, that is able to range them under reason. We shall find it
so even in this particular in the own time, although this were no time for him
to reply: no more then it had been for Sir James at Stirling. But the time
being now come in the year 1305. as said is.

But the time being now come, though not so fit as he could have wished, yet as
it was he behoved to use it, and make virtue of necessity. And so withdrawing
himself secretly out of England, he came to Dumfreis, and there slew John
Cummin his greatest enemy, determining from thenceforth to behave and carry
himself as King of this Realm. And here by the way, we may observe Gods
providence toward this Kingdom, in preserving the liberties thereof, who had
before stirred up William Wallace like another Sampson to vindicate it out of
the hand of the English. Now that he is gone, he sends home our lawful Prince,
and righteous successor to the Crown, to fight our battles for us, and to
perfect the work which the other had begun; only for so much as about this
time, John Monteeth under color of friendship, had betrayed William Wallace
into the hands of the English for money; and he being taken and carried to
London, was by King Edwards command, tortured and put to death with great
cruelty; and his arms, and legs, and head, hung up in the most eminent places
and Cities both of England and Scotland. Of which fact of Edwards we will say
no more, but only set down thesaid Wallaces Epitaph, which is perfixed to that
book that is written of his exploits in Scots rhyme. The Epitaph is in latin
verse, but the Author is uncertain, and the more is the pity, sor he deserves
to have been better known. Thus it is,

Invida morstristi Gulielmum funere vallam,
Quae cuncta collit, Sustulit
Et tanto pro cive, cinis; pro finibus urna est,
Frigusque pro lorica, obit.
Ille licet terras loca se inferiora, reliquit:
At fata factis supprimens,
Part sui meliore solum, Coelumque perrerat
Hoc spiritu, illud gloria.
At tibi si inscriptum generoso pectus honesto
Fuisset, hostis proditi
Artibus, Angle, tuis in poenas parcior esses,
Nec oppidatim spargeres
Membra viri sacranda adytis, sed scin quid in ista
Immanitate viceris
Ut vallae in cunctas oras spargantur and horas
Lauds, tuumque dedecus.
A verse, whereof Buchanan needed not to have been ashamed*

Envious Death, who ruins all,
Has wrought the sad lamented fall
Of Wallace, and no more remains
Of him, then what an Urn contains,
Ashes for our Hero we have,
He for his armor a cold grave.
He left the earth too low a state,
And by his worth over came his fate.
His soul death had no power to kill,
His noble deeds the world does fill
With lasting Trophies of his name.
O! had thou virtue loved, or fame;
Thou could not have insulted so
Over a brave betrayed dead foe,
Edward, nor seen those limbs exposed
To public shame, fit to be closed
As Relics, in a holy shrine;
But now the infamy is thine.
His end crowns him with glorious bays,
And stains the brightest of thy praise.
But to return to our Sir James: he is no sooner advertised of the Bruces
arrival into Scotland, and of the Cummins slaughter, when without either
summons or entreaty (save of his own mind in that common case simpathising with
the other) he resolves to try his fortune in that course with him. But what
could he do (poor Gentleman) being in such necessity, and destitute of all
help: he had neither horse, nor armor; nor followers for such a business: all
was gone, and violently taken from him by the iniquity of the times, and the
prevailing of the enemy. There was neither friend nor mean left for his
provision. Shall he burden Archbishop Lambert? what could a Prelate do? what
could he, especially being under the beasts feet, as we say, and subject to
King Edward? It is better sometimes to force a friend, then to endanger him.
Compulsion may be used where there is peril in the consenting: chiefly if the
party be not unwilling, the ground right, and the cause good: otherwise,
violence is never to be attempted, neither is iniquity, fraud or falsehood,
(evil and hurtful courses) either against private men, or the public state
to be warranted by this example. To it he goes, and robs Lambert of what he
durst not give him: he inticeth his servants; whose hearts did serve them to
serve him in that hazard, whom their Lord durst not command to go with him: he
takes also some gold from him, and provides himself a horse and armor, and
that all might seem to be done by the strong hand; and violence might plead
for the Bishop at King Edwards hands, he beats the rest of the servants that
were left behind, and so goes away with the prey: An honorable robber, and
just spoiler! He meets Robert Bruce at Arickstone in the head of Anandale. If
he were welcome or not, I leave it to the consideration of the Reader: he was
received as his Cousin, and used as a companion, and continued a faithful
Friend and loyal Subject, so long as their days continued, without variance,
emulation or jealousy, or grudge on either side. A happy King by such a
servant! A happy servant by such a Prince! A happy Country by such a society
and pair of worthy friends! (So it is where virtues encounter, begetting
mutual affection, and produce notable effects.) The Bishop of Rosse John
Leslie says, that he carried this money to Bruce from the Archbishop, and
makes no mention of any force, whose commendation of this James is not amiss
to be here inserted. Hoc tempore quidam Jacobus Duglasius, altissimi animi, and
ad quaevis pericula subeunda paratissimi adolescens, dum cum animo suo rep^tat
Robertum ( omnibus virtutum ornamentis excultum) injustis Anglorum armis
vexari, and iniquis belli telis configi, ab Episcopo Sancto Andreapolitano, in
cujus suit comitatu, pecuniam grandem ad Roberti causam labantem sustentandam
impetravit; illamque illi quam celerrime tulit. Cui in bello strenuam, in pace
liberam, in adversis sidelem, in prosperis j^cundam (...) per reliquum vitae
curriculum semper post ea navavit. Ab hoc Jacobo clarissima Duglasiorum familia
primum suae Nobilitatis nomen accepisse perhibetur. In English thus: At this
time one James Douglas, a youth of high spirit, and ready to undergo whatsoever
peril, considering with himself how Robert Bruce (a man adorned with all
virtues) was vexed with the unjust arms of the English, and pursued with war
against all equity: obtained of the Bishop of Saint Andrews (in whose company
he was) a great sum of money, to uphold the now declining cause of Robert;
which money he carried to him with all diligence, and ever after aided him in
his wars valiantly: in peace he was free and upright, pleasant in prosperity,
and faithful in adversity, during all the days of his life. From this James
the noble family of the Douglasses is counted to have taken the beginning of
greatness: so far John Lesley.

To return: their efforts at first were of exceeding hard success. Robert
Bruce was crowned at Scone in the year 1306. in April, at which Sir James
assisted, casting into a heap, as others did, a quantity of earth of his lands
of Douglas, which making a little hill, it is called yet Omnis terra. This was
the custom of those times, by which homage they that held the King of Scotland
Supreme under God, were distinguished from others. Some months after the
coronation, about the 19. of June, they were defeated in a conflict at Methven
by (...) de Valence Earl of Pembroke, but without any great loss of men: for
they being few in number, and perceiving their inequality, fled betimes, while
their men were yet in breath and unwearied, having adventured so far rather to
try their fortune, what it was like to prove in their maine intentions, then
in hope of victory, where there was so great odds every way. There were taken
at this battle Sir Thomas Randulph a young ftripling, Sir Alexander Fraser,
Sir David Barclay, Insh Mairtin, Hugh de la Hay, or Hugh (...), Somervale, and
some others, whom* Sir Aimer Valence caused to promise fealty to the King of
England, and on that condition saved their lives: especially Randulph, who is
remarked after this to have been very forward for the King of England, till he
was taken again by Sir James Douglas, as we shall hear hereafter. After this
battle they retired to the Castle of Kildrummie, where the Queen and diverse
other Ladies remained in great scarcity of vivers, being susta^ned most part
by what Sir James Douglas took by hunting and fishing. Not long after, as they
went by Athole into Argyle, Athole having intelligence of them, invaded them,
together with Lorne his sisters, and constrained them to fight at a place
called Dalree (which is to say, The Kings field) about the twelfth of August;
their fortune was no better then it had been before, the day was lost, some
but not many of their men slain, they themselves put to flight, and by flight
feign to save their lives by lurking amongst the hills for a season in a most
desert place, living upon roots and herbs, and lying in the open fields on the
bare ground, or among the heath, sometimes but with one, other times with none
to attend them, being uncertain whom to trust, in that frowning of fortune,
when commonly there are but few that remain friends, and many become enemies,
base minds seeking thereby either to avoid harm, or to gain favor of the
stronger. At last finding that they were hotly hunted after, and hardly
followed, they thought it their safest way to go to the Western Isles.
Lochlowmond lay in their way, whether being come, and having found an old boat,
Sir James (however expert in that Art before) having learned so much by that
great Schoolmaster Necessity, rowed his King over this Lake in a night and half
a day. Thus says the manuscript, but it seems rather to have been some other
Lake then Lochlowmond, or rather some inlet of the Sea (which are called
sometimes Lakes) between the main Land and the Isle in which they lurked:
because Lochlowmond is of no such breadth, as that it should be esteemed a
great matter to row over it in that space: and besides they did row to an Isle
where they did rest amongst our Aebudes, to none of which Lochlowmond is
adjacent. The Bruces book says not that they rowed through the Lake to the
Isle, but through the Lake to the next land, and then passed to the Sea side
where they provided boats in which they sailed to the Isles. It attributes also
this rowing to others, then Sir James, though he were the first finder of the
old boat.

Thus it went with them, and to such an exigent was the hope of our Country
brought. Thus we see these great minds, and (afterward) great men in a base,
poor, and perilous, but never miserable estate (which virtue is not capable
of) desolate in it self, destitute of friends, and their first attempts dashed
by the mean under Captains of their great enemy King Edward. But ere they have
done; they shall make his successor to fly in the like sort in a small fisher
boat, poorly accompanied to save his own person, after the loss of his army.
On such moments do the hopes and fears of mortal men depend, and such
vicissitude is the estate of those glorious crowns subject unto, which men do
so much affect, with ^uch travel and turmoil; as for them, it was not the
Crown only, but their libertty also, that they suffered for: and not their
own liberty alone, but the freedom o^ their Country and Patriots, which they
sought to maintain against injustice, fraud and violence. Wherefore we never
hear that they fainted at any time, or dispaired any time in the midst of
despair: such force has a good cause in a good heart, the Author of
goodness, no doubt sitting at the rudder of that boat, and preserving the old
sheards of it, so that they gave no place to the violence of the waves, and
their hearts from yielding to that despair that every way did assault them,
until he had finished that work he had to do with them; for recovering the
liberty of their Country, and beating down the pride of tyranny, that he
might in all this show his own might and prerogative, in casting down and
setting up at his pleasure. Such hard beginnings have oftentimes the greatest
works, and so little ought either hope or despair be grounded on the first
success.

Being landed in this little Isle, which the Bruces book calls Rachrine, (other
Authors name it not) they remained a while hidden there with a special friend
of King Roberts; both the Isle and the man being worthy of more express
honor, and a perpetual memory of their names: he for his faithful
friendship, the Isle for its safe receipt, and harboring so good guests, and
their good luck after this receipt, their efforts from hence forward having been
almost ever prosperous. Their safety was (most part) in this, that men believed
they were not safe; ceasing to seek those whom (they thought) had ceased to be,
taking them to have perished, because they appeared no where to the view of the
world. Like example is long since recorded of Masinissa King of Numidia: and
their lurking does bring forth the like fruit and effects.

But it was not fit for them to lurk too long: their friends might so have been
discouraged, and losing hope, have forsaken the cause, whereby the work would
have been the more difficult, if not impossible. Therefore to begin again
afresh, the King obtains from his good friend some small company of men, and
Sir James with forty of these (which he got of the King) went and took in
the Castle of Arane by a stratagem. A small, but happy flourishing of a better
spring time, after that their tempestuous winter, which shall yield a full
harvest, and bring forth the ripe fruit of liberty to their Country, and the
settling of the Kingdom to his master, and his posterity, until these our
days, and we hope for ever. Thither came the King also within two days (and
hearing of them) Malcolme Earl of Lennox. These sailed from thence into
Carrict, where they took a Castle of the Kings proper inheritance, but the
Writers do not name it.

And here indeed the course of the Kings misfortunes begins to make some halt
and stay, by thus much prosperous success in his own person; but more in the
person of Sir James, by the re-conquests of his own Castles, and Countries:
from hence he went into Douglasdale, where by the means of his fathers old
servant Thomas Dickson he took in the Castle of Douglas, and not being able to
keep it, he caused burn it, contenting himself with this, that his enemies had
one strength fewer in that Country than before. The manner of his taking of it
is said to have been thus: Sir James taking only with him two of his
servants, went to Thomas Dickson, of whom he was received with tears, after he
had revealed himself to him, for the good old man knew him not at first, being
in mean and homely apparel. There he kept him secretly in a quiet chamber,
and brought unto him such as had been trusty servants to his father, not all
at once, but apart and by one and one, for fear of discovery. Their advice
was, that on Palmsunday, when the English would come forth to the Church, being
a solemn Holiday, he with his two servants should come thither apparelled like
country taskers, with mantles to cover their armor, and when he should
perceive that the English were in the Church, and his partners were conveened,
that then he should give the word, and cry the Douglas slogan, and presently
set upon them that should happen to be there, who being dispatched, the Castle
might be taken easily. This being concluded, and they come, so soon as the
English were entered into the Church with Palms in their hands (according to
the custom of that day) little suspecting or fearing any such thing; Sir
James, according to their appointment, cried too soon (a Douglas, a Douglas)
which being heard in the Church (this was Saint Brides Church of Douglas)
Thomas Dickson, supposing he had been hard at hand, drew out his sword, and
ran upon them, having none to second him, but an other man, so that oppressed
with the multitude of his enemies, he was beaten down, and slain. In the
mean time Sir James being come, the English that were in the Chancel kept off
the Scots, and having the advantage of the strait and narrow entry, defended
themselves manfully. But Sir James encouraging his men, not so much by words,
as by deeds and good example, and having slain the boldest resisters, prevailed
at last, and entering the place, flew some 26 of their number, and took the
rest, about 10. or 12. persons, intending by them to get the Castle upon
composition, or to enter with them when the gates should be opened to let them
in: but it needed not, for they of the Castle were so secure, that there was
none left to keep it save the porter and the cook, who knowing nothing of
what had happened at the Church, which stood a large quarter of a mile from
thence, had left the gate wide open, the porter standing without, and the Cook
dressing the dinner within. They entered without resistance, and meat being
ready, and the cloth laid, they shut the gates, and took their refection at
good leisure.

Now that he had gotten the Castle into his hands, considering with himself
(as he was a man no less advised then valiant) that it was hard for him to
keep it, the English being as yet the stronger in that Country, who if they
should besiege him, he knew of no relief; he thought better to carry away such
things as be most easily transported, gold, silver, and apparel, with
ammunition and armor, whereof he had greatest use and need, and to destroy the
rest of the provision, together with the Castle it self, then to diminish the
number of his followers, for a garrison there where they could do no good. And
so he caused carry the meal and malt, and other corns and grain, into the
Cellar, and laid all together in one heap: then he took the prisoners and slew
them, to revenge the death of his trusty and valiant servant Thomas Dickson,
mingling the victuals with their blood, and burying their carcasses in the heap
of corn: after (...) (...) struck out the heads of the barrells and puncheons,
and let the drink run through all, and then he cast the carcasses of dead
ho^ses and other carrion amongst it, throwing the salt above all, so to make
altogether unusefull to the enemy; and this Cellar is called yet the D^glas
Lairder. Last of all, he set the house on fire, and burnt all the timber, and
what else the fire could overcome, leaving nothing but the scorched walls
behind him. And this seems to be the first taking of the Castle of Douglas,
for it is supposed that ^e took it twice. For this service, and others done to
Lord William his father, Sir James gave unto Thomas Dickson the lands of
Hisleside, which has been given him before the Castle was taken, as an
encouragement to whet him on, and not after, for he was (...) in the Church:
which was both liberally and wisely done of him, thus to hearten and draw men
to his service by such a noble beginning. The Castle being burnt, Sir James
retired* and p^ting his men into diverse companies, so as they might be most
secret he caused cure such as were wounded in the fight, and he himself kept
as close as he could, waiting ever for an occasion to enterprise something
against the enemy. So soon as he was gone, the Lord Clifford being advertised
of what had happened, came himself in person to Douglas, and caused re-edifie
and repair the C^le in a very short time, unto which he also added a Tower,
which is yet called Harries Tower, from him, and so returned into England,
l^ving one Thruswall to ^e Captain thereof.

Sir James his men being cured of their wounds, and refreshed with rest, he
returned again to the King, at what time he was ready to fight with Sir Aymore
(...), the Lord of Lorne, and Sir Thomas Randulph, at Cumnock. The King had not
above 400. men, so that being almost encom^ed by the (...) (...) he was aware,
he was forced to forsake the field, having lost his Banner, which was taken by
Sir Thomas Randulph, ^y which he got great credit with King Edward. King Robert
in his flight, or retreat, divided his men into three companies, that went
several ways, that so the enemy being uncertain in what company he himself
were, and not knowing which to pursue rathest, he might the better esc^e. When
the^ were all come again to the place of their rendezvous, which the King had
appointed when he divided them, Sir James Douglas persuaded the King to set
upon a company of the enemies, who were very securely lying by themselves far
from the body of the Army, without fear of any danger which the King did, and
having slain 200. of them, he scattered the rest.

After this, Sir Aymore Valence (being then Warden for King Edward in Scotland,
and residing himself at Bothwell) sent Sir Philip Mowbray with a company of
men, about 100. into Coile and Cunninghame, to (...) the Inhabitants in their
obedience to England, whereof when Sir James Douglas had notice, and knowing
the way by which they must go (called (...) way) he lay in a straight foord
between two marshes, called (...), accompanied with some 40, choice men, and
there rising up of a sudden, (...) Sir Philip was aware, they routed his men,
and chased himself, who did escape very narrowly, for he left his sword with
them, and fled alone to Kilmarnock and Kilwinnin, the rest back to Bothwell.
This was before the battle of Lowdoun hill, where both the King and Sir James
were present, at which they defeated Sir Aymore Valence and 3000. men, they
having only 500. which Sir Aymore took so to heart, that he retired himself
into England, where he gave over his charge of Warden, and never returned into
Scotland again with any command, except it were when the King came in person.
The English Chronicle says that the King discharged Sir Aymore who was Earl
of Penbrooke, and placed John de Britton in his office, and made him Earl of
Richmond. These particulars I cannot guess why they should have been omitted
by our Writers, being so remarkable defeats, where diligence, dexterity, and
valor, have been used with wisdom and judgment. However, upon this
withdrawing and departure of Sir Aymore Valence, King Robert being rid of the
greatest danger, makes toward Innernesse, leaving Sir James behind him, to
recover such places as were still in the enemies hands. He therefore getting
him into Douglasdale, did use this stratagem against Thruswall Captain of the
Castle of Douglas, under the Lord Clifford: he caused some of his folks drive
away the cattle that fed near unto the Castle, and when the Captain of the
garrison followed to rescue, gave order to his men to leave them, and to flee
away. This he did often, to make the Captain to slight such frayes, and to
make him secure, that he might not suspect any further end to be in it: which
when he had wrought sufficiently (as he thought) he laid some men in ambuscado,
and sent others away to drive away such beasts as they should find in the view
of the Castle, as if they had been thieves and robbers, as they had done often
before. The Captain hearing of it, and supposing there was no greater danger
now then had been before, issued forth of the Castle, and followed after them
with such haste, that his men (running who should be first) were disordered and
out of their ranks. The drivers also fled as fast as they could, till they had
drawn the Captain a little beyond the place of the ambuscado; which when they
perceived, rising quickly out of their covert, set fiercely upon him, and his
company, and so slew himself, and chased his men back to the Castle, some of
which were overtaken and slain, others got into the Castle, and so were saved;
Sir James not being able to force the house, took what booty he could get
without in the fields, and so departed. By this means, and such other exploits,
he so affrighted the enemy, that it was counted a matter of great jeopardie to
keep this Castle, which began to be called the adventurous (or hazzardous)
Castle of Douglas: whereupon Sir John Walton being in suit of an English Lady,
she wrote to him, that when he had kept the adventurous Castle of Douglas seven
years, then he might think himself worthy to be a suitor to her. Upon this
occasion Walton took upon him the keeping of it, and succeeded to Thruswall,
but he ran the same fortune with the rest that were before him.

For sir James, having first dressed an ambuscado near unto the place, he made
fourteen of his men take so many sacks, and fill them with grass, as though it
had been corn, which they carried in the way toward Lanerik, the chief market
town in that County: so hoping to draw forth the Captain by that bait, and
either to take him, or the Castle, or both.

Neither was this expectation frustrate, for the Captain did bite, and came
forth to have taken this victual (as he supposed.) But ere he could reach
these carriers, Sir James with his company had gotten between the Castle and
him: and these disguised carriers, seeing the Captain following after them, did
quickly cast off their upper garments, wherein they had masked themselves, and
throwing off their sacks, mounted themselves on horseback, and met the Captain
with a sharp encounter, being so much the more amazed, as it was unlooked for:
wherefore when he saw these carriers metamorphosed into warriors, and ready to
assault him, fearing that which was, that there was some train laid for them,
he turned about to have retired to the Castle, but there also he met with his
enemies; between which two companies, he and his whole followers were slain, so
that none escaped; the Captain afterward being searched, they found (as it is
reported) his mistress letter about him. Then he went and took in the
Castle, but it is uncertain (say our writers) whether by force, or composition;
but it seems that the Constable, and those that were within have yielded it up
without force; in regard that he used them so gently, which he would not have
done if he had taken it at utterance. For he sent them all safe home to the
Lord Clifford, and gave them also provision and money for their entertainment by
the way. The Castle which he had burnt only before, now he razeth, and casts
down the walls thereof to the ground. By these and the like proceedings, within
a short while he freed Douglasdale, Atrick forest, and Jedward forest, of the
English garrisons and subjection.

But Thomas Randulph, Alexander Stuart Lord of Bonckle, and Adam Gordone, being
Englized Scots, concluded to gather together their forces, and to expulse him
out of those parts. Now it fell so out, that Sir James, intending to lodge at a
certain house upon the water of Line, and being come hither for that purpose,
by chance all these three were lodged in the same house before he came, which
drew on a skirmish betwixt them, in which Alexander Stuart Lord of Bonckle, and
Thomas Randulph, were taken prisoners, and Adam Gordone saved himself by
flight. This piece of service was of no small importance, in regard of the good
service done to the king by Thomas Randulph, both while the King lived, and
after his death when he was regent, which all may be ascribed to Sir James, who
conquered Randulph to the Kings side. With these his prisoners he went into the
North, as far as the Mernes, where he met the King returning from Innernesse,
of whom he was heartily welcomed, both for his own sake, and because he had
brought him his Nephew Randulph, whom the King did chide exceedingly. And he
again reproved the King out of his youthfulness and rash humor, as though he
did defend the Crown by flying, and not by fighting; wherefore he was
committed to prison, thereafter pardoned; and being made Earl of Murray, he
was employed in the Kings service. This is related in the Bruces book, and has
nothing fabulous or improbable in it: and therefore it ought not to ^e
flighted: Especially seeing, as I am informed, the Book was (...) by a man of
good knowledge and learning, named master John Harbor; Archdeacon of Aberdene;
for which work he had a yearly pension out of the Exchequer during his life,
which he gave to the Hospital of that Town, to which it is allowed and paid
still in our days. He lived in the reign of David the second son, and
successor to King Robert Bruce.

Sir James was with the King at Inverourie (ten miles from Aberdene) against
John Cummine Earl of Buchan, who was there defeated on As^ension day, in the
year 1308. From thence Sir James went with him when he recovered Argyle; the
Lord whereof had once comed in to the King, but was now revolted to the English
side. And likewise at many more journeyes and roads, both in Scotland, and
England, Sir James did ever more accompany him.

In the year 1313. he took in the Castle of Roxburgh, called then Marchmouth,
whilst the King was busy about Dumfrees, Lanrick, Air, and others; and while
Sir Thomas Randulph was lying at the Castle of Edinburgh: The manner of his
taking of it was thus; about Shrovetide which is a time of feasting and
revelling, he with sixty more, having covered their armor with black, that
they might not be discovered by the glittering thereof, went in the forenight
toward the Castle; and when they came near to it they lay along, and crept
upon their hands, and feet, through a bushie piece of ground, till they were
come close to the foot of the wall. Those that did watch upon the Castle wall
espied them; but the night being dark, and by reason of their creeping they
took them to have been cattle: for they at the foot of the wall heard the
watchmen, (there being two of them) saying the one to the other, my neighbor
such an one (naming him by his name) means to make good cheer to night, that he
has no care of his cattle, but leaves them thus in the fields all the night:
to whom the other replied, he may make good cheer this night, but if the
Douglas come at them, he will fair the worse hereafter; and with this discourse
they went their way. Sir James and his men having heard this conference, were
very well pleased withal, and glad to be so mistaken: they laddered the walls
with ladders of cords, made by one Simon of the Leadhouse, who was also the
first that adventured to scale with them himself alone, both to try how they
would hold unbroken, and to view what guard and watch was kept above. The man
that stood sentinall saw him well enough, but because there were no more with
him, he gave no alarm, but stood watching to have catched him on the top of
the ladder, thinking to have knocked him down, or to have tumbled him headlong
over the wall: but the other prevented the danger, and leaping in nimbly upon
him ere he was aware, stabbed him with a knife, and threw him over the wall
amongst his fellows, to whom he called to make haste up, assuring them the
coast was clear: but ere they could come up, another of the watch coming about,
and perceiving a man standing on the wall, made toward him, but Simon
dispatched him also. And now the rest of his companions were got up also, who
marching toward the hall, they found the English at their shroving, eating,
and drinking, and piping, and dancing. They entered the hall, he had but easy
work of it, to do with them what he listed, being most of them drunk, and all
of them unarmed: Only the Captain ( Guillaum de fermes) fled into the great
tower being dangerously hurt with the shot of an arrow, where he remained safe
all that night, but the next morning he yielded himself because of his wound,
upon condition that his life should be safe, and his person safely set on
English ground, which was willingly granted, and faithfully performed. But he
lived not long after, his wound being deadly and uncurable.

Thus was the wheel of worldly affairs (which men call fortune) so vvhirled
about by the King, and his partners, that in this year 1313. being the
seventh from his Coronation, and the fifth or sixth from the beginning of the
course of his victories, there was not one strength remaining in the
possession, or power of the English, save Dumbartane Castle (which was
afterward yielded up by John Monteeth upon composition) and Stirling, which at
this present was besieged by Edward Bruce the Kings brother. To relieve
Stirling, and to raise the siege thereof, King Edward the second came in proper
person, and thereon insued the battle of Bannockburn; a battle so famous and
memorable, as few the like have happened in any age; where there were two Kings
present, the ods so great, and the defeat so notable. The English King did
bring into the field all that he was able to make, not only of English, but of
his beyond sea dominions; neither of those that were his own Subjects only,
but he was also aided and assisted by his friends and confederates, in
Flanders, Holland, Zeland, Brabant, Picardie, Gascony, Normandy, Guien,
Bullonois, and Bordeaux; of these and his own Countrymen, he had in all
150000. fighting men, to place them in the middle number, which some say was
but half the number, and that he had 300000 of the whole, in equal proportion
of foot and horse; intending to have exterminated the whole nation of Scots,
with so confident a presumption of victory, that he brought with him a
Carmelite friar (a Poet according to the time) to commit his triumphs to
writing: he was defeated by 30000 or 35000 at the most (as all agree) and that
in a plain and open field, where there was slain of his men 50000. It was
fought the 22 of June, 1314.

Sir James being present at this Battle, did carry himself so before the
fight, in the fight, and after it, as that his behavior is not to be slightly
slipped over with a dry foot (as we say) but particularly to be noted* both for
his own honor (for it is indeed worthy of perpetual honor and praise) and
for a pattern to be followed by others, especially by all such as set their
hear^s and minds to follow virtue, and to seek true glory, which arises from
virtue. Before the battle, we have his kindness, love, and care of his
friend, or (as some will have him to be) his emulous Competitor, joined with
true magnanimity in his demeanor toward Thomas Randulph: for King Robert
having sent Randulph with 500. horse to oppose the Lord Clifford with 800. who
was making toward the Castle of Stirling; Sir James careful for his friend in
respect of this ods in number, first very orderly sought leave of the King to
go to his succors, but after the King had refused him, he went out without
leave; which though it were a kind of breach of military discipline, yet it
shows how dearly he loved the man, that for his sake he would thus tran^gresse
the order of the war, and to take his hazard of the Kings displeasure,
rather then to fo^sake him in this great danger, as he took it to be. And as he
showed his love and kindness in this (a virtue of great price, and greatly to
be commended) so did he also his modesty, courtesy, and magnanimity (all
three concurring in one fact, and much more commendable) in that he seeing his
friend to have the better of the enemy, stood aloof as a spectator, for fear
to impair his glory in that victory* by being a sharer with him therein.
Weak minds seek to participate of other men's glory, and for want of worth in
themselves thrust in with others. Base and mean spirits are wont to lessen and
diminish the actions of others, because they have no hope to equal them.
Malignant dispositions envy them, and approve of nothing but what is their
own, and would have it thought that they only are able to do all things, and
that none besides them can do any thing. As these vices were here far from
this man, so should they be as far from all others: and as the contrary
virtues did shine in him, so let them also do in us. And thus he behaved
himself before the Battle.

In the Battle he with Randulph had the leading of the Vantguard, wherein he
discharged himself so well, that for his good service he was knighted in the
field. This honor in those days was given for desert, and was a badge and
seal of valor, not of favor or riches, as now it is for the most part:
neither was it so ordinary and common as now it is, and by commonnesse
prostitute as it were, and dis-esteemed. But that it was in great esteem of
old it appears by this, that notwithstanding this man's predecessors, and
himself also (as his evidents do witness) were Barons and Lords, yet he
thinks it no disparagement to be knighted, and did choose rather to be known
and designed by that title, than the other; so as he was commonly called Sir
James Douglas, rather then Lord Douglas. And indeed we have found that even
Princes and Kings have taken upon them this order, not as any diminution of
their place, but an addition of honor, seeing by it they were received into
the number and rank of military men and Warriors; their other titles showing
more their dominion and power, or place, then their valor and courage.
Wherefore we read how Edward Prince of Wales was knighted when he was sent
against King Bruce: So Henry the second, being then Prince of England, received
the honor of Knighthood from David King of Scotland, his grand Uncle, as from
one that was the best and worthiest man in his time. Then it was that he took
his oath, that he should never take from the Crown of Scotland, the Counties
of Northumberland, Westmoreland, Cumberland, and Huntingdon. This cremonie was
performed with great solemnity and pomp in those days, as our Writers
observe: so honorable was it then; and of late it was thought so too: for
the Earl of Clanrikart (chief of the Bourks in Ireland) having done a piece
of notable service to Queen Elisabeth at the siege of Kinsoile, and at an
encounter between the Lord Deputies Army with the Irish Rebels, was knighted
by the Lord Mon^joy, then General Lieutenant for the Queen. Neither should
any abuse discredit it now. Nor can it diminish the honourablenesse thereof in
our Sir James, who is able to honor it rather by his worth.

After the battle he is as diligent (as he was both diligent and valorous) in
it. This is a virtue which has been wanting in great Commanders, and has been
marked as a great defect in them. It was told Hanniball that great Carthaginian
to his face: Thou can obtain, but not use a victory, nor prosecute it to thy
best advantage. Sir James did not so, but as far as he was able, with such
companies as he could gather together, and with as much speed as was possible
for him, he followed King Edward to have done him service, though his father
Edward the first would have none of it, and set it at naught. But he was gone
ere Sir James service came to the best: Now he would gladly have shown what
it was worth to his son and successor (the second Edward) in most humble
sort, though it had been to have pulled off his boots (no question) but his
Majesty had no mind to stay for him, who notwithstanding made all the haste he
could to have overtaken him, and followed him with four hundred horse more
then forty miles from Bannockburne, to Dumbarre Castle, into which he was
received, and so escaped. The next was to wait upon him in his way to Berwicke,
which he did; but the King nothing well pleased with the service he had done,
and expecting rather worse then better, seeing his importunity, and that other
ways he could not be rid of him, went by sea to Berwicke in a small fishers
boat or two, with a very thin train to attend him: not unlike unto Xerxes who
a little before was so proud of his huge army, is now become the scorn of his
contemned and threatened enemies, a spectacle of pride, and an example of
presumptuous confidence unto all ages. We told before how his father had
driven King Robert and Sir James to the like shifts and straits, but theirs
was not so shameful. A Christenmasse feast may be quit at Easter, says our
Proverb, which they do here verefie by this requital: And this was all the
service Sir James could do to King Edward at this time: but afterward we
shall hear what service he shall do, if not to himself, yet to his son,
Edward the third, at Stanhop Park some few years after this.

In the mean time let us behold our Scots, enjoying there renowned and
honorable victory, which cannot be denied to have been such, nor cannot be by
envy it self. Their spoil and prey was great and rich, their prisoners many,
and their ransomes proportionable. The Queen (King Roberts wife) was restored
by exchange, and for her an English Nobleman set free without ransom: And as
their joy was great, and their gaining not small, so was both the grief of the
English, their shame and their losses. Their were slain of note in the field
200 Knights, together with the Earl of Gloucester, and Sir Giles of Argentine
(whose death was lamented by King Robert very much) and of prisoners very nere
as many, of which the chief were the Earl of Hartford, who fled to Bothwell,
and was received by Sir Gilbert Gilbaston captain thereof, (as the Bruces book
says) Sir John Segrave, John Clattengrave (perhaps Cattegrave) William
Latimer, Sir Robert Northbrooke (Lord keeper of the broad seal) and Sir Ralph
Mortimer, who had married the Kings sister. Mortimer was dimitted ransome-free,
and obtained the Kings broad Seal at Bruces hands. These and many other
prisoners of diverse nations thus dismissed, are as many witnesses of the
Scottish valor in the fight, and of their mildness and humanity after it,
who used these their so spightfull enemies no worse, who if they had overcome,
would have used another kind of cruelty, as they had both determined and
threatened unto them.

Amongst other Forreiners, there were two Holland Knights, who being in King
Edwards Army before the battle, and hearing the bravery and brags of the
English, and their spightfull railings against King Robert, had wished him good
luck. These were turned out of the English Camp, and sent unto the Scottish,
bidden in scorn to go and fight with them whom they wished so well, with a
price set upon their heads to him that should either kill or take them
prisoners in the battle. Their heads nevertheless were safe, and themselves
did partake of the good fortune they had wished; and when they came home into
their own Country, they built a lodging, naming it Scotland, upon which they
set up the Scottish Arms, and King Roberts statue in Antwerp, as a monument of
that notable victory; which remained there many years after. The Carmelite
also changed his note, singing their victory, whose overthrow he came to set
forth; and chaunting their discomfiture, whose praises he was hired to
proclaim. Thus he began his Ditty.

De planctu cudo metrum cum carmine nudo,
Risum detrudo, dum tali themate ludo.
In English thus:

With barren verse this mournful rhyme I make,
And am but laughed at, while such theme I take.
Let us here consider the means and ways of both sides, we shall find on the
one side confidence of their power, and a contempt and slighting of the enemy,
which seldom falls well, because from thence there arises commonly sloth,
negligence, disorder, and confusion* on the other side we may see carfulness,
diligence, order, and exhortation, all possible means used both humane and
divine: wisdom joined with religion, and prayer, and what pious forms were
then in use. They dug trenches and ditches, which they covered with green
turfe, for the horsemen to fall into, and did knit together and twist as it
were a net of cross ropes to entangle the footmen: which stratagems being
seconded with true courage, resolution, and valor of the common soldiers and
Commanders, together with the device of those that were set to keep the
baggage, the sculs, and grooms, who made shows and musters, as if they had
been another army (of their own head, without the direction of any) were the
chief means of the victory. For the first was the overthrow of the men at
arms, and barbed horses, and the second the bane of the middle battle of the
English, who seeing this trap laid for them, fled presently, and turned their
backs. But above all these, the principal and prime cause was even the Lord of
hosts, who guided all these, and gave success unto them. Let no mortal man
ever think other of any his enterprises, or that any man, however wise,
provident, or valorous, can use his wisdom providence, or valor, or whatever
other virtue he has, to any purpose, or succesfully, unless it be given him
in the very instant of using it. A lesson much inculcat, but little learned;
often approved by experience, but seldom marked* or soon forgotten; at least
little appearing by our practice, and which does produce no other effect but a
superficial acknowledgement, and slender confession thereof.

But to return to our Douglas: though the King himself did thus escape 1316.
his service, yet out of all doubt he has been employed against King Robert
Bruce in Ireland.
his subjects, seeing our Historians do tell us, that after this battle there
were diverse incursions made into England, for which they never stirred, but
sat quiet for 2. or 3. years: howbeit there are no particulars set down.

In the year 1316. King Robert Bruce went into Ireland to support his brother
Edward Bruce made King of Ireland; and King Edward of England thinking this a
fit opportunity for him to be revenged on the Scots, did levy a great Army,
and came to the borders of Scotland, hoping to do some notable exploit now in
the Kings absence. But many things fail that are intended, and princes as well
as others may be disappointed of their purposes, and frustrate of their hopes.
It seems he had forgotten, or not well considered what a Lieutenant he had
left behind him, and how good a second Sir James had always been to his
master the King. But howbeit he knew it not perhaps, or would not take any
notice of him, yet King Robert knew it full well, and put such trust and
confidence in his well known worth and sufficiency, that he durst go abroad
out of his own Kingdom, and hazard himself and the flower of the youth in
Ireland, concrediting the Country unto his care and conduct, leaving him
Governor in his absence, and entailing the Crown unto him next unto Thomas
Randulph, by making him Protector of the young King during his minority, if he
himself should happen to die in that voyage, as the black book of Scone does
witness. And indeed Sir James did not deceive the Kings expectation and trust,
neither did King Edward find him asleep, but watchful and diligent in his
charge, as became a good Governor: for he raised an Army to give him battle,
and put both him and his people to flight, slew three notable Captains with his
own hand, Sir Edward Lillow a Gascoine, Captain of Berwick; others call him
Callock, and say that he was slain at the rescue of a booty which he had
taken in the Merse and Tivedale; which narration agrees with the Bruces book,
which calls him Edmond de Callock. The second was Sir Robert Nevill, and the
third a Nobleman whom they do not name, only they say that Sir James slew him
with his own hand: but the Bruces book calls him John de Richmond, and says
he slew him in Jedward Forest, in the midst of his Army, Sir James having
very few with him, not above fifty horse, and some Archers, in a strait Cleugh
or Valley, between two hills, which he had of purpose taken as a place of
advantage; and tying together the young birk trees by their boughs in the way
by which the English were to pass, the horsemen being entangled in the
thickets, he set upon them and defeated them. From hence it is that some think
the Earls of Douglas and Angus have stakes and rice in their Coat of Arms; yet
such points of Heraldrie are hard to interpret and give a reason for them. This
was the second piece of service that he did to King Edward himself (say some
others) but others say that the King was not there in person, but sent a great
Army commanded by diverse Captains, with whom Sir James fought in three several
battles, at three sundry times, and slew all their Chieftains, with most part
of their companies. Others again a^irme that in every one of those battles he
slew the Commander with his own hand in sight of both Armies, the which
whatsoever way it was, the victory was notable and glorious. And thus did he
govern in the Kings absence.

He had been a good subject before when the King was present, now we see how
well he governes when he is absent, and at his return laying down his
authority, and returning to his former subjection, he proves as good a
companion and colleague unto Thomas Randulph (then made Earl of Murray) with
whom the King did join him for the prosecuting of the wars. It is seldom
found that these virtues are so happily linked together in one person, ability
to govern, and willingness to be subordinate, and obey; excellency of parts,
and patient enduring of an equ^ll and companion. I have often observed and
admired it in these two (the ground whereof seems chiefly to have been in Sir
James his love and modesty, as we observe in his carriage toward this man at
Bannockburne) that in all their joynt-services, being equal in authority, and
both commanding in chief, we never hear of any question, controversy, or
debate, of any grudging or heart-burning between them, but find them ever
agree and concur, without any dissension or variance, with one heart and
mind (as if they had been one man) in all business whatsover.

Their first association (after the Kings return out of Ireland) was when they
went and burnt Northallerton and Burrowbrigs, and spoiled Rippon, where they
spared the Church, only they caused those that fled thither to pay 5000. marks
sterling to be free. They burnt also Scarborough town, and hearing that the
people had fled into the woods with their goods and cattle, they went and
searched them out, and brought away a great booty. Then returning home by
Skipton in Craven, they spoiled the Town, and after burnt it without
resistance. This was in the year 1318. in May.

The next was in the year following. 1319. when King Edward having gathered an
army lay before Berwick. These two entered England as far as Milton, which is
within 12. miles of York, where the Archbishop of York, and the Bishop of Ely
Chancellor, made head against them; in which conflict there were four
thousand English slain, amongst whom was the Major of York, and a thousand
drowned in the water of Swail, and if the night had not come in too soon, the
battle being joined in the afternoon, few or none of them had escaped as it is
thought. It is called The whi^ (...).
the battle of Milton or Swail, or the white battle, because there were a
number of Priests slain at it, belike they have been apparelled in their
surplices.

Hollinshed in his Chronicle of England, relates the manner how it was done:
He says that as the English men passedover the water of Swale, the Scots set
fire upon certain stacks of hay, the smoke whereof was so huge, that the
English might not see where the Scots lay. And when the English were once
gotten over the water, the Scots came upon them with a wing in good order of
battle in fashion like to a shield, eagerly assailing their enemies who were
easily beaten down, and discomfited. Many were drowned by reason that the Scots
had gotten betwixt the English and the bridge, so that the English fled betwixt
that wing of the Scots, and the main battle, which had compassed about the
English on the one side* as the wing did upon the other. The King of England
informed of this overthrow, brake up his siege incontinently, and returned to
York, and the Scots home into their Country of Scotland.

Their third expedition was that same year at Hallowtide, when the Northern
borders of England had gotten in their corns, and their barns were well
stuffed with grain, which was their provision for the whole year. They entered
England and burnt Gilsland, took diverse prisoners, and drove away all the
cattle they could find. Then they went to Brough under Stanmoore, and
returned by Westmooreland, and Cumberland, with great booty and spoil, none
offering to make head against them.

The fourth was in the year 1322. when the King of England grieved with these
invasions, having complained to the Pope, had purchased a Legate to be sent
into Scotland, to admonish King Robert to desist from further disquieting the
Realm of England, and because he would not obey, he with Sir James Douglas,
and Thomas Randulph, were accursed by the two Cardinals, the Archbishop of
Canterbury, and York, and all the Priests in England, every day thrice at
Mass. These two, Sir James Douglas and Randulph (some say the King himself)
following the Legate at the heels (as it were) entered England, little regarding
their cursings, and wasted the Country to the Redcrosse, and coming to
Darlington at the feast of Epiphanie, stayed there a while for gathering of
booty, and destroying the Country: The Lord Douglas on the one hand, and the
Lord Stuart of Scotland on the other; the one going toward Hartelpool and
Caveland, and the other toward Richmond. The inhabitants of Richmond-shire,
having no Captains to defend them, gave a great sum of money (as at other
times they had done) to have their Country saved from fire and spoil. These
adventurers stayed 15, days in England, and returned without battle. It is
said that the Knights of the North came to the Duke of Lancaster, then lying at
Pomphret, and offered to go into the field with him against the Scots, but he
refused; whether by reason of the discord between him and K. Edward, or for
some other occasion I know not.

At this time it is, that the King gives to Sir James Douglas a bounding
Charter of Douglasdale, dated apud Bervicum super Tuedam anno Regni nostri
decimo quinto, which is either the year 1320. or 1322. the first of April. It
bears Jacobo de Douglas, filio and haeredi Gulielmi Douglas, militis, which
decides the question of his age, and his brother Hughes, who outlived Sir James
12. or 13. years, and calls himself his heir, as shall be shown. It has also
this clause, Volumus insuper, etc. we will also, and grant for us and our
heirs, that the said James and his heirs shall have the said lands free, ab
omnibus prisiis, and petitionibus quibuscunque ita quod nullus ministrorum
nostrorum in aliquo se intromittat infra dictas divisas; nisi tantum de
articulis specialiter ad coronam nostram pertinentibus.

To return, King Edward conceived such discontent, and was so grieved at this
so wasting of his Kingdom, that he gave order to levy an army of 100000* to
enter Scotland at Lammas: whereof K. Robert being advertised, entered England
near to Carlisle; and burnt some towns which belonged to King Edwards own
inheritance, spoiled the Monastery of Holme, where his fathers corpse were
interred. Hither the Earl of Murray, and Sir James Douglas came to him with
another army, whereupon marching further Southward, they came to Preston in
Andernesse, and burnt all that town also, except the College of the
Minorites. This was fourscore miles within England from the Borders of
Scotland. Then they returned with their prisoners and booty to Carlisle, where
they stayed some fourteen days, wasting and destroying all about with fire and
sword, and so they returned into Scotland on Saint James day, having remained
within England three weeks, and three days, without any opposition or
resistance. They were not long at home when K. Edward entered into Scotland with
his army, and passed to Edinburgh, but for want of victuals (which were
conveyed out of the way of purpose by King Roberts command and direction) he
was forced to make a retreat, and go home the way he came, having discharged
his choler with what he could meet with in his return. But he was quickly
followed by the two Colleagues, Sir James and Randulph, who entered England,
burnt The battle of Billand.
North-Allerton, with other towns and villages as far as York; and
overtaking the King at the Abbey of Biland, gave him battle, and defeated him.
There was taken John Britton Earl of Richmond, who had also the Earldom of
Lancaster: he being ransomed for a great sum of money, passed over into
France, where he remained, and never came back again into England. The English
Chronicle to excuse this defeat, lays the blame hereof upon Andrew Barkeley
Earl of Carlisle, whom (...).
(they say) Sir James Douglas corrupted with money, upon which pretext Barkeley
was executed, suffering (good Gentleman) to cover other men's faults. It does me
good to hear Master John Major answer the English Writers in his round and
substantial manner: It is but a dream (says he) and spoken without all
likelihood, for neither were the Scots ever so flush and well stored with
moneys as to corrupt the English, neither was that the custom of good Sir
James Douglas, a valiant Warrior, who did what he did, not with gold but with
another mettell, sharp steel. The Earl of Carlisle also died without
confessing any such thing. Some write that King Robert was there in person, but
it is more likely that he was not, but sent these two, of whom we have spoken:
however, if he were there, these two were with him. At this battle Sir James
took three French Knights, Robert Bartrame, William Bartarhome, Elye
Anyallage, with their vallats; for whose relief the K. of France requested K.
Robert, and he willing to pleasure him, transacted with Sir James to give him
for their ransom four thousand marks starling, for payment of a part of
which sum, the K. gives to him the next year appearently.)

Indictamenta Latrociniorum, and Ministrationem eorundem in omnibus, infra The
Douglas Emrauld Charter.
omnes terras suas subscriptas: Scilicet infra. 1. Baroniam de Douglas. 2.
Forrestiam nostram de Selkirk, de qua est officiarius noster. 3. Constabularium
de Lauderio. 4. Forrestiam de Jedworth cum Benjedworth. 5. Baroniam de
Batherewle. 6. Boroniam de Wester-Calder. 7. Baroniam de Stabilgorthane. 8.
Baroniam de Romanok. Then in general, Et infra suas terras quascunque, infra
regnum nostrum, cum pertinentibus, quas de nobis tenet in capite.

Then follows the Privelledge.

Etsi a^qui de hominibus suis, infra praedictas terras, fuerint judicati per
Justitiarium nostrum; volumus quod dictus Jacobus, and (...) sui, and eorum
ministri habeant Liberationem, and liberam eorundem ministrationem, salvis
nobis, and haeredibus nostris omnibus aliis particulis ad homicidium and
coronam nostram pertinentibus. Tenenda, and habenda praedicta indictamenta, cum
administratione eorundem, and cum omnibus libertatibus commoditatibus ad
praedicta indictamenta, and administrationem eorundem (...), praefato Jacobo,
and haeredibus suis in feudo and haereditate in perpetuum de nobis and
haeredibus nostris.

Volumus insuper and (...) pro nobis and haeredibus nostris, quod praefatus
Jacobus and haeredes sui, and eorum homines infra praedictas terras manentes
Libri sint infuturum, de sectis curiae, de omnibus terris supradictis, and de
Wardis castrorum, nec non de omnibus presis; talliagiis curiagiis and
captionibus quibuscunque ad opus nostrum, and haeredum nostrorum, salvo tantum
communi auxilio pro defensione regni nostri contingente.

Et ut praesens charta robur firmitatis obtineat in perpetuum, manum ejusdem
Jacobi, annulo, cum quodam lapide qui dicitur (Emeraudus) eidem Jacobo, and
haeredibus suis nomine Sasinae in memoriale permansuro in futurum ex (...)
nostra personaliter invectimus. Apud Bervicum super Twedam (...) die mensis
Novembris anno regni nostri nono decimo, anno Domini. 1325.

Then there is a precept directed to Bernard Abbot of Arbrothock, Chancellor,
to cause make a Charter thereof under the broad seal, and deliver it to the
said James. This I thought good to set down in the own words, because of the
singularity, in that it is the promise of a King fulfilled to his subject, not
for any proper debt, or money disburst, but for the ransom of prisoners. 2 It
is singular also in respect of the thing given, Inditements, Immunities,
Liberties and Privileges. 3. The form and manner of it is not ordinary, to
hold in feudo, and inheritance without any duty, or reddendo, as they speak. 4
And last of all, the manner of infeftment and seasing; not by earth and stone,
but by pu^ting a ring on his finger with the Kings own hand, and thereby (...)
both himself and his heirs (as it should seem) in this one action without
reiterating. All which things how our Lawyers will allow of considering their
formalities; and what their opinion will be of the validity hereof, I know
not; but we find here plain and square dealing, and honorable meaning:
whatsoever the subtilties and quirks of Law be, we see an upright and loving
Prince, a liberal and bountiful King, willing to honor a princely loyal
subject.

This and the former Charter given four years before, and such others as may
be thought to have been given after to corroborate or increase (perhaps) these
freedoms and privileges, ^s it whereunto Archbald the fourth and his
successors have leaned and trusted to, in contemning Crighton and Levingston,
at what time they told them they would preserve their own rights and
privileges, and not suffer them to be infringed. And this also has been the
ground upon which the Bailies of William the eighth Earl, he being himself in
Italy, would not suffer the Kings Officers to meddle with these privileged
things in his bounds; which men that know not their immunities particularly
account treason and rebellion: and so their enemies did term it, to incense
the King against them.

This battle at Biland was the last piece of service that Sir James did to
Edward Carnarvan, who having found fortune so froward to him in chance of war
against the Scots, was thereby taught to doubt the trial thereof any further,
and therefore he sued for peace, which was concluded at Newcastle to last for
certain years. In this time of peace, although all occasion of Warlike action
was cut off, yet Sir James was not idle, but did good offices for his King and
Country. K. Robert did esteem so well of him, and had so good opinion of his
prudencie and fidelity, and did so confide in his love, that he entrusted and
employed him in the greatest business that ever he could have to do, which
concerned no less than the settling of his Crown, and his title to the
kingdom, which Sir James performed dexterously and happily.

For being sent into France to John Balliol of Hercourte to procure his Douglas
sent into France to Balliol.
resigning all title and right to the Crown in King Roberts favor, he sailed
into Normandy, and having declared his Commission, and delivered his message,
he found Balliol very tractable, contrary to all men's expectation; for he
plainly and ingeniously confessed that he had been deservedly rejected and
debouted, being no wise useful nor profitable for the good of Scotland. He
said likewise that it was Gods especial and favorable providence, that had
advanced K. Robert thereunto, and therefore he did not repine nor grudge, to
see the Kingdom in the hands of his Cousin, by whose high virtue, singular
felicity, and great travel, it was restored to the ancient liberty, splendor,
and magnificence, but rather rejoiced thereat. And chiefly for that they by
whom he was deceived, did not enjoy the hoped fruits of their fraud. And
calling together his friends and kinsmen in presence of them all, he did
freely resign unto Robert, and to his heirs, all right and title, that he, or
any from, or by him, had or might have to the Crown of Scotland, renouncing all
interest and claim whatsoever that could be alleged or pretended for any
cause, or consideration, from the beginning of the world unto that present day.
This being done, Sir James returned into Scotland. This King Robert thought fit
to be done, not because his own title was not good enough before, for it was
good already and sufficient, and so found to be by a better judge then King
Edward of England, to wit, the Estates of the Realm, who are the rightest
judges in controversies of this nature, and who had power to have made it good,
if it had not been so, and might have helped any defect that had been in it,
seeing Balliol by his own fact had disabled himself, by giving it over to King
Edward, especially seeing it was prejudicial, and against the common liberty,
and good of the Kingdom, to accept of him who had betrayed these, and was not
able to defend them. Wherefore King Robert being in possession, and the
Kingdom being confirmed to him, and to his posterity, he needed no further
right from Balliol: Notwithstanding of this, to cut away all pretenses of
quarrels and calumnies, that malicious men might surmise thereabout
afterward, he thought good to have a renunciation from Balliol of his title,
and consolidate that with his own: whereupon esteeming none fitter for the
purpose then Sir James, as well for the honorable place he held, as for his
sufficiency to discharge the Commission, not without some consideration of his
kindred with Balliol, by the house of Galloway: he laid the charge upon him,
which he performed as we have heard.

Sir James being thus returned out of France, King Robert being very glad that
his business had succeeded so well, called a Parliament at Cambuskenneth, in
the which the right of succession to the Crown was renewed to King Roberts
heirs, and namely (failing his son David) to Marjorie Bruce his daughter, and
Robert Stuart his son. This the Nobility did enact, and confirm by oath in
the year (1325. or 1326.) and before the sending of Sir James Douglas, as some
Authors record.

Not long after King Robert fell sick, and partly for that cause, partly in
regard of his age, not being able to ride abroad and endure travel himself, he
committed the managing of all business of weight both in peace and war to
the two Friends and Colleagues, Sir James and Randulph, two of the most noble
Knights, and bravest Captains that were in their days, as our Writers do say.
And now Edward the second was dead, and Edward the third had succeeded to him,
to whom Sir James labors to do as good service, as he had done to his
father. This Edward sent Ambassadors to King Robert to treat of peace, but
being discovered to have no sincere meaning, and to deal fraudfully, in stead
of peace they carried home war. So due preparation being made on both sides,
our two Commanders assembled to the number of 20000. all horse men: (some say
20000. horse, and 5000. foot) and entered into England with resolution not to
fight but at their advantage and pleasure, which was the reason they took all
or most part horse men, and few or no foot men. Against these King Edward came
in person with a great Army of 100000. men, (as Froysard writes) 80000. horse,
24000. archers, having brought with him the Lord Beaumont out of the
Low Countries with 700. or 500 horse. The English soldiers of this Army were
clothed in coats, and hoods, embroydered with flowers and branches, and did
use to nourish their beards; wherefore the Scots in derision thereof, made this
rhyme, and fastened it upon the Church door of Saint Peter in the Canongate,
beards hartlesse, painted hoods witless, gay coat graceless, make England
thriftlesse. He fortified the Towns of Carlisle and Berwick, and furnished them
with men to stay the Scots passages. But they little regarding either his
fortifications, or his forces, passed the water of Tine at known Foords, and
made him first know of their arrival by smoke and fire: whereupon putting his
men in order, he marched directly toward those places that were smoking, to
have given them battle; but not finding them there, and not knowing how to
force them to fight, his resolution was to pass Tine, and there to entercept
them at their return, and to give them battle in those fields where the
ground was more level and even, and so fitter for his Army. Thither then he
goes with great trouble and turmoiling both of men and horse, by reason of the
great rain that fell, as also for scarcity of victual; and after he had lien
there eight days waiting for them, he could hear no news of them: wherefore
he chose out about sixteen able young men, whom he sent abroad into the
Country to search for them, promising a great reward to him that should first
bring him word where they were. They having roaved up and down the Country,
at last one of them fell into the hands of the Scots, who when he had told how
K. Edward had sent him to search for them, they let him go, and withal bid
him tell the King, that they had been eight days as uncertain of him, as he
had bin of them, and that now they were come within 3. miles of him, where they
would stay for him, and abide him battle, being as desirous to fight as he
was. When the young man told the King this, he was rewarded with Knigthood,
being made such by his own hand; and besides that he got 150. pound land to
maintain his dignity. Then he gave order that his Army should march toward
them; but when they came near, they found them so strongly encamped upon a
hill, having steep rocks at the one side, and a river on the other, called by
Hollinshed the water of Weire, that they durst not adventure to assail them at
so great disadvantage: wherefore they sent a trumpet to them, and desired them
to come down to the plain ground, and ^o to fight with true virtue, for
honor and empire, and not to sit on the tops of the hills, where no body could
come at them. The Scots answered with derision, that they would not fight how
and when it pleased their enemy, but at their own pleasure; telling him
withal, that they were come into his Country, and had done as he knew, if any
thing that they had done did grieve him, he might come and seek his revenge:
they would stay there as long as they thought meet and expedient for them, and
if any should assail them, they would do what they could do to defend
themselves, and make their enemies smart. So they stayed there three days in
his view, but he not thinking it sase to assail them in that place, after some
few skirmishes at their watering place, the Scots removed their C^mp to another
place that was stronger and harder of access, which Hollinshed calls Stanhop
park, whither the English also followed 1327
them. While they lay there encamped the one over against the other, Sir
Douglas at Stanhop park*
James Douglas (who was a provident and watchful Captain) perceiving that the
English watches were somewhat negligently kept (either because they despised
the small number of the Scots, or for that they thought they had no mind to
fight, but to retire) adventured upon a hazzardous but hardy and worthy
enterprise: he did choose out two hundred of the choicest of his men, and
passing the river in the night season, a little off from the English Camp, he
entered the enemies Trenches on that side they least expected, and approached
the Kings Tent, thinking either to have taken or to have slain him; but the
Kings Chaplain being awake, discovered him, whom he slew with his own hand
for his pains: and now the alarm was given, and the whole Army was up
against him: wherefore having only cut the Kings Tentroapes, he returned safe
in spite of them, leaving 300. of them slain in the place, who offered to
hinder his retreat. Upon this show and omen of success and good fortune,
Thomas Randulph would have given them battle in the plain fields, but Sir
James advised him otherwise, showing him how it was not for them, being so few
in number, to deal with so great an Army in the open and plain fields, but
that their only way was to use slights and stratagems, and to keep themselves
in places of strength and advantage. To which purpose he told him the Apologue
of the Fox, whom a Fisherman finding in his Lodge carrying away a Salmond to
his den for his young Cubs, he drew his sword, and stood in the door to kill
him, knowing he had no other way to get out. The Fox being thus straightened, went
and took hold of the Fishers mantle (which lay by) and went toward the fire to
cast it into it and burn it: the Fisher to save his mantle, ran to the fire,
and left the door free, so that the Fox escaped out at the door, and in his
way catched hold of the Salmond, and went clear away withal, to the fishers
great grief, who had his mantle burnt, his Salmond lost, and the Fox escaped.
Even so, says Sir James, it fares with us; we have done these men harm, and
they think they have us in the nouse, and in a mouse-trap, but I have espied a
way, by which, though it may seem somewhat hard and troublesome, we shall
escape safe without the loss of a man.

They continued still in the same place certain days after this, without
doing any thing of note or moment on either side; for the English warned by
their late danger, kept better watch then they had done before: and now having
taken a Scottish prisoner, they were informed by him, that the host of the
Scots was commanded to be in readiness against the third watch to follow Sir
James his standard. This put them to no small business, so that they presently
armed, and stood all night ranked in order of battle, supposing that the Scots
intended to make an onset, and assail them in their Trenches, and therefore
their Watches and Sentinels were doubled, and the Foords strongly guarded. But
the Scots by this time were risen and departed, passing through a Moss or
Bogue two miles long, which was never passed before, especially by horsemen:
but they had provided flaikes and hurdles, upon which they made the horse to
pass without sinking, leading them in their hands, and walking on foot by
them. About the break of day two Scottish Trumpeters were brought to K.
Edward, who were taken by his Scouts, and being come before him, told that they
were commanded to suffer themselves to be taken thus, that they might tell him
that the Scots were gone home, and that if he had a mind to be revenged on
them for any thing they had done, he should follow them. But he considering of
the matter, and weighing all things, and with what men he had to do, being
both valiant, and able to endure so much hardship, thought it his best to let
them go, and so he returned to London, having seen his Kingdom burnt and
spoiled under his nose, for all his great Army, and himself in the midst
thereof in danger of his life, or of taking: which effronts he was forced to
pack up at this time, not without great grief and anger without all doubt. And
this is the third piece of service done by that so despised man to the
posterity of his despiser; to his son before, and now to his grandchilde in
the year 1327. or 28. near unto Stanhop park; which because it cannot be
denied, Caxton alleges that it came to pass by the treason of Mortimer Earl
of March, who being corrupted by the Scots with money, would not suffer (says
he) the Earl of Lancaster to pass the water, not very deep at that part to
invade them, by which means they escaped. But our Major does justly scorn that
point of corrupting and bribing with money, and does further affirm, that they
had not any conference at all with Mortimer. So that it is likely, that what
Mortimer spoke in that matter of not following, or invading the Scots at their
departure, he has spoken it out of judgment, and not partiality; and perhaps
more prudently, then they that counseled the contrary. However they confess
that the King missed of his purpose, and being very pensive therefore, broke up
his army and returned to London. Amongst other things, they tell that after the
Scots were dislodged, some of the English went to view their Camp, partly to
see their customs and manner of living, and what provision they had, partly to
seek some spoil; when they were come there, they found only five hundredth
carcasses of red and fallow Dear, a thousand pair of Highland shows called
rullions, made of raw and untand leather, three hundredth hides of beasts set on
stakes, which served for Caldrons to seethe their meat. There were also five
English men who had their legs broken, and were bound naked to trees, whom they
loosed and gave them to Chirurgions to be cured. When they saw these things,
and judged hereby how painful and able to endure the Scottishmen were, they
found that counsel to have been good and sound, which was given to their King
not to follow them, whether it were Mortimers or some others.

The English Writers upon this scarcity and penury here found, and upon such
other passages (as when Edward the second entered Scotland, and was forced to
return for want of victuals, the King having caused remove all things out of
his way) take occasion to speak contemptuously of the Scots, as though they
had not defended their Country by virtue and prowess against England (between
it and which they think there is no comparison) but partly by cold and hunger,
partly because the English Kings did slight it, and were not desirous to
conquer it: as also for the English forces were almost employed in France, so
that they had no leisure to bend their whole power against Scotland, which if
they had done, they might easily (as they think) have mastered it. Imputing
hereby the cause of their failing to do it, they having so great ods in number
of men and warlike appointment, to want of will, and their hinderance by
France, and the poverty of our Country, together with the roughness thereof
(being so Mountainous, and full of heaths and wastes, harder enemies then the
inhabitants) giving no place to the virtue and valor of the people, very
absurdly and maliciously: for as touching the first, that they have had no
desire of it, it is a childish alledgeance, when they see they cannot get a
thing, to deny that they desire it. The great means they have used, the many
attempts they have made, and that common and proverbiall speech so ordinary in
their own mouths, and devised amongst themselves, ( Qui la France veut
gagner, a l' Escosse faut commencer) do testify the contrary. And above all,
their often intending a full conquest of it, as their own Histories bear
record. And as for the hinderance by France, their aides to Scotland have not
been very great, nor very frequent; yea, it may be said justly, that France
has received more help then ever it gave: for since the league with
Charlemaigne, it may be truly said without any poetical hyperbole, nulla
unquam Francis fulsit victoria castris, sine milite Scoto; that the French
armies never wanted Scottish soldiers, but the Scots have but very seldom had
Frenchmen to help them. And if the Kings of England have sometimes bended
their forces toward France, yet they did it not always, but have made more
war in Scotland, when they had peace with France. And it is amongst the
complaints of our Nation, that France have cast them into wars with England,
when they might have had peace: Like as when they had advantage by war,
France did often wring their weapons out of their hands, and forced them to a
disadvantagious peace, which was commonly the greatest fruits of their
friendship and league. Now as for the difficulties of hills, hunger, etc. These
are not so great as they talk of; for neither is it altogether so poor, nor
so hilly, and mountanous, as they would have it believed to be; and if King
Robert at this time or any other at any time have caused spoil and waste in the
Country at some times, thereby to famish or straiten the enemy, or have chosen
to vex or trouble them with a Camp volante to eschew the hazard of a battle
(as Douglas and Randulph did at this time) it has been the practice of all
warriors of all Nations: but neither has it been, neither could it have been,
the only mean of conserving this Country in freedom, except manhood and
valor had been joined with it, and that in a great measure; whereof sufferance
and hardness to endure great straits, want, scant, cold, hunger, and travel
is no little part. As on the contrary, not to be able to endure these, is
effeminatenesse, the ordinary consequent of riches, wealth, ease, abundance and
delicacie, all reproachful to men. Even as the other (I confess) are often the
consequences of poverty, and are helps to harden the bodies, and whet the
courages of men.

Wherefore if they had meant nothing else, but that the poverty of Scotland did
preserve the liberty thereof, because it kept the inhabitants in continual
exercise both of body and mind, and did not suffer them to grow tender,
delicate and effeminate, but hardened their bodies against want, and their minds
and courages against perils and dangers, which they employed for the defense
of their Country, and by the which (as the chief means under God) they did
defend it, we could well admit of it, and acknowledge as much poverty, (that is
to say, want of superfluity) and vanity, invented by soft and womenly minds,
and covered under the mask of civility, as has begotten in them valor and
temperance, as it is said to have done in many people before; the Romans,
Macedonians, Turks, Parthians, Scythians, etc. But since that is not their
meaning, but even to detract from their valor, they exprobrate their poverty,
and casts it up for a reproach, to breed contempt of them in others, and to
ascribe to it what is due to their worth; to wit, the liberty, and preservation
of their Country from all foreign enemies: we may say justly that it has not
been the immediate cause of their being preserved against England, Danes, or
whatsoever enemy; but that there has been as much sufficiency of things
necessary (call it riches, or by what other name you list) as has moved other
Nations (especially England) to covet it, and coveting to invade it, and when
they had done their best, they were driven from it; not so much by the
barrenness and roughness of the soil, as by many and sad strokes of the
inhabitants thereof; and by such acts and deeds, as became wife, valiant and
courageous men. Touching all which, this one example will serve to confute
whatsoever has been, or can be said in this kind, then which we need no other
proof, and that is this same huge and great army raised by this King ( Edward
the third) and intending to have come into Scotland, if he had not been thus
affronted by Sir James and Randulph: and before in his fathers time at Biland,
(and which admits for no exception) at Bannockburne. In all which there is
no color of want of will; he showed it, he professed it, and presumed to
devour them in an instant* No want of forces, having gathered from all
Countries not only his subjects, but his friends also: no scarcity of
victual, he had abundance of all things: no hills nor mountains, they met in
the plain fields: no foreign aid on the Scots side that we hear of, besides
the two Brabanders, that King Edward sent to help them. And so again whatsoever
progress, or appearance of conquest the English have made of Scotland, it was
never by their valor and arms, but by the advantage of an intestine war,
they siding with the one party, and at last overcoming both, as did Edward the
first, in the days of Balliol; wherefore they make a wrong account, and much
mistake the matter, that think the liberty of this Kingdom has been
maintained more by the wants of our soil, want of will in our enemies, or of
leisure in the English, then by the worth of our predecessors, if we weigh
things rightly. But the true way, and mean, by which our Country and liberty
thereof have stood, and by which they have relieved and vindicated it, when it
was thralled, are these we have spoken of; by which also they procured peace at
all times, and now also at this time.

For the same year, in March Ambassadors came from Edward to treat Peace with
England.
of perpetual peace, which the next year was concluded by the Parliament of
England held at Northhampton: unto this Parliament for treating of Articles of
peace, King Robert sent Sir James, with some Prelates, where it was concluded
on these conditions: That the King of England should renounce all title and
claim that he and his predecessors had said to the Crown of Scotland, and
deliver unto them whatsoever Bonds, Contracts, Writs or Evidents, they had for
their pretended Title thereto. And should leave that Kingdom as free as it had
been in the days, and at the death of King Alexander the third, from all
bondage and servitude for time to come. That the Scots should also resign to
the English, all lands and possessions, which sometimes they had in England, or
held of England in fealty, as beneficiars thereof, and that the Marches between
the two Kingdoms should be Cumberland and Northumberland, unto Stone-moore:
That David son to King Robert should marry Jane, King Edwards sister, called
by some Jane of the Tower, and by the Scots, Jane make peace, (in derision) and
that King Robert should pay to Edward three thousand marks sterling, for the
damage done to his people in the late wars, by Sir James and Randulph, Earl
of Murray. The first of these articles was presently performed, and the King of
England delivered all the Writs and Evidents which he had concerning his
alleged superiority of Scotland, and amongst them an Indenture which they
called Ragman (says Hollinshed) and certain Jewels won from the Kings of
Scotland, amongst which the black Crosiere or Rood was one. This peace the
same Author calls unprofitable, and dishonorable, done by evil and naughty
counsel. If it were dishonorable for England, it was so much the more
honorable for the Scots that gave the peace. But the dishonor he means is
the renunciation of his title to the Crown of Scotland, whereof he had fair
claiming. King Robert and the Scots had driven him out of his usurpation, and
vindicated their liberty by force of arms. And as for his right and title in
Law, the world knows what small account Scotland ever made of his pretensions;
having never been subject unto any but to their own King. Wherefore it was
only to take away all occasion of cavilling, and the better to keep peace with
their neighbors, that they desired this surrender, as they had done before
with Balliol, whose right notwithstanding carried a greater show of equity and
reason, and truly it is not so much to be wondered at, that King Edward
condescended to these Articles; as it is that King Robert should have yielded
to them, being more unprofitable for him, then for the other: and a man would
think it very strange that he should part with Northumberland, or give any
moneys to recompense any damage done in a just war: and that there should
not rather money have been given unto him, as a dowry or portion with his
daughter in law. But the time answers it, he was now of a good age, and
unmeet for travel, and wars, being wearied with battles, and cloyed with
victories, and ceased by sickness, he longed for peace to himself, and to his
posterity, but with what fidelity, and how little it was kept by King Edward,
we shall hear hereafter. No aliance, nor bond of amity (which ought but
seldom does tie Princes and great men) could keep him from breaking of this
peace. The marriage was solemnized at Berwick, with all the pomp that might
be, after which King Robert lived not a full year.

A little before his death being at Cardrois, which stands over against
Dumbarton on the other side of the water of Levin: whether he had withdrawn
himself by reason of his age and sickness, to live a private, and quiet life;
he called his friends together, and made his last Will and Testament, in which
having ordered all his other affairs, he called to mind a vow that he had
made to go into Syria, and there to fight against the common enemy of the
Christian name: but because his wars before, and now his age and sickness
would not suffer him to perform it in his own person, he recommended the
performing of it to Sir James Douglas, requesting him earnestly to go and do it
for him; and withal, to carry his heart to Jerusalem, and there to bury it
near the holy Grave. This was esteemed a great honor in those days, both by
Sir James himself and others, and withal a clear and honorable testimony of
the Kings affection toward him; and so he interpreted it. Wherefore King
Robert dying the 7. of July 1329. he made himself ready, and prepared King
^ruce, (...)
all things for his voyage very diligently; yet there were some of the most
judicious in those times, who took it to have a deeper reach; and that 1329
(however he did also respect Sir James, and think him the fittest for this
business:) his main design was to prevent all dissension, which might have
risen between these two great Captains, Douglas and Murray, Randulph to obviate
the which, they think he devised to send Sir James out of the Country upon
this honorable pretext. But there be Authors that say, the King did not
particularly design Sir James by name, but desired his Nobles to choose one of
his most noble Captains in the Realm for that effect, and that they after his
decease laid it upon Sir James with one consent, who most willingly accepted
thereof, as one (who during King Roberts life) had served the body wherein the
heart had lodged. But whether the King desired him by name, or the Nobility did
interpret the Kings meaning to be such (under the title and description of the
most noble Captain) or that they themselves did deem him to be so (as indeed he
was most worthy) so it was, that the charge was committed unto him, and he most
gladly undertook it, when his presence was very needful for the Country.

For before he took journey, their fell out a matter that occasioned great
troubles afterward by Edward Balliol. One Lawrence Twine an English man borne,
and one of those who had obtained lands in Scotland for reward of his service
in the wars, a man well borne, but of a vicious life. This man after King
Roberts death presuming of inpunite in respect of K. David's youth, loosed the
reigns to his licentious lewdness; and being often taken in adultery, and
admonished by the official of Glasgow when he would not abstain from his
wickedness, he was excommunicated; wherewith being i^censed, he took the
official as he was riding to the town of Air, and kept him prisoner till he
was forced to redeem his liberty with a sum of money. Sir James Douglas
highly offended with this enormity, caused seek him, that he might be punished;
which Twine understanding, and fearing that he should not long escape his hands
if he stayed within the Country, fled into France, and addressing himself unto
Edward Balliol, he persuaded him to enterprise against the King of Scotland,
and recover that which he had so good right to, and so fair an opportunity,
which Balliol did in Sir James his absence, by his voyage, or after his
slaughter in his voyage. And no question his absence was a strong inducement
both to this Edward, and to Edward of England, to attempt the subduing of
Scotland; which he did think would prove (...), by making Randulph away (which
he sought to have done by poison) Sir James being absent. So that either the
Kings devotion (if it were indeed devotion or his policy, (if it were but
policy) in sending of him out of the Country, is greatly condemned by our
Writers. And to speak the truth it deserves to be condemned, having by so
doing sent away so fit and useful a man, denuding the Country of such a
Captain in so doubtful times; whereas a Prelate or some other Churchman had
been fitter for that employment. And he ought to have considered that England
would be still aiming at the Crown of Scotland, notwithstanding of the late
alliance: neither needed he to fear any emulation between Randulph and Sir
James, there being such entire love in Sir James toward Randulph, that
howsoever he contended with him in virtue, yet his contention was but in
virtue, and ever within the bounds of modesty, love, and friendship, behaving
himself to him as to his Comrade and Brother in arms, whereof he had ever
given in all the joint services so evident proof, especially at Bannockburne,
where his love drew him out to have succored him if there had been need, and
the same love and candor (so to call it) or courtesy and modesty joined with
true magnanimity, stayed him from going forward, that he might not arrogate to
himself one share or parcel of that victory, whereby the others glory had been
eclipsed. And when he had gotten the victory, he accompanied him joyfully
unto the Camp, no less glad then if he had been victorious himself, far from
any hateful or envious emulation: so that there was small reason to look for
any harm from such a disposition, or any inconvenience from such emulation,
but rather to have expected much good from that his so well known affection
and constancy both toward Randulph, and his native Country: however, he out
of his own worthy and good nature taking all in good part, he passed on with
his journey, taking with him two hundred Gentlemen of note, and (as it is
reported) seven hundred others. Amongst the Gentlemen of good quality, there
was Sir William Sinclaire of Rosline, Sir Robert Logane of Rastaslrig, and Sir
William Keith. De Froysard (in his 20. Chapter) reports that after his
imbarking in Scotland he arrived at the Sluice, and stayed there some 12 days,
where he kept such state and port, as if he had been King of Scotland: That he
had in company with him, a Knight Banneret, and 7 other Knights of Scotland,
and was served by twenty six young Squires and Gentlemen of good sort, all his
vessels being of gold or silver: That all that came to see him of all sorts of
people were (according to their ranks) well and plentifully served with all
manner of vivers, wines and spices, the best that could be had. He says also
that in his return from Jerusalem, he arrived at the port of Valence the great
in Spain, where endeavoring to assist Alphonsus the king thereof, who warred
against the King of Granado, then a Saracen, he was there enclosed by an ambush
of the enemy, and so lost his life.

He carried with him to Jerusalem the Kings heart embalmed and put into a box
of gold, which he solemnly buried before the high Altar there: and this is the
reason why the Douglas bear the crowned Heart in their coat of Arms ever
since. When he had performed this service to his dead Master, he went with such
company as he had brought with him, and joined himself unto such other
Christian Princes, as at that time were gathered with great power out of sundry
parts of Christendom, to war against the Infidels; where he did so notable
service, that by his frequent victories, he wan great honor to the Christian
name. At last, having accomplished things in those parts with no less fame and
glory, then Princely Magnificence, he embarked for Scotland, but was cast by
storm of weather upon the Coast of Spain, and forced to go a shore on the
borders of Granado, where at the same time he found the King of Arragon
fighting against the Saracens that inhabited these parts: Sir James offered to
the King to serve him in those wars, and so fought against the enemy
valiantly, and with great success at diverse times; till at last having
conceived too great contempt of the enemy, esteeming them no Warriors, he
became somewhat too careless and secure, so that he was enclosed in an ambush,
and slain, with all that were about him: his bones were embalmed and sent home
to Scotland, and buried in the Church of Douglas, called Saint Brides Kirk.

And thus he died in the year 1330. the 20. of August, the next year after
King Roberts decease. As for his virtues, his actions have declared him
sufficiently, yet these in special are to be observed: In his youth he was
careful to enable and fit himself for employment, by the study and exercise
of letters, and all good and commendable arts, whereby his mind contracting a
good habit, was solidly fixed upon the virtues of modesty and soberness, and
emptied of all envy; which hardly and very seldom are joined with these great
virtues of courage and magnanimity in a Military spirit and life, which
commonly do hinder another. In his riper years we may see his perfect practice
of them against the enemy, and toward his friends: In action he was bold,
resolute, courageous, strong, diligent, and advised; and such every way as a
stout Soldier or worthy Commander ought to be. Out of action, and in private
converse, he was toward, affable, gentle, and courteous unto all: he was
loving to his Country, loyal, faithful and obedient to his Sovereign; he
contended in virtue with his equals, free from envy and hatred against any,
and through the course of his whole life, without stain or blemish that we
hear of.

He is reckoned to have been in battles and incounters against the English
fifty seven times, against the Saracens and other Infidels thirteen times
ever victorious; thrice as often as he had been years in action, which were
about twenty four from King Roberts Coronation. 1306. until the time of his
death in 1330. which if it be so, we may see how many things were omitted by
our Writers, all that are set down being far short of that number. Wherefore
it is no marvel, if in such a continual course of victories, some confidence
crept upon him; and if accustomed to so hard enemies, and good warriors, as
the English, and Scots that sided with them (as commonly those are, who are
born and bred in in the Northern parts of the world) he disesteemed and
slighted the Saracens and Southern softness, weakness and effeminacie in
respect thereof, whereby he fell into this Ambush, which was his death. Now as
in these respects it is somewat to be pardoned, so is this use to be made of
it, that we despise no enemy however inferior, and to eschew too much
confidence and presumption in whatsoever advantage, which has been the ruin
and loss of many worthy men. He is said to have been of a black and swart
complexion, and to have lisped somewhat in his speech. We hear nothing either
in History, or Monument, or otherwise of his marriage: he had two base or
natural sons, William Lord of Liddesdale (of whom we shall speak hereafter)
and one Archbald, whom the Lord of Liddesdale made Captain of the Castle of
Edinburgh, when he took it in. To conclude, let this be observed, that Sir
James is never mentioned by any either English or Scottish Writer whatsoever,
but with honor and commendation, as worthy, valiant, noble, good, or some such
Epithete; and confessed to have been one of the most valiant that lived in his
days. Such is the force of virtue, and so prevalent is it, even with enemies.
We will not omit here (to shut up all) the judgment of those times concerning
him, in an old rude verse indeed, yet such as bears witness of his true
magnanimity, and invincible mind in either fortune, good or bad.

Good Sir James Douglas (who wise, and wight, and worthy was) Was never
overglad for no winning, nor yet over sad for no tineing, Good fortune and evil
chance, he weighed both in one balance.

Jacobus Duglassius Brucii Regis socius omnium laborum in Hispania coesus a
Saracenis, 1330.
Quicquid sors potuit mortali in pectore far
Vel facere, hoc didici perficere, atque pati.
Prima ubi luctando vici, sors affuit ausis
Omnibus, and quid non pro patria ausus eram?
Hosti terror ego: nullus me terruit hostis:
Consiliis junxi robora dura meis.
Proelia quot numerat, titulos, actosque triumphos
Brucius, hinc totidem pene trophaea mihi.
Quo jam signa feram? major quaerendus and orbis
Atque hostis; famam non capit iste meam.
Arma Saraceno objeci prope littora calpes
Herculeae, hic tellus me male fausta tegit.
Herculeae Graecis memoretur Gloria laudis,
Fallor an Herculeis stant potiora mea.
In English thus,

What ever weight in furious Fortune laid
On weak man's breast, I suffered undismaid,
Nor less my active force; and when I tried
Her power in war, propitious fate denied
No help; whiles my endeavors well did prove
How much I dared for my Countries love.
A terror to my foes; I knew no fear,
Wisdom and valor both united were
In me. And look what triumphs great Bruce gained,
As many Trophies were by me obtained.
What more remains to increase my name?
The world appears too little for my fame.
To Spain my aid I gave, and did oppose
The Saracen, there was the fatal close
Of my brave life, wher't may be questioned much
If Hercules his Monuments were such.
Of Hugh the fourth and ninth Lord of Douglas.
UNto this Sir James his brother germane Hugh Douglas did succeed, the ninth
Lord, and fourth of that name. Of this man, whether it was by reason of the
dullness of his mind, or infirmity of his body, or through whatsoever occasion
else, we have no mention at all in History of any of his actions, only it is
certain that he succeeded, and was Lord of Douglas, which he demitted (in
favor of his brother Archbald, slain at Halidoun hill) to his son William,
who was the first Earl of Douglas, as shall be shown in his life. The honor
of the name and dignity of the house was upheld by his brother Archbald Lord of
Galloway, of whom therefore we are now to speak. This Hugh lived after the
death of his brother Archbald (which was 1333.) some nine or ten years, till
the 1343* as the Charter of resignation of the Lordship to his nephew does
witness. He died without children, and was never married.

Of Archbald Douglas Lord of Galloway, Governor of Scotland, third brother to
Sir James.
BEfore we proceed to speak of the next Lord Douglas, the time, and order of
the History requires that we speak of Archbald Douglas Lord of Galloway; and
Governor of Scotland: he was third brother to good Sir James, as Boethius
affirms in these words; Archibaldus Duglasius Germanus Jacobi de Douglas,
quem nuperrime in hispania interiisse scripsimus. This Archbald did outlive Sir
James not above three years, as we shall show hereafter. Neither is the loss
of the battle wherein he died, imputed to his youth, but to his haste and
indignation. And in the battle of Annand, he showed wisdom and advisednesse
sufficiently. Touching his education, there is no mention thereof in History:
he married Dornagilla daughter to Red John Cummin, whom King Robert slew His
marriage.
at Dumfrees. This John Cummin was styled Lord of Galloway, having married a
daughter of Allane Lord of Galloway, called Mary, whose elder sister
Dornagilla, John Balliol had married: and therefore he is also styled Lord of
Galloway. There was also a third of these daughters married (as our Writers
say) to the Earl of Abermale: it seems the lands of Galloway (Lord Allane
dying without heirs male) have been divided among the three sisters: as for
his third we find nothing else of her. This Archbald having married John
Cummins daughter, the inheritrix of the lands of Galloway, was employed in the
war against Edward Balliol, whom he defeated and chased to Roxburgh,
whereupon for this service, and also by another title which he claimed as
nearest to the house of Galloway by his Grandmother, the Earl of Carricts
sister, (which right we have deduced at large in the life of Lord William the
third maker of the Indenture) Balliol being forfaulted, he obtains the lands
of Galloway, as Evidents and Histories bear record, stiling him Archibald Lord
of Galloway, which continued in his posterity until the forfeiture of the
Earls of Douglas. Some allege that Red John Cummin did not marry the Lord of
Gallowayes daughter Marie, but a daughter of John Balliol of Harcourt in
Normandy, called Adama, whom he begot on his wife Dornagilla, who was daughter
to Allane Lord of Galloway: but how came Red John to style himself Lord of
Galloway, seeing his wife was Adama Balliol, who had brothers, at least one, to
wit, John Balliol that was Competitor with Bruce. However it was, Archbald
Douglas He is made Lord of Galloway.
having chased Edward Balliol, and Balliol being forfeited, was made Lord of
Galloway.

This Archibald had by his wife, Dornagilla Cummin, two sons, William, His
sons.
who succeeded to his Uncle Hugh in the Lordship of Douglas, and was created
Earl of Douglas, and Archibald after Lord of Galloway: he had also a daughter
called Marjory married to Thomas Earl of Mar.

We have heard in the life of good Sir James, how King Robert Bruce before his
death had taken all pains for establishing the Kingdom to his posterity, and
to leave it peaceably unto them, and had done for that effect what the wit of
man could devise: he had beaten out his enemies by arms, he had ratified and
confirmed his right by the Laws and Act of Parliament, he had obtained a
renunciation of all title and claim he could pretend, from John Balliol his
Competitor: he had gotten also the like renunciation of the King of England,
and all Evidents, Writs, and Monuments concerning his pretenses delivered up
unto him* discharged and cancelled, and declared to be null, and of no value,
by consent of the English Parliament, and (to be the surer of King Edwards
friendship) he had married his son David to Jane his sister. He had cut off
the rebellions that were springing up against him, by executing such as were
guilty, established Randulph Tutor and Protector to his son, and Governor
of the Country, he had removed all occasion of emulation, that might have
fallen out therein, and settled all with good advice, good precepts, good
council in his Testament, both for peace among themselves, and war against
the enemy. But what is the wit of man, and how weak a thing are his devices! or
what bonds will bind whom duty cannot bind?

This same Balliol, whose father had renounced his right (nothing regarding
what his father had done) renewed his claim to the Crown. This same King of
England, who had himself solemnly renounced, who had bound up friendship with
the most sure and strongest bonds that can be amongst men, regarding neither
his resignation made, nor his affinity and alliance, nor any duty toward God,
or faith and promise to man, used all means to strip his brother-in-law (by
consequent his sister) out of the Kingdom of Scotland; as if nothing were
unlawful, that could fill up the bottomless gulf of his ambition. First, he
caused an English Monk (under color of giving Physic for the gravel) to
poison the Governor Thomas Randulph Earl of Murray; and afterward aided Edward
Balliol with 6000. English, upon condition that Balliol should hold the Crown
of him. Edward Balliol entering Scotland with these forces, and being assisted
by the malcontents in Scotland, prevailed so, that having won a battle at
Duplin (13^2. the 22. of September, the third year after 1332.
the death of King Robert, and about one year after the death of Randulph)
Battle at Duplin.
in which many were slain, to the number of 3000. together with Duncane or
Donald Earl of Mar, the Governor; he was Crowned at Scone, Balliol Crowned
at Scone.
and these of the Bruces side constrained to send their King ( David Bruce with
his wife) into France, having no safe place at home to keep him in.

After his Coronation, having taken in diverse places that stood out against
him, he went at last to Annand, receiving such as would acknowledge him, and
taking their oath of Allegiance and Fidelity. Whereupon Andrew Murray Earl of
Bothwell (chosen Governor after Marres death) sent Archbald Lord of Galloway
to see what he could do against Balliol in these quarters: he taking with him
his nephew William Douglas Lord of Liddesdale, and John Randulph (the Governor
Randulphs son) together with Simeon Fraser, having in company with them a
thousand horse, went first to Mophet, and having there understood of Balliols
careless discipline and security, departing from thence in the night, he came
so suddenly to Annand where Balliol lay, that he escaped very narrowly, Douglas
(...) Balliol at Annand, the 25. of December, 133^.
being half naked (not having leisure to put on his clothes) and riding upon
a barme horse unsadled, and unbridled, till he came to Carlisle. Others write,
that howbeit he came very quietly to have surprised the enemy at unawares in
the night time, yet they had notice of his coming, and issued forth of the
Town with a great army, where they fought long, and stoutly, till at last
Balliol was overthrown, and fled. There were slain many of his friends, and
amongst these, Henry Balliol (who behaved himself very manfully) John Mowbray,
Walter Cummin, Richard Kirbie. Robert (or Alexander) Bruce Earl of Carrict,
(and son to Edward King of Ireland) was taken prisoner, and obtained pardon
by the intercession of his Cousin John Randulph.

Hollinshed writes, that somewhat before this time the friends of David Bruce
understanding that Balliol did sojourne within the Town of Perth, had besieged
it, but that they were constrained to raise the siege, because of the men of
Galloway, who having bin sometimes the Balliols dependers, invaded the
besiegers lands under the conduct of Eustac^ Maxwell; whereupon he says,
Archbald Lord of Galloway, with the Earl of March and Murray, invaded Galloway
with fire and sword, and brought away great booties, but slew not many men,
because they got them out of the way, for fear of that terrible invasion. This
narration may be true in the last part thereof concerning their invasion, but
the cause of this invasion is not probable: that the men of Galloway should
invade men's lands that lay so far from them, as they behoved to be, that did
besiege Saint Johnston; for in all liklihood it was besieged by these that were
nearest to it, being in kin, and friends to those that were slain in Duplin;
and both ^ollinhed himself, and others, write that it was recovered in Balliols
absence about the same time, while he sojourned in Annand, by those that lay
near to it, without mentioning any other siege before that at which it was
taken.

This battle at Annand so changed the case, that he who even now was Crowned
King (in September) who had far prevailed, to whom all men (even King David's
nearest friends and kinsmen) had yielded, (despairing of his estate) was by
this act of Archbald Lord of Galloway turned quite out of his Kingdom and
Country, and compelled to fly into England, to save his life, the 25. of
December the same year, about three months after his Coronation, and was
compelled to keep his Christmas at Carlisle in the house of the Friars Minors. A
notable example of the inconstancy of worldly affairs, and constancy of an
honest heart in the Douglas, not abandoning his Princes cause, when others had
forsaken it, and also a proof of his good service, and useful; for which as he
deserved perpetual praise and favor of his rightful Prince, so did he
incur great hatred of his enemy, the usurping Balliol; who the next day
after (the 26 of December) going into Westmoreland, and there being honorably
received by the Lord Clifford, gave unto him the whole lands of Douglasdale,
which the said Lord Cliffords grandfather had before in the days of King
Edward the first. So proudly did he presume, to give that which was not in his
power: And so little had he learned the lesson of the uncertaintie of humane
affairs, grounded on whatsoever power, appearance, or even success: and so
difficult a lesson it is to learn, where there remains means so great as he
trusted to, the power of the King, and Kingdom of England, with his own
particular friendship and faction within the Country of Scotland, which shall
indeed have power to trouble the State a while, but not to establish either the
Kingdom to himself, or any part of Douglasdale to the Lord Clifford.

The next year, 1333. K. Edward of England having shaken off all color War
proclaimed.
of duty to his brother-in-law K. David, made open war to be proclaimed
between the two Countries, which turned on all hands to the disadvantage of
Scotland, even upon both the Marches. For the Lord of Liddisdale was taken
prisoner on the West hand, he having the charge of that quarter: and Murray the
Governor on the middle March was taken likewise at the Castle of Roxburgh, by
pursuing the victory too far on the bridge, and so excluded from his own.
King Edward took openly upon him the protection of Balliol, having caused him
to swear homage to him, and so with a great Army both of his own subjects and
forreiners, came in person and sat down before Berwick, and besieged Berwick
(...) sieged by K. Edward the third.
it, both by sea and land. Hereupon the Nobility of Scotland choose Archbald
Douglas Lord of Galloway to be Governor, and General of the Army, advising
him to enter England, and to spoil it with fire and sword, so to force K.
Edward to rise from before Berwick, and leave the siege. And this whilst he
was about to have done, he is advertised from within the Town, that Sir
Alexander Seaton Governor thereof had Occasion of the battle at Halidoun hil^.
made a paction with K. Edward to render the Town, if he were not succored by
the Scots before the first of August next, and for performance thereof had
given him his son and heir in pledge and hostage. Hereupon the Lord
Governor changes his purpose, fearing the loss of the Town, and against the
opinion of the wisest of his Army, (...) directly toward Berwick, and the
third day after he set forth, he came within the sight both of his friends and
foes. Before this King Edward (besides Thomas Seaton, who was given him in
pledge) had taken also Alexander Seaton, another son of the Governor of
Berwick (whilst at a sally out of the Town he followed upon the enemy too
eagerly) and had now both the brothers in his power, the one a pledge, the
other a prisoner. He therefore seeing now that the Town was like to be
relieved, sent to the Captain, certifying him plainly, that unless he did
render the town forthwith into his hands, both his sons should be hanged
immediately upon a gibbet in ^ight of the Town before his eyes. The Captain
returned him answer, that the days of Truce were not yet expired, and
therefore desired him either to keep the covenant he had made, or else deliver
the Hostages, and be at his advantage. When the King could not prevail with
him, nor break him off his resolute constancy (to which his virtuous and
generous Lady did also notably encourage him) he was as good as his word, and
performed indeed what he had threatened, against the law of Nations, and against
all humanity, hanging them up almost in the very sight of their Parents, who
bore it patiently and constantly for the good of their Country, and thought
their childrens lives well bestowed in that regard: only that they might not
be beholders of so heavy a spectacle, they retired themselves to their chamber
apart.

This strange, tyrannical, barbarous, and monstrous fact is suppressed in the
Histories of England, and buried in silence, not unwisely, it being capable
neither of defense nor excuse; and yet is contrary to the laws of Histories,
and the duty of an Historian, who ought (according to the oath of witnesses) to
tell all the truth, and nothing but the truth; seeing where the truth is either
adulterated or suppressed, the life of History is lost, which consists in
particular circumstances, truly related. Neither do I see how this same King
(in the end of his life) can pertinently and justly be called courteous and
gentile, after such a fact, whereof few the like have fallen into the hands of
the cruellest Tyrants that ever were recorded in story. And for my part I think
certainly, that it is not possible that one who is of a nature truly gentile
and courteous, should commit and be guilty of so foul a crime. It is a
perpetual blot and unexcusable, and such as no wit can wash away. So it is
still, and so let it ever be branded and detested. So it was by our Governor
the Lord of Galloway, and so much did it move him, and so far stir up his
noble indignation, that he thought he could never be exonered with credit,
without avenging of it, or spending his life in the quarrel, and so being
resolved to fight, he would never give ear to any counsel on the contrary,
nor alter his determination for any difficulty that could be proposed. And now
K. Edward (after that unpleasant spectacle, detested even by the English
themselves) had drawn up his Army, and taken a hill to the west of Berwick,
called Halidoun hill, a place very advantageous for him; and the Scottish Army
did stand over against them in battle array. The Governor commanded to march
up the hill, and to invade the English where they stood, altogether against the
counsel of the best advised, who both before, considering the inequalities of
the Armies, both in number (they being but few in respect of the English) and
in experience (being for the most part young and raw soldiers, not yet
trained) had dissuaded him from fighting any at all, and now seeing the odds,
and inequality of ground, would gladly have opposed themselves thereunto. But
all was in vain: he was so incensed with that so detestable fact, that boiling
with anger, and desiring of revenge, and trusting to the goodness of his
cause, and to the forwardness of his Army, who being inflamed in the like
anger, upon the same occasion, were very desirous to join battle, esteeming
that their earnestness of mind would supply their want of skill, and overcome
all other difficulties, and thinking in himself, that if having bin a spectator
of that vile and cruel murder, he should turn his back without fighting, it
would be accounted cowardice; he prosecuted his resolution, and commanded to
march forward, which was accordingly performed. They were first to descend and
go down from a little hill on which they stood, then through a valley, and so
to climb up another hill so steep that one man may (as Major says) keep
down four, such is the situation thereof on the west side. Wherefore the
Scots, ere they could come to strokes, were almost overwhelmed with shot and
stones; when they were come up, being quite out of breath, and charged from the
higher ground, they were borne down with violence, and slain. Some write that
the first joining of the battle was at the foot of the hill, upon more even
ground, but that the English gave somewhat back toward the side and ascent of
the hill, and having gotten that advantage of the rising of the hill, made a
fierce onset upon the Scots, who pursued them too rashly, supposing the English
had fled, by which mean they were utterly overthrown.

There died of the Scots in this battle 10000. others say 14000. the English
writers say 30000. A rare host amongst the Scots, though the Country had not
been divided in it self: and there were but few more then 30000. when they
overthrew the King of England with his invincible Army at the renowned battle
of Bannockburn: but such is the custom and form of their Writers, to extol
their own facts, and to lessen their neighbors, for they say there were
slain only at Bannockburne of the English 10000. and at this battle but 15.
how apparently let the Reader judge. Our Writers say there was no small number
of them slain, and that it was fought with great courage, nevertheless of this
inequality: neither did the Scots turn their backs, or give ground, until
their General (fighting valiantly in the midst of them) was slain. There died
with him John, James, and Allane Stuarts, sons to Walter Stuart, in his own
battle, the Earl of Rosse, to whom he had committed the Vauntguard, with
Kenneth Earl of Sutherland, Alexander Bruce Earl of Carrict, Andrew, James,
and Simon Frasers. Few were taken prisoners, and such as were taken, by the
commandment of K. Edward were beheaded the next day, against the law of arms:
some few were saved by their keepers, who were more covetous of their ransom,
then of their blood. Such cruelty did this gentile nature practice before the
battle (upon the Seatons) in the the chase (upon the flyers) and after the
battle (upon the prisoners) in cold blood. But his aim was to make a full
conquest of Scotland, which did fail him notwithstanding. This battle was
fought July 22. 1333. called Magdalens day, accounted, by the superstition of
the people, unfortunate for Scotland.

Thus died Archbald Douglas Lord of Galloway fighting for his Country: his
love thereof, his indignation against so inhumane a fact is commendable: his
magnanimity likewise and valor is such as became his house: his conduct is
blamed, and the cause thereof, whether it were anger or error: his anger or
desire of revenge, though the cause be never so just, should have been bridled
and tempered, and so governed, with such wisdom as might have effected a due
punishment indeed, and not so headie, as to have precipitated himself and the
Country into extreme danger and ruin, whilst he sought revenge. Or if it
were error, and too much relying upon the forwardness of his Army, that
indeed is a thing not to be neglected, but to be taken hold of, and made use
of, yet it ought not to be so far trusted, but well employed, and managed
with judgment, as a good addition to other means and helps, but not that the
whole hope of the victory should be grounded and hang upon it alone; far
less ought it to be made use of when there is too great odds. In which case it
serves but for a spur to set us on to our more speedy ruin. If it were fear
that he should be thought a coward if he did not fight that moved him, his
fear was needless: he had given good proof of it before, and might have
given more thereafter: he should have remembered that he was a General, and
Leader, in whom want of wisdom and government were as much to be blamed as
fearfulness. He was also a Governor, in whose safety the Kingdom was
interessed, and who ought to have regarded the good thereof. In this balance
he should have weighed things, and should have done according to it, though
with hazard of a sinister report for a while, which might easily have been
recovered in the own time. Concerning which, and all idle fame, and vain
opinion of ignorant people, we have that notable example of that worthy Fabius
Maximus, the Roman Captain, who neither by the provocation of the enemy, nor
importunity of the soldiers, nor disgraceful rumors scattered among the
people, as if he durst not have fought, or had colluded with Hanniball, and
other such slanders, could be moved to fight but at a convenient time. Nay
rather then he would do it, he suffered the half of his Army to be taken
from him, and given to his Lieutenant, as the hardier man than he, who both
durst, and would fight, as he bragged. And so he did indeed upon the first
occasion, but with such foole-hardinesse, as that he had both lost himself,
and his whole Army, if Fabius had not come in time to his rescue; who at that
fit time of fighting showed in effect both what he durst in manhood, and what
he could do in wisdom; and easily made those fond rumors to vanish, to his
perpetual glory, the confuting and confounding of his Competitour, and
confession and acknowledgment of his worth from those who had blamed him
before. Not unlike to this was the saying of great Scipio the Africane, who
being reproached by a certain man that he was not so forward a fighter as he
could have wished (though in very deed he was forward enough) daigned him with
no other answer, but that his mother had borne him to be Commander, not a
fighter; thinking that a Captains chiese honor is to command well, and to
choose fit times, places, and means for fighting. And not to go any farther;
we heard before in good Sir James his life, how little he was moved at the
English Heralds demands, who desired (in the Kings name) that he would fight
him on the plain field, upon equal ground, if he had either virtue or honor.
Sir James sent him away with derision, as one that had made a foolish request,
telling him, that a good Captain should account it his honor not tofight for
his enemies request, but as he found most expedient and convenient for
himself, in wisdom, choosing the form, the field, the time, the place, and
all for the advantage of his Army, and giving no advantage to the enemy whereof
he could possibly hinder him. And this I have insisted upon so much the more,
because many that are of good spirits otherwise, do oftentimes err in this
false opinion, and thereby do both lose themselves and their honors. So that
while they affectate to be called hardy fighters, do prove indeed to be
foolish Captains, and ill Commanders, and so do not eschew reproach, but
incur it. Neither get they the honor of valor, which they seek, but the
blame of temeritie and rashness, which they should avoid. So that the Writers
speaking of this fact, do all of them condemn it, and brand it with a note of
ill conduct; and some of them say in express terms, Archbald Lord of Galloway
was not valiant (in this case) but temerarious and foolish; very truly and
wisely, to warn others to take heed, and beware of failing in the like kind;
very soberly and respectively, restricting it to this particular only, and in
this case leaving him his due praise and commendation in his other actions, as
ye have heard he very well deserved.

This defeat drew on with it the surrendering of the Town of Berwick (the next
day after) by Sir Alexander Seaton, and of the Castleby Patrick Dumbarre Earl
of March, lives and goods safe, themselves giving their Oath of allegiance and
fealty to the K. of England. He commanded the Earl of March to re-edifie the
Castle of Dumbarre, which he, being not able to keep it, had demolished, that
it might not be a receipt to the English. And within a short time this overthrow
had wellnigh overthrown the Kingdom, and the cause: for the greatest part of
the Nobility, that were not dead before, being slain in this conflict, the
rest flying to save themselves, to strengths and desa^ts; Balliol assisted by
Robert Talbot (a Noble man of England, whom the King had left with him, with a
few English bands) being aided by his Favorers in Scotland, made himself once
more King, and was confirmed by Parliament, within half a year after he had
been driven out. All yielded obedience to him, save only four Castles, to
wit, Loch-leven, Dumbarton, Kildrummie, Urwhart and Lowdon peele, seated on a
little lake; so that no man in Scotland durst call David Bruce their King,
except young children in their plays: so far were matters altered by this
check! Where it is to be marked, that as by the wise and wary government of the
same Archbald, his Country and lawful King were defended, and Balliol chased
out of his usurped Kingdom: So by the same man's oversight in government, both
the usurping Edwards (English and Scots) are repossessed again therein, and his
Country plunged into misery, and the rightful King and his partners brought
to great extremity.

Of so great efficacy is good, or evil government: therefore it is so much
the more circumspectly to be looked to, and to be exercised according to the
rules of wisdom, and not after the opinions of men, fame, and reports, anger,
or whatsoever other cause does make men stray from the right and strait course
of reason. This was the lamentable condition of our Country: But let us have
patience a while, and we shall shortly have better news. Both these usurpers
shall ere long be driven to let go their hold, and at last be utterly
disappointed of all their hopes and projects; God conserving the liberty of
this Country, and the Crown thereof to the rightful heir, and the Bruces
blood, in whose posterity it shall yet prosper. In which work no little part
shall be the valiant and faithful efforts of the Douglasses. Amongst whom it
were requisite to speak of the next Lord Douglas: But the order of time draws
me another way: it being long before his turn come in, even ten or twelve,
or perhaps twenty years, as shall be seen in the own p ace, for he has
been young (it should seem,) and abroad out of the Country, but in his
absence some other of the Douglasses must not be idle.

Archibaldus Duglasius ad Halidonem coesus, 1333.
Non potuit perferre nefas, foedamque Tyranni
Perfidiam. Et quisnam sustinuisse queat?
Ergo furens animi, atque accenso pectore inardet
Praelia, and ingratas increpat usque moras.
Poscimus aut aequo (dixit) certamine Martem,
Aut certum est fatis cedere velle tuis.
Ah nimis! ah properant! Non illis ignea virtus
Defuerat: nocuit praecipetasse nimis.
Nec te victorem jactes, temeraria virtus
Sic nocuit. Vinci vis animosa nequit.
In English thus,

He was not patient enough to see
The Tyrants faithless fact (and who could be)
Hence his enflamed breast with anger sweld,
Enraged at such impediments as held
His hand from just revenge. Come let us try
Our chance, and win the field, or bravely die,
If fate will have it so, he said: and all
With too much haste obeyed their General.
No courage wanted, but the hard event
Proved the act rash, and lose the punishment
Of ill ruled valor. Thou did nothing gain.
Who to his passion yields commands in vain.
Of William Douglas Lord of (...), called the flower of Chevalrie.
BEfore we proceed to the rest of the Lords of Douglas, the order of the
History requires, that we speak something of William, not Lord of Douglas,
but Lord of Liddesdale, and a worthy member of the house and name of Douglas.
The first mention of him, and his actions, is at the battle of Annand, where
he was with Archbald, Lord of Galloway. The last of his actions of importance
are in the beginning of the first Earl William, before the battle of Durham
the space of thirteen years or thereby: which time he employed for his
lawful King and Country against the usurpers, so diligently as shall be
deduced in the progress of this Story. Writers call him natural son to Sir
James slain Son natural to Sir James.
in Spain, which is truth: But they err when they say that John Lord Dalkeith
was brother to William Lord of Liddesdale, he being Liddesdales uncle, and Sir
James brother, so master John Major has Davidis, for Gulielmi, and Hollinshed,
and (...) William for Archbald, who was made Captain of the castle of
Edinburgh, by this same William. But it is so clear and manifest whom they mean
of, that there is no question to be made of it. However it be, he has so
honored and nobilitated himself by his virtue, that no posterity needs to
enquire of his birth. We find that he was married to a daughter of Sir John
Grahame, Lord of Abercorne, called Her marriage
Margaret Grahame, by whom he got the lands of Liddesdale, he had but one only
daughter ( Mar^) who was married to Sir James of Lowden, One child (...).
who after the Lord Liddesdales his death, and Marga^t Grahames, got the lands
of Liddesdale.

His first appearing, to wit, at the battle of Annand, has been spoken of:
after that he was for his wisdom and manhood accounted worthy to have the
custody and government of the West Marches, ^s the charge of the East Marches
was committed to Patrick Du^. Being Wairden there, he had his residence at
Annand, where at a certain skirmish with the English, his men were scattered,
himself was hurt and taken prisoner, about that same time that Regent Murray
was taken at Roxbrough, to wit, in the year 1332. before the battle of
Halidoun hill, which was the occasion that he was not there with his uncle
Archbald, Lord of Galloway. He continued a prisoner until 1335. and then he
and Murray were both 1335
set at liberty, having paid a great sum of gold for their ransom. It is
strange that these two great Politicians (the two Edwards I mean) intending a
conquest of Scotland, should have suffered such men to be set at liberty at
any rate, without making them sure to their side; considering that the
detaining of them would greatly have facilitate their designs: and their
liberty, being enemies, hinder and annoy them, as we shall hear it did not a
little. It was apparently the pride of their hearts in that good success,
which made them careless and secure, not fearing any danger from these or any
else. So does success and pride growing thereupon commonly blind men: or so
does God blind the* wisdom of unjust men, when he has a work to do against
them. But before we come to the rest of the deeds of this valorous Lord, we
must take a view of the estate of things at that time, that the circumstances
(which are the life of History, and light of actions) being known, the actions
themselves may be the better considered.

We have heard how desperately things went on the Brucian (which was the only
right) side: he that was lawful King durst not be named, nor there was none
that durst do so much as once offer to call him King, but the little children
in their play, who still styled him so; whether by a natural inclination to
their rightful Prince, or by some spark of Divine inspiration joined
therewith, who can tell? or who knows these things? what motions will either
remain of old or spread of new in the hearts of men, where Gods work is to be
done? wise men keep silence, and therefore the stones behoved to cry out, and
foolish simple babes bear witness that the Bruce was King, for all the
usurpers confidence and cruelty: no doubt, it was with great derision, and
contempt of the hearers, but the event did justify it, that it had a secret
mover. No man saw the means how it could come to pass, but means will not be
wanting, where a work is to be done. This ought to be a heartning to good
subjects in their lawful Princes quarrel, and for good men in all good
causes, not to despair for want of means. Let men do their best, means will
come from whence they least dream on: Perhaps it will fall out so here in this
case: Out from among the midst of the enemies the first glimpse of deliverance
does arise.

There were that conspired against the Bruce to wrack him, and the Country,
England and the Balliols faction in Scotland, and those had overrunne all.
There comes a blink of favor, and hope from Rome, by the procuring of France.
The Pope sends to King Edward of England, to desist from invading of Scotland,
but that evanished without effect: pride had so far prepossessed his heart,
that he thought himself sure to make a conquest of Scotland, pleasing himself
in his own conceit, and supposing Scotland neither durst, nor could ever make
head against him hereafter: wherefore he will not do so much as give the
Ambassadors leave to come into his sight. A manifest contempt, not so much of
the people, as of the voice of equity and reason: But he called it reason what
he had ability to do: ( Stat pro ratione volu^as) is the voice of Tyranny,
and indeed a change being to come, pride behoved to go before; but the working
of this is obscure, and not perceived at first openly: di^ention amongst the
conspirators does arise upon a light occasion, a gnats wing (as the Proverb is)
but it grows to a Mountain. Talbot an English man was appointed with Balliol
(as has been said) for to govern Scotland, his co-adjutors for re-conquering
of it were (amongst other Scots Englized) David Cummin Earl of Athole, Henry
of Beaumont, John Mowbray an old favourer of that faction, from the time of
Edward the first, of whom he had received diverse lands for ill service to his
Country, which Edward esteemed to be good; as indeed it was profitable to
him. This John Mowbray was dead, and had left his lands to be divided between
his two daughters, and his brother Alexander, or rather as a bone, and a matter
of debate amongst the whole faction: for his daughters claiming it as heirs of
line, his brother by heire-male as entail, the Case was brought to judgment.
Henry of Beaumont had married one of the daughters, he therefore was fracker
froward that way, as one that was interessed. Talbot and Cummin swayed this
way; Edward Balliol inclined to the other party, and gave sentence for
Alexander the brother. Hereupon dissension arises; they grudge and murmr
against the judgment, they complain of it in their open discourse, and
speeches, as unjust: they withdrew themselves from Court, as mal-contents.
Talbot goes into England (perhaps to complain to the King) and as he came
through Lowthian, he is taken by some of King Bruces party (who began to show
their heads upon this occasion) and carried to Dumbarton where he died:
Beaumont put hand to work, and without so much as acquainting the King withal,
takes Dungard a strong Castle in Buchan, and the rest of the lands that were in
plea, he cease them, and makes them his own by the law of the strongest.
Cummin gets him into Athole and there fortifies himself against whosoever
should assail him. This terrifies Balliol so, that he retreats his sentence,
and turns his coat; agrees with those two, granting unto Beaumont the lands
which he had adjudged from him, and giving Cummin diverse other good lands
which belonged to Robert Stuart, who shall reign afterward, to show upon what
ill ground that gift was founded. But is he the better for this injustice? for
injustice it must be either first, or last, he is not so much the better, as in
likelihood he should have been; for injustice is never profitable. If he gain
one, he losseth another: he winnes Cummin and Beaumont, but he loses
Alexander Mowbray: who thereupon joins himself to the other party. And thus was
this usurpers faction brangled, then bound up again, and after divided again by
want of worth in Balliol their head. But this is not all, for it seems that
Cummins mind has not been so much soundly reconciled to Balliol, as it has
been only plaistered over, which may appea^e to be probably collected out of
the History, which they say is thus. Edward of England came with 50000. men
into Scotland; to what purpose so many? was there war? None says he, nor
rebellion greatly, that appeared any where, what does he then? does he fight
with any man? does he fortify Castles? we hear no word of any such matter.
What has been his intention then? wherefore came he, and with so huge an Army?
they tell not. But let actions speak, they will tell: All agree in this, that
he took away Balliol into England; there is one point: Then he has been
jealous of him, and has feared perhaps that he would not continue long his
vassal, as his Grandfather had proof, in Balliols father: but what does he
more? he leaves Cummin to guide the (...) in Scotland; there is another point:
He makes him Viceroy in Scotland for Balliol, and Balliol in effect prisoner
in England. Of which course Edward of England is the Author, let it be so;
who will purge Cummin of having been a Counselor, a suggester of information
for his own advancement? he being a man that did ever hunt after preferment,
which he made the scope of his actions, and compass, by which he ever sailed,
being also of an aspiring mind, and of a fickle and various disposition and
nature. However it be, this is another division in that society between the
Edwards, the usurping Kings. And thus much of the estate of their faction.

Concerning the other party that stuck to the lawful King Robert Stuart, that
afterward was King, had escaped Balliols ambush: being but fifteen years of
age, and by the help of his friends, was conveyed to the Castle of Dumbarton,
where he was received by Malcolm Fleeming Captain thereof. Now both the
Edwards being absent, and he having a particular spleen against Cummin, who
possessed his private inheritance; the said Robert with the help of Colin or
Duncan Campbell in Argyle (from whom he obtained an aid of four hundredth men)
had taken the Castle of Dunholm in Coile, and destroyed the English Garrison
there, whereupon the men of Boot (which was his private inheritance) had taken
arms, slain Allane Lyle there Captain, and Sheriff, who was placed there by
Balliol and Cummin, and were come home very joyful to their old master the
Stuarts. Upon this Thomas Bruce Earl of Carrict with his friends, and
neighbors of Coile, and Cunninghame, and William Karrudise of Annandale (who
had ever refused the English yoke) coming forth out of the place where they
had lurked, resorted to him also. John Randulph Earl of Murray was returned
from France, and did encourage them with hopes of foreign help of Jefferey or
Godfrey Rosse (Sheriff of Air) had drawn Coile, Carrict, and Cunningham to
be of the party; Ranfrow was also returned to the Stuarts. By their example,
the dependers of Andrew Murray had drawn all Cliddesdale to them, partly by
fair means, partly by force. These under the command and leading of Robert
Stuart, and John Randulph had passed into the North parts, chaised David
Cummin, Governor for the English to Lochaber, and compelled him to yield, and
swear obedience to David Bruce: Notwithstanding, that the enemy had committed
to him so great a charge, as to be Lieutenant for him in those parts.

About this time or a little before, William Lord of Liddesda^e returns from
his captivity, having been three years in prison: And he is no sooner
returned, but that presently he begins to serve his King and Country
faithfully, and diligently against both their enemies, Scots and Englized
usurpers; recompencing his long imprisonment with his enemies losses,
especially in Lowthian: for the more easy performance hereof, and that he
might annoy them that were in the Castle of Edinburgh, (which was then held by
the English) and them that went toward it, he lay in wait in Pentland-hills.
To him John Randulph, after that he had left David Cummin Earl of Athole
Lieutenant for him in the North parts ( Randulph and Robert Stuart were chosen
Governors by the Kings party) did adjoyn himself as to his old and fast
friend: from thence they Convention* at Perth, 2. April. 1335.
both went to Perth, to a Convention of the States, the 2. of April 1335. But
there was nothing done at that meeting, because of the enmity betwixt the Lord
Liddesdale, and David Cummin Earl of Athole. The occasion was, the Lord of
Liddesdale alleged that he was detained longer in prison, then other ways he
would have been, by the means of the the Earl of Athole, who (no doubt) did
think it meet for Balliol and the English faction, and therefore advised them
to keep him. And certainly he was wiser in that point, then they that set him
at liberty for ransom: Now under the color and pretext of this ill will
between him and Liddesdale, Athole was so strongly accompanied with his
servants and dependers, that the rest being jealous of his disposition, and
fearing his present power did conclude no matter of importance, Robert Stuart
inclined toward him, but all the rest favored the Lord Liddesdale. Robert was
young, and knew not the disp^sition of Athole, which the rest knew better, and
what ods was between them in fidelity, which was not long in discovering. For
King Edward of England came with a great army, both by Sea and Land, and
brought Balliol with him. So soon as he came to Perth, Athole being solicited
to defection from Bruce, he was not very hard to woo, whereas Liddesdale did
still his uttermost endeavors for him. One of the Governors (to wit, Robert
Stuart) being sick, and the other ( John Randulph) thinking it too heavy a
burden for him alone to fight, divided his forces, that so he might the more
annoy the King. Now word was brought to him, that there was a great army of the
Guelders coming through England, to join with Edward, and help him against the
Scots. Wherefore Randulph passes over into Lowthian, to try if he could
conveniently intercept them, and cut them off ere they should join with the
King. There came hither to assist Randulph (the Governor) Patrick Earl of
March, William Lord Liddesdale, and Alexander Ramsay of Dalhousie, and others.
These being assembled together, lay in wait for them near Edinburgh in the
Borrow moore: and so soon as they came in sight one of the other, without any
delay of either side they joined battle, and after a great conflict, the
Guelders were put to rout, and chased to a little hill, where was a ruinous
Castle. There they were besieged all that night, and the next day, they
rendered themselves, lives safe.

Others write that they fled to the Castle hill of Edinburgh, up Saint Mary's
wind or lane, defending themselves valiantly through the high street till they
came to that place, where they slew their horses, and made (as it were) a
rampart of their carcasses, and so saved themselves. There they stayed all that
night, and having neither meat nor drink, nor convenient lodging, oppressed with
hunger, and cold, and thirst, yielded themselves on the morrow. This narration
seems not to be so probable, as the former; for if it had been at the Castle
of Edinburgh, it might have made them more support, atleast releeved the Duke,
and have saved him. Besides that, the town of Edinburgh should suffer strangers
to pass through the midst of them, and neither aid them if they were friends,
nor as^ail them if they were enemies, nor shut their gates if they were
neutrall, for fear of some danger to come to their town thereby, but suffer
both parties to have free access into their chief street and to stand as
lookers on, it has no great likelihood. They ascribe also the winning of the
field, to the Lord of Liddesdale, who was not (as Hollinshed says) present at
their first joining battle, but came to it from Pentland-hills in so
convenient time; that if he had not come, the Guelders who fought exceeding
well, had got the day. Others make no mention of Randulph, but of the Lord
Liddesdale, and Alexander Ramsay with him.

Those that write of this battle, tell of a huge and wonderful stroke given
by Sir David Annand in his fury, he being hurt, stroke his enemy on the
shoulder with a Pole-axe, and clave him and his horse down to the hard
pavement, in which, the force of the stroke left a great mark long after. And
no less memorable is the valor of a woman in the Guelders army, who at the
beginning of the battle stepped forth before her company, and encountered in a
single combat or duel a Scottish Squire, named Robert Sha^* whom she slew, and
afterward beat down her enemies on each side, till at last after a good time
she was compassed about, and so slain. The Duke of Guelder their Captain
having yielded, was courteously, and honorably used, his stuff and baggage
was restored to him, and himself set free. The reason of this was, because G^y
Earl of Murray, having been bred in France, knew that the French King did
affect him; and therefore to gratify him, he showed him this ^avour to let him
go without any other hurt or damage; only he made him swear, he should
never aid the English again against the Scots. This same Author says that this
was not the Duke of Guelders, but the Earl of Namurs called G^y contrary to
all our Writers, who with one consent affirm that it was. And if it were G^y
of Namurs, he had always been an enemy, and received greater courtesy then
enemies (...), and more favor then was expedient for the Country. Nay, (...)
was not content to dismiss him free only, but would needs for his safety,
accompany him to England, in which journey they were suddenly set upon by the
Lord (...), and the Englized Scots, who had dressed an ambuscado for them, and
there Randulph was taken, and the Lord Liddesdale hurt in the leg. The
Governor was (...) to the two Edwards that lay before Perth, which town was
thereupon soon after rendr^d unto him.

Upon this success of the usurpers faction, A^hole very glad of what had (...)
out, accounting the prize now (...), and following forth his (...) policy
revolted again to the usurping Kings* thinking it safest to side with the
stronger, and did now clearly show, how worthy he was of that favor bestowed
on him by Robert Stuart, who at the Convention at Perth had appeared on his
side against the Lord (...). And not only did Cummin come in to them, but
undertakes also the government of Scotland once more as Lieutenant for the
English, promising to root out all these of the contrary part that should stand
out, and would not acknowledge their authority. The King of England partly for
lack of victuals (which were put out of the way by the Governor) partly
because of his journey into France, which he was then projecting, returned into
his own Country, and took along with him Balliol, who had the name of a King,
but was indeed a very slave to another man's affection, for a vain and empty
title; a just reward for his foolish trusting to a stranger in prejudice of his
Country.

Athole being willing to do what he had said to the Edwards, that he might
approve his service and fidelity unto them (whereby he proved also false to
his lawful King, and late benefactours; his so friendly enemies, who had not
only pardoned him so lately, and saved his life, but trusted him so far, and
committed so much to him) left no kind of cruelty unpractised, that he could
against his Country, so far, as that almost the whole Nobility relented, and
became slack and remiss againsthim, or did yield unto him, having forgotten
their duty. But behold the reward of such wisdom, and the due fruit of such
seed as he had sown; a fruit that is often reaped of such seed, if men would
believe, and observe it: though the present appearance, the first buds and
blossoms of things do blind their eyes, and make them choose that which
should not be chosen, which is unacceptable to man, and not past over by God,
as is seen in this man before the year be fully expired. For Robert Stuart
being sick, and Randulph a prisoner, there were left but three Noble men who
stuck fast, and were faithful to their King, and Country. These were William
Lord Liddesdale, Patrick Earl of March, and Andrew Murray who had been
Governor. They were so constant, that no promises could corrupt their
fidelity, nor no threatening nor danger could quail their courage so, as to bow
their hearts to any English servitude. Some add unto these the Earl of Rosse,
and William Lord Keith. These did greatly hate his unnatural dealing against
his Country, and treachery against his promise, and cruelty joined withal:
three things ever odious and hateful to honest minds. Wherefore understanding
that he lay at the siege of the Castle of Kildrummie, they levied such
companies and number of men as they could get, and marched toward him. Cummin
being advertised hereof, raises the siege, and meets them in the fields
within the Forest of Kilblane: There they fought it very hardly, and Cummin
being more in number, had overthrown them (as it is thought) but that John
Craig Cummin overthrown at Kilblane, and slain.
Captain of Kildrummie, issuing forth with three hundredth fresh men, restored
the battle which was almost lost, and gave them an undoubted victory, which
when Cummin perceived (being conscious of his own ill 1337.
deserving) that he might not fall into his enemies hands alive, he rushed into
the midst of the battle, and so was slain: Sir Robert Minyeis fled to the
Castle of Kenmure (says Boethius) who says also that Alexander Gordon was he
that slew Athole; but others attribute it to the Lord Liddesdale himself, who
for that cause, and for the slaughter of Sir Thomas Minyeis (it may be they
mean Sir Robert) at the Castle of Lochindors, in the Sheriffedome Sheriffedome
of Bamfe, was rewarded with the Earldom of Athole, and is so styled in the
resignation by which he surrenders it again some four years after (to wit,
1341) the 16 of February in favor of Robert Stuart, Great Stuart of Scotland,
whereof the evident is yet extant in the Register. There died in this battle
besides Athole, Walter Braid, and Robert Cummin, and a great number of others
both Gentlemen and Commons. Sir Thomas Cummin was taken prisoner, and the next
day (being the 1. of January) he was beheaded. They were not above 1000. or (as
some write) 500. choice men against 3000. yet the event was (as we have said)
favorable to the just and right cause. This battle was fought the last of
December, 1337. By this blink of fair weather in such a storm of foreign
assaults, things were again somewhat changed, and the Brucians encouraged:
wherefore that they might have some face of a settled estate and government,
they choose Andrew Murray Regent as he had been before his captivity. He went
into the North, and in the mean time the Lord of Liddesdale with a company of
chosen men passes over into Fyffe, and besieged the Castle of Saint Andrews,
Falkland, and Luchers, all which he took in with small difficulty, by his
wisdom, and manhood, though they were strongly manned, and well fortified,
and furnished with munition, and victual. Major re^erreth this to the time
after the Governor came back out of the North. After this, he returned into
Lowthian to his old haunt in Pentland-hills to wait his time, and watch the
English that lay in Edinburgh Castle, that he might slip no occasion of
troubling, and molesting them. At last this occasion did happen; the Town
being full stuffed with a great number of Soldiers, both English and Scots:
There was a scottish man amongst them of a stout stomach, named Robert
Phanderghest whose lot was fallen to be on that side, but his heart was with
the other party, and he carried no great good will to the English. This being
perceived he was the worse entreated by them, so that one day his head was
broken by the Marshall Thomas Kneveton, whereat taking indignation, he sought
all means to be avenged thereof, and so brought it to pass that he shortly
after slew him; and to avoid the danger of punishment, fled to the Lord
Liddesdale, whom having informed of the negligence that was grown amongst the
English; he persuaded him to take advantage of their sloth, he nothing slack
in a business of that nature, went secretly in the night to the Town, and
slew four hundredth of them in their sleep, and drunkenness, before they could
make any resistance.

About this time Murray the Regent dies, after he had brought back all the
Northern parts of Scotland to his Princes obedience excepting Perth, a great
loss for his Country, and he greatly regrated; But no loss is without some
gain. Robert Stuart had now recovered his health, who was the other Governor;
(and as some write) he assumed the Lord Liddesdale for his colleague, whether
that were so or not, and what ever his place and name was, he was a notable
adjunct to Robert Stuart, and under his authority performed much good service,
and profitable to King and Country with great hazard of his life, by receiving
of many wounds; while he did assail and vanquish greater numbers with far
fewer: So that by his prowess and singular valor he reduced Tivedale,
Niddesdale, Annandale and Cliddesdale (except the Hermitage) to the Kings
obedience, having expulsed from thence all the English. These lands and
strengths were lost again after the battle of Durham, and recovered again the
second time, by William the first Earl of Douglas, which we have inserted
here, lest men inconsiderately should confound, and mistake the one William
for the other.

By these doings his name came to be spread throughout the whole Island,
insomuch that Henry Lancaster Earl of Darbie hearing thereof, and being
himself a valiant man, and desirous of glory, provoked him to fight with him
hand to hand on horseback: but at their first encounter, the Lord of Liddesdale
his hand was so sore wounded with his own spear (which brake hard at his
hand) that he was not able to prosecute the combat, whereupon it was delayed.
Major makes mention of his justing, and joyneth Alexander Ramsay with him at
Berwick: he tells also of one Patrick Grahame, who being provoked and
challenged by an English man into the field, told him he was content; but
wished him to dine well, for ^ee would send him to suppe in Paradise, which he
also did: hereupon he condemns these justs and duels in time of peace; so that
it should seem there have been some peace or truce. But we hear not of any,
I do rather think there has been some assurance at that time.

That same year, the King of England sent a very valiant Knight named Sir
Thomas Barcklay into Scotland with a great power of men to assist their
faction: Robert Stuart and the Lord Liddesdale go against him, and gave him
battle at Blackburne; where the Lord of Liddesdale fought A battle at
Blackburne.
so eagerly, that all his men being slain, he and Robert Stuart having only
three left with them, continued still fighting, and defended themselves till
night, which being come on, by favor thereof they escaped, and saved
themselves by flight.

It was not long ere he recompensed this loss, by the defeating of John John
Stirline defeated by Liddesdale.
Stirline and his company. This Stirline with five hundredth men assailed the
Lord Liddesdale at unawares, at a place called Cragens, having but forty in
his company, as he was journeying without any fear or suspicion of an enemy.
This did put him into a great fear at first, but he recollecting himself out
of that sudden affrightment, fought so valiantly that he defeated Stirline,
slew fifty of his men, and took fouretie prisoners.

Afterward the English that lay at Creighton, made diverse onsets and incursions
upon him, in one of which he was run through the body with a spear, and was
thereby disabled to do any service for a season.

So soon as he was recovered, being accompanied with twenty men only, he set
upon sixty English, at a place called The black Shaw, and having wisely taken
the advantage of the ground, which was fitter for foot then horsemen, he slew
and took them every one.

In the same year 1338. the 24. of December, or as others, the 2. of November,
he set upon the convoy of the English that were carrying vivers to the Castle
of Hermitage, as they were in Melrosse, or near to it, and defeated them, but
not without great slaughter of his own men: and so He takes the Castle of
Hermitage.
having got the victuals, he went and besieged the Castle of Hermitage, ^ooke
it, and did victual it with the same victual which he had taken at Melrosse.

He vanquished also Lawrence Vauch (alias Rolland Vauch) a very valiant man,
with a great company of Englishmen.

And in the year following (1339) he fought five times in one day He fights
five times with Lawrence in one day, and (...) him.
with Lawrence (or William) Abernethie, a Leader under Balliol, and having
been p^t to the worse four times, says Hollinshed, Boethius, five times, at
the sixth time vanquished him, and slew all his men, and took himself
prisoner, and thereafter presented him to Robert Stuart, who sent him to the
Castle of Dumbartan. For these and such other exploits achieved by him, he was
highly esteemed of all men, and got the name which is commonly used of him, The
flower of Chivalrie.

He was after this sent Ambassador into France to inform King David He is
sent Ambassador into France.
of the estate of the Realm, and to confer with him about weighty matters,
being either chosen for his worth, or only sent by Robert Stuart as his
Colleague, and so fittest for that employment. While he was there he obtained
pardon of the K. of France, and peace for one Hugh Hambell a famous Pirate.

During his absence in France, Robert Stuart had laid siege to St. Johnstoun
Perth besieged by Robert Stuart.
in the year 1339. and had divided his Army into four squadrons, under four
chief Captains (each Captain commanding a part) of which he himself was
one, the Earl of March another, William Earl of Rosse the third, and Magnus
Mowbray Lord of Cliddesdale the fourth. It was diverse times assaulted, but they
were repulsed with loss, it being valiantly defended by the English that were
within. They had lien at it ten weeks without doing any good, and were now
almost quite out of hope to take it; so that they began to think of leaving
off, when in the very mean time the Lord Liddesdale arrives on Tay, having
brought with him out of France Hambell the Pyrate, with five ships well
furnished with men, munition, and weapons. These men the Lord Liddesdale had
hired in France of purpose for this business; amongst them were two Knights of
the family of Castle Galliard, and two Esquires, ^iles de la Hayes, and John de
Breise, He landed a part of the soldiers, and left the rest in the Ships to
keep the mouth of the river, and he himself marched to Cowper in Fife to take
it. It had been deserted by the Englishmen for want of vivers in the time of
Murray the Governor, and now again it was seized by the Englized Scots for
the use of the English. Their Captain at this time was one William Bullock an
English Priest, but a valiant man, who was also Treasurer for them and the
faction. The Lord Liddesdale deals with him, that seeing there was no hope of
succor from England, and that the Scots Garrison was not to be (...) to, he
would forsake the English faction, and enter into King David's service,
promising to procure him lands in Scotland. Bullock accepted his offer, and
having obtained his promised lands, he did much service afterward to the King
and the Lord of Liddesdale. Having by this means recovered Cowper, he returned
to the siege of Saint Johnstoun, Recovereth Cowper.
where (as he was ever forward) he was hurt in the leg with the shot of a
Crosbow going to the Scalade. Nevertheless, he departed not till the Town was
taken, or given up by the Governor thereof Thomas Uthred. Perth taken.
The manner of the taking of it was this: when the siege had lasted four
months, and was like to have continued longer, the Earl of Rosse by digging
of Mines drew away the water, and dried up the Fous^es and Ditches, so that the
Soldiers going to the assault upon dry ground, and approaching the walls
without any let or difficulty, beat the defenders from off the walls,
especially by shooting of darts and arrows out of the Engines which they had
caused make: And so they rendered, and departed with bag and baggage in the
year 1340.

Within four days after Stirline was also besieged, and rendered on the
Stirline taken
same conditions.

After the siege of Saint Johnstoun was ended, the Lord Liddesdale rewarded the
Frenchmen very liberally, and sent them back into France well contented. He
caused also restore to Hugh Hambell one of his best Ships, which was taken by
the enemy during the siege. For Hambell having adventured to approach the
Town with his Ships to give an assault, one of them was taken by the English,
and now was restored.

Thus K. David's party did flourish by the faithful valor of these his good
and notable subjects, and prevail against the pretended K. Balliol: who seeing
such success in K. David's affairs, durst show his face no longer* but having
lurked a while in Galloway, by changing and shifting places for fear of being
intercepted, and wearying of that kind of life, he returns into England now
the second time after his conquest; he did not possess his Kingdom long, and
but with little ease or contentment, what by the Scots chasing of him, what by
the King of England (his good Master) detaining of him little better then a
captive. A shadow of a kingdom, or slaverie rather; being miserable indeed,
yet sees he not his misery, but seeks it again, and loses it again.

But let us return to our Lord of Liddesdale, who desists not here from doing
of good service to his King and Country. Edinburgh Castle is yet in the
possession of the English: it was too strong to force, wisdom must supply,
which was not lacking in him, no more then valor; a good harmony, and happy
conjunction, which were ever to be wished! There was one Walter Towers (of whom
are descended the Towers of Innerleith) The original of Innerleith.
a man of his acquaintance, and a follower of him, had (by chance) a Ship laden
with victual in the Firth of T^y beside Dundie. Liddesdale causes him to
bring about his Ship to Forth, where (as he was instructed) feigning himself
to be an English Merchant, and sending some flagons of very fine wine to the
Captain of the Castle, he prayed him to take him into Occ^sion of taking the
Castle of Edinburgh.
his protection, and that he would give such order as the rest of his victual
might be free from all danger and peril of his soldiers, and of the enemy;
promising that if the Garrision in the Castle had need of any thing, he should
command any thing that was in his power, so ^arre as it could reach. The
Captain desired him to send some hogsheads of the same wine, and some biscuit
bread, and promised him access when he pleased: he further warned him that he
should come timely in the morning for fear of the Scots, that did make
frequent onsets and incursions in those parts. The Lord of Liddesdale being
advertised hereof, chooses out 12. of his best men, and the same night goes
out to Walter Towers ship, and he and his men having borrowed the Mariners
apparel, did put it on above their Armor, and so went to the Castle, carrying
the wine and victual with them: he had before placed the rest of his men as
near as he could, that they might be in readiness, upon a sign given them,
to come to the Castle to his aid. Liddisdale himself, with Simeon Fraser, and
William Bullock (say our Writers, but his name was Sir John Bullock) went a
little before, and the rest followed a certain space after. When they were let
in within the Bulwark, perceiving the keys of the Castle hanging upon the
Porters arm, they slew him, and without noise opened the gate, and presently
gave the signal, by winding of a horn. This sound gave warning both to his
friends and enemies, that the Castle was taken. Both made haste, the one to
defend, the other to pursue; but the Scots having a steep hill to ascend,
behoved to come forward the more slowly: for that cause (lest their Lord should
be excluded from his men) they cast down the carriage in the gate to keep it
open, and having fought The Castle taken, he makes Archbald Douglas his
brother Keeper.
a sharp fight, at last they that were within gave place: the Captain with six
more were taken, the rest were all slain. And having thus won the Castle, he
made his brother William Douglas (say they, but should call him Archbald)
Keeper and Captain thereof.

This same year or the next (1342. the 30. of March) Alexander Ramsay took
Roxburgh in Tividale, and sone after John Randulph was set at liberty in
exchange for John Montague taken in France (says Major) and took in his own
Castle of Lochma-bene in Annandale.

So that by the industry and efforts of these three Wairdens, the Lord
Liddesdale in the middle March, Alexander Ramsay in the East, and John Randulph
in the West: the English were wholly expelled out of Scotland beyond the
Borders, which fell out in the time of Edward the third: neither did the
English men possess one foot of Scottish ground, excepting the town of
Berwick. Such good service did these Noblemen, with the other good Nobility,
in the minority and absence of their Prince from his Country, against the
great force of England, and a great part of their own Country of Scotland,
being unfaithful Subjects, unnatural Scottishmen. And this these Nobles did
even for the love they bore to King Robert, this David's father, bearing the
heat of the day for him, while he is at ease and security, with watching,
hunger, thirst, cold and great effusion of their blood, to make the Kingdom
peaceable to him, choosing to adventure their lands, their lives, and
whatsoever worldly thing is dear unto men, rather then to abandon him, and
follow his enemies with ease and quietness, under whom they might have lived a
peaceable life; if they would set aside regard unto their honor and duty.

Such is the force of the love of Subjects, beyond all strength of men, and
riches of treasures, only able to bide a stresse, and hold out: As may be
seen by this example to be remarked greatly by subjects, and entertained above
all treasure by Sovereigns, and to be accounted a chief, yea almost the only
point of true policy, to love and make much of all men, and most specially
their Nobility; that they may in such their Princes straits (when they shall
happen) endure the better as these men did, which they could not have done, if
they had not had authority and dependence, and so been respected by their
inferiors: who so would diminish this authority in Noblemen; abasing them too
far, and making them suspect to Princes, and not safe for them, they err
greatly in policy, and unadvisedly cut the props of the Princes standing,
which being brangled but a little, his Kingdom is easily bereft him, all
authority going away with his own person: It fell well out with King David
Bruce, that these Noblemen were not so, and therefore the more able to do so
great things for him.

After these things, they sent Ambassadors to desire King David to come home,
and so he did the 2* of June that same year. His first Act was carefully to
inquire for, and gratefully to reward such as had suffered in his service, a
prudent Act; But allas (the mal heur) it falls often out that Princes know
not all things, and ere they be informed, they many times conclude. The cause
of many errors and much mischief has happened thereby, as it fell out here.
We have heard how the Lord of Liddesdale (amongst many his notable services)
had in special expelled the English out of Tividale, and diverse other places,
by his wisdom and valor, and was therefore rewarded with the same lands,
which he enjoyed afterward as his rightful inheritance* from thenceforth he
so used it, as in a manner conquered by himself. He was Wairden, and so
defended it: defending ministered justice, and discharged the place and office
of Sheriff, having won it from the enemy. This he did with the tacit
consent of the Country, and by allowance of those that were in authority.

Thus being in possession, and trusting to his deserving toward King and
Country, and the Nobility of his blood, and potencie of that house he was
come of; he looked for no competitour in that which he had taken from the
enemy. And not knowing or not caring for the Law (as is customable to Martial
men) or perhaps being prevented, being slower in going to King David, or on
some such like occasion: the Sheriffe-ship is given from him to another.
Alexander Ramsay was amongst the first that welcomed King David at his return,
and was received kindly as he had merited, and much made of by him, who for
his service gave him the keeping of the Castle of Roxbrough, and together with
it (whether of the Kings own free and mere motion, or any other suggestion, or
by Ramsayes procurement) the Sheriffe-ship of Tividale, very unadvisedly if he
knew Liddesdales interesse, very ill formed, if he knew it not. Very
imprudently (say our Writers) who blame the Kings indiscretion, for giving it
from William Douglas Lord of Liddesdale, to Alexander Ramsay; and for
withdrawing of it from so worthy a man, so well deserving to whomsoever, for
that was to make a division among his own: so it proved, for William Douglas
of Liddesdale took it very highly that Alexander Ramsay, should be preferred
before him to that office. But he was chiefly incensed against the taker of
it, as having done him a great indignity, which makes it apparent that he
has not only accepted of it, but sued for it: therefore set altogether on
revenge, he suppressed his ire for that present. But after some three months,
as Alexander Ramsay was exercising the office in Hawick, and looked for no such
thing: he set upon him, and having slain three of his men that stood to the
defense of their master, he hurt himself, and casting him on a horse, carried
him to the Hermitage, Alexander Ramsay taken by Liddisdale, and starved in the
Hermitage.
where he died of famine, according to the testimony of sundry of our Writers,
and the black book of S^ne, where it is showen that he was taken the 20. of
June, and kept seventeene days without meat, save that some few grains of
corn, which falling down out of a corn loft which was above him, were
gathered by him and eaten.

Such is the unbridlednesse of anger (justly called fury) to be greatly blamed
in him, yet they mark the cause thereof, the Kings unadvisednesse in procuring
thereby the loss and ruin of so worthy a man of war, far from his fathers
prudencie and probitie. The King (not acquainted yet with military
dispositions) was marvellously moved therewith, and purposed to have punished
it exemplarily to deter others from doing the like, and therefore caused
search very diligently to have apprehended Liddesdale, but in vain: for he
withdrew himself to the mountains, and desert places* and in time obtained
pardon by the suit of his friends, of whom he had purchased good store by his
worthy acts for the liberty of his Country; Among whom Robert Stuart the Kings
sisters son was his special good friend. That which most effectually served
to procure him favor, was the magnificke, but true commemoration of the great
exploits achieved by him, the consideration of the time, in respect whereof
(the peace being uncertain without, and things not very quiet at home) military
men were to be entertained, and used with all favor. By this occasion he did
not only obtain pardon for his fault, but he got also the gift of keeping of
the Castle of Roxbrough, and Sheriffeship of Tivedale (and all other his lands
in Tivedale, or elsewhere restored to him) which the other had, and which were
the cause of the slaughter. This clemency of King David was (perhaps
profitable for that time, but pernicious in example.) This fell out (as has
been said) three months after the Kings coming home, and therefore in October,
or (perhaps in 1346.
September) at the head Court in Hawick. His pardon was obtained, He is
banished and restored again.
and his peace made with the King a little before the battle of Durham, which
was in the year 1346. the 17. of October: So as he has been three or four
years a banished man.

After his return from banishment, finding the King bent upon his journey
against England, he wisely and earnestly dissuaded him, and did exhort him
first to take order with the discorders at home, and before all things to
settle them. For the Earl of Rosse had slain the Lord of the Isles, whereby a
great party of the Kings army was diminished, the Lord of the Isles men lying
back for want of a head; and so the Lord Rosse, and his men for fear of
punishment. So did also many others that lay near them, retire and go home,
fearing least they should suffer in their absence by their neighborhood to
those disagreeing Lords, and be some way endamaged; wherefore they thought good
to provide in time, the best they could against all perrills that might happen.
For this cause he councelled the King, first to settle peace amongst his own
subjects before he enterprised a foreign war; that peace being settled, and
his army united, he might the more strongly, and with better success invade
England. But the King contemning his good and wholesome counsel, (his French
friendship prevailing more with him, then either his own good, or the good of
his Country) he raised an army wherewith he entered England, and was
encountered by the English at Durham, where the Scots The battle of Durham.
King David taken.
were defeated, King David Bruce taken prisoner, and with him (beside others)
William Earl of Douglas, and the Lord of Liddesdale, who were shortly after
ransomed or dismissed so much the more easily, for that they had the King, and
so cared the less for others. This fell out in the year 1346. October the 17.
as has been said.

While the Lord Liddesdale is a prisoner amongst his enemies, he forgets
Liddesdale taken also.
not his friends at home. Sir David Barcklay had slain one John Douglas,
brother to Sir William, and father to Sir James of Dalkeith (say our Writers)
beside Horsewood: but they should say rather, brother to Sir William, (for
there Sir William is the same Lord of Liddesdale, of whom we now speak, son
natural to good Sir James) neither was John Douglas slain in Horsewood, but in
Kinrosher, by Loch-leven. This Barcklay also had taken Sir John Bullock at the
Kings command, and put him in prison in Lindores, where he died of hunger
almost in the same sort that Sir Alexander Ramsay died. The Writers lay the
blame on the Nobility that envied so worthy a man, and accused him falsely to
the King of unsaithfulnesse; but they tell not in what point. They themselves
call him a worthy Chaplain of great wisdom, singular prudencie, and
eloquence, beyond any in his time, who had been Chamberlain to Edward Balliol,
Treasurer to the rest of the Englishmen in Scotland, and lastly, Chamberlain to
King David, and amongst the chief of his Counselors reputed as another
Chussay. Nevertheless, thus was he delated, and taken away, having done diverse
good offices in the Commonwealth, and being very necessary unto it. The Lord
of Liddesdale had drawn him from the English faction to King David's party, and
he had used him in good services, whereof he was not forgetful, ever
remaining one of his special friends. This gives men matter of suspicion,
that his death was for ill will to the Lord of Liddesdale by the King incensed
against him, never digesting in heart the death of Sir Alexander Ramsay,
whereby the King is blamed, as counselor or follower thereof; and that Sir
David Barcklay enemy to him, did execute it willingly, or did procure the Kings
command thereto. The taking of the Castle of Edinburgh, in the year 1341. by
the Lord of Liddesdale, was plotted by Sir John Bullock, say the Writers, who
in quickness of wit, and sharpness of invention past all men in his days. In
revenge of this, Liddesdale causes slay Sir David Barcklay, by the hands of
Sir John Saint Michaell (say they) but they should have said Carmichaell in
Aberdene. A just fact, but not justly done; the matter was good, the form ill,
being besides and against all order, but who could wait for order in so
disordered a Country? when should he by order of law have obtained justice,
his Prince being in captivity; his duty to his friends defends the fact,
the estate of the Country excuses the form. God looks not so upon things:
he had before (as we heard) slain Sir Alexander Ramsay, he must not want his
own share, but who durst do it? The avenger of blood finds the means. Such is
the estate of man, what can they lean to on earth? ere he do not pay that debt
of blood, the Earl of Douglas shall exact it; his Chief, his Cousin, and to
add that also his own son in Baptism (as the Lord Liddesdale was to the
Earl of Douglas, for the black book of Scone calls him his spiritual
father) and thus it came to pass.

The Lord of Liddesdale being at his pastime, hunting in Attrick Forest, 1353
is beset by William Earl of Douglas, and such as he had ordained He is
slain by the Earl of Douglas.
for that purpose, and there assailed, wounded and slain beside Galsewood in
the year 1353. upon a jealousy that the Earl had conceived of him with his
Lady, as the report goes, for so says the old song.

The Countess of Douglas, out of her Boure she came,
And loudly there that she did call;
It is for the Lord of Liddesdale,
That I let all these tears down fall.
The song also declares how she did write her love letters to Liddisdale, to
dissuade him from that hunting. It tells likewise the manner of the taking of
his men, and his own killing at Galsewood, and how he was carried the first
night to Lindin Kirk, a mile from Selkirk, and was buried within the Abbacie of
Melrosse.

The cause pretended, or the cause of this slaughter, is by our Writers
alleged to be the killing of this Alexander Ramsay, and Sir David Barklay, and
some other grudges, and so the Earl said himself, as they say, and so it was
indeed, if we look unto God; but who does believe him, that it was on his
part? no Writers, no report, no opinion of men does believe it, not until this
day. They lay the cause on his ambition, on his envy of Liddesdales honor,
and jealousy of his greatness. Reason swaies to the same side, and brings
great if not necessary arguments: for what had he to do with Alexander
Ramsay, that he should for his sake dippe his hands in his own blood? far
less for Sir David Barcklay, on whom he himself should have taken avengement,
if the Lord Liddesdale had not done it; this John Douglas whom Barcklay slew,
being so near to himself; but something must be said to color things. But
this will not color this blemish, though in a fair body indeed as we shall
see hereafter. Does ambition spring from a great mind? Does envy, of virtue?
jealousy, of hatred? Let noble hearts eschew them; it is the basest thought
that can fall into a man's mind. Right minds love virtue, even in strangers,
even in enemies; generous minds strive to do better, not to hinder such as do
well. It is a strange maxim and ill grounded, a wicked wisdom and perverse
policy, to keep back ones friend in whom virtue appears. It is of follies the
greatest folly, to hinder their growth, for fear they should overgrow our
greatness; the which when we do, it comes to pass that we are outgrowne by
strangers, and often by our enemies: yea undermined oftentimes, while our
friends (thus kept under) are unable to underprop us, as they both should and
would do: a just reward of so unjust wisdom. But for themselves to put hand
in them for their worth, I can find no name to it. I must wish this Nobleman
had been free from so foul a blot, and I would fain vindicate him, and some
small appearance there is, that it was not his fact. But the current of
witnesses lay it upon him, and who can contend against all the world. Wherefore
let us regrate it and not allow it, eschew it and not excuse it, or follow it,
as we are too ready to follow evil examples.

To return, thus he lived, and thus he died, for whose Elogium short, but
worthy; let it be said (as it was then blazed in the mouths of men, and cited
by the manuscript) He was terrible and fearful in arms; meek, mild and
gentle, in peace; the scourge of England, and sure buckler and wall of
Scotland, whom neither hard success could make slack, nor prosperous
sloathfull. He is styled by the Writers a second to none, and by consent of
that age and voice of the people, the flower of Chivalrie: he was often
wounded, thrice a prisoner, and ever ready to fight again, what manhood? what
wisdom behoved it to be? with fifty men, to overcome five hundredth: with
twenty, to take and slay sixty. What invincible mind was it, that being
defeated five times in one day, he had the courage to fight and overcome the
sixth time. Let Hanniball wonder at Marcellus, that neither overcoming, nor
overcome, would suffer him to rest: yet was he not thus restless that we read
of, a worthy branch of such a stock, a true member of such a house, well
retaining that natural sap sucked from his Predecessors, of valor, and of
love to his Country. And thus far concerning the name of Douglas in this
branch thereof, in the time of the minority or absence of the chief. Now let us
return to the Principal stock, the Earl of Douglas himself.

Gulielmus Douglassius Liddalianus, 1333. caesus
Omnia quando habeas, quae Mars dedit omnibus unus
Ut Mars Mart ferox fulminet alta tuo,
Hoc putes ut patiare parem; tibi Defuit unum hoc:
Quin age posce hostem caetera solus eris.
John's Heroes.

In English thus.

Whiles thou alone all valor did enjoy,
Mars does bestow on those he would employ,
One only virtue wanting, does appear
To make thee excellent, thou could not bear
An equal, bate this pride, and thou shall have
This honor never soldier was more brave.
Of William the fifth of that Name, the tenth Lord, and first Earl of Douglas.
UNto Hugh the ninth Lord of Douglas, did succeed his nephew William son to
Archbald Lord of Galloway, and Governor of Scotland, who was slain at Hallidon
hill. Of this William the other great branch of Douglasses does spring; to wit,
the house of Angus, which overtoppeth the rest, and at last succeeds unto the
place of the stock. He it is also that raises the house to the dignity of an
Earldom, and does greatly increase the state thereof. That he was son to
Archbald, and not to Sir James (as some do mistake it) it is clear by diverse
confirmations, in which Sir James is expressly termed his uncle, and Archbald
his father. And so does the Charter witness, upon which the confirmation
proceeds. The Charter is given by Hugh Lord Douglas brother and heir to the
late Sir James Douglas, to William son and heir to Archbald brother to good
Sir James Douglas. It is dated at Aberdene the 28. of May. 1342. The Kings
Charter likewise clears it, bearing David dei gratiae, and. Sciatis nos
concessisse, and. Gulielmo de Douglas (says the one) Confirmasse dilecto, and
sideli nostro Gulielmo de Deuglas militi (says the other) Omnes terras
reditus, and possessiones per totum regnum nostrorum, de quibus quondam Jacobus
dominus de Douglas avunculus suus, and Archibaldus de Douglas Pater suus
milites obierunt vestiti.

Touching his marriage, we find that he had three wives! The first His
marriage, wives, and children.
was Margaret, daughter to the Earl of Dumbarre and March; by whom he had
gotten two sons; James slain at Otterburn, and Archbald called the grimme
Lord of Galloway, and afterward Earl of Douglas: and one daughter married to
the Lord of Montgomerie. His second wife was Margaret Mar, daughter to Donald
or Duncan Earl of Mar, and afterward heir, and inheritrix of that
Earldom: for this Duncan had but one son named Thomas and this Margaret,
Thomas twice married: by his first marriage he had one only son named Thomas
also: This second Thomas was married to Marjorie sister to this William Earl
of Douglas, but died without issue: his father Thomas married a second wife,
Margaret Stuart, who was inheritrix of the Earldom of Angus, but he had no
children by her: so that there being none left now of Duncans race, but this
Margaret Mar, married to the Earl of Douglas: we find him styled Earl of
Mar in his wives right in the year 1378. whereof diverse Monuments and
Evidents yet extant do bear witness. By this Margaret Mar, he had one only
daughter Isabell Douglas, who did succeed to the Earldom of Mar. She was
twice married, First to Malcome Lord Drummond, by whom she had no children.
Secondly, to Alexander Stuart, son to the Earl of Buchan, brother to King
Robert the third, but had no children by him neither, yet she did resign the
Earldom in his favor, as a Charter given thereupon by King Robert the third
to him and his heirs, which falling unto her and her heirs. Thirdly, the
Earl of Douglas after the decease of Margaret Mar, took to his third wife
Margaret Stuart daughter to Thomas Stuart Earl of Angus, and his heir and
inheretrix of the lands, and Earldome of Angus. This Thomas was son to John
Stuart, and brother to Walter Stuart the great Stuart of Scotland, who married
Marjorie Bruce, daughter to King Robert Bruce. Now this Margaret had a brother
who died without issue, and a sister called Elizabeth, married to Alexander
Hamilton of Cadyow. Margaret Stuart herself was first married to Thomas Mar
Earl of the same, and son to Duncan or Donald, but had no children by him.
Then she was married to this William Earl of Douglas, by whom she had a son
named George. This George succeeded to her in the Earldom of Angus, and by
gift of his sister Isabel Douglas inheritrix of Mar, he got the lands that
she had gotten from her father: which disposition Isabel made to her brother
George, and not to James or Archbald, for good considerations to be related at
large hereafter, when we shall come to treat of the house of Douglas.

And so we see him very fortunate and honorable in his marriage, in his
purchases, and in his children: his honorable mind appears in his deportment
to his sister Uterine, whom the Writers call Elconora de Bruce, to whom he
gives no less then the Baronie of Wester Calder in maritagium to her and her
heirs whatsoever, with her husband Sir James Sandilands, as the transumpt of
the Charter bears, extracted by James Douglas Lord Dalkeith 1420. April 4. The
Charter it self is not dated, but the giver is clear, Gul^elmus Douglas
Dominus loci ejusdem, and Sir James his entaile does clear it, in which he is
called Earl of Douglas and Mar. This El^onora Bruce had to her father Robert
Bruce (some call him Alexander) son to Edward flaine in Ireland, and Cousin
Germane with K. Robert. He was Earl of Carrict, and after the death of
Archbald Lord of Galloway, he married his relict this Earls mother, and had by
her this Lady Elionora, who (as we have said) was married to Sir James
Sandilands. In regard of this marriage, and the Donation of these lands, that
house of Sandilands gave the coat of the house of Douglas, a Heart, and three
mullets, which none else has besides him, except those of the name of Douglas.

This Earl William was bred in France, and as the manuscript bears, most
part in the wars; his first return to Scotland was before the battle of
Durham some few years, which appears by the forenamed Charter given him by his
uncle in the year 1342. Touching his actions after his return, the first was a
hard entry at the battle of Durham, where the King made many Knights to stir
them up to fight valiantly; and first he created William Lord Douglas an Earl.
In the morning, being Warden, he is sent to view the English Camp, and engaged
among them ere he was aware, he had a number of his men slain, and himself
also narrowly escaped. In the battle (being Leader of the Foreward) he was
taken, and He is taken prisoner at Durham.
the King himself likewise, with diverse others. But his success after is more
fortunate: for the better understanding whereof, let us remember the estate of
affairs of the Country of Scotland at that time.

After King David Bruce was taken prisoner at the field of Durham, the English
repossessed themselves of the Merse, Tivedale, Liddesdale, and Lawderdale: so
that their Marches were Cockburnspath and Sawtray, and from that to Carnilops,
and the Corse-cave. Balliol had gotten again his old inheritance in Galloway,
and wasted Annandale, Nidisdale and Cliddisdale, with fire and sword, and had
also with Percie overrun Lowthian: neither could there be an army made up in
Scotland to resist him for some few years, so that Balliol behaved himself
again as King: but we hear that no obedience he got by the good will of the
people. The Scots had chosen Robert Stuart (who was King afterward) to be
Governor in the Kings absence, but no great action is recorded, that he was
able to take in hand at such a time, and in such estate of his Country. The
Earl of Douglas being ransomed or dismissed, the more easily for that they
Ransomed.
had the King in their power, returned home. Thereafter there fell out a matter
very greatly to be lamented, that it should have fallen into the hands of so
worthy a person, the killing of the Lord of Liddesdale by the He killes
Liddesdale.
Earl: let me never excuse such a fact, I may well be sorry for it. But I
wonder at this, that the Earl after his slaughter, should have obtained his
whole estate: not only that which he did acquire for his own virtue and
valor in the Borders, as Liddesdale with the Sherifship of Roxbrough, or
Tweddale, but also those lands which he had gotten by his wife, as Dalkeith,
Newlands, Kilbugho, etc. But being rightly considered it seems not so strange,
for after the Lord of Liddesdale had slain Sir Alexander Ramsay, the King
apparently has never pardoned from his heart. But being still incensed against
him (as may appear in that action the King allowed, or rather moved of Sir
David Barcklay in taking and slaying Sir John Bullock a special friend of the
Lord of Liddesdale, and for ill will and spite of him (say our Writers) and
that his anger being renewed, and increased by the killing of Sir David
Barcklay: It is possible the King has been well pleased to hear and know of
his ruin, whereupon the Earl of Douglas there being none so able to do it as
And obtains his whole estate.
he, being his Chief and kinsman, having his own particular grudge, was
encouraged to make him away, and having done it, has obtained his lands the
more easily. Our Histories testify that the house and name of Douglas was
divided against it self, pursuing each other for many years together with much
bloodshed, and all upon this occasion. Belike the marriage of the Lord
Liddesdales daughter, to Sir James Douglas of Lowden, Kincavell, and
Calder-cleere, has been or should have been made in his own time, which has
moved the Douglas of Dalkeith, Caldercleere, and them of Strabrock to make head
against the Earl, as those who did most resent that slaughter. But at last the
Earl (as commonly remorse comes after blood) repenting, or at the
intercession of friends, gives the lands of Dalkeith, Newlands, and Kilbugho,
to Mary daughter to the Lord of Liddesdale, by resignation in favor of her (as
is extant in our public Register) to regain the favor and dependence of his
friends, that were alienated from him; retaining Liddesdale and his other
Borderlands and Offices in his own person: for we find in the Register James
Douglas son to William Earl of Douglas, and Mar, styled Lord of Liddesdale
in a letter of pension of 200 marks sterling granted to him by King Robert the
first of the Stuarts.

His first care was to deliver his own inheritance from the English bondage,
for which purpose having gathered together a company of his friends. He
recovered Douglasdale from them, having slain and chased them every man out of
it: then encouraged with this success, the favor of his country people
increasing toward him, and greater companies drawing to him: he expelled them
also out of Attrick Forest and Tueddale, and the greater part of Tivedale.

At that time John Copland (I know not whether it were he) that had taken King
David at the battle of Durham, or some other of that same name, was Captain of
the Castle of Roxbrough, and seeing that the Earl of Douglas did so prevail
against his country men, gathered together a great company of them, and went
forth to oppose him, but was quickly put to flight, and constrained to retire
to the said Castle again.

Thus having repressed and ejected the English out of those parts of Scotland,
he not contented therewith resolves to invade them in their own Country:
wherefore he accompanied with the Earl of March (his own father in law) and
having gathered together a great power of men, as privately, and as secretly as
he could, he marched toward England. They sent William Ramsay of Dalhousie
before, and gave him order to Conflict at Nisbet-moor.
burn Norame, and to spoil the Country about, to draw the English upon their
host, which lay in ambuscade at a place called Nisbet-moore. Ramsay having
done his part very dexterously as he was enjoined, having gathered together a
great booty of cattle, made as if he would drive them into Scotland. The
English to recover their goods, pursued him eagerly, and he slying of purpose
drew them into the ambushment, where the Scots arising suddenly, set upon them
fiercely, and put them to flight with great slaughter. There were taken
prisoners, Thomas Gray and his son, with John Darcy a Noble man, and many
others, even the greatest part of them.

After this (being encouraged by their former success) they did enterprise He
takes Berwick.
against the town of Berwick, and took it in by scalade, not without great
opposition and resistance, having been discovered by the watches. They had in
their company Eugenie Garrantiers, with some fouretie Frenchmen more, whom John
King of France had sent into Scotland a little before, with four thousand
crowns to wage soldiers therewith, and this was all excepting fair promises,
a weak support in so great a strait! and let it be well marked, that men may
see how far they err from the truth, that allege that our Country and the
liberty thereof has been maintained and upheld by support from France, and not
by the valor and industry of the inhabitants. The Nobility took the money,
and divided it amongst themselves, prosecuting the war in their own manner
by frequent incursions and inrodes. These fouretie were present at this
exploit, and at other occasions where they behaved themselves valorously. It is
said by some, that Thomas Stuart Earl of Angus was present at these surprises,
and that he had a chief hand in it, as being the man that first broached it,
and drew the rest to it by his persuasion: But most Authors mention only the
two former. There were slain within the town of Berwick, Alexander Ogle,
Governor thereof, Thomas Percie brother to the Earl of Northumberland, and
Edward Gray with others: but they could not win the Castle which he held
against them: whereupon King Edward coming to rescue it; they being not able to
keep the town, rifled it, and then burnt it, and razed the walls thereof, in
the year 1355. King Edward caused repair it again, and while that was 1355.
in doing, he went himself to Roxbrough, where he kept his residence for
R^gained by the English,
that time: Thither came Balliol, and being wearied (as may be supposed) of his
titular Kingdom, resigned all that he had, which was a show and pretense to
it. The King of England requesting instantly that he would avenge him of the
injuries done to him by the Scots, who would not acknowledge nor obey him, but
had expelled him out of his Kingdom: King Edward heard him very willingly, and
upon that pretext invaded Lowthian by sea and land: but his Navy was dispersed
and broken by storm of weather, and by land the victual was put out of the
way, so as he was constrained to retire home again, after he had powered out his
fury upon Edinburgh, Hadington, and other towns in Lowthian which lay in his
way. He being gone, the Earl of Douglas passed into Galloway, and partly by
force, partly by persuasion and entreatie, he reduced that whole County to
the Kings obedience; and caused Donald Mackdowgall one of the principal men in
Galloway, to take his oath of allegiance and fidelity in the Church of
Cumnock. Hollinshed attributes this to the Lord of Niddisdale his brothers
son, natural son to the Lord of Galloway: he took also by force the
Castle of Dalswinton and Carlaverock, and razed them. Some Histories say they
were razed by composition, and upon agreement by King David himself after his
return. At this time also John Stuart son to Robert the Governor recovers
Annandale from the enemy, and Roger Kilpatricke took in Disdeir. And even as
before in their Kings minority they had done: so now during his captivity,
these his faithful subjects made his enemies to reap but small profit of all
the pains, having now again delivered this Country from them almost every
where. Let it be remarked (as we said before) to the end that Kings and
Princes may think it the best policy that can be to procure and entertain the
love and hearty affection of his subjects, and more specially of his faithful
Nobility.

Shortly after this they write, that the Earl of Douglas went into France with
3000. men, and was made Knight of the chiefest order in Douglas at the battle
of Poictiers.
that Kingdom: he was present at the battle of Poictiers; where the field
being lost, and John King of France taken prisoner by Edward the black Prince
(son to King Edward the third) the Earl of Douglas escaped very hardly, being
rescued by his own men, of whom there was slain Andrew Stuart, Robert Gordon,
Andrew Haliburton, and Andrew Vasse Knights. Archbald Douglas, son natural to
good Sir James, and brother to the Lord Liddisdale was taken prisoner, and with
him William Ramsay of Colluthie. Archbald was known for a man of quality, but
the other not known to be a man of any estate, and they perceiving it, the more
to deceive their taker, Archbald used him as his serving-man, making him to pull
off his boots, and do such other drudgerie, by which means he was set at
liberty for a small ransom.

Now, as these actions of war do show his valor and love to his Country, so
likewise there fell out an occasion at home in matter of State Policy, which
did no less manifest his prudencie, magnanimity, and affection to his native
soil; which was this: King David being returned from his captivity, after he
had spent some five years in settling of the troubles and affairs of his
Kingdom, after he had fined such as had fled first at the battle of Durham,
and composed such broiles and disorders 1363
as were amongst his subjects, at last in the year 1363* he kept a Parliament.
A Parliament
There he propounded unto the Estates, that they would give The union of the
Kingdoms sought.
way to the uniting of the two Kingdoms of Scotland and England; and seeing he
himself had no children, be contented to give way, that King Edward of England,
or his son, might be his Successor. Whether he made this proposition, because
he did judge it* indeed to be most profitable for both Kingdoms, so to end all
their quarrels, and wars, or that he had taken a great liking of the King of
Englands son, or else that he had been constrained to promise and swear to do
it by King Edward, when he was in his power, or some other occasion, it is
uncertain. But the motion was so ill taken by all that were there present, that
they had no patience to stay till every man's vote were asked in his turn, but
altogether with one voice did cry out with a confused noise and clamor,
detesting it, and protesting, that so long as they were able to bear arms,
they would never give their consent thereunto; that they had one of age to be
heir already, whenever God should call him. Especially the Earl of Douglas
took it so to heart, that he entered into League with Robert Stuart Earl of
Stratherne, (who was next heir, and was chiefly prejudiced hereby) with Patrick
Earl of March, George Earl of Murray his brother, John Stuart of Kile,
(afterward Robert the third) and Robert Stuart of Monteith (after Duke of
Albanie) to withstand and oppose this business to the uttermost of their
powers, in case the King should prosecute it, and to defend themselves if he
would use violence against them. And they were so forward herein, and went so
far on in it, that it had almost come to an open rebellion. Neither were they
reconciled until the King changed his purpose; And then by the mediation of
the Prelates of the Realm, they desisted, and gave their oath of fidelity to
him again in the year 1366. having been at variance and jealousy the space of
two or three years. The English Writers would make it seem to have been but
collusion, and that the King did but propound it for exoneration of his promise
to King Edward, and was glad of the refusal, for that he was not to labor
further in it. But our Histories signify no such thing, and say directly that
he did it sincerely, and was highly offended with the denial for the time, and
that those who had refused, looked for the worst, and set themselves for
defense; yea, that they went so far, that some of them made incursions upon
the towns and villages in the Country, to terrify the King (says Major) and
that he might learn to know, that the whole Kingdom did not altogether depend
upon him, but upon the good counsel, and mature advice of the Nobility. And
Boethius writes, that the convention being dissolved, there followed rebellion
of some of the Nobility: whilst they feared that they had offended the King
with their free speeches, determining to enterprise and do somewhat before they
should be caused to suffer. Such is the force of jealousy when it enters
into men's breasts. And therefore it is to be eschewed with great care, and the
occasions thereof cut off betimes: For it comes often to pass, that upon such
suspicions, when neither party have had an ill meaning, but have been afraid
of ill, and sought to prevent it, such inconveniences have followed, as would
not have fallen out otherwise. And therefore above all things assurance should
be given to Counselors, and free voters, that in their free delivering of
their opinions, they shall not offend there; or if they do suspect they have
offended him, the suspicion should be removed betimes, and they put in
security. And this King David did in this matter, as the most judicious of our
Writers say. They that had carried out against it most freely (says he)
hearing that the King was angry, were about to have made defection, whose fear
when the King understood, he remitting all wrath, received them immediately into
favor. By this wise government and modesty on all sides suspicion was taken
away, and howbeit he was offended for the time, because they did not yield to
his desire, yet afterward he rejoiced greatly (as certainly he had great cause)
to see the true and hearty affections of his subjects to their Country, to
his own blood, and the house of Bruce, the uprightness, sincerity, and
magnanimity (virtues requisite and necessary for Counselors) in resisting
even himself for himself, for his own honor and good, which were both greatly
interessed by this his desire, if he had obtained it; being so prejudicial to
his sister, and her offspring, who have happily succeeded yet since, besides
the breach of oath to his father, the servitude of his Country, subjecting it
to strangers, and the stain of his honor for ever, to have been the author of
so unworthie a fact. And without all doubt, it was greatly against the security
of his own Person, in regard of the ambition of his designed Successor and
Heir (King Edward) and his impatiencie to abide Gods leisure, who in a colder
hope, had used indirect means to make away Thomas Randulph. What would not that
man have attempted for a certain possession? And what miserable case had the
Person of this good King been in, if he had gotten his own will? if his will
had been accounted as a Law by these his subjects? A notable example to
Counselors, of freedom, where their Princes good, and the good of their
Country does require it: to Princes of modesty in opposition made to that
which may be their will for a time, and whereunto for the present appearance
they may be very bent. A happy King that can so dispole himself not to be
wedded to his own affections only! Or if not so, yet happy is he that has
such Counselors, who will resolutely remonstrate the right, and stand to it,
by which means he may be brought to examine his own affections, to see the
errors of them, and rejoice thereafter that he did not what he most desired.
Certainly, this King has rejoiced at it all the rest of his days, living in
great quietness some four or five years. There was not any grudge,
heartburning or suspicion after this between him and any of them: such was the
integrity of heart on both sides, and so it should be in reconcilements;
otherwise enmities must be perpetual, or would be so, if it were not hoped
that the reconciliation would be sincere, and entire. Nay, where it is not so,
that peace is worse then any war, and nothing else but a snare to entrap men.
King David died in the Castle of Edinburgh in the Tower which he himself had
caused build, and is called from his name David's Tower, in the year 1370. the
nine and thirtieth year of his reign, and was buried at Holyrood-house.

After his de^rease there was a Convention of the States at Linlithgow, to have
Crowned Robert Stuart son to Marjorie Bruce King Roberts daughter. Thither went
the Earl of Douglas, and did claim the Crown; where he was so strongly
accompanied, that they feared he would have taken it by force, if it were not
given him voluntarily. He alleged that he was to be preferred before Robert
Stuart, because his right was derived both from Balliol and Cummin. Now for the
better understanding of the ground of his claim, we must remember that King
Alexander the third dying without heirs, the title of the Crown was devolved
to David Earl of Huntington, brother to the said Alexanders Grandfather, King
William. This David of Huntington (as Histories relate) had three daughters,
Margaret, Isabel, and Alda or Ada. The eldest ( Margaret) was married to Allane
Lord of Galloway; Isabel the second, to Robert Bruce, called commonly Robert
the Noble; the third, Alda or Ada, to Henry Hastings, whose Posterity does
still yet happily with good report possess the Earldom of Huntington. This
Alane Lord of Galloway had by his wife Margaret (eldest daughter to David) two
daughters (as is most commonly reported) Dornagilla and Mary. Dornagilla his
eldest daughter was married to John Balliol, father to that John Balliol who
was afterward Crowned King of Scotland. Mary his second daughter was married to
John Cummin Earl of Mar, and (by her) Lord of Galloway, called Read John
Cummin slain by King Robert Bruce at Dumfrees. Some write that this Alane had
three daughters, and that the eldest was married to one Roger Earl of Winton,
of whom seeing we have no mention in pretension to the Kingdom, it is apparent
that either there has been no such woman, or that she has died without
children. Buchanan says he had three daughters at his death in the life of
Alexander the second. Also Boethius (in his thirteenth book, fol. 294.) says
the same, and calls this man Roger Quincie Earl of Winton, who (says he)
was made Constable for his father in law Alane, and continued in that Office
until the days of King Robert Bruce, and then being forfeited for treason,
the Office of Constable was given to Hay Earl of Arrall: he says also that
John Cummin did not marry one of Alanes daughters, but one of this Quincies
Earl of Winton, who had married the said Alanes eldest daughter, which is
carefully to be marked. Hollinshed says the same in his Chronicle of
Scotland, and calls him Roger Quincie. John Cummin had by Mary his wife one
only daughter, called Dornagilla, who was married to Archbald Douglas slain at
Halidon hill, father to this Earl William, of whom we now speak; whereby he
was Grandchild to Mary, and great Grandchilde to Margaret (David of Huntingtons
eldest daughter) and by consequent reckoning from David of Huntington his
daughter, 1 Margaret, 2 her daughter Mary, 3 Martes daughter, 4 this Earl
William is the fourth person. On the other side, for Robert Stuart, reckoning
likewise from the said David of Huntington; his daughter 1 Isabel, her son, 2
Robert Bruce Earl of Carrict, 3 his son King Robert, 4 his daughter Marjory.
5 her son Robert Stuart is the fifth person, which is a degree further then
the Earl of Douglas, who was in equal degree with Marjory his mother. This
reckoning is not unlike that whereby Robert Earl of Carrict did claim it
before when he contended with Balliol; for Bruce was a Male and a degree
nearer, equal with Balliols mother, and this Earl was also the Male, and a
degree nearer then Stuart, equal with his Mother; and besides all this, he was
come of the eldest of David's daughters, which Bruce was not. This was the
ground of his claim; but finding his pretension evil taken, and disliked by
all the Nobility, and disputing that which had been decided long before in
favor of King Robert Bruce, who had been confirmed King, and to whom Balliol
had renounced whatsoever right he could claim; to whom also and to his
posterity they all, and Earl Williams own predecessors, had sworn obedience,
and continued it the whole time of his life, and of his son David the space
of 64. years.

To which Robert Bruce, and not to David of Huntington, Robert Stuart was to
succeed; wherefore the Earls chiefest friends George and John Dumbars, Earls
of March and Murray, his brothers in law by his first wife, and Robert Ereskene
his assured friend, keeper of the three principal Castles in Scotland,
Dumbartan, Stirlin and Edinburgh, dissuaded him from it: And so he was
contented to desist, and joining very willingly with the rest of the Nobility,
accompanied him to Scone, and assisted at his Coronation; being no less
acceptable and commended for his modest acquiescing, then he had been before
displeasing for his unseasonable motion. For the which in token of his good
will, and that he might so much the more tie the Earl to him, the new King
bestows two very honorable gifts upon him: His eldest daughter Euphane on the
Earls son James, that failing heirs Male, the Crown might so fall to his
house. The other benefit was bestowed upon the Earl himself, the marriage of
Margaret Stuart Countess of Mar and Angus, daughter and heir to Earl
Thomas: This Countess of Mar and Angus did bear to this Earl, George Earl
of Angus, that was married to one of King Robert the thirds daughters; as we
shall see in the house of Angus. It is known that these two lived after from
thenceforth in good friendship, as Prince and Subject without suspicion,
grudge, or eye*list on either party; for neither did the King remember it as
an aspiring, whereby to hold a continual suspicious eye over him; neither did
he fear the King as jealous of it, or as esteeming that he had suffered vvrong
in the repulse, nor seekking any means to prosecute it further, laying aside
all quarrels with the cause in sincerity on both sides.

This should be the practice of all honest hearts, and is the only mean to end
all debates, entertain peace, and keep humane society: far contrary to this
now called wisdom of diffidence, distrust, jealousy, curbing and keeping
under those with whom we have had any difference, which is the only way
to foster variance, and to make enmity eternal. For trust deserves truth,
and moves a man to deserve that trust, and to be worthy of it. Time vvins and
allures even the wildest minds of men, and also of beasts, even of fierce
lions, if it be not a monster in nature, or worse then a monster, one amongst
a thousand, which is the only true and solid policy, that makes the hearts of
men ours; for men must be led by their hearts, and by no other way, and so
employed, or else let no man think ever to make any great use of them.

King Robert after his Coronation made diverse Earls and Barons (or Lords) and
Knights; amongst whom James Lindsay of Glenaske was made Earl of Crawford.
This same year the peace with England was broken, which had been made with
King David at his releasing from captivity for fourteen years, and had now
continued not above four or five years only. The occasion of it was this:
there is a yearly Fair in Roxbrough, and some of the Earl of Marches
servants going thither, were slain by the English that kept the Castle thereof.
When the Earl of March craved justice, and could not obtain it, the next year
when the Fair day came again, he having gathered a sufficient power of men,
invaded the Town, slew all the Males of any years, and having rifled it, and
taken a great ^poil and booty, he burnt it to the ground.

We read that a good while after this, the Earl of Northumberland and
Nottingham set forward toward Scotland with an army of three thousand men at
arms, and seven thousand archers, and sent forth Sir Thomas Musgrave with
three hundredth spears, and three hundredth archers Sir Thomas Musgrave taken by
Douglas.
to Melrosse, to try what he could learn of the Scots in those parts, with
whom the Earl of Douglas encountering, took Sir Thomas himself, a hundredth and
twenty prisoners, besides those that were slain.

The same year (1380.) the Earl Douglas entered England with twenty thousand
men, and went to the Fair of Pennure; and having taken all the goods that were
there, he burnt the Town. Hollinshed in his English Chronicle speaking of that
journey (in all likelihood) says they brought away fouretie thousand cattle,
and were assaulted by the way, but came into Scotland with the prey, having
lost some few of their men; he says the occasion of it was, because the men of
Newcastle had taken a Scottish ship well known to be a Pirate, but very rich,
worth seaventy thousand pound, whereat the Scots being angry, and offended,
made this incursion.

About this time the Earl of Douglas entreats for mercy to James Lindsay
Earl of Crawford, who had been banished a certain time before for killing of
John Lion, son in law to the King, and Chancellor (as some call him) or
Secretary as others: he was the first of the name of Lion, of whom the house
of Glammes is descended. This Lion was a The original of the house of Glammes.
young man endued with all the natural gifts of body and mind that could be.
He was comely in personage, well bred, and of a good carriage, and winning
behavior, which made him to be well liked of of all men, and in special by
this James Lindsay, who received him into his train, and made him his
Secretary. By this occasion being often at Court, the King took notice of
him, and liking his deportment, and upon Crawfords commendation, took him into
his service, and made him his Domestic Secretary. It fell so out at last, that
the Kings daughter (by Elizabeth Moore) fell in love with him, and was made
with child by him; which he revealed to the Earl of Crawford. The Earl
fearing that the King would take the matter heavily and hainously, and use the
young man hardly, devised this way for his safety: he causes another
Gentleman of his acquaintance to take the blame on him, and to absent himself
as guilty; and then being very familiar with the King, deals with him to bestow
his daughter (seeing she had thus fallen) on John Lion, and to give him the
lands of Glams with her; which was done accordingly. He got also for his coat
of Arms, the flower de-luce, field argent, and a Lion azure, with a double
treasure, and a woman's head for his Crest. What unthankfulness the Earl of
Crawford did find in him afterward, or did apprehend and conceive, it is not
particularly set down; but finding his own credit with the King to decrease,
and John Lions to increase, and taking Lion to be the cause thereof, esteeming
it great ingratitude after so great benefits he took it so highly, and with
such indignation, that finding him accidentally in his way a little from
Forfaire, he slew him very cruelly, and fearing the Kings wrath, fled into a
voluntary exile: and so he remained certain years, until (at the Earl of
Douglas intercession) the King suffered himself to be so far entreated, as
that he was restored, obtained pardon, and received into the Kings favor. What
interest the Earl of Douglas had in it, and what friendship with the Earl of
Crawford, or what pity of his afflicted estate, or commiseration of him; or
weighing the cause that drew him to so hard a fact (as great men will regard
one another, where they think they have been evil requited by them to whom
they have been beneficial) or how necessary the presence of so worthy a man
was for the King and Countries present estate, it is hard to conjecture: but
this is clear, that the Earl of Douglas has been not a little respected and
accounted of at that time, seeing at his suit the King consented to forgive the
murder of his own son in Law, and to receive the Author thereof into
favor.

The year following, (which was 1381.) there ensued a truce between the two
Countries for three years. There met for concluding of this truce John of Gant
Duke of Lancaster, who was Uncle to King Richard the second, with some other
Lords of the English side: and for the Scots, the Earl of Douglas and March.
In the very time of their meeting and treaty, both parties were informed of
the insurrection made by Jack Straw in England, and both dissembled the matter
until the truce were agreed upon. Then when all was ended, the Earl of
Douglas with a generous wisdom (far from that which is now in vogue and
request) addressed himself to the Duke of Lancaster, and told him, that from the
very first beginning of their conference, he was not ignorant in what estate
the affairs in England were; but that they were so far from catching hold of
any advantage of the time, and from making either of peace or war
accordingly, that they had the rather consented to the truce, because of the
troubles in England. And for your self (says he) if it please you, you may
remain here in Scotland, until these tumults be settled, or if you had rather
return home, you shall have 500. horse to accompany you, and to set you safe in
what place in England you please. The Duke thanked them for their courtesy,
but thinking that he needed it not at that time, made no use of either of
their offers. But afterward being on his journey home, when he found that they
shut the gates of Berwick against him, and would not receive him into the
Town, he came back again, and was conveyed to Haliroodhouse by the Earl of
Douglas and his brother Archbald Lord of Galloway, and remained there till
matters were composed in England.

After the truce was expired, Archbald Lord of Galloway, assisted by his
brother the Earl of Douglas, and by the Earl of March, won the Castle of
Lochmabane, as we shall hear in the life of the said Archbald.

Upon this the Duke of Lancaster by way of revenge made an incursion upon
Scotland, in which having rifled Edinburgh, and wasted the Country, he
returned home. And he being gone, the Earl of Douglas took in all the Castles
and houses of strength in Tivedale, which the English had kept since the
battle of Durham, Roxbrough only excepted, and purged that Country of
Brigands and Robbers, who had in time of the war been very licentious and
bold.

This was the last work of this Nobleman, worthy (say our Writers) 1384.
of his house and Predecessors, for he died soon after of a Fever in the
Earl Douglas ^ath.
Castle of Douglas, and was buried in Melrosse in the Abbey, in the year 1384.
as they reckon, and is likely: for his son James is styled Earl in the year
1385. March 20. Of what age he was at his death it cannot be certainly
collected: but from his fathers death at Halidoun hill we have 51 years after
he began to come upon the stage, and appear in business, and the affairs of
his Country: 30. years at least or 40. since we account that he came home
before the battle of Durham.

He was a man (without question) of exceeding great valor, whom even the
English Writers spare not to call one of the most valiant personages in his
days, within the Realm of Scotland: And certainly his actions bear no less,
even as they are summarily set down. But if all had been particularly
described, with the full circumstances, it would have been far more clear.
And not only his valor would have appeared, but his wisdom also, travel,
and diligence, which he must needs have used in recovering of so many
Countries and Castles, as he is recorded to have won, and in so many years,
as he was employed in continual action, ever victorious, without mention of
any repulse, overthrow, or evil success, where himself was Conductor, and we
may say, nor elsewhere, safe at the battle of Durham. Now all is involved in
general, and rolled up in gross, expressing little or nothing of the
accidents, or particular wa^es of his exploits, only they tell us this road he
made, and these Castles he won, and tell the event indeed to have been
successful, but no more. This good fortune (as men call it) though it be
commended, and commendable in Leaders, yet it is seldom alone, but accompanied
with virtue, to which it gives the luster, and without which he could never
have achieved such enterprises.

The love he carried to his Country, and to the liberty thereof, needs no
declaration. Those his travells declare it, which could have no other end,
chiefly that act of withstanding King David in bringing in a foreign King,
with such resolution, even to the coffeehouse of his Sovereign, to whom
otherwise he had been ever most obedient, with the hazzarding of his person
and estate. In which opposition, if we weigh it narrowly, how many virtues do
appear? An unspeakable love to his Country, with such hazard, freedom of
mind, and uprightness far from flattery, or any dissimulation; not
following his Princes humor, or soothing him in his present disposition, but
regarding what was most for his good and honor, what best for his Country,
and what the King was like to acknovvledge best for him, when he should be
out of that fit. We may also see in it a strange magnanimity and courage, in
his resolving (as he did without all doubt) to part with all that the world
could afford, and whatsoever is dear to men in the world, rather then not
to maintain that which he accounted to be right, his life, lands, dignities,
honors, and all such things, both for himself and his posterity. For what
was that banding for it, but a plain opposing himself to the power of both
the Kings (Scottish and English) the S^iter, and for whom it was suited; who
questionless would both have concurred in that cause: and what could the
consequent of opposing then be other, then the loss of his life, lands, and
all? or what other hope could he have? and what means to double it out? The
more is his constancy remarkable that never yielded up that disposition. As
for his wisdom, it is included in all these things, and does shine in all his
actions, which without it could not have been performed. Likewise in that
favor which was borne unto him by men, the causes of favor are employed, and
such qualities and virtues are apt to gain and procure affection, to wit,
gentleness, meekness, soberness, liberality, and the like; his gen^rosity
and courteous humility in his speech, which are the true and only means of
acquiring the good will and hearts of men: his generous mind and
courteousnesse appeared in his speech and carriage toward the Duke of
Lancaster, his justice in pacifying the Country, and purging out the thieves:
a worthy catastrophe of so well an acted life.

Some may think him ambitious in standing for the Crown, but if he thought he
had right, what could he do less? it was no ambition to seek what was his
due. And there was as great appearance of right on his side, as might have
deceived a better Lawer than he was. Yet let it be his ambition, and that he
was not so ignorant but that he knew where the title was: have not many
dispensed with great duties in that case? And is it not thought half duty,
not to be over precise in duty; and half justice, not to look too narrowly to
justice? Si violandum est jus, etc. If law or lawfulness should be broken,
where should it rather be broken, then for a Kingdom? which is not so much the
saying of one man, as the tacit opinion of almost all men, as appears by the
approbation of themselves, and all others after they have gotten it. It were to
be wished that error were away, and men saw as well the inward thorns, as the
outward pearls of the Diadem, that they might let it lie at their foot, and
not take it up, though they might have it for the lifting: but that will be
called a Stoicall Philosophy, and even the Stoics are thought to have much
ado to keep themselves in that moderation. Neither do men believe them when
they say they do it in lesser matters, where they may attain them: and what
they lack is thought to be for want of power and dexterity to compass and
obtain, not of judgment to contemn or neglect. What could the Earl Douglas
then do, who was not so well schooled or skilled? who had honor and glory for
the great objects of his intentions, which is the objects of these great
spirits, and many think it should be so. So that in regard of this common
opinion of men, and the instructions of that age, yea of all ages, even of this
age almost, in such military men, or politic wise men, who are not pedants
(as they call them) or Theologues (to give them the best name men term them
with) I think it not so strange that he insisted, as I marvel that he
desisted so soon, and easily: neither can I so much dispraise his motion, as I
have reason to commend his modesty. For his motion, belike, has not been
immodestly moved, or too vehemently pressed, that he gave it soon over; far
from the unbridlednesse of turbulent minds, that would rather have moved
heaven and earth (as we say) to have come to their purpose, and have cast
themselves, their Country, and all, into confused broillerie and into foreign
hands and power: nay (which is more and worse then merely foreign) into
English, our enemies, which would be flat slaverie, as both the Balliols (John
and Edward) had done before him, and the last of them on no better, nay not so
good a ground. Wherefore if we will needs call it ambition, yet certainly it
has not been of the worst sort thereof, neither unruly, nor immoderate, but
by the contrary, very sober and temperate, and such as may well fall, and often
does fall into the best and greatest spirits, that are not brought up and
deeply instructed in the inmost and profound points of humane and divine
Philosophy Of which sort how few be there? and how meanly are they accounted
of? Let us either think better of them, or find the less fault with him.
Certainly, if he cannot be fully excused, yet can he not be over hardly
censured, neither condemned: yea, no more condemned for the moving, then
praised for his speedy leaving off, and yielding, truly acquiescing, and
sincerely obeying in all times thereafter.

Of James, the second of that name, the eleventh Lord, and second Earl of
Douglas, slain at Otterburne.
UNto William the first Earl his son James did succeed, a man in all kind of
virtue worthy of so great a father, and honorable place; who was no whit
inferior to him either in courage or fortunatenesse, unless we account him
less fortunate for that he lived but few years: wherefore we shall hear his
own judgment at his death.

He had two wives, Euphane eldest daughter to the King (as we have His wife and
children.
said) by his wife the Earl of Rosses daughter: yet the genealogy of the
Kings in the Acts of Parliament says that she was daughter to Elizabeth Moore,
and not the Earl of Rosses daughter. He had a son by her, who lived not half
a year: he had also two base sons, William (of whom is descended the house of
Drumlanrig, as evidents do witness given The Original, of the houses of
Drumlanrig, and (...).
by Jacobus Douglas Comes de Douglas silio nostro) and Archbald of whom is come
the house Cavers and Sheriffs of Tivedale, who if they had been lawful, had
been sons to the Kings daughter, and had succeeded to the Earldom before
his brother Archbald the Grimme, who did succeed to him. But though they did
not succeed, yet have they showed themselves very worthy, and amongst the chief
great men of the land. Of this William also are descended the houses of
Coshogle, Pinyerie, Daveine, and others in Niddisdale: for Archbald Douglas the
first of Coshogle, was second son to this William of Drumlanrigge, and was
married to one Pringle of the house of Galasheiles, who bore to him twelve
sons, and after his death she was married to one Carnel Wallace, and bore
twelve more to him also.

Touching Earl James his actions, which were done in his fathers days, one
thing we have spoken of them in his fathers life, as most proper: there is one
thing more, besides what has been said, recorded of him by some; that during
his fathers life he was sent into France, for renewing the He goes into France.
ancient League with that Kingdom; in which Embassage were joined with him
Walter Wardlaw, Cardinal and Bishop of Glasgow, and his Uncle Archbald, Lord
of Galloway. This is said to have been in the year 1381. which is the eleventh
year of the reign of Robert Stuart. The occasion of it was a message that
came out of France from Charles the sixth, who desired to have it so.

After his return in September, he recovered the town of Berwick He takes
Berwick.
from the English; and entering England with a competent power, burnt and
spoiled all the Country about as far as Newcastle.

About the time of his fathers decease (in the year 1384.) there was a Truce
concluded between France and England, to last a year, in which Scotland was
also comprehended. This treaty was at Boloigne, or at Lillegham (as others
write) and for intimation hereof, some French men were directed to come into
Scotland: but while they prepare themselves too negligently, the Earls of
Northumberland and Nottingham, with such as lay nearest to the Scottish
Marches, laying hold of this opportunity to annoy Scotland, so that the Scots
should have no time to revenge it before the truce were proclaimed, entered
Scotland with an Army of 20000. or (as others say) 10000. horse, and 6000.
Archers and Bowmen, and spoiled the Country far and wide; especially the
lands pertaining to the Douglasses, and Lindsayes. The Scots who trusting to
the brute of the truce dreamed of no such thing, finding themselves thus used,
were greatly grieved with their own sloth, and no less incensed at the fra^d
and falsehood of England, and resolved to avenge the same. In the mean time the
report of the English incursion coming to the ears of the French, who had the
charge to intimate the assurance, admonished them of their slownesse: wherefore
to make amends (though somewhat too late) they hasten over to London in the
very time that the English Army was in Scotland. There they were very
chearefully received, and magnificently entertained with feasting and
banqueting, and under this color cunningly detained, until it was known
that the English Army was come home and dismissed: then being suffered to
depart, they came into Scotland, and show their Commission. The greatest part
of the Nobility, but chiefly the Earl of Douglas and such as with him had
received great loss by that expedition, cried out against the craft of the
English, that this their fraud and manifest ludification was no way to be
suffered. The King went about to pacify them, and showed plainly that he
meant to receive and keep the truce, which they perceiving, drew out the matter
at length by reasoning and arguing to and fro, until such time as they had
gathered together quietly 15000. horsemen; then Douglas, 15000. horsemen.
Dumbarre and Lindsay, withdrew themselves from Court without noise, at a day
appointed; and joining their companies at the place of rendevous, enter England
with displayed banners, waste and spoil Northumberland to Newcastle. Then they
do the like to the Earl of Nottinghams lands, and the Mowbrayes, and so
return home with a huge prey of men and cattle. Straight after their return
the truce was proclaimed meeting fraud, not with fraud, but with open force, by
a just and honest recompense and retalliation. Neither were the English
discontented for all this to accept the truce, acknowledging that the Scots had
reason to do what they did, or confessing their own weakness and want of
ability to avenge it at this time, or both, by their sitting still and
acceptance: for neither could right (though weak) have had patience in so
great an injury, neither would force (if it had thought it self sufficient)
have been bridled with reason only in so manifest an affront, and so great
damage. How ever it be, they stirred not, and so the truce was kept till it
expired of it self.

When it was run out, John de vienne a Burgundian, a very valiant man,
Admiral of France, and Earl of Valentinois, arrived in Scotland, and brought
with him 2000. men, amongst whom were 100. men at Arms. He brought also 400.
Curiasses, and 400. half long swords to be distributed amongst the Scots, and
(as some write) 50000. Crowns. Before their coming James Earl of Douglas
entered into England with a new Army; and upon their arrival was called back to
Court, where they attended his coming. Then having consulted of their
business, and the Army being ready, they accompanied him into England, where
they took in the Castles of Wark, Foord and Cornwall, and spoiled and burnt
the Country between Berwick and Newcastle. But when they intended to go on
further, the continual rain that fell in great abundance (being in Autumn)
did so spoil the ways, and raise the waters, and wet the Soldiers with their
armor, that they were forced to retire home again into Scotland. In the mean
time King Richard greatly moved that the Scots must bring in strangers to waste
his Country, enters Scotland with an Army of 60000. foot, and 8000. horse,
and used all sort of Hostility in the Merse and Lowthian, not sparing the
religious houses and persons, such as Newbotle, Melrosse and Dribrough, with
the Monks thereof. The French Admiral better remembering, and more careful of
his Masters directions, then considering what was fit to be done, dealt
earnestly with the Earl of Douglas to give him battle. But the Earl knowing
better, and regarding more the good of his Country, and weighing with
judgment the English power and forces, would no ways listen to him: he told
him it was not for want of affection to do the King of France service that he
refused to fight, but in respect of the unequal number and appointment of the
Armies at that time. And that he might the better see the English forces, he
took him up to a hill, from whence they might have a reasonable view of them
as they passed by in order; which when the Admiral had seen, and considered
thereof, he easily yielded to the Earls opinion. Hollinshed sets down the
odds, saying, that the Scots and French were not above 8000. spears, and
30000. of all other sorts, and the most part of those not well armed: where he
reckons of English 6000. horse, and 60000. Archers, which are 2000. horses
fewer then our Histories do reckon. In this inequality therefore being no
less a wise Conductour, then a valiant Warrior, he resolved not to hazard a
battle, but determined to take another course, which he did, for he entered
England on that quarter, which was furthest distant from the English Army, and
wasted Cumberland and the adjacent Country near to it. The King of England
being advertised hereof, purposed to have followed him, and forced him to
fight, but being better advised, and put in mind (no question) of what had
be^allen his Grandfather ( Edward the third) at Stanhope Park against good Sir
James, he altered his purpose, and marched the readiest way home. And so both
Armies having spoiled and wasted each others Countries, they returned without
encountering or fight of other.

In the return the Earl Douglas persuaded them to besiege Roxbrough Castle,
making full account that the King of England would not raise a new Army before
the next Spring, and so they sat down before it; but it did not continue eight
days ere they raised the siege. The cause was a reasonlesse demand of the
Frenchmen, who would needs have the Castle to be given to them, and to belong
to the King of France, when it were won from the enemy. This demand did so
offend the Scots, that they could by no means hear of it, and so the
enterprise was deserted upon this occasion, but chiefly by the Frenchmens
insolent and licentious behavior and carriage in the wars; who rob and
steal, and use all manner of force and violence: there arose many times great
strife, and many quarrels between the Country people, and them: for the
Country people watched them when they were alone, or but few together, and
sometimes robbed them of their horses, sometimes of their valises and luggage:
sometimes they hurt, and at other times slew of them. The French Commanders
complained to the Kings Council, and the common people answered, that they had
received more loss and hurt by the French, who professed themselves to be
friends, then they had done by the English, who were sworn enemies. And
therefore they said it were reason that the French should no ways be suffered
to go home, until they had satisfied for the wrongs they had done. The Earl
Douglas in this hard case seeing they were strangers that came to aid
Scotland, was willing partly to bear with their faults, as proceeding from an
evil custom and form used at home in France, and therefore interposed himself
to have mitigated the people, but could hardly pacify them, yet at last with
great instancy and entreatie, being greatly favored, and generally well
beloved and popular, he obtained that the common Soldiers, and the Army
should be suffered to return into France, and that their Captains and
Commanders should be retained still until satisfaction were made for the loss
they had sustained. And so the King of Frances desire was satisfied, who had
then sent for them, and withal order taken with the damage done by them.

This was the aid, and this was the success of the help received from France
now the second time. It was very small before, and it is now to very little
purpose: more hurtful and troublesome to the Country, then of importance
against the enemy. After their embarking the Scots remained still in England
the space of two months, and then the English having withdrawn and conveyed
all the victual out of the way, they returned into Scotland. And hereby they
did show clearly how little they leaned to foreign aid, without which there
greater enterprises were ever performed: neither was there ever either by
these, or by others before or since (though we look over all Histories) any
great exploit achieved. All the help they ever got was only in the besieging
of some Towns at some happening times, and some such trifles scarce worth the
naming, in respect of the whole power of the body and state of the Country
which I remark again, and commend to the Reader to be truly considered for
vindicating the valor and worth of the inhabitants, from that obloquie and
unequal judgment of such as diminish and impair it: who cannot but know that
it was never foreign forces (as is wrongfully surmised) but the virtue and
valor of their Predecessors that has preserved the honor and liberty of
their Country, all manner of ways: and that any one man amongst diverse of
the name of Douglas has done more in that cause, then the force of France (if
it were put all together) did ever to this hour.

The year following, the Earl of Douglas with Robert Stuart Earl of Fife,
and Archbald Douglas Lord of Galloway his Uncle, entered into England with an
Army of three thousand men, passing the water of Solway so secretly, that they
were at Cocket-mouth on such a sudden, that the people had no leisure to convey
their goods out of the way. Wherefore having for the space of three days
gathered together a rich booty, they returned home through Cumberland,
Westmerland, and Northumberland, into Scotland again without any encounter.

Not long after Archbald Lord of Galloway in company of the same Earl of Fife,
made a road into England, in revenge whereof the King of England sent an Army
into Scotland, which did great harm in the Merse, Occasion of the battle of
Otterburn.
and occasioned that notable battle of Otterburn.

For the Scots irritated herewith boiled with desire of revenge, being at that
time very flourishing with strong youth, and never better furnished with
Commanders. But King Robert a man by nature given to quietness, far stricken
in years (seaventy three years old) was become slacker, and seemed not to
make so great account of the public injuries. His eldest son John was dull
of nature, and having received a hurt by a stroke of a horse, which pertained
to James Douglas Lord of Dalkeith, was thereby lame of a leg, and halted, and
so unfit for the travel of war. Therefore they have their recourse to the
Kings next son the Earl of Fife, and do easily agr^e with him, resolving to
avenge the hurt and damage they had lately received. So every man promising
his best endeavor, appointment is made to conveen in August, or (as some say)
in July, but so covertly, as it should not come to the knowledge of either of
the two Kings, lest the King of Scotland should hinder them, or the King of
England prevent them* yet when they had used all the expedition and secrecy
they could* The English had notice of it, and were informed of both the day and
place of their meeting. Wherefore that they might entrap them and take them at
unawares, they advertised one another, and the Noblemen commanded the Commons
to be in a readiness against the next advertisement, without appointing any
certain day, for fear that the Scots should hear of it. These things thus
ordered when they heard that the Scots were conveened in Tivedale not far
from the March to the number of 30000. or (as Froysard says) 40000. men, not
daring to join battle with such a multitude, they concluded not to stir or
appear before the coming of the enemy, but that every man should ramain in his
own bounds, till they saw on what coast and quarter the tempest would light,
and then to take the best course they could according as occasion should offer,
and if they could do no more, to invade Scotland on another hand far from
the enemy, as the Scots had done to them the year before, and so to recompense
loss with loss: In the mean time they sent a spy to the Scots camp, who
might bring them more certain report of all things; desirous to know not only
their intention, but even their particular speeches and actions. He who was
sent (being nothing different from the rest in language, apparel, or armor,
did easily pass for a Scot, and by that mean having been in the company
undiscovered, and having observed sufficiently all that was needful to be
known) as he returned to his horse to be gone, which he had bound to a tree,
he found that he was taken away, whereupon taking him to his feet with his
cloak, boots and spurs, and his other riding equipage; he was perceived,
suspected, taken and examined what he was, whence he came, and whither he
went: and being found to vary in his answers, he was brought before the
General of the Army, where being threatened with the rack, he confessed all,
and revealed the English men's intentions, and purposes. Upon this the Scots
altered their purpose, and whereas they were before minded to have gone all
together in one Host, they now divided themselves in two; so that the greatest
part of the Army should pass in at Carlisle, led by the Kings two sons, the
Earls of Fi^e and Stratherne, together with Archbald Douglas Lord of Galloway,
Uncle to the Earl. The other part of the Army was committed to the Earl of
Douglas, and with him George and John Dumbars Earls of March and Murray (his
Uncles) William or James Lindsay Earl of Crawford, the Earl of Arolle
Constable, the Lord Montgomry, and Patrick Hepburn of Hales with his son: the
number of his company is not agreed upon. Some say that he had the half of the
Army, 15000. others but 2000. foot, and 300. horse, with as many foot men
waiting on the horse men, who were lightly armed and able to fight, and almost
equalling the horse men in speedy expedition. Some say they were four thousand
chosen horsemen in all, which is most apparent by the great diligence and haste
he made: with his company he entered England on the East hand, and crossing the
river of Tine with great celerity, he was past Durham, before ever the enemy
was advertised or knew of his coming, till he himself made it known by fire
and smoke, in burning the Country.

The Earl of Northumberland hearing of him, himself being a man of great
years, sent his two sons Henry and Ralph (hardy and valiant young men) to
Newcastle, commanding the rest of the Country also to resort thither, that
they might intercept the Earl of Douglas in his return: but he having
spoiled the Country about Durham, and gotten a great booty, passes Tine
again, about three miles above Newcastle; and being desirous of glory, and
encouraged by this success, esteeming it but small honor for him to spoil the
villages, and not to dare to look upon the towns, marched toward Newcastle,
and did make offer to have assaulted it, and (as some write) did assault it,
having first filled the ditches with hay and faggots, hoping thereby to have
drawn out the enemy to the open fields, having stayed there two days; there
passed some light skirmishes amongst them every day: And at last, Henry Percie
eldest son to the Earl of Northumberland (called Hotspurre) being desirous
to try his valor, either provoking the Earl Douglas, or provoked by him; the
combat was offered, and accepted betwixt them. They mounted on two fair
steeds, and ran together with sharp ground A combat betwixt Percie and Douglas.
spears at outrance; in which encounter the Earl Douglas bore Percie out of
his saddle. But the English that were by did rescue him so that he could not
come at himself, but he snatched away his spear with his guiddon or witter; and
holding it aloft, and shaking it, he cried out aloud, that he would carry that
into Scotland as his spoil. Hollinshed says (out of F^oysard) that they did
not run on horseback, but that in an assault at the Barriers without the
gate, Douglas by chance being matched hand to hand with Percie, by force plucked
his Pennon from him, and holding it up on high, said, he would carry it for his
sake into Scotland.

There was then at Newcastle a great number of people, for besides the
indwellers, there were all the choice men from York to the borders, as the
Writers relate. Wherefore Earl Douglas (in respect of his small number) caused
keep strait watch; and on the morrow removing his Camp, he marched toward
Scotland a slow pace, being laden with booty. Then sending it away before, he
assaulted, took, and demolished a certain Castle and Town, that was in their
way, called Pouclane, whereof Sir Aymer of Alpholl was Lord, whom he took
within the Castle and made him a prisoner. Then marching forward, they came to
a place called Otterburn, about twelve miles from Newcastle, where they pitched
down their tents, that the Soldiers might take some rest, and refresh
themselves after their great travel, as not having rested that day, nor the
night before, nor much any where since their entry into England. There they
consulted about the rest of their journey, and the most part advised to march
toward Carlisle, that they might join with the other Army, that so they might
observe the order given them, which was not to fight at all, till both Hoasts
were joined t^gether. But the Earl Douglas thought best to stay there some
three or four days that they might refell the Percies bragging, who had
affirmed that they should not carry his spear into Scotland, and that the
Soldiers might not be idle the while, they might be taking in the Castles, and
Gentlemen's houses about, that lay near. To this opinion the others did yield
for his sake, howsoever it seemed not to be the most expedient: so they
fortified and strengthened their Camp as well as they could on that side where
it was weak, being fensed with Marshes on the other sid^: they went and
besieged a certain Castle, called Combure. Percie would fain have followed them
presently upon their retreat, but he was hindered by the better advised, for
fear of an ambush: for they thought it was not likely, that the Scots being so
fevv in number would have assaulted (...) strong a Town, unless they had
known of some greater power to succor and aid them.

Having therefore searched diligently that day, and the next, and understanding
that the other great Army wat not to be feared, as being far The battle of
Otterburn.
from the Earl Douglas; Percie marched toward him with 10000. strong, not
staying for the Bishop of Durham, who was said to be at Newcastle that same
night, esteeming his present forces sufficient to overthrow his enemies, who
were fewer in number by the one half at least. The avantcurriers of the
English Host were come in sight, whilst the Scots were some at supper, and
others gone to rest* being wearied with assaulting the Castle. Hereupon the
alarm was given, and the English approaching, assail them fiercely, and were
received valiantly by a part of the footmen, and the lackies, and the grooms;
who having the advantage of the Fortification which had been made, sustained
the charge till the rest were armed and ready. At their first encamping when
they viewed the fields, they had espied a little hill which they meant to make
use of if the enemy should follow and assail them, (as they did certainly
expect) and now it stood the horsemen in very good stead: for whiles the
English assaulted the entry of the Camp, the horse men fetching a compass
about this hill, charged them in flank at the far side, in which charge many
were slain, and the whole Army was filled with tumult and fears. But by the
coming of fresh supplies, the English abounding in number, the battle was
restored, and their ranks ordered as before: yet this profit it brought to the
Scots, that the fight being slaked at the entry of the Camp, they had space to
go forth, and to put their men in array. In the mean time night drew on, which
was troublesome, and unwelcome to both; but being short (as in the Northern
parts it uses to be in July) and the season fair, the Moon light did serve
them in stead of Day light, and the fight was continued very hard as amongst
noble men on both sides, who did esteem more of glory, then life, Percie strove
to repair the foil he had gotten at Newcastle, and the Earl Douglas did as
much labor to keep the honor he had won: So in unequal number, but both
equally eager in mind, they continued fighting a great part of the night. At
last a Cloud covering the face of the Moon, not being able to discern friend
from foe, they took some respite for a while; but so soon as the Cloud was
gone, the English gave so hard a charge, that the Scots were put back in such
sort, that the Douglas Standard was in great peril to have been lost. This did
so irritate him, that he himself in the one wing, and the two Hepburnes
(father and son) in the other, pressing through the ranks of their own men,
and advancing to the place where the greatest peril appeared, renewed a hard
conflict, and by giving and receiving many wounds, they restored their men into
the place from whence they had been beaten, and continued the fight until the
next day at noone. The Earl Douglas not being satisfied, nor contenting
himself with that, that he had renewed the battle, but himself with two
companions, Robert Heart, and Simon Glendining, rushed into* the midst of the
enemies, and equalling the courage of his mind with the strength of his body,
whatsoever way he set himself he made great havoc of the enemies. It was a
wonder to see the great vassallage that he wrought: Major in describing them
can make no end, nor satisfy himself: his comparisons are high, like a Lion
of Lybia: his description of his body is, that it was fair and well compacted,
his strength huge, which he yet amplifieth with greater hugeness, saying that
he fought with a Mace of iron, which two ordinary men were not able to lift,
which notwithstanding he did weild easily, making a great lane round about him
wheresoever he went: his courage and confidence appears in his so valiant
insisting, as though he would have slain the whole English Army himself
alone: and seeking to find Henry Percie amongst the midst of them, he was
entered far within the ranks of the enemies. Hollinshed confesses, that
with a great Mace in his hand he laid such sad strokes about him, that none
came within his reach but he went down to the ground. And Boethius says
plainly he fought with a mase heavier then any man is able to bear in those
days, and that rushing into the midst of his enemies, he made such a
slaughter, that it was chiefly attributed to his virtue, that the Scots wan the
field.

But whiles he is thus fighting in the midst of them, before his friends could
come at him, though they pressed forward to have seconded and assisted him with
all the force and speed that might be, they found him Douglas slain.
lying on the ground with three deadly wounds. There was lying dead by him
Robert Heart; and the Priest called Richard Lundie (who was after made Arch Dean
of Aberdene) that had ever stood fast by his side, defended his fainting body
with a halbert from injury: he being in this estate, his kinsmen James Lindsay,
and John and Walter Sinclairs came to him, and asked him how he did: I do well
(says he) dying as my Predecessors have done before; not in a bed of
languishing sickness, but in the field. These things I require of you as my
last Petitions, First, that ye keep my death close both from our own folk,
and from the enemy; then that ye suffer not my Standard to be lost, or cast
down; and last, that ye avenge my death, and bury me at Melrosse with my
Father. If I could hope for these things, I should die with the greater
contentment, for long since I heard a Prophecy that a dead man should win a
field, and I hope in God it shall be I. Hereupon they covered his body with a
cloak that it might not be known, and then hoiseing aloft his Standard, and
crying (as the manner is) a Douglas, a Douglas, most part repairing thither
from all quarters they began the fight afresh; for not only the common sort of
Soldiers came thither, but the Earl of Murray also came with great speed,
thinking that the battle went hard on that hand, for he had beaten those that
he had to deal with, and Sir John Mackyrell had taken the young Percie named
Ralph, and delivered him to his Master the Earl of Murray, who had sent him
(being hurt) to the Camp to be cured, as Froysard says. Hollinshed and
Boethius agree that it was Keith Marshall that took him. By this means the
ardour of the battle being relented on that hand, the fight was renewed, and
the strife redoubled on this side, and the Earl Douglas followers (who were
gathered about his Ensign) did at last scatter and defeat the English, weary
with the former fight which had continued both day and night: And in this
assault the Earl of Montgomery took Henry Percie their Captain prisoner,
whereupon the Army fled and turned their backs. There were slain in this
batteil 1840. of the English, and 1040. taken prisoners, 1000. also were hurt.
Of the Scots there were 100. slain, and 200. taken prisoners, whilst they
followed over rashly (fewer following more) they turned and took those that
would have taken them.

This is the battle at Otterburn, memorable not only for the magnanimity,
courage, perseverance, tolerance of travel, and (in victory) modesty of
Soldiers and Captains, but also for the variable event, where the victor in
high expectation of glory preven^ed by death, could not enjoy the fruit of his
travels: the vanquished, albeit his Army was defeated, and himself made a
prisoner, yet lived long after this battle with praise; for it was no reproach
to him to be overcome, nor so great a blot to have been put to the worse, as it
was honorable to have so contended. The event of battles is uncertain, and
only in the hands of the highest: if men do there endeavor, what more can be
required? It is not the least part of the Percies honor that they did contest
with the Douglasses, and did sometimes overcome, and sometimes were thus
vanquished: thought it were but seldom that the Douglasses got the worse, when
their forces were equal

Here there was great inequality, where notwithstanding he won the honor
through the loss of himself: neither was it accounted dishonor to his Army,
though more in number, or to himself to have been thus overcome: for they are
recorded to have done their endeavors, and discharged the parts of valiant
men, and were only overmatched by excellency of valor as we have shown, and
as it may be seen by all Writers; not by hunger, or cold, steepness of hills
and mountains; which I speak not to reproach any, but to make known the truth,
and withal, not to cover virtue on either side, which was confessed of all in
that age, neither was any man found of another mind: only the Earl Marshall
of England being a little after sent down with a company to be Warden of the
Borders during Percies captivity (who did build for his ransom the Castle of
Penoun near to Glasgow) durst extenuate the virtue of the Scots with the
reproach of his own Contrymen, attributing the cause of this victory, not
to the valor of the Scots, but to the cowardice of the English that fought
against them, boasting much of himself, that if he had been present, or if
he should happen to have occasion to sight with the Scots, he should do great
matters; but his brags were soon made to appear but idle words: for moved by
these his speeches, the Governor of Scotland ( viz. Robert Earl of Fife)
having raised an Army, went into England with Archbald Earl of Douglas (called
the Grimme) brother to this deceased Earl (and who did succeed him in the
Earldom) and made directly toward the Earl Marshall, and as soon as they
came in sight, offered him battle: and when they could not draw him out to
fight, they sent an Herald to him to challenge him, and provoke him to fight,
but all in vain, for neither did he send back any answer, neither would he
come to an equal and even ground. Therefore they having spoiled and wasted the
Country with fire and sword in his sight, and as it were under his nose,
returned home into Scotland, to the great contentment of the Scots, and no
great coffeehouse of the English prisoners, who were not sorry that his
vanity was thus discovered. Certainly, the truth can hardly be belied, and if
partiality will not, yet indifferency will bear witness to it. Froysard (a
stranger, and favoring more the English) concludes touching this battle,
that in all History, there is none so notable by the virtue of the Captains,
and valor of the Soldiers, fought so long, so hardely, so variable, the
victory enclining dive^sly diverse times, and at last obtained, not by the
cowardice of the overcome, but by the valor of the overcomers: neither is that
virtue of valor only remarkable in this place, and marked by him, but their
modesty when they had overcome, rare and wonderful to him (as it is indeed to
others) but common enough to the Scottish Nation, practiced by them often in
their victories, and almost ever where some great enormitie has not irritated
them, contrary to their nature and custom; yet here very singularly* for in
the heat of the conflict no men ever fought more fiercely, in the victory
obtained none ever behaved themselves more mercifully; taking prisoners, and
having taken them, using them as their dearest friends, with all humanity,
courtesy, gentleness, tenderness, curing their wounds, sending them home,
some free without ransom, some on small ransom, almost all on their simple
word and promise to return at certain times appointed, or when they should be
called upon. So that of 1000. prisoners scarce 400. were brought into Scotland,
the rest all remitted in that same manner, with Ralph Percie; and by his
example, who because of his words desired this courtesy of the Earl of
Murray, and obtained it, and was sent to Newcaste on his naked word to return
when he should be called for. But what courage and confidence was it, that
they durst adventure with so great peril to be so courteous as they were?
when the Bishop of Durham approaching to invade them the next day, 10000. (as
some say) with 7000. (as others) of fresh men, yet they would not kill their
prisoners that were within their Camp, equal (almost) to the half of their
own number, but on their own promises to remain true prisoners (how ever the
field went) and with a small guard, having only pinioned them together with
small cords, suffered them to live in the Camp, and went themselves to
encounter the Bishop, full of confidence and scorn, that after the defeat of
the flower of Northumberland, with there so worthy Leaders as the Percies, that
a Priest (so they called the Bishop, should dare to set upon them, or but to
abide them three marked strokes, as their Leaders said to them in his
exhortation, as it came indeed to pass without any strokes: for they
affrighted him with the only sound of their horns (as it seems Major would
say) which they winding against him, and the hills redoubling the sound
thereof, he was afraid and durst not invade them, finding them ready and
resolved to fight, whom he thought to have found weary, because of their
former travel, or negligent because of their victory. And considering (says
Froysard) there was more to be lost, then to be won at their hands, the
Captain distrusting his Host, and the Host their Captain, it was thought best
not to give battle, and so he retired without assaulting them. Their Leader
after the Earl Douglas death, was the Earl of Murray (says Buchanan) but I
should rather take it to be the Earl of March, for he was the elder brother;
and Major says it was March. However our Scottish men's courtesy and courage
is exceeedingly to be commended, who notwithstanding that they looked for
nothing but to have fought with the Bishop of Durham, yet did they spare their
prisoners, which (and the like actions) when I consider, I would gladly
understand of such as delight to reproach our Nation with all the calumnies
they can invent, and amongst the rest, style them barbarous, what it is they
call barbarity? and if cruelty, and inhumanity be not the special points of
it? whereof they shall never read that any Nation were more free, or that ever
has been more courteous, humane, gentle, in peace and in war, even at all
times, and in all places. I wish all men would acknowledge the truth as it is:
if they will not, yet shall it be truth, and truth shall never want a witness.
It will be acknowledged, and must prevail to their great reproach that seek to
hide or to impair it.

To return to our History: when the news of these things were brought to the
other Camp, which was in Cumberland, they were stricken with extreme grief,
and were more sorry for the death of the Earl of Douglas, then they were glad
for the victory obtained; all their joy for that success being turned into
grievous lamentation. So great was the affection of all the Army toward him,
that not only those who followed him, but those of the other Army also,
retired home silent and sad, as if they had been discomfited, and overcome. It
increased the commiseration of men, that he died in the flower of his age, and
that he alone should be deprived of that victory which was obtained by his
virtue and valor. And I think that the same affection does continue in the
hearts of the Readers of the History, which is never mentioned without a tender
compassion.

And for my self so often I call to mind his great worth, and short life, I
remember withal that of the Poet,

Ostendent terris hunc tantum fata, nec ultra
Esse sinent, etc.
The fates shall make but of this youth a show,
Such virtue must not tarry long below.
And with a great hyperbole, greater then Piety can well admit, if any such
speeches can be over great, which do not import what they speak, but are only
brought to express the highest excellency that can be.

Nimium vobis Romana propago
Visa potens, superi, propria haec si dona fuissent.
The Heavens had made the Roman race to be
Too blessed, if this gift had held on with thee.
Change but the Country name, call it ( Scotana propago) and you shall
accommodate these verses more fitly here to this man: but most of all in the
simple sense, that which follows,

-- Non illi quisquam se impune tulisset
Obvius armato, seu cum pedes iret in hostem,
Seu spumantis equi foderet calcaribus armos.
No man in Arms that durst to him make head,
Did escape unfoild, on foot, or foaming steed.
Which he speaking of Marcellus, if he had lived, is witnessed of this Earl
Douglas, even by the adversary, whiles he yet lived. To which purpose I
remember that worthy Sir Philip Sidney in his defense of Poesy writes of
himself, that he never heard the song of Douglas and Percie, but he found his
heart more moved therewith then with a Trumpet; whereof he alleges the cause
to be the force and power of Poetry: though it be sung (says he) by some
rude crowder, and with no rougher voice then a gross style. What he says of
himself I doubt not but others have found in themselves: neither is it the
m^sick of that rough singer, that gives it this force, far less the virtue
of the gross rhyme: it is the matter that gives the efficacy, and the virtue
of the man that begets a resembling virtue in the heart; not by Poesy, but
by the rightly described History. Indeed this is the man apparently, who has
given subject to those songs, being the first that encountered with Percie in
such a particular conflict: but that which is commonly sung of the hunting of
Chiviot seems indeed Poetical, and a mere fiction (perhaps to stir up
virtue) yet a fiction, whereof there is no mention neither in the Scottish, nor
English Chronicle: neither are the songs that are made of them both one, for
the Scots song made of Otterburn tells the time about Lammasse, and the
occasion to take preyes out of England; also the dividing of the Armies betwixt
the Earls of Fife and Douglas, and their several journeys, almost as in the
authentic History: It begins thus:

It fell about the Lammas tide
When yeomen won their hay,
The doughtie Douglas began to ride,
In England to take a prey.
Whereas the other m^keth another occasion, and altogether different, yet it is
not more effectual to move virtue, then the true History here set down: nor
indeed so effectual as it. And therefore let it be read, and read over again,
by such as delight in Military virtues; chiefly by those to whom these examples
are as hereditary, and domestic, which they must needs affect, as also all the
other actions of the life, but none testifying a better mind, a better
resolution of the mind; more courage, more valor, with gifts of the body,
strength and activity, all ruled by reason, and guided by wisdom, as is seen
in his dealing with the French men, when they would have had him to ^ight with
the King of England: which virtues of valor and wisdom so joined, are able
to make a due harmony, acceptable to a right judgment, commendable to after
ages, and profitable for the present.

Boethius writes that he died not in the field, but after the field in his
own Tent, and that the Earls of Crawford, Murray, and March, went into his
Tent, and found him lying hurt with three great wounds, almost dead: at which
sight, each looked upon other with a silent ast^nishment, and then burst forth
into tears and weeping: which he beholding, said unto them (with a weak and
faint voice which could scarcely be heard) I beseech you good friends leave
your lamenting, and be glad of the present victory which God of his goodness
has granted to us: We exposed our bodies to the enemies sword, to obtain that
which we have obtained: Turn therefore your tears un^o thanks, mindful
rather of the benefit, then sorrowful for that which is happened otherwise
then ye wished. If ye regard my pains and my life, which for you I lose, pray
for my soul, and follow Virtue, and Arms, as ye do, which you may employ for
the liberty of your Country, keeping concord amongst your selves, with a kind
remembrance of me.

Soon after these words were utte^ed, he died in the arms of his friends.
There are that say, that he was not slain by the enemy, but by one of his own
men, a Groom of his Chamber, whom he had struck the day before with a
truncheon in the ordering of the battle, because he saw him make somewhat
slowly to: and they name this man John Bickerton of Luffenesse, who left a part
of his armor behind unfastned, and when he was in the greatest conflict,
this servant of his came behind his back, and slew him thereat: but this
narration is not so probable. Buried at Melrosse.
He was buried at Melrosse besides his father, with a Military pomp of the
whole Army, and all the honor that could be devised for him besides by the
Abbot, and Monks of that Convent, after the most solemn manner of those times:

Jacobus Duglassius qui obiit ad Otterburnum Julii 21. 1388. Moriens.
Quaeritis o quid agam? an animam jam ago, fata meorum
Hac sequor. Innumero huc vulnere facta via est.
Nesciat hoc hostis, sequitor quam quisque secat spem:
Atque aliquis nostri funeris ultor ades.
Finiit: Et subito redivivo funere surgens
Mars novus intonuit, victor and ultor obit.
Johnst. Herees.

In English thus:

My friends you ask me how I do.
My soul is now prepared to go,
Where many wounds have made her way.
Conceal it, till you win the day:
Pursue your hopes: this said, he died;
Then the whole rank's a Douglas cried,
And charged a fresh, that thou might have
Revenge and honor in the grave.
Before we proceed to speak of the next Earl of Douglas, the order of the
History requires that first we speak of Archbald Douglas Lord of Galloway,
brother to William the first Earl of Douglas, and of the said Archbalds
natural son William Lord of Nithisdale. Of this Archbald we have mentioned
what was remarkable in his brother Earl Williams life, for that was the time
of his action. The first was after the battle of Penure, to be revenged of
the loss, whereof the English invaded Scotland with 50000. men (as they say
that make them the fewest) or 40000. (as others) conducted by the Lord Talbot a
very valiant man: with this huge number when they had spoiled the Country
far and wide, as they retired toward England, they were assailed at a strait
passage by the Lord of Galloway, who had not above 5000. in his company: with
these he discomfited his host, and recovered the whole booty. There were
slain of the enemies in the conflict. 400. and 200. taken prisoners, and many
were drowned in the river Solway, as they fled unadvisedly. Some write that he
set upon them in the night being encamped in a strait valley, not far from
England, where the first that they met withal being slain, the rest were
affrighted and disordered, and so overthrown.

The next thing that we hear of him, is that he was with his brother the Earl
at the conference with John of Gaunt, Duke of Lancaster, concerning a truce,
and that he accompanied the said Duke to Holyroodhouse. The truce was made for
three years.

And after these were expired, the Lord of Galloway being very much grieved
that there should be a Garrison of English in the Castle of Lochmabane, which
did daily spoil and rob the villages and towns of Galloway, and Annandale,
raised a great power by the help of his brother the Earl Douglas, and the
Earl of March, and besieged the Castle for the space of eleven days. There
came some English companies to have raised the siege, and relieved the Castle,
but he repulsed them. Thereafter He takes and razeth the Castle of Lochmabane.
having assaulted it very fiercely, the Captain thereof, Sir William Ediston,
yielded it up unto him, lives and goods safe, and he having gotten it into his
hands, razed it to the ground.

It is written also of him that he went into France with his Nephew James
Earl of Douglas, when he was sent to renew the ancient league with that
Kingdom.

The last of his actions that we can find is that he was with his Nephew
James Earl of Douglas, and the Earl of March, at the taking of Wark, Foord,
and Cornhill, where he wasted and spoiled the Country betwixt Berwick and
Newcastle with the Frenchmen. These Frenchmen not contented herewith, but
desirous to do some other exploit, joining with Archbald Lord of Galloway,
passed Solway sands, and did wonderful great hurt in Cumberland.

He is accounted by Writers, to have been a very sufficient and valorous His
death. He found the Hospital of Holywood.
Gentleman, and that he died before the battle of Otterburn, in the year
1387. He founded the Hospital of Holiwood, and to him succeeded his Nephew
Archbald (called the Grimme) in the Lordship of Galloway, who afterward was
both Earl of Douglas, and Lord of Galloway.

And here it is to be observed, that there were three Archbald Douglasses
almost contemporary, which are to be distinguished, that we mistake not one for
another. The first is this Archbald, brother to William the first Earl, who
was Lord of Galloway, then when his brother lived, and who was father to the
Lord Niddisdale. The second Archbald was son natural to good Sir James, slain
in Spain, who was made Captain of the Castle of Edinburgh, when it was taken by
his brother the Lord of Liddesdale, who is wrongfully named William in our
Chronicles, in stead of Archbald. He was at the battle of Poytiers, and is
reported to have married in France, and remained there till his death. The
third is Archbald the Grimme, of whom we shall speak hereafter. Our Writers
through inadvertance do diverse times confound these three; taking one of them
for another. As when they say Archbald Lord of Galloway, son to sir James
slain in Spain, was taken at Poytiers, it is a manifest error: for if he was
Lord of Galloway, he was not son to Sir James; if he were son to Sir
James, then was he not Lord of Galloway; for Galloway did never belong to Sir
James, but to his brother Archbald slain at Halydoun hill, who (...) it by
m^rrying the heir of Galloway (as has been said) and gave it to his second
son this Archbald. Thus much I thought good to advertise the Reader in this
place, for the better distinguishing of them.

Of William Lord of Niddisdale (son natural to this foresaid Archbald Lord
of Galloway) commonly called The black DOUGLAS.
THis William Lord of Niddisdale (son natural to Archbald Lord of Galloway)
is (if any else) worthy, who should be (...) of by himself being highly
commended by Writers, who say that he was the prime and principal of the youth
of Scotland, that he was a man accomplished with all abilities of body and
mind, straight and tall of stature, not overcharged with flesh, but big of
bone, a mighty personage, valiant, courteous, amiable, merry, faithful and
pleasant in company and converse, of such extraordinary strength, that
whomsoever he struck with Sword or Mace, he fell to the ground, were he never
so well armed: he was also wise and sober. At one time having but 800. in his
company, he fought against 3000. English, of which he slew 200. and took 500.
prisoners. This is he that is commonly called The black Douglas, He is called
the black Douglas.
because he was of a black and swart complexion. His first vassallage of note
was at the inroad made by Robert Earl of Fise, and James Earl Douglas, when
they burnt Cumberland, Westmoreland, and Northumberland. In this expedition he
is said to have gained great reputation, for (beside many other exploits not
expressed) he with other two only made great havocke of the enemies at the
burning of the Suburbs of Carlisle (who offered to hinder him from passing the
bridge) by slaying some, and turning over others into the river. Some say that
he slew with his own hands three of the most valiant of the English, of which
one was a chief Commander: afterward, when the same Town was besieged, the
enemies having made a sally, whilst he repulsed them, and followed too
eagerly, he was engaged too far in the midst of his enemies, and taken
prisoner. As he was led along toward the Town by four men (having been
before disarmed, and his weapons taken from him, he struck two of them to the
ground with his fists, and the other two betaking themselves to flight, he
returned safe to his company. Hereupon his name was terrible to the English,
especially the common sort, who did ordinarily affright and skare their
children, when they would not be quiet, by saying, The black Douglas comes,
the black Douglas will get thee.

These his virtues moved Robert the second to favor him so far, as He
marries the Kings daughter Egidia.
to bestow his daughter on him, though he knew him to be a bastard. The Ladies
name was Giles (or Egidia) and she was a mirror of rare and singular beauty,
so that whithersoever she went, she drew the eyes of all men toward her with
admiration. The chief noble youths of the land did suit her in marriage, but
the King preferred our William of Niddisdale for his worth before them all.
(...) writes that the King of France having heard of the ^ame of her beauty,
sent a painter into Scotland privately, who having drawn her portraiture
truly, and showed it to the King, he was so enamoured thereof, that incontinent
he dispatched Ambassadors to desire her in marriage; but all too late, for she
was married (before their coming) to Niddisdale. The King gave him and his
heirs to be begotten by him with his daughter, the Lordship of Niddisdale,
lying nearest unto Galloway, with the Office of Warden of that Border, and
Sheriffeship of Dumfrees, with the Office of Justice, and Chamberlain, with a
pension of three hundred pound sterling by year out of the great Customs of
certain Burrowes designed to that effect. He had by this Lady a daughter, who
was married to Henry Sinclaire His daughter married to the (...) of Orkney.
Earl of Orkney, who bare to him a son called William, afterward Earl of
Orkney. This daughter of his (married to Orkney) was named Giles (after her
mother) as appears by a note that is extant of the descent of the Sinclairs.
Her husband is called Henry Sinclaire, and his titles are, Knight of the
Cockle, of the Garter, and Prince of Orkney. This note calls William Douglas,
Lord of Niddisdale, Prince of Danskine, Duke of Spruce. Sir William Sinclaire,
son to Henry and Giles, is called Knight of the Golden Fleece, and of the
Cockle, Prince of Orkney, Duke of Holdenburgh, Earl of Cathnes, Lord
Sinclaire, Lord of Niddisdale, with the valleys of Neth, Sheriff of Dumfrees,
Great Admiral of Scotland, Warden of the Marches, Great Justice General,
Baron of Erkfoord, Caverton, Cowsland, Rosseline, Pentland, Harbarshire,
Disart, Newbrough in Buchan; Titles to weary a Spaniard: which I have s^t
down to recreate the Reader, either by seeing his greatness, or to laugh at
the vanity of the Writer: and yet he has forgotten one of his titles, which
is, Chancellor of Scotland, as Buchanan calls him, and a confirmation given
him by King James the second in the year 1456. April 29. wherein he calls him
his Chancellor and Cousin. This confirmation is of the Earldom of Cathnes
united into one Baronie, and his lands of Orkney in compensation of his claim
and title to the Lordship of Niddisdale, Offices and Pensions whatsoever that
were given to William Douglas (his Grandfather by his Mother) by contract of
marriage with Giles Stuart (daughter to K. Robert by his wife Elizabeth Moore)
as is at length therein contained.

About the time of the field at Otterburne, because some Irishmen that (...)
(...) into Ireland.
adhered to England had roaved upon the coasts of Galloway, and carried away
store of booty and spoil, the Lord of Niddisdale to be revenged thereof,
gathered together a competent number of men, by the aid of his brother-in-law
Robert Earl of Fife, and by license from the King providing himself of Ships
and vessels, passed the seas into Ireland, and besieged Carlinfoord, a rich
Town in those parts. The Townsmen fearing their Town should be taken by
assault, obtained a truce for certain days, promising to give him a sum of
money to have their Town saved. But in the mean time they assembled some 500.
men through the help of a neighbor Town called Dundalke, and joining with
them, they divided themselves into two squadrons or companies: the one of which
invaded Robert Stuart of Disdier, who conducted the Earl of Fifes men, and was
gone abroad to bring in some prey: the other assailed the Lord of Niddisdale,
who lay still before the Town. Notwithstanding of this unexpected sally, they
were received with such courage and valor, that at last they were put to
flight; and immediately Niddisdale gave an hard assault to the Town, and
carried it: having taken and rifled He takes and burns Calinfoord.
it sufficiently, he set it on fire, and burnt it to ashes. Others write, that
at his first landing the Citizens hearing it was the Lord Niddisdale (whose
name was so fearfully spread over all those quarters) not only rendered the Town
to him, but also received him with great triumph, as if he had been their King
or Prince; and that hereupon he used them courteously. But when his men were in
great security, scattered and separated, as fearing no hurt or danger, and some
at their Ships, some sent with Robert Stuart of Disdier to spoil the Country
about, which stood out against him, and to furnish his ships and the town; so
that there remained not with the Lord Niddisdale above 200. men when they set
upon him, as before we have said; and being beaten, the Town was sacked and
burnt. Then they took 60. ships, which they found in diverse Havens and Creeks,
and laded 15. of them with such spoil as they had gotten, and burnt the rest.
Then returning homeward, they spoiled the Isle of Man, which lay in their way.
He landed at Loch-rien, which divides a part of Galloway from Carrict, and
hearing there of the road into England, he hasted him He returns out of
Ireland
hither with all diligence.

But truce being made for certain years with England, that he might not
languish in idleness, he passed into Spruce, from whence he heard that an Army
was to be sent against the Infidels. There he gave such proof of his virtue
and valor, that he was chosen Admiral of the He is made Admiral.
whole Fleet, which was very fair and great, esteemed to consist of 250.
sail, and was there created Duke of Spruce, and Prince of Danskin. But there
arose dissension betwixt him and the Lord Clifford an Englishman, upon an old
emulation, and present envy of his new preferment, at which Clifford grudged.
Wherefore being challenged to the field by Clifford, he accepted it gladly: but
the other weighing with himself what a hazard he was like to run by
fighting with such a man of such incomparable He is murdered by the Lord
Clifford.
valor, found means (before the day of the combat came) to make him away by
hired Assasines and Brigands, who murdered him in the night on the bridge of
Danskin. The Manuscript seems to say that combat was not taken on there and
then, but long before, while they were both at home; and that Niddisdale before
the day passing to Paris to provide armor fit for him (or on whatsoever
occasion else) Clifford gave it out that he had fled the combat; but when he
saw that he was returned before the day appointed, fearing to match with his
well known strength and valor, would have shifted the fight with many
frivolous excuses. Now there being assembled and met together at that time
brave Knights from all the parts of Christendom, Clifford partly for envy of
the honor conferred upon his adversary, and partly remembering their old
debates, but chiefly because of this disgrace and infamy, of being put to this
necessity of refusing to fight with him, he caused mercenarie cutthroats to
lie in wait for him, who as he happened to walk through the streets, and view
the walls of the Town, set upon him, and murdered him, not without great
difficulty: by which loss that enterprise against the Infidels was disturbed
and dashed.

We told before how he is styled Prince of Danskin, and Duke of Spruce, in the
Monuments of the Sinclairs, of whom one had married his daughter: sure it is,
by the report of many eyewitnesses, that there was a gate in Dansick on which
the Coat of the Douglasses was carved and graven in stone, which decaying, and
being of late re-edified, this monument of him is perished. The common opinion
is, that Dansick having been taken by Infidels, was regained by Scottishmen,
and therefore it is that the Scots have such privileges there: and there is a
part of the Town which they call little Scotland, which is inhabited almost
with Scottishmen. All which must be referred (most apparently) to the Lord
Niddisdale, and to this time, and does testify in some measure he has
surpassed the quality and condition of a private man, or of a stranger in those
parts, seeing he acquired the title of Prince and Duke, whereof we can affirm
no more then has been said. This fell out about the year 1389. or 1390.
about the death of King Robert the second.

Of Archbald the second, called The Grimme, the third Earl, and twelfth Lord
of Douglas and Bothwell.
UNto James ((...) at Otter^urn) succeeded his brother Archbald, whom (...)
wrongfully calls his Cousin. He was married to the daughter of Andrew
Murray, sisters son to K. His marriage.
David Bruce, and Governor of Scotland: by her he got the Lordship of
Bothwell, and many other lands; and she bare to him two sons, first His
children.
William, who died a year before his father without children; and (...), who
succeeded to his father: also a daughter named Marjorie, married to David
Prince of Scotland. Concerning this Archbald the Grim, we find not many
particular acts of his recorded, besides those which he did in his fathers
time, and in his brothers (of which we have already spoken) although certainly
he cannot but have done diverse worthy of memory, seeing he has the name and
reputation of a most worthy Captain, being so stern and austere in carriage
and countenance, that he was termed, The Grimme Douglas, and by our Writers,
Archbald the Grimme.

Now that we may the better understand the reasons of the Douglasses
proceedings and actions, let us (as our manner is) take a general view of the
estate of the Country at this time. His succession to the Earldom by the
death of his brother was (as we have said) not long before the death of King
Robert the second, who died in the Castle of Dundonald in the year 1390. April
19. Before his death there was a Truce taken between England and France for
the space of seven years, wherein Scotland was also comprehended. By reason of
this Truce partly, and partly for that his son John, who was afterward called
Robert the third, was lame both of body and mind, and so no ways fit for
war, there is no mention of any exploit done by this man: only it is said of
him, that when King Robert the third, in the year 1396. and the seventh of his
reign, created diverse Dukes, and would have made this Archbald one, he refused
He refused to be Duke.
it as a noveltie and an empty title, not worthy of the accepting, seeing it
was neither bestowed for merit, nor service done, nor had any real advantage
in it, save an airy show of appearing honor to please the humor of ambitious
minds, of which he was none.

The next year following, Richard the second of England, was deposed, and the
Duke of Lancaster was made King in his room, who was Henry the fourth: In the
beginning of Henry's reign, the seeds of war were sown upon this occasion.

George Dumbarre, Earl of March had betrothed his daughter Elizabeth to David
the Kings eldest son, and had paid a great part of their portion before
hand: But the Earl Douglas, alleging that the Kings private contracting of
his son without the consent of the State, was not according to the custom of
the Kingdom, nor right and orderly done, caused the matter to be propounded by
his Majesty to the Parliament, as former Kings had done, and as reason
required, seeing the whole Kingdom has interest in the matching of their
Princes, and Kings children. There he handled the business so, that the contract
with Marches daughter was declared void and null, and his own daughter
Marjorie Douglas, His daughter Marjory contracted to Prince David.
was contracted to the said Prince David by consent of the Parliament; having
offered a greater portion with her, then the Earl March had done with his
daughter. He obtained for her jointure, all the rents and revenewes which
belonged to the King on the south side of Forth. The way he took to bring this
to pass, was by the means of the Kings brother Robert Earl of Fife, now made
Duke of Albany, and Governor of the Country under the King, as he had been in
their fathers time; who did also then even govern both King and Kingdom, and
every thing as he listed: and Douglas and he were inward, and dear friends, as
his brother James (slain at Otterburn) and he had ever been: now whether the
Earl Douglas had that respect indeed to have matters of such importance to the
Kingdom done by common advice of the Nobility chiefly, or if his chiefend were
his own particular, because of the old emulation betwixt the Earls of March
and Douglas, to hinder the growth of that house by this great advantage of
aliance, or if he had an eye to both, or to any thing else, I leave it to be
judged of others.

The marriage was solemnized in the Church of Bothwel the year 1400.
1400. with greater haste then good speed, or any comfort to either party Their
marriage.
that we hear of. For neither came this David ever to be King, which was the
thing that was expected, that thereby the house of Douglas might have been
greatned: Neither did this aliance of Prince David with the Earl of Douglas,
stand him in any stead: in that he was most miserably handled by his Uncle the
Governor, who aspired himself to the Crown, which makes me to wonder why he
did not rather hinder this marriage of his Nephew with the Earl Douglas, then
thus further it; seeing in all likely hood it might have been a great let and
strong hinderance to those his ambitious designs: But so are the secrets of
things hid from us, that we cannot find out the causes and reasons of them by
no means, being not observed, or not mentioned by the Writers of those times;
hovvever this marriage bred great contention and enmity betvveen the Earls of
March and Douglas (though near kinsemen) and did also disturb the peace and
quietness of the Kingdom: for March before the marriage was solemnized, did
not stick to go to the King, and upbraid him with breach of promise, which (he
said) was neither just, nor Princely; craving also (...), and roughly the
restitution of his money which he had advanced for his daughters portion. The
King having not answered him according to his mind, he spared not to threaten
that he should be avenged on that rufle and disgrace that he had put upon him
and his daughter. And so retiring from Court, he fortefies his Castle of
Dumbarre, and gives it in keeping to his Nephew Robert Metellan, he himself
(having received leave of King Henry) went into England; whereupon the Castle
of Dumbarre was summoned in the Kings name by an Herald of Arms, and was
surrendered by the Captain thereof Robert Metellan into the hands of the Earl
Douglas. The Earl of March returned into Scotland, but being excluded out of
his Castle at Dumbarre, went back again into England, taking his Lady and
children along with him, together with the nearest of his kinsmen, and his
chief friends accompanying him. There he joined with (...) (...) (called hot
spur) a (...) (...) of the house of (...), and trusting to the favor and
good will borne him by these who dwelt on the East Border or March of Scotland,
most of which were his vastalls and dependers, many of them his kinsmen, and
all of them (...) to him by some relation, or obligation, he troubled the Merse
chiefly and the Earl Douglas lands with frequent incursions and inroades. The
King hereupon caused proclaim him rebel, and yet notwithstanding, sent to him
a Herald of Arms, with profer of pardon, and restitution, upon condition that
he would return and live peaceablely at home; and that he should receive all
such satissaction for any wrong he could justly complain of, as he desired. But
when he (...) to embrace this offer, the Herald passed on to King Henry, and
complained of the Earl of March, craving that he might be delivered
according to the Articles of the tr^ce. But he was answered by the King, that
he had given him his word, and could not break it.

In the mean time P^rcie, and the Earl of March, being emboldned with diverse
successful attempts upon the (...), adventured with 2000. men to come into
Lowthian, where they wasted the Country near unto Hadington, assaulted the
Castle of Hales twice but in vain: burnt the towns of Hales, Trapren, Markill,
and other adjacent villages. And while they encamped at Linton upon Tine,
hearing of the Earl Douglasses approach, who had raised sufficient forces, and
was marching toward them, and was come as far as Penkrake, they arose and
fled in great haste, leaving behind them all their booty, together with their
own luggage and carriage. The manuscript and black book of Scone say clearly
that the Earl Douglas followed them so quickly, that he overtooke them or they
got to Berwick, and killed diverse, having wrested an ensign out of the hands
of Sir Thomas Colbouth which he brought into Scotland with him. Boethius relates
it not much otherwise. Other Histories make no mention hereof, but only say,
that the Earl returned to Edinburgh with great congratulation and joy of all
men.

He died not long after of a burning fever the same year 1400, in the His
death.
beginning of February: very unseasonably for his Country; which was destitute
of able Commanders in war, having lost diverse others of good note not long
before. He was buried in Bothwell with his La^ie. He was a man nothing
inferior to any of his Predecessors, or Successors of his house and name, in
any kind of virtue, and in special of true and real kindness to his friends
and followers, as appe^reth by a letter of his to the Earl of March in favor
of the Lord of Ridpeth, a Gentleman in Lammer moore who was his follower, and
was wronged by the Earl of March in the possession of some lands: but more in
Marches refusal to right him; he assembleth his forces, and dispossesseth the
Earl of Marches son, and reponed Ridpeth in his right, and maintained him
therein ever after, which his successors do enjoy at this day. As for his
valor and conduct in war, he is termed the best Captain of his time, and
that in his person the splendor and glory of warrefare both stood and fell.

Others say that he left behind him an honorable memory of high Prowess,
and noble valor, showed in many enterprises by him happily a^chieved for the
good of his Country. In Piety he was singular through his whole life, and
most religious according to those times. He did very much honor and reverence
all religious persons; for whose He founded the College o^ Bothwell.
use he founded the College of Bothwell. Out of his zeal and sincerity he
expelled the Nuns of the Abbacie of Lincloudon, and changed it into a College
of Clerks, because the Nuns (says Boethius) kept not their institution of their
order: and Major faith it is to be presumed, that they kept not their
Chastity, otherwise he could never have thrust them out. And in this he
commends him, as having an eye to Religion, and a special care of the pure
and sincere worship of God, as his only end and intention. As for his prudence
and providence, it appears that he did greatly increase his Revenues, and
enlarge his Dominions: he was trusty and faithful in his promises, and
carried a mind free from all ambition, and vain glory: All virtues greatly to
be accounted of, and imitated of all.

Of Archbald the third of that Name and thirteenth Lord, the fourth Earl of
Douglas, Lord of Bothwell, Galloway and Annandale, first Duke of Turrane, Lord
of Longe-ville, and Marshall of France.
UNto Archbald (the Grimme) succeeded his second son, named also Archbald; he
was married to Margaret daughter to King Robert the third, and second of the
Stuarts. She lies buried in the Church of Linclouden, with this inscription on
her Tomb,

Hic jacet Margarita Scotiae regis filia, Comitissa de Douglas, vallis
Anandiae, and Gallovidiae Domina.
Here lies Margaret daughter to the King, Countess of Douglas, Lady of
Annandale and Galloway.
He had by her two sons, Archbald, to whom Thomas Flemine Earl of Wigton
resignes the Earldom of Wigton, and he is entitled (during His children.
his fathers life time) Archbald Earl of Wigton: his other son was James,
Lord Abercorne, called gross James. He had al^o two daughters, Marga^et,
married to Sir William Sinclair Earl of Orkney who was fifth in line from the
Earl of Saint Clarences second son, that came first out of France, and was
son to Giles (or Egidia) Douglas, daughter to the Earl of Niddisdale.
Elizabeth was the other, who was married to John Stuart Earl of Buchan, second
son to Robert the Governor, afterward Constable of France: her dowry or
portion given with her in marriage, were the lands of Stuarton, Ormeshugh,
Dunlope, Trabuyage (in Carrict) by resignation.

This Archbald is he who was called Tine-man, for his unfortunate and hard
success he had, in that he tint (or lost) almost all his men, and all the
battles that he fought. This nickname, or cognomination in the Or Tine man.
old manuscript (of Sir Richard Metellan of Lithington) gives to Archbald
slain at Halidoun hill, and call^th this, Archbald one eye, for distinction,
because of the loss of his eye in a battle against Percie. But that surname
of Tyne man cannot be given so conveniently to the former Archbald, who lost
only one field, and himself in it* whereas this man ever lost his men, himself
escaping often: he is distinguished also from others by the Title of Duke of
Turrane: But however he be named, it is true, that no man was less fortunate,
and it is no less true, that no man was more valorous, as will appear by the
History.

At his beginning to be Earl, a little after the decease of his father in
August 1409. Henry the fourth of England entered Scotland with an Army, and
came to Edinburgh, where he besieged the Castle, in the which the Duke of
Rothsay (Prince of Scotland) and with him the Earl of Douglas, were. The
Governor of Scotland raised an Army to have given him battle, and was come to
Calder-more, but went no further, and there disbanded his Army. The English
Histories say, that the Governor sent word to the King of England, that if he
would stay for him but six days only he would give him battle, and that the
Herald got a silk gown, and a gold chain for his news from the King; but
the King having stayed twice six could hear nothing of his coming. The cause
of the Governors slacknesse is given out by some to have been the desire that
he had that the Duke of Rothsay might perish, and be taken out of the way, that
he himself might come to the Crown. Now as all do agree, that he had these
ambitious thoughts, so Major shows that there was also some other particular
between them, whereof he relates the occasion to have been this. There was one
John Remorgeny, who first labored to persuade the Duke of Rothsay to cause
slay the Governor, and then (when he could not prevail with him to wrong his
Uncle) he dealt with the Governor to cut off the Duke his Nephew, as one that
would ruin him, if ever he should come to be King. This Remorgeny was seconded
by Lindsay, who was upon the plot with him, and helped it forward upon malice
against Rothsay, who had betrot^ed his sister, an^ rejected her, as he had done
to the Earl of Marches eldest daughter. This seems not to be unlikely, and
gives some further light to the History, as containing the cause of the
Governors not releeving the Castle of Edinburgh. It is also a remarkable
example of crafty Counselors, who are to be noted and avoided. And I marvel
much how it has escaped the diligence of our best Writers. I thought it not to
be omitted in this place, as an instance of fear concurring with ambition in
the Governor: and indeed these two are commonly joined together, and take
matter each of other. Ambition brings fear with it, and fear spurreth
forward ambition toward that it aims at; as being not only honorable, but
necessary, and the only mean to secure a man's self: especially where it
lights upon such Counselors, as these were, to blow the fire, whereof
Princes had need to be aware, and stop the entry to the first motions thereof.

The black book of Scone says that Henry the fourth acknowledged himself to
be ( semi Scotus de sanguine Cumini) half a Scot of the blood of the Cummins,
and that he took the most High to witness, that he was not come to hurt the
Country, but only to have reason of some of the Nobility, who had written to
the King of France that he was a Traitor in the superlative degree (which
letters his men had intercepted) and to try if the Authors of these letters
durst fight it with him. The Manuscript says that he was disappointed of his
purpose notwithstanding: for he thought to have taken the Castle of Edinburgh,
and to have made Scotland subject to him thereafter; but it being valiantly
defended by the Earl Douglas, he was constrained to rise from before it with
great Edinburgh Castle (...) by Douglas against King Henry the fourth.
loss and coffeehouse, and no great credit; especially for that the winter
drew on apace, having sat down before it about the end of September. I am not
ignorant that our Writers give this Henry the commendation of great modesty in
this journey, as being mindful of the courtesy shown to his father the Duke
of Lancaster in Scotland, and that they say that he used the prisoners not
cruelly but courteously, and that when he passed by the Castles and Forts of
the Country, he did only require of the Captains and Keepers of them, that
his Ensigns might be set on the top of the wall, as a token of their
submission, and that they were in his will: but seeing their own Authors deny
him this honor, and say that he burnt the Towns, Villages, and Castles, even a
great part of Edinburgh and Leith, we have small reason to contend with them
for it; and so we accept of it, and follow the Scottish Manuscript.

Upon Henry's departure, because the Earl of March troubled the Country with
frequent rather then with great incursions, the Earl Douglas (who had the
government of Lowthian, and the Castle of Dumbar) went with an Army into
Northumberland, and wasted the Country with great havoc. At his return he
gave order that the Barons and Ge^tlemen should choose some of their number to
be Captains, and allot unto them a competent number to follow them, who might
by turns wait and be in readiness, either to resist the enemy, or to make an
inroad upon him in his own Country, as they should find occasion. The first
turn fell to Thomas Haliburton Lord of Dirleton, who having entered England,
and gotten a great booty near unto Bambrugh, returned home safe. But Patrick
Hepburne of Hailes (the younger) had not the like success: for he going upon
the like adventure, had indeed taken a rich booty, but having stayed a day
longer then he should (and had been advised by his friends) in the enemies
bounds, they gathered themselves together, and following him, overtooke him at
West Nisbet in the Merse. There, after a sharp encounter, the Scots had gotten
the better of the English, and well nigh the victory, till George Dumbarre,
the Earl of Marches eldest son, coming in with an hundred fresh horse,
regained the victory to the English, and slew the flower of the youth of
Lowthian, together with their Captain Patrick Hepburne. The fight happened the
22. of June 1401. the place whereof is yet called, The Slaughter Hill.

This Patricke Hepburne was entirely beloved of the Earl Douglas, and as dear
to him as his own self: for he it was that fought so valiantly at Otterburne,
and therefore he was filled with grief and indignation for his death, being so
brave a Captain, and so dear a friend to his house, and to himself. His
honor also, and the credit of his Country stirred him up also to seek a
revenge of the Authors thereof. Whereupon having obtained leave of the
Governor, he gathered together about some 10000. men, amongst whom were many
of the chief Nobility of the land, even the Governors eldest son Murdock
(who succeeded to his father in the Government) George Earl of Angus (his own
Uncle) Thomas Earl of Murray, and John Dumbarre brother to the Earl of March,
one that had married the Kings sister. With this company he entered England as
far as Newcastle upon Tine, and having gotten a great booty, was retiring
homeward. In his returning, near unto Milfield, Henry Hotspurre and George
Earl of March lay in his way with a far greater Occasion of the battle of
H^mildon, n^ere Milfi^ld
power then he had. Wherefore the Earl Douglas took a ground of advantage,
which was a little hill besides Homildon, a Village in Northumberland. Percie
would have marched straight toward him to have assailed him, but the Earl of
March (being very skillful in war, and more calm and advised) stayed him,
and gave him counsel first to send a flight of arrows amongst them, and to
give them a volee of their fielding pieces, which was done accordingly, and did
greatly annoy the Scots, and slew many of them. Douglas perceiving that he
could not brook that place with safety, thought it better to hazard the
battle in plain field, then to stand still and see his men slain about him
by the enemies shot, while they stood safe, and came not within stroke of
their swords, and long weapons. And so (though far inferior in number) down
the hill he goes, and gave a fierce assault upon the enemy. But the Vauntguard
being brangled, and giving back (being much troubled and sore wounded by the
Archers) though they were sharply rebooked by Adam Lord Gordon, and Sir John
Swinton, and brought on again, yet were they not able to sustain and abide
the shot of the enemy, but were defeated every man. The rest that were behind,
being exhorted by their Captains to revenge the death of their fellows slain
before their eyes, did acquit themselves bravely, but being overwhelmed with
the greater number, were also overthrown at last. There were many slain,
amongst whom were the forenamed Adam Lord Gordon (who had been at variance
with the Earl Douglas, but in this expedition he had been reconciled to him,
and Knighted by him) and Sir John Swinston, two that gained greater reputation
of valor and courage that day, and fought so valorously, that if the rest had
followed their example, that field had not been so lost. There were also diverse
others of note; such as John Livinston of Calender, Alexander Ramsay of
Dalhousie, with a number of common soldiers. Many were taken of quality,
Murdock the Governors son, George Earl of Angus, Thomas Earl of Murray,
Robert Ereskine of Alloway, James Douglas eldest son to the Lord Dalkeith, and
his two brothers, John and William; George Lesly of Rothes, Patrick Dumbar of
Beell.

In the black Book of Scone is set down the death of the foresaid George
Earl of Angus, how he died in England of the plague being a prisoner (with
many others) and Alexander Hume of Dunglas also, as the same Book does
witness. The Earl Douglas himself was taken also, The bat^ll lost, and
Douglas taken.
having lost one eye in the fight. This battle was fought on the Holy Rood-day
in Harvest, or (as others) the 5. of May 1401. or 1402. rather as appears by
the former History.

Whilst the Earl Douglas was prisoner in England, the Duke of Rothsay became
so riotous, and insolently unruly, that his father not being able to govern
him by his own authority, did commit him to his brother, the Governors
tuition, to be corrected and tamed by him. He made use of this occasion for
compassing his own ambitious ends, or to be rid of the fear he had of him;
shut him up in Falkland, and starved him to death. The black Book of Scone
says, that the Earl Douglas was with the Governor, when he brought the Duke
from Saint Andrews to Falkland. But it should rather seem that he has been a
prisoner in England, when the Duke was thus used: for if he ^ad been at home,
in all likelihood he would have reclamed the Duke (being his brother in law)
and have brought him out of his wild courses; or by his credit with the
Governor would have saved him, and prevented such extremity, unless he had
proceeded so far as to cast off the Earls sister, whereof we hear nothing.
And even in that case, seeing there is always some hope of reconcilement
between man and wife, and therefore such fallings out are often born with, in
Princes upon that hope; it is likely he would have used his care and credit to
have composed things in some better sort: however, whether through his absence
or negligence, or that having small hope of amendment, he would not meddle in
it: the Duke persists in his lewd ways, and grows rather worse then better.
We read of no help or assistance that the Douglas made unto him, as he was
bound by so near alliance. Neither do we hear how he carried himself toward
the Earls sister his wife; or whether she had any children by him or not,
though they had been married at that time some four or five years, and he
was a man of twenty three or twenty four years of age at the least, having
been eighteen when he was enstalled Duke in the 1396. year, which is a great
neglect and oversight in our Writers. This is clear that neither party had any
contentment, or comfortable succes from this match which they so much affected
and brought to pass with so great trouble, disquiet, and mischief in the
Kingdom ^a notable lesson for men to moderate their desires of any thing, and
not to seek it over eagerly (though it seem never so advantageous) in respect
of the uncertainty of the sequel and event of all humane things.

But to return to our prisoner: we see him hurt, defeated, a captive, but
neither disgraced, nor discouraged; no nor any whit less esteemed of by his
friends, or enemies: who indeed needed not to be over proud of this victory,
which was obtained rather by the multitude of men, then mere valor, neither
were they yet quit with the house of Douglas, for what they had received of
them before: however these vicissitudes of fortune in the emulation of these
two houses ( Douglas and Percie) were matter rather of sharpning then
discouraging, and dejecting their spirits, and b^ed not hatred, but an higher
(though emulous) esteem of each toward other. This overthrow and loss of the
Earl Douglas did not diminish, but rather increase his praise and glory, and
that even in the opinion of the Conqueror. It became also the occasion of
showing his worth in a more conspicuous and public Theater, and on a more
eminent subject, and powerful enemy: for not long after, the Earl of
Northumberland (whether for envy of King Henry's good success, to whom he had
been a great friend in the beginning; or for that Henry usurped the Kingdom
contrary to his oath and promise; or for his neglecting to relieve Edmond
Mortimer Earl of March, taken prisoner in his service against Owen Glendour by
the said Owen, or out of indignation against him for craving to have his
prisoners from him, which he had taken at West Nisbet, and Occ^sion of the
(...) of Shrewsbury.
at Homildon, of whom only they had sent Murdock Stuart to the King; or for
what ever other cause) the said Earl entered into league with Edmond, Owen,
and some other Lords, against the King, with such confidence, that they made a
tripartite Indenture, wherein they divided all England into three parts, to
each of them a third: whereupon Percie, esteeming highly of the Douglas valor,
having had good proof thereof at Homildon, offered if he would take part with
him in this enterprise, and show himself as valiant on his side, as he had
done against him, that he should not only be let go without ransom, but also
(if they prevailed) he should have Berwick, and a part of Northumberland for
his reward.

Douglas, who was no ways slack to embrace any good occasion against England,
gladly accepted the condition, and getting leave to come home, returned again
at the time appointed, well accompanied with many of his friends and followers.
The leading of the vantguard was committed to him, which place he discharged
bravely, and behaved himself so, as no man ever did more valiantly and
admirably by all men's confession: for after the Scots (who were led by him) had
made a fierce onset upon the Kings foreward (conducted by the Earl of
Stafford) and forced them to give back, having almost broken their ranks, the
King came to their aid with his fresh troops, and renewed the fight more
fiercely then before. Douglas and Percie, perceiving the King to be there in
person, bent their whole forces toward him with such violence, that if George
Dumbarre, Earl of March (who had of late betaken himself to the Kings side)
had not warned the K. to withdraw himself from that place, Douglas had
certainly slain him, for he made so hard an onset on the Kings Standard, that
he bore all down before him, and slew the Earl of Stafford with his own
hands, who had been made Constable of England that same day: as also three
more, who were apparelled like the King: and when the K. restored the battle
again, and had broken the ranks of those that stood against him, Douglas
seeing him the fourth man in royal apparel, he said aloud in great choler
and indignation, where the Devil were all these Kings borne? and withal
running fiercely at him, beat him from his horse, and at the same instant slew
Sir Thomas Blunt, the Kings Standardbearer, Wal^.
and overthrew the Standard. But the K. was rescued, and mounted again by those
that were about him, especially by his own son (afterward Henry the fifth)
and so escaped. At last the victory fell to the Kings side, who had behaved
himself most valorously, and is reckoned to have slain with his own hands
thirty six of the enemies. So that the victory is ascribed chiefly unto him,
who did both by word and example encourage his Soldiers, that they renewed the
fight, slew the Lord Percie, and with him discomfited the whole Host.

The Earl Douglas was taken prisoner, and brought to the King, who Douglas
taken
would on no wise consent to have him put to death (though diverse persuaded him
to it) but commended his faithfulness to his friend, and praised his valor,
which he honored much; in regard whereof he both caused cure his wounds, and
sent him rich presents. Some write that being asked by those of the Kings side,
why he did join with such traitors against the King, his reply was only
this; It seems (says he) that the King is yet alive, though diverse Kings
have been killed to day. This answer being so full of resolution, and courage,
and void of all fear, did move the King to regard him so much the more. They
tell also that being hurt in his privy members, when after the battle every
man was reckoning his wounds, and complaining; he said at last when he had
hard them all, They sit full still that have a riven breike. The speech
continues still in Scotland, and is past into a Proverb which is used, to
design such as have some hid and secret cause to complain, and say but
little.

Hollinshed writes, that in respect of his Noble parentage, and valor, he was
tenderly cherished by King Henry, and frankly and freely demit^ed without
ransom: and such indeed is the custom of generous minds to honor virtue even
in the enemy. It is generally agreed upon by all, that he was highly honored
and esteemed, so that the King (or some of his Nobles) caused draw his picture,
which is still to be seen in the privy Gallery at White Hall. But touching his
delivery, some say that when he had stayed in England certain months, he was
with difficulty set at liberty after he had paid a great sum of money.
Others write, that he was detained eight or nine years at least, but that
seems to be too much for this battle (called Shrewesbury field) was in the
year 1403. in the fourth year of King Henry, on Saint Magdalins day, and
Douglas 1406.
was set free at the death (or not long after) of K. Robert the third of
Scotland, He is set free.
in the year 1406. When the Earl hard word of his death, he made shift to
agree for his ransom, and so returned with all speed into Scotland. It is
said, that George Earl of March did him very good Offices in England, and was
a chief mean and instrument of his delivery, being reconciled to him during his
imprisonment: wherefore the ^arle Douglas at his (...) procured liberty for the
Earl of March to come home into Scotland, and to be received a free Liege
again; but upon condition that he should suffer the Castles of Lochmaban and
Dumbarre to remain with the Earl Douglas and his heirs, notwithstanding of
any agreement made between them to the contrary in England. And so in the year
1411 he was restored by the Governor, after he had remained fifteen years in
England, or thereby, having done great hurt to his Country, and much good
service to the Kings of England; but for all the service he did, he could
neither move the King to restore him, and repossesse him again in his own,
neither obtain competent means and allowance for his estate and quality. A
notable example for Subjects, to learn hereby not to forsake their natural
King, and native Country in hope to be supported or aided by foreign Princes:
far less thus to hurt and endammage their own Country, for the pleasure
and advantage of strangers.

The black book of Scone ascribes the restitution of the Earl of March to
Walter Halyburton son in law to the Governor ( Gener Gubernatoris) by
marrying his daughter Isabell (a widow, and Countess of Rosse) for which he
got from March a forty pound land in Birgeam; and that the Earl Douglas got
back Lochmaban, and the Lordship of Annandale: however it be, a year or two
after the Earl Douglas was returned, the Earl March was restored, whereunto
Hollinshed al^o seems to agree: for in another place after the death of King
Robert (which he sets in the year 1408.) forgetting what he had said
before (that the King dimitted Douglas frankly and freely) he writes thus.
Archbald Earl of Douglas, as yet remaining captive in England, after he had
knowledge of King Roberts death (to wit, five year after this at least by his
own account) made shift to agree ^or his ransom, and so being set at liberty,
returned with all speed now at length into Stotland. Wherein he contradicts
himself, and casts down all that liberality, and mag^nimity of his King (in
dismissing the Douglas freely) and with so much the more blemish, as in saying
it was done, he acknowledged it should have been done, as it had indeed been
most honorable and Princely, and might (perhaps) have gained the heart of that
worthy Nobleman. But we find but ^ew actions in that kind of full beneficence
practiced toward the Scots: and it seems that his great worth has extorted
their admiration, and some Offices of courtesy, and common humanity, such as
were the preservation of his life, and curing of his wounds; but the old grudge
of National quarrel remaining still in vigor, did choke the fruit of true
Princely dealing, and kept ^t that it came not to that full maturitie of
beneficence, which the party deserved, and was suitable fot such a King.
Wherefore let him content himself with this honor, that his valor was
acknowledged abundantly, and himself by the confession of King Henry's own
Heralds, accounted one of the chief Chivaliers and Champions in Albion: and
let him thank his own prowess more then their kindness for this testimony.
We will also add a witness of these in our times, on^ of their own Poets (
Samuel Daniell) who speaking of King Henry's son, who releeved his father in
the battle of Shrewesbury from the Earl Douglas, he writes thus:

Lib. 3. Stanza 113.
Had thou not here lent present speedy aid
To thy endangered father nearly tired,
From fierce encountering Douglas overlaid,
That day had there his troubled life expired.
Heroical courageous Blunt arrayed
In habit like as was the King attired,
And deemed for him, excused the fault of his,
For he had what his Lord did hardly miss.
Taking Blunt for one of those that were apparelled like the King, whereas
others account him to have been the Kings Standard Bearer. But in the wars
between York and Lancaster, it is more amply set down in this sort:

Lib. 4. Stanza 49.
Yet here had he not speedy succor lent
To his endangered Father, near oppressed,
That day had seen the full accomplishment
Of all his travels, and his final rest:
For Mars-like Douglas all his forces bent
TO encounter and to graple with the best;
As if disdaining any other thing
To do that day, but to subdue a King.
Stanza 50.
And there with fiery courage he assailes
Three all as Kings adorned in Royal wise,
And each successive after other quails;
Still wondering whence so many Kings should rise,
And doubting least his hands or eye sight fails,
With these confounded on the fourth he flies,
And him unhorses too, whom had he sped
He then all Kings in him had vanquished.
Stanza 51.
For Henry had divided as it were
The person of himself into four parts,
To be less known, and yet known every where,
The more to animate his peoples hearts;
Who cheared by his presence, would not spare
To execute their best and worthiest parts:
By which two special things effected are,
His safety and his Subjects better care.
And in the 54. Stanza, speaking of Hotspurre,

But he as Douglas with his fury led
Rushing into the thickest woods of spears,
And brooks of swords, still laying at the head.
Then a little after in the 56. upon the killing of Hotspurre

Which thus misspent, thy Army presently
As if it could not stand, when thou were down,
Dispersed in rout, betakes them all to flee:
And Douglas faint with wounds, and overthrown,
Was taken; Who yet wanne the enemy
Which took him, by his noble virtue shown
In that days mighty work, and was preserved,
With all the grace and honor he deserved.
And that was all to be preserved and respected, but not easily nor soon
dismissed: for (besides what has been said of this point) there is an
Indenture yet extant, which contains the agreement betwixt King Henry, and him.
That whereas the said Earl was lawful prisoner to him, or to his son, John
of Lancaster, he should have free liberty to return to his own Country of
Scotland, upon his giving of twelve Noble Hostages for his reentry into the
Castle of Durham, being then in the custody of the said John of Lancaster. The
Hostages were, 1. Archbald Douglas, his own eldest son and heir: 2. James his
brother: 3. James son and heir to James Lord Dalkeith: 4. Sir John Mongomery,
Lord of Adderson: 5. Sir John Seiton, son and heir to the Lord Seiton: 6.
Sir William Douglas, of Drumlainrig: 7. Sir William Sinclair of Hermiston: 8.
Sir Simon (...) son and heir to Sir Adam of Glendining: 9. Sir John Harris,
Lord of Terregles: 10. Sir Harbert Maxwell: 11. Sir William Hay: 12. Sir
William Borthwick. The Condition bears that upon the Earls reentry of his
person into the wards of the said John of Lancaster, the said Hostages were to
be set free to repair with safe conduct into their own Countries, and that
within forty days after the Earls re-entry, or after his death. And that the
Prince Thomas, and his said brother John, and the Earl of Westmoorland should
be obliged by express commandment from the King to secure the said Hostages,
during the time of their abode, and residence in England. And if the Earl
should fail of his re-entry again, that the said Hostages should be at the
Kings disposing. And in case the said Earl should die, his eldest son and
heir was to abide prisoner with the King in his sons keeping, and the rest of
the Hostages were to be set free immediately. And further it was conditioned,
that the Earl should do his uttermost to keep the truce that had been reated
of between the King, his Counsel, and the said Earl: and that he should cause
it to be ratified and confirmed by both the Realms of Scotland and England, for
sixteen years: and in c^se he could not obtain that, that then the said Earl
for himself, and his Countries between the East and West seas, inhabited by
any of his men and vassals, should keep truce with England from Pasch next,
till Pasch thereafter. These conditions were drawn up by the Kings Council in
form of an Indenture, whereof each had a counterpane, signed, sealed, and
delivered reciprocally by the said parties at London the fourteenth of March
1407.

During the time of his captivity in England, the Duke of Rothsay was famished
to death by his Uncle the Governor, who being accused thereof by the King his
brother, made such a slender purgation, that the King fearing he would do the
like to his other son James, sent him by sea to France, where he might remain
in safety while he were come to years. But being driven in by storm of weather
into the coasts of England, he was detained as a prisoner by the King and
State. Hereupon followed the death of the desolate father, and the continuance
of the Governor in his Office. And now Douglas being come home (in the year
1411.) he kept good correspondencie with the Earl of March ever after, for
there had always been friendship betwixt the two Houses (of March and
Douglas) until the match with the Duke of Rothsay did separate them; and now
that being away and digested, and March having furthered Douglasses delivery
out of captivity, and Douglas procured, or helped to procure Marches peace and
restitution, they joined ever thereafter in all common affairs. Some write
that those two did burn the town of Roxbrough, but it seems to be mistaken;
for that was done ere they came home, by William Douglas of Drumlanrig, and
Gawin third son to the Earl of March. After their return, there is no
mention of any exploit of war between Scotland and England for the space of
ten years: whether it were that there has been any truce, or that Henry the
fourth dying, his son Henry the fifth was so taken up with the war with
France, that he had no leisure to look toward Scotland; or that the Governor
durst not attempt any thing against him, for fear he should send home the
rightful heir to the Crown of Scotland, whom he had in his power and
custody, and who (he doubted not) would find favor enough in Scotland, both
for his right, and out of commiseration of his estate, and condition. So there
was nothing done, except some slight and private inrodes, such as when the
Earl Douglas burnt Penmoore a town in England He burns Penmoore.
at which the Earl March is also said to have been in the year, 1414.

In the year 1420. The Governor died, and his son Murdock was made
Governor in his place, having been relieved a little before by enterchange of
a son of the Earl of Northumberland. He was a man of a dull and heavy
spirit, and of no authority, not so much as to govern his own family, which
made him to be little regarded: about this time the civil war in France grew
hot between, Charles the sixth King of France, Philip Duke of Burgundy and
Henry the fifth of England on the one part, and the Daulphin of France on the
other, for Philip of Burgundy had persuaded the King of France to dis-inherrit
his son the Daulphin, and to give the Crown with his daughter to Henry of
England. So that the Daulphin, (afterward King Charles the seventh) was
redacted to that extremity, that his enemies called him in derision, King of
Bourg, because his residence for the most part, was in Bourg in Berrie.
Wherefore he being thus abandoned by his own Country men, and destitute of all
foreign help, sent (this year) the Earl of Vandosme Ambassador into
Scotland to crave aid according to the ancient League, and made great promises
to all the Scots that would assist him in this quarrel. It was willingly
granted by the whole State, and seven thousand men agreed upon, as a competent
number for that service, which was soon made up of Volunteers: the youth of
Scotland being now greatly multiplied by long peace with England. Their
Generals were John Earl of Buchan, and Archbald Earl of Wigton the one
son, the other son in law to Archbald Earl of Douglas.

Whilst they were busied in France, the Earl Douglas was not idle at home,
for the black book of Scone bears that he went with an army to besiege the
Castle of Roxbrough, and with the Governor Murdock, against Berwick, but they
returned both without effecting any thing, by reason of the treachery of some
Scots; wherefore this was named the foul road. We read of Douglas also how
he was judge to a duel in The foul road.
Bothwell-haugh, between John Hardy, and Thomas Smith: this Smith had accused
the other of treason, which Hardy denying, and the other not being able to
prove it by witnesses, the comb^t was appointed for trial of it, in which
Smith (the accuser) was slain. The same book also says that (in the year
1420. or 21.) the Earl Douglas entered England, and (...) the town of Aewels.

But here it will not be impertinent for us to step over to France, and His
son Wigton and Buchan in France.
see what Buchan and Wigton are doing, seeing that this employment gave Wigton
occasion to show himself there, and did afterward also draw over his father
(the Earl Douglas) thither: and the order of time does also lead us to speak
of those things in this place. We have told before how John Stuart Earl of
Buchan, who was second son to the former Governor, and brother to Murdock
present Governor of Scotland) and Archbald Douglas Earl of Wigton (whose
sister Buchan had married) were chosen to conduct the forces sent into France,
to aid the Daulphin against the King of England, and Duke of Burgundy. The
chief Gentlemen of note and quality that went along with them were Robert
Stuart (another son of the Governor) Alexander Lindsay (brother to the Earl
of Crawford) and John Swinton Knights, being arrived in France, they were
received of the Daulphin with great joy, and made heartily welcome; who gave
them the Town and Castle of Chastillion in Turrain for their rendezvous and
place of retreat and resort, being a fertile Country, and abounding in all
things necessary; as also for that it lay near unto the enemy, for the Duke of
Clarence (King Henry's brother and Lieutenant) was about to have spoiled the
Country of Angiers, or as ( Hollinshed) had spoiled it already, and had
retired into the town of Beaufort in the Vallay, and was ready to assault a
town called Vielle Bauge (old Bauge) some two days before Pasche. The Scots
expecting that (as the manner then was) he would have abstained from all feats
of arms, and have given himself to the devotion of the time: or having (as
some others say) taken and given assurance for eight days, which is the space
of time commonly bestowed upon that solemnity, were somewhat remiss and
negligent in their discipline. The Duke of Clarence having notice hereof by a
Lombard called Andrew Fregosa (as some say) or by some Scottish prisoner
intercepted (as the Annals of France do bear) who discovered to him the
government of their army, and the carriage of their Leaders and Captains, was
very glad of so good occasion (as he deemed it) to take them at unawares, and
defeat them. Wherefore he rose presently from dinner, and taking with him only
the horsemen, leaving the Archers under the conduct of the bastard of Clarence,
Sir Thomas Beauford, whom he had lately Knighted at Angiers, together with two
Portugal Captains to assist him, he made straight toward the enemy, saying,
that he and the Nobles only, would have the honor of that day. He went with
great confidence to have surprised the enemy, carrying a fair Coronet of Gold
on his head, and very magnificently apparrelled, as if he had been riding in
triumph.

There was a Village called little Bauge, through which the Duke was to come,
where a few Frenchmen of the Daulphins side lay. These being terrified with the
sudden coming of the English, got up into a steeple for safety and sanctuary:
there while they make a halt, and assault the steeple, the cry rises, and the
noise of their approach was carried to the rest of the Army, when presently ran
and took arms. While they were arming themselves, Buchan and Wigton sent 30.
Archers to keep a certain bridge, by which it behoved the enemy to pass over a
brook which ran in the way. These went as they were commanded, and as they
were going Hugh Kennedie came out of a Church where he lay with an hundred men,
but unarmed, or half armed, by reason of the great haste, and joined with
them: while they defended and made good the bridge, and kept off the horsemen
with shot of arrows, the Duke with the principal of his company alighted from
their horse, and made such an onset upon them, that they were forced to leave
the bridge and passage open for the enemy. Being past the bridge while the Duke
mounteth again on horseback, and the rest of his folks are passing after him,
Buchan and Wigton came upon him with two hundred horse, and enter there into a
sharp conflict on both sides, both parties being (most part) Noble men, who
were desirous of glory, and had a mind to give a proof of themselves with
equal courage, and hatred. The Scots were glad to have occasion to show the
French what they could do; and to confute their whisperings, and surmises,
wherein they reproached them, as fit only to consume victuals: and the English
were moved with great indignation, that they should be thus perpetually
troubled by the Scots not only at home, but also abroad beyond the sea in a
foreign country.

And none among the English fought with a greater courage and resolution, The
Duke of Clarence wounded by Sir John Swinton.
then the Duke himself: but Sir John Swinton espying him (being easily known
by his Coronet shining with precious stones, and his glistering armor) ran
fiercely at him with a lance, and wounded him in the face: he being hereby in
a great fury, put forward his horse to have charged the enemy, but was
encountered by the Earl of Buchan, who ran him through with a spear, and so
slew him; or (as others) felled Clarence slain by Buchan.
him down to the ground with a steell hammer. The rest seeing him fall, some
fled, and many were slain in their flight, being pursued till the night came
on. This battle was fought on Pasch Eve, in the year 1420. Pasche Eve.
or (as our Writers and the English) 1421, There were slain of the English 200.
Nobles and Gentlemen: The Duke of Clarence, The Earl of Tankervill, The Lord
Rosse, Sir Gilbert Wimfravill (whom they call Earl of Angus) John Lumlay, Sir
Robert the Earl of Summerset, and his brother (whose sister James the first
did marry afterward) Suffolk and Perch, the Lord Fitzwater, Sir John Barcklay,
Sir Ralph Nevil, Sir Henry Englishes, Sir William Lanton, Sir Thomas Boroughes,
were taken prisoners. There were but few slain of the Scots and French, and
those mean and obscure men. This is the most common report of the Duke of
Clarence his death: but the book of Pustardan says, that he was slain by
Alexander Macklellane, a Knight in the Lennox, who also having taken the
Coronet from off his head, sold it to John Stuart of Darnelay, for 1000. angels.

This victory being obtained, most part by the valor of the Scots, the
Daulphin in recompense hereof made Buchan Constable of France, and morgaged the
Dukedom of Turraine to Wigton, the revenue whereof at that time was vallued to
10000. crowns. The reversion of this Duchy he gave afterward to the Earl
Douglas his father, who was created absolute Duke of Turrain, and Lord of
Longu-vill, and established the same to his heirs male, as shall be showed
hereafter. The French Writers say also that he made Wigton Marshall of France.

The King of England upon the death of his brother, came into France in May, or
about the beginning of June; and carried along with him the heir of the Crown
of Scotland: (afterward King James the first) thereby to divert the Scots from
assisting the Daulphin, or to have made the Daulphin to suspect their
fidelity; but none of those plots succeeded as he would have had them: for
neither would they acknowledge him for their King being in another power:
neither did the Daulphin conceive any sinister opinion or jealousy of them.
Wherefore the same year (or the next, to wit, one thousand four hundredth and
twenty one) the Daulphin caused besiege the Town of Cosme upon Loire. And
Henry departed from Paris to have relieved it, but by the way he was overtaken
with sickness, and returned to Bois-devincins: yet he sent the Duke of Bedford
with a puissant Army to succor it; and the Scots and French finding themselves
too weak to resist, rose and retired to a strength, where the rest of the Army
had assembled with resolution to abide the enemies coming. While as the
English were preparing to fight, news were brought them of their Kings death,
which made them to alter their purpose of giving battle. The King died about
the last of August, one thousand four hundred and twenty one, and his corpse
was carried into England, the two and twentieth of October. Not long after
Charles King of France died also, which was the occasion that Buchan, and
Wigton, with many of the Gentlemen that accompanied them, returned into
Scotland.

But it was not long ere the Daulphin had need of them, sent his Chancellor
Rene de chartres, and the Archbishop of Rheines into Scotland to recall his
Constable, but the Earl of Wigton was so vehemently sick that he could not
possibly travel. Wherefore the Earl Douglas his father The Earl Douglas goes
into France.
went in person himself, and being a Noble man greatly regarded far above any
other Subject in Scotland: there went with him great store of young Gentlemen,
some to do him honor, some to be participant of his fortunes, and most to
be trained under him in discipline of war. So besides those that went over
with Buchan and Wigton, in the year 1420. there went at this time with the
Earl Douglas 10000. more, as says Hollinshed. They landed at Rochell, and
being to come to the Daulphin, were gladly welcomed and much made of,
especially the Earl Douglas, of whom he had heard much by report, that he was
both valiant and skillful in war: And therefore he enstalled him in the
Duchy of Turrain, (...) D. of Turraine
which he gave to him and his heirs for ever; having only engaged it before
to his son (upon reversion) and moreover made him Marshall of France.

This has been (in all appearance) in the year 1423. at most, yet we do not
find any memorable thing done by them, or against them, until the battle of
Vernoill, (which if we read our Histories) one would think it had been fought
immediately upon their landing, thought it be clear, that it was not till
after the death of King Henry the fifth, and in the second year of his sons
reign in the year of God 1424. The occasion The occasion of the battle of
Vernoill.
whereof was this: The Earl of Bedford having besieged Ivery, the Daulphin to
relieve it, sends the Army under the Conduct of the Duke of Turrain (whom the
French call Marshall Douglas) of the Constable Buchans the Earl of Narbon and
others. They not being able to force Bedfords camp, when they were come within
two miles of him, returned toward Vernoill in Perch, which belonged to the
King of England, and sent word to the Garrison there, that they had discomfited
the English Army, and that Bedford with a small number had saved himself by
flight. The Garrisons giving credit thereto did open the gates, and received
them with the whole Army into the town, where having left a part of their
Army, they came and encamped in the fields near the town. Bedford having
gotten Ivery by composition, or surrender, follows them, and sent word to the
Duke of Turrain by a Trumpet, that he would come and dine with him: The Duke
bade him come, he should be very welcome, for all was ready. Nevertheless,
when the point came to consultation, his opinion was that they should not fight
at that time, because he thought it not fit to hazard a battle, but in case
of necessity, and that they had no necessity to fight at that time, in
respect that they had Vernoill in their hands, and other two good towns
besides, whereby they might be plentifully furnished with provision, which the
English could not have, and thereby would be constrained to retire: But the
Earl of Narbon was earnest to have them fight, and said the Nobility of France
should not receive such a bravade from the enemies, and if none would fight, he
would do it alone; and so getting him hastily out of the Counsel, he began to
put his men in order.

The Duke of Turraine took such indignation hereat, that he should offer to
fight without his leave, that he determined not to ^ave stirred at all, and it
was long before he would suffer his men to go forth: yet at last, thinking
that it would reflect upon him if he should sit still, and see them overthrown
in his sight, he armed and went forth also. But then there arose some strife
for the vantguard betwixt them, which made A battle at Vernoil: Douglas slain.
things to be so confusedly handled, that the English got the victory, slew the
Duke, Buchan, Sir Alexander Lindsay, Robert Stuart, and Sir John Swinton, with
above 2000. others of all sorts. Hollinshed in his Chronicles of England says,
(but upon what warrant we know not) that the Earl Buchan (Constable) was not
slain, but lost an eye only, and was taken prisoner: he reckons among the
slain Sir Alexander Hume, whom our Writers do not mention, yet it is true and
known to them of that house: that Sir Alexander Hume of Douglas went thither
in the Earl Douglas company, and was slain with him: for they tell how Sir
Alexander being minded to send his brother David Hume of Wedderburn, went to
accompany the Earl to his Ship, and when they were parting, Douglas embracing
him kindly, said to him, would I have believed Sir Alexander that ever you and
I could have been separated from one another: To whom he replied, surely then
my Lord, I shall not part; and so taking his brother David's apparel and
furniture, and sent David back: he went with him to take care for his house and
children in his absence, or in case of his death: which he also did with such
fidelity, and industry, after the death of his brother, that he greatly
increased the estate, and purchased for a younger son of his brothers, called
Thomas, the lands of Tiningham: and for another (named James) the lands of
Spot: he is said to have purchased Wedderburn for himself: but the truth is,
he had it ten years before, not by marriage, but by the gift of Archbald,
Earl of Douglas, which must have been the same Duke of Turrain, as the date
of the evident does clearly show, being of the year 1413. His son Archbald
also entitling himself Earl of Wigton, and Lord of Longuevill, and Eskdale
gives to the same Sir Alexander Hume a bond of one thousand Nobles, dated at
Bothwell the 9. of February 1424. whom it designeth Sir Alexander Hume of that
Ilke, which I mention the rather to show what great freindship has been
between them.

Here again I cannot pass by the sloth. and unattentivenesse of Writers
sloth, (Scottish and English) who reckon amongst the slain, here a son of
the Earl Douglas (whom some call James) and make him his second son, nay,
some do even make him his eldest son and heir, and call him Earl of
Wigton. But those are all mistakings; for the Earl of Wigton (whose name was
Archbald) was left sick at home, and possessed the Earldom after his fathers
death: Neither was it yet James his second son, who was Lord of Abercorn, and
outlived his elder brother, and his children, that were put to death in the
Castle of Edinburgh, to whom also he succeeded in the Earledom, as the same
Writers themselves (almost all of them) confess. Wherefore the Reader had need
even to read the best Writers with judgment and attention, seeing such
escapes are incident ever to the most accurate, and careful Historians.

Touching this battle, this is the relation of it, by Duscrres in his
inventarie whom I have chosen to follow, not because I think it the fullest or
faithfullest narration (for certainly the Frensh Writers speak slenderly
enough of the actions of strangers, as may be instanced in the battle of
Baugue, and other exploits done by the Scots in France, which they pass in
silence) but because his testimony cannot be rejected by the French, and may
well be admitted by the English, as being indifferent for his person, and no
ways partial in his pen, at least in setting forth this battle: but if we
shall rely upon the writings or reports of our own Country men. The loss of
that field was caused for the envy and treachery of the Earl of Narban. We
heard how Douglas, and he contested for the vantguard, each striving who should
be first: Douglas being ready sooner then he, or being quicker in his march led
on before him, and charged the enemy first: whereupon he abandoned them, and
would not second them as he should have done. And so it came to pass that they
being destitute of his help, and not being able to make head against such a
multitude, were encompassed about by the English (who saw their backs left
bare) and so overthrown, fighting valiantly, that they might die nobly. Some
blame the Lombards (who were in the Army assisting the French that were for the
Da^lphin) but tell not, why, nor wherefore, or wherein. Others say that there
were 400. of them all horsemen, who being commanded to break the ranks of the
English, either in the flank or in the rear, did what they were appointed to
do: and having broken through the English Army, went to their carriage to
pill and spoil, without prosecuting their charge anyfurther* and so having got
their prey, departed off the field, whereupon 2000. English Archers that were
set to keep the carriage, and had now no more to do; entered into the battle,
and being fresh and unwearied, made such an impression, that they did cast the
balance and gave the overthrow, whereas before they had fought for the space
of three hours so doubtfully, that no eye could guess, which way the victory
would go.

Major also tells us that there was some dissension between the Duke of
Turraine, and Buchan, for precedence, but that is not likely: for although
Buchan had the honor to be Constable, and was the chief Commander, so long
as he had no other Colleague but Wigton (his brother in law) yet the Earl
Douglas being an old experimented Commander, and it being ever his due to lead
the the vantguard at home, and being even there, for his well known vvorth
and sufficiency made Duke and Marshall upon his first arrival. It carries no
appearance that the other would strive with him, especially seeing he was
his son in law (for he had married his daughter) and also the younger
soldier. And that the English did acknovvledge the Duke for Chi^tane, it is
evident: for Bedford sent the Trumpet to him, and he returned answer: It was
he that resolved they should not fight, and took it ill at Narbons hands, that
he would not follovv his conclusion, and obey his direction: So as I cannot be
persuaded that their could, or would be any difference betvveen them for
that matter: And if there had been any, they would have composed it, and
agreed betwixt themselves before that time, to have resisted the common enemy.
However, they both died in the field: And the Earl of Narbon wanted not his
reward of his either treachery, or headiness and folly, for he was taken and
hanged as guilty of the death of the Duke of Burgundy. A notable example of
the end of such as carry themselves after such a manner.

Of those that escaped at this defeat, Charles the Daulphin (afterward The
Scottish guard (...) in France.
King Charles the seventh) erected a company to continue a guard to himself,
and his successors for ever, of the Scottish Nation. For he was not contented
to reward their Nobles and Leaders with honors and dignities, but thought
himself also obliged to recompense even the inferior sort, and to respect the
whole Nation, whose valor and fidelity he had found to deserve regarding: As
also he saw their service would be steadable to him, and therefore in wisdom
did thus obliege the whole Country, and engage them to assist him in his war
with England. And so they did, as now, so often hereafter both within the Isle,
and in France: neither could they ever be diverted by any loss or damage
whatsoever. They did still cleave fast unto the French, until they were fully
freed from the English: sending over army after army, and Captain after
Captain, without wearying or relenting, or the least shrinking: and even after
this battle we read of diverse that spent their lives in the Frenches
quarrel against the English, and that within three years, (notwithstanding
this great loss) who were men of quality, such as William Stuart and his
brother, and two Douglasses who were predecessors of the houses of
Drumlanrigge and Lochleven. There was also amongst those that escaped at this
battle of Vernoill, one John Carmichell of the house of Carmichell, in
Douglasdale (who was Chaplain to the Duke of Turrain) a valiant and learned
man, who remained in France, and was for his worth and good parts made Bishop
of Orleance: he it was that during the siege thereof, did notably assist Jane
D'arc, called the maiden of Orleance, The French History calls him John de
Saint Michael (for Carmichell) ^vesque d' Orleance, escossois de nation. He is
mentioned in the particular Story of that Maiden, and in the Annals, Ecclesiae
Aurelianensis auctore Carolo Sanseye Aureliano. Wherefore in the principal
Church in Orleance, called Saint Croix, there is Mass said for the souls of
the Scots daily that were slain there. But to return.

The Duke of Turraine being thus slain, was buried in the Church of Tours,
called Saint Gratians, the 20. of August, in the year 1424. whose coat of
arms was to be seen long ago upon the gates of Tours. He was a man no where
branded for any vice, and of unquestioned valor, for so much as belonged to
his own person, equal to any that were before him. Neither can I see any
evident fault in his conduct and leading. It is true Major taxes him as
unskilful and unfit for matters of war, though he gives him a large
commendation of courage, and personal valor. But he seems to have grounded
his censure more upon the success, then upon his actions, to which we will
answer with the Poet, Careat successibus and quisquis ab eventu, etc. Or if
that will not serve, we will choke him with the French Proverb, Le clerc aux
arms, he is not a fit judge of such things. But we have to do with a more
judicious indeed, who glanceth at no less for speaking of his father Archbald
the Grimme, he says that Chivalry stood in him; as though he would have said,
it fell also with him: which seems to prejudge this his son ( Tine-man) if
not in his valor (which no man can call in question) yet in his conduct, and
leading, which is the chief property and quality of a General and
Commander. Of which judgment questionless, the ground is the same, his hard
success in his interprises. And there is no reason that he should be thought
so of for it, if there be no other cause of evil success. But if there may
be some other reason, and if many well guided Armies, and interprises have
mis-carried (which none will deem, there is no necessity nor just cause why he
should be double burdened, both with ill luck, and the blame of it, unless it
be showed where and how he erred, which neither he, nor any other Historian
does. We must therefore absolve him as free from this imputation, seeing they
do not make it to appear, that he was guilty of any error, or oversight
either at Homildon, Shrewsberry, or Vernoill. On the contrary, his wariness
and circumspection may sufficiently appear to the attentive and judicious
Reader. Let not then his praise be lessened, or his glory eclipsed by his
cross fortune, nor himself esteemed any whit inferior to his Predecessors.
Na^ he deserves to have so much more praise, as that his worth does shine
through the thick cloud of the frownings of fortune, whereas their glory is
increased, and lustred with the beams of a prosperous issue in their exploits.

Archibaldus Duglassius Dux Turronensis, and Johannes Stuartus, Buchaniae comes
ad Vernolium coesi.
Gallia vos titulis; vos gallica regna trophaeis
Auxistis, meritis utraque regna cluunt,
Tertia si invideant, quid mirum ingentia damna
Queis data, Saxonidum dum cecidere duces,
Desine lingua procax verbis incessere Testis:
Gallus adest, servat tot monumenta ducum,
Et vos aeternum memorabit Gallia cives
Grata suos, titulos quae dedit, and tumulos.
Johan. Johnston Heroes.

Archbald Douglas, Duke of Turraine, and John Stuart Earl of Buchan his son in
law, Constable of France, killed at Vernoill.
France gave you Titles, you it Trophies gave;
Both Kingdoms, mutual obligation have:
If the third envied it, their loss received
Might well excuse them, being often bereaved
Of their most ancient Leaders: no bold tongue
By base detraction can have power to wrong
Your merit, and the French will witness bear,
To whom your memory shall still be dear:
Their graceful Monuments the same express,
As do the places you did there possess.
Archbaldus Dux Turonensis etc.
Bis vi^tus, captusque amisso milite; caesus
Denique cum sociis, Vernoliae occubui:
Dura meis raro affulsit victoria signis:
Nostra tamen nusquam sunt data terga fugae.
Semper at ingentes haec dextra liquit acervos,
Hostibus and semper maxima damna dedit.
Hinc fortis, magnisque ducis (...) urnant
Me titulis; nec non hostis and ipse colit.
In me virtutem videas, verumque laborem:
Fortunam proprio quis (...) (...)?
Discite, ab eventu qui censes facta virosque
Exemplo, non sic (...) notanda, meo.
Archbald Tine-man, Duke of Turraine.
Twice with my Armies rout I lost the field;
Now with my friends, I am at Vernoil killed:
My labors hardly met with victory,
Yet did I never stay behind, nor fly,
But killed my foes on heaps: my valiant arm
Did ever bring revenge, and equal harm.
Hence was I honored, as most fit to be
A Leader, courted even by the enemy.
In me you may the hight of worth behold;
But ah, who in his power can Fortune hold?
O! you, who from the event your censures take,
Disprove your selves, and me the instance make.
Of Archbald the fourth of that Name, the foureteenth Lord, and fifth Earl of
Douglas, he was the first Earl of Wigton, Lord of Bothwell, Galloway and
Annandale, the second Duke of Turraine, Lord of Longe-ville, and Marshall of
France.
UNto Archbald Tine-man succeeded his eldest son Archbald he had to wife Mauld
Lindsay, daughter to David Earl of Crawford: he was married at Dundee with
great solemnity and pomp. This alliance has been the occasion of Crawfords
going with him into France (as we told before) and the ground of that
friendship that was betwixt Earl William (slain at Stirlin) and that Earl
Crawford, whereof we shall hear more of hereafter. It appears also, that
there has been continual friendship betwixt these houses from the first
Earl Douglas time, who procured a pardon for Crawford who had slain John Lion.
His children were William, David, and a daughter named Beatrix. The time that
he possessed the Earldom of Douglas, from his fathers death in the year
1424. until the year 1439. is fifteen years; all the time of King James the
first, and about two years in the minority of King James the second. So that
the estate of the Country may easily be known, if we call to mind what
has been said of the death of King Robert the third, and of Robert the
Governor, to whom his son Murdock did succeed in the government before the
King came home out of England.

This Murdock, when he had governed, or rather misgoverned some three years,
or four, being provoked by an insolent fact of his eldest son Walter (who to
despite his father, had wrung off the neck of a Hawke which he loved)
determined in revenge hereof to send and fetch home the King out of England,
and to possess him of his Kingdom.

No other motive we read of to induce him to this; whether it be because
there were no other, or because they have not been careful to set down the
true cause, I know not. But if this were indeed, it is so memorable, that it
deserves not to be passed over with a dry foot (as we say) and without
observation: For who can but wonder at so rare a fact betwixt a father and a
son, as the like is not extant elsewhere in any Record or History, and has not
been heard of, I think, since the world stood: That a man to spite his son
should quite a Kingdom, whereof he was possessed, and saw no other appearance
but to enjoy it still. I confess there has been much unnatural unkindness
in the world, whereby they have procured the death and destruction of those,
whose safety they were tied by the bonds of nature to maintain: but that has
been for their own honor and dignity, to obtain the place, or continue in
it, which men do so much aspire unto: but that their unnatural despite
should reach so far, as to undo themselves, and to quite a Kingdom, for
obtaining and retaining whereof, ambitious men turn the world upside down,
only to satisfy a passionate humor, or malice conceived against their own
child; let him that can, parrellel it, and put this up in his note book for a
second instance at least. It was for love of his Cousin, for respect to
equity, out of duty to God, and love of his Country, which he saw he
himself could not, and his son would not govern rightly, and therefore thought
fittest to resign it to him that both could and would do it; it was a good,
sober, wise and worthy thought. But then our Writers do him wrong, that never
signify that such was his mind, no not in the least word: and mention only
his own anger, and the instigation of Coline Campbell a chief man in Argyle,
who blew the coal out of a private spleen against Walter, who had done him
some injury: but however it were, whether his spite moved him to do justice,
or desire to do justice caused despite, he threatened to do it to his son,
and performed what he threatened; for he sent Ambassadors into England to have
the King released, of which this He is sent Ambassador into England.
Archbald was chief, about the time of his very first coming to the Earldom.
He with his two Colleagues, William Hay Constable, and Henry Bishop of
Aberdene, carried the matter so wisely, that they brought it to a conclusion,
which was the more easily effected, because King James married a Lady of
England without portion, which they thought would move him to forget any wrong
he had received by their injust detention. The Ambassadors also condescended
upon a ransom to be paid, though none were due from him, who never was
lawful prisoner. So at last Brings home the King.
he was released, came home, and was crowned King the 22. of May 1424.

We have heard hitherto the rise of the house of Douglas, and the continual
increasing thereof by their great deserts, with the approbation and applause of
all men, with the good will and liking of their Princes for the space of many
years: their Princes delighting to employ them, and they endeavoring to serve
their Princes, and their Country to the uttermost of their power, with a good
harmony, and happy agreeing on all sides. Let us now be contented from
henceforth to find the world to be the self still; that is, rolling and
tumbling by perpetual vicissitudes, and changes: for though this house shall
yet grow up, and to a higher pitch then ever, yet this concordance shall not
continue so full, but shall begin to have some jarring* their Princes being
jealous of them, they standing in fear of their Princes, sometimes in favor,
sometimes out of favor; sometimes employed, and sometimes neglected: having
men's affections sometimes toward them, sometimes averse from them, liking and
disliking by turns and fits.

They also for their parts were now well-contented, then malecontented: now
dealing in affairs, then withdrawing from all meddling in State business, from
whence did spring discords, imprisonments, banishments, slaughters: which
things beginning in this man's time at his committing, strangeness and
discontents continued in the next, and proceeded in his sons time to his
putting to death, and was transferred as hereditary to his successors, with
many interchangings of smilings and frownings of fortune and Court, which at
last ended in that fearful catastrophe of the final ruin of this
flourishing family, in the year 1483. which troubles continued the space of
59. or 60. years, beginning at King James the firsts return into Scotland.

For the very first year of his reign, this Earl Douglas is committed to
ward, but is soon released: and then within some few years, was committed
again. For his first commitment, there is no cause thereof recorded, only the
time thereof does furnish some matter of conjecture, together with other
circumstances set down. As for the time, it was when Duke Murdocke, and his
sons ( Walter and Alexander) and their Mother, and her Father, Duncane
Stuart, Earl of Lennox, were committed. The circumstances are, that he was not
alone, but with him twenty four Earls and Barons were committed likewise,
amongst whom there were some of the Kings own special friends, and kindred:
as William Earl of Angus, who was the Kings sisters son, and so Duke
Murdokes Cousin. The Earl of Douglas was also allied with him: for Robert the
Governors son, John Earl of Buchan had married Douglas sister; and there had
been cor-respondency, and friendship betwixt the Governor, and Archbald the
Grimme, as also Archbald Tyne-man (this Earls Father and Grandfather) and
Buchan and this Earl, had been fellows in Arms together in France at Baugue:
as also Buchan and Archbald Tyne-man were slain together at Vernoill. Likewise
the Earl of March, who had been restored by Duke Murdocks Father, and had kept
good friendship with him, and his son after his restitution: Robert Stuart of
Roth-house, Stuart of Dundonald: John Stuart of Carden, being also of the name
of Stuart, and all in some neernesse of blood to Murdock, as the King himself
also was. The rest Hepburn of Hailes, Hay of Yester, Ramsay of Dalhousie,
Haliburtoun of Dirleton, we find to have been dependers of the houses of
Douglas and March* and the rest also, Walter Ogilbe, Alexander Seiton, or
Gordon, Hay Arroll, Scrimger Constable of Dundee, have been friends and
followers of the house of Douglas, as we find they did assist and accompany
them in diverse battles; and have also perhaps had some friendship with the
Duke or his Father in law, as commonly the Nobility are allied, and of kin
one to another. Who therefore (thought they were willing, that their lawful
and rightful Prince should enjoy his own place) would not agree so easily to
the putting to death of those, whom the King was resolved to make out of the
way. Now what it was that moved the King to this course, whether desire to be
revenged of the cruelty of Robert the Governor (their Father) toward David D.
of Rothsay his elder brother, or for his mis-demeanour and undutifusnesse
toward his Father ( Robert the third) or for his neglecting himself in his
captivity, or for that he esteemed all that government (of Robert and Murdock)
to be an usurpation of the Crown, and feared the like hereafter, or even
perhaps found such practisings to his prejudice, is uncertain. However being
resolved to rid himself of them, he thought it the safest way to make them
fast, who he believed would not be so well contented with it, as he desired.
He did therefore commit them till he had tried their minds, and drawn them to
his course, or at least taken order with them to sit quiet. And this was not
long a doing: for we read that the foresaid prisoners were all shortly
releeved, and some of them also put upon the others quree (or assise) as
Douglas, March, Angus, Arrole: But by what means he has constrained them to be
content, or what remonstrance or evidence he has given them, to let them see
that those men were guilty of death, or what crime they died for, (if any new
conspiracy, or what else) our Histories tell us not, which is a great defect in
them: Major thinks it likely that there was some conspiracy found against the
King, otherwise they would never (says he) have condemned such men to death
(Princes of the blood as we may call them) and their own especial friends.
And thus much of the Earl Douglas first committing, and the issue thereof.

For the second Hollinshed and Boethius do agree, that the K. arrest the Earl
Douglas, and kept him long in prison; till at last, by the mediation of the
Queen and Prelates, he and the Earl of Rosse were released. Boethius calls him
Archbald Duke of Turraine plainly: but Hollinshed is pleased (out of sum
partial humor as should seem) to suppress the Title of Duke of Turrain, and
this is all the difference betwixt them. It was some years after his first
committing, but what year? it is not condiscended upon. Some say, it was in
the year 1431. but impertinently, for the year 1430. is the year of his
releasing, except we will think that he has been imprisoned thrice, which
is not mentioned by any. And a little mention there is of the cause wherefore
he was warded, whereof Major complains saying, that our Annals tell not the
cause of the Stuarts executions, and the incarcerating of the Earl Douglas,
and John Lord of Kennedie, the Kings own sister son; for both were
committed, Douglas in Logh-leeven, and Kennedy in Stirling; for how shall it
be known whether it was done justly, or for matters of weight, or if for
trifles only, and for his own pleasure. Others insinuate a cause, but do but
glance at it without setting it down so clearly as to let men know, whether
it were just or unjust, which is the light and life of History, and the right
end and use thereof: for they say no more, but that they had spoken sinisterly
or rashly, and somewhat more freely then became them, of the estate and
government of the Country. What use can any man make of this generality?
rashness may be a fault, yet perhaps none at all in them, of whom it is
spoken, they being Privy Counselors. Likewise the phrase ( freelier than
became) is so general, that the Reader remains unsatisfied: neither can
posteriry (either King or Subject) judge of this fact, whether it were right or
wrong, or whether the example were such as men ought to follow, or forbear and
avoid.

It should have been expressly set down what they spoke, to whom, if to the
King himself, or to others: In what sort, if by way of admonition,
counselling, or advising, or if by form of cavilling, detracting, murmuring,
mutining, and such other circumstances, whereon the judgeing of it chiefly
depends: In this uncertainty we can hardly condemn or absolve, praise or
censure them, In that the Lord Kennedy was of the same mind, and category with
the Earl Douglas, apparently it has not been spoken in malice, seeing the
Kings nearest and his best friends (such as these Kennedies were) having
approved thereof. And that Noblemen must not speak their opinion freely of
things to the King, or if the King (being without malice) is very hard: for how
shall a King know, that will not hear? he cannot know all by himself: And how
shall he hear, if Noblemen have not leave to speak freely: he cannot hear
all by himself.

Such carriage as this has often done Princes ill, and it may be, has done
this same Prince no good. And what ever it was, that displeased the Earl
Douglas in the government was either for the Countries sake, or the Kings own
sake, or for both: why might not the King think there might be errors? And
why might he not then have heard them? To have proceeded so vehemently (for
their has been great ve^emency in it) to have cut off his own kinsmen, and
leave none but himself for the Earl of Athole to aim at: it was most
important, and worthy to be considered of, whether or not it were best for him
(in policy) to do. Doubtless his doing of it has emboldned Athole to cut off
the King himself, when all the rest were cut off first by the King. And was it
nothing to lose the Nobility, to alienate their hearts? to irritate them by
imprisonments, forfeitures? has it not done ill think you, and encouraged him
to go on in his intended treason? looking for the favor of the offended
Nobility, or for neutrality, and slacknesse to revenge the Kings death. We see
the King himself retreateth his taxations once or twice, when he saw the
people grieved therewith. And wisely, in that he ^as careful to keep the
hearts of the people. But was there no care to be taken for keeping the
Nobility also ungrieved? was it enough that they would not, or durst not
(perhaps) or could not openly rebel? was it not something to want their
affections? to want the edge, and earnestness thereof? to relent them, to
cool them? Certainly such proceedings as these have encouraged his enemies in
hope of impunitie (greater then they found) yet in hope of it to go on with
their designs, and has furthered and hastened that dolorous conclusion which
ensued.

What ever the cause were, he acknowledges the Earl Douglas mind not to have
been of the worst sort, in that he releaseth him, and in token of a full
reconcilement, makes him a witness to the Baptism of his two sons (twins)
which was in those days no small honor and signification of good will, and a
pledge of intimate friendship. He made also his son William (though but a
child of five years of age) the first knight of fifty, who were dubbed at
that solemnity, as the Manuscript affirms. By which actions, as he honored
Douglas, so did he withal honor himself in the eyes of the people, and of
forrainers, gracing his Court, and that so solemn action by the presence of
such a Peer, far more then if he had been only accompanied by Creighton and
Levingston and such new men (who were but new and mean in regard of him) as
then but growing under the Kings favor. And so it is indeed, the Prince
honors his worthy Nobles by his favors to them, and they grace, adorn, and
decore, and give a luster and splendor to him, and his Court, by their
presence, and attendance thereat. And it is wisdom so to esteem, and so to
use them; and happy are they on both sides, and happy is the Country where
they thus agree and concur. This was he in the year 1430. in October,
released out of prison, and this solemnity being ended, he past into France,
and was installed in his Duchy of Turrain: whether he went thither for that
only, or if he used that fairest color of his absence, that he might not see
the government, which he disliked, and in which he had no employment, I leave
it: yet his going thither gave others occasion to grow great, and to be
employed; especially the house of Angus, which was at last the overthrow of his
house. So as the honor and profit they had in France, may have been said to
have been their wrack in Scotland: what by the envy of their greatness, what
by their absence from home, as has been said. So uncertain are the affairs
of the world! neither is there extant any mention of his actions in France,
though at that time (from 1430. till 1437.) the wars were very hot there,
King Henry the sixth of England being brought over in person, and crowned in
Paris. It is attributed to the Earl Douglas, that he moved the King of France
to require King James his daughter ( Margaret) in marriage to his son
(asterward Lewis the eleventh) and that he met her when she landed at Rochel,
and was present at her marriage.

He remains there until the year 1437. in which, the 21. of February, King
James was slain at the Black friars in Saint Johnstoun by Patrick Grahame, and
Robert Stuart, at the instigation of Walter Stuart Earl of Athole, the Kings
fathers brother by the Earl of Rosses daughter, who pretended to be the
rightful heir to the Crown; and that he was wronged, and defrauded by the
son of Elizabeth Moore, who was only a Concubine, as he alleged.

This posterity of Elizabeth Moore he had craftily caused to destroy one
another; the Governor Robert to destroy David Duke of Rothsay, and now King
James (David's brother to destroy the house of the Governor D. (...), and his
children. And thus causing the King to spoil and weaken himself by cutting
off his friends, none being left alive but the King and his only son (a
child of six years) he was emboldened to put hands in the King also; so much
the rather, because he knew that many of the Nobility were discontented, what
with being imprisoned, what with being endamaged in their goods, lands, and
rents; what with putting to death o^ their friends. So that he hoped that they
would be well contented with the Kings death, at least they would not take great
care or pains to be revenged thereof: which things if the Earl Douglas foresaw,
and being grieved therewith, admonished the King thereof, or caused any other
to warn him that these courses were not for his good; this event shows he
did the part of a faithful Subject, Friend, and Counselor. However, it was
not so well taken by the King at that time, as being contrary to his humor,
and present disposition. He did wisely also to withdraw himself, seeing he
could not help things, as he would have gladly done. Now that the King was
dead, he returns home, and was present (as some think) at the Coronation of his
son James the second, who was crowned at Edinburgh the tenth of March 1437.
not a month (or no more then a month) after the death of his father: where it
is to be observed, that either the death of the King is not rightly said to be
in the year 1437. in February, in stead of 1436. or else they reckon the year
from the first of January, which was not the custom then. And yet Buchanan
means so, for he lays he was slain in the beginning of the year 1437. in
February, which makes me think the Earl Douglas has not come in time to the
Coronation, seeing he could hardly have used such diligence to have had notice
of the Kings death, made himself ready, and come home out of France in so
short a space, though the wind had favored him never so much. However,
through his absence, his adverse party and faction had gotten such possession
of guiding State affairs in the late Kings time, and had so handled the
matter, that he was no whit regarded, nor was there any account made of him. He
was not admitted to the managing of any business of the Commonwealth, or any
public place or Office therein. Creighton and Levingston (the one made
Protector or Governor, the other Chancellor) did all according to their
pleasure.

Our Writers say that the reason hereof was, because the Nobility envied the
greatness of Douglas, which was suspected, and too much even for Kings. How
pertinently either they write so, or the Parliament thought so, I refer it to
be judged by the indifferent. He was far from the Crown, to which he never
pretended title; his predecessors had quit all pretension, title, claim, or
interest thereto, in the time of K. Robert the second he that did claim it,
and gave over, and all his posterity after him had ever behaved themselves
modestly, they had submitted themselves to all government, even to be ruled by
them who were but Governors only, and not Kings ( Robert and Murdock) as
obediently in every thing as any of the meanest of the Nobility, and had never
given occasion of any suspicion to any man, nor taken upon them any thing
beyond or above the rest, unless it were they took greater pains in defense
of the liberty of the Country, in which they spent their lives under their
Kings. And this same man in the late Kings time had behaved himself most
humbly, going to prison once or twice, and obeying his Sovereign in all things,
without the least show of discontentednesse, far less of opposition. So that
whatever hard opinion either the King had taken of him, or any man had put into
the Kings head, has been without his deserving; who if he had been that way
disposed, how easily might he have troubled the Governor, and the whole
Country? But suppose they did suspect, and were jealous of his greatness
(though without a cause) what moved them to neglect and pass by the rest of
the ancient Nobility? was there none of them fit for those places? where was
the Earl of March, a valiant man, and of an ancient stock? Where was the
Earl of Angus, the Earl of Cassils, and diverse others? They will say that
Creighton and Levingston were wise men. But were they the only wise men? were
there no more wise men in the Country? Then if they were wise, were they good
also? were they just? were they sober, modest, and moderate? For without these
virtues their wisdom was not good, but dangerous, and even ill; chiefly when
it is joined with power, and is in authority. And I pray you what has their
wisdom been? or wherein did they show under to the late King? They tell not,
and I believe it, if it be tried, it shall be found that which made him to have
so short a life, that gave occasion to his enemies to take courage against him;
even their seeking of their own particular advancement, with offense, and
vexing of the Nobility, without regarding the Kings good, or the good of the
Country And it must needs be so, if it were the same wisdom they show now
after the Kings death. Therefore if we shall speak in right terms of that
matter, we shall say that Alexander Levingston, and William Creighton, both
small Barons only, and not of the ancient blood of the Nobility; new men bent
to seek their own profit only, without regard to any other duty, had
mis-governed the State, and gotten the guiding of the late King, and drawn such
a faction, that Douglas being absent in France, they had gotten all into their
hands; Levingston being made Governor, and Creighton Chancellor, who is the
first Chancellor that we read of in our Chronicles.

The Earl Douglas took such indignation at this, esteeming it disgraceful to
the whole Nobility, and more especially to himself, that finding he could not
bow his heart to acknowledge such men, and yet not willing to oppose or impugn
them who were clothed with authority (which would move war and trouble in
the Country) he chose, as the calmest and best course, to withdraw himself,
and not to meddle with any public business, or to take any care or share in
ruling the Country, which he left to them to whom it was committed, and to
such as had taken it upon them: with this resolution he returned home to his
own house, without further troubling of them. But that he might keep them
from infringing his liberties, and privileges granted to the house of Douglas
of old by former Kings for their good services, he commanded such as were his
to contain themselves within his regalitie, to answer to his courts, and to no
other; professing plainly that he would keep his privileges, and that if any
man should usurp or encroach upon them, he should be made sensible of his
error.

This was a bit cast into the teeth of the new Governors, and did curb them
very short on the south side of Forth, he having large lands and lordships in
those parts. And here their foolishness was quickly seen, in that they would
take upon them such authority, and the unadvisednesse of those who had given it
them who were not able to execute it, but by the permission of another.
Hereupon also fell out great inconveniences, for the men of Annandale
(accustomed to theft and robbery) seeing the Earl Douglas discontented, and
retired (who was the only man they stood in awe of, and was only able to
restrain them) they began to slight and contemn the authority of these
Governors, and to molest and vex their neighboring Shires with driving away
preyes and booty by open force and violence, as if it had been from the
enemy. This the Governors not being able to repress, the evil increased
daily, as a canker, so that it overspred the whole region (almost) on that side
of Forth.

In the mean while these jolly Governors were so careful of the common good
of the Country, and the charge committed to them, that in stead of thinking
how to pacify and restrain those Annandians, they fall at variance each with
other, sending out contrary Edicts and Proclamations: Variance betwixt the
Governors.
The Governor commanding that none should acknowledge the Chancellor, and the
Chancellor that none should obey the Governor; so that when any came to the
one to lament his estate, and seek redress; he was used by the other as an
enemy, and both pretended the Kings authority. For the Chancellor had the
King in his custody in the Castle of Edinburgh, and the Governor had the name
of authority, and was in Stirling with the Queen mother: at last she under
color to visit her son, found means to convey him out of the Castle in a
Chest to Stirling. And now the Governor having gotten the Kings person to
countenance and strengthen his authority, went with an Army to besiege the
Castle of Edinburgh where the Chancellor was.

The Chancellor to make himself a party, sends to the Earl Douglas, offers
to come in his will, desires his protection, remonstrates to him the cruelty,
avarice, and ambition of the Governor, telling him that he was deceived, if he
thought they would go no further then to seek to extinguish him, and that he
would make him but a step to overthrow the Nobility, and him with the first.
Douglas returned answer, That the Governor and Chancellor were both alike
false, covetous, and ambitious, that their contentions were not of vert^e, or
for the good of their Country, but only for their own particular quarrels,
and private commodity, in which contention there was no great matter which of
them overcame, and if both should perish, the Country were the better* neither
could there be a more pleasant sight for all honest men, then to see such a
couple of Fencers yoked together. This answer was so true: that none can or
does contradict it. Their falsehood he has known, and that is it which men
call wisdom in them by a fair name. It shows it self in their dealing with
this Earls son, and appears also in their carriage one toward another,
each striving who should deceive the other.

Their factiousnesse likewise, ever when they durst for fear of a third, and
that their contentions were but for particulars grounded upon ambition and
avarice, without any care of the common wealth, the world saw it then, and it
may be seen as yet. And therefore it is most true that the Country had been
better if it had been rid of such ambitious and avaritious Governors,
seeking nothing but themselves; and that it was not for any honest man to
embroil himself in their so dishonest debates, but a pleasant show and
spectacle indeed, and to be desired to see each of them (though unjustly) yet
to do justice upon the other. It was a free speech also, no man can deny. But
they say it was not wisely spoken, for it made the two parties agree to his
prejudice, and procured to him the hatred of both, at least increased their
hatred: for no doubt they hated him before, and now he might have divided them
by joining with the Chancellor.

To this we answer, that seeing the Chancellor hated him, he would have done
nothing, but served himself of him for his own particular: either to have
overthrovvne the Governor, that he might have had all the prey and benefit
alone; or perhaps made use of his help to agree with him on better terms,
and easier conditions, as we see they did agree at last. It was for no
common good of the Country, no nor for any good will to the Earl: what
could he do then? why should he have meddled with them? they say to have
met with him in his own craft, and to have used the one of them to
overthrow the other, that so both might have been overturned. Will men never
leave these things? such false tricks, such bastard and spurious wisdom? and
shall we not think there is another way besides it? there is a true honest
wisdom, that honest men may keep without fashood, or any point, or
tincture thereof, without deceiving any, even the deceivers. What other
answer did his request deserve? was it not fit that such crafty companions,
who had abused the Country, should hear the naked truth out of a Noblemans
mouth? Should such a Nobleman have glosed with such as they were, flattered and
dissembled, and struck cream in their mouth? Nay, it is a part of punishment
to wickedness, even to hear the own name given to it: And it is very fit it
should have it. So that his answer cannot be justly taxed, but commended as
true, just, magnanimous, and such as became his place, house and birth, without
fraud or dissimulation, calling (as the Macedonian did) a spade, a spade; vice
by the own name: which as he did here, so perhaps had he done before, when
he spoke of the government in the late Kings time, whereby it would appear
that such was his natural disposition, far from all frivolous flattery, or
dissimulation, either toward King or others. Indeed now these are crept in, and
accounted wisdom, to the prejudice of the ancient true generositie of these
great spirits, far better, and far more worthy to be adorned with the full
and due praise, then to be obliquely taxed and nipped by half words, as not
being wisely and profitably enough spoken, when there can be no just blame laid
upon them. Neither ought it to be thought unprofitably said, or dangerously,
seeing (out of all question) the same courage and magnanimity that moved him to
speak the truth, made him also now to despise their persons, contemn their
spleen, and slightly account of any power they had to do him any harm, for
all their joining together. Neither is there any appearance, but that he did
it out of a right weighing of his own and their power, and not out of any
arrogancy, or idle confidence. And certainly, any indifferent man can think
no less, and that they durst not attempt any thing against him or his
successor after him, but after a most treacherous manner as ever any was since
the world stood. So that there was not any want of wisdom in this speech, nor
in this same point of profit or harm.

His death followed not long after in the year 1438. at Rastalrigge, of a His
death.
burning fever: very opportunely and in a good time (say our Writers) and so
it was indeed for them, and such as they were, who had now better opportunity
to prey upon the Commonwealth, and spoil and use it for their best advantage.
But it was unseasonably for the house of Douglas, which was left in the hands
of a youth without experience; and therefore uncircumspect, yea untimely for
the Nobility, who became a prey to the avarice, and ambition of these two, and
untimely for the Country, in that these two were now left free from the fear
of him they stood most in awe of, and who might most have repressed their
attempts, and bridled their appetites.

This thing only I can account worthy of reproof in him, that he suffered
Annandale to overcome the adjacent Countries, and did not hinder them from
wronging the innocent people: he should not have thought that it did not
belong to him to hinder them, because he was no Magistrate. This if he had
done, and kept justice within himself, it would have gotten him both favor and
honor, and might have brought contempt upon the Governors, that could not
keep peace in a more tractable and peaceable Country, nor amongst themselves:
for how excellent a thing is it by good means to seek honor. It would have
taken away the occasion of the Calumnies of his enemies, who yet did much worse
themselves: he was otherwise a valiant wise man, a lover of his Country, and
of a free, plain, good and generous nature; his generous disposition appears
in his brave demeanor toward the Lord Kennedie. There being something wherein
the Lord Kennedie had wronged and offended him, he conceived such high
indignation thereat, that he published his desire of revenge to be such, that
whosoever would bring the Lord Kennedies head, should have the lands of
Stuarton. This offer proceeded from so powerful a man, and known to be a man
that would keep his promise, the Lord Kennedie hearing of it, (fearing he
could hardly long escape his hands) resolved by way of prevention to be
himself the presenter of his own head unto him, and accordingly (keeping his
own intention close to himself) he came privately to Wigton, where finding
the Earl Douglas at his devotion in Saint Ninians Church (a place famous in
those days for the frequent resort of Pilgrims thither) immediately after
divine Service, offered his head to the Earl, as one who had deserved the
promised reward, and did crave it. The Earl seeing the resolution and
confident assurance of the man, who had put himself in his power and mercy,
forgave him all former faults, made him his friend, and withal gave him the
reward he had promised, disponing to him and his heirs the lands of Stuarton,
which his successiours (the Earls of Cassils) do peaceably enjoy to this day.

He was buried in the Church of Douglas, called Saint Brides Church, with this
inscription.

Hic jacet Dominus Archbaldus Douglas, Dux Turoniae, comes de Douglas, and
Longe-ville: Dominus Gallovidiae, and Wigton, and Annandiae, Locum tenens Regis
Scotiae. Obiit 26. die Mensis Junii, Anno Domini millesimo quadringentisimo
tricesimo octavo. Of William slain in Edinburgh Castle, the sixth William, the
sixth Earl of Douglas, and third Duke of Turrain, etc.
UNto Archbald Earl of Wigton, succeeded his son William, a youth of no
great age, of an high spirit, and of a sweet, tractable, and meek disposition.
And therefore we cannot but detest and execrate the wickedness, and treachery
of his enemies, who did so unworthily cut off such a sprig in the very budding;
from whose blossoms none could but have expected passing good fruit, to the
great good of the commonwealth, and Kingdom, if malice and envy had suffered
it to come to maturity. Let us notwithstanding rest contented with his change
begun in his father by warding, and displacing from the room of his
Predecessors, from mannaging of affairs in the Kingdom, prosecuted against
him in his life time, and now followed forth against his son. This vicissitude
which befell this house, is to be found and seen in all humane affairs, and
does overturne all due and right order in the world, as far as men can judge:
for innocence is often overthrown by cruelty; honesty and uprightness of
heart by craft, falsehood and treachery: and yet let us reverence the Sovereign
cause, and Over-ruler of all things, who in this disorder directs all things
certainly by a great wisdom, and with good order doubtless, things
unsearchable by man. But as nothing has ever been so enormous, which may not
receive some color, either of virtue to make it seem good, or at least of some
extenuation to make it seem not so ill, as it is: So this fact amongst others I
perceive to be of the same kind: by some thought to be good (but very
ignorantly, or maliciously) by some excusable, both in form and in fact, by a
necessity, or pretext of the common good; by all that have written, more
slenderly handled, and doubtingly, then ought to be. For they leave it almost
uncertain what ought to be judged of it, whether it be good or ill: so that
sometimes you would think they condemn it, sometimes they allow of it, and
none of them deals with it so fully, as reason would they should do for the
information of posterity, and according to the right law of an History: but as
men do with nettles which they would gripe, they are afraid to handle them
heartily and hardly.

Now that this so instant a fact may the better appear in the own colors, I
will labor to wash away the painting and plaster wherewith the Authors would
so fain (but falsely) overlay it; or wherewith men's judgments (whereof many
are but half wise, and perceive but the half of matters; not plumming and
sounding the depth and ground of things so well as were needful) may be
deceived by others, or may fancy to themselves for excusing of it, that we may
learn to detest and abhor so detestable and horrible facts with a true
detestation and abhorring in earnest and effect, that Pos^erity may know and
condemn, and avoid the like practices.

And for this purpose, before we come to the narration of the fact it self,
we will speak something of the Authors thereof, Levings^on, and Creighton,
and their actions in the last Earl Douglas time.

We heard before (and we must not forget it) how well these men guided the
Country, what care they took of the Commonwealth; or to say better, how
little care they took of it: how they cared for nothing save their own
particular; under color of the Commonwealth: each striving to disgrace other
by their private speeches, and open Proclamations: so greedy and ambitious they
were, that howbeit they had all the Country between them, yet it could not
satisfy, or content them: they could not so much as agree between themselves,
to divide the spoil, and part the booty peaceably and quietly, which thieves
and robbers, and Pirates are wont to do without discord or injustice. But they
had not so much modesty, but fell at variance; spoiling, fighting and besieging
one another, till remembering themselves that a third might come and take the
bone from both, they were so wise as to agree for fear of him I mean the
Earl Douglas: and that they did so, more in that regard, then for any good to
their Country or love they bore one to another, it soon appeared after his
death: for incontinent thereupon they returned to their old byas, and the
agreeance that was made for fear of him, lasted no longer then he lived:
wherefore Levingston being Governor, and having the King also in his custody,
being freed from the fear of the Earl Douglas, respected the Chancellor
Creighton no longer, but began to despise him, and though now there was no band
to bind him any longer to him, he would give him no share of his booty and
spoil of the Country, but would needs keep all to himself. This was his
ambition, or avarice, or both; for ambition would be alone in all, and likes of
no equal, no fellowship, no copartner. And avarice might also have moved him
to this, for guiding all, he might take all: and if he made the other partaker
of the guiding, he behoved to make him partaker of the gain: and therefore he
would none of his assistance in the government. But let us see now how well he
governed, he imprisoneth the Nobles at his pleasure, upon light grounds of
suspicion only, yea he casts them into fetters.

The third of August 1439. he warded the Lord Lorne and his brother Sir James
Stuart, who had married the Queen Mother, upon suspicion only for their
dealing with the Earl Douglas, and did commit the Queen her self to be kept
in a close chamber in Stirling Castle, of which he himself was Captain: so
that she could not get her self released, until there was kept a Convention
of the Lords, then by the intercession of the Chancellor and some others, she
was dismissed, having given Sir Alexander Gourdon (alias Seton) who was the
first Earl of Huntly, surety and cautioner for her, that she should pay 4000.
marks to the Governor. This was his iniquity, yea tyranny, and barbarous
abusing of Noblemen, and yet he gave remissions, and pardoned men guilty of
great crimes, or passed them over by conniving.

The Chancellor therefore (who thought he should have his share of the booty)
seeing his life thus debouted by the Governor, and not being able to help it,
nor to have patience, and sit quiet, it being more then he could digest or
bear with, retired him from Court to Edinburgh Castle, there to be safe in
his Fort, and lie in wait for the first opportunity that he could find to
supplant Levingston. Neither was he slow in coping of him: for before the year
was ended, he took occasion of the Governors going to Perth, and knowing by
intelligence the time and place of the Kings hunting in the fields about
Stirling, thither he rides, and brings him away to Edinburgh Castle. By this
means the dice are changed, he had now gotten the durke (as our Proverb goes)
he will divide the prey over again, he will have his large share of all, and
direct all now, as Levingston had done before. The other finding himself in
this strait, might lament his case, but could not help himself: necessity
has no law. The Chancellor had yielded to him before, when he (or the Queen
for him) stole away the King. Now he has gotten a meeting, he must yield to
him again, and so he does: Bows his bonie heart, goes to Edinburgh, gets
mediators, brings on a meeting, and finally agrees by the mediation of Henry
Lighton, Bishop of Aberdene, and John Innesse, Bishop of Murray.

But if you would see the right face of a stage play, deceivers, deceaving,
dissembling, and putting a fair outside on their foul falsehood, and
proceedings; read me there harangues on both sides, that you may either laugh
or disdain them. I cannot take leisure to set them down at length (as they are
to be found in our Histories) but in a word, you shall find nothing but
pretexts of the Commonwealth, of the Public peace, the good of the King, and
the well being of all honest men, which is all joined, and depends upon them,
and their well being forsooth. That has been still their scope, that has
been the aim of all their intentions, no particular, no ambition, no avarice;
only love of those things which were common and profitable unto all* and
because in them all did lie and subsist, in their standing honest men did
stand, and by their ruin honest men did fall; nay, the King and Country were
ruined. For this cause and for no other, that the Country might be well, that
wickedness may be bridled, they forgive one another, avouching that their
discords arose only from diversity of opinion, and judgment; while as both
seeking the common good, one thought one form the best for it, and the other
another form to be best for it, and the other another form; which if it were
true, let what has been said above bear witness. It would make a man to
loath speaking virtuously, to see virtue by them so far abused; yet the old
Proverb might have warned them: ( Oportet mendacem esse memorem) and sometimes
a liar will speak truth is verified in them. They confess their ambition, and
striving for honor and pre-eminence, they are ashamed to say for goods and
riches, but it was no less true, and both were alike faulty, and they exhort
one another, and promise to amend thereafter by a better strife, who should be
most moderate and just. But they were as true in keeping that promise as they
were in their discourse what was past. When the Fox preaches, take heed of
the hens (says the Proverb:) we shall see notable moderation and justice,
such, as the world has scarce seen the like example of treacherous tyranny.

This is the sum of these jolly men harangues. The conclusion is a new
friendship (if falsehood be friendship) or rather a conspiracy against the
Country, and directly against the Noblemen, who (their conscience tells
them) hate them as new men, lifted up to the highest degree (as they grant
themselves) and that was reproach enough to the Nobility, and an argument of
their unworthiness. But they might have said as truly, that they were hated
for abusing the King and Country for their private advantage, under pretext of
the common wealth, which whether the whole Nobility resented or not, we cannot
tell; for there is no mention, and it is a wonder if they did not, yet it would
seem they did not: they had stouped and taken on an unworthy yoke of slavery.
But what ever the rest did, there was one that was a sorethorne in their foot,
and moate in their eye, it behoved to be plucked out.

The Earl of Douglas was of the old spirit, of the ancient Nobility: he could
not serve, nor obey but whom he ought, and the lawful commanders, lawfully
commanding for his honor and utility, whereof they were neither. Such a spirit
is unsufferable, under these new conspiring Tyrants: he will not acknowledge
their authority, his father had told them their holy days name, himself took
them for his enemies. But how shall they do with him? he is not easily to be
dealt with; they must have muffles that would catch such a cat. Indeed he
behaved himself as one that thought he would not be in their danger, he
entertained a great family, he rode ever well accompanied when he came in
public, 1000. or 2000. horse, were his ordinary train. He had great
friendship, and dependence of old, he had been careful to keep them; and had
also increased them, and conciliated many new followers and clients by his
beneficence and liberality, and his magnificence, which was answerable to his
place, suitable for an Earl of Douglas, and Duke of Turrain; which Duchy he
had obtained himself to be invested in, as heir to his father: having sent
Malcolme Lord Fleming, and Sir John Lawder of Basse, (or Haton as others say)
into France for that purpose; and was well accepted of in remembrance of his
father: and grandfather, he had all his affairs in singular good order: he had
his ordinary Council, and Counselors for guiding his affairs: he dubbed
Knights also, as he thought men worthy; which power and privilege he did not
usurp out of pride, nor take upon him by imitation to counterfeit Kings (as
some would insinuate) but by virtue of both his dignities of Duke and Earl.
And although he were but fourteen years of age at his fathers death (in the
year 1438. or 39.) and was put to death in the year 1440. not having attained
to fifteen or sixteen, or little above at the farthest, yet in this his port
and behavior, did not only appear the sparks of a great spirit, but also of
such wisdom and providence as could scarce be looked for from so young a
man. This galled them so much the more to think if that fruit should come to
ripeness at any time, how poysonable, or rather, how great a counterpoyson it
would prove to their greatness. But here the skin of the Lion would not
serve their turn (he was too hard for them to deal with by force) they do
there sow that on that of the Fox.

The occasion fell out thus: During the time of the jarres betwixt themselves,
the common affairs were neglected between stools, and partly because they
could not (being but mean men of small power) partly because they cared not to
prevent, or to amend things, many insolences were committed without redress.
The men of the Isles had come into the main land, had put all to fire and
sword, men, women and children, young and old, far and wide, omitting no
kind of example of avarice and cruelty: and that not only on the Sea coast,
but in the Lennox also: out of the Isle of Loch-lomond (called Inch-mertin)
they had made an appointment with a Gentleman, named John Calhoon (Lord of
Lusse) as if it had beento end some business and slain him (the 23. of
September) with many such things, and many foul facts had been done in diverse
parts of the Country. Likewise Sir Allane Stuart of Darnelay was slain at
Paselay, by Sir Thomas Boide; and again, Sir Thomas Boide was slain by
Alexander Stuart of Belmot (brother to the foresaid Sir Allane) and his sons,
through which there arose great troubles in the west parts of the Country and
Kingdom. The Borderers had not been idle, who living under the Earl Douglas,
and being his followers, or retainers, what they did was interpreted to be done
by his allowance. And at a Convention in Edinburgh many complaints were given
in against him, but never a word spoken of the tax of Isles men: never a word
of Levingstons and Creightons own doings, who had warred one upon another, not
a word of any other slaughter or bloodshed, but as though nothing were amiss
in the Country, but what was done by the Earl Douglas dependers; they only
were complained of. Whether the cause was in his enemies, and that this
proceeded from them, or was done by their instigations, our Histories tell not,
neither can we affirm it: yet it is strange, that there being so many more,
and more enormous faults (for the Isle-mens were more heinous) none should be
taken notice of but his men's. Theirs are exaggerated, multiplied, and made
odious; and the envy thereof derived upon the Earl, as Author of all:
hereupon Sir Alexander Levingston, (carrying malice in his heart, but
dissembling it for a time, with a false deceitful mind) persuaded the rest,
that the Earl Douglas was rather a man to be dealt with by fair means, then to
be irritated by suspicions: As one who had such power, that if he should oppose
himself, he might frustrate all their conclusions and decrees. Wherefore he
procured a letter to be written to him in an honorable manner in all their
names, entreating him, that being mindful of his place, mindful of his
Progenitors, whose good deeds and deservings, most ample and notable toward
his Country of Scotland, were still extant, he would come to the Convention of
the States, which could not be conveniently kept without him, and his friends.
If he had taken offense at any thing, they would satisfy him so far as was
possible. If there were any oversight committed by him, or any of his friends,
they would remit it, and would forgive many things to his most noble house
which had done so many good offices, and so much good service to his Country.
They would impute many things to the times, and consider his youth, and the
great hope and expectation they had of him That he should come therefore, and
take what part of the affairs of the commonwealth he best pleased, and as his
Ancestors had often delivered the Realm from dangers of wars by their arms
and victories, so that he would be pleased now by his presence to raise it, and
establish it almost sunk, and overthrown with intestine discords.

This letter as it was honest in words, and very right, carrying that right
course that should have been used toward him, and the duty that all these
reasons contained, craved to have been done to him, if it had been in
sincerity: so being in falsehood, and with a treacherous intention, used only
to entrap him, makes their ditty the clearer: for he (out of the honesty of his
own heart) interpreting their meaning to be according to their words, and
being of no ill disposition, but of a sweet and tractable nature, desirous of
glory by good means, that so he might have followed the footsteps of his
Predecessors in all good offices to his Country, not having so great malice
in his mind, and therefore not thinking any could have so great in theirs
against him, as to seek his life, (for there had been no such occasion, their
contentions with his father had not come to that hight and degree, but had been
contained within the bounds of words only) and therefore not imagining that so
great villainy could have been harbored in their hearts, he willingly embraces
the occasion of making peace in the Country, and that he might contribute
thereto his best endeavors, takes his journey for Edinburgh. His friends are
reported to have furthered him in this resolution, in hope of their own
particular employments and preferment, which (say they) blinded their eyes that
they saw not the danger. But truly I cannot see how they could have seen any
peril, unless we will say that they might have known that the Governor and
Chancellor were treacherous men, and had given some proof of as great
disloyalty before, which is not mentioned any where that we know of; for though
they were known to be subject and inclinable to falsehood (as his father had
objected to them before) yet it was so well covered, that it was not accounted
falsehood, but wisdom* for there are degrees, and there be many who will
dispense with themselves to step something aside from the strict rule of
uprightness (which is accounted simplicity) that will be ashamed of so high a
degree of manifest treason, as this was. So that howbeit they knew their
falsehood in some measure, yet could they not have looked for such proditorious
dealing: besides it might have seemed to any man in discourse of reason, that
if they cared not to blot their names with the foulness of the fact, yet they
could not have great hope to gain or profit much by it: for what could it avail
them to cut him off, seeing another was to succeed in his place, as ill
(perhaps) as he? so that by putting of him to death, all that they could gain
would be but an irreconcilable deadly feude with that house, which was too
high a degree of enmity for any thing had yet been amongst them, being nothing
but grudges, and such things as might have been easily taken away. So that
(since the discourse of man for ought we can judge, could never have reached so
far as to have suspected what followed, but rather to have looked for the
contrary) I see not how the Earl nor his friends can be blamed for credulity,
or how it can be censured in him as a defect of his youth, and proceeding from
want of experience: for what otherwise could he have done, if his experience
had been never so great? or himself never so old? neither is there sufficient
ground to tax his friends as if their hopes had blinded them so that they could
not see any peril which no discourse of reason could see, or apprehend. It is
true, men ought to be circumspect, but it is a fault also, and proceeds of an
ill nature to be suspicious, as he might well have seemed to be, if he had
refused to come. The event shows there was cause to suspect the worst: but I
deny that reason could foresee that event, or any, considering of the
circumstances, could have made one to have looked for it: neither can any man
save himself from such treason, neither can it be reputed as simplicity to
the sufferer, but as a monstrous enormity to the doer.

To return to our purpose, their disloyal practice stayed not in this smooth
letter: they double fraud upon fraud: for so soon as Creighton knew he was on
his journey, he came many miles to meet him, and inviting him to his Castle of
Creighton (which was near the way he was to go) he feasted him, he cherishes
him, he entertaineth him friendly, cheerfully, and magnificently: and that not
for one day, but two days, kindly* with all the tokens and demonstrations of a
friendly mind that could be given. And to remove all suspicion of
unfriendlinesse, and the more circumvein him, he admonished him familiarly,
that he would remember the royal dignity of his Prince, and his own duty
toward him. That he would acknowledge him for his Lord and Sovereign, whom
the condition of his birth, the laws of the Country, and the consent of the
estates had placed at the rudder of the Commonwealth: that he would labor to
transmit his so great Patrimony acquired by the virtue of his Ancestors, and
with spending of their blood to his Posterity, even so as he had received it:
that he would be careful to keep the name of Douglas, which was no less
illustrious and renowned for their faithfulness, then their deeds of arms,
not only from the foul blot of treason, but even from all stain of suspicion,
or aspersion thereof: that he himself would abstain, and cause his men to
abstain, from wronging the poor people: that he would put from about him
thieves and robbers: finally, that in time to come he would set himself to
maintain justice, that if he had offended any thing in times past, it might
be imputed not to his natural disposition, but to ill counsel, and that
infirmity of his youth, penitency would be admitted, and accepted as innocence.
Venomous Viper that could hide so deadly poison under so fair shows! unworthy
tongue, unless to be cut out for example to all ages! Let not the Poets be
thought fabulous, who have transformed men into beasts; lo a beast composed of
many beasts: a Lion, a Tiger, for cruelty of heart: a Waspe, a Spider, a Viper,
for spite and malicious poysonablenesse: a Fox and Camelion, for falsehood
and doubleness: a Cockatrice and Crokodile, and whatsoever nature has brought
forth, that is deceitful and hurtful, a sweet singing Ciren, enchanting the
outward senses to the destruction of the listner, so much the more odious, that
it was in the shape of a man; and the more detestable, that it durst so pollute
the image of God, so abuse the glory of man: the speech of the tongue therefore
given him (beyond the beast) that he might employ it well to inform aright, to
speak truth, and to do good to others. The honest heart of the hearer that
knew what he spoke was right, and intended to follow so good counsel, takes
all in good part, believes the speech for the truths sake, the man for his
speeches sake. And who could have done otherwise? who would not have thought
that he who knew so well what was right, would have had some regard to do
right? shall we account it childishness, that he accounted so of them, and
suffered him to be so deceived? nay, he could not keep himself undeceived.
Good men, and wise men have often been deceived both in sacred and profane
Histories. We must not impute it to childishness in Abner, that Joab stabbed
him under trust, but esteem it vile treachery in Joab, of whom David says,
H^e dies not as a fool dies, howbeit his hands were not bound, but as a good
man falls before a wicked man, that is by treason, which no man can eschew.

It is said that his friends seeing so extraordinary entertainment, so fair
language above measure, so humble behavior, and withal so many messages (at
every step almost) betwixt the Governor and the Chancellor, took some
suspicion of ill meaning, and that there arose first a still murmr through
the whole company; thereafter some began to admonish him, that if he would
persist to go on, he would send back his brother David, being mindful of a
precept of his fathers, That they should not come both together into one place
where themselves were not masters, lest they should endanger their whole family
at once. The unwary youth (unwary indeed; but what wariness could he have
poor innocent?) and very well inclined, even angry with his friends, stayed
those murmures by a plain commandment, and assured his friends thus: That he
knew well it was a perpetual pest of great houses that they had ever about
them some men that were impatient of peace, who made gain of the perils,
travels, and miseries of their Lords and Patriarchs: and because in peace they
were restrained by the bridle of the law, they were ever stirring up strise and
sedition, that in troubled times they might have greater scope and liberty to
their wickedness. As for himself, he reposed more upon the known wisdom and
prudencie of the Governor and Chancellor, then to give ear to their
suspicious surmises.

This speech thus uttered, testifying both an acknowledging of the evil past,
and a resolution to amend, was it not sufficient to have purged whatsoever
error had been, or might have been thought to have escaped him before? And
certainly it would, if these men had regarded Justice, or the good of the
Commonwealth, and had desired to reclaim him from his errors, and win him
to his Country. But his so full confidence thus reposing on their credit, was
it not enough to have tied them to have kept their credit? If there had been
any spark of humanity or nature of man left in them: and if they had not been
worse then savage beasts. Trust deserves that we should prove worthy of that
trust, and credit procures keeping of credit; where all humane nature is not
extinct, and even simplicity deserves favor and pity. Neither can a man that
is not altogether given over, and has not sold himself to wickedness choose
but favor it, and have compassion of it; yea though he had been otherwise
disposed in the beginning, it would even move any man's heart (that were indeed
a man, and not changed into a beast) to favor and commiserate, and would have
tamed and calmed any former coffeehouse, and have wrung from them any evil
intention which they might (perhaps) have conceived before. However, this noble
youth goes on in the innocence of his heart, and that the more quickly, to
cut off all occasion of such speeches, and with his brother, and with a few
other principal friends goes directly to the Castle, (being led as it were
and drawn by a fatal destiny) and both enter, and so come in the power of
those their deadly enemies and fained friends. At the very instant comes the
Governor (as was before appointed betwixt them) to play his part of the
Tragedy, that both might be alike embarked in the action, and bear the envy
of so ugly a fact, that the weight thereof might not lie on one alone: yet to
play out their treacherous parts, they welcome him most courteously, set him to
dinner with the King at the same table, feast him royally, intertain him
cheerfully, and that for a long time. At last about the end of dinner, they
compass him about with armed men, and cause present a bulls head before him on
the board: the bulls head was in those days a token of death (say our
Histories) but how it has come in use so to be taken, and signify, neither
do they, nor any else tell us, neither is it to be found (that I remember) any
where in any History, save in this one place: neither can we conjecture what
affinity it can have therewith, unless to exprobrate grossness, according to
the French, and our own reproaching dull, and gross wits, by calling him
Calves head ( test de Veau) but not Bulls head. So that by this they did
insult over that innocence which they had snared, and applaud their own
wisdom that had so circumvented him: a brave commendation indeed, and an
honest! yet I wonder what they meant by entertaining him so well at that time,
there was some reason for it why they should have done it by the way, that they
might work out their treason, until he were within their thongs: but being
now within the Castle, and fully in their power, I wonder what it should mean
to make him so fair a welcome, to feast him so liberally and solemnly at the
Kings table, and from thence to bring him to the shambles: what could have
been their intention? might they not have conveyed him to some private
chamber? might they not have carried him to the place of execution? what needed
all this process? what needed they to have let him see the King at all? It
would seem as if they had not been fully resolved upon the business before;
and that their intentions and purposes were not treasonable, but that they
took occasion to be treasonable from the facility to atchieve it: but our
Writers are clear against that, and say only it was pre-concluded, when he
was written for. It might seem also that they did this to communicate the
matter, or to transfer it altogether upon the King: but he was too young, and
purges himself by disproving of it. So that I can see no other reason of it,
but as the Lion with his prey, or (to use a more base, yet a more familiar
example, and the baser the fitter for them) as the c^t with the mouse, which
she might devour immediately, yet it pleases her to pl^y a little with it: So
they for their greater satisfaction, and contentment, delight to play out their
Scene; so strangely (notwithstanding) that such process and uncouth forms of
doing might seem to import some mystery, and deeper reach then ordinary: which
I confess is so profound and deep a folly, and mischantnesse, that I can no
wise sound it, unless it were that the Noblemans place, and his worth forced
their wicked hearts to acknowledge it notwithstanding their wickedness: And
although the acknowledging could not prevail so far, as to make them leave
off the enterprise, yet did it in some sort brangle their resolution, and wrung
out this con^ession of his worth: as all the actions of wickedness, and all
wickedness in the acting, are full of contradictions, as this same is most
clearly: for if this Nobleman was guilty of death, why is he brought into the
Kings presence? why is he set at his table? If he was not guilty, why was he
put to death? So difficult a thing it is in a lie to keep conformity, either in
a lie of actions (so to speak) or in a lie of words! In words it is difficult
so to speak that the attentive hearer shall not perceive contrariety: In
actions it is impossible that they can be dissembled. This action is a lie, for
it says he is guilty of death; but their welcomming of him, their setting of
him at the table with the King, and their feasting, says, he is an innocent,
Noble, worthy man; Indeed only truth in word and action can accord with it
self: as it is uniforme, it flows from unity, tends to it, and ends in
it, and keeps the taste of the fountain from which it comes. So they having
given this confession of his worth, and again, (by that ominous sign)
contradicted their confession, must needs be false witnesses however it go. The
young Nobleman either understanding the sign as an ordinary thing, or
astonished with it as an uncouth thing, upon the sight of the Bulls head
offering to rise, was laid hold of by their armed men in the Kings presence at
the Kings table, which should have been a Sanctuary to him. And so without
regard of King, or any duty, and without any further process, without order,
assise (or jurie) without law, no crime objected, he not being convicted at
all; a young man of that age that was not liable to the law in regard of his
youth, a Nobleman of that place, a worthy young Gentleman of such expectation,
a guest of that acceptance, one who had reposed upon their credit, who had
committed himself to them, a friend in mind, who looked for friendship, to
whom all friendship was promised; against duty, law, friendship, faith,
honesty, humanity, hospitality; against nature, against humane society,
against Gods Law, against man's law, and the law of nature, is cruelly executed,
and put to death: They, (in despite as it were) spitting in the face of all
duty and honesty, proclaiming (as far as lay in them) there was no duty to
God nor man to be regarded. And that the measure of their wickedness thus
heaped and shaken, and pressed down might also run over; all this was done (as
it should seem) without the consent, nay, against the will of their King and
Sovereign, who wept at their execution, and forbad them to meddle with his
Cousin: the shameless men chid him for weeping at the death of his enemy (as
they call him) during whose life (say they) he needed never to look for
peace, whereas they themselves were his chiefest enemies, and greatest
traitors to him, and besides him to God and nature, and to the office of
Justice which they bore; bringing a blot on the one, and the other, and
bloud-guiltinesse upon his Crown, so far as lay in them.

This is that detestable fact never enough to be extracted, which I have
labored indeed to set forth in the own simple colors, stripping it naked of
all farding (though I confess no words can equal the wickedness of it) that
men may learn to detest such things wherein may be seen what respect they have
carried either to justice, to equity, to common peace, or Commonwealth; that
thought it better to root out such a plant, then to dress and to cherish it;
to ruin such a house rather then to gain it, which they never would have done,
if their private pride and avarice had not had the greatest sway with them. I
think all honest minds should disdain to read what they gave out before of
their love to the public good, having here so terribly belied it: neither
should any man speak of it indifferently without a note of detestation;
neither extenuate it by the Earls simplicity, which seems to diminish and
lessen this execrable perfidie, and cruelty. If this were the wisdom, whereof
they had purchased an opinion and name under the former King James the first,
and if they had practiced such things as this, it has been a bitter root, and
has brought forth a very bitter fruit, and has, in all appearance been no
small part of the cause of hastening his death, and the emboldning of his
enemies unto it, as indeed I find some of our Writers inclined to say; for
such new men go commonly about to persuade Princes, that ancient Noblemen are
enemies to them, and bars to their absoluteness, which is it that these men
here mean, in saying that the Earl Douglas was an enemy to the King. Not that
he bare any ill will to the Kings person (for that they could no ways make
appear) but because he was so great a man: According to that general rule,
that greatness in the Nobility is dangerous for the Prince, and as if to be a
great man were by infallible consequence to be an enemy to the King. Which
maxim I fear they have beaten into his head afterward, not so much to
strengthen and provide for his security, as to draw him to their party for
strengthening of themselves for we see all their intentions aim but at their
own particulars; and so in this they intend nothing else; only they color
their particulars with the Pretext of the Kings service, as they do this
wicked fact also.

David Douglas the younger brother was also put to death with him, and Malcolme
Fleming of Cumbernald his special Counselor. They were all three beheaded in
the back Court of the Castle, that lies to the West. This augments yet their
wickedness, that they execute his brother also, whose age behoved to be less
then his own, who was but very young too, as we have said. These were good
Tutors and bringers up of a young Prince, thus as it were to bait him with the
blood of his Nobility, and to imprint such a lesson in his tender mind that
they were his enemies. But for conclusion of this matter, concerning these
young men, as there was no law laid against them, so is there no History that
bears witness that they were guilty of any capital crime. And Major says
expressly, Apud Annals legi, quod viri illi non crant rei mortis, sed consilio
and dolo Gulielmi Crighton, Scotiae Cancellarii haec perpetrata sunt: That is,
I read in our Annals that these men were not guilty of death, but this matter
was achieved by the counsel and fraud of Crighton Chancellor. It is sure the
people did abhor it, execrating the very place where it was done, in
detestation of the fact: of which the memory remains yet to our days in
these words.

Edinburgh Castle, Town and Tower,
God grant thou sink for sin;
And that even for the black dinner
Earl Douglas got therein.
Now since these youths were not guilty, whereof were they not guilty that put
them to death? and with what note of infamy to be branded? Though some seem
to blame this innocent young man (as they cannot deny him to have been) with
half words, as guided by flattery, given to insolency, presumptuous in his
Port, yet is there no effect, or affection brought importing either his being
addicted to flattery, or that he was more insolent, presumptuous or arrogant,
then became a man of his rank. But contrary, that he was of a gentle nature, a
repulser of flattery (now as he grew in age) and of due magnificence, such as
well became him. Let us therefore account of him so, as one that was singular
in respect of his years. And let the blame lie fully on his enemies, who shall
find some meeting hereafter from their Cousin; that they may find all the
house perished not with him, though indeed the punishment was not
proportionated to that which they deserved.

In Gulielm. and David. fratres in Arce Edinburgena trucidatos.
Vestra Sophoclco caedes est digna cothurno,
Vestra Thyestea coena cruenta magis,
Vos scelere atque dolis, vos proditione necati,
Insontes, puerique and patriae proceres:
Regius and vestro est foedatus funere vultus:
Qui fertur siccas non tenuisse genas.
Haeccine (Rectores) vestra est prudentia tanta?
Haeccine laudatur justitia? haecne fides?
Exemplum aeternis nunquam delebile fastis
Perstat fraudis atrae, perfidiaeque trucis.
In English thus,

Your murder may deserve a tragic Muse,
Your horrid dinner justly might excuse
Thyestes feast, by a more treacherous train
Drawn to the axe, more barbarously slain
Then was his son: your Princes guiltless eye
Stained with the sight, wept at the cruelty.
Is this these Rulers wisdom? this their love
To Justice? this the prudence men approve
So much? O! black example fit to be
Marked in eternal scroules of infamy.
Of James (called Gross James) the third James, sixteenth Lord, and seventh
Earl of Douglas, Lord of Bothwell, Abercorne, and Annandale, the fourth Duke
of Turraine, and Lord of Longe-ville.
UNto William succeeded his fathers brother, James Lord of Abercorne, in all
the lands that were intailed, but Beatrix, sister to the said William, fell
here to the rest that were not entailed, which were many (say our Writers)
specially Galloway, Wigton, Balvein, Ormund, Annandale. This James was called
gross James, because he was a corpulent man of body: he had to wife Beatrix
Sinclair daughter to the Earl of Orknay, but which Earl it is not expressed.
To find it, we must consider, that from 1 William Sinclair (the first that
came out of France, and married Agnes Dumbarre, daughter to Patrick first Earl
of March) 2 the next was Henry his son, who was married to Katherine daughter
to the Earl of Stratherne. 3 His son called Henry, also married Margaret
Gratenay, daughter to the Earl of Mar. 4 This Henry's son, Sir William
passed into Spain, with good Sir James Douglas, who carried the Bruces heart to
Jerusalem; he was married to Elizabeth Speire daughter to the Earl of Orknay
and Shetland, and so by her became the first Earl of Orknay of the Sinclaires.
The second Earl was 5 William also, who married Florentina daughter to the
King of Denmark, the sixth person, and third Earl was (his son) Henry who
married Giles (or Egidia) daughter to the Lord of Niddisdale. The seventh
person and fourth Earl is Sir William, who married Elizabeth Douglas daughter
to Archbald Tine-man the first Duke of Turrain) and sister to this James the
gross. Now this James his wife cannot have been this last Sir Williams
daughter, for then she should have been his own sisters daughter. And
therefore she has been either Henry's (that married Giles Douglas) or else Sir
Williams, who married Florentina; which of the two I leave it to conjecture;
her great spirit, and high ambition would seem to argue that she was come of
Kings, and near to them: but the Monument in Douglas calls her daughter to
Henry.

She bare to this Earl James seven sons, and four daughters. The name of
the eldest was William, and the second James, who were Earls of Douglas, both
of them by succession, as we shall hear. The third, was Archbald, who married
the daughter of John Dumbarre Earl of Murray, brother to George Earl of
March, by which means he got the Earldom of Murray. The fourth, named Hugh,
was made Earl of Ormond, and had sundry lands given him by the King in
Tividale and Rosse. The fifth John was made Lord of Balvenie. The sixth Henry
was Bishop of Duncalden. George, the seventh, died before he was fifteen years
of age, as our Chronicles do witness; but there is no mention of him in the
monuments at Douglas, where the rest are set down by name. As for his four
daughte^s, 1 Margaret the eldest was married to the Lord Dalkeith. 2 Beairix
the second, to John Stuart Duke of Albanie, Constable of Scotland, and Captain
of fifty men at arms in France. The third was named Jennat, and was married to
the Lord Flemine of Cumbernauld. Elizabeth (who was the fourth) died unmarried.
This Gross James his eldest son William, partly to hold up the greatness of
his house, partly by the Ladies own desire, (who directly refused to marry any
other of the name of Douglas) married Beatrix Douglas his Cousin: She was
called the fair maiden of Galloway: and so by this match the estate of Douglas
was preserved entire, and those lands which she would have been heir to, and
divided from it, were kept in their own hands. This match was made far
against the opinion of the rest of the name of Douglas, who thought it better
that she should have been married to some of the house of Angus or Dalkeith,
alleging that the house of Douglas was too great already, and that their
greatness would be the ruin of the house, which maxim although it proves
often true, that too great Dominions under Princes, as also Princes themselves
having so large extent of territories, and other republics, and
Commonwealths, when they come to that hugeness that they cannot easily be
governed, do fall, and are overthrown by their own weight: and the
conspiracies and combinations of neighboring Princes, or States (who fear,
and are jealous of their excessive greatness) or by their Subjects within,
either through the Princes jealousy (who suspects them) or others envy, who
stir jealousy in the Prince, and draw him to suspect them. And therefore
all, both Lordships and Empires, are to be restrained and kept within a
mediocritie, and that as well Princes, and Commonwealths, as subjects; which
all men will confess: but what this mediocritie is, they declare not, neither
will they confess, or do they ever think that they are come to that
fullness, that there is any danger of exceeding so far, as to procure their
overthrow, or breed any peril. It is said of Augustus Caesar that he intended
some moderation of the Empire, and had resolved to have propagate it no
further: yet it was doubted upon what ground it was that he thus resolved;
whether out of prudencie, or of envy toward his successors, that none might
go beyond him, or add any more to it then he had. And it is indeed a hard
matter to persuade men, and perhaps no less difficult to prove, for all agree
that these inferior things (even all of them) are in a perpetual flux and
motion, and that they cannot stand long at a stay, without going either forward
or backward, increasing or decreasing. If therefore they go not forward, they
must go back; if they do not increase, they must decrease: which if it be
true, it were better to seek to increase so long as men may, then to take them
to a standing, from which they must decrease, if they do not increase.

But whether out of that discourse of reason, his friends of the name of
Douglas would thus have persuaded him not to become too great, for fear of
falling, or for any particular of their own, or whether he for this other
reason, or rather for the common disposition of men to press ever forward, I
know not, but he chose to be great, and take his hazard. And because the two
parties were within the degrees prohibited by the Roman Church (Brothers
children) he sent to Rome for a dispensation, which being long in coming, and
he fearing least the King, and the rest of the name of Douglas would cast all
the impediments they could in the way to hinder the match (which was also
reported, and not without ground) caused hasten the marriage before the
dispensation came, and that in Lent too, a time forbidden also, and which is
more, on the friday before Pasch, called commonly Good Friday. This was thought
ominous, and the unhappy event confirmed this opinion. They were married in the
Church of Douglas. Some write that this marriage was procured and made by the
young man himself, after the decease of his father. However, this was a
special cause of dissension, and division amongst those of the name of Douglas.

For the actions of this gross James, we have no particulars recorded in
Histories, either in his brothers time, or his nephews time, or now when he
comes to be Earl himself. There is no mention at all made of him, whether he
did any thing for to revenge the murder of his nephews by Creighton and
Levingston: belike as he has been corpulent, so has his corpulensie caused a
dullness of spirit, as commonly it does. Some write that he was Warden of all
the Marches, and his Monument at Douglas agrees with them, and says that he
was a great justiciary. Others write that he was no ill man, that he
entertained no disordered wicked men, but yet he did not repress them sharply
enough, and therefore was suspected by the King, and disliked by many: he died
in Abercorne within two years, or not three (says the manuscript) after the
marriage of his son, which has not been long in the making. We may guess
it most probably to have been not fully three years, and so that he died in
the year 1443. He was buried in Douglas, where on his Tomb he is called (
Magnus Princeps) and amongst other Titles, Lord of Liddi^dale, and Jedward
Forest: his wife is styled Domina Aveniae, Lady of Avendale. His Epitaph there
is yet to be seen thus,

Hic jacet magnus and potens Princeps, Dominus Jacobus de Douglas, Comes de
Douglas, Dominus Annandiae, and Gallovidiae, Liddaliae, and Jedburg-Forrestiae,
and Dominus de Balvenia, magnus Wardanus Regni Scotiae versus Angliam, etc. Qui
obiit vicesimo quarto die mensis Martii, Anno Domini millesimo quadringentesimo
quadragesimo tertio. 1443.

His Wives is thus:

Hic jacet Domina Beatrix de Sinclaire, (filia Domini Henrici Comitis Orcadum,
Domini de Sinclaire,) Comitissa de Douglas, and Aveniae, Domina Gallovidiae.
His Childrens thus:

Hae sunt proles inter predictos Dominum, and Dominam generatae. 1 Dominus
aGulielmus primo genitus, and haeres praedicti Domini Jacobi, qui successit ad
totam haereditatem predictam. 2 Jacobus secundo genitus, Magister de Douglas. 3
Archibaldus tertio genitus, Comes Murray. 4 Hugo quarto genitus, comes
Ormundiae. 5 Johannes quinto genitus, Dominus Balveniae. 6 Henricus sexto
genitus. Margarita uxor Domini de Dalkeith: Beatrix uxor Domini de Aubignia.
Joneta uxor Domini de Biggar, and Cumbernauld. Elizabetha de Douglas, quarta
filia erat. In English thus,

Here lies a great and powerful Prince, Lord James Douglas, Earl of Douglas,
Lord of Annandale, and Galloway, Liddesdale and Jedbrough-Forrest, and Lord of
Balveny, great Warden of the Kingdom of Scotland toward England, etc. He
died the 24. day of March, in the year 1443. His Wives is thus,

Here lies the Lady Beatrix Sinclair, daughter of Henry Lord of the Isles, Lord
Sinclair, Countess of Douglas and Evendale, Lady Galloway. Their Children.

These are the children betwixt the said Lord and Lady: 1 Lord William his
eldest son, and hei ^e to the said Lord James, who succeeded to all the
foresaids lands. 2 James the second son, Master of Douglas. 3 Archbald, the
third son, Earl of Murray. 4 Hugh, the fourth son, Earl of Ormund. 5 John
the fifth son, Lord of Balvenie. 6 Henry, the sixth son. Margaret, wife to
the Lord of Dalkeith: Beatrix, wife to the Lord Aubignie: Jenet, wife to the
Lord of Biggar and Cumbernald: Elizabeth Douglas was the fourth daughter.
Jacobus Crassus,
Duglasii crassique mihi cognomina soli,
Convenient: O quam nomina juncta male.
James the gross.
To be a Douglas, and be gross withal,
You shall not find another amongst them all.
Of William slain in Stirling Castle, the seventh William, and eighth Earl of
Douglas, the sixteenth Lord, and fifth Duke of Turrain, etc.
UNto James succeeded his son William, a man of another metal, and
resembling more his Grandfather, and Cousin, (who was put to death in Edinburgh
Castle) then his father, who did remember, and imitate more his Cousins
diligence, then his fathers negligence, for he endeavored by all means to
entertain and augment the grandeur of the house by bonds, friendship, and
dependances; retaining, renewing, and increasing them: and therefore his
marriage of his Cousin Beatrix is attributed to him, and is thought to be his
own doing, and not his fathers. Upon his first coming to be Earl, his first
care was to establish some certain order for his affairs: for which purpose
he conveened his whole friends at Dum^reis, made choice of his Counselors,
creates his Officers for his rents and casualties, and settleth a constant
order in his house. Great was that house (as has been said) and doubtless it
was nothing diminished by him, but rather increased by the accession of his
fathers estate (which he had ere he was Earl) and his wife: which being added
unto the old Patrimony of the house, made it to surpass all others that were
but Subjects: for it had been ever growing from hand to hand, since the time
of Lord James slain in Spain, continually, who had the Lordship of Douglas
only at the first. To it was added the Lordship of Galloway by Archbald, slain
at Halidoun-hill. By Archbald the Grimme, the Lordship of Bothwell. By Archbald
the third (called Tineman) the Duchy of Turrain, and Lordship of Longe-ville.
Annandale, and the Earldom of Wigton, by Archbald the fourth: and now the
Lordship of Abercorn, by Gross James. So that his revenue has been huge at
this time, as appears also by the rank he ever carried, as second in the
Kingdom.

His dependence and following may be judged by these his Lordships, and
estate, and for his other friendship, there were diverse houses of the
Douglasses; as Angus, Morton, Drumlanrigge. By his alliance he had Aubigny, and
the Lord Fleming of Cumbernauld, who had married his sister. By his mother, the
Earl of Orknay* by his wife, at ( Beatrix) the house of Crawford, of which her
mother was a daughter, beside the old friendship that was ever betwixt them.
And this may be seen by History, who list to observe it, whereof more may be
found by a more accurate disquisition. Thus enriched, thus waited on, thus
followed, thus served, thus underpropped, and sustained by wealth, friendship,
dependence, alliance, and kindred, his power and greatness was such, as was
not matched under the Prince by any in this Kingdom.

But here is the maleheure, the Principalls of his own name (Angus and Morton)
assisted him not, but divided themselves from him; and either were not his
friends, or even became enemies, as we shall hear hereafter. What the
occasion thereof was, is not directly mentioned: some think it was the
coffeehouse they had conceived at his marriage, either because they
accounted it unlawful, or because some of them would have had her to
themselves, which is the more likely, or in respect of their kindred with the
King, who was indeed induced (though not yet) to think hardly of him; or out of
emulation of his greatness, as an hinderance to their growth, which was Bishop
Kennedies opinion to his brother, the Earl of Angus: and so it falls out
often, where a decay is to come upon a house, it first divides from, and within
it self, yet that was but an insensible point at this time, his own
greatness being such as would scarce suffer him to find the loss; standing
as it were not by any friendship, but merely of himself, and upon his bottom.

At the very first, when he entered to the Earldom, he entered also (as
hereditary) to the enmity of the two grand guiders of the time Levingston and
Creighton, with whom the hatred took beginning in his Uncles time, and was
thereafter traitorously, and cruelly prosecuted by them, on his two Cousins: it
continued, though coldly, in his fathers time, and was now quickened and revived
by himself. They would needs lay the blame of whatsoever disorder happened in
the Country upon him; not only of what fell out in the borders (where he
commanded, and might command indeed) but even in the Highlands also, that which
John Gorme of Athole did (who fought with the Lord of Ruthven, and would have
rescued a thief out of his hands (being apprehended by him as Sheriff) if he
had not been defeated, and thirty of his men slain by Ruthven) they would
have it to be thought that the Earl Douglas forsooth had an hand in it. But
it is well that our Writers say, it was but thought so* and thought it had
been said so by his enemies, there is no necessity to believe it was so, for
they had done him more wrong, and dealt more treacherously with him, then to
make such a report for me, it sounds not in my ears, that it had so long a
foot, or that John Gorme could not do such a thing without the Earl of
Douglas, or that the Earl Douglas would meddle with such a matter. This I
think, that in his own bounds he would suffer none to acknowledge the
Governors, which was his Uncles course, as we heard, seeing he was himself to
be answerable for them. It was his fathers way also (though more coldly
according to his natural disposition) as may be gathered of that which is
said, that he repressed not thieves, though he entertained them not: which is
as much as to say, as he was not Author, or occasion of their theft, yet he
being no Magistrate himself, and others having taken the government upon them,
he would let them bear the weight of their own charge in executing thereof,
and would not help them therein by restraining any. And that so much the
rather, because having murdered his Nephew, he could not with credit employ
himself to ease them of their burden by his assistance: he did them no hurt,
he could not with honor do them any good. So he lets them alone, doing to
them neither ill nor good, then which I think he could not do less. And where
just cause of enmity was, how could it be more modestly used? Except they would
have had him (after such a vilanous fact) to go creeping under their feet (as
we say) which the meanest man will not do after the smallest injury. And even
where there is no injury, unless men reap some benefit, they will suffer
others to do their own part, and not help them, where they have no interest
either as belonging to their charge, or from whence they may gather some profit.

It is true, he only could do that service, and there was no ability in them
that had the charge, but he was not obliged to supply their inability: and why
should they have taken on them? or why should the States (which I think did
not, but that it was done by faction) have laid it upon them, that were not
able to discharge it? This was not wisely done, and it is the very point of the
error in the Estates (so called) and the ground of all the inconveniences that
fell out, for they chose men that had not power to discharge the Office, and
such as had, did let them do it alone; and withal (perhaps) disdained their
preferment, as being without merit, for we see no merit in them by true
virtue: hereon arose discontents, then grudges, then crossings, then blamings,
and reproaching in words and deeds, growing at last to an open enmity. Of such
great importance is it, to make right choice of men for employments. And such
wisdom is requisite in the choosers (be it Estates, be it Princes) not to
follow affection, but to consider worth and ability rightly, and to employ
accordingly: which if it be not done, it carries with it infinite
inconveniences, and has troubled many Estates, yea, ruined them; and it must
needs be so. Happy State, happy Prince, yea, happy he whosoever, that having a
necessity to employ others (as who has not) imployeth according to reason, and
not affection, or has his affections ruled by reason! which if he do not, it
shall disgrace the imployer, breed disdain to him that is employed, and bring
contempt upon both, which will burst out with occasion, and not long be curbed,
and kept in, thought it lurk for a time.

It may be this Earl of Douglas has gone further then his father in showing
his contempt of these justice-bearers. It may be he has borne with the
Bordermen, and been more slack in repressing of them, (for his father repressed
them, though not enough) because he had intention to employ them; being more
sensible of the wrong done to his Cousins, and had a greater eye to revenge it,
and therefore was loath to control these men of service, further then the mere
necessity of his place did require at his hands, whereof the rule (in the eyes
of the people) was to save all men from that misery as far as he could: in
his own eyes, the rule which he propounded to himself, it was to protect his
friends and dependers; and for his adversaries, to rejoice perhaps at their
smart, if not to procure it: as for neutralls, to leave it to the Magistrate to
redress what is amiss, not perceiving by that mean, he does more hurt the
Country, then his enemies, and wounds his own credit more then their
reputation: and therefore* he lost more by furnishing them with some ground of
obloquie, offending the people and honest men, then he gained by the hurt of
his adversaries, or favor of broken men. Nothing is more popular, yea nothing
is more profitable then justice, (say all Writers) not to mean and private men
only, who incur the danger of law by injustice, but even to great men, even
to Princes, who if they incur not the danger of laws, being placed above the
reach thereof, yet do they lose the most profitable instrument of all their
actions, by which they must needs work, and without which they cannot, the
hearts of men: It fears me, too many think it enough to have their hands, to
have their bodies at command, but let no man think he can have their bodies,
if he have not their hearts: neither their heart, if he have it not indeed,
in a high measure of affection. Who has no measure of affection, can have no
action of the body to any purpose, and a slack affection produces but a slack
action, as it has ever proved. So that in effect, policy has that chief
object to work on the affections of men, and that not to deceive, or force
them (for neither of these can work well and long.) Neither is it sufficient
that a man see not a present evil, as a Prince a present insurrection, a great
man a present loss of his followers, and favorers (which falls out
sometime, but not always.) Oftentimes it is like a canker, working by
peece-meale, insensibly, from degree to degree upon the affections, til it has
consummated the work of disgrace of the party it seazeth on, and winded their
favors out of the hearts of men. As commonly men's actions that procure it are
of the same sort, not all in an instant, or at one time, but one ungratious
fact comes after another, and another again upon the neck of that, and so
forth. This therefore is so much the more diligently to be taken heed of, and
eschewed in the beginning; or if any error escape, to be taken up and
recompensed by amendment, or some other grateful action importing as much
favor, as the error did disdain: neither must the affections of men be
suffered to cool, languish, and to be eaten up at unawares, till at last they
utterly decay and perish.

Thus (we may see here) he has not been well advertised by those of his house
of Douglas, which before were the most esteemed, the best beloved, and favored
universally almost by the whole Country. But now, while as they would trouble
the Governors, and let their inability b^ seen, and for that end either bear
with thieves, or suffer them, they are not aware, that by this mean they suffer
an ill opinion of themselves to creep into men's minds, and that love of the
people to diminish by peecemeal, for the space now of three or four men's
lives. And whereas they were wont with their heritage to succeed to a general
favor of the people, now on the contrary, they succeed to a grudge, and ill
opinion, and so an universal dislike, which at last has done away all that
wonted love, and turned it into hatred; which did greatly advance and further
the plots of their enemies against them, and made that their greatness odious,
that was accustomed to be favored. It is very true, that the men against whom
he set himself, had used no good means, abused there Offices, abused their
Country, and the name of the King, and Commonwealth for their own
particular; yet he should not have used ill means, no not against ill men; and
the bare name of authority is of weight in the eyes of men, as the name of
theft odious; from any countenancing whereof, Noblemen should be far, as also
from seeming to rise against any manner of Authority, though Authority be* put
even in mean men's hands, as these were* chiefly when the opposers of Authority
can make no other end appear, but their own private, and that blotted with the
enormities of broken men: yet what shall be given to a just anger? what unto
the time? what unto youth? all these plead pardon, if not approbation; The
rather for that he takes up himself from that sort of doing, so soon as he
can get a right King, to whom he might have access, and to whom he might yield
with honor which was ere long.

The next year, 1444. the King takes the government on himself directly.
Thither immediately the Earl Douglas concludes to address himself, and by
all good means to obtain his favor; to satisfy the people, to satisfy all
men that were offended, and fully to change that course he had before followed.
Certainly repentance is worth misdeed: and it may be seen, that the force of
enmity has driven him into these faults, which as soon as he can, he lays
aside. So coming with a great company to Stirlin, he deals with the King by
the intercession of such as were about him; and finding that he was appeased,
goes on, and puts himself and his estate in his Princes will, partly purging
himself of the crimes past, partly confessing them ingeniously; and telling
him, that what ever estate he should have from that time forth, he would owe
it to the Kings clemency, and not ascribe it to his own innocence: That if the
King would be contented to be satisfied by good Offices, he would endeavor
not to be short of any in fidelity, observance, diligence, and good will
toward him: That in repressing and punishing of thieves (whose actions his
enemies laid upon him) there should no man be more severe, nor more careful:
That he was come of a house that was grown up, not by doing injuries to the
weaker, but by defending the weaker and common people of Scotland by arms.
Certainly a true conclusion, and undeniable by his greatest enemies. But I have
thought good to set down all as it was conceived: for whether there was any
fault or not, his submission was great, and his repentance sufficient to purge
it whatsoever it were. Such is his respect to his sovereign Prince; and such
the force of authority rightly placed in the due owner thereof. And such was
also the force of truth in his speech, that the King, understanding that it was
true in his predecessor, and hoping it would be true in himself, moved also
by the private commendation of his Courtiers, not only passed by, and forgave
what ever had been amiss in his life before, but also received him into his
most inward familiarity, and did communicate unto him the secrets of his
counsel: Neither was the Earl unworthy thereof for his part, but behaved
himself so well, that within a short time he acquired the favor of the King
by obedience; of his Courtiers, and servants, by liberality, and of all men by
gentleness, courtesy, and modesty, and put the people in hope that he would
prove a meek and sober-minded man.

The wiser sort doubted (say our Writers) whither so sudden a change would
turn. But why should we think it a change? or if it were a change, it was
very casual, very apparent, and nothing to be wondered at: for it is this in
effect: he had been untoward to base men, why should he not yield to his King?
he had slighted the shadow of authority in them, why should he not acknowledge
and reverence the beams of it in his Prince? he had been froward to his
enemies, why not gentle to his friends? he had sought to make them smart that
wronged him, why not cherish those that did him good offices? he had warred on
them, that had warred against him: why should he not keep friendship with
those who kept friendship with him? certainly, these are not changes, neither
of nature, nor of manners, but are commonly (we fee) in one and the same
nature, and proceed from one and the same cause, which is greatness of
courage, and regard of due honor. The greater despiser of baseness, the
greater reverence of true greatness, the greater repiner against compulsion:
the gentler and calmer being used courteously: the harder enemy, the
faithfuller and sweeter friend: so that we may suspect these men's wisdom,
that did so far mistake his true courage, and accounted that a change, which
was but a continuation of his inbred disposition.

Two men are designed to have taken fray at the matter, whose consciences were
guilty of what they had deserved: Alexander Levingston, and William Creighton,
not for the change of his manners, but for the change of his credit. They had
traitorously slain three innocent Noblemen, his two Cousins, and Malcolme
Fleming. They had kept himself back from his Prince, and his Prince from him,
and were sorry that ever they should have met in a friendly sort. They would
have been glad to have blown the bellows of dissension, to have irritated the
one, and misinformed the other, made their own quarrel the Kings, and so have
caused the King and Country to esteem of it. They were now disappointed of
that, and the Earl had access to inform the King of their misdemeanour in
their Office, and to move him to call them in question for it. They knew he
would remember the wrong done to his Cousins: they knew how unable they were to
answer for many of their facts, and therefore they retire themselves from
Court: Levingston to his own house Creighton to the Castle of Edinburgh which
he had still in his keeping. Neither was the Earl Douglas negligent in this
oecasion, that was thus offered to seek justice by law and by justice, to be
avenged of his enemies for the wrong done by them against law. Wherefore he
diligently informed the King from point to point, of their misbehaviour in
their Office: how they had abused him, abused his rents to their own private
use, and moved him to call them to an account thereof, whereupon being summoned
to a certain day, they durst not compeir; but to set a fair face on the
matter, they answered by Procuratours, or by letters: That they were ready to
give an account of their government, that they had been very careful of the
King and Country, desired nothing so much as to give an account thereof before
equal Judges. But for the present, when the minds of men were preoccupied with
the favor of their enemies, and all access closed with armed men, the King
behoved to pardon, that they did eschew not to come to judgment, but to come in
the danger of their deadly enemies, and keep their lives for better times: when
the Captain of thieves, being removed from the Kings side (which they had of
times done before) they would approve their innocence to the King and all
honest men.

These reproaches, and brags touched, and were meant of the Earl Douglas. Him
it was they called Captain of thieves, because of the border men, of whom many
were his followers. That they removed him often before was idle boasting: for
he had abstained to come to the King, so long as the King was in their custody,
so long as he was in the Castle of Edinburgh, where they might have murdered
him, as they did his Cousins: That he was their enemy, he denied not, and had
just cause so to be: but to take that excuse from them, he gave them assurance
he should not proceed against them any ways, but by order of law; and offered
for that purpose to go from Court, till they should come to it in safety. And
to meet their reproach (of captain of thieves) and their boasting of the just
administration of their Offices, he was ready to prove that they themselves
were thieves, that they had stolen the Kings revenues, and distributed to
their friends, and converted them to their own particular use, and that they
had traitorously against justice murdered his Cousins, whereof he besought the
King to grant him justice; and so a new charge was given out, and another day
appointed for them to compeir. Which being come, and they not compeiring, they
were denounced rebels, in a Convention kept at Stirlin the fourth of November,
and their goods and movables confiscated.

Thereafter John Forrester of Corstorphin (a depender of the Earl Douglas) is
sent with a power of men, to intromet with their goods; who having received
their houses, some he razed, some he manned with new forces, and provision: and
so without resistance he returned, laden with great spoil. He was scarce
retired, when Creighton assembled his friends and followers so suddenly as none
could imagine, furrowed the lands of Corstorphin, together with the lands of
Strabrock, Abercorn, and Black-nesse, and amongst other goods, he drove away a
race of mares, that the Earl Douglas had brought from Flanders, and were kept
in Abercorn, doing more harm then he had received. This may seem strange to
any man; neither do our Histories sufficiently clear it, either where he got
these forces, or whither he carried the goods. They insinuate, that he was
aided and assisted underhand by Bishop Kennedie, and the Earl of Angus and
Morton. Angus was the Kings Cousin germain, son to his fathers sister, and by
her, brother to the Bishop: Morton had married the Kings own sister. But of
these, the Bishops power lay beyond Forth; (for he was Archbishop of Saint
Andrews) and the Earl of Angus further (beyond Tay): so it is hard to
conceive, either how they could suddenly assemble to their folks, or that they
could conveene many (except such as Angus had on the South side of Forth in
Liddisdale, Jedward Forest, and Bonkle; likewise Mortons lands and friends
were (most part) on the same side of Forth) to make assistance against the
Earl Douglas. But how ever apparently, they did it not openly; and this, it
was against order, against authority, and against Law: and if the Earl Douglas
had done it, it would assuredly have been called an open Rebellion against the
King, theft, oppression, presumption, arrogancy, insolency, and faction, as
we heard it was before, when he contemned the Governors only, and as it will
be called (perhaps) hereafter. If men allege, that the King was guided with
the Earl Douglas counsel, and his name used to a particular only: tell me (I
pray you) was there ever any thing more formally than this against Creighton?
And if the Earl Douglas his particular was in it, what then? how many actions
of justice are otherwise done without instigations of private men? without the
mixture of their cause? without their particular suiting? and particular
insisting? and if it be lawful to any to seek justice for his own particular,
the Earl Douglas his particular was such, as very well became him to insist in
the wrong so manifest, the murder so vile and traitorous. And if that which is
done against the laws shall not be accounted wrong, nor esteemed to touch the
King, because parties have their particular in that law, none or few things
shall be accounted to be done against the king, or against law; for there is
almost ever some particular joined: and the same has been and will be the Earl
Douglas his case. This therefore cannot be accounted innocence; yea no less
then open violence, and plain rebellion, and presumption against the Earl,
clad now with justice and laws, and against the king as protector, and Patron
of justice. No marvel then if the Earl Douglas was offended herewith, both
for his own cause, whom the loss touched so near, and for such manifest
contempt of the King, and if therefore he seek to be avenged thereof.

But there was a different form to be used, according to the different
actours; of which we se^ there are two sorts, Creighton and Levingston were
open enemies, open actours; they themselves obnoxious to the law; against them
the law will strike, and so he proceeded with them: he besieges openly
Creighton in the Castle of Edinburgh, and no question he had taken from him
before whatsoever was without it. The others, not open enemies, and actours
themselves, they were but secret stirrers up, abetters, and assisters of his
enemies; and among them Bishop Kennedie was the chief plotter and deviser; the
law could not well be had against him; he must be met with in his own way, he
had done besides the law, he must be met with besides the law: he had done
disadvowedly, he must be met with disadvowedly. Therefore he writes to the
Earl of Crawford, who with Alexander Oglebee of Innerwharitie gathered a great
host, entered, life, and without resistance spoiled the Bishops lands, either
because they could not get himself, or because they had a greater mind to the
booty, then to the quarrel. The Bishop using his own weapons, curses them;
but they made small reckoning of his curses. Nevertheless shortly after there
fell variance between Crawfords eldest son (the master of Crawford) and the
Oglebees about the Bailliarie of Arbroth: for the Monks had given it from the
Master to Innerwharitie, and hereupon having assembled their forces on both
sides, they were ready to fight it out. But the Earl of Crawford (having
gotten advertisement) came into the field to have composed the business, and
trusted they would have respected him, and not have offered him any violence,
he entered in between the two parties; where having stayed his sons company;
he was going over to speak with the Oglebees to have brought matters to a
parlee, and treaty. In the mean time one that neither knew what he was, nor
what his intent was, runs at him with a spear and slayes him: hereupon the
battles joining the victory fell to the Master of Crawford, there being 500.
slain of the Oglebees side, Alexander Oglebee taken, and the Earl of Huntly
escaping on horsback. This victory was obtained chiefly by the valor of the
Cliddisdale men, of whom the Earl Douglas had sent about 100 to assist the
Master of Crawford. This Master of Crawford was now Earl (his father being
slain) and was called Earl Beardie, of whom there will be mention made
hereafter, he being that Earl with whom Douglas is said to have entered into
league; though we see there was friendship betwixt them now, the Earls Lady
Beatrix being a sister daughter of the house of Crawford, besides the old
friendship that had been (ever since the first Earls time) betwixt the two
houses.

In the mean time the siege of the Castle of Edinburgh (where Creighton was
shut up) had now continued some six or seven months, from the midst of July
(as appears) unto the beginning of February in the next year: for there being
a Parliament called, to be held at Perth, it was removed to Edinburgh, that the
siege might not be interrupted, and sat down in the beginning of February
1445. The siege lasted two or three months after, which makes in all some nine
months, or thereby: at last both parties (the besieger and the besieged) being
wearied, the Castle was surrendered to the King, on condition that Creighton
should be pardoned for all his offenses which he had committed against the
King, and should be suffered to depart life safe, which was granted unto him:
Our Writers term them the offenses which he was said to have committed against
the King: As if they should say, There was no offense indeed done to the King:
And more plainly a little after, as in all contention, he who is most strong
would seem to be most innocent: which sayings are to be judiciously considered,
and accurately weighed, whereof we have spoken before: But if they will needs
have it so, we will not be contentious. Thus Creighton, not so much hurt, as
terrified, escaped due punishment by means of the Castle, which could not
easily be taken, but by composition. Whether this was through the impatience of
the Earl Douglas, that would not take leisure to wait on the siege, until
they should have been forced to yield for want of victuals; Or whether
Creighton has had some (...) friends at Court, who did make use of this
occasion to work his safety, there is no mention. But Levingstone leapt not so
dry-shod, being no less guilty of his Cousins murder. The Earl had bent his
just indignation against him also, and caused summon him to the Parliament of
Edinburgh, together with his sons, James and Robert Levingstons (this Robert
had been Thesaurer) and David Levingston his Cousin: His friends also, Robert
Bruce of Arth, with James and Robert Dundasses. The Lord Levingston himself,
with the two Dundasses, were convict, forfeited, and condemned to perpetual
prison in the Castle of Dumbarton. The other three, James, and Robert his sons,
and David his Cousin, and Bruce also, were execute: What the crimes were that
were laid to their charge, whereof this difference of punishment did arise, it
is not written, either by the old or late Historians. This appears, that it
has been no particular of the Earl Douglas (of which the father was most
guilty) and that their Process has not been guided and ruled by him, nor
framed according to his spleen, which would have aimed most at the old man, as
accessory to the death of his Cousins, whereas we see he escapes with
imprisonment only: His sons are hardlier used, being put to death: So that it
must needs have been for some other crime, whereof the acts of Parliament that
are extant in print makes no mention, or particular relation, as the form is;
and James Levingston in his speech at his death purges himself, as free of all
true crime, what by being innocent of some, and having obtained a remission of
others; yet he mentions not what was alleged against him; wherefore we must
leave it as uncertain. Some conjecture, that it was for keeping of some
castles, and strong houses, and not rendering them to the King being summoned,
against an act of Parliament made by Creighton before, by which act Creighton
also himself was forfeited afterward; but we know no ground for that opinion.
They alleged also another act (which only is extant) the other not being
extant (and may seem to sound something that way) made in the second
Parliament, in the year 1488. against the re-setting of rebels in castles;
which imports no keeping of houses after they be charged, or summonedto render
by the Kings officers; but only commands to arrest their persons, or to take
surety, and bail for them that they do no harm: Neither is there any penalty
(much less forfeiture) annexed thereto; only it says, they shall be forced
and constrained to do it. This execution of the Levingstons is cast into the
year 1447. (after that Queen Marie, the Duke of Ghelders Daughter was married
to the king) at which time it is said, that Creighton was also forfeited,
notwithstanding he had been Ambassador in procuring and making that marriage.
The cause of his forfeiture is given out to be the keeping of the castle of
Creighton when it was summoned and charged by an Herald of arms, according
to, and by virtue of the same act forsaid: But we have already spoken of that
act, and we find no mentionof any Parliament that year. Neither from the year
1443. until the year 1449. wherein he should have been forfeited. And this we
observe, that judgment may be adhibited in the reading of those, and such like
things, however Creightou thus dashed, the Levingstons some executed, some
imprisoned, forfeited, and condemned, there seemed to be some compensation of
the murder of his Cosins, also their assister Bishop Kennedie received his
part, so it is said that he had much ado to save himself, by leaving h^s goods
a prey to them that pleased to take them.

These things are imputed to the Earl Douglas as faults: why I cannot tell,
unless we require of him that exact philosophical disposition, to be free
from all humor of revenging, which few have brought with them that have been
conversant in the affairs of State, or common wealth. No not these who have
been accounted as Philosophers, and that very precise ones, such were both the
Cato^s, whose common ordinary course was to be avenged of their enemies by
public accusations, and pursuit of law: wherein if there be a fault, let there
be no law, that permitts it, yea that allows it, and exhorts unto it; it is
recorded of Cato called Censorius, that having met a young man in the street,
who had accused his fathers enemy, and gotten him condemned, he cherished him
and embraced him, saying, It was far better so to celebrate the funeral of
his father with the tears and condemnation of his adversaries, than to
sacrifice with kids and Lambs. It is natural to men to resent injuries, and
as natural to seek the repairing of them; and he is excused who recompenses a
wrong received; and he is accounted also just who does it byorder and modesty,
that has patience to suit it, and abide the delays of a Court-sute, it being
a mean to purge blood out of the land. Neither does either Philosophy, or
Religion forbid it but; by the contrary, commands and allows it. Only the
caution is, that the mind of the pursuer be void of malice, and his eye set
upon justice: of which intention the searcher of hearts can only be the
competent judge. If some Imperfections, and weakness of nature do mingle with
the action; we must not always for that either utterly reject the action, or
condemn the author. But we must acknowledge that as right, which is right,
and pardon the imperfection, which none wantes. We must not exclaim against it
as if it were nothing but partiality: Nor against the doer, as merely
vindictive, cheifely in a fact so very enormous, as the murdering of his
Cosins was, wherefore if we shall without partiality in our selves consider
this whole pursuit, and give it the right name, we shall call it kindness to
his kinsmen: equity, justice, modesty, and patience, rather than wrong and
malice: and praise him for his kindness, and faithfulness in friendship in
revenging their quarrels, which has been his very inclination, as will
appear hereafter yet not only this his just pursuit, but every thing that
fell out in the country is laid upon him to brand him: as the slaughter of
James Stuart by the Boydes, and the like: the taking of the castle of Hales by
Patrick Dumbarre, which he is said to have taken, and killed the keeper
thereof: because the Lord Hales had then received the Queen mother into the
castle of Dumbarre: who had fled hither to eschew the troubles of the times.
The Earl Douglas within a few days after got the castle of Hales again, on
condition to suffer the said Patrick Dumbar and his men to depart with their
lives safe. Likewise he is said to have constrained Sir James Stuart (the
black knight of Lorne) who had married the Queen mother, to go out of the
country, upon some speeches uttered by the said Sir James against the ill
government of the affairs of the kingdom: But neither is it set down what the
words were, neither what sort of constraint was used toward him. This Sir
James as he was sailing into France, his ship was taken by the Flemings, and he
himself died soon after.

The next year (which was 1448) there fell out war with England, and
incursions made on both sides by the Borderers: where the Earl Douglas began
again after so long an intermission (to wit from the entry of King James the
first in the year 1423. the space of twenty five years) to take upon him the
managing of the war, which his house had ever done, and he now also
discharging with honor, and following the footsteps of his predecessors, for
Dumfreis being burnt by the Earl of Shreusburie (or Salisburie) Dumbar spoiled
by the Earl of Northumberland, James Douglas (the Earls brother) burnt Anwick
in England, where having gotten great store of booty, and many prisoners, as
the others had done in Scotland, being almost equal, the and prisoners goods,
and were changed byconsent and agreement of the captains. But this was onlya
small assay before a greater matter, which followed this same year, as should
seem, yet there was some cessation for a while, and truce taken for seven
years. In which time the Earl who (as we see) was so zealous in prosecuting
the revenge of the wrong done to his Cosins, shows another property no less
commendable, which is to be as kind and forward to advance his friends as he
had been to quell his enemies.

For the same year James Dumbar (Hollinshed calls him John) Earl of Murray
being dead, first he obtaines the foresaid Earls daughter (who was Niece to
King Robert the second by his daughter) for his third Brother Archbald; then
the title of Earl of Murray from the King; notwithstanding that she whom his
brother had married was but the youngest sister, the elder being married before
her fathers death unto James Creighton, of whom the house of Fenderet is
descended; how it came that he was preferred before (...), who married the
elder sister; whether because the titles of Earls do not go by succession unto
the heirs of Line, but by the pleasure of the Prince, and that he had more
court then Creighton, or whether there was some respect also had to the kindred,
or what ever cause there were of it, it gave matter of speech to his enviers,
and to our histories it has furnished matter of Censure, as a wrong done to
the elder sister, to whom they think it belonged: he obtained also his fourth
brother Hugh to be made Earl of Ormond; and his fifth brother John to be Lord
of Balvenie, and Baron thereof, with many rich, and fruitful lands. In which
actions of his, when men can find no ground of alleging that he did any
wrong, they blame him as immoderate in augmenting too much the greatness of
his house.

Wherein I cannot but praise his kindness and carfulness, in preferring of
his friends by all lawful means, which is a duty stands with wisdom, and a
right wisdom: neither was it ever, or can it be ever justly discommended, where
there is no injury committed. Whereas, not to do it (if a man be able) and not
to seem to do so, proceeds either of carelesnes, or that which is worse,
wickedness, self love, and in some, envifulnesse, and malignity, even to
their own friends. Which kind of doing, deserves no commendation, when it is
but carelessness, far less when it is done of malice: last of all, when men
do not only not labor to advance their friends, but even endeavor to keep
them under, by a point of wisdom which they think very deep, that they may
remain servants to them; fearing that if they come to any preferment, they
would not be so ready to serve them, and might perhaps grow up above them. This
humor, as it is malignant, and an ill disposition, so it is no great good
wisdom, whatsoever subtilty it may seem to have in it* for they advert not,
that they hinder them, who would stand them in stead, and cut them short in
power to be steadable to them, and so cut down the props of their own
standing, and such as would support them in their need and necessity. And while
they fear that their friends outstrip them, they give place and matter to
their enemies to overtop them both. Now the fear which they apprehend of their
friends neglecting their duty to them, is very far off, and if ever it come
to pass, it should not be envied, providing that kindness remain among them,
though they should grow greater then they; and howbeit they answered not our
expectation in kindness (except it were joined with extremity of wickedness,
and perhaps not then neither) ought we to repent, or repine? it being much more
tolerable then to be overmatched by an enemy, as it often falls out, and can
hardly choose but fall out, when a house stands alone by it self, having no
honest member thereof to underprop and uphold it. Besides, while men thus seek
to make their friends altogether servile to them, their friends perceiving it
(as it can hardly but be perceived, what ever cunning be used to cover it)
are the lother to serve; as men's nature is, in whom love-service
(questionless) is the best: yea, only fruitful service. And therefore they
will either repine the more, or withdraw themselves altogether, if they be of
any spirit; and if they be not, their service is not worth having. So that men
lose even their service (which they so effect) and sometimes turn it by
unkindnesse, into unkindlinesse and enmity, which has ever been found by
experience: neither did ever any house flourish so well, or any man in any
house, as when they concurred with one mind to a mutual help one of another:
and none ever prospered so well as he, who used and showed his care (not to
keep back his friends, or to neglect them) but to advance them, and take
their business to heart as his own.

This is a true pattern of kindness, and no less of true wisdom, howsoever
men may subtillize as they please, which is seriously, and sincerely followed
by our Earl Douglas, and deserves both commendation and imitation. Neither
will it be found that this is it which did him hurt, but (questionless) made
him strong, and not easy to be meddled with, and so difficult that they could
get no other mean to overthrow him, but that which they used, unto which they
were forced, and of which, constraint is the only excuse, as we shall see
where he is slain. Therefore, to say his greatness was the cause of his
wrack, is more subtle, then solid; even as it may be said (in some sort) that a
man's riches are the cause of his throat being cut by robbers, and that a man's
virtues and good qualities are often times the cause of his overthrow, which
should not (for all that) be eschewed. But shall there then be no moderation!
(will some say) and is it not fit, that Subjects should keep themselves within
some cert^in bounds, that are not envious, or suspect to Princes? Moderation is
good both in Prince and Subject, and it were to be wished that all would
moderate their greatness, at least their appetite and desire o^ greatness: or
if not that, yet so that they would limit the means of attaining it, and the
end for which they desire it; and that they would have that wise conference of
Cyneas with Pyr^hus before their eyes, that they might less affect it, or
less err in affecting of it: But where the end is good, and the mean right
and lawful, who craves further moderation, and limitation, whether in Princes,
or Subjects, of their Empire (as Augustus) or of their greatness (as this
Earl here and many others) whatsoever show it carry, and however Histories
speak thereof, (besides their moderation that duty and religion requires) in
so far as touches Policy, will be found but Sophistry, and no good Policy,
when it is well examined. In all this therefore we can acknowledge no fault;
but on the contrary, kindness, effectual freindship, and a due and provident
wisdom in strengthening himself against his enemies, and underpropping his
house most wisely, and most circumspectly.

Where is then his fault? ye will say, and what was the cause of his ruin? for
we find he did ruin in the end. Truly we must not account of all that have
fallen, that they have faulted, that is a great error in our judgments, and
too common, that by finding faults in others, we may be thought the wisest: yet
it is not hard to find his fault if we will believe his enemies speeches set
down by our Historians; for though his friends fear nothing, and see nothing
but his greatness (which is but a vain fear) his enemies see further (as
enemies are quicker sighted) in faults, or would seem to espy further: in
their speech ye shall find these gross and lewd faults. 1. An unsatiable
cupidity (and then they explain in what) in avarice: 2. Then an impotent
Tyranny, two great faults (Tyranny and Avarice) sufficient to bring down, and
such as often brought down Kings let be Subjects. And that we may not think that
there was but an idle disposition in him, and but a natural inclination, which
he bridled, and suffered not to debord, they tell us the effects of them. Of
his 1. avarice (and that unjust, as all avarice is, if it be properly avarice)
He seized on Noblemens Patrimonies, he himself by law, and without law: 2. Of
his tyranny and oppression, He gave the Patrimony of mean men as a prey to his
dependers; and yet further, Them that withstood his pleasure, he harried or
caused make them away by thieves and briggands: he advanced new men to the
highest honors, placing them in the rooms of ancient Families. If any man
spoke a free word, tasting of liberty it cost him no less then his life: These
faults indeed are great ones, if they were true, and such as merited that their
end should have been as it was: These are indeed errors both in policy and
humanity, in private men or in Princes, in small or great, in what ever
person; and they were worthy to be detested, and abhominated by all men, if
they were true, for our Authors say not that they were true. I say again, if
they were true expressly; for they do but report them as the voice of his
enemies, who did exaggerate things as enviously as they could (as that amongst
other speeches of theirs) does witness, where they say, That all the riches of
the Country were heaped upon one Family: that there were so many great Earls
and Barons of them, that they had so much power and potencie, that the King
reigned but by their license, and courtesy as it were. As for the Authors
own judgment hereof, (besides what he said before, that they were amplyfied
in the most odious manner) he subjoynes these, and such like speeches as
those, Many of them were true many besides the truth, and augmented above it,
to procure hatred unto them. So he leaves the judgment uncertain, and tells
not what things were true, and what false and augmented, which we ought to
discern and separate (if it be possible) to make a right judgment: for this
is indeed the craft of Calumny, to mingle truth with falsehood, that something
being known to be true, the rest may pass for such also. But Prudencie will
sift, and separate them, and winnow them in a right judgment, both that which
is true, from that which is false, and in every point laid against him so much
as it has of truth, from that falsehood is mingled with it for Calumniators
are excellent in their mixtures, and compositions of truth and falsehood, so
that there is great attentiveness required to distinguish betwixt them, yet if
we will attend to them, it may be they be discerned. Let us then consider the
particulars, and what particulars we find in any of those to be true, let us
acknowledge it; what is not so, let us reject as false, and reckon amongst
those that are but amplified, and augmented for envy: After which rule we
shall find in effect the last three to be those which are most true. 1. The
riches: 2. The number: 3. The puissance of the house and name of Douglas. And
yet not simple true as they set them down, for they amplify them also to
stir envy, unless we interpret it favorably: for not all the riches of the
Country, nor all the honor was in their hands, though there were more in
theirs, then in any others at that time: yet there has been more (both riches
and honors) in the hands of some other before; for the Cummines are accounted
to have been greater, and that their power was beyond the Kings power: it was
false, their power being but a dependant, and subordinate, and could not be
supposed to have been so great, so united (though they were of one name) as was
seen afterward. And however we find it was thought so of before in the first
Earls time, yet he never used it to the Kings prejudice after that he was
informed of his right, which was now out of question: but these carry no fault
in them. The rest which carry fault in them, the first two (avarice and
tyranny) are to be tried by the effects: the third (taking to himself the
Noblemens Patrimony) by law and besides law: what he did by law take from them,
was not theirs; what besides law we hear of no instance given: There is a fact
may seem so in the Earldom of Murray, which he took not to himself, but to
his brother. Neither was that the Patrimony, but the Title and Dignity, of
which we have spoken already, and it was but a small piece of matter. The
fourth and fifth (his killing and robbing by thieves, and his dependers
invading of other men's Patrimonies) are of the same quality, for we hear of no
instance bearing any wrong, Neither of the sixth, and seventh, advancing of new
men wrongfully, or killing of men for free speeches. And truly raising of new
men, and mean men was the thing that he and all his house did ever dislike very
much, and was the ground of their discord, with the Levingstons and with
Creighton. And I hope no man will call his brother a new man. So that to be
short, when we have sifted them all, we see nothing but falsehood, and
calumnies, and aggravations to move envy, which makes it no truth: for a truth
augmented or diminished, is no longer truth, though otherwise it were true in
substance.

Wherefore leaving these speeches as the speeches of his enemies, that is to
say, for Calumnies (as they are called, and as they are indeed) we will come
to that which is of greater weight, and follows in the Authors own name,
Animus per se insolens, he was of an insolent mind of himself says one,
which being the judgment of one of the most learned and judicious Writers, I
will not contest, but leave it in the middle, and soberly crave to have it
weighed, that we may see whether there be any necessity to make us think so
or not, for it is Historical only, which I must think he has found in fact
as he has had leisure, and perused his Histories, of which we are scarce; to
wit, that he grew by success to that impotency of commanding his affections,
that he had his ears closed from the free admonitions of his friends. Nothing
is more pernicious, nor is there a more certain prognostic of ruin to follow,
then when men are so puffed up with the opinion of their own wisdom, that they
disdain and contemn to hear, and to weigh the judgment of others. Yet this
that follows is an extreme high degree of it, that men might not dissemble
their minds in silence, to hold their peace at those things which they could
not approve, was not sure nor safe for them, which ought to be safe for all
men, to say nothing, and keep their minds to themselves and God; which no other
man, no not a man's self can command altogether. He is obedient that obeyes in
the rest: The mind is his that made it, and can search it, over which no man
should usurp. The cause of all this ill follows; the abundance of flatterers,
and giving ear to them: a natural, but a pestiferous fault, natural to all
great men, and small in their own kind: men are given to delight in what they
believe, and to believe easily most good of themselves, whom they love most of
any, and for abundance of flatterers, who wants them? Diogenes said he had his
own Parasites, the mouse was if men failed! yea, men never fail, and perhaps
failed not him; he whom all the world flattered. King Alexander, did he not
flatter Diogenes? what was his speech to him but a flattery both of himself and
Diogenes? or else anerrour concerning them both, when he said, If I were not
Alexander, I would be Diogenes. So common is it, so natural is it, but
notwithstanding, it is hurtful, and to be avoided, and the more carefully to
be taken heed of, the more common and the more natural it is: he has the
fairest of the play, that is most wary of it, and accounts it his greatest
perfection, to know his imperfection; and he is most accomplished that best
knows his defects, and wishes for helps, and knows he has need of them. Out
of doubt these were enough to bring down more then one Earl of Douglas; as for
that which is further said of him. His old enemies were drawn to law to plead
their cause before the same man, both judge and party, of whom many were
spoiled of their goods, some of their lives; some to eschew the injust
judgment, took voluntary exile unto them; and that which is said of their
dependers, they overshot themselves, careless of all judgments (because none
could contend with them in judgment) To all sort of licentiousness, robbing,
and stealing holy things, profane things, and slaying them they could get their
hands over: neither kept they any bridle (or measure) in their wickedness.
Of all this concerning his dependers, being so generally and almost
hyperbolically conceived: I could wish among so many, that there had been some
instance set down, that we might the better have known it, and discerned it.
This (I am sure) cannot be without hyperbole: that they did commit some gratuit
wickedness (that is, such as was for no good to them nor profit) and without
gain, pleasure or profit, having no cause in the world for them, but only to
keep their hands in ure of wickedness, lest being disaccustomed from ill, some
honest thought might come into their mind, that might tame them from their
wickedness and vileness. So strange a conclusion would have had clear and
plain antecedents, and not a few of those. It is hard to believe this upon any
man's word, chiefly such a one as lived not in those times, nor was an
eyewitness (as we say) of things, who by such speeches would have us to
conceive more then he could, or by any could be expressed in words. But what
one man could only gather out of Histories, we might also ^ve gathered by the
same History, if he had named his Authors, or shown the way of his collecting
of it from thence. But there being no footsteps of such enormities in the
Histories which we have, that can lead us to this, I know not if we be bound so
to reverence any man's person, as to receive it absolutely. That which follows,
is of the same kind, wherein the evils of those times are amplified, That it
fell out well for Scotland that England had their own civil wars in those
days, otherwise Scotland had sunk under the burden. For first their civil
wars from this time (which was from 1444. until 1448.) were not great, and
but secret grudgings only. The commotion of Blue-beard was not until 1449.
and in Kent by John Cade in 1450. Then the foreign wars with England might
have moved the discord at home, as they have done often, and men fit for
warlike employment, and given to arms, should have had matter to exercise
themselves upon the common enemy, who in time of peace, for want of such
employment as they are inclined to, are the cause of much evil at home. Last
of all, we find the contrary by experience: for notwithstanding of these
dissentions and disorders, yet they obtained a notable victory of the English
by the same Douglasses who are accounted so disorderly in time of peace, but
have ever proved in the eyes of all men honorable, and dutiful in war,
their enemies not being able to detract from their manifest and evident worth.

The occasion of this victory fell out thus. We heard how after the burning
of Anwicke by James Douglas, younger brother to the Earl, a Truce was taken
for seven years: notwithstanding of which, in this year (as would seem) or
in the next at farthest, the English (without any regard of the Truce) made
inroades upon Scotland, spoiled, forrowed, and burnt the Villages far and
wide where they went, which the Scots would not suffer to pass unrevenged.
Wherefore to cry quit with them, they entered England, and returned unto them as
much hurt as they had received; and the storm fell chiefly upon Cumberland,
from whence the beginning of the troubles had arisen, which was by this
incursion almost redacted to a wilderness. When news hereof were brought to
London, they gave order for levying of an Army of 40000. men (as some write)
intending to bring Scotland under their subjection, which they thought would
not be hard to do, in respect the Country had been so lately wasted and
impoverished, as also ^or that they knew their divisions at home. Therefore
having made a levy of the best and choice soldiers, the Earl of
Northumberland is made General, and there was joined with him a certain man
called Magnus (only a Gentleman borne) who had given good proof of his valor
many times in France, where he had been brought up, and trained in the wars
from his youth. This man bearing great hatred to the Scots, and being too
confident of his own sufficiency, is said to have obtained of the King of
England, for the reward of his service, whatever lands he could win from
them, for himself and his heirs in perpetual inheritance. He was remarkable
by his long and red Beard, and was therefore called by the English Magnus
Red-beard, and by the Scots, in derision, Magnus with the red Maine, as though
his beard had been an horse Maine, because of the length and thickness
thereof. The Manuscript calls him Magnus with the red hand, taking the word
(Maine) for the French word, which signifies an hand: but the attentive Reader
may perceive the error, and how it was a word merely Scottish, and used by
the Scots in derision.

The King of Scots hearing of this preparation in England, caused also levy an
Army, wherein he made the Earl of Ormond ( George, or rather Hugh Douglas)
General, who immediately went into Annandale, through which the English Army
was to come. Both sides being thus prepared, the English having passed the
Rivers of Solway and Annand, pitch their Camp upon the brinke of the water of
Sarke. The Scots marched toward them, and they hearing of their approach, made
themselves ready, so that being come within sight one of another, they ranged
their men in order of battle. In the right wing of the English Army was this
Magnus with the red Maine.) In the left Sir John Pennington with the Welsh men.
The middle battle was led by the Earl of Northumberland himself. On the Scots
side was the Earl of Ormond in the middle battle over against Northumberland,
and William Wallace of Craiggie opposed Magnus, and against Sir John Pennington
was placed the Knight of Carlaverocke, called Maxwell, and Johnston of
Johnston, with many inland Gentlemen, (says the Manuscript) because they had
no great confidence in their own Annandale men, who were more set upon spoil
then victory. Ormond exhorted the Army in few words, telling them, That they
had great reason to hope for the victory, because they had taken arms, being
provoked thereto, and that it could not be, but that so just a cause should
have a happy event. Only behave your selves valiantly, abate the pride of the
enemy with a notable defeat, and so you shall reap a long lasting fruit of a
short travel. When the English Archers did annoy the Scots with their arrows
from afar, William Wallace cried out with a loud voice, so as he was heard by
his followers, Why should we stand still thus to be wounded afar off? Follow
me (says he) and let us join in hand strokes, where true valor is to be
seen: and so marching forward, and the rest following his example, they made
so fierce an onset, that they quite overthrew the right wing thereof. Magnus
perceiving that, being more mindful of his honor acquired in time past, then
of the present danger, resolved either to restore the battle, or lose his life
with credit, pressed forward against Craiggie Wallace to have encountered him,
and ere he could come at him, he was encompassed about by the Scottishmen, and
slain: his death put the English in such a fear (for they had great
confidence in his valor and conduct) that they without any further resistance
turned their backs, and fled in great disorder. The Scots pursued so fiercely
and eagerly, that there was more of the enemies slain in the chase, than in
the battle, chiefly upon the brinke of the River of Solway, where the tide
being come in, the river was not passable, and such as adventured to take it
were drowned. There were slain in this battle 3000. English, and amongst
those their great Magnus, and the Scots deadly enemy, who had presumed so of
victory. A notable example to teach men not to be over confident in things of
such uncertain event, as are the wars; and (as our proverb is) Not to sell
the bears skin before he be slain. There were slain besides him eleven
Knights of good account and note. Of the Scots were lost but 600. There were
taken priloners a great number, amongst whom were Sir John Pennington, and Sir
Robert Harington, Knights, and the Lord Percie son to the Earl of
Northumberland, whilst he helped his father to his horse, who thereby escaped
taking. There was also so great store of spoil gotten, as no man remembered so
much to have been gotten at any battle before. For the English trusting to
their number, and the strength of their Army, together with the opinion of
their enemies weakness, through dissension and variance (as they supposed) had
brought with them their best furniture, and richest stuff, in full assurance
of victory, Wallace of Craiggie being sore wounded in the fight, was carried
home, and died within three months after. The Earl of Ormond having gotten
this honorable victory, conveyed the chiefest of the prisoners to Lochmabane,
and then repaired to Court, where he was joyfully met, and received of all,
with all sort of honor that could be, envy it self not daring to open her
mouth against him.

The King did highly commend him for this exploit, and exhorted him and the
Earl Douglas his brother, That as their foregoers had often, as they also had
done, defended the Estate of Scotland with their labors, and virtue, in most
perilous times, and had given large proof of their valor and courage: That
so they would at home accustom themselves to modesty: That they themselves
would abstain, and that they would contain their friends from injuries toward
the weaker sort: Their power and puissance, which they had acquired by so many
their great deserts, toward their Kings, his Predecessors, and the Country,
that they would employ it rather in suppressing of robbers and disorderly men,
then to make new of giving way to it by connivence* That this only was lacking
to their full praise, which if they would add, they should find by experience
there was nothing more dear unto him then the advancement of the House and
Name of Douglas. To this the Earl Douglas replied (he being the elder brother,
and finding that this speech was chiefly directed to him) with great
submission, and promised to do as his Majesty had exhorted them: and so they
were dismissed, and returned home to their own houses with great honor and
applause both of Prince and people, to whom they had by this victory purchased
great quietness. For neither were the English Borderers able to invade them
any more, nor the King of England to send down a new Army (which feign he
would have done) by reason of the civil war which ensued shortly after at
home. So that he chose rather to have peace with Scotland, in regard of the
case he was then in, then war. Wherefore he sent Ambassadors, and obtained a
Truce for three years, the Scots thinking it no less expedient for them in a
case not unlike to his, through intestine dissension, though not open
insurrection against the King. For notwithstanding all this service done to the
King and Country, the malice of such as were the enemies of the Douglasses was
no whit abated* nay, their worth the more it was shown, and the more brightly
that it did shine, it did so much the more stir envy in their ill-willers,
whose secret practices still continued, and whose credit in Court seemed still
to increase against them. Creighton, who before had been sent Ambassador to
Charles the seventh of France, for procuring a wife to the King, had concluded
a match for him with Mary daughter to Arnold Duke of Gelders, who by her mother
(the Duke of Burgundies sister) was come of the Blood Royal of France, was now
returned into Scotland with her in this year 1448. This service and her favor
increased his credit greatly with the King; which the Earl Douglas perceiving,
was nothing pleased with it, but being discontented, obtaining leave of the
King, he withdrew himself from Court, seeing his error of having been
contented that Creighton should be employed in that honorable message,
thinking himself well rid of him by this his absence; which practice of Court
succeeds sometimes happily (as it did against the Boyds in King James the
thirds time, in the very like case) yet it did not so now, but turned to the
greater advantage and advancement of his enemy. Creighton was well contented
with his retiring, esteeming it his gain to be so rid of him from the Kings
ear and presence.

Whilst they concorded thus in their discord, both willing one thing in so
contrary minds (to wit, the Earl Douglas absence) there fell out an accident
that occasioned his longer absence, not from the Court only, but out of the
Country also. Richard Colville of Ochiltree was an enemy and bare deadly feud
to John Auchenlech of Auchenlech, a friend and depender of the Earl Douglas;
whom the Earl having sent for to come to him to Douglas Castle for such
business as he had to do with him, the said Richard having notice of the said
Auchenlechs journey, notwithstanding he knew he went toward the Earl, whether
stirred up by the Earls enemies at Court, so to put an affront upon him, or
leaning to their credit for impunitie, or out of impatience, or presumption, or
contempt of the Earl in respect of his withdrawing from Court, not regarding
him, or fearing his displeasure or anger, he lay in wait for him by the way,
and set upon him with a number of armed men, where, after some small conflict,
Auchinlech was slain, and diverse of his friends and servants with him. The
Earl Douglas having notice hereof, the fact touching him so nearly in the
person of his friend and follower, in his service, coming toward him, and sent
for by him, he was so incensed therewith, that whether distrusting the ordinary
course of justice (as wherein he might be eluded by his enemies then guiders of
Court) or impatient of delay, or not accounting it so honorable for him, nor
so awefull in example to others, concluding immediately to revenge it, and
vowing solemnly he should be avenged before he either eat or drank, he took
horse immediately, and with the readiest of his friends rode to the Castle of
Ochiltree, forced it, and slew the said Richard Colvill, and all the males
within the Castle that were come to the age of men. This opened the mouths of
men diversely, according to their diverse humors, some condemning his cruelty,
some commending his courage, some saying that he had gone too far, and done
too much; others that he could do no less, that he had just cause, and that
he had been ill used, his friend slain, his honor interessed, that such kind
of justice best became him; his enemies at Court took hold of it, aggravating
it to the King, an insolent fact against law and custom, and however Colvill
had deserved it (which they could not deny) yet it was a perilous example,
prejudicial to all order, and to the King, to whom the punishing of such
things belonged; So that the King became highly offended therewith.

Hereupon the Earl Douglas, partly to give place to his Princes anger, partly
upon some remorse (as all blood has ever some touch and sting of Conscience
with it:) the next year being the year of Jubilee, he purchased a license
from the King to go to Rome, pretending he would do penance for the said
slaughter, (but as his enemies did interpret it) to show his greatness to
foreign Princes and Nations. Before he took his journey, having a care of
his house, and being out of hope to have children of his own (as having been
seven or eight year married without children) he procured his second brother
James to be received by the King, and confirmed in the Earldom after
himself. There went with him in company a great number of Noblemen and
Gentlemen, such as the Lord Hamiltoun, Gray, Salton, Seaton, Oliphant and
Forbesse; also Calder, Urwhart, Cambell, Fraiser, Lawders of Crumartie,
Philorth and Basse, Knights, with many other Gentlemen of great account. He
went first to Flanders, and from thence by land to Paris, where he was
honorably received by the King of France, whom some call Lewis the eleaventh,
but it must needs be Charles the seventh, who lived till the year 1460. some
ten years after this Jubilee, which behoved to be in the year 1450. The
remembrance of the good service done by his Uncle at Bauge, and his Grandfather
at diverse times, and at last, for spending his life for him at Vernoile, was
not yet worn out of Charles his memory, in regard whereof, and for the place
he carried, and the public League between the Countries, he omitted no kind
of honor undone to him that was fit for his quality and rank: from thence he
took his journey toward Rome, which was filled with the expectation of his
coming. He had taken from Paris with him his youngest brother George, a young
man who was there at Schools, and of whom there was great expectation; but he
died by the way, to his great grief, he is said by the manuscript, to have
been nominated Bishop of Dunkell, and that he was to be inaugurated at Rome;
Buchannan also says it, perhaps following the manuscript: but they both forget
that his eldest brother Henry is said by the same manuscript, in the life of
their father, to have been Bishop of Dunkell: and this George died before he
was fifteen years of age. I take it also to be an oversight in this same
Buchannan, that he says that this George was destinated to be Earl by the
Kings permission, after his brother, who had no children. For it is against
reason that he being youngest of many brethren (worthy men) should have been
preferred before them, while he was but yet a child at school.

While the Earl was thus in his pilgrimage, his enemies slept not at home, but
taking the opportunity of his absence, did both blame him at the Kings hand by
all invention they could devise, and stirred up such of the common people as
had received any wrong of any man, to complain to the King, alleging they had
received it by the Earl Douglas friends or servants, and by such ways moved
the King to cause seek Siminton, then Bailiffe to the Earl in Douglasdale,
and to cite and summon him to answer to such crimes as were laid to the Earls
charge, for the actions (perhaps) of his dependers and clients, or (at least)
for such things as his Lord had neither commanded, neither (happily) heard of.
Siminton looking for no equity at their hands, who moved such a citation,
choosed not to come into judgment, suffering things to pass rather for
non-compeirance, than to compeire, not knowing the state of things, nor how to
answer, having neither knowledge of them by himself, nor direction, nor
information from his Lord. Upon this occasion his enemies laid hold,
interpreted this his non-compeirance in the most odious sort, and called it
contumacie, and what grievous name they could devise. So they moved the King to
send his servants and apprehend him, and would gladly have proceeded with all
extremity against him, exclaiming against his presumptuous contempt of the
King, and telling the King, that his royal authority was become a mockery,
and despised by every base fellow: That by his lenity he did but foster the
malapertnesse of the wicked sort: That by impunitie new doors were opened to
new misdoers: with such other speeches, in the most vehement manner they could,
to have dipped the King in blood, and cut off all hope (as far as in them
lay) of reconcilement betwixt them. But he, not being so far alienated as yet
from Douglas, howbeit the complaints of so many had stirred up some dislike,
and taken impression in his mind, was not moved with their speeches in that
high nature, but persisted in his opinion to recompense the Complainers in
their losses of goods by goods, but not to meddle with any man's blood:
wherefore he caused Siminton to be set at liberty, and commanded him only to
satisfy the Complainers. But he who could neither answer without information,
nor satisfy without direction, humbly besought his Majesty, that since he had
not information, and could not answer, being but a servant, and unacquainted
with business; seeing also he was not Collector of his masters rents, but
only commander of his servants, it would please him to delay the matter till
his Lord returned, (whom he expected within few months) who (he doubted not)
both could and would answer to whatsoever complaint, and satisfy sufficiently
at his Princes pleasure whatsoever damage he should have been found to do to
any man. This seemed most reasonable, that the Earl himself should be heard
first, and not condemned unheard, and in his absence; and there could be no
great prejudice in a short delay. Wherefore the King condescended to it, and
yet notwithstanding being importuned by the multitude of new complaints, he
sent William Sinclair Earl of Orkney (a near Cousin to the Earl Douglas)
being Chancellor for the time, to intromet with his goods and rents in Galloway
and Douglas, to satisfy Complainers therewith: but it was to no purpose, for
he was eluded, and almost mocked by the tenants. He alleged, and reported to
the King, that was done by the instigation of the Earl of Ormond, that he was
so frustrate; for the Earl Douglas had committed to him the mannaging of his
estate in his absence, and he greatly disdained that Orkney, being so near of
blood and alliance to them, should have undertaken that charge. The King
irritated herewith, as a contempt of his authority, caused Heralds to be
directed (or Pursevants) to summon all of the name of Douglas, and their
favorers, to compeire upon a certain day, and the Earl himself within
threescore days; which being expired, and none compeiring, they were denounced
Rebels. Then the King himself went with an Army into Galloway, where at his
first entry, having forced their Captains to retire to their strengths, a
small number of his host, whilst they followed the Rebels uncircumspectly
through strait places, were beaten back upon the King, not without some
disgrace. The king moved with great indignation hereat, went and assaulted
their chief fortes: And first he took the Castle of Lochmabane without great
trouble or travel; thereafter with great toil and wearying of his men, the
Castle of Douglas, which he razed to the ground. He commanded the Farmers,
Tenants, and Laborers of the ground, to pay their Meals to his Collectours,
until such time as the complainers were satisfied with their Lords goods.

These things being reported (thus as they were done) to the Earl Douglas
while he was yet at Rome, moved him greatly, and greatly astonished them that
were in his company; so that many withdrew themselves, fearing what it might
turn to; and he, with the few that remained with him, made what haste they
could homeward.

As he came through England, he was honorably entertained by the King and
Queen there: but when he approached near to the borbers of Scotland, he
stayed a little time, and sent his brother James before to try the Kings mind
toward him; which when he found to be placable, he returned home, was kindly
received, and lovingly admonished to put away from him disorderly persons,
especially the men of Annandale, who had in his absence committed many outrages
and cruelties. This when he had faithfully promised to perform, he was not
only received into his former place of favor, but was made also Lieutenant
General of the whole Kingdom of Scotland. And this was the bitter fruit of
his perilous Pilgrimage, that hereby he loosed the reins to his enemies, and
gave them power so far to prevail, as to embarke the King in open quarrel
against him, even to the casting down of his Houses, and intrometting with his
Revenues. This notwithstanding was either his wisdom, or the account and
respect of his place and person, that the King, who had done him such harm and
disgrace, could be contented so to forget it, receiving him so far into
favor, and advancing him, whatever blame or imputation may be laid upon him
for his journey, which was so rashly taken on, and which had so dangerous a
sequel; yet this retreat from that storm cannot but be commended, and his
dexterity (whatever it were) acknowledged to have been great, which guided
him through such billows and surges to so peaceable a Port and Haven. And it
were to be wished that Writers had set down by what means this was brought to
pass, for the more perfect understanding of the History; but we must bear
with this amongst many more defects that are to be found in them.

Now what ever wisdom (though undescribed in the particular) may appear to
be in this; as much unadvisednesse is evident in that which he did
immediately after, in his journey to England. For without acquainting the King,
he went to the Court of England, and had privy conference with that King and
Queen, he pretended that it was for restitution of some goods taken out of
Scotland, and not restored by the Wardens of England: but this cause, the
lighter it was, the greater suspicion did it move in his own King, who could
not think it probable, that he being of that place, of that courage, of that
nature, would upon such an occasion only, take such a journey: The true cause
is thought to be, that he went to treat of certain conditions for his
assistance to be given to the King of England against his Nobility, with whom
he was then in hard terms, the wars of the house of York beginning to
spring up, which increased afterward so mightily, and prevailed, to the
ejecting him out of the Kingdom.

This the Queen of England either foreseeing, or fearing some other such like
enterprise against her husband had dealt with the Earl Douglas when he came
home through England from Rome the year before, to strengthen them by his
help, and appointed him to return for performance, and perfecting of all
conditions of agreement. But we find no effect of this agreement and
conditions, whether because that conspiracy of the Duke of York was not yet
come to maturitie, and so Douglas was not employed, being prevented by death
(which fell out shortly after this) or because they were not fully agreed, is
uncertain. Neither is it specified what the conditions were: only it is
conjectured, that they were the same, or such like, as the same King ( Henry
the sixth) granted afterward to the Earl of Angus in the time of King James
the third, which if they were, they were no ways prejudicial to the King of
Scotland (as shall appear there) yet being done without his knowledge, it gave
occasion either to the natural jealousy of Princes to think hardly of it, by
his own mere motion, or to his enemies, so to construct it to the King, and
stir him up by their speeches to that suspicion which he inclined to. Of both
which he ought to have been wary, and not to have given such ground to the
one, or to the other, by such a journey undertaken without the Kings allowance.

Whether at his return he acquainted the King with what had past betwixt him
and the Kings of England, it is not certain, and our Writers seem to say the
contrary, yet in that he brought letters from the Queen of England to the
Queen of Scotland, and she thereupon interceded for him, it is not improbable
that he has acquainted her (and so the King also) with the truth of the whole
business: which whether the King did not believe, or if his jealousy remained
not the less, and that he was not willing there should be such an accession
and increase of the Earls greatness, who (he thought) was greater already
then was safe for a King; he pardoned him the fault at the intercession of the
Queen and some Nobles, but he took from him the Office of Lieutenant, and all
other public charge, that so he might be made unusefull and unsteadable to
the King of England, or at least not so able to aid him, and so he might be
frustrate of the conditions so liberally promised unto him from thence. He
^estored also his old enemy Creig^ton to the Office of Chancellor, and the
Earl of Orkney was made Lieutenant. Thus not only disappointed of his hopes,
but disgraced at his Princes hands, both by being himself depressed, and his
enemies advanced, he was incensed against all the Courtiers, taking all to
proceed from their instigation. But more especially his anger was bent against
Creighton, both as the ancient enemy of his House, and also as the chief
Author of all this present dis-favour by his surmisings, transported herewith,
he gave way to his passion to carry him to a course somewhat more then civil,
which until that time he had tempered, retaining it with the bridle of
equity, and himself within the compass of the laws. Now whether altogether,
and only for these causes foresaid, or if irritated by a new occasion of
malicious speeches uttered by Creighton (That the Kingdom of Scotland would
never be at rest so long as the house of Douglas was on soot: That in the vuine
thereof stood the good of the Realm, and peace of all Estates: That it was
necessary a man of so turbulent a nature, so puissant and powerful by his
Kindred and Alliance, whom no benefits could appease, nor honors satiate,
should he cut off, and the public peace established by his death,) or if
Creighton contrived this speech to make Douglas the more odious, and his own
quarrel seem the juster against him (for both are written) so it is, that the
Earl caused certain of his friends and servants lie in wait for him as he
was riding from Edinburgh toward Creighton: but he escaped, being acquainted
with the plot (as some write) well accompanied, and excellently well mounted,
but not without being wounded himself, and having slain some of his
adversaries in his escape. Others, attribute his escaping not to any foresight
or foreknowledge, but says that he was assailed in the night at unawares,
and being astonished at the first, yet afterward recollecting himself (for he
was a man of good courage) he slew the foremost he met with, and having
received some wounds, brake through them, and saved himself in Creighton
Castle, where he remained not long; but his wounds being scarce well cured, he
conveened his friends, and coming on the sudden to Edinburgh, had almost
surprised the Earl Douglas, who was there in quiet manner, and looked for no
such thing, but he getting advertisement hereof, did advertise the King that he
could no longer end^re Creightons hidden malice and practices against his life,
and estate, and his now open attempts also: wherefore he desired to be
excused, the he could no more repair to Court, so long as Creighton was there,
and so retired himself to his house to remain as a malcontent for a season.

In the mean time finding his enemies thus to increase in credit at Court, and
with their credit (as commonly it comes to pass) in number and power, he, to
strengthen himself also on the other side against them, entered into a new
confederacy with the Earls of Crawford, and Rosse, men of greatest puissance
and force next the Douglasses, that were in Scotland in their times; or rather
he renewed the old friendship that had been betwixt them. For their houses were
in old time in great friendship with the houses of Douglas (as has been
showed) and the house of Crawford was particularly obliged unto them by diverse
good Offices, from the days of Robert the second: and in this same man's time
had been helped against the Ogelbees at Arbroth: as his father also had at the
Earl Douglas desire spoiled the Bishop of Saint Andrews ( Kennedies) lands:
And besides, this Beatrix Douglas (the Earl Douglas Lady) was daughter to one
of the Earls of Crawford, and could not but be of kin to this Earl. The
sum of their band was, That they should every one assist and defend another,
together with their friends and dependers, against all men: That they should
have the same friends, and the same enemies, with reservation always, and
exception of their duty to their Prince. But whether this band was made of new
(as some write) or if it were of old continued from hand to hand, and then
renewed as though it were intended in special against Crcighton and his
partakers, and due exception of the King expressly contained in it, is
uncertain: however, they so possessed the King, that he interpreted all as
done against himself. And therefore matters being come to public Hostility
betwixt Douglas and Creighton, and the Country divided into factions, when the
Earl of Crawford and Rosse had sent to Creighton, and given up all friendship
with him as an enemy to their dearest friend, by virtue of the foresaid League;
he acquainted the King therewith, and with all vehemency exaggerated the
League, as a conspiracy against him and his royal Authority, and that it was
very dangerous for him when such great houses, and powerful men had combined
together. The King apprehending it to be so, having once settled that opinion
in his mind, did upon that ground build all his interpretations of the Earl
Douglas actions, and framed his own actions accordingly against him; Neither
was Douglas so fortunate, or circumspect, as to avoid the occasions of
fostering that opinion in the King: but (as commonly happens) when ruin is
to come on men, all things work that way, so fared it with him in two facts.
The first was on the person of the Lord Hanris, who was too hardly used of him,
as appears: The other on the Tutor of Bombee, more justly; yet so, that his
carriage in it seemed to confirm that which his enemies allege against him,
that he exercised his authority, and used his privileges more absolutely then
the King had reason to be contented with. The occasion of the first, and the
form thereof was, Sir William Harris of Terreglis having been the Earl
Douglas ancient dependar, had now in this frown of Court, and diversity of
factions (whether to please the Court, and because he accounted it justest to
follow it, or because indeed he misliked things done by the borderers who
followed Douglas) withdrawn himself from his dependence; and if he sided not
openly with the other party (which he could nor durst hardly do, lying so
near to Douglas) yet did he not follow him as he was wont, and so either by
a real enmity in private, or a kind of neutrality in public, had procured
the like behavior of the Earl to him, to behave himself as neutrall in his
affairs: and as he had abstracted his dependence and attendance from him, so
the other abstracted his Protection from him. This when the Annandians
perceived, they (ready upon all such occasions) made a rode, and furrowed his
lands: hereof when he complained to the Earl, and had received answer
according to the foresaid coldness betwixt them, he would needs attempt some
redress by his own power; and hereupon assembling a number of his friends, he
rode into Annandale to have rendered them the like, and either to recover his
own, or repair his losses out of their goods. But he was overthrown by them,
and taken prisoner, and so brought to the Earl Douglas, he esteeming him as
his own servant, and taken within his bounds where his jurisdiction (by
regallity or otherwise) was extended, put him to assise. They of the Jury
found him guilty, being taken after he had seized the goods, (with red hand as
they term it) and so being convict of theft, he was condemned, executed, and
hanged as a thief, and that notwithstanding the Kings earnest request for his
life by letter. A pitiful matter, and greatly to be lamented! and though he
had some color of justice, yet it tasted not so much of justice as of malice;
no not of indifferency (which would be injustice, having eye to the due
circumstances) so much as of partiality, joined with contempt of the King, and
his equal request; and so it was constructed, and gave more just occasions to
his enemies surmising, and the increasing of the Kings indignation, which by
yielding, and remitting a little of his privileges, and showing respect to the
Kings entreaty, he might have mitigated in some measure; and that without any
danger he could have incurred by the said Lord Harries enmity (although he
should have been his enemy, and perhaps he might have regained him to his
friendship by remitting the offense.) The other fact which ensued upon this,
not so unjust, but made as odious (as carrying the odiousness of the other
with it) was, Macklalane Tutor of Bombee, the chief of that name, and one of
the principal houses in Galloway, falling at odds with a servant of the Earl
Douglas had slain him, and was therefore with his brother who was partaker of
the slaughter) apprehended and put in prison in the Trevie, a strong house
belonging to the Earl. His friends made means to the Courtiers, and by them to
the King; informing him that Douglas carried a spleen against the man, more
for being a friend, a favourer and follower of the best side (so they called
their own) then for killing of the man: wherefore they besought him that he
would not suffer a Gentleman of his rank, who was also a good man otherwise
(however that had fallen out in his hands) to be drawn (not to judgment,
but) to certain and destinate death, before one, who was both judge and party.
By this and such like information (whereby the ears of Princes are deceived,
while men go about to withdraw their friends from due punishment) they persuade
the King to send for Bombee, and take the trial and judgment of him in his
own hands, desiring the Earl Douglas, that i^ he had any thing against him, he
should come and pursue him before the King. Amongst the furtherers of this suit
Patrick Gray of Fowls (uncle to the Tutor) was chief: he was directed with the
Commission, as one that both would be earnest therein, being so near to the
party, and would also be respected, being some way in kin to the Earl;
Douglas having notice of his Commission, and perceiving thereby they meant no
other thing, but to defraud him of justice for killing of his servant (which he
thought he could not suffer with his honor) that he might do what he had
determined the more calmely, and with the (...) offense (as he thought) he
courteously received the said Patrick Gray, and entertained him with diverse
purposes, and caused the Tutor in the mean time to be tried by an Assise, and
being condemned, to be quickly conveyed a mile from thence to a place called
Carling-work, and there executed. Afterward when Patrick Gray (ignorant of what
was done) had delivered his Commission from the King; he answered, he was sorry
he was come too late, and then told him what was done, and desired him to
excuse him to the King. When he heard that, and saw himself so deluded, he
presently (in a great chafe and rage) renounced all kindred and friendship, and
whatsoever band besides might seem to tie him to the Earl; vowing that from
that time forth he should be his deadly enemy in all sort, and by all means he
could, which the other little regarding, dismissed him: But however he little
regarded it, the French Proverb proves true, and is worthy to be regarded of
all men, That there is no little enemy: for he had the power to be his death
afterward with his own hands, and plotted it by his Counsel, or set it
forward, being plotted and devised by others: for being come to the King, and
relating the issue and effect of his message, all was by him and the other
Courtiers of the faction aggravated in the most heinous sort: That the Kings
commandments were contemned, eluded and mocked: That it was likely that the
Earl Douglas was King: That doubtless he aimed to be so, yea, he behaved
himself already as such: That that was the meaning of his private conference
with the King of England, on that ground he gave license to slay so many honest
men, to spoil and rob: That innocence now was contemned for brutishness,
faithfulness to the King punished for unfaithfulness: That by the Kings
indulgencie the common enemy was become insolent: That it became him once to
take upon him his place as King, and do things by authority, and by his power,
that then it would appear who were friends, who were foes. These, and such as
these, were the speeches of the Courtiers and interpretations of his actions:
such as it pleased them to make, following their humor of faction or judgment.

But they neither considered the equity that was done in punishing blood by
blood, nor the authority by which it was done, for he had authority and
sufficient jurisdiction of old granted to him, and given by former Kings to his
Predecessors and their Heirs for his service. Neither did they observe what
order and formality he kept in his proceedings, nor his honor interested in
the revenging his servants death: Neither what scorn to him it was on the
other part, if he had sent the party: having thereby his privileges,
infringed, his servant slain, and no satisfaction for it, but to be eluded by
a Commission, purchased by his enemies, justice defrauded, and the guilty
pulled out of his hands: and by their credit with the King, procuring him to
hinder justice, who should have been the furtherer of it, only upon their
particular private motion, and by their factions, inclining of his Majesty that
way. Upon these considerations, what had been more extraordinarily done, would
have been excused by the same men, in another then Douglas. Now in him (though
done orderly) it is thus traduced, aggravated, exaggerated, amplified, and
named contempt of the King, and affecting (...) Crown.

Such is the misery, when Princes are moved by parties, to command or request
things that are unjust, there being peril and inconvenients, either in obeying
or refusing their requests, receiving hurt and prejudice in their rights,
scorn of their adverse party, or denying to offend whom they would fain serve:
and happy is that man that can steer aright betwixt these rocks! Happy he who
falls into the hands of such a Prince, as measures and moderateth his
commands according to equity; or if they be inique, when it falls out so
(for what Prince may not fall into such weakness) who tempereth his passion,
and moderateth his mind, in the just refusal thereof, taking it in good part,
and accounts not his authority contemned, when an unjust command is refused
by his Subjects.

Whether it were on the displeasure of this fact, or jealousy conceived of
this and other actions of the Douglasses, it is hard to discern: but so it
was, that his enemies making use for their own ends of the Kings credulous
suspicion, prevailed so far, that they persuaded the King to resolve to make
him away (and seeing it could not be done by open force) in any sort it could
be done; whereof when they had advised of all the means they could, this they
found to be the most expedient way, that he should be sent for to Court, by
fair promises, and being come, the King should enter into terms of
quarrelling: And thereupon they that were appointed for the purpose, should
dispatch him. So they caused a certain Courtier of their faction, but such an
one as was free from all suspicion of bearing enmity to the Earl, to address
himself to a Gentleman, who was Douglasses friend, and to show him how
Creighton was retired to his own house, and that in his absence it were fit
the Earl should take that good occasion, to come and see the King, with whom
he might be assured to find favor, if he would crave it humbly* and this
he told as a great secret, not to be revealed, but to his Lord, and dealt
earnestly with him to follow this advice.

The Gentleman believing, went and dealt very earnestly with his Lord, but he
suspecting Creightons craft, and having the murder of his Cousins before his
eyes, flatly refused to go thither, where he had so many enemies, so potent
and of so great credit, and some of which (had not long ago) lien in wait for
his life, unless he saw assurance of his life and liberty. Hereupon he was
directly sent for to come to Court, with promise of all freedom, and with
assurance under the broad Seal: and to remove all fear and doubt that he could
conceive, the Noblemen that were present at Court were moved to send a warrant
to him, subscribed with all their hands, and sealed with all their seals, with
the greatest oaths and protestations interposed therein that could be; and not
only so, but every man wrote his own particular letter apart, assuring him of
the Kings good will; and further promising him, that if it should so fall out,
that the King would be so disposed as to break his faith and promise, and to
interprise any thing against his person, life, lands or liberty, they should
send him home safe nevertheless: What could he seek more at their hands? Or
what could he devise more? And who would have doubted after such assurances?
Yet, that he might not only repose upon his enemies credit all his safety,
he accompanies himself for his honor and surety with as many as might
secure him, and keep him free from being in danger of any private man's forces.
So relying (for the Kings part) upon his safe Conduct, and the Nobilities
credit interposed therewith, he comes to Stirling, where the King was well
attended and followed by his friends and servants, but in a peaceable manner;
being come into the Kings presence, after some sort of admonition to lead a
more peaceable and orderly life, he seemed to pardon him what ever was past,
and kindly invited him to supper in the Castle: After they had supped
cheerfully and merrily together, the King takes him aside, and leads him
into an inner room, where there was none present besides them two and Patrick
Gray, of whom we spoke before, how of his friend and Cousin he was become his
enemy, for the execution of the Tutour of Bombee. There the King beginning his
speech from the valor and loyal fidelity of his Predecessors, came shortly
to his own indulgencie toward the whole Family, and toward himself in
particular. Then sharply upbraiding him how often he had pardoned him, and what
insolences he had committed: Douglas answered submissively, and craved pardon
for what he had offended against himself in any sort; saying, his intention
was not against him, but against his enemies: That as for others that would
complain, he was ready to satisfy them according to justice, and at the
Kings own pleasure: There rests yet one thing (says the King) the League
betwixt you, and the Earl of Crawford and Rosse, I will have you presently to
quite it. At that word the Earl was somewhat astonished at the first, yet
gathering his spirits again, he answered, that for him, he knew nothing
wherein that League could be offensive to his Majesty, seeing that all duty
to him was especially reserved. The King replied, I will have you presently to
break the same. Douglas answered, that if he would have him to do so, he
would be pleased to give him leave to advertise the said Noblemen, and then
he would do it, otherwise, he would be accounted a faith breaker, if having
entered into friendship with them, he should forsake them, not giving a reason
why: And therefore besought him to have patience. The King replied in an angry
manner, speaking aloud; If you will not break it, I will: And with those
words, he stabbed him in the breast with a dagger. At the same instant Patrick
Gray struck him on the head with a Pole-axe. The rest that were attending at
the door, hearing the noise, entered, and fell also upon him; and, to show
their affection to the King, gave him every man his blow after he was dead.

Thus died he by the hand of the King, but by the practices of his enemies,
they being the choice movers, and the king yielding to their motions, as if it
had been his quarrel, (for so they made it seem to him) whereas indeed it was
but their own particular; or if his, it was but thus far his, that he took
it on him as his, espoused theirs as his own, and embarked himself therein. A
common practice of Courtiers, who have Princes ears; what ever is contrary to
their will, is all against the King, is all presumption, is all high treason;
whereas indeed they are often times themselves his greatest enemies, what ever
show of service and affection they make; and they whom they call his enemies
far more heartily affected to him. They make the King always wed their
quarrels, bear their errors, and the whole hatred and envy of their
enemies; and often times draws him into great absurdities, besides and contrary
his own natural disposition, to his great disgrace, or diminishing his grace,
in the eyes of his Subjects, not without great peril of his life and estate.
Happy the Prince that can rightly take up, and rightly discern the quarrels
which are indeed his own, from those which others would have him think to be
his own, and so understands the disposition of his Subjects, that he
account not all that is against his Courtiers, is against him, or all that is
done by his Courtiers, is done for him.

These Courtiers had gained this point of the King, and by that mean had
brought him to do that hard fact against this man as his own enemy, as one
aspiring to his Crown; where indeed never any such thing appeared to have been
intended by him, or aimed at, but only revenge against his private enemies.
And for the other crimes that his enemies alleged against him; small
presumptions, cold conjectures, and no appearance there was of them. But above
all this, the greatest pity is, that they had power to bring such a King to
commit such a fact, contrary to his faith and promise, solemnly sworn and
sealed by himself, and by his nobility, to break the bonds of all humane
society. It is worthy the considering, to see their pretenses and arguments set
down by Writers, which they used to move and induce him to consent and yield
to this strange, and unnatural fact. A Paradox in truth, though a Maxim in
Matchivellisme: one of them is, Necessity; for they make him believe, first
that the Earl Douglas did aspire; then, that he was so powerful, that there
was no other remedy for his aspiring; all they bring, is but weak
presumptions: and for his strength and power, he was strong enough indeed to
defend himself against his enemies, or an unjust force and violence; but it
had been another matter unjustly to have invaded the Kingdom, for which he
was not so strong, as justice and a just title to a Crown, which are of great
force: and against which, that force, which otherwise and in another case may
be great, will prove nothing, for God has given his image of authority with
it, which so affects the hearts of men, that they cannot but regard it, and
this image being imprinted in their hearts is not easily abolished but by very
enormous faults, and even s^rce by any faults though never so extraordinary. So
that it was error in them to think, or craftiness to persuade that there was
no remedy in a just authority to defend it self by it self, and without
forgoing it self and becoming injustice, and that in such a hateful manner.
Whereas by the contrary, this their way was not so safe and so certain a mean
to defend himself, but had almost been the mean to deprive him of what he
would have had men think he preserved by it; that is, his Crown, for the
fact being so vi^e and base, it not only moved the friends and followers of
the Earl Do^glas his house to rebellion, but also incensed the whole common
people: for that if his brother who succeeded, had been as politic as he
was powerful, the King might have been set beside his Throne. And as it was,
he was once in a great brangling, and had resolved to quit the Country, had it
not been for James Kennedies counsel, who was Bishop of S. Andrews; so far
was this fact from establishing his Throne, as they made him believe it would
do.

Then for the honesty and lawfulness of it, it is to be diligently weighed: It
is lawful (say they) to catch fraud in the own craftiness. And indeed that
saying is most true, good and conform to all wisdom, being rightly
understood, thus: Let fraud work on fraudfully, until he be entangled and
intrapped in his own fraud, and so become guilty and obnoxious to a lawful
and orderly avengement by justice: but that men to meet fraud, may justly use
fraud, and that against all promises, seals, subscriptions, or oaths, to the
extremity of murdering, changing justice into injustice, in the very seat of
justice, is not, nor ever was, nor ever can be justified under any pretext
whatsoever; as being that which breaks the bands of humane society. It is an
unworthy Kingdom, which cannot otherwise defend it self, and it is unworthy
of a King to stoop to such unworthy and base ways: It has also been by some
pretended elsewhere to cover the foulness hereof, that hereby much bloodshed
is eschewed, which would have been, before such a man could have been cut
off, which I marvel is not alleged here also.

But that is frivoulous amongst the rest, for it is the cause of much more
blood shedding, because it takes away all trust, and so peace, until the
wars end by the destruction of one party, which without trust cannot end by
reconcilement, besides this, they insinuated it unto the King, as a point of
want of courage in him, and cowardice, if he durst not so much as deceive his
enemy; whereby they would mean, that it was courage to deceive him: An unhappy
dareing to dare to do wrong, and very far mistaken, and misnamed!

And last of all, they half menace to abandon him, and provide for themselves
and their own safety, by taking part with Douglas as the stronger party; whom
if the King did not make away, they would follow him, and that there was no
other remedy left to them. Such boldness were they come to, thus to threaten
their master, and Sovereign! And such is the weakness of that place, where it
submits it self to servants! By these means was this good King (far
contrary to his own nature) drawn on by them who had his ear to this
unnatural fact, as to that which was most lawful and flat necessary, yet was
neither this pretended necessity, nor alleged lawfulness sufficient to
defend it even in the judgment of the doers themselves. And therefore the
Courtiers found out another mean to put some fair face, at least some
colorable excuse upon it as they thought, for being ashamed of those
allegiances, or distrusting that they would be accepted for just causes of
breach of faith, and fearing they should be detested of all men: they gave it
out that the slaughter was not committed of set-purpose, but that it fell out
only by chance, and that the King had no intention to kill him, till he
himself by his indiscretion procured it, having irritated the King by his
presumptuous answers.

But this is a weak excuse, to commit murder contrary to promise, although
he had answered so: but there is no appearance of it, that it was but a sudden
passion, neither was it believed in those days, as may be seen by the
persuasions given him by the Courtiers: which while Writers set down, they
witness it was a set draught and fore plotted. For they say plainly also that
the Courtiers would have had it appearing that it came by his arrogance in his
carriage and answers, but not that it was so indeed: besides there is a
received tradition, that James Hamiltoun of Cadzow pressing in to follow the
Douglas, Liviston being Uncle to James, and knowing the Earl was to die, gave
him a blow on the face, and thrust him back from the gate. James Hamiltoun
drew his sword, which the other little regarding, held him off with a long
halbert, and made the guard shut the gate against him, was exceeding angry at
this affront in the time, but after when he heard the Earl was killed, he
knew it was done for his safety. He had given too much matter for his enemies
to work on by his rash journey into England, and private conference with the
King and Queen there: but this had been forgiven him, as an oversight only,
wh^ the King had (apparently) tried, and found to be nothing else; he had
been vehement in the revenge of the murder of his Cousins and servant John
Auchinleck, but that (though vehement) was not injust, and therefore we find
him never charged with it as injustice: he had against equity executed the
Lord Harries, yet he had done it legally and by form, and order of Law,
whereof the particulars not being perfectly known, the judgment is difficult,
yet is it not (for any thing we see) any way to be excused. The execution of
the Tutor of Bombee was very good justice and irreproveable, though it bred him
most hatred and ill will at Court. Other particulars are not mentioned: Only
they say that he bore with thieves to have their assistance: An ill and unwise
course, and ever pernicious to the users of it, for harming of such as they
hate! A far worse, and unworthy fact, unfit for a generous mind to companion
it self with them whom he should punish, and to participate of the
guiltiness he should correct! But how far he went in this point is not
certain, at least is not specially set down: and as for the speeches of his
enemies reproching them unto him in the hatefullest sort, all must not be
taken for truth they say.

All agree that he was a man of great power, great policy, great performance
and execution, and greater expectation, in whom the name of Douglas rose to the
greatest top of height, and with whom it began to fall, which was afterward
accomplished in his successor, as shall be said; he was slain the 13. of
February 1452. esteemed to have been Fastings-Eve, (or Shrove-Tuesday.) after
the Roman supputation, or in the year 1451. as Major reckons it according
to the account of Scotland. He was Earl the space of nine years or
thereabout, but left no children behind him. Where he was buried, or what was
done with his body, there is no mention made in History.

Me laetho ante diem Chrightonus Rexque dedere,
Ille necis causam praebuit iste manum.
By Crighton and my King too soon I die,
He gave the blow, Crighton the plot did lay.
Of James the ninth and last Earl of Douglas, the eighteenth Lord, sixth Duke
of Turraine, and fourth James, who died in Lindores.
WIlliam being thus slain by the instigation of these Courtiers, his enemies,
to the end that the King as they would have it thought might be established in
his Crown, by the making away of him whom they made the King to think so
great an enemy to him: It was so far from producing that effect, that by the
contrary there was nothing nearer, then that it should have been the very
occasion of spoiling him thereof; for the Earl Douglasses friends, who before
took Creighton, and his faction only for their enemies: Now they take the
King for their enemy. They, who before thought not that what they had suffered
proceeded from the King, or that it was his doing: now they impute them to him.
They who before were only malcontents, and within the bounds of obedience,
and had a good opinion of the King: now they become enemies with an ill opinion
of him as a wicked man. They who before contained themselves in civil terms,
now become openly rebellious: and whereas they had good hope, and looked for
reconcilement, now cast off all hope thereof, and (matters becoming
irreconcilable) all love and regard, all reverence, their hearts being laden
with the injury, with the dishonesty, with the horror of it, they burst forth
into all outrageous words, and deeds: things coming to that point, that they
could not be ended, but by the destruction of one of the parties. Either they
behoved to ruin the King, or behoved to be ruined by him. And here the hardest
lot at the first was the Kings (by all appearance) the power of the other party
being so great, their minds so inflamed, their anger so incensed against him:
neither the party only, but the people in general detested the fact and the
horriblenesse of it, in such sort, that he was put by all his shifts, and
driven to such a point of despair, as to think of leaving the country, and
going by sea to France.

For though the Earl himself was dead, yet had he left behind him in the
town of Stirlin four brethren, that were come thither to accompany him. The
eldest of these, James, was provided to the estate three years before by the
Kings consent (upon the occasion of Earl Williams going to Rome in the year
of Jubilee) to succeed to his brother after his decease. He therefore, with the
rest of the Nobility who favored them and their cause, having heard the report
of Earl Williams being stabbed in that manner, being astonished with these
sudden and unexpected news, first ran and took arms with great haste and
tumult, but having contained themselves, and commanding their companies to be
quiet, every man keeping within his own lodging for that night, upon the
morrow they assembled together in counsel, and according to the defuncts
ordinance, and the Kings consent obtained thereto before, they acknowledged
James lawful heir and successor to his brother William. Then he with many
vehement and bitter words, inveighing against the treasonable perjurie of the
King and Courtiers, exhorts them who were present to lay siege to the Castle.
Send (says he) for your friends and followers from all quarters, and let us
withdraw out of their lurking holes those men who are only valiant in
persidiousnesse, while as yet they waver, being uncertain in their
resolutions, and tremble with the guiltiness of so horrible a fact. They who
were present praised his piety toward his dead brother, and also his courage;
but because they were come in a peaceable manner, and unprovided of things
necessary for so great a work, they abstained from the siege; which if they
had (as the Earl gave advice) resolved upon, and fallen to presently, while
the odiousness of the fact was yet green and fresh before the eyes of men,
the King and his partners being unprovided and unforeseene in any certain
course of their affairs, as neither able to consult, nor to meet for
consultation, the Castle being enclosed, which being also (as it is to be
supposed) not well victualled for a siege, the King could hardly have escaped
their hands. Neither was the matter so difficult for them, to have remained,
and sent for the rest of their friends, and any provision which they needed;
who might have come to them within five weeks, as they did themselves return
in that time, having given the King so mnch leisure to advise and prepare for
them. Neither could the King (for all that he had that space and time) find
any means sufficient to match them. For having upon this their deliberation
resolved upon the worst part, and departed to their houses, and taken full
advice concerning all things, they returned the five and twentieth day of
March, where all the way as they came along to Stirling, James Hammiltoun
dragged the Kings safe conduct (which had been given to Earl William, having
the broad Seal hanging thereat) at the tail of an ill-favored spittle jade,
or mare, through the streets of all the towns and villages in their way,
abstaining from no contumelious words, that they could devise against the King,
his Counselors and Courtiers.

Being come to Stirlin, they went to the market Cross, and there sounding with
five hundred horns and trumpets, they caused a Herald to proclaim the King,
and such as had been plotters and authors of E. Williams death, perjured
traitors to God and man, and that they were to be abhorred, and detested by all
men as such. Others write that they went to the Castle gate, and made that
Proclamation in the Kings hearing, whiles he was looking on them, and that it
was done the next day after the slaughter. Thereafter they pillaged the town,
and being angry even with the innocent and harmless place, they sent back
James Hamiltoun of Cadzow, and burnt it. Where this is to be considered, what
could be the cause why these men (who before were upon advisement to have
besieged the Castle of Stirlin, and did not do it then, only because they
were unprovided) why these men (I say) now being come again and provided,
abstained notwithstanding from besieging of it, having nothing to let them; and
which if they had obtained, they had withal obtained full victory, being
masters of the field, the King enclosed and secluded from his favorers and
partners, no others (in likelihood) could have made head against them; for
neither could any have taken that upon them, neither would the people (as was
thought) have followed them, at least not so freely; whether it was because
they had no hope to force it (being a strong place) neither to famish it in
haste (being well provided of victuals) or if they chose rather to deprive him
of his partners abroad in the Country by forcing them to forsake him first,
and then it would be easy to take the King who had nothing but the Castle
walls to trust to; or what ever else were the occasion thereof, our Histories
(very defective in this so special a point) tell not; But so it was, that they
leaving the principal point unprosecute (the King himself wherein would have
consisted the whole sum of a full victory, and to which they should chiefly
have directed their courses) contented only to have blazed his reproaches,
turned toward his friends, pilling and spoiling such as remained on his side,
and even by this the King was so put to it, that he had determined to leave the
Country and to fly into France, had not Archbishop Kennedie advised him to
stay, and hope for better fortune, showing him, that if he could keep his
person safe, and have patience to protract, and linger out the time a while,
his adversaries faction would dissolve ere long, and fall asunder of it self.

Amongst those who took part with the King, there were diverse of the name of
Douglas, and that of the principalls, as Angus, brother to Archbishop Kennedie,
by the mother, who was daughter to Robert the third, and sister to James the
first, by whom therefore they were Cosins germain to the King, who was partly
persuaded by his brother to take that course as fittest for him against the
Earl Douglas, partly also accounted it right to follow him as his King, partly
for kindred. There was also John (or rather James) Lord Dalkeith, who had
married the Kings sister (as Hollinshed writes in the life of Mackebeth) as
also the manuscript in this same place, and the contract with the Earl of
Morton yet bears: Also the manuscript in the life of Grosle James (this E.
James father) faith, the Lord Dalkeith, (or Henry his son rather) married the
said Grosle James eldest daughter; this James sister called Margaret: whether
therefore having married the Kings sister, and so frucke on that side, or
having married E. James sister, and being of the name, The Earl Douglas was so
much the more incensed against him, that he should without regard of this tie
have joined with his enemies, and therefore besieged the Castle of Dalkeith,
binding himself by an oath not to deport from thence, until he had gotten it
taken in. But it was valiantly defended by Patrick Cockburne and Clarkington,
in such sort, that after he was constrained by great travel, and trouble of
his men with watching, and many wounds to lift his siege and depart. The King
had in the mean time conveened a company of men to have releeved the besieged,
but finding that his power was not sufficient for that purpose, he resolved to
attend the coming of Alexander Gordon, Earl of Huntley, his brother in law (or
sister son) whom he made Lieutenant, and who they said was come in with a
great Army collected out of the furthest parts of the North. But as he was
marching through Angus (the twenty eight of May) he was encountered at Brichen,
by the Earl of Crawford, who lay for him there to stop his passage. There
was fought a great battle betwixt them in such sort, that Huntleyes middle
ward was almost defeated, and well nigh routed, not being able to sustain the
impression of Crawfords army, which was so strong, that they failed but a
little to overthrow the Kings Standard, brought thither and displayed by
Huntley, had it not been for the cowardly and treacherous flight of John
Collesse of Bonnie-Moone, to whom the left wing was committed by Crawford: He
in the hottest of the conflict (offended with Crawford, because he had refused
him that same morning the Barrony of Ferme, or a part thereof, which lay near
to his house) fled on set purpose out of the battle, and so left the middle
ward naked on the one side of the special force, which the said Earl had,
which was called the battle of axes, or billmen. By their flight, the rest
(who were almost victours) were so terrified, that they turned their backs, and
left the victory to Huntley, far beyond his own expectation; and yet, not
without a great slaughter of his friends, servants and followers; and
especially those of his name, amongst whom were two of his brethren. This
battle was fought on the Ascension day, in the year 1453. he had before the
battle that same day given lands to the principal men of those surnames that
were with him, as Forbesses, Leslies, Vrwines, (...), Graunts, and diverse
others, which made them fight with greater courage. Crawford also lost many of
his men, together with his brother John Lindesay, so that the loss on both
sides, was accounted almost equal.

Huntley had the name of the victory, yet could not march forward to the King,
as he intended, and that partly because of his great loss of men, partly for
that he was advertised, that Archbald Douglas Earl of Murray had invaded his
lands, and burnt the Piele of Strabogie. Wherefore he returned speedily to his
own Country, which gave Crawford leisure and occasion to pour out his wrath
against them, who had so traitorously forsaken him, by burning and wasting
their lands, and casting down their Houses and Castles. Huntley being returned
to the North, not only recompensed the damage done to him by the Earl
Murray, but also compelled him out of his whole bounds of Murray: yet it was
not done without conflict and mutual harm: for Huntley coming to Elgin in
Murray, found it divided, the one half standing for him, the other half (and
almost the other side of the street) standing for the Earl Murray: wherefore
he burnt that half which was for Murray; and hereupon rose the Proverb, Half
done as Eglin was burnt. While he is there, Murray assembled his power, which
consisting most of footmen, he sat down upon a hill some two or three miles
off, called the Drum of Pluskardein, which was unaccessible to horsemen.
Huntley forrowed his lands to draw him from the hill, or at least to be
revenged of him that way, thinking he durst not come into the plain fields,
and not thinking it safe to assault him in a place of such disadvantage. But
Murray seeing Huntlies men so scattered, came out of his strength, and falling
upon four or five hundredth horsemen, drove them into a bogue called the bogue
of Dunkintie, in the bounds of Pittendreigh, full of quag-mires, so deep, that
a spear may be thrust into them, and not find the bottom. In this bogue many
were drowned, the rest slain, few or none escaping of that company. There are
yet to be seen swords, steelcaps, and such other things which are found now
and then by the Country people that live about it. They made this round ryme
of it afterward,

Where left thou thy men thou Gordon so gay?
In the Bogue of Dunkintie mowing the Hay.
These victories in the North, together with the repulse (at least the retreat)
of the Earl Douglas from the Castle of Dalkeith did so encourage the King,
that he began to conceive better hopes of his affairs, and by the counsel of
Archbishop Kennedie he called a Parliament at Edinburgh, and summoned the Earl
Douglas and his partners to compeir thereat. But the Earl was so far from
obeying, that he caused plackards to be affixed upon the Church doors, and
other public places, sealed with his seal, containing in effect, that from
thenceforth he would neither obey citation, nor other commandment of the
Kings, nor in any sort commit his life to him, who having allured his Cousins
to Edinburgh, and his brother to Stirlin, under safe conduct, had traitorously
murdered them without any order of law, and contrary to his oath. Hereupon he
and his three brethren, Archbald, Hugh, and John, together with Beatrix, Relict
of Earl William, were declared Rebels, and forfeited, and with them Alexander
Earl of Crawford, and James Lord Hammiltoun; and that the number of the
Nobility might not seem to be diminished by their forfeiture, there were
diverse new Lords created, and the goods and lands of the forfeited given to
them.

Thereafter an Army was levied to pursue them, their lands were wasted, their
goods driven away, their corns destroyed, and then (winter coming on) because
the Army could not lie in the fields, they were dismissed, and appointed to
meet again in the spring. But the Earl Douglas seemed to make small account
of all this, and that the grandour of his house (which was grown to that great
height by that great marriage) might not be impaired, and that estate
transferred to strangers, he takes to wife the foresaid Beatrix, and deals
with the Pope for a dispensation, and confirmation of the marriage. But that
suit was crossed by the Kings Letters. I find it in an ancient book written of
the Douglasses in meeter, that she her self alleged, that her first husband
(Earl William) had never carnal copulation with her, and that she gave her
oath thereupon: which gives some colorable excuse to this fact, which
otherwise is so enormous, and void of all appearance that he could have been
so shameless as to have gone about it without some such reason, or pretext,
which therefore I would not omit to intimate, and I remember not that I have
read it elsewhere. However it were, he kept her as his wife, and continued the
wars that year, and the next two years, pillaging and wasting the Kings
possessions, and the King doing the like to him, especially in Annandale,
Galloway, and the Forest. Hereupon ensued a Famine, and upon the Famine a
Pestilence, Towns and Castles were destroyed on both sides, and no kind of
hostility pretermitted. The King notwithstanding caused try indirectly
whether the Earl could be persuaded to yield himself to him, and the wi^est
of his friends counseled him to do it, alleging that his Predecessors had
often done so; chiefly seeing he had a King of a gentle nature, and who would
be entreated by friends, not to extinguish so noble a Family, and undo so
many Noblemen as joined with him, or to redact them to that necessity, that
they should be forced to take a course for themselves; that it would be easier
for him to get some good quarters now, while matters were as yet not past
reconciliation, and while his friends were about him, then afterward, when he
should be deserted, and left alone: then there would be no hope of pardon. To
this he answered, That he would never commit himself to the credit of those
whom neither shame nor honesty could bind, who regarded neither the law of
God, nor man: but having allured his Cousins and Brother with fair promises,
had so traitorously and cruelly slain them, that he would rather suffer all
extremity, then come into their power. This speech was approved or reproved
according to every man's disposition, some praising his magnanimitle and
courage, some disliking his obstinacy, and exhorting him not to lose this good
occasion of making his peace, which (if his friends weary of troubles should
abandon him) he would repent afterward. He persisted in his opinion, and what
for detestation of the fact, what for fear to be used after the same manner
himself, if he should come into the Kings power (as it falls out, and must of
necessity, where trust, which is the ground of all peace and reconciliation, is
taken away) not suffering any thought of peace to come into his mind, resolved
himself to try the fortune of war.

But the Earl Crawford being weary of so long troubles, apprehending the
iniquity of the cause, and weighing with himself the common changeableness
of all humane affairs, and knowing that pardon would be easily granted to him
who should preoccupy the Kings favor, and uneasy and difficult to those that
should continue in arms, being left by a part of his friends, and suspecting
the fidelity of the rest, as the King was journeying through Angus, he casts
himself in his way with a habit most composed to move pity, bare footed, and
bare headed; he plainly confessed his offenses in times past, put himself
absolutely in the Kings will, commemorating the good offices done by his
Predecessors; that he acknowledged that whatever had happened to him, had
happened by his own default; whatever life or fortune he should have
thereafter, he would owe it to the Kings clemency. These and such like
speeches moved the Noblemen that were present, especially the Gentlemen of
Angus, who although they had always followed the King, yet were loath that so
ancient and noble an house should perish: chiefly Archbishop Kennedie, howbeit
he had received many injuries of Crawford (or his sather) yet considering of
what importance it was to the King to have his own forces increased by this
accession, and his enemies diminished and weakened by want of so great a man,
dealt earnestly with the King to receive him into his wonted place of honor
and favor. Neither was the King difficult to be entreated, but graciously
pardoned him, and restored him to his former condition both of goods and
honor, only admonishing him to do his duty in time to come. It is reported
that the King being desirous to perform his promise (which was to raze the
house of Phineavin, the chief Manor of the Earl Crawfords) and to make the
highest stone the lowest, he went up to the top of the house, and (according to
this promise) threw down a little stone, which was lying loose above the built
work, to the ground, which is to this day kept in an iron chain for a
Monument and memorial of this action. Some also write that the King took from
him the lands of Badenoch and Loquhabre, and gave them to Huntley for the lands
which he had distributed at the field of Brighen, as also the second place in
Parliament, and honor of bearing the Scepter. Crawford died within six months
of a burning feavour at Phineavin, and was buried in the Gray Friars at Dundee,
in the Sepulcher of his Progenitors.

The Earl Douglas informed hereof, and seeing his forces decay daily, and the
Kings daily growing greater, he thought he would go try what succor or
support he could have out of England, and for that effect he sent James
Hammiltoun of Cadyou to K. Henry to desire his help in this estate. King Henry
considering, and thinking the occasion fit for him to encroach upon Scotland,
persuading himself that the Earl Douglas his passion of revenge on the one
part, and the necessity of his estate on the other (two powerful perswaders
to move men) should drive him to accept his help on whatever terms, was
content to aid him upon this condition, that he should become his subject,
swear himself English, and so to continue for ever; and for better assurance
hereof, should put into his hands such Strengths and Castles in Scotland as he
had in his custody. Unto this Douglas replied very generously and honestly,
``That he (...) would never leave such a blot upon his house, and would rather
choose to die by what ever hand, then commit such a crime against his Country,
for a fault done by the Prince and some particular men only, whereof he hoped
to be avenged, without that shame. This being so honest a part, and testifying
so honest a heart, as some of them have not had the like, even of those who
pretended to be Kings themselves (some of whom have not refused to render
themselves and their Kingdoms to the English servitude, to be avenged of their
enemies, and to obtain the Crown for themselves) is too lightly overpassed by
our Writers, without the due testimony, approbation, and praise that it well
deserves. Besides, there can hardly be a clearer argument of his not affecting
or aiming at the Crown, which his brother and Predecessors were charged with,
and tra^uced to the King: for had he been that way set, he would have accepted
of the proffer of England, and made use of their help, which (questionless)
these Kings would not have denied him, according to their ordinary practice.
And how many are there that would have forborne in such power, and upon such an
occasion? for although he seems to have no color of title to the Crown, yet
men that aspire to it, do seldom want their pretenses, when they have power
to search it. So that the greater is the pity in so moderate prosecution of
such a quarrel, that the event should have been so hard on his side, which
appears yet better in that which followed.

So le^t thus to himself, by the instigation of his partners, and namely of
James Hammiltoun of Cadyou, he gathered together his friends and followers to
raise the siege of Abercorne, which the King had beset, and lay before it in
his own person. And when he was come within five miles, or (as others say)
within sight of the besiegers, they looked assuredly that he would, and that
he had resolved to fight, because he put his Army in order of battle; and
being very ready for their part, and forward, Cadyou also exhorting him
thereto, that he would end these wars with a notable victory, to his
perpetual praise, or with an honorable death, as became his house, that he
would vindicate himself from those miseries and contumelies; he utterly
refused to fight, though he were more in number, saying plainly, his heart
would not suffer him, nor serve him to fight against his Sovereign. Whereby it
may be conjectured (as says the Manuscript) that his meaning was only to have
terrified the King, and brought him to some reasonable conditions of peace. But
there wanted intercessours to deal betwixt them, partly because all were
engaged to the one or other side, partly for that they believed that he still
persisted in his former opinion of distrust and indignation, and so nothing was
done therein by any. Others interpret it to have bin cowardice, or faint
heartedness, and lack of courage (for their words import so much) a fault that
was incident to few of that stock, and we never find it imputed to any of them
against England, or against any other private enemy; neither to this man
elsewhere, but only at this time. And we heard how after the killing of his
brother his courage is commended, together with his piety. The reason of it
has been this; then while his anger was recent, and green against the authors
thereof, he could have done any thing to have been avenged; now time having
taken away the edge of that disposition, when he considered it was his King he
had to do with, whose hand the Courtiers, his enemies, had only borrowed; his
natural affection, and regard of a subject toward his Prince, was returned,
and by peece-meal had taken possession of his heart again, as the own proper
lodging where it had been harbored ever before. Certainly this refusal to
fight now, and his former rejecting the King of Englands disloyal conditions
of help, have proceeded from one and the same disposition of mind. Wherefore
seeing that ought highly to be praised, I see not how this can be condemned, at
least how they can condemn it, that do so highly respect that high place of
Kings. The word also will import, not altogether flat cowardice, but a natural
sluggishnesse, and want of action, whereof cowardice is sometimes the cause,
but not always, though they concur often* But there is another affection that
makes men slack in action, which proceeds not either of sluggishnesse, or
cowardice, but of irresolution; when a man swiming betwixt two opinions,
resolves not fully upon either, and this seems to have been his disposition.
A great impediment in his actions, and at least in this last point of such
importance, the cause of his ruin, while neither his heart could suffer him to
betake himself against his Prince, whom naturally he affected, neither could he
digest to forget the fact done, or (after it) to commit himself to the doer.
Which disposition, though it have brought out the like effects as cowardlinesse
and sluggishnesse are wont to do, to wit, lingering and eschewing of the
battle, yet this did not proceed in him from either of these two, but had the
original from a very honest mind to his duty. His love to his Prince strove
and fought with another duty, which was his love to his dead brother, or to
his own honor. Out of which, whileas he either cannot, or occasion is not
offered to extricate himself, and wind out a full resolution, he suffered
himself to be carried unto that which he was most inclined to, his love to his
Prince, and thereby he slipped and let slide through his fingers (as it were)
this fair occasion which was then offered unto him, of no less (in the
judgment of his friends) then the casting the dice for the Crown. And so James
Hamilton told him, that the occasion was such, that if he did not lay hold of
it, he should never find the like again: he told him withal, that his want of
resolution would be his overthrow, as it was indeed.

For James Hammiltoun himself left him that same night, and went to the King,
of whom he was so honorably and well received, that others thereby were
encouraged to come in also. Yet others write that he was committed to ward in
Rosseline for a certain season, and afterward releeved at the entreatie of
George Douglas Earl of Angus. However, by his information to the King of the
estate of the Earl Douglas his Army, how forward they had been to have
fought, and how discontented and discouraged they were with his lingering, how
the greatest motive that kept them with him was their doubting of pardon for
their former offenses, the King caused make a Proclamation, that whosoever
would come unto him, and forsake the Earl Douglas, should have free remission
for all that was past, providing they came within 48. hours.

This being published, the most part of the Earls Army left him, so that there
remained not (ere the next morning) with him above 2000. men, whereby he was
constrained to leave the fields, and his friends and servants that were in
Abercorne to be cruelly slain, and executed; for the Castle was taken by
force, and demolished, to his no small reproach, in that he was so irresolute,
and had not by some mean or other procured at least some honest composition
for himself and them, or else to have adventured all. Where if he would not
have taken the Kingdom, in case of victory, yet might he honorably have set
down conditions of peace; or if he had lost the field, he could not have lost
more then he did; for by these means, abandoned of all, he was constrained to
flee unto England.

In the year 1455. having gotten together a small company of men, he returned
into Annandale, thinking to have found some friends in those quarters, which
were his own lands before; but there he was encountered by the Kings followers,
especially by his own kinsman (but the Kings Cousin) George E. of Angus (as
some write) who defeated him. His brother the Earl of Murray was slain in the
field, and his other brother the Earl of Ormond was hurt, and taken prisoner;
after his wounds were cured, being brought to the King, he was executed, with
greater regard to this last action, then respect to his victory obtained not
far from the same place, at Sark, against the English, and Magnus with the red
main, their insolent Champion, which was so greatly praised by the King before,
and so acceptable to all Court and Country. Such is the course and vicissitude
of all humane affairs. We hear of one only son of Ormonds, named Hugh,
Dean of Brichen, of whom we shall speak somewhat hereafter in the life of
Archbald Earl of Angus, who was Chancellor of Scotland. His takers were the
Lord Carlisle, and Johnston of Johnston, to whom the King gave in recompense the
40. l. land in Pittinen upon Clide, to each of them a 20. l. land thereof. The
third brother, John Lord of Balvenie, escaped in a wood, and the Earl himself
by flight got him to Dunstaffage, where finding Donald Earl of Rosse, and Lord
of the Isles, he incited him to make war against the King in his favors, and
after he had engaged him therein, he withdrew himself again into England. This
is noted to have been in the year 1455. after which there was a Parliament
called (about the fifth of June, or August, as the Acts bear) wherein he, and
his brother John, and his wife Beatrix, were again forfeited, and their lands
of Galloway annexed to the Crown. This Beatrix (who had been his Brothers
wife, and whom he had used and kept for his own wife for certain years) came
to the King, and excused her self, as being a woman, and compelled to do what
she had done. The King received her into favor, and married her to John Stuart
his half brother (by the mother) and gave her the lands of Balvenie. This John
was afterward made Earl of Athole in King James the thirds time: he had by
Beatrix two daughters only, the eldest of which was married to the Earl of
Errole. This is cast in by some in the next year following.

The Earl Douglas abandoned on all hands, traveled with Donald of the Isles,
Earl of Rosse, conform to their old band made with Earl William to assist
him, and renew his claim to the Isles. Hereupon Donald wasted Argyle, Arran,
Loquhaber, and Murray, took the Castle of Inner-Nesse, burnt the town, and
proclaimed himself King of the Isles: but his wife (who was daughter to James
Levingston, and had been given to him in marriage at the Kings desire, of
purpose to retain him the better in duty) when she saw she could neither
prevail with him in that point, and that besides she was but contemned by him,
and the barbarous people that were with him, she left him, and came to the
King, who received her very gladly. About this same time Patrick Thornton, a
secret favourer of the Earl Douglas his faction, though he had followed the
Court a long time, slew John Sandilands of Calder the Kings Cousin, and Alane
Stuart also, upon occasion at Dumbartan. These two were of the Kings side,
wherefore the said Thornton was taken by the Kings Officers, and executed.
These things being not yet fully settled, did greatly perplex the King, between
domestic and foreign enemies. In the year 1457. the Earl Douglas came in with
Henry Percie Earl of Northumberland to the Merse, which as they were in
wasting and pillaging, they were encountered by G^orge Earl of Angus, and put
back to their Camp. Being irritated with this indignity, they put themselves
in order of battle, without staying for their full companies; many of which
were gone abroad into the Country and Villages for spoil and booty, and so
entered into conflict. When the noise hereof was carried to the ears of the
forrowers, they for fear of losing what they had gotten, which was a very rich
and great prey, past directly into England, without regarding what became of
the two Earls. Hereby the battle was lost by the English, but the loss of
men was almost equal on both sides. This victory did not a little recreate
the King, and so affrighted Donald and his Islanders, that he sent and
submitted himself to the King, and was received by him. Neither was there any
farther insurrection within the Country. Neither did the Earl Douglas without
the Country enterprise any thing by the aid of England (they being distracted
at home by the dissension of Lancaster and York) during the days of this
King, which were not many: for about two or three years after this, the King
alone was slain by the wedge of a piece of Ordnance of his own, and with him
George Earl of Angus hurt amongst 30000. of his Army (of whom none else was
either slain or hurt) at the siege of the Castle of Roxburgh in the 29. year
of his age in September 1460, some 8. years after the killing of Earl William
in Stirlin Castle, at which time he was about the age of twenty one or twenty
two years.

Neither hear we any mention of the Earl Douglas his stirring in the next
Kings ( James the thirds) time, either in his minority (being but a child of
seven or eight years of age at his coronation) or in his majoritie; either in
the dissentions betwixt the Kennedi^s and the Boydes, or the dissension betwixt
the King and the Nobility. Whether it be the negligence and sloth of Writers
that have not recorded things, or whether he did nothing indeed, through want
of power, his friends, and dependers, and vassals being left by him, and
despairing of him, having taken another course, and his lands being disposed of
to others; so it is, that for the space of twenty years, or three and twenty,
until the year 1483. there is nothing but deep silence with him in all
Histories. Only we find that he was made Knight of the noble Order of the
Garter by King Edward the fourth, and is placed first in order of all the
Earls, and next to him the Earl of Arundell (who is the first Earl of
England) in the book, entitled, Nobilitas Politica; and the English Heralds
say of him, that he was a very valiant noble Gentleman, well beloved of the
King and Nobility, and very steadable to King Edward in all his troubles. These
troubles (perhaps) have been the cause that they could enterprise nothing in
Scotland until the soresaid year 1483. However it be, he has the honor to
be the first of his Nation admitted into that Order.

At last then in the year 1483. Alexander Duke of Albanie, and brother to King
James the third (who was also banished in England) and the Earl Douglas,
desirous to know what was the affection of their Countrymen toward them, vowed
that they would offer their offering on the high Altar of Loch-mabane upon the
Magdalen day, and to that effect got together some five hundred horse (what
Scottish what English) and a certain number of English footmen, that remained
with Musgrave at Burneswark hill to assist them in case they needed. So they
rode toward Loch-mabane, and at their coming the fray was raised through
Niddisdale, Annandale, and Galloway, who assembling to the Lord of Moushill
(then Warden) encountered them with great courage. The English who were on the
hill (Burneswark) fled at the first sight of the enemy, so that the rest
behoved either to do or die. And therefore they fought it out manfully from
noone till twilight, with skirmishes, after the border fashion, sometimes the
one, sometimes the other having the advantage. At last the victory fell to the
Scots, though it cost them much blood. The Duke of Albanie escaped by flight,
but the Earl of Douglas being now an aged man, was stricken from his horse,
and taken prisoner with his own consent, by a brother of the Lord of
Closeburnes, in this manner: The King ( James 3.) had made a proclamation, that
whosoever should take the E. Douglas should have 100. l. land: the E. being
then thus on foot in the field, wearied of so long exile, and thinking that he
might (perhaps) be known by some other, seeing in the field Alexander
Kilpatrick (a son of Closeburnes, and one that had been his own servant
before) he calls on him by his name, and when he came to him, he said, I have
foughten long enough against my fortune, and since I must die, I will rather
that ye (who have b^ene my own servant, and whom I knew to be faithful to me
as long as I did anything that was likely for my self) have the benefit
thereby then any other. Wherefore take me, and deliver me to the King according
to his Proclamation, but see thou be sure he keep his word before thou
deliver me. The young man, who loved the Earl entirely in his heart, wept (as
is reported) for sorrow, to see him thus aged, and altered in disguised
apparel, and offered to go with him into England. But he would not, being
wearied of such endless troubles; only he desired the young man to get his
life safe, if he could obtain so much at the Kings hands, if not, to be sure
of his own reward at least. Hereupon Kilpatricke conveyed him secretly out of
the field, and kept him in a poor cottage some few days, until he had
spoken with the King, who granted him the Earls life, and gave unto himself
the fifty pound land of Kirk Michaell, which is possessed by his heirs, unto
this day. Some give the honor of this victory to Cockpool and Johnston, and
make the number of those that came with Douglas and Albany greater, and say
that King Richard of England blamed the Duke of Albanie for the loss thereof,
and that he discontented and taking it ill to be so blamed, withdrew himself
secretly into France.

The Earl Douglas being brought to the King, he ordained him to be put into
the Abbacie of Lindores; which sentence when he heard, he said no more but
this: He that may no better be, must be a Monk, which is past in a Proverb
to this day. He remained there till the day of his death (which was after the
death of King James the third) which fell out 1488. he being of a good age, and
having been a man in action from the beginning of his brother William now
four and forty years.

Some write that while he was in Lindores, the faction of the Nobility (that
had put Coghran to death, and punished some others of the Courtiers supported
by the Kings favor) especially Archbald Earl of Angus, (called Bell-the-Cat)
desired him to come out of his Cloister, and be head of their faction;
promising he should be restored to all his lands, which seems not very
probable: But that which others write, has more appearance, that the King
desired him to be his Lieutenant against the Rebels; but he laden with
years and old age, and weary of troubles, refused, saying; Sir, you have kept
me, and your black coffer in Stirling too long, neither of us can do you any
good: I, because my friends have forsaken me, and my followers and dependers
are fallen from me, betake themselves to other masters; and your black trunck
is too far from you, and your enemies are between you and it: or (as others
say) because there was in it a sort of black coin, that the King had caused to
be coined, by the advice of his Courtiers; which moneys (says he) Sir, if
you had put out at the first, the people would have taken it, and if you had
employed me in due time, I might have done you service. But now there is none
that will take notice of me, nor meddle with your money. So he remained still
in the Abbacy of Lindores, where he died, anno 1488. and was buried there.

THus began and grew, thus stood and flourished, thus decayed and ended the
Noble House of Douglas, whose love to their Country, fidelity to their King,
and disdain of English slavery was so natural, and of such force and vigor,
that it had power to propagate it self from age to age, and from branch to
branch, being not only in the stock, but in the collateral, and by branches
also, so many as have been spoken of here. They have continually retained that
natural sap and juice which was first in Sholto, then in William the Hardy,
who died in Berwick (who was in a manner a second founder) in such a measure,
that amongst them all it is uncertain which of them have been most that way
affected. This virtue joined with valor (which was no less natural, and
hereditary from man to man) caused their increase and greatness: their Princes
favoring them for these virtues, and they by these serving their Princes in
defense of their Country: Their affection pressing them thereto, their worth
and valor sufficing them, the hearts of the people affecting and following
them: Their enemies regarding and respecting them, all men admiring them: so
that in effect, the weight of warlike affairs was wholly laid on them. The
Kings needed only to give themselves to administer justice, consult, and
direct, living at peace and ease, and in great quietness to use their honest
recreations, from the latter days of King Robert Bruce, wherein there was a
pleasant harmony, and happy concurrence; the Kings (as the great wheel and
first mover) carrying the first place in honor and motion, and commanding: and
they in the next room, serving and obeying, and executing their commandments
(as under wheels, turned about by them) courageously, honorably, faithfully
and happily, to the great honor and good of their Prince and Country.

This behoved to be accompanied with greatness: for neither could service (to
any purpose) be done without respected greatness, neither had greatness
been worthily placed without service. Their power is said by some to have been
such, that (if they had not divided amongst themselves) no Subject in this
Island could have compared with them in puissance. But that which diminished
their power, and ruined the Earl Douglas, was the falling of the houses of
Angus and Morton, from them to the King: for the last battle the Earl Douglas
was at, the Earl of Angus discomfited him; so that it became a Proverb, The
Red Douglas put down the Black: Those of the house of Angus, being of the
fairer complexion. They might have raised (thirty or forty thousand men) under
their own command, and of their own dependers only, and these most valiant:
for their command was over the most expert, and most exercised in war, by
reason of their vicinitie, and nearness to England, which was their only
matter and whetstone of valor. They who give them least, give them 15000. men,
who upon all occasions were ready with them to have ridden into England, at
their pleasure, and back even for their private quarrels, and have stayed
there twenty days, and wasted all from Durham Northward, which no other
private Subject could ever do, upon their own particular, without the Kings
Army: this power (as has been said) they u^ed ever well, without giving of
offense to their Prince in any sort, that we can read of clearly and expressly
set down.

Yet our Writers say, it was too great for Scotland. But how could it be too
great, that was thus for the good of it? for the Kings service? for their ease?
making no rebellion, no resistance, no contradiction? which (we see) they came
never to, until the killing of E. William at Stirling. Truly if we shall
speak without partiality, their greatness was so useful to their King and
Country, that Hector Boethius sticks not to say, the Douglasses were ever the
sure buckler, and war wall of Scotland, and won many lands by their
singular manhood and vassalages: for they decored this Realm with many noble
Acts, and by the glory of their Martial deeds. And though their puissance was
suspected to some of their Kings, and was now the cause of their declining, yet
since that house was put down, Scotland has done but few memorable deeds of
Arms: And we cannor say justly, that they gave any cause of jealousy. Princes
were moved to conceive it without just occasion given by them, unless it were
a fault to be great: whether they were jealous of their own natural
inclination (as jealousy is esteemed ordinarily to the highest places) or by
the suggestion of others, that were mean men, and so envious of great men: the
one inclining to jealousy, the other working on that inclination, however
notwithstanding of all this, they sti^l behaved themselves toward their
Princes moderately, obeying them to warding, and after releeving to warding
again, at their Kings pleasure, without any resistance whatsoever, as may be
seen in the Earl of Wigton, which being well considered, the cause of their
stirring, or commotion against their Prince (which was never till this last
man) will appear not to have proceeded from their greatness, enterprising
against their Prince, or aspiring to his Throne, (although the mean men, and
new start-up Courtiers persuaded the King so, for their own advantage and
ends) but the cause was indeed the aspiring and ambition of these mean men, who
labored to climb up into their rooms by their decay, neither was this their
aspiring by virtue, but by calumnies, and flattering, fostering the foresaid
jealousy.

I know it is a maxim in Policy, and that plausible to many; That Princes
should not suffer too great Subjects in their Dominions; yet it is certain,
that without great Subjects there can be no great service. Things may be
shufled at home, but abroad there can never any thing be done to the purpose,
or of note. But now the question is where great men are already; whether it be
best thus to undo them, and make up new men by their ruin, or not: a thing
worthy to be considered: and also, whether or not there be a possibility to
use great men to good uses; and (if possible) whether it were not better to do
so, then to go about to undo them: whether also there be not in undoing of
them such great hazard (as we see) that though it may succeed at last (as it
did here) yet it is not so good wisdom to adventure upon it with such trouble
and uncertaintie.

Truly, that which made it to succeed, was the very honest heart of this last
Earl James; who, if either he would have turned English, and cast off all
respect to his native Prince, or entered into battle against him at Abercorne,
it had proved an unwise course so to have affected the advancement of these
mean men; and not rather to have used them well, that were become already
great. And therefore the Writers find no other cause of this success on the
Kings side, but the only providence of God, who had not determined to give the
Crown to the Douglas, but to continue it in the right line; which though the
Douglas did not aim at, yet being driven to this necessity, either to lose his
own estate, or to take the Crown in case of victory, he could hardly have
refused it, if it should have come to that, but he chose rather to lose his
own; and lost it indeed by a rare modesty, which is even disallowed by
Writers, who interpret it to have been fearfulness, or laziness; so hard is
it to know the right, and not to incur some censure in our actions: how ever
it be, this appears most certain, that their meaning to their Prince and
Country has ever been good, and that even in this man. Their errors and
faults whatsoever they fell into, they were drawn to them by the malice of
^eir particular enemies, and the Princes assisting, fostering and maintaining
them in their ways, thereby to undo that Earldom, jealous of their Crown,
and that they might reign (perhaps) with greater liberty, and fuller
absoluteness, which their Courtiers persuaded them they could not do, so long
as they stood. But it comes not ever so to pass; and though it came here so to
pass in this Kings days (which were not many) yet in his sons days, we
shall see it fell out otherwise: for out of these mean men (at least in
respect of the house of Douglas) there arose some who proved as great, and
greater restrainers of that liberty, then ever the Earls of Douglas were. So
that if that be the end of cutting off great men (to obtain greater liberty)
we see it is not always attained, and does not ever follow upon it; yea, we
shall see, that almost it never (or but for a very short while) produces that
effect. It is therefore worthy to be examined, whether it be to be sought, or
to be bought at so dear a rate, such hazard and trouble. But this is the
vicissitude of this rolling world; let men consider it, and reverence the Ruler.

Jacobus Comes Lindorensi coenobio inclusus.
Quid rides rasumque caput, cellaeque recessum?
Quodque cucullatis fratribus annumeror?
Fortuna volvente vices fiet modo Princeps,
Plebeius: Monachus saepe Monarcha fuit.
Why do you laugh to see my shaven Crown?
My Cell, my Cloister, and my hooded Gown?
This is the power of that Sovereign Queen,
By whom Monks, Monarchs; Monarchs Monks have been.
Another.
Both Fortunes long I tried, and found at last,
No State so happy as an humble rest.
Georgius Angusiae comes.
Anvici Gallos obsessos undique laetho,
Scotorum, eripuit te duce parva manus,
Te duce Duglasius, victus quoque Percius heroes
Militiae statuunt clara tropheae tuae:
Sed consanguinei, sed quid meruere propinqui?
O furor, O rabies, perdere velle suos?
Matrem ingrata necat crudeli vipera, morsu
Stirpem, qua genita est noxia vermis edit
His non absimilis fueras: per te domus illa
Eversa est ortum ducis and unde genus,
Non me ventosa ambitio, non dira cupido
Egit opum me non impulit invidia
Far parem poteram, poteram vel far priorem,
Contentusque mea sort beatus eram:
Ast Regi parere and jussa facessere fixum;
Fas quoque semper erat, fas mihi semper erit
George Earl of Angus.
Thou ledst a handful, who from death did free
The French besieged at Anwick: victory,
Though bloody from the Noble Piercy gaind,
Increast thy honor: but against thy friend
And kinsman, what strange fury turned thy force?
What madness to destroy thy own, 'twas worse
Then Vipers cruelty, compelled to eat
Their way or die; thine was a needless hate:
No vain ambition oversway'd my heart,
No love of wealth, no envy had a part
In what I did, I could an equal bear:
Nay, did not grudge though Douglas greater were,
Content with what I had, I happy lived,
But 'twas my Prince his will and it is believed
Lawful, and Justice has pronounced it good
To serve our King, without respect of blood.
Aliud.
A solo potuit Pompeius Caesare vinci,
Non nisi Romano milite Roma cadit,
Duglasios nemo cum posset vincere, solus
Duglasium potuit vincere Duglasius.
Another on the same.
Pompey by Caesar only was overcome,
None but a Roman Soldier conquered Rome;
A Douglas could not have been brought so low,
Had not a Douglas wrought his overthrow.
Here ends the first Part, containing the History of the House of Douglas.
THE SECOND PART OF THE HISTORY OF THE DOUGLASSES, CONTAINING THE HOUSE OF
ANGUS.

By Master DAVID HUME of Godscroft.

EDINBURGH, Printed by EVAN TYLER, Printer to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty. 1643.

Of the House of ANGUS, before it came to the name of DOUGLAS.
THe great and potent House of Douglas (of which we may say, the best subjects
that ever served Prince, the worthiest seconds that ever seconded any, worthy
for their modesty to be seconded by others, second to none in all virtue, and
true worth of valor, magnanimity, kindness, courtesy, faithfulness to
King, Country; and kindred, serving their Prince, and served by the rest,
worthily served, worthy to be served, as knowers of service, and recompencers
thereof in due proportion, and degree, as Charters of Lands liberally given do
testify) being thus brought to this pitiful end, there arose in place thereof
the House of Angus, of which we come now to speak, and to view in the descent
of it. If we shall consider it in our best discourse, with all circumstances
due to it, and compare it with the former, to which it succeeded, ballancing
all things aright, we shall find it, as not fully so great in that huge
puissance and large extent of lands and rents that the house of Douglas had
(which did surpass all others that were before, or have been since amongst
subjects,) so shall it be seen otherwise nothing inferior. In antiquity Angus
is thus far beyond it, that there have been diverse ^hanes of Angus (which was
a degree of honor in those days equal to that of Earls now) as also that
the Earls of Angus were created amongst the first that carried the title of
Earls in the year 1057. or 1061. at the Parliament of Forfaire in the days of
King Malcolme Kenmore; whereas the house of Douglas was honored only with the
title of Barons, or Lords. This is much preferment, yet it is more, that in our
Chronicles the name of the house of Douglas is then first found, whereas Angus
is found 200. years before that time in the 839. year, howbeit we have already
shown that there were Douglasses in the year 767. though not mentioned by our
Writers. In blood they are equal on the fathers side, as being descended of
the same progenitors; so that what ever belongs to the house of Douglas before
James slain at Otterburn, belongs also to the house of Angus; the first Earl
of Angus of that surname being brother to him, and both of them sons to
W^lliam the first Earl of Douglas, or rather the first Earl of Douglas, being
also Earl of Angus in effect, seeing his wife was Countess of Angus, howbeit
he used not the style. By the mothers side, the house of Angus has the
preeminence, being descended of the greatest in the Kingdom, and even of the
Royal stock, having been diverse ways mingled therewith. In virtue, valor,
and love of their Country, it resemblet^ the spring from whence it ^owes, and
comes nothing short of it. In c^edit, authority, place, and action, account,
favor, and affection of men, we shall find it no less beloved and popular,
and no less respected and honored. So that with all this (both likeness, and
no great inequality) bearing the name of Douglas, together with the arms, and
title of Lords of Douglas, the fall of this former house was the less felt, it
seeming not so much cut off, as transplanted; nor destroyed, as transferred;
some comfort it is, when it comes so to pass, as may be seen in many others.

To deduce then the house of Angus from the first original thereof, (...) 838.
is declared by our Writers, that Kenneth the second son to Alpine, the 69.
King, having expelled the Picts out of his Kingdom; did dispose of their Lands
to his Noblemen, and such as had done him good service in the wars. In which
distribution he gave the Province (of old called O^estia) to two brothers, the
elder of which was named Angus, or (as B^chanan) Aeneas, and the younger Merns.
These two brothers dividing that Province betwixt them, gave each of them his
name to that half he possessed, and so of one they made two, calling the one
Angus, and the other the Merns, as these Countries are so called at this
present. This is the first Thane of Angus, from whom that Country took the
name. 2. After him we read of other Thanes, as of Rohardus, Radardus, or
Cadhardus, who slew Culenus (the 79. King) for ravishing his daughter. 3. Also
there was one Cruthnetus (in the reign of Kenneth; brother to Duffe, in the
year 961.) who was slain by Crathelint; who was his own grandchild by his
daughter Fenella, or Finabella; married to the Thane of the Merns. 4. Then we
have one Sinel, (in the reign of Malcolm^ the second son to this Kenneth, who
began his reign 1104. and reigned 30: years) who married Do^ or Doada, younger
daughter to King Malcolm^, whose elder sister Beatrix, was married to Crinen,
Thane of the Isles; and principal of the Thanes, whom that age called Abthane.
5. Of this marriage was procreat Mackbeth, or Mackbed, or Mac^abee, Thane of
Angus, and afterward King of Scotland, of whom the History is sufficiently
known. 6. The last Thane was Luthlack, son to Mackbeth, who was installed King
at Scone after his fathers death, but within three months he was encountered
by King Malcolme; and slain at Strabogie. This was about the year 1056, or 57.
And so much of the first period of the house of Angus, under the title of
Thanes.

The second period of the house of Angus, is under the title of Earls, before
it come to the name of Stuart. The first is, one made Earl by King Malcolme,
at the Parliament of Forfaire, where Boethius tells expressly, that the Thane
of Angus was made Earl of Angus. The next is in the days of King David
(called Saint David) in the wars with Stephen King of England, in the battle
at Alerton, where the General the Ea^ of Gloucester was taken prisoner; the
Scottish Army is said to have been conducted by the Earls of March,
Stratherne, and Angus, in the year 1136. or 37. but he is no^ named. The third
is Gilchrist (in the year 1153.) in the reign of Malcolme the maiden, who did
good service against Sumerledus, Thane of Argyle, and being married to the
Kings sister; having found her false, put her to death; and fearing the King,
fled into England, and afterward was pardoned. Then we have John Cumin in the
days of Alexander the second, in the year 1239. of whom we read nothing, but
that he was sent Ambassador into France to Lewis then King, and that he died
by the way before he had delivered his Embassage: Boethius, (...). This was
about 1330.

The third period is in the surname of Stuarts; of whom the first is one John
Stuart entitled Earl of Angus, Lord of Boncle, and Abernethie, in a Charter
given by him to Gilbert Lumsden of Blainerne, yet extant in the hands of the
house of Blainerne. It is not dated, but the witnesses show the time, for
Randolphus custos regni Scotiae is one. What this John was is uncertain, but in
likelihood he has been brother to Walter (the seventh from the first Walter)
and son to John, and so also uncle to Robert the first King of that Name, for
so the time does bear, and his father John (or himself) married the heir of
Boncle, and was slain at the battle of Falkirk in the year 1299. This John was
slain at Halidoun hill, together with his brother James, and Alan^. (Bu^h. lib.
9.) 2. The second is, Thomas (apparently son to John) who assisted the Earl
of Douglas, and the Earl of March in their taking of Berwick, in the year
1357. or 58. he died in the Castle of Dumbartan, having bin imprisoned there,
but for what, is not known. 3. Then Thomas again, father to Margaret Stuart
Countess of Mar and Angus. 4. Last of all Margaret Stuart, daughter to this
Thomas, married first to Thomas Mar Earl of Mar in her fathers lifetime
apparently. And after her fathers death (who died without heirs male) she was
heir to her father by the renunciation of her sister Elizabeth (who was married
afterward to Alexander Hamilton of Cadyowe) and so she was Countess of Mar
and Angus, Dowager (or Lady tercer) of Mar, and inheritrix of the Earldome of
Angus. Her first husband dying without issue, she was married after his death
to William the first Earl of Douglas, she being his third wife (as has bin
showed) in the year 1381. She was a kind Lady to her friends, loving to her
sister Elizabeth, and a careful mother to her son George Earl of Angus. She
is never designed Countess of Douglas, either for distinction, being better
known by her titles of Mar and Angus, or because these were more ancient, and
no less honon^able. She is the twelfth from Bancho, and tenth from Walter the
first Stuart, and she is the last of that Name in the house of Angus. And thus
much of the house of Angus in general before it came to the Douglasses, of
whom now it is time to speak.

Of the first Earl of Angus of the Name of Douglas. Of William the first Earl
of Douglas and Angus.
WE shall do no wrong to reckon William (the first Earl of Douglas) as the
first Earl of Angus, also of the Name of Douglas, seeing he married the
inheritrix of Angus. Nay we should do him wrong to omit him, being the root
from which all the rest are sprung. He was the first Earl of Douglas, and first
Earl of Angus of the Name of Douglas, though it be true that he was 23. or 24.
years Earl of Douglas before he came to be Earl of Angus, and that is all the
difference betwixt the antiquity of these two houses in the possession of that
Name. Now that it was Earl William himself, and none else, it is evident by a
bond made by the said Earl William to his sister Marjorie (Countess of Mar)
for the due payment of the said Marjories third, let to him and Margaret Stuart
(Countess of Mar and Angus) where he calls her his wife. Also that the same
Earl William was father to George, it is clear by a Charter of Tutorie, and
entaile made by Sir James Sandilands of West-Calder to George, in which Sir
James speaking says thus, The Land of Calder were given to my father and
mother of good memory by my Lord Sir William Earl of Douglas and Mar his
father: that is, father to George. Of the life of this William we have spoken
in the house of Douglas, whither we refer the Reader.

Of George Douglas, second Earl of that Name, and son to Margaret Stuart
Countess of Mar and Angus.
GEorge his son enters to the Earldom in the year 1389. the 9. 1389.
of Aprile, a boy of seven or eight years old at most, for he was born but in
1381. which is the first year that we find his father and his mother married.
His mother resigned the Earldom of Angus in his favor at a Parliament in the
aforesaid year 1389, the 9. of April, so that he has the title of Earl of
Angus, from that time forth, notwithstanding his mother was alive.

He had to wife Mary Stuart daughter to King Robert the third, being His wife
King (...) the third his daughter.
then about 16. or 17. years of age. All that we hear of him in our Histories
is, that he was taken prisoner with the Earl of Douglas, at the battle of
Homeldoun in the year 1402. When he died is uncertain, only thus much we know,
that his son William kept Courts as Earl in the year 1430. So he has lived
42. or 43. years. And certainly he has not lived long; for aster his death
Mary Stuart his wife was twice married, first to the Lord Kennedie, and bare to
him John Lord Kennedie, and James Archbishop of Saint Andrews, who are called
brothers to his son George Earl of Angus. Then she was married to the Lord
John Grahame of Dindaffe-moore, and bare to him Patrick Grahame Bishop also of
Saint Andrews, and James Grahame first Lord of Fintrie. First Lord of Fintrie.


His children were William and George, both Earls of Angus afte^ him.

Of William the third Earl of Angus, and second of that Name (of William)
TO George succeeded William his son by Mary Stuart, as all our writers do
testify, and all men acknowledge, He was amongst those that were committed to
prison by King James the first, in the year 1424. After this he was employed to
receive the Castle of Dumbarre, when the Earl of March was imprisoned, in the
year 1435. the 29. of King James the first his Reign, he was made warden of
the Warden of the middle marches.
middle March.

In the year 1436. he was sent against Percie, who, either by private 1436.
authority, or public allowance, had entered Scotland with 4000. he was about
the same number: and had with him in company men of note, Adam Hepburne of
Hales, Alexander Ramsay of Dalhousie, Sir Gilbert Johnstoun of Elphinston. They
fought at Piperdain or Piperdean (as The battle at Piperdean.
say Boethius and Holinshed) perhaps Harpardean by Hadington: for we 1436.
see that most of them are Lowthian-men that are remarked to be in his company,
yet it is hard to think that Percie could come so far in with so few. The
Earl of Angus was there victor, beginning his first Wars upon Percie, fatal
to the Name belike. There were (...) of the English He overthrevv (...).
400. together with Sir Henry Cliddisdale, Sir John Ogle, Sir Richard Percie
Knights; taken prisoners 1500. Of the Scots one only of note was slain, Sir
Gilbert Johnstoun of Elphinston ( Buchanan calls him Alexander, Sir Gilbert
(...) of Elph^nston (...).
but amiss) a gentleman of singular approved virtue (says Buchanan) and
Boethius tells the manner, while he pursues the enemy too eagerly.

Before this, Archbald Earl of Douglas, and Wigton was gone into France
male-contented with the government, having been twice committed prisoner, to
receive his Dukedom of Turaine. Every mis-hap is good for some body: that gave
occasion and way to this employment, for while the house of Douglas was
present, who but they for service against England? who but they were able to do
it? Now they being absent, who but a Douglas? A branch of that tree, and not
long since come of it, especially being the Kings Cousin so near. So they
begin, and so they shall continue with the like virtue.

We hear not whom he married, nor any thing of his children, save of his son
James who did succeed to him. Neither is it known when he died precisely: only
we find that he was dead before the 1437. the 27. of February. So that
reckoning from the first year of his fathers marriage (in the 1398.) he has
lived some 41. years in all, and 13. years Earl, from the 1424.

Of James the fourth Earl of Angus of the surname of Douglas.
AFter William, his son James was Earl. Our warrant is a writ; where he is
served heir to William his father in Killiemoore, of the date 1437. Febr. 27.
some 6. or 7. years after the death of King James the first. There are also
diverse other writs of this kind extant* which do witness that he has been,
but of no use in public, or for history. Whither ever he was married, or had
any children we hear nothing. Dies
He dies before the year 1452. 1452.


There is one thing not to be omitted, which is a bo^d of Robert Fleming of
Cummernald, to him (where he is entitled James Earl of Angus Lord of
Liddisdale, and Jedward Forest) to enter within the iron gate of the Castle of
Tantallon or Hermitage, under the pain of 2000* marks upon eight days warning.
The cause is subjoyned, because he had burnt the Earls Corn within the
Baronie of North-Berwick, and taken away his Cattle there on Fasting-even, or
Shrove-tuesday. It is dated in the year 1444. the 24. of September. This
burning is a token of no good will even then betwixt the house of Angus, and
the house of Douglas, whereof the Lord Fleming was a follower. Even then, I
say, before the time of William slain at Stirlin. For this seems to have
fallen out about the time of Gross James, or (it may be) in the beginning of
Earl William. But it is hard to conceive how this man (a depender of the
Earls of Douglas) should thus far have bowed himself, and it is a token,
that the Earl of Angus authority has not been small. Howsoever, on these
grounds we restored him to his own place, being left out altogether by all
other that I have seen.

Of George Douglas, the second George and fifth Earl of Angus.
TO James succeeded his uncle George, by the consent of our whole writers, who
(all) speaking of King James the second, call this George the Kings fathers
sisters son. So the King and he, are brother and sisters children. We need
not to impugn the received op^nion; The time and computation of years will
admit it sufficiently, for though he were born two years after his fathers
marriage 1400. yet shall he not pass 63. at his death. Neither does any other
thing that I know of, hinder us from believing this deduction. Wherefore we
will follow them, though we have no other monument to testify so much
expressly, or to hinder him from being son to James. There is this scruple
in it, that Buchanan calls James Kennedie (Archbishop of Saint Andrews) of
greater age then George Douglas. Which if it be true, then George could not be
his brother, for their mother was first married to Angus. We have monuments of
him as Earl in the year 1452. May 24. and in the 1461. the last of September;
and of his son retoured heir to him in the 1463. So that he has been Earl
about 10. or 11 years. But our histories say it was he that assisted Creightoun
to spoil the Earl Douglas Lands of Strabroke, etc. from about 1445. or 46.
years, and so his time shall be 17. years. Sibard his wife.


He married Elizabeth Sibauld daughter to Sibauld of Balgonie Treasurer of
Scotland for the time, profitably, and not dishonourably. For his place of
Treasurer was a place of credit and honor, and himself Original of the house
of Balgonie, Sibard.
descended of honorable race, viz. the Earls of Northumberland; who were of
that name in the days of Malcolme Ke^more, and Grandfather to the said
Malcolme by his mother, and had the leading of the Buch. lib. 7. (...)
English Army that was sent in for his aid against Mackbeth, to the number
Sibaulds.
of 10000. men. We find also the name of Sibards in the days of King
Alexander the second to have been in good account, of whom Buchanan writes that
they entertained feed against the Earl of Athol, as also that the said Earl
of Athol being burnt in his lodging in Hadinton, the chief of the Sibards whom
he calls William, without any further Sibaulds.
designation ( Boethius calls him John) being suspected thereof because of
their known enmity, was called in question for it, and arraigned. And although
he proved by the testimony of the Queen, that he was in Forfaire at that time
(some 60. miles from Hadinton) yet the Judge thought not this sufficient to
absolve him, because the other party alleged that his servants and followers
had been seen very many of them in the Town. And although he offered to purge
himself by combat, it could not be accepted: Whereupon he fearing the power of
his adverse party (which were the Cumins) fled into Ireland with a number of
his name. By which relation it appears that this name has been in good
account, and this marriage no way disparageable. It was also profitable in
effect, but more in hope, which was to have succeeded heir to the estate of
Balgonie, both Lands and Movables, she being his only daughter, and he
himself and his Lady of good age, the Contract also being made so that he
should be heir, failing heirs male of his own body, whereof there was small
appearance; Yet (as it often falls out in such cases, the Divine providence
eluding humane wisdom, that they may know that there is a directing and
overruling wisdom and power above theirs) that hope was disappointed. His
mother in law dies, his father in law marries a second wife, and by her has
heirs male to inherit his Lands. I think if he had known what was to come, he
would not have done it. And yet is Balgonie disappointed also, for his son
had but one daughter who was married to Lundie, and so transferred it from the
name, where he thought to have settled it. Angus gets with his Lady. 3000.
Marks of portion, no small sum in those days when portions we^e little and
the terms of payment long.

His children were Archbald, and another son* whose name we have His children.
not. Some tell us of James Earl of Angus, and Lord Warden of the borders. But
when should he have been Earl of Angus? for Archbald succeeded to George; and
to Archbald his grandchild Archbald. The truth is this James was before son
to William, as has been said; yet it may be that he has had a son named James
also, though Writers do not name him. He had four daughters; first Elizabeth,
married to Robert Grahame of Fintrie; second Margaret, to Duncan Campbell;
third Giles; and fourth Alison, of whose marriage there is no mention. He had
also a son natural, of whom are descended the house of Bonjedward. His
daughters The original of the house of Bonjedward.
were not married in his own time (belike they have been young) but their
brother in the year 1476. contracts with Robert Grahame of Fintrie, to marry
his sister Elizabeth, failing her, Margaret; and failing Margaret, Giles; and
failing Giles, Alison; so soon as a dispensation can be obtained, for they were
within the degrees then forbidden, she being the third from Mary Stuart the
Kings Daughter, and Robert Grahame in the same degree (belike) son to James
Grahame. The portion is 400. Marks. Margaret was married to Duncan Campbell (we
know not of what house) in the year 1479. Her brother contracts for 600. Marks,
and finds Robert Douglas of Loghleven, and Alexander Ramsay of Dalhousie
surety for it. Her mother gives her bond for their relief.

To return to Earl George, we find that he was a man very well accomplished;
His person.
of personage tall, strong, and comely: Of great wisdom, and judgment. He is
also said to have been eloquent. He was valiant and hardy in a high degree.
His father (carrying the name of George also) we saw how by his mothers help he
raised and advanced the house many ways, almost doubling the estate of it, as
it was before him, this man reares it up a great deal higher upon the ruins of
the house of Douglas: yet does he also diminish his own patrimony and revenues
of Angus, whiles to gain service and dependancie, he bestows liberally,
chiefly his lands of Angus, for he redacted the greatest part thereof from
property, to superiority only, there being above 24. Barons, and Lords in
Angus, that hold their lands of the Earls of Angus. His determination was
fully to follow the King, though against his Chief and Cousin. But He follows
the King against the Earl Douglas his Chief.
the King who had espoused the quarrel, and made the Earl Douglas party, was
nearer to him in blood, and therefore reason inclined his mind more to him.
Besides he was a King, duty required his assistance. Hope also swayed the
balance greatly: There is hope of a Kings liberality, chiefly when Lands come
in dealing and parting. And he being a Douglas, and the Lands having belonged
to a Douglas, he had great probability to expect a large share in them. For to
whom could they b^ given so justly and pertinently? His brother Bishop (...)
could well egg him on. There was no hope of rising for him, that huge tree of
Douglas standing which over-topt all others, and over-shadowed the whole
borders, and almost the whole Kingdom. He was younger (this Bishop) than
Angus, but wise, virtuous, learned, and of authority: Experience also had given
occasion of late to think that the house of Douglas drew all to themselves. The
maiden of Galloway (the Earl of Wigtons daughter) was thought fittest to have
been matched to some other Douglas being near to the Earl (as was thought
then) and the house too great already in the Kings eyes, not to beaugmented.
But he would none of such wisdom, he marries her himself, and disappoints
them all, who could look for any rising by these men's means? Or in their
standing in such greatness? yet the cause seems to go higher than the Kings
cause. For even when the Earl of Douglas had the Kings authority on his side,
and Creighton was denounced Rebel, Angus assists Creighton against the Kings
authority. Wherefore in all likelihood the course has begun in King James the
firsts time. Then has the house of Angus entered into friendship with Creighton
in the days of William Earl of Angus, which has continued in the time of
Earl James his son, whose Lands Robert Fleming therefore did burn and spoil
in the Baronie of North-Berwick. And now that course begun then, is here
prosecuted by Earl George to the utmost point. A pity of such dissension in
these houses, or one house rather, against which if it had not been thus
divided in it self, their enemies could hardly have prevailed. For it cannot be
denied but the house of Douglas had great wrong, and was treacherously dealt
with by Creighton, neither did it ever intend any thing against the King; but
the King was drawn to the party against it: though in the good cause of it, it
committed errors, it is to be pitied, and lamented; for who does not. Also
George Earl of Angus declares not himself openly against the house of Douglas
for a time. The support that he is said to have given to William Creighton is
said to have been done covertly at the spoiling of Strabroke and Abercorne.
Neither after that, until such time as the King declared himself openly, slew
William Earl Douglas at Stirlin, and made open War against James who
succeeded to him. Then he also declared for the King, and bent his whole force
and power to aid him. He had that same year before 1452. the 24. of May, taken
a course for keeping good order in his Country of Liddesdale, and to keep his
Castle of the Hermitage safe for him, and that his folks should do no hurt to
others, nor receive any of the enemies. He had for that purpose made Sir
Archbald Douglas of Cavers (Sheriff of Roxbrough) and William his son,
Bailiffs of Liddesdale, and keepers of the Castle, who undertook, and bound
themselves to do what we have said, for which he allowed them a large
recompense and reward, as the Indenture thereof (yet extant) does testify. He
is styled in it Warden of the east marches, William Earl of Douglas being then
alive. Some give unto him the honor of the battle in which the Earl Douglas
was defeated in Annandale, where the Earl Murray was slain, and Ormond taken
in the year 1455. Others attribute all to the Lord Carlisle, and Johnston.

But however that was, in the year 1457. he defeated the said Earl, 1457.
and Henry Percie Earl of Northumberland on the east border (which He
overthrowes the Earl Douglas and Percie in a bloody battle in the Merse.
was his wardenrie) in a bloody battle. For the Earl of Douglas, and
Northumberland (a fatal Warrior to the Douglasses) having conveened an Army,
and come to the Merse, began to spoil and burn the Country. But the Earl of
Angus set upon the Forragers and drove them to the host. The Earls moved with
this indignity (though many that were gone out to forage were not yet come
in) advanced and presented him battle, which he also accepted. After a sharp
conflict on both sides with a greater courage and spite than strength, the
victory, which a long time was doubtful which way to incline, at last fell to
the Earl of Angus, not without some loss. The number of the slain was equal,
but the English were put to flight, and many of them made prisoners. A chief
cause of this defeat was the suddenness of the enemy in giving battle, and
his not staying for the rest that were abroad, and had been sent out to forage
the Country. For they being laden with booty, when they heard the noise of
the fight, were so far from coming to succor their fellows, that for fear of
loosing what they had gotten, they took their way directly home into England.
This victory did not a little recreate the King, being wearied both with
civil and foreign War. For this service, which was exceeding pleasing and
acceptable, the King gives him a new Charter of the Lordship of Douglas, upon a
resignation, which he had gotten before when the Earl Douglas was forfeited.
What other Lands he got we have no special mention.

So the Earl Douglas being now forfeited, his brother slain, himself banished,
and with small either effect, or effort, entertaining hostility by small
incursions, rather than doing any thing for the advan^ing of his main
business, the face of the world was quite changed. The Earl of Angus was now
made Lord of Douglas; and howbeit he came somewhat short of that huge
greatness and puissance of the former, yet was he nothing inferior in place
of authority, in credit and account, in action and employment, as we said in
the beginning. Nothing was done but by him, and under his shadow. Bishop
Kennedie had the greatest vogue; he upheld the Bishop by his power, and by him
men did come to find favor, and did seek to have credit. We will set down two
examples for all the rest, but those remarkable, and sufficient to show of
what great account and authority he has been. The one is of our own Nation,
the other of a Forrainer.

The first is in the same year 1457. the 13. of May. We heard of James Lord
Hamilton a faithful, frank, and forward friend for the Earl Douglas, so long
as he was a friend to himself by any action. He leaving himself, Hamilton also
left him: I mean, seeing the Earl had lost that so sair occasion (if not to
cast the Dice for the Crown, as the Lord Hamilton said to him) yet to cast the
Dice for the victory, and to give or take conditions of peace, which he had at
Abercorne, being more in number than the King; the Lord Hamilton was come in to
the King upon this, that same night. He was received by the King, but not
greatly credited, for he was committed to Rosselin (a Castle then of the Earl
of Orkneyes) and afterward (say our writers) friends interceding for him, he
was released out of prison, and received into most inward friendship. Thus
sarre they go, but what friends these were, or how the friendship was made they
do not tell. The Earl of Angus evidents tell us; and show that it has been he
that did him this friendly office. For whether before to move him to intercede
for him, or after in token of thankfulness (though it be most likely it was
after, because it is done at Tantallon, which must be after his releasement out
of Rosselin) he gives to this Earl George a memorable remembrance. He, I say,
being a noble man, and a notable active man besides, gives him his bond of
service (or Manreid) and that in ample form, and submisse terms, excepting
none but the King and Queen. And that I may not seem to speak without a
warrant in so great a matter, scarce to be believed of some, and that I do
rather amplify things than set down the naked truth, I will set down the very
words of the band, as it is extant in the hands of the Earl of Angus, Bond of
Manreid and service by the Lord Hamilton to him.
which now is copied word by word, that every man may judge of it, as he thinks
good.

Be it known to all men by their present Letters, me James Lord Hamilton, etc.
to be comen, and by these presents to become Man of special service and
retinue, for all the days of my lifetime, to an high and mighty Lord George
Earl of Angus, Lord Douglas, and Warden of the East and middle marches of
Scotland, foregainst England. Before, and against all them that live, or die
may; mine allegiance to our sovereign Lord the King, and my band of service to
our sovereign Lady the Queen Mary now present, allanerly out-tane. Promising
all and sundry dutiful points in bands of retinue contained, to observe and
keep to my Lord foresaid, as effeirs, for all the said time. In witness of the
which thing I have guard set my seal. At Tantallon the 13. day of the month of
May, the year of our Lord 1457, etc.

It has been no small matter, nor small authority of him to whom it is given,
that has moved such a man to give such a Band. His credit has been great, and
Hamilton has either received great benefit at his hand, or expected to receive
some. I take it, that he has procured his liberty, and obtained to him that
favor in Court that our Writers speak of, to be of the Kings inward friends. I
suppose also that kindred has been of some moment to move him to it. The reason
of my conjecture is, because we have heard before, that Elizabeth, sister to
Margaret (Countess of Mar and Angus, and Grandmother to this Earl George)
was married to Sir Alexander Hamilton of Cadyow (as some call him) by which
mean this James Lord Hamilton might be third from her, and the Earl of Angus
and he Cousins twice removed, or fourths in kin, as we speak. But this I
refer to them that have the monuments of that House. However, what more
honor could have been done to the great House of Douglas in the greatest
grandour thereof, than what is here done to the House of Angus? Neither is it
any dishonor to him that does it. It is but folly to think so: Houses have
their beginning and grouth: Mine to day, thine to morrow. This same Lord
Hamilton by these beginnings, within a few years (17. or 18. at most) shall lay
such grounds of greatness, as shall lift his House above any subjects, to the
very top of all, so as to have the Crown entailed to his Posterity, and to
enjoy it for a while as Regent and Governor. Let us remember the changes of
the world, and the vicissitudes of Fortune, and let every man bear with
patience, and hear with calmnesse, either what he is now, or what he was
before. And this for the first domestic witness of honor and authority,
credit and greatness of the House of Angus in this man's person.

The other amongst Forrainers was greater; which is this: The King Indenture
betwixt King Henry the sixth and him.
of England, Henry the sixth, being overthrown, and put out of his Kingdom
and Country of England by the Duke of York, Edward the fourth; he, and his
son, and his Queen being come into Scotland for refuge, he indents with George
Earl of Angus for his assistance, to help to restore him to his Kingdom, and
binds himself to give unto George Earl of Angus, and his heirs, Lands lying
betwixt Trent and Humber, worth 2000. Marks sterling of yearly rent. 2. That he
should erect it in a Duchy, and infeft the said Earl therein, in as free
Knight Service as any Land in England; and that the Earl, and his heirs,
should be Dukes thereof. 3. That in time of peace between Scotland and England,
it should be lawful for the said Earl, to repair to England to his Duchy,
or to Court, or where he pleased, with an hundred horse in train. 4. And that
if there happened to be war betwixt the Countries, it should be lawful for
him to send 24. armed men, who should be under the King of England his
protection, to gather and up-lift for his use, the rents and revenues of the
said Duchy. 5. That it should be lawful for him, during the wars between
the two Countries, to serve the King of Scotland; which should no ways
prejudice him in the enjoying of his Lands; neither should it be a cause of
forfeiture or unlaw. 6. That he should not be bound to answer in person to the
Parliaments of England, or any other Court of Justice; and that neither he, nor
his Tenants, should be fined for his non-compearance. 7. That this Indenture
should be shown to the Pope, and ratified by him. And so it was; sealed and
subscribed with a ( Henry) as long as the whole sheet of Parchment, the worst
shapen letters, and the worst put together that I ever saw. And (as I believe)
it has a particular Letter of confirmation of the Pope in the hands of the
Earl of Angus. It is thought that when William Earl of Douglas went secretly
into England, that his errand was to this, or some such purpose, to have made a
proffer of his service to King Henry, on these or the like conditions. For even
then the seeds of civil discord were sown, and began to bud forth. But either
because things were not as yet come to any ripeness, or for that the Earl of
Douglas was fallen into disgrace with his Prince, nothing was done. Now about
the year 1460. (in the minority 1460.
of King James the third) King Henry came into Scotland, and did thus transact
with the Earl of Angus; A rare thing, and whereof the like example is hard to
be found in any subject, except it be the Earl of Douglas, concerning the
Duchy of Turaine with the King of France, which is not unlike in many things.
Howsoever, this shows how little inferior the house of Angus has been to the
house of Douglas in credit and authority at home and abroad.

This Indenture took no effect, it being now too late, and King Henry's estate
brought to so low an ebb, that both his friends and his fortune having
forsaken, and turned their backs upon him, his aid could not suffice against
the whole power of England to make head against King Edward, and to stop the
current of his victories. Notwithstanding Angus gave him a taste of what he
could have done for him, and showed him in a notable exploite, how available
his service would have been, if his case had not been desparate, and past
recovery. Which though it were not rewarded with a Duchy, yet does it not
want, nor ever shall want the due reward of high praise and honor as one of
the hardiest, and greatest interprises, that has been atcheived by any subject.

The Queen (King Henry's wife) had obtained of her friends in France a few
soldiers, 300. of which were in the Castle of Anwick with Monsieur He brings
the French out of Anwick Castle.
Brissac their commander. King Edward following his victories, and that he
might prevent or suppress any commotion that might arise in the North parts,
or out of Scotland was come to Durhame with a great Army. He himself remaining
in the Town, sent abroad his Commanders to take in all such Castles as stood
good for King Henry. Amongst others he sent the Earl of Warwick to besiege
Anwick with 20000. men. He had another Army lying about Bambrough not far off
from this, and a third besieging another Town. King Henry (and more especially
his Queen) being very solicitous, for the French men dealt with the Earl of
Angus very instantly to have them relieved. He promised to do his best, and
performed no less than he promised. He assembled to the number of 10000.
horse, amongst whom there were 500. empty horses or more (for commonly the best
appointed have ever two horses for service) upon which he might mount the
Frenchmen, and bring them away. So he marches toward Anwick, and when he came
within a little space of the Castle, he ranged his men in order of battle in
the sight of the English Army, making show as if he would have invaded them, or
at least that he meant to bide them battle if they should offer to set upon
him, or hinder him in his purposed business. In the mean time he sent those
500. spare horse conducted by some choice troops to a posterne of the Castle to
receive the French, and so brought them away. Some of the the English esteeming
it a great affront, to suffer them to be carried away in such sort from under
their noses, advised the Earl of Warwick to stay them. But he was resolute in
the contrary, and told them, that he had no commission to fight. And (says he)
who knows what more aid these may have near hand in the park, or some other
place. And suppose they have not, these are certainly all choice men able
enough to sustain our charge. They cannot take the Castle with them into
Scotland; let them take the men, I shall get the Castle, which is all that my
commission bears. And so he lets them go, who returned into Scotland with the
French men, an acceptable present chiefly to the Queen of England. This was a
fair assay and preamble of his ensuing services, which being prevented by King
Henry's destiny, and his death, were smothered in the cradle, and his Duchy
engrossed in parchment to have lien betwixt Trent and Humber, is confined to a
narrower precinct within the compass of a Coffer.

Notwithstanding of this greatness and power, to make him yet stronger, and
more puissant on the borders, he did excambe his Lands in the Maines and
Clarberon with Robert Grahame of old Monrosse, and got for them the Lands of
Eskedale upon the border.

He contracted his son Archbald, and his heir apparent to Catherine daughter
to Alexander Earl of Huntly, or to any other of his daughters which the said
George should choose. The portion 2000. marks, the terms of payment 10.
years, 100. marks every term. That if Archbald should die, his brother (whom
the Indenture does not name) should marry one of the said Earl of Huntlies
daughters. That the Earl of Angus should give his son 100. mark Land in
Angus. That Archbald after he be seven years old shall be given to the Earl of
Huntly, and the Earl of Huntlies daughter to the Earl of Angus. The Indenture
is dated at Saint Andrews 1461. the last of September. This marriage took no
effect, what ever were the cause thereof.

Either before or after this there fell out a dissension amongst the Estates
about the choosing of a governor and protector for the young King James the
third. In which he and his brother Bishop Kennedie with the greatest part of
the Nobility, opposed themselves to the Queen, who pretended to be Tutrix, and
had now usurped that place a year, while as the Nobility being busied in the
Wars, had no leisure to look into these things. The Queen and such as
followed her remained in the Castle, and the other party in the Abbey of
Halyroodhouse. A Convention being appointed, the Queen and her faction came to
the Parliament house, and declared her Tutrix, So soon as this was known, the
Earl of Angus, and James Kennedie came up to the market place, where the said
Bishop declares that their intention was nothing else but to maintain their old
law, and the ancient practice of the Country, which was that in such cases the
Nobility should choose one whom they thought most fit to undergo that charge
of governing, which was for the good both of the King and Country, whereas
they of the other party intended nothing but their own particular advantage, as
he should show more evidently, in time and place convenient. After this speech,
as they retired to their lodging, they were advertised that those who were in
the Castle with the Queen, were coming down in arms to assault them, or to
have hindered them from making this declaration. The Earl of Angus thinking it
a great indignity, that they being more in number, and better in quality,
should give place to the weaker, and the meaner and inferior party, and that
in such sort as might seem to be a direct flight, could scarce be retained,
but that he would needs turn upon them and fight, though he were not armed, as
they were. But the matter was composed by the mediation of the Bishops of
Glasgow, Galloway, and Dumblane, and assurance given for a month. After the
expiring whereof, having entered into a new consultation, with more peaceable
and calm minds, both parties agreed, that the King and Country should be
governed by four Noblemen, two of which should be chosen out of the Queens
party, and two out of the other. For the Queen she chose William Lord Grahame,
and Robert Lord Boyd, then Chancellor; for the oother side they chose Robert
Earl of Orkney, and John Lord Kennedie, all chief of their Name and Families.
Here is no mention of the Earl of Angus, which makes me think he has died in
this mean time, during the Truce, otherwise being principal of this other
side, they would not have neglected him. Sure he died much about this time,
which seems to His death.
have been in the year 1462. Neither did his brother Bishop Kennedies business
1462.
go so well after this. He was buried in Abernethie amongst his Predecessors.

His wife (after his death) is said to have married a younger brother of the
Captain of Crawford, and that she got from her son Archbald the Lands of
Balmoodie in Fife, and that the house of Balmoodie is descended of her. Which
notwithstanding, we find her bind her self for relief of her son for the
payment of her daughters portion, 1479. as a free person making no mention of a
husband. It is true he might also have been dead; then the space being 17. or
18. years. But if her son were so liberal as to give her such Lands, he
would never have troubled her to bind her self for his relief in the payment
of his sisters portion in likelihood.

Of the first Archbald, sixth Earl of Angus, called commonly, Bell the Cat.
TO George succeeded Archbald his son and heir, a boy about 5. or 6. years of
age at the most. For in the year 1461. the last of September, he is not 7. as
appears by the Indenture made betwixt his father and the Earl of Huntly
concerning his marriage. It took no effect: but in place thereof he marries
EliZabeth Boyde, daughter to Robert Lord Boyde, then one of the Governors of
Scotland, viz. in the year 1468. the fourth of May. Which makes it seem that
the match 1468.
has not failed on the Earl of Huntlies part, but on his, or at least theirs
His marriage.
to whose tuition he has been committed. They, or he preferring credit at
Court before their keeping and fulfilling of the Contract made by his father.
But it was little to their advantage, for the next year after that the Court
was changed, the Boydes were discarded; his brother in law Thomas Boyde (son
to Robert) banished, and his wife (the Kings sister) taken from him, and his
brother Alexander Boyde execute. As for their father Lord Robert himself, he
fled into England. And this is all the fruits he reaps by his marrying for
Court. He was by this our calculation 14. years of age at the most; and yet his
Lady gets seasing of Abernethie upon his resignation the same year the 1. of
May. It is not unlikely that one William Douglas of Clunie has had some hand
in the guiding of his minority, for we find that the wardship of the Lands of
Tantallon, and Earldom of Douglas was given to him; and he having again
resigned it into the Kings hands, the King makes a new disposition thereof to
Archbald, non obstante non aetate ejusdem, notwithstanding his nonage, which
was then 16. years 1470. the 26. of June. Six years after, he 1470.
has care of his sisters Contracts by himself with Fintrie for one of them;
and three years after that he takes upon him the burden for his mother, and
has her bound for his relief 1479. as has been said in his fathers life,
being then about 25. years of age. This dutifulness toward his sisters,
deserves that he should be blessed with children of his own, and that he should
have good success in his affairs who begins so well.

And so it was with him: for he had by his wife four sons; and His children
four sons.
three daughters, all honorably provided. His sons were, first George called
commonly Master of Angus, because he came never to be Earl, Glenbarvies'
original.
being slain at Flowdon before his father died. The second, Sir William of
Glenbarvie, who married Elizabeth Authenleck, heir of Glenbarvie. Third Gawin,
who was Bishop of Duncale, a man of singular wisdom and prudencie, and well
lettered according to the times. This (...) had a base daughter, of whom the
house of Foulewood ( Semple) is descended. We shall have occasion to speak
something of him in the life of Archbald his brothers son, in whose time he
lived. The Duke of Albanie being Governor, having conceived some jealousy
against the Earl of Angus, and the Douglasses, whereupon Angus was sent to
France, and his uncle this Bishop was sent for to Rome by letters from the
Pope, at the Governors procuring, to answer to such accusations as were given
in against him. As he was going thither, he was seized of the plague at London
in the year 1522* and died there; leaving behind him great approbation of his
virtues, and love of his person, in the hearts of all good men. For besides the
nobility of his birth, the dignity and comeliness of his personage, he was
learned, temperate, and of singular moderation of mind; and in thief so
turbulent times, had always carried himself amongst all the Factions of the
Nobility equally, and with a mind to make peace, and not to stir up parties;
which qualities were very rare in a Clergie-man of those days. He wrote in his
native tongue diverse things. But his chiefest work is the translation of
Virgil, yet extant in verse, in which he ties himself so strictly as is
possible, and yet it is so well expressed, that whosoever shall assay to do the
like, will find it a hard piece of work to go through with. In his Prologues
before every Book, where he has his liberty, he shows a natural, and ample
vein of poesy, so pure, pleasant, and judicious, that I believe there is none
that has written before, or since, but comes short of him. And in my opinion,
there is not such a piece to be found, as is his Prologue to the 8. Book,
beginning (of Dreams and of Drivelings etc.) at least in our language. The
fourth son was Archbald Douglas of Kilspindie, who married a daughter
Kilspindies original.
of one Little in Edinburgh. He had by her Archbald of Kilspindie, who was
Provest of Edinburgh in King James the fifth his minority, and was married to
the Earl of Crawford his daughter, by whom he had first Patrick, secondly
Alexander, and thirdly James. Patrick was married to one Murray, a daughter of
the house of Balbaird, by whom he had William. After that he married Agnes,
daughter to the Lord Gray, and had by her two sons, and two daughters. And thus
much of his sons.

His daughters were first Marjori^, married to Cudbert Lord of Kilmaers Three
daughters.
in the year 1491. Her portion was 1700. Marks. Secondly, Elizabeth, married to
Robert Lile Lord Chief Justice. Her portion was 1000. Marks, whereof 100.
pounds was to be paid at the first Term, and then 50. pounds termely till all
were paid. It is with dispensation, which is a sign that they have been in
kin before the year 1493. Thirdly, Jennet, whom we find contracted to Robert
Lord Harris, in the year 1495. November. 22. to be married, and that he (...)
divorce from the wife he had, so soon as can be. That she in the mean time
shall not marry elsewhere. For which caufe she is infeft in his Lands of
Tarrigla, with the Kings confirmation past thereupon, the same year and day.
Her portion is, that the said Earl then Chancellor, shall procure his Lands
to be new holden of the King. This fact, for a man to contract to part with the
wife he has, and marry another, as it is harsh to conceive, so being done so
solemnly by such persons, we must suppose it had sufficient and honest
grounds. For certainly the Earl of Angus, being withal Chancellor for the
time; needed not to hunt after unlawful or unseemly marriages for his
daughters. Some reckon a fourth daughter, whom they name not, but say she was
eldest, and married to the Earl of Montrose, this Earls great Grandfathers
father: but because I have not seen any monument of her, I reserved her to the
last place.

He had also sundry bastard sons after his wifes death. First William Base
sons, Parkheads original.
of the Parkhead, of whom the house of the Parkhead is come, and the Lord of
Torthorrell by his mother. Secondly James of Tod-holes: And thirdly one that
(they say) was gotten in Glenbarvie, born after his decease. But this seems to
be false, because they affirm commonly, that after the field of Flowdon (where
his son George was slain) he went into Galloway to Saint Maines, and lived
the space of a year an austere life. Then he was not thus incontinent, if that
be true, neither came he to Glenbarvie, seeing he lived in Galloway. He had
also a base daughter. And thus much of his children.

To come to himself: we have heard how his father Earl George raised the house
of Angus to such greatness of credit and authority, that it was become not
much inferior to the house of Douglas, to which it had succeeded. Archbald his
son did no way diminish it. But when he came to be of years fit for managing
affairs, he so behaved himself, and gained so good opinion of his wisdom and
courage, that the whole burden of the estate of the Country did lie upon him
(...). And for that cause chiefly he is commonly designed by the epithete of
The great Earl of Angus. For as touching his Lands and Rents, we find no
great augmentation of them, save that he provided his children well. If we
consider the means, it has been his own worth and sufficiency that has
brought him to it: for he began indeed his marriage with Court, as a fit mean
whereby to rise; but that lasted but short while, as we have heard. The Court
changing, it was rather a mean to have wrought him discredit. Notwithstanding
of which, and though he was young himself, we find nothing, but that his
business went right. He got his own wardship, even when his alliance were at
the hardest pinch, that same very year that Thomas Boyd had his wife taken from
him, and married to another. His success in the marriage of his sisters does
also show the same. Neither hear we of any hard effect that their dis-courting
did produce toward him.

It was he that was the chief actor in taking order with Robert Cochran, He
takes order with Cochran and the Courtiers.
and the other Courtiers, that did abuse the King and Country. He propounds
the matter to the Nobility, he opens up the estate of things, he puts hand to
work, and executes what was concluded. The rest consent, and follow, he goes
before in every thing. And even then when he did all this, he was of no great
age, not above five and twenty; and yet his credit, power, and authority, was
able to go through with it. The History is written at length in our Chronicle,
we need do no more but transume it. Neither is it necessary that we do that to
the full, it will suffice to set down only what is requisite for laying open
the occasion and circumstances for clearing of the fact, that the Reader may
the better discern the right from the wrong, which otherwise lie confused.
Thus The rel^tion thereof.
it was. King James the third of that name, a man of a great and high spirit,
and of a hasty nature, and prone to anger, and such a one as would not suffer
patiently his own judgment to be contradicted, could not away with that
freedom of speech, which he found in his Nobility: wherefore he made choice
of such to be about him, as would not correct, but approve all his sayings, and
who would not offend him by gainsaying, but did curie* favor by soothing of
him, and who with flattering admiration did extol all that he said, or did.
Wherefore excluding the Nobility, he was wholly at the devotion of a few of
his servants with whom he advised, and consulted of all business, and either
followed their opinions, or made them to consent, and ex^cute his will. Thus he
began to do about the year 1474. having after his marriage (in the year 1470.)
1474.
addicted himself most part to his domesticke, and private pleasures, seldom
coming abroad, or giving time to the affairs of his Kingdom. He had gotten
about him base men both in place and worth, whom he (...) a Mason. Rog^rs a
Singer.
had advanced to honors, and nobilitated. Amongst these there was one Robert
Coghran a Mason by his trade, whom he made Earl of Mar, An English singing
man called William Rogers, whom he honored with Knighthood, with diverse
others of mean rank and quality, whose chief commendation was that they were
impudently wicked, and villainous. This Rogers is thought also to have been his
Pander, and an enticer of him to lewdness and wronging his Queen. Amongst
these base men, there was one Gentleman of good birth, but he seeing the Kings
inclination, had set himself fully to follow it in all things; wherefore he had
given his daughter to Robert Coghran in marriage as a bond of friendship and
soci^tie, his name was Thomas Preston. There was also a young page John Ramsay,
who was of the same combination. These were the Kings Minions, Counselors,
and whole confidence. On these he reposed, and cast the burden of affairs.
Their hopes were built upon the ruin of the Nobility, that by their fall they
themselves might rise. These were Counselors and Executioners of the murder
of his younger brother John; and had caused him to commit his other brother
Alexander to prison in the Castle, who had died likewise, if he had not found
means to escape in the night, by making a rope of his bed-clothes, and so got
over the wall. To these great evils there were joined worse things. He had
given himself to seek responses, and predictions of things to come, chiefly
concerning his own estate, of Magiciens, and Witches. He had for that purpose
brought one out of Flanders that was thought very skillful in divining, named
Andrew a Physician by profession, and Astrologer. This man had given the Kings
Ambassadors some proof of his cunning when they went through Flanders to the
Duke of Burgundy. He hearing whether they were going, told them they needed
not to make any great haste, for they should hear news of the Duke ere it were
long. And so they did indeed, for within three days they heard that he was
slain. When they came home they related this to the King, extol his skill, and
inflame his mind; which was too prone of it self, with desire to hear him. So
he was sent for, and being come, was presented with many rich gi^ts. And good
reason he should, if he could withal have instructed the King how to avoid
the evils that were to come. But merely to foretell evil which could not be
shunned, it was too dear bought evil tidings. Yet that is all he does, tells him
that his own should be his ruin. The King interprets it of his brethren, his
kins-men, and his subjects, especially the chief of the Nobility. Whereupon
being suspicious and jealous of all others, he trusted none but his foresaid
Minions. By these doings he makes way for the fates, by slaying or warding his
brother, he irritates the Nobility, he suspecting them, and being suspected of
them by a mutual fear. They to secure themselves, put hand into the Courteours
who were the authors of these evils; he interprets that to be Rebellion
against himself, and seeks how to be revenged. They for their safety are driven
from point to point, constrained by necessity for the preservation of their
lives, cast off all respect, and take Arms openly, draws his son to the
party (his own nearest according to his responses) whereon ensues his ruin.
This is the effect of seeking to Magiciens and soothsayers, whereof we seldom
hear a better end. And it is but deservedly, that those that leave the author
and fountain of all good* who guides all by his providence, to follow follies
and superstition, and the author of all evil and wickedness should be thus
served. This is the effect of pride and arrogancy, that leans only to its own
judgment, and will not give way and liberty to admonish and inform rightly.
Upon which, other inconvenients do follow by degrees: First withdrawing the
ear from faithful Counselors, then giving themselves to flatterers, then
entertaining of these, and rejecting and casting off others, whereof arises
suspicions, jealousies, wrongs, injustice, from hence shedding of blood under
color of law, or without color in open Tyranny, as no man at first becomes
extremely wicked. At last follows the ruin of the authors, together with the
ruin of others. To return to our point, it came so about here. The war began
betwixt Scotland and England; An Army behooved to be raised, and for the
raising thereof the Nobility must be conveened. Loath were those new men to
the work, they knew not what they might think when they were conveened. But
there was no remedy, their privy counselling could not sustain the wars.
That was the part of the Noblemen, and could not be done without them. So they
are conveened; The King with his Army at Lawder.
the Army raised marches toward the borders, on to Lawder they go. It is a Town
in the confines of Merse and Tivedale, which countries were both wasted by the
incursions of the enemy. Nothing will make men wise where there is ruin
determined. The place, the time, the enemy, the necessity to use the
Nobility, could not serve to admonish the King and his Courteours to give them
some small countenance and contentment. Whom they were constrained to employ,
they would not endeavor to please. On they go with their wonted course. The
King only countenances, consults, advises with his Cabin-councell. Neglects*
the Nobility and distrusts them. It had been strange if they had not recented
it; and as strange if they had not remedied it. Now was the time or never. The
force, power and all was in their own hands. They disdain it, they regrate it
in private one to another. They agree on the general, that some order must be
taken with these disorders. They appoint a meeting for advising of the form
and particular manner how and what to do. The place, Lawder Kirk; the time,
next morning betimes. Thither The Nobility meet in the Church.
they come at the time prefixed. Here the Earl of Angus, first in place and
rank, first in credit, first in authority and their account, is also first in
Angus makes this speech.
speech, and is said first thus to have opened up the matter unto them. My
honorable Lords, I hold it not needful to go about with many words to set
before you the Estate of this Kingdom. For some things you your selves
remember, some you see before your eyes. Our chief Noblemen are thrust into
exile, and forced either to suffer into lerably, or do unjustly. And you who
are the Arms and Limbs of this Kingdom are left without a head, as a Ship
without a Pilot and Master, exposed to the storms and tempests of fortune. Our
fields are burnt, our goods carried away, the laborers killed, or seeing no
other remedy of their manifold miseries, have yielded themselves to the enemy.
His Majesty in the mean time a man indeed (if he were himself) of a generous
mind and rare understanding, bewitched in his affection, asks no advice or
counsel of his Nobility, but consulteth of peace and war, of the good of
the Country, and safety of us all with a few base, vile, and ignorant fellows,
who by relating the predictions of Sorcerers and Magicians, fill his sick mind
with vain fear and superstition. And these men determine and set down decrees
of our lives and estates, who knowing that they merit the hatred of all men, do
therefore hate all men. Neither do they seek only to lessen your authority,
but to strike off your heads by one plot or other. Some of you they have
already made away by death, others by banishment. Neither do they, as commonly
new risers do, climb up to the highest places by degrees, but they make the
carcasses of the Kings sons steps for them to mount upon, and water their
growing honors with the Blood Royal it self. One of his brothers they have
most cruelly murdered, the other they have constrained for fear to forsake his
Country, and become a Captain in the enemies Camp. And now being rid of them,
they lie in wait for the rest. For being conscious of their own baseness, they
cannot endure any that is excellent or eminent. Whosoever has riches to satisfy
their avarice, or power to assist their bold attempts, him they reckon for
their enemy. And do we prepare our selves to withstand the common enemy? And
encampe against England? As if any were more deadly and more to be feared then
he whose greediness our goods cannot suffice, and whose thirst of slaughter
our blood is not able to quench. Now that you may know how much this inward
plague is worse than that outward foe, put the case that England (which God
forbid) should overcome, what could we look for at their hands? what would they
make the end of their hatred, or reward of their victory? The death of the King
do you think, or of yourselves? verily, I believe neither. Our contentions have
not been for lives, but for honor and empire. And a noble heart, as it is
vehement and violent against those that oppose, so is it easily mitigated by
prayer and entreaty; and even with the consideration of the (...) of humane
affairs it is moved to pity and compassion. But let us suppose the (...), that
they being (...) of our old debates, and (...) up with present victory would
take the Kings life, which of these two does deal more easily with us? He that
by depriving us of life, does also take away all sense of evil; or he that
reserveth that to daily (...) and (...), which next after our God, should be
most dear to us? who besotting the mind with Witch-(...), do (...) the King to
the destruction of his nearest kindred, who detain him like a captive* and
will not (...) him at any time to show his face to his loyal Subjects? that
they may enjoy the comfort of his countenance, and he behold their service
(...) his honor and safety. They are not so much to be reputed enemies, who
with displayed banner profess hostility, as they who within the walls lie in
Ambush for your overthrowe. who drawing away his Majesty's affection from his
friends betray him to his enemies, and making you destitute of a leader, would
expose you to the mercy of your enemies. Into whose hands if you do fall,
though perhaps you escape death, yet shall you not eschew shame and ignominy,
and which is wors^ than a thousand deaths, (...), and bondage. If you get the
day and (...) victorious, you shall not for all that, acquire that which is the
end and fruit of victory, honor and renown to your King, rest and (...) to
your selves, and to your posterity, a flourishing and prosperous ^state of
your Country, but on the contrary a greater liberty to your adversaries for
the present, and greater security for the time to come, ruin and destruction
to your selves; and to your King a worse slavery, So that by vanquishing you
shall not be so much freed from troubles abroad, as you shall increase your
miseries at home. Wherefore my opinion is, to speak it in a word, that first we
shake off this yoke of servltude at home, before we enter into fight with the
foreign enemy. Otherwise all of us shall be slaves to the will and pleasure
of a ^ew, we shall strengthen our enemies, and become Traitors to the
commonwealth. What you shall resolve to do, I pray God to prosper. When the
Earl had ended his speech^, there arose a confused murmr throughout the
whole Assembly, for they had not the patience to give their votes in order, but
all cried out together, testifying their approbation and assent to his speech
and opinion. Amongst others there present, the Lord Gray was one, whom some
would have to be he that slew The Lord Gray his speech.
the Earl of Douglas at Stirlin, commonly called Cow^-Gray. But if it were he,
he behoved to be of great age now, and of greater at the battle of
Bannock-burne, where he is also said to have been* wherefore I take it rather
that this has been his son. However, the Lord Gray heard all, and seeing their
forwardness, craved audience, and told them the Apologue of the Mice, who
consulting in a public meeting, how to be sure from the Cats surprising of
them, found out a very good way, which was to hang a bell about her neck, that
would ring as she st^pped, and so give them warning of her approach, that they
might save themselves by flight. But when it came to be questioned who would
undertake to ti^ the bell about the Car^ (...), there was never a mouse durst
cheep or undertake it. The Earl of Angus understood his meaning, and what
application was to be made of it* wherefore he answered shortly, Angus called
Bell the Cat.
I will Bell the Cat, and what your Lordships conclude to be done, shall not
lack execution. For this answer, he was always after this named Archbald Bell
the Cat. And so they concluded, that these wicked Counselors, and their
Accomplices the Courtiers of the same quality, and stamp, should be brought to
judgment, and punished according to their deserts. In the execution whereof
their main care was that no inconvenient should come to the King, which because
it might fall out in a tumult, they ordained that the Army should lie quiet,
and only the Noblemen with their household servants should go to Court, and
apprehend them as peaceably and calmly as possible they could. After the
meeting was broken up, as they were going along, they encountered by the way
with Robert Coohran, whom the King (informed of their meeting) had sent to know
what the matter was: For it seemed to be some business of moment, and great
importance that had moved such men to conveen at such an hour, so early in the
morning. He had about his neck a gold chain of great weight, which the Earl of
Angus took hold of, and straining it a little, This chain, said he, does not
become a man of your rank, but I shall ere long, give you one that will become
you to wear far better, and so pulling the chain from his neck, he delivered
him to one of his men to be kept sure. After that he went on to the Kings
lodging, where the Guard and others that were present astonished with the
suddenness of his coming, or reverencing the dignity and majesty of his
person gave place, and shrank away, so that the rest were easily apprehended
without resistance or tumult. Only John Ramsay fled to the King, and clasped
his arms about his middle, and at the Kings request was pardoned in respect of
his youth which excused his errors, and seemed to promise for him, that he
would do no more so. The rest were led forth, and accused. 1. Of causing kill
the Kings brother John. 2. Of inciting the King, and animating him against his
other brother Alexander Duke of Albaine, so as to banish him: 3. Of sowing
dissension betwixt the King and his Nobles. 4. Of drawing him to superstition,
witchcraft, and magic to the offense of God, and slander of Religion. 5. Of
persuading him to coin a certain kind of brass, coin of no value, which the
people called the black coin, which fact of all other was most odious to the
vulgar. For hereupon had ensued great dearth of corns and victual, while as
the owners did choose rather to suffer their grain to rot in their Garners,
then under the name of selling to give them to the buyers, for so they thought
it to be a gift, and not a sale. Their accusations were no sooner read, but all
cried out against them; and so they were condemned to be hanged over the bridge
of Lawder. That sentence pronounced, was so acceptable to all that heard it,
that they ran and brought their horse halters, and bridle reins to serve for
ropes, and strive who should have Cocbran and his fellows hanged.
the honor therein, the whole Army, and Nobility concurring and assisting at
their execution. And thus they did remove those men, whom the good of the King,
of the Nobility, and whole Country required necessarily to be removed from
their Prince. Yet it was done with as great respect to himself, as it could be
in such a case, where matters were to proceed contrary to his mind. They offer
his person no violence, they do not mis-behave themselves in words: they are
careful it be not done by any in a tumult, and therefore come accompanied with
the fewer number. They grant his desire when he did interceed for one of the
guilty, which shows how willing they would have been to have granted the rest
also, if it could have been done safely. A very remarkable and rare example of
carfulness of the Commonwealth, joined with all modesty, love, and
dutifulness toward their King. Their behavior was just such as Lawyers
prescribe in such cases, who accounting the person of the Prince sacred, and
not to be touched any way, do allow that their wicked counselors and abusers
only be taken order with, where the good of the Country enforces it. Wherein
the Earl of Angus being the principal actour, the chief commendation thereof
can not be taken from him; the praise, I say, not only of wisdom in
propounding, and persuading, of courage and resolution in under-taking, but
also of discreet moderation, and dutiful regard to the King, in performing of
this action without tumult, or uprore. Happy had the King been, if he could
have taken it up rightly, and as he saw how far his wicked abusers were hated,
he had also read their love and regard of his person, that appeared in every
act of this Tragic Comedy, written in fair and Capital Letters. He made
show, as if he had taken all in good part, but it was not in sincerity. He
accounted it high treason and rebellion, and set his mind wholly on revenge.
He saw what was done to his Courtiers, but he would The Army dismissed the King
comes to Edinburgh.
not see the respect carried to himself; for upon this occasion the Army
dissolving, so soon as he came to Edinburgh, and found himself at liberty, he
retired to the Castle with a few of his familiar friends, as not da^ing to
trust his Nobility. Which when they perceived, they had their private meetings
and consultations apart. Hereupon his brother Alexander moves the King of
England to send an Army with the Earl of Gloucester, hoping to do somewhat for
himself. And so he does; for the Nobility sent for him, and made him chief man
of the party, under the name of General Lieutenant of Scotland. The King
remained in the Castle, from whence he is brought out, and restored to his own
place, his brother endeavoring by modesty to approve his uprightness, and
banish all jealousies by his actions. But all would not do; he continues his
jealousy, and the effects of jealousy, an evil mind, and ill will. Intends
to make him away, some say by poison; whereof he being advertised, with-drawes
himself again into England; and that he might be the more welcome thither, he
put the Castle of Dumbar into their hands. Neither does he bear any better
mind toward the Nobility; but still intends their ruins, making up a heap of
crimes, calling all their proceedings and actions rebellious. And after a short
while, the Courtiers began to follow the footsteps of those that had gone
before them, and nothing terrified with the example of their end, began to
trade the same path that they had done. John Ramsay (who was pardoned at
Lawder) procured an edict from the King, that none but he and his followers
should go armed in those places where the Kings Court did converse. The King
thought it was hard for him to deal with them all at once, therefore they must
be divided. For this effect he insinuates himself, and becomes very familia^
with a part of them, and advances them to honors. He makes the Earl of
Crawford, Duke of Monrosse, a great and powerful man. But who was so fit for
his service as the Earl of Angus? he makes as if he were fully reconciled to
him, has him continually about him, countenanceth him every way, communicates
with him his most secret affairs, some say he made him Chancellor; but the
Chancellor ( Andrew Stuart Lord of Evendale) was even now living, at the
coming in of Alexander Duke of Albanie; neither hear we of his death, neither
do we find in old Evidents, that the Earl of Angus is entitled Chancellor,
before 1493. which is after this Kings death, in King James the fourth his
time, though we have Evidents of the year 1488. and 89. To him the King opens
his mind so far, as finding that the principal of the Nobility were in
Edinburgh the K. sends for Angus to the Castle, tells him that now he has a
fair occasion to be avenged of his enemies, that he would cause seize and
apprehend them: for if the Leaders and Chief of the Faction w^e once cut off,
the rest would not dare to stir: that if he should neglect this opportunity,
he could hardly look for the like hereafter. Some say, that he purposed to have
invited them to a supper in the Castle, and so to have laid hands on them,
others say, that he meant to have caused take them in their lodgings in the
night, which is not unlikely. The Earl of Angus, though he were no very old
Cat (some 31. or 32.) if that was 1486. as it should seem, yet was he too wary
and circumspect to be drawn by a straw. He knew himself to be as guilty as any
of them, and as much hated for his guilt. But he was now within the Castle, and
had need to carry himself wisely. To refuse, might endanger his life; to
consent he could not, it was so gross and foul. Wherefore he frames his
answer after such a kind, as might be both safe for himself, and no ways
prejudicial to the rest. He tells him what a disgrace it would be for him, if
without order of law he should (all of a sudden) bring so many Noblemen to the
scaffold without a crime, to whom he was but lately reconciled, and had
promised remission of all that was past, especially at such a time when they
trusted to the public assurance given them for their security. Neither will
those that ^emain, said he, be terrified, and dismayed with the death of these
few, but be irritated and driven to despair, and so to greater violence. But if
it will please your Majesty to follow my advice, I shall tell you a better way
to give you satisfaction. Do but charge and summond any of them at any time to
under-lye the law, and I with my friends and followers shall bring them in by
force openly, and in fair day light, to what place you please, where execution
may be done according to law, which is not only more safe, but more
honorable, than either to betray them under color of friendship, and
feasting, or to invade them in the night, as if they were set on bytheeves and
robbers. This being spoken with that grace and courage wherewith he used to
accompany his actions, the King acknowledging it was true that he said, and
knowing he was able to perform what he promised, supposing he spoke in
sincerity, gave him many thanks* and having loaded him with as many promises,
dismissed him. As Soon as he was come to his lodging, he revealed all to the
Noblemen, and withal went himself out of the Town. From that time forth there
was no more peace. The Kings counsel being revealed, he distrusted all men.
The Nobility seeing his resolution to ruin them, and that there was no trust
to be given to his words, despairing of concord; whereas they had before sought
his amendment, and not his overthrow, retaining ever a Plot against the King.
dutiful love and regard to his Person, now they set themselves, and lay all
the plots they can how to undo him. Yet can they not be alienated from the race
of their Kings. His son had not offended, and fell to succeed. They affect him
for their Captain. He is also most acceptable, and most agreeable to the
people, and so fittest for them. Others might be The K. son head of the
faction of the Nobles against his father.
suspected, envied, or mis-interpreted. Wherefore they allure him to their
party by his keepers, and his keepers persuade him by fear of being
disinherited, and put besides his succession to the Crown. And now the parties
are adressed, the King and his own son. There was diverse times mention of
peace, but where all trust was taken away* it could not be established. They
send the King word flatly, they could not give credit to his promises. And so
there was no way to mediate a peace, but by his dimission of the Crown to his
son. That condition was intolerable; he aggravates it to foreign Princes, and
to the Pope, showing what an ill president it was for all Princes. But before
any help can come from thence, the Lords make haste to come to a conclusion,
which fell out according to their desire. The Kings Forces lay most part beyond
Forth, and in the Northern parts. For conveening of them, Stirlin was the
fittest place. Thither l^e takes his way with the Forces he had: The Nobility
following as near as they could come to him. Yet was he gone before them, and
might first have come to the Castle. But being excluded by the keeper, he is
constrained to hazard the battle at Bannock-burn. Battle at Bannockbu^ne.
There, having overthrown the vanguard of the enemy, he was overthrown by the
Anandale men, and west-borderers that bare longer spears than they that were on
the Kings side. The King himself hurt with the fall of his horse* and wounded
in the right arm, fled unto a water-mill that was near unto the place, with
intention to have fled to his Ships. But he was perceived, and known by the
partisans of his Guard, that stuck to him (which were trimmed with white
fringes or fasses) and followed by Patrick Lord Gray, and Stirlin (of Keir) and
a Priest named Borthwick. Which of these, or if all of them fell upon him it is
uncertain, but there he was slain by them. Fame lays it most on the Lord Gray,
who if it were Cowe-Gray; it seems his apprentiship and his practice in his
old age have been very suitable. For he it was that slew William Earl of
Douglas at Stirlin, under this Kings father 35. or 36. year before this. He
has put a long time between his assay, and his masterpiece, and gone too high
in it. If it was his son, he has followed well his fathers example, and gone
beyond him also. All this while the Earl of Angus part was honorable and
kindly, his heart could not digest the slaughter of his The K. slain*
King. He sought his own safety, and to shorten the reins of his unbridled
mind, but for his life, he neither sought it, nor could he suffer it to be
taken so far as he could hinder it. Wherefore seeing the victory to be on
their side, he cried often to save the King, attesting all for their love to God,
and for their respect to the young Prince his son, that they should do him no
harm. This was cast in his teeth by the way of reproach as childishness, or
too much tenderness of heart at such a time, by the Lord Gray. There were
slain on the Kings side the Earl of Glencarne (and a few of his fellows) the
Earl of Angus married his daughter three years after, to Robert Lord Kilmaers
son or rather Grandchild to this Earl of Glencarne. This happened 1488. the
28. of King James 1488.
Reign, and 35. of his age.

But the War did not end with the death of the King. The old Kings faction
was rather scattered than broken, chiefly his Navy and Sea Forces, of which the
Captain ( Andrew Wood) stood out obstinatly. In the North the Lord Forbes had
gotten the Kings bloody shirt, and carrying it upon a spears point like an
ensinge, through Aberdene and other Towns stirred up all he could to revenge
the Kings slaughter. In the Western parts of the Kingdom, the Earl of Lennox
assembled his power, and diverse more with him did send their messengers to and
fro, exhorting the people every where not to suffer so detestable a murder
un-revenged; forbidding them to scarre at the shadow of the present Kings
authority, whom these Parricides did detain a captive to countenance their
wickedness, he being rather a prisoner than a Prince, the whole power resting
in the hands of the Douglasses, Humes, and Hepburnes. That even in that regard
they would take Arms to free him from their tyranny, who would make the World
believe that he being but a child of 15. years of age were so unnatural as to
allow of his fathers murder. Besides all this the English made some trouble by
Sea with five Ships, which lay in the mouth of Forth, and not only infested
the Merchants and such as did trade by Sea, but also many times came a Shore,
and pillaged the Country. These were prognostics of a storm arising, and of a
tempest as great as had been from the West, from the North, and from the Sea.
But these droping Clouds which threatened an after-clap were quickly Five
English Ships taken by Andrew Wood.
dispersed by the prudent handling of the other party. Andrew Wood was
entreated, and brought not only to be no enemy, but also to set upon the
English Ships, which he did with his own two only, and brought in the five
English to Leith. Lennox was defeated by the Lord Drummond, whose daughter
George master of Angus had married: and the Northern men hearing of it sat
quiet, and stirred not. And for conclusion A Parliament at Edinburgh 6.
November 1488.
a Parliament was held at Edinburgh the 6. of November, where all that was done
at Bannock-burne was decerned to be good service, and that those that were
slain there, were slain through their own default, and that those that had
taken Arms against them were free from all crime. This had been done before in
the Parliament when the King was crowned, but there were so few present then,
that they thought it necessary to renew it here, where both parties were
present. And so it was not only enacted, but subscribed by all that had vote
in Parliament. Thus did Angus with the rest of his associats govern those
matters which seemed to be very hard to settle, both wisely and moderately. For
they used not their victory and power either cruelly or covetously. They
forgave sincerely those that came in and yielded, and punished gently the more
obstinate, fining them in their goods, or taking from them some portion, or
parcel of their Lands and Possessions; but there was no man ruined, or wholly
undone by them; And so they both pacified things, and did not much displease
the parties, who bare it patiently when they called to remembrance for what
small faults, and upon what slight pretenses men were turned out of their whole
Estates in the late Kings time. By these means they procured a true and
sincere peace among the Subjects, strengthened with a general love and
submission of both parties to the King. And to confirm all the two principalls
of the other party L^nnox and Forbes came in, and were received into favor:
Many attribute the commendation of all this to the King himself, whose
inclination (it cannot be denied) was good; but to speak the truth, as it is,
he was but young, and not a Guider, but guided, even by the confession of the
adverse party. Neither could he of himself have carried things so wisely, for
all his good disposition; neither was he able to have done it, though he had
been skillful, if there had not been great moderation in those that were about
him. Wherefore seeing both common report, and our Histories also make our
Douglasses, Humes, and Hepburnes, the chief authors and actors in these
matters; I see no reason why we should defraude them of their due commendation
of being men that were dutiful to their Country, and withal very respective
to their King, having labored all they could to reclaim him, and after he had
shut himself up in the Castle, restoring him to his full authority, and even
when he was seeking their lives, they did tolerate him a good while, being very
loath to come to extremity. And last being forced to it by necessity for the
preservation of their own lives, they had regard to the race of their Princes,
yea to himself, and his life in the greatest heat of the battle, ever willing
and desirous to save him. And then after the victory, we ^ee how moderate they
were against their detractours, slanderers, and professed enemies that had taken
Arms against them, how meek in bearing with them, how careful too, with
calmnesse to reconcile them, how gentle in using of them, how wise and prudent
in the whole progress of pacification. And above all the moderation of their
desires is to be remarked; for they did neither increase their estates, nor
enrich themselves on whit, by spoiling or viole^ ^eizing of any man's Lands or
Goods. The Earl of Angus was made Chancellor. But that was after the death of
the Lord Evendale, and so it was not taken from any other man, neither was
there any wrong in it. And on whom could it have been so well bestowed? who was
so (...) for it? and who so worthy of it? Besides, it seems that he got it not
in the Kings minority, when he had all power in his own hand under the shadow
of the Kings name, and so might have extorted it from the King in those
troublous times, for he is never termed Chancellor (...) the year 1493. which
was 5. years after Bannock-burne, and then all the troubles were quieted and
pacified, and the King came to be 20. years of age, able to guide his affairs
by himself. The Lord Hume is also made Chambe^lain. Lord Hume
great Chamberlain of Scotland, yet that was also in the Kings power to give,
and belonged to no man. What other casuality, or benefit they acquired by the
Kings liberality, we find not, unless it were the Guardianship of the
inheritrix of Glenbarvie, which Angus got, whom he married to his son William.
But suppose they did get any such thing, yet was it without injury to any man
and un-reproveably. Wherefore we may say justly, that no Princes minority was
ever so moderately and innocently, so justly, wisely, and prudently guided
amongst so great troubles and grounds of dissension. This made them that they
feared no man, having offended no man, but were even secure in the Kings
presence, notwithstanding that he had enjoined himself a penance, for being
accessarie to his fathers death, which was the wearing of a chain of iron about
his middle in stead of a girdle, to which he added every year a new link or
ring. Not the less of all this, they were never afraid of the King nor jealous
of him, but interpreted this well, and took it in good part, not only because
they trusted to the Kings gentle disposition, or because they confided in their
own Forces, as being of the stronger faction; but also because they reposed on
the conscience of their fact, the necessity of doing what they had done, and
innocence every other way toward every man.

From this time the Earl of Angus continued Chancellor, so named Angus
Chancellor.
in all Writs and Indentures until the year 1496. the 14. of January, at which
time he contracts his daughters to the Lord Harris, and the Lord Lile. He
indents with Hugh Douglas Deane of Buchan, and son to the late Earl of
Ormond, in two several Indentures, whereof the condition of the one is to
pursue for the lands of Evendale in the year 1493. the other in the year 1496.
the 14. of January, is to this purpose; That the said Hugh shall pursue for
Glenwhome, Gladstanes, and any other Lands pertaining to the Earls of Douglas,
Lord of Evendale, or his father the Earl of Ormond, and that having obtained
them he shall resign them in favor of the Earl of Angus. Other things
remarkable we have none, until about the time of the Field of Flowden, which
makes it seem to be probable (which some allege) that all this time he was
confined in Arane. The pretended cause (as they say) was secret intelligence
with King Henry of England; but the true cause (they say) was his taking Jean
Kennedie, daughter to the Earl of Cassils out of Galloway, to whom the King
bare affection, and to whom the Earl gave infeftement, and seizing of the
Lands of Bothwel, although he never married her. As touching the pretended
cause it has no appearance at all, seeing there was always peace and
friendship betwixt us and both the Henry's (the 7. and 8.) until the war was
denounced, or a very short time before. And concerning that of Jeane Kennedie,
we have a note of an Indenture betwixt Angus Chancellor, and the Lord
Kennedie, but they have neglected to set down about what it has been in the
year 1496. So that we are uncertain what to think of it. And contrary to this
we find that the Lands of Bothwel were not in the Earls hands, but in his
son Georges, who got them from the Lord Bothwel in exchange for the Lordship
of Liddisdale, which for that cause he resigned into the Kings hands in favor
of the Earl Bothwel in the year 1492. so that the Earl could not give her the
Lands that belonged to his son. Further our Histories tells us, that when
James Earl of Aran, who was sent with the Navy which the King had prepared for
a present to Queen Anne of France, had turned in upon Ireland, and having
burnt Knockfergus, was come to Air a Seaport in Coile, the King offended with
his folly, gave the charge of the Ships to Angus for prosecuting of the voyage.
But Aran having heard of it, hoysed sail, and was gone before Angus could come
to the place where the Ships lay. Now although it should seem by this that the
King continued his favor toward him, yet there are some apparent reasons to
move us to think that it has been somewhat diminished. For Alexander Lord Hume
was made Warden of all the three marches (and that before Flowdon) of which the
east and middle march at least had continued under the government of the Earls
of Angus, for the space of three or four generations, descending from father
to son by succession, from Earl William in the persons of James, and George
to this present Archbald.

Other mention, or monument of him we have none till the Wars betwixt King
James the 4. and King Henry the 8. of England. It is reported War with
England, and the occasion of the Field of Flowdon.
by some, that the Queen and he did what they could to dissuade the King from
that War, but when he could not prevail with him, he followed him into
England. There the King having wasted Northumberland, and taken Norham with
some few other Castles, got a view of the wife of one Heron of the Foord, and
did so fancy her, that he neglected the prosecuting of the war, and care of
his Army, and did nothing but dally with her. Whilst the Army lay there idle,
the English sent a Herald to the King desiring that he would appoint a day for
battle. But the greatest part of the Nobility did dislike it. And the Earl of
Angus though he saw all this and many more errors, yet he held his peace all
this while, whereas the rest of the Nobility reasoned with the King, but in
vain. For the King told them flatly, he would fight them though they were a
hundredth thousand more, and that he would retire. Then (and not till then) the
Earl of Angus hearing his answer, and knowing the danger of such resolution,
being the Chief man amongst them both for years and authority, he went about
to set before the King the reasons of the counsel given him, hoping by that
mean to break him of his determination, in these words. Sir (said he) your
Majesty Angus his speech to the King to dissuade him from fighting.
has done abundantly to satisfy your friendship with the King of France, in
that ye have made the King of England withdraw the greater part of his Army out
of France, and have turned the danger of the War from him without endangering
your self. For they cannot keep the fields long in a Country that is so cold
and wasted, especially now when the Winter is so near. Neither need your
Majesty to wonder that the French Ambassador is so instant with us to fight;
he being a stranger, it is no strange thing to see him prodigal of other men's
blood, who does not regard the good of the parties, but the benefit that will
thereby redound to France. Besides, his request is altogether impudent and
shameless: For he requires us to do that which his master (a man of great
understanding) thinks not fit to do for his own Kingdom. Neither should the
loss of this Army seem small, because our number is few, for all that are of
worth, and excel either in wisdom or valor in Scotland are here, and these
being slain, the vulgar will become a prey to the enemy. Therefore as it is
safest for the present to prolong the War, so is it most profitable in
general. For if Lewis would have either the English exhausted with charges, or
wearied with delay, what is more convenient, then to compel him to divide his
Forces, by keeping one half thereof continually in readiness against us, who
lie in wait to invade his Country upon every occasion, so to ease the French
of so much of their burden? As for your honor and reputation, which men
pretend, what can be more honorable, than having razed so many Forts and
Castles, wasted and spoiled their Country with fire and sword, to return
laden with such store of spoil, that they shall not be able to recover their
losses, nor their soil redeem the former beauty in many years, though there
should happen to be peace? What greater commodity can we expect to reap of the
War, than in such a tumultuous noise of Arms to have leisure to refresh our
soldiers with ease and quietness, to our credit, and to our enemies shame? Of
all the victories that are acquired, that which is obtained more by counsel,
than force of Arms, is most properly the victory of man, and the praise of it
does only redound to the Commander and General; for in it the Army can claim
no part or interest. When the Earl had ended his speech, all that were present
showed by their countenance, that they did approve and assent unto his
counsel. But the King who had solemnly sworn to give battle, heard him
unwillingly, and answered angerly; bidding him, if he were afraid, go home.

Then Angus seeing the King obstinate, and foreseeing in his mind what would
be the event of such headiness, burst forth in tears, and after a while
having gathered his spirits again, when he was able to speak, If my former
life, said he, does not free me from the imputation of fearfulness, I know not
by what other evidence I can clear my self; while this body of mine was able to
endure labor and toil, I spared it not for the defense of our Country, and
honor of our Kings. Now seeing my counsel, by which only I am able to do
good, can have no place, I leave here my two sons, who next after my Country
are dearest to me, together with the rest of my friends and kinsmen; the surest
pledge that I can give of my affection to your Majesty, and to the rest that
are here present. And I pray God that this my fear may prove frivolous, and
that I be rather esteemed a false prophet, than that those things happen, which
I think I see before mine eyes. And so he took his leave, and departed, leaving
behind him with the King his eldest son George, and Sir William of Glenbarvie,
whom he exhorted to carry themselves valiantly, as those they were come of had
ever done, and recommending them to God and their good fortune, he rode home.
As the Earl of The field of Flowdon, 1^13. Sept. 15.
Angus presaged, so it fell out: for the battle was fought at Flowdon, where
the day was lost, and the King slain, yet his body could never be found, which
had been easily discerned by the chain of iron which he ware for a girdle.
There were also slain at this battle George Master of Angus, and Sir William
of Glenbarvie, with some 200. Gentlemen of the name of Douglas.

Their father the Earl went to Saint Mains in Galloway. He lived there a year
after, an austere and hard life, where he died also, and was buried Angus death.
in the Church of Saint Mains, about the year 1514. his heart was 1514.
carried to Douglas. The years of his age were 61. or 62. by all the conjecture
that can be made. So that it has not been so much for his years, as for some
other infirmity, that his body has not been able and fit for service, as he
says himself at Flowdon.

He was a man every way accomplished both for mind and body. He was for
stature tall, and of a strong composition. His countenance was full of
majesty, and such as bred reverence in the beholders; wise and eloquent of
speech; upright and square in his actions; sober and moderate in his desires,
valiant and courageous, a man of action and undertaking, liberal also of heart
and hand, loving and kind to his friends; which made him to be beloved,
reverenced, and respected of all men. He gave proof of his personal valor in
a duel which is reported to have been thus. A duel betwixt Angus and Spense.
The King on a time was discoursing at table of the personages of men, and by
all men's confession the prerogative was adjudged to the Earl of Angus. A
Courtier that was by (one Spense of Kilspindie) whether out of envy to hear
him so praised, or of his idle humor only, cast in a word of doubting and
disparaging: It is true, said he, if all be good that is up-come; meaning if
his action and valor were answerable to his personage and body. This spoken
openly, and coming to the Earls ears in the worst interpretation, offended him
highly. It fell out after this, as the Earl was riding from Douglas to
Tantallon, that he sent all his company the nearest way, and he himself with
one only of his servants, having each of them a hawke on his fist in hope of
better sport, took the way by Borthwick toward Falawe; where lighting at the
brook at the West end of the town they bathed their hawks. In the mean time
this Spense happened to come that way; whom the Earl espying, said to his man,
Is not this such an one, that made question of my manhood, I will go to him,
and give him a trial of it, that we may know which of us is the better man.
No, my Lord, said his servant, it is a disparagement for your Lordship to
meddle with him, I shall do that sufficiently, if it will please your Honor to
give me leave. I see, said the Earl, he has one with him, it shall be thy
part to grapple with him, whilst I deal with his Master. So fastening their
hawks, that they might not fly away in the mean time, they rode after him,
and having over-taken him; What reason had you, said the Earl to him, to speak
so contemptuously of me at such a time, doubting whether my valor were
answerable to my personage? When the other would have excused the matter, he
told him, that would not serve the turn; Thou art a big fellow, and so am I,
one of us must pay for it. The other answered, If it may be no better, there is
never an Earl in Scotland, but I will defend my self from him as well as I
can, and will rather kill him, if I can, than suffer him to kill me. So
alighting from their horses, they fought a certain space, but at last the Earl
of Angus with a stroke, cut Spenses thigh bone asunder, so that he fell to the
ground, and died soon after. The two serving-men were very hard at it still,
when the Earl came and stayed them, saying to Spenses man, Go thy way, tell my
Gossip the King, there was nothing here but fair play: I know my Gossip will be
offended; but I will get me into Liddisdale, and remain in the Hermitage till
his anger be over. And so it is thought he did: whereupon the King, when he was
pacified, caused the Earl to exchange his Lordship of Liddisdale, with the
Lands of Bot^well, alleging that there was no order to ^e had of the Earls of
Angus so long as they kept Liddisdale: What other reasons the Earl had to move
him to this excambion, I know not, nor why he should have preferred Bothwell;
but it is certain his son George exchanged them with his consent. One fault he
had, that he was too much given to women; otherwise there was little or
nothing that a man could have wished to be helped in him, or that was amiss.

Archibaldus Angusiae primus.
Palponum dum turba ferox illudere regi
Non timet; idque palam plebsque patresque fremunt;
Amissum decus imperii; vilescere sceptrum;
Omnia turbari tum foris atque domi;
Cochronum extinxi (caput horum and dux nebulonum
Is fuit) and laqueo colla scelesta ded^.
Talibus infestus quod sim Gnathonibus, atro
Dente petit, famam rodit and aula meam.
Faex hominum, procerum pestis, Regumque ruina;
Quo magis oblatras, hoc magis illa nitet.
Archbald of Angus, the first of that name.
Whiles bloody flatterers did not fear
To Abuse their Princes name and ear:
Whiles great, and mean, and all repine,
Whiles the Kings honor does decline,
His rule too much despised by all,
And State affairs to ruin fall.
Cochran their Head was hanged by me:
And for I punished such as he,
They do attempt my name to stain
With slanders, but these dregs of men,
The pest of Courts, the shame of Kings,
Their greatest hate most honor brings.
Of George Master of Angus, and son to Archbald the first.
HIs eldest son (as has been said) was George slain at Flowdon, designed
commonly by the appellation of Master of Angus. He was married to Elizabeth
Drummond, daughter to the Lord Drummond of whom we told how he defeated the
Earl of Lennox.

His children by her were three sons. First Archbald, afterward Earl of
Angus. Secondly Sir George of Pittendrich. Thirdly William Priour of Colding
hame.

His daughters were, First the Lady Yester. Secondly the Lady Basse. Thirdly
Jeane Lady Glames. Fourthly Alison, married first to Robert Blackader, of
Blackader, and afterward to Sir David Hume of Wedderburne. Fifthly the Lady
Drumlanerige, as I take it. Also they mention a sixth, married to a Baron in
the North, whom they name not, neither do I know who he should be.

His age at his dea th (to reckon from the 15. year of his fathers age in the
1469. to the year of his own death at Flowdon 1513.) was not above 44.

His actions, because he never came to be Earl, are not recorded. Some dealing
there was betwixt him as Governor of Liddisdale, and the Lord Dacres in
England, with whose Deputies he agrees to meet at Dumfreis, for doing of
Justice in the year 1489. the year after the King was killed 1489.
at Bannock-burne. So at Cannabie he met with the Lord Dacres himself,
Cannabbie,
where they accorded not well: For they intended both to send to the Councels
of both Nations to have their determination of their differences. He agrees the
same year with Sir Robert Lundie of Bagonie, Treasurer for a general remission
to Ewsdalde, Eskdale, and Niddisdale, which I think should rather be
Liddisdale, for a 1000. pounds, being at this time not above 20. years of age,
not out of Curatorie by the Laws, though that was in his fathers hands. Yet we
see also Courts held in his name, by his Bailiffs, as a retoure of Adam Ker, to
some Lands in Selkrig, in the said year, which makes me to think he has been
then married. Also he it is, as we told above, that excambes the Lands of
Liddisdale for Bothwell with Patrick Earl Bothwell, resigning the Lands of
Liddisdale, and the King disponing them upon the resignation in the year 1492.
upon what reason either the Earl Bothwelshould have affected 1491.
these, or he preferred the other, and not thought himself as fit to rule that
unruly Country as any other, I have not heard. But it was done in his fathers
life time, who was no fool when he was in his greatest vogue, the first three
years of King James the fourth. He allies afterward with this same Earl
Bothwel, marrying his son Archbald to his daughter, but that must be long
after, except that he has been married young, as some say he was.

In the year 1510. he indents for the marriage of his fourth daughter 1510.
Alison to Robert Blackaders son, and apparent heir to Andrew Blackader of
that Ilk. Her portion 300. marks, the terms, 1. at the completing 40. pounds,
and 20. pounds, at the feast of Martimasse next after; and so 20. pounds termly
till it were paid. That same year he is in^eft in Abernethie. And this is all
we have of him, which we have set down chiefly for his children, and the
History that follows of them.

Of Archbald the seventh Earl of Angus and the second Archbald.
TO Archbald the first, succeeded Archbald the second, his Grandchilde by his
son George Master of Angus.

He was thrice married, first to Margaret Hepburne daughter to Patrick Hepburne
the first Lord Bothwell, being as yet very young: for at his second marriage he
was not old, but a youth, or stripling, Adolescens. She died in childe-birth
within the year (as they say) immediately after the Field of Flowdon. 2. His
second wife was Queen Margaret relict of King James the 4. and daughter to King
Henry 7. of England. She bare to him a daughter Lady Margaret Douglas, who was
married to Matthew Stuart Earl of Lennox, and bare to him Henry Lord Darnly,
that married Queen Mary of Scotland, and father to King James the sixth of
Scotland, and first of great Britain now happily reigning. Lady Margaret had
also another son named Charles, who was father to the Lady Arabella. 3. His
third wife was Margaret Maxwell daughter to the Lord Maxwell. She bare to him a
son and a daughter, who died both of them before they were 8. years old. He
had also a base daughter by a daughter of Traquairs, Jeane Douglas married to
the Lord Ruthven. Some say that he begot this daughter in the Queens time,
while she lying in of Lady Margaret Douglas in England, after her delivery went
to London and stayed there with her brother King Henry the 8 and with her
sister the late Queen of France, and then Duchess of Suffolk. Others say that
it was before. He had also a base son (as I take it) commonly called George
the Postulant to a by-name, because (I know not upon what claim or title) he
did postulate and claim the Abbacie of Aberbroth (or Abernethock) and not only
did postulate it, but apprehended it also, and used it as his own.

Having brought the house of Angus still increasing, and growing in greatness,
and honor unto this man Archbald the second, shall we suffer it now to decay,
or to take halt in his person? No, but we shall see it increase so much the
more, as he approaches nearer unto that descent, which is able to give honor
unto baseness it self, far more to add and multiply honor upon that which is
already honorable. Men do not only take honor from their progenitors; their
posterity makes them honorable, when they have much honor, and that variable
according to the degrees of their honor more or less. Which seeing it is
undeniable, in what place of honor shall we rank this Archbald, father to the
Lady Margaret Douglas, and by her great Grandfather to our Sovereign King
James of great Britain? This one thing is enough to list him up to the highest
top of honor. All other things are but accessory; yet are they additions of
great importance. Men are honorable by their marriage: Who then so honorable
as he? Having married a Queen, a Kings daughter, a Kings sister, a Kings
mother. Others also of the Subjects of this Country have married Queens (I
grant) But none of them did marry Queen Margaret, a Lady so virtuous; None did
marry a Queen so Royally descended, and every way Regal in her father, her
mother, her brother, her sister, her husband, her son being all of them Kings
or Queens. None did marry a Queen without some blemish and diminition of her
reputation but he. None with the approbation of all men; even of the Queens own
chief Kindred, with the allowance, desire, and exhortation of her Kinsfolks, of
King Henry the 8. But you will say perhaps, that this has been chance or
fortune, or ignorance in her, blindness of an impotent woman, who placed her
affection without desert, or that it has been ignorance in King Henry her
brother, a foreign Prince ill informed. Let us therefore hear such witnesses as
were not blinded, either with womanly affection, or with the ignorance of a
stranger; such as were unpartiall, and who had neither fear nor hope, love or
hatred, which are the common causes of partiality. These are ourhistories,
which if they record truth (as they are recorders of truth) if there was any
more worthy, or before him in any good quality, then let it be accounted folly
in her, and weakness in her brother. What do these our Histories then say?
First of his place and descent, they say he was the first of the youth of
Scotland for Nobility. Lo here is one good quality, and that a very main one,
wherein her choice and her brothers approbation are justified, and he shown to
be worthy, nay most worthy by hi^ place and birth, whereof we have said enough
heretofore. But let that be thought of no moment or value if there be no more.
What say they next? What of himself? In himself? in his personage? The first of
the youth of Scotland for favor and comeliness of personage. I dare not
consent to them that make no account hereof. It has ever been in account; men
have thought it worthy, whereon to bestow a Kingdom. It is yet regarded, it
affects all humane creatures, and moves us whither we will or no; They say that
beasts discern it not. I doubt of it, though we are not able to discern their
discerning of it. But let them be beasts that do so. And let this also be
nothing in him, if there be yet no more in him; if there be no qualities joined
to it, which it gives luster to, as gold to a Diamond. Let it be (as in all men
and women) like a ring of gold on a Swines snout, ill placed, and matched;
unseemly, and unworthily. Yet it is gold, and gold is ever precious, and to be
desired; although the Swines snout of ill conditions be not worthy to be so
fairly and finely decked, or adorned. What are then his other properties and
qualities of mind and manhood, soul and body? which is the third point. The
first and principal (say they) of the youth of Scotland in all good exercise,
knowledge, cunning, skill and understanding, belonging to a man of his place!
for I doubt not there were many more cunning Clerks than he; yet not more
sufficient in uprightness, honest virtue, dexterity, and good address, both
in politic matters belonging to the good government of the Country; and
Gentleman-like, exercise becoming his estate, for body or mind, for peace, or
war. What particulars they are we shall see in his particuliar actions; viz.
valor, and true courage, with love and kindness to his Country, hereditarie
properties from the very root of which he is sprung. Also wisdom and
magnanimity, truth and uprightness in words and actions, with others which
will appear, as the occasion occurres. And so we have him by these testimonies
thrice (that is every way) first, or chief and principal. 1. Chief in
Nobility beyond all. 2. Chief in personage, beyond all. 3. Chief in virtue,
and all good arts (for so is the word) or qualities, beyond all. Worthy
therefore whom the Queen should have preferred, and made choice of to be her
husband beyond, and before all. Worthy of whom should descend that race of
Kings so Noble, beyond all. Which as it honors him, so does it not disgrace or
disparage that Noble and Princely race, to be come of such an one in his
person; of such stock in the whole race and descent of that whole Family, so
noble, so worthy, and heroical every way. Not so much private in place, as
Princely in worth, all virtue and magnanimity; though otherwise Subjects. And
thus the honor of the house does rise in his person, whom we see accounted by
all every way honorable, honorable by blood, honorable by virtue, honorable
by marriage, honorable by affinity and alliance, honorable by progeny and
posterity, honorable by all actions, by all valiant, and always worthy acts.
As for his greatness and puissance, we find it at his entry and beginning
matched (yea over-matched) by the Lord Hume Chamberlain; But in end harderto
be matched by any, nay matching (almost) what should not be matched in any
sort, wherewith no Subject should match himself. Which however good or evil it
be in using, yet it is greatness to have done so.

To come to his particular actions; The first we find is his marriage, He
marries Q. Margaret.
which is not indeed to be attributed to his prudencie, or his purchasing, yet
is it the effect of his worth. She affected him, and he had reason not to
refuse the party. Her brother King Henry consents, and writes lovingly to them
both. He had his own particular end, which was to counterpoize, or weigh down
the French faction, and to hinder the incursions of Scotland by his means; some
say also to stay the Duke of Albanie from coming home to be Governor, but that
was not yet motioned. And though that were his end, yet the other was the end
of his desire to stay Albanie, and his main scope; for all that he aimed at by
staying of him was but to stay the Scottish wars, which he by his coming was
like to set on foot. Things fall out contrary many times to men's intentions.
This marriage brought in the Duke of Albanie, and by him had strengthened the
French if he had guided wisely, kept the hearts of men in Scotland, and
entertained his home-bringer, the Chamberlain, and given him a thankful
meeting for that work. But there is a providence, if men would observe. This
plot fails King Henry, that fails the Chamberlain, this fails the Duke of
Albanie. The King hopes to hinder the French by this marriage; it furthers them
to be all the guiders, being brought in by the Chamberlain. The Chamberlain
looks to be rewarded, he has his head stricken off. The Duke thinks that the
Chamberlains death shall breed him all quietness, ease, and power, it loses
him the hearts of all men, and at last his office. The working of these things
was thus.

The Queen was by the King her husbands testament left Regent during her
widow-hood. That lasted not long; from the 25. of September until the next
Spring was ended, say some: others fay until the 6. of August almost a year.
Then she marries, and so falls from that charge. The Queen lo^th her Regencie
by her marriage.
The Earl of Angus did labor to have it continued, and used a strong motive,
which was, that so the peace should last with England, which was both
profitable and necessary. The Queen during her Regencie had procured it; She
had written to her brother that he should stay the war, and abstain from
troubling his Nephews Kingdom; troubled already too much with factions within
it self. He had answered her, that he warred against the Scots, when they made
war against him; and that he would keep peace with them when they kept peace
with him. This was a magnanimous mind, and a Princely (say our writers, not
envious of the praife of the English) though indeed it were not without a good
policy. For by that mean he had leisure to prosecute his French intentions
without fear of being disturbed or diverted by the Scottish incursions. But we
will not extenuate it: he had indeed the better hand of it, and at this time
peace was more needful for Scotland. And therefore this reason brought by
Angus for the continuation of the Queens authority was so much the greater.
But it could not move the other party, whereo^ the Lord Hume (Chamberlain) was
Chief. They show their willingness to honor the Queen. That appeared (say
they) in this; that contrary to the ancient custom of this Kingdom, they had
suffered and obeyed her authority, whiles she her self kept her right by
keeping her widow-hood. Now that she had quit it by marrying, why should they
not choose another to succeed into the place which she had left? which the old
laws would also have taken from her, which do not permit that a woman should
govern in the most peaceable times, far less now, when such evils do threaten,
as can scarce be resisted by the wisest and most sufficient men. This they
pretended, and touched the point that did annoy them. The marrying of the Earl
of Angus had made him too great already, the continuing of her authority would
make him far greater.

This they can not endure; especially the Chamberlain who was jealous of his
greatness, which he thought would impair and lessen his own, already beginning
to decline, by the retiring and withdrawing of Liddisdale and Anandale from
following him, and casting them again under the wings of the Douglasses, to
whom they had wont to belong. This point being once obtained, that the Queen
should govern no more, the next was, who then should be the man. Here also was
no less strife and Convention about choosing of a Governor.
contention. The Chamberlains credit carried it away, his own power, his
alliance, the Earl of Arane being his brother in law, the Earl of Lennox
Aranes sisters son, joined to the Prelates, (a Faction ever French, and then
more than ever by the King of Englands shaking off the yoke of Rome) especially
the Archbishop of Glasgow, a proud Prelate, and ever factious. By these men,
all Noblemen at home are despised and balked, and the Office cast upon John,
called afterward Duke of Albanie, Cousin-germane to the late King, being then
in France, brought up in France, and only with the French tongue, where his
father was banished and forfeited, and he himself not restored: yet is he by
them, who had not so much power as to restore him in the minority of a King
(as had been proved in King James the second his time, against the Earl of
March restored in his minority) ordained to be Governor of the King and whole
Country. Bent was the Chamberlain that way: And so bent he was, that he
professed openly at the Convention, that though they would all refuse, yet he
alone would bring him home, and make him Governor. A great word, if he were
not able to do it; a great power if he were able. It is interpreted ambition in
him, and that despairing to have that honor conferred on himself, and envying
it to any other, he took this course. I cannot be of that mind. He that had
power to do so much for another, had power to have done somewhat for himself:
At least so far as to have gotten some part of the government with others, as
it was customable, when they could not agree upon any one man, they divided it.
It is reported also for certain, that the Earl of Angus finding that he was so
earnest in that course, went to him, and naming him familiarly by his name,
Alexander, said he, what do you mean by this? that man is a stranger to us, and
understands not our language no more than we do his. He will work his own
ends, and who knows after what manner? Whether or not to the Kings prejudice,
who is only between him and the Crown. Certainly, he will never regard either
of us, whom he will rather seek to depresse than to advance. Go to therefore,
let us agree amongst our selves. Take you the government of the borders, and of
all that lies on that side of the river of Forth, and let me have the command
on the other side. A fair offer, and a wise consideration, which the
Chamberlain shall acknowledge hereafter too late, and shall himself say the
like to him that now does thus admonish him. For the present he refused
obstinately, and (as it may be thought) fatally, persisting in his former
resolution. Whereof when I consider what might have been the cause, I think it
has been not any distrust to obtain some place in the guiding of affairs, but
a doubting how to keep it: if by chance any thwarting or insociablenesse of
Empire should fall out between them at any time thereafter: in which case Angus
could not but be the stronger by the power of England his allies, they having
no party so great to counterpoize them. For this cause he has thought it fit
to bring in the French to equal the balance as principal, himself only as
accessarie, not doubting of a chief place both by his desert in bringing him
home, and the necessity of his service, which could never be lacking. On this
rather than the other ground (as I take it) he has laid down his course. But
as well as he laid his grounds, hereupon he built both his ruin before three
years were come about, and speedy repentance soon after the arrival of his
Governor.

Howbeit upon this occasion the Duke of Albanie (so called afterward) is sent
for, arrives, is made Earl of March, Duke of Albanie (which his The Duke of
Albanie made Governor.
father had been before, but was forfeited) and Governor until the Kings ripe
years. The Lord Hume comes to him, some say with a huge number (10000. horse)
to Dumbartan, whereupon the Governor said, he was too great to be a subject.
Others report, that he came very privately with his household only (some 24.
horse in Kendall Green which was his Livery) and that the Duke slighted him
with this sentence, minuit praesentia famam; being a man of low stature, and
carrying no appearance of much stuff to be in him by his outside. However he
was then welcomed, and what fair and good countenance he got then, it lasted
not Prior (...) undermines the Lord Hume.
long. John Hepburne Prior of S. Andrews was his enemy on this occasion.
Andrew Stuart Archbishop of S. Andrews was slain at Flowdon. Three diverse
pretended to the place by diverse means. Gawin Douglas Bishop of Dunkel, uncle
to the Earl of Angus, by the Qneens admission, Hepburne. by the election of
the Chapter, Andrew Foreman by the Popes gift. This Foreman was Abbat of
Dumfermling, and Aberbrothe, Legate from the Pope, and had gotten this to
maintain his grandour, or as a reward of his service. The question was hard to
decide. All pretended right and reason. Gawin Douglas had gotten possession of
the Castle, and had put servants into it; but the Priour was stronger about the
town, and finds a mean to thrust them out. Foreman cannot get his Bulls
proclaimed: none durst take it in hand so long as Hume and Hepburne. agreed. He
works wisely, having been born under the Lord Hume, he flees to him as his
Patron, agrees with him as a friend, and gives the Abbacie of Coldinghame to
his youngest brother David. He does his turn, proclaims his Bull, but had no
power in Fife to prosecute it any further. Yet it causes Hepburne to come to a
point, to take composition, the Bishopric of Murray, and 3000. crowns by
year, and a discharge for all his bypast intromissions. So he agrees with
Foreman, but dis-agrees with the Lord Hume, and despites him with such malice,
because of that morsel pulled out of his jaws, that he ceased not to work him
what mischief he could. He did so possess the Governor with jealousy of the
Lord Humes and Angus greatness, and aspiring, that he thought there was no way
to secure himself* and his Government, but by ridding the Country of them
both. Wherefore the Lord Hume repairing to him, and finding by his neglectfull
carriage, and cold entertainment, the little good will he bare him, repenting
too late his forwardness in his election, and calling to mind what Angus had
foretold him, though he had contemned his counsel, yet now seeing no other
remedy, went to him, and the Queen his wife, condemning his fact, and
regrating the present estate of the King and Country, and advised them to fly
into England with the young King. When the Governor had notice of this
consultation, he used such diligence and expedition, that coming to Stirlin
unlooked for, he surprised the Queen; and removing her, and the Douglasses from
about the King, he gave the keeping of him to the Lord John Ereskin, and other
three Noblemen. Hereupon the Queen and Angus, as also the Lord Hume, and his
brother William, withdrew themselves into England, and the Governor upon
their departure, sent Ambassadors to King Henry to clear himself, that he had
done nothing why they should be so afraid of him, or leave their Country. He
dealt also privately with themselves by their friends, promising and protesting
to give them all content and satisfaction, in such ways, that they believing
and desiring to live at home, returned all of them, save only the Queen, who
being then near the time of her childe-birth, remained at Harbottle in
Northhumberland, Lady Margaret Douglas born at Harbottle in England.
where she was brought to bed of Lady Margaret Douglas. Then as soon as she was
able to endure travel, she went to London, where she was kindly welcomed, and
lovingly entertained by her brother King Henry, and her sister Mary Queen of
France, and afterward Duchess of Suffolk. But the Governors head being once
filled with suspicions, and new causes of distrust arising daily, could not be
quieted by their return, nor the Queens absence, neither could he think himself
bound by promises. Gawin Douglas Bishop of Dunkel, uncle to Angus, was
committed to prison: John Lord Drummond his Grandfather, or mothers brother,
and David Panetier Secretary to the late King, were likewise laid fast.
Alexander Lord Hume, and his brother William, were executed, their goods
confiscat, their lands forfeited, and their heads affixed on the City Gate of
Edinburgh, called the Nether-Bow. Being thus rid of the Chamberlain, he did
much fear the Earl of Angus, whom he left to govern in his absence (for he
went into France) but joined with him the Earls of Arran, Argyle, Huntley, the
Archbishop of S. Andrews, and Glasgow, together with a Frenchman, named
Antonius Darsius, commonly known A^t. Darsius or De la Beau^e slain 1517.
by the title of Sieur de la Beauty. To this La Beauty he allotted Dumbar, the
Shires of Lowthian, and the Merse, where the Chamberlaines lands and friends
were. This Darsius was slain by Sir David Hume of Wedderburn, occasionally, in
the year 1517. the 18. of September. For this Sir David was outlawed, his
house seized, and Sir George Douglas (Angus brother) suspected to be
accessarie, imprisoned in Garvet Castle, they not daring to meddle with the
Earl himself, who was no less suspected to have been conscious of it (though
falsely) because Sir David had married their sister Alison.

Not long after this, there fell out an occasion of great troubles betwixt
Dissension betwixt Arran and Angus.
the Earl of Angus, and the Earl of Arrane. There was some question of the
Bailiff-ship and right of keeping Courts in Jedward Forest, the Earl of Angus
his Lands, but in which Andrew Ker of Farnihaste challenged a right and
privilege of doing justice, and punishing male-factors as hereditarie Bailiff.
In this controversy Arrane sided with Farnihaste, not for any particular
relation, or because he thought his right was good, but only in opposition to
Angus, whom he hated inwardly. What the cause of his hatred was, we ^ear not,
and they had been good friends before. Arrans base son James Hamilton, as he
was on his way toward Farnihaste to assist him, John Summervale of Camnethen
set upon him, killed five or six of his company, took thirty men and horses,
and pursued himfelf so near, that he was forced to turn in to Hume Castle for
his safety. This fact was imputed to Angus, on whom Summervale did for the
most part depend, men thinking that it was done by his direction. But it is
well known that besides this quarrel of the Earls, that man had ever a
particular feude with the Hamiltons. But if the Earl had been guilty of this
wrong and offense done unto them, it is not likely that he would have been so
slightly accompanied at Edinburgh, and have stayed their coming thither with so
small forces, if he had suspected any ill meaning from them, or known any such
deserving in himself. Besides they having so just cause, they might have
complained and gotten redress and satisfaction of the Earl by order of law,
if they could have made it appear that he had any hand in it, and not have
taken this violent course. Wherefore in all likelihood this was but a color
and pretext. Hereupon (however) in the year 1520. the 27. of April, a
convention being appointed 1520.
at Edinburgh where Archbald Douglas of Kilspindie (the Earl of Skirmish in
Edinburgh betwixt them.
Angus his uncle, or Consin-German rather) was Provest: the Hamiltons refused
to come thither, alleging that they could not think themselves assured of
their lives in the Town, where he was Provest. Archbald to cut off their
excuse, and that he might not hinder public business, laid down his office
voluntarily, and in his room was chosen Robert Logane a Burgess of Edinburgh.
Then they came to the City, and finding the Earl of Angus there but meanly
attended, and weakly guarded, his friends not being yet conveened, they
assembled together with the chief Noblemen of the West in Archbishop Betons
house in the Black-FrierWinde (this Beton was also Chancellor) and there
resolve by all means to apprehend Angus; alleging that his power was so great,
that nothing could be discerned freely, so long as he was free. The cause was
plausible, their malice great, and the occasion fair, considering his
singleness, and their multitude.

So soon as Angus heard of their consultation, he sent to them his uncle the
Bishop of Dunkell, desiring that if they had any grievance, or just quarrel
against him, they would complain thereof to the convention, to whose censure he
would submit himself, and make such satisfaction as it should please them to
ordain. And to this purpose Dunkell spoke to Glasgow the Chancellor, to move
the rest to accept of this offer, and that he would not be an instrument of
civil dissension. But he had fair persuading of him: no man was deeper in it
than he, who was ringleader to the rest, and very Episcopally had put on armor
to be present at it, and to assist them himself in person: yet he sought to
excuse himself, and laid all the blame upon the Earl of Arran, who, said he,
is highly offended with the Earl of Angus for many occasions, but chiefly for
the affront done to his son by Sommervale, and for the slaughter of De la
Beauty committed by his brother-in-law Sir David Hume, not without his
knowledge, consent, and council. For this cause Arran will needs have him to
go to prison. There is no remedy, says Glasgow, upon my conscience I cannot
help it. And in the heat of his asseveration he beat his breast with his hand,
where his conscience lay well covered with a jack of Maile, or a Secret hid
under his Seton or Cassock. And now being knocked upon, it answered with a
rattling noise, which the plates of iron did yield, bearing witness against him
how little he cared for that inward witness, which be-lyed him when he
protested he was desirous to pacify matters, being indeed thus preparing for
war. Neither did Dunkell stick to tell him so, saying, How now my Lord, me
thinks your conscience clatters. We are Priests, it is not lawful for us to
put on armor, or bear Arms, it makes us irregular. And so leaving him, he
returned to his Nephew, and told him shortly that there was no possibility of
composing matters, and as little of escaping or fleeing, for the City Gates
were shut, and his enemies were assembling. For me I am a Churchman, I will go
to my Chamber and pray for you. And so he did, but he sent his servants with
the Earl to aid him. Some ascribe this to want of strength, and to his
debilitie and old age; but it was indeed, because he held it not lawful, as a
thing forbidden in the Canon Law, and which he had reproached to Bishop Beton.
For in the year 1513. his eldest brother George slain at Flowdon was but 44.
and Gawin the fourth brother not above 38. or 39. so that now in the year 1520.
he has not been more than 46. which is no age of Decrepitnesse. Dunkell being
gone to his devotion, Angus without further consultation resolves rather to die
honorably defending himself against his enemies, than to be hailed (he and his
friends) forth to the Scaffold, and lay their necks upon the block to be
be-headed by their proud and insulting enemies. So he conveens his small troup,
tells them what his mind was, and exhorts them to stand to it manfully. They
all commended his resolution, and showed themselves most willing to hazard
their lives for his safety. Wherefore that they might not be surprised in their
Chambers, they came forth, and went down the High Street (for the Earl did
lodge at the Straight-Bow) being in all but 80. or 100. at most; but they were
all of them choice men, valarous, and hardy. Angus was well beloved in the
Town, so that when he came by the Shops where the Pikes and Spears are made,
they had liberty to furnish themselves with long Weapons, and many also were
reached to them by the Citizens out at the Windows, and from the Stairs; which
was no small advantage, their enemies having no long Weapon at all. The Chief
Street is so seated that the Gates being shut there is no entry to it, but by
some few Lanes that reach from the Cow-gate; in one of which called the
Black-frierWinde the adverse party had conveened. Now that they might not issue
forth upon him at diverse places, and so oppress him with their multitude,
Angus had caused his men to close up and bar the entrances of the Lanes with
Coale-horses, and Ale-barrels, Carts, and such things as would best serve for
that purpose, and could be gotten on a sudden. He placed also some few men at
every Lanes head to defend the Barricadoes; but he himself with the choycest
and most resolute of his company, planted themselves directly over against the
Black-frier-Winde, which he had left open for them, and as they thronged out,
he assailed them with Pikes and long Weapons. There having slain many of the
formest that came out, and scattered them all, he drove the rest down the Lane,
which by the narrowness thereof, made their number unprofitable, as had been
rightly foreseen by Angus, who knew that a few would be able to make good a
straight passage against many, their multititude availing nothing, scarce one
of ten having room to fight at once, and come to strokes together. The Earl of
Arran and his son James Hamilton (having been apparently of that number that
issued forth at the Lanes head at first, or else he could not have gone that
way) crossing the High Street, fled down a Lane on the Northside of the City,
and finding a Coale-horse standing in their way, they threw off his loading,
and rode through the North-logh at a foord where there is none known now, and
so escaped easily, no man pursuing them that way. The rest were scattered on
the other side of the Town, of which some fled to the Gray-Friers Monastery
for sanctuary, the Chancellor fled on foot to Lithgow. In the mean time, while
they were at this bickering within the City with great tumult, William Douglas
Priour of Coldingham (Angus his brother) and Sir David Hume (his brother in
law) came to the City Gates with 800. horse which they had brought out of the
Merse; and finding them shut, broke open the wicket with Smiths hammers, and so
entered. But before they could get in, the fray was ended. Angus strengthened
and emboldened with this supply, because the City was still full of his
enemies, caused it to be proclaimed with sound of Trumpet at the Market-Crosse,
that none should be seen abroad with Arms but he and his, under pain of death.
This enforced them of his adverse party to crave leave to depart, which was
granted unto them. Such was his moderation toward those who had plotted his
ruin and overthrow. He had fought for his life and honor, not out of malice,
or hatred; and now that these were out of danger he lets his enemies go away
safe and sound. And so there departed of them in one company 800. horse well
laughed at, and derided of the beholders, to see so many beaten and chased by
so few. Besides these there were many others that had fled before, and diverse
stayed still in the City lurking. This conflict fell out in the year 1520. the
last of April, in which there were 70. 1520.
slain, and two of note; Patrick Hamilton brother to Arran, and the Master of
Montgomerie. The Chancellor (as we have said) fled disguised to Stirlin to the
Queen. After this, Sir David Hume returning to the Merse, and being thus
strengthened by the authority and countenance of Angus, found means to take his
own house of Wedderburne from those that had kept it since the killing of De la
Beauty. He took also the Castle of Hume at the same time which had been seized
on by the Governor, and was kept by men that he had put into it. And thus was
the Earl of Angus party settled and strengthened in the Merse. Also in
Lowthian he had no opposition or contrary, neither in Tividale, and such other
parts of the borders. The Hamiltons were the only great men that had any
equality to match him, and were now incensed by their loss at Edinburgh. Some
of his friends lay near unto them, Robert Lord Boyde was his depender, and
special friend. He was also near to him in blood, for Angus his Grandmother (
Elizabeth Boyde) was sister to Thomas Boyde, Grandfather to this Robert. The
Lord Boyde was nearer to Arran; for King James the third his sister was mother
to Arran, and Grandmother to Boyde, as is probable. But Boyde followed Angus
more than him. His house of Kilmarnock in Cunninghame, lay nearest to their
Forces in Cliddisdale, and farthest from the Earl of Angus his power and
friendship. Therefore they besiege it, but without success, it being so well
defended, that they rose and went away without getting of it.

The next year (1521. the 18. of July) Angus came to Edinburgh, accompanied
1521.
with his friends, and especially the Humes that were banishshed, as our
writers design them. By which he means rathest (as I think) George now Lord
Hume (for he is Lord ever after this) and Sir David of Wedderburne with his
brothers, who may be said to have been banished, in regard he was denounced
Rebel, and outlawed: but otherwise he never went out of the Country, but
dwelt ever still in some part of the Merse. There Angus (as Buchanan says) but
(as our folks say) George Lord Hume and Wedderburne, by Angus his connivence,
took down the heads of the late Chamberlain, and his brother William, and
interred them solemnly in the Gray-friers. He passed from thence to Stirlin,
hoping to have found the Chancellor Beton there, but he was fled. From thence
he returned to Edinburgh.

About the 28. of October, the Governor returned out of France. Angus his
power seemed to him to be too great. He determines to diminish it. For which
purpose he commands himself to go into France, Angus goes into France.
causes his uncle the Bishop of Dunkell to be sent for to Rome, as we have
said above. Neither did Angus return out of France, until the Government was
taken from the Duke, who from this time forward does nothing of importance. For
the next year 1522. he went with an 1522.
Army to Solway to have invaded England; But his Army loved him not; all went
unwillingly with him, and against the hair. The Earl of Huntly being come
within three miles of England, openly refused to go any further; so that he was
forced to move Dacres and Musgrave (Englishmen) under hand to sue for peace,
that he might have some show of an honorable cause for his retreat. Wherefore
the 10. of October the same year, away he goes again to France having stayed
one full year in Scotland, and returns into Scotland the next year 1523. 1523.
the 22. of September. He brought then with him 3000. foot, and 100. men of
arms. Then assembling an Army of Scots (the 20. of October) thinking to do
great matters with his French aid, but having passed Tweed at the Bridge of
Melrosse, he was served just as he had been the year before; they refused still
to enter into England. Thereupon he came back again to the other side of the
River, and coming along by the bank thereof on Scottish ground, he began to
batter from thence the Castle of Warke standing on the other side of the River
on English ground. And having made a breach caused his Frenchmen to give the
assault, who entered the breach, but they were repulsed again, and beaten out.
So he left the siege, and retired to Lawder in the night. In the spring he
goes again into France promising to return before September, and taking a
promise of the Nobility that they should not transport the King from Stirlin
before his return. This their promise was kept with the like fidelity as he
had kept his promise made to the Chamberlain. For the King was brought to the
Abbey of Halyroodhouse by the Queen his mother; The Earls of Arran, Lennox,
Crawford, and many others: And from thence with all solemnity of Parliament,
to the Parliament Albanies government abrogated.
house, where he did solemnly abrogate the Governors authority: by which mean
he saved him a labor of returning into Scotland again. He needed not, neither
did he return any more to it, nor pass the Seas for that errand. He had
governed, or rather mis-governed the space of nine years. He spent in his
journeyes, and staying in France, five whole years, or six of these nine, being
absent from the country, and leaving it a prey to forreiners, and civil
ambition and dissension, and when he was at home, he abused and oppressed the
Nobility by slaughter or banishment.

But though he returned no more, yet others returned for him, those The Earl
of Angus returns out of France.
whom he had caused go to France by his authority, do now return without his
license, yea without license or recalling of any other, for ought we read. The
Earl of Angus returns after he had been in France almost three years. He
returned through England, having first sent Simon Panango, and obtained license
of K. Henry, by whom he was received lovingly, and dismissed liberally. For K.
Henry desired greatly the diminishing of the Governors authority, and was
glad of the alterations in Scotland, and therefore did make the more of Angus,
because he knew that he was opposite to the Duke. At his return he found the
estate of the Country in this case. We told before, how in the year 1518. the
Queen his wi^e, and he, had withdrawn themselves into England, and stayed at
Harbottle, where she bare her daughter Lady. Margaret Douglas: how her husband
having returned into Scotland, she (after her deliverie) went to the Court of
England to visit her brother and her sister, with whom she stayed for the space
of a whole year. In which time the Earl her husband becomes acquainted with a
daughter of Traquair, by whom he had a daughter called Jeane Douglas, married
afterward to Patrick Lord Ruthven. When the Queen came home again, he meets her
at Berwick, and brought her to Edinburgh. She having gotten notice of this
wrong he had done her, never lived with him in that love they had done before.
And now having set her affection upon a younger brother of the Lord Ochletrees,
whom she intended to create Lord Methven, she was become altogether his enemy:
And that so obstinately, that howbeit her brother K. Henry wrote to her, that
for her own honor, for the peace and quietness of the country, and for the
advantage of his affairs, she would be reconciled to him* yet she not only
would not yield to it, but even sued for a divorcement before the Pope, at the
Court of Rome, alleging that Angus had been affianced, betrothed, or
hand-fasted to that Gentlewoman who bare the child to him before he had
married her, and so by reason of that pre-contract, could not be her lawful
husband. She prevailed not in her suit, for her alledgance could not be proved,
being also untrue: but she increased in spite and hatred against him, and was
set (by all the means she could) to overthrow him. This drew Arran to be of her
Faction; both of them disliking that Angus should be in the first place, and
suspecting he would not be contented with the second, bent their Forces to
contend against him as for dominion and empiring. On the other side there were
the Earl of Lennox, and Argyle, who had assisted the Queen and Arran, and
helped them to abrogate the Duke of Albanies authority, and to establish the
King himself in the Government of the Kingdom. But now finding that the Queen
and Arran took all the guiding of the King and Country into their own hands
only, and did not admit them The Triumvirate of Angus, Argyle, and Lennox.
to be any way sharers with them therein, but wholly excluded them from all
copartnership, they were glad of Angus his return: for they knew that by his
power they should be able either to break the authority of the Queen and
Arran, orto diminish it in some measure. Neither were they deceived in their
expectation: for having conveened the greater part of the Nobility, Angus,
Lennox, and Argyle, are chosen Keepers and Governors of the King and Country.
Hereupon they pass forth with great celeritie, accompanied with 2000. horse,
and move Archbishop Beton, Chancellor, to consent to the election, who did
accordingly, not daring to refuse. Then to Stirlin they go, and there depose
all that bare any public Office, whom they suspected, and placed in their
rooms such as were sure to their side. From thence they came to Edinburgh, and
made there entry without violence. The Queen and Arran remained in the Castle
with the King, confident in the strength of the place, and the Kings (though
naked, and unarmed) authority: but there being but a small trench cast up
about the Castle, they yielded themselves, and it, because they were no ways
provided for enduring a siege. The King only was retained, and the rest
dismissed. The order of governing agreed upon amongst these three Earls, was,
that they should rule by turns, each of them his four months successively.
The first place was Anguses, either by lot, or by consent. During the time of
his presiding, the Abbacie of Holy-rood-house fell vacant, the Abbot thereof
George Creichton being advanced to be Bishop of Dunkell. Angus conferres this
Abbacie on his brother William, Prior of Coldinghame, either by himself and his
own power, or by moving the King to confer it upon him, and that without the
consent of the other two, which he thought he needed not, seeing he was
absolute Governor for his time. The other two thought themselves wronged by
this balking, and thought that howsoever he was for those months to attend the
King alone, yet that he ought not to govern, or dispose of any thing of moment
by himself alone. So they take offense at it, and Argyle retires, and
with-drawes himself home into Argyle. Lennox would gladly have done the like,
but the King detained him for the love he bare him, yet did he utter his
discontentednesse many ways. Thus is the Trium-virate dissolved: The
Triumvirate dissolved.
for which dissolution Angus is blamed, as having encroached upon the others,
and drawing all to himself alone. But he seems to be unjustly blamed, if this
were the time of his Government (as it should appear it was) and not of
attendance only; for they also attended the King at that same time. The
decision of this question depends upon the words of the Act or Contract of
their agreement in point of governing, which we have not precise. Yet they seem
to have been too hasty, in that they did not expect their turn, during the
time of which some such thing, or perhaps some better thing might have fallen
in their donation, wherein if he had impeded, or hindered them, then they might
have had just and undeniable cause to complain of him. Now they abandon their
charge, and thereby give him occasion to administer all alone, which is imputed
to his ambition. And so he takes all upon him, making small reckoning of their
offense, which he esteemed to be unjustly taken; and leaning to the greatness
of his own power, which was such as we have said; and was now also increased by
having the Earl of Huntly for his ward and pupil, he being left Tutour by his
Grandfather Earl Alexander Gordon, and having gotten the Wardship from the
King; so that now he had the friends and dependers of the house of Huntly to be
his.

In this mean time fell out the slaughter of Patrick Blackader Archdeacon The
slaughter of Patrick Blackader, Archdeacon of Dumblane.
of Dumblane, Cousin Germane to Robert Blackader, sometime Priour of
Coldingham, and brother Germane to Robert Blackader late of Blackader. Robert
the Priour of Coldingham had been slain before by Sir David Hume of
Wedderburne, and his brother John Hume being in his company, is thought to have
given him the deadly stroke. This Sir David married Alison Douglas sister to
the Earl of Angus, and relict of Robert Blackader of Blackader. She had two
only daughters, married to two of Sir David's brothers; the eldest to this John
Hume, and the younger to Robert Hume, who claimed, and possessed the Lands of
Blackader in the right of their wives, who were heirs of Line. Hence arose
deadly feude betwixt them, and the name of Blackader, who challenged to be
heirs by entailment of the Lands to the heirs male. Wherefore they had laid
wait for John diverse times to have slain him: especially at one time he being
in a Tavern in Edinburgh, and his men being all abroad, or in another room
with a Gentleman or two of his acquaintance, and companions, a Priest of
Archdeacon Blackaders came into the room where he was. John, not knowing who
he was, desired him to drink with him out of courtesy, but he refused, and
went forth presently. When he was gone, one of the house says to John, if ye
had known who that man was, ye would not have offered him any wine, for it was
such an one. If I had known (says John) that it had been he, I should have
made him drink his belly full whether he would or not. As they were thus
talking, a servant of the house going to the door, espies the Archdeacon
coming with a great company of men, and came running to John and told him of
it, who leaping to the door just as they were ready to enter, made good the
door, and drove them back, so that with much ado, he and those that were with
him found means to shut it. This attempt so incensed him, that having
understood of the Archdeacons coming to Edinburgh at this time, he lay in wait
for him by the way, and slew him. This slaughter was imputed to the Earl of
Angus by his enemies; at least some aspersion thereof was rubbed upon him,
because (as they alleged) Angus had sent for the Archdeacon, and he was come
upon his sending for, and (as some said) upon an appointment of agreeance to be
made betwixt John Hume and him. But John ever in all discourse, or conference
of that business denied that everthere was any appointment, or overture of
agreement, or that he ever knew of Angus his sending for him. That which made
it the rather believed to be done by Angus consent, or privity was, because
when in the tumult raised upon the slaughter, diverse went out to have
apprehended John, Sir George Douglas (the Earls brother) went out also to have
taken him at the Earls command, who was highly offended that he should have
committed this insolency in his government; whom when the others saw, they
suspected that he being John's wives uncle, and seeing many Douglasses and Humes
in his company (who were friends and allied with John) was come out, not to
apprehend but to defend and assist him. Wherefore they returned from pursuing
of him. Sir George also returned shortly after without finding him; neither was
there any search made for him after that: Angus (besides that he was uncle to
John's wife) having almost continual use of serviceable and active men, being
loath to offend his brother Sir David, and his other friends in the Merse. And
now were things in working, A faction against Angus.
and a faction making against Angus. Archbishop Beton, who had joined with him
rather out of fear, than good will, had quickly fallen off from them: And
Angus, to be revenged of him, had brought the King to his lodging in Edinburgh,
and intrometted and seized on his household stuff for his own use. Argyle and
Lennox had separated from him: The Queen and Arran were his professed enemies.
These had their friends about the King. Lennox was ever with him, and most
entire of any. His domestic servants were corrupted by the Queen, who
therefore all sought by all means to alienate the Kings mind from the
Douglasses, detracting and calumniating their actions, some justly, many of
them unjustly, aggravating their errors, mis-interpreting things doubtful,
concealing the good which they did, and traducing all. Thus did the King
(though to retain his favor they had used him with all indulgence, and had
loosed the rains to all delights and pleasures, even more than was fit) weary
of their government. Yet were they so incircumspect, or careless, that they
neglected to remove his suspected servants, and to place their own assured
friends about him; either not doubting them that were wi^h him, or being too
confident in their own strength and power, so that by little and little he
became altogether alienate: at last he opened his mind to such as he trusted,
and began to confer with them of the way and means how to be set free from
that bondage, as he was taught to call it. Above all he did most especially
confer with the Earl of Lennox. While they are in plotting of these devices,
Angus (either not knowing, or not caring what they were doing) was much
troubled in settling and ordering the borders, and the outlaws there. He had
made many rodes thither, but effected nothing or little. Now he takes resolution
(for the better furtherance) to go into Tividale, and (the more to terrify the
malefactors, and to encourage others against them) to take the King with him.
Being come to Jedbrough, he moves the King to command the chief of the Clannes
to bring in such men as were given up by name in writing to him. It was obeyed;
and by that mean many were execute and put to death, many pardoned in hope of
amendment, and that of the principal malefactors. While all are glad hereof,
and their minds loosed to some peace of contentment, the occasion seemed fair,
and as it had been fallen from Heaven, to them who were enemies to the
Douglasses, of taking the King out of their hands and custody.

The mean is devised thus, that Balcleugh (who dwelt within a little of
Jedbrough) should invite the King to his house, and retain him there (being not
unwilling) till more were come and conveened. But that plot failed by chance,
or by discovery, the King being brought back to Melrosse. Notwithstanding
hereof, Balcleugh resolving to prosecute, what he intended, would assay to do
by force what he had failed in by craft. He assembled about 1000. horse of his
friends and other borderers accustomed to theft. He cast himself to be in the
Kings way, as he was to pass into Lowthian at the Bridge of Melrosse upon
Tweed. The Con^ct betwixt Angus and (...) at the bridge of Melrosse.
Earl of Angus sends to him, and asks his meaning, and wills him to retire. He
answered, he was come to show himself, and his friends, to the King his Master,
as other border-men did. Then a Herald was sent to him, commanding him to
withdraw himself out of the way, in the Kings 1526.
name; but his answer was, that he knew the Kings mind as well as he, and
would not go away till he saw him. The Earl of Angus had not so many in number
about him as Balcleugh, yet those he had being his choice Gentlemen, together
with the Chiefs of the names of Hume, and Ker, George Lord Hume, and Andrew Ker
of Cesford, all valiant and active men, he resolved to hazard battle. And
because they were all come out on horseback, he gave order that they should
alight, and fight on foot. The Lord Hume answered, he would do so if the King
would command him to do it. We hear not what answer was made, or that the King
commanded, but he alighted, and took part very honestly with the rest.
Balcleugh also alighted, but he had no sooner joined battle, than a great
number of his men (better accustomed to steal then to fight) fled away and left
him. He himself, and his friends, stood to it manfully, and continued the
fight, which was for a space very fierce and hard; as being in the presence of
the King, who was a beholder, and was to be the reward of the victor. At last
Walter Scot of Balcleugh, being hurt, his whole company turned their backs,
there being fourscore of them slain, and having first slain Andrew Ker of
Cesford. Balcleugh escaped himself out of the Field. Hereupon began deadly
feude betwixt the Kers and Scots; or was renewed and continued diverse years
after, and diverse murders and slaughters followed upon it, amongst which was
the slaughter of Sir Walter Scot himself in Edinburgh. There my Lord Fleming
also alighted with Angus, and took part in the conflict* but the Earl of
Lennox sat still on his horse by the King, as an indifferent spectatour, and
looker on. He being before a suspected, but now (by this) a declared enemy to
the Douglasses withdrew himself from Court. This fell out about the 18. of
July 1526.

After this attempt, Angus perceiving so many evil-affected toward him, entered
into parleying with the Earl of Arran; and having composed Arran joins with
Angus, and Le^ makes up a faction against them.
their old differences, received him to be his partner, and fellow-governour in
ruling the Country. This did the more incense Lennox against them both, and
his anger made them both the more watchful and careful to strengthen
themselves against him. The ground of their dissension was this; Lennox was
Arrans sisters son (as has been said) and failing heirs of his own body, was
to be his heir, and to succeed as well to the Earldome of Arran, as to his
right and title to the Kingdom of Scotland, after the King and his heirs, and
there being great appearance of it, Lennox had conceived great hope that he
should be his heir, because his uncle Arran had been long married to the
Chamberlan Hume his sister, and had no children by her. She also her self
(whether because she was of good age, or because she had been so long barren)
had lost all hope to conceive; whereupon her husband (either by her advice, or
not without her consent, as is thought) divorceth from her, pretending he had
before he married her, lien with a kinswoman of hers, that was so near in
blood, as made his marriage with her incestuous, and so could not be brooked by
him with a good conscience. So being divorced, he marries one Beton, daughter
to Creigh in Fyfe, who was brother to Beton Archbishop of S. Andrews. This was
a great stop in the Earl of Lennox his hopes, chiefly concerning the Earldom
of Arran, for as touching the Crown, the report went, that the King would
entaile that to him, out of his own favor. Neither was his hope of Arran quite
given over, if the divorcement could afterward be quarrelled either in
substance, or formality, which Lawyers might readily do in a subject of this
nature, which is so full of questions and doubts. These things wrought
jealousy, that contrariety, and alienation of minds, which soon begat
hostility and hatred. The diversity of faction increased it, and it bred and
increased the faction. The King held firm for Lennox, or was held firm by him,
and sent him many private Letters to many of the Nobility, with whom he dealt,
and drew a great faction. In which being very confident, he assembled them at
Stirlin, where was Archbishop Beton, and diverse other Bishops. There he
propounded in plain terms, the setting of the King at liberty; which they
decreed and appointed a day for the performance and execution thereof. Angus so
soon as he had found the wind thereof, and had begun to smell it out, had
written to the Earl of Arran to come to Lithgow, where they might meet, and
take such order as was needful. Arran was not slow, but gathered his Forces
quickly, and kept the appointment. Lennox hearing of it, resolved (though the
day were not yet come that was appointed for his associats to conveen at
Stirlin) to adventure to set upon the Hamiltons, before Angus (who was at
Edinburgh) should join with them, with such power as he had ready about him.
The Hamiltons having notice of Lennox his intention, advertised the Earl of
Angus thereof. Angus made ready, and addressed himself for the journey, but he
got many letts and impediments. The King also did hinder and stay him not a
little, for he lay long a bed, pretending indisposition and sickishnesse, he
marched slowly, and stayed often, and made many halts by the way, as being
weary, and troubled with looseness of his belly, which moved him often to
untrusse, which he did only for an excuse of purpose to stay them. Angus
perceiving it, and fearing lest he should come too late, left his brother Sir
George, and some few with him to attend the King, made all the haste he could
to join with Arran in time. In this mean while, Lennox was come from Stirlin
straight to Linlithgow; and the Hamiltons issuing out of the Town, had manned
the Bridge, which is a mile from the Town; and the rest had put themselves in
order of battle along some small hi^s not far from the Bridge. This forced
Lennox to forsake the passing of the River by the Bridge, and to cross the
water at a foord a little above, near to the Abbey of Machlein. He exhorted his
men to assail Conflict at Linlithgow.* Lennox and Hamilton.
the Hamiltons, before Angus should come to assist them: and they made haste,
but by too much haste they broke their ranks, and having the little hills to
climb up, they were out of wind when they came to strokes, and withal the
cry arose that Angus did approach. So the Hamiltons assailing them with long
Weapons from a ground of advantage, and the Douglasses also coming upon them on
the other hand, Lennox his men were over-thrown, being sore wounded. This was
done ere Sir George Douglas could come to them, who desired greatly to be with
his brother, but was held back by the Kings pretenses. It is constantly
reported, that Sir George seeing the King linger thus, and knowing that he did
it of purpose, said to him in great fury, It is as much as our lives are
worthy, if our enemies get you from us to day; which, rather than they shall
do, we will hold fast one half of you, and let them pull away the other. These
words the King never forgot, nor forgave; neither would ever hear of pardoning
him; when he seemed not to be implacable toward the rest. When the King could
not stay Augus any longer from going to aid the Hamiltons, he sent Andrew Wood
of Largoe to have saved Lennox life by all means. But he was slain in the chase
by the Earl of Lennox slain.
Arrans base son James Hamilton, who used the victory cruelly, and whom
afterward a Groom of Lennox wounded almost to death, having stabbed him in
five or six places, in revenge of his Lords death. He was lamented of his uncle
Arran with many tears; by Angus with sorrow and sadness of heart; but above
all, the King took his death ill, seeing his care to save him not to have
succeeded. It is said that when he was coming from Stirlin, Arran sent to him,
and prayed him not to come forward, but to stay, otherwise that he would force
him to fight him, which he desired not to do. To which Lennox answered; That he
would not stay, but would go and see the King maugre him, and all that would
take his part. But his purpose was directly to fight the Hamiltons, and not to
go to the King; for he could not go to him, and leave them strong behind him,
having the Douglasses before him. There were slain with him the Lord of
Howstoun, and the Master of Glencarne was sore wounded, and hardly saved by the
Earl of Angus, whose Cousin he was (brother and sisters children) as is said
above. After the Battle, those that had born arms against the King were
enquired after, and summoned to compeere in judgment; but some of them
compounded for money, some became dependers to the house of Angus, some to the
Earl of Arran. The obstinate were pursued by Law, such as the Earl of
Cassils, who alleged for himself, that he had the Kings Letter to show for his
warrant, to do what he had done; whereupon they desisted from further process
against him; which I see no ground why they should have done upon a private
Letter; and as little reason is there why they could not charge him with the
hurting or slaying of some man, seeing he was in the Battle. It should seem
they would not have been so malicious, and vehement against men, as our writers
give out; or not so pregnant in the inventing of crimes and quarrels, as men
are now a days. Cassills was slain by the Sheriff of Air his friends (a
little after) at the instigation of Arrans bastard, who had killed Lennox at
Linlithgow, because he stood to justify himself, and refused to become a
depender of the house of Arran. His son betook himself to the protection of the
Douglasses, came to Archbald Douglas of Kilspindie (who was then Thesaurer to
the King) and was kindly received by him, and lovingly entreated, as one who
for his noble birth and towardliness he intended to make his son-in-law. Now
the Earl of Angus knowing well that Archbishop Beton was one of the chief
stirrers up of the Earl of Lennox in this enterprise against him, remembering
also how he had before stirred up Arran in the same manner, and his assisting
of him at Edinburgh, and many other times, goes now to S. Andrews, takes the
Castle by force, and pillageth it, but could not apprehend the Fox himself, who
fled from hole to hole, and linked secretly amongst his friends. The Queen also
(lest she should come intoher husbands hands) kept her self hid and solitary.
These escaped their search.

After this he went to the Border, where he caused the principal of every Name
to give pledges and hostages for their good behavior, and keeping of good
order. And first he went into Liddisdale with an army, where they came and
yielded themselves to him; and the rest of the Borderers followed their
example. And now had the Earl of Angus settled all things, in all appearance.
His enemies were overcome on the East hand at Melrosse; on the West at Lithgow;
the Earl of Lennox was dead, and his Faction dispersed and broken, the Queens
authority dashed, and Bishop Beton beaten out of the cockpit, both put to
save themselves by hiding, all hushed, and under hatches; no party, no faction,
no men to make head against him. An estate highly esteemed, greatly affected,
and much sought for by men. But as in our bodies, fullness of health has the
own danger, so in our estates, too great prosperity and ease are the
forerunners of change, which (as experience does teach) is even then at the
doors when there is least appearance otherwise. It fell The beginning of a
change with Angus, and his discourting.
out just so now while the Douglasses were thus secure of all danger, knowing
too well, and leaning too much to their own strength, no party to take the
King from them, no place strong enough to keep him in when he were taken, nor
to keep them out, no means to effect either the one or the other, and threupon
grew slothful in attending him, are often abroad about their business, he
finds first the place, then the means to escape, then the party to maintain
it, and at last to overthrow them. The Queen (his mother) had the Castle of
Stirlin as a part of her dowry, which, while she (for fear of the Douglasses)
hides her self, was left empty and waste, and yet not seized on by them, who
were neither so greedy, as men would have them to appear, by so much; neither
so circumspect as wise men should have been, to secure themselves, knowing the
fitness of the place for such a purpose, the disposition of the owner, and the
inclination of the King toward themselves. Now her fear being somewhat abated,
and the coasts being clear of them, the Queens servants returned thither, and
furnished it more for show, than sufficient resistance of any Force. The King
making (wisely) choice of it, knowing there was no other place so strong,
pretending the conveniencie of hunting (even to her) transacts secretly with
her, and gives her Methwen in exchange for it, with other Lands about Methwen,
no less convenient and profitable for her. And so he had gotten his first
point, a place of retreat. The means how to retire, were easy, which was the
next. He was in Falkland, which was not far from Stirlin, in a country not
subject to the Douglasses, nor near their forces and power. Angus, and Sir
George his brother, are both absent about affairs of the Country, and none of
theirs we hear of, that were to attend the King, or few and negligent they
were, as men are wont The King escapes to (...) Castle.
when they are secure. So he goes from Falkland, to Stirlin in the night, with
a few of his familiar servants, as secretly as he could. Having gained these
two points of them by their error, there rested the third (without which these
errors had been no errors to them, nor advantage to him, they had been of no
effect nor importance) that was a party to maintain the retreat. This is the
main point, and their main error, the cause, and the ground of the other two
errors, that made them slothful in seizing that house, in attending the King,
because they laid their ground, there could be no party in Scotland. And
Buchanan writes concerning the Earl Bothwels refusal to be Lieutenant against
them, that he saw them a little before to be such, as all the rest of Scotland
were not able to match them. But they took not heed, nor considered, that then
the King was with them. However his mind was against them, he was in their
custody and power, and if any had been ill-affected to them, he could be no
warrant to any Faction, having no assurance of his life which was at their
disposing, and therefore he could not be a Head to any: These considerations
being of no small consequence, as the event now proves: for he is no sooner
gone from them, than he finds a party against them, now that he could be a
Head to a party. He writes for many of the Nobility, they come all to him:
others upon the first news of his retiring, came without staying till they were
sent for. So that he quickly found himself free, and out of danger to be
forced. Then by their advice he causes make a Proclamation, that the
Douglasses abstain from all administration, and handling of public affairs,
and that none of them, or their dependers, Angus and the Douglasses (...) (...)
the Court.
come within twelve miles of the King, under pain of death. This Edict being
brought to them, as they were on their way toward Stirlin, many of their
friends advised them to go forward, but the Earl himself, and Sir George,
resolved to obey, and persuaded the rest to do so. A dutiful and wise
resolution, if there was not sufficient power with them to go forward, which
others that counseled them to go on, have thought sufficient: And if withal
they had resolved to lay down their necks under the yoke, and bear whatsoever
should be laid upon them. But that they did not resolve to do, as appears
afterward, therefore they lost here also the occasion which might have procured
them peace on better and more equal terms. They returned to Linlithgow to
remain there till they should hear farther from Court. This their (...), and
not going forward to Stirlin, is such an oversight, as a man could scarce have
looked for at so wise and resolute heads and hands. But where ruin is
determined, wisdom is taken from the wisest, and hearts from the hardiest.
They will disobey more out of time hereafter. The King makes use of that respit
of time, assembleth more and more Forces, summonds a Parliament in September.
They go to Edinburgh, and assemble also their friends more fully. Both parties
aimed more at their own security, and to defend themselves, than to offend the
other, yet they give place again, and the second of August leave the City,
which day the King entered with displayed banner: from thence (by entreatie of
friends) he sent conditions to them, which if they would obey, there was some
hope shown of clemency and gentle dealing toward them. These were, That the
Earl of Angus himself should be confined beyond Spey, and his brother Sir
George, together with his uncle Archbald of Kilspindie, should go to prison to
the Castle of Edinburgh. But they rejected the Parliament at Edinburgh the 6.
of Sept.
conditions, and thereupon were summoned to compeare at the Parliament in
Edinburgh the sixth of September. In the mean while their Offices are taken
from them, the Chancellorship from the Earl, which we 1528.
hear not when it was given to him. Archbishop Beton had been Chancellor in
the Governors time, he had consented to the Triumvirate, and afterward had
left and forsaken them. Then has it been taken from Beton (as far as we can
conjecture) and given to Angus. It was now given to Gawin Dumbar the Kings
Pedagogue in law matters, one who was no ill man, but who was thought to be a
greater Scholar, than wise and prudent for government. The Thesaurers place
was taken from Kilspindie, and given to Robert Carnecrosse, a man better known
by his bags of money, than for his virtues. Thus driven to their last hopes,
they labor to hinder the meeting of the Parliament, by taking of Edinburgh
where it was to sit, and from whence the King was returned to Stirlin. For this
end they send Archbald of Kilspindie, with some troops of horse, to assay what
he could do. A poor shift, if they had gotten it. But the King had prevented
them, and sent thither Robert Maxwell, who with his friends and dependers,
assisted by a great number of the Commons, excluded them, and with watch and
ward kept the town till the Kings return. Hereupon Angus retired to his house
at Tantallon. The day of the Parliament being come, they were cited, accused,
condemned, and forfeited; the Earl, Sir George, Kilspindie, and Drummond of
Carnock. The main cause, and clearest The Douglasses are forfeited.
evidence given in against them, was, that the King swore he was ever in fear
of his life, so long as he was with them. It is strange that his fear should
have seemed a sufficient cause and evidence of forfeiture. Their absence was no
cause, for they were prohibited to come within 12. miles of the K. and they
had forgotten to release them from that command and interdiction. Sir John
Ballandine, who was then one of their dependers, and afterward Justice-Clerk,
knew it well, and did freely and courageously protest in open audience, that
nothing done there should be hurtful, or prejudicial to the Earl, because he
had just cause of fear, and so of his absence, which should be declared in the
own time; which was both an honest part toward his patron, and a wise and stout
part in it self. Upon this protestation the forfeiture was reduced seventeen
years after this. But for the present it goes on, and an act was also made
against such as should receive, them, that they should be liable to the same
punishment of forfeiture. Soon after this, William, Abbot of Halyroodhouse
(Angus his brother) died through sickness which he had contracted by grief and
sorrow for their estate. The rest, seeing no appearance of pardon, make now for
open violence. Who can think but it was as unfit now, as fit to have used it
when they stayed from going to Stirlin? But then they have had hope of more
favor, which has marred all their course. Better late wise than never, time
was driven, but they counted it not lost, because by their so long patience
they had given proof of their goodwill; now they will show their enemies what
power they had then; and that it was willingness, not weakness, made them to
forbear doing more than they did. They burn Cowsland, and Cranston, and daily
rode about Edinburgh in view of the City, so that it was in a manner besieged,
the mean sort suffering for the faults of the great ones. By this their
proceeding, the thieves and broken men of the borders, and elsewhere (whom they
had before restrained in their government) loosed from all fear of them, waxed
bold to come out of their lurking places, and greatly molested the Country
people about them. Many outrages were committed by many, in many places;
oppression, theft, murders, and robberies. All was imputed to the Douglasses,
and called their doing by the Courtiers, thinking thereby to please the King
well. There was a Ship (called the Martin) which being laden with rich Ware,
brake about the Skate-raw, and the common people came and took away the goods
from the owners; this was laid also upon them, and their faction and followers,
though nothing of it came to their use, unless it were that some of their
straggling horsemen, happening to be there at that time, might perhaps get their
share with others.

About this time the King resolves to besiege Tantallon Castle in Tantallon
besieged.
Lowthian, some sixteen miles from Edinburgh, and for that purpose causes bring
Ordinance, Powder and Bullet from Dumbar, which was then kept by the servants
of the late Governor the Duke of Albanie, as a portion of his patrimony. There
was in Tantallon one Simcon Penangoe, with a competent number of men, well
furnished and provided both of Victuals and Munition. The Earl himself
remained at Billie in the Merse, within his Baronie of Bonkle, not willing to
shut himself up within the Walls of any strength, having ever in his mouth this
maxim (which he had received from his Predecessors) That it was better to
hear the Lark sing, than the Mouse cheep. The Castle was well defended for
certain days, none hurt within; many without were wounded with shot from the
Castle, and some burnt and scalded with their own Powder, which took fire
unawares, and diverse killed. The besiegers were troubled without by the
horsemen, who assaulted them daily at their trenches, so that seeing no hope of
carrying it, they raised their siege, and retired. In their retreat they were
set upon in the Rear by Angus his horsemen; and one David Falconer (a
principal Cannonier) slain with some otherhired Musketeers, and two of the
Cannons cloyed. This the K. took so highly (esteeming it an affort and scorn
put upon him) that he ^wore openly, that so long as he lived, the Douglasses
should never be received into favor. He was then young, and in his hot blood,
and saw not their worth, or at least looked upon it through the prospective of
an angry passion; but before he died, he saw it more setledly and clearly, and
that their service was more steadable than all theirs that were now about him.
Being come to Edinburgh, he advises what was next to be done. It was thought
fit to keep a company at Coldingham, which needed not to be very great, but
only to lie there constantly, to preserve and protect the common people from
their incursions. But that was to Bell the Cat; a good design, but difficult
to prosecute. Billie (where Angus made his residence) is within five miles of
Coldingham, and all the Country about did favor him; yea, some in that same
Town it self did bear him good will. The task to execute this conclusion, was
laid upon the Earl Bothwell, who was the most powerful man in Lowthian. He
refuses it absolutely, as that which he was not able to perform. So is the King
driven to think of another. The Earl of Arran was the greatest in power and
friendship; but he had slain the Earl of Lennox at Linlithgow, and was in
society with the Douglasses. He doubts with what zeal or fidelity he would
prosecute the business. Argyle was in great account, for warrelike and
politic wisdom; But he lay far off, Argyles expedition against them
frustrated.
in the North-West parts of the Kingdom. There is no remedy, he must be the
man; he is made Lieutenant, and (as our Writers say) by the Lord Humes
assistance drove Angus out of Scotland. But all our ancient men, who lived in
those days, and were present at those doings, and actors in them, say the
contrary, That he did no good, but came to Dumbar, and some of his companies
going before, were set upon at the Peeths, and three or fourscore of them
slain. Hereupon was made this rhyme in derision, beginning thus:

The Earl of Argyle is bound to ride
From the border of Edge-bucklin bray,
And all his Habergeons him beside,
Each man upon a sonke of Stray,
They made their vow that they would slay, etc.
Neither did the Lord Hume take any particular dealing against him; neither did
he leave Scotland, being compelled thereto by force (as our traditioners say)
but upon the King of Englands desire, who wished him Angus returns to England.
so far to obey and yield to his Prince. He also caused him to render
Tantallon up to the King. What warrant the King of England had, and what
promises by word (for it stood not with his honor to give any thing in writ,
that his clemency might be free and voluntary, and not by capitulation) our
History does rather glance at it, than express it in these words* That the
Castle of Tantallon being rendered, the King should under his handwriting
assure them of the rest of their petitions. Yet the Castle being rendered, the
rest were not (for all that) sincerely kept. What he speaks of the rendering of
the Castle, ou^ old men (acquainted with these mysteries) speak also of the
Earls leaving Scotland; That both were done upon these promises. They tell
also what the promises were, that they should be received again, pardoned, and
get their peace (the Kings honor being once thus salved by his going out of
the Country, and rendering of the Castle) within such a space as was agreed
on. Our Histories also signify no less by the exception which it makes in
this: The rest (says he) were not sincerely kept, except that favor was
granted to Alexander Drumond to return, etc. Then his return has been one of
the conditions, seeing it is accepted as one of them that were performed.
Neither has the condition been that he alone should return, but that they
should be brought home all of them. He signifies also, that Drumonds return was
not permitted out of any respect to the promise, but at the request of Robert
Bartaine. So that the exception is no exception; and so nothing has been
kept. But the King of England (to whom the promise was made) was not at this
time disposed to exact the performance of it, and to back his exacting of it
with* 40000. men, as Princes promises should be urged. Men say he had other
work in hand, and business of his own to request for; which was to desire his
Nephew James to be quiet, and not to trouble his Kingdom while he made War
against the Emperor Charles. Yet afterward in the year 1532. he sought it
directly amongst the conditions of peace* that the Douglas (according to his
promise) should be restored. For He and Sir George Privy Counselors there.
King Henry's own part he entertained them with all kind of beneficence and
honor, and made both the Earl and Sir George of his privy Council.

The Kings anger still continued against them in such sort, that nine years
after, in 1537. he was contented that Jeane Douglas Lady Glames (who was Angus
sister) should be accused by false witnesses, condemned and execute. The point
of her accusation was, that she, and her husband ( Archbald Campbell then) and
her son and an old Priest, had gone about to make away the King by
Witchcraft. Their servants were tried and racked, but confessed nothing, the
accuser John Lion (a Kinsman William.
of her first husband) when he saw how they were like to be used, and that the
house of Glames would be ruined, repenting of what he had done, confessed to
the King that he had wronged them; but it did no good. She was burnt upon the
Castle hill with great commiseration of Glames bu^nt.
the people, in regard of her noble blood, of her husband, being in the prime
of her years, of a singular beauty, and suffering all, though a woman, with a
man-like courage, all men conceiving that it was not this fact, but the hatred
the King carried to her brothers, that had brought her to this end. Her husband
seeking to escape over the wall of the Castle, ^ell, and broke his leg, and so
died. Her son was kept in prison, because he was so young that the law could
not strike against him. Others were committed to Ward, as Sir George Hume of
Wedderburne (who was Angus his sisters son) to the Black-Nesse, for whom his
mother Dame Alison Douglas coming often to entreat the King for him, though he
always used her courteously, and gave her good countenance (and that almost
only to her of all their friends) so that his language was by way of excusing
without denial, yet she could obtain nothing till a little before his death
about the rode of Fawla, when he began to miss their service, then he set him
at liberty. His implacabilitie did also appear in his carriage toward Archbald
of Kilspindie, whom he (when he was a child) loved singularly well for his
ability of body, and was wont to call him his Gray Steell. Archbald being
banished into England, could not well comport with the humor of that Nation,
which he thought to be too proud, and that they had too high a conceit of
themselves, joined with a contempt and despising of all others. Wherefore being
wearied of that life, and remembering the Kings favor of old toward him, he
determined to try the Kings mercifulness and clemency. So he comes into
Scotland, and taking occasion of the Kings hunting in the Park at Stirlin, he
casts himself to be in his way, as he was coming home to the Castle. So soon
as the King saw him afar off, ere he came near, he ghessed it was he, and said
to one of his Courtiers, yonder is my Gray Steell, Archbald of Kilspindie, if
he be alive. The other answered, that it could not be he, and that he durst not
come into the Kings presence. The King approaching, he fell upon his knees, and
craved pardon, and promised from thence forward to abstain from all meddling in
public affairs, and to lead a quiet and a private life. The King went by
without giving him any answer, and trotted a good round pace up the hill.
Kilspindie followed, and (though he wore on him a Secret, or shirt of Maile for
his particular enemies) was as soon at the Castle gate as the King. There he
sat him down upon a stone without, and entreated some of the Kings servants for
a cup of drink, being weary and thirsty: but they fearing the Kings
displeasure, durst give him none. When the K. was sat at his dinner, he asked
what he had done, what he had said, and whither he was gone? It was told him,
that he had desired a cup of drink, and had gotten none. The King reproved them
very sharply for their discourtesie, and told them, that if he had not taken an
oath, that no Douglas should ever serve him, he would have received him into
his service, for he had seen him sometime a man of great ability. Then he sent
him word to go to Leith, and expect his farther pleasure. Then some kinsman of
David Falconer (the Cannonier that was slain at Tantallon) began to quarrel
with Archbald about the matter, wherewith the King showed himself not well
pleased when he heard of it. Then he commanded him to go to France for a
certain space, till he heard farther from him. And so he did, and died shortly
after. This gave occasion to the King of England ( Henry the 8.) to blame his
Nephew, alleging Kilspindie dies in France.
the old saying, That a Kings face should give grace. For this Archbald
(whatsoever were Anguses or Sir George his fault) had not been principal actor
of any thing, nor no counselor or stirrer up, but only a follower of his
friends, and that no ways cruelly disposed. He caused also execute Sir James
Hamilton of Evendale, for diverse reasons: but that which incensed him most, was
his correspondencie, and secret trafficking and meeting with the banished
Douglasses, especially with Sir George, whom he met with in the Park-head, as
the King was informed. There was no man that he could hear had but received
them into his house, but he caused apprehend, and execute the rigor of the law
upon them. He caused the Lord of Blackader bring in John Nisbet of the
Spittell, and made him to be executed to death, for receiving (as was alleged
at least) the Earl of Angus into his house. These many executions proceeding
from many reports and delations given to him, bred great suspicion in his
mind, all the woods seemed full of thieves. Many were put to death for the
Douglasses; this was a token that they had many favorers: many were offended
by these executions, and so many ill-willers by being offended. So his
suspicion against the Nobility was daily increased, his jealousy grows,
cares multiply, his mind is disturbed, which would not suffer him to sleep
sound, but troubled his head with dreams and fancies.

In the mean time the Wars began with England by mutual incursions (...).
on the Borders. The King sent George Gordon Earl of Huntley to the Border to
repress the English. But they seeing his Forces so small, came forward to have
burnt Jedburgh. The Lord Hume hearing of their intention, went and lay in their
way. The Earl of Angus had been sent down to the Border by the K. of England,
to wait for occasion to do something against Scotland, and was now with these
English here. He dissuaded them from fighting, and told them, that the Lord
Hume would not flee, nor his men leave him, and that they would all die at his
feet. But they would needs fight, and were overthrown. The Earl of Angus
himself was almost taken, for he was caught about the neck, and rid himself
again with his dagger, and so escaped. There were some slain, more taken, all
scattered and chased. The King was so glad hereof, that Hirsel lands given to
A. Ker. Fawla.
he gave the lands of the Hirsell to Sir Andrew Ker of Little-dean for bringing
the first news hereof: but he that was the chief actor the Lord Hume got
nothing. This was at Halden rig. Then was the rode of Fawla, where the
Nobility did flatly refuse to fight, and suffered the English to retire, and
escape without battle or skirmish. The King being there in person, was so
enraged hereat, that he burst forth into open railing against them, calling
them cowards, and beasts that were not worthy of their places or Predecessors;
and withal told them, that he should bring home those that durst and would
fight, meaning the Earl of Angus Solemn Moss.
and his friends. Then followed on the neck of this the defeat at
Solemne-Mosse, where Oliver Sinclar being deserted by the Nobility, was (...)
to fly, and so lost the day, and many were taken prisoners; many also yielded
themselves to the English. The King, who was not far off, when he heard of
it, was wonderfully commoved, having his mind distracted with indignation,
anger, grief and sorrow; now thinking how to be avenged on them that had dealt
thus traitorously with him; then of new preparation for the Wars, and how it
should be managed. For which he saw now there was but one way left, which was
to bring home the Earl of Angus, upon what ever terms; seeing at last what a
subject he had thrust from him, and repenting him, said he should bring him
home, that would take order with them also. But it was too late, for his death
K. James the (...) die^h.
ensuing shortly after, hindered the execution of that purpose. He died the
thirteenth of December 1542. leaving one only daughter Mary his 1542.
heir behind him, a child of five days old.

But although he lived not to effect his determination, yet he gave them an
honorable testimony of their worth, and withal made a confession of the wrong
he had done to them, and gave them a clear absolviture from all former
imputation. And so for their part they rest satisfied with it, and seek no
other. The King was dead, who had purposed to have brought them home, his will
is enough to them; they stand not on ceremonies, they come home now unsent for.
There were taken prisoners at the Solom-Mosse, seven Earls and Lords, four
and twenty others of inferior, but good place and quality. When King Henry of
England had triumphed a while over them (causing to lead them from the Tower of
London to Court through Cheapside Street the 20. of December upon Saint Thomas
day) he rebuked them as breakers of Covenant by a long harangue of his
Chancellor* who magnified the Kings mercy, who did (said he) remit much of the
rigor he might justly have used against them. After this they had some more
freedom; and when the news of the Kings death was come, he dealt kindly with
them, and told them his intention; which was to have their Kings daughter
married to his son Prince Edward, that so the Nations of England and Scotland
might be joined together by that alliance; for affecting of which match he
takes their promise to favor his design, and to set it forward at home as
far as they might without damage to their Country, or reproach and infamy
to themselves. So (having first taken pledges and hostages of them at
New Castle, by the Duke of North-folke, for their return, in case the peace
were not agreed on) he sent them home to Scotland the first of January 1543.
with these returned our Douglasses (the Earl and Sir George) after fifteen
years exile, and were received of all with great joy and gratulation. Only
they were not welcome to the Cardinal. They had been ever at variance, they
ran diverse courses in policy, he suspected their Religion, specially Sir
Georges. He knew they would not approve nor ratify the Kings testament which
he had forged* wherein he was made Protector and Governor, with three
Noblemen to be his Assessours. He doubted not, but that they would oppose him
in the Parliament; and therefore here he found means to be chosen Governor
before their retu^n. Yet his fraud was detected before they came home, and he
debouted, and Hamilton Governor.
put from that authority. In his place James Hamilton Earl of Arran was
chosen, as being the man to whom it properly belonged, as next heir, and best
beloved, partly because they had a good opinion of his towardly disposition,
and that he was not averse from the reformed Religion (whereof he willingly
read the controversies) partly because they hated the Archbishop Beton and his
priests cruelty, which put every man in fear of their government. That
business was settled ere they came home. The next point was the marriage of
the young Queen, which they were to set forward with England. The Queen mother,
and the Cardinal, and the whole faction of the Priests, oppose this way with
all their might and power. But they prevailed not, and the Cardinal because he
troubled all, and would suffer nothing to be done orderly, he was shut up in a
Chamber till the matters were concluded, and pledges promised to be given to
the English Ambassador Sir Ralphe Sadler for performance. Ambassadors also
were sent into England to treat on the conditions* They were, the Earl of
Glencarne, Sir George Douglas, Sir William Hamilton of Machane, and the
Secretary of estate. These remained four months in England, agreed at last,
and concluded all articles and conditions. But in their absence, the Cardinal
was set at liberty, who troubled all, gathered a contribution of the Clergy,
and what by bribing, what by other practices used by him, and the Queen, turns
the Nobility quite an other way. When those that had been sent into England
were returned, and found things in this estate, they were much grieved at it,
and labored to recall things, and to persuade them to keep their promise made
to King Henry. To move them hereto, Sir George Douglas Sir Georg^ Dougla^ hi^
speech concerning marrying with England.
spoke to them very earnestly, and told them the apologue of the ass, which a
King did love so dearly, that he had a great mind and desire to have her to
speak: and having dealt with diverse Physicians to make her to speak, they told
him it was a thing impossible, and against nature; but he being impatient, and
not enduring to have his desire crossed, slew them because they told him the
truth. At last he trying about what others could do, one, who was made wise by
their example, being required to do it, he undertook it; but withal he show
him, that it was a great work, and would be very chargeable. The King being set
upon it to have it done, told him he should have what allowance he pleased, and
bade him spare for no charges: and that besides he would reward him liberally.
The Physician told him that it would prove also a long cure, and could not be
done in a day; ten years were the fewest that could be allotted to it. The King
considered of it, and was contented to allow him that time for performing it;
and so they agreed, and the Physician began to fall to work about his ass. His
friends hearing of it, came to him, and asked him what he meant, to take in
hand that which could not be performed in nature. He smiled, and said unto
them, I thought you had been wiser than to ask me such a question: if I had
(says he) refused to take it in hand, he had put me to death presently, now I
have gained ten years time, before which be expired, who can tell what may
happen. The King may die, the ass may die, I my self may die; and if any of
these happen, I am freed. In the mean time I shall be in good estate, wealth,
honor, and the Kings favor. Even so (says Sir George) stands the case with
us at this time: if we refuse and leap back from the conditions that are
propounded and agreed on, we enter into present War, for which we are very
unfit, and ill provided. If we embrace them, we gain time, we shall enjoy peace
and quietness during the Queens childe-hood, and before that be expired,
Prince Edward may die, our Queen may die, King Henry may die, or the parties
when they come to age, may refuse one another, or then perhaps (as things may
fall out) it may be thought the best way by us all. But he could not persuade
them to it, the Queen mother, and the Cardinal, the Pop^sh and Politic
Faction standing for France, and drawing all to that end, had so wrought the
matter, that there was no place le^t to any wholesome council. These two for
strengthening of their party had sent to France, and moved that King to send
home Matthew Earl of Lennox a competitour and Lennox comes home out of France.
counterpoyse to the house of Hamilton. He came, being put in hope of the
Queens marriage* and to be made Governor, but when he saw himself deluded, and
Beton preferred to the government, in effect upon agreement of Arran, and the
Cardinal (wherein Arran had renounced the controverted heads of Religion, and
addicted himself fully to the Queen and Cardinal, to be ruled by them) he
forsook them, and so did also the Governors chief friends leave him, and turn
to Lennox: And now Lennox had made a strong party against the Governor and the
Cardinal, but at last he was drawn to come to a Parley with them, first at
Edinburgh, and then at Linlithgow, where finding that they intended to entrap
him, he fled in the night, first to Glasgow, then to the Castle of Dumbartan.
About this time the Hamiltons and Douglasses were reconciled: and for further
assurance of sincere and firm friendship, Sir George Douglas, and Alexander
Cunninghame Master of Glencarne, were given as pledges (the one for his
brother, and the other for his father) to the Governor Hamilton, upon promise
to be released within a few days, but they were kept till the English Army
came. Angus himself also, and the Lord Maxwell going to mediate a peace Angus
and Sir George (...) prisoner^.
betwixt the Governor and Lennox (a dutiful part of a Nobleman, and of a good
Patriot) was retained; and both sent out at a backdoor at Glasgow, to
Hamilton, while their followers did wait for them at the ordinary fore-gate of
the Governors lodging. Angus was sent a^terward to the Black-Nesse, and kept
there a close prisoner. Thus were both he and his brother in the hands of their
enemies: neither did their wisdom or experience, the examples of their
Predecessors, or their own maxims and rules save them from being intrapped.
But who can keep himself from deceit: What wisdom was ever able to do it? we
heard before in the Lord Hume (Chamberlain) how he was catched, and therefore
no wonder, though the young Douglasses (put to death in Edinburgh Castle) were
deceived. It is wrong to impute it to want of foresight, as these two (who
were at other times wary enough) may witness. They may thank God more than
their own good guiding, if they escape with life; but that God does work it
out, where their wisdom failed* He sends in the English Navy, which was
bound for Boloigne, under the command of the Earl of Hartford. Some says that
they were so directed by King Henry to relieve the Earl and his brother; some,
that it was to revenge the rejecting of his affinity. However it was the mean
and occasion of their releasing. For having landed at Leith unlooked for, the
Governor and Cardinal were forced to flee out of Edinburgh, which they burnt,
being abandoned by them, and the Citizens being most of them absent about their
Traffic. The Governor, either required to do so by the Earl of Hartford (who
threatened to destroy more of the Country after the same manner if he refused)
or They are (...) again.
of his own motion, so to regain their favor, and service of their followers,
set them all at liberty, Angus, Maxwell, Glencarne, and Sir George. Their
wisdom saved them not from being catched, but their worth releaseth them,
either in the judgment of King Henry (if it were his request) or in the
estimation of their enemies, if it came merely* of themselves, who saw how
steadable, yea how necessary their fav^ur was to them. That which had brought
them home, if King James had lived, procures their liberty from this Governor
now when the King is dead. Lennox goes to England*
Envy committed them, true valor brings them out of prison. So it is seen ere
long: for Lennox being ^orsaken by the French, and his partners overthrown by
the Hamiltons, he fled into England, and was well received and entertained by
King Henry, who gave him also his sisters daughter by the Earl of Angus, Lady
Margaret Douglas to wife. On her Marries Lady Margaret Douglas.
he begat Henry Lord Darneley, who was married to Queen Mary of Scotland. He
sought to have married the Queen Dowager, he is rejected; but he fares better,
and comes to reign in both the Realms by his Posterity. Let men look on it,
and see the deepnesse of providence, and learn not to distrust in whatsoever
strait, seeing the worst does often occasion the best; for even in exile being
condemned and for^eited, he was laying the foundation of this return.

Of these dissentions at home, the Foreign enemy takes advantage, the K. of
England sends an Army to Scotland, burns Jedburgh, and Kelso, The Governor
and Angus at Coldinghame.
takes Coldinghame, and fortifies the Abbay and steeple thereof. Thither goes
the Governor Hamilton with 8000. men in winter, and batters the steeple one
whole day and night, all the Company standing all that while in Arms. The next
day he took horse, and went to Dumbar with all the speed he could, accompanied
only with a few of his most familiar friends, without acquainting the
Nobility or Army with his departure. What it was that moved him hereto, is
uncertain, whether it were some rumor of the enemies approaching, or that he
feared lest his own Army (whom he had offended many ways) should have
del^vered him into the hands of the English. This troubled them all so much the
more, because they knew not thereason of it. Wherefore they began to advise
what was next to be done: Some thought it best that every man should go whither
he would, and leave the Ordnance a prey to the enemy. Others thought it was
better to charge them double, and so to break them, that they might not be
useful to the enemy. Thus is the case brought to an exigent, this is the
place for the Earl of Angus to show himself to be a Douglas of the right
stamp. So he does; he rejects both these ways as dishonorable, and exhorts
them, that they would not ad de this gross error in War to their shameful
flight. But when he could not persuade them either by reason or authority, he
cries out aloud, that they might all hear, For my part (says he) ^had had
rather die honorably, than live with shame, though with never so much riches
and ease. Ye that are my friends and companions in arms, do what you think
best, but I shall either bring home this Ordnance, or shall not bring home my
self alive, and one and the same day shall end both my life and my honor.
Having spoken thus, he commanded them to go on with the Ordnance, and he with
his Company, and some few more that stayed with him for shame, marched after,
to keep off the English that pursued them, and so brought them safely to
Dumbar. Then turning him to the Master of the Ordnance, Take them there to thee
(says he) better thus, than either broken, or left behind. A sober and gentle
reproof to those that had abandoned him, yet such as might put them in mind of
their fault.

The honor was his, but the fault (more observed oftentimes) redounded to the
discouraging of the Country, and emboldening of the English, which gave new
occasion of stirring up in him the ancient virtues Sir Ra^ Ivers, and Sir Bria^
Laitons expedition.
proper to the name, valor, and love of his Country. Sir Ralph Ivers, and Sir
Brian Laiton, had made diverse in-rodes into Scotland, in the Merse, Tividale,
and Lawderdale, with good success, finding no man to oppose or make head
against them. The Inhabitants of those places, had for the most part yielded
and taken on the badge of England, the red Cross, or at least kept themselves
in strong places in safety from the enemy. They esteemed all conquered, and
for that which rested, they made account to conquer all unto Forth. So to Court
they go, and sue to the King for a reward of their service, the enlarging of
his Dominions. The Duke of North-folk, who had made war in Scotland diverse
times, and knew the fashion of the Country, how easy a matter it was to make
the Commons (when they wanted a Head in time of Civil and intestine
dissension) to yield to any conditions; but withal know also, that they would
presently cast off the yoke so soon as they found any to lead them into the
field, he persuades the King to bestow upon them for their reward, all the Land
that they had conquered, and to encourage them to go on, promises unto them
all the Land that they could conquer more thereafter. They come to the Borders
full of hopes, and increase their Forces by the addition of 3000. hired
soldiers, with intention to go on with their conquest. This did greatly grieve
such Scots as remained true Scots indeed. The flight from Coldingham had
discouraged them; they could look for no good from the Governor. But he who
had his Rose Garland unstained there, must be the man to do the turn here also.
Angus had large possessions in the Merse and Tividale: therefore he had his
particular interest, and could not so easily leave his lands for a prey to the
enemy, nor suffer so great an indignity in public, and reproach to his
Country. Being moved with both these considerations, he goes to the
Governor, and lays before him the greatness of the danger, and how he did
suffer in his own reputation for the business at Coldingham, and would now
suffer more if he sat still and did nothing at this time: Wherefore he
exhorts him to take some course for the safety of the Country, and to repair
his own honor. The Governor bewailes his own estate and condition, that he
was not able to do any thing; being deserted by the Nobility, whereof he
complained heartily. Angus replied, and told him it was his own fault; For
Angus speech to the Governor.
they (said he) would willingly hazard and bestow both their lives and
fortunes for the defense of their Country, but you contemn their counsel, and
have given your self over to be guided by a company of Priests, who are unfit
to go abroad to the War^es, and are seditious at home; being free from peril
themselves, they live on the fruits of other men's labors like Drones; abusing
and spending all upon their own pleasures. From hence does spring this
suspicion and jealousy betwixt you and the Nobility, that none of you does
believe or trust other, which is the bane of all actions, and hinders the
atchieving of any matter of moment. But if you will apply your self to them,
and consult with them, who will not spare to spend their lives in the execution
of things; I do not distrust but as honorable acts may be performed by us now,
as have been done at any time by our Predecessors* But if by sloth and
negligence ye suffer the enemy thus to encroach by piecemeal, he will at last
force us either to yield to him, or forsake the Country: of which two it is
hard to say which is the most miserable and shameful condition. As for us two,
I know we are traduced by our enemies, they accuse me of betraying my Country,
and you of cowardice, but if you will resolve thoroughly and soundly to do that
now, which you must needs do some time, it shall not be a flourished speech, and
painted words, that shall confute their calumnies, but the flourish of Arms,
and a Pitched field. The Governor considering the truth, and honorable
counsel given him, promised to follow his and the rest of the Nobilities
advice. Hereupon Proclamation is made and sent into all the Provinces about,
commanding the Nobiltie to repair to the Governor with all the haste they
could, wheresoever he should happen to be. There came not above 300. horse,
with these they march toward England* and by the way some few of Lowthian, and
some of the Merse join with them. So they come to Melrosse upon Tweed, where
they intended to stay, and wait for the rest that were coming. The English were
come to Jedbrough before, and now being advertised of the small number of the
Scottish Army, they march toward Melrosse, having 5000. men in their Army, in
great confidence to defeat so small a number as was with the Governor, who
besides that they were so few, were also*wearied with their journey. The Scots
had notice of their coming, and thereupon retire to the next hills, where they
might with safety epsy what course the enemy would take. The English
frustrate of their hope (which was to have surp^zed them) stay about the Town
and Abbey of Melrosse, which had been spoiled not long before, to see what more
spoil they could light on, until it were day; for this was in the night time.
As soon as it was day, they began to march back toward Jedbrough, and the Scots
(to whom had now joined Norman Lesly with 300. Fifemen, and Sir Walter Scot of
Balcleugh, with a very few of his domestics) encountered them by the way. Both
Armies alighted from their horses, and fought on foot. The English confiding in
their number, and hoping with a few hours travel, to perchase honor and
riches with peaceable and quiet possession of the Lands that were granted to
them by their Kings gift, fought very valarously. They had divided their Army
into three battles; and seeing the Scots Grooms (who rode up the hill with
their masters horses, which they had put from them) they supposing they had
been the Scottish Army fleeing, made great haste to overtake them. And so ere
they were aware, they were hard upon the Scottish battle, which stood in array
in the valley at the foot of the hill unseen till now. At the first encounter
their Foreward was beaten back upon the middle, and both together upon the
Reer-ward; so that their Ranks being broken, and all in confusion, they were
constrained to flee, and the Scots following hard upon them in gross, slew
them down right without resistance. At night when the Scots were returned from
the chase, every man repairing to his Colors, they found but two of their own
slain; and of the enemy (besides Sir Ralph Ivers, and Brien Laton) 200. or (as
others say) 800. amongst whom there were diverse Gentlemen of good note and
quality. There were taken prisoners* 1000. or as others 2000. (with all their
baggage which had been left at Melrosse) of which there were 80. of good birth
and quality. It was no little furtherance to the victory, the advantage which
the Scots had of the Sun going down, and so beating full in the eyes of the
enemy: as also of the Wind that blew the smoke of the Powder on their faces
likewise, so that they were blinded two ways. They had also marched so fast to
overtake the Scots, that they were quite out of breath almost ere they came to
strokes; and when they came to them, at the first joining, the Scots that were
on their side fled without fighting. It is said that the Earl of Angus was so
resolute and void of fear, that when they were going to join battle, he
perceiving a Heron fly over their heads, cried out aloud; ``O that I had my
white Gose-hawke here, we should all yoke at once. The honor of the victory
was wholly given to him, and the profit came to the Governor. But the more
honor that Angus got at home of his own contrymen, the more hatred he had
of the Enemy the English. King Henry blamed him, saying he was ungrateful, and
vowed to be avenged of him for it. As if any gratitude could bind a man to
betray his Country, or any benefit tie him to omit his duty toward it: Angus
had never learned such gratitude of his Predecessors, nor could his noble
heart stoop to such mercenarinesse. And as for his threatenings, he looked upon
them with the same courage and resolution. Is our brother-in-law offended
(says he) that I am a good Scottish man? Because I have revenged the defacing
of the tombs of my Ancestors at Melrosse upon Ralph Ivers? They were better
men than he, and I ought to have done no less: And will he take my life for
that? Little knows King Henry the skirts of Kirnetable, I can keep my self
there from all his English host.

The news of this victory being come to France, the King sent Monsieur de
L'orge Earl of Montgomerie into Scotland with 3000. foot, and 500. horse, to
assist against England. He gave him also commission to bestow the order of the
Cockle (or S. Michael) on the Governor, Angus, Huntley, and Argyle, which he
did accordingly. De L'orge arrived about the fourth or fifth of July 1545. and
moved the Governor to assemble some power of men, about 15000. which were
mustered at Hadington. From thence they went to the Borders, and encamped over
against Warke, an English Castle upon Tweed. But they did nothing to any
purpose. Hereupon the Count Montgomerie returns into France the rest of that
year, and the next following, with a good part of the year 1547* there was
nothing done abroad, or at home, save that the Cardinal was busied in causing
execute such as were of the reformed Religion, whereupon followed his own
tragical death, and the French Galleyes coming, besieged S. Andrews Castle,
and carried away the authors of the Cardinals slaughter into France. The Earl
of Angus has had no hand in all these broils; for he is never mentioned in
any of them. Only his natural son George is said to have gotten the Abbacie of
Arbrothe. But then (if he got it) he might have been called Abbot, and not
Postulat, or Postulant, which*implies, that he was ever asking it, but got it
not.

In the same year 1547. in August, King Henry of England dying, his son Edward
(a child of some eight or nine years of age) succeeded, and his Uncle the
Earl of Hereford was created Duke of Sommerset, and made Protector of
England. He levied two Armies to come against Scotland, one by sea, another by
land, in which he came himself in person, Occasion of Pinkie field.
and with him the Earl of Warwick. It contained 18000. men. He pretended for
the cause of his coming, the performance of the marriage betwixt the King his
Nephew, and the young Queen of Scots, together with the observation of the
Articles agreed upon with the Scottish Nobility in the Treaty of Peace with
King Henry. The Governor was mightily perplexed herewith. He had no foreign
aid, and he distrusted his Countrymen at home. Notwithstanding he causes it
to be proclaimed, that they should assemble themselves to resist the common
enemy. They had their randezvous at Edinburgh, and there came thither to the
number of 30000. men. From thence they march to Musclebrugh, which is seated at
the mouth of the river of Eske in Lowthian some four miles from Edinburgh. The
English lay at Preston within two miles, and their Fleet sailed along the
Coast, still in the view of the Land army, and ready to second or succor it.
The Protector looking down from Carberrie Hill, and perceiving the Scottish
Army to be greater than he had expected in regard of the civil discord and
dissension that was amongst them, called a Council of War, to advise about
the Battle; and in the mean time he sends a Letter to the Governor, to try if
things could be taken away without blood. The sum of the Letter was, that he
was come to crave the performance of the marriage, and the observance of the
conditions agreed unto by the Scots. If they would not yield to that, yet if
they would but promise not to enter into terms of marriage with any other
foreign Prince, nor carry her out of the Country till she were come to years
of discretion to choose her own husband, they should return in peace, and make
satisfaction for any damage their Army had done. This was very reasonable; but
it should have been treated of before they came from home, and rather by
Ambassadors than in the field and camp. It has never been the cause of their
coming with an Army, but rather hope that no head could have been made against
them (in respect of the dissension for Religion and other divisions) which
persuaded them to come: Now the sight of an Army which was a sufficient party
for them, had taught them wisdom and moderation in their conditions. If the
Governor could also have moderated his hope of victory, which arose from his
confidence in the number of his men, the bargain had been agreed on, and the
business had ended without blood. But his council of War (his base brother
the Bishop of S. Andrews, George Durie* Abbot of Dumfermling, Archbald Beton,
and Hugh Rigge) puffed him* up with idle hope of a sure victory. So the Letter
is suppressed, and preparation made for battle. The Armies were thus ordered.
The English were divided into three battles; Whereof Warwick led the
Vaunt-guard, together with Sir Francis Brien, who commanded 800. light horsemen
which were in the wings. The Protector himself commanded in the mid battle,
having with him Sir Peter Mewtas with 600. Musketeers, and Jamboas a Spaniard
with 1000. horse with Carabins. The Rear was conducted by the Lord Dacres, to
whom was joined Sir Richard Manners with 600. light horsemen. The men at Arms,
and demilances, were commanded by the Lord Gray. The Scottish Army was also
tripartite, of which Angus had the Vaunt-guard; to whom were joined Coile,
Carrict, and Cunningham, with Stirlin-shire, and Stratherne, to the number of
10000. in all. The like number was with the Governor in the middle Ward, and
as many with the Earl Huntley in the Rear. The English had resolved on a fair
retreat toward Berwick, thinking it not fit to hazard a battle upon such
disadvantage in the number of men; and not being able to stay without fighting,
for want of vivers, which they could not bring in out of the Country by
forraging, in regard of the neernesse of the enemy. In the mean time they
perceive Angus with the Vantguard coming marching up the hill against them. He
made no great haste at the first, knowing they could not stay long, thinking it
better to assail them in their retreat. But the Governor sent him word to
advance, and yet for all that he marched but leisurely, till he sent to him
again, and commanded him to mend his pace, assuring him that he and Huntley
should be hard at his hand to support him. Then he marched so fast that the
English beholding them from the hill, believed they had been all on horseback.
Wherefore the Lord Gray was sent with his men at Arms, and demilances, on
barbed horses, to stay them, and (if he could) to break their Ranks. The Scots
were close joined together (as their manner is) and carried long spears, not
unlike the Macedonian Phalanx: Angus encourages them, exhorts them to fight
manfully, and advises them to kill the horses by pricking them in the belly,
for they were armed in the Counter. These men (said he) shall be our prey if ye
do so. They followed his counsel, charged the enemy fiercely, and kept their
Ranks so whole and close, that 200. of the English were brought to the ground
and killed; the rest retired to their companies. The Protector commands the
Lord Gray to charge again, but he answered; that he might as well command him
to run against the walls of Boloigne, for it was as impossible to break
through the Scots Ranks, as to break through a Brick-wall. Hereupon the
Protector resolved either to retire, or flee as they could, and called for
some Scots in his army, who knew the ways, to be their guides. One of these
was named Thomas Lorraine, a Tenant to the Lord of Red-brayes in the Merse, of
whom many have often heard this report. The Earl of Warwick advises to try
another way; he causes Jamboas the Spaniard with his Carabins to set upon them
in flank. Hereupon they, lest they should break their Phalanx, turned softly
toward him, from the right ascending of the hill, which way they were in
before. The Governor with his mid battle seeing them declining from the
straight way which led to the enemy, and which they had been in before,
supposed they had fled, and so brake their own Ranks, and fled first
themselves. Huntley with his Rear followed the Governors example, and fled
likewise. The Defeature a^ Pinkie.
Vaunt-guard thus destitute of all support was overthrown, and most of them all
killed. The English Ships had greatly annoyed the Scots Rear with shot from the
Sea, for there was one Galley, and two Pinnaces, that came so near to the
Shore, that they reached the enemy with their Ordnance, and Lochinvarre was
slain by one of their shots. This the Governor and Huntley alleged for their
not coming to succor the Vaunt-guard after the first charge, because their men
(chiefly the High-landers) refused to go with them being so troubled from the
Ships. There were slain in this battle a great number, and those of the Flower
of the Scottish Nobility; amongst whom were the Masters of Ereskine, Grahame,
Methvane, Oglevie, Levingston, and Rosse; the Lords, Fleming, Glencarne* the
Lairds of Lochleven, and Sir George Hume of Wedderburne. The Earl Angus his
brother, Sir George, and Glenbarvie were commanded to keep themselves on
horseback, and ride about the companies to exhort them and keep them in order.
It was so much the more easy for them to flee, yet Glenbarvie was hardly
pursued for the space of four miles, being taken for the Earl of Angus,
because he rode on a py-bald horse that was known to be the Earls. Angus
himself escaped, and came that night to Calder, very heavy and sorrowful for
the loss of the battle, and of his friends. Many fled to the Castle of
Dalkeeth, amongst whom was James Douglas Earl of Morton, afterward Regent of
Scotland; and David Hume of Wedderburne, brother to Sir George Hume that was
slain in the field. The Castle was besieged by the English, and defended a
while, but wanting provision of victual for such a number of men as had fled
thither, and having no hope of any relief to come to them against a victorious
Army, it was rendered, and these forenamed made prisoners.

The Earl of Angus complained heavily that he had been thus abandoned by the
Governor and Huntley, and laid the blame on them of the loss of the day, and
of his so many dear kinsmen and friends, especially to the Queen Mother; whom
he went to visit at Stirlin. She seemed to be much grieved therewith, but was
thought not to be discontented that the Hamiltons had suffered this disgrace,
and their pride and authority was thus abated, which made for the setting
forward of her project, which was to wring the Government out of their hands,
and wind in her self into that place; as also to bring in the Frenchmen, under
the pretext that the Country was not able to maintain the war against the
English, who had fortified Insh-Keith, Saint Columbs Insh in Forth, Broghtie on
Tay, Hadington on Tine; at Lawder and Roxburgh built Forts, and taken the
Castles of Hume, and Fascastle. The French were sent for* and came into
Scotland at her request, these places were all regained by their assistance,
the young Queen Mary was conveyed into France, to Queen (...) sent into
France.
be married to the Daulphine, Francis the second afterward. Then the
Queen Mother dealt with the Governor to demit his place, which he did at last,
and she was substitute into it as her daughters Deputy, having Queen Mother
Governor.
Monsieur D'Oselle (a Frenchman) for her Counselor and adviser in all
affairs. This was done in a Parliament in the year 1555. the 10. of April. All
this while we hear nothing of the Earl of Angus, save at the siege of
Hadington, where when the walls were battered and made assaultable by a
sufficient breach, the French (who were there) refusing to enter the breach,
(because they being far from home, they could not easily repair their loss of
men*) the Earl of Angus moved with indignation hereat, left them, and went to
Tantallon to remain there. And again, when Monsieur de Terms besieged Broghtie
upon Tay, Angus is said to have been with him, and lying at Breeghen with some
horsemen to have skirmished daily with the enemy. At last both Broghtie, and
another Castle near unto it were taken, and almost the whole Garrisons slain
that were in them.

And now the Queen Mother being Regent, all her care and endeavor was to bring
Scotland into subjection of the French. For this purpose a motion was made,
that all men should be taxed proportionably, according to their means, and the
moneys levied thence, should be employed to wage soldiers for the defense of
the Country, that so the Gentlemen and Nobilities travel and blood might be
spared. None liked of this course, but every one eschewed to be the first
refuser and opposer of it. At last the small Barons sent Sir James Sandilands
of Calder, and the Lord of Weemes to her, whose speeches are set down at
length. Thus our Writers say: But the ancient men report, that the Earl of
Angus was the man that made the refusal (it may be he joined with them) and
that he came to Edinburgh, accompanied with 1000. horse, which was against her
Proclamation, whereby it was forbidden that any man should have any more in
train then his domestics and household servants, which was to make way for, and
was another mean of their intended tyranny. She reproved him for transgressing
the Proclamation by being so accompanied. He answered; That the Knaves would
not leave him, that he would gladly be rid of them, for they did eat all his
Bread and his Beef: that he would think himself much bound to her, if she
would make him free and quit of them. Concerning the tax which she desired to
be made, he said briefly; We will fight our selves, and that better than any
hired fellows; our Prededecessours have done it, and so will we do also. They
tell also how at another time, she desired of him to have his Castle of
Tantallon to keep warders, in or upon I know not what pretext, or for what use.
To this he gave no direct answer for a long time, but having a Gose-hawke on
his fist which he was feeding, The devil is in this greedy Glad she will never
be full.
spoke of her, saying she was a greedy Glad, that she had already too much, and
yet desired more. But when the Queen insisted (not understanding, or not
willing to understand his meaning) he told her, Yes Madam, why not, all is
yours, ye shall have it, it is at your service: But Madam, I must be Captain
and keeper of it: I shall keep it for you as well as any man you shall put into
it. They tell also how the Queen Regent had intention to make the Earl of
Huntley a Duke; whereof when she was discoursing with Angus she told him, how
Huntley had done her very good service, for which she intended to advance him
and make him a Duke, to which he answered, Why not Madam, we are happy that
have such a Princess, that can know and will acknowledge men's service, and is
willing to recompense it: But by the might of God (this was his oath when he
was serious and in anger, at other times it was by Saint Bride of Douglas) if
he be a Duke, I will be a Drake (alluding to the word Duke, which in Scotland
signifies a Duck as well as that title and dignity, which being the female,
and the Drake the male, his meaning was he would be above and before him) Our
Predecessors (says he) have done as good service as he or his, for which they
have the privilege to be the first of the Nobility after those of the blood
Royal, and I will not lose it in my time upon any such pretext. So she
desisted from further prosecuting of that purpose.

Not long after this he died in Tantallon, and was buried in Abernethie, Angus
dies.
when he had lived from his marrying the Queen in the year 1514. in continual
action, all the minority of King James the fifth, his majority, all the time of
the Duke of Albanie, of the Governor Hamilton, and of the Queen Mother, till
the year 1556. or 57. the space of 44. or 45. years; to which if we shall add
his age at his marriage (of which we have no certainty) and suppose it to have
been 20. years, he has lived some 64. years. He was a man (besides his other
virtues spoken of) of greater wisdom than he made show of, or then did appear
unto men. His brother Sir George (who died before him) was more learned, and of
greater eloquence, with whom he entertained always brotherly love and
friendship, and would seem to be guided much by his counsel, so that when any
suit was made to him, his answer was, We shall advise with our brother. But his
brother would tell them (who came to entreat him to mediate with the Earl) in
plain language, that if he had referred it to his advising with him, it was a
thing he intended not to do: for (says he) what he minds to do, he never
advises with me. Neither was he hereby accounted less wise indeed; for even
this was a point of wisdom, that he would have his brother seem more wise,
which did no whit diminish nor derogate any thing from him. It was of this
brotherly affection, that he espoused his brothers quarrel against George Lord
Hume about the Lands of Cockburnspeth, or Colburnspeth, as some will have it
termed. The Lands were possessed by one John Hume, who was a near Kinsman to
the Lord Hume, but for some unkindnesse or hard dealing and usage of the said
Lords toward him, he chose rather to sell them to Sir George Douglas. To put
his brother in possession (or to keep it) the Earl assembled out of
Cliddisdale, Tividale, and other parts to the number of 3000. men. He was also
assisted by Sir George Hume of Wedderburne, and the Lord of Blackader,
together with the rest of Wedderburnes father brothers, all of them except
Broom-house, who followed the Lord Hume. Angus brought with him fieldpieces,
and all provision of War. The Lord Hume with his forces came to the Moor
above the Park-gate of Cockburnspeth, and alighting from their horses, put
their men in order of battle. But when he saw Angus begin to march toward him,
and that none came between to bring the matter to a Parley, he shrunk back over
the ditch that was near by. Hereupon Angus (thinking it enough to retain his
brothers possession) stayed his Companies, and stood still. The Lord Hume
retired, and going homeward, scattered his Company, and the Earl did the like.
Here a quarrel was like to have arisen betwixt John H^ of Blackader, and one
Douglas of Jedward forest. For when Angus began to march against the Lord
Hume, this Douglas says to Blackader; Now we of the Forest, will teach you of
the Merse to sight. The other answered a little angerly only for the time: but
when all were retired, he challenged Douglas for those words: to whom Douglas
answered, were ye angry at my words? when the other said he was, It is well
(says he) that ye were; for I was afraid you would not have been half angry,
nor have fought half eagerly, there being so many Humes on the other side.
Besides his wisdom and brotherly affection, the Earl of Angus is also
reported to have had a great dexterity in conciliating men's favor. There was
no man whom he would not win with his courtesy and affability, no man but
he would take notice of him; and pretended to know either himself, or his
father, or his Grandfather, or some of his friends, whom he would praise unto
them, and tell what honest men they had been, and what good service they had
done in such and such a place, at such and such times. Of which they relate
this instance, how being in Edinburgh talking (in the Tolbooth) with the Lord
Drummond, there came a friend to Drummond, and took him aside to speak with him
a little. When the Gentleman had ended, and was going away, Angus takes him
kindly by the hand, and spoke familiarly to him as if he had been of his
acquaintance. After he was gone, my Lord Drummond asked Angus whether he knew
the Gentleman or not; he answered, that he knew him not at all, and had never
so much as seen him before. How com^s it then (says Drummond) that ye spoke so
familiarly to him? He answered, I saw he was a friend of yours, and your
friends are my friends: And besides, this does gain men's hearts, If I were now
in danger, or had to do, yonder man would assist me, and take my part.

Archibaldus Secundus.
Quam praestans animi juvenis formaque decorus,
Et fuerim tantis, tunc quoque dignus avis.
Testis erit thalamo quae me dignata Superbo,
Nympha, parens Regis, filia, sponsa, soror.
Consiliis promptumque manu Teviotia laudat,
Quae stratas acies vidit Ivere tuas.
Atque tuas Latone: loquetur nos quoque fort^s
Esca lothi, and dextra hac me meruisse mori.
Quin jam victor eram, ni Prorex Gordoniusque,
Sive metus trepidasuasit abire fuga.
Seu dolus aut error, liquissent turpiter hostem,
Dum premo qui fugiens jam mihi terga dabat.
Summus at hinc mihi surgit quod sanguine Creti,
Sint nostro reges terra Britanna tui.
Archbald the second Earl of that name.
How lovely was my shape! how sweet a grace
Dwelt in my looks! how like the Douglas race!
How gallant was my mind! what hopes were had
Of my fresh youth! witness the Royal bed
Of her who had been daughter, sister, wife,
To three brave Kings; how my ensuing life
Made good these hopes; how wise my projects were,
Ivers and Laiton vanquished, witness bear.
Pinkie beheld my strength, there had I gained
The field, but Huntley, and the Regent stained
Their honor: fear or error made them flee,
Even when I won ground of the Enemy:
Yet do not these such height of honor bring
As to have been Grandsire to Great Britains King.
Of David the eighth Earl of Angus: And of his father George, called Sir
George of Pittendrigh.
TO Archbald the second, dying without heirs male of his own body, his brother
Sir George of Pittendrigh should have succeeded, if he had outlived him,
wherefore we will speak a word of him. He got the Lands of Pittendrigh by
marriage. His children by the heir of Pittendrigh (whose name was Douglas
also) were David, who succeeded to the Earldom of Angus, and James Earl of
Morton, and Regent of Scotland. This James got the Earldom of Morton by
marrying the third daughter to the Earl of Morton, who was Douglas also, and
so was made Earl by provision. Her other two sisters were married before, one
to the Lord Hamilton Governor, and the other to the Lord Maxwell. He had also
a natural son, called George of Park-head, because he married the heir of
Park-head in Douglas, she was also Douglas to name, of whom he begat James,
afterward Lord Torthorall, by marriage likewise, and Sir George of Mordington.
He had also a natural daughter by the Lady Dundas, in her husbands time,
called Elizabeth, who was married to Smeton Richeson. Of this Sir George we
have spoken above in his brothers life, and how he died before his brother.

His son David married Elizabeth Hamilton daughter to John Hamilton of
Samilston, called John of Cliddisdale, brother German to Duke Hamilton who was
Governor. She bare to him one only son called Archbald, and two daughters,
Margaret first Lady Balcleugh, then Countess of Bothwell; and Elizabeth Lady
Maxwell. His wife after his death married the Lord of Whitelaw, and had before
been married to the Lord of Johnston.

This David lived not long, was little above a year Earl of Angus, neither
hear we of any of his actions, being so^e what sickly and infirm of body. He
died in Cockburnspeth in the year 1558.

The ninth Earl of Angus, Archbald the third, and of his Uncle and Tutour
James Douglas, Earl of Morton.
TO David succeeded his son Archbald, a child not above two years old. His
Tutour and Guardian was James Douglas Earl of Morton his Uncle, and mother to
David. Wherefore it is no ways out of our way, or impertinent for our History,
but rather necessary and most requisite, that we should first speak of him,
being a branch and a brother of the house of Angus, and in effect, Earl of
Angus, as well as Morton, though under the name of Tutour, or Guardian.

Of his marriage, we have told before, how he was married to Douglas his wife,
and daughter to the Earl of Morton. She bare to him diverse children (ten as is
reported) but none of them lived long, but died all young, ere they came to
perfect age. She her self became distracted of her wits, and would not company
with her husband, alleging he was not her husband, but that he was Master
Archbald Douglas, who was brother to William Douglas of Whittinghame, that her
husband was dead, and that Master Archbald Douglas had killed him. She was kept
and entertained by him as became her place, and had her residence at Tantallon,
but he being deprived of her Company, loosed the rains to others, and begat
three natural Children: 1. James (whose mother was one High in Dal^th) who was
made Captain of Black-Nesse Castle, Priour of Plusquardain; and afterward
became Lord of Spot, by marrying the heir thereof, Anna Hume only daughter to
George Hume of Spot. 2. His second son was Archbald, whom he provided to the
estate of Pittindreigh, which belonged to his father Sir ^rge. 3. The third son
was named Master George Douglas who was lame of his feet. Thus much his
Children.

Touching himself, during his childe-hood and youth he lived obseurely, His
lurking and being a Greeve.
and lurked for fear of the King ( James the fifth) who had banished his
Father, and Uncle, caused burn his Ant (the Lady Glames) and had professedly
set himself against the whole name of Douglas utterly to ruin, and ext^ them.
We do not hear that his elder brother David did thus hide himself, or if he
did, it has not been so observed of him: but of this James, it is certainly
known that all the time of his fathers banishment and exile, he lurked under
the borrowed name of James the Greeve, or James (...): First with his Cousin of
Glenbarvie, afterward, for fear of being discovered with so near a Kinsman,
with some Gentleman in the more Northern parts of Scotland. And as he (...) the
name, so did he also (...) the office of a Greeve, and over-seer of the Lands
and R^, the Corn and Cattle of him with whom he lived. Neither was this
(howsoever mean) employment without great use, as nothing else in providence
ever is, if it be rightly observed. It fitted him for those weighty matters,
which afterward he was to meddle in, and schooled him for that charge in which
he was to be employed ere long. For by this mean he became acquainted with the
humors and disposition of the vulgar and inferior sort of the common people,
which knowledge is useful and necessary to greatest Governors, that so they
may know how to deal with them, and manage them according as they shall have
occasion. He attained also hereby such skill in husbandry, and such perfection
in economy and thriftinesse, that having acquired a habit of frugalitie, he
not only repaired the decayed and shattered Estates of these two Earledomes
(Angus and Morton) but also helped to recover, and augment the revenues of the
Crown and Kingdom, more than any other Regent.

So long as his uncle, father, and brother were alive, we do not hear any thing
of him, neither is there any mention at all made of him, save that in the year
1547. as has been said, after the battle at Muscleburgh, he yielded up to the
English his Castle of Dalkeeth, together with himself He is a prisoner in
England.
their prisoner, and was by them carried into England, being then about seven
and twenty years of age, or thereby: How long he stayed there, we cannot
affirm, but it should seem he remained there certain years, for during that
time, he learned the Estate of that Country, together with the English tongue,
and tone, which he did ever thereafter much delight to use.

At his return, after the death of his brother David, he being Tutour, Returns.
and Guardian to his Nephew Archbald Earl of Angus, finding both his own, and
his pupils Estate greatly burdened with debt, he lived privately, and retired
for a while with a very small retinue of his domestics only, neither going to
Court, nor intermedling with any public affairs, Lives retired and privately
at home.
to avoid the charges which otherwise he must have undergone. Wherefore his
first care was to reduce these two Earledomes to their former integrity, by
frugall parsimonie in the beginning, and not to lavish out the remainder by
untimely magnificence, esteeming wisely that means and money are the sinews,
not only of War, but also of all civil and politic actions. Now besides
the burden that was on the Lands, his Nephews title to the Earldom of Angus
was questionable. For if the entailement were not very strong (as it seems it
was not) Lady Margaret Douglas Countess of Lennox had the better right, and
was before him, she being sole heir of Line to Archbald that married the Queen,
and so inheritrix of Angus. It is true she lived in England with her husband
Lennox, who was banished, but who knew how soon he might be recalled and
restored? Wherefore to prevent that danger, and to strengthen his Nephew and
himself against their attempts he contracts him to Monsieur D'Osels daughter,
that by his means and friendship (he being a French man) he might have the
Queens favor and good will to uphold him against their claims. But this
contract took no effect, for she was married afterward to Monsieur D'Aubespine,
and Angus to others, as we shall hear in his life.

After that he had thus settled his affairs at home, he began to come abroad He
comes abroad, and begins to deal in public affairs.
and to have a hand in public business. In the year 1559. he with Duke
Hamilton do mediate a truce between the Queen Mother, and the Lords, from the
24. of July, until the 10. of January. Some Writers say that he assisted, and
sided with the Queen; but it should seem that they have mis-taken the matter:
for not long after, he joined openly with those that were against her, and the
French Faction; and is now reckoned among the Noblemen that sent to the Queen
of England for her aid and assistance. These were the Duke of Chattelraut,
James Stuart brother to the young Queen (afterward Earl of Murray) the Earl
of Arran (son to the Duke) Argyle, Glencairne, Rothes, Sutherland, Monteth,
Huntley, Caithnesse, Arrol, Marshal, Montrose, Cassils, Eglinton: The Lords
Ruthven, Oglebye, Ereskin, Drummond, Hume, Rosse, Creighton, Levingston,
Sommervale, the whole Nobility almost. Their cause and their company being so
good, Morton could not but take part with them: The common liberty of their
Country against the French, and Religion was no less dear to him than it was
to them. In matter of Religion, he was so forward, that the Book of Discipline
being compiled by some appointed for that purpose, though diverse refused to
approve of it, and to set to their hands, yet he did it with the first, and
received it willingly. Wherefore these two (then which there is nothing dearer
unto men) being in danger, he was forced in a manner to lend his helping hand
for their defense, pro aris and focis, as the common saying is. And that the
rather, for that he saw there was no hope of peace, seeing the truce which he
had procured till the 10. of January was not kept. For before the middle of
September Monsieur La Croque, being sent out of France to certify the Queen of
the new Forces which were in levying for her aid under the leading of
Marquess D'Elbeufe her brother, she began to fortify Leith with those French
which were already in the Country. Not long after arrived Octavian (a French
Colonel) with 1000. men, and immediately followed him at the heels La Brosse,
Knight of the Cockle, with 2000. more. The next spring came also the Count
Marquess of the house of Luxemberg, afterward Duke D'Estamps, with 1000. foot,
and some horse. These all remained and abode in Leith, which they had
fortified; but the Queen to secure her own Person, retired to the Castle of
Edinburgh, though the Captain thereof, the Lord Ereskin, were on the contrary
part. The Nobility assembling themselves at Dalkeeth Castle, which belonged to
Morton, hard by Edinburgh, from thence do write to her, desiring that she would
dismiss the French, who were forrainers, and set open the Town of Leith, that
the Natives might have free recourse and commerce thither. When they could not
obtain these things at her hands, the English, to the number of seven or eight
thousand being already entered into Scotland, they sat down before Leith the 4.
of The QueenMother dies.
April 1560. About the eight of June, the Queen Mother dying in the Castle of
Edinburgh, a peace was concluded, the Town of Leith was surrendered, and the
French men returned home into their own Country. Morton Ambassador in England.
In the beginning of Winter, Morton, together with Glen^, and Sir William
Metellan of Lithington, Secretary, were sent to thank the Queen of England for
her ready succor. Morton had also a private message from the Earl of Arran,
son to Duke Hamilton, to lay out marriage to her, but it is not likely that
he would deliver it, being so unprobable, and such a proposition as he knew
would not be very acceptable unto her. In this journey, Morton procured of his
Cousin Lady Margaret Douglas Countess of Lennox, her renunciation of all
claim and title she had to the Earldom of Angus, in favors of his Nephew
Archbald, but being done without the consent of her husband ( Matthew Earl of
Lennox) it was renewed again afterward.

The sixteenth of August 1561. Queen Mary returned out of France to Queen Mary
arrives in Scotland.
her native Country and Kingdom of Scotland, her husband Francis the second
of France, being dead before in December. The Nobility was still divided
concerning matter of Religion, and although now having their native Princess
at home, her husband being dead, there was no great cause to fear the power or
empire of strangers, yet did they suspect that she would be too much ruled and
counseled by her Uncles the Cardinal of Loraine, and the Guisians. The Heads
of the parties were James the Queens brother, and George Earl of Huntley, the
first a zealous Protestant, and wholly bent to maintain the received
Reformation, and the other no less forward to reduce the Romish Religion. The
Queen inclined to favor Huntleyes cause, but the Reformed Religion was
established by Acts of Parliament, which had been ratified by her own consent.
Huntley, as he was a crafty and turbulent man, so was he also esteemed to be
by the Queen, and her uncles, who (like unto themselves) made but a cloak of
Religion to attain his own ambitious ends and designs. Wherefore howbeit they
thought him a fit instrument to bring their own purposes to pass, and made use
of him, yet did they not trust him. James Earl of Murray by the contrary was
sincere, upright, trusty, and faithful in all his actions, but he ran a
course directly opposite to that which they intended. The Earl of Morton
entered into strait bonds of friendship with Murray, which continued so long as
they lived together. They had the Friendship betwixt Morton and Murray.
same friends, and the same enemies, the same ends and aims, the good of their
Country, and maintaining of Religion. They ran the same hazard in all perils
and dangers, never separating their counsels, nor failing to aid and assist one
another. Wherefore Murray being sent by the Queen against the out-lawes upon
the Borders, being assisted by Morton and his friends (who lay near unto these
places) he came to Hawick upon the Fair-day of that Town, and having
apprehended fifty of the most notorious Thieves which came to the Market
fearing nothing, he did so terrify the rest, that those parts remained
peaceable and quiet for a long time after. This success as it increased his
reputation, so did it also more and more kindle the hatred and envy of his
enemies. And now besides those at home, the Guisards did also plot his ruin.
Their quarrel was Religion, their instrument Huntley, their hope, his power
and greatness, which was given out to them to be rather more than it was
indeed. Wherefore they write to the Queen (their Niece) to feed Huntley with
large promises, and to entertain his son John with hope of marrying her, and
fair countenances, that so they might be drawn to do what she lifted, to make
away Murray and Morton, with their accomplices. The Popes Letters were to the
same effect. She had Their ruin plotted.
sent to him for moneys to make War upon those that had spoken of the yoke of
Popish obedience; and his answer was, that she should not want his help; so
that she would do it seriously, that was (according to the Cardinal of Lorains
Gloss) so that first of all she would cause make away those whose names were
given her in writing. These Letters she showed unto Murray and the rest; either
because she suspected they had notice of them some other way, or to lull them
asleep in security, that being thus persuaded of her sincerity and good
meaning, they might the more easily be overreached and entrapped. So the
project goes on; and all things being sufficiently forecast, and prepared for
the accomplishing of their intentions, the Queen takes her Progress into the
North. The Queen goes to the North, they accompany her.


Murray behooved to accompany her, and Morton would not forlake Murray. Who can
imagine that their counsels should be disappointed? The Forces which Murray and
Morton had, were very small, and they were far from their friends, which
dwelt in the south parts of the Kingdom. Huntley commanded all in those
quarters, being Lieutenant and Sheriff by inheritance: and compassed about with
his friends and dependers: So the Game seemed sure. But what can prevail a
against that which God has ordained? He had decreed to frustrate them, and that
by themselves. The Queens intentions and Huntleys did not jumpe in all things:
they had their several ends. They agreed in their desire of being rid of those
who opposed the re-establishing of Popery, but Huntley had a further drift. He
propounded to himself as the reward of his service, no less than the Queens
Person, to be married to his son John, and so in effect the Crown and
Kingdom. But howsoever the Queen by her carriage toward the young man, was
contented they should please themselves with that conceit; yet neither did she
ever go so far as to promise any such thing, neither was it indeed her
meaning: for she desired no less to be rid of Huntley, and hated him much more
than she did Murray, having had many proofs of his perfidious dealing both
toward her father, and her mother. Besides, she thought him too great and more
powerful than was fit for a Subject, or safe for the Prince. Wherefore before
she began her journey into the North, she left his son John in prison behind
her. The pretext was, because he had hurt the Lord Oglebie in a Skirmish on the
Street of Edinburgh; but the true cause was, that he might be kept there as a
pledge of his Fathers fidelity, and that he being absent, Huntley might not
constrain her to marry him, nor force her to any thing she had not a mind
to. But John made an escape out of prison, and followed the Queen, that his
absence might not be any hinderance to the marriage. So Huntley and his son
gather their Forces together to meet the Queen, and to cut off Murray and
Morton, as they would have her believe, but their main aim was withal to
compel her to marry if she should refuse. This the Queen knew well enough* so
that when the Countess of Huntley did tell her from the Earl her husband,
that he was ready to put in execution what had been determined, the Queen told
her, that there was one thing which Huntley must needs do first of all, before
any thing else were taken in hand. His son John had broken prison, which was
a manifest contempt of her authority, and such a thing as she could not in
honor wink at, and therefore he behooved to return and enter himself prisoner
in the Castle of Stirlin, though it were but for some few days, to show his
obedience and subjection to the Laws. Huntley would none of that, for he saw
that so his son should be made to answer for whatsoever should be done contrary
to the Queens liking, so there was a demurre in the business. In the mean
time the Queen goes from Aberdene to Bawhan, the house of one Master Lestie a
Gentleman, some twelve miles from the Town. This was thought a fit place to
execute their design upon Murray and Morton: but the Gentleman, though he was
Huntlies friend, would upon no terms give way to have done in his house. Then
the Queen went toward Strabogie (a house of Huntleyes, where he had resolved to
make an end of all) but by the way she told the Earl, as they rode together,
that unless his son would return to his prison, she could not in honor go to
his house. But he not The Queen at Innernesse.
condescending thereunto, though she were within sight of Strabogie, she turned
another way, and went to a house of the Earl of Athols, from thence to
Innernesse, where thinking to have lodged in the Castle, Huntleys servants that
had the keeping thereof, shut the gates against her. Then did she perceive what
danger she was in, being constrained to lodge in an open town, which had
neither wall, nor rampart, nor ditch, the Country about being wholly at
Huntleyes devotion, whose son John was in the fields with a thousand armed men,
besides the country people, who were ready to join with him. Wherefore now
seeing that her own safety consisted in her brothers, having none else on whom
she could rely and trust into, she began to make much of him and Morton. These
two caused set a watch, and placed a strong Guard at all the entries of the
town, by which means Huntleyes spies and intelligencers were taken: The next
morning the Clon-chattans, with the Frasers, and Monroes, and many
High-landers, understanding that their Princess was in danger, came to her
aid, and forsook Huntley. With these she took the Castle (...) Gordon beheaded.
of Innernesse, and caused execute Alexander Gordon the Captain thereof, which
was a sufficient testimony of her alienation from Huntley. All this did not
quail the Earl, or divert him from his purpose. His ambition spurred him on
before, necessity does now drive him forward. He had gone too far to think of
a retreat. Therefore he follows the Queen She goes to Aberdene.
from Innernesse to Aberdene, watching for some opportunity to effect his
intentions. He lay not far from the town with his Companies, and had his
intelligencers within it, the Earl of Sutherland, Master Loslie of Bawhan,
black Alexander (or Arthur) Forbes. The townsmen were most of them, either of
his kindred, or allied to him; and all of them so affected, as that they neither
would, or durst oppose him. But letters being intercepted, which Sutherland and
Bawhan wrote to him, their plots were discovered, and they defeated of their
intendments once more.

Then Murray and Morton thinking it both tedious and perilous, to be always
on their guard, and to be defenders only, resolved to take their turn of
assailing, and pursuing, if so happily they might break his Forces, and
disperse them. And howbeit they had not of their own, that The battle at
Corrighie, 1562.
they could trust to above an hundred horse, yet being armed with authority,
and the Majesty of their Sovereign, for the safety of whose person they were
to fight, having gathered together of Forbeses and Leslies, to the number of
seven or eight hundred, and hoping that albeit they inclined to favor Huntley,
yet their duty and allegiance to their Princess would not suffer them to
betray her, they took the fields. These made great show of forwardness in
conveening, and gave out great words and brags, that they alone would do all.
Huntley with his men had taken a plot of ground, enclosed about with marshes,
so that he was in a manner encamped Murray and Morton, with the trustiest of
their Friends, retired to a little hill, to behold the issue of this Battle,
committing all to those who had taken it upon them: Only they sent some
horsemen a byway, to close up the passages of the marish, that Huntley being
overcome, might not escape that way. So those boasters begin to march toward
the enemy, and by the way they plucked off the heath (or hather) which grows
in abundance in those parts, and stuck it in their Helmets, and Head-pieces,
according as it had been agreed upon betwixt them and Huntley. Wherefore, he
thinking now (these being for him) that there was no power to resist him, came
out of his Strength against them, who presently turned their backs, and came
fleeing with their swords drawn, and crying, Treason, treason, as if they had
been betrayed, when indeed themselves were the traitors. They had thrown away
their spears and long weapons, wherefore Murray and Morton, though they were
astonished at the first sight of these hather-topped traitors, who came
running toward them, with Huntley at their heels, yet they took courage, and
resolved to stand to it. For as they were about to save themselves by flight,
and were calling for their horses, William Douglas of Glenbarvie, (who was
afterward Earl of Angus) requested them to stay (as is reported) saying, No
horses, my Lords, we are strong enough for Huntley, and these men, though they
flee, yet will they not fight against us. Wherefore let us present our pikes
and spears to keep them out, that they come not in amongst us, to break our
ranks, and the rest will prove easy. This advice was liked, and followed, so
that Huntley expecting nothing less, than to find resistance, and being
destitute of long weapons, was forced (some of his men being slain) to give
ground, and at last to flee as fast as before he had followed the counterfeit
fleers. Then the Hather-tops perceiving that Huntley fled, turned upon him, and
to make amends, slew most of them that were slain that day, which were some
hundred and twenty, and an hundred taken prisoners, amongst whom was Huntley
himself, and his sons John, and Adam. The Earl being an aged and corpulent
pur^ie man, was stifled with his armor, and for want of breath in the taking.
Some say, that he received a stroke on the head with a pistol, but it seems
to be false: for it is reported, that when Huntley saw his men routed, he asked
of those that were by him; what the name of the ground was upon which they
fought, and having learned that it was commonly called Corraighie, he repeated
the name thrice, Corraighie, Corraighie, Corraighie, then God be merciful to
me. The name of the place put him in mind of a response or oracle (if we may
so call it) which was given by a Witch in the Highland, to whom he had sent to
enquire of his death, and she had told, that he should die at Corraighie. But
whether the messenger, or he himself mis-took the word, he understood it of
Creigh, a place which was in his way to Aberdene, and which (riding thither) he
always did shun, by reason of this Soothsayers speech; or if at any time he
did adventure to go by it, he was sure to be well accompanied, and to have the
fields cleared and curried before. But this event discovered his mistaking. It
was also told him by some of the same profession, that the same day, on which
he was taken, he should be in Aberdene, maugre those that would not so, neither
should one drop of his blood be spilt. This seemed to promise him a
successful journey; but the ambiguitie thereof was cleared by his death: for
he was indeed that night in Aberdene, being carried thither upon a pair of
creels, or panniers, and that against the will of all his friends, who would
not have had him brought thither in such a guise. Neither did he lose any
blood, but was choked for want of breath. Such are commonly the answers of
such spirits, ambiguous, and of no use to the receivers; yet men's curiosity is
so prevalent, that posterity will take no warning of former examples. Murray
being glad of this so-unlooked-for-victory, sent to the Ministers of Aberdene,
to be ready against his coming, to go to the Churches, and give God thanks for
that days success: which they did very solemnly, and (no question) heartily,
as men are wont to do while the memory of a great delivery is yet fresh in
their minds. The next day John Gordon (the Earls son) was execute, and his
brother Adam was pardoned in regard of his youth. George the eldest brother
fled to his father-in-law Duke Hamilton, and afterward being arraigned and
condemned of high treason, he was sent prisoner to the Castle of Dumbar: Who
does not see through this whole journey, but especially in this catastrophe, an
overruling power and providence does either willingly shut his eyes, or else
has his understanding blinded by partiality or prejudice. Five several times
(at Bawhan, at Straboggie, at Inner-Nesse, at Aberdene, and last of all, at
Corraighie) did Huntley attempt to cut off these men, who were many degrees
weaker; and five times is he disappointed. And that neither by their wisdom
or strength, but by him who confounds the wisdom of the wise, and who
delivers without the help of the arm of flesh. Neither were they delivered
only, but their enemies were also taken in the trap, and fell into the pit
which they had dug for them. Let men observe it, and let them learn not to
confide in their own (never so seeming wisely grounded) projects, lest they be
thus disappointed as Huntley was. This fell out in the year 1562. After this
they returned with the Queen to Edinburgh, where we will leave them in rest,
and so in silence a year or two.

In the year 1564. Matthew Stuart Earl of Lennox returned into Scotland after
22. years exile, and was restored to his estate in a Parliament. Lennox and
Henry Lord Darnely come ho^e.
Not long after, his son Henry Lord Darnely, having obtained leave of the
Queen of England for three months, came to do his duty to the Queen as his
Princess and Kinswoman. He being a proper and handsome young man, and her
Cousin Germane by his mother, Lady Margaret Douglas, the Queen began to think
him a fit husband for her, Proposition of mar^iage with the Queen.
and ere long did propound the matter to the Nobility, craving their consent
and approbation thereto. They were divided in their opinions. Hamilton and
Murray were against the match, fearing alteration in Religion, he being a
Roman Catholic, as the Queen also was. Besides, they thought it not fit to
conclude any thing without the Queen of Englands consent. Morton was for it,
and thought it great reason that she should have her liberty in her choice of
a husband. He liked also the party, being his near Kinsman, the Lady Margaret
Douglas and he being brothers children. Wherefore having endeavored to draw
those that stood against it to be of his opinion, when he could not prevail,
he professed openly he would do what lay in him to set it forward; and speaking
to the Duke and Murray, It will be long (says he) ere you two agree on a
husband for her, if she marry not till you do, I fear me she marry not these
seven years; and so he left them. The rest bound themselves to withstand it.
Her Uncles of Guise did also oppose it, intending to bestow her on some
foreign Prince, so to strengthen themselves by some great alliance. The Queen
of England did not so much dislike it, as she desired to have some hand and
stroke in it. Notwithstanding all this opposition the marriage They mar^y the
27. of July 1565.
was consummate the 27. of July 1565. about some six months after he came into
Scotland. Whatsoever the motives were that induced the parties thus to hasten
it, so it pleased God in his wisdom and providence, to dispose of things that
by joining of these two, this happy conjunction of the two Kingdoms which we
now see and enjoy, should spring from them without all controversy or
question. The eldest daughter of King Henry the seventh of England, Margaret,
had but two children; James the fifth by King James the fourth, and Margaret
Douglas (born at Harbottle) by Archbald Earl of Angus her second husband.
James the fifth left behind him but one child, Mary, sole heir to the Crown
of Scotland. Lady Margaret Douglas, being brought up with her Uncle Henry the
eight, was married to Matthew Stuart Earl of Lennox, who being banished, and
living in England, had by her Henr^, Lord Darnely, and Charles, father to
Arabella. So that by this marriage of Queen Mary to Henry Lord Darnely, the
whole right that was in Queen Margaret to the Crown of England (failing the
heirs of King Henry the eight) was combined and united in the persons of these
two, and their off spring. What eye is so blind as not to see evidently the
hand of the Almighty in this match? In taking away her former husband (the King
of France) in bringing her back again into Scotland; in sending Lennox into
England, there to marry Lady Margaret Douglas, in bringing him and his son (
Henry) home again after 22. years absence, and in moving Queen Mary to set her
affection on him. I make no question but this consideration (of strengthening
the title to England) has been amongst the motives that drew on this match,
though we find none, or very slender mention thereof in our writers.

The next day after the marriage, they were proclaimed with sound of Trumpet at
the Market-Crosse of Edinburgh by a Herald, Henry and Mary, King and Queen of
Scotland. This was ill taken both of the Nobility and Commons. A King made by
Proclamation! The voice of a Herald to be in stead of a Parliament! King
Francis, her former husband had not done so; he had sought a matrimonial
Crown from the three estates, and hardly obtained it, after he had been
refused at first, yet not without consent of a Parliament. But by this it
appeared they made no account of the estates, nor bare no respect unto the
customs of the Kingdom. Every man thought it a great neglect and derogation
to their privileges, but the male-contented called it, a tyrannical
usurpation. Thus many of the Nobility being discontented withdrew themselves,
and the want of their presence and countenance in guiding of affairs, did
alienate the people. The principal malcontents were Hamilton, Murray,
Argyle, Rothuse, Glencairne. Against these the King goes to Glasgow with 4000.
men. They lay at Pasley; and though they were together, yet they were not all
of one mind. The Hamiltons would not hear of any peace, alleging there could
be no true and firm reconciliation with Princes once offended. The rest were
not of their opinion: they said that matters had been hitherto carried without
blood; neither were their differences such, but that they might be composed
without stroke of sword; especially in regard that there were some about their
Princes, that would both mediate their peace, and endeavor to have it
faithfully kept, The constant practice of their Predecessors, and the rule
they had ever followed had been this; To pass by, and not to take notice of
the secret and hidden faults of their Princes, and to salve those things which
were doubtful by a favorable and charitable construction; yea even to
tolerate and bear with their open faults and errors, as far as might be,
without the ruin of the common wealth; of which nature they esteemed these
slips in government to be proceeding from their youth, and want of experience,
which might be redressed by calm and fair means. Duke Hamilton himself did
like of their moderation, but the rest of the Hamiltons refused to assist them
upon these terms; wherefore they departed all of them, save the Duke, with some
sixteen that attended his Person. By this departure they were so weakened, that
not daring to abide the Kings coming, they went first to Hamilton, and the day
following toward Edinburgh, but being shot at from the Castle, they took their
way through Bigger to Dumfreis, to the Lord Harris, who had desired them to do
so, and had made them many fair promises. But he failing them, they dismissed
their Troops, and fled into England. All this way the King with his Companies
dogged them at the heels, whereupon it was called, the Runne-away Rode (or
runne-about) and, the wilde-goose The Runneabout Rode.
chase. The King returned to Edinburgh in the latter end of October.

All this while the Earl of Morton took part with the King and Queen, but he
was suspected to favor the other side, which he did indeed so far, as to
wish that the matter might be so taken up, that none of their lives were
endangered. Otherwise he was in a good place, and Morton Chancellor.
Chancellor for the time. But these male-contented Lords being thus removed,
his house of Tantallon was seized, that it might not be a receipt and place of
refuge for the Rebels, if they should happen to take it: But the true cause
was, Rizio (commonly known by the name Signior Rizio.
David) had put the King and Queen in some jealousy of Morton; the occasion
whereof was this, This Italian (or Pied-montoise) was of a Musician, risen to
such favor, that he was become Cabin-Secretary to the Queen; and Sir William
Metellan (Secretary of estate) finding himself prejudiced by him, who had
encroached upon his office, as also out of the love he bare to Murray (to whom
Rizio was a professed enemy) bethought himself how to be rid of him. Wherefore
he appointed a meeting with Morton, and the Lord Harris, in which he used all
the persuasions he could to induce them to cut off that base stranger, who took
upon him to disturb the Country, did abuse the Queens favor, and set all in a
combustion, to the dishonor of the Prince and Nobility; telling them, that it
belonged to them, and such as they were, to have a care that such disorders
were not suffered unpunished. And the more to incite them thereto, he alleged
the examples of former times, omitting nothing which he thought might move them
to undertake it. But Morton (as the Proverb is) was as wise as he was w^ely: He
told him flatly, he would take no such violent course, he would do what he
could by fair means for Murrays peace and restitution: but as for that way, it
would o^d the Queen highly, and therefore he would not meddle with it. Metellan
seeing that he could not draw him to it by persuasion, casts about how to drive
him to it by necessity. He betakes himself to Rizio, m^es show as if he were
very desirous of his friendship, and proffers him his (...) so far as he was
able. After he had so insinuated with him, that he began to have some trust
with him, he told him that the place he had (to be the Queens
Closet-Secretarie) was neither gainefull, nor usual in this Country, and that
he might easily come by a better: The Lord Chancellours office (says he) is
the most honorable, which is in Mortons hands, a man no ways fit for the
place, as being unlettered and unskilful. Do but deal with the Queen to
estrange her countenance from him, as one the savours Murray a Rebel, and with
the King to insist in his right to the Earldom of Angus, Morton will be glad
to sue to you for your favor, and to obtain your friendship; will be content
to demit his place of Chancellor in your behalf: Only; in regard that the
place (being the chief office in the Kingdom) must be possessed by a Scottish
Nobleman, you must first be made a free Denizan, and naturalized, and have the
title of an Earl, which the Queen may confer upon you of her self. This
Metellan thought would incense Morton against Rizio, and force him to do him a
mischief. Rizio began to follow this advice, in so much that the Castle of
Tantallon was summoned, and delivered into the Kings hands. Likewise the King
entered heir to his Grandfather Archbald Earl of Angus. The Queen also
intending to create Rizio an Earl, would have bought Melvin Castle with the
Lands belonging thereto for the first step of his preferment, but the owner
would by no means part with them. And it is very probable, that he would have
prosecuted the rest of the Plot, if he had not been interrupted, and dispatched
before he could bring it to pass: for his credit increased so far with the
Queen; that like too big a Sail for a small Bark, he was not able to bear his
good fortune, but being puffed up therewith beyond measure, he forgot his duty to
the King, and carried himself so insolently toward him, that the King resolved
to rid himself of him upon any terms. So he imparts his mind to his friends,
that Rizio must needs Rizio his de^ plotted by the King.
be made away. Those whom he first acquainted with his purpose, were George
Douglas (commonly called the Postulate) a natural brother of his mothers, an
understanding and active man; the Lord Ruthven who had married a natural
sister of his mothers, and the Lord Lindsay, who was his Cousin German, and had
to wife a sister of the Earl of Murrayes; and his own father the Earl of
Lennox. These had concluded to lay hold on him as he came from the
Tennesse-Court, where he used much, but he having gotten some inkling hereof,
kept a Guard about him of some fifty Halbards, which constrained them to think
of a new course. And because their power was neither sufficient to effect it,
nor to bear it out when it were done, they thought good to join the Earl of
Morton. He being somewhat alienated, and discontented with the Kings insisting
in his claim to the Earldom of Angus, they sent to him Andrew Ker of
Fadunside, and Sir John Ballindine Justice-Clerk to deal with him, who
prevailed so far, that he was content to come to Lennox Chamber where the
King was. There they came soon to an agreement, the King and his father for
themselves, and undertaking also for Lady Margaret Douglas (whose consent they
promised to obtain, and that she should renew and ratify what had been done
by her self before) renounced all title, right, interest, or claim they had or
could make to the Earldom of Angus in favors of Archb^ld son to David,
sometime Earl thereof. Having obtained this, he consented to assist the K.
with all his power on these conditions. 1. That nothing should be altered in
the received Religion, but that it should be established as fully, and in as
ample manner, as it was before the Queen came home out of France. 2. That the
banished Lords should be brought home and restored. 3. That the King would take
the fact upon himself, and warrant them from whatsoever danger might follow
thereon by the Queens displeasure. These Articles were given him in writing to
subscribe, lest afterward out of his facility or levitie he should either deny
it, or alter his mind, which he did very willingly, and even eagerly.
Prosently hereupon Lennox went into England to acquaint the banished Lords
herewith, and to bring them near to the Borders of Scotland, that when Rizio
were slain, they might be ready to lay hold of the occasion for their
restitution. And now the day of the Parliament drew near, in which they were to
be forfeited; and Rizio did bestirre himself notably to bring it to pass. He
went about to all those that had vote in Parliament, to try their minds, and
to terrify them, by telling it was the Queens pleasure to have it so, and that
whosoever voted to the contrary should incur her high displeasure, and no
ways do any good to the Noblemen. This made them hasten his death, to prevent
the sentence which the Parliament might have given out against the Lords by
Rizio his practices. Wherefore that they might take him, when his Guard was
from him, and that it might the more clearly be seen, that the King was the
chief author of it, they determined to take him along with them, who should
bring him out of the Queens Chamber, from when^ he should be carried to the
City and have his trial by assise, and so legally and formally (for they had
matter enough against him) condemned Rizio killed.
and executed at the Market-Crosse of Edinburgh. So Morton assembled his
friends, and going to the Abbey of Halyroodhouse (the 8. of March 1566. Martii
8.
1566) in the evening, he seized the Keys of the Palace, and leaving a
sufficient number in the Inner-Court below, to keep in the Noblemen that were
lodged in the Palace, and were not on the Plot, he himself went up to the
presence, and there walked up and down. The King went directly to the Queens
Chamber by the privy stairs, and with him the Lord Ruthven, and some five
more all armed. The Queen was at supper, and there was with her, her natural
sister the Countess of Argyle, and Rizio with some few other servants. She was
at first somewhat amazed to seethem come into her Bedchamber being armed; but
because the Lord Ruthven had been sick of a burning fever, she thought he had
been distracted with the vehemency of the fit, so she asked what the matter
was. Ruthven made no answer, but laid hold on Rizio, and told him it did not
become him to be in that place. He ran to the Queen, and clasped his hands
about her to save himself, but the King taking her softly in his arms, told her
they had determined to punish that villain; who had abused both them and the
Country; and withal unclasping Rizio his hands, he delivered him to Ruthven,
who carried him from thence into the Privie-Chamber, and then to the Presence.
In the mean time the Earl Bothwell and Huntley (who were opposite to this
course) being lodged in the Palace, and hearing how things went on the Queens
side, would have made resistance* by the help of the underofficers of Court,
Butlers, Cooks, Skuls and suchlike, with Spits and Staves, but they were
quickly rambarred, and beaten back by those that had been left of purpose in
the Court by Morton. So Huntley and Bothwell fled out at backwindowes. Athole
was persuaded to keep his Chamber by Secretary Metellan, who was on the Plot,
and supped that night with Athole, partly to keep him from stirring, lest he
might have offered or suffered violence; partly and chiefly that he himself
might not be suspected to have a finger in the Pie, having Athole to be a
witness of his behavior therein. He had given order to his followers, that
they should remain quie^ till it came to be acted; and that then they should
arm themselves, and run hastily, as it were to an unknown and sudden fray
and tumult, but if there were need, to assist Morton and those that guarded the
Court. The noise of the scuffling which Huntly and Bothwel made below in the
Court, coming to the ears of those that were above in the presence, and had
Rizio in their hands; they not knowing what it might import, but fearing that
he might be rescued from them, they fell upon him, and stabbed him with their
daggers, sore against the will, and besides the intention of Morton, and the
rest of the Noblemen, who thought to have caused execute him upon the scaffold,
so to have gratified the common people, to whom it would have been a most
acceptable and pleasant sight. It is constantly reported that he was advised by
one (...) (a French Priest, who was thought to have some skill in the black
Art) that now he had gotten good store of means and riches, it was best for him
to return home to his native Country; where he needed not to fear the
Nobility of Scotland; whose hatred he could not be able to stand out against
long; but he contemned his counsel, saying, The Scots were greater threatners,
than doers. They say also, that one Signior Francese admonished him to carry
himself more soberly, and not to irritate the Nobility; for as he understood
they bare him no great good will, and would not fail to do him some mischief
one time or another; but he answeredhim in Italians, Parole, parole, all was
but words, he feared them not, they were no body, they were but like Ducks,
which if some of them be stricken down, the rest will lie in. To whom the other
replied, Take heed you find them not rather like Geese, of which if you stir
but one, all the rest will fly upon you, and so plume you, that they will
leave you neither Feather, nor Down. So when he was desired by some Diviner, or
Sooth-sayer, to beware of the Bastard, he said, That Bastard should not have
power to do much hurt in Scotland, so long as he lived; understanding it to be
spoken of Murray, who was Bastard-brother to the Queen. But the Bastard that
slew him, was George Douglas (as is the most received opinion) who stabbed him
with the Kings dagger; having none of his own then about him. This brought
Morton into great trouble; for the next day being the day of the Parliament,
the banished Lords compeered in the Parliament House, as they had been
summoned, where finding no accuser; now that Rizio was gone, the Parliament was
deserted, and the Queen reconciled unto them, intending to use their help
against the slayers of Rizio. Wherefore she went first to Seton, then to
Dumbar, where she assembled a sufficient number Morton flees to England.
of men, so that Morton, Ruthven, and their partners, were fain to flee into
England, but some of them lurked in the High-lands. Their Goods were
confiscated, their places and Offices disposed of to others. Their friends, who
were no ways accessarie to that fact, were committed to prison. Sir David Hume
of Wedderburne, only because he was Mortons kinsman, was sent first to Dumbar,
then to the Ken-moore in Galloway. It is true, it was his brother-in-laws
house, and Loghen-varre was indeed a loving brother, yet was it far from
home, neither was he set free without bail to re-enter when he should be
required.

Thus were the dice changed. Morton was at Court, when Murray and his accomplices
were banished: now they are in Court, when he and his associats are
dis-courted, and forced to ^e. He had favored them, but had not joined with
them: they favor him, but think it not good to take part with him. Yet had
they more reason to do it, for his fact had wrought out their Liberty, theirs
had made him to be suspected. But whether they would not, or could not do him
any good, or that they thought the time was not fit, and a better time was to
be expected, the King (who was the chief author and first mover of it) having
forsaken him, he was constrained to withdraw himself into England, as we have
said. There he did not remain long in ease and quiet, for about the beginning
of May, the Queen sent Master John Thornton (Chanter of Murray) desiring that
he and the rest, might not be suffered to harbor within the Queen of Englands
Dominions. She sent the same Thornton also to France with the like message, but
it needed not, for they never meant to go thither. Queen Elizabeth sent one of
her servants ( William Killigrew) and by him promised to cause them void her
Realm before Mid-summer. It was so done in show, they were warned to depart,
and did depart from Newcastle, abstained from conversing in public, but they
lurked privately in a place not far from Anwick. No search was made for them,
and the Messenger had whispered them in the ear, when he commanded them to be
gone, that England was broad and wide. Before they came from Newcastle, he lost
his good friend the Lord Ruthven, whom God called to his rest in mercy. Thus
was he banished from Scotland, England, The Lord Ruthven dies there.
France, and Ireland, yet did he lurk still in England.

But he lurked not long; for matters were in brewing at home, which Bothwell
the Queens favorite.
gave occasion to his return. The Earl Both well was now become the Queens
favorite, all men followed him, all preferment came by him. His thoughts were
high, his ambition no less than to enjoy the Queen, if she were free from a
husband. To bring this design to pass, she was content to forget all private
quarrels with Morton, and he presumed that Morton being abandoned of the King,
and engaged to him for his return and restitution, as also being led with hope
of his further goodwill, to gratify him in any thing that might be procured
from the Queen, would be induced either to become his friend, or at least not
to be his enemy, nor to raise, or to side with any Faction against him; which
he esteemed a great point, and of much importance. There was amongst Bothwels
followers, one Morton returns.
M. Arch. Douglas, a brother of the house of Whittingame, by his mediation all
former quarrels were taken away on both sides, and Mortons peace procured from
the Q. on condition he should not come within a mile of the Court. This
restraint he reckoned to be rather beneficial, than hurtful to him; seeing
that by that mean, he should be the farther off from whatsoever should happen
amiss. Wherefore being returned before the Q. was King James borne.
brought to bed of her son James the 6. (which was the 19. of June 1566) he
becomes a spectatour, beholding a far off what would be the issue of 1566.
19. June.
things. To sit on the shore, and to behold others at sea tossed with wind
and wave, though it cannot but stif our pity and commiseration in common
humanity, yet when we reflect upon our selves, and consider how happy we are
that are on firm land, free from these fears and dangers, the joy and
contentment we have in our own safety, does swallow up the former consideration
of another danger. So it was with Morton, he saw what a fearful tragedy was
like to be acted at court, but not being able to hinder it, he chose to keep at
home. He was the Kings kinsman, yet could he do him no good, having had
experience of his weakness and inconstancy in his forsaking of him, after the
killing of Rizio. He was beholding to Bothwell for his restoring, and therefore
bound not to oppose him, in honesty and duty he could not aid nor assist him
in such courses. Wherefore he uses the benefit of his confining, and becomes
a looker on.

To declare the estate of those times, and to dilate it, let them do it that
can delight to blaze the weakness of those, whom they ought to love and
honor, and who have that task imposed upon them, by whatsoever necessity. For
my self, neither am I any way necessitated thereunto, neither could my soul
ever delight in the reproach of any. I wish I could cover the sins of the
world, they should never be uncovered, or known, but where necessity did
require it, that so they might be taken away by order. My endeavor should
rather be with the blessed sons of Noah, to overspread, with the mantle of
silence and oblivion, the nakedness of those to whom we owe even a filial
duty and piety. Concerning that Princess, my heart inclines more to pity;
I see good qualities in her, and love them: I see errors, and pity them: I see
gentleness, courtesy, humility, beauty, wisdom, liberality; who can but
affect these? If they be carried to inconvenience, who can but lament it? In
that sex, in that place, in that education, in that company: a woman, a
Princess, accustomed to pleasure, to have their will, by Religion, by sight,
by example, by instigation, by soothing, and approbation. Happy, yea thrice
happy are they who are guided through these rocks without touch, nay, without
shipwreck. I do advert more than I find set down by Writers, while I search
into all the causes which might have drawn on these lamentable events. Besides
the secret loathings in the estate of marriage (which who knows but the
actors?) bringing forth dislike, then quarrels on both sides, then crossing and
thwarting, then hatred, then desire to be freed; besides all this, impotencie,
and desire of revenge, being seconded with show of reason, and backed with a
color of law and justice; what will it not do? Her husband had killed a servant
of hers, whom he had dragged violently out of her bedchamber. Behold him
therefore (as Lawyers, or such as pretended skill in law would allege) guilty
of death in their judgment. He was not crowned, but proclaimed King only by her
sole authority, never acknowledged by a Parliament, so was he but a private
man, and a subject to her his Sovereign, as are the wives and children of
Kings. Wherefore his Fact (in slaying Rizio) was flat treason, for which he
might have bin arraigned, and suffered according to law. But bearing the name
of a King, and having many friends and kindred, a legal proceeding could hardly
be attempted without great difficulty, and might have caused an insurrection,
and much bloodshed with uncertain event. Wheresore in wisdom the most
convenient way was to do it privately and secretly; secret justice, is justice
notwithstanding; formalities are but for the common course of things. This was
an extraordinary case. Justice is absolutely necessary, the form (whether this,
or that way) is indifferent, it may be altered, or omitted; the Princes power
may dispense with forms in case of necessity or conveniencie, so the substance
be observed. Well, I conceive that a Prince upon such suggestions, upon
dislike, in anger and indignation, might be drawn by his counselors, neither
can I but conceive, that these colors have been here represented to persuade,
or to sooth. To be short, that fact so lamentable, and (which I can never
remember without lamenting) every way in her The King murdered by Bothwell.
own, and her husbands person, done by the Earl Bothwell, he murdering her
husband, she marrying him, the matter seemed extreme strange and odious in the
eyes of many. It is true, Bothwell was cleared, or rather not filed by an
Assise; but the Nobility judging him not to be sufficiently cleansed, but
rather being fully persuaded that he was the author of the murder, thought
themselves bound in duty to bring him to a further trial And howsoever he had
married the Queen, yet did they not take themselves to be so far bound in
obedience to her, as in that regard to desist from all further inquiring into
that Fact. Nay, it did rather move their indignation to see him who had
committed so vile and execrable a murder, not only to escape Scot-free, but to
reap so large and rich a reward, as was the Queens own person. The Nobility
bands against Bothwell.
Besides, they thought the consequent might prove dangerous, if he who had
massacred the father, and married the mother, should also have the son (the
only bar and let of his ambition, to establish the Crown to himself and his
posterity) in his power and custody. These were given out as the causes of
their taking arms, which were very plausible to the vulgar, especially the
safety of the young Prince James. There is no question, they had also their
own particular respects, which are seldom wanting, and do commonly concur
with the public cause: wherefore there joined together the Earls of Argyle,
Glencairne, and Mar, the Lords Lindsay and Boyde. These bound themselves to
pursue Bothwel, and to assist one another against whosoever would oppose them,
especially to keep the young Prince from coming into Bothwels power. But Argyle
repenting him, went the next morning to the Queen, and revealed all the matter,
and the Lord Boyde also was at last persuaded with many fair promises, to
forsake them, and join with Bothwell. The rest notwithstanding remained firm,
with whom Morton took part. He thought he could do no less, being so near a
kinsman to the late King, and so to the young Prince. It is true, he had been
beholding to Bothwell, but no benefit could bind him to assist him in this
case: for by so doing, he should have given some colorable ground to that
report, which had so spread it self, that it was believed a while about the
Court of England, that Murray and he were authors of the Kings murder. To have
remained neutrall, would have been but ill taken on both sides. The Lord Hume,
Cesford, and Balcleugh, though they had not subscribed with the other Lords,
yet did they hate Bothwell, and were suspected to incline to the contrary
Faction. The year preceding, Bothwel had made an in-rode upon Liddisdale, for
the suppressing of thieves, and apprehending of outlawed Borderers with bad
success, for he was wounded, and hardly escaped with his life. This year he
resolves to repair his honor, and by some notable exploit, to gain the
good will of the people, which that he might the more easily do, the chief men
of the name of Scot, and Ker, who were likely to ^inder him, were commanded to
enter into prison in the Castle of Edinburgh, and there to remain till his
return. But they fearing some worse meaning, went home to their houses.

The Lord Hume also being summoned to enter, would not obey. Notwithstanding
Bothwell goes on with his intended journey, and so the Queen and he come to
Borthwick Castle, there to make all things ready for this expedition. The
adverse party thought this place was not unfit to surprise him in it: and
therefore they appointed their Rendezvous at Liberton, whither Morton only
came. The Earl of Athole (whither through his natural slownesse or
fearfulness) by his not keeping that appointment, caused the rest to break
also, and to stay still at The Queen and Bothwel at Borthwick
Stirlin. The Lord Hume in hope to have been seconded, went directly to
Borthwick, and lay about the Castle, but seeing no appearance of their coming,
he kept such negligent watch, that the Queen and Bothwell escaped, and went
back to the Castle of Dumbar. The Lords thus frustrated, went to Edinburgh to
practice the Citizens there, and to draw them to their side, which they easily
effected. The Castle was kept by Sir James Belfoure (whom Bothwell had made
Captain thereof, and who had been his intimate friend, and pr^vie to all his
secrets: But upon some distaste or distrust, Bothwell had sought to put him out
of the place; which he finding, had made himself full Master thereof: and he
was now entered in terms of agreement, and capitulation with the Lords to put
it into their hands, but had not yet concluded and transacted with them. There
were in the City at this time of the other party, John Hamilton Bishop of S.
Andrews, the Earl of Huntley, and the Bishop of Rosse John Lesly. These when
they heard that the Lords were come into the City, came forth into the Street,
hoping the Citizens would assist them and help them to expel the Lords; but
when they saw that few or none did resort to them, they fled to the Castle,
where they were received (the Captain thereof not having as yet agreed with the
Lords) and some few days after were let out at a posterne, and so escaped. In
the (...) hill.
mean time the Queen had sent abroad to assemble her forces. There came to her
out of Lowthian, the Lords Seton, Yester, and Borthwick, small Barons,
Waughton, Basse, and Ormeston. Out of the Merse, Sir David Hume of Wedderburne,
with his Uncle Blackader, notwithstanding their Chief the Lord Hume, and his
Cousin German Morton, were on the other side. Besides these, they had 200.
hired Soldiers under the leading of Captain Anstrudder, mounting in all to
2000. and 500. with these they set forward from Dumbar, with intention to go to
Leith, that so they might be nearer the enemy, and lose no opportunity of
taking advantage of them. A wrong course; and ill advised: Whereas if they had
but stayed a space in the Castle of Dumbar, the Lords not having sufficient
forces to assault them there, nor Ordnance, or any other necessary provision
for a seige, had been constrained to disperse themselves, and retire home to
their own houses. Which if they had done, they might easily have been
overthrown being separated and scattered, before they could have joined their
forces again. But there is a directour of all things, who had not ordained that
Bothwell should prosper in his ways; which fell out also by his own temeritie,
and the counsel of Master Edmond Hay (his Lawyer) who is said to have advised
him thus, alleging that the Lords neither would nor durst abide their coming,
but would presently flee upon the first noise of their approach; and that if
they did but once show themselves in the fields, the Commons would all come
flocking to them. But it fell out clean contrary, for neither did the people
concur with them (because they hated Bothwell) and the Lords having once
taken Arms, were enforced by necessity to fight for their own safety. Their
number was about some 2000. most part Gentlemen of good quality and rank; of
the which, the chief were Morton, Mar, (...), Glencairne, Montrose; the
Lords, Hume, Lindsay, Ruthven, Semple, and Sanwhere; Small Barons, Cesford,
Drumlenrigge, Tillebardine, Grange. They had no Artillery, neither any
Musketeers, save a few from Edinburgh. They caused to be drawn on their
ensigns, the late King lying dead, and his young son the Prince James sitting
on his knees, with his hands heaved up to Heaven with this Motto, Judge and
revenge my cause, O LORD. While they were in Edinburgh, word was brought to
them about midnight, that the Queen and Bothwell were come to Seton and
Salt-Preston, within six miles of them. Whereupon they made haste, and having
armed, went speedily toward Muscleburgh, lest the enemy should seize the
Bridge and Foords of the River which was within two miles of Preston. So having
passed it without disturbance a little after the Sunrising, finding that the
enemy did not stir, they took their refreshment, and broke their fast at
leisure. Not long after, those whom they had sent before to currie the fields,
and to give notice what the enemy was about, having perceived a few horsemen
without the village; drove them back again, but not daring to follow them for
fear of some ambuscade, could learn nothing else, save that the enemy was
ready to march. Hereupon the Lords also began to set forward toward them, and
being now without the Town of Muscleburgh they perceived the enemy, ranged in
order of battle all along Carburie hill, ready to encounter The (...) of
Carburie hill.
them. The hill was steep, and the ascent difficult on that side, wherefore
they turned a little to the right hand, where they might with more ease and
less disadvantage ascend, the hill being there much plainer* and the ground
more level. This deceived the enemy, who seeing them turn aside, supposed they
had fled to Dalketh, which belonged to Morton, and lay on that hand. But they
being come where they would have been, set their men in order, having the Sun
on their backs, and in the face of the enemy, which was no small advantage,
for the day was exceeding 1567. June the 5.
hot, being the fifth of June 1567. besides, the Townes-men of Dalkeeth did
furnish them sufficiently with drink, together with other villages that lay on
that hand. But on Bothwels side it was not so, there was no such alacrity and
readiness in the people to supply them; no foresight in themselves to provide,
no cheerfulness in the Army, but most of them wavering between their duty to
the Queen, and their suspicion of Bothwels guiltiness. Yet did they not offer
to forsake her, neither would they have done it for any thing we hear of, if
Bothwell durst have stood to it. But his self-accusing conscience, struck his
mind with such terror and dread, that knowing what he had deserved, he judged
other men's minds to be accordingly affected toward him; and seeing head made
against him beyond his expectation, he began to doubt of the fidelity of those
that were come to take part with him. Especially he distrusted Sir David Hume
of Wedderburne, in regard of his friendship and Kindred with the Lord Hume, and
Earl of Morton. Wherefore he moved the Queen to ask him whether he would abide
constantly by her, and perform his part faithfully. He answered freely, that
he was come to serve her, as his Sovereign out of duty, and in sincerity,
which he would do to the utmost of his power, against whomsoever, without
respect of whatsoever friendship or kindred with any. Blackader said the like,
and added withal, speaking to Bothwell, I wish my Lord, you stay as well by
it, as we shall. That which made them the more to fear Sir David was, because a
servant of his, as he went to drink at a well not far from the enemy, was
taken, and brought to Morton, who hearing whose man he was, dismissed him, and
bade him tell his Master from him; That if he were the man he should be, he
alone might put an end to that days work, which is like enough he might have
done, if either he would have revolted to the Lords, or forsaken Bothwell, and
gone home. The rest of the Nobles and Gentlemen being in like manner exhorted
by the Queen to fight valiantly, promised that for their own parts they would
do it faithfully, but they said, the hearts of the common Soldiers were averse
from Bothwell; and thought it more reasonable that he should adventure his own
Person in his own quarrel for maintaining his innocence, than that either her
Majesty, or so many of her good Subjects should adventure or endanger their
lives for him. But if she were resolved to try the hazard of a battle, it was
her best to defer it till the next day, that the Hamiltons, who were on their
journey, might join with them. As they were about to join battle, the French
Ambassador ( La Croque) would have mediated a Peace, and came to the Lords,
promising to obtain their pardon at the Queens hands for what was past, and
that none of them should ever be called in question for their taking Arms
against her, so that they would now lay them down, and proceed no further:
Morton made answer, that they had not taken Arms against the Queen, but
against Bothwell, who had murdered their King, whom if her Majesty would be
pleased to abandon, they would quickly make it appear, that they desired
nothing more than to continue in all dutiful obedience and allegiance to her,
as became Loyal Subjects; but so long as Bothwell remained unpunished, they
could not in duty and conscience be so forgetful of their late King, as not to
avenge his murder. La Croque not being able to persuade them, retired to
Edinburgh. All hope of peace and agreement being cut off, Bothwell being
jealous of his Soldiers, and either intending in good earnest to fight, or for
a Bravado, sent a Trumpet to the Lords to declare his innocence, in confidence
whereof, if any would accuse him, and stand to his allegation, he was ready to
maintain his cause against whosoever would attach him, in Duel, and single
Combat. There were two of the Lords faction that undertook to make it good
against him, William Kirkadic of Grange, and James Murray brother to
Tilliberdine; but he rejected these as not being his equals, and Peers, he
being an Earl, and they but Gentlemen only. Wherefore he challenged Morton by
name. He accepted of the challenge, and appointed the Weapons two-handed
Swords, and to fight on foot. But the Lord Lindsay stepping forth, besought
Morton and the rest, that for all the service that ever his Predecessors, or
himself had done, or could do unto the country, that they would do him that
honor as to suffer him to undertake that Combat; which he said did also duly
belong unto him, in regard of his nearness in blood to the defunct King. They
condescended, and Bothwell having nothing to accept against him, they prepared
on both sides. Morton gave Lindsay the Sword which had been Earl Archbalds
(called commonly Bell the Cat) wherewith he cut asunder Spenses thigh, as is
showed in his life. With this (which Lindsay wore ever after*) and a buckler,
as the manner then was, he presents himself before the Army, to attend Bothwels
coming. But the Queen would not suffer him to fight, and interposing her
authority, commanded him to desist. Then she sent a He^auld to the Lords,
requiring them to send Grange to her, that she might confer with him, and
that in the mean time the Army should stand quiet. While the Queen did Parley
with Grange, Bothwell (as it had been fore-plotted) conveyes himself secretly
out of the Army, and fled to Dumbar. When the Queen had talked so long with
Grange, as that Bothwell had time enough to escape, and be out of their reach,
free from all danger of being overtaken, she went with him to the Lords; and
desiring them to suffer her Army to depart in safety (which they easily
granted) she dismissed them. Then she requested, that she might go to the
Hamiltons, who were not far off, at Corstorphing, to give them thanks for
their good will, promising faithfully to return, whereupon she desired Morton
to pass his word, and be surety for her. A strange request for her to ask in
such a case; far stranger for them to have granted, or for Morton to have
undertaken that which lay not in his power to* see performed. Bothwell had
escaped to their great grief and coffeehouse; the Queen only remained, the
pledge of peace, and foil of their enemies, who wanting her did want a head.
Therefore her suite was denied, and she brought to Edinburgh.

There a consultation was held, what were fittest to be done with her. Amongst
great diversity of opinions, Morton would by no means yield to have her life
meddled withal, desiring only that some such course might be taken, as that
the professed Religion might not be prejudiced, and that they themselves might
be secured from future danger. Yet there were some that pressed the matter very
hard against him, alleging that there was no possibility, either to preserve
Religion, or secure themselves, so long as she were alive. Promises were to no
purpose, and of no value. They might be easily eluded, as proceeding from a
just fear, and compulsion, as they would call it. And to imprison her were no
better* seeing there would not want a party ere long to set her free. And
though there were no party, yet she her self might use means to escape, and
others might help her; yea, without all these, time and occasion would work her
delivery. Nay some went so far with him, as to denounce GODS judgments against
him, as a hinderer of the execution of justice, which he himself should feel
upon his own person, because he would not give way to it in the person of
another. For it is but justice (said they) else if it be unlawful, so is this
detaining of her unlawful, and whatsoever we have done is unlawful, and flat
treason. All this notwithstanding, Morton would not consent unto it, but made
answer, That howsoever they had gone thus far being drawn to it by
necessity, for the preservation of Religion, the good of their Country, their
own honor and credit, and even led by nature to look to their own safety, yet
they ought not to meddle with the life of their Soveraign^. To secure
themselves, it was sufficient to have her kept in some place of surety and
strength, which he thought even too much, if he could see any other remedy.
And so it was concluded, that she should be sent to Logh-leven, there to be
kept by William Douglas owner thereof, a very honest Gentleman, and who had
sided with neither Party.

And although the same matter was agitate again, while she remained in
Logh-leven (the 25. of August, at a solemn meeting of the Estates, after
Murray was come home, and had accepted the Regencie) and many did incline to
have her executed, (some out of zeal to Religion, and love of Justice, as they
deemed it) some out of love to the Hamiltons, (who by her death would be but
one step from the Crown) yet Morton stuck to his former opinion and resolution:
She was no sooner committed, but some began to plot her deliverie; supposing
that undoubtedly she would get out at last by one mean or other, they strove to
anticipate her favor, and make her beholding to them for that which could not
fail to come to pass. Neither did they fear the consequent, if once she were
set at liberty, for they made no question to make their party good. The
authority was hers, time would make the peoples heart to relent and fold to
their natural Princess; the Faction that was against her, was the weaker; and
diversity of opinions would bring forth division amongst them.

Of those that sought her favor, Sir William Metellane Secretary was one. His
dis-like and hatred of Bothwell, had made him join with the Lords: being now
rid of him, he returned to his old byas again, and bent his course toward her.
But not daring to do it openly, he wrote privately to her, and assured her of
his good will, and promised his best endeavor to serve her; and that howsoever
his power were none of the greatest, he showed that he might prove steadable to
her by the Apologue of the Lion, which being taken in a net, was delivered from
thence by the help of a Mouse, that did shear the net, and cut it in pieces
with her teeth.

Morton did constantly prosecute the course begun, with great courage and
wisdom, overcoming all difficulties before the Earl of Murrays return (who
had gone to France in the beginning of these stirs) which were neither small,
nor few. His Associates found them more than they had expected. They had
promised themselves the approbation of all men, and that all would join with
them, at least, the best affected. It fell out otherwise; time diminished
envy, change of their Princes estate begat pity, fear of the event kept
aloof; doubt of duty restrained some, and desire of rest and security,
others. So that no new Forces came to them; but on the contrary, some of their
own side forsook them, and went to the other; new hopes not only cooling, but
even changing their affections. Wherefore they were much perplexed, and had it
not been for Morton, they had quite deserted the cause. But he persuaded them
to keep together at Edinburgh, and to write to the other Lords that were
assembled at Hamilton, to desire them to come to Edinburgh, that so they might
consult together what were fittest to be done for the good and peace of the
Kingdom. But they would neither receive Letter nor Message, saying, It was
great presumption in them to have possessed themselves of the chief City, and
to offer to send for them, and not to come to them, who were (so they thought)
the stronger, and had the better cause. The others to give them satisfaction in
that point, caused the Ministers of Edinburgh to write to them jointly, as also
severally to their particular friends and acquaintance, both to excuse that
which they took exception at, (which they told they had done, not because they
did challenge or claim any preeminence or prerogative to themselves beyond
them, or for any other cause, save only the conveniencie of the place for both
parties to meet in) and withal to exhort them, that in so perilous a time,
setting aside all particular respects and quarrels, they would have a care of
the common good of the Country. But these Letters prevailed no more than the
former. Yet though they would not concur with them, they did nothing against
them; whether because they were not able (they being within the town of
Edinburgh) or, because they did not agree among themselves, or that they wanted
a Commission, and a sufficient Warrant from the Queen, they dissolved, and
returned every man to his own home. This their attempt to have kept some form
of meeting and Parliament in the Queens name, admonished the Lords to take away
that which would bear greatest show against them, the Queens authority.
Wherefore they deal with her to resign it to her son, which she was very
loath to do; yet at last she consented to it, and having subscribed a formal
renunciation and dimission: she made also, and signed a Procuration, or
Letters of Attorney, to cause crown her son at Stirlin, or where they
pleased. She named likewise his Curators, Murray (if he would accept of it at
his return) failing him, these seven; The Duke ( Hamilton) Lennox (the Childs
grandfather) Argyle, Morton, Glencairne, Mar, and Athole. It was presently
put in execution, for within two days (the 26. of July) the Prince was King
James crowned.
crowned at Stirlin, being then thirteen months, and eight days old. Morton
and the Lord Hume took the Oath for him, that he should observe 1567. July 26.
the Laws, and maintain the Religion then professed. Master Knox made the
Sermon, the Coronation was also performed by him, and two Super-intendents.

Having gained this point, they had now this advantage of the others, that not
only were their enemies deprived of the countenance and color of authority,
but they themselves were armed therewith. And thus they remained till Murrays
return, who at first would not accept of the Place, which by the Queens
direction was reserved for him, but being pressed by the rest, that they might
have an established and certain Murray Regent.
Head, he yielded to their requests, and took the Place and charge of Regent
uponhim. From this time forward, Murray being Regent, according as did belong
unto his place, he was chief Commander in every thing; yet was he assisted by
Mortons faithful counsel and advice, who did also many times supply the
public wants with his private means, in times of greatest necessity.
Especially when Bothwell was to be pursued, who having put forth to Earl
Bothwel a Pirate.
sea, and being turned Pirate, lay about Orknay, robbing all that came in his
way, without fear of being followed, knowing well that there was no money in the
treasury (he himself having emptied it) to rig out any shipping against him.
Then did Morton on his own charges provide Vessels, hire Mariners and
Soldiers to go out after him. This was the fruit of his good husbandry, and
the good use he made of his parsimonie and menagerie. Grange was sent Admiral,
who came so suddenly Is pursued.
upon him, that he had well-nigh taken him before he was aware, yet he escaped
in a light Pinnace over a craig in the sea, with such hazard, that it is
thought to have grazed upon it. The Lion which followed after, being a Ship of
greater bulk and burden, and which drew more water, stuck fast upon it, so that
the men were constrained to betake themselves to their Cock-boat. The Bishop of
Orknay ( Bothwell to his name, who was father to the Lord Haly-rudehouse) was
last in the Ship, and seeing the Boat loosing, called to them to stay for him;
but they being already sufficienrly laden, would not hear him. He seeing no
other remedy, leapt into the Boat, having on him a Corselet of proof, which was
thought a strange leap, especially not to have over-turned the Boat. Thus the
men were all saved, and the Earl Bothwell sailed to Denmark. There being
examined what he was, and whence he came: when he did not answer clearly and
distinctly, he Flees to Denmark.
was cast into prison, and having lien there ten years, at last he died mad.
Dies mad there.


The 15. of December, a Parliament was held at Edinburgh, where most part of
the Nobility were present, and amongst others, the Earl of Huntley, which
when the Queen heard of, she said, Bothwell might as well have been there, as
he; meaning that they were both alike guilty. In this Parliament, the Queens
resignation of the Crown, the Kings Coronation, and Murrays Regencie were
confirmed, their Fact was approved that had taken the Queen at Carburie, and
William Douglas was authorized to keep her still in the Castle of Loghleven.

Things being thus settled, the Regent being acknowledged of all, and his
authority ratified, Religion established, and the fear of Bothwel removed,
they seemed to be in great surety, yet were they never less sure; for these
very things which seemed to make them strong and sure, were the causes of
change, for many did envy the Regent, some hated Religion, and others there
were, that being rid of Bothwell, applied themselves to the Queen, whom only
out of hatred to Bothwell, they had forsaken. Of the last sort was Secretary
Metellane, of the second Tillebardin, who had also some particular against the
Regent, which Writers do not specify. The Hamiltons were of the first Rank,
who thought themselves injured by him, and esteemed his Office due to them,
together with Argyle, whose mother and Huntley, whose wife was of the house of
Hamilton. These had some hopes from France, where Beton Archbishop of Glasgow,
lay as Lieger for the Queen, and fed them with fair promises of men and money.
Yet they carried things very closely, and made show of friendship to those of
the Kings side, till such time as the Queen escaped out of Loghleven, by the
means of George Douglas brother to William of Loghleven, and to the Regent also
by his mother. This George had corrupted a natural brother of his who was
often trusted by William with the Keys of the Castle. One day William being at
dinner, this man desired the Keys of him (as he had done diverse times before)
to let out the Queens waiting Gentlewoman; and having gotten them, he let out
the Queen her self in her Gentlewomans apparel, and masked. He also went out
with her, and having locked the Gates, threw the Keys into the Lake, and rowed
the Queen over in the Boat to the Lake side, where George and Tillibarne were
staying for her with nine horse only. Our Writers say, it was without the
mothers knowledge; but others affirm, that she had a hand in it, being moved
with pity and commiseration to see her Princess in such estate; and upon the
Queens promise to prefer her son George, The Queen escapes out of
Legh-leven.
and pardon her other friends that were on her contrary faction; amongst which
we hear no mention of Murray. Morton also was left out; only 1568. May 2.
it was agreed upon that his forfeiture should not prejudice their right to the
Earldom of Morton. This fell out the second day of May 1568.

She went that night to Nidderie, where by the way the Lord Seton, and John
Hamilton of Orbiston did meet her: and the next day they went to Hamilton with
500. horse. The Regent was then at Glasgow, keeping of justice Courts. When
these news were brought to him, some counseled him to go to Stirlin, where the
King was, and where he would be the stronger. But William Douglas of
Drumlenrig, not having the patience to stay till it came to his turn to speak,
and before his opinion was asked: If you do so my Lord (says he) I will get me
straight to the Queen, as Boyde has done. For Boyde indeed was gone to her,
with intention (as he would have made them believe) to play Husha's part; for
he wrote back to Morton by his son, that he would be more steadable, and do
them better service being with her, than if he should remain with them. There
is a Proverb, a foot backward, a mile backward, a mile a million, and so never
forward: Whereby is signified, that there is much moment in the beginnings and
first efforts, and great danger in recoiling, and letting slip the present
opportunity. So thought Drumlenrig, and the Lord Semple also was of his mind.
Morton did confirm their opinion, and reduced at large how necessary it was
for them to stay still in Glasgow, showing that it was their best to make all
the haste they could, and that their safety did consist in celeritie; in
regard that so soon as it were known that she was at liberty, the opinion of
her authority and name of a Queen would daily draw more and more followers to
her: especially seeing the most remote parts of the Kingdom were most
affectionated to her service. We are enough here (said he) together with the
Towns men (who being enemies to the Hamiltons, we need not doubt of their
fidelittie) to keep this place, and make it good against them. The Cunninghames
and Semples ( potent families) are hard at hand, and so is the Lennox, the
Kings own patrimony: Neither is Douglas-dale very far off, nor
Stirlin-Shire, and the Earl of Marres Forces. These will suffice to oppose the
enemy till such time as our friends that dwell further off, be advertised.
Mortons judgment was respected, and his opinion followed; whereupon messengers
were immediately dispatched, and sent into Lowthian, and the Merse, and other
parts which lay far off, to give them notice of their danger, and of their
intentions; and to desire them to make all the haste that possibly they could
to come to their aid, and assistance. The first that came was The field of
Langside the 10. of May. 1568.
the Lord Hume with 600. horse the ninth of May; upon his arrival, they
intended to go directly to Hamilton, and dare the enemy, and force him to
fight. But that same night (ere morning) word was brought them, that they were
gathering their forces, and mustering their men to take the fields; for having
gotten together 6000. men, and knowing by certain intelligence, that they were
not above 4000 with the Regent, confiding in their number, they purposed to
carry the Queen to the castle of Dumbartan, where she remaining in a place of
safety, they might manage, and prosecute the war according to their pleasure;
and either use expedition therein, or draw it out at length, and linger as they
should see cause, and find it most for their advantage. The Regent ghessing
what their aim was, led also his army forth into Glasgow-Moore, supposing
they would have gone that way: but when he saw them on the South side of the
river of Clide, he made haste, and crossed the river at the Bridge and Foords,
to be before them in their way. I have heard it reported by those that live
thereabout, that the Queens Soldiers did essay to pass the river, and come to
that side where the Regent was, but one or two of the foremost being slain by
his men, the rest refused to go on with such hazard and disadvantage, and
therefore they took the way of Rutherglem, which leads to Dumbartan. The Regent
perceiving their intent, commanded the horsemen to hye them quickly to Langside
Hill; which they did, and the rest of the Army followed them so fast, as that
they were all got thither, before the enemy understood their meaning. Two
things made for the Regents advantage; one was Argyles sickness, who being
overtaken with a sudden fit of an Epilepsie, or Apoplexy, the Army halted, and
thereby gave the Regent time to choose his ground, though he came a further way
about. The other was, their confidence in their number, and despising of the
small number of their enemies, who were indeed fewer than they, yet were they
more than they were aware of. For having marched over hills and dales, they never
had a full view of them to know their number aright and perfectly. When they
came within a little of the hill, perceiving that it was already taken by the
Regent, they retired to another little hill just over against it, where they
drew up their Companies, and put their men in order. Argyle was Lieutenant, and
led the Rere-ward. With him there was the Earls of Cassils, Eglinton, and
Rothuse, the Lords Seton, Somervaile, Yester, Borthwick, Sanwhere, Boyde, and
Rosse, with diverse Gentlemen of good quality. The Vant-guard was committed to
Claude Hamilton of Pasley son to the Duke, and Sir James Hamilton of
Evendale, consisting most of Hamiltons, together with their friends and
followers. James Stuart of Castleton, and Arthur Hamilton of Mirrinton, were
Commanders of the Musketeers, which were some 300. The Lord Harris commanded
the horsemen, which were most part Borderers, dependers and servants to his
brother the Lord Maxwell. The Regent did likewise divide his men in two
battles, the Vant-guard was conducted by Morton, with whom were the Lord Hume,
and Semple. The Regent himself was in the Rear, and with him Mar, Glencairne,
Monteith, the Lord Ruthven, Ochletree, and Kirkart, with the small Barons of
the Lennox, and the Citizens of Glasgow. The horsemen were committed to William
Douglas of Drumlenrig, and Alexander Hume of Manderston, and John Carmichell of
Carmichell. They were inferior in horse, and therefore upon the first
encounter they retired, and fell back to the footmen, who made out to succor
them, and drove back the enemies horse by the means of the High-Landers,
especially who bestowed a flight of arrows amongst them, and so galled them,
that they could no longer endure it. The Queens Vant-guard coming to join
battle with the Vant-guard of the enemy, marched through a narrow Lane, near
unto which the Regents shot were placed in the Yards, Gardens, and Orchards of
the Village of Langside so conveniently, that they being at covert did annoy
the enemy, and shoot at them as at a mark without any danger, or hurt to
themselves. In this Lane many were slain before they could get through; and
having passed it they were assaulted by Morton very fiercely with Pikes and
Spears, and other long Weapons on both sides of the Lane. They fought very
eagerly a while, in so much that when their long Weapons were broken, being so
close together, that they could not draw their Swords, they fell to it with
Daggers, and Stones, and and what so came readiest to hand. In the midst and
heat of the fight, Mackfarlane with his High-Landers fled out of the last Ranks
of the Regents Companies (as our Writers say) but indeed it was from this wing
where they were placed, as I have heard it of those that were present. The Lord
Lindsay, who stood next to him in the Regents own battle, when he saw them go
away; Let them go (says he) and be not afraid, I shall supply their place: and
withal stepping forward with his Company, charged the enemy afresh. Their long
Weapons being broken, and themselves well nigh overcome before, they were not
able to sustain a new impression, but turned their backs, and fled. The Regent
and his Squadron stood still and kept their Ranks and places, till they saw
that the victory was clearly theirs, and that the enemy did flee disorderly;
then they also brake their order and followed the chase, in the which more were
killed, than in the fight; and that most part by the High-Landers: who seeing
that their side had the day, returned and made great slaughter to make amends
for their former fleeing. There were many wounded, and many taken, but 300.
slain, who had been many more, had not the Regent sent horsemen throughout all
quarters with command to spare the fleers. There were taken of note, The Lord
Seton, and Rosse, Sir James Hamilton, the Sheriff of Air, and Linlithgow with
others. On the Victors side one man only slain, John Balonie of Preston in the
Merse, a servant of Mortons: few hurt, the Lord Hume with a stone on the face
very ill: and Andrew Stuart Lord Ochletree, by the Lord Harris. The Queen, who
stood as a spectatour about a mile off, seeing the field lost, fled away with
the Lord Harris, and his horsemen. For after he was repulsed by the Regents
Vant-guard, and the HighLanders, he went to her, and stayed by her. From thence
she fled to England, suspecting the Lord Harris his fidelity. Some do reckon
amongst the causes of this victory, a contention which fell out between John
Stuart, and Arthur Hamilton, two Captains of the Queens Musketeers, who that
morning before they set out, strove for precedencie, and the matter being
referred to the Queens decision, she adjudged it to Stuart for the names sake
and because he had been sometime Captain of her Guard. Hamilton took this so
ill, that when they came near to the enemy, he cried out aloud, Where are now
these Stuarts that did contest for the first place, let him now come and take
it. The other hearing him, answered presently: Langsidelord.
And so I will, neither shall thou, nor any Hamilton in Scotland set his foot
before May 13. 156^.
me to day: whereupon they rushed forward unadvisedly, and were followed as
inconsiderately by Claude Hamilton of Pasley, with the Vantguard, which was the
occasion of their disconfiture. The battle was fought the 13. of May, eleven
days after the Queen came out of Loghleven. The Regent returned to Glasgow,
and after public thanksgiving for the victory, and mutual congratulation,
the rest of the day was spent in taking order with the prisoners. Morton sought
to have had the Lord Seton in his keeping, but he was withstood by Andrew Ker
of Fadunside, whose prisoner he was, whether out of fear of hard dealing
toward him, or lest he should lose his thanks in saving of him, wherefore
Morton modestly desisted.

The day after they went into Cliddesdale, and cast down Draphan, and some
Houses that belonged to the Hamiltons. Afterward there was a day appointed for
a Convention of the Estates at Edinburgh, for staying of which the other
faction did use all possible means. They caused rumors to be spread of some
help to come out of France; which had come indeed under the conduct of Martige
(of the House of Luxemburg) but that the Civil Wars at home made him to be
called back again. The Earl of Argyle came to Glasgow with 600. horse, and had
some conference with the Hamiltons, and others of that faction, but they not
agreeing, he went home again and did nothing. Huntley also with 1000. men was
coming toward Edinburgh, and was on his journey as far as the water of Erne;
but the Bridges and Foords being guarded by the Lord Ruthven, he went likewise
home again. Last of all they procured Letters from the Queen of England, in
which she desired that they would delay the meeting till such time as she were
informed of their proceedings, and justness of their cause, why they took Arms
against their Queen her Cousin, of whose wrongs she behooved to take notice,
and be sensible. It was hard to offend her, but harder to suffer their
adversaries to gain the point they aimed at, which was in the Queens name, and
by her authority to keep a meeting, and to forfeit all those who were on the
K. side, having already appointed a day for that purpose. Wherefore they go on
with their Convention, and punish some few for example to terrify others. And
for suppressing the daily incursions of the Niddisdale, Anandale, and Galloway
men, they raised an Army of 5000. horse, and 1000. Musketeers; which
expedition, because it was memorable for the extreme scarcity of victuals
when they came to Hoddam, was called, The Road of Hoddam.
The Road of Hoddam: They set forth from Edinburgh the 11 of June, and
returned thither again the 26.

The chief thing that they did in that journey, was, that they seized the
houses of Bog-hall, Crawford, Sanwhere, Logh-wood, Hoddam, Logh-Maban, and
Annand. Logh Maban is a house of the Kings, and was then in the Lord Maxwels
keeping: but now being surrendered, Drumlenrigge is made keeper of it, who was
also made Warden of the West Marches. As Soon as the Regent was gone from
thence with his Army, Maxwels folks, who had hidden themselves in some secret
corner of the Castle, turned out Drumlenrigges men, and re-possessed themselves
thereof again. Logh-wood belonged to Johnston, Hoddam to the Lord Harris, and
the rest to their several Lords and Owners, which were all spared, on hope of
their promised obedience: Only Skirlin was razed, and Ken-Moore, a house of
Loghen-varres, who was obstinate, and would not yield upon any condition. The
Regent and Morton sent Sir David Hume of Wedderburne to him, who was brother to
his wife, but no entreatie nor threatening could prevail with him, or move him
to submit himself: When they threatened to pull down his house, he said, They
should by so doing save him a labor; for he meant to take it down himself,
and build it up again better: Which was performed on both sides: for it was
cast down (the 16 of July) and he did afterward re-edifie it much better. Many
yielded, diverse stood out, of whom there came a thousand within a mile of the
Regents Camp. Who were their heads, is not mentioned, but as yet Maxwel,
Johnston, Loghen-varre, and Cowehill were not come in; and whether it were any
of these, or some other, we have not learned. Morton and the Lord Hume with a
thousand horse went out against them, but they were gone before they came
near, and fled to the Boggs and waste Marshes.

In their return, at Peebles they received Letters again from the The Regent
goes to England.
Queen of England, wherein she renewed her former request to them, that they
would send some up to her to inform her of the equity of their cause. The
Regent himself undertakes the journey, with whom went Morton, Lindsay, the
Bishop of Orknay, Master Pitcarne Abbot of Dumfermeling, Sir William Metellan
Secretary, Master James Mackgill, Master Henry (...), and Master George
Buchanan. The Queen having heard their Justification and Defenses, made
answer, That she saw nothing for the present to object against their
proceedings, yet she desired them to leave some of their company behind, to
answer to such things as might be objected afterward by their Queens
Ambassadors. While they are there, Duke Hamilton came over out of France, and
desired the Queen of England to cause Murray give over the Regents place to
him, being (as he alleged) his due, seeing he was next heir to the Crown.
But the Queen perceiving that he intended to make some stir, and to raise new
troubles in Scotland, commanded him to stay, and not depart till he were
licensed. The Regent with his company was dismissed, and returned into Scotland
the 2 of February. Within a while after, the Duke returned also, being made
Lieutenant for the imprisoned Queen, and adopted to be her father. He sent
forth his Proclamations, commanding that no authority should be obeyed, but
his, which no man would obey: And that none might fear him, the Regent went to
Glasgow with an Army, and there Hamilton came to him, and promising to
acknowledge the King and Regents authority, he gave pledges to be kept, till
such time as he should do it, prefixing a day when he would come in. When the
day was come, he came to Edinburgh, and began to shift, and desire a longer
day, while he might have the Queens consent. Then being asked what he would do
if the Queen would not give her consent; he answered, that he would do nothing,
and what he had done already, he had done it out of fear. Hereupon he and the
Lord Harris were sent to prison in the Castle of Edinburgh. The next to be
taken order with, were Argyle, and Huntley. Both had been busy in the Regents
absence, but not alike. Argyle had only shown himself in the fields, but had
done hurt to no man. Huntleys case was worse, he had vexed the Mernes and
Angus, made Lieutenants about the water of Dee, and behaved himself in all
things as if he had been King. After much debate, Argyle was only made to take
an oath, that he should be obedient in time coming, and Huntley was also
pardoned, save that he was ordained to make satisfaction and restitution to the
parties who were robbed and spoiled by him and his followers. For the
performance of which, the Regent and Morton went to Aberdene, Elgin, and
Inner-nesse, with two Companies of Harquebusiers, and Musketeers, where having
received hostages and sureties of Huntley, they return to Perth, to hold a
Convention of the States.

Thither were brought two Packets of Letters from the two Queens. 1569.
A Convention at Perth.
The Queen of England made three Propositions. First, that the Kings Mother
might be restored to her former Place and Crown. Secondly, that if they would
not yield to that, yet that her name might be used in all Writs, and joined
with her sons, and that the Government should continue in the Regents hands.
The third and last was, that if none of these could be granted, she might be
suffered to live a private life, as another subject, with as much respect and
honor as could be given to her, without prejudice of the King. This last was
accepted, the rest rejected. Queen Mary in her Letters desired, that the Judges
might determine of her marriage with Bothwel, and if it were found to be
unlawful, that they would declare it to be null, and pronounce her free from
him. To this they answered, that they saw no reason of such haste. He being
absent, and out of the Country beyond sea, the laws allowed him threescore
days* after he was summoned at the shore and Peer of Leith; before which time
were expired, the Judges could not give out any sentence. But if she had such a
mind to be rid of him, her shortest cut were to write to the King of Denmark,
to execute him for his murder and Piracie. The reason why they would not have
her marriage with Bothwel dissolved, was, to hinder her matching with the Duke
of Northfolk, who would not adventure upon uncertainties; and he could not be
sure, so long as her marriage with Bothwel stood firm; he being alive, and no
legal divorcement had bin yet obtained. So they thought by this dilator, they
would gain time, and time might work out some better effect than did appear for
the present. For the Regents friends in England had written to him, That
Northfolks Plot and the Queens, was so laid, so strong and cunningly
conveyed, that no power, wit, or wisdom was able to resist it; yea, though
all the rest of Britain would oppose it, yet he remained steadfast, and sent
to the Queen of England one of his Domestics, to acquaint her with Queen
Mary's Petition, and their answer. But she not being satisfied with the Bearer,
Robert Pitcarne (Abbot of Dumfermling) was sent to her from a Convention holden
at Stirlin for the nonce. About the very same time that he came to London, the
Duke of Northfolke was committed to the Tower (the 11. of October) and the
conspiracy discovered, the party still remaining so strong, that she not
daring to meddle with Queen Mary, was purposed to have sent her into Scotland
by sea; but things beginning to settle, she altered that resolution. Now in
confidence of this so strong a party, Secretary Metellane had taken himself to
that side, and stirred up all he could against the Regent. He had so dealt with
the Lord Hume, and Grange (Captain of the Castle of Edinburgh) that he
Convention at Stirlin.
had brought them over to that party. Hereupon he is sent for to Stirlin,
whither he came, and brought along with him, the Earl of Athole to intercede
for him, if need were. There Thomas Crawford (afterward Captain Crawford) a
follower of the Earl of Lennox, accused him of being accessarie to the late
Kings death; whereupon he was committed to a close chamber in the Castle. Sir
James Balfoure (one of his Accomplices) was also sent for, and the Convention
were of opinion, that both of them should be used as enemies to the King, and
guilty of treason. But the Regents lenity marred all; he pardoned Sir James,
and sent Metellane to Edinburgh, to be kept by Alexander Hume of North-Berwick.
Grange counterfeiting the Regents hand, brought a Warrant to Alexander, to
deliver Metellane to him, which he did; and so Grange carried him up to the
Castle.

After this, the Regent went to the Merse, and spoke with the Lord Hume, whom
he found to be alienate from the Kings side, and inclined to the North-folcian
Faction. From thence he went to Jedburgh, where Morton and others came to him.
He past with them to Hawick (the 20. of October) and from thence he rode
through the whole Dales; he riding on the Scottish side upon the Borders, and a
Company of Englishmen on the English side, that they might not flee from one
side to another, nor any of them escape. He lay two nights at Cannabee, one at
Copshae-holme, two on the water of Milk, and so came to Dumfreis. In this
circuit he constrained the Borderers to put in pledges and hostages (to the
number of 72.) for keeping of the peace and good order, whereby he gave great
contentment to the whole Country, and gained great reputation and admiration,
even of his very enemies. He returned to Edinburgh before the 21. of November,
the day appointed for the trial and arraignment of Secretary Metellane. There
finding that he had assembled so many great men that were for him (Hamilton,
Huntley, Argyle, and others) he adjourned the arraignment, and deferred the
judgment. That Faction was now become very powerful; many were fallen off
from the Regent; many had joined themselves to the North-folcians, relying
mainly on the Dukes power. And although he were now committed, yet the Faction
held good, and the plot went on. The Earls of Northumberland, and Westmerland,
with six thousand Foot, and two thousand Horse, came with displayed Banner to
Durham, and there burnt the Bible and Service Book, heard Mass in Darnton, and
besieged Bernard-Castle, which was rendered upon composition. But being pursued
by the Earl of Warwick, with an Army of twelve thousand, and Sussex with
another of seven thousand men, they were forced to flee into Scotland about the
22. of December, and put themselves into the hands of thieves that lived on the
Scottish Border, with whom they abode and lurked a while, but not very long.
For Morton dealt with one Hector Arme-strang, by Sir John Carmichael, and got
the Earl of Northumberland into his hands, and delivered him to the Regent;
The Earl of Northumberland taken, and sent to Logh-lev^n.
he sent him to be kept in Logh-leven a prisoner, being an enemy no less to
him and the Kings side, than to Queen Elizabeth.

This made her give the better ear to Robert Pitcarne, Ambassador from the
Regent, and to desist from requesting any more, that Queen Mary might be
restored again to her former place and estate. She declared also, that she
took that which the Regent had done very kindly in pacifying the Borders,
apprehending Northumberland, and imprisoning of him, pursuing Westmerland and
his Faction, as enemies, his offering his best aid and assistance to her
Captains and Governor of Berwick. She promised to be ever mindful of these
his good offices, and good will showed toward her, and that she should be
ready to aid him when he should need; yea, that he might use and command all
the Forces in England as his own. Thus by the overthrow of the English Rebels,
by the favor of the Queen of England, and the love of his Country people at
home, the Regent was more strengthened, and the Kings side became the more
powerful. His adversaries therefore seeing no other remedy resolved to cut
him off, and make him away by treachery. James Hamilton of Bothwell-hawke, (one
whose life the Regent had spared before, when he was taken prisoner in the
field bearing arms against him) under-took to kill him. Wherefore having
watched his opportunity, when the Regent was at Lithgow, he placed himself in
a house there, by which the Regent was to pass as he rode out of the town, and
shot him with an Harquebuse out at a window; the Bullet whereof, after it had
gone through the Regent, killed the Horse of George Douglas of Park-head, a
natural brother of the Earl Mortons. This The Regent Murray shot at Lithgow.
fell out the 21. of January 1569. The Regent finding himself hurt, alighted
from his horse, went to his lodging, and died ere midnight. Bothwell-hawke, who
had done the deed, having mounted upon a horse which he had ^nding ready for
him of purpose, escaped untaken.

He was much lamented of all, but especially of Morton, who had best reason to
be sensible of this loss, seeing by his death the common cause did want a main
pillar and supporter thereof; and the Kings side which he followed, was
deprived of a sufficient and able leader. He himself also had lost a dear
friend, with whom he had so long entertained honest and faithful friendship,
and who had borne so great a part of that heavy burden, and weight of State
affairs with him. For now the whole burden of guiding the Kingdom and managing
the State lay upon him almost alone, and that even in the time of the two
succeeding Regents, for the space of some three years, or thereby. They indeed
bare the name, and the authority, but he was the man by whose advice and
counsel, by whose travels and pains both of body and mind, yea and upon
whose charges also (often times) most things were performed, till at last he
himself was chosen Regent, and did then all things alone without a helper. This
was well known to all, and was plainly spoken in the time of Lennox his
Regencie. A staff under a Hood (so they termed Lennox.) Morton rules all. Yet
was it not so altogether, neither was Lennox so devoide of judgment, but
behaved himself very well, very judiciously, courageously, and courtiously
(even in Mortons absence) in the taking of Pasley and Dumbartan, and in his
courteous usage of the Lady Fleming, who was within the Castle of Dumbartan.
Only because matters seemed to rely most upon Mortons good advice, action, and
means; the ruder interpreters made that hard construction of it, as if Morton,
because he did much, had therefore done all, as commonly men are wont to judge
and speak. And it is very true that is said of Lennox in that Epitaph of him,
famam virtute resellit. Yet it cannot be denied, but that even while Murray was
Regent, Morton did very much; and though he were not equal with him in place
and dignity, for there was but one Regent, yet he was such a second as might
well be esteemed a yoke fellow both in consulting and performing, being a
partaker with him in all perrils and burdens. So that of all that is set down
here of Murray, Morton was ever an equal sharer, and may justly challenge the
one halfas his due. And therefore it is that we have been so particular, and
insisted so long in Murrayes actions, because of Mortons perpetual concurrence
with him in all things, and his interest in every business. Wherefore we hope
it will not be thought impertinent to our History thus to have handled them,
although Morton were not the sole actor, since he was a prime and maine one.
For whosoever will rightly consider, shall find that saying to be true of these
two, which Permenio said of Alexander and himself ( Nihil Alexander absque
Permenione, multa Permenio absque Alexandro) being applied to Morton. For
Morton did many things without Murray, but Murray nothing without Morton. And
thus it went even when Murray was alive, when all acknowledged his authority.

Now he being dead, many swarved, many made defection; and, as if they had
forgotten what they had promised, became open enemies. The Kings party was
weakened, the adverse party strengthened both by foreign and homebred power.
Fear might have terrified him, ease solicited, honor and profit allured him
to have left it, and joined with the other side. But he shrinks not for any
peril, hatred, or envy, for no pains or travel to be sustained, no case or
security could allure him, no hope of favor, of riches, of honor could move
him to abandon it. Which does evidently justify, and clear him of all the
imputations which the wit of man can devise, or imagine against him. Whether it
be that he conspired with Murray to make him King: he was now dead, and that
hope with him: Or if it be any particular end and aim of his own, what
appearance is there that he could have any private end, which he followed forth
with certain danger, and uncertain event, or profit? For clearing of which, let
us weigh the parties, and the forces and means at home and abroad on both
sides. First there were of the Queens side Duke Hamilton, Argyle, Athole,
Huntley, almost all petty Princes in their several Countries and Shires. Also
the Earls of Crawford, Rothuse, Eglinton, Cassils, the Lord Harris, with all
the Maxwels, Loghenvarre, Johnston, the Lord Seton, Boyde, Gray, Oglevie,
Levingston, Flemin, Oliphant, the Sheriff of Air, and Linlithgow, Balcleugh,
Fa^hast, and Tillibardine. The Lord Hume did also countenance them, though few
of his friends or name were with him, safe one mean man, Ferdinando of
Broom-house. Metellan the Secretary (a great Politician) and Grange an active
Gentleman, who was Captain of the Castle and Provest of the Town of Edinburgh;
they had the chief Castles and places of strength in their hands, Edinburgh,
Dumbartan, Logh-Maban. France did assist them, Spain did favor them, and so
did his Holiness of Rome, together with all the Roman Catholics every where.
Their faction in England was great, all the North-folcians, Papists, and
malcontents had their eye upon Queen Mary. Neither was she (though in prison)
altogether unusefull to her side: for besides her countenance, and color of
her authority (which prevailed with some) she had her rents in France, and her
Jewels, wherewith she did both support the common cause, and reward her private
servants and followers; especially they served her to furnish Agents and
Ambassadors to plead her cause, and importune her friends at the Court of
France, and England; who were helped by the banished Lords, Dacres, and
Westmoreland, to stir up foreign Princes all they could. Thus was that
party now grown great, so that it might seem both safe, and most advantageous
to follow it. The other was almost abandoned, there were but three Earls that
took part with Morton at first; Lennox, Mar, Glencairne. Neither were these
comparable to any one of the foremost four. In Fyfe there was the Lord
Lindsay, and Glames in Angus, no such great men, and no ways equal to
Crawford, and Rothuse. The Lord Semple was but a simple one in respect of
Cassils, Maxwell, Loghenvarre, and others. Methvaine in Stratherne a very mean
Lord; Ochletree amongst the meanest that bare the title of a Lord, and yet
Kirkart was meaner than he, both in men and means. Neither was Ruthven so
great, but that Tillibardine, and Oliphant were able to overmatch him. They had
no Castles but Stirlin and Tantallon, which belonged to Morton. The commons
indeed were very forwardly set that way, but how uncerraine and unsure a prop
is the vulgar? England did befriend them some times, but not so fully as they
needed; and even so far as did concern their own safety. So that when all is
duly considered, we shall not find any ground for one to build on, that would
seek nothing else, but his own private ends of honor or preferment. Wherefore
it is no wonder if Secretary Metellane, and Grange (men that sought themselves
only) did join with that party which was likest to thrive and prosper, in
all discourse of reason and humane wisdom. Neither can any man think that
Morton did aim at his own greatness, or that it was out of any self-respect
that he followed the other party with such disadvantage, if we will
acknowledge that he was a wise and judicious man. And therefore if we search
with an unpartiall eye, what could have been the motives that made him cleave
so steadfastly to this cause, we shall find them to have been no particular of
his own, nor any thing else besides the equity and justness thereof (as he
conceived) his love to the young King, as his King and Kinsman, together with
the preservation of Religion, and the welfare of his Country, which he thought
did stand, and fall with this quarrel and cause. This in all likelihood has
been his mind; which whether it was right or wrong, let them dispute who list:
our purpose is only to show so far as may be gathered by discourse of
reason, what it was that did induce him to follow this course.

Now although he had bent all his power and endeavors this way; yet there
lacked not some who did blame him, as not zealous enough to revenge Murrays
death. His brothers Uterine (Loghleven, and Buchain) craved justice against the
murderers; so much the rather, for that he was not slain for any private
quarrel or enmity, but for the public defense of the King and Country. When
it came to a consultation, some were of opinion, that those who were suspected,
should be summoned to appear against a certain day, according to custom, and
order of Law. Others again thought that such process and legal proceeding
needed not to be observed toward them, who had already taken arms to maintain
by force, what they had committed by treachery and treason, but that an Army
should be levied against them; and not only against them, but also against all
such as had been declared Rebels by the former Parliament. But Morton did not
like of this last course, nor Athole: because neither was that meeting frequent
enough to determine of those things: and besides, they foresaw that the joining
of many faults would take away or diminish, and make men forget the principal;
and to mingle other crimes with the murder, were but to make all the guilty,
in what ever kind, to join with the murderers, and so raise a general and
open insurrection, and a most dangerous Civil War. Wherefore they deferred
all till the first of May, the day appointed for a Convention, as also for
choosing of a new Regent. These delays were motioned by Secretary Metellane,
who (at Granges request, upon his oath that he was innocent of the Kings and
Regents murder, and of the Rebellion raised in England, and having found
sureties to appear, and answer whenever he should be legally pursued) was
released by the Nobility here conveened. For what ever respect Metellane made
this motion, Athole consented to it, and Morton also, because he saw there
could be no orderly proceeding at this time. This was ill taken of the vulgar,
who did interpret this delay, of which they knew Metellane to be author, to be
nothing else but a plot of his to gain time to strengthen his own faction; and
that Murrayes death might be forgotten, or at least the heat of revenging it
might cool, and relent, which they thought should not have been granted, and
given way to. This was done the 14. of February, the day after the Regents
Funeral.

The 15. of February, Argyle, and Boyde, wrote to Morton from Glasgow, where
the principal of the Queens side were conveened, that they were willing to
join with the rest of the Nobility against such as were guilty of the Regents
death; but because it was not yet perfectly known who they were, they desired
that they might meet, and confer about it, so that they of the Kings side
would come to Lithgow, or Fawkirk, or Stirlin, for they would not come to
Edinburgh. Morton did impart the business, and communicate these Letters with
Metellane (as they had wished him to do) but he refusing to meet any where else
save in Edinburgh, there was no meeting at this time. But afterward the 24. of
February, they came to Morton to Dalkeeth, and labored to persuade him to come
over to their side; but he was so far from listening to them, that he did
assure them, he would stand to the maintenance of the Kings authority to the
utmost of his power. It may be, some will think that this constancy did
proceed from distrust, according to that Pseudo politic and Machiavillian
maxim, qui offensa, non pardona, who once offends, never forgives: and that he
thought his fault so great in opposing the Queen, that it could not be
pardoned. But why should he have thought so? His was no greater, than were some
of theirs, who were pardoned, than the Lord Humes by name. And certainly by all
appearance, he could have made a far better mends: he might have put an end to
the controver^ie, and restored the Queen again to her own place, which might
have sufficiently expiated all his former transgressions. Wherefore we may
justly call it constancy, which was accompanied with courage, in undertaking so
hard and difficult a task, and with wisdom in atchieving, and bringing of it
through. In the beginning of March he went to Edinburgh, whither the principals
of the other party came also, Huntley, Crawford, Oglebee, and the Lord Hume,
Seton, and Metellane. There were but few with Morton, till Mar and Glencairne
came in to him. The next day after, they met to consult of business; but
because Argyle was absent (whose power was great) they could conclude nothing.
Wherefore Huntley goes to him, with intention to bring him along with him, but
he came back without him, which every body thought was done by Metellans
cunning, who hindered all agreement, that he might the better fish in troubled
waters. The night following, these Lords, who were on the Queens side, took
such a sudden apprehension, and panick fear, without any apparent cause, that
having watched all the night in their Arms, they departed next morning, without
order, and very dismayedly.

About the end of April 1570. the Earl of Mar set forth from Convention at
Edinburgh, 1. May.
Stirlin to Edinburgh against the 1. of May, which was the day appointed for a
Convention of the States; but the Lords of the contrary party lay in his way
at Linlithgow. Wherefore Morton goes forth to meet him with 500. horse, and
1000. foot, so that Mar having crossed the water of Aven a good way above
Linlithgow, they joined their Troops, and came both safe to Edinburgh the 29.
of April, about twelve a Clock at night. Thus were the two parties, the one at
Linlithgow, the other at Edinburgh; each accusing other and blaming other as
authors of dissension; yet they at Edinburgh offered to yield unto any thing,
and to come to any terms of agreement, which might not be prejudicial to the
K. authority, and upon condition that they would assure them of their
concurrence to avenge the late Kings, and Murrayes slaughter. But they were so
far from accepting of these conditions, that on the contrary they chose three
Lieutenants for the Queen, Arran, Argyle, and Huntley, they appointed also a
Parliament to be held in her name the 3. or 4. of August at Linlithgow. In this
mean time, Sir William Drury with 300. horse, and 1000. foot came into Scotland
to pursue the Queens Rebels, and such as received them (as was given out) but
the Lords at Linlithgow fearing they might be brought against them, as soon as
they heard of their coming, went toward Glasgow, and besieged the Castle
thereof, which Minto had in keeping. But he being absent, and not above 24. of
the Garrison Soldiers within, the Castle notwithstanding was so well defended,
that having slain more of the besiegers than they were themselves in number,
after six days stay, hearing of the approaching of the contary party, they
raised their siege, and went every man unto his own home. The Kings side with
Drury (and the English) went into Cliddisdale, and cast down Hamilton, and
other Houses belonging to the Queens faction. After this the English returned
to Berwick, and Morton did go along with them the 3. of June, having stayed
some 20. or 22. days, from the 2. of May.

The 13. of July 1570. they chose Lennox to be Regent, in a Convention 1570.
July 13.
holden at Stirlin, and gave him the oath to observe the Laws, Lennox Regent.
and to maintain the professed Religion. His first care was to stay the
Parliament, which the contrary party had appointed to be kept at Linlithgow in
August. Wherefore he sends to Grange for some pieces of Ordnance out of the
Castle of Edinburgh: but he refused to send any, pretending that he would be a
procurer of peace, and not an instrument of War, and shedding of Scottish
blood. Notwithstanding hereof, the Regent goes to Linlithgow with 5000. men the
3. of August, where he could see no appearance of a Parliament, nor of any
meeting, nor hear no news of them at all, save that Huntley had been at
Brechin, and placed a Garrison there of some hired Soldiers, and that he had
also commanded them to provide victuals and lodging for some thousands of men
against the 10. of August. Hereupon the Earl of Morton made haste to go to
Brechin, to surprise them before they were aware, and sent word to the Lord
Ruthven and Lindsay, to go with him, or before him, because they lay nearer.
But the Soldiers having gotten some inkling of their coming, fled, and
retired, some to the Steeple, some to the Castle, where they thought themselves
to be in safety. Morton therefore lay about Morton goes to Brechin.
these places, and not long after, the Regent came thither himself in person,
and the Gentlemen of the Country about came all to him, so that The Regent
also goes thither.
his Army did now amount to the number of 7000. men. Those that were in the
Steeple, yielded presently: but they that were in the Castle stood upon their
defensive at first, and wounded some that approached to have assaulted the
castle; but hearing that the Battery was to be planted, and that Huntley, who
they looked should have come to their relief, according to his promise, had
abandoned them, offered to yield, their lives only safe; but when they could
not obtain that, they came in the Regents will, simply, without condition.
Thirty of them were hanged, The Garrison yields.
who had bin taken diverse times before, and bin pardoned, upon their promise
never to bear arms against the King; the rest, with their Captains, were let go
free. This being done, they returned to Stirlin the 15. of Aug.

The Winter following was quiet, and free from trouble. In the beginning of
February, Morton was sent into England to Queen Elizabeth Morton sent into
England*
at her desire, with whom went Pitcarne, Abbot of Dumfermling, and Master James
Mackgill Clerk Register. Being come to the Court the 18. of February, he was
remitted to seven of the Council, who were appointed to treat with him. These
propounded two heads to be spoken of; one was, that the Queen might be better
informed of their proceedings, and the equity of their cause, then as yet she
was, and that their reasons and proofs might be so clear, and such, that both
she her self might be fully persuaded thereof, and that she might be able to
satisfy others, who should require her help against them. The other point was,
to make some overture of Peace, and to find out some way of reconcilement,
that so the Kingdom of Scotland might be quieted and settled. For the first
point, they gave in their Reasons in writing, the last of February; which when
the Queen had read, she answered by her seven Counselors, that she was not
satisfied therewith fully, and therefore desired them to come to the second
point; what course was to be taken for pacification. She propounded the first
Head only for a show, she knew well enough before what they could say, and was
sufficiently satisfied, but would not be so, at least she would not seem to be
so. As for the second Head, they answered, that their Commission was limited,
and that they could not consult of any such thing as tended to the diminution
of their Kings authority, neither would they take it upon them (though they
might) nor use any such power, although it had been given them. The Queen was
at Greenwich, whither she sent for them, and in a manner, chid them for their
obstinacy, that they would not listen to a Treaty of Peace, but did rather
avoid that which did concern their good so much, and made large Protestation
of her good will toward them and their King, willing them, at least, if they
would do no more, to hear what her Counselors would say unto them. On the
morrow her Counselors propounded many things, for deciding the Title of the
Crown betwixt the Mother and the Son, Morton craved the Propositions in
writing, in regard there were many Articles, and of great importance. Which
being given him, after he, and the others that were with him, had considered of
them, they found them to be such as did diminish the Kings authority, and were
without the bounds of their Commission; wherefore they returned answer; that
these were things of so high a nature, that they belonged only to the three
Estates, and could not be meddled withal by so few as they were. This answer
the Counselors craved also to have in writing, which was done accordingly the
day following. The 10. of March, they had presence of the Queen, and were again
importuned to come to some proffers of agreement, but they absolutely refused.
Again, the 20. of March, they were brought before the Queen, who confessed that
these matters belonged to a Parliament, which (says she) seeing it is to be
shortly, go home to it with Gods blessing, and take such order, as that there
may be men chosen of both sides, to consult how to put an end to these
controversies. And for the furthering thereof, I will send my Ambassadors
thither, and will now presently deal with the Ambassadors of the Scottish
Queen, and move them to gothither also, if it be possible. And so she did, but
they could give her no present answer, until such time as they had acquainted
their Queen therewith, and received some direction from her thereabout. So they
were forced to stay till Letters were sent, and brought again from her: which
being come, the 4. of April they got presence again, and the Queen told them,
how Queen Mary had rated her Ambassadors for their boldness, in daring to go
so far, as to enter into any terms of agreement. Wherefore (says she) seeing
she is so averse from this way, I will stay you no longer; but if afterward
she shall repent her, and be contented to hear of it, she said, she hoped they
would be ready to follow the way of peace. And so they were dismissed very
lovingly the 8. of April, and came to Stirlin the first of May, He returns and
comes to Stirlin the 1. of May, 1571.
where having given an account of their Embassage in the Convention assembled
there, their proceedings were allowed, and approved by all.

During Mortons absence in England, Lennox the Regent had taken Pasley, and the
Castle of Dumbartan; but on the contrary, the other Faction (by Granges means,
and their own Forces) had made themselves Masters of the town of Edinburgh,
with intention to keep out the Lords, and to hinder them from meeting in
Parliament. Wherefore Morton being come to Dalkeith, kept 100. Musketeers
about him, together with a Company of horsemen, both to be a Guard to himself
(if they should happen to attempt any thing against him) as also to hinder
their excursions, and to keep them from pillaging the country about. This
company of foot, with some 70. horse, he sent to Leith to assist the Herald in
making a Proclamation in the Kings name, to discharge all men to relieve or
support the city of Edinburgh with victuals, or munition, or any other
necessary provision. As they returned out of Leith (out of a braverie, or
because it was the nearest way) the footmen would needs go hard by the City
gates, and the horsemen (though they liked it not) would not forsake them. They
in the town not knowing what might be their meaning, armed themselves, and
seeing so small a number, issued out at the two gates, (called the Nether-Bow,
and the Cow-gate-Port) and skirmished with them. Mortons men (though they were
fewer in number) had the better of them, and beat them back again within the
gates. This fight was called The LousieLaw.
the Lowsie-Law (or hill) because it was fought near to a little hill (or Law)
where Beggars used to sun and louse themselves. It was the first yoking or
bickering they had, and the beginning of the War between Leith and Edinburgh;
so called, because the Lords that were on the Kings side lay at Leith, and the
contrary party at Edinburgh. And howsoever it was of small moment, yet it is
not unworthie the observing, that this little essay, was, in a manner, a
presage and prognostic of the issue of the ensuing Conflicts, that they should
be of answerable success. And so indeed it fell out, that the Kings side,
though fewer in number (as at this time) had ever the better, during the whole
time of these wars. Parliament the 14. of May 1571. without the Gates of
Edinburgh.


The day appointed for holding of the Parliament being come (which was the 14.
of May) the Regent comes to Leith, and Morton with him; but not being strong
enough to force the Town of Edinburgh, they went hard to the Gate, and having
caused cast up a trench to keep the enemy from sallying out, they held the
Parliament, though without the Gates, yet within the liberties of the City,
which Lawyers said, was as good, as if it had been within the walls. In this
Parliament, Secretary, Metellane, with his two brethren ( John and Thomas) and
the Abbot of Kilwinning were declared Rebels, their Lands were forfeited, and
their Goods confiscated. They sat five days, during which, the Ordnance from
the Castle did play upon them continually, and the Bullets did often fall
amongst them, yet not any man was slain, or hurt, as if by special providence
they had been protected. Afterward they adjourned it, and transferred it to
Stirlin against the 4. of August. They in Edinburgh also kept their Parliament,
where they had the Crown, Sword, and Scepter (which they had gotten from
Grange out of the Castle) and declared some of the Kings side Rebels, and in
end adjourned it likewise till a new day.

The Regent returned to Stirlin, and Morton went with him to bring him on his
way as far as Corstorphin: As he returned to Dalkeith, they of the City
issued out, as if they would have fought him, and the Castle at the same time
did shoot at him; but he being without their reach, and the Enemy not daring to
go farther from the Town, than the Cannons could shoot, he went home without
fighting. His house being near to Edinburgh, he kept all those that lay about
him, or offered to come that way, from bringing any victual thither. Wherefore
they issued out of the City to the number of 220. Foot, and 100. Horse, with
intention to surprise him, and either to burn his town of Dalkeith, or at least
to brave him at his own gate, supposing that he durst not come out to fight
them, now that his Friends were all gone home to their own houses, and not
above 200. or few more of waged soldiers left with him. So they march, and
carry with them two Fieldpieces, and were come to Lugton (within half a mile
of him) before they were espied. But as soon as the Alarm was given in
Dalkeith, Mortons men (about 200 foot, and A fight at Craig-Miller the 2. of
June 1571.
60. horse) came forth, and having put themselves in order in the open fields,
offered them battle. After some little skirmishing, they of Edinburgh seeing
themselves disappointed of their expectation (who thought to have found very
small or no resistance) began to retire toward the City in good order, and
keeping their Ranks unbroken. The Dalkethians did follow them in the same
manner, til they came to the castle of CraigMiller; then some of Mortons Foot
getting before them (by running about on the other side of the castle) and
rising as it were out of an ambushment, fell upon them in a narrow Lane which
leads from the Castle; and having broken their Ranks, made them flee. When
they perceived from the Castle of Edinburgh, that the flight was toward the
City, and that their men had the worse, they sent out 30. Harquebusiers to
their aid, and a barrel of Powder on horseback. By this new supply, they
drove back Mortons horsemen as fast as they had followed them before: but while
they are in filling of their measures out of the barrel, the Powder being
fired by some of their Matches, killed and hurt some 24. or 30. amongst whom
was Captain Melvin, that did keep the barrel, and distribute the Powder. By
this mean, the loss on both sides was almost equal, safe that there were more
killed of the Citizens, and more of Mortons made prisoners; having followed too
eagerly at a straight place, called the Queens Bridges. This fell out the 2. of
June.

Not long after this, Morton was advertised, that they of Edinburgh were gone
to Leith, to intercept Captain Weemes, and 100. Soldiers who had served in
Denmark, and now being come home were waged by the Kings side. They had gone to
Fyfe, and having refreshed themselves there a little while, were now coming
over to Leith, to enter into the Kings service, and some 24. of them being in a
little Ferrie-Boat, were taken by the enemy, and carried to the Castle of
Edinburgh, the rest being Morton at Leith.
in a pretty good big Bark, arrived safe at Leith. Morton came thither too
late, for the men of Edinburgh were all gone ere he came, save some 10. or 12.
whom he took, and kept for the Soldiers that were carried away. Morton lay
long at Leith, during which time there fell out a notable conflict, and the
most memorable that happened all the time of that War. The Queen of England
labored to mediate a peace between the parties, and for that purpose had
commanded Sir William Drury (Marshall of Berwick) to deal with them, and try
what conditions of agreement Conflict with the Lords of the Queens Faction.
he could bring them to. Drury went to Stirlin to the Regent, he did also speak
with Morton, and was now come to Edinburgh to take his leave of them there,
seeing he could do no good, nor prevail with either side. Morton in the mean
time being wearied with watching, and excessive pains and travel; tormented
also with a vehement fit of the Colic, kept his bed, which they at Edinburgh
having notice of, either to take advantage of his sickness, or to brave them of
Leith in the presence and sight of Drury, to make him believe that they were
the stronger, and hardier; they issue forth of the Town, and march toward
Leith, having ordered and ranked their men as ready to give battle. This was
the 10. of June in time of their Parliament, where the chief of their faction
The 10. of June.
was present, and did make Huntley Lieutenant for Queen Mary. He with the Abbot
of Kilwinning, and Master John Metellane Priour of Coldinghame, had the leading
of the foot, Balcleugh and Farnihaste were Captains of the horse. These came as
far as the hill where the Gibbet At the Gallow-Law.
uses to stand (called commonly the Gallow-Law) not far from Leith, Morton
understanding hereof by the watch, esteeming it a great indignity and affront,
that they should offer to come so near to the place where he was, forgetting
his own sickness and infirmity, rose out of his bed, and caused sound the
Trumpets, and beat up the Drums, and marching out of the Town, set his men in
order within half a mile, and less, of the enemy. Sir William Drury rode
betwixt the Armies, and made them promise not to fight that day, but then there
arose a question which of them should retire first. Morton alleged that those
of Edinburgh ought to do it, because they came out first, and were in a manner
the provokers. But Drury to decide the controversy desired, that when he
standing in the midway betwixt them should give a sign, they should both
retire together at the same instant^. Morton was content, but the other party
refused flatly, threatening withal, that unless he retired first, they would
make him do it with shame, and would scarcely forbear till Drury withdrew
himself; who when he could not prevail with them, went aside, and looked on,
saying, GOD show the right. Morton, who had yielded before not out of fear, but
only to satisfy the English, thinking that he had done enough to show his
moderation unto them, began to march toward the enemy. There were with him 3.
Companies of foot, which were Mercenaries, under the leading of Captain Thomas
C^ord, David Hume of Fishick, and Captain Weemes, who was come out of Denmark,
all expert and valiant Captains. Besides these there were some Volunteers of
the Townsmen of Leith, and of Edinburgh also, who had left the City to follow
the Kings side. The horsemen about 130. were conducted by William Douglas of
Drumlenrigge, James Hume of Coldinknowes, and one Jordan of Aplegirth. Morton
had about himself a Company of Pikemen, and such as carried Spears, and long
Weapons. The forenamed Captains began the fight, and made the enemies shot
quickly to give ground, and drove them back. The horsemen in like manner beat
the Rebels horsemen, and routed them; which Huntley perceiving, fled also as
they did. There was no head or resistance at all made against them, save only
by a few of the foot men in the Abbey Churchyard, who made show as if they
would have defended that place of advantage, but they were quickly forced to
leave it, and flee with the rest. For some of them being slain, some trampled
under foot, and diverse crushed to death in the throng and crowde, the rest ran
away so disorderly, and fearfully, that they forgot to shut the Citie-gates,
and sled straight to the Castle. And so great was their ^r and confusion, that
if the followers had not been too much bent, and eagerly set upon the pillage
and spoil, they might easily have entered, and taken the City. There were slain
in this fight about some 50. of whom Gawin Hamilton Abbot of Kilwinning was
one: there were 150. taken prisoners, the chief of which was the Lord Hume,
being a little hurt by the falling of his horse, James Culen Captain of a foot
Company, and a Kinsman of the Earl of Huntleyes had hid himself in a poor
wives Aumerie, and being found, was drawn out from thence by the heels, and
brought to Leith: There so soon as the people saw him, they made a great noise
and clamor, desiring that he might not be spared, but punished according to
his deserts. For in the time of the Civil War at home, he had behaved
himself both covetously and cruelly, more like a thief and robber, than a
Captain or generous Soldier: and abroad in France, he was very infamous for
many vile and base pranks he had played there. And in the War betwixt Sweden
and Denmark, he had taken Money of both Kings to levy men, and promised to
aid both, but performed to neither. For these things, besides many more foul
and horrible crimes which he had committed, he was publicly executed, to the
great contentment of all the commons. Sir William Drury, when he saw how things
went (contrary to his desire, as is supposed) being (as was thought) a
North-folcian, went away to Berwick.

After this, the Regent came to Leith, and caused fortify it, and make it as
strong as he could, to hinder any victual to be carried from thence to
Edinburgh; and having appointed the Lord Lindsay to remain there as Governor,
he returned to Stirlin, and Morton went with him to hold Parliament in Stirlin,
the 4. of August.
the Parliament, which was appointed to be there in August. There was at this
time no small contest and debate, betwixt the Court and the Church, about
Bishops, and Prelates, concerning their office and jurisdiction. The Ministers
labored to have them quite abolished and taken away, and the Court thought
that form of government to be more agreeable, and compatible with a
Monarchical estate, and more conform to the rules of policy, and Civil
government of a Kingdom. Besides, the Courtiers had tasted the sweetness of
their rents and revenues, putting in titular Bishops, who were only their
receivers, and had a certain Contention about Bishops.
Pension or Stipend, for discharging and executing the Ecclesiastical part of
their office, but the maine profit was taken up by the Courtiers for their own
use. Wherefore they labored to retain at least these shadows of Bishops, for
letting of Leases, and such other things, which they thought were not good in
Law otherwise. There was none more forward to keep them up than the Earl of
Morton; for he had gone Ambassador to England on his own private charges, and
to recompense his great expenses in that journey, the Bishopric of S. Andrews,
being then vacant, was conferred upon him. He put in Master John Douglas* (who
was Provest of the new College in S. Andrews) to bear the name of Bishop, and
to gather the rents (till such time as the solemnity of inauguration could be
obtained) for which he was countable to him. This he did immediately after he
came home out of England. Now he will have him to sit in Parliament, and to vote
there as Archbishop. The Superintendent of Fyfe did inhibite him to sit there,
or to vote under pain of excommunication; Morton commanded him to do it under
pain of Treason and Rebellion. The Petition given in to the Parliament,
desiring a competent provision for the maintenance of Preachers, in which they
complained of the wrong done unto them by the Courtiers, who intercepted their
means, was cast over the Bar, and rejected; and by the most common report,
Morton was the cause thereof. Afterward Morton in a meeting of some Delegates,
and Commissioners of the Church at Leith, by the Superintendent Dune's means,
used the matter so, that he obtained their consent to have his Bishop admitted,
and installed. Wherefore the 3. of February, he caused affix a Schedule on the
Church door of S. Andrews, wherein he charged the Ministers to conveene, and
admit him to the place, which they did accordingly, but not without great
opposition. For Master Patrick Adamson (then a Preacher, but afterward
Archbishop there himself) in a Sermon which he preached against the order and
office of Bishops, said, there were three sorts of Bishops* 1. The Lords Bishop
(to wit Christ's) and such was every Pastor: 2. My Lord Bishop, that is, such a
Bishop as is a Lord, who sits, and votes in Parliament, and exercises
jurisdiction over his brethren. 3. And the third sort was (my Lords Bishop)
that is, one whom some Lord, or Nobleman at Court did put into the place to be
his receiver, to gather the Rents, and let Leases for his Lordships behoof,
but had neither the means nor power of a Bishop. This last sort he called a
Tulchan Bishop, because as the Tulchan (which is a Calves skin stuffed with
straw) is set up to make the Cow give down her milk; so are such Bishops set
up, that their Lords by them may milk the Bishoprics. Likewise Master Knox
preached against it the 10. of February, and in both their hearings (Mortons,
and his Archbishop) to their faces pronounced, Anathema danti, anathema
accipienti, a curse on the giver, and a curse on the taker. This much I thought
fit to mention here, and to cast these things together which are of one nature,
though done at several times, yet which began at this Parliament in Stirlin.

While the Lords assembled at Stirlin lay there securely and negligently, An
attempt upon Stirlin, and the Lord there.
without fear of the Enemy that lay so far off as (they thought) at
Edinburgh, they had well nigh been cut off all of them, and the whole cause
overthrown. Forthere was in Edinburgh one George Bell (an Ensigne-bearer to a
Company there, and a Stirlin-man borne) who knew all the Town, and every Lane,
and Street, every turning and corner in it. He had learned also in what
particular houses every Nobleman was lodged. This Bell knowing by intelligence
how careless the Lords were, how few they had with them, and that there was
either no watch kept at all, or else but very negligently, and the Sentinels
very thin placed, thought it possible to surprise them with a very few men;
wherefore having imparted it, and acquainted the chief Commanders withal, they
liked, and approved of it. So with all speed they prepare for the journey, and
march from Edinburgh with 200. horse, and 300. foot; the Earl of Huntley,
Claude Hamilton of Pasley, and Walter Scot of Balcleugh being their Captains
and Leaders. They used such expedition, and were so fortunate, that having got
thither undescried, they planted themselves in the Marketplace, and setting
men to guard all the Lanes, and narrow passages of the Town, they entered the
Noblemens lodgings, and took them prisoners; the Regent, Glencairne, and
others. Only Mortons house made some resistance; which being so well defended,
that seeing they could not enter otherwise, they set it on fire, and he,
seeing all filled with fire and smoke, one or two of his servants also being
slain, yielded himself to Balcleugh, who had married his Niece Margaret
Douglas. And thus having made all sure, as they supposed, the Soldiers began
to roame up and down the Town, and rifle the houses, seeking for spoil and
booty. In the mean time the Earl of Mar^e, and his folks, who were in the
Castle, and had essayed diverse times to break into the Marketplace, but in
vain, all the passages and entries being so well guarded, that they could by no
means do it; at the last he sent some 16. of his men, with small brass pieces
of Founds (as they call them) to his own new house, which was then a building:
and because no body dwelt in it (for it was not yet finished) the Enemy had not
regarded it. These entering in at a back-gate, got up to the top of the house,
and to the windows which did look directly into that Street where the Enemy
was, and began to shoot among the thickest of them. Hereupon they presently
fled so fast, that they (...) one upon another thronging out at the gate.
Marres folks came presently down and pursued them, but the lodging-gatebeing
shut, they could not get out at the little narrow wicket but one at once, and
that very slowly, whereby the Enemy had time to flee safely. And now many that
before kept within doors for fear, began to creep out of their corners, and
come forth to the Street, and join themselves with the Earl of Marres men; so
that the case was quite altered* For the Victours and Conquerours, leaving
their prisoners and their spoil, fled for life to save themselves; and diverse
became prisoners unto their prisoners, namely those who had taken Morton and
Glencairne. The Regent was taken by David Spense of Wormiston, who was himself
(...) the Regent killed.
killed while he labored to save the Regents life, and the Regent also
received his deaths wound. They might have utterly destroyed the Enemy, but
that at their first entry the Tividale men had taken away all their horses, so
that they could not pursue them. And so they escaped (we may say) on both
sides: for both were victorious, and both were vanquished in a few hours
space. A rare and remarkable example, how available, and of what moment it is
to use diligence and expedition; and how dangerous in time of War to be
negligent and secure. But especially this accident does make good that often
repeated observation of that great Warrior Julius Caesar, Multum in utramque
partem fortuna potest; that in all the exploits of War, fortune has great
power either to frustrate, or make successful. But what he calls fortune, we
know to be providence, and ought so to call and acknowledge it; which turns
the wheel of humane affairs beyond, and contrary to their expectation. If we
may judge of the justice of the cause by the perpetual success of the
maintainers, and by their meekness and moderation therein, the Kings side have
Buried.
had the better and the juster. The Regent died that same night, and was buried
in the Chapel of Stirlin Castle, with such solemnity as the Town and time
could afford.

The Grandfather being dead, the next Regent was Mar, being chosen 1571.
the 8. or 9. of September the same year 1571. There were three put Mar
Regent 9. September.
on the list, Argyle, Mar, and Morton. It is strange, they should have made
Argyle one, who had been all this while on the contrary faction, and was now
but a reconciled Enemy at most, unless they were sure how to carry it. Many
thought Morton should have been the man, but he nothing ambitious of the title,
which was but matter of envy, helped to cause Mar be chosen, who was a very
sufficient and trusty Nobleman, able to discharge the place, and who had the
Kings person in keeping within the Castle of Stirlin. The main thing that he
did in his Regencie was, that he conveened the Country, and lay about the
Town, but wanting Artillery to batter it, he returned again to Leith; where
having divided the Kingdom into quarters, he appointed the several divisions
to come to him by turns, with whom having broken the Mils about Edinburgh, he
placed Soldiers in the villages and Gentlemen's houses about it, to hinder all
kind of provision from it. In the South parts of the Kingdom, Balcleugh and
Farnihaste did molest the Kings side, especially the town of Jedburgh.
Wherefore Morton both for this cause, as also for a particular against
Farnihaste, who claimed to be Bailiffe of Jedward Forest (which belonged to
the Earl of Angus) by inheritance, sent for the chief Gentlemen of the Merse,
and desired them to subscribe a Band, by which all those that were by name
insert therein, did bind themselves to assist other, and all of them to aid
and assist the Warden Sir James of Coldinknows. In this Band were contained the
townsmen of Jedward, the Lord of Badrule, together with the Trumbles and
Rutherfords, and diverse others.

The first that wascalled (they being all assembled together in Mortons lodging
at Leith) was Sir David Hume of Wedderburne, who flatly refused to subscribe
it; but said, He was ready to serve the King, as became a faithful Subject,
so far as he was able; but that he would not bind himself in any Band to
any man, further than he was already bound in duty, especially such men, with
whom he would not enter into any society, fellowship, or combination. He
understood chiefly the Trumbles and Rutherfords, which names were infamous, and
most of them reputed thieves, and Badrule a notorious one. Morton seeing him
thus resolute, lest the rest might by his example refuse likewise, caused him
go aside into a back-room, and called in the rest.

The first of which was Patrick Hume of Polwart, who hearing of the Trumbles
and Rutherfords, refused also to be joined with them, or to subscribe. When
Morton asked him his reason, he answered roundly, Because, says he, it may be
some of these men have helped to steal Wedderburnes cattle. And has
Wedderburne any cattle stolen from him, says Morton? Yes, my Lord, answered
the other, that he has. He did not tell me so much, says Morton. But it is
true, my Lord, says Polwart. Well, says Morton, will ye subscribe this Bond?
I cannot, my Lord, says he, as the case stands. If you do not, says he, you
shall do worse. Worse, my Lord, says the other, nay, rather than do worse, I
will do it. No, but says Morton, I do not mean to compel you. No; but my
Lord, says he, you have said enough; and so he signed it, accounting it
threatening and compulsion, and so himself no whit bound by his subscribing. The
rest of the Gentlemen being called, seeing Polwarts hand at it, made no more
scruple, but set to theirs likewise.

After this, Morton went to dinner, and being set, he remembered himself, and
sent one to call Wedderburne out of the back-roome, and when he came, he asked
him, Why he did not come to dinner? I was (says he) lawfully committed, my
Lord, and I would not break prison, but stayed till I was lawfully released.
These dealings made some that were rigid censurers think hardly of Morton, that
he would use such infamous men, and tolerate them for his own ends, especially
being a public person, and in the place of justice: Yet others did excuse
him, as being necessitated thereunto by the times; there being no other way to
counter-poyse the power of Farnihaste and Balcleugh, but by these Trumbles and
Rotherfords; alleging withal, that it is not fit, or possible, to observe
those Schoolrules precisely in Politic affairs, which it seems has been his
opinion also.

In February, Morton being absent in S. Andrews, about the Those of Edinburgh
set fire in Dalkeith.
installing of his Archbishop Master John Douglas, those in Edinburgh watching
and laying hold on this opportunity, went forth, and setting fire in the town
of Dalkeith, burnt some twenty houses thereof, and having spoiled and pillaged
it, returned safe to Edinburgh. There was little other thing of moment done by
either side, during Marres time. And now by the Garrisons (which lay about
Edinburgh) hindering Victual to be brought to them, their scarcity increased
so much, that they sent to procure an Ambassador from France, and another from
Queen Elizabeth, to mediate a Peace. And for the preamble of a full Peace, the
A truce in August 1572.
Ambassadors obtained a Truce in July, to begin the 1. of August, 1572. and to
last till December, or January. The conditions were simple, that the Town of
Edinburgh should be patent to all the Kings Subjects; which was as much to
say, as that they should render it up, since they could keep it no longer. And
so it was done Mar the Regent dies the 28. of October.
the first of August 1572. Before the expiring of this Truce, the Regent
sickened, and died at Stirlin about the twenty eighth of October, 1572.

Thus have we waded through those times and actions of the Earl Mortons which
were inter-mingled with those of other men's; in which though he were not the
sole agent, nor the principal and first in place, yet had he a main hand in
all of them, and in all the affairs of Estate, he was ever a chief Actour,
during the reign of the Queen Mother, and Queen Mary (her daughter) in the
time of the three Regents, Murray, Lennox, and Mar; to all whom, he was ever
even more than a second. Now we are come to that time and those actions, which
are absolutely and fully his own; where he is the deviser and executer, sole
counselor and sole commander of all, where there is none to go before him,
none to share or partake with him in his praise, or blame. What he does
aright, the honor thereof is due to himself alone; and if he do any thing
amiss, the blame thereof must lie upon him only. The pain or pleasure, the
gain or loss, touch and concern him, and none else. For Mar being dead, we
do not find so much as any question made, who should succeed him in the
Government; men's minds had by presage designed him to it, and the Lords meet
to accomplish that presage, rather than to consult of it. Wherefore the twenty
fourth of November, he Morton Regent the 24 of Novem. 1572.
was by uniforme consent of all those of the Kings side, chosen to be Regent.
Would you know the reason of their choice? Be pleased then to hear it in the
words of a stranger, who is very impartial, and far from lavish
commendation, that is, Master Thin (or Boteville) in his Scottish Chronicle;
They sought (says he) a new Regent to succeed in Marres place, that might in
all respects defend the Kings Person, and the Realm, as he had done before.
Wherefore the Noblemen assembling, did select by one consent, the Earl of
Morton to that Office, a man no less wise than provident, and such a person,
as both for the nobility of his birth, and service to the Realm and to the
King, did well merit the same. By which it appears, that he did neither
ambitiously seek the Place, nor got it by faction, but was chosen to it for the
good of the Country, freely and advisedly. He says indeed, that it was after
long consultation, but it could not be very long, being little more than a
month, which was short enough time to be spent in making the late Regents
Funeral, and to conveen the Nobility therein. For according to himself, the
election was in December; but our Acts of Parliament (which are more
authentic) say, it was the 24. of November. But how ever long their
consultations were, we do not hear that he had any Competitour, or that there
was any other mentioned or nominated with him; and seeing he says, it was done
(by one consent) then was there not any contrary Votes, or contradiction and
contesting; but a perfect and full uniformitie and harmony of mind amongst
all of that side. Nay, even of those of the other side also, who sent (as some
Notes say which I have seen) Commission and Proxees to that purpose, and
namely, the Duke and Earl of Huntley. Others say, these were at the
Parliament, where this Regencie was confirmed, holden the 26. of January, in
Edinburgh. They that delay it longer, cast their yielding in February at Perth,
where they name Huntley, Argyle, Athole, and in general, the greatest part
(say they) of the Nobility, and so we see his entry was free and right, and
duly approved by all; the rest of his Office we have to consider. It lasted the
space of five years and three months, till the twelfth of March, 1577. which
is the time of his dismission. All this time the Country enjoyed a full and
perfect Peace, save so much war as they had in recovering the Castle of
Edinburgh out of the enemies hands. There were The Queens party within the
castle of Edinburgh.
within the Castle (beside Grange Captain thereof) Secretary Metellane, and
his brother Master John, Priour of Coldinghame (afterward Chancellor of
Scotland) who remained still in terms of hostility. I know not why, nor
wherefore, whether it was, that they thought themselves so guilty, as that
they could not be pardoned; or that they had conceived such spleen and hatred
against the other Faction, that they would not be reconciled; and so, out of
despair, taking a desperate course, or that they were borne up with hope of
some change, persuading themselves, that this agreement among the parties could
not last long, being so ill cemented (as they conceived) but that some
difference would soon arise upon some occasion or other, and that the rather,
having their example for the present, and the Castle of Edinburgh for a place
of refuge, when it should be needful.

Upon these, or such like considerations, being also not altogether forsaken of
the French (who sent some small supply of Moneys, but large promises by James
Kircadie, brother to Grange, who landing at Black-Nesse, conveyed himself and
it secretly into the castle) they resolved to be the last in yielding, and to
hold out so long as possibly they could, assuring themselves that they could
make their peace when they listed (if it should come to the worst) by
surrendering the place upon good conditions. There were with these forenamed (as
their followers) the Lord Hume, who was altogether led by Metellans counsel,
and Logan of Rastarig, who depended upon Hume. Pittadraw was Lieutenant to
Grange the Captain, and Sir Robert Melvill was Uncle to Grange. The Regent
being resolved to pull this thorn out of his foot, caused the Castle to be
enclosed with a trench, and Soldiers set to keep it, under the command of
Captain Crawford, and Captain The Castle blocked up.
David Hume before mentioned. And because they of the Castle watered at a Well
(called S. Margarets Well) Captain Michell was appointed to lie with his
Company at S. Cutberds Kirk, who hindered them from fetching water from thence,
and after a while, he found means to poison it, and so left it without any
Guard. While the Castle was thus blocked up, one Captain Bruce issued forth
thereof, to bring in victuals, but he was taken by the Regents men, says
Master Thin: a thing very hard to be conceived, how he either durst, or could
do it; neither is there any mention or memory of his being there, o rany where
else to be found. Now because the Castle did annoy the City with their Ordnance,
so that none could walk in the Street (which lies open in a straight line from
the Castle exposed to their mercy) without danger of their lives, the Regent
caused make three Traverses or Dikes, (...) ramparts of earth, turfe and dung,
over-thwart and crossing the Street, so thick, as that they were Cannon-proofe,
and could not be pierced, and so high, that they took away the view of the
Street from them of the Castle. One of these was raised hard by the Land-Market
above the Tolbooth, and the other two (with proportionable distance one from
another) nearer the Castle; so that the Citizens and others walked safely to
and fro about their business, Parliament at Edinburgh, the 26. of Jan.
and the Lords also sat in Parliament without any hurt, notwithstanding that
the very day of their sitting (the 26. of January, or as others the 16.) for
their welcome and first salutation, they had bestowed on them 87. great shot;
only there was one poor dog killed before the Regents door. Neither was there
any great hurt done before, though they had been still sending their vollies
the 1. of January (at what time the truce expired) not above 6. persons hurt
that kept the ^nches, and as many within the City, but none slain. One night
the Captain issued forth, and skirmished with the Regents Soldiers in the
trenches, till he found means to set some houses of the City on fire; which,
the wind being high, did spread through the City, and when any did offer to
quench it, he caused the Ordnance to play so thick upon them, that none daring
to come near it, there were some 100. houses consumed therewith being burnt
down to the ground, but not any man either slain, or hurt. This fact made him,
who was hated before, to be abhorred and thought abominable by all men.

Wherefore the Regent determining no more to dally with him (not Siege of the
Castle of Edinburgh.
having sufficient store of Artillery of his own, and fearing lest the Castle
being well victualled, might hold out too long) he sent to the Queen of 1573.
20. April.
England to borrow of her; who sent him 30. pieces in ^ll ( viz. 9. Cannons, 6.
Demi^anons, 6. Sacres, and 9. Culverins) with all manner of needful provision;
together with 700. or (as Master Thin says) 1500. men under the conduct of Sir
William Drury General. With these and 500. hired Soldiers of Scots, besides
the Gentlemen Volunteers, and the Citizens of Edinburgh (after he had summoned
the Castle, and they not obeying) he sat down before it the 20. of April 1573.
They raised five Mounts or Terrasses, whereon to plant their battery, in that
place where now Heriots work is built. These (being called by the several
names of the chief Commanders, First, the Kings, Secondly, Mount Drury,
Thirdly, Mount Leyes, from Sir George Leyes, Fourthly, Mount Carry, from Sir
George Carry, and fifthly, Mount Sutton, from Thomas Sutton Master of the
Ordnance) were finished the 17. of May, with great toil and labor, and not
without some loss of men by shot from the Castle. They began their battery
the 17. of May, and continued it till the 26. The Castle is situate on a steep
and inaccessible Rock, having a large utter Court beneath that Cragge whereon
the Castle stands. About this Court there is a strong Wall, and on that side
which lies toward the Town of Edinburgh, a Bulwark (or Blockhouse) ending in
a sharp point, being made in form of a triangle. The use of it is to defend the
entrance and gates of the Castle. The walls of this Blockhouse are subject to
the sight and shot of the Castle, and so may be defended by those that are
within, but the corner and sharp point thereof is not so, and if it be taken by
the Enemy, those that are within the Castle cannot annoy them. There were
within the castle at the inner end of the said Blockhouse, two turrets of
ancient workmanship, but more high than strong; of which the one was called
David's Tower (which stood nearer the Gate) the other without it nearer to the
South, was called Wallace Tower, but I know not the reason of their names.
Against these two Towers, and the side of the Blockhouse nearest to the Castle,
they directed their first battery. Thereafter they battered round about on
every side of the Castle, and having dismounted some of the Ordnance within,
and broken other some by shooting in at the mouth thereof, their Cannon did
little hurt, being made unserviceable. Besides, David's Tower being battered,
was beaten down, and fell in such sort, that the ruins thereof did damme up
the gate and ^trance betwixt the Castle and the utter Court and Blockhouse. The
Blockhouse was also battered in that part that was over against the gate; and
Wallace Tower, which stood above the gate within the Castle, was beaten down.
There was a breach large enough, made not far from the gate of the Bulwark,
and the ditch also was filled up with stones and rubbish, so that they might
well enough have entered there; but because it lay so open in the very mouth of
the enemies shot, it was not thought safe to give the assault at that place.
Wherefore having provided Ladders, they went to the point of the Blockhouse,
there to climb up out of danger of the Enemies shot. The foremost in this
service were Captain Hume and Captain Crawford. Humes Ladder being too short,
and there being one of his men also shot upon the Ladder behind him, he was
forced to come down again, and so Crawford got first up, and Hume followed him
upon his Ladder, and so did the rest of the Soldiers without any hurt done. So
they went forward, and planted a Corpse de guarde before the Gate of the
Blockhouse called Humes Porter-lodge, I know not why or how it got that name.
They had no let or impediment, save that they had some small shot from the
Castle, for the great Ordnance could not annoy them, being so high above them.
And those that had kept the Blockhouse, had forsaken it, and weretaken in to
the Castle, being towed up over the Wall in the night. Forit being sore
battered, and the passage from thence to the Castle being so dammed up, that
there could come no relief nor succor to them from within, they would not stay
in it any longer, but abandoned it. While they were in scaling the Blockhouse,
there was another Company sent to make show of giving an assault at another
place, but they having gone further on than they had warrant or direction, they
were repulsed, and about thirty of them slain. And so they did (as it were)
make an exchange, and recompense their loss of the Blockhouse, with the death
of these thirty. But this taking of the Blockhouse, was a matter of no great
consequence; for neither could they any wise annoy or harm them that were
within from thence, neither was the Castle Wall any where scalable, but as hard
and difficult to get up into it as ever. Only they had taken from them the
only Well which was left them, and out of which had been furnished to each man
a pint of water a day. For the other Well that was within the Castle, by the
fall of David's Tower, was so filled with lime and rubbish, that it served them
to no use. Besides, they were at variance amongst themselves; for the Soldiers
were not well pleased with their Captain, in regard of his hard usage of them.
For he had committed to his wife the charge of distributing their Vivers, so to
please her in that, that she might be the better contented to bear with his
untimely and unlawful love toward her maid whom he entertained all this while.
It is true, the victual began to grow scarce, but she made it scarcer by her
niggardly disposition. They did not mutine, but they murmured so, that they
within were content to Parley with the besiegers. Wherefore the 26. of May,
Grange the Captain, Pittadraw Lieutenant, and Sir Robert Melvill came down over
the Wall by a rope, and spoke with General Drury; for they addressed
themselves to him, as one in whom they did much confide as a favorer of theirs.
They demanded that their lives, lands and honor safe, they might depart with
bag and baggage, both he, and all that were with him. But when he could not
obtain that, he returned to the Castle again. The Regent after this, found
means to let the soldiers understand, that if they would render up the Castle,
their lives should be saved, and they should have free liberty to pass with
bag and baggage whither they pleased; else that they must expect all rigor and
extremity. Hereupon they show themselves unwilling to undergo any more pains
or danger for him, and refuse to obey him; so that he was constrained to yield
up the Castle the 28. or 29. of May, without any condition at all, but
referring The castle rendered the 29. of May.
himself absolutely to the Queen of Englands pleasure. Her pleasure was to
remit all to the Regents own wisdom and discretion, and so the 16. of July
she called back Sir William Drury and her Soldiers; as also about the same
time her Ships and Munition were sent home again to her. Concerning the
prisoners, the Lord Hume was committed again to the Castle, and the Castle to
the keeping of George Douglas of Parkehead, brother natural to the Regent. Sir
William Metellane of Lithington deceased (the 9. of July at Leith, where he lay
with Drury) before he was suspected, and reported to have poisoned himself.
What fear, what guiltiness, or what other occasion there was to move him
hereto, or what information he got, or apprehension he took of the Regents
mind toward him in particular, I know not; but after that he knew that he was
to be left by the English in the Regents hands, he lived not many days. None
of the rest were hardly used, save Grange the Captain, who being odious for his
breach of faith to those of the Kings side (with whom he took part at first)
and much more hated for his treacherous dealing with the first Regent Murray,
who had been so kind and loving a friend to him, and had trusted so much to
him; but most of all for his obstinacy and unmercifull cruelty in firing the
Town of Edinburgh, and not suffering them to quench it, the common people did
so abominate and detest him, that they could not abstain from revlling and
cursing of him, as he was led along, after the Castle was surrendered; neither
could they be hindered from stoning of him: so that they who were with him were
feign (for saving of themselves and him) to take the house upon their heads.
And now that he was in the Regents power, there was no way to satisfy them,
but by executing of him: Wherefore being condemned for these things, he was put
into a Cart, and drawn backward to the Marketplace ^range exe^ed.
of Edinburgh, where he was hanged, and with him his brother Master James
Kircadie, and two men of Edinburgh ( Mossman and Cackie) who had made false
Coin in the Castle on the 3. day of August 1573. Master John Metellan was sent
prisoner to Tantallon, and Sir Robert Melvill to Lithington, to be kept there
by David Hume of Fishick, who th^n possessed it.

This was the only exploit of War which he achieved, and by which he
acquired great reputation; the former Regents having never been able to get
this Castle into their hands: as also by his no-wayes rigorous dealing with
those that were in it. The rest of the time of his Reg^ncie, there was a
general peace in the Kingdom, and full obedience was yielded to him by all
men. No man of those times had seen the like before; no King was ever more
dreaded and reverenced, nor did ever keep all sorts of people (High-Landers,
Low-Landers, Borderers and all) in better order and greater subjection, even to
inferior Magistrates, both Civil and Ecclesiastical. The chief mean hereof
was the execution of the Laws. He made not many new ones, but what he made, he
Parliament Jan. 26. 1572.
took care to have observed. Concerning Religion, there are these five Acts
extant, which he made in his first Parliament the 26. of January 1572. before
the besieging of the Castle. 1. The first of these is relative Acts concerning
Religion.
to an Act made by Regent Murray before. In it (being made for establishing of
Religion) it had been declared: That they were not of the Church, that did not
approve the heads of Religion then received, and who refused ^o participate of
the Sacraments as they were administered. Morton ordains (in this Parliament)
such persons to be first searched, and secondly, admonished to recant then
wicked errors; thirdly, to make confession of their faith according to the
form prescribed; fourthly, to participate of the Sacraments* fifthly, submit to
the Discipline of the Church within such a competent time; sixthly, if they
fail to do this, that they be excommunicated; seventhly, then have their names
printed in a catalogue; eighthly, divulged; ninthly, and affixed on the Tolbooth
door of Edinburgh; tenthly, from thenceforth to be reputed infamous;
eleventhly, not to sit or stand in judgment, pursue, defend, or bear any
public office; twelfthly, not to be admitted as a proof or witness, or
assessour against any, professing the reformed Religion, till they submit, be
reconciled, and obtain a testimonial of their reconcilement. That to be in
this Catalogue shall be a relevant exception against, first, Judges principal:
secondly, or Deputies: thirdly, Members of Court: fourthly, Officers: fifthly,
Parties or Procutors: sixthly, persons of inquest: seventhly, or witnesses, to
decline them from, first, Judgment: secondly, Office: thirdly, Pursuit:
fourthly, Procuration: fifthly, Inquest: or sixthly, Bearing witness: That the
Archbishops, Bishops, Superintendents, Visitours, Commissioners, Readers,
shall give in their names within every one of their bounds; under pain of
forfeiting a years rent in case they fail. 2. The second Act is: That all
Ecclesiastical persons (that is Ministers, or such as pretend any right to
have, or brook and enjoy any, first Benefice: secondly, Life-rent: thirdly,
Stipend: fourthly, Pension: fifthly, or Portion of Benefice) who shall not
confess, subscribe, and participate the Sacraments, as said is, shall be ipso
facto deprived, and all his Ecclesiastical promotions and livings shall be
void and vacant, as if he were naturally dead. 3. The third Act: That none
should be reputed as loyal and faithful Subjects to our Sovereign Lord, but
be punishable as Rebels, that gave not confession and profession of the
reformed Religion: That such as had once professed it, and afterward made
defection, should return before the first of June next, and renew their former
confession: first, Promise to continue in it: secondly, To maintain the Kings
authority: thirdly, The Preachers: fourthly, And Professors of the true
Religion, against whomsoever and whatsoever enemies, especially against all (of
whatsoever Nation or degree) that had bound themselves to maintain the decrees
of the Council of Trent, and were falsely called, The holy League. 4. The
fourth Act: That whosoever were excommunicated, and remained so 40. days,
letters of horning should be directed to charge him to satisfy the decree of
the Church pronounced against him, and to be reconciled to the Church, and
submit to the Discipline thereof under pain of Rebellion: and if he did remain
obstinate, that he should be put to the horn, and then letters of caption
should be granted to apprehend him, etc. 5. The fifth Act was: That
Ecclesiastical persons (such as above) remaining year and day at the horn,
should lose their Life-rents. These Laws he procured to be made in Parliament,
and being made, he saw them duly executed; by which mean it came to pass,
that in his time, there was no man in Scotland, that professed advowedly any
other Religion than the reformed; or maintained any point of Religion, contrary
to the doctrine of this Church. Men do now wonder at it, how it could be: yet
so it was, and this was the mean that procured it.

As for the Borders, he tamed and daunted them by In-rodes, and Justice-Eyres,
executing some for terror to others, taking pledges and hostages of the rest,
and punishing them that transgressed according to their faults, most part by
pecuniarie mulcts and fynes. The High-landers were kept in, by binding the
chief of the Clans over to the peace; and partly by fear, partly by
gentleness, he drew them to the obedience of the Laws. But the chief mean for
all, was a solid and perfect peace established amongst the Nobility, the only
certain and sure way of keeping the Borderers in order; as by the contrary, a
stir amongst the States (as themselves speak) does never fail to incite them
to their theeving and robbing. This he knowing well, partly by his wisdom
compassed and effected it, partly it fell out of its own accord by men's
inclination thereto, being wearied with so long troubles, and the turbulent
heads that stirred up and entertained dissension, being now taken away by
death. It is matter of laughter and sport, to consider men's judgments
concerning this his government. I heard then, and have read since in some
memorials of those times, his government mightily taxed, and reproached, and
himself censured as covetous and greedle, as one that hanged some poor snakes
for a show of justice, but suffered the richer thieves to escape for their
money. And yet the same men do not stick to say and write, Betwixt the 3. or
March 1575. and the 4. of March 1577. the space of two years, there was nothing
of importance to write of: All this time the Regent governed the Realm both
well; and wisely: for during these two years, the common people had rest and
quietness; Not considering that his government in the former years had
procured, and caused the rest and quietness of these years: Yea, these same
things which they call (hanging of the poor for show of Justice, and letting
the rich go for money) they might call it (if they would speak in proper
terms, and give it the right name) a just moderation and tempering of justice
with lenity* punishing some (lest impunity might breed contempt of the Law)
punishing the fewest and in the gentlest sort, lest too much rigor might drive
them to despair, and so force them to desperate courses, and to stir up new
commotions. If this course did withal meet right with any natural inclination
in him toward money; yet that inclination did rather concur with this
judgment, than cause it. He knew the nature of his contrymen, how they
cannot easily endure to have their lives touched, or their blood meddled withal,
and how hard it is to over-master them by the strong hand, and a violent way,
but far more easy to be overcome and gained by fair means; and therefore
out of his wisdom he made choice of this, as the best way for his purpose of
settling Peace. The event and issue did justify his choice: for from hence did
arise a full Peace, and perfect quietness, together with all obedience and
good order in Church and State at home* and account and great esteem of
Strangers abroad. His means (indeed) were also increased, yet that came not so
much by public fynes or for^ures, as by his good husbandry and thrifty
managing of the revenues of the Crown, and his own private estate. For no man
knew better how to improve both the one and the other, and to make the best of
them; and no man was more careful and diligent in it, than he. He guided both
himself, and employed his own pains and industry therein, as in all affairs
whatsoever. His servants were ever particularly directed by himself, and they
did but execute what he commanded. The chief men he used were John Carmichael
of Carmichael, and George Auchinleck of Balmannoe. He employed the former in
all matters that were to be done upon the Borders, having made him even a
warden; theother had a care to gather in his rents, and was (as it were) Stuart
or Chamberlain to him. His private delight was in planting and building, which
he did very magnificently, especially at Dalkeith; for which Drumlenrig
admonished him that it was too sumptuous and stately for a Subject, and too
near to Edinburgh. He built also an house in Tweddale, called the Droghholes,
for his private retreat.

He grew so* in esteem of wisdom and riches with all men, that it was no
wonder though he were a little touched with the opinion of it himself; being
now past all emulation, and so accounted of by all men, he could not but esteem
also well of himself. They who did envy him had little hope to hurt him by
action, being above their reach; but by their tongues they sought to make him
envied of all; saying, He had all the riches, all the friendship, and all the
wisdom of Scotland, Him alone. This was Hyperbolicall, and spoken to stir
envy; yet thus far it was true, that he had more of all these than any other
one man, and so much as all his enemies were not able to match or impair. He
had added to his friendship great parties, the Lord Maxwell and Hamilton.
Maxwell married his Niece (a daughter of his brother David, and sister Germain
to Archbald Earl of Angus) and the Lord Bothwell also had married her sister
Margaret, Relict of Walter Scot of Balcleugh. The Lord Hamilton had been in
great enmity with him; for (besides the public cause of Regent Murrays death)
he with his brother Claud of Pasley, had killed Johnston of Wester hall, a
follower and depender of the house of Angus. At that time the Countess of
Cassills ( Lion by name, of the house of Glames, and a near Cousin to the
Regent) was a widow. Whether the love to that Lady brought on the
reconcilement, or their reconciliation occasioned the affection to the Lady, it
is hard to say; but so it was, that Hamilton suited her in marriage, and
obtained his suit; and by this all quarrels, and more especially that slaughter
of Westerhall was taken away. And for the better satisfaction herein, both the
brothers (the Lord Hamilton, and Claud of Pasley) made public obeisance to
Archbald Earl of Angus, in the Palace of Haly-rood-house, by coming the whole
breadth of the Inner-Court thereof barefooted, and bare headed, and falling
down on their knees, holding each a naked sword by the point, delivered it to
him to take hold thereof by the Pommell. This was in the year 1575. the
seventh of March, being Monday, A^ this, Hamilton was married to the Lady. Yet
may it be doubted, whether he acquired more friendship in private by them,
than he furnished matter of obloquie in public to the country; because both
these brothers were accounted authors or accessarie to the killing the Earl
of Lennox, (then Regent) and the Kings Grandfather; as also they had been of
that of Regent Murray. These slaughters all the Nobility (especially of the
Kings side) had solemnly sworn to avenge: and now by this he seemed to
neglect that quarrel, and his oath, and that he had more care to be satisfied
in his own particular, for the slaughter of one mean man his depender. It
grieved particularly William Douglas of Logh-leven, who desisted not from the
pursuit of those that had slain his brother Murray: after a private manner,
seeing he could not get public justice executed; twice he set upon the Lord
Hamilton, as he was coming from Arbrothe, and chased him so, that he was
constrained to return to Arbrothe again. Another time as he was coming through
Fyfe, he made him flee to Darcie, which he beset and lay about it, till the
Regent sent to him, and commanded him to desist. However, by the alliance of
these Noblemen, he seemed more strengthened and more secured. The Earl of
Angus (his Nephew) was married to the Lord Ereskins sister, daughter to the
late Regent, Earl of Mar, a Lady of rare beauty and virtue, and worthily
made choice of by Morton who was author of the match, both because of the
Ladies deserving, as also for that it not a little seemed to strengthen him,
seeing her mother and uncles (during the minority of her brother) had the
custody and education of the young Kings person, which was the only way to
attempt any thing against his Regencie. Whether these things begat in him
security, and security bred carelessness to entertain men's love, from whence
did arise a loathing of him in all estates, and coldness in particular
friendship; or what ever the occasion was, certain it is, that he kept his
place more by the estimation of all, than by the affection of many, on the
occasions following. We showed before, how in matters of Church Government, he
ever inclined (as the most politic course) to the estate of Bishops. The name
was yet retained by custom, the Rents were lifted also by them (as we have
said) more for other men's use and profit, than their own. They had also place
and vote in Parliament after the old manner, and he would gladly have had them
to have kept their power and jurisdiction over their brethren. M. John Douglas
being dead, he filled the place by putting in M. Patrick Adamson his domestic
Chaplain, who then followed that course, thoughbefore he had preached against
it. Many were displeased herewith, all the Ministers (especially they of
greatest authority) and all men of all estates that were best affected to
Religion. He endeavored also to have put the charge and cure of more Churches
into one Preachers hands, that there being the fewer to provide of stipends,
the Kings revenues (who paid them out of the thirds of the Church lands) might
be increased by the surplusage which remained to him. He did so eagerly press
this point* that some thought it necessary to write against this course;
namely, Master John Davidson (Minister at Salt-Preston) then a Student at S.
Andrews. Him he caused to be summoned to under-lye the Law, and to be indicted
criminally, and being entreated for him* he showed himself so animated against
him, that he durst not under-go his trial, but fled to England, with the
consent of those that were bail for him; of whom he exacted the sum to the
full, and they willingly did choose rather to pay it, than to expose their
friend to the hazard of his wrath. The Printer General Assembly in Edinburgh.
of the Book Robert Lake-privike, was convicted by an assise or jurie, and
committed to the Castle of Edinburgh. It was also hardly taken, that 1573.
he sought to diminish the authority of the General Assemblies of the Church,
by refusing to be present (being desired) at an Assembly holden in Edinburgh
the 6. of March, 1573. which was very frequently and solemnly kept almost by
the whole body of the Country; the Nobility, Gentry, Commissioners from
Burrowes, as the custom had always been, and as he himself before had been
present at them. Yea, he began to question the privilege and liberty thereof,
by asking the Commissioners (which were sent from them to crave his assistance
thereat) who had given them power to assemble the Kings Lieges without his
leave, who was in authority: With this unlooked for demand, they were dashed at
first, but re-collecting and gathering their wits again, they answered: He that
gave power to preach and hear preaching, gave power also to conveene in
Assemblies: Neither does it depend on man (say they.) He said, that was
treason. They answered, That if so be, then all the Apostles were Traitors,
and the primitive Church in time of persecution. He said, That they conveened
only to preach the word: They answered, That they conveened to advance,
facilitate, and set forward the preaching of the word, and that was to preach
also. But however, if to conveene without the consent of the Magistrate were
unlawful, preaching was also unlawful, unless they should preach to the
Walls. A little velitation thus passed, he in end refused to go, which did so
grieve them all, that a public Fast was appointed to pray for diverting and
averting of such things as he seemed by this to intend against the accustomed
Assemblies. He propounded to be reasoned, whether the supreme Magistrate
should not be head of the Church, as well as of the commonwealth; and there
were Divines appointed to dispute it for the Church, Master James Lowson
(Minister at Edinburgh) the Lord of Dun (Superintendent of Angus) and Master
John Spoteswood (Superintendent of Lowthian) and James (or Master David)
Lindsay. For the Regent, there was the Justice-Clerk, Master David Borthwick,
Sir James Balfoure, and William Douglas of Whittingame. These met at Edinburgh
in the Abbey, and conferred for the space of 12. or 13. days; but he finding
no appearance of obtaining that point, dissolved the meeting till a new
appointment.

The Commons, and chiefly the Town of Edinburgh were offended with him, because
he had diminished the value of a certain brass or copper coin (called
Hard-heads) and abased them from three half pence to a penny: and also the
plack piece (another brass coin) from four pence to two: which was done
(notwithstanding) by the consent of a very frequent Convention, where the whole
Nobility (no Earl, Lord, or great man in Scotland being absent, except the
Lord Hamilton, not then reconciled) was present the 25. of February 1573. He
licensed also the transporting of Corn out of the Country, against which he
himself had made an Act, but now he dispensed with the Act for money. He
committed all the Butchers of Edinburgh for forestalling the Market, and
afterward dis-missed them, having paid a Fine. He held Justice Eyres, and
raised a taxation under color to c^ down the Woods of Hair-law (on the
Borders) which was a place of retreat and refuge to outlaws, thieves and
rebels. These things were interpreted to be done rather as a pretext to get
Money, than for any other good use or end. He was in his own person loosely
given (his own Wife being frantic) and his household servants were not much
better, as it commonly comes to pass by imitation. They were also not
altogether void of envy for their great wealth: nor of hatred, in regard of
the way that men thought they got it, which was by receiving and taking bribes
from such as had suites to him for obtaining access to him, or his favor by
their means, and some such indirect ways. Riches are ordinarily accompanied
with hautinesse and disdaining of others, either really, or in men's opinion;
which does again beget disdain in those that think them disdainful. This was
the general opinion men conceived of his servants, from the highest to the
lowest, even of his door-keepers and grooms. One thing did marvellously offend
men: George Authenleck of Bawmannow having (I cannot tell what) small quarrel
against one Captain Nisbet, being come out of Dalkeeth (where the Regent kept
commonly his residence) and going up the Street, he met this Nisbet, where
drawing his Rapier, he thrust him through, and leaving him as dead, he held on
his way to the Tolbooth where the Lords of the Session sat, as though he had
done no wrong, with great indignation of the beholders: and at night he
returned to Dalkeeth, where he waited upon the Regent as before. This made the
people to murmr both against him as the actour, and against the Regent as
conniving thereat, who perhaps did not hear of it, at least for a certain
space. This Authenlecks credit with the Regent was so great, that all suites
(for the most part) were obtained by him: and therefore men of the best
quality countenanced, and followed him, which was both observed and disdained.
One day this man being in the Tolbooth within the Inner-Barre, Oliver Sinclar
(sometime Minion and Favorite to King James the fifth, who was now at Court)
standing at the Middle* Bar, entreated earnestly to speak with him, which
having obtained with difficulty, when the other asked him what he had to say
to him: Oliver answered, I am Oliver Sinclar, and without saying any more, left
him; as if he should have said, Be not too proud of your courtship, I was once
as you are, you may fall to be as I am. This was matter of much talk a long
time.

The Nobility grudged to see the Regent and his servants to ingrosse all
matters of profit and commodity to themselves alone. If any Writ were to
pass, it passed through at the highest rate; few casualities were given cheap,
fewer gratis. The marriages of Wards, the gifts of escheit, re-abling, or
naturalization, were bestowed all upon his Domestics. They were neglected in
these things, and in other things also of a higher nature, their advice was not
often sought, nor themselves much employed, as if he had not stood in need of
them. The Earl of Argyle was mightily incensed against him upon this occasion.
He had a Jewel which had sometime belonged to Queen Mary, which was an ensign
of precious stones, set in form of the letter H (for Henry) which his Lady had
either gotten from the Queen (who was her sister) to keep, or some other way in
a token perhaps; the Regent re-demanded it as belonging to the King, and when
he got it not by request, he sent an Officer of arms to him, and charged for
it; whereupon it was delivered to him, but with great alienation of his heart
and affection ever after.

His most near and particular friends wanted not their own exceptions and
grievances against him. In the East and middle March, he planted strangers
amongst them, as Arch. Auchenleck (brother to George) and Arch. Carmichael
(brother to John Carmichael of Carmichael) in the Merse. These he married to
two Wards; the last to one Hume, Inheretrix of Edrem; and the former to one
Sleigh of Cumblege; notwithstanding that she had gone away with Patrick
Cockburne (brother Germain to the Lord of Langton) who had kept her certain
days, yet he caused an Officer of arms to charge him to deliver her, and so
she was exhibited, and married to Auchenleck. Both these march with the Lands
of Bonckle, belonging to the Earl of Angus; and therefore this planting of
these men there, was not well taken, but was interpreted, as if he had meant
to strengthen himself there by them, and to acquire dependers there for
himself, not leaning or trusting sufficiently to those of the Earl of Angus,
or his friends in that Country. The purchasing of the Lands of Spot to his
natural son James, wrought him both hatred and hurt (in the end) for it quite
alienated Alexander Hume of Manderston. This Alexander had to wife a sister of
George Hume of Spot, and by her diverse children, of which one was George,
afterward Earl of Dumbar. George of Spot having but one daughter, had taken to
him, and (in a manner) adopted this George son to Alexander, with resolution
to bestow his daughter on him in marriage, and with her his whole estate. It
fell out afterward, that John Cockburne of Ormeston married a daughter of
Alexander of Manderston. This John having some difference with Spot about some
Lands, the very day before his marriage, rode with his Company, and did eat up
the Corns that grew on the controverted Lands which Spot had sown. The next
day Spot being at the Wedding of his sister daughter, complained of the wrong
done to him, but received small satisfaction, either of the Bridegroom, or of
his brother-in-law, who was loath to offend his new Allie. Spot conceived such
indignation hereat, that to be revenged of Manderston, he resolved to sell his
estate, and to bestow his daughter somewhere else, and so to disappoint his
son George. Wherefore he addresses himself to the Regent, and offers his
daughter with his whole estate to his son James. The Regent, nothing slack to
such an occasion, without more scruple or any question, transacted and
contracted with him, and the marriage was accordingly accomplished betwixt Anna
Hume, and James Douglas who got by her all the Lands pertaining to her father
George Hume of Spot, his life-rent only being reserved. By this mean Alexander
of Manderston, and his son George were debouted and frustrate, which did so
incense him, that from that time forward, he lay in wait (as it were) and
watched for an opportunity to be revenged of the Regent. There lies near unto
these Lands of Spot, the Lordship of Thurston, which belonged by inheritance to
Craigie-Wallace, but was possessed by Sir George Hume of Wedderburne, and had
been possessed by his Predecessors of so long a time, that it is thought to
have been their possession before they had Wedderburne, for eight or nine
generations. The right they had was sometimes a Lease, sometimes (the Lease
expiring) kindlinesse only. At last, the King having given to Wedderburne the
Lands of Dundonald (which lay hard by Craigie Wallace Gates) Wedderburne puts
him in possession of them, and retains his possession of Thurston, wherewith
they rested both a long time well contented and satisfied. This excambion being
real, and without Writ on either side, it fell out that the Kings Lands (which
had not as yet bin set to feud) coming to be set out, they that were entrusted
therewith, finding Craigie-Wallace in possession of Dundonald, gave him a
legal right to it, and so he had the right both of it and Thurston. Hereupon
he warnes Wedderburne to remove from Thurston, as having no right thereto, but
he kept his possession. On this ensued no little trouble, by reason of
Waughtons assisting of him, who had married Craigie-Wallace sister. Afterward
Sir George of Wedderburne (Uncle to this Sir George) marrying a daughter of
Waughtons, matters were taken up and accorded, and Wedderburne was no more
molested. The Regent knew all this very well, and yet notwithstanding hereof,
the nearness of Thurston to Spot, and his desire to enrich his son, made him
to send for Craigie-Wallace, and buy his title and right from him to Thurston.
T^en he sends for Wedderburne, tells him what he had done, and that he did not
mean to make him a loser thereby: and therefore desires to know what
satisfaction he would have for his right and interest. He answered, That he
desired nothing but his own, and that only could content him. The Regent
replied, That he had now bought that: And the other answered, That he was the
more unkind to buy that which he knew to be his by so long and kindly
possession. No other in Scotland (says he) would have bought it, nor you, my
Lord, if you had not been Regent. This he bore patiently, as a free speech of a
justly offended friend* yet he still pressed him to know what contentation he
would have* but the other persisted in his former answer, That his own would
only content him. So they parted, being divided in words and minds, concerning
this particular, but without breach of friendship. After a while the Regent (to
bring on the matter more freely, and to necessitate him thereto) makes warning,
and no objection being made, obtaines a decree of removing against him.
Wedderburne to show what little account he made of these doings, falls a
building on it, that he might know he had no intention to remove. He had a
Lease which was not expired as yet, and there were two or three years thereof
to run; but he would not make use of it, but kept it up, par^ly to try the
Regents intention, partly reserving it as a ground of reduction, if it should
need. Thus they continued all the time of his Regency* after his dimission the
difference was taken away by William Douglas of Logh-leven, after this manner*
Wedderburne got one half of the Lands (the Manour-house, and what lay about it)
and a full and perfect right thereof, and did quit the other half, which was
let out in Tenantry. Sir James Hume of Coldenknows, and Alexander Hume of
Huton-hall were also alienated from him, but I know not what the occasion of it
was. In Tiviotdale William Ker of Cesford, and Andrew Ker of Fadunside were
likewise displeased, and had fallen off from him for some hard usage. He had
banished William Ker of Ancram, for the fewd betwixt him and the Rutherfords,
of whom he had slain one. His fathers house of Ancram was seized, and given
in keeping to his enemies the Trumbles. His mother (a daughter of the house of
Wedderburne, and the Regents Cousin Germane) had often sued to him, to have it
restored to her and her husband, but could not prevail with him. At last, she
found means by her self and her servants, to get into the house (being
negligently kept) and turning the keepers out of doors without doing them any
harm, dwelt in it with her husband, and her other son Robert. William
absented himself from public view, and remained sometimes in England, but most
part in Wedderburne, both in Sir David's, and Sir Georges time; neither was the
Regent very careful to pursue him, or search after him (though he knew of it,
and they made no bones to confess their receiving and entertaining of him in
their houses) yet would he not release him from his banishment, being loath to
displease the Trumbles and Rutherfords, whose service was very useful to him.
He tolerated also John Hume (son natural to John, called of Crumstaine of
the house of Wedderburne) who had been with William Ker of Ancram in all his
troubles, so far as at the meeting which the Regent had with the English
(after the Red-swire;) he being in company with Wedderburne, the Trumbles and
Rutherfords perceiving him to be there, went to the Regent, and complained that
he was suffered to live in the Country, being a Rebel, and one that had so
much wronged them. Let him alone (says the Regent) and do not meddle with him
at this time, when he has so many of his friends about him: for if he were now
challenged, it might trouble you and me both. Some few days after this, he
went to Tantallon with Wedderburne, where having kept himself out of the
Regents sight all the day long, at night (when the Regent was gone to bed) he
fell to Cards with the servants in the h^ll. The Regents Chamber was hard by,
and he, not resting well, arose and came forth to the hall in his night-gowne
to look on their gaming: By chance John sat next to him, and he leaning with
his hand on his shoulder a long time, without knowing who he was, at last going
away to bed again, he perceived it was he, and smiling, said to him, GOD make
you a good man; and so went his way. From thence forward John conversed in
public and came ordinarily into his sight and presence without being
challenged, as if he had been formally released from his banishment. The Earl
of Angus himself had his own discontents; and thought him too careful to
prefer and provide for his natural sons, and not so careful of him as he
should have been. Besides, these that thought themselves dis-obliged, he had
professed enemies that hunted for all the advantages against him they could
devise; at home the Castle faction (Master John Metellane, Sir Robert Melvin,
Pittadraw) and abroad in France, the Lord Seton, Farnihaste, Waughton (who was
not very busy) the Bishops of Glasgow, and Rosse, Ambassadors, and Agents for
the Queen. These things, like warts or freckles in a beautiful body, seemed to
stain the luster of his government, and though they may be thought but small
slips and weaknesses, yet they made impression in the minds of some, and in
the own time brought forth hard effects, albeit in respect of his place,
wisdom and power (like slow poison) they were long ere they did show forth
their operation.

There fell out a business in the year 1576. the 7. of July, which men looked
should have brought on war with England. Sir John Forester, Warden of the
middle March in England, and Sir John Carmichael Warden for Scotland, met for
keeping of the Truce, at a place called, The The P^ed Swire.
Red Swire. There the Scottish Warden desired that one Farstein (an English
man) who had been filed by a Bill of goods stolen from Scotland, should be
delivered (as the custom was) to the owner of the goods, to be kept by him
until he were satisfied for them. The English Warden alleged that the man was
fugitive, and so the Warden was not bound to answer for him, or deliver him,
but the party endammaged was to seek redress of any that should be found to
receive or harbor him in their houses. Sir John Carmichael taking this not to
be spoken in sincerity, but for a shift to frustrate justice, urged and
pressed the matter more hardly, desiring him to speak and deal plainly, without
sparing any man for fear or favor; but regarding only what was just and
right, according to equity and reason. Sir John Forester thinking himself
taxed of partiality, began to be angry, and in a contemptuous manner bad
Carmichael match himself with his equals, and not with him, who was above him
both in birth and quality; and therewith he rose up from the place he sat
in, and walked a little away from thence. The English Borderers (chiefly they
of Tindall) being all Bow-men, when they perceived their Warden displeased,
glad of occasion to trouble the Peace, sent a flight of arrows amongst the
Scots, whereby they killed one of them, and wounded diverse. The Scots who
looked for no such thing, and were gone some to Cards, and some to other
Pastimes, being scattered here and there, fled at the first many of them. At
length some few (about twenty persons) taking courage, and calling to the rest
to stay and stand to it, they joined together, and charged the English so
fiercely, that they slew diverse of them, amongst whom was Sir George Heron, a
worthy Gentleman, and well beloved of both the Countries, whom they would have
been loath to have hurt, if the heat of the conflict had not carried them to it
unawares. Sir John Forester, and the Gentlemen that were with him, were taken
prisoners, and brought into Scotland to the Regent. He entertained them
kindly, and honorably, but detained them as lawful prisoners, and breakers of
the Peace, till the Queen of England sent for them. It was expected that this
should have bin an occasion of war; but the Regent was nothing afraid of the
matter. He knew them, and they him; he entertained friendship with them after
his wonted manner, and sent many Scottish Falcons for a present to the
Courtiers of England, whereof one made a jest, saying, That he dealt very
nobly and bountifully with the English, in that he gave them live Hawks, for
dead Herons, alluding to Sir George Heron, who was slain. The business came to
a treaty, and the Regent came in person to Foulden in the Merse, where the
English Commissioners met him. They agreed on these terms, That the goods
should be restored, and for satisfaction and repairing of the Queens honor,
Carmichael should go to London, and come in the Queens will. He went as far as
York, where being come the 26. of September, he was detained there some five or
six weeks, and so was dismissed. Concerning restitution of the Goods, the
Regent caused make a Proclamation, by which he commanded all that were on this
side of Forth, to come to him at Edinburgh the 8. of October, with provision of
victual for twenty days, intending to go to the Borders. But he continued or
adjourned the diet till he should give new advertisement; for the Borderers
ceased from their stealing, and took order for restoring what they had taken.
Afterward he held Justice-Courts at Peebles and Edinburgh, which was
interpreted to be done, more for getting money, than doing of justice. The
townsmen of Edinburgh were especially aimed at, and most carefully summoned;
yet they were continued and cast over to another time; only they paid a
thousand marks Scottish for Bullion, which the Merchants are bound to furnish
to the Mint, but had neglected to do it. During the time of his Regencie, he
met with one private conspiracy, of which John Semple, son to the Lord Semple
was author; upon what ground or motive I know not. It was revealed by one
Gabriel Semple, who being confronted with John before the secret Council,
avouched it, and offered to make it good by combat: But it needed not, for
John confessed it, and was thereupon condemned to be hanged, quartred and
drawn. Yet when his friends interceeded for him, the Regent (nothing
bloodthirsty) did only send him to the castle, there to remain during
pleasure; which not being declared, he was kept there during his Regency, after
which he was set at liberty. M^ton dimits his Regencie.
In the year 1577. the 4. of March, the Nobility assembling at Stirlin,
concluded that the King should take the government into his own hands, and
should be guided by a Council, and the Regent deposed. No cause was given out,
nor could there be any sufficient reason pretended. The King was not yet 18.
years of age, which was the time limited and set down in the Act of the Queens
dimission for him to be governed by Regents. At most he was but 11. or 12.
years old, When these news were brought to the Regent at Dalkeith, being
astonished therewith, he came to Edinburgh; but little countenance was made to
him by the townsmen; few came from the country (no Baron almost of note, save
Wedderburn) none of the Nobility, so far were they alienated from him in
affection. And indeed though they had intended to have come in to assist him,
he gave them no time to do it; for, ere they could have come (as my Lord Boyd
only did) he had dimitted his Regencie; and was so far from making any
impediment or let to the Proclamation, that he assisted a single officer with a
trumpet, who came to proclaim the Kings authority, and publicly laying down
his Office, he took instruments of his dimission. The next day when the Lord
Boyd came to him, he chid him soundly for this his haste; and even he himself,
when he had thought better on it, was angry with himself, that he should so
rashly and unadvisedly have given way to his enemies, who used the Kings bare
name against his authority, which was to last five or six years longer, and
was established by the Laws of the Kingdom, and Act of Parliament; unto which
they themselves had consented and given their approbation. Whether or not he
did best in dimitting, it may be disputed on both sides. The adverse party
seemed strong, Argyle, Athole, Crawford; yea also (which did most astonish him)
his friends Glames, Ruthven, and Lindesay; his most cherished, Pitcarne (Abbot
of Dumfermling) Secretary, and Tillebardin Controller; he had the ill will of
the Burrows, especially Edinburgh. And yet having right and the law on his
side, some would have regarded that; the multitude (so mutable) might have been
reconciled, and the Faction dissolved (being glewed together by nothing but
common coffeehouse) by contenting some, and putting some in hope of having
place in managing the affairs of the Kingdom. Neither could matter of division
have been long wanting amongst themselves, where there were so many heads, such
diversity of judgment, and so many several aims and intentions.

If he had but stuck to his right declared, and claimed it, and in the mean
time kept himself safe by his own power and friendship in Dalkeith or
Tantallon, it is possible, and not improbable that he might have dis-appointed
them. But he left that way, and having dimitted the authority, he rendered
also the Palace of Haly-rood-house, the Mint and Coyning-house, with the
printing irons; also the Kings Jewels, and what else belonged to the Crown was
delivered to the Lord Glames and Maxwell, who were sent from the King and his
new Council to receive them. And good reason he should do so, for now they
were no more his, seeing he was no more Regent, having dimitted the authority,
he could not retain them. Yet he did not so with the castle of Edinburgh, which
the same two Lords had also commission to receive. His brother ( George of
Parkhead, as we have said) was Captain of it, who not being well provided of
Victual before, he found that it was then too late to begin. For seeking to
Victual it both privately and openly, he was hindered by the Townsmen,
whereupon ensued bloud-shedding and slaughter. The Town had placed a Guard
about the Butter-market (where the Weigh-house now stands) and the Constable of
the Castle Archbald Douglas (brother to John of Tillie-whillie) issuing forth,
set upon the Guard before they were aware, and having killed two or three of
them, retired to the Castle again. This did no good; it procured hatred toward
himself, but purchased no Victual to the Castle. Wherefore the Guard being
more wary, he was so straited for want of Vivers, that he was forced to
surrender it to the Lord Ruthven and the Lord Lindsay the first of April 1578.
The Lord Glames slain at Stirlin.


In this mean time (some fourtnight before, the seventeenth of March) the Lord
Glames Chancellor, was slain at Stirlin. There had been some old quarrel
betwixt the Earl Crawford and him; but now both being on the Kings side, they
were upon terms of agreement or assurance. I^ happened so, that as the one was
going to the Castle of Stirlin, and the other coming from it, they rencountred
in a narrow Lane. Both of them commanded their followers and train to give way,
which they did, and were now all passed save two of their servants that were
last, who having first justled one another, drew their Swords, and flew to it.
Hereupon both their Lords with their Companies turned, and began to skirmish;
where the Lord Glames being a tall man of stature, and higher than the rest,
was shot with a Pistolet, and so died. It is uncertain who it was that shot
him, but many thought it was Crawford himself, because he was very skillful in
shooting with a piece. Wherefore he was committed to prison, but was released
again soon after, without further trial or enquiry: Whereupon followed great
enmity and mischief betwixt these two families of Crawford and Glames. It was
observed with admiration, that the news of this slaughter, which was committed
about five a Clock in the afternoon, was reported punctually and perfectly at
Edinburgh by six, there being 24. miles distance between. It appears by this,
that if Morton had not laid down his authority over hastily, other such things
might have fallen out to have divided that faction, which might have furnished
him with matter enough to have wrought out his own continuance therein.

But now having laid it down, he must play the after-game as well as he may.
There were chosen to be of the Kings Council, Argyle, Athole, Montrose; the
Bishop of Caithnesse (Montroses Grand Uncle) the Abbots of Dumfermling, and
Newbottle; the Lord Ruthven, Lindsay, and Oglebee. These coming to Edinburgh,
he gives place, and withdraws himself, not to Dalkeeth (it was too near)
neither to Douglas (it was too far off and out of the way) nor to Tantallon
(it was a place of strength, and it might have been interpreted fear in him)
but to Logh-leven to his Cousin William Douglas, who was also a near Cousin to
the Earl of Mar; that from thence, and by him he might deal with them who
had the Kings Person in keeping, and find means to turn about the wheel
again, and to overturne them who had turned him (in a manner) out of his
Regencie. There he busied himself in making of Walks and Alleys, in drawing of
Garden plots or knots, little minding any State affairs in appearanee; or if
any wary wit did suspect any thing of him, or any clear eyed Lynceus, or well
sighted Argus espied some design (which was very hard for them to do) yet
most part saw nothing; and there were but few that suspected any thing, and
none that could help or hinder it. For so he brought it (as most men think) or
so it came to pass, that Alexander Ereskin (brother to the late Earl) a man
of a good easy nature, and no ill disposition, and who, though of himself he
were nothing factious or malicious, yet he had been an instrument, whom the
other party (Argyle, Athole, etc.) had used to turn Morton out of his
Regencie, by admitting them unto the King, who was committed to his charge as
Captain of the Castle of Stirlin, and Tutour to the young Earl of Mar, was
himself almost after the same manner turned out of his charge of keeping the
King and Castle. For as the King had been moved to take the government upon
himself before the time appointed, so the Earl of Mar was moved to take upon
himself that his own charge (of keeping the King and Castle of Stirlin) before
his time, being not yet of age nor Major. The manner of it was this: One
morning (the 26. of April 1578. the Earl got up betimes to go a hunting, and
sending for the Keys of the Castle Gate, Alexander (his Uncle) came himself in
person, and having opened the Gate to let his Nephew forth, he himself and his
servants were thrust out at the Gate by the Earl, assisted by his own natural
brother, and his Uncles the Abbots of Cambskenneth and Driebrugh (very worthy,
kind, upright, and honest Gentlemen) and so he took the Keys and keeping of
the King and Castle into his own hands the 27. of April 1578. (as my notes say)
and so not above 7. weeks after Mortons dimission of his Regency. Whether or
not Morton employed Tillibardine in this work, and gave him Money for it (he
being Uncle to the Earl of Mar) I cannot affirm it, though I know it was
reported; neither indeed can I say confidently that Morton plotted this
business, and that it was his doing, or what hand he had in it, or whether it
were nothing else but division amongst themselves.

However it were, by this means the designs of the new Counselors were
turned to nothing. They had (the 9. of April) chosen the Earl of Athole
Chancellor, and indicted a Parliament to be held the 10. of July, and had
consulted of many Articles to be concluded therein. Upon the news of this
change, they go to Stirlin, but the Castle was kept so close, that they were
not suffered to come in, save one at once. There they had some meetings in the
Town, and afterward returned to Edinburgh the 8. of May. Morton waa come to
Dalkeith a little before; wherefore they send to him, and desire to confer
with him. He came to Craig-Miller, and there spoke with Athole and Argyle, and
at last (after much tossing of business) they agreed so well, that they went
with him to Dalkeith to dinner. On the morrow (the 9 of June) Morton goes to
Stirlin, and was friendly received by the Earl of Mar into the Castle. The
rest followed that same day, so that the whole Nobility was assembled together
the tenth day. By their advice the Counsel was changed, and Morton made
Principal and President thereof. The Parliament by Proclamation was transferred
to Stirlin, there Morton President of the Council.
to be held the twenty fifth day of July, whither the Lords of Parliament were
ordained to come with their ordinary train. The other Lords, Athole, Argyle,
Montrose, Lindesay, Oglebee, Maxwell, Harris, and the former Council conveened
in Edinburgh, and sent Montrose and Lindsay, to excuse their absence, and to
give the reason and cause of it, because (as they alleged) the Parliament was
not free, being kept within Parliament in Stirlin Castle the 25. of July 1578.
the Castle of Stirlin, and both King, Castle and all in the Earl of Marres
power. All this notwithstanding the Parliament held, wherein there were not
many things concluded. The chief things were a discharge given to Morton for
his government, during the time of his Regencie. An ^xoneration to the late
Earl of Mar (who had been Regent) for his keeping of our Sovereign Lords
Person within the Castle of Stirlin. The Lord Hume was also restored from his
forfeitrie, by the means and procuring of Sir George Hume of Wedderburne, with
the consent indeed of Morton (whom he solicited for that end) but against his
opinion and advice. For he told him freely, that he thought it was not his best
course; for (says he) you never got any good of that house, and if it were
once taken out of the way, you are next, and it may be you will get but small
thanks for your pains: Sir George answered; that the Lord Hume wa^ his Chief,
and he could not see his house ruined; if they were unkind he could not do
withal, that would be their own fault; this he thought himself bound to do,
and for his own part, whatsoever their carriage were to him, he would do his
duty to them; if his Chief should turn him out at the foredoore, he would come
in again at* the back-doore. Well (says Morton) if you be so minded, it shall
be ^o, I can do no more but tell you my opinion, and so consented to do it: Yet
Sir George had so ordered the matter, that he made no question to have carried
it without Mortons consent by the Abbot of Driebrugh and Cambskenneth, to whom
he was allied by his wife. Wherefore they are mis-taken that say (...) did all,
and that there was nothing done but according to his pleasure; for he was but
accessory, and concurred (as one of the chief and prime Noblemen) but the house
of Mar had the main sway at this time. At this Parliament, the wardenrie of
the East march was taken from Coldinknowes, and given to Sir George of
Wedderburne, and he thought it no robbery to take it, being given him. In
August the other Lords (with whom were Coldinknows and Manderston, Cesford and
Fadunside) assembled their forces, and having set forth a Declaration, that
their purpose was to set the King at liberty, they marched from Edinburgh to
Fawkirk. Neither was Morton slow in gathering together his friends at Stirlin,
with resolution to have tried the hazard of a battle. The Earl of Angus went
out diverse times, and skirmished with them, but there was no great hurt done.
Only in a single Combat or Duel Duellbetwixt Tait and Johnston.
(upon a challenge) which was fought on horseback with Lances, one Taite (a
Tividale man that belonged to Cesford) was slain by James Johnston a follower
of Angus, he also being sore wounded. At last they came to an agreement, and
lest they should seem to have done nothing, they condescended that the King
should be brought to Edinburgh or elsewhere, as they pleased, by the advice of
the Nobility, which served little for their purpose; for there was no time
limited; and when he was brought to the palace of Haly-rood-house (the 30. of
September 1579. a year after) yet was Mar and Morton the chief men about him,
and had greatest credit with him.

But before that time it was concluded in Council that the Lord Aberbrothe and
Claude of Pasley his brother should be pursued as slayers of Lennox and Murray
(late Regents) which was done accordingly. But they themselves having fled into
England, their servants were taken, and some executed, others imprisoned, and
their Lords Houses demolished. This motion is thought to have proceeded chiefly
from the house of Mar and Logh-leven. We hear of no new occasion given by
them, for they remained neutrals, and did not side with either party at this
time. Mortons part was, that he remained a spectator, and was contented that
men's minds should be taken up with some other thing, and not have leisure to
think of him, and his late greatness, and that their fury should be powered
forth on somewhat else.

While they remained yet at Stirlin, the Earl of Athole died suddenly, Athole
dies at Stirlin.
which was matter of much talk, and gave occasion to Mortons enemies to lay
that foul aspersion upon him, that he had poisoned him. For all the Doctors
did affirm that he was poisoned, save only Doctor Preston, who said it was
no poison; but being desired to taste of it, and having only touched a little
thereof with the tip of his tongue, it had almost cost him his life, and he did
never after fully recover, but languished and was sickly so long as he lived.
Wherefore seeing it was certainly poison, Who could give it him (said they) but
Morton? And yet they could never tell how he could do i^. For he was not in
Mortons lodging, nor Morton in his, as they knew, and do themselves confess.
Neither were any that belonged to Morton in his house, and though they had
been, they were neither Cooks, nor Cup-bearers, nor Carvers to him. So blind
is malice, or so malicious are impudent detractours. Morton cleared himself of
this imputation at his death. And yet there are some to this day, that are not
ashamed to report it.

In the next year 1579. in June, upon the Kings longing to be abroad, it was
concluded in Council that he should go to Edinburgh the 25. of September next,
but he came not till the 30. day thereof. Morton and Mar were still with him
as his chief Counselors. They invited him to Dalkeith, where he remained a
certain space, and returned to the Abbey of Haly-rood-house the 16. of October:
The King comes to Edinburgh and makes his (...) the 17. of October.
The day following he made his entry through the City of Edinburgh with great
solemnity and pomp; with great concourse and applause of people, rejoicing to
see him whom they loved heartily and dearly, as they testified by their
acclamations and prayers, powered forth for his safety and welfare. After this
(on the 20. of October) he kept a Parliament, extant in the printed Acts.
Hitherto we have seen our Earl of Morton, though not an absolute Favorite
of fortune, yet so cherished by her, that howbeit she did now and then frown
on him, yet she seemed rather to try his strength whether or not he were able
to endure a storm, and ride it out with resolution, than that she meant to
over-whelme him in her waves; for the issue did ever prove advantageous to him,
and he became rather a gainer than a loser by his sufferings. But now having
raised him to the highest dignity and pitch of greatness that a subject was
capable of, according to her accustomed levitie, all of a sudden turning down
that was up of her wheel, she brings him so low as to lose life and estate.
There is nothing more deserves our observation, than these vicissitudes of
great places, to see men of low made high, and than again falling from their
height and greatness to become low, which is to be seen in this last Act and
Catastrophe of his Tragedy, so notably as is rare to be found elsewhere. Who
could and would truly discover the depth of the mysteries of these times, and
tell exactly who were the chief plotters and first movers of this work, and who
were the instruments and executers thereof, as he should do a piece of good
service for clearing of the truth of things to posterity, and the ages to come,
so do I confess for my own part, that it is too hard a task for my self to
perform, and more than I will undertake or promise to do. All that I can do is
to set down the actions which are evident in gross, and to follow such
conjecturall probability in the narration as my weak judgment can lead me to.
We have heard how the King and Queens factions did long contend, and how Morton
had ever been on the Kings side, and how in The beginning of Mortons fall.
his Regencie he had so handled business, that they that stood for the Queen
had yielded and acknowledged the King and him as Regent. The keeping of the
Castle of Edinburgh was the last Act of opposition, and with the yielding of
it, all was whisht. Lithington and Grange were taken out of the way, who were
the strongest or the stoutest upholders thereof. Yet the Society was not quite
broken or extinguished with them. Master John Metellane (sometime Priour of
Coldingame, and brother to Lithington) Sir Robert Melvin (uncle to Grange)
Pittadraw, the Bishop of Dunkell, and some others remained. These he had
committed to prison for a short while; afterward had pardoned them, and set
them at liberty. They kept still their old mind, entertained mutual
friendship and correspondence, and wanted only occasion to show the effects of
their former disposition: Especially Master John Metellane, and Sir Robert
Melvin bore great hatred to Morton; the one for putting his Nephew Grange to
death, the other because he supposed Morton would have done as much to his
brother, if he (fearing so much) had not prevented it by poisoning himself, as
the common rumor was. Besides these private grudges, the public cause did
also egg them on and animate them against him; which they never forgot, and
looked upon him as the man who had been the bane thereof. Yet they set it on
foot again, by (...) of it openly, and advancing it (all they could) secretly
and indirectly; using all the means they could to make all things work for the
Queens advantage. She had her Agents and Ambassadors in France, together with
her Uncles (of Guise) and wanted not her underhand Favorers in England, that
still had their eye upon her (as upon the rising Snnne) whom they esteemed the
hope of their Religion. Their suite now was (who would not think it so?) both
plausible and modest; to join the mother and the son in an equality of
government, being so near joined in nature. It could not but be for the good of
the Country, and make much to confirm and strengthen their title to England.
Thus they said; but how can this be done? He is in possession of the Crown,
how can it be taken from him again? How can he be desired to dimit? And though
he would demit, yet those of his party will never be contented that he should
do it. On the other side, She is living and dis-possessed; but who that has
ever worn a Crown, can live and be content to want it? What other mids then,
and mean can be found out, but association in the Crown? So shall both have
it, and both be satisfied, a happy society, from which will flow the sons
love, and the mothers blessing. All shall so go well, and it will be easy to
persuade a child (though never so wise) being unacquainted with such things,
especially one that is so gentle, and of so towardly* disposition: only the
difficulty will be to move his old friends thereto; they will never consent to
it; they will be jealous and fearful of any party or equality in ruling,
though of never so near and dear friends: they will choke us with that old
saying, Nulla fides Regni sociis, etc. They will think it a diminution to the
Kings authority, which ought not to be admitted either in effect, or in
appearance. The grounds of his Title will seem to be brangled and
overthrown; also his estate will be made thereby more unsure, and doubtful:
The match (though with a mother) will be too hard for him; she is elder, and
so wiser, and more experienced, and may soon step up from this equality to a
Superiority, by questioning her former dimission, by revoking and recalling of
it, as being done in prison, and so not free, nor voluntary. Thus shall the
King be thrust out of his place, the Country, his old friends, Religion, and
all quite undone.

Morton was too old a Cat, to draw such a straw before him, or to propound any
thing tending that way: wherefore their best was to make him away, that so the
plot might go on. And much more good effect would come of that one stroke: He
was rich, he had fair lands and houses, a fair reward of all their pains and
travel. And no question, his friends that should take his part, might be
involved, and ensnared with him: Especially the Earl of Angus could hardly in
this case of his Uncle, so behave himself, but occasion might be found
against him, which would be a fair booty.

The facility of compassing a business does often draw men on, and does
greatly prevail in all consultations. The new factions against him were very
strong, yet ^ee kept them down, but it was meeerly by the Kings countenance;
if that were once taken away from him, the rest would prove but easy. And now
to facilitate all, there fell out such occasions, as they could have wished, or
as they had made.

For in September, in the year one thousand five hundredth seventy Obignie
comes home in September. 1579.
and nine, Mounsieur d' Obignie was come (or brought) home: his name, his
kindred, his carriage, his commission from friends in France, his comeliness,
his observance, his person did procure him credit with the King; and this
faction did privately insinuate with him, and openly thrust him forward into
the Kings favor; and put him out of conceit of Morton; and indeed quite
alienated him from him, and so by him the King, whose ear he now had; for
Morton being such an adversary to the Queen, and so to France, Obignie to do
the Queen, and to do France service, to pleasure the holy League (himself
being a Papist) and to gain the good will of this faction by whom he was to
rise to some great place about the King, was easily induced to promove their
plotte and malice against him. Neither was there great difficulty in it: he
had lost many friends, offended all sorts of men; the Burrowes, the Ministry,
and who so does zealously affect them, so far as that if they were not his
enemies, they were but cold friends, and such as would be but spectatours, and
no ways actours for him. There fell out also (about this time) in October
(1580.) an accident, which did him much hurt, and made for their purpo^e. The
Lord Ruthven having been in Controversy betwixt the Lord Ruthven and Olyphant.
Kincarn (a house of the Earl of Montrose) at the marriage of the Earl of
Mar, as he returned to Perth, his way lying near to Diplin (which belonged
to the Lord Olyphant) and there being enmity, and deadly fewd betwixt Olyphant
and Ruthven: Ruthven notwithstanding, rode that way in view of Diplin. Olyphant
took this as done in contempt of him, and therefore issuing forth with some
horsemen, and some fire locks, followed them, and came upon them so
unexpectedly, and with such advantage of weapous, that Ruthvens men fled
presently, and their Lord was forced to do the like. Only one Alexander
Stuart (of the house of Traquaire, and a Kinsman of Ruthvens) stayed behind the
rest, partly to keep off the pursuers, partly to speak with Olyphant in fair
terms, and was slain by a shot, from one that knew him not, sore against
Oliphants mind, and to his great grief and coffeehouse. The Lord Ruthven,
seeking by order of law to repair his credit, and to be revenged for the
killing of his friend, causes summon Oliphant to answer criminally before the
Justice General. This Oliphant had married Margaret Douglas, daughter to
William Douglas of Logh-leven, and now being pursued upon his life, was
assisted by his father in law. The Earl of Morton would gladly have agreed the
parties, but the fact being recent, and the Lord Ruthven (together with the
friends of the Gentleman that was slain) having received such an affront and
indignity, there was no possibility to take it away, save by law. Wherefore
Morton joined with the party that was pursued for his life, which has ever
been accounted most Noble, most tolerable, and free from exception or
quarrelling. Besides, Oliphant had not commanded his servant to shoot, neither
did he allow or approve (but was sorry for it) in his heart; but he thought
he could not with his honor deliver one who followed him, and had done this
rash fact, in and for his service, but was bound to defend him all he could,
and protect him from all danger, and harm, according to his power.
Notwithstanding, of this, Ruthven was mightily displeased with Morton, for
countenancing, and assisting Olyphant against him, and Master John Metellane,
and Sir Robert Melvine (who took part with Ruthven) laid hold of the occasion,
and blew the bellows so, that they brought him to that point of unkindness,
that he could very well have been contented to see Morton reduced to such an
estate and condition, as that he might need his help, and be sensible of
the loss of so steadable and useful a friend, as he took himself to be.

Wherefore, when he understood that his enemies were plotting against him
(either for that he knew not that they aimed at no less then his death and
final overthrow, or if he did know so much, because he thought he could
give them a stop when he pleased, and hinder them from attaining that point of
their aim) he suffered the course to go on, and perhaps helped it forward.
The name of Stuart were also offended with him for assisting one who was
accused of the killing a Stuart, and all this was aggreaged and aggravated by
those of his opposite faction. Besides this, he had showed that he was not
well pleased with the Courtship and favor which Mounsieur D' Obignie had with
the King; because there was a general suspicion and fear, that he was
employed, and would labor to corrupt and pervert him in his Religion. There
was with Obignie, one Monbirneau (who was thought to have been an actor and
executioner of the Massacre in France) extremely dissolute in his
conversation, and therefore much hated, feared and abhorred of all men, which
did reflect upon Obignie for his entertaining, and familiarity with him. The
Ministers spoke and preached openly and plainly against them both, and the
English Ambassador (Sir William Bows) desired Monbirneau to be removed off
the Counsel as such an one, and when it was refused, he likewise refused to
deliver his message, or to show his Commission, for so he had been commanded by
the Queen and State of England. Morton withdrew himself as discontented, and
retired to Dalkeith, either for dislike of the present estate of things, or out
of fear and doubt of some danger, or inconvenient, or for both; neither did
he come to Court or Counsel, but when he was sent for by the King. This
disliking of their ways, made them to dislike the more of him, and his fear
caused them to fear him more also: dislike and fear increased their hatred,
and hastened their resolution to overthrow him. The way was laid, which was to
charge him with the murder of the late King, the accuser (either made choice
of by them, or who did willingly offer himself) was James Stuart (son to the
Lord Ochletr^e) a bold, venturous and aspiring young man. And so the last of
December he was Morton aceused of the K. murder.
sent for, and being set in Counsel, he was accused by James to his face. The
crime was, of being airt and pairt of the murder of the late King Henry. Being
greatly moved herewith, he arose from the table, and purged himself with great
vehemence, as innocent thereof: and offered to abide a legal trial, not only
of his Peers, but of any Gentlemen whatsoever, though he himself were an
Earl, and had been Regent. Hereupon he was confined to his lodging, where he
abode all the next day, which was the first of January, and the Sabbath day. So
much leisure he had to bethink himself of his case, and what were best for
him to do: he might have seen that it was a quarrel picked against him of
malice, seeing the crime laid to his charge was so heinous, as none but his
mortal enemies would have broched, and such as sought his utter ruin. And he
might know that innocence is not always a sure warrant and defense against
such: and that it was dangerous to fall into their hands. On the other side, to
avoid and shun a trial were half a confession of the crime, and would make
him seem guilty; nay it would make him truly guilty of contempt, disobedience
and rebellion, which might (perhaps) be the thing they sought; through fear
to drive him to some rebellious act, and so to involve him in a true crime
while he sought to eschew a falls accusation; his friends and followers advised
him to take the first way, but he himself resolved on the second: for he
supposed that they could not convict him by law, and that they would not
proceed against him without law, having (as he thought) friends that would not
suffer it, especially the Earl of Angus, being at liberty, and out of their
power. But he had forgotten the old maxim of his predecessors, That it was
better to hear the Lark sing, then the Mouse peep; and their Proverb, Loose
and living. On the second of January, he had a warrant sent to him to enter
himself Imprisoned in the Castle.
prisoner in the Castle of Edinburgh, which he obeyed immediately. As he went
up the street, accompanied only with his own domestics, James Stuart (his
accuser) was coming down, and as he passed by, he said to him (in an insolent
and insulting manner) fare well my Lord, go on. His servants would fain have
made an end of the accuser, if not of the accusation, but he would not suffer
them by any means, but held on his way toward the Castle (without replying any
thing) and so entered there a prisoner. This obedience of his is liable to be
diversely thought of by diverse, and is diversely censured by men (according to
that saying) Laudatur ab his, culpatur ab illis, it is commended by some, and
discommended by others. They blame his wisdom, that he should have trusted,
and relied so much upon his innocence, as to have put his life into the hands
of his enemies, who used the color and shadow of the Kings authority, for
their own private ends, and to fulfill their own malice, and revenge. Others
commend him, that being innocent, he obeyed the King, and submitted himself to
the laws. The event gave judgment for the first, and all men since are of the
former opinion; yet it may be he did not rely merely on his innocence; and that
he looked not to have had such a number of enemies, having never deserved such
hatred of any; and that he thought the Nobility would never give way to such
extremity, which was an ill precedent and preparative against themselves. But
however, God had his work to bring to pass, and meant to humble him this way;
and therefore his wisdom (which appeared at other times) did now fail him, so
that he was confounded in his discourse and reason. There can nothing else be
said or alleged for this gross error in so wise a man.

This is the first evident step of his falling. They might now do with him
what they pleased, and yet scarce all that they pleased, with safety and
security. His Nephew the Earl of Angus was at liberty, and remained at
Dalkeith, who being sent for to come to Court, refused to come; yea, though he
were charged under pain of treason by a Herald to come to the King, yet he
would not obey, but was declared rebel. Also Mortons keeper Alexander Ereskene
(master of Mar) being an honest and kind hearted Noble man, they could not
use any violence toward him, so long as he was in his custody. Therefore they
thought it best Morton is sent to Dumbarton.
to send him to Dumbarton: and that they might do it the more safely, they set
forth Proclamations, discharging all men that had any relation to him, or that
they suspected to favor him, to come within four miles of any place where the
King was, or should happen to be. So in the 17. or 18. of January, he was
brought forth of the Castle of Edinburgh to be carried to Dumbarton. There it
did appear, how the change of men's fortune does change the minds and
affections of people toward them. When Morton dimitted his office and authority
of Regent, none of the Citizens would take norice of him, or look toward him:
Now that he suffers for a good cause (as they esteemed it, to wit, opposing
Obignie, and his courses) they flock to him, and accompany him out of the town
in such numbers and multitude, that his keepers were afraid of them. And that
the rather, because some of his well-wishers had (some nights before) called
the Captain of the Castle, and desired him not to deliver him, or to let him
come out; and had threatened, that if he should deliver him, it should be
remembered as an act of hostility, and he reputed and used as an enemy. They
that were his convoy were commanded, if any should come to rescue him from
them, that they should kill him rather then suffer him to escape. The Queen of
England by her Ambassador, Master Randolfe, interceeded for him, and told the
King and Council, that she understood that he was a true and good Subject, a
worthy Noble man, and free of that he was accused of. She desired that he
might be tried by an assise (or jury) and that his enemy (known to be so)
Mounsier d' Obignie (now made Earl of Lennox) who was also an enemy to the
reformed Religion (as being a Papist) might be removed off the Counsel. It
was answered, that the King was not so far bound to any foreign Prince, as
to change his Counselors at their request, or to try his Subjects but where
and when he pleased. The Ambassador discontent with this answer, gives up all
bond of friendship, and having denounced war, returned into his own Country
the 27. of March, 1581. Hereupon a taxation was imposed, and a company levied
of 1000. foot, and some horsemen, to be a Guard for the Kings person. James
Stuart (the accuser) was preferred to be a privy Counselor, is made Baron of
Bothwell-haugh (say the notes) Lord Hamilioun, Earl of Arrain, and Captain of
the Guard; with most ample Commission to apprehend whomsoever he suspected, and
to banish and punish at his pleasure; especially any that favored the Earl of
Morton, of whatsoever degree, rank or quality. But the English intended rather
to threaten then to make war indeed; and they knowing that well enough, went on
with their intended projects against Morton. He being still kept prisoner in
Dumbarton, learned a lesson there, which he had not well learned till then. Let
the profane be silent, and let mockers leave off their mocking, and let all
mortal men know that there is a happiness which consists not in honor or
riches; that there is a God who disposes of all things, who is All-sufficient,
and who is able alone to satisfy and content the mind: few there are that
know, or consider it, but when they are brought to such a point; and happy is
he that can do it then. He had heard of it before, and believed it, but had
not taken it so fully to heart, nor felt it by experience. Now he sees, now he
feels and finds it really, and experimentally. He contemns the world, and his
riches are vile in his eyes, his glory vanity, and all his delights madness.
He finds that one thing is necessary, and is all that is of man, which is, to
reverence God. He sees his oversight, in that he had been so slack and
careless thereof before: now he goes about it as he can, and labors to amend
his fault; he reads the Scriptures, and meditates on them; he makes his use,
and finds comfort therein: he sees his sinfulness, and repents him thereof;
sees Gods mercifulness, and lays hold on it. He acknowledges himself to have
been miserable when he seemed to swim in happiness, and that now he was truly
happy when he seemed overcharged with misery, in respect that God had given
him leisure to meditate and think of his end, and time and grace to repent,
while being sequestrate from all worldly affairs, and restrained by his
imprisonment, his mind had full scope and liberty to raise it self to those
better and higher thoughts of the life to come, and of eternity: wherein he
found such contentment and resolution, that now death was no more death to him,
nor terrible, and that all the horror thereof was swallowed up with the hope
of those eternal joys and pleasures which last for evermore. Thus being
prepared for that last act, he was sent for to give proof how well he could
practice and make use of this lesson. For on the 24. of May the Earls of Arran
and Montrose, with some companies of horse and foot, brought him from Dumbartan
to Edinburgh the 27. to Robert Gourleyes lodging, which was one He is brought
back to Edinburgh the 27. of May:
of the strongest in the City. Before they took their journey (on the 22.
day) proclamation was made, commanding all that favored him (in general) to
depart out of the town, and not to come within ten miles of the King and his
Court; and particularly some 52. Citizens by name were expressed, and strictly
charged to go forth of the City. After four days respite (the first of
June) he was called to the Tolbooth, and And there condemned of treason.
there empannelled, and convicted by a Jurie, and found guilty of the late
Kings murder. The sentence was given out by the Earl of Montrose, who was
Chancellor of the Assise, and it is said to have been pronounced in these
terms; The Jurie (or Assise) does find him guilty of being airt and part of
concealing the murder of our Sovereign (King James his father) the late King
Henry. When Morton heard it, he repeated these words twice over, Airt and
pairt, airt and pairt, and without speaking farther, he held his peace.

It is reported that the Jurie did find him only guilty of concealing the
murder, and that Arran and Montrose, thinking that to be only guilty of
concealing was not sufficient matter of condemning him, did ^oist in these
words (airt and pairt) to give it the greater sound, and to make it be thought
and understood, as if he had been found to be airt and pairt (that is,
deviser, contriver, plotter, and part* ker or accessory) to the Kings murder,
whereas he was only found to have concealed it. This made one that heard it,
and perceived the sophistry thereof, to say, that they had stolen his head
from his shoulders by sophistry. His known enemies (the Lord Seaton and
Wauchton) were of his jurie, yet it is thought they did him no wrong in their
verdicts. But however, it showed partial dealing, in that they would not
suffer them to be set aside when he excepted against them as known enemies.
Being asked at his death what he thought of the judgment; he answered soberly,
that he would leave them to God and their own conscience: but he perceived
that whether he had been guilty or guiltless, as Stephen, or Judas, all had
been one, his death had been concluded before; for his lawful and legal
exceptions were not admitted, his enemies were on his Jurie, (naming the two
former) and such as were partial, and not indifferent, who had given partial
counsel against him, by name the Earl of Argyle. He added also that it was
not his death alone that would content them, and that they would not stay
there, others should be put to it as well as he, he was but made a precedent,
and preparative to make way for the rest: the cause was the maine thing they
aimed at. However it were, whether the sentence were thus involved and wrested,
or if it were plain and clear; whether it were indeed so given out by the
Jury, or if it were thus patched out by Arran and Montrose, he was conveyed
back again to his lodging as a condemned man. There he carried himself after
his wonted manner, his countenance was no ways cast down, or changed, he
supped cheerfully, and slept soundly, without any apperance or show of fear,
or solicitousnesse.

About three of the clock in the morning he arose and wrote letters (for the
space of three hours) with his own hand to the King, and afterward laid him
down again and slept till nine. These It would be known what was in these
Letters.
Letters were sent by the Ministers who came to visit him, but Arran and Lennox
would not suffer them to be received. When he was up, Master Walter
Balcanquell, and John Durie (two of the Ministers of Edinburgh) came to him,
and had long conference with him, which is set down at length in the History
of Scotland, written by Francis Boteville, called Thin, an Englishman and
joined to Hollinsheds Chronicle, so that he who desires to know it, may read
it there. The sum of it is his confession concerning such things as they
questioned him of,

1. And first concerning the murdering of the King, he said he was His
confession before his death.
neither airt nor pairt thereof, and that being pressed by the Earl Bothwell, he
would never consent to it. And although (say the notes) Bothwell alleged that
the Queen had determined it, and diverse Noblemen had given their consent under
their handwriting, and had sent to him to desire him to put to his hand also;
yet he answered resolutely, that he would in no wise meddle in it, nor be
guilty of innocent blood. As for the Queen (said he) though it be so, yet women
will say and gainsay, she may in her anger do or say that which afterward she
will repent her of. Nay, when Bothwell promised to bring her consent thereto
under her handwriting, yet he refused to join with him upon any terms; and to
avoid his importunity, he passed over to Saint Andrews to vifit the Earl of
Angus, who was then a Student in the New college there; neither did he see or
meet with Bothwell after that, until such time as the fact was committed.

2. As for poisoning the Earl of Athole at Stirling, he said he was neither
author of it (if he were poisoned) nor any wise accessory or conscious to it;
that he detested and abhorred all such forms of dealing even with enemies, and
was sorry to think that so base, foul, and wicked practice should creep into
this Country, which was already guilty of too many, too common other sins of
its own: he said also that he was not such an enemy to Athole, as that he
would have done him any hurt, though he had found him lying asleep by the way
side.

3. Touching the Earl of Lennox, he said, he never wished him any hurt, so
far was he from conspiring against him. Only it grieved him that he knew the
estate of this Country no better, and that he saw not what danger the King was
in, and that he was induced by persuasion to bring home such as were enemies to
the true Religion, which he purposed to have let him understand, and hoped to
have advised him better, when they had been better acquainted, and more
intimately familiar.

4. And as for carrying the King to England, he said, he would not have done it
for a world, unless it had been to have made him King of England: that there
was never such a motion made to him directly nor indirectly by the Queen, or
any other in England or Scotland: that he never had any pension of her.

5. As touching his setting up and maintaining the estate of Bishops (whereof
there had ensued great debate and contention betwixt him and the Ministry) he
said, it did not proceed of any ill mind; of any malice, or contempt of them,
or their callings, but merely out of want of better knowledge, thinking that
form of government to be most conform to the rules of policy, and to be
fittest for the times. That if he had then known better, he would have done
otherwise, and that he had intention (if he had lived) to have made amends.

6. Concerning his incontinencie, and worldly mindedness, he freely
acknowledged and confessed it, seriously repented, and craved God pardon for
it, and said, he firmly believed to obtain it: that ^e saw mercy, and had
found more grace during the time of his trouble, then ever he had done all his
life before.

7. For his detaining of some Citizens of Edinburgh in prison, he said, he had
not done it out of any spleen, or private quarrel against the men; but the
matter of bringing in Bullion being then in hand, and he being informed that
these men did hinder it, he thought it his best course to commit them till such
time as the business were done: Wherein, if he had wronged them, he was
sorry, and craved them pardon, and forgivenes.

His counsel to the Earl of Angus (his Nephew) was doubtful: for he said he
durst not advise him in any particular for the present, because he thought it
would endanger his life if he should come to Court; and not to come (if he were
commanded) would hazard his estate. His best were to use what means he could
to obtain the Kings favor and leave, that (life and lands safe) he might
serve God, and him, in a private retired manner, which he would wish him to do
in all humility, and to submit himself and all to the Kings will and pleasure.

To the King (his master) with all submission; yet in the name and fear of God,
he would exhort him to beware of Papists, either professed, known or suspected,
who (as he thought) were become too too familiar with him: that he would
continue in the true Religion, and fear of God, and entertain in his company
such as loved it, according as he had bin bred and brought up, and not to make
defection from it, or slide back, else it could not be well with him: he feared
there was danger, which men should see when he was gone. He remembered the
admonition which master Knox gave him when he came to visit him on his death
bed (or a little before) being newly made Regent: God has (said Knox) blessed
you with many blessings, he has given you wisdom, riches and friends, and
now he has preferred you to the government of this Country; use these things
well, and better than hitherto you have done; always to his glory who has
given them you* first by advancing the Gospel, and maintenance of the
Ministers, and the whole Church; next, by procuring the good and welfare of the
King, the Country, and all good subjects; which if you do not, God shall rob
you of them with shame and ignominy. This he spoke (said he) and this I find
now, yet I doubt not, but God will be merciful unto me.

He was much with them in prayer, and very earnest to have their aid and
assistance therein; whereof he acknowledged that he received great comfort. He
reasoned of the natural fear of death, which sticks and remains in men, even
though they have assurance of the forgiveness of their sins; wherein he
declared his own sense, and the collections he had made in his reading, since
his going to Dumbartan. He said, that in the History of the Bible, he had
observed Gods wonderful mercy toward the children of Israel; who when they
sinned against him, he chastised them; when they repented, he forgave them; and
though they sinned again, and were corrected again, yet when they cried to him
again, he forgave them again, he hoped so of himself, that God would forgive
him also. He showed them a Book he had about him, which had been sent to him by
the Lady Ormeston, when he was first committed, which he had read, and made
good use of it: it was M. Bradfords Meditation of Death; he caused M.
Balcanquell to read a passage or two of it, (which he had chiefly noted) and as
he read, Morton discoursed thereof to his own comfort, and their great
satisfaction and contentment. He professed, that now he heard with other ears,
and read with another mind and sense than he had done in former times. This
Book he sent back to the Lady by Master James Lowson, with many thanks,
acknowledging he had been bettered by it. When breakfast was brought in, he
desired them to take part with him, and spoke very cheerfully to them, telling
them what a difference there was betwixt a man troubled with cares, and him
that is resolved and free from them. The last night (said he) before I came to
my trial, I could not sleep nor take rest for thinking how to make my
defenses; but all this night I sleeped very sound, having (...) to trouble me,
but to make my peace with God. After noon, M. James (...), M. John Davison, and
diverse others of the Ministry came to him. There he embraced M. John Davison,
and said to him, You wrote a Book, for which I was angry with you, but I never
meant any ill to you, forgive me M. Davison was so moved herewith, that he
could not refrain from weeping. Then he repeated again before them the same
things which we have set down before. The Ministry hearing that the King was
otherwise informed of his Confession, than was true, sent John Durie, David
Ferguson, and John Brand to his Majesty, who informed him rightly, and related
things as they were.

They being returned, his Keeper ( William Stuart, as I take it, brother to
Arran) required him to come forth to go to the place of execution: To whom he
said, They have troubled me much to day with worldly business, wherefore I
supposed they* would have given me this nights leisure to have thought of
things which concern my soul: But his Keeper replied, I think they will delay
no longer, for all things are ready. If it be so (said Morton) so am I too, I
thank my God. And so (after a prayer made by one of the Ministers) he went down
the stairs without any farther stay. The Earl of Arran met him by the way, and
brought him back to the chamber again, willing him to stay till his Confession
were set down in writing, that he might sign it with his own hand. But he,
and the Ministers that were present with him, entreated that he might not be
any more troubled with that matter, seeing they had all heard it suffi^iently.
Then Arran desired that he would forgive him for what he had done, seeing he
had no particular against him. He answered, that it was not time to remember
quarrels; he forgave him and all others, as he desired they would forgive him.

So he went to the Scaffold very resolutely, and repeated the same Morton
brought to the Scaffold.
things in audience of the people, which he had spoken before in private. He
added moreover: The King (says he) shall this day lose a good servant, who
dies professing the Gospel taught now in Scotland: and though I have not
walked worthy of that profession (as by the grace of God I should have done, if
I had lived longer, to the hazarding of my Life, Lands and all) yet am I
persuaded of Gods mercy in Jesus Christ. And here I charge you all to continue
therein, and to maintain the same to the uttermost of your power, and God
shall bless you, otherwise you shall not escape his punishment. Then while
the prayer was conceived by Master James Lowson, he fell down all along flat on
his face: during which he uttered great signs of being mightily moved, which
he expressed in his sighs and groans, which many of the beholders saw
evidently did not proceed from fear, but from the spirit of grace working
powerfully in his heart. Prayer being ended, he stood up, and his friends came
to take their leave of him, and after he had bidden them farewell, he saluted
the Ministers, and took them all severally by the hand, and bade them farewell
in the Lord.

After all was done, he went without fear or dismayednesse, and laid His death.
his neck upon the block, crying continually that happy song, Lord Jesus
receive my spirit, till the axe (of the Maiden, which he himself had caused
make after the pattern which he had seen in Halifax in Yorkshire) falling upon
his neck, put an end to his life, and t^ note together. His body was carried to
the Tolbooth, and burie^ ^ecretly in the night in the Gray-friers, his head was
affixed on the Gate of the City.

Thus he died the 2. of June 1581. proudly (said his enemies) and Romane-like
as he had lived: constantly, patiently, humbly and Christian-like, said the
Pastors, who were beholders, and ear and eyewitnesses of all he said and did.
These outward motions being so like to other, are hardly discerned but by a
skillful and unpartiall eye. Wherefore the judgment and testimony of the
Pastors deserves best credit; they being best able to distinguish nature from
grace, and being freest from prejudice and partiality. His enemies censure may
justly be suspected as coming from that same disposition which moved them to
plot and work his death. And certainly if we observe and consider his whole
carriage and discourse, during the time of his imprisonment, and at the very
point of his execution, he must be void of all charity that does not judge the
best of his confession, profession, and Christian disposition. So that it seems
to be more than humane hatred and enmity, to be thus affected toward an enemy
after his death, to kill him again by an uncharitable construction of his
devotions, and piety toward his God. Livor post fata quiescit. Envy cease
after death* and so let it do toward him.

If a man would see a pattern of one, exercised in all the changes and
vicissitudes of fortune, who had gone through and tried all the estates and
conditions of humane life; let him cast his eye and look upon our Earl of
Morton, in his childhood, in his riper years and m^nly estate, and in his old
age, in peace and in war, in private and public employments. In every thing
he took in hand, in every estate and condition, he acquit himself with credit,
honor; and even admiration. When he was a serving-man, he was industrious,
careful and faithful; when he came to an estate, and was a Nobleman, he
behaved himself as if he had been bred such from his infancy. In Court, he
acted the Courtier* in Council, a Statesman, abroad in England, being sent
thither Ambassador, he approved himself to both Nations, and gained great
reputation of sufficiency. While he enjoyed the favor of his Princess, he
was not puffed up; and being in disgrace and banished, he was not casten down.
He was a faithful Colleague and fellow-governour with others; and when he came
to be sole and supreme, this Country never enjoyed greater peace, and a more
flourishing Regencie. Being returned to the condition of a private Nobleman, he
obeyed as well as before he had commanded. And last of all, when he was
accused, condemned and executed, he showed himself to be himself, and a good
Christian. He was well skilled, as in politic government, so in oeconomie,
from the shrub to the scepter, from planting of Cabbage in his Garden, to the
weelding of the Sword and Scepter in the seat of Justice. The smallest and
meanest points of husbandry did not escape him, and the highest and deepest
points of State were not above his reach. So that the saying of the Hystorian
concerning Cato Major (In hoc viro tanta vis animi ingeniique fuit, ut
quocunque loco natus esset, fortunam sibi ipse facturus fuissevideretur) Is no
less true, and mayas well be applied to Morton. And that also which follows;
Nulla ars neque privatae, neque publicae rei gerendae ei defuit, urbanas,
rusticasque, res pariter callebat. He was slow of speech by a natural
stayednesse and composed gravity. He was of a middle stature, rather square
than tall, having the hair of his head and beard of a yellowish flaxeri. His
face was full and large; his countenance majesticall, grave and Princely; he
was affable and courteous to all, yet so as to keep bold encroachers aloof,
and so familiar as not to forget to keep his distance. He was given to gather
riches, yet without oppression or sordidnesse and baseness: For he was
liberal upon occasion, and not unkind or unmindefull of his friends. Of which
disposition I remember this instance; when John Halden (of Gleneagles) with his
friends of the house of Mar (especially the Abbot of Driebrugh) came to him
to agree with him for his wardship (he being Regent) told them that he had
bestowed it on Isabel Hume daughter to Sir David, and sister to Sir George Hume
of Wedderburne, and that he might take her and it together, which he did
accordingly. This came merely of himself having never been spoken to, and when
there was none that belonged to the Gentlewoman near him, to motion or suggest
it to him. He was also calm and not easily moved to anger, and apt to forgive
and forget injuries or contentions, that had been betwixt him and any other.
This appeared in his carriage toward Master Knox, who had used him roughly, and
rebuked him sharply for diverse things, but especially for his laboring to set
up and maintain the estate of Bishops. For howsoever he took it hardly for the
time, yet when Master Knox lay a dying, he went and visited him, and after he
was dead, was present at his burial; where he gave him this honorable and
ingenuous testimony; Here lie thou (said he) who ^ert never afraid of the
face of man in delivering thy message from GOD. He set a foot a great good
work, and would (no question) have seen it perfected, if he had brooked his
Regencie a while longer, which was the reducing of our Laws into a more easy
form and method, than now they are. The care of this was committed to, and the
task laid upon Sir James Balfoure, and Master John Skeene Clerk-Register, and
Master of the Rols. The work (as I am informed) was well advanced, but when he
quit his authority, they left off any further proceeding in it. And I have
heard since some question it, whether or not it would have done good to the
subjects, as if it were to be doubted whether it were better to have some order
than none at all. So apt are men to calumniate any thing that hinders their
particular emolument, or limits their unwarrantable power, and curbs them from
doing what they list. He kept a Concubine or two, because of his Ladies being
distracted and frantic, and was even too much set to heap up treasure. Yet his
care was, that his enemies should not be enriched by it* and his luck was
answerable to his care. For those on whom he would have bestowed them (if he
had had power and opportunity to distribute them according to his mind) by
good fortune lighted on it; I know not if they got all of it* or if it were
divided according to that proportion, which he perhaps would have observed.
James Richiso^ of Smeeton (his brother-in-law) got a share of them, having been
trusted with the keeping thereof; Jannet Sharp his Lemmon another share, James
Douglas of Spot got some part thereof; and some very small portion (as is
thought in respect of the whole sum) came to the hands of Archbald Earl of
Angus, after his return from his first banishment. A notable example of the
uncertainty of these corruptible riches, and of worldly treasure, which cannot
be preserved from the digging through of the thief, the eating and consuming of
the moth or canker-worme, or the dispersing and scattering of an unfaithful
hand and heart. Though he employed himself much about it, and thought it a
great point of wisdom thus to store up wealth; yet at his death he saw and
confessed it to be but vanity and folly.

If we admit Morton to be a judge or witness (and what better either judge or
witness can we find?) he will decide the question betwixt the two (both
self-pleasing) parties, which do challenge (each to himself, and derogates from
the other) that high honor and title of wisdom; I mean betwixt him that
seeks after, and labors for worldly honor, dignity and riches: and him that
having his mind raised higher and pitched upon better things, slights these
earthly things as trash, not worthy of his thoughts or care. The worldling
calls, and thinks him a fool, and he esteems no better of the worldling; and
each laughs the other to scorn. Who then shall be judge or witness? Seeing
all are parties; and there is no man but is either of the one side or of the
other. Certainly, we may judge best by the confession of the parties
themselves. Of which the last never yielded, never gaine-said or be-lyed their
assertion; while they live they avouch it, and at their death they do confirm
it much more. Though Chrysippus tormenter do torture them, though the world
(for the want of it) do afflict them with contempt and despising, still they
stand fast, and stick to their point unshaken and unmoved. The worldlings, by
the contrary, sometimes while they flourish in prosperity, ever when they are
in adversity: Sometimes while they live and are in health, ever when they lie
in dying, confess against themselves, and calls all their labor and pains
about it folly and vanity. So did Morton amongst others, which the wise will
lay to heart, and make their use of it.

Jacobus Duglassius, Mortonius Comes, Prorex pro JACOBO Sexto, Edinburgi securi
percussus Anno 1581.
Hunc specta Heroem, celso cui spirat ab or^
Majestas, toto and pectore rarus honos.
Augustos inter terrarum lumina, reges
Pro Rege, and Domino, regia sceptra tulit.
Consilium, imperium, virtus, facundia, census,
Quaeque homines capiunt, quaeque dedere dii,
Unus cuncta fuit. Nihil ad fastigia summa.
Defuit, aeternum si sua fata d^rent.
Sed viden' ut subito fatorum turbine versa
Omnia, and in praeceps pondere pressasuo?
Discite mortales mortalia temnere, and illa
Quaerere, quae miseris non rapit aura levis.
Joh. Johnstonus in Heroibu^.

James Douglas Earl of Morton, Regent, beheaded at Edinburgh, 1581.
Behold this Heroes how his looks be graced
With Majesty, what honor's in his breast!
How high his port may to the world appear!
He rules a King, and does his Scepter bear.
Counsel, commanding, and persuasive Art,
What ever men enjoy or gods impart,
Is found in him: If Fortune did remain
Constant, no greater height he need obtain.
But ah! what sudden change is here! this state
Fallen with its own weight lies oppressed by Fate.
Observe it well, and learn those goods to prise
Which never can decay; the rest despise.
Of Archbald (the third of that name) and ninth Earl of Angus.
NOw we come to Archbald himself (the third bearing the name of Archbald) son
to David, as has been said.

He was thrice married; first to Margaret Ereskin, daughter to John Earl of
Mar, who was Regent of Scotland immediately before Morton. She was a
beautiful, chaste, and virtuous Lady. She lived with him but few years, and
died without children.

After her, he was married to Margaret Leslie, daughter to the Earl of Rothus.
She lived with him the space of years, after which he was divorced from her for
her adultery. She likewise had no children.

His third wife was Jeane Lion, daughter to the Lord Glames (Chancellor) and
Relict of Robert Douglas of Logh-leven. She bare to him a daughter after his
decease (named Margaret) who died about the age of fifteen years a maid
unmarried.

He was bred and brought up with his Uncle Morton, as we have said, His
educatio^.
who was his Tutor and Guardian. He studied in S. Andrews in the New College
with Master John Douglas Provest of that College, and Rector of the
Universitie, till he was fifteen years of age. After that, he lived at Court
with his Uncle, having with him his Pedagogue Master John Provaine, who
endeavored to instruct him in the Latin tongue, and taught him his Logicks
and Rhetoricks, but with such success as is customable to youth and Nobility;
nature, counsel, and example drawing them rather to the exercises of the body,
which are more agreeable to their inclination, and are esteemed more fit and
proper for their place. Whereas Letters are thought only necessary and useful
for mean men, who intend to live by them, and make profession of some Art or
Science for their maintenance, but no ways either suitable or requisite in
Noblemen, and such as are of any eminent rank or degree. For these they are
judged to be too base, and he that affects them, pedantick and of a mean
spirit. Nay most men do account the study and knowledge of them prejudicial,
hurtful, and no small let and impediment to politic activenesse, and that it
does abate the courage of the mind and vigor of action, which is requisite
for their charge and calling of being Statesmen and Warriors. A perverse and
pernicious Tenent, and far contrary to the practice of the most famous
Captains, and Princes in all ages; such as were Julius Caesar, Scipio
Africanus, Alexander the Great, and Pompey called the Great also; of Trajane,
Antonius, Charlemaigne; and almost of all the Grecian Worthies. And yet (we
hear) that the Nobility (in France especially) account it a reproach to be
called or esteemed learned, and deem it honorable to be illiterate and
ignorant.

Much good may this honorable ignorance do them, ere any wiseman envy it. As
for the Earl of Angus, sore did he repent him of this neglect, and greatly did
he blame himself for it. Especially in the time of his last banishment, during
which he labored to have repaired that loss and over sight of his youth, by
reading and hearing read to him Latin authors of all sorts, both Historians
and others; chiefly ^us and Tremellius translation of the Scripture, which he
took great pleasure and delight in. And though the defect of practice in his
youth could not be altogether and fully supplied, yet such was his natural
ju^gement, that in expressing of his mind either by word or writ, none c^ld do
it more judiciously and sensibly; and in dictating of Letters or any other
thing, he even equalled (if not over-matched) those who would challenge to be
the greatest and most skillful Artistes therein. This was well known, and
ingenuously acknowledged, and witnessed by Chancellor Metellane (of honorable
memory) who having lighted upon some letters of his written with his own hand,
so well conceived and penned, that some who heard them read, supposed they had
not been of his own penning, but that he had only transcribed them, that they
might seem to be his own; he on the contrary affirmed (and it was true) that
they were of his penning, and that he did seldom use any man's help that way,
being himself very sufficient and able to discharge it.

Concerning his actions in the time of his uncles Regencie, we have spoken of
them above in his life (as* the fittest place for them to be remembered in) and
we need not repeat them here. After his death, finding no sure footing for him
in Scotland (amongst these who were authors of it, and would seek to secure
themselves from all revenge He flees into England.
thereof by making him away in like manner) being commanded by the King, and
summoned in his name to come to Court, he retired into England. There he was
kindly received, and honorably entertained by the bountiful liberality of
that worthy Queen Elizabeth; partly in memory of his uncle, but no less for
his own sake, being of such great hope and expectation, conceived by the
appearance of his present virtues, his wisdom, discretion, and towardliness,
which made him acceptable to all, and begot love and favor both from her
Majesty's self, and her Councillors and Courtiers that then guided the State;
Such as Sir Robert Dudley (Earl of Licester) Sir Francis Walsinghame
Secretary; and more especially, he procured the liking of him who is ever to
be remembered with honor, Sir Philip Sidney I mean; like disposition, in
courtesy, of nature, equality of age and years, did so knit their hearts
together, that Sir Philip failed not (as often as his affairs would permit
him) to visit him, in so much that he did scarce suffer any one day to slip,
whereof he did not spend the most part in his company. He was then in travel,
or had brought forth rather (though not polished and refined it as now it is)
that his so beautiful and universally accepted birth, his Arcadia. He
delighted much to impart it to Angus, and Angus took as much pleasure to be
partaker thereof.

There were with him at this time in England, of the name of Douglas, James
Lord Torthorrell, and Sir George his brother; two sons of Mortons, James of
Spot, and Archbald of Pittendrigh: Also James of Maines, and Sir George of
Langnidderie. There were besides these (of note) only John Carmichael and his
sons, together with Hugh Carmichael: the rest were but his ordinary servants
and dependers.

He resided openly at Court, being no Rebel, and not convicted or guilty of
any crime committed against his Prince or Country. No such thing was laid to
his charge by his enemies; otherwise the receiving and entertaining of him had
been a breach of the peace betwixt the Kingdoms. All that could be alleged
was, that he had withdrawn himself from the fury of his enemies. And yet, as
if he had been a Rebel and forfeited, they intrometted with his rents and
estate for their own use. He spent his time there, in learning to ride great
horses, and handling of his Arms and Weapons, together with using such courtly
and manly exercises as became his age and place. But above all, he was
careful to observe the Government of the Country, and Policy of that State
and Kingdom; making his own use thereof for his bettering, both in
Christianity and civil prudencie. He looked with an heedfull eye upon men's
wisdom, and through that, upon Gods working by their wisdom; he noted the
actions of those who were the guiders of that State, Court and Country, saw
their aims and designs; and comparing them with his own affairs, and things
fallen* out at home, he called to mind what had befallen his Uncle Morton; who
(like them) had no less flourished, but was soon cut down and withered: who
had been so powerful and honored but a little before, yet in a moment (as it
were) was overthrown and trod under foot. His thoughts also reflecting upon
himself, and his own condition, how he was forced to forsake his own Country,
and depend upon the estimation of strangers; that though for the present he
were somewhat respected, yet it was uncertain how long he should be so, no
longer than they should think it profitable for their own estate, and
conduceable to their ends. From hence raising his mind to the contemplation of
all humane affairs, and of all more, men (...) all (...) even of Princes
themselves, he learned that (which few (...), (...) (...) learn of any rank,
and fewer do practice that are in high places, whose places crave action, and
action over-treads contemplation) he learned (I say) truly to contemn all
worldly things, such as riches, honor, dignities, and the like; and truly to
long and seek after heavenly treasure, which perishes not, and brings with
it no anxietie, or solicitude of mind, having the soul fully set and fixed on
God alone. Many speak of it, and that very well, and not without some sense
and feeling thereof, but it lasts not, save for a fit, and sudden flash. We are
all of us too earthly, and savor too much of earth, from whence we were taken,
and of which we were made, and thither also we bend, and tend ever down-ward,
what through our natural propension that way, what by example of the
multitude, which like a violent stream of an overbearing flood, carries us
along, if we be not firmly built upon the rock of heavenly resolution, and
unless we keep fast our hold by perpetual and never-intermitted meditation.
For him I dare avouch it, that howsoever he refrained from outward shows, for
fear of falling into ostentation, or whatever other ways he was employed
about in regard of his place and calling, yet his mind was ever (even in the
midst of business) wholly bent to Godward, and would have been glad to have
been freed from all thoughts and affairs which had any mixture of earthly
things. And this disposition wrought in him by his being exiled, he esteemed no
small benefit and advantage of his sufferings; so that in private where he
expressed himself freely, without all mask of ceremon^e or niceness, he has
many times been heard to thank God very heartily and seriously, with grave
words, and settled countenance, saying, That he would not have exchanged the
cross of his first banishment for all the Crowns and Princes estates in the
world: far less for an Earldom, or Lordship, such as Angus, or Douglas. So
did God work with him by adversity.

While he was thus working upon himself in England, and framing his heart after
a new mould and fashion (which few knew or dreamed of) God was preparing the
way for his return to his place and honorsin Scotland. The love which his
Contrymen bore to him was great, and likewise general, and almost
universal (as it did commonly follow that popular name of Douglas, to which it
was in a manner hereditarie) even in regard of his own courteous, mild, and
towardly disposition, and of the great hopes and expectation of excellent fruit
from so noble and worthy a plant. This being accompanied with his suffering,
and innocence, together with his harmless youth, age did move pity, and
stir the affections of most men toward him.

As for particular friends, he wanted them not (as few Noblemen in this
Country do, all the Nobility being linked and bound one to another by
Kindred or alliance) his house having been so eminent of a long time, and
there being few of the Nobles, but were either descended of it, or tied to it
by some consanguinity, affinity, or other relation. And therefore one would
think it strange that he should have been so long banished: yet when we look
upon his uncle Mortons case (who had the same friends or more) it is far more
strange that he should have come to such an end. But as in this, when the
appointed time came, nothing could hinder his fall and overthrow: so in Angus
his case, until the time appointed by God did come, nothing could work his
restitution. What the estate of business was at his departure, we have told
already in Mortons life, ere that year came fully to an end (or not long after
he had been a year in England) there fell out a change at Court, which was
thus:

Esme Lord Obignie (now Duke of Lennox) and James Stuart Earl Change in Court.
of Arran, had (with their great riches and honors) acquired much hatred from
all sorts of men. The Ministry were offended at them for making master Robert
Montgomerie Archbishop of Glasgow, (an Office then odious and unlawful, as
being against the Laws of the Country, and ordinance of the Church) and were
jealous of the one as a suspected Papist, and persuaded that the other (to wit,
Arran) was a downright Atheist. The Nobility stormed and grudged at their
extraordinary and sudden preferment. For James was made Lord Hammiltoun,
Abercorne, Bothwel-haugh, and Earl of Arran, with a power almost absolute
(given or usurped, under the name of Captain of the Guard, and the pretext of
pursuing the Douglasses) to apprehend, imprison, and put on the rack
whomsoever he pleased. Obignie was made Lord of Dalkeith, Tantallon, Darlin,
Torbouton, and Duke of Lennox, Keeper of the Castle of Dumbartan, and great
Chamberlain of Scotland.

Thus did they overtop and overshadow the rest of the Peers, as tall Cedars
do small Shrubs, to their great coffeehouse and disdain. The Gentlemen
were so used by them, that they esteemed themselves brought into a thraldom
and slaverie, none of them being sure of their estates, which were wrung from
them by color of law (the cloak of their oppression) and all fearing the rage
and unlimited violence, especially of James Stuart, who was composed of nothing
else, and whose actions were suitable to his disposition.

The Burrowes were alienated by being cut short in their privileges,
liberties, and immunities, which were quarrelled, retrenched, cancelled, and
taken away, according to their humors of avarice, and desire of gain, and
according to the pleasure and suggestions of their informers and parasites.

With this their exorbitant increase of power and insolency, as the hatred of
others did increase toward them, so did variance arise betwixt themselves. The
first occasion hereof was the carrying of the Crown at Parliament: this was
proper, and is the hereditarie right and privilege of the house of Angus, and
he being now banished, and the Duke of Lennox having his estate, either for
that regard, or because of his more honorable descent, or by the advantage of
the Kings favor (which he had in greater measure then Arran) we cannot
affirm; but so it was, that he was preferred to bear it. Arran stormed at
this, and protested that his bearing of it at this time should not be
prejudicial to his claim, who being descended of the house of D. Mordack (which
was nearest to the King) ought in reason to have carried it; yet he renounced
all title to the kingdom, notwithstanding of this extraction of his pedigree,
and challenging of this honor. This renunciation was derided by some, and
disdained by others, as a great malapartnesse, and high presumption in him, who
being but lately raised from so mean a fortune and estate, durst utter such
speeches as bewrayed such vast and high thoughts, as to aim at no less then
the Kingdom, if ever (the Kings own race failing) the right thereto should
come in question, and happen to be controverted. And indeed his designs are
thought to have flowne to no lower pitch, which (perhaps) had been no very
hard or impossible task for him, if he could as well have kept out the
Hammiltouns (who could only pretend right to it) and the Douglasses (whose
power and authority was the greatest in the Country) as he found means to
cast them out of Court and Country. For then he had had no Competitor but the
Duke of Lennox, and him, being a stranger, and subsisting merely by the
present Kings favor, he nothing doubted to supplant by his craft and violence,
joined with such a colorable claim. Another occasion of discord fell out by
Sir John Seaton, son to the Lord Seaton, and Master of the Kings horses. As the
King was about to go to his horse to ride a hunting, Arran having something to
speak to him in private, all men were commanded to remove, which all did
saving Sir John, who being by his place to wait upon the King, and set him on
his horse, stayed still, and did not remove with the rest. Arran seeing him to
stay behind the rest, either threatened to throw his batton at him, or did throw
it indeed; for he carried a staff or batton as Captain of the Guard. Sir
John would have requited this affront, but was hindered by the Guard, who
carried him down stairs, and so parted them for that time. The next day Sir
John, his brother Sir William, and the Lord Seaton himself, were all commanded
to keep their lodgings; which the Duke (who favored them) took so ill, that
he refused to come abroad that day. At last they were so divided, that the Duke
carried the King with him to Dalkeith, and Arran abode in the Palace of
Halyrood-hoose. There were with the Duke, the Lord Seaton, Maxwell, (then Earl
of Morton) with some others. Argyle, Ruthven, (then Thesaurer, and lately made
Earl of Gowrie) the Secretary, the Controller, and other Officers of State,
stayed with Arran, and took upon them to make the body of the Kings Council,
and to sit as such. But all their Decrees and Conclusions were dashed by the
King in person, which they wanted.

These broiles lasted from the end of October till mid-Februarie, about which
time the King returning to Halyroodhouse (from whence Arran had removed before)
and from thence going back again to Dalkeith, he sent for him, and reconciled
him to the Duke, after which they became greater friends then ever they had
been before: so that Arran would do nothing for any man but what he knew
stood with the Dukes good liking But this union betwixt themselves divided them
the more from others, and others from both of them; for now he that had any
business with either, behoved to sue to both, and he that disliked, or bore
ill will to either, was forced to fawn on him also, or to hate both, and seek
the overthrow of them both alike. At the Justice Aires in Perth 1582. 1582*
in July, in some contest betwixt the Duke and the Earl of Gowrie, the Justice
Aircs in Perth in July.
Duke spoke some reproachful words to him in French, which Gowrie not
understanding then; afterward, when he had learned what the meaning of it was,
he upbraided the Duke for ungratefulness, telling him, that was all the thank
he got for having twice saved him from being killed. Thus was he alienated, or
thus did he bewray his alienation of mind, which lay hidden till now it burst
forth. Another time the Chamberlain Aires being indicted to be kept (the 28.
of August) by the Duke (then Chamberlain) which was a Court very odious to the
Burrowes, as being rather a legal robbery, then a Court of Justice, and upon
which it is thought he was set of purpose that he might incur more hatred,
which commonly falls out, when a former general dislike does meet with private
grudges. This Court (I say) being indicted, while the Duke was bu^ied in
preparing for it, and he with Arran having left the King, were at Edinburgh and
Dalkeith about such things as was necessary thereto: the four and twentieth of
August the King came from his hunting in Athole to Ruthven, where Gowrie,
assisted The road of Ruthven 1582 August 24.
by some of the Nobility, removed the Guard, that were under the command of
Arrane, with no great ado, and laid hold also of the Earl himself as he
entered into the house of Ruthven, and conveyed him into a close room, where
he was kept, and not suffered to come near the King.

He had, upon the first surmising of an alteration, come from Edinburgh with a
company of some fourscore horse, but hearing that the Earl of Mar was at
Kinrosse in his way, he sent his company with his brothers ( Robert and
Henry) and he himself with one or two taking a byway, came to have slipped into
the Kings presence before they had been aware of him. But Gowrie being
advertised hereof, met him at the gate, and had straightwayes killed him, if
George Authenlecke (sometime servitour to Morton) had not held his hand as he
was about to have pulled out his dagger to have stabbed him. His two brothers,
with their company, were defeated by the Earl of Mar, of which Robert was
wounded also, and taken prisoner.

There joined with Mar and Ruthven openly, Thomas Lion (Master of Glames)
Lawrence Lord Oliphant, together with Sir Lewis Ballandine of Achnowle
(Justice-Clerke) and others. Before Mar came, the Guard made some difficulty
to admit them, and grant them entrance into the Kings chamber: for they serving
for pay, and being put in, and commanded by Arran, when they heard what had
happened to their Captain, made an offer to resist, and not to suffer any man
to come near the King, unless he should signify his pleasure to be such.

Sir Lewis Ballandine conceiving great indignation hereat, asked at master
David Hume (who by chance was come thither, and stood next to him) if he had a
pistol about him, which he gave him, but withal said to him, Be not too
hasty to shoot, let them alone, you shall find that their fury will soon fall
(lacking their Captain, and a head) and that they will give way, when once
they see the Nobility approach. And so they did indeed, for the Earl of Mar
being come, and the rest joining with him, they shranke away and gave place.
When they came to the King, they showed him the necessity of doing what they
had done, in regard of the violence of Arrane, and their fear and suspicion of
the Duke of Lennox: That there was no other way to remove the general
discontent of his Subjects, and to prevent the dangers which would follow
thereupon to himself, and his Crown, then by removing of these men from about
him, whose unjust actions, and violent oppressions, reflected upon his Majesty,
to the great prejudice of his honor and estate, as also to the great
disadvantage of Religion, and the good of his people. The King assented to what
they said, either because he thought it to be the true, or rather, (as appeared
afterward) that he might seem to approve of that which he could not resist*
So they go to Perth, then to Stirling, where their Proclamations were set
forth; the one containing the Kings Declaration, concerning what was done at
Ruthven; that it was for his service, and acceptable to him. In the other the
Duke of Lennox was commanded to depart out of the Realm of Scotland before the
24. of September. There was a third also, by which the Chamberlain Aires were
discharged to be kept.

The Earl of Angus had (a little before these things) come down from Angus
returns home.
the Court of England to Berwick, in expectation of this change; and now having
notice given him by these Noblemen of what had passed, he stayed a while in the
town, and thereafter came into Scotland: yet did he not go directly to Court,
but came to Cumledge in the Merse, a house within eight miles of Berwick, which
belonged to Archbald Authenleck (a follower of his Uncle Morton) and lay next
adjacent to his Barony of Boncle. There he remained till Master Bows, and
Master Carry (Ambassadors from the Queen of England) came into Scotland (the 11
of September) and did by their intercession obtain of the King, that he might
be assoyled from that crime of Rebellion, which his enemies had put upon him,
because he had not obeyed their charges given out in the Kings name, to come to
Court, which was indeed to come into their power. Neither did he presently
after he was relaxed come near the King, until he had assurance that the
King was very well contented, and desirous that he should come to him; but
stayed some five weeks, expecting his full and free consent therein, that his
return might be such as could not be excepted against. The King delayed him a
while, that he might be beholding to him ^or this favor, and he was contented
to stay so long, that the King might see he was willing to receive it at his
hands as a favor, and that by so doing, he might fully remove all hard
construction that his Majesty could make of his withdrawing into England. He
had presence of the King the 20. of October (about two months after he came
home) in the Palace of Haly-rood-house, where he was kindly and lovingly
received, to the great contentment of all men, and with great commendation of
his modesty; for that he had patiently waited for his Princes pleasure so long
a time, and had not abruptly rusht into his sight, which many would, and he
might have done easily had he pleased to have made that use of the times and
opportunity which was offered: but his disposition was not that way set; he
was truly of a mild disposition, abhorring all turbulencie, every way
towardly, inclining to peace, and to all submission toward his Prince.

Now being thus returned, gladly would he have lived in quietness, and
enjoyed the Kings favor still, as he had it at this time, and willingly would
he have served him as a faithful and loyal Subject according as he had been
pleased to have employed him, without further stirring or meddling with any
thing, or any person. Neither (as I think) did the world ever know, or bring
forth a more calm and quiet spirit, void of ambition and covetousness, as
also of all envy and malice to any creature, which are the chief causes of
restless and tumultuous practices. He was also mindful of Mortons counsel at
his death, who advised him to do so: and being already in so honorable a
place (first of the Nobility) he had little or nothing else to desire or hope
for, if he could have been assured to possess his own in peace. But finding
the Country divided, the dregs of the old faction that stood for the Queen,
still working underhand, and by it the Romish party laboring to undermine the
true reformed Religion, and such as had been instruments to establish it, upon
whose ruin these new men (by their new courses) did endeavor to build their
preferment, so that none could with surety live in any honorable place, as a
good Patriot, but behoved to take part with them that stood for Religion, and
undergo the like hazard as they did. Besides, these Noblemen had (in very
deed) wrought out and made way for his return from exile, by removing of those
who were (as common enemies to all honest men, so more particularly) his
especial enemies, having been authors of his Uncles death, and who had seized
upon his own lands and possessions. They were also his near kinsemen, and
dear friends, Gowrie and Glames were come of his house, Oliphant was of his
alliance (having married Margaret Douglas, daughter to William of Loghleven)
and Mar was his brother in law, and no less his brother in love and
affection, which continued without the least breach or diminution, so long as
he lived. These private and public inducements thus meeting and concurring, he
could not esteem that cause to be more theirs then his own, and therefore
could not choose but embrace it as his own, that is, to the utmost of his power.

Therefore he joined with them in it sincerely for his own part, but He joins
with the Lords against the Courtiers.
they continued not long undivided amongst themselves. For the Duke being
diverse times charged to void the Realm, after diverse shifts and delays, at
last he went through England into France in the month of December, and not
long after he died there the 27. of July 1583. After 1583.
he was gone, they being rid of that fear, there fell out dissension betwixt
L^nox dies in France.
the Earl of Gowrie, and Secretary Pitcarne (made Lord of Dumfermeling) in
April 1583. The King went to the Castle of Saint Andrews Gowrie takes a
remission for the fact at Ruthven.
in August, and there the Earl of Gowrie (having changed his mind with the
change of affairs) took a remission for his fact at Ruthven, as being
Treason, and so by his own confession condemned himself, and all his partners
therein, and by separating himself from them, overthrew the cause, and them
with it. All this while after Angus his return, there was nothing done worthy
of memory, save that he (out of his love and respect to his Uncle Morton)
caused his head to be taken down from the City gate, and honorably buried
with his body, the 10. of December 1582. The chief instrument in this change,
was William Stuart, a brother of the house of Goston, who had been a Colonel
in the Low-Countreyes, and was then Captain of the Kings Guard. Gowrie had
brought him home, and preferred him to the Kings service, of purpose to
counterpoyse the greatness of Arran: but they were so wise, as not to cross
one another; but on the contrary, they did aid and strengthen each other all
they could.

By this Williams means, the authors and actors of the fact at Ruthven A^an
returns to Court.
were strictly commanded to depart from the Court, and the Earl of Arrane
recalled thither again. Angus had joined with those of Ruthven, yet because he
had not been an actor there, and had had no hand in it, he hoped that they
would suffer him to live in quietness at home. Secretary Walsingham
(Ambassador from Queen Elizabeth* had gotten a promise of the King that he
should be fully restored to all his lands and possessions, and he had relied
thereon, and waited long for the performance thereof; but finding nothing but
delays, he perceived they had no good meaning toward him. And so indeed it
proved, for Mar, and the master of Glames were confined in Argyle, the Castle
of Stirling (of which Mar and his predecessors had been keepers time out of
mind) was committed to the custody of Arrane; and the Earl of Angus was
confined beyond Forth.

Before his going to the place of his confinement, he wrote to some Angus
consined beyond Forth.
of his friends to accompany him thither for his safety in his journey. This
being known at Court, it was interpreted to be done of intention to surprise
the King, who was that day to go abroad to his haulking. It was alleged also,
that Mar and Glames were to meet him at Achnoweshill, and to join with him
in his surprisall. Hereupon the King having risen by times that morning to go
to his sport, and being ready to take horse, was stayed that day, and curriours
were sent out to try how matters went, and whether that report were true. Some
of these scouts came to the Key-stone, (for that way Angus took of purpose,
being furthest off from the Court, that he might be out of their danger, and
they freed from all fear of him) and found him riding in a peaceable manner,
accompanied with a small train of his domestics only, and those but
halfe-armed (which was ordinary then, even in the most peaceable times) and no
ways prepared for war. He desired them to tell his Majesty that he was
going toward the place of his confinement, in obedience to him; and they did
relate the truth very faithfully and honestly to the King. This rumor (of
surprising the King) was said to have proceeded from one of his own name, who
having been in Tantallon the day before, and perceiving that there were letters
in writing, which they did not communicate to him (as Angus did never impart
business to any, but such as were his intimate friends, and there having been
some difference betwixt him, and this Gentleman, he never used him after that
so familiarly) made this conjecture of their secrecy, and whispered, it to the
Courtiers, who were apt to believe it: whether he did indeed suspect some such
thing, or if it were raised only by envious, and malicious persons, we cannot
affirm, but fame laid the blame of it on him; for that he, having been so late
over night at Tantallon, had made great haste to be in Edinburgh that night,
and came to Court before day light: and that upon his coming, the Kings
haulking was stayed; yet it is uncertain, for he was commanded also to depart
out of the Country.

The Earl of Angus crossed Forth at the Queens Ferry, and went to his own
house at Aberdowre; but because there he was too near the Court, and so
obnoxious to suspicion, he removed from thence to Kinrosse: and to secure them
yet more, leaving his household there behind him, he went almost alone to
Lesely, a house belonging to his brother in Law, the Master of Rothusse. Being
there, he moved him, and the Earl his father to deal with the Courtiers to
grant him so much favor as to suffer him to live a private and retired life,
at one of his own houses in the Country far from Court, and State
business: but they were so far from yielding to any such thing, that whereas
he had been charged only to remain beyond Forth before; now he is sent He is
sent beyond Spaye.
to remain beyond Spaye.

Wherefore he takes his journey thither, and came to Dundie; and from thence
toward Elgin in Murray. Master Scrimger of Diddup He goes to Elgin in Murray.
(Constable of Dundie) would needs bring him on his way; and as if he had
intended no more, caused carry his haulkes with him, but by no means would
leave him till he came to his journeyes end. By the way he being well known,
took upon him to be the chief man, and gave out that Angus was his son in
law, the Lord of Inshmartin. This he did, least the Courtiers should have
laid some ambushment for him by the way, he being to pass through a Country,
where their party was strong, and where they had many favorers, having none
of his own followers with him, save Robert Douglas of Cavers, Gentleman of his
horses. So he passed the Carne-Mont with great celerity and haste, the rest of
his household following after by easy journeyes. Great was the care his worthy
friend the Constable had of him; and many ways did he labor to keep him
from melancholy, and to divert his thoughts from too much dwelling upon his
present hard condition: there was no kind of sport or game, which he did not
afford him with all the variety he could devise to entertain him, and to
cheer him up: till the court, envying even this small contentment to him,
commanded the Constable also to go off the Country; yet was he never
destitute of friends; such was the sweetness of his disposition, and of such
power and force was it, that it won the hearts of all the Gentlemen in those
quarters to him: such as the Innesses, Dumbarres, Hayes, and others, who did
all strive who should show most affection toward him, by inviting him to their
houses, and feasting him by turns, and using of him with all courtesy, and
respect; so that he could not have been more honored and regarded amongst
his dearest friends, and nearest kinsfolks. Nay, such was their love to him,
that hearing some surmises of no great good will borne to him by Huntley, they
of their own accord came to him, and forbade him to be afraid of him, for they
would spend their lives in his defense, and for his safety, if the Earl of
Huntley should attempt any thing against him* Wherefore it was thought that
they being thus affected, he durst not adventure to execute any Court plot
against him, which he wanted no good will to do, and otherwise would have
done. Yet was this the place of the Kingdom, where all Huntleyes power and
friendship lay very near at hand, and where Angus had least acquaintance and
fewest friends, all of them being mere strangers to him, without any other
bond of obligation or tie of relation, but what his virtue and worth had gained
in that short time of his being amongst them and conversing with them.

The Courtiers at this time were at no small contest and variance Discord
betwixt the Ministers and Courtiers.
with the Ministers; chiefly with Master James Lowson, Master Walter
Balcanquell, John Durie (Ministers at Edinburgh) and Master Andrew Melvin,
Principal of the new College of Saint Andrews, and Professor of Divinity
there. The occasion was this; they had at a General Assembly approved the fact
of Ruthven by the Kings especial commandment, and now being desired by the
Courtiers to condemn it, they refused to do it. Both sides alleged the Kings
authority; the Courtiers pleading, that such was his will now: and the
Ministers, that it was not such then. The Courtiers said that he was a captive
then; and the Ministers replied, that (perhaps) he was so now: that they saw
not any thralling of him then; and that it might as well be alleged hereafter
that he was a captive now, as it was alleged now that he was a captive then.
As for the particular quarrels of either side, they said they knew them not;
but one thing they knew, that they were as good men, as Noble, as worthy, as
well affected to his Majesty who were with him then, as those were who were
about him now; that they were as free from all suspicion of unsoundnesse in
Religion, nay, much freer, the others being at least suspected.

In which regard they could not retract what they had done, and could not but
allow of their fact who had removed from the King, men that were not altogether
free of suspicion. What private ends or aims they had, was unknown to them, as
also they were ignorant what the respects were which they now had; both
pretended the Kings will; but they were sure of this point, that the removing
of suspected men was a good office, and made for his well being, and that the
instruments thereof were instruments of a good work, whatsoever were their
intentions. Thus most of them spoke: Others expressed themselves more harshly,
saying, that wicked men were removed, and such as were enemies to the Church,
to the Country and to the Nobility, who sought their own preferment with the
overthrow of all, that they might be built upon the ruins of all these. These
speeches were very unfavourie to the Earl of Arran, to the Colonel Stuart,
and the Prior of Pitten-weeme. It rubbed upon them, and (by consequent) as they
would have it appear) reflected upon the King. Wherefore they called it
sedition, and stirring up of dissension betwixt the King and his Subjects. So
they inform the King, and by their Information, animate him against them.
Wherefore John Dury behooved to be removed from Edinburgh to Monrosse: Master
James Lowson, and Master Walter Balcanquell were rebuked only. Master Walters
Text was treason (against the Courtiers) and spoke too much though he had said
nothing. It was that passage of Ecclesiastes [ I saw Princes walking on foot,
and servants riding on horse-back] that is, Great and worthy men displaced,
and base men set up in their room; to which doctrine he added an admonition,
that they should look to themselves when the cup of their iniquity should be
full. Master Andrew Melvin was dilated to the King and Council by one William
Stuart, that he had said in a Sermon of his, That the King was unlawfully
called to the Kingdom; but he craved, that seeing he was accused of wrong
doctrine, that he might be tried by a General or Synodall Assembly, who are
the proper judges of doctrine delivered from the Pulpit. It was answered, that
he should have no other than the King and Council, who ordained him to enter
himself prisoner in Blackness. Melvin flees to Berwick.
Whereupon he fearing, and informed that Colonel Stuart and Arran had no good
meaning toward him, fled secretly to Berwick Before his departure, he drew up
his Apology, of which it will not be amiss to set down the sum, as a
testimony of his innocence and equity of his cause, as also of the violence,
and iniquity of those times, that so it may appear more evidently what just
grounds and reasons the Noblemen had to labor to have things redressed, and
such enormous insolences repressed. First, He protested His Apology
solemnly before God and his Angels, that he never uttered either in that
Sermon or in any other, any one word which might import any disgrace or slander
of his Sovereign the Kings Majesty: but had ever exhorted all men to yield
him all reverence and obedience: that he had ever, and still did acknowledge
him his lawful Prince and supreme Governor in civil matters; that he had
ever, and even then prayed for his preservation and prosperity: Secondly, that
his desire to be tried by a Synod of the Church, did not proceed from any
intention to call his Majesty's authority in question, but only because they
were appointed to be the ordinary judges of any thing delivered in preaching,
In prima instantia. He alleged for this a plain Act of Parliament, and a
con^erence betwixt certain Lords of the Council, and some Ministers deputed by
the King, who had agreed upon this conclusion. Thirdly, he said that Councels
and Doctors of the Church did think that the trial of such things is most
conveniently and fitly to be taken in the place where the slander is raised,
and scandal given; which was Saint Andrews, for there that Sermon was
preached: Fourthly, he pleaded, that the privileges of the University,
granted and given to it by former Kings, and confirmed and ratified by his
Majesty's self, made the Rector and his Assessors, Judges to all Ministers,
Masters and Students that were Members of the same, and were accused of any
offense committed within the liberties thereof. Fifthly, that he spoke nothing
but what he had good warrant for from scripture. Sixthly, that he had for him;
first, the testimony of the Universitie, signed by the Rector, and sealed with
their seal; secondly, the testimony of the Church-Session in S. Andrews,
subscribed by the Ministers, Elders and Deacons; thirdly, the testimony of the
Provest and Bailiffs, and town Council, signed by the town Clerk by their
commandment, and sealed with their seal; fourthly, and last of all, the
testimony of the Presbytery, subscribed by the Clerk thereof: which
testimonies were of more value to absolve him, than any one man's accusation was
to condemn him. Seventhly, he desired that he might have the common privilege
of all the Subjects, which was to know his accuser* and the prerogative of a
Minister of Gods word, that an accusation should not be received (or put in
process) against him, but under two or three witnesses. Eighthly, that his
accuser might be liable, and incur the punishment due to him by the Acts of
Parliament, if his accusation were found to be false. Ninthly, that the
Defender might have place, and be permitted to object against his Accuser: And
that if William Stuart were the man, he would prove that the said William had
professed hatred against him, and had threatened him to do him bodily harm; in
which respect, his information was to be suspected if he were the Delatour, or
if he were a witness his testimony was not sufficient. Notwithstanding of all
this, yet he said, he would simply declare the truth in the presence of God and
his Angels, so far forth as his memory would serve him. He said, his text was,
Daniels expounding of the handwriting on the wall to Baltazar. Here he observed
how Daniel in reproving Baltazar for not giving glory to God for his benefits
toward him and his father, and for abusing the vessels of the house of God, did
apply the Text (of the handwriting) to Baltazar. From hence (and other places
of Scripture) he inferred, that application ought to be made of examples
(whether of mercies or judgments) by the Ministers of the Word (as Daniel was)
to Kings, as was Baltazar: And that the nearer the example touched the party to
whom it were applied (as that of Nabuchodonosor, who was father to Baltazar)
the more forcible it would be. This (said he) is the right way of application,
but who does it now-a-dayes? Or if any do it, who cares for it, or is moved
with it? If a man should now apply the example of our Predecessors to these
times, as of King James the third, how his Courtiers and flatterers abused him,
would they not say that he raved, and wandered from his Text? Nay, perhaps,
accuse him of Treason. Secondly, he said, concerning these words which his
accuser did allege to have been spoken by him (that our Nabuchodonosor, to
wit, the Kings mother, had bin banished twice seven years, and would be
restored again) as it never came into his mind, so did he not remember the
words, or any expression tending to that purpose, or importing any such thing:
Thirdly, As for that speech (That the King was unlawfully called to the Crown)
or any thing sounding that way; he protested before God, he never spoke it, nor
did he ever doubt of the lawfulness of his Majesty's authority, which the
Church had ever maintained, and he himself constantly avouched, as all that
knew him could bear witness. That it was true, that in speaking of
Nabuchodonosor, he had said; That first, howbeit he had succeeded to his
fathers Kingdom, and that when he was of ripe years: secondly, though he were
endowed with wisdom, learning, liberality, and other virtues: thirdly, though
he had conquered and purchased diverse Territories and Countries, as a valiant
Captain (having been Lieutenant to his father) in his fathers time: fourthly,
And although he were made King (after his father) by all the Nobility: yet
Daniel makes mention of none of all these, but says, That God gave him the
Kingdom. From whence he gathered as a firm conclusion; That, by whatsoever way
Kingdoms do come (whether by election, succession, or conquest, whether by
ordinary or extraordinary means) it is God that gives them, and he that makes
Kings. But (alas!) men do forget this that are in high places, as experience
does show: And not only Atheists and Idolaters, but even godly Kings are
subject to this forgetfulness. David extraordinarily called, Solomon also
extraordinarily, and Joas extraordinarily preserved and crowned in his tender
years, did all forget the ordainer, all forget God their advancer; and he
therefore did chastise them. That instead of applying this to the King, he did
(as his custom ever was, when he spoke of his Majesty) turn and convert it
into a Prayer: That since such was the weakness of Godly Kings, it would
please God of his mercy never to suffer our King to forget Gods goodness and
mercy toward him, who had called him extraordinarily to be King of the
Country: first, being but a child in his Cradle: secondly, his mother yet
alive: thirdly, a great part of the Nobility his enemies: and fourthly, some of
them still pursuing of him, ever since the heavy burden of government was laid
on his shoulders. He concluded that these were his formal words, upon which,
what ground any man could have to build such accusation against him, he
referred it to the wisdom of his Majesty and his council, who, he hoped,
would not give ear to such who through malice did stretch or wrest his words,
or through ignorance did mistake them; not being able to distinguish betwixt
extraordinary calling, and unlawful calling. This Declaration he set forth,
not so much to beg favor or releasement, but to render the reason of his
chosen and voluntary exile. Diverse more than he, who suffered as he did, and for
the same cause, set forth likewise their apologies to justify themselves, by
clearing of their innocence, and showing the causes of their leaving the
Country and their callings. The Courtiers did interest the King in all these
quarrels, and labored to embarke him therein the deepest they could: and by
all means strove to make him believe that all was against him, and that their
aim was at him, whom they wounded through their sides: and fain they would
have persuaded all others to the same. But all were not so blind: there were
many that could, and did distinguish and separate the Kings cause from the
Courtiers; and did show that as they hated them, so they loved him. Especially
the Ministry, who at a General Assembly (held at Edinburgh in November)
appointed a general Fast to be kept throughout the whole Kingdom, and gave
out the reasons thereof to be: first, The abounding of wickedness: secondly,
The danger of the Church: thirdly, The danger of the King: fourthly, The danger
of the Commonwealth (which all were meant, and did directly point at the
rulers of court chiefly) through their wickedness, Atheism, want of Religion,
Godlessenesse, Popishnesse, or Libertinisme, avarice, aspiring; Who being sole
(said they) or chief about the King, under the shadow of his authority: first,
do trouble the Ministry: secondly, seek to pervert his Majesty, and draw him
(if it were possible for them) to the same contempt of Religion; that so in
time he might become a persecuter and enemy to the Church, and overthrow it
altogether: thirdly, do tread under foot the Commonwealth of this Country, by
banishing the best of the Nobility, who do love God and the Church best, and
are best affected toward the Kings welfare, that they in the mean time may
possess and brook their Lands and Inheritance: And fourthly, who suffered
murder, oppression, witchcraft, whooredome, and many other sins to pass
unpunished and uncurbed. This Fast continued the space of a Week, including
both the Sundays.

The Cou^tiers (notwithstanding of this) contemning and slighting all
admonitions, kept on their own ways and course of committing, banishing,
discrediting, and weakening of all such as they thought did favor the
Nobility, and were not forward enough to further them, and advance their
faction. They engrossed all places of power and authority to themselves;
dis-armed, dis-abled, and diminished all others, and even derided them. Of
which dealing I will recompt one example amongst many: I have made mention
above, how some discord and variance fell out betwixt Pitcairne, Abbot of
Dumfermling, and the Earl of Gowrie. Hereupon Gowrie (to match Pitcairne) had
reconciled himself to the Courtiers, and was thought to side with them; and
especially to be very intimate with Colonel Stuart. Pitcairne labored to
out-shoot the Earl in his own Bow, and for that end sues to the Colonel for
his friendship, which because he knew that it was vendible, he sent him the
price thereof (according to his estimate) in gold. The Colonel liked the
metal, but not the condition, and therefore he kept both his friendship and
the gold to himself; and having showed it to the King and Gowrie, deriding him,
said, that the Abbot had sent him that to draw the King to favor him; and thus
was he flouted, and wiped clean of his Moneys. William Douglas of Logh-leven
was confined in the Merse, for no other fault, but because he was a Douglas,
and an upright honest man as any was in the Kingdom. Sir George Hume of
Wedderburne, because he was in Kin, and a friend of the Earl of Angus, was
sent prisoner to the Castle of Down beyond Forth: Sir James Hume of
Coldinknows was committed to the Castle of Edinburgh; Master Cunninghame of
Drummewhasle was likewise imprisoned; and Master John Colvill brother to Cleish
had been served in the same kind, if he, fearing their rage, had not prevented
it by fleeing. Many others were used after the like sort, it being a sufficient
crime to favor any of the discourted Noblemen. Last of all, a Proclamation was
made, wherein the Fact at Ruthven was condemned as foul, abominable, and
treasonable, and all the actors therein (or favorers of them) were commanded
to depart from Edinburgh, and not to com^ near the place where the King was, or
should happen to be, under the pain of death. The Earl of Gowrie had taken a
remission for it, but it served not his turn, nor did him any good at all: for
he was particularly charged Gowrie commanded to go beyond sea.
to go off the Country, and not to remain in Scotland, England, or Ireland,
with a non obstante, notwithstanding any remission obtained before. And to
secure themselves yet further, they prohibited all men to carry Pistols, except
the Kings Domestics, and his Guard. They brought home also into Scotland,
Lodowick Duke of Lennox (son to Obignie) being then but a child, to strengthen
their party, and to tie the Kings affection Lodowick Duke of Lennox brought
home.
so much the more to them. He was restored to his fathers estate, and (as a
part thereof) to the Lordship of Dalkeith. This being Angus his inheritance,
they thought it would engage the Duke in a perpetual enmity with him, as it is
ordinary for a man to hate him whom he wrongs. On these and the like grounds
they established to themselves (in their own conceit) a perpetual and safe
estate; which they had so fastened and linked with the Kings, that neither could
be brangled without the shaking and over turning of the other. But these
courses produced a quite contrary effect, and even then wrought such
disposition in men, as did at last overthrow all their plots, and themselves
withal. So frail, and so unsure a foundation is iniquity. For Angus as he was
altogether innocent of any thing that could be alleged against him, even in
their own judgments, so was he universally beloved of all, by an hereditary
popularity from his Ancestors, and more for his own known virtues; and
therefore being thus wronged in his person, and in his inheritance, he was
pitied of all. Mar in like manner, being descended of an honorable, ancient,
faithful and loyal race of Progenitors, as also for his own good parts and
conditions, was beloved in like sort, and pitied, notwithstanding that he had
been an actour at Ruthven. The Earl of Gowrie (by the contrary) was greatly
hated by the Courtiers, and little set by, or regarded by the other party. He
had assisted (with his father) at the slaughtering of Rizio, and was the chief
man and principal author and actour in the fact of Ruthven. Yet had he
changed his mind and side at S. Andrews, repented him of what he had done at
Ruthven, condemned it, and taken a remission for it. Now being casten off by
the Court, and commanded to depart off the Country, he repents him of his
repentance, and condemns his condemning; and would (if he could) salve all
again by his recanting and retracting of this last act. But as the committing
of the fact had made him to be hated by the Courtiers, so his condemning of it
had brought him to be suspected of the Noblemen. He had condemned himself, and
did deserve to be condemned, either for that he had done at Ruthven, or for his
condemning of what he did then, and taking a remission for it. He had given a
color to the adverse party to condemn it by his confession and example, and
had furnished them with that argument whereby to press the condemning of it
upon the Ministry or others. For that was their maine argument, and the
string they most harped on, Gowries confession of a fault, and remission for
it. All this notwithstanding, he desires to join with the Lords, and offers to
tie himself to their party with the strictest bonds that could be devised.
Their case was the same with his; all to be utterly undone, unless some
remedy were found; their enemies were the same with his, the guiders of Court;
neither should they only be overthrown, but with them and through them the
es^te of Religion, and of the whole Country. This as it was spetious, so was
it most true and certain, and which could not be denied. But what society could
be sure with the Earl of Gowrie so often changing? If his changing proceeded
from fraud and deceit, who could join with him? Or if it were from fear, what
sure hold could they have of one so fearful? Even Angus himself (whose nature
was far from distrusting) could not but distrust and suspect him. Only, his
present case seemed to plead for his sincerity at this time; which was such,
that he knew not where to shelter or secure himself, but by joining with them.
For he was charged to depart out of the Kingdom, which was a token of no good
will, nay of true enmity with the Court: or certainly, a deeper dissimulation
than any man could concei e. And as necessity did force him to take part with
them, so were they also no less urged by necessity to admit and receive him,
in respect of his great power and friendship in those quarters. The Earl of
Athol and the Lord Oglebee (two Noblemen of great power and command) were his
sonnes-in-law: Inshe-chaiffrey and Drummond his dear friends; and he himself
was Sheriff of Perth, and Provest of the Town. Wherefore Angus his confinement
being enlarged to the North-water, and he residing in the Castle of Brechin
(his brother the Earl of Marres house) he sent one Master David Hume.
Master David Hume, whom he trusted, to confer with him, that he might try
and sound his mind as narrowly as he could, and report to him what he found.
The Gentleman found him in words, in countenance, and in gesture greatly
perplexed, solicitous for his estate, besides the affairs of the Country, and
greatly afraid of the violence of the Courtiers. So that looking very pitifully
upon his Gallerie where we were walking at that time (which he had but newly
built and decored with Pictures) he brake out into these words, having first
fetched a deep sigh; Cousin (says he) Is there no remedy? Et impius haec tam
culta novalia miles habebit? Barbarus has segetes? Whereupon he was persuaded
of his upright meaning, and at his return persuaded the Earl of Angus thereof
also. So partly upon this assurance, partly enforced by necessity (there being
no possibility to be strong in those parts without his concurrence) he
resolved to assume him into their fellowship and society. Then did those
scruples and doubts arise in Angus his mind, which are incident to honest
natures and loyal dispositions. He considered that banding against Courtiers
would be called, and seem to be combining against Authority and the King; for
he would take their part for the present: so was he to force his will, whom
his heart carried him to honor. But what should he do? There was no other
way (that he could devise) to secure their estates, their houses, themselves,
their Country, and all honest men from oppression and ruin, to preserve
Religion (which ought to be dear to all men, and was dear to him) nay, even to
save the King himself (whose safe^e did consist in the preservation of the
Church and Kingdom) and to deliver him, and pluck him out of the claws of
these Harpies, whose oppression and wickedness did reflect upon him, and
redound to his dishonor: For whatsoever they did, was done in his name, and
said to be the Kings will and pleasure. Their banishing of Noblemen, and
oppressing of all sorts and ranks of men, without difference or respect, so
that there was no honest man but stood in continual fear of losing his life
and estate: all this was laid upon the King. Their avarice was insatiable,
their malice cruel, and their suspicion unsatisfiable. They stood not upon
reason, law or right; any pretense (which they never wanted) served them for a
warrant to seize men's persons or estates. Their ordinary course was to summond
a man super inquirendis, and if he did compeir, to commit him to a free or
close prison; if he were afraid, and did not compeir, he was found guilty of
rebellion, denounced, and his goods seized. They would be sure not to want
witnesses to prove any thing against any man, by torturing his servants, or
himself, to wring something out of him, which might be matter against him,
through impatiencie, and the violence of the Rack: At least he should be sure
to be vexed by re-examinations, and withdrawn from his necessary affairs,
that so he might be constrained to buy his liberty and leave to stay at
home, with some portion of his land, or a piece of money.

These doings of theirs, though many knew that the King did not allow of them,
yet being colored with his authority, were apt to alienate (and might in time
produce that effect) the minds of the Subjects from their Prince, as also the
heart of the Prince from his Subjects, by their filling his ears with
jealousies, and by making virtue a cause of suspicion, and him that was
virtuous in any eminent measure, suspected and hated; and on the contrary, vice
and the vicious to have vogue and credit, and to overruled all.

How could this be obviated, unless these men were removed? And how could
they be removed without controlling of the King? And to contrary him (though it
were for his good and sasetie) how ill would it be taken by him? Invitum qui
servat, idem facit occidenti: To save a man against his will, is commonly
rewarded with slender thanks. Patriam and parents cogere etiamsi possis, and
utile sit, tamen importunum est: To save a Prince against his will, and to
force him for his good, how dangerous a point is it? For they account it as
their life to reign, and no reigning without absoluteness, unless they
reign at liberty, without any controllment, were it never so little. But
there was no remedy; whosoever undertakes any great enterprise, must resolve to
pass through some danger.

And it is good for Kings sometimes that their hands be held. had Alexanders
hands been held when he killed Clitus, he had not offered to kill himself,
nor should Calistines have needed to take such pains with him, to make him
digest his grief for it. If speeches could have prevailed with the Courtiers,
the Ministers had tried that way, but with bad success: for they were
accounted seditious and traitorous for their liberty and freedom therein.
Wherefore there was nothing remaining but to remove them at what ever rate: and
if his Majesty should take it ill for the present, future obsequiousness
would make it appear, that what they did, was in love and humility, and no
ways out of any treasonable or malicious intention, or out of arrogance,
pride, or presumption. The French Proverb takes place; Il faut passer par la:
there was no other way besides; no audience, no access could be had to him by
any other means.

So they conclude to join their pains, and to partake of the peril. The way
resolved upon, was, to assemble themselves at Stirling with their Forces; there
to supplicate the King, and to make their declaration to the Country: to
intimate their grievances and desires, with all respect to his Majesty, and
with all evidence and plainness, against the Courtiers.

For this end, the Earl of Mar and Master of Glams should be sent for, and
first find means to take in the Castle of Stirling (an easy task for the
Earl of Mar to perform, having his friends lying near to it, and the Town
devoted to his service) then the Earl of Gowrie should go thither (who lay
nearest to it) together with the Earl of Athole, the Lord Oglebie, the
Drummonds, and the Murrayes: Next to him the Earl of Angus from Brechin, to
whom his friends would repair out of the South parts, the Merse, Liddesdale
and other parts: The Earl Bothwell, my Lord Lindsay, and diverse others of the
Nobility were also on the party, and had promised to join with them.

Being once Conveened, and having the affection of the Ministry and Burrowes,
they hoped to be strong enough against these new men's own power, assisted
only by their particular friends. If the Kings name were used against them,
there behoved to be a Convention of the Nobility, and Barons; who would hear
the Cause, judge impartially, and inform the King truly, without flattery or
fear of the courtiers, whom they hated; neither could they doubt of his
equity, and tractablenesse, when he should understand how things were. So the
business should end without blood, and have a good and happy issue. And if the
worst should come, yet were it better to die noblely in the field, then to be
hailed to the scaffold and suffer by the hand of the Executioner.

Thus did they propose, but God did dispose of things otherwise. Men know not
the Council and secrets of the Almighty, whose determination does only stand
and come to pass. He had not ordained, that they should execute their designs,
nor that they should die in the quarrel; it was to be done by another way, and
at another time: the cup of their iniquity, was not yet full against whom they
took arms. Wherefore they were disappointed at this time, which fell out
thus. The Earl of Gowry was charged the second of March to depart the Country
within fifteen days. He shifted and delayed; this affrighted the Courtiers,
or gave them occasion to seem afraid, and to put the King into a fear and
suspicion, that there was some enterprise in hand against him: whereupon the
Citizens of Edinburgh were made to keep a watch about the Palace. Gowrie made
show as if he had intended to obey the charge (contrary to the advice of his
associates) and that they might believe that his intention was real, he goes
to Dundie, causes provide a ship, and make all things ready; so that the
Courtiers were not more afraid that he would stay, then his Partners were
that he would hoise sail, and be gone; Especially, the Earl of Angus
distrusted him, and was jealous of his dissimulation, being uncertain whether
it were with the Court, or with them that he did thus dissemble.

At last having trifled out the time, till mid April, Colonel William G^
taken at Dundi^.
Stuart came to Dundie, and having a small company with him, sets upon him
at unawares, and made him save himself in his lodging. Then having brought
some pieces of Ordnance out of the ships, which lay in the Haven, being aided
by the Townsmen (to whom he had brought a Commission, and warrant from the
King) he began to batter the house; whereupon it was rendered, and the Earl
taken prisoner. By chance as this was in doing, a servant of the Earl of
Angus, coming from Dalkeith by Dundie, and having seen all that had happened,
made haste, and came to Brechen about twelve a clock of the night, where he
gave his Lord notice of what he had seen. He arose presently, being much
moved therewith, and sending for the Gentleman, whom he had employed to try
his mind before, made a heavy moan, bewailing the overthrow of their cause,
and of themselves. Then he asked his opinion what he thought of it, and first
told his own, that he thought it could be nothing else but deceit, and
collusion, which he had ever feared, and was now evident, that his going to
Dundie (contrary to his advise) had no other end but this: and that his
lingering proceeded from the same ground. For (said he) how could the Colonel
undertake to apprehend him with so small a number of men, if he had not
himself been willing to be taken? If he doubted, or distrusted the town of
Dundie, why did he commit himself to them, or come in their power? Why did
he not stay at Perth, where he was out of all danger, till the time appointed
were come? Doubtless, he has betrayed us all, and has colluded to suffer
himself to be taken; so to color his unfaithful dealing with us.

It was answered, that he could not approve his coming to Dundie, which he
ever disliked, and had labored to dissuade him from it, but could not
prevail: yet it seemed a hard construction to think that he came thither of
purpose to act a fained apprehending; that his slownesse and lingering was well
known to be his natural disposition, (being another Fabius Cunctator in that
point) which he had often found by former experience, and often contested with
him for it. But to think him false in such a degree, or to imagine him to be
so foolish as to come in the hands of those Courtiers, with a crime lying on
him, (though but counterfeited) it was such a point, that for his own part,
his opinion was, that he durst not do it, lest they should make use of it for
his ruin, and convert a colluded crime into a true dittie, and so work his
death. But this could not satisfy the Earl of Angus, but still he kept his
opinion, that there was no realitie in that act of Gowries apprehending. And
he was the more confirmed therein, when he heard that the Colonel carried
Gowry to the houses of his own especial friends, such as Weemes of
Wester-Weemes, whose son offered to set him at liberty, and to take him out
of the Colonels hands, and to go with him himself, which he refused to do.
Angus passed the rest of that night in great solicitude and fear, lest he
himself should be assailed, and taken after the same manner, which had been
no hard matter to perform, he having but a small family, and the Castle not
being furnished with Arms, the Earl of Crawford lying hard at hand with his
dependers, and that whole Country being evil affected to him.

But whether the Colonel had no Commission to take him, or that he did not
think of it, and thought he had sped well enough already by taking Gowry, is
uncertain: but however it were, he went away with the prey he had gotten
without attempting any thing against Angus. And yet for all that, Angus was not
altogether secure, knowing well his danger, and the small power he had to
defend himself: for in the day time he went abroad a hunting, that they might
not know where to find him: and in the night, he caused his servants to keep
watch, that he might not be surprised unawares.

Within three days after, the Earl of Mar sent to him, to let him know,
that the Master of Glames and he had performed their part of the work, had
taken the Castle of Stirling, and were ready to wait upon his coming, which
they entreated him to hasten. There was no choice, they were his true friends,
and he was no less theirs: and they were resolved to run the same hazard in
that course, from which there was no retiring for any of them. Angus desired
the Lord Oglebee, and Master Oglebee of Powrie, with others of that name, to
go with him. They were allied to the Earl of Gowry, and were well affected to
the business, as also they were his own vassals; but being terrified with
Gowries taking, and thinking that their joining with the Lords would incense
the Courtiers to take some hard course with him, and not knowing what his mind
was herein, they refused to go. He notwithstanding, goes with his own
family, from Brechin to Stirlin, and avoiding Perth, he crossed the river of
Tay, at that place where it meets with Almont by boat, and comes to
Inshechaffray, where he lodged with the Lord thereof, but could not persuade
him to take part with them for the same reason, when he came to Stirling An^us
comes (...) Stirling to (...) Lords.
he was kindly welcomed by Mar, and the rest that were there; and presently
dispatched away letters, and messengers to Douglas, and other places, for his
friends and dependers to come thither to him, with as great speed and diligence
as they could. He wrote also to Robert Douglas (eldest son to William
Douglas) of Logh-leven to the same purpose; but the letter falling into the
hands of his mother (her name was Leslie) she took upon her to answer it after
this manner. It is not enough (says she) for you to undertake so foolish a
work, whereby you cannot but ruin your selves, but you would also draw my
son and house to the same destruction: I have hindered him, and laid my curse
and malediction upon him, if he take part with you, like as I do upon you, if
you make him disobey me.

This letter moved him very much, and he caused an answer to be returned to her
according as it merited, which was thus. I can very well believe that it is
your doing to keep back your son from so honorable an enterprise, knowing
his own disposition to be always honorable and noble, and such as of
himself he would not neglect, his duty either to his friends, or country.
The Noblemen that are conveened here, have entered upon such a course as
becomes them, for discharging their duty both to God and man: what the event
will prove, is known only to God, and in his hands alone; if we perish
herein, we cannot perish more honorably. Yet we hope that God, in whom we
confide, and whose cause we have taken in hand, will work out our safety, and
accomplish that which we intend for the good of his own Church; when you and
your house (for which you are so solicitous, with the neglect of the house of
God, and of all friendly duty) shall find the smart of such careless
indifferency, and perish (as we fear, and are sorry for it) through such
carnal and worldly wisdom and wariness. And so indeed the event proved more
answerable to this prediction then he wished: for the Lords escaped into
England (for that time) and were safe in their persons, and within a year and
a half, they brought their designs to pass, (which were now frustrate) by
Gods blessing upon them: but her son Robert, and her son in law Laurence,
Master of Olyphant, being commanded to depart the Country, as they were
sailing for France, perished at sea, and neither they nor the ship, nor any
that belonged thereto, were ever seen again, yet how it came to pass is
uncertain.

The most common report is, that being set upon by the Hollanders, and having
defended themselves valiantly, they slew a principal man of the enemies; in
revenge whereof they sanke the ship, and all that were in her: Others say, that
after they had yielded themselves, they were hanged upon the mast. A pitiful
case, but a notable example. The youths were noble, active, and of great hope
and expectation, and so great pity of their loss. But it may show us how
little surety there is in too great affecting of it; as on the contrary, how
perils are avoided by hazarding and undergoing of peril. And their case is so
much the more to be pitied, and lamented; as that they themselves were very
unwilling to have followed such perverse wisdom, had they not been forced to
it by their mothers importunity.

The Lords proceeded as they could with their intended course. They The Lords
Declaration.
caused set forth a Declaration, showing their mind and purpose, together with
the causes thereof, the abuses in Church and Commonwealth. They remonstrated
what tyranny was exercised by James Stuart, under color and pretext of the
Kings will and pleasure; how the Nobility, and men of all ranks, were vexed
by him; what mis-reports were made of them to their Prince; what violence used
against them; what evils were presently felt, and what more were to be feared
and looked for hereafter to ensue hereupon: The distraction of the hearts of
the people from their Prince, and of the Prince from his people; the blasting
of the greatest hopes of virtue that ever was in a young Prince, and of his
piety, in the solid use of true Religion; by working fear of the contrary;
tyrannizing in government, and superficial profession of Religion, yea of
reducing Popery, or (which is worse) of irreligion and Atheism. They told how
dea^e their Religion, their Country, their Prince was to them; what their own
estate and condition forced them to; what the care of all these required of
them, out of duty, in regard of their place, being Nobles, and Peers of the
Land, and Privy Counselors by birth; how every man, according to his place,
was bound to lend a helping hand, but chiefly those of the Nobility, yet not
excluding either Barons, Burgesses, or men of whatever degree, rank, or
quality, when the common Ship of the State was in hazard, and in danger of
being overwhelmed and perishing, and when there was such a fire kindled as
would devour all, if it were not quenched in time. How they, for their own
part, after long patience, seeing all things grow worse, had now at last (being
driven thereto by necessity) called to mind what duty, conscience, God, and
the station wherein God had placed them, did crave of them: which was, to
endeavor, that wicked Counselors (namely James Stuart, called Earl of
Arran, chief Author of all the mischief) might be removed from about his
Majesty, after such a manner as they could best do it. And since no access
was free, and no man durst or would undertake to present their supplications to
the King, which contained a true information of his own estate, of the State
of the Church and Country, together with theirs; therefore they had conveened
in Arms, not intending any hurt to their Prince (whom they ever had honored,
and still did honor, and whose welfare was their chief end and aim) or to
wrong any good subject, but for defense of their own persons, until they
should inform his Majesty of that which concerned him, and belonged to them to
remonstrate unto him, either in his own presence, or by a public
Proclamation, that so it might come to his ears, which otherwise these wicked
Counselors did and would hinder him from hearing: and that so it might come
to the knowledge of all men, and move the hearts of such as had true, honest,
and courageous hearts, to concur with them in that so honorable and
necessary a work. Wherefore they exhorted all men that they would not, through
fearfulness, or a vain opinion of obedience to the pretended command of a
Prince (who then was best obeyed, when God was obeyed, and wickedness
punished; who did then truly reign, when wicked Council was removed) withdraw
themselves by lurking, and abandon the common good, in hope to provide for their
own particular safety, which was not possible for them to do at any time or in
any case; much less under such a man could there be any security for any good
and honest man, he being so violent, proud, tyrannical, unjust, and such a
profane mocker of Religion, who would not be tied to, or guided by any law or
reason, but was carried away by his own appetite and ambition, and who was
more fit to be the executioner of a bloody Nero, then a Counselor to such a
just and Christian Prince: far less to be sole Ruler and Commander of the
Kingdom under the shadow of his Majesty's authority, having so abused and
polluted his name, who was so honored in his cradle, and admired through the
world for his hopefulnesse, and great expectation of all princely virtues.
Whosoever truly loved him, ought to concur and lend their aid to pluck him out
of the jaws of these worse then wild beasts, that so his estate, kingdom,
honor, and person (both in soul and body) might be preserved.

This was the sum and strain of their Declarations and Letters sent abroad
to move men to join with them in this business, but all was in vain: for
despair of doing any good at this time had so possessed the hearts of all men,
that even the best affected did choose to sit still, and lie quiet. The Earl
of Gowries apprehending had so astonished them, and the incertaintie how to
construe it did so amaze them, that all his friends (who should have made up a
great part of their forces) as Athole and others, absenting themselves, others
fainted and held off. Even Sir George Hume of Wedderburne, a man both zealously
affected to the cause, and entirely loving the Actors (Mar and Angus) as
being tied to them by blood, alliance, and particular intimatenesse of
friendship, though he were acquainted with their proceedings from time to time,
and being prisoner in the Castle of Down in Monteeth, might easily have
e^caped from thence, and come to them to Stirlin, yet did he avoid all meddling
therein, and would neither receive nor send message concerning that matter:
yea, they themselves were contented that he should do so in that general
desertion, having gained nothing by their Declaration and Remonstrance, save
the publishing of their Apology, which was not necessary to friends (whose
approbation they had already) and wrought nothing upon others. For though the
King had a copy thereof delivered into his own hand (which they greatly
desired, that thereby he might know the naked truth of things, and be truly
informed of the Courtiers carriage and behavior) yet did it produce no effect
to purpose: neither did they make any use thereof, that was known, either to
inform and persuade the King of the things contained therein, or to reform
themselves. Wherefore now their whole thoughts ran only upon this, how to
come off, their lives safe, and reserve themselves to a better and more
convenient time: so incertaine is the event of all humane enterprises. The
Courtiers failed not to make contrary Proclamations in the Kings name; the bare
show whereof (though there were but very few that favored them or their
proceedings in their heart) was of such force, that men conveened thereupon out
of all quarters. It was made in the strictest form, commanding all that were
able to bear Arms, from sixteen years of age to sixty, to assemble
themselves, and to bring with them provision of victual for thirty days, to
march whither the King should be pleased to direct them. Hereupon Francis
Stuart Earl of Bothwell* came with his forc^s to Edinburgh, where the King
was: but he being brother-in-law to the Earl of Angus (having married his
sister) the Courtiers did not like of his company, and so he was commanded to
return home again to his house. He was indeed of the Lords faction, and so
were many others who obeyed the Kings proclamation, who, if they had had hearts
and heads, were enough of themselves to have taken order with the Courtiers. But
being dashed with fear of they knew not what (if they had considered aright)
they looked upon one another, and so were forced to guard those men whom they
could have wished to be hanged.

The Town of Edinburgh were commanded to make out 500. Musketeers, which they
did, and this was the Courtiers greatest strength, yet consisting of the
vulgar, and such as had no obligation to bind their fidelity to them, and (if
they had seen the Nobility and Gentry go about to take them in hand) would not
have made great opposition, nor have hazarded themselves for the Courtiers
safety, in all likelihood. However, Colonel William Stuart is sent with 500.
men to Fawlkirke, whereupon the Lords at Stirling went to a consultation to see
what were best for them to do. They had not with them above 300* men, which
were their own proper followers; yet being resolute, willing, forward, and
active Gentlemen, it was thought fittest by some to assail him, and to punish
his boldness and audacitie for taking such charge upon him, being but a mean
Gentleman, to invade and come against the Nobility. Disdain, anger, and
courage seemed to approve of this resolution, that so his malapertnesse might
be chastised and dashed. Neither were it without good use; for if he were once
defeated, the rest would make a halt, and not be so forward: that the first
success is of great moment, and might bring matters to a parley, or such as
craved audience of the King to get it: that it was no hard matter to do, he
being accompanied by such as cared not for his personal safety, and had no tie
to defend him with the hazard of their own lives especially, but would be glad
to have a fair excuse, and occasion to abandon such an one, in such a
quarrel: especially if he were invaded in the night, the darkness would
excuse, and take away their shame of flying. It was argued of the other side,
that night conflicts were subject to hazard, error, and mistaking, as well on
their own side, as the enemies: and that it could not be performed without
blood, and that (perhaps) of the most innocent, whereas he himself, whom they
chiefly aimed at, might escape: neither would the defeat of these few bring
success to the cause, the enemies forces remaining whole and entire in
Edinburgh, which would guard and defend them: besides, by so doing they should
be involved in a crime, and made obnoxious to the laws, which as yet they were
free of: that it were better to suffer the guilty to go unpunished for a
while, then to spill the blood of the guiltless: and seeing they could not
thereby accomplish what they had intended, their best was to retire and
withdraw themselves, with as great innocence and modesty as they could,
having done hurt to no man. This advice prevailed with them, and so they
concluded to march in the night season toward Fawkirke, but so soon as they
were gone out of the The Lords flee from Stirling toward England.
town of stirling, to take the way that leads to Lanericke; the which they
did accordingly, leaving the Castle of Stirling in the custody of David Hume
of Argatie.

Being in Lanerick, as they were refreshing themselves, and baiting their
horses, word was brought them that a Troup of horsemen did approach: whereupon
fearing that it was Colonel Stuart pursuing them, they took horse, and sent
Archbald Douglas (called the Constable, because he had been Constable of the
Castle of Edinburgh in the Earl of Mortons time, as has been showed before)
to discover what they were. He finding that it was Johnstoun (who had been
sent for to Edinburgh to assist against the Lords, and was dismissed upon their
retreat from Stirling) went familiarly to him, fearing no harm, so much the
rather, because Johnstoun and Angus were brothers by their mother. But
Johnstoun either fearing that notice might be given to the Courtiers, and he
challenged thereof, if he should let him go; or to get thanks, and show his
forwardness to their service, lays hold on him, and carries him immediately
back to Edinburgh, declaring what way he came into his hands, and what way the
Lords had taken, delivering also Archbald their prisoner to be used at their
pleasure, not looking for such cruelty from them as ^e found. For they, partly
to seal the justice of their cause by blood, partly to make the greater
alienation betwixt the brothers ( Johnstoun and Angus) that being out of hope
of reconciliation, he might be necessitated to cleave to their side: they
thank him in words for this his Archbald Douglas hanged.
good office, and hang Archbald.

The Earl of Angus, and the rest that were with him, being resolved to go
into England, took their way through Tweddale toward Branxton: from ^hence
passing through east Tiviotdale, they entered England on that hand. Calso, where
the Earl Bothwell remained, was not far out of their way; wherefore as they
passed by it, it being now night, he came forth to them secretly, and had
conference with them. Thereafter, as if he had come to pursue them, there was
a counterfeit chase made, and a counterfeited fleeing for the space of a mile,
till they were on English ground. The next day they came to Berwicke, where
they were received, and remained a certain space.

After their departure, the King went to Stirling with his forces, where the
Castle was rendered by the Keepers, who forced the Captain Argatie executed.
to yield it absolutely, without condition of so much as their lives safe. So
he and three more were executed by the Courtiers suggestion. Here also the
Earl of* Gowrie was brought from Kenniel, and arraigned of high Treason,
whereof being condemned by a Jurie, Gowrie bcheaded at Stirlin.
he was beheaded. Neither did the forbearance of his friends to join with the
Lords at Stirlin (then in England) procure him any favor; whereas if they had
joined with them, and so strengthened their 1584. the 28. of April.
party, they might have terrified the Enemy, and obtained better conditions for
him. He was executed the eight and twentieth day of April 1584. The points
whereof he was convicted, were the fact at Ruthven; and the late enterprise at
Stirlin. His speech was short; he answered to the first, That he had a
remission for it: and to the second, That there was no intention there against
the King: only they had purposed to remove those wicked men who abused him,
and whose thirst of blood he wished that his death might quench. But they
cared little for his speeches, and as little for his alliance, his Countess
being a Stuart of the house of Methven, toward whom and her children they
showed no respect at all, but used them with all incompassionate rigor and
cruelty. For she coming to entreat for her self and her children (in the His
Lady basely and beastly used.
time of the Parliament) and having fallen down upon her knees before the King,
she was trodden under foot, and left lying in a sound.

From Stirlin they returned to Edinburgh, and there kept a Parliament
Parliament at Edinburgh the 22. of May 1584.
the two and twentieth day of May, in which the Earl of Angus and (...), the
late Earl of Gowrie, and the Master of Glames, with diverse Barons, and others
their associats were forfeited; the fact of Ruthven The Lords forfeited.
con^emned, the order of Church Government (by Presbyteries, Synodes, and
General Assemblies, which had been received, and publicly allowed in
Scotland, all men swearing and subscribing thereto, and the oath translated
into diverse languages with great approbation of (...) reformed Churches, and no
small commendation of the King and Country) forbidden and prohibited, and
termed unlawful conventions. And in place thereof the office of Bishops
(condemned by this Church as unlawful, as an invention of man's brain, having
no warrant of the word of God) was reared up again and erected. Also Master
Robert Montgomerie (who had been excommunicated for accepting such an office)
was now released and restored to his place. There was strait inhibiting all men
from speaking against these Acts, against the Kings proceedings, Counselors,
or Courtiers under highest pains. What shall the Ministers do here? Shall they
oppose? That were to cast themselves into certain danger, and to expose
themselves to the cruelty of cruel men, armed now with a color oflaw. Should
they keep silence? hear with patience that order blaspemed, which they had
approven, received, sworn to, and the contrary (which they had detested,
abominated, condemned) set up and allowed, to their no small disgrace, and
shame of the Country; yea, to his Majesty's discredit in foreign Nations? and
suffer a door to be opened to those corruptions, which had been kept out of
the Church, both in doctrine and manners, by virtue of that order, which only
(in their conscience) was agreeable with Scripture? This their zealous hearts
could not endure: let all peril be silent, where conscience and Religion
speak: let no enemy breathe out his threatenings, where the mind is set on God.
So it came to pass here. For while the Acts were in proclaiming at the
Market-Crosse of Edinburgh, the Pastors of that Town, Master Prot^station
against she Acts of Parliament by the Ministers.
James Lowson, Master Walter Balcanquell, Master Robert Punt, taking their
lives in their hands, went boldly and made public Protestation against that
Act of the erection of Bishops, as unlawful, in many respects, whereof they
took instruments. Hereupon they being menaced, to avoid their fury, Master
Walter Balcanquell flees to Berwick, together with Master James Lowson: Thither
came also after them Master James Carmichael (Minister at Hadinton) Master John
Davison, and William ^ird, Ministers of the Suburbs of Edinburgh, or some
Churches near to it: also Master Patrick Galloway, and Master James Melvin,
with diverse others of the Ministry. Edinburgh being thus destitute of
Pastors, Master Patrick Adamson (Archbishop of Saint Andrews) was brought to
supply their places, and to maintain the lawfulness of the office the seven
and twentieth day of May, being Wednesday, which was an ordinary Sermon day,
but on which the Courtiers were not ordinary auditors. But that day they would
needs accompany their Bishop, and grace him with the Kings personal presence.
Yet the people disgraced him by their absence; they disdained to hear a
Bishop, other than a Pastor, whose office is not ordained by GOD in the
Scriptures, and was ejected out of the Church of Scotland; wherefore being
grieved to see this Wolf in their true Pastors place, they go out of the
Church and leave him to preach almost alone. Besides the common people, the
Kings own Ministers Master John Craig, and John Brand, also John Herriese
(with others) preached against it, and were therefore summoned to appear
before the Council the five and twentieth day of August; where they were
reviled and rebuked with bitter words, as saucy and presumptuous fellows: and
being demanded how they durst speak against the Kings Laws, they answered
boldly, that they both durst and would speak against such Laws as were
repugnant to the word of GOD. Hereupon the Earl of Arran starting up suddenly
upon his feet in a great rage, fell a swearing many an oath, and with a
frowning countenance said unto them, that they were too proud to speak such
language to the Council; adding, that he would shave their heads, pair their
nails, and cut their toes, that they might be an example to others. Then he
warnes them to compeir before the King himself at Falkland the four and
twentieth day of September; where they were accused again by the Earl of
Arran (then Chancellor) for, breaking of the Kings injunctions, in not
acknowledging nor obeying his Bishops. To which they answered, that Bishops
were no lawful office of the Church, having never been instituted by Christ;
and that therefore they would not obey them; nor no person else that would
command without warrant of the word of GOD; assuring him that GOD would humble
all proud Tyrants that did lift up themselves against him: as for them, their
lives were not so dear to them, but that they would be contented to spend
them in A^n mocks the Ministers.
that cause. Arran arising from his seat, and sitting down on his knees, says
to them scoffingly; I know you are the Prophets of God, and your words must
needs come to pass; behold now you see me humbled and brought low. Well, well,
(says Master John Craig) mock on as you please, assure your self, GOD sees,
and will require it at your hands, that you thus trouble his Church, unless
you repent. Then they were remitted to the sixteenth day of November, and in
the mean time Master John Craig was discharged to preach. About this time (in
November) Master James Lowson died at London, meekly and sweetly as he had
lived. Edinburgh had been all this while destitute of Pastors, and did want
preaching at sometimes for the space of three weeks. This was very odious
amongst the people, and now (Master John Craig being silenced) they were like
to want oftener than they had done: to remedy this, the Archbishop of Saint
Andrews was ordained to preach to them, and the TowneCouncell ordained to
receive him as their ordinary Pastor. The Council obeyed, but the people
would not hear him, and when they saw him come up to the Pulpit, they arose,
and went forth at the Church doors.

The Ministers every where persisted to oppose that office, and by common
consent appointed a Fast to be kept the four and twentieth day of October,
whereof they publicly and advowedly gave out these to be the causes: First, to
stay the creeping in of Wolves (meaning Bishops:) Secondly, that GOD might send
true Pastors: Thirdly, that he would repair the breaches and decayings of the
Church (which had been sometime the Lantern of the world:) Fourthly, that he
might remove the causes of this decay (tyranny, and the flattery of
Courtiers.) This was plainer language than pleasant, they behooved to be wisely
dealt with. There are two ways to deal and work upon men: by fear and by hope:
by terrifying and flattering; they used both these toward them. We heard how
the sixteenth day of November was appointed for their compearance: many
therefore were warned against that day from diverse parts. When they were
conveened, they were pressed to allow of the Act concerning Bishops; and in
token of their approbation thereof, to promise and subcribe obedience to their
Ordinary. To move them hereto, they partly flattered, and partly threatened
them; saying, That all was well meant, and no hurt intended to Religion: Who
was so well affected to it as the King? Who so learned among Princes? Who so
sincere? That he would respect and reward the worthy and obedient: And by the
contrary, no Stipend should be paid to him that refused; but he should be
deprived, imprisoned, banished. When all this could not prevail, they devise
how to temper and qualify their promise of obedience, which was conceived in
these words; You shall acknowledge and obey Bishops, according to the word of
God. This seeming a restriction and limitation (as if the meaning had been that
they should allow of, and obey Bishops as far as the word of God allowed, and
ordained them to be obeyed) many took it for good Coin, and were so persuaded
of it, that some said in plain terms, Bring a Cart full of such Papers, and we
will subscribe them all. For to obey such a Bishop in such a sort (according to
the word of GOD, that is, so far as the word of God commands to obey him) is
not to obey him at all: for the word of GOD commands not any obedience at all
to such a Bishop: neither does it ordain, acknowledge, or once name such a
Bishop. Thus either truly deceived, or deceiving themselves, that they might
redeem their ease by yielding, and cover their yielding with an equivocation,
they found that it was all in vain; for they were not admitted nor permitted
to expound it in that sort (whatsoever their meaning was) but were forced to
accept of the exposition which the Court and the Bishops did put upon it: who
understood that phrase (according to the word of God) not as a limitation but
affirmatively, wherein it was acknowledged that the word of God did command
obedience to them; and therefore they promised obedience according to that
command. Notwithstanding of all this, diverse stood out, and would no ways be
moved, neither by threatenings nor by promises to give the least show of
approbation directly or indirectly, by equivocation, or any other form
whatsoever; but spoke plainly against them, and prayed publicly for the
banished brethren. Of these Master Nicholas Dagleish was one; who thereupon was
accused as too bold to pray for the Kings Rebels. He answered, that they were
no Rebels, but true Subjects, who had fled from tyranny, and such as sought
their lives by commanding them to do against their conscience. He was
empannelled, put to his trial by an assise, and was cleansed, in despite and
maugre the Court; so far there remained conscience in men. But the Courtiers
will not let him escape thus dry-shod; they labor to find a hole in his Coat
another way: they search and find that a Letter had come from Master Walter
Balcanquell to his wife, which because she could not well read the hand, she
had given him to read to her, and he had read it. Hereupon he is again put to
an as^se: and they, not daring to cleanse him, yet would they not find him
guilty, but desired him to come into the Kings will. He was contented to
submit himself to the Kings pleasure (for so much as concerned the reading of
the Letter) and so was sent to the Tolbooth, where he remained three weeks,
and was from thence sent to Saint Andrews.

And thus went Church Matters; In the civil government there was none now but
the Earl of Arran, he lacked the name of King; but he ruled as absolutely,
and commanded more imperiously than any King, under the shadow of the Kings
authority, and the pretext that all that he did was for the Kings good and
safety. He had gotten before the keeping of the Castle of Stirlin; he behooved
also to have the Castle of Edinburgh in his power. Alexander Ereskin (Uncle to
the Earl of Mar) was Captain of it, he must needs favor his Nephew and his
Faction: wherefore it was taken from him, and given to Arran, who was also made
Provest of the Town. He was Chancellor of Scotland, and having put out
Pitcairne, Abbot of Dumfermling, he made Master John Metellane Secretary. He
did whatsoever he pleased; if there were no Law for it, it was all one, he
caused make a Law to serve his ends. (...) was observed, that his Lady said to
one who alleged there was (...) (...) ^or doing of what she de^red to have
done; It is no mat^ (...) she) we shall cause make an Act of Parliament for
it. If (...) ^an re^used to do o^ grant any thing he craved, they were (...)
(...) be tossed and vexed for it; even the chief of the Nobility. (...),
Cassils, and the Lord Hume were committed: Athole, be^ ^ee would not divorce
from his wife, and entaile his estate (...) (...) the Earl, or Master of
Cassils, because he would not give (...) (...) great sum of Money, under the
name of a Loan: the (...) (...), because he would not give him his portion of
Dirleton. (...) ^he Lord Maxwell (then Earl of Morton) was quarrelled, be
(...) he would not excambe his Baronie of Pooke, and Maxwell ((...) ^ld
inheritance) for a parcel of the Lord Hamiltons Lands, which we^ ^ow his by
forfeiture. Many Lands had he taken from many, but (...) satisfied, ever
seeking to add possession to possession, (...) was not impertinently
remonstrated to him by John Barton Goldsmith, a witty and free-spoken man. He
had directed this Barton to ma^e him a Seal, and to carve on it his Coat of
Arms duly quartered according to his Lands and Honors. This he did pretty
well to his contentment, but he left one quarter thereof blank and void. Hereof
when the Earl asked the reason, he answered, That there may be room for the
Lands your Lordship shall purchase hereafter. He took for his Motto, Sic fuit,
est, and erit: m^ning that it was an ordinary thing in all ages for mean men
to rise to great fortunes; and that therefore it ought not either to be
wondered at, or to be envied. And it is true, if the mean had been virtue and
not wickedness, which ever was, is, and will be both envied and hated, as it
deserves. His ambition was such (amongst other examples thereof) that Queen
Elizabeth must needs be God-mother to his daughter, whose Ambassador was
present at the Christening. His cruelty (though conspicuous many ways) did
appear singularly in the causing execute Master Cunninghame of Drummewhasle,
and Master Douglas of Maines, his sonne-in-law. This Cunninghame was an ancient
Gentleman, and of an Maines and Drummewhasle executed.
old house, who (himself in person) had been a follower of the Earl of Lennox
(the Kings Grandfather) and had done him good service when he took in the
Castle of Dumbartan, and Douglas of Maines was esteemed to be one of the
properest men in the Kingdom, and was a youth of good expectation: yet both of
them were hanged at the Market Cross of Edinburgh. The pretext was a forged
conspiracy to have taken the King on a certain day at hunting, and to have
carried him into England. Their accuser was Robert Hamilton of Inshemachon, who
was (as he said) himself upon the plot, or at least (as he said) had been
desired to be of it by Master Edmiston of Duntreath. Edmiston being
apprehended, related; How they had plotted to bring in the exiled Lords on
horses (forsooth) which had their ears, their maynes, and their tails cut,
themselves being disguised, etc. A tale which was so unhandsome, toyish, and
ridiculous, that no man did believe it, but esteemed it a foolish fable; yet
did they make use of it, to practice their cruelty upon such as they feared,
and to make themselves a terror to all men.

To return to the Earl of Angus, he and his associats were removed from
Berwick to New Castle, in May. So it seemed good to the State of England
(seeing no appearance of their hasty restoring to Angus at Newcastle.
their own Country) to secure the Court of Scotland, by taking that thorn out
of their foot, which was too near, and too pricking at Berwick. Besides, these
banished Lords were not greatly liked of by the Lord Hunsden, then Governor of
Berwick: for he entertained correspondencie with the contrary Faction; either
out of his own inclination, or being directed so to do for reasons of State, or
for both; he so inclining, and the State of England making use of that his
inclination, that by him they might understand and make use of the mysteries of
the Court of Scotland, and such as guided it. But our Courtiers being rid of
the fear of the Lords so near neighborhood, did the freelier vent themselves,
and discover their ways, and by discovering, bewray their wickedness, and
disgrace themselves.

As they went to New Castle, they visited by the way, Lord John Hamilton, and
Claud of Paslay (his brother) at Widdrington, the place of their abode. There
had been some variance betwixt them, but now being all involved in the same
case of banishment, it was to no purpose to entertain and keep in t^ sparkle of
discord, and therefore they were reconciled.

Being come to New Castle, they stayed there a while, not so much to enterprise
any thing from thence upon any ground they had laid already, as to wait for any
occasion that should be offered. Here did the Angus his kindness and bounty.
Earl of Angus his kindness and bountiful disposition toward all men
plainly show it self. For hearing that the Ministers were come to Berwick, he
caused a Letter to be written, and sent to them, from them all in common; and
he himself wrote particularly to them besides, and caused the rest of the
Nobility to write also their private Letters, wherein many arguments were used
to persuade them to come to them. Especially he wrote very earnestly to Master
James Lowson, and Master James Carmichael, not neglecting any of the rest,
fitting his argument according to his acquaintance and relation, and according
to the persons of the men; pretending some such cause and necessity of their
coming, as he thought would be most effectual to move them; but the true
cause which moved him to send for them, was, because he thought they all stood
in need of supply in necessaries. Besides, he caused one that was with him,
whom he knew to be very intimate with Master James Lowson, to write to him
for the same effect; and to tell him, that he longed to see him: and when
Master James excused himself, alleging that he behooved to stay at Berwick,
because he expected some things from Scotland, he would not accept of his
excuse, nor of the interpretation thereof, (that he meant of Books that were
to be sent to him) but caused return him answer, that he took it ill that
he should think to lack any thing where he was. Wherefore he entreated him
to make haste to come to him, by doing of which, he should do him a singular
pleasure. He dealt even so with others also, and sought pretenses to put
courtesies upon them. David Ereskin Abbot of Drieburgh, being an exceeding
honest, modest, and shamefast man, and who had ever been readier to give, than
to take from any, and Angus fearing that he would not (out of his
bashfulnesse) take any courtesy directly from him, found out this way to fasten
it upon him. He pretended that he had some Tithes of Lands in Tweddale, which
belonged to his Abbacie of Drieburgh, for which he did owe him some arrearage
duties and meals, which he would needs pay him, and under that color gave
him what he listed to take, without acquittance.

The Mini^ers were for a long time wholly maintained by him, and he extended
his liberality, not only to supply their necessities, but even to furnish
them with what Books they desired to buy. And indeed there was no man that
wanted in that company, who did not taste of his bounty. At last when all was
gone (for it could not last always) he said to one with whom he was pleased
to be familiar, with a cheerful countenance; Now it is gone, and fare it
well, I never looked that it should have done so much good. Meaning, that being
acquired by more rigorous exacting than either he himself could allow of, or
the common people took well, by the Earl of Morton in his Regencie (for this
was his treasure, at least that part of it which came to his hands) he doubted
whether it should have had such a blessing as to have done so much good to so
many honest men. Neither was this lavishnesse in him, or superfluous waste so
to bestow it, in regard that their English allowance was spare enough, and
oftentimes very slowly furnished unto them: So that having occasion to use
moneys, and not knowing from whom to borrow any, he was forced to employ one
of his followers to borrow from Master Archbald Douglas on his own credit (for
my Lord himself would not be beholding to him, nor use him so familiarly) two
hundred pounds Sterling, which he lent very courteously upon the Gentleman's
own Bond, knowing well enough that it was for my Lords use. This was repayed
to him when their allowance came in.

While they remained at New Castle, Master John Colvill was sent to Master John
Colvill sent to the Count of England,
attend at Court about their affairs, partly because of his acquaintance there
with Secretary Walsinghame and others; partly by the advice of the Master of
Glames, whose opinion and recommendation the rest did much respect. He fed them
with hopes; and upon occasion of the preparing and rigging forth the Queens
Navy, he did insinuate by his Letters, as if there had been some intention to
have sent it into Scotland for their behoof, which some did believe. But they
could not persuade the Earl of Angus of it, he esteemed it but a dream, as it
was indeed no other. When that hope was vanished, and there was no appearance
of any thing to be done of a sudden, one (whom he was pleased to use
familiarly) seeing no great use of his remaining there, told him, that he had a
desire to go to London, being loath to spend that time idly, that there he
might the better advance his private studies and exercises, as in a place more
fit for bettering himself therein. He most willingly and lovingly consented
to the motion, not only to satisfy his desire herein, but having a reserved
intention to employ him in their common business, as occasion should serve, or
at least in his own particular to his particular friends; which purpose he
concealed then, but showed it afterward. He had almost over di^iked Master
John Colvill, and did many times in private complain, That he could not find
that sincerity in him which he wished, and which (he said) was seldom to be
found in any such as he was, who had left the Function of the Ministry, to
follow the Court and worldly business. And for him in particular, he said, he
was a busy man, thrusting himself into all affairs; and who sought only his
particular ends in doing of public business, without sincerity or
uprightness; which (says he) when it is wanting, I know not what goodness
can be in him; and if it be not to be found in the world (as they say it is
not) I know not what can be in the world but misery. For mine own part, my
heart cannot like of such an one, nor of such dealing. It is true, he has
traffiqued with the Statesmen of England, and others think fit to use him,
neither will I contest with them about it, but truly I have no delight in such
men. But this was after at Norwich. For that time he said no more, but desired
him to write often to him, both concerning business as he could learn, and
other things, as he should also write to him upon occasion. This was performed
on both sides, after such a private and secret way, as they agreed upon before
their parting. For howsoever there was nothing passed betwixt them, but what
might have endured the censure of any man, yet was it not fit that every man
(into whose hands their Letters might have fallen) should know all that was
written familiarly betwixt them, though the matter were never so good, sincere,
and unblameable; in regard that many are incapable of things, many not able to
discern or judge of them, many contemners and mockers, many of a different,
and some of a contrary mind and judgment. If the^e Letters were extant, there
were nothing more fit to show the Lineaments of his mind and most inward
thoughts, and to represent to the life his true disposition, without all mask
of dissimulation (from which he was ever free) or shadow of ceremonious
reservednesse, which even the best men (for some one respect or other) are
forced to draw over their inclinations, and wrap up, and obscure their meaning
in it at some times, especially in public. Besides, they would also conduce to
clear some historical points more fully, which neither can ones memory serve
to do, nor can any other (now alive) supply so certainly and unsuspectedly. Now
we can but grieve for this loss.

To supply which defect (so far as they can do it) we will set down one or
two of those that were written to him, which being answers to his (and
containing so much of them, as that the sum and substance of them may be
gathered from thence) will bear witness of his Noble, and Honorable
disposition.

The first was written in October (one thousand five hundredth eighty and
four) the first year of his banishment to Newcastle, where he still remained
as then.

Please your Lordship,
I Received your letter dated in September. Master James has promised A letter
from London to Angus from the Author.
to seek out those books of which your Lordship wrote to him; and is in good
hope to come by some of them, though it be harder to find them out then it
was not long ago. Other things I hope your Lordship is advertised of at
length, by Master John Colvill.

What books these were, and what Master James this was is quite forgotten,
save that it would seem to have been Master James Carmichael, whom he
employed in things of this kind for most part. But this being only for show
(that the paper might not seem blanke, if it had fallen into such hands as
would have opened the letter) the maine business was written in such dark and
unperceiveable manner, that none could read it, but such as were acquainted
with the ways thereof. And thus it was:

I have read your Lordships letter, and am very glad that my opinion did so
jump with your Lordship concerning that point, whereof you wrote that you have
not been forgetful, and that you mind to hold your ground as near as can
be, from which you think that other matter to be so far different, and so
contrary to all reason, that no man (as you believe) will propound it to you
directly. That which made me fear that it would be propounded (besides the
speeches sounding that way) was the end of your Lordships letter (written
before) wherein you make mention, that some thought it necessary for your
cause, that ye should enter with them into some strait, and indissolvable
bond. This I took to be a mean to try your Lordships mind: First, in that
general, that afterward they might come to the particular, which would be,
that the best way to make it strait and indissolvable; were to have it of your
Lordships handwriting. For as concerning the lawfulnes thereof, it did seem to
some unlawful (as I wrote to your Lordship at greater length) and I had heard
also generally that there was some scruple made by your Lordship to enter into
bond with them. And because (if I be well remembered) before your coming from
Scotland, you were resolved to receive them into the society of that common
action, and to compose any particular of your own which you had against them;
I did the rather think that some new occasion had occurred, which had made you
nice and difficult to it now. And if I have failed in my conjecture of the
cause, it is no wonder that (not having knowledge of the particular
circumstances whereof you now write) I lighted upon that which seemed to me
would breed greatest difficulty in this. If it be not so, I am contented to be
deceived, and could wish that every man's mind that shall have hand in that
action, were as upright as your Lordships, then we might hope that it would
prosper so much the better.

However, I cannot omit to put your Lordship in mind of this general caveat,
to take heed, and have a care, that whatever bond be made, it may be
perspicuous, clear, plain, and as particular as may be: for the more
particular it be, it is the better for your Lordship, who means uprightly,
and for all others that have the same meaning, and who do desire that their
upright dealing may be evident unto all men. It will also (being such) be
less obnoxious and subject to the calumnies and sinister interpretation of the
adversary and enemies, who may seek to traduce your Lordship, and make you
odious thereby. It will likewise be freest, and not liable to the sinister
gloss, and wrong interpretations of those, who shall be bound by it, if they
should (perhaps) hereafter seek any evasion or subterfuge to frustrate it, and
make it void through the generality or ambiguitie thereof. And by the contrary,
where a bond is couched in obscure, general, and doubtful words, it is both
more easy for them, who list to deal after that sort, to elude it by some
wrested construction; as also for such as would calumniate your Lordships
intention, to find greater color to do it. Concerning which purpose, I
remember a distinction which the Earl of Gowry made, upon occasion of the bond
which your Lordship remembers was presented to him to have signed it: It is
(said he) very good, and well penned, but it is too prolixe to be a Bond, and
too short to be a Proclamation, or Declaration: for a Bond (said he) ought to
be short, and general; but a Proclamation or Declaration, would contain the
particulars. I was then, and still am of a contrary mind: for I think a Bond
should be clear, and special, and contain the causes of their binding; and
that a Manifesto or Declaration should be conformable to it, and the very same
in substance and effect, having the selfsame reasons and narration; only it
ought to be amplified with admonitions and exhortations, which are not proper
nor per^ent for a Bond. And I believe no man can show me what inconvenience
can follow upon the prolixitie of a Bond, unless it be the greater pains of
the Writer; which is recompensed with this great advantage, that being drawn
up at large, it needs no other Expositour, or Pleader for it, b^ does expound
and justify it self. And your Lordship knows what great necessity and
need there is of this circumspection in this case, that the very band it self
be an exposition and justification of it self, into whose hands soever it
shall happen to come. For its own interpretation of it self cannot be
rejected, when no other will be admitted to expound it. For this purpose let
them that please read and consider the Memorials of France, of the
LowCountreyes, and of Germany in the beginning of their Reformation: they shall
see that the tenor of all these bands, contains ample declarations of the
causes wherefore, and the reasons moving them to join themselves together in
that kind of association, as also for what end they did it, so that no
Declaration can be more large. But I did declare my opinion to your Lordship
in the like matter long ago; and I doubt not, but, if it shall please your
Lordship to weigh and consider it, you shall easily find how necessary it is
(for many respects) that into whatsoever band you enter, it be clear and
particular.

Whereas it pleases your Lordship to write, that if you can find a fit
occasion (whereof you also have some hope) you will cause employ me here, and
withal you add (That none should refuse to further the business all they
can) I am not so ignorant, or forgetful of my duty, as either directly or
indirectly to refuse that service, or any other your Lordship shall be pleased
to command me. But I see there are diverse others who seem to be so diligent,
that my pains will not be very needful, as I doubt not but your Lordship
knows sufficiently. When it pleases them at any time, in half words, and
dark speeches (like parables) obscurely to signify ought to me of the State
of business, they appear and seem to me so deep and profound mysteries, as
I can no ways understand or know what to make of them. Wherefore I am very
well contented that I am free of them, and to be a beholder of all, leaving the
managing thereof to those who know these obscure grounds better, and like
better of them, then (it may be) I should do, in regard of their deepnesse. I
had rather employ my time upon other thoughts far more pleasing to me (where
duty rightly considered calls me not from them) then business of that
nature. They are not desirous of any companion or copartner in their travels,
nor am I desirous to encroach upon their labors, or the labors of any man, or
to bereave him of the fruit of his pains and industry, by intruding my self
thereupon, and to be a sharer with him in the good success of his endeavors,
if they shall happen to be successful. And as little am I willing (if there
be no appearance of the prospering of it) to take the work out of their hands,
which is (perhaps) marred already; or to enter in at the broad side, upon
grounds already laid by them with this State, wherewith I have not been (as
yet) so thoroughly acquainted as were needful for one to prosecute their work
dexterously, and to purpose. However, I do not speak this to prejudge your
Lordship, or that I mean to shun any burden you shall be pleased to lay
upon me, and I am able to undergo (whatever it be) but only to tell my mind
freely, that I had rather (if it were in my choice) your Lordship would employ
me in any particular of your own, which might give me occasion to visit master
Secretary (for your Lordship knows how ill I can trouble any man without an
errand) and if upon that occasion he should happen to speak of the public
business, I should manage the opportunity the best I could. However, my
dutiful service ever remembered to your Lordship in what I can, in this mind
and disposition (which your Lordship knows) and leaving you and all to be
rightly managed by that God, who certainly can, and assuredly will manage all
things rightly, in whom I rejoice always to see your Lordship so depend, I
rest in him, etc.


The other Letter (the only extant of many) was written long after from London
also, but to Norwich, whither he was then come from Newcastle. It is dated the
20. of March following, in the year 1584.

Please your Lordship,
SInce the writing or my other, the Earl of Lancaster has been (...) (...)
the (...) to (...).
(most part) from Court at his own house. On Saturday he returned, and I
attended all that day, and the next day (till 12. of the clock) but in vain.
At last, when he came to Westminster, I got speech of him with great difficulty
in the Council chamber, by the means of one master Baptist (one of his chief
Gentlemen) who professes to love your Lordship entirely. I delivered your
Lordships Letter to him, and declared the credit: it was courteously received,
with many loving words concerning your Lordship: That in that, and all other
things, he would do for your Lordship what lay in his power: that his
affection to your Lordship was no whit changed, but remained the same that it
was of old, and that it should appear he was no less careful of you then he
had been before. I went after that to Sir P^ilip Sidney, who so soon as he
saw me, (of his own accord, before I spoke to him) told me, That he had not
been unmindfull of your Lordships business; that he had spoken of it to
Leicester, and the Secretary, and that he would not forget it, but do in it
all that could be done. I wrote to your Lordship before, what cold hopes I had
to speed herein, and the cause thereof. Now I am put in better hope by diverse:
That your Lordship shall be licensed to come up, and that the Ambassador will
insist against you, concerning which matter I shall show your Lordship farther
(God willing) at meeting. He is gone this day to Court upon occasion of Letters
which he received on Saturday at night: what they bear I have not yet
learned. Only I hear no word of any alteration or stirring in Scotland, as it
was reported, save that in the general there is an universal fear and envy
at Court amongst themselves, and in the Country every where, of every man
against his neighbor. However it be, if I be not mistaken, this motion (of
your Lordships coming up hither) is occasioned by these last Letters: and ^et
it is said even by some of their favorers, that they think verily that your
Lordship has great wrong done unto you: which speeches argue but small hope to
prove, yea, or to color their pretended accusations, and that they diffide and
distrust, that they shall be able to do it. And most men think, that if there
be nothing wrung out of John Hume, by some one means or other (as there is no
cause to doubt of the Gentleman's honesty and constancy) they will have no
subterfuge for their false allegations, which must needs tend to your Lordships
good and honor, clearing your innocence, and confuting the calumnies of your
enemies. I received a letter, by Master James Melvine, and Master Walter
Balcanquel, (who arrived here on friday last) declaring the courageous and
constant death of Maines, who gave testimony of your Lordships innocence and
loyal affection to his Majesty, by his last words. There was no other new
matter of importance in it, being dated the 18. of February, not long after
your Lordships coming from Newcastle. But I shall have no more intelligence
that way; for the Author is forced to flee hither, having been searched for,
and escaped narrowly. He was delated by the confession of William ^ray (my
brother Wedderburnes servant) who being booted, confessed he had delivered him
a letter from me. It is done by Manderston, to make it reflect upon my brother;
and he (to recriminate) has accused his son George; and it is thought he will
be able to prove it by George Hume of Cramnicrook: John Johnston is also fled,
and great sums of money offered for him: this other letter will show what
comfort I may expect from Scotland; or he, who is now in the same case. There
is sure word from France, that the Duke of Guise is in the fields with an Army
of 30000. or 40000. men: some say against the King; maniest, against Navarre,
or Geneva. So ceasing to trouble your Lordship, I rest, etc.


Out of these may be seen the honest and honorable dealing, together with the
right and loyal disposition of the Earl of Angus, whatever has been set
abroche or intended by any other: as it is clear there have been some other
motions made to him, which his heart could not incline to, nor his mind
dispense with. For certainly, this fear could not arise without some great
occasion; and what it has been, or whether it did tend, as also who are
likeliest to have been Authors of it, though it may be conjectured in some
sort probably, yet I will leave it to every man's consideration of the
circumstances and persons who were upon this course of joining together. For my
task being at this time to draw, (though with a rude hand) as I can, the true
draughts of this Noblemans mind, whom I have now in hand. I could not omit
this piece, whereby (though there were no more to be found of him) this
general may appear, that duty, justice, and virtue, were the men of his
counsel, and the square by which he ruled all his actions, from which, no
extremity or hard estate, could ever divert him or drive him away; but to touch
upon any other man, or glance at any thing which might rub a blot upon any,
is besides my purpose, and no ways incumbent to me. But to return, it fell
out with them according to this last letter: for as they were removed from
Berwick to Newcastle, to secure the Scottish Court; so Newcastle being not so
far from Edinburgh, but that within twenty four hours (or little more)
they could have been there upon a necessary occasion, the Courtiers were put in
fear by others, or feigned and imagined fears to themselves, for taking away
of this (suggested, or apprehended) fear, as they had been removed from
Newcastle to Norwich; so now they are brought from thence to London, as was
pretended, The Lords brought to London.
to answer to the Ambassadors accusation, but indeed, to advise with him of
the way, how they might be restored to their Country, and the Country rid of
Arran, who was now become odious both to Court and Country. It is a true
saying, That there is no society amongst Pirates without Justice: for if the
Arch-Pirate take all to himself, or if he divide not the prey equally, the
rest will kill or forsake him. The Earl of Arran knew not this rule, or
regarded it not: for in parting of the spoil of these Noblemen, their lands,
their goods, honors, government, and places of Command, he dealt them
unequally; drawing most to himself, and in Council and guiding of the State,
he was the only figure (or number) and the rest were but ciphers and
instruments to execute his decrees.

There were then at Court (of greatest note) the Master of Gray, a near Mo^ing
against Arran.
Kinsman to the late Earl of Gowry, and of the ancient Nobility, who did hate
and disdain Arran, for that he had been Author of the death of his dear
friend, seized on his lands, and did presumptuously take upon him to govern the
whole Country alone, being but newly raised to be noble. There was also Sir
Lewis Ballandine (of kin likewise to Gowry) an ancient depender on the house
of Angus: and Master John Metallane (Secretary) who had been indeed an enemy
to the Earl of Morton, and was well contented that Arran should be employed to
work his ruin; but he could not away with his peremptory, and absolute
domineiring. These were the actours and great instruments of his fall: Gray,
directly, and of purpose, the other two by conniving and being conscious to the
plot, yet so as they would have seemed not to know of it, and they did rather
give way to it, then work it. They all thought it reason, that they should (at
least) have their share of the spoil in a fit proportion; but they could not
have it any ways proportionable to their esteem of themselves. There was
besides these, Francis Earl Bothwell, who (amongst other causes of
coffeehouse) was grieved at the banishment of the Earl of Angus, his Ladies
brother. Alexander Lord Hume had been discarded for being thought to be his
friend: Sir George Hume of Wedderburn, and Sir James of Coldenknowes were
known and professed friends to the Earl of Angus: and Wedderburnc was of
kin to the Master of Glames, and allied to the house of Mar. Robert Carre
of Cesford was also of the party, what out of love to Angus, what for emulation
with the house of Farnhaste, who were on the other faction. His Uncle the
Provest of Linclowdan ( Douglas to his name) was a special stickler in the
business: he was very familiar and intimate with the Secretary ( Metellane)
who without his advice did almost nothing. But above all, the Lord Maxwell
(made Earl of Morton) entered into open hostility: for being charged to
compeare, he disobeyed and refused; and by intelligence with the banished Lords
he levied soldiers, slew one Captain Lammie, that was sent against him, with
his companies, whom Johnston did assist. Hereupon a Proclamation was set forth
in the Kings name, that all that were able to bear arms, should come and
follow the King, who was to pursue him in person the 24. of October. These and
many others (and indeed the whole Country) agreeing in this conclusion, that
Arran was to be removed from the helm of government, which he steerd so
ill: the Master of Gray was sent Ambassador into England, and had broken the
business with the Lords concerning their return, and his removeall. Now Sir
Lewis Ballandine is sent up Ambassador Sir Lewis Ballandine Ambassador in
England.
with Commission to accuse them of a conspiracy, detected by Duntrethes
deposition: Hereupon they are sent for from Norwich, to make answer to it. The
Master of Glames being of greatest age and learning, they made choice of him to
plead their cause before a certain number of the Councillors of England,
deputed by the Queen to hear and judge of it. Their own innocence, the
ability of the pleader, and the favor of the Judges meeting together, made
them to be easily absolved, notwithstanding, that the Ambassador did his best
in framing, and pressing his accusation to the full, to discharge his
Commission every way. It is a pretty sport to consider the proceedings of the
world, and what masks and vizards men do put on sometimes to cloak their
designs. With what respect and reverence did they carry themselves toward my
Lord Ambassador? and with what strangeness and aversation did he look upon
them? One day as the Earl of Angus was walking into the fields for his
recreation, he encountered the Ambassador coming from Tuttle-fields in a
narrow lane, ere he came near, he espied him, and knowing it was he, he called
to his servants to give way to my Lord Ambassador, and he himself standing
aloof with cap in hand, made a low reverence to his Lordship as he passed by.
The Ambassador again acted his part finely, remembering his place, the person
he represented, and the errand for which he was sent (to be his accuser) with
a countenance which did bear anger and grief in it to see the Kings rebels,
he turned away his face, and would not so much as look on that side of the
street, notwithstanding that he both loved and honored him in his heart, and
was even then laying the groundwork of his restitution. He being gone home,
the plot went forward in Scotland. England was no better affected toward Arran,
then his own Country was: they did altogether dislike of him, and suspected
his ways, they conceived that he did prosecute the Guisian plots begun by
Obignie, and which had been interrupted by his disgrace, and discourting. And
yet they acted their part also, bore fair countenance and correspondence with
him, and he with them, but all was but dissimulation, and like a stage play.
The Lord Hunsdon Governor of Berwick, and Warden of the Marches on that hand,
paid him home in his own coin, and entertained a show of friendship with him,
but no more. Diverse meetings they had upon the borders, and many fair promises
were made by Arran, to keep back England from favoring or aiding the Lords:
That the King should be at the Queens devotion, that he should follow her
advice in all things, that he should not marry without her consent, and that
he should make a league with her, offensive, and defensive. The Master of
Gray, Ambassador, had promised so much, but when the English urged the
performance of it, it was a jest to see their fine shifting. The Master of
Gray put it upon Arran, Arran upon the Master of Gray, and the King professed
that neither of them had warrant or direction from him to say any such thing,
and therefore he was not tied to make it good: they were too sharp and quick
sighted not to see through greater clouds. In the mean time it fell out at a
meeting of the Wardens ofthe middle-marches, that Sir Francis Russell (son to
the Earl of Bedford) was killed, whether Sir Francis Russell killed.
by chance or of set purpose, is uncertain. This did alienate them from the
Courtiers, and joined them to the Lords, whom they knew to be honest, true, and
trusty, and therefore they wished well to them, and helped forward their
interprise endirectly all they could. While matters were thus in working, the
Lords remained still at London, and were lodged at a place appointed to them
(called long-ditch, near Saint James Park, whither the banished Ministers
resorted, and kept continual exercise of preaching, praying and fasting (on
occasion) in a private manner, without ostentation or notice thereof in
public, being done within their lodging only.

There was a motion made to the Counsel of England, that there The Scots sue
for a Scottish Church at London, but cannot obtain it.
might be a particular Church allowed, and allotted unto the Scots, as the
French, Italians, and Dutch, have their Churches apart: but it was not granted,
they being unwilling (apparently) that being of one language, our
discomformitie with their ceremonies should appear to the common people. This
grieved us greatly, and especially Master James Lowson, who partly for that,
partly because of a letter written to him from the town of Edinburgh, (in
which they did unkindly reproach his flying into England as a de^ertion, and
did renounce him for their Pastor, calling him a Wolf, who had fled without
just cause, and had joined himself with rebels, and such other calumnies, as
Bishop Adamson had endited, and caused the Provest and town Counsel sign) he
sickned and died, being much lamented, both of English, Scots, and all that
knew and were acquainted with him. Notwithstanding that they could not obtain a
peculiar Church, yet the Lieutenant of the Tower, being acquainted with some
of our Ministers, he desired them to preach in his Church within the Tower
(which is a privileged place, and without the jurisdiction of the Bishops) and
many of the people came thither to hearethem. Amongst other exercises, Master
Andrew Melvine read Lectures in Latin upon the old Testament, beginning at
Genesis, which were much frequented; and the Earl of Angus was a diligent
Auditour, and a painful repeater of them for his own use and contentment.

But now the negotiation of their return being far advanced, and The Lords
came to the Borders.
come even to the maturitie and full ripeness, Angus, Mar, the Master of
Gl^mes (with a few onwaiters) take post from London, and came with all
expedition to the Borders. They had composed their differences with the Lord
Maxwell, and the Lord Hamilton, and so all were to join in the common
business, with one heart and hand, as one man. Before Angus came from London,
he wrote to his friends in Scotland after this sort: You have now known by M.
John (Colvill as I think) that we stay here only till we receive new
advertisement from the Provest of Lincluden, in name of the rest of our friends
that should join with us in that Country; after the receipt whereof we mean
not to stay, but immediately to come down; wherefore be ye not unready, seeing
others will be forward enough, as we believe. At our first coming we mean to be
quiet two or three days, in which space I mean to speak with some principals,
and by their advice to go more plainly to our purpose. This State will not
seem openly to know our designs; but we are to receive some help of Moneys,
for so it is promised. Sir William Russell shall also join with us as a
malcontent, having been of late ill used by that State (in killing Sir
Francis) but not as having any command so to do. If matters go on, we mind to
enter on both hands. Hamilton and Maxwell shall enter on the West-borders,
Angus and Mar at the East, with such as will join with them there.

Thus did it please him to speak of himself in the third person, howbeit it was
written all with his own hand. But Sir William Russell did not join with them.
Angus, Mar, and the Master of Glames came to Calsoe, and remained there with
the Earl Bothwel two or three nights. Thither came the Lord Hume, Sir George
Hume of Wedderburne, and others of their friends; and with common consent from
thence they went to Jedbrugh, where they made their coming known, and professed
their intentions. Upon the report hereof, Colonel Stuart was sent against them
with such forces as he could get, and came to Peebles; but he found that he had
not to do with irresolute and lingering folks, as the Earl of Gowrie, nor
with such deserted and abandoned men as had fled from Stirlin, and therefore he
retired in due time, to tell tidings of the certainty of their coming. They
took their journey toward Hamilton, and there joined the Lord Hamilton and the
Lord Maxwell; and so altogether marched to Fawkirk. They caused publish
Declarations every They come ^o Fawkirk the 1. of November 1585.
where, containing their intentions, and justifying their proceedings, which
are set down word by word in the History of Scotland, written by Holinshed an
Englishman; who pleases, may read it there. The sum is not unlike to that
which was made before at Stirlin (when they fled to England) only such things
were added thereto, as had fallen out since then, in the time of their abode
there. Their Declaration.
As namely; First, The proceeding by cruelty under the shadow of the Kings
name, whose Predecessors did commonly labor to win the hearts of his
Subjects by clemency: Secondly, The executing, imprisoning, banishing (by
wrested Laws) the worthiest, most ancient, and the most faithful (to G O D
and the King) both Noblemen and Barons: Thirdly, Acts and Proclamations
published, inhibiting Presbyteries and other exercises, privileges and
immunities allowed by Parliament, or practiced and permitted by laudable
custom of the Church, without which, purity of Doctrine, and the right form of
Ecclesiastical discipline cannot continue: Fourthly, compelling and forcing the
most learned and most religious men, and such as were of most entire life and
conversation, and of most sincere conscience, to forsake their Country; or
inhibiting them to preach, and defrauding them of their Stipend, by violence:
Fifthly, the entertaining of Jesuits, and executers of the Decrees of the
cruel Council of Trent: Sixthly, obdurate Papists having place in Session,
and honest men removed, an evident proof and presage of intention to root out
the true Religion: Seventhly, the thrusting of Magistrates upon Burrows
(contrary to their privileges) which were neither free of the Towns, nor fit
to discharge the place in their persons: Eighthly, the secret practices of
James Stuart, and the Colonel, to turn the love and amity which has been
now of a long time entertained with England (very happily) into open hostility,
having had intelligence with such persons as sought the Queen of Englands
destruction: a point confessed by diverse her Rebels, executed in England, and
which appeared by the slaughtering of the Lord Russell, a man noble in birth,
honorable by virtue, zealous in Religion, of great expectation, and a special
friend and lover of Scottish men, notwithstanding that they had made show of
the contrary for certain months, and had pretended to enter into an offensive
and defensive League with her. The conclusion was, We command and charge in
our Soveraign^ Lords name (as his born Counselors, who are bound in duty to
be careful of his welfare, honor and reputation, for which we have our Lands
and Inheritances) all and sundry his subjects, to further and assist this our
godly enterprise, to concur with us, and so to give testimony of their
affection to the true Religion, his Majesty's welfare, and public peace and
quietness of this Realm. It contained also certification, That such as should
attempt any thing to their contrary, yea, that did not take plain and open
part with them, should be reputed as partakers of all vice and iniquity, as
assisters of the said treasonable Conspiratours, ( James and William Stuarts)
and enemies to Religion, to his Majesty, and Authority, and to the public
quietness of the two Realms, and should be used as such, in body and goods.
Commanding all Justices and Magistrates, as well the Lords of the Session as
others, Sheriffs, and whatsoever inferior Judges, to administer justice, for
the furtherance hereof, as they would answer upon their allegiance and highest
perils: with the like certification to them also, if they failed herein.

They staid at Fawlkirke that night, being the second day of November, The Road
of (...).
and kept strong watch, being within five miles of the enemy. It was observed
with great disdain, that the Lord Maxwel, who had the charge of the hired
soldiers that were put on the watch, and so the choice of the watchword, gave
it, Saint Andrew; as smelling of his superstitious disposition, and which was a
blemish, and contradiction (in a manner) to their declaration, wherein they
professed to stand for the true Religion. But it was rather privately grudged
at, than publicly reproved. On the morrow there came a message from the Castle
of Stirlin, as from the King to the Earl Bothwell, whereby he was desired to
forsake that Company, and either come to the King, or return to his own house,
which he pleased. This was a trick to divide them, and which did so work upon
him, that if the Earl of Angus had not partly by reason persuaded him, and
partly by his authority (being a man greatly respected) detained him, and
fixed his wavering mind, he had forsaken them altogether, not without great
danger to have weakened the hands and hearts of the rest, by such an untimely
example. On such moments (many times) do even the greatest business depend.
But God had determined to bless that Work at that time in their hands. That
rub being removed, they march forward, and about the going down of the Sun,
they showed themselves at S. Ninians Kirk, which is scarce a full mile from
Stirlin, and were seen from the Castle wall, of friends and foes. They lodged
there-about as they could, till near the dawning of the day; and then upon a
secret sign given to the Companies that had dispersed themselves into the
neighbor Villages for better lodging and victual, without sound of Drum or
Trumpet, they came to their Camp and Colors. The way of assaulting the Town
was laid down thus: First, one of the Commanders, with a few Companies, was
directed to go and make show, as if he meant to enter the Town through some
Orchards that lay on the West side thereof; and at the same instant another
(with some other few Companies) was sent to go through the Park as if they had
intended to assault it on that hand, near to the Castle hill; while in the mean
time the Noblemen themselves, with the gross and body of the Army, marched on
the South side, and passing the ditch a little above the Mill, going through
some Gardens, entered at a certain narrow Lane, not ^arre from the West gate,
where the way was so strait, that single men with weapons could hardly pass
it. The hired soldiers which carried shot were set foremost, to remove any that
should offer to make head against them. They that were within the Town were
equal in number to those that were to assault it without; Noblemen, (the Earl
Marshall, and the Lord Seton) and Barons, who were come, out of obedience to
the Kings Proclamation: These had the keeping of the West gate. But the only
enemies were James, and the Colonel ( Stuarts) together with Montrose and
Crawford, in respect of some particular quarrels. For Montrose had been
Chancellor of the Assise, by which the Earl of Morton was condemned, and was
esteemed to have been a bad instrument therein: And Crawford had killed the
Lord Glames, the Masters brother, whereupon deadly feude, and diverse murders
had ensued on both sides. The rest, though they did not openly assist the
invaders, yet did they wish them no hurt, nor make any resistance against them.
There were in the Castle, the Master of Gray, and Sir Lewis Ballandine, who
were suspected by James Stuart, and not without cause. He knew also that Master
John Metellane bare him no great good will. These he intended to have rid
himself of, and to have slaughtered, but they were too strong to do it without
great hazard; and besides, it had been but little wisdom to have gone about
that, wherein if he had failed, it would have been his overthrow, and though
he had prevailed, it would not have freed him from his enemies without. All he
did was, that the Colonel with some shot, was set in the Street near the
West-Gate of the town, which was the place likeliest to be assaulted, James
Stuart himself stayed about the Bridge, having the Keys of that Gate in his
pocket, making that back-doore sure for his last refuge to escape by it. The
Earl of Montrose was placed at the foot of the Castle hill, to make good the
entry through the Park. The event was, that having entered the Town through a
narrow Lane, they were welcomed and entertained by the Colonel with some shot
in the street, but seeing that they were resolute, and more in number than he
was able to deal with, he retired to the Castle. In this entry there was but
one only (of the Lords side) killed, and it is uncertain whether it were done
by the Enemy, or by one of his fellows, who were so unskilful in handling
their Muskets, that their Captain said, That who had known them as well as he
did, would not willingly have marched before them. The Earl Marshall and the
Lord Seton, seeing the Colonel so quickly quit the Field, stood still at the
Gate, invading no man, and no man invading them. The Earls of Montrose and
Crawford, hearing the tumult of the Town taken, on the other hand, forsook
their station, and were received into the Castle. James Stuart fled by the
posterne on the Bridge, and having locked the Gate behind him, he threw the
Keys into the River. The Colonel in his retreat was followed so near by
Master James Halden (brother Germane to M James Halden slain.
John Halden of Gleneagles) that he overtook him, and was laying hand on him,
but in the mean time was shot by Josua Henderson (a servant of the Colonels)
and so died presently. He was a young Gentleman, much lamented of all that knew
him, being lately come out of France, where (as also in Italy) he had lived
diverse years, with great approbation of all his Contrymen, being greatly
beloved for his sweet courteous disposition. If it were lawful here to bewail
a particular loss, I have just cause to loose the reins of my private
affection, and pay that tribute of sorrow and tears which I owe to the memory
of so faithful, upright, and trusty a friend. For the present it shall suffice
to say thus much (and let it remain as a poor witness of some small
grateful remembrance, as long as this piece can remain) that before him I
found not any, and since have known but very few so hearty and sincere friends,
as he was to me from our childe-hood for many years.

Having thus without any further loss or hurt made themselves Masters Stirlin
taken by the Lords.
of the Town, all rejoiced at their success, and with cheerful minds and
countenances welcomed them, and congratulated their return. One thing was like
to have bred some stir and tumult, but that the parties interressed knowing
the Lords own noble disposition, and how these things could not be helped, bore
patiently the loss they received, for the joy they had of the public good.
This it was; when the Nobles and Gentlemen alighted to enter the Town on foot,
they gave their horses to their footmen to be held without till they had made
all clear within. While they were busied in assaulting and rambarring,
Colonel Stuart; the Annandale men (and others also by their example*) who came
with the Lord Maxwell, seized on their horses, and went clear away with them,
having spared no man friend or foe, of their own, or the adverse party. It was
no time to follow them, and though it had, yet could they not do it, their
horses being gone. That day they lodged in the Town, and kept watch and ward
about the Castle, that none might go forth, or come in without their knowledge.
Robert Hamilton of Inchmachan, who had falsely accused Master Douglas of Maines,
and Master Cunninghame of Drummiewhasle caused himself to be let down over the
Castle wall (at the backside thereof) in a basket, thinking so to escape; but
he was perceived, followed, and slain (in the Park) by Johnston of Westerhall,
receiving that just reward of his betraying innocent blood. The Lord Hamilton
himself when he heard of it, said he had gotten but what he had deserved. The
Castle not being provided of Victuals, and no man (almost) caring to defend it,
it could not hold out: wherefore messengers being sent to and fro betwixt the
King and them, They come into the King^ presence.
all things were agreed on; and so the fourth of November the Gates were set
open, and the Companies entering, the Noblemen presented themselves before the
King in all humble and submisse manner, and did by their carriage and behavior
really confute the calumnies of their enemies, who had accused them of
traitorous intentions and practices. When they came, they used not many words;
only, They were his true and loyal Subjects, ready to serve him with their
blood; and that they were come to declare themselves, and to clear them from
those calumnies which wicked and seditious men that sought their own
particulars, had filled his Majesty's ears and mind with, and so made him to
be suspicious of them without cause. The King answered lovingly; That it was
true, and that he now saw that he had been too long abused. That it was
certainly the mighty hand of GOD working with their good affection that had
brought them so through without shedding of blood. And so embracing them
heartily, he welcomed them with a cheerful countenance; desiring that they
would forgive and spare the Earls of Montrose and Crawford, who were afraid to
lose their lives and estates, being conscious of their own deservings. This
request diverse of the Earl of Angus his friends would have had him to have
denied; but he, by a rare moderation, and to show how far he regarded the
desires of his Prince, being willing also that the whole work should be free,
not only of innocent blood, but even from particular (though just) revenge,
neither could nor would refuse it.

This was the Catastrophe of this Tragick-comedie, acceptable and joyful to
all (except these few particular men) and harmefull to none, which did justify
their (unjustly condemned) former meeting at the same Town of Stirlin, which
if it had had the same success, had produced the same effect, as it had the
same aim and end. It justified also those of the Ministry who had fled to
England, and those at home who approved and favored them, that in so doing,
they did not favor Traitors, or traitorous enterprises. This the Earl of
Angus (above all) did observe, and did often remember this consequent of the
success, with no less contentment than the success it self, esteeming it a
greater mercy and favor from GOD to have thus cleared their innocence and
loyalty, than that he was restored to his own home and inheritance. And
therefore he did often call to mind, and mention that speech of the Kings,
That it was the very hand of GOD which had prospered their enterprise, and
given them that success without blood. For though it may seem no hard matter,
in respect of the general favor of the Country, yet if we consider what a
desperate enemy, loath to quit such places as they have enjoyed, is wont to
do, it will seem strange that they should without once striking a stroke thus
be gone without more ado. But as it has been found in broils (and I have
particularly observed) that GOD has preserved their hands from blood, whose
hearts did abhor from the shedding of it, even upon such occasions as men
thought they could hardly avoid, either to be frustrate of their intentions, or
to obtain them with much blood; where by the contrary, many whose feet have
been swifter, and their hearts less careful of it, have on very small
occasions fallen into it. So in this public business, it pleased GOD to look
on the hearts of the actours, and according to the innocence thereof, to
dispose of the means of their restoring, that their hands were kept pure from
the blood of any. He observed also of the Town of Edinburgh, how it had pleased
GOD to cut short their aid and assistance, which they might have given the
enemy by laying of it waste and desolate through the death of 20000. persons of
the plague (which had raged there) whereby the rest were so terrified, that
they were glad to forsake the City. For the Courtiers did most repose and rely
upon them, who were readiest upon the sudden, and who (upon the least
advertisement) were wont to come at their beck, without any disputing, or
questioning the lawfulness of the quarrel or justice of the cause, but took
every thing as from the King, whatsoever was commanded in his name, as they had
given proof before, when they conveened at Stirlin; having been the first that
were sent against them, when they were forced to flee into England. This plague
began immediately after their flight, and the departure of their Ministers, and
increased daily with such terror and fearfulness in the hearts of men, that
every man did interpret it to be the immediate hand of GOD, striking them for
their obsequiousenesse to the Court, and contempt of their Ministers; and now
they being returned it diminished daily, so evidently, that after their entry
into Stirlin, it ceased, not by degrees or piece-meale, but in an instant (as
it were) so that never any after that hour was known to have been infected, nor
any of such as were infected before, to have died. The Lane also, in Stirlin,
by which they entered, was wholly infected, yet no man was known to have been
tainted with it, or to have received any hurt. Nay, the men of Annandale did
rob and ransack the pest-lodges which were in the field about Stirlin, and
carried away the clothes of the infected, but were never known to have been
touched therewith themselves, or any others that got, or wore the clothes. They
also that were in the Lodges, returned to their houses, and conversed with
their Neighbors in the Town, who received them without fear, suspicion, or
reproof, and no harm did ensue upon it. As for Edinburgh, before the first of
February (within three months) it was so well peopled and filled again with
inhabitants, as none could perceive by the number that any had died out of it.
As if GOD from Heaven should have said, Lo, the cause of my wrath, lo, the
cause of my mercy, with the going and coming of his servants: a rare and
remarkable work never to be forgotten, as he did never forget it. And for my
part, I think it merits to be recorded here, and that it is worthy that the
remembrance thereof should remain to all posterity, so far as my weakness can
preserve it, that men may see and learn to fear and seek that GOD who works
so great things, and none can hinder him. A notable wonder, and next unto that
overthrow of the Spanish Armado in 88. both in my time, both immediately by the
hand of GOD: But this, so much the more evidently, as that there, some ordinary
industry and help of man did intervene; here, nothing can be alleged to have
brought it to pass, but the very singer of GOD. Let mankind advert and admire
it. And whosoever shall go about to bereave GOD of his glory by laying it over
upon chance or fortune, may his chance be such as his blindness or
perverseness deserves. Things being brought thus about, who would have been
so modest, as not to have been so far ambitious, as in distributing the
offices of the Kingdom, to have taken to himself, or bestowed on his friends
some place of honor or profit? But Angus did neither take to himself, nor
procure any for his particular friends and followers. Let ambition be silent,
and let her plumes fall, when she sees her self truly contemned by him. He
contented himself with that only which was his own; yea, he even dispensed and
forbore that which was his own; modestly tolerating, that the Lands, House and
Lordship of Dalkeeth, should still be retained by the young Duke of Lennox,
upon the Kings promise to be restored thereto, so soon as any occasion should
fall out of providing some other Lands to the Duke; which was not done, till
the Lord Methven dying without heirs male, the Lands falling to the King, he
gave them to Lennox, and restored Dalkeeth to Angus. Out of the like modesty
and will, to gratify his Prince in whatsoever he could to the very uttermost
of his power, at the Parliament (held in Edinburgh 1587.) about two years
after, he dispensed with his privilege of bearing the Crown at the Kings
request, and suffered the Duke to carry it, with protestation (and promise)
that it should not be prejudicial to him nor his house in time coming, and so
(with all meekness) submitted himself to take the second place, and carry the
Scepter. In this last point, it was thought wisdom to yield, so to disappoint
those, who were thought to have put the King upon it, of purpose to have made a
breach betwixt the King and him by his refusal. The former was not effected
without the bribing of those Courtiers who did then possess the Kings ear.
Secretary Metellane got his Lands of Die-Water to work it; which when he would
have holden of the King by renunciation, Angus refused to renounce, and would
only give them, holding of himself, not without some indignation on both
sides. It was hardlier constructed, that he suffered a decree given in favors
of Farnihaste to his prejudice, to be reserved, and stand good in his
restitution. And thus did he behave himself in his private affairs.

As for the public affairs of the Kingdom, he suffered them to be Gl^mes
Treasurer.
managed by the Master of Glames, to whom the rest of their society were most
inclined, for the opinion they had of his wisdom, greater experience and age;
as also for that now he was a prime officer of State (Treasurer) and allied
with the Lord Hamilton; rather than he would enter into any contest, which
might breed any division amongst themselves, being set altogether on peace and
calmnesse, howbeit he did not approve of all their proceedings, and differed
much in judgment from them, concerning the administration and handling of
matters. So in the policy of the Church, though out of a sincere mind and
true zeal, he favored and affected the right form as much as any, and was
much grieved, that such order was not taken in it, as should have been, and was
expected; yet he did tolerate that course which the rest thought good to suffer
to go on. For this they gave out, That the King inclined to the government of
Bishops, and therefore it was not convenient to cross his inclination abruptly
and directly, left he should seem to be constrained or thralled in his actions
(a point which they avoided carefully) and not used with that respect and
liberty, which is due to a Prince: yet they said they should labor to work him
to it with time, taking their opportunity as it should be offered unto them.
And so indeed it was brought to pass; for Bishops were first restrained of
their using their pretended jurisdiction, and by fact ( de facto) even then
brought under obedience to Synodes and Presbyteries, and in the year 1592. the
former discip^line was re-established by Act of Parliament, and all authority
directly taken from Bishops. But neither in the former Parliament (holden at
Linlithgow in December 1585.) neither in the next (holden at Edinburgh the 29.
of July 1587.) was there any mention made thereof. This gave occasion of much
coffeehouse to the best affected, and bitter contention betwixt the Court
and the Ministry; they reprooving this toleration of that unlawful office,
and the King committing them for their freedom of reproof. So no man of any
judgment and good disposition was satisfied with their proceedings.
Notwithstanding, there was none of any degree, but had a good opinion, and
thought well of the Earl of Angus, and excused his part of it, laying the
blame thereof upon the rest, who (they thought) were more careful of their own
particular, than mindful or solicitous for the state of GODS Church. And when
I call to mind the disposition of men in those times, I cannot express it
otherwise than thus; That they accused all, but excused him; and yet they so
excused him, that they did also accuse him; not for his want of good will, but
for want of action. They were persuaded of the sincerity of his heart but they
thought him defective in action according to their opinion, and would have had
him to have taken more upon him than he did. Concerning which purpose I have
thought it best not so much to deliver my own judgment, or use my own words in
excusing or accusing what might be thought worthy to be excused or accused in
him (for what is mine may be more obnoxious to men's censure) as to set down
every point according to the judgment, and in the words of others, who were
present eyewitnesses and special actours in those times: what they thought
worthy to be reprehended, and what they required to have amended, which will
comprehend whatever negligence or omission any man can lay to his charge: for
as touching any fault of Commission, and doing what he ought not to have done,
there was no man complained of him. To which effect, diverse letters might be
produced, which were written to himself by diverse persons of all sorts,
Civil and Ecclesiastical, Scottish and English, of the Ministry, which had
been banished with him, and of the brethren of the Church of England: but I
have made choice of one for all, which contains the sum of all, both Church
and State business, both private and public, and that in the Authors own
words most faithfully, neither adding nor impairing any thing. To which we
shall subjoyne his own answer, in his own words (so far as our memory can
serve) at least his own estimation, and judgment of every point; his ends,
grounds and reasons of his actions, which he delivered in his most inward, and
private conference, where it pleased him to open himself, as he was
accustomed, freely, and even to the laying naked of his very heart and soul.

The letter was (after the wonted formalities) thus,

HAving occasion of this bearer, I thought good to remember some A letter
written to the Author, concerning the State of those times.
things, especially that you would (as you know I intended to have done)
purchase in name of the Country, some to be sent to keep Justice Courts, in
our Country and Teviotdale, otherwise all will break. Also let the sitting
of the Session be hasted, that such things as flow from their restitution may
be decided, otherwise some men may be greatly prejudiced and disappointed.
As for Master John, it is hard for my Lord to help you both (I am still of
that opinion) wherefore if no place fall about the King, let it not displease
his Lordship that one of you seek some other course.

After my departing from Linlithgow, I continued in great anger, whereof I am
not yet fully freed, because of that sentence (or decree) reserved to
Farnihaste against the Earl of Angus: and though the doers be partial, yet I
blame most his own simplicity (I must needs so call it) seeing his
authority ought to put order to others, where now he is only a beholder of
that which it pleases others to do. But he must either take matters
otherwise upon himself, or undo himself, and all the rest with him. For if
the Master of Glames, forgetting the event of Ruthven business, will needs
trace the steps of the Earl of Gowrie, it is not for the rest of the
fellowship to be slothful to their own hinderance. They are indeed at Court,
but are esteemed no better (abroad) then beasts in the Country, never like to
acquire the favor of any; but continually declining out of the hearts of many
of their well affected friends, who all speak, as though they saw already an
evident ruin of them: and that (doubtlesly) deserved, for lying in their good
cause, and not vindicating Israel from Aram. Remember whence they are fallen,
and return, or we shall be forced to lament for that which we shall never be
able to amend. If they stick to their cause, all is sure; otherwise nothing
sure: for either their surety is by the Kings favor (whereof I speak
nothing) or the favor of the people: this they must have by pressing their
cause; of Noblemen, for relieving them from bondage, and revenging their blood;
of Gentlemen and Commons, for purging Religion, restoring of Justice, and
providing that Tyranny thrust not it self in again. If this be urged, it
will confirm such as are already in the cause, and will make more to join in
it: So shall the cause prosper; and if occasion crave so, there is a party
ever ready to take Arms for it. But if, omitting this, a flattering, or a
fearful course be taken, who shall speak plain, and assist such fearful
dissemblers? who shall credit them, when afterward (as heretofore) they shall
take on the name of the good cause? I wish the Kings Majesty may be used with
all Princely reverence, but not flatteringly fostered in tyranny to his own
undoing, though I seem to see even now that these flatterers shall be worthily
wracked. I ask them whether they had a just cause in hand or not? (and yet of
all these evils, under the burden whereof the Country groned, they have opened
nothing at all to his Majesty) why is it not then justified in deed by
condemning the other worthy to be condemned? Is their cause already ended? And
if not, why is it then left off? has it not enemies? why should it not then
be fortified against them? The Declaration of their cause, why was it
published? To acquire favor at the hands of the people? And why then is there
nothing done to retain this favor? yea rather, why are such things done, as
procure their disfavour, and hatred? I see nothing, but as men have
dissemblingly pretended a good cause with uncleansed hearts, God (to discover
their hypocrisy) has given them their hearts desire, but for their further
ruin for their Hypocrisy. I cannot forbear to write this, though I be out
of hope of any good, yet I suppose that such as have meant uprightly, shall (in
Gods favor) be provided for (though with trouble) when God shall require of
those dissemblers the blood of such as have perished, and shall perish through
their default, giving them a proof of their own wits, and their unfaithful
hearts: They would not serve God, he made men their masters. Are means failed
him? No: the last shall be worse then the first. It seems to me that God
has even prepared a mischief for them; and therefore given them over to their
own devices, wherewith they are so drunk, and blinded, as men in a
melancholicke apprehension, who are past all cure of Physic. But this, above
all, troubles me most, that till such time as good men be all undone, and the
Land utterly ruined, and overborne with Tyranny, it shall not be resisted
hereafter. For a new Generation must arise (that has forgotten these things)
before that any who shall pretend a common cause get credit: good men are so
often deceived under that color and pretext, and drawn on to their wrack.
And certainly, rather then I were he, that (through mis-governance and evil
order) should undo so many as are like to be undone at this time, I had far
rather give my own life for it. But I speak to deaf men, and therefore I
cease, committing to God the providing for those, whose hearts he sees to be
upright, having from time to time kept nothing back of that which I knew would
make for the surety of these men, and the cause, without troubling them with
any particulars. If Angus could steer in his own room, he might redress
the Masters errors: Speak to Dunniepace and Largoe: See what is done about
the Barons, and give me notice of such direction as goes to their Shires. I
say, for conclusion, their earnest suite in particulars, and negligence in the
common cause, convicts them before all men, and the King may justly say, They
had no good meaning. But if it were mine to do, we should go all together to
the King, and say, this or the like speech. Sir, in that ye have (as may be)
redressed our particulars, we thank you heartily, though it was ever the
least part of our desire; for Gods Church has been heavily oppressed (then
tell him the particulars apart) Your Realm and Subjects have been tyrannized
over: (then tell him also some proofs) Let therefore the Gospel be restored
to the own liberty, and some men chosen to set down some sure policy which
may last and continue. Let some also be deputed to hear the plaints and
grievances of such as have been wronged, under the color of your Majesty's
name, and let their wrongs be redressed as much as is possible; and such order
taken, that the Subjects may be out of fear heareafter of suffering, so they
keep the Laws. Let the Laws also be revised by wise men, and such of them
taken away as be hurtful to the Subjects (for you shall find the like
Ordinance touching Acts of Parliament of old.) This being done, we doubt not,
but God shall bless you, and your Country; seeing, the neglecting hereof,
has been the cause of the evils past. Sir, do it your self, for the gain
is yours, though we put you in mind of it. Now except this be done, there
can be no continuing quietness.

Postscript.
THeir foolish proceedings make all men to stand aloof. I hear the Lord Boyd
is secretly in this Country of Scotland, but sees not that in them which he
could wish. Let the Master behave himself as he pleases, can the King but
think that he would rather wish his own ^ster son King? I find great
fault that the Abbots (Driebrough and Cambuskenneth) Lie abake, who are
practitioners and partakers, as Mar at Ruthven: let them join together and
be known.


This letter being received, and a fit opportunity espied; it was Presented t^
Angus.
brought to my Lord, and without further ceremony; I have received here a
letter (says he) from whom, and from whence your Lordship may see. It is
written to me indeed, but not for my sake, (for he knows my mind) but that
I might so inform your Lordship concerning your estate, and the state of the
public cause which you have embraced; and you might know what the thoughts of
honest men are concerning it, what they think, what they expect, what they
wish and require. I think it best that it speak for it self in its own
language, let it be your Lordships pleasure to read it. He took it and read
it, and after a little pause; This (says he) that is here in the beginning of
this letter may be obtained, this Commission for Justice Courts, and this for
our security we shall and must needs be careful of. There is next that which
concerns your self; wherein I am sorry that occasion has not served me to
express in effect the good will I bore you, as I think I ought to do. And
while he was about to go on in that purpose, the other interrupting him, made
answer: Let it be your Lordships pleasure to break off that discourse: I never
doubted (nor never will do) of your Lordships mind, which is enough to
satisfy me; you know my ambition. I am content to do any thing, I am content
to do nothing: hope did not bring me to this cause; frustrating, nor fear
cannot divert me. If I can serve to any good use, I am glad of it: if I cannot,
yet am I contented: it is enough to me that I have been willing, and gone as
far as God has called me: he knows how far he will employ any, and
your Lordship is my best witness, that I never did thrust my self into your
Lordships public or private business. So far as you were pleased of your
own accord to communicate with me, so far I knew and meddled. I know what
men think, but this shall ever be my wisdom, or my folly (let who list
account it so) yet if I were even aspiringly disposed, how can your Lordship
do for your friends, at his Majesty's hands, who does your own affairs with
him by the mediation of strangers? But (seeing we are fallen upon this purpose)
let it not displease your Lordship that Master John retire himself (as you see
it is desired here) I will (by Gods grace) run such hazard and fortune as may
befall me, by being your Lordships only; to which my mind, my liking, and the
honor I have to be your Lordships Kinseman, and will to honor and do what
good office I can to your Lordship, do carry me; and if so I can serve your
Lordship to any good use in any thing you have to do, it is all I crave: for
the present let me be bold to ask your Lordships mind and disposition
concerning this letter, what you think rightly admonished, and what you intend
about the prosecution or amending of every point in it?

Before we come to this (said my Lord) let me demand a question of Discourse
concerning Mr. Craigs Sermon.
you first, and hear your judgment in a point which has greatly perplexed
me: you remember the sermon preached at Linlithgow, by Master Craig, what
think you of it? I remember you told me you did not fully like it: but I would
hear you again more particularly to refresh my memory, because it is greatly
incident to this purpose, and seems to cut short all our actions. For if the
case of all Subjects toward their Princes be such, what can we do but depend
on their pleasure? The other (smiling a little) indeed my Lord (as it is in our
Proverb) It is time to ask the question! for if you must depend on their
pleasure, why did you not expect it? and stay in England till you were
recalled? why came you unsent for? and that in such a manner? what is become of
your Proclamations? and of all the fair reasons of it? you must go back
again, and recant all, and cry peccavie for these things. Oh, (says my Lord)
that is another question, for what we did in that, was done of necessity for
our lives and estates, and to remove that violent tyrannous man, who else would
have undone King, Country, and all: But now that he is removed, and that
necessity taken away, it is another case; how to deal with our Prince, to
whom we owe such obedience, he being amongst Kings, Who are in the place of
God, who are called Gods, and to whom is due the obedience to God. But leaving
the particular, let me hear you of the general, What you think of that
Sermon, and of his grounds? I know there are others also, that were not
satisfied with it, but I would hear you. Having paused a little, he answered:
Loath am I my Lord, to enter upon that task of censuring any man, chiefly a
Preacher: I like better to dispute a point and discuss a truth, without
touching upon any man's person, so far as it can be avoided. But seeing your
Lordship draws me to it: I confess, we all disclaim implicit faith, and
think we are reasonable c^eatures, apt to weigh and consider men's reasons,
and yield assent to their opinions so far as they enforce, neither ought we
otherwise to consent, nor can any reasonable man enforce himself to assent,
which makes me, in matter of consenting (chie^ly in Religion) to dislike of
constraint: For I judge of others as I find my self; the world cannot force
me, nay, I cannot force my self to think otherwise, then my judgment
allows of. But to your question, I am more favorable to Princes, then many
believe, and to Monarchs: I account it a great and heavy charge, and burden,
which has need of great relief, and many comforts to recompense the pains
thereof, and can permit much to a good Prince, yea, as much as he himself
pleases; which will never be more then is good and just, though it were all
the estates of his Subjects, and the whole Country to be guided by himself
alone, with as absolute power as any ever spoke of, and yet not think that he
had an hairs breadth of more power to do hurt. But to the question we are on;
your Lordship remembers the ground that Master Craig did lay? yes (says he)
very well: It was that passage of the 82. Psalm ( God sits in the assembly of
the Gods) And what he built thereon? He built (said he) obedience to Kings
commandments and impunitie without controulement; your Lordship remembers
right, and reports the best of his speech in the fairest terms [Obedience to
Kings, Impunitie to Kings] whereas he said Of Obedience to Tyrants, and
Impunitie of Tyrants.
roundly, [Obedience to Tyrants, Impunitie to Tyrants] which two who confounds,
does great wrong to good Kings. But whether we call them Tyrants, or Kings,
which that Psalm speaks of, Who so inferres these conclusions from thence,
does it without warrant from the text, the drift of which is clean contrary;
not to extol or lift them up, but to abate their pride, and to humble them;
not to secure them, but to terrify them; not to exempt them from death (the
lot of other men) but to let them know that they are subject to it as well as
others, and to threaten them therewith. Wherefore let men build up Power and
impunitie to Tyrants upon what other place of Scripture they please, I dare
affirm that this place is most unfit for it. For here there is never a word of
[Obedience] never a word of [Impunitie] but by the contrary of [punishment.]
Oh,! but it says [ I have said ye are Gods:] True, but it says also [
Nevertheless, you shall die] which two being put together, the one shows them
their duty, [ Do justice as God doth] the other threatens punishment [ Te
shall die if ye do it not.] But they will say, that this threatening is from
God, and therefore God (indeed) may and will punish, but man may not. I answer,
the Text makes no mention whether God will punish them immediately, or by the
hand of man: but however that be, the scope of the Psalmist is to humble them,
and he who from thence does gather any Prerogative or impunitie to them,
gathers that which is contrary to the Text. Now to come to the particulars of
the Sermon: To what use was it at that time to preach [Obedience] to Tyrants?
was it not sufficient to have preached [Obedience] to good Kings? And to have
shown his Majesty to be a good King (if he thought that any man doubted of
that point) which was more honorable for his Majesty, more beseeming a
Preacher, more easy to persuade, then to root out the inveterate opinion of
the lawfulnes to resist Tyrants? Concerning his Arguments: 1. Was the first
solid? [ God sits in the assembly of Gods] therefore Tyrants sit in the seat
of God: though it were true, yet it follows not: and it is even like to this,
The King sits in the Assembly of the Lords, therefore the Lords sit in the
Kings seat. As on the contrary, The King (being present) does sit in his own
seat, and the Lords do rather sit in his seat when he is absent, then when he
sits in the Assembly amongst them. Also (as I have said) the presence of God is
there mentioned: not to authorize, but to control them. Neither does the Text
infer, [Therefore obey them] there is no word of that there, but [ Therefore
they shall die] Because God sits and sees them, eyes them, and perceives the
wrong they do, and how they abuse their power, which is a contrary illation to
his, and far more consonant to the Text. 2. His second Argument was [ The
people of God are commanded to obey Nabuchodonozor, who was a Tyrant, therefore
all Tyrants should be obeyed.] How hard an inference! Of a particular
extraordinary, to gather a general ordinary rule! If we allow of this kind
of arguing, it will be replied: God commanded Jehu ( a private man) to slay
Achab ( a Tyrant) therefore private men ought, or may slay Tyrants. 3. His
third [David did not slay Saul, therefore no man should lay hands on a Tyrant]
how loose is it? from example or authority, negative. 4. But the fourth [ God
placed the Tyrant in that place, therefore no man may put him out of it, though
his Tyranny be never so great] what do you think of it? A man's goods are
taken from him by a briggand, who doubts but God has given them into the
briggands hands? But does it therefore follow, that no man (not the Magistrate)
may take them from him again, because God has put them into his hands? yea,
who knows but God has cast them into his hands for that end, that they may
be taken out of his hands, and he punished for it? Besides, this inconvenient
will also follow hereon: if an usurper shall once get himself place in a
Kingdom, no man (by this reasoning) may ever dispossess him again, to
repossesse the lawful King; because (without all doubt) God has placed him
there. This were a maxim very prejudicial to lawful and rightful Kings. 5
The fifth was a Simile] which all men know are ever lame, and do halt some
way; yea those which he used, are brought by others to prove the contrary. 1.
For even Children are sometimes made free from their Parents by the civil law
Roman. 2. And Servants from their Masters, by Gods Law given to the Jews; as,
If his eye be beaten out, let him go for his eye. 3. Wives are divorced, and
freed from their husbands, if the essential knot and tie of matrimony be
violated, and broken: why then may not the tie we have to Tyrants be taken
away? If the Essential cause of obedience (the image of God) justice) be
violated, and cast off by the Tyrant, why may not the obligation of obedience
cease? And this for his Arguments, which you ^ee how frivolous and weak they
are. As for his conclusion [ Men may not put hand in Tyrants] it can never be
deduced from his text: There is only one word, which seems to make for him [ I
said ye are gods] but the next words say plainly [ Nevertheless ye shall die,]
whereby it is clear, that this appellation of (gods) is not given them to free
them from punishment, but to put them in mind of their duty; which when they
neglect, they lose the name, and are liable to the punishment. So that
(according to his own form of reasoning) if it follow from hence, that
because God has placed them in that place to do justice, therefore men should
not take them out of it, though they prove Tyrants; it will follow far
better; God appoints them to die, because they do not justice, therefore they
must die, therefore men may make them die, when they become Tyrants in stead of
being gods. Which kind of reasoning if he think not to be good, then must he
quit his own reason, and leave this passage, as neither making for him, nor
against him; neither exempting them from punishment (in calling them gods,
which shows but what they ought to be of duty) nor yet giving express
command for men to slay them, in this other word ( ye shall die) which shows
only what God will do in his justice. He alleged (as others also do in this
cause) that the thing which moved him to broach this conclusion, was, because
that if a liberty to kill, or disobey Tyrants be granted unto men, then good
Kings shall not be obeyed, nor sure of their own lives, because seditious or
ambitious men (of which there are enough) will call a good King a Tyrant. But
your Lordship may consider the futilitie of that pretext; for by the same
reason all laws are taken away, and all punishment of vice and wickedness.
For where the law ordaines thieves to be punished, an unjust Judge may call an
honest man a thief; and if we allow blasphemy to be punished, a Jezabel will
find means to cause Naboth be accounted a blasphemer; and if we suffer
sedition to be punished, Tyrants will call a good Patriot, a seditious fellow;
free admonitions, treason; and any word of liberty, rebellion. Shall therefore
sedition be unpunished? shall theft? shall blasphemy? And certainly there is
more danger, and it comes oftener to pass, that a Tyrant should call an honest
man seditious, then it is found that subjects call a good King a Tyrant. The
people suffer much (what by custom, what through a natural inclination and
love toward their Princes) and bear with many great faults, and seldom come
to rise up against him, but when the injury is intolerable. And you shall find
(when you please to try it) that they have comported more and oftener with
wicked Princes, then ever they have made insurrection against good ones; nay,
then they have made against the wicked, unless their wickedness has been
extreme enormous and pernicious. Yea, I doubt whether any can find an example
of insurrection against any that was good, nay, against any tolerably wicked:
whereas of the other side, many honest men have been oppressed, and put to death
by Tyrants upon small or no occasion, upon a forged accusation, lie, or
calumny. Wherefore it is a foolish and ridiculous pretext, to maintain
Obedience, and the Impunitie of Tyrants, that so good Kings may be obeyed, and
secured: as if a man should plead for impunitie to harlots, that so honest
matrons may be secured. All is but folly, for there is but one way to secure
honest women, which is to avoid whorish fashions; to secure honest and true
men, to take heed they be not found breaking or digging through of houses. And
let a good King beware and carefully avoid all tyrannical actions. So (and
only so) shall he be sure (if word and work justify him) and free from all
fear of punishment from God or man. And thus much concerning your Lordships
question, what my opinion is of that Sermon.

But seeing we are fallen upon this subject, let me tell your Lordship Bo^inus
his absurdity.
how men, while they labor to put a good face upon this matter, wavering
betwixt flattery of Princes, and truth of reason received, and allowed by the
common consent of all men against Tyrants, involve and entangle themselves into
many difficulties and absurdities. I will bring one instance for all, and that
is Bodinus (a Frenchman) in his book De republica: feign would he make even
Tyrants to be sacred and inviolable, and persuade that all obedience is due,
and ought to be given them. And he concludes, that they are not to be touched
by their subjects, but obeyed; whereof he gives this for his chief reason,
Because their subjects have no jurisdiction over them* yet finding how hard it
were to free them from all fear of punishment, he puts them into the hands of
foreign Kings, and exhorts them to exterminate and root them out, commending
it as a laudable action, by the imitation of Hercules, who traveled through
the world (says he) to destroy these Monsters, Tyrants. Now let any man judge
what good reason can be given for denying that power to the Country it self
(under the pretext, because they have no jurisdiction) and to give it to a
forrainer, who has neither interest nor jurisdiction over another Prince. And
whether is there more danger in the sedition of his Country people, then in
the ambition of a stranger Prince? And which of them is likeliest to pick a
quarrel against him, and to call him a Tyrant, and seek occasion to work
their own particular ends? Besides, what shall be the part of the people in
this case? Shall they fight against this forrainer, who comes to cut off their
Tyrant? Who then shall come to relieve those from tyranny, that will take
arms for defense of the Tyrant? Shall they join with him? Certainly in all
reason they ought to join with him, seeing it is for their sakes that he
under-takes the war. But that is Rebellion (if we believe Bodinus.) Shall
they be neutrall, and spectators? Even that is disobedience. And yet the same
Bodinus says, That Tyrants are monsters; now there is no society (far less
bond of obedience and subjection) with monsters. Yea, he says, That there is
no society with Pirates* because they break the Laws of humane society; and
Tyrants break them much more. This same man in his D^monomania says, A King
may become a Wolf; and that a great King in Christendom was one when he
pleased. I ask him then, Whether such a King should be obeyed, when he is a
Wolf? And if he should ever continue to be such, without returning to be a
man, whether or not must he be ever obeyed in all things? Shall his sacred
Majesty be reverenced? And (lest he should starve) shall he be fed with
childrens flesh (perhaps) because he will eat no other, or (at least) because
he likes that best? Certainly, his reason will infer no less than that he
should. And if he be ashamed to affirm this, and will confess that it is
lawful to put such an one from his Kingdom, who has put off humane nature,
and can now no more guide a Kingdom: what shall we think of one, who (though
retaining the shape of a man) has a wolvish nature and disposition, being
cruel, wicked, licentious, and over-throwes all right and equity? And is not
a Tyrant (for the like reason) as worthy to be deprived of that Kingdom,
which he cannot, or will not guide rightly, but destro^s and makes havoc of
all? Certainly, the reason is all one: for it is not the shape (so much) of a
Wolf that men abhor, as the wolvish and ravenous nature and disposition. For
suppose a good Kingwere (contrary to his will) transformed by Magical
incantation only, into the sh^pe of a Wolf, who did retain his reason, his
speech, his wisdom, justice, equity, meekness, and all good Government,
omitting nothing that belonged to a good Prince, men would not so much abhor,
as pity him, and expect till some way were found how he might recover his
former shape, and would (doubtless) prefer his humane nature, though in the
shape of a Wolf, to a wolvish nature, though under the shape of a man; it
being far more tolerable, and f^rre more advantageous for the Commonwealth,
whereof the good and safety is ever to be respected and preferred in all
things. And thus much for Bodinus.

But will your Lordship be pleased to hear what that great Doctor Apol. cap.
34.
of the Laws (a professed Patron of Princes, in his book which he wrote of
purpose for their defense) I mean Blackwood says concerning Of Blackwoods
opinion.
this question? It is (says he) an absurd thing to affirm, That a Princes
commandment should or may be dis-obeyed. Yet if a Prince command any thing
that is unjust, it must not be obeyed. But how shall we do then? Even this,
says he, when the commandment is unjust, we must suppose that the
commandment is not the Kings commandment: but either that it is, first, some
fained and forged thing under his name; secondly, or stolen from him at
unawares; thirdly, or that being busied some other way, he did not take heed to
it: Fourthly, or that he has been ill informed: Fifthly, or mis-taken it:
Sixthly, or that he is misled and mis-carried with some passion or prejudice.
So in the point of controlling Princes, he cannot endure that the Sacred
Majesty, Gods Vicegerent, should be constrained or forced any way; that is
absurd and abominable: Yet if he mis-governe the Country, so that the state of
the Commonweal be in danger, the blame must be laid on his evil
Counselors; those they may lay hands on, and take order with them; nay, hang
them, if they please, and place good men about him, whose better advice he may
follow. But by no means must they touch or meddle with himself in person. This
opinion is such, that (I believe) he against whom he writes, has not written
any thing that may seem more hard. For if we may call his commandments (when
they are unjust) stolen, and so dis-obey them; we are not bound to obey his
unjust commandments. And if we may take order with his counselors, who will
be his counselor? Or who will execute his unjust will? Nay, how can subjects
do either of these two without a manifest controlling and forcing of him, Since
he will oppose and interpret all as done against himself, and call it Treason
and Rebellion against him? So that in effect, all comes to one. Besides, this
way leaves that ground (which men so carefully pretend to avoid) which is, to
call all his commandments stolen (though they be never so clearly his) and
albeit they be never so good; as also of calling his Counselors evil,
though they be not so. Whereby he makes them Judges both of his Commandments
and Counselors; so that they may call it in question whether they be good or
not; which does brangle, and (indeed) over-turne all that absolute power which
he gave them before.

I will not omit here to tell your Lordship of another distinction that Of
Active and Passive Obedience.
some use against unlawful commandments: They grant that we should not give
them Active Obedience, that is, that we should not do the thing commanded, but
that we must yield Passive obedience, that is, Suffer what punishment the
Prince shall be pleased to lay upon us for our refusing to do what he commands,
whether it be a pecuniarie mulct, imprisonment, or death it self. But if this
be rightly weighed in the balance of reason, if the commandment be unlawful,
the punishment inflicted for refusing to obey it, is also unlawful, and the
commanding of us to under-go that punishment, is likewise unlawful. Therefore
there is no necessity of obedience to that command, according to Blackwoods
rule; for it is not the Kings; it is stolen. Therefore if a Tyrant command a
thing unlawful, under the pain of paying a sum of money, a man is no more
bound to pay the money, than he is to obey the commandment; for both are
unlawful. Far less is he bound to submit himself to a corporal punishment,
or to lay down his life, or to enter into prison, which takes away his
liberty, as dear to him as his life, and does oftentimes endanger both his
life and goods by consequence. If (I say) he can get these things avoided, he
is not bound in conscience to under-go them, but may lawfully withdraw himself
from them, and shun them. What he is to do when he cannot eschew these things,
is not a case of duty, but of prudencie: for that same question will come to
be considered, when a man has to do with a Robber (to whom he owes no
obligation of obedience) if he be not able to resist him, how far he shall
yield to him. Let us put the case then, That a Tyrant would (for our
dis-obeying of his unlawful commands) invade us his subjects by Arms, we are
not so bound to him, but we may avoid the blow; nay, the subject (in this
case) may ward the blow, and put by his Princes Weapon, he may hold his hands
(if it be necessary) and if he cannot otherwise save himself. And what will
these that stand for Passive Obedience answer to those that suppose this case:
That the Prince and his subjects were in a ship, and the Prince should command
a leake to be made in the ship, by which the water might come in, and drown
both them and himself? They will (perhaps) say, that they would not do it,
although he should command it. But would they give him a Passive Obedience?
Would they suffer him to kill them for their refusal? Would they give him
leave and way to do it? Or would they set aside such ceremony, and stay him
from it calmely? Put the Augre or Wimble out of the way, or keep it from him?
Hold his hands; or (if there were need) even bind him rather? so to save
themselves and him. Which if it be right and lawful to do for preserving a
private ship, what shall be said of the Bark of the Commonwealth (I pray you)
if a Tyrant do such things, which will cast it into danger of drowning and
shipwreck?

Now the ground of all this; First, (That tyrants must be obeyed; Secondly,
that they must not be controlled, nor resisted, but get ever a Passive
Obedience; Thirdly, that they must no ways be deprived, and far less
touched in their persons) is in this (forsooth) That they are Gods; which name
(as they allege) inferres all these, Obedience, not resistance, not depriving,
etc. And indeed (to be God) carries more with it; it imports both Active and
Passive Obedience to whatsoever he commands without exception, to kill his
son with Abraham; for each man to kill his brother, as the Levites did. But
how far these (called) Gods, come short of that privilege (notwithstanding
of the name) I have said before: and therefore this appellation will not import
any of the rest by any necessary consequence, no more than it does absolute
Active Obedience. Neither are Princes there compared to GOD, because of equal
soveraignity or obedience due to them, but because of the likeness of the
action, and to warn them to imitate him in justice. And to draw an argument
from a Comparison of things, to prove an equality in them, in that wherein they
are not matched or compared, is against the law of Similies, or Comparisons.
Secondly, those who dispute in this sort, speak only of absolute Monarchs (as
they call them) but the name of [Gods] is not only given to absolute Monarchs.
It is given to the Judges of Israel before they had Kings: and the Turks use
(at this day) when they go to law, this phrase, Let us go to God: by which they
mean, not their absolute Monarch, the Emperor, but any inferior Judge, even
the lowest and meanest, as (no question) even a Sheriffs depute, or a Barons
Bailiffe sit in the place of God, when they sit to do justice betwixt parties;
yet no man for that does attribute absolute power to them.

Behold the ground of your Lordships cause, and of this so worthy an action
done by you, to your perpetual honor, of rare memory and example in any age:
lo what you have been; not contemplating and disputing in the Schools, but
practicing in the Commonwealth. For if it be not lawful to disobey the
command of Princes (even of lawful and borne Princes) in any case, then is
this that you have done, very unlawful. If it be a wrong to control their
wills, then must this your fact be condemned as wrong. If it be not lawful to
remove from them wicked Counselors and instruments of iniquity, then is this
your act altogether unjust, enormous, unlawful and treacherous. But the world
acknowledges, all men assent, and the Prince himself confesses, that you have
happily achieved a worthy work, in freeing your King from the jaws of these
wolves and lions, who devoured the Realm, and polluted his name and fame; that
you have restored him to his honor, and that high expectation of him to his
Country, and to the Church of God throughout the whole world.

There rests only this exception and doubt in men's minds, whether or not this
has been your aim (in very deed) and the true scope and end of your
enterprise; or if this be but incident and adventitious to your own particular
designs. For it is sure, your particular was joined with it; but that is no
fault: yea, I account him happy, whose lot joins his estate with an honest
cause, so that they must stand or fall together; or whose mind and resolution
casts him upon it. But it is of great weight, and makes a great difference,
when the cause is our end, and (our particular but accessorie, or contrarily)
when our particular is the maine motive, and the common cause but a by end, and
embraced only to advance our particular. Your Proclamation (or Declaration)
which ye published, speaks much of the public cause and commonweal; but you
may perceive what men think (how your actions and doings since do not answer
thereto) by this Letter. For they are begun to think, that howsoever you
pretended the public, yet your intention was fixed only on your own
particular; because you have done nothing for the Church or Country, and has
settled your own particular. And it is observed, That of all the Parliaments
that were ever held in this Country, this last (held since you came home) is
it, in which alone there is no mention of the Church, either in the beginning
thereof (as in all others there is) or elsewhere throughout. This neglect of
the state of the Church and Country, as it is a blemish of your fact,
obscuring the beauty and luster of it; so is it accounted an error in policy
and civil prudencie, by so doing, to divide and separate your particular from
the common cause of the Church and Country; which as it has been the mean of
your particular restitution, so is it the only mean to maintain you in this
estate, and to make it sure and firm.

He having thus spoken, the Earl of Angus answered, I know Angus answers.
that question stands yet undecided betwixt those that stand for Tyrants, and
those that are against them, and is disputed by Lawyers on both sides; as what
is not disputed and called in question by them? I see also there has been
continual practice of both ways; and the practice has been allowed or
dis-allowed according to the success; The Nobility calling it Tyranny and
mis-government, and the Prince calling the controlling of him, Sedition,
Rebellion, Treason. But if Doctor Blackwood say that which you say, he touches
the point very right, and the fashion of our Country, whose ordinary custom
has ever been such, to take order with wicked Counselors, carrying all
respect to the Prince, and as much reverence as ever any Nation did. Yet that
beginning with the Counselors drew many at last by necessity to betake
themselves directly to their Prince himself, when he would needs espouse their
quarrel, and either to protect and maintain them, or to revenge them. So that
if Blackwood say that it is lawful to punish wicked Counselors, he must
confess also, that it is lawful to control Kings. Neither is he aware that
in so saying, he makes the Nobility (or Estates) Judges to discern whether the
Counselors be wicked or not; and whether their proceedings be for the good
of the Country, which he will allege they are; and that both themselves are
good servants, and their service good and profitable to him and the Country;
and these actions which they do, and the counsel which they give* that they do
them as his servants, and by his direction, as Counselors advising and
propounding things, not prescribing or enjoining; and therefore what is done
against them, is not done against them, but against him; and that they are not
wicked, but good and faithful men. Now the case standing thus, to whomsoever
he allows the power to put order to them as wicked, he allows them also
power to cognosce of them as wicked, to judge of them as wicked; and that
contrary to the judgment of their Prince who will never judge them such. And
indeed, unless it be so, when wicked men shall wind themselves in about a
Prince, and abuse his name, or pervert his mind, How shall the Prince be
preserved? How shall the Country, the State, Religion, Laws, Order, and
particular men's estates be saved from ruin? As has been profitably and
necessarily practiced (diverse times before) in this Kingdom; and of late by us
upon a flat necessity for his own good, and the good of the Country. And for
my own part (I will answer for one, and can answer but for one) his good did as
much move me to that course, as any private interest of my own: and I still
shall as much regard it (by GODS grace) so long as this weak life is in my
body. I know not how long that will be, and who lives longest, lives but a
short time; and I account not that he lives, who lives only to live this
life, or to enjoy any thing that is in it. This Lesson I have learned
substantially (so my GOD has schooled me) and I speak it to you seriously,
knowing to whom I speak. Neither shall ever any endeavor of mine have any
particular for the last end of it. That all is not so well done and so clearly
to the satisfaction of the Ministry, and all honestly affected, it grieves me
as much as any, and I am not ignorant that these inconvenients follow
thereupon, That we undergo the slander of respecting our particular, Of
carelessness of the Church and Country; as though all our speeches and
Proclamations tending that way, had been but pretexts, and that if ever any
such business should fall out again, our credit will not be so great. Yet (not
for these causes, but for the well doing it self) my desire is, That every
thing be rightly done, because it is right so to do. But what can I help it? I
am but one of the society, neither can I persuade my associats to do
otherwise, nor am I able to compel them, nor were it fit I should, it not
being the Law of a society to do so; but to do all with commune consent, and
to obtain what may be obtained by a fair way, but to go no further.
Otherwise it would quickly dissolve into diverse factions amongst our selves,
and make some of us join with others to the overthrow of us all: which if ever
it come to pass, it shall never be through any occasion from me. Men think (I
know) that my place is a principal one, yet it is but the place of one;
neither is it so principal, but that there is as principal as it, equal to
it, or (perhaps) beyond it, in respect of proxinitie to the Kingdom, if it
should fall out so, which GOD forbid it should. For no King (you know) can ever
be so near to me, and therefore there is none whom I should or will affect
so much. And this is it that carries it away from me, and gives them no little
advantage: The Lord Hamilton being next the Crown, is guided by the Master of
Glames: and the Master delights to be deep in his counsels, and pleases
himself in this form of managing affairs, which you see is now used. I have
many times told him (and others also) my opinion, but cannot bring them to it.
If I should take a course to cross and force them, How dangerous were it? Yea,
what concurrence or assistance should I have? Or, of whose friendship could I
assure my self? Maxwell, you know what his respects are: and what Religion he
is of. I can never forget the Watchword he gave at Fawkirk, whereby he did
plainly profess his disposition to superstition, Saint Andrew was it. And who
knows what intention he has to retain the title of the Earl of Morton. As
for your Chief (the Lord Hume) dare we think better of him? My brother-in-law
(the Earl Bothwell) how uncertain is he? What ado had I to retain him at
Fawkirk? And what trouble have I still to keep him in good order? There is
only one, of whose steadfastness and friendship I dare assure my self, as much
as of my self, who is loving, faithful and constant, and that is the Earl of
Mar: yet he has been so tossed with troubles already, that he is loath to
entangle himself a new, if it can be avoided any way. And why should not I be
as loath to put him to any hazard, or to occasion any trouble to him, contrary
to his disposition? GOD forbid, but that I should* be as careful of him as
he is of himself.

And concerning their proceedings; as I do not approve them altogether, so dare
I not condemn them altogether. We have to do with our Prince; what should we
not do to gain him by all fair and Gentle means? We ought not to cross or
thrall his will, but to draw it easily to a better temper; and not so much
oppose him, as by complying with his inclination a little, to wind him from
that ill way and course he has been set upon. He desires to be at liberty,
and to be known to be so, and it approves and justifies our proceedings to
have it so, and testifies to him and to the world, our love and obedience, and
what our minds have been from the beginning toward him. He promises not to
withdraw himself from us, to join with others; our trusting of his promise
will deserve that he should continue with us, and will gain his affection,
which is a surer bond than a guard placed about him; which would entertain
mutual suspicion, and move him to seek means of freeing himself from us: and
hardly could any guard be so kept, but that one set to escape, might ^inde a
way for it; not to speak of the charges that were required to entertain it.
Neither need we to fear much, though he had a mind to forsake us; for we
know who would or could be our party, and what forces they have. That there
are some suffered to remain about him, who are no good friends to us, nay, who
have been evil instruments against us, proceeds from the same ground: for it
is done, that himself and others may see his liberty, and what confidence we
have in him. That the state of the Ministry is not brought to that point which
we wish: we cannot get it done suddenly, except we will plain^y and directly
enforce his will: and how many would agree or concur to that? But we hope to
work it with his own consent in time: for the Ministry insist in their right,
and he commits them; and we intercede and mitigate his anger so far, that it
proceeds only to a short and easy confinement or imprisoning. In the mean
time, they have leisure to inform him, and he of himself will be wearied with
such continual opposition; and will give way to settle such a course as they
desire; and so it will be better and more durable, than if it should now be
extorted from him by any show of compulsion. These be the grounds, upon which
such as think themselves very wise amongst us, build their work; which though
it be not so framed, as to give every man present satisfaction (who knows not
what their way is? or if they knew, allows not of it?) yet when they shall
find the effects thereof, they will think better of them. Neither are they
afraid to want the assistance of such as are honestly affected, in case we
should be assaulted by any; for they cannot betake themselves to any other,
having none else from whom they can look for any good in the least measure:
nay, who is there besides, that has no^ a very bad meaning? And we, though
we do not all the good ^hey would; yet are we doing somewhat, and keep off
much evil; and therefore they will ^ather take part with us, than suffer all
to go to wrack. You may happly think that you have much to say against this:
but (as I said before) though I approve not all, yet I do not condemn all; so
I say now, though I report all, yet I do not approve of all; and do confess
that we should do much more, and it were better if we could agree to it, and
be all of one mind. Yet this is the wisdom of our deepest and profoundest
Politicians, whom I am resolved not to cross nor press any more, but to take
my hazard amongst the rest; and I do hope, GOD will provide for me as well as
for them, and that my part shall be as well known every way to honest men. And
therefore we will have no more objections nor reasoning at this time.

Well, my Lord (said the other) it shall be so then; we shall reason no more
of this Subject. Indeed your Lordships part is best interpreted, save that they
think that your authority should be of greater moment (as you may see by this
Letter) and that you should rather go before all, than follow any. This one
thing give me leave to remember concerning the King; He is the most apparent
instrument that is in Europe (and so in the world) of whom we can expect
greatest good and comfort to the Church of GOD; as being the only King that
has been bred in the purity and sincerity of Religigion, and therefore of
great expectation; and because of this expectation, greatly favored and
beloved of all true Professors of Religion every where: He is of a great
spirit, ingine, wit, judgment, and learning. Great pity therefore it were,
that such an one should be lost, either through corruption creeping into his
own mind, or by the poysonable suggestions of others. You do therefore
exceeding well to cherish him calmly, and to entreat him gently, and deal with
him in an humble and submisse manner; which is the way to tame and gain even
wilde-beasts that are without reason; far more is it like to prevail with
reasonable men; and most of all with Princes, who in respect of the height of
their place, are not to be violently thralled or enforced, which were the way
to spoil them: as they write of Alexanders horse Bucephalus, whom Philips
riders could not manage or over-master by force of bit or bridle, but Alexander
by stroking and making much of him, made him manageable. And if ever you intend
any worthy or great enterprise in this Country or in Europe, behold the mean,
use it wisely, and the LORD of Heaven give success. But this (I hope) may be
suggested to your consideration, that you would weigh with your selves, and see
whether or not this obsequiousness (so to term it) be the only mean to be
used toward him, smoothing all, and allowing all; never mentioning the abuses
that have been, and yet are in this Country; or if it be not fit also to
remonstrate freely (though reverently) what has been, or (perhaps) yet is
amiss in Religion and the commonwealth, in some such form as is set down
here in the end of this Letter. And whether it be fit or tolerable for the
gaining of him to a right course that such men as have no good meaning, have
his ear, and be his most intimate and ^nward Councillors. Now I fear me
greatly that the mean by which they have perverted all, and which may be still
used to pervert all, and whereby they have gained most upon his tender age, is
the eye he has to our neighbor Kingdom of England, upon which his mind is
greatly set, and to which (no question) he has the right of succession; yet
has he need of assistance to obtain the possession thereof. And they persuade
him (as he may also think of himself) that this cannot be done without help
from the Papists in England, France, Spain, Italy, and from Rome it self;
and that the way to make them to be for him, is to put them in hope of him, by
(perhaps) a present toleration, countenancing, cherishing, and advancing of
their Religion. And this (he may think) cannot stand with the purity of
Discipline, and Government of our Church, which may make him the more averse,
and hardly affected toward it, and think it fit to curb it, and so the more
to incline to Episcopacie; by which as he shall more please the Statesmen of
England, so shall he be able the more to restrain our Preachers, and their
freedom of speech, and the more freely deal and traffic with Papists, and
so make use of all sorts of people, because he may think all sorts necessary
for his ends, whereas (indeed) none of these are of great consequence. For
Papists that are without the Country (as France or Spain) will never in their
hearts wish him to be King of England. France for his nearness to them will
not desire that he be so great, in respect of hi^ claim to their own
Country, and because so the league with Scotland will fall, and they shall
want the assistance of the Scots against that title. Spain pretends a title
themselves, which the Papists in England will rather set forward then hinder.
Such Papists as are within the Island are of small force, and almost of none
yet in Scotland, and not so many in England as to counterpoise the Protestants.
Bishops there stand by the State, not the State by them; men of mean birth, no
great riches, less following, attendance, or friendship; easy to be framed to
what course he pleases, their lifetime being reserved, or without condition.
Those that seek Reformation are the strength of that Country, and certainly
the wisest in it, of greatest power by the peoples favor, and credit in
Parliament, and every where. Your Lordship has seen the lettter directed to
you all from some of them, containing their judgment, not to be contemned:
gain these, gain that Country. This (as it is the truth) would be imprinted
in his mind by such persons and means as are fit, and others removed, who
persuade him otherwise, and his Majesty made to know, that by blending and
mingling of Religions, or by professing, or seeming to favor and incline to a
contrary Religion, he cannot attain to that Kingdom. That he is happy in
this, that the professing and advancing of the true Religion is most profitable
for his honor, and prosperous estate in the world, and the best mean to
preserve his own, and to attain another Kingdom. Neither does he stand in
need of any bastard, or spurious policy, or far sought, profane, or wicked
course; a plain and sincere uprightness, in maintaining justice, piety and
religion in this his present Kingdom, will serve his turn; and the more
seriously, fully, and exactly that he observe and follow this way, it will
increase his credit and reputation so much the more there, and facilitate his
designs. And this is that which will most thoroughly join him to your
Lordship, as the opinion of the contrary is the most effectual mean that
ever they can use to dis-joyne him from you. From the same ground it arises to
be considered, whether it be fit to suffer his Majesty and the Ministry to
be at such variance, they finding fault with him, and he committing and
confining them; and if it be not to be feared that it beget in him a loathing
of them, and in them and the Country a weariness of him: And whether
(therefore) it were not better to interpose your credit to inform him freely
and truly, then thus to look through your fingers (as we speak) and behold
things, and only now and then procure some little relief to them* which form
of dealing rather fosters the rancour, then remedies it, seeing the King gets
not the thanks of it himself.

Certainly if I were a Politician, an ill affected Statesman, and had a desire
to make way for another intrant, I would take this course to incense him, and
irritate him against the Ministry, that he might commit them; or at least
feed and foster his disposition herein, that so he might be brought to loathe
them, and to be loathed of them, and so take away that great expectation men
had of his Religion, and their love to him for it: I would separate and divide
him from such, and such from him; then bring him to a neutralitie in Religion;
then to countenance men of contrary Religion; then stir suspicions on each
side; then alienation would follow; and what not? But as I am, out of my poor
affection toward his Majesty, I do wish that these occasions were taken away.
I wish (I say) that your Lordship see to it, as you would have things right,
and out of that mind you spoke of, which was, that you have the honor to be
nearer in kin to him, then to any King that can come after him; howbeit your
Lordship is in the same degree of kindred with the next apparent, my Lord
Hammiltouns children. But you desire no change, I know, and that it may
continue in the present race, as I am persuaded that Hammiltoun himself has
no other mind: yet the matter is worthy your Lordships consideration, so much
the more, as ye have had experience how far evil company about him has had
power already to make things go on. I leave it, and rest, as having no part
or particular save only to wish well, and to follow, as your Lordship goes
before. In the mean time I have also here a note (of a sheet of paper or two)
concerning the abuses in the Church and Commonwealth, sent to me by master
James Melvin, to be (I know) imparted to your Lordship: you may lay it by you,
and read it when you have leisure, for your remembrance.

This he took; and having read a little of it, with a deep sigh, (which
expressed the inward passion of his heart) God knows my part (says he) I
shall neglect nothing that is possible for me to do; and would to God the
King knew my heart, how I am affected to his welfare, and would give ear to
me. But, etc.

Many times was he most earnestly dealt with to take more upon him, to
frequent the Court more, and to make his residence at it; especially by Sir
Lewis Ballandine. His pretext was the common cause, and the good of it; but it
proceeded from a particular betwixt him and master John Metellane, then
Secretary, who had crossed him in some suite he had concerning Orkney, and
drawn the half of it to his own use. For which cause he endeavored to
employ the same Gentleman to have persuaded my Lord to that purpose: but he
knowing both my Lords inabilitie of body, and averseness of mind, told him
sincerely and plainly which way my Lord was inclined; and that his disposition
was not to be drawn by any man farther then he thought fit, out of his own
discourse of reason. And for his own part, he was to follow his Lordship, and
not to go before him, or prescribe him what he should do. Sir Lewis grieved
very much hereat, having been familiar with him of old, and complained to his
friends, that the Earl of Angus was too slow, and that he had one with him
that was as slow as himself.

Not long after, the infirmity of his body increasing, and his strength and
health decreasing, he was seldom able to come to Court, and could not stay
long at it when he did come. I find (in a note of those times) that at the
Parliament holden in Edinburgh 1587. (in June) there was some dispute betwixt
the Earl of Angus, and Master of Glames. But I remember no such thing, neither
do I know how there could be any public dissension (either in this, or any
other thing) howbeit they differed in judgment concerning the guiding O^ State
affairs, yet I see not how that could come to any public contention.

His associates propounded to him to accept the Office of Chancellor, The
Chancellours place offered ^o Angus.
which had been vacant ever since the removing of James Stuart. This he did
familiarly impart to the former Gentleman, and asked his opinion therein. He
answered plainly, That it was indeed the most fit place for him, as being the
most honorable Office in the Kingdom, by which he might do most good offices
to his Country, in Council, Session, and elsewhere; and that by that occasion
it brought great dependence, and many followers: That it had been before in
the hands of his Predecessors, as of Earl Archbald the first (called Bell the
Cat) and of late in the Earl of Mortons, before he was Regent. He answered,
that it required skill in the laws, and more learning then he had. It was
replied, that (in very deed) much learning was not absolutely necessary; that
it was not known what learning Archbald the first had, and it is not likely
that he had much. But it was well known that the Earl of Morton had very
little, or none at all to speak of, not so much in the Latin tongue as he
himself had; and yet he had discharged the Office with credit. A natural
judgment to conceive and resume the question, and the reasons of each side, is
more needful in a Chancellor then learning, his part being properly to do
that, whereas the decision seldom hangs upon his vote. Or if it come to that,
learning does not always the turn, knowledge of the customs of the Country
is more requisite, and is only required in Council. As for the Session
business, the President does commonly supply the Chancellours room. Besides,
seeing that ordinarily the question is not ended at the first hearing, what is
difficult may be advised, and tossed by whom your Lordship pleases, before the
next hearing. And although you find not that full sufficiency for the
present, which you could wish, yet time and custom will bring experience, and
experience beget knowledge. And this is said to have been observed of the
Earl of Morton, that having been rude enough at first, he became afterward
very skillful, and as able and sufficient as any man in the Kingdom: and
therefore your Lordship needs not to distrust or diffide your self in the like
case. Well (says my Lord) I know not what dexterity either of them has had:
and as for the Earl of Morton, though he wanted letters, yet he was of a
singular judgment, and rare wisdom, scarce to be matched by any in this age.
But for my own part (as I yet think) neither am I able for the present to
discharge it, neither do I think it fit to enter into an Office before I have
learned what belongs to it; neither can I digest to do it by others, seeing I
ought to do it my self: yet I shall advise.

The conclusion was, he rejected it, and thereupon it was given to He rejects
it* Met^ made Chancellor.
Secretary Metellane, to his associates great grief, he having ever been a
man of a contrary faction and disposition in all business of the Commonweal.
He accepted of the Office of Lieutenant on the Borders Angus Lieutenant on the
Borders*
willingly, being more suitable to his disposition, and his proper element, as
we speak; and he professed that he delighted as much to hunt out a thief, as
others did to hunt a hare; and that it was as natural to him, as any other
pastime or exercise is to another man. But he lived not long after this, nor
had he time to do any memorable thing in it. He made only one road against
the outlawed thieves of the name of Armestrang (most of them) after the King
was gone home, who had been present at the casting down of their houses. He
pursued them into the Tarrasse Moss, which was one of their greatest
strengths, and The road at the Tarrasse Moss.
whither no host or companies had ever been known to have followed them
before; and in which they did confide much, because of the straightness of the
ground. He used great diligence, and sufficient industry; but the success was
not answerable either to his desire, or other men's expectation. Neither did he
forget to keep his intention close, and ^ecret, acquainting none of the people
of that Country therewithal, until he was ready to march. Then directing one
Jordan of Aplegirth to go to the other side, whither he knew they behooved to
flee, he sent with him one of his especial followers, whom he knew to be
well affected to the service, to see that he did his duty. He himself with
the Army came openly and directly to the place of their aboade, that they
fleeing from him, might fall into the hands of Aplegirth, and his company, who
were come in sufficient good time, before the Army could be seen to that
passage which they were sent to keep. But the birds were all flowne, and there
was nothing left but the empty nest, having (no question) had some inkling and
intelligence hereof; but it could not be tried by whom the notice had been
given them. In the retreat, they show themselves, and rode about to intercept
and catch such as might happen incircumspectly to straggle from the Army, and
they failed very narrowly to have attrapped William Douglas of Ively, a young
Gentleman of my Lords family; for which incircumspection, he was soundly chid
by him, as having thereby hazarded his own person, and his Lords honor.

After this he came to Langhop, where his infirmity having continued long, and
being now increased through travel, it grew at last to a formed disease.
Wherefore he was carried from thence to Smeeton, (near to Dalkeith) a house
belonging to James Richison, of whom we have spoken before. His care of the
good of the Church (which was ever in his mouth during his sickness) showed
that it lay nearest to his heart of all other things. There he departed out of
this transitory life, with great comfort to himself, and great grief of all
honest men, and with a general regreting of all men; there being none such an
enemy to him, or who did so envy or hate him, as not to profess and express
his sorrow for his death: King, Courtiers, Noblemen, Barons, Burgesses,
Commons; men of all degrees, rank, quality and condition, did lament him:
such was the forceable power of virtue in him. Of which we will say no more,
only we will set down this following Elogium to be considered by the Reader,
then which nothing can be said more true: Here therefore let it remain as a
witness of his virtue, and the Writers deserved affection.

Morte jacet saeva Angusius, spes illa bonorum,
Terror malorum maximus: Look for the translation of these verses in the
following page.

Cui, laud and luctu meritis, pia turba parentat;
Patrem, Parentem ingeminans.
Par studium impietas simulat: quem carpere livor
Vivum solebat, mortuum
Aut veris sequitur lacrymis, aut gaudia fictis
Celat pudenda; and laudibus
Saltem non fictis os pene invita resolvit,
Seque arguit mendacii.
O laus! O very vis! O victoria! honosque
Cunctis triumphis clarior!
Yet were not the aspersions of his enemies (if he had any such) of any moment
or consequence: I say, if he had any, for he had no private enemies who hated
him, or bore him any ill will for his own cause; only such as were enemies to
the Country, and the true Religion, hated him as a main pillar, and supporter
of these. The greatest objection they had against him (I mean that carried any
show of truth) was his modesty, (which they termed slownesse) but after his
death, all mouths were closed. The love which was generally borne to him was
exceeding great, both for his house and families sake (which was ever the most
popular in this Kingdom of all other names) as also, and that no less for his
own virtue, and personal humanity and courtesy. He was of a blackish and
swart complexion, tall'of stature, and of a slender body, but well proportioned
and straight limmed; of a weak and tender constitution, and not very able to
endure travel, but having courage enough, and willingness to undergo. His
death was ascribed to witchcraft: and one Barbary Nepair in Edinburgh (wife to
Archbald Douglas, of the house of Casshogle) was apprehended on suspicion, but
I know not whether she was convicted of it or not: only it was reported that
she was found guilty, and that the execution was deferred, because she was
with child, but afterward, no body insisting in the pursuit of her, she was
set at liberty. Anna Simson, a famous witch, is reported to have confessed at
her death, that a picture of wax was brought to her, having A. D. written on
it, which (as they said to her) did signify Archbald Davidson, and (she not
thinking of the Earl of Angus, whose name was Archbald Douglas, and might have
been called Davidson, because his fathers name was David) did consecrate or
execrate it, after her form, which (she said) if she had known to have
represented him, she would not have done it for all the world. He died the day
of 1588. years: his body was buried in Abernathie, and his heart in Douglas,
by his own direction. He is the last Earl of the race of George, entitled
Master of Angus, who was slain at Flowdon, etc.

Of Archbald the ninth Earl of Angus.
Angus by cruel death lies here, The translation of the verses in the page
foregoing.

The good man's hope, the wickeds fear;
The praise and sorrow of the most
Religious, who as having lost
A father, mourn; worst men are known
To feign a woe i^ they have none:
Envy, accustomed to wrong
His guiltless life, imployes her tongue,
Now a loud Trumpet of his ^ame,
And weeps, if not for grief, for shame,
Enforced to give her self the lie:
O! Power of Truth, O! victory,
By which more honor is obtained,
Then is in greatest triumphs gain*d.
Archibaldus Duglassius Angusius.
OLim saeva truci dente calumnia
Clam vanas ad opes fraud viam struens
Mussabat, posito aut palam pudore
Jactabat caput in me^m:
(O si non nimium credita!) Crimina,
Foeda atrociaque infandaque crimina,
Aut Diro Lepedo, aut fero Cethegi
Patrandum genio nefas.
Quos caecis stimulis ambitio impotens,
Aut aestu rabies fervida pectoris,
Auri aut sacra mali fames in omne,
Egit praecipites scelus.
Moliri in patriam incendia, spicula
In patrem patriae, sanctaque numina
Regum alti solio Jovae locata
Celsis pellere sedibus:
Regni praesidium, spem, decus exsterae
Genti ludibrium tradere, civium
Vota, and pontificis (nefas) tyranni,
Romae degeneris metum.
O linguae improbitas, callida nectere
Frauds, insidias, exitium bonis:
Regum aures animosque suspicaces,
Ficto ludere crimine.
Haec cuncti cumulum flagitii manus
Patrare? haec facinus men's coquere impium!
Haec coctum potuit probare? pectus
Hoc conscire nefas sibi.
At me qui sapiens intima sensuum
Scrutaris Deus (and quisquis erat mihi
Arcani penito sinu reposti
Testis) crimine liberas.
Vitae perpetuus compositae tenor,
Men's legum patiens, imperii jugum
Justi legitimum subire mitis;
Cunctis cedere lenitas:
Non claros atavos stemmate regio,
Regnatasque atavis pene provincias
Et belli decora, and feri triumphis
Partam Martis adoream:
Non longo titulos ordine turgidos,
Arces pennigeris turribus arduas,
Non turbam numerans gravem clientum, aut
Latis praedia finibus.
Nudi simplicitas candida pectoris
Et semper similis cana fides sui,
Frauds impietas licet, dolosque
Laudans clam sibi rideat.
Sincerae rigide justitiae tenax
Dextra, a flagitio libera, sanguinis
Expers innocui, doli rapinae,
Solis noxia furibus.
Archbald Douglas Earl of Angus.
BLack slander erst her ends to gain,
Employed her Art to wound my name
Low whispers were her secret train,
Her open force lies void of shame.
O! that they had less credit found,
As from the thought my heart was free;
Lepidus nor Cethegus owned
Such mischiefs as were charged on me:
Whom love of vengeance set on fire,
Or blind ambition overswaid,
Or hope of riches or desire
Of pleasure, to every vice betrayed,
As if my soul such plots had known
As would a public ruin bring
By justling from his sacred Throne
My Countries father, and my King.
And so to foreign scorn expose
The Kingdoms glory, shield and hope;
The peoples joy and daily vows,
The scourge and terror of the Pope.
Thus wicked tongues with cunning Art
Weave nets, the innocent to catch,
And to the jealous ear impart
Feigned treasons, which their fanciesatch.
So base a villainy to act
Was it, for such a hand as mine,
Or could my breast contrive the fact,
Or conscious be of the black sin.
But I appeal my God to thee,
Who know my heart, and to those friends
Who were most intimate with me,
How much I loathed unworthy ends.
The constant tenor of my life,
Was calm obedience to the will
Of rightful power: detesting strife
I shunned (more then resisted) ill.
Though my descent from Kings I drew,
And in my Grandsiers well might see
A Princely power, none ever knew
A bragging vanity in me.
No empty titles filled my mind
With hateful pride; nor stately tops
Of Towr's, large fields, nor troops of kind
And humble followers, swelled my hopes.
An equal virtue led my way,
A spotless truth adorned my heart,
Let wicked falsehood boast and say;
Lo what I compast by my Art.
By me sincere strict Justice dwelt,
From guiltless blood my hand was free,
No wrong my harmless neighbor felt,
Only thieves punished were by me.
Ad Archibaldum tertium, cum post primum exilium reversus, ultra Speiam Elginii
in Moravia relegatus esset.
NUper fortunae varias expert procellas
Angusie, and velis aequora iniqua tuis:
Nuper in immenso pelagi jactate profundo:
Obruteque insanis pene voraginibus:
Nunc quoque nescio quos iterum subiture labores,
Quicquid id est sorti pectore perfer onus.
Discute tristitiae nebulas; frontemque serena:
Anxietas animo sit procul atra tuo:
Pelle graves curas, proper antem and parce sever^
Sponte sua fati praecipitare diem:
Degeneres animos flatus levis aura sinistri
De^icit, aeternis in tenebrisque premit:
At mala cum pungunt, tuleris si fortiter illa:
Materiesque tibi causaque laudis erunt.
Scilic et ille viros dignus numerarier inter:
Hunc sequitur firmo gloria celsa pede:
Cui dejecit mutatum nubila vultum,
Blanda nec in fastus sustulit aura leves:
Qui solidum vitae servans, certumque tenorem,
Robore fortunam vicit utramque pari.
Ut fremat hinc Boreas, illinc ruat Eurus and auster,
Et quatiat timidam fluctibus unda ratem:
Illa tamen medios inter secura tumultus
Aetheris; and rapidi vimque minasque freti,
Saepe tenet cursum optatum, portuque potita
Despicit irati murmura rauca maris.
Hinc cape non obscura tuae exemplaria vitae
Dura: nec rebus cedere disce malis.
Magnis te quoque junge viris: quid passus Ulysses?
Exul in ignoto nudus inopsque solo.
Quid cui Roma suae tulit incunabula gentis?
Queis sua in Adriaco Troia renata mari?
At quid ego haec antiqua? quid and peregrina recordor?
Ditior exemplis stat patria alta suis:
Stat genus ordine longo: atavos age, respice, avosque,
Quot sunt Duglasiae nomina magne domus:
Quot bello insignesque duces; and fortibus armis
Heroes; saecli gloria quisque sui.
Quem non nobilitat virtus afflicta? polo quem
Non aequat? numera: vix reor, unus erit.
Omnis turba salo fortunae exercita, and omnes
Passa vices, versae ludibriumque rotae:
Quas pax infida insidias, discrimina bellum
Quaeque habet exilii taedia, longa dies:
Nec nisi post exantlatos, venere, labores,
Otia; nec nisi post dura pericla quies.
Te quoque defunctum, confide, laboribus olim
Laetior excipiet, candidiorque dies.
Securusque inter dulces memorabis amicos,
Tu quoque fortunae tristitia factatuae.
Tristia nunc: sed quae tunc and meminisse juvabit:
Agnosse and decoris prima elementa tui:
Hac itum: hac quicunque alta affectabit, eundum est:
Hac te sublimi, gloria celsa, via
Sistet avos supra, atque atavos, accingere: O te
Quo sors! quo virtus! quo Deus ipse vocat!
Fallor? an heroas supra priscosque futurosque
Tollere te tanta sydera mole parant
Virtuti labor est comes: ire per ardua rerum
Gaudet and invicto fata superba gradu.
Aude ingens, jam nunc superi ad templa ardui Olympi
Carpere, qua pronum semita monstrat iter:
Aude, inquam, nec tu surgentia nubila ventis
Aethera terram, undas tartarave ipsa time.
Tantum, quem venerare Deum pius, igneus insta
Sollicitans; cursus diriget ille tuos.
Ille gubernaclo succedet rector and ille
Inveniet facilem per vada salsa viam
Anfractusque vagos per, and avia, and invia vitae,
Et brevia, and syrtes saxaque caeca ratem
Securam in placida sistet statione: perenne
Ut teneas celsi flammea templa poli.
To Archbald the third, when after his return from his first banishment, he
was confined to Elgine of Murray beyond Spey.
THou who but lately did endure the smart
Of roughest storms, and with a Pilots art
Have escaped the many dangers of the seas,
O Angus! now in place of wished ease
New troubles come: I know not by what fate:
Keep your great spirit firm in every state.
Shake off sad thoughts, and let your looks appear
Cheerful, without the darkning clouds of fear.
Deep cares expel, let not impatience haste
Those ills, which of themselves approach too fast.
Poor worthless souls are pressed below the weight
Of light afflictions; to a noble height
In cross affairs do thou thy courage raise:
By this thou may obtain deserved praise.
He merits honor, and may justly be
Esteemed a man, whom no adversity
Dejects, nor prosperous success swells with pride;
But by a constant temper does abide
Still like himself, and with an equal mind
Both fortunes bears. Let every boistrous wind
And threatening wave oppose his laboring oar,
He steeres his course, and seeks the wished shore,
Slighting the angry waters chiding noise.
Let these (like hard) examples prompt your choice:
Learn to meet ills, till you with all compare
For fortitude admired: Ulysses bare
Worse harms then yours; a stranger, poor, alone,
Unclothed, an Exile, wandering and unknown.
Aeneas and Antenor suffered long
Ere Rome was built, or Venice: but I wrong
Our own, to dwell on strangers, since there be
More store at home: mark the whole Progeny
Of Douglasses your fathers, how they are
Famed for their gallant acts in peace and war:
Each worthy was the glory of his time:
None without virtue can to honor climb.
Look on all ages, you shall hardly see
One raised by fortune, but through misery.
Who live at ease, and least disturbance feel,
Soon bear the mock'ry of her rolling wheel.
How many trains has peace? What discords war?
What troubles exile? Yet no pleasures are
O (...) but after toil; nor have we rest
Till (...) and difficulties are past.
So thou, when this is past, hereafter may
Enjoy at home a calm and pleasing day:
And to your dear friends cheerfully relate
The sad effects of Fortunes sullen hate:
Sad now, but pleasant to remember, when
Your prentisage has brought a noble gain.
This is the way: would you a great name win?
Then tread the steps your Grandsires traveled in.
Where Virtue, Fortune, where your God does call,
Follow: my thoughts deceive me, or you shall
Excel those Worthies who already are,
Or will be famous: so the stars prepare
Your youth. Fair virtue never dwells alone,
Hard labor is her near companion:
Un-easie taskes she loves, and joys to beat
The roughest ways, and triumph over fate.
Be bold and onward, take your mounting flight,
Till you have reached a true Olympian height.
Be bold, I say, and let no furious wind,
(Though earth and hell should mix) shake your brave mind.
Only with God, whom you must still adore,
You may be instant, and his aid implore:
Let him direct your course, and he will be
Your Pilot through the waves of misery,
Steering your bark by every Rock and Shelfe:
Each strait and wheeling Poole His sacred Self
Will guide the Oar, first to a place of rest
On earth, then after death thou shall be bl^st.
^aults escaped in some copies.
IN the Preface, page 6. line 18. for Long Willie, read Longe-ville, p. 11. l.
2. for unum, r. unam. l. 15. for (...), r, Duglasiis. In the Book, p. 14. l.
21. for wanted, r. was. p. 25. l. 11. supply son. p. 34. l. 36. supply
lessened. p. 43 l. 1. sup. long. p. 52. l. 43. for in furious, r. injurious. p.
64. l. 1. for people. r. pope. p. 70. 72. 74. 76. 78. in the titles, for
Galloway, r. Liddesdale. p. 76. l. 17. for rather, brother, r. father-brother.
p. 80. l. 13. for Douglas, r. Angus. p. 85. l. 8. sup. Prince. p. 102. l. 37.
for words, r. wounds. p 107. l. 42. for making, r. marrying. p. 131. l. 38 sup.
not p. 145. l. 7. for thing, r. though. p. 148. l. 30. r. therefore ^ow on. p.
154. l. 34. for extracted, r. execrated. p. 168. l. 31. for life, r. Fife. p.
171. l. 44. r. the prisoners goods were exchanged. p. 177. l. 18. for moved, r.
composed. p. 179. l. 34. for new, r. show. p. 233. l. 30. sup. not. p. 244. l.
(...) sup. not. p. 277. l. 3. sup. honos. p. 278. l. 10. for mother, r.
brother. p. 335. l. 32. sup. out of.

FINIS

