THE BREATHINGS OF THE Devout Soul.



LONDON, Printed, 1648.

THE BREATHINGS OF THE Devout Soul.
I.
BLessed Lord God; thou call me to obedience; and fain would I follow thee:
but what good can this wretched heart of mine be capable of, except thou put it
there? thou know I cannot so much as wish to think well without thee; I have
strong powers to offend thee; my sins are my own; but whence should I have any
inclination to good but from thee, who art only, and all good? Lord, work me to
what thou requirest, and then require what thou will.

II.
Lord God, whither need I go to seek thee? Thou art so with me, as that I
cannot move but in thee. I look up to heaven; there I know thy Majesty most
manifests it self; but withal, I know that being here thou art never out of
thy heaven, for it is thy presence only that makes heaven: Oh give me to enjoy
thee in this lowest region of thine heavenly habitation; and as in respect of
my natural being, I live and move in thee, so let me not live and move
spiritually, but with thee, and to thee.

III.
Whither now, O whither do ye rove O my thoughts? Can ye hope to find rest in
any of these sublunary contentments, Alas? how can they yield any stay to you,
that have no settlement in themselves? Is there not enough in the infinite good
to take you up; but that ye will be wandering after earthly varities* Oh my
Lord, how justly might thou cast me off with scorn, for casting any
affective glances upon so base a rival? Truly Lord, I am ashamed of this my
hateful inconstancy; but it is thou only that must remedy it; O thou that art
the father of mercies pity my wildness, and weak distractions: Take thou my
heart to thee, it is thine own; keep it with thee, tie it close to thee by the
cords of love, that it may not so much as cast down an eye upon this wretched
and perishing world.

IIII.
Lord, I confess to my shame, thou art a great loser by me; for, besides my
not improving of thy favors, I have not kept even-reckonings with thee; I have
not justly tallied up thy inestimable benefits: Thy very privative mercies are
both without, and beyond my account; for every evil that I am free from, is a
new blessing from thee; That I am out of bondage, that I am out of pain and
misery, that I am out of the dominion of sin; out of the tyranny of Satan, out
of the agonies of an afflicted soul; out of the torments of hell: Lord, how
unspeakeable mercies are these? Yet, when did I bless thee for any of them? Thy
positive bounties I can feel, but with a benumbed and imperfect sense. Lord, do
thou enlarge, and intenerate my heart; make me truly sensible, as of my good
received; so of my escaped evils; and take thou to thy self the glory of them
both.

V.
Ah my Lord God, what heats and colds do I feel in my soul? Sometimes I find
my self so vigorous in grace, that no thought of doubt dare show it self; and
me thinks I durst challenge my hellish enemies; another while I feel my self so
dejected and heartlesse, as if I had no interest in the God of my salvation,
nor never had received any certain pledges of his favor: What shall I say to
this various disposition? Whether, Lord, is it my wretchedness to suffer my
self to be robbed of thee, for the time, by temptation? or whether is this the
course of thy proceedings in the dispensation of thy graces to the sons of men;
that thou will have the breathings of thy Spirit, as where, so how, and when
thou please? Surely, O my God, if I did not know thee constant to thine
everlasting mercies, I should be utterly disheartened with these sad intervals;
now, when my sense fails me, I make use of my faith; and am no less sure of
thee, even when I feel thee not, then when I find the clearest evidences of
thy gracious presence. Lord, shine upon me with the light of thy countenance
(if it may be) always; but, when ever that is clouded, strengthen thou my
faith; so shall I be safe, even when I am comfortless.

VI.
O my God, I am justly ashamed to think what favors I have received from thee,
and what poor returns I have made to thee: Truly Lord, I must needs say, thou
have thought nothing either in earth, or in heaven too good for me; and I, on
the other side, have grudged thee that weak^ and worthless obedience which thou
have required of me: Alas, what pleasure could I have done to thee who art
infinite, if I had sacrificed my whole self to thee, as thou command? Thou
art, and wilt be thy self, though the world were not; it is I, I only that
could be a gainer by this happy match; which in my own wrong I have
unthankfully neglected; I see it is not so much what we have, as how we employ
it: O thou, that have been so bountiful, in heaping thy rich mercies upon me,
vouchsafe to grant me yet one gift more; give me grace and power to improve all
thy gifts to the glory of the giver; otherwise, it had been better for me to
have been poor, then ungrateful.

VII.
Ah Lord, What struggling have I with my weak fears? how do I anticipate my
evils by distrust? What shall I do when I am old? How shall I be able to endure
pain? How shall I pass through the horrid gates of death? Oh my God, Where is
my faith that I am thus surprised? Had I not thee to up-hold, and strengthen my
soul, well might I tremble and sink under these cares; but now, that I have the
assurance of so strong an helper, as commands all the powers of heaven, earth,
and hell, what a shame is it for me to give so much way to my wretched
infidelity, as to punish my self with the expectation of future evils? Oh for
the victory that overcomes the world, even our faith; Thou 1 John 5. 4.
O God, art my refuge and Psalm. 46. 1. 2.
strength, a very present help in trouble; therefore will I not fear though the
earth be removed, and though the mountains be carried into the midst of the Sea.

VIII.
Lord, I made account my days should have been but an inch; but thou have*
made them a span long; having Psalm. 39. 6.
drawn out the length of a crazie life beyond the period of my hopes: It is for
something, sure, that thou have thus long respited me from my grave, which
looked for me many years ago: Here I am, O my God, attending thy good pleasure;
Thou know best what thou have to do with me; Dispose of me as thou will;
Only make me faithful in all thy services; resolute to trust my self with thee
in all events; careful to be approved of thee in all my ways; and crown my
decayed age with such fruits as may be pleasing to thee, and available to the
good of many; Lastly, let me live to thee, and die in thee.

IX.
How often, Lord, have I wondered to see the strange carriage of thine
administration of these earthly affairs; and therein to see thy marvailous
wisdom, power, goodness, in fetching good out of evil! Alas, we wretched men
are apt enough to fetch the worst of evils, out of the greatest good, turning
the grace of thee our God into wantonness: Jude 4.
but how have I seen thee, of liveless stones to raise up children to Abraham,
of sinners to make Saints? out of a desperate confusion to fetch order; out of
a bloody war, an happy peace; out of resolutions of revenge, love; out of the
rock, water; out of a persecuter, an Apostle? How can I be discouraged with
unlikelihoods, when I see thee work by contraries? It is not for me, O my God,
to examine or pre-judge thy counsels; take what ways thou will, so thou
bring me to thine own end; all paths shall be direct that shall lead me to
blessedness.

X.
How many good purposes, O my God, have I taken up, and let fall to the ground
again without effect? how teeming has this barren womb of my heart been of
false conceptions? but especially, when thy hand has been smart and heavy upon
me in mine affliction, how have I tasked my self with duties, and revived my
firm resolutions of more strict obedience, which yet upon the continuance of
my better condition, I have slackened? Lord, it is from thee that I purposed
well; it is from my own sinful weakness that I failed in my performances; If
any good come me, the will and the deed must Prove. 16. 1.
be both thine; The very preparations of the heart are from thee; and if I have
devised Prove. 16. 9.
my way, it must be thou that directest my steps: O God, do thou ripen and
perfect all the good motions that thou put into my soul; and make my health
but such as my sickness promised.

XI.
Every man, Lord, is unwilling that his name should dye; we are all naturally
ambitious of being thought on when we are gone; those that have not living
monuments to perpetuate them, affect to have dead; if Absolon have not a son,
he will yet erect a pillar: yet when we have all done, time eats us out at the
Eccles 2. 16.
last; There is no remembrance of the wise more then of the fool for ever;
seeing that which now is, in the days to come shall all be forgotten. O God,
let it be my care and ambition, what ever become of my memory here below, that
my name may be recorded in Heaven.

XII.
Thy wise providence, O God, has so ordered it, that every man's mind seeks
and finds contentment in some thing; otherwise it could not be (since we must
meet with so frequent crosses in the world) but that man's life would be
burdensome to him; one takes pleasure in his hawk or hound; another in his
horses and furnitures; one in fair buildings; another in pleasant walks and
beautiful gardens; one in travailing abroad; another in the enjoying of the
profits and pleasures of his home; one in the increase of his wealth; another
in the titles of his honor; one in a comfortable wife, another in loving and
dutiful children; but when all is done, if there be not somewhat else to uphold
the heart in the evil day, it must sink. O God, do thou possess my soul of
thee; let me place all my felicity in the fruition of thine infinite goodness;
so I am sure the worst of the world has not power to render me other then
happy.

XIII.
O Lord God, under how opposite aspects do I stand* from the world? how
variously am I construed by men? One pities my condition, another praises my
patience; One favors me out of the opinion of some good that he thinks he sees
in me; another dislikes me for some imagined evil: What are the eyes, or
tongues of men to me? Let me not know what they say, or think of me, and what
am I the better or worse for them? they can have no influence upon me without
my own apprehension: All is in what terms I stand with thee, my God; if thou
be pleased to look upon me with the eye of thy tender mercy and compassion,
What care I to be unjustly brow-beaten of the world? If I may be blessed with
thy favor, let me be made a gazing-stock to the world, to Angels, and to men.

XIV.
Speak Lord, for thy servant hears: What is it which thou would have me do
that I may find rest to my soul? I am willing to exercise my self in all the
acts of piety which thou requirest; I am ready to fast, to pray, to read* to
hear, to meditate, to communicate, to give alms, to exhort, admonish, reprove,
comfort where thou bid'st me; and if there be any other duty appertaining to
devotion, or mercy, let me serve thee in it: But, alas, O my God, howsoever I
know these works are in themselves wellpleasing unto thee, yet as they fall
from my wretchedness, they are stained with so many imperfections, that I have
more reason to crave pardon for them, then to put confidence in them; and if I
could perform them never so exquisitely, yet one sin is more then enough to
dash all my obedience. I see then, O Lord, I well see there is no act that I
can be capable ^o do unto thee, wherein I can find any repose* it must be
thine act to me, which only can effect it; It is thy gracious word, Come Matthew.
11. 28.
unto me all ye that labor, and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest; Lo
this rest must be thy gift, not my earning; and what can be fi^er then gift?
Thou givesh it then, but to those that come to thee; not to those that come
not; To those that come to thee laden and laboring under the sense of their
own wretchedness; not to the proud, and careless; O Savior, thy sinner is
sufficiently laden with the burden of his iniquities; lade thou me yet more
with true penitent sorrow for my sins; and enable me then to come unto thee by
a lively faith; Take thou the praise of thine own work; Give me the grace to
come; and give me rest in coming.

XV.
O blessed Savior, What strange variety of conceits do I find concerning thy
thousand years reign? What riddles are in that prophecy; which no humane
tongue can aread? where to fix the beginning of that marvailous millenary, and
where the end; and what manner of reign it shall be, whether temporal, or
spiritual; on earth, or in heaven; undergoes as many constructions, as there
are pens that have undertaken it; and yet (when all is done) I see thine
Apostle speaks only of the souls of thy martyrs, reigning so long with thee;
not of thy reigning on earth so long with those Martyrs; How busy are the
tongues of men, how are their brains taken up with the indeterminable
construction of this enigmaticall truth? when, in the mean time, the care of
thy spiritual reign in their hearts, is neglected; O my Savior, whiles others
weary themselves with the disquisition of thy personal reign here upon earth
for a thousand years; let it be the whole bent and study of my soul, to make
sure of my personal reign with thee in heaven to all eternity.

XVI.
Blessed be thy name, O God, who have made a good use even of hell it self; How
many Atheous hearts have been convinced by the very operations of Devils? Those
which would with the stupid Saducees, persuade themselves there are no spirits;
yet when they have sensibly found the mavelous effects wrought even by the
base instruments of Satan; they have been forced to confess, Doubtless there
is a God that rules the world; for so great powers of evil spirits must
necessarily evince the greater powers of good; It is of thy wise and holy
dispensation that thy good Angels do not so frequently exhibit themselves, and
give so visible demonstrations of their presence to thy Saints, as the evil
Angels do to their Vassals, though they are ever as present, and more
powerful; What need they; when thou so mightily over-rulest those malignant
spirits, that thou forcest from them thine own glory, and advantage to thy
chosen? Lord, how much more shall all thy other creatures serve to thy praise,
when thy very hellish enemies shall proclaim thy justice, goodness, omnipotence.

XVII.
Speculation, O Lord, is not more easy then practice is difficult; how many
have we known, who, as it was said of the Philosophers of old, know how to
speak well, but live ill; How many have written books of Chemistry, and given
very confident directions for the finding out of that precious stone of the
Philosophers, but how many have indeed made gold? Practice is that which thou,
O God, chiefly requirest and respectest; who have said, If ye know these
things, blessed are ye if you do them; Knowledge puffs up, but love edifieth:
O 1 Cor. 8. 1.
Lord do thou enlighten mine eyes with the knowledge of thy will; but above all,
do thou rectify my affections, guide my feet into the ways Psalm. 119. 112.
of thy commandments; apply my heart to fulfill thy statutes always; and
Prosper Psalm 90. 17.
thou the work of my hands upon me, O prosper thou my handiwork.

XVIII.
How often have I wondered, O Lord, at the boldness of those men, who knowing they
must shortly die, yet dare do those things which will draw upon them eternity
of torments? What shall I say, but, The fool has said in his heart, there is
no God; Surely, men love themselves well enough; and would be loath to do that,
which would procure them an inevitable misery and pain; Did they therefore
believe there were another world, and that they must be called to a strict
reckoning for all their actions, and be doomed to an everlasting death for
their wicked deeds, they durst not, they could not do those acts which should
make them eternally miserable: Let me say to the most desperate ruffian; there
is poison in this cup, drink this draught and thou die; he would have the wit
to keep his lips close, and cast the potion to the ground; were it not for
their infidelity, so would men do to the most plausible (but deadly) offers of
sin. O Lord, since I know thy righteous judgments; teach me to tremble at them;
restrain thou my feet from every evil way; and teach me so to walk, as one
that looks every hour to appear before thy just, and dreadful Tribunal.

XIX
The longer I live, O my God, the more do I wonder at all the works of thine
hands: I see such admirable artifice in the very least and most despicable of
all thy creatures, as does every day more and more astonish my observation: I
need not look so far as Heaven for matter of marvel (though therein thou art
infinitely glorious) whiles I have but a spider in my window, or a be in my
garden, or a worm under my feet: every one of these overcomes me with a just
amazement; yet can I see no more then their very outsides; their inward form
which gives them their being, and operations, I cannot pierce into; the less I
can know, O Lord, the more let me wonder; and the less I can satisfy my self
with marvailing at thy works, the more let me adore the majesty and omnipotence
of thee that wroughtest them.

XX.
Alas, my Lord God, what poor, weak, imperfit services are those (even at the
best) that I can present thee withal! How lean, lame, and blemished sacrifices
do I bring to thine altar! I know thou art worthy of more then my soul is
capable to perform; and fain would I tender thee the best of thine own: but,
what I would that I do not; yea, Romans 7. 15.
cannot do: Surely, had I not to do with an infinite mercy, I might justly look
to be punished for my very obedience: But now Lord my impotence redounds to the
praise of thy goodness; for were I more answerable to thy justice the glory of
thy mercy would be so much less eminent in my remission, and acceptance; Here I
am before thee, to await thy good pleasure; thou know whether it be better
to give me more ability, or to accept of that poor ability thou have given me;
but since, when thou have given me most* I shall still, and ever stand in need
of thy forgiveness; Let my humble suit be to thee always* rather for pardon of
my defects, then for a supply of thy graces.

XXI.
O my God; how do I see many profane and careless souls spend their time in
jollity and pleasure* The harp and Jsa. 5. 12.
the Viol, the Tabret and the pipe, and wine are in their feasts; Whiles I that
desire to walk close with thee, in all conscionable obedience, droop and
languish under a dull heaviness, and heartless dejection: I am sure I have a
thousand times more cause of joy and cheerfulness, then the merriest of all
those wild and joviall spirits; they have a world to play withal, but I have
a God to rejoice in; their sports are trivial and momenta^ie; my joy is
serious, and everlasting: One* dram of my mirth is worth a pound of theirs*
But, I confess, O Lord, how much I am wanting to my self in not stirring up
this holy fire of spiritual joy; but suffering it to lie raked up under the
dead ashes of a sad neglect: O thou, who art the God of hope, quicken this
heavenly affection in my soul; and fill Romans 15. 13.
me with all joy and peace in believing; make my heart so much more light then
the worldlings, by how much my estate is happier.

XXII.
What shall I do Lord? I strive and tug (what I may) with my natural
corruptions, Ephesians. 6. 12.
and with the spiritual wickednesses in high places which set upon my soul;
but sometimes I am foiled, and go halting out of the field; it is thy mercy
that I live, being so fiercely assaulted by those principalities, and powers;
it were more then wonder if I should escape such hands without a wound: Even
that holy servant of thine who strove with thine Angel for a blessing, went
limping away, though he prevailed; what mervail is it that so weak a wretch as
I, striving with many evil Angels for the avoidance of a curse, come off with
a maime, or a scar? But blessed be thy name, the wounds that I receive are not
mortal; and when I fall, it is but to my knees* whence I rise with new courage
and hopes of victory; Thou who art the God of all power, and keep the keys
of hell and death, have said, Resist the Devil, and he will flee from you;
Lord, I do and will by thy merciful aid still and ever resist; make thou my
faith as steadfast, as my will is resolute; Oh still teach thou my Psalm. 144* 1.
hands to war, and my fingers to fight; arm thou my soul with strength, and at
last according to thy gracious promise, crown it with victory.

XXIII.
Oh Lord God; how ambitious, how covetous of knowledge is this soul of mine? as
the eye is not satisfied with seeing, nor the ear filled Eccles. 1. 8.
with hearing; no more is the mind of man with understanding; yea, so
insatiable is my heart, that the more I know, the more I desire to know; and
the less I think I know: Under heaven there can be no bounds set to this
intellectual appetite: O do thou stop the mouth of my soul with thy self, who
are infinite; Whom P^. 73. 25.
have I in heaven but thee? and there is none upon earth that I desire besides
thee: Alas, Lord, if I could know all creatures, with all their forms,
qualities, workings; if I could know as much as innocent Adam, or wise Solomon;
Yea more, if I could know all that is done in earth or heaven, what were my
soul the better, if it have not attained the knowledge of thee: Since, as the
Preacher has most wisely observed, In much Eccles. 1. 18.
wisdom is much grief, and he that increases knowledge, increases sorrow; Oh
then, set off my heart from affecting that knowledge whose end is sorrow; and
fix it upon that knowledge, which brings everlasting life: And this is Joh. 17.
3.
life eternal, to know thee the only true God; and Jesus Christ whom thou have
sent.

XXIV.
O my God, what miserable uncertainties there are in these worldly hopes! But
yesterday I made account of an eminent advantage of my estate, which now ends
in a deep loss. How did we lately feed our selves with the hope of a firm and
during peace, which now shuts up in too much blood? How confidently did I rely
upon the promised favor of some great friends, which now leave me in the suds,
as the scom of (a mis-called) fortune? In how slippery places, O Lord, do our
feet stand? If that may be said to stand which is ever sliding, never fixed;
And not more ^^ippery, then brittle; so as there is not more danger of falling,
then of sinking: With thee, O God, with thee only, is a constant immutability
of happiness; There let me seek it, there let me find it; and over-looking all
the fickle objects of this vain world, let my soul pitch it self upon that
blessed immortality which ere long it hopes to enjoy with thee.

XXV.
Lord God, What a wearisome circle do I walk in here below; I sleep, and dress,
and work, and eat, and work again, and eat again, and undress, and sleep again;
and thus wearing out my time find* a satiety in all these, troublesome; Lord,
when shall I come to that state, wherein I shall do nothing but enjoy thee; do
nothing but praise thee; and in that one work shall find such infinite
contentment, that my glorified soul cannot wish to do any other? and shall
therein alone bestow a blessed eternity?

XXVI.
O God, how troublesome and painful do I find this Sun of thine, whose
scorching beams beat upon my head? and yet, this excellent creature of thine is
that, to which, under thee, we are beholden for our very life; and it is thy
great blessing to the earth, that it may enjoy these strong and forceable rays
from it; Oh, Who shall be able to endure the burning flames of thy wrath, which
thou intendest for the punishment, and everlasting torment of thine enemies?
And if men shall blaspheme the name of thee the God of heaven, for Rev. 16. 9.
the great heat of that beneficial creature, what shall we think they will do
for that fire which shall be consuming them to all eternity? Lord keep my soul
from those flames, which shall be ever burning, and never, either quenched, or
abated.

XXVII
Which way, O Lord, which way can I look, and not see some sad examples of
misery: One wants his limbs with Mephibosheth, another his sight with
Bartimeus, a third with Lazarus wants bread, and a whole skin; One is pained in
his body, another plundered of his estate, a third troubled in mind; one is
pined in prison, another tortured on the rack, a third languisheth under the
loss of a dear son, or wife or husband; Who am I Lord, that, for the present,
I enjoy an immunity from all these sorrows? I am sure none groans under them
that has deserved them more: It is thy mercy, thy mere mercy, O my good God,
that any of these calamities have fallen beside me; Oh make me truly thankful for
thine infinite goodness; and yet only so sensible of thy gracious indulgence
this way; as that when any of these evils shall seize upon me, I may be no
more dejected in the sense of them, then I am now overjoyed with the favor of
their forbearance.

XXVIII.
O blessed God, what variety of gifts have thou scattered amongst the sons of
men? To one thou have given vigor of body, to another agility, beauty to a
third; to one depth of judgment, to another quickness of apprehension; to one
readiness and rarity of invention; to another tenacity of memory; to one the
knowledge of liberal arts, to another the exquisiteness of manuary skill; to one
worldly wealth, to another honor; to one a wise heart, to another an eloquent
tongue; to one more then enough, to another contentment with a little; to one
valor, to another sagacity: These favors, O Lord* thou have promiscuously
dispersed amongst both thy friends, and enemies: but oh, how transcendent are
those spiritual mercies which thou have reserved for thine own; the graces of
heavenly wisdom, lively faith, fervent charity, firm hope, joy in the holy
Ghost and all the rest of that divine beauye. For any competency of the least
of thy common blessings I desire to be thankful to thy bounty; (for which of
them, O God, can I either merit or requite?) but oh for a soul truly and
eagarly ambitious of those thy best mercies; Oh let me ever long for them, and
ever be insatiable of them; Oh do thou fill my heart with the desire of them,
and let that desire never find it self filled.

XXIX.
How comfortable a style is that, O God, which thine Apostle gives to thine
Heaven, whiles he calls it the inheritance of the Saints in light? None can come
there but Saints; the ^oomes of this lower wo^d are taken up, commonly, with
wicked men, with beasts, with Devils; but into that heavenly Jerusalem no
unholy thing can enter; Neither can any Saint be excluded thence; each of them
have not only a share, but an entire right to thy glory: And how many just
titles are there, O Savior, to that region of blessedness; It* is thy Fathers
gift, it is thy purchase, it is thy Saints inheritance; theirs only in thy
right; by thy gracious adoption they are sons, and as sons, Romans 8. 17.
heirs: coheirs with thee of that blessed Patrimony; so feoffed upon them, so
possessed of them, that they can never be disseized: And* Lord, how glorious an
inheritance it is! An inherit^nce in light: In light incomprehensible, in light
inaccessible: Lo, the most spiritual of all thy visible creatures is light;
and yet this light is but the effect, and emanation of one of thy creatures*
the Sun; and serves only for the illumination of this visible world; but that
supernal light is from the Al-glorious beams of thy Divine Majesty, diffusing
themselves to those blessed spirits, both Angels, and Souls of thy Saints, who
live in the joyful fruition of thee, to all eternity: Alas, Lord, we do here
dwell in darkness, and under an uncomfortable opacity, whiles thy face is
clouded from us with manifold temptations there above, with thee, is pure
light, a constant noontide of glory; I am here under a miserable and obscure
wardship; Oh teach me to despise the best of earth; and ravish my soul with a
longing desire of being possessed of that blessed inheritance of the Saints in
light.

XXX.
What outward blessing can be sweeter then civil peace? What judgment more
heavy then that of the sword? Yet, O Savior, there is a peace which thou
disclaimest; and there is a sword which thou challengest to bring* Peace with
our corruptions is war against thee; and that war in our bosoms, wherein the
spirit fights against the flesh, is peace with thee O let thy good Spirit
raise and foment this holy and intestine war more and more within me. And as
for my outward spiritual enemies; how can there be a victory without war; and
how can I hope for a crown without victory? O do thou ever gird me with
strength to the battle; enable thou me to resist unto blood; make me faithful
to the death, that thou may give me the crown of life.

XXXI.
O Lord God; how subject is this wretched heart of mine to repining, and
coffeehouse? If it may not have what it would, how ready it is (like a
froward child) to throw away what it has. I know and feel this to be out of
that natural pride which is so deep rooted in me; for could I be sensible
enough of my own unworthiness, I should think every thing too good, every
thing too much for me: my very being, O Lord, is more then I am ever able to
answer thee; and how could I deserve it when I was not? but that I have any
helps of my wel-beeing here; or hopes and means of my being glorious hereafter,
how far is it beyond the reach of my soul? Lord, let me find my own
nothingness; so shall I be thankful for a little, and, in my very want, bless
thee.

XXXII.
Where art thou, O my God? whither have thou withdrawn thy self? it is not
long, since I found thy comfortable presence with my soul; now I miss thee,
and mourn and languish for thee: Nay, rather, where art thou O my soul? my God
is where he was; neither can be any other then himself; the change is in thee,
whose inconstant disposition varies continually, and cannot find it self fixed
upon so blessed an object. It will never be better with me, O my God, until it
shall please thee to stablish my heart with thy free Ps. 51. 12.
Spirit; and to keep it close to thee, that it may not be carried away with
vain distractions, with sinful temptations: Lord my God, as thou art always
present with me, and can no more be absent, then not be thy self; so let me
be always with thee, in an humble, and faithful acknowledgment of thy
presence; as I can never be out of thine allseeing eye; so let mine eyes be
ever bent upon thee who art invisible; Thou that have given me eyes, improve
them to thy glory and my happiness.

XXXIII.
My bosom, O Lord, is a Rebeccaes* womb, there are twins striving within it; a
Jacob and Esau, the old man and the new: whiles I was in the barren state of my
^nregeneration all was quiet within me; now this strife is both troublesome,
and paineful; so as nature is ready to say, If it be so, why am I thus? Genesis
25. 22.
But withal, O my God, I bless thee for this happy unquietness; for I know
there is just cause of comfort in these inward struglings; my soul is now not
unfruitful, and is conceived with an holy feed which wrestles with my natural
corruptions; and if my Esau have got the start in the priority of time; yet my
Jacob shall follow him hard at the heel, and happily supplant him* And though
I must nourish them both, as mine, yet I can, through thy grace, imitate thy
choice; and say with thee, Jacob have I loved, and Esau have I hated; Blessed
God, make thou that word of thine good in me, That the elder shall serve the
younger.

XXXIV.
Alas, my Lord God, how small matters trouble me? every petty occurrence is
ready to rob me of my peace; so as, me thinks, I am like some little cock-boat
in a rough Sea, which every billow topples up and down, and threats to sink: I
can chide this weak pusillanimity in my self; but it is thou that must redress
it: Lord, work my heart to so firm a setledness upon thee, that it may never
be shaken; no not with the violent gust^ of temptation; much less with the
easy gales of secular misaccidents: Even when I am hardest pressed, in the
multitude of the sorrows of my heart, let thy comforts refresh my soul; but for
these slight crosses, oh teach me to despise them, as not worthy of my notice,
much less of my vexation: Let my heart be taken up with thee, and then, what
care I whether the world smile or frown.

XXXV.
What a comfort it is, O* Savior, that thou art the first fruits of them that
sleep: Those that die in thee, do but sleep: Thou said so, once, of thy
Lazarus; and may say so of him again; he does but sleep still* His first
sleep was but short, this latter, though longer, is no less true; out of which
he shall no less surely awake at thy second call, then he did before at thy
first; His first sleep and waking was singular, this latter is the same with
ours; we all lie down in our bed of earth, as sure to wake, as ever we can be
to shut our eyes; In, and from thee, O blessed Savior, is this our assurance;
who art the first fruits of them that sleep: The first handful of the first
fruits was not presented for it self, but for the whole field, wherein it grew*
The virtue of that oblation extended it self to the whole crop: Neither did
thou, O blessed Jesu, rise again for thy self only, but the power and virtue of
thy resurrection reaches to all thine; so thy 1 Cor. 15. 23.
chosen Vessel tells as: Christ the first fruits, afterward they that are
Christ's at his coming* So as, though the resurrection Act. ^4. 15.
be of all the dead, both just and unjust; yet to rise by the power of thy
resurrection, is so proper to thine own, as that thou, O Savior, have styled
Luke 14. 14.
it the resurrection of the just; whiles the rest shall be dragged out of their
graves by the power of thy Godhead to their dreadful judgment: Already
therefore, O Jesu, are we risen in thee: and as sure shall rise in our own
persons; The Loco-motive faculty is in the head; Thou who art our head art
risen, we who are thy members must, and shall follow: Say then, O my dying
body, say boldly unto Death, Rejoice not over Micah 7. 8.
me, O mine enemy, for though I fall, yet I shall rise again: Yea, Lord, the
virtue of thy first fruits diffuseth it self, not to our rising only, but to a
blessed immortality of these bodies of ours: for, as thou did rise immortal
and glorious, so shall we by, and with thee; Who shall Phil. 3. 21.
change these vile bodies, and make them like to thy glorious body. The same
power that could shake off death, can put on glory and Majesty: Lay thee down
therefore, O my body, quietly and cheerfully; and look to rise in another hue;
Thou art sown in corruption, 1 Cor. 15. 42, 43.
thou shall be raised in incorruption; thou art sown in dishonor, thou shall
be raised in glory; thou art sown in weakness, but shall be raised in power.

XXXVI.
In this life, in this death of the body; O Lord, I see there are no degrees,
though differences of time; The man that dyed yesterday is as truly dead, as
Abel the first man that dyed in the world* and Methuselah that lived nine
hundred sixty nine years, did not more truly live, then the child that did but
salute, and leave the world; but in the life to come, and the second death,
here are degrees; degrees of blessedness to the glorified, degrees of torments
to the damned; the least whereof is unspeakable, unconceivable: Oh thou that
art the Lord of life and death, keep my soul from those steps that go down to
the chambers of death; and once set it (for higher I dare not sue to go) but
over the threshold of glory and blessedness.

XXXVII.
O Lord my God, I am as very a Pilgrim as ever walked upon thy earth; Why
should I look to be in any better condition then my neighbors, then my
forefathers? Even the best of them, that were most fixed upon their
inheritance, were no other then strangers at home: It was not in the power of
the world to naturalize them, much less to make them enroll themselves
free-Denizons here below; they knew their country, which they sought, was
above; so Heb. 11. 13, 14, 15.
infinitely rich, and pleasant, that these earthly regions which they must pass
thorough, are, in comparison, worthy of nothing but contempt.

My condition is no other then theirs; I wander here in a strange country; What
wonder is it, if I meet with forrainers fare, hard usage, and neglect? Why do I
intermeddle with the affairs of a nation that is not mine? Why do I clog my
self in my way with the base and heavy lumber of the world? Why are not my
affections homeward? Why do I not long to see and enjoy my fathers house? O my
God, thou that have put me into the state of a Pilgrim, give me a Pilgrims
heart; set me off from this wretched world wherein I am; let me hate to think
of dwelling here; Let it be my only care how to pass through this miserable
wilderness to the promised land of a blessed eternity.

XXXVIII.
One Talent at the least, O Lord, have thou put into my hand; and that sum is
great to him that is not worth a dram; but, alas, what have I done with it? I
confess I have not hid it in a napkin; but have been laying it out to some poor
advantage; yet surely the gain is so unanswerable, that I am afraid of an
Audit* I see none of the approved servants in the Gospel brought in an increase
of less value then the receipt; I fear Luke 19. 16. 17, 18, 19.
I shall come short of the sum. O thou, who justly hold thy self wronged
with the style of an austere master, vouchsafe to accept of my so mean
improvement; and thou, who valuedst the poor widows mites above the rich gifts
cast into thy Treasury, be pleased to allow of those few pounds that my weak
indevors could raise from thy stock and mercifully reward thy servant, not
according to his success, but according to his true intentions of glorifying
thee.

XXXIX.
What a word is this which I hear from thee, O Savior; Behold I stand at the
door and knock! Thou which art the Lord of life, God blessed for ever, to
stand and knock at the door of a sinful heart! Oh what a praise is this of thy
mercy and long suffering? What a shame to our dull neglect and graceless
ingratitude? Ps. 40. 1.
For a David to say I waited patiently upon the Lord; Truly my soul waits
upon Ps. 62. 1.
God; it is but meet and comely; for it is no other then the duty of the
greatest Monarchs on earth, yea, of the highest Angels in Heaven to attend
their Maker; but for thee the great God of Heaven to wait at the door of us
sinful dust and ashes, what a condescension is this, what a longanimity? It
were our happiness, O Lord, if upon our greatest suit and importunity we might
have the favor to entertain thee into our hearts; but that thou should
importune us to admit thee, and should wait at the posts of our doors, till
thine head Cant. 5. 2.
be filled with dew, and thy locks with the drops of the night, it is such a
mercy, as there is not room enough in our souls to wonder at. In the mean time
what shall I say to our wretched unthankfulnes; and impious negligence? Thou
have graciously invited us to thee, and have said; knock and it shall be
opened; and yet thou continuest knocking at our doors, and we open not;
willingly delaying to let in our happiness; we know how easy it were for thee
to break open the brazen doors of our breasts, and to come in; but the Kingdom
of Heaven suffers not violence from thee, though it should suffer it from us;
Thou will do all thy works in a sweet and gracious way; as one who will not
force, but win love; Lord, I cannot open unless thou that knock'st for
entrance, wilt be pleased to enable me with strength to turn the key, and to
unbolt* this unweldy bar of my soul. O do thou make way for thy self by the
strong motions of thy blessed Spirit, into the in-most rooms of my heart; and
do thou powerfully incline me to mine own happiness: else, thou shall be ever
excluded, and I shall be ever miserable.

XLI.
In what pangs could thou be, O Asaph, that so woeful a word should fall from
thee, Has God forgotten to be gracious? P^. 77* 9.
Surely, the temptation went so high, that the next step had been blasphemy;
Had not that good God, whom thy bold weakness questions for forgetfulness, in
great mercy remembered thee and brought thee speedily to remember thy self and
him, that which thou confessest to have been infirmity, had proved a sinful
despair: I dare say for thee, that word washed thy cheeks with many a tear, and
was worthy of more; For, O God, What can be so dear to thee as the glory of thy
mercy? There is none of thy blessed attributes which thou desire to set forth
so much unto the sons of men, and so much abhorrest to be disparaged by our
detraction, as thy mercy: Thou can, O Lord, forget thy displeasure against
thy people; thou can forget our iniquities, and cast our sins out of thy
remembrance; but Micha. 7. 18, 19.
thou can no more forget to be gracious, then thou ^anst cease to be thy
self; O my God, I sin against thy justice hourly, and thy mercy interposes for
my remission; but oh keep me from sinning against thy mercy; What plea can I
hope for, when I have made my Advocate mine enemy?

XLI.
How happy, O Lord, is the man that has thee for his God? He can want nothing
that is good; he can be hurt by nothing that is evil; his sins are pardoned,
his good endeavors are accepted; his crosses are sanctified; his prayers are
heard; all that he has are blessings, all that he suffers are advantages; his
life is holy, his death comfortable, his estate after death glorious; Oh that I
could feel thee to be my God; that I could enjoy an heavenly communion with
thee* In vain should earth or hell labor to make me other then blessed.

XLII.
How just a motion is this of thine, O thou sweet, singer of Israel; O love the
Lord, all Psalm. 31. 23.
ye his Saints; Surely they can be no Saints that love not such a Lord; Had he
never been good to them, yet that infinite goodness which is in himself, would
have commanded love from Saints: Yet, how could they have been Saints, if he
had wholly kept his goodness to himself? In that then he has made them Saints,
he has communicated his goodness to them, and challenges all love from them;
and being made such, how infinitely has he obliged them with all kinds of
mercies? How can ye choose O ye Saints but love the Lord? What have ye, what
are ye, what can ye be, but from his mere bounty? They are slight favors that
he has done you for the world; in these his very enemies share with you; How
transcendent are his spiritual obligations! Has he not given you his Angels
for your attendants; himself for your Protector; his Son out of his bosom for
your Redeemer; his Spirit for your Comforter; his heaven for your inheritance?
If gifts can attract love; O my God, Who can have any interest in my heart but
thy blessed self, that have been so infinitely munificent to my soul? Take it
to thee, thou that have made and bought it; enamour it thoroughly of thy
goodness; make me sick of love; yea let me die for love of thee, who have loved
me unto death that I may fully enjoy the perfection of thy love, in the height
of thy glory.

XLIII.
Lord, how have I seen men miscarried into those sins, the premonition whereof
they would have thought incredible, and their yeildance thereto, impossible?
How many Hazaels has our very age yielded, that if a Prophet should have
foretold their acts, would have said, Is thy servant a dog that he should do 2
Kings. 8. 13.
these great things? Oh my God, why do not I suspect my self? What hold have I
of my self more then these other miserable examples of humane frailty?

Lord God, if thou take off thy hand from me, what wickedness shall escape me?
I know I cannot want a tempter; and that tempter cannot want either power, or
malice, or skill, or vigilance or baits, or opportunities; and for my self, I
find too well, that of my self I have no strength to resist any of his
temptations: O for thy mercies sake, uphold thou me with thy mighty hand; stand
close to me in all assaults; show thy self strong in my weakness: Keep Psalm.
19. 13.
back thy servant from presumptuous sins; Let them not have dominion over me;
then (only) shall I be upright, and shall be innocent from the great
transgression.

XLIV.
It is thy title, O Lord, and only thine, that thou give songs in the night:
The night Job 35. 10.
is a sad and dolorous season; as Eccles. 11. 7.
the light contrarily is the image of cheerfulness; like as it is in bodily
pains and aches, that they are still worst toward night; so it is in the cares
and griefs of mind; then they assault us most when they are helped on by the
advantage of an uncomfortable darkness: Many men can give themselves songs in
the day of their prosperity; who can but howl in the night of their affliction;
but for a Paul and Act. 16. 25.
Silas to sing in their prison at midnight; for an Asaph to call to
remembrance his song in Ps. 77. 6.
the night, this comes only from that Spirit of thine, whose peculiar style is
the Comforter: And surely, as music sounds best in the night, so those
heavenly notes of praise which we sing to thee our God in the gloomy darkness
of our adversity, cannot but be most pleasing in thine ears: Thine Apostle bids
us (which is our ordinary wont) when we are merry to sing, when afflicted, to
pray; but if when we are afflicted we can sing, (as also when we are merriest
we can pray) that ditty must needs be so much more acceptable to thee, as it is
a more powerful effect of the joy of thy Holy Ghost; O my God, I am conscious
of my own infirmity; I know I am naturally subject to a dull and heavy*
dumpishness, under whatsoever affliction; Thou that art the God of all comfort,
remedy this heartless disposition in me; pull this lead out of my bosom; make
me not patient only, but cheerful under my trials, fill thou my heart with joy,
and my mouth with songs in the night of my tribulation.

XLV.
It is a true word, O Lord, that thy Seer said of thee long ago; The Lord sees
not as man 1 Samuel 16. 7.
sees: Man sees the face, thou see the heart; man sees things as they seem,
thou see them as they are; many things are hid from the eyes of men, all
things lie open and displaid before thee. What a madness then were it in me to
come disguised into thy presence* and to seek to hide my counsels from thine
al-seeing eyes? I must be content, Lord, to be deluded here by fair
appearances; for I may not offer to look into the bosoms of men, which thou
have reserved for thy self; it is only the outside that I can judge by; Yea, O
God, if I shall cast my eyes inward, and look into my own breast, even there I
find my self baffled at home; The heart of man is deceitful above all things;
who can know it? None but those piercing eyes of thine can discover all the
windings and turnings of that intricate piece. What would it avail me, O Lord,
to mock the eyes of all the world with asemblance of holiness, whilst thou
should see me false and filthy? Should I be censured by a world of men, when
I am secretly allowed by thee, I could contemn it, yea glory in their unjust
reproach; But if thine eye shall note me guilty, to what purpose is all the
applause of men? O thou that art the God of truth; do thou open, and dissect
this close heart of mine; search every fiber that is in, or about it; and if
thou find any ill blood there, let it out; and if thou find any
hollowness, fill it up; and so work upon it, that it may be approved of thee
that made it; as for men, it shall be alike to me whether they spend their
breath or save it*

XLVI.
Lord God, What a world of treasure have thou hid in the bowels of the earth,
which no eye of man ever did, or shall, or can see? What goodly plants have
thou brought forth of the earth, in wild, unknown regions, which no man ever
beheld? What great wits have thou shut up in a willing obscurity, which the
world never takes notice of? In all which thou show, that it is not only the
use and benefit of man which thou regardest in the great variety of thy
creation, and acts of administration of the world, but thine own glory, and the
fulfilling of thine own good pleasure; and if only the Angels of heaven be
witnesses of thy great works, thou can not want a due celebration of thy
praise; It is just with thee, O God, that thou should regard only thy blessed
self, in all that thou do, or have done; for all is thine, and thou art all:
Oh that I could sincerely make thee the perfect scope of all my thoughts, of
all my actions; that so we may both meet in one and the same happy end, thy
glory in my eternal blessedness.

XLVII.
Indeed, Lord, as thou say, the night comes when no man can work; What can
we do, when the light is shut in, but shut our eyes, and sleep? When our senses
are tied up, and our limbs laid to rest, what can we do, but yield our selves
to a necessary repose? O my God, I perceive my night hastening on apace, my Sun
draws low, the shadows lengthen, vapors rise, and the air begins to darken;
Let me bestir my self for the time; let me lose none of my few hours* Let me
work hard a while; because I shall soon rest everlastingly.

XLVIII.
Thou see, Lord, how apt I am to contemn this body of mine; Surely when I
look back upon the stuff whereof it is made, no better then that I tread upon;
and see the loathsomness of all kinds that comes from it; and feel the pain
that it often times puts me to, and consider whither it is going, and how noisome
it is above all other creatures upon the dissolution; I have much ado to hold
good terms with so unequal a partner; But on the other side; when I look up to
thy hand, and ^^e how fearfully and wonderfully thou have made it* what
infinite cost thou have bestowed upon it, in that thou have not thought thine
own blood too dear to redeem it* that thou have so far honored it, as to make
it the Temple of thy holy Ghost; and to admit it into a blessed communion with
thy self; and have decreed to do so great things for it hereafter; even to
cloth it with immortality, and to make it like unto thy glorious body; I can
bless thee for so happy a mate; and with patience digest all these necessary
infirmities; and now I look upon this flesh, not as it is, withered and
wrinkled; but as it will be, shining and glorified. O Lord, how vile so ever
this clay is in it self; yet make me in thine interest and my hopes so
enamoured of it, as if I did already find it made celestial. Oh that my faith
could prevent my change, and anticipate my ensuing glory.

XLIX.
Lord, what a dreadful favor was that which thou shewedst to thy Prophet
Elijah, to send a fiery chariot for him, to conveigh him up to Heaven! I should
have thought that the sight of so terrible a carriage should have fetched away
his soul beforehand, and have left the body grovelling on the earth: But that
good Spirit of thine, which had fore-signified that fiery rapture, had
doubtless fore-armed thy servant with an answerable resolution to expect, and
undergo it: Either he knew that chariot, how ever fearful in the appearance,
was only glorious, and not penal; Or else he cheerfully resolved that such a
momentany pain in the change would be followed with an eternity of happiness: O
God, we are not worthy to know whereto thou have reserved us: Perhaps thou have
appointed us to be in the number of those, whom thou shall find alive at thy
second coming; and then the case will be ours; we shall pass through fire to
our immortality: or, if thou have ordained us to a speedier dispatch, perhaps
thou have decreed that our way to thee shall be through a fiery trial. O God,
what ever course thou in thine holy wisdom have determined for the fetching up
my soul from this vale of misery, and tears, prepare me thoroughly for it; and
do thou work my heart to so lively a faith in thee, that all the terrors of my
death may be swallowed up in an assured expectation of my speedy glory: and
that my last groans shall be immediately seconded with eternal Allelujahs, in
the glorious Chore of thy Saints and Angels in Heaven. Amen.

Amen.
FINIS.

