ANNOTATIONS ON MILTON's Paradise Lost.

WHEREIN The Texts of Sacred Writ, relating to the POEM, are Quoted; The
Parallel Places and Imitations of the most Excellent Homer and Virgil, Cited
and Compared; All the Obscure Parts rendered in Phrases more Familiar; The Old
and Obsolete Words, with their Originals, Explained and made Easy to the
English Reader.

By P. H. (...).

Uni, cedit MILTONUS, Homero Propter Mill annos. Juv. vii. 38.

LONDON, Printed for Jacob Tonson, at the Judges Head near the
Inner-Temple-Gate in Fleet Street, MDCXCV.

NOTES On MILTON's PARADISE Lost.
BOOK I.
PARADISE, (...), is a word of Persian Extraction, whence the Jews borrowed it,
and of them the Grecians: Though they who affect such Gingles, derive (...).
from (...), to water round about; because it was a Place, according to the
Description of Moses, watered by some of the most famous Rivers of the World.
This adopted Hebrew word is found but in three places in the Old Testament,
Eccles. 2. v. 5. Nehem. 2. v. 8. and Cantic. 8. v. 13. where it is styled a
Paradise of Pomegranates; expressive every where of a Place of the greatest
Perfection, Pleasure, Plenty and Delight imaginable. Xenophon tells us of
diverse Paradises, (like Fortunate Islands) encompassed by Euphrates; and Phil.
in Vit. Apoll. mentions Many, in which not only the choicest Trees and Fruits,
the most sweet and beautiful Flowers, the most fragrant and lasting Greens, but
Multitudes of living Creatures of the selectest sorts were enclosed; whence
Aul. Gell. Est autem Paradisus, omnis locus amaenissimus, and voluptatis
plenissimus, quem etiam vivaria dici a Latinis, l. 2. c. 20. Noct. Alt.

That Paradise was not Allegorical or Figurative, (according to Origin, St.
Ambrose and others) is not only confirmed by the general Consent of the Greek
and Latin Fathers; nor Fantastical, according to the Jewish Cabbala: But a part
of Asia, where Babylon was afterward built, and known by the Name of
Mesopotamia, as lying between the Euphrates and the Tygris; both the
Description of Moses, the Nature of the Soil, and the Comparison of many places
of Scripture most evidently make out. Of the Fertility of the Country, Q.
Curtius gives this Testimony, Resudat toto fere solo humor, qui ex utroque amne
(Euphrate and Tigri) manat per aquarum vends, and solo Babylonico foelicitatem
affert maximam.

In this Garden of God, as it is called Genesis 13. 10. abounding with all things,
the choicest and most excellent the Earth ever bore, God seated our great
Progenitors, in a Condition so superlatively happy, that our blessed Savior
was pleased by it to Typifie the high and happy State of Everlasting Life, Luke
23. 43. This day thou shall be with me in Paradise.

The Forfeiture of this Innocent and Blissful Seat, by the Disobedience of our
first Parents, and their deserved Expulsion out of this Paradise, is the sad
Subject of this unparalleled Poem.

V. 2. The Fruit of that Forbidden Tree. It imports not much to know, nor can
it be determined, what kind this Interdicted Tree was of, the Prohibition
having no regard to, or influence on, its Fruit, more than that it was made the
Trial of Man's entire Obedience to his Maker. Moses Barcepha endeavors to
prove it a Fig Tree, because the Offenders had its Leaves so ready at hand to
cover their Nakedness, Genesis 3. 7. But this implies no more, than that a Tree of
that kind, stood in its dangerous Neighborhood. It seems on the contrary, not
reasonable to imagine, Adam should presume to cloth his Nakedness, the
Consequence of his Offense, with the Leaves of the same Tree, the Eating of
whose Fruit had been the cause of his Offending; especially when according to
Genesis 3. 3. the Prohibition was so strict and severe, that it had been a Daring
second to his shameful Sin, but to have touched that sacred Tree; sacred (as
our Author tells us) to Abstinence, secluded and set apart from all Enjoyment.

The common Opinion, That this Tree so set apart, and secluded by God's
Command, was an Apple Tree, is weakly grounded on Cantic. 8. 5. (...) etc. sub
arbore malo suscitavi te. Ibi corrupta est matter tua, ibi violata est genetrix
tua, more expressive of the Original than our Translation, I raised thee up
under an Apple Tree, there thy Mother conceived thee, there she conceived that
bare thee: But this excellent Song is wholly Allegorical, and not to be
literally understood.

V. 2. Whose mortal taste; Mortalis, Lat. deadly: The taste of this Forbidden
Fruit is called Deadly, not as such in its own Nature, and therefore
prohibited; but by the Prohibition, being made the Test of Man's Obedience,
became pernicious to him by violating his Creator's Command, and brought forth
Death and Hell.

V. 4. With loss of EDEN; Of Paradise, which by God was planted Eastward in
Eden, as to the place where Moses wrote, Genesis 2. 8. though (...), signifies
Pleasure and Delight, from whence perhaps the Greek (...), and also Adonis
horti, from some knowledge the Ancient Poets had of the Writings of Moses and
this Garden of Eden. And although St. Hierom, and after him Cajetan and others,
and in some places the LXX (though not in this) translate Eden, Pleasure, as
Genesis 2. 8. Plantaverat autem Dominus Deus Paradisum voluptatis, yet undoubtedly
Eden is here the proper Name of a Region, as will be more evident from Genesis 4.
16. Ezech. 27. 23. Isai. 37. 12.

Diverse have been the Opinions of Men, and Many, even of the Learned, absurd
enough, concerning the Site of this Terrestrial Paradise: Some have fancied it
in the Moon, others beyond an Unnavigable Ocean, others under the Equinox;
some, near the North Pole; others, above the middle Region of the Air: But the
Learned Sir Walt. Rawleigh plainly proves, God planted this Delightful Garden
in Eden, (Eastward in respect of Judaea) which was afterward called
Mesopotamia, where Tygris and Euphrates join their Streams, and taking several
Courses water Chus and Havilah according to Moses, the Seat of Chus and his
Sons being then in the Valley of Shinar, where Nimrod built Babel. A Climate of
all others the most temperate, 35 Degrees from the Equinoxial, and 55 from the
Pole; abounding with most Excellent Wines, Fruits, Oil, and Grain of all sorts,
where, as the most perfect proof of Fertility, Palm Trees grow in great numbers
at this Day, without Care or Cultivation.

Ibid. One greater Man, the Man Christ Jesus, much greater than the Protoplast
Adam, as being both God and Man, the perfect Image of his Father, who fulfilled
all Righteousness, and was made a Propitiation for us.

V. 6. Sing, Heavenly Muse: Inform me, Heavenly Muse, who did instruct the
Shepherd Moses, who first taught the Sons of Israel, how the Heavens and Earth
were made, and how this Beauteous Universe arose in such bright various Forms
out of Confusion.

The Poets, Ancient and Modern, in the beginning of their most Considerable
Works at least, call some one, or all, the Muses to their Assistance: (...).
(...).


Musa, mihi causas memora a AEn. 1. Nunc age qui Reges Erato, etc. Tu vatem,
tu, diva, moan, AEn. 7. Pandite nunc Helicona, deae, cantusque movete, AEn. 10.

So one of our own: Begin then, O my dearest, sacred Dame,
Daughter of Phoebus and of Memory,
That do Ennoble, with Immortal Name,
The Warlike Worthies of Antiquity,
In thy great Volume of Eternity.
Begin, O Clio, etc. Spen. B. 3. C. 3.


As our Author has attempted agreater Undertaking than that of either of those
two Master-Poets, so he had need to Invoke this Heavenly Muse, whom a little
after he explains by God's Holy Spirit, to inspire and assist him: And well he
might, being to sing, not only of the Beauteous Universe, and all Created
Beings, but of the Creator Himself, and all those Revelations and Dispensations
He had been pleased to make to Fallen Man through the Great Redeemer of the
World, His Son. This Argument might need a Divine Instructress, preferable to
any of their Invoked Assistants, though styled (...), the Daughters of Jove.

The Christian Poet, the famous Torquato Tasso, the Darling of discerning
Italy, begins his Exordium, O Musa, tu che di caduchi allori,
Non circondi la front in Helicona
Ma su nel Cielo infra i beati Chori,
Hai di stelle immortali aurea Corona,
Tu spira al petto mio Celesti ardore, etc.


These are the choicest Lines that adorn his Invocation; in which, though he
calls to his Assistance the same Heavenly Spirit, yet we shall find him fall
short of our Poet, both as to the Sublimity of his Thoughts and Argument, as
much as Helicon is inferior to Horeb, and that he had but too just occasion to
ask Pardon (as he does in the end of this Stanza) for mixing and intangling
Truth with vain Fiction.

Ibid. Muse, Lat. Musa, from Greek (...), ab inquisitione.

V. 7. Oreb, or of Sinai. The Poets use to mention their Parnassus, the Famous
Haunt of the Muses; ours opposes to it his Oreb, Nam neque Parnassi vobis juga,
nam neque Pindi Vlla moram fecere, Virg. Ecl. 10. Horeb and Sinai are not two
distinct Mountains, but One variously so called, as Deuteronomy. 5. 2. The Lord our
God made a Covenant with us in Oreb; and Exodus 19. 2, 3, 4. c.and the same
Place, in which the Law (God's Covenant with the Jews) was given and promulged,
is named Sinai. It is a Mountain of Arabia Petraea, parted at the top into two
Hills, of which Sinai is much the highest. The Jews tell us, this later
Appellation was given the Mountain, in Memory of the Bush in which God appeared
to Moses, Exodus 3. 2. who calls Himself (...), Inhabitant is rubum, Deuteronomy. 33.
16. And the Rabbis confidently assure us, the very Fragments of Stones
gathered on this Mountain, show the Image of that Incombustible Bush, whence it
was named (...) before that called only Horeb.

Its Top or Summity is said to be secret, either as hid among the Clouds, or
rather from that thick Darkness which covered the Mount, when God spoke there
with his Servant Moses, as in private, Exodus 19. 16. In Memory of which, it is
by the Arabians named at this Day Gibel-Mousa, the Mountain of Moses.

V. 8. That Shepherd, Moses, Exodus 3. 1. though he was also in Homer's sense
(...), God having led his People through the Wilderness by the Hands of Moses
and Aaron.

Ibid. Who first taught, That the Mosaical Philosophy is most Ancient, is not
only very certain, but that all the Heathen Poets, and their greatest
Philosophers too, borrowed their Description of the Chaos, and what they
delivered of the first Formation of Matter from the Creation, as delineated by
Moses, whose Writings many of them saw, though they did not understand them.
Hence Mercur. Trismegist. in his Pimand. 3. gives us this Relation; Erant
Tenebrae infinitae in Abysso and Aqua, and Spiritus tenuis intelligibilis, quae
divina virtute er ant in ipso Chao. And Plato in Timaeo, discoursing of the
Fabrication of the World; Quicquid erat non tranquillum and quietum, sed
immoderate agitatum and quasi fluctuans, id assumpsit, and ex inordinato ad
ordinem adduxit, etc. These, and many such, are the obscure Comments on the
(...) of Moses, Genesis 1. 2. signifying Desolation and Emptiness, though we read
it without form and void, and the LXX translate it (...), invisible.

Ibid. The chosen Seed, the Israelites, the Seed of Abraham, God's chosen
People, Exodus 19. 5.

V. 10. Rose out of Chaos. Chaos is a wide, dark, gaping Gulf, a vast
unfathomable Deep, by which the Poets express the Confusion of uninformed
Matter, out of which, at the Creator's Word, this Wonderful World arose. Unus
erat toto Naturae vultus in Orb
Quem dixere Chaos, rudis indigestaque Moles. Meta. Li. 1.
Et Chaos innumeros avidum confundere Mundos. Luc. Li. 6.
Antiquum repetent iterum Chaos omnia, etc. Luc. Li. 1.


Chaos is, by Hesiod in his (...), made the Ancestor of the Gods, whose
Progenitors he names Chaos, the Earth and Love; thereby intimating the
Beginning of all things, as Virg. uses the word, aque Chao densos divum
numerabat amores. Geo. Li. 4.

This Original Chaos is by some fancied from (...), to gape; by Philo demundo
from (...), as being a Mixture of fluid Matter. Eugub. in his Cosmopoeia, take
notices of the small difference between (...), (the word the Greek Philosophers
express the Worlds first Matter by) and (...), Mud and Slime, where all things
lay wrapped and swallowed up in the Womb of Water.

Ibid. Sion-Hill, a Mountain in Jerusalem: On this Hill stood the Strong-hold
of the Jebusites, which King David took, 2 Samuel 5. 7. and made it the place of
his Residence, and named it The City of David; which, when Jerusalem was in its
greatest Glory, was called the Upper City.

V. 11. Siloa was a small Brook, as appears by Isai. 8. 6. arising on the
East Side of the Temple in Jerusalem; of which, the Tower our Savior mentions
Luc. 13. 4. probably took its Name.

V. 12. Fast by the Oracle of God, close by God's Temple, (as before) where he
gave his Sacred Oracles; Oracula, Lat.

V. 13. Invoke, pray, call upon, from invocare, Lat. to call for help,
adventrous, bold, daring, from Fr. adventureux, courageous.

V. 14. To soar, to get up, to take a high flight, from sorare, It. to fly high.

V. 15. The Aonian Mount, is in Boeotia, (a Province of Greece) made famous by
the Poets for a Meeting of the Muses. The Country was first named Aonia from
Aon, Son of Neptune and the Muses, thence styled Aonides. Primus ego in Patriam
mecum, (modo vita supersit) Aonio rediens deducam vertice Musas. Geor. Li. 3.

V. 16. Things unattempted yet, so Hora. Non usitata nec tenui ferar penna; but
not on so sublime a Subject as this, not undertaken as yet by any Poet: As in
the beginning of the Ninth Book, he says of himself, he was not sedulous by
Nature to indite Wars, hitherto the only Argument, Heroic deemed, -- trita
vatibus orbita. So Virg. on a Subject much inferior makes his Brags, Sed me
Parnassi deserta per ardua, dulcis
Raptat amor: Juvat ire jugis, qua nulla priorum
Castaliam molli divertitur orbita clivo. Geor. 3.


Ibid. In Prose or Rhyme, either in Prose or Poetry, Prosa, Lat. for that free
and easy way of writing and speaking, unshackled and unconfined in its Parts
and Periods, used by Orators, Historians, and all Men in common Conversation,
styled Soluta Oration, as opposite to Rhyme, derived of the Greek (...),
consisting of a more exact Measure and Quantity of Syllables, of which
Aristotle says, (...), in Probl. (...) autem longitudines, and altitudines
vocis emetitur, longior mensura vocis (...) dicitur, altior (...), Aul. Gell.
l. 15. c. 18. Scribimus inclusi, numeros ille, hic pede liber, Pers. Sat. 1.

Poetry (of which Rhyme is a Modern part) is tied up to certain Measures and
Quantities, which, among the Greek and Latin Poets, (till the times of Monkish
Ignorance) consisted in an Harmonious Modulation of Numbers, that employed
nothing less than the inconvenient gingle and chime at the ends of Verses,
which we falsely call Rhyme; so deservedly disdained by our Author, for the
shackles it puts upon Sense; no Comparison better suiting such Poetasters than
that of Tagging of Points in a Garret.

V. 17. O Spirit. Diverse are the Opinions concerning the meaning of Genesis 1. 2.
The Spirit of God moved upon the Waters. Jerome, Basil, Theodoret, Athanasius,
and many of the Fathers, understand it of the third Person of the Trinity: From
hence the Heathen Philosophers coined their quickening and intellectual Spirit,
that diffused it self through the Universe, as Zoroaster and Heraclitus, which
Orpheus calls (...), a fiery Breath: Hence the Platonists borrowed their Animam
Mund^* and the Pythagoreans learnt this great Truth, That God was all in all,
in all Things and all Places; admirably expressed by the sublime Virgil; -- Deum
namque ire per omnes
Terrasque tractusque Maris, Coelumque profundum. Geor. 4.
Principio Coelum, and Terras. Camposque liquentes,
Lucentemque Globum Lunae, Titaniaque Astra
Spiritus intus alit, totamque infusa per ar^us
Men's agitat Molem, and Magno se corpore miscet. AEn. 6.


That this Spirit was not a Wind, which God made to move the Waters into a
Separation, as Tertull. against Hermogenes; nor a quickening enlivening Power
fraught with Fecundity, as St. Chrysostom. Nor Angels (as Cajetan imagines)
setting the Primum Mobile on work: But the Spirit of God, is manifest from
other Texts of the Divine Writ: His Spirit has garnished the Heavens, Job 26.
13. And Psalm. 104. 30. If thou sendest forth thy Spirit, they are created, etc.
And to this our Author's meaning is conformable here.

V. 21. Dove-like sat'st brooding. Spiritus Dei ferebatur super aquas, Genesis 1.
2. which Basil, out of a Syrian Doctor, interprets by incubabat and f^vebat, a
Metaphor taken from Birds sitting and hatching their young ones, which is here
extremely heightened by Dovelike, God's Holy Spirit having visibly descended on
his Son, the Blessed Jesus, in that soft Similitude, the Emblem of Meekness and
Innocence, Matthew. 3. 16.

Ibid. On the vast Abyss, (...), Gr. Bottomless, the Immeasurable Deep, a
Bottomless Profundity, the vast Gulf and wide Womb of Nature, out of which the
Created World arose, from the privitive a and (...), Bottom. Others fetch it
from (...), to cover, and so it signifies a place overwhelmed with a mighty
unfathomable Quantity of Water, the meaning of it in this place, and that of
Genesis 1. 2.

V. 22. Made it pregnant; Fruitful, productive of all things; Praegnans, Lat.

V. 23. Illumin; Illuminate, enlighten, clear my Understanding; Illumino, Lat.

V. 25. Assert Eternal Providence; Prove and make plain the wise, just and
equal Administration of all things, by God's Eternal Providence: Assert, from
assero, Lat. to affirm, to prove.

Ibid. Providence; Providentia, Lat. the Infinite Knowledge and Wisdom of God
Almighty, by which he foresees all things, and orders and disposes them, as
seems best to his unaccountable Distributions.

Cicero acquaints us, the Exordiums and Beginnings of all great Works, should
be plain, easy and modest; Principia verecunda, non elatis intensa verbis,
etc. Orat. which our Author has in his exactly observed. Now, if we cast our
Eyes on the stern Achilles, and consider his fatal Anger, so pernicious to his
Party: Or on the sly and subtle Ulysses, who, with all his Cunning, after Ten
Years Ramble, brought home no Body but himself, weary, weather-beaten and old:
We must confess, both these to be very imperfect and unfinished Heroes.
Virgil's AEneas is a more Correct and Manly Piece, the Lines are not so gross,
and the Features more fine and exact, yet this must be allowed much inferior
to the Protoplast, who, as the first, and finished by the great Creator, must
needs be the most accomplished of his kind.

If we carry our Consideration to the Fields of Battle, our Myriads of Immortal
Spirits, will, in endless Strife, outdo all the Heroic Havoc of their Rage,
who fought at Thebes or Troy. But when we reflect how shamefully the one
exposes all his Deities, though the other in that respect much better observes
the (...), it must be acknowledged, a much harder Task to form a right Idea of
that Eternal Being, which made the Universe; and to observe with all due
Veneration, and Awful Respect, the great Decorum requisite in speaking of the
True God; and to offend in nothing against the Revelations he has been pleased
to make of himself; and yet to manage all this under the Heats and Heights of
Towering Fancy; than either Homer or Virgil undertook, a Task, by none, but
himself, attempted, (as he may justly boast) and impossible to be, by any
Undertaker, better performed.

V. 27. Say first; Tell me first, O Thou Supreme Spirit, from whose vast View,
nor highest Heaven, nor the dark deep Vaults of Hell, can any thing conceal.
(...).
(...).


V. 28. The deep Tract of Hell; The low dark Region and Place of Everlasting
Punishment, which many imagine to be in the Center of the Earth; Tractus, Lat.
for Coast or Country.

V. 29. Moved our grand Parents; Persuaded our great Ancestors, our
Progenitors, the first of Human Kind, Adam and Eve. Grand, Fr. Great, Parens,
Lat. Father.

V. 32. For one restraint; For the Fruit of one Tree forbidden. Lords of the
World besides; Words highly aggravating the Crime of our first Parents, who
having all the World at will, could not undergo one restraint, laid, by their
Mighty Maker, on their Sensual Appetite, as a trial of their Homage and
Obedience to him, who had made 'em Lords of the World, and all the Creatures in
it; for this prohibited Tree had, probably, nothing in it more alluring, to
sight or savor, than many others, left free and open to enjoyment, Genesis 2. 16,
and 17.

V. 33. Who first seduced them; Who first mislead them to the base Rebellion;
another Imitation of Homer: (...)
(...).


Seduco, Lat. to lead astray, to deceive. Revolte, Fr. Rebellion.

V. 34. The Infernal Serpent; The Devil, who entered into the Serpent, and
actuating his Organs, deceived our Mother Eve, therefore called the Old
Serpent, Revel. 12. 9. Moses, in the Relation of Satan's Attempt, takes no
notice of the Arch Fiend, but barely reports the Matter of Fact, the Serpent
entertaining and tempting Eve, who discovered not the fly Seducer, Genesis 3. 1.
He relates, but does not interpret. So Genesis 18. 3. the Angels entertained by
Abraham, are called Men, because such in outward appearance.

Moses Barcephas, Chap. 27. de Parad. affirms, it was not so much out of
choice, as mere necessity, that Satan entered into the Serpent; God permitting
him to make use of no other Animal, that Eve might be the more amazed and
startled, at so strange and bold an attempt, from such a base and creeping
Worm, and with the greater horror detest and tremble at the Temptation, urged
by so vile a Creature, against the express Command of her Creator.

This Old Serpent imposed long after upon the Grecians and Romans in the same
shape; the later of which, sending to Epidaurus for Esculapius (a Grecian God)
to stop the Plague that had almost desolated their City; the Serpent, in the
form he was there worshipped, is said to have followed the Ambassadors, of its
own accord, into the Ship that transported it to Rome, where it was inshrined
in a Temple, built in the Isle of Tiberina, Val. Max. l. 1. c. 6. Read the end
of Metamorph. l. 15.

Ibid. Infernal. Infernalis, Lat. Hellish. Serpens, Lat. a Serpendo, from
creeping.

Ibid. Whose Guile; Whose Craft and Cunning, an old word from the Fr. Guille,
deceive, Originally from the Sax. Galian, to bewitch or inchant.

V. 36. The Mother of Mankind. Eve, from whom the whole Race of Mankind derive
their being, Genesis 3. 20.

V. 37. With all his Host; With his whole Power, with all his Army. Host, or
Ost, an old Fr. word for an Army, from Hostis, Lat. Enemy, because prepared
against such. Of Rebel-Angels, of Disobedient Spirits: Angel, of (...), Gr. a
Messenger.

V. 38. By whose Aid aspiring; By whose Assistance endeavoring. Aspiro, Lat.
to attempt.

V. 39. Above his Peers; Above his Equals. Pares, Lat. for the Fr. Pairs, and
our Peers.

V. 42. Against the Monarchy of God; Against the Sovereignty of Heaven, the
Absolute Government of God Almighty. (...), the Supreme Power placed in a
single Person, from (...), One; and (...), Principality, Rule.

V. 44. The Almighty Power; God Almighty, well expressed by the boundless and
infinite Power he has, to do whatever pleases him.

V. 45. From the Etherial Sky; From the Lofty Firmament, out of Heaven, (...),
belonging to the Ether, (...), used by the Poets for the Habitation of the
Gods. Cui Rex AEtherei breviter sic fatur Olympi. AEn. 10.

V. 46. With hideous Ruin, etc. With terrible Destruction and everlasting
Burnings, threw headlong flaming out of Heaven, down to endless Desolation.
Hideux, Fr. frightful; Ruina, Lat. downfall; Perditio, Lat. Destruction,
Combustion, Burning, Lat. Combustio.

Whether Angels were Created before, or with the World, no Text of Holy Writ
that I know, does declare. St. Austin affirms the later in l. 11. c. 32. de
Civit. Dei: But Theod. in 3 q. sup. Genesis after he has endeavored to support
the same Opinion, concludes, Illud porro scire necesse est, omnia quaecunque
Extant, (excepta Sancta Trinitate) Naturam habere, Creationi obnoxiam; hoc
autem concesso, siquis Angelorum turbas, ante Coelum and Terram, conditas esse
di xerit, non offendet verbum Pietatis.

That Angels were Created concurrently with the World, the Lateran Council
conceives, because there could be no place of Destruction, no Hell to hurl the
offending Spirits into, before there was any place in Nature; Everlasting Fire
being said to be prepared for the Devil and his Angels, Matthew. 25. 41. But our
Narrow Capacities are in no proportion to the Compass of the Creation. Of the
Rebellion and Overthrow of these wicked Spirits in Heaven, and of their
Expulsion thence, we read Revel. 12. 7, 8, 9. whose defeat, for their Pride and
Disobedience, most probably was not unrevealed to Adam, by so terrible an
Example, to fright him from offending his Maker, and to determine him more
steadfast and unshaken in his Duty.

V. 48. In Adamantine Chains, etc. In Bonds Eternal, and afflicting Fire.
(...), made of Adamant; so Hor. Figit Adamantinos, dira necessitas Clavos; a
Stone so named of its hardness, from the Privatives A and (...), to tame, as
hardly to be cut by any Tool. Thus Virgil describes one of the Gates of Hell:
Porta adversa, ingens, solidoque Adamante Columnae,
Ut vis nulla virum, non ipsi exscindere ferro
Coelicolae valiant. AEn. l. 5. Durum vinclis Adamanta. Lu. l. 6.


Ibid Penal; Poenalis, Lat. painful, torturing, from Poena, punishment.

V. 49. Omnipotent; Almighty; Lat. Omnipotens.

V. 50. Nine times the space; A certain, for an uncertain time, is usual with
the Poets, who are fond of the Number Nine, whether in respect to that of the
Muses, or as being the Square of the Ternary, made famous by Pythagoras, and by
Aristot. and Plutar. styled the most excellent of all Numbers as containing, in
it self, the beginning, middle and end; to Christians much more renowned, as
expressive of the Mysterious Trinity. (...).
(...).
(...).


Which last Virg. imitates, Jamque dies epulata novem Gensomnis. AE. l. 5.

V. 52. In the Fiery Gulf; In the Flaming Flood, from the It. Golf^, and that
perhaps from (...), sinus Maris, or from the Lat. Gula, because like a
Whirlpool, it swallows up every thing.

V. 55. Of lost Happiness; According to the received Opinion, that the Torments
of the Damned consist, in poena damni, the loss of the Beatifick Vision of God,
(in whose presence are pleasures for evermore) as well as in poena sensus, the
Punishments of more gross sensibility.

V. 56. His Baleful Eyes; His sorrowful sad Eyes, weighed down and overwhelmed
with Grief, from the Dutch, Bale, a Burden; Grief being deducible a gravitate:
Sorrow is a a heavy Burden, and hard to be born. So the Baleful Stound, F. Q.
Cant. 7. St. 25.

V. 57. Dismay; Astonishment, from the old Fr. Esmay, an overwhelming Grief and
Affliction.

V. 58. Mixed with Obdurate Pride, etc. Supported by inflexible Pride, and
unrelenting Hatred, the short, but severe and true, Character of the Arch-Rebel
Satan, mixed from mistus, Lat. mingled with. Obdurate, Lat. Obduratus, hardened,
stiff-neck'd, unalterable.

V. 59. As Angels Ken; At once he views around as far as Angels Eyes can see.
Ken, to see, to discern, from the Sax. Cennen, to know, to discover, whence
cunning Knowledge, Experience.

V. 60. The Dismal Situation; The sad ghastly Seat; Situation, Fr. the site or
standing of a place, Lat. Situs, dismal, horrid, dark, frightful. Dimmel, Sax.
obscure.

V. 61. A Dungeon horrible; A frightful Prison, filled and surrounded on all
sides with Everlasting Flames, from the Fr. Dongeon, the strongest place in the
middle of a Fort, the last Retreat, where the Besieged made their utmost
Effort, and thence used for the strongest place in a Prison. Horribilis, Lat.
dreadful.

V. 62. As one great Furnace; Like one great red-hot Oven flamed. Fornax, Lat.

V. 63. Darkness visible, seems nearer a Contradiction, than that Egyptian
Darkness sent on Pharaoh, which was such as to be felt, Exodus 10. 21. But a
Mist is often the cause of Darkness that may be palpable, though that in the
Text was preternatural: But our Poets meaning by this Darkness visible, is
only, that from Hell's flaming Dungeon there issued no Light, but such a
Darkness, as through it might be discovered those dismal Scenes and Seats of
Everlasting Woe.

V. 65. Regions of Sorrow, Doleful Shades; The Realms of Grief, and Seats of
Everlasting, Sorrow. Regio, Lat. Country, doleful, woeful, sorrowful, from dole,
an old word from dolor, Lat. grief. The Description of this vast flaming
Fu^nace, may (if we consider the gloomy Darkness which our Poet arrays it in)
admit of these sad Shades, without the least allay to its Eternal Burnings;
though I conceive this Verse, and the two subsequent, not to relate so much to
the Topography of Hell, as to the Persons of its hopeless Inhabitants. The dark
Regions of the Dead, are, by all the Poets, delineated by Shades; Ire sub
umbras, is, in Virgil's phrase, to die, Vitaque cum genitu fugit indignata sub
umbras. And Hell is so by him described, -- Tum Tartarus ipse,
Bis patet in praeceps tantum, Tenditque sub umbras. AEn. 6.


V. 67. Hope never comes, that comes to all; Except the Damned, who are past
all hope, which on this side the Grave courts all Conditions, and under the
worst, caresses life, Dum curae ambiguae, dum spes incerta futuri. AEn. 8.

Ibid. But Torture without end; The never-ceasing Stings and Lashes of
Conscience, that put the wicked to Eternal Tortures, assiduum quatiente animo
tortore Flagellum, Juv. Tortura, Lat. Torment.

V. 68. Still urges; Continually presses and pursues 'em: Urgeo, Lat. to vex.

Ibid. And a Fiery Deluge fed, etc. A Flood of Flaming Brimstone, which, though
always burning, will never be consumed. Deluge, from Diluvium, Lat. for an
Inundation, Sulphur, Lat. Brimstone; late circum loca Sulfure fumant. AEn. 2.

V. 73. Their Portion set; Their Lot, their appointed Place, from Lat. Portio,
a Proportion, a Share.

V. 74. As from the Center thrice. Outcasts of Heaven, banished from its pure
and everlasting Light, and the glorious Presence of God Almighty, three times
as far as either Pole is distant from the Center: An Imitation of Homer, (...),
(...)
(...),
(...).
Tum Tartarus ipse,
Bis patet in praeceps tantum, tenditque sub umbras;
Quantus ad AEthereum Coeli suspectus Olympum. AEn. 6.


In Homer, Jupiter threatens to throw any of the Gods that shall dare to aid
either the Trojan or Grecian Army contrary to his Command, down very far into
gloomy Hell, where is the deepest Pit beneath the Earth, whose Gates are Iron,
and its pavement Brass, as far beneath Hell, as Heaven is above the Earth.

Virg. tells us, Hell goes headlong down twice as deep, as the prospect thence
up into Heaven.

Our Author says, God, in his Justice, had appointed the dark Infernal Dungeon
for these Disobedient Spirits, thrice as far from Heavens cheerful Light, and
his own blessed Abode, as is Earths Center from the utmost Pole: Which of 'em has
measured the Distance most Mathematically, is hard to determine; but Milton's
Description of this Infernal Region, far exceeds both the (...), of the one,
and the Pallentes umbras Erebi, Noctemque profundam, of the other; neither of
'em having ventured on so large a Survey of that sad Seat. Tasso's Description
is curt and inconsiderable; Itene maladetti al vostro Regno,
Regno di pene, e di perpetua morte. Cant. 9. St. 64.


Ibid. Center: Lat. Centrum, from (...), Gr. the middle point in a Circle, from
which the Circumference is equi-distant.

Ibid. Pole. The Poles (or Vertical Points) of the World are two, the North and
South, so called from (...), to turn round, because on them the Daily Motion
from East to West is made, for the same Reason by the Lat. termed Vertices a
Vertendo, Hic vertex nobis semper sublimis, at illum
Sub pedibus Styx atra videt, manesque profundi. Georg. 1.


V. 77. Whirlwinds of Tempestuous Fire: A Noble Expression of the Flaming
Hurricane of Hell, taken doubtless from Psalm. 11. 6. Fire and Brimstone, and an
horrible Tempest.

V. 78. Weltring; Wallowing, tossing and tumbling up and down by his side, from
Fr. Veaultrer, of the Lat. Volutare.

V. 79. Next in Power and next in Crime; One of his associate Angels, the
greatest next to himself both as to Authority and Transgression. Crime, fault;
Lat. Crimen, Sin, Offense.

V. 80. Palestine; Palestina, Lat. so named from the Philistines, its old and
famous Inhabitants; since Judaea, of the Jews who dispossessed them: It is a
Province in Syria, bounded with Euphrates, Arabia, Phoenicia, and the
Mediterranean Sea, called by Christians the Holy Land.

V. 81. Beelzebub; The Lord of Flies, of (...) Lord, and (...) a Fly, an Idol
worshipped at Ecron, a City of the Philistines, 2 King. 1. 2. most probably a
Telisina made against Flies, in Imitation of the freedom from those Insects,
which is reported to have belonged to the Slaughtering-place of the Jewish
Sacrifices; the more remarkable, because the constant Effusion of so much
Blood, must naturally have bred, or, at least, have brought, and kept,
together, vast Swarms of those troublesome Creatures. Matthew. 12. 24. Beelzebub
is called Prince of the Devils; therefore deservedly here made second to Satan
himself.

V. 82. Th'Arch Enemy called Satan; the chief Enemy, and therefore in Heaven
called Satan the Enemy, (...). Arch is an additional Particle, by way of
Pre-eminence set before many words, as Arch Duke, Arch Rogue, from the Gr.
(...), chief, principal, (...) Satan an Adversary from (...); to be against, to
hate, the Enemy of God and Man.

V. 83. The horrid silence; The dismal, the dreadful silence, which, under the
Astonishment and Amazement they were overwhelmed with, till now was never
broken. Horridus, Lat. for rough, ugly; Horrida jussa, severe Commands, AEneid.
4.

V. 84. If thou be he; If thou be my Companion; But how disguised, how
changed and altered by thy fall, from him, who in the happy Region of the Day,
invested with excessive Brightness, did outshine Millions though bright! So
Virg. Hei mihi qualis erat! Quantum mutatus ab illo
Hectore, qui redit exuvias indutus Achillis,
Vel Danaum Phrygios jaculatus puppibus ignes! AE. 2.


V. 85. Realms; Regions: Royaulme, Fr. Kingdom, the Realms of Light, in Heaven.

V. 86. Transcondent Brightness; Excessive Glory; Transcendere, Lat. to exceed,
surpass.

V. 87. Myriads; Millions, from (...), Gr. for Ten Thousand, from (...),
infinite, innumerable, a certain for an uncertain Number, familiar with the
Poets.

Ibid. If he whom Mutual League; If thou be he, whom Solemn League and
Covenant, agreeing Thoughts and Resolutions, mutual Hope and Danger in the
Gallant Undertaking, made my Companion once, and now the same Misfortune has
made my Miserable Associate in this fatal Downfall.

League; Ligne, Fr. a ligando: A Confederacy or siding of Factious Subjects
against their Sovereign, of which the Holy League in France, and its Spawn the
Solemn League and Covenant in our Country, are two abominable Instances.

Mutual; Mutuus, Lat. for alternate, by turns; Mutuaque inter se laeti convivia
curant, Georg. 1. They make merry, and entertain one another by turns.

V. 88. United Thoughts and Counsels; Designs and Counsed chosen and agreed to
between us, from unitus, agreed, joined together.

V. 89. Enterprise; An Undertaking, Fr. Entreprinse, an Attempt, an Exploit.

V. 91. Into what Pit thou see; Thou see how we are fallen, from Heavens
bright Battlements, into this low dark Dungeon.

V. 94. The force of those dire Arms? Till taught by sad Experience, who knew
the fatal force of his hot Thunderbolts, those dreadful Engines? Dirus, Lat.
Cruel.

V. 95. The Potent Victor; The Powerful Conqueror, his Pride was still too
superlative to allow God to be Omnipotent, although he found him such to his
ruin: Potens, Lat. mighty; Victor, Lat. Conqueror.

V. 96. Can else inflict: Nor for what ever more he can lay on, or load me
with, do I relent or alter my unchanged Mind, though as to my Brightness and
outward Luster altered and abated: Infligo, Lat. to inflict, to punish.

V. 97. In outward Luster; Though altered as to my External Brightness, the
abatement of my Beauty has not at all impaired the Gallantry of my Mind:
Luster, Fr. shining, glittering.

Ibid. -- That fixed Mind, etc. I alter not my firm Resolution, nor that Noble
Scorn, proceeding from a sense of despised Desert, which, raised in me
The Ambition to engage with the most Highest, and to the furious Encounter
brought along infinite Aid of Angels numberless, who boldly blamed his
Government; and preferring me before him, with all their Might, his utmost
Strength attacked, in doubtful Battle on the Heavenly Plains, and shook his
Seat. A vain boast of the Father of Lies, whom the Lord of Host had in derision.

Fixed; Fixus, Lat. firm, stable, steadfast.

V. 98. Injured Merit; Wronged Desert, abused Merit; Injurior, or injurio, Lat.
to do wrong to: Meritum, Lat. Desert, Merit.

V. 99. To contend; To strive with; Contendo, Lat. to make earnest Opposition,
so Contention for Strife, Encounter. -- Quis talia demens
Abnuat, aut tecum malit contendere Bello? AEn. 4.


V. 101. Innumerable; Without Number, numberless: Innumerabilis, Lat.

V. 102. Reign; Government, Power, from Regner, Fr. to Rule, and both from
Regnare, Lat.

Ibid. Me preferring; Esteeming me before him, from praefero, Lat. to set by,
to make esteem of.

V. 103. With adverse Power opposed; With open Force resisted: Adverse, from
adversus, Lat. against, opposite to; opposed, Lat. Opponere, to place, or stand
against.

V. 104. Dubious; Dubious, Lat. doubtful, uncertain.

V. 105. His Throne; His Royal Seat, his Kingdom, (...), Gr. Heaven is called
(...), Jove's Throne, (...), Theoer. Idyl. Z. But more truly by our Savior The
Throne of God, Matthew. 5. 34.

Ibid. -- What though the Field be lost? What though we have lost the Battle?
All is not gone, our Wills inflexible, The Eternal study of Revenge, and Hatred
irreconcilable, and dauntless Resolution never to yield, remain our own, and
still within our Power; and what besides, may not be overborn?

V. 107. Immortal; Immortalis, Lat. not subject to death or decay.

V. 108. Submit; Yield, submittere, Lat. to yield to, to humble ones self to.

V. 110. That Glory, etc. A Submission, so glorious for him, and base in me
neither his Anger, nor his Power shall force from me: Gloria, Lat.

V. 111. Extort; Force from: Extorqueo, Lat. to wrest by force.

Ibid. To bow and sue for Grace: To cringe, and like a Suppliant sue for
Pardon, on bended Knee, and own him for my God, who from th'affright this armed
Hand of mine, so lately put him in, doubted his Imperial Power; that were base
and mean, that were an Infamy and a Disgrace more vile and low than is this
fatal Downfall. Another of Satan's blasphemous Boastings, and suiting well his
cursed Character, which our Poet holds up to the height of Luciferian Pride.

Grace; Fr. Pardon.

V. 112. Suppliant; Begging, entreating: Supplicare, Lat. to beseech.

Ibid. Deifie; Deifico, Lat. to make a God of, from Deus, God, and facio, to
make.

V. 113. Terror; Fright, a Dread; Terror, Lat.

V. 114. Empire; Imperium, Lat. Command, Power.

V. 115. Ignominy; Disgrace, Dishonor: Ignominia, Lat. Infamy.

V. 116. Since by Fate; Since by th'unalterable Laws of Nature, we that are
Gods, and this our Heavenly Substance is not subject to decay.

Fate by the Heathen was used to express that Unchangeable and Eternal Series
of Things, which the Gods themselves could not disturb or alter: Thus Juno, Hoc
regnum dea gentibus esse, siqua fat a sinant. AEn: 1.

Fatum a sando, as if it were; Quod de unoquoque fatus est Deus, Heavens
Decree: But Hermes deseribes it better, An Obedience of second Causes to the
first. Fate therefore is the Excuse of Fools, who ^harge it with the greatest
of their Follies, Sin: For if Fate, or any irresistible Influence of the
Heavenly Bodies, or Cogency of the Stars, did overruled our Wills, or overreach
our Reason, just were that Impious Evasion of those that say, Accusandum potius
Auctorem siderum, quam Commissorem scelerum.

Ibid. The Strength of Gods: The Vigor and Power of Angels, or Angels
themselves, after the Grecian manner: (...), for Priam himself: (...), Bring
Priam with you, that he himself may swear. (...) and (...), the Strength of
Hector, (...), whom Virg. imitates, Vimquo Deum Infernam, AEn. 12. the Infernal
Gods.

V. 117. This Empyreal Substance; This Heavenly Being, this glorious shining
Substance, from (...), burning like Fire; hence Coelum Empyraeum, the Firmament
adorned with Everlasting Lamps.

V. 122. Irreconcilable; Not to be made Friends, implacable:
Irreconciliabilis, Lat. not to be appeased.

V. 123. Who now Triumphs, of the Lat. Triumphare, to ride in Pomp after a
Conquest made.

Excess, of Excessus, Lat. abundance, overmuch.

V. 124. Sole reigning, etc. Reigning without a Rival, is absolute above.

Sole, of Solus, Lat. alone, without any Companion or Competitor of his Power.

Ibid. Holds the Tyranny; Exerts his Arbitrary Power on high. (...), Gr. for
Government, is most commonly expressive of an unjust and cruel Domination; so
its Derivative Tyrannus, is by Plato. Is^crates, and the Greek Tragedians, used
for a good Prince; by Virg. in both senses, Pars mihi pacis erit dextram
tetigisse Tyranni, of AEneas, AEn. 7. and Odium crudele Tyranni, of Pigmalion,
AEn. 1.

V. 125. Th'Apostate Angel; The Disloyal, the Desertor, fallen from his Faith
and Allegiance, (...), a Renegado, from (...), to stand on the other side; one
who quits his Party, and runs over to the Enemy.

V. 126. Vaunting aloud, etc. Though in torment, making vain boastings, from
Vanter, Fr. to brag.

Ibid. Rackt; Tormented and torn in pieces by dire Despair, that rackt his
Soul. -- Curisque ingentibus aeger,
Spem vultu simulat, premit altum cord dolorem. AEn. 1.
Soft and expressive of a less-sized Sorrow.


V. 127. Compeer; Companion, Mate: Compar, Lat. a Second.

V. 128. Chief of many Throned; O Leader of many mighty Angels, that heretofore
in Heaven sat on Thrones. Angels and Superior Beings are in Scripture expressed
by Powers and Thrones. (...). Colos. 1. 16.

V. 129. Th'Imbattell'd Seraphim; Th'Embodyed Angels, th'Array'd Angelick
Armies, (...) Seraphim, is the usual Appellation given the Angels, Isai. 6. 2.
where they are described attending on Gods Throne: It Is a Derivative of (...)
to burn, or flame like Fire, alluding to the brightness of those Celestial
Beings, or to their wonderful Activity, as Psalm. 104 ^. Making his Angels
Spirits, his Ministers a flame of Fire.

V. 130. Under thy Conduct; Under thy Care and Guidance, from Conductus, Lat.

V. 131. Heavens Perpetual King; God Almighty, the Everlasting Ruler in Heaven:
Perpetuus, Lat. Beelzebub here diminishes as much as he may of Gods
Everlasting Empire, not styling him Heavens Eternal, but Perpetual King, a word
not of so Comprehensive Signi^cancy.

V. 132. To proof his high Supremacy; Made trial of his Title to that vast and
absolute Dominion he assumed unto himself, whether supported by his mighty
Power, by Fortune, or the Fates. Supremacy, absolute Power, from Supremus, Lat.
Highest, God's frequent Title in the Scripture being the Most High.

V. 134. Rue the dire Event; Lament the sad Success, from the Ger. Rue, to
repent of, perhaps of the Gr. (...), to bewail. Event, Consequence, Success;
Eventus, Lat. from evenire, to happen, to come to pass.

V. 138. Heavenly Essences; Spirits, Angelick Beings, Inhabitants of Heaven;
Essentia, Lat. the Being and Existence of any thing. He arrogantly calls his
Fellow Subjects Gods, in Derogation of the one Almighty.

V. 140. Invincible, and Vigor; For the Mind and Soul remain unconquerable,
and Strength and Courage are soon recovered: Invincibilis, Lat. Vigor, Lat.
Courage.

V. 141. Though all our Glory extinct; Notwithstanding all our Glory be decayed
and lost. Extinct; Extinctus, Lat. put out, as a Flame, or any thing that burns
and shines, a word well expressing the loss of that Angelick Beauty, which like
a Glory attended on their Innocence, which by their foul Rebellion they had
forfeited, covered now with Shame and black Confusion. Extinctus is used in the
same Metaphorical manner by Virg. -- Te pr^pter eundem
Extinctus pader. AEn. 4.


V. 148. Suffice his Vengeful Ire; That we may be able long to suffer and
endure his Revenging Wrath: Vengeful, Vindicative from Venger, Fr. to revenge.
Ire, an old word for Anger, from Ira, Lat.

V. 149. Thralls; An old Danish word for Slaves, or Captives.

V. 152. His Errands; His Messages, Sax. Erend; a Messenger, ab errando,
journeying to and fro.

Ibid. In the gloomy Deep; In the obscure, the dark Abyss, an Interval our Poet
supposes between Heaven and Hell, corresponding well enough with Virgils,
Pallentes umbras Erebi, noctemque profundam. AEn. 4. Gloomy, from Sax. Glommun,
Twilight.

V. 153. What can it then avail? What does it profit, or advantage us? Valere,
Lat. to help or conduce to.

V. 154. Strength undiminish'd; Our Vigor unabated; Indiminutus, Lat.
unbroken. What will all our Strength, unbroken and undecayed, nay, our
Everlasting Being, what will these avail us, if given us only to increase our
Woes, by undergoing Everlasting Punishment? A Question that startles Satan and
to which he makes a quick Reply.

V. 156. Arch-Fiend; The chief Devil, Satan, our chief Enemy, Fiend, Sax. an
adversary.

V. 157. Fallen Cherube; Lapsed Angel, (...) according to the Rabbis, is a
Human Shape with two Wings, placed over the Mercy-Seat of the Ark of the
Covenant Exodus 25. 18 and 19. representing the Invisible Angels; and Moses by
this word expresses the Angelick Guard placed before Paradise, after Adam's
Expulsion, Genesis 3. 24.

Ibid. To be weak is miserable; To faint in undertaking, or sink in undergoing
what may happen, is to be wretched. Superanda est omnis fortuna ferendo, Virg.
Fortiter ille facit, qui miser esse potest, Mart.

V. 164. To pervert that end; To cross and thwart that Design; Pervertere, Lat.
^o turn aside, to put out of the way.

V. 167. -- And disturb his inmost Counsels, etc. And make his most secret
Deliberations miscarry, and fall short of their designed end. Disturb, from
disturbo, Lat. to throw down, to hinder. Destino, Lat. to appoint, to design.

V. 169. But see, so Virg. Quos ego: Sed mo^os prastat Componere flactus, AEn.
1.

V. 170. His Ministers of Vengeance; The Executioners of his Anger who pursued
us; Minister, Lat. Servant; Vengeance Fr. Revenge.

Ibid. Pursuit, Fr. Poursuitte; The Chase, pursuing of an Enemy.

V. 171. The Sulphurous Hail; The Storm of Fiery Hail that beat so sore upon
us, is now blown over, and these Flaming Waves, into whose Boiling Bosom, from
Heavens Lo^ty Towers we fell, begin t'abate, and the Thunder, riding upon the
Wings of ruddy Lightning and sto^my Rage, perhaps exhausted of its Shafts,
begins to give over Roaring and Bellowing through the void Immense.

Sulphureu^. Lat made of Brimstone: Upon the Wicked he shall rain Snares, Fire
and Brimstone, and stormy Tempest, Psalm. 11. 5.

V. 173. The Fiery Surge; The Flaming Flood: Surge, a Wave; a Surgendo, from
their rising, and riding over one another.

Ibid. That from the Precipice; That in our steep downfall from Heaven received
us: Pracipitium, Lat. a direct steep downfall.

V. 175. Winged with Red Lightning: The Poets give the Thunder Wings, to denote
its swiftness and suddenness: Fulminis Ocyor alis, AEn. 5. and Virg. describing
the Cycl^ps forging a Thunderbolt; -- Radios --
Addiderant, rutili tres ignis, and alitis Austri,
Fulgores nunc terrificos, sonitumque, metu nque
Miscelant operi, flammisque sequacibus Iras. AEn. 8.


A Noble Description! yet is our Poet very short, and very significant.

Impetuous; Impetuus, Lat. violent, stormy.

V. 179. Or satiate Fury; Or his Anger now allayed, his Rage appeased:
Satiatus, Lat. full, cloyed, satisfied.

V. 180. Y^n Dreary; That dismal, woeful, an old Sax. word, Yon that Sax.

Ibid. Forlorn; Waste, destroyed; Verlohren, Ger, spoiled, lost; whence the
Forlorn Hope, from the eminent danger they are exposed to.

V. 181. The Seat of Desolation; That lonely, solitary Seat, destitute of any
living Creature but our wretched selves. Desolatio, Lat. a laying waste.

Ibid. Void of Light; Without Light, dark: Unide, Fr. from Vacuus, Lat. empty.

V. 182. Save what the Glimmering, etc. Except what the obscure Glimpses of
those Pale Flames, Casts faint and fearful. Glimmering, a faint feeble shining,
like that of the Twilight, from the Danish Glimmer, to shine a little.

Livid; Lividus, Lat. for Lead-colour, or that of bruised Flesh. Virg. styles
the Water of Cocytus one of the Poetic Rivers in Hell, Vada Livida, AEn. 6.
This is an exact Explanation of our Poets meaning by Darkness visible, in the
foregoing Description of Hell, V. 63. and is a wonderful addition to it.

V. 183. Tend; Go, Tendo, Lat. to go to remove: Tendimus in Latium, AEn. 1.

V. 185. Can harbor there; Can dwell, is to be found there: Hauberge, Fr. an
inn, a place to stay at; or from the Ger. Here, an Army, and Bergen, to cover,
signifying properly the station of an Army.

V. 186. Our afflicted Powers; Our broken and beaten Forces: Afflictus, Lat.
broken, harrass'd.

V. 187. Consult; Consider of: Consulo, Lat. to advise about.

V. 189. This dire Calamity; This sad Affliction and Overthrow: Calamitas, Lat.
Damage, Adversity.

V. 190. What Reinforcement; What Reparation, what new Strength and Courage we
may gain from hope: Renforcer, Fr. to strengthen again to inspirit and add new
Vigor to.

V. 192. Mate; Companion, from Maet, Be^g. an Associate.

V. 194. That Sparkling blazed; That shot forth Fire, and blazed out like a
Flame: Blaze, from Blase, Sax. a Torch.

V. 195. Prone on the Flood; Lying along upon the flaming Flood: Pronus, Lat.
lying down both from (...), Gr. (...), cecidit autem Pronus, I^. E.

Ibid. Extended; Extentus, Lat. stretched out in length and breadth.

V. 169. Lay floating many a Rood; Covered a mighty space: Rodata terrae, as
the Law terms it, is the fourth part of an Acre.

Ibid. In bulk as huge; For size as large: Bulk signifies Greatness, Thickness,
Largeness, according to all Dimensions, from (...), Gr. weight: Hugh, vastly
great, from Oga, Sax. terror, fright; as hugy, terrible, big.

V. 197. As whom the Fables: Satan was of a size as vastly big, as any of the
Giant-Sons of Earth, Briarcos or Typhon, who, as the Poets relate, made War on
Jove. The Fables Name, of whom the Stories are told; Fabula, Lat. a Tale, a
Fiction.

Ibid. Monstrous; Wonderful: Monstrosus, Lat. strange, preternatural.

V. 198. Titanian or Earth-born; The last explains the first, as is evident,
Genus antiqu^un terrae, Titania Pubes, AEn. 6. The Poets tell us, Coelus and
Vesta had two remarkable Sons, Titan and Saturn; this the youngest was
permitted to Reign, on condition he should destroy all his Male Children, that
the Empire might revert to Titan and his Posterity: But the Cheat of Nursing
Jove in Crete being discovered, Titan and his Sons made War upon Saturn, and
deposed him: To his Fathers rescue came Jupin, overthrew the Titans, and soon
after deprived his Father of his Kingdom, Vesta (the Earth) concerned at the
Destruction of her Sons, brought forth, and raised against Jupiter many hideous
Monsters, of vast bigness, who Rendezvousing in Thessaly, piled the Mountains
one upon another, till they gave Jupiter a terrible Scalado at Heaven-Gates:
(...), etc. (...)
Affectasse ferunt, Regnum Coeleste, Gigantes,
Aitaque Congestos struxisse ad sydera montes. Meta. 1.
Et conjuratos Coelum rescindere Fratres,
Ter sunt conati, imp^nere Pelio Ossam. Georg. 1.


V. 199. Briareos was one of these Earth-born Boobies, he had 100 Hands, with
which he hurled up great Rocks at Jupiter; therefore styled by Virg. Centum
Geminus Briareus, AEn. 6.

Ibid. Typhen, who had his Name of (...), to smoke, was of all these Monsters
the most dreadful, therefore reported the Son of Earth and Hell: His Stature
was so prodigious, his Knees reached above the highest Mountains. He had 100
Dragons Heads, vomiting perpetual Fire and Flame, at such a rate, that all the
Gods, who came to Jupiter's Assistance, finding such hot Work on it, ran
shamefully away into Egypt, disguising themselves there, in the shapes of
diverse Beasts, etc. However, with much to do, at length Jupiter, with many
Volley of his Thunder, overbore him, and buried him under the Isle of Sicile,
as Ov^^ relates. Emissumque una de sede Typhoea terrae,
Coelitibus fecisse metum. Metam. l. 5.
Vasta Gigantaeis injecta est Insula Membris
Trinacris, and Magnis subjectum molibus urget,
AEtherias ausum sperare Typhoea seeds.


In Memory of this Victory of Jupiters, Virgil calls his Thunder Tela Typhoea,
AEn. 1. Nec tam justa fuit Terrarum Gloria Typhon, etc. Luc. 1. 4.

V. 200. By Ancient Tarsus, the chief City of Cilicia in Asia the Lesser, near
which, in the Mountain Arimus, was a Cave, called Typhon's Den. (...).

Translated by Virg. -- Durumque Cubile
Inarime, Jovis Imperiis, Imposta Typhoeo. AEn. 9.


Where (...), is made Inarime, an Island Southward of Prochyta, which is a
Mountain in Cilicia,

V. 201. Leviathan; The Whale, (...) Heb. excellently described, Job 41. 9. His
Neisings make the Light to shine; his Eyes are like the Eyelids of the Morn,
out of his Mouth go Lamps, and Sparks of Fire. So that Satan's Blazing Eyes,
came up to the Comparison. After this, he that has a mind to read Tasso's
Description of Satan, may find it, Cant. 4. Stan. 6, 7, and 8. Ne tanto scoglio
in mar, ne rupe Alpestra
Ne pur Calpe s'inalza, O'l mago Atlante,
Ch'anzi lui non paresse un picciol colle
Si la gran front, e ie gran corna est^lle, etc.


V. 202. The Ocean Stream; The Sea, the vast Mass of Water that encompasseth the
Earth, and with it makes one Globe, (...), Gr. (...), ad Ocea^i fluenta, (...).

V. 203. On the Norway Foam; On the German Ocean, that washes Norway on the
West, a Kingdom of great Extent, on the North-West Shore of Europe* reaching
from the entrance of the Baltick-Sea, almost to the North-Cape, about 1300
Miles long, and 250 broad.

Foam, for the Foaming Sea, as Adnixi torquent spumas and caerula v^rru^t, AEn.
111. Et spumas salis aere ruebant, AEn. 1. They cut through the Salt Foam with
their Brazen Prows.

V. 204. The Pilot of some; Pilot, the Steersman, he that takes the chief Care
of the Sailing part of a Ship, from the Bell. Piilen, to sound, to Fathom and
Loot, Lead: One that sounds the Shallows. Many Sea-Terms are Dutch, borrowed of
the Saxons, Belgians, and Cimbrians, being Maritime Nations.

Ibid. Night-founder'd Skiff: Some little Boat, whose Pilot dares not proceed
in his course* for fear of the dark Night; a Metaphor taken from a foundered
Horse, that can go no further; or Night-founder'd, in danger of sinking at
Night, from fo^dre, Fr. to sink to the bottom, the meaning of a Ships foundring
at Sea. I prefer the former, as being our Authors aim.

Skiff, from the Gr. (...), a little Boat.

V. 205. Deeming some Island; Judging it to be an Island: Fr. Isle, and both
from I^sula, land surrounded by the Sea. As Seamen tell; As Seafaring-Men are
used to relate among the other Wonders of their Voyages, Words well added to
obviate the Incredibility of calling Anchor on a Whale, (a Floating Delos)
which if any mistaken Pilot ever did, he might well wish for the delaying Morn,
for doubtless he underwent a tossing and tempestuous Night.

V. 206. With fixed Anchor; With his Anchor sticking fast in his Back all armed
with Skales* Anchora, Lat. (...), acurvitate.*

Ibid. Skaly Rind; In his tough Hide covered all over with Scales: Fr.
Escailles. Rind is properly the Bark of a Tree, yet not unapplicable to the
Scaly Skin of this armed Monster, especially if it originally be from (...),
corium. Job describing him, says of his Scales, The Majesty of 'em is like
strong Shields, they are sure sealed, etc. Job 41. 6.

V. 207. Moors by his side under the Lee; Makes fast to his side with Anchors
and Cables, to keep him off the Leeshore, to which the Wind drives him; Moor of
the Fr. Marer, (and this of Mare the Sea) to fix himself, to take a place for a
Ship to ride in.

The Lee, from A'l'Eau, Fr. is the verging or inclining of a Vessel, either by
Wind, or the setting of the Tide toward the Shore, the Water naturally tending
thither as higher than the Land, and falling down to it.

V. 208. -- Night invests the Sea; While Night covers and overcasts the Sea
with her dark Mantle: Fr. Investir, to cover, to enclose as Garments do. --
Rui* Oceano Nex
Involvens umbra magna terramque Polumque. AEn 11
Nox ruit and fuscis tellurem amplectitur alis. AEn ^.


All exact Night-Pieces, yet is this one word [Invests] (...).

V. 214. Reiterated Crimes; Repeated Sins, committed over again* Reitero, Lat.
to do over again.

V. 220. Treble Confusion; Threefold Confusion, that is, manifold Vengeance,
Wrath and Confusion: Triple, Fr. Lat. Triplex.

V. 222. His mighty Stature; His vast Bulk, of Proportion and Size huge and
extraordinary: Statura, Lat. Bigness, or height of Body.

V. 223. Driven backwards slope, etc. On either side of him the Flames forced
backwards, slant of their Pointed Wreathes. Slope, raise sidelong, obliquely,
indirectly.

Ibid. Their Pointing Spires; Their Curling Wreathes that end in Points. Spire,
from Spira, Lat. as that from (...), any thing that turns round, and fetches a
Compass; well applied to Flame, whose curling Motion rises Circular, ending in
a Pyramid Point, which has its Denomination of (...), Fire. Spira is used by
Virgil for the Gyres and Twistings of Serpents. -- Spirisque ligant ingentibus,
AEn. 11.

V. 224. -- Rolled in Billows, etc. The Flaming Flood, by Satan's motion in
raising of himself, was beaten backwards into Fiery Billows, that on each side
rolled over one another, leaving betwixt 'em a most dreadful Valley. Vale, a
diminitive of Valley, from Vallis, Lat.

V. 225. Then with expanded, etc. Then with his out-stretch'd Wings he takes
his flight on high, oppressing sore the smoaky Clime, that never yet felt such
weight.

Expanded; Lat. Expansus, spread, stretched out.

V. 226. Incumbent; Lying, leaning heavily upon: Lat. incumbens, from incumbo.

Ibid. Dusky Air; Obscure, smoaky, from (...), Gr. shadowy, dark.

V. 129. With solid as the, etc. If that may be called Land, that always
burned, with firm as the Lake burned with fluid Fire. Solid; Solidus, Lat.
firm, substantial: Liquid, liquidus, Lat. melting, moist, running.

Lake; Lacus, Lat. (...), Fissura, a Pool, or deep place always full of Water.

V. 230. And such appeared in Hue; And such for Color seemed: Hue, or Hew, a
Sax. word. And such for Color showed, as when the Strength
Of Wind pent under Ground, removes a Hill
Rent from Pelorus, or the ragged side
Of Roaring Etna, whose wide Womb well stored
With Matter fit to burn, thence catching Fire,
Heightened with Flaming Sulphur, Wing the Winds,
And leave a Boiling Bottom, Clouded over
With stinking Fumes.


V. 231. Subterranean Wind; Bred or imprisoned underground: Subterraneus, Lat.
underground, from sub and terra. Transports; Carries, forces away: Transporto,
Lat. to carry from one place to another.

V. 232. Pelorus; A Promontory of Sicily, now Cape di Fare, about a Mile and a
half from Italy, whence Virg. Augusta a sede Pelori, AEn. 3.

V. 233. Thundering AEtna; A Mountain on the East of Sicily, now Mont Gibel,
often belching out Fire and Smoke, and sometimes casting forth huge Stones with
mighty Noise, well deserving the Epithet of Thundering, which Virgil also
applies to it, -- Horrificis juxta tonat AEtna ruinis, AEn. 3. This Mountain
has made nine several Fiery Eruptions, of which the most dreadful was that in
the Year 1669, when four Torrents of liquid Fire ran down its sides, through
the Fields. a Mile into the Sea, and there maintained their Fury a long time
unextinguish'd. Satan spitting Fire, is by Tasso compared to this AEtna, which
our Poet does apply much better to his Place than Person. Qual' i fumi
sulp^urei, and infiammati
Escon di Mongibello, e'l puzzo, e'l tuono,
Tal dela fiera bo^^a, i negri fiati
Tale il fettore, e le faville sono. Canto. 4.


Hear our Spencer: As Burning AEtna, from his Boiling Stew,
Does belch out Flames, and Rocks in pieces broke,
And ragged Ribs, of Mountains Molten new,
Enwrapt in Cole-black Clouds, and filthy Smoke,
That all the Land with Stench, and Heaven with Horror choke. Fai. Q. B. 1. C.
1^.


Ibid. Whose combustible; Whose Bowels apt to burn: Combustus, Lat. burnt.
Comburo, to burn.

V. 234. And fewell'd Entrals; Whose hollow Womb is stored with fit Materials
for Fire; Fuel, any thing fit to burn: The Food of Fire, from Feu, Fr. Fire;
this from Fuoco, Ital. and both from Focus.

Entrals; Des Entrailles, Fr. Bowels, the Inwards.

Ibid. Thence conceiving Fire; Catching Fire, or hatching and bringing it
forth, from concipio, to breed and bring forth, as viviparae do.

V. 235. Sublimed with Minerai Fury; Raised, height'ned with the furious Force
of a Sulfureous Mine: Mineral, of Mine, whence Metals are dug, from the
barbarous Lat. Minare, to make Mines and Cavities underground. Sublimed, of
Sublimis, Lat. high, lofty.

V. 236. All involved; Covered all over: Lat. Involvo, to hide, to wrap up in.

Virg. AEn. 3. Gives us a large Description of this Burning Mountain. --
Horrificis juxta tonat AEtna ruinis,
Interdumque atram prorumpit ad aethera nubem,
Turbine fumantem piceo, and candente favilla:
Attollitque Globos flammarum, and sidera lambit:
Interdum Scopulos, avulsaque viscera mont is,
Erigit eructans, liquefactaque saxa sub auras
Cum gemitu Glomerat, fundoque exaestuat im^.


Which though very exact, yet the Avulsa viscera montis, Erigit eructans, seem
short of the combustible and fewell'd Entrails, thence conceiving Fire,
sublimed with Mineral Fury: Whereour Author has given us the Philosophy of this
Fiery Mountain, viz. great Quantities of combustible Matter, lodged in vast
Hollows and Caves; in whose dark Womb, the Winds either bred or imprisoned,
striving and struggling to get out, collide and strike Fire, and in a roaring
Tempest springing a Mine of Sulphur, blow the Mountain up, and roll out flaming
Floods of liquid Fire. Sive bitumineae rapiant incendia flammae, etc. Ovid.
Meta. Lib. 15.

V. 237. Such resting found the sole; Such place to rest upon: Sole, of the
Lat. Solum* both signifying the bottom of the Foot. Avia Pieridum peragro loca,
nullius ante, Trita Solo. Lucr. Lib. 1.

V. 239. The Stygian Flood; The Gulf of Fire. Stygius from Styx, a Fountain of
Arcadia, whose Waters were so contagious, that it was esteemed one of the
Rivers of Hell: It was had in such Veneration, that no Oath was so inviolable,
as that confirmed by the invocation of this abominable Flood; for Styx is from
(...), to hate, to detest. (...)
(...)


Excellently translated by Virgil, Stygiamque Paludem, dii cujus Jurare timent
and fallere numen. AEn. 6.

V. 241. Of Supernal Power; Not by permission of a Higher Power: Supernus, Lat.
high.

V. 242. The Clime; The Climate, the Situation: (...), Gr. of (...), to bend
from, to decline. A Clime is properly a space of the Earth comprehended between
two Parallels, serving to distinguish the difference of Daylight by their
approaching to, or receding from the Equator; at first reckoned seven, then
nine, sufficient for the then-known World, since a fuller discovery made,
increased to 24, according to the length of the Days, augmented by half an hour
in every Clime from the Equator to the Pole, till they attain to 24 Hours; then
increasing by Weeks and Months to half a Year, the Climes are of no more use.
Satan's is a Fiery Climate, a Torrid Zone.

V. 244. This Mournful Gloom; This lamentable glaring Darkness for Heavens pure
Light: Celestial, Heavenly; Coelestis, Lat. divine, excellent.

V. 246. Who now is Sovran; Who now commands in chief. Souverain, Fr. Sovrane
and Sovrano, Ital. all from Supremus, Lat. the most High.

Ibid. Can dispose and bid; Can order and command as just, what he thinks fit,
and therefore must be just. A Description of Arbitrary Power, harmless in no
Hand, but His, who is as Just, as He is Powerful and Almighty, Righteous in all
his Ways, and holy in all his Works, Psalm. 145. 17. though many of 'em
unaccountable, and past our finding out.

Dispose, from Dispono, Lat. to order, to appoint.

V. 248. Whom Reason has equaled: Satan makes very ill use of that Reason the
Sovereign Creator had in such Perfection endowed him with, to argue an Equality
with his Maker, and that by force of Arms he had obtained an Usurped
Superiority over him and his Rebellious Crew, as his Equals, who are his
Creatures; and though of a higher Form than Man, yet infinitely short of the
transcendent Perfections of their Maker. Supreme, highest: Supremus, Lat. most
High.

V. 250. Hail Horrors: Thou Seat of Dreadful Desolation, I salute thee: And
thee, thou nethermost World and deepest Hell, receive thy new-come Lord. Hail,
a Sax. word for Salutation (as the Lat. Ave, and the (...) of the Greeks) of
Hele, Health and Welfare.

Horror, Lat. dread: Infernus, Lat. lowermost: Profundus, Lat. deep.

V. 254. The Mind is its own Place; Is not to be altered by change of Air,
Coelum non animum mutant qui trans mare currunt: The Mind makes all Places
alike: He who is unalterable, by the Circumstances of Time and Place, may by
his mighty Mind turn Heaven to Hell, and Hell into a Heaven: Another
vainglorious Boast of the Father of Lies.

V. 256. What matter where? What does it import me* in what place I am, if I
continue still the same, and all I should be, but less than him, whom Thunder
has exalted?

V. 260. For his Envy; A malicious Inuendo, as if their Bountiful Creator had
denied them the Heaven he placed 'em in.

V. 262. To Reign is worth Ambition; To Reign, though but in Hell, is
desirable, and worth attempting; Well expressed! -- Nam te nec sperent Tartara
Regem
Nec tibi regnandi veniat tam dira Cupido. Georg. 1.


Ambition; Ambitio, Lat. A desire of Honor and Power.

V. 265. The Associates and Copartners; The Companions and Sharers of our
Misfortunes. Associo, Lat. to join together, to accompany, from Socius, Lat.
Copartners, from the Law-Term Coparceners, such as have equal Shares in their
Ancestors Inheritance.

V. 266. Lie thus astonished, etc. Lying amazed on the forgetful Flood. Lethe,
the oblivious Pool of the Poets, has its Name from (...), forgetfulness, which
it caused in all that drank of its Waters. -- Lethaei ad fluminis undam
Securos Latices and longa o^livia Potant. AEn. 6.


This forgetfulness here mentioned, does not imply that the lapsed Angels had
lost all Remembrance of what they had enjoyed or suffered; but is expressive of
that great Astonishment and Confusion with which they were at present (helpless
and forgetful of themselves) quite overwhelmed.

Oblivious; Forgetful: Lat. Obliviosus. Astonished, Lat. Attonitus, confounded.

V. 268. Unhappy Mansion; In this our sad abode: Mansio, Lat. an abiding place,
a manendo.

V. 269. With rallied Arms; With reunited Force, with all our Powers
re-assembled: Rallier, Fr. to bring into order broken Troops.

V. 273. None could have foiled; None could have worsted, beaten, overcome,
from fouler or affoler, Fr. to trample upon, to bruise.

V. 274. Their liveliest Pledge; The best Security and Raiser of their hope.
Plege, Fr. an Undertaker, a Law-Term for one who is Security or Gage for
another.

V. 276. On the Perilous Edge; On the Bloody Brink of Battle when enraged: Well
is the eminent Danger of Outrageous Slaughter described by the Edge of Battle,
acted by the Edge of the Sword, our Poet uses the same Expression: On the
rough Edge of Battle ere it joined. Bo. 6. V. 108.

Perilous; Periculosus, Lat. dangerous. Edge, of the Lat. Acies, as that of
(...), mucro.

V. 277. In all Assaults; In all Attempts, in all Onsets. Fr. Assault, from
Lat. Assultus, a leaping upon.

V. 278. Signal; Sign, from Signum, Lat. Notice.

Ibid. Resume; Take new Courage, recover: Resumo, Lat. to take again.

V. 280. Grovelling; To lie flat on ones Face, unable to rise or help ones self,
as if Groundling.

Ibid. Prostrate: Lat. Prostratus, knocked down, overthrown.

V. 281. Astounded, an old word for astonished, confounded: Fr. Estonne, from
the Lat. Attonitus.

V. 282. Such a pernicious height; Fallen so far, from such a dangerous
height. Perniciosus, Lat. destructive.

V. 283. Scarce had ceased; Made an end of speaking: Cesso, Lat. to leave off,
to give over.

Superior; Chief, the Arch-Fiend: Superior, Lat. higher, uppermost.

V. 284. His Ponderous Shield; His Weighty Shield: Lat. Ponderosus, heavy, from
Pondus, Lat. weight.

V. 285. Ethereal Temper, Massy; Of extraordinary temper, of Trempe, Fr.
Temperature.

Massy; Solid, strong, heavy, from Massa, Lat. for a Lump.

V. 286. The broad Circumference; -- The mighty Round, covered his Shoulders
like the full-Orb'd Moon; A Comparison better suiting the Shield of this mighty
Seraph, than that of a Grecian Shield, or the Circumference of the Sun, the
Monstrous Eye of Polypheme. Argolici Clypei, aut Phoebaae Lampadis Instar. AEn.
3.

Circumference; Circumferentia, Lat. the Round, the Compass of a Circle, or a
Circular Body. They who will please themselves in reading Homer's Description
of Achilles's Shield, (...). and that of AEneas in Virg. AEn. 8. will find that
Vulcan, who made 'em both, gave neither of 'em such a turn as our Poet has, to
this of Satan; yet the first was large enough to be engraven with the Sun,
Moon, and all the Stars, two Cities, Fields and Vineyards, Combats, Music and
Weddings, and so many things as employ 138 Verses, whom though Virgil imitates
by the Embossment of his Hero's Shield in 107 Lines, yet he exceeds him by
adorning it with all the Prowess and Praises of his Posterity, down to the
famous Victory over Anthony and Cleopatra, and puts it on his Back with an
admirable Grace, Attollens humero, famamque and fata Nepotum.

Tasso has followed both these, in Rinaldos Shield celebrated Cant. 17. from
Stanza 66. to the 81. consisting of 128 Verses. And in another place he tells
us of a Divine Shield large enough to cover the whole Country between Caucasus
and Atlas, Scudo di lucidissimo diamante
Grande, che puo coprir genti, e paesi
Quanti ve n'ha fra il Caucaso, e l'Atlante. Cant. 7. Stan. 82.


V. 287. Whose Orb; Whose Round Spherical Body, through his Perspective Glass,
The Italian Artist views: Orbis, Lat. any round thing of a circular Shape, and
therefore the World Terrarum Orbis, as also the Celestial Circles in which the
Heavenly Bodies move, Quos ignis Coeli Cyllenius erret in Orbs, Georg. 1. Here
it properly denotes the Moons Orbicular Phasis, or appearance.

V. 288. Through Optic Glass; Through his Telescope, an Instrument invented to
draw things vastly distant nearer to the Eye, by which they are more clearly
presented to the view, therefore named (...), Visorius, from (...), to see,
strengthening the Visual Ray, and affording great assistance to Sight, in
Objects so remote, as are the Stars and Heavenly Bodies.

Ibid. The Tuscan Artist; The Italian Astronomer, Native of Tuscany, whence
Virgil styles Tiberim Tuscum, Georg. 1. Artist: Artista, Lat. one skilled in
the Arts and Sciences, especially those called Liberal, of Ars, Lat.

V. 289. From Fesole: Lat. Fesulae, a considerable City of Tuscany in Italy,
one of the twelve famous Towns of Etruria, where the Augurs used to reside.

V. 290. Or in Valdarno; A Fruitful Valley in Tuscany, through which the River
Arno runs, between Florence and Pisa, into the Tuscan Sea. Of Vallis, Lat. a
Vale, and Arno, Arnus, an Italian River.

Ibid. To descry new Lands, etc. Which the inequality of the Moons Surface
seems to suggest to the Beholders; for by repeated Inspections, through the
Glazed Optics, her Superficies is discovered neither to be equal, nor exactly
Sperical, but rough and uneven, full of vast Hollows and great Extuberancies,
not much unlike Earths Hills and Valleys, whose highest Mountains fall short of
the Eminences discovered in the Moon, as Galilaeus demonstrates in his Siderius
Nuncius, Page 25. To descry, to discover.

V. 291. Rivers or Mountains, etc. According to the Opinion of the
Pythagoreans, that the Moon was another World, whose brighter part resembled
the Earth, and the more dark and obscure the Watery Element. Mihi autem dubium
fuit nunquam, Terrestris Globi a long conspecti, atque a radiis Solaribus
perfusi, terream superficiem clariorem, Obscuriorem aqueam, sese in conspectum
daturam. Gal. 11. P. 17.

Ibid. Spotty Globe; In her circle full of Spots, which arise not so much from
the Inequality, as from the Dissimilitude of her Contexture. Globus, Lat. any
thing that is, or appears round and Globular.

V. 292. His Spear to equal, etc. Compared with which, the loftiest Pine:
Pinus, Lat. for that tall straight Tree.

V. 293. Norwegian Hills; The Hills of Norway, a Kingdom of large extent on the
North-West Shore of Europe; Barren and Rocky, but abounding in vast Woods, from
whence are brought Masts of the largest size. Norvegia, Lat. from the Germ.
Nort, the North and Weg signifying Way, from its Northern Situation.

Mast; Lat. Malus, made generally of Firr-Trees, which for their streightness
and tallness are fittest to hoist the Yards on, which bear the Sails of a Ship.

V. 294. Ammiral; According to its German Extraction Amiral or Amirael, the
Chief Commander at Sea. That this Similitude may not seem too exorbitant, let
us compare it with the Cyclop his Club: (...)
(...)
(...)


Ulysses and his Companions took it, to be as big as the Mast of a broad Ship
of Burden, with Twenty Oars; thus translated by Ovid: Cui postquam Pinus,
Baculi quae praebuit usum,
Ante pedes posita est, Antennis apta ferendis. Metam. l. 13.


Tasso arms Tancredi and his Adversary with two Spears as big. Posero in resta,
e drizzare in alto 1 due Guerrier le noderose antenne, Cant. 6. St. 40. Hector
took a Spear Ten Cubits long, (...). Now if Hector, or Polyphemus himself,
compared to their Superior Satan, were but a Pigmy, who can wonder at the
Circumference of his Shield, or the Size of his Spear? (to use our Author's
Argument and Words) When Millions of fierce encountering Angels fought
On either side, the least of whom could weild
These Elements, and arm him with the force
Of all their Regions. Bo. 6.


See Spencer, Bo. 3. Cant. 7. his Spear amidst her Sun-broad Shield arrived,
that nathemore the Steel asunder riv'd, all were the Beam in bigness like a
Mast.

V. 296. Over the Burning Marle; Over the Burning Ground, the singed Soil;
Marle, according to Pliny, Marga is a Fat Earth, of kind and color like Lime,
used in many Countries to soil the Earth, which its innate heat stimulates into
great Fertility.

V. 297. On Heavens Azure; On Heavens Blue Plains: Azur, Fr. Azurro, Ital. both
from the barbarous Greek (...), Lapis Lazulus, a Stone of which is made the
best Blue Paint resembling the Blue Sky, brought from Persia, called there
Lazurd.

Ibid. The Torrid Zone; The Roasting Region, the Scorching Climate: Torridus,
Lat. burnt: Torrida semper ab igni, of the Torrid Zone. Geor. 1.

V. 298. Vaulted with Fire: Voulte, Fr. Arched over-head with Fire, well
agreeing with his former Description, -- On all sides round,
As one great Furnace flamed. V. 62 and 63.


V. 299. Nathless;. Nevertheless, of which it seems to be a contracted
Diminutive, or the Sax. Nadeles, of Na, not and less.

Ibid. Till on the Beach; The Brink, the Side, the Brow of that Burning Sea.

V. 300. Inflamed; Inflammatus, Lat. all on a light Fire.

V. 301. His Legions, Angel-forms; His Armies of Angels, Angelick Shapes:
Legio, Lat. was a square Battalion of Roman Footmen, consisting of about 6000,
more or less, according to different times. Twelve millions of Angels our
Savior mentions Matthew. 26. 53.

Forms; Forma, Lat. for Shape, Figure, Beauty, etc.

Ibid. Intrans't; Helpless, confounded: Transi, Fr. fallen into a Swound:

V. 302. Thick as Autumnal; As numberless as Leaves in Autumn. (...), As many
as the Leaves and Flowers that adorn the Spring, says Homer; And (...). Very
many, like to Leaves or Sands for number. Thus improved by Virg. Quem qui scire
velit, Libyci velit aequoris idem
Discere, quam multae Zephyro turbentur arenae.
Aut ubi Navigits violentior incidit Eurus,
Nosse quet Ionii veniant ad litora sluctus. Geor. 2.


But those which exactly quadrate with the place are, Quam multa in Sylvis
Autumni frigore primo
Lapsa cad^nt Folia. AEn. 6.


Ibid. Autumnal; Of or in the Autumn: Autumnus, Lat. the Harvest, that Quarter
of the Year from the beginning of August to that of November.

V. 303. In Vallombrosa; It. In the shady Vale. Valombrosa is a famous Valley
in Tuscany, so named of Vallis and Umbra Shade, remarkable for the continual
cool Shades, which the vast number of Trees that overspread it, afford.

Ibid. Where the Etrurian Shades, etc. Where the lofty Tuscan Trees Vaulted
high overhead, agree in one green Bower. Etruria was the ancient Name of a
considerable part of Italy, now Toscana, Thuscia and Tuscia, Lat. containing
all that Country, which belongs to the States of Florence, Siena, Pisa and
Luca, the last a Free State, the rest subject to the great Duke of Florence.

V. 304. Over-arch'd; Arched over-head, Arch. A Circular Figure from Arc, Fr.
as that of Arcus, Lat. for a bent Bow its resemblance.

Ibid. Scattered Sedge; Weeds broken by the Wind, and covering the Red Sea.
Sedge, from the Sax. Saecg. A little Sword, from its shape; and A secando, from
the sharpness of its sides, which are apt to cut the Hand they are drawn
through.

V. 305. A Float; Floating, swimming about, from Flotter, Fr. as that from
Fluctuare, to swim.

Ibid. Orion armed: The Poets Fable, that Jupiter, Mercury and Neptune, being
one Night out late on a Ramble, were forced to take into a poor House where one
Hircus lived, who killed the only Ox he had, to entertain his Heavenly Guests;
who to reward his Gratitude, granted him any Request he should make 'em; which
was, That he might have a Child without the trouble of a Wife: Whereupon these
his Guests Urining in the Oxes Hide, commanded him to bury it Ten Months in the
Earth, which he did, and at the end of the term he had this Son, who proving a
great Hunter, was killed by a Scorpion, and by the Commiseration of the Gods
translated to Heaven, into a Constellation of Sixteen Stars: From this
extraordinary way of Generation, he was called (...), from (...), Urine. Others
say, (...), from the Stormy Weather that attends him. Assurgens fluctu nimbosus
Oryon. AEn. 1.
Armatumque Auro Circumspicit Oryona. AEn. 3.


Where Virgil has adorned him with Gold in respect of his Splendour, as Milt^n
does here arm him with fierce Winds in Consideration of the season he appears
in, which is generally tempestuous. Armatus; Lat. armed.

V. 306. The Red Sea Coast; Mare Erythraeum, of Erythreus, Son of Persus and
Andromeda, who Reigned in Egypt on the Confines of this Sea, and probably found
the way of sailing in small Vessels, among Islands thereof, the affinity of his
Name with (...), Greek for Red, occasioned the naming this Sea so. Sir Walter
Rawleigh, from a view that Gama a Portugese took of this Sea Anno 1544,
affirms, That the Earth, Sand and Cliffs of diverse Islands in this Sea, being
of a Reddish Color, give by Reflection a foil to its Waters, that seem to have
a Tincture of Rubicundity, though not real: Where the Hebrew Text mentions the
miraculous passage of the Israelites cross this Sea, it is called (...), Mare
Algosum, the Sea of Weeds, from the abundance of Weeds and floating Sedge,
though translated the Red Sea.

V. 307. Busiris was, according to Sir Walter Rawleigh's Opinion, one of the
Egyptian Kings that oppressed the Israelites, in whose Reign Moses fled, having
slain the Egyptian, and that he was called Chencres, on whom the Ten Plagues
were inflicted, and who was afterward in persuit of 'em drowned with all his
Host in the Red Sea. Pharaoh (the word used by Moses) was the general
Appellative of all the Egyptian Monarchs, as is evident from 2 Kings 23. 29.
and Jerem. 46. 2. where by his Surname one of their Kings is called
Pharach-Nechoh.

Ibid. His Memphian Chivalry; His Egyptian Horsemen; from Memphis the great and
glorious city of old Egypt, seated on the Brow of a Mountain two Miles West of
Nilus, and is called Moph, Hos. 9. 6. About Ten Miles from this place stand the
famous Pyramids. Barbara Pyramidum sileat miracula Memphis. Mart.
Quem non AEgyptia Memphis, AEquaret visu, numerisque moventibus astra. Luc. l.
1.


Chivalry; Chevalerie, Fr. Horsemanship, Service performed on Horseback, and
such as perform it, from Cheval, Fr. a Horse.

V. 308. Perfidious Hatred; Treacherous, because Pharaoh, after leave given to
the Egyptians to depart, followed after 'em like Fugitives. Perfidiosus, Lat.
faithless,

V. 309. Sojourners of Goshen; The Israelites, who inhabited that part of
Egypt, Genesis 47. 27. Sejourner, Fr. to stay in.

V. 310. Their float Carcasses; Their dead Bodies swimming to and fro: Fr.
Carquasse, quasi Caro cassa. Read Exodus 14.

V. 311. Chariot, from Carrus, whence Currus, Lat. for the same sort of
Carriage.

V. 312. Abject; Lat. abjectus, cast away, cast down, lost and dispirited.

V. 315. Of Hell resounded; Rang again: Resonner, Fr. from resonare, Lat. to
sound again, or to resound.

Ibid. Potentates; Rulers, Governors, from the Lat. Potentatus, a Chief
Magistrate, as Vossius tells us, used both by Caesar and Livy.

V. 316. The Flower of Heaven; Lately Heavens chief Inhabitants, from Flos, Lat.

V. 317. If such Astonishment can seize; If such Confusion, such a Dullness and
Stupidity as this can master Everlasting Beings: Saisir, Fr. to lay hands on,
to take hold of.

V. 319. After the Toil, etc. After the Fatigues and Labors of the Foughten
Field, to recover the decayed Strength.

Repose; Some will have from reponere, Lat. to rest; others from re and pausa,
of (...), to ease, to rest: Virtue, of Virtus, Lat. Courage, Gallantry,
Strength.

V. 323. To adore the Conqueror; To worship and pay Adoration to our
Adversary: Adorare, Lat. to worship. The manner of Adoration among the
Idol-Worshippers was, Manum Ori, Capite inclinato, admovere. So Job 31. 27. If
my Mouth did kiss my Hand. So Psalm. 11. 12. Kiss the Son; that is, worship him:
Thus Hosea 13. 2.

V. 324. Cherub and Seraph; Angels of all sorts and kinds. Seraph is the
singular of Seraphim, of which before.

V. 325. And Ensigns; With Arms and Colors thrown away, from Insigne, Lat. for
any thing remarkable.

V. 326. Discern the Advantage; See the Advantage they have got over us: Lat.
discerno, to judge of, to know well, of dis and cerno, to see.

V. 327. Descending; Falling or driving down directly on us: Descendens, Lat.
from descendere, to go down.

V. 328. Thus drooping; Fainting, and out of heart, or with Thunderbolts linked
together like Chain-shot.

V. 329. Transfix us, etc. Strike through and rivet us to the bottom of this
Flaming Whirlepool: Transfigo, Lat. to pierce through. This alludes to the Fate
of Ajax Oileus, (...). imitated by Virg. Illum expirantem transfixo pectore
flammas, Turbine corripuit, scopuloque infixit acuto, AEn. 1. Who pleases to
read the Devils Speech to his Damned Assembly in Tasso, Cant. 4. from Stanza 9.
Tartarei. Numi di seder piu degni, La soura il Sole, to Stanza 18, will find
our Author has seen him, though borrowed little of him.

V. 334. Rouse; Get up, a more Northern pronunciation of Rise, like the Dorick
Dialect.

V. 335. Evil Plight; The sad Condition, a Metaphor from Merchants plighting or
passing their Words the Commodities (often sold unseen) are in good case.

V. 337. Generals; Generalis, Lat. thence Commander in Chief.

V. 339. Amrams Son, was Moses by Jochebed, Exodus 6. 20. Numb. 26. 59.

Ibid. In Egypts evil, etc. When her obstinate King provoked God to plague both
him and the whole Land. It was so named of Egyptus the Son of Belus, one of its
most ancient Kings.

V. 340. A Pitchy Cloud; A Cloud of Locusts as black as Pitch; for the sacred
Text tells us, The Locusts covered the face of the Earth, so that the Land was
dark, Exodus 10. 14 and 15. as it follows, and darkened all the Land of Nile.
Locusta, Lat. for that devouring Insect.

V. 341. Warping; Working themselves forward, a Sea-Term: The East Wind wafted
'em over, Exodus 10. 13.

V. 342. That over the Realm of Impious Pharaoh; That like dark Night
overspread the Kingdom of Profane Pharaoh; this was not the particular Surname
of any King of Egypt, except him who bore it first, whose Virtue and Heroic
Actions made it Honorary to all his Successors, as that of Caesar and Augustus
was among the Romans, till the Egyptians in process of time altered it to
Ptolemy, in memory of Ptolomaeus Lagus, one of Alexander's Captains, who after
his death succeeded in the Sovereignty.

V. 343. The Land of Nile; Egypt Graphical described, by that famous and
wonderful River Nilus, to whose Annual Overflowings that Country owed its
extraordinary Fertility: Rich without Rain.

V. 344. Hovering; Flying about, taking many turns on the Wing without
alighting.

V. 345. Under the Cope of Hell; Under the Flaming Vault, the Fiery Canopy of
Hell: Cope, from It. Cappa, as la Cappa del Cielo, the Cope of Heaven, from
Caput, Lat. Head, as Heaven seems to be, to the under World. Others deduce it
from (...), a Canopy, such as is hung about Beds in hot Countries infested with
Flies, made of thin and small Measht Net to keep 'em out, from (...), a Gnat.
In Testudineo tibi Lentule Conopeio, Ju. Sat. 6. I prefer the former.

V. 346. Surrounding Fires; 'Twixt the Flames above, below, and on all sides
encompassing them. Nether; Underneath, from Ned, Dan, for under, surrounding
from the obsolete Fr. surronder, to encompass quite round, to enclose on all
sides.

V. 348. Of their great Sultan; The Title of the Turkish Emperors for their
Cruelty and Tyrannick Government, well enough applied to Satan, (...), Heb.
Dominion, of (...), to bear Rule over.

Ibid. To direct; To appoint, to give order and direction: Dirigo, Lat.

V. 349. In even Balance, etc. They light down all at once in exact order of
time and place. Bilanx, Lat. a pair of Scales, from Bis, Lat. two, and Lanx,
Lat. a Scale.

V. 350. On the firm Brimstone; On the burning Soil: Brimstone, from the Sax.
Brennestone, a hard stony Substance, apt to burn.

V. 351. A Multitude; A vast Company, a mighty Swarm: Multitudo, Lat.

Ibid. The Populous North. Northern Countries abound in People, as being more
Procreative than hotter Regions, and the Inhabitants of Northern Climates are
more vigorous and strong, than those that lie nearer the South and the Sun,
whose Heat enervates and emasculates its few and feeble Inhabitants: Populosus,
Lat. full of People.

V. 352. Poured never from her Frozen Loins; Never sent forth from her cold
Climates: Poured relates to the Similitude of the Deluge, by which he well
expresses the Inundation these Barbarous Nations made upon the Southern parts
of the World, when straightened for room they left their hungry Hives. The holy
Text expresses the Production of Mankind by the same word Loins, Thy Son which
shall come out of thy Loins, of Solomon, 2 Chronicles. 6. 9.

V. 353. Rhene; Rhenus, Lat. A vast River of Germany, and one of the greatest
in Europe, arising out of the Alps in Switzerland, and after a course of 800
Miles falling into the British Sea by the Briel, famous for having been for a
long time the Boundary of the Roman Empire. Alpinas, ah dura, Nives, and
Frigera Rheni,
Me sine S^la vides. Virg. Ecl. 10.


Ibid Danaw; Called by the Germans, Donaw; by the French, Daiuibe; by the
Italians, Da^^bio; by the Poles, Dunay; and by the Turks, Tuna; and by the
ancient Greek and Latin Historians and Poets, Danubius and Ister. Stat vetus
urbs ripae vicina Binominis Istri. Ov. l. 1. de Ponto.
Et conjurato descendem Dacus ab Istro. Geor. 11.


It is the greatest River in Europe, rising in the County of Bar in Suabia, and
after a course of 1500 Miles, (modestly computed) emptieth its self, and many
other Navigable Rivers, into the Euxine, or Black Sea, by three great Out-lets.
It was also for many Years the Boundary of the Roman Empire on that side
against the Barbarous Nations, the Legions having their Stations on its Banks.

Ibid. Her Barbarous Sons; When her cruel Offspring, as Virg. Quaeve hunc tam
barbara morem
Permittit Patria? AEn. 1.


Strangers were by the Grecians styled (...), not being understood; so St. Paul
uses the word 1 Cor. 14. 7. and Virg. Barbarus has Segetes, Ec. 1. But the
Greeks, proud of their extraordinary Language and Learning, esteemed and termed
all other Nations Barbarous. Suidas tells us, that Foreigners endcavouring to
learn the Athenian Idiom, spoke and pronounced it very roughly and untowardly,
and did often (when at a nonplus) repeat and chop upon Barbar, which gave
occasion to the naming them thereby. But these our Poet speaks of, are more
justly styled Barbarous, because they blotted out, and almost utterly defaced
all the Learning of the Civilized parts of the World, which their overran.
They were the Goths and Vandals, who first made an Irruption into Poland, then
into Italy, Spain, Africa, and possessed themselves also of some of the Southern
parts of France, Languedoc and Provence. The Goths, ancient Inhabitants of
Gothland in Sueden, removed most prosperously into Spain about the Year 400,
and continued Masters of it under 31 Kings of their own Nation, till overcome
by the Moors in the Year 716, whence our Poet says they spread, etc.

V. 355. Beneath Gibralter; A City and Mountain of Andalusia in Spain, seated
at the Moutl^ of the Mediterranean Sea, where it runs into the Atlantic Ocean:
The Name is corrupted from Gibel Tarick, in the Morisque Tongue, signifying the
Mountain of Tarick, a famous Leader of the Moors, who first Landed here, when
they Invaded Spain.

Ibid. To the Lybian Sands; To the Sandy Deserts of Africa. Lybia is generally
taken for Africa, and had its Name from Lybia the Daughter of Epaphus, or as
others, from Lybs the South Wind, to which it lies open and exposed. -- Lybiae
deserta peragro
Europa atque Asia pulsus. AEn. 1.


Properly speaking, Lybia is but a part of Africa, bounded by the
Mediterranean, Egypt, the Country of the Tripolitanians, and Ethiopia. Of its
Sandy Barrenness, Lucan. Lybicae, quod fertile, terrae est, --
Vergit in occasus, sed and haec, non fontibus ullis
Solvitur, Arctoos raris aquilonibus imbres Accipit, Lib. 9.


The Vandaels, or Vindelici, seized on this Country about the Year 428. a
People of Germany, Natives of Suevia, one of whose Kings, Gensericus, Invaded
Italy, sacked Rome, and gave the Plunder of it for 14 Days space to his
Soldiers; their Power continued in Spain and Africa for 146 Years.

V. 356. Squadron; Esquadron, Fr. Agmen quadratum, a Body of (Foot) Men drawn
into a Square, from Quadratus, Lat.

Ibid. Band; A Company, from Band, Fr. and Banda, Ital. for the same, all
perhaps from (...), as Suidas tells us, Gr. for an Ensign: An easy Metonymy,
the Flag for those that follow it.

V. 357. The Heads and Leaders; The one explains the other; Commanders are in
respect of the Military Bodies they Command, what the Head is to the Body
Natural. Thus in our Universities, the Master of a House or College is called
the Head.

V. 358. Godlike Shapes; Whose Size and Shapes were like the Gods: If Homer
gave his Hero the Title of (...), and Virg. AEneas be, Os, humerosque, Deo
similis, these Mighty Spirits that durst Rebel against The Almighty, may be well
allowed the same Epithet.

V. 359. Forms Excelling Human; In Shape and Beauty exceeding all Mankind:
Excellens, Lat. of Excellere, to surpass, to go beyond, to outdo: Humanus, Lat.
belonging to Mankind.

Ibid. Princely Dignities; Majestic Personages: Princeps, Lat. Dignitas, Lat.
Worthiness, Majesty and Powers, well applied in the Abstract to such Spiritual
Beings: Podesta is at this day in use for a Magistrate, as Juvenal long since,
Vis Fidenarum Gabiorumve esse Potestas; Thrones, Dominions, Principalities or
Powers, Colos. 1. 16.

V. 360. Erst; Formerly, lately, from Erist, first.

V. 361. In Heavenly Records; In the Registers and Rolls that are kept above in
Heaven. Records, from Lat. Recordari, to remember, Authentic and
Uncontrollable Testimonies in Writing, contained in Rolls of Parliament and
preserved in Courts of Record.

V. 362. Be no Memorial; Is no Remembrance: Lat. Memoriale: Rased, scraped out,
Fr. raser, to blot or scratch out: a Radere, Lat.

V. 364. The Sons of Eve; Among Mankind Eve took her Name of (...) to live,
because the Mother of Mankind, who from her derive their Being, Genesis 3. 20.

V. 371. To transform to the Image of a Brute; To change the Glory of the
Invisible God into the Image of a Beast, as Exodus 32. 1, 2, etc. Where the
Israelites forced Aaron to make them a Molten Calf, likening their Maker to the
Grazed Ox, as follows: Transformare, to turn into several shapes: Omnia
transformat sese in miracula rerum, Georg. 4. Imago, Lat. the likeness or
appearance of any thing represented, as if imitago ab imitatione. Brutus, Lat.
dull, heavy, void of Reason, as Beasts are.

V. 372. Adorned with Gay Religions full of Pomp, etc. Decked and set out with
Gaudy Rites and Shows, Solemn Processions and Copes wrought with Gold.
Adornatus, Lat. trimmed, set forth. Pompa, Lat. of (...), a fight, or glorious
show. Gay, fine, splendid, of (...), to be proud.

V. 375. Idols; (...), gross Material Representations of God, the Infinite and
Invisible Being.

Ibid. The Heathen World; Among the Gentiles, some fetch the word from (...),
Gr. for the same. Vossius, Heathen, Ger. Heyden, is from Heyde, a Country
place, where these Heathen used to observe their profane Rites, after their
Churches were dedicated to, and employed in the Service of the True God.

V. 379. On the bare Strand; On the barren Bank, or the fruitless Shore. Of
Strande Belg.

V. 380. Promiscuous Crowd; The common Crowd of ordinary Angels, like common
Soldiers. Promiscuus, Lat. mixed, mislead, common, confuted, confused.

Ibid. Aloof; At a distance, far off. All-off; at a good distance.

V. 382. Roaming to, etc. Wandering up and down the Earth. It seems derivative
from Room, as that from the Belg. Ruym, broad.

V. 384. Their Altars; Their places of offering Sacrifice: Altar, Lat. Quasi
alta ara, Erected above Ground, and raised, on which they sacrificed diis
superis, to the Heavenly Deities. Altar est, quod e terra erectum est: Ara
vero quae in terra statuitur.

V. 386. Jehovah, (...), The peculiar and most expressive Name of GOD,
describing him by Essence and Eternity, explained well by St. John, Revel. 1.
4. (...), see Exodus 3. 14. and Chap. 6. 3. and Isai. 42. 8. Its Root is (...)
to be, to exist. The Jews had this Name in so great Veneration, that, as often
as it occurred in reading the Mosaic Text, they pronounced (...). Adonai in
stead of it, thence called (...) the explained Name, and from the number of its
Letters (which the Greeks learned of 'em) the (...). The sacred Concealment of
this Name, was not unknown to the Heathens. Joh. Melala, Lib. 3. Cronic. tells
us, Orpheus made his Boasts, that he had heard from the Oracle the ineffable
Name of God, HERI KEPEO. The Cabalists among their Arithmetical Traditions,
have this Numeral of the Name Jehovah, (...). KEPEO, which they deduce thus,
etc. (...), that ^ gives 100. ^. behold 125. And so ^, which added to 125,
makes 161. Lastly, ^, which with 161, makes 186 by the Hebrew Numeral Letters
thus expressed, (...), to which prefixing the Note of Admiration (...), behold
186, is a Numeral Expression of that Sacred Name of GOD, (not to be pronounced
but once a Year by the High Priest, on the Day of Expiation) and the meaning of
the Oracles (...).

Ibid. Thundering out of Sion, as it is expressed Joel 3. 16. and Amos 1. 2. The
Lord shall roar from Sion, and utter his Voice from Jerusalem.

V. 387. Throned between the Cherubim; This relates to the Description of the
Oracle in Salomon's Temple, wherein the Ark was placed between the two Golden
Cherubims, 1 Kings 6. 23. 1 Kings 8. 6 and 7. See also the 2 Kings 19. 15. O
Lord God of Israel, which dwell between the Cherubims, Hezekiah's Prayer.

V. 388. Within his Sanctuary; Within his Holy Temple: Sanctuarium, Lat. of
Sanctus, Holy. The place in which the Ark of the Covenant resided in Salomon's
Temple was called Sanctum Sanctorum, the most Holy Mansion, into which the High
Priest entered but once a Year. Of the Idols attempting and possessing even
this Holy Temple, read 2 Kings 23. 4. and 2 Kings 21. 4 and 5.

Ibid. Their Shrines, Abominations; Their Temples and Worship, things
derestable and accursed. Shrine, from Escrin, Fr. as that from Scrinium, Lat. a
Repository, or place wherein Jewels and things of the greatest Value were laid
up. So Scrinium Sacrum, where Holy Relics are kept by their dull Adorers.
Demetrius the Silversmith is said to make Silver Shrines for Diana, (...),
little portable Silver Chapels, representing the Form of that famous Ephesian
Temple, with the Image of Diana enshrined: These Silver Shrines were not made
for, but of Diana, Act. 19. 24.

V. 389. Abominations; Accursed things, detestable, such as God abhors:
Abominatio, Lat. By this phrase the Holy Writ expresses Gods detestation of
Sin, all sorts of it being Abomination in his sight, as Levit. 18. 22, 23, 26,
27, 29, 30. and 1 Kings 11. 7. Solomon built an high place for Chemos, the
Abomination of Moab, etc.

V. 390. His Holy Rites profaned; Polluted and defiled his Sacred Ceremonies,
which in his Worship the Jews were appointed to observe. Ritus, Lat. Custom:
Profane, Lat. to unhallow. Of the most Solemn Feasts enjoined the People of
God, see Exodus 13. Verse. 14, 15 and 16. Levit. 23. 39. read Deuteronomy. 16.

V. 391. Affront his Light; And with their Deeds of Darkness durst oppose and
encounter his Holy Purity, the Delusion must have been very strange, and this
Darkness must have possessed the misty Minds of their Adorers, before they could
be prevailed upon to quit the Living GOD, (by so many miraculous Deliverances
manifested to 'em) a GOD of infinite Mercy, appeasable by the Sacrifice of a
Pigeon, for those Grim Idols to whom they were to give up their Children (their
own Bowels) to be burnt. Affronter, Fr. to encounter sawcily and impudently.

V. 392. First Moloch horrid King; Dreadful King. (...) Heb. King. Levit. 18.
21. 2 Kings 23. 10. Jer. 7. 31. 1 Kings 11. 5. he is called Milcom, and in the
1 Chronicles. 20. 2. Malcom, which our Translation reads of their King, which the
LXX render (...), took the Crown of Moloch (the Idol of the Conquered
Ammonites) from off his Head.

This Idol is by some thought the same with Saturn, to whom the Heathen
sacrificed their Children, worshipped chiefly by the Ammonites, and afterward
by the Idolatrous Jews, who in cursed Imitation of their cruel Neighbors
offered their Sons and Daughters to it; the Devil probably seducing and
enticing them by these horrid Sacrifices, to an Emulation of the Trial God was
pleased to make of Abraham's Faith and Obedience, in offering up his only Son
Isaac, Genesis 22. 2.

The Image of Moloch was of Brass, hollow within, with the Head of a Calf
Crowned; and being made red hot by an internal Fire, the Child was clapped into
his Arms, fixed in a posture to receive it; and to hinder hearing the horrid
Shreicks it gave, they made a horrible Din with Drums and Trumpets, etc. He who
thus sacrificed to Moloch, is by Hosea said to kiss the Calf, Chap. 5. 2. The
Sacrificers of Men kiss the Calf, that is, worshipped and adored him.

Ibid. Besmeared; Dawbed all over, from Be, in Composition signifying round, as
Beset, and smear of the Belg. smeeren, to dawb, to anoint, to pollute.

V. 394. Timbrels loud; Drums, Tabers, either of the Fr. Tambour, a Drum, as if
Tambrel, or from (...), Gr. for the same.

V. 395. That past through Fire; Although this be an Hebrew phrase expressive
of burning, yet all Parents, though zealous in this Idolatry, were not so
unnaturally impious as to offer up their Children Burnt-Sacrifices to Moloch,
when God himself was contented with Bullocks and Rams. Some of 'em satisfied
their Diabolical Zeal, by making 'em pass through the Fire, others between two
Fires, before this Grim Idol, which they were made by the Priests to believe to
be very conducive to the Prosperity and Long Life of their singed Offspring.
There were some remains of this Heathen Rite in St. Chrysostom's Days; Mothers,
even Christians, were wont to make their Children pass yearly over the Fire on
St. John's Day, which he reproves: Solennes ejus honores, (...) excitatas ait,
ipsumque diem Lampada, appellatum. In Homil. de Not. St. Joann. In this sense
Ahaz made his Son to go through the Fire, 2 Kings 16. 3.

V. 396. Grim Idol; Ugly, cruel: Grimm, Ger. Anger, which distorts the
Countenance, and disorders it; hence the Fr. Grimace, for an ugly or ridiculous
Face.

Ibid. Him the Ammonit^; The Ammonites were descended from Lot, by his youngest
Daughter, Genesis 19. 38. who called her Son (...), The Son of my People; (...)
signifying a Nation: The worshipping this detestable Deity Moloch, is called
The Abomination of the Children of Ammon, 1 Kings 11. 7.

V. 397. Worshipped in Rabba; A City beyond Jordan, belonging to the Ammonites,
and Capital of their Kingdom, besieged by Joab, and taken by David, before
whose Walls Uriah was slain, 2 Samuel Chap. 11. and 12. Her Plains are styled
Watery, from the many Springs and Brooks, that gave Rabba the Name of The City
of Waters, 2 Samuel 12. 27.

V. 398. Argob; Was a Country, part of the Dominion of Og King of Basan, Deuteronomy.
3. 3, and 4. Jair, Son of Manasseh, took this Country, to whose half Tribe it
was allotted for a Possession, Deuteronomy. 3. 13, and 14.

Ibid. Basan; Was all that Country, under the Command of Og the last King
thereof, lying beyond Jordan, from the River Arnon, to Mount Hermon, given in
Allotment to the Reubenites, Gadites, and the half Tribe of Manasseh, Deuteronomy. 3.
12, 13.

V. 399. Utmost Arnon; A River beyond Jordan, in the Country of the Ammonites,
being the farthest part Eastward possessed by the Children of Israel, therefore
called utmost, (outermost) as their Boundary on that side.

V. 400. Audacious Neighborhood: Nor was Moloch satisfied by being so bold a
Neighbor to the True God, as to invade the Land of Promise, and to be
worshipped in the borders of his Kingdom among the Idolatrous Ammonites, but he
seduced even Solomon himself to build him a Temple just over against God's Holy
Temple at Jerusalem, on that scandalous Hill, etc. Audax, Lat. bold, daring.

V. 401. Of Solomon; The Son of David by Bathsheba, 2 Samuel 12. 24. so named of
God by Nathan the Prophet, famous for his extraordinary Wisdom granted him by
God, 1 Kings 3. 12. and 1 Kings 4. 29. to the end.

V. 403. On that Opprobrious Hill; Where Moloch's Temple was erected in the
Valley of Minnom, South East of Jerusalem, by King Solomon, 1 Kings 11. 7. to
please and gratify his Idolatrous Wives: The Hill is deservedly called
Opprobrious, from the scandal which it gave not only to the People of God, but
to the Jealous God of his and their Fathers. Opprobriosus, Lat. repro chful.

V. 404. Valley of Hinnom; This is sometime called the Valley of Benhinnom,
(...), that is, the Vale of the Children of Hinnom, an usual Hebraism, Jer. 7.
31. in which the Grove of Moloch stood: Throughout the Sacred Text, wherever
Idolatry is either reproved, punished or abolished, mention is made of Groves,
2 Chronicles. 24. 18. They left the House of the Lord God of their Fathers, and
served Groves and Idols. So 2 Chronicles. 14. 3. the planting of Groves near God's
Altar was positively forbid, Deuteronomy. 16. 21. as being a part of the Gentile
Superstition. Ingens ara fuit, juxtaque veterrima Laurus,
Incumbens arae, atque umbra complexa Penates. AEn. 11.


Ibid. Tophet; (...) Heb. a Drum, the Name opprobriously, and by way of
detestation of the Grove where Moloch's Temple stood, because they made use of
many of those loud and noiseful Instruments to drown the dismal Outcries and
Groans which proceeded from those cruel Sacrifices, Jer. 7. 31, and 32.

V. 405. Black Gehenna called; Hell it self, from its dismal Flames. This
Valley of Hinnon some fetch from (...), to roar, to cry out, through excessive
torment: It lay South-East of Jerusalem,. Josh. 15. 8. where Tophet stood, 2
Kings 23. 10. From the Burnt sacrifices of Infants, and the horrid Groans and
Outcries of Human Holocausts, Hell, the Seat of Eternal Punishment and Penal
Fire was named Gehenna, read Isai. 30. 33. and our blessed Savior himself so
applies it, (...), Matthew. 18. 9. Type, the Image, the Resemblance, of (...),
Gr. the Form or Likeness.

V. 406. Chemos, the Idol of Moab, Jer. 47. 7, and 13. from (...), to hide,
(...), says Philo Judae. both importing a behavior fit to be concealed.
Origin, who searched the Hebrew Authors, confesses he could find no other
account of this Chemos and Peor, which are the same) but that it was Idolum
Turpitudinis. St. Hierom on the 9 Chapter of Hosea, likens it to Priapus, whose
Lascivious Deity was worshipped by shameful Prostitutions. And indeed, in Numb.
25. 1 Kings 15. 2 Chronicles. 15. 16. and in all other Texts of Holy Writ where
mention is made of this abominable Idol, his Worship is attended with, and
expressed by, all the Lustful and Wanton Enjoyments imaginable. Of the same
Opinion is our Milton, who therefore style^ Chemos the O^scene Dread of the
Moabi^es, and his Rites Wanton: 'But our Learned Seldom disagrees, and not
without sufficient Reason on his side, for Idolatry throughout the Old
Testament is every where exprost, by going a Whoring after strange Gods, and by
Lust and Abominations, as is sufficiently evident Ezekiel. 23. The Whoredoms,
which the Israelites committed with the Daughters of Moab, cannot be proved to
have been any part of the Idolatrous Rites performed in Worshipping this their
God, but rather the Allurements and Rewards these fair Idolatresses bestowed on
their Admirers, by which they ensnared them, to bow down before their senseless
Deities, and to provoke the Living God. Read Numb. 25.

Ibid. The Obscene Dread; The filthy Fear, the lustful Deity, the beastly
lascivious God of the Moabites. Dread, for Deity; Primus in orb deos fecit
timor; And Ovid speaking of Styx, so much reverenced of all that swore by it.
-- Stygii quoque conscia sunto
Numina torrentis, timor and deus ille deorum. Met. Lib. 3.


Obscaenus, Lat. unclean, unchaste, abominable. Moab, the Father of the
Moabites, was the Son of Lot by his eldest Daughter, Genesis 19. 37.

V. 407. From Aroar to Nebo; The first a City West of, the later a Hill East of
the Promised Land, whence Moses took his prospect of it, Deuteronomy. 34. 1.

V. 408. Of Southmost Abarim; Mountains of Moab bordering on the Desert
Southward, and therefore wild, a Wilderness, not far from Mount Nebo, Numb. 33.
47.

V. 409. In Hesebon and Horonaim, etc. Chief Cities of Seon King of the
Amorites, from whence he had driven out the Moabites, Numb. 21. 26. Jerem. 48.
3, 4, and 5.

V. 410. The Flowery Dale of Sibma; The Fruitful Vale: Dale, of the Dan. Dall,
the Germ. Thall, all of Vallis, Lat. which seems to spring of the Gr. (...), to
be green, to abound and flourish as Valleys do, that are generally more
fruitful than the Hills.

Sibma; A City in the Vale of Moab, famous for Vineyards: O Vine of Sibma, I
will weep for thee, Jerem. 48. 32.

V. 411. Eleale; Another City of the Moabites, rebuilt by the Reubenites, Numb.
32. 37.

Ibid. The Asphaltick Pool; The Lake Asphaltites, so named of (...), Bitumen,
there gathered in great quantities: It is a black, thick, Pitchy Consistence,
sometimes used in Lamps, of the Nature of Brimstone. This Pool is often in
Scripture called the Sea of the Plain, Deuteronomy. 3. 27. and the Sea of Sodom, of
its Neighborhood thereunto; also the Dead Sea, because no living Creature is
or can live there; or from its thickness, as being unmovable by the Wind. It
is 32 English Miles long, and 10 broad, and like the Caspian Sea, has no
Outlet. It lies to the Southward of the Deserts of Moab, and in it the famous
River Jordan loses it self. See Tacitus, Lib. 5. Page 618.

Ibid. Pool; Properly a standing Water, of the Belg. Poel, from Palus, Lat.
Stagnum as that perhaps of (...), Mud.

V. 412. PEOR his other Name, and more usual than Chemos, which seems to be
given this Idol by the Prophet Jeremiah, by way of disgrace, Chap. 48. 7, and
13. The Sacred Text often styles him (...), Baal-Peor, and the LXX (...), Lord
of Peor, a Mountain in the Territories of Moab, beyond Jordan, where he was
worshipped, even by the Israelites, enticed thereunto by the Beauty and
Embraces of the wanton Midianites. Read Numb. 25. 1, 2, and 3. where, by the
Peoples eating and bowing down, Moses means the Sacrifices and Feasts the
Heathens made to the Infernal Gods, for their dead Friends and Relatives, which
is evident; They joined themselves to Paal-Peor, and did eat the Offerings of
the dead, Psalm. 106. 28. (...)
(...). Apo^^in.


V. 413. In Sittim; The last encamping place, of the Israelites, under Moses,
in the P^ains of Moab, whence came the Wood of which the Ark was made, Numb.
33. 49.

Ibid. From Nile; From Egypt, of which this is often called the River. Nilus,
Lat. is a vast River in Africa, it had formerly seven Outlets, Septemplicis
Ostia Nili; now reduced to four, which run into the Mediterranean Sea; on it
the Fertility of Egypt depended. Gurgite septeno rapidus mare summovet ^mnis,
Terra suis contenta bonis, non indiga mercis
Aut Jovis, in solo tanta est fiducia Nilo. Luc. 8.


V. 415. His Lustful Orgies; His Lascivious and Wanton Feasts, he extended even
from Egypt, as far as Jerusalem. (...), the Feasts and Sacrifices of the
Drunken God Bacchus, celebrated every three Years, from (...), Gr. Anger,
because his Proselytes, clothed in Skins of Tigers and Panthers, danced about
expressing the Fury of this God, who is reported in the shape of a Lion, to
have torn the first Giant that assaulted Heaven in pieces. Others fetch the
word (...), from the Mountains, the Heathenish Sacrifices being usually made in
High Places. (...). Theoc. Idul. 27.
Nocturnique Orgia Bacchi Geo. 4. And
Ubi audito, stimulant Trieterica Baccho, Orgia. AEn. 4.


V. 416. Even to that Hill of Scandal: This Hill was East of the Temple at
Jerusalem, something higher than that Opprobrious Hill, where Moloch's
Idol-Edifice stood, termed Scandalous, for the same Reason that the other was
called Opprobrious: And at Verse 443. Th'Offensive Mountain, from Scandalum,
Lat. an Offense, or a cause of Offense; these were both built by Solomon, as
appears from 1 Kings 11. 7. And 2 Kings 23. 13. it is said to stand on the
Mountain of Corruption; in which Chapter there is a large account how the good
King Josiah, Son of Am^n by Jedidah, drove these daring Monsters from Jerusalem
to Hell.

V. 417. Homicide; Manslayer, Murderer of Mankind, of Homicida, Lat. from Homo,
a Man, and Caedes, Slaughter; a fit Epither for the Devil, the designing
Destroyer of all Mankind.

V. 420. Of old Euphrates, now Aferat, and by the Arabians called Frat, is one
of the most Celebrated Rivers in the World, springing from the Mountains of
Armenia Major, washing Mesopotamia on the West and South, and dividing it from
Syria and Arabia Deserta; hence by our Poet rightly styled The Bordering Flood:
It joins with the Tygris, and with it loses it self in the Persian Gulf. Well
may this River pass for old, since remembered so long ago in the History of the
Creation by Moses, Genesis 2. 14. compared with whom, these are Neotericks that
speak of him, as Virg. Caesar dum Magnus ad altum
Fulminat Euphratem Bello. Geor. 4. And Ovid,
Arsit and Euphrates Babylonicus. Met. 2.


Ibid. To the Brook that parts; Some Anonymous River, such as Fuller mentions
crossing the Desert of Shur, and calls a River of Egypt, near Rinocolaura,
entering the Mediterranean. See his Map of Symeon, Page 227.

V. 421. Egypt; AEgyptus, (so named of one of its ancient Kings) is by the
Turks its present Masters called Misir, retaining something of the Hebrew
Misraim: It is the most ancient and most fruitful Kingdom of Africa, the famous
Nile runs the whole length of it, and annually overflowing it in the Month of
June, extremely enricheth it.

Ibid. From Syrian Ground; From Syria, a vast Country in the greater Asia,
containing Phoenicia, Palestina and Syria properly so called.

V. 422. Of Baalim, (...), the Plur. of Baal: By this Idol whose Name
expresses Lord, the Sydonians, and many other Nations, worshipped the Sun, the
seeming Supreme Visible Lord of the Universe. Now Baalim is here put for the
other Luminous Stars in general, as is evident from 2 Chronicles. 30. 3. He reared
up Altars to Baalim, and made Groves, and worshipped all the Host of Heaven.
Hence Plato derives (...), God, from (...), to run, the Grecians as well as the
Phoenicians having worshipped for Gods the Sun, Moon and Stars, whose motions
are strange and unaccountable.

Ibid. Ashtaroth, (...), Plur. Hebrew for Herds, Flocks. Kimchi tells us, it
was the Name of certain Images in the shape of Sheep, which the Sydonians
adored as Goddesses: But doubtless the Holy Writ does by this word express the
Host of Heaven; Judge. 11. 13. Judge. 10. 6. They forsook the Lord, and served
Baal and Ashtaroth. Baalim was expressive of those more mighty and vigorous
Stars and Constellations that governed Men, as Ashtaroth signified the more
weak and Feminine, which influenced the She-Sex, as our Author well observes:
Male belonging to Men, from Mas, Lat.

V. 423. These Feminine; Belonging to Women: Foeminius, Lat.

V. 424. Can either Sex assume; Can take upon themselves which Sex they please:
Sexus, Lat. kind: Assumere, Lat. to take to, or upon ones self.

V. 425. Uncompounded; Simple, not mixed and made up of diverse and different
things: Incompositus, Lat.

V. 426. Not manacl'd; Not tied together with Joints and Ligatures of Nerves
and Sinews: Manacles, of the Fr. Manicles, from the Lat. Manicae: Irons fastened
about the Wrists of Malefactors, of Manus. -- For Spirits can make choice
Of which Sex likes 'em best, or both; so easy,
So clear and unmixt are these Heavenly Beings,
Not linkt to Limbs, or bound with Sinews up,
Or weakly underpropt with brittle Bones,
Like heavy Clods of Clay; but in what Forms
They please, larger or less, shining or sad;
Their Undertakings quickly bring to pass,
Showing themselves our Friends, or Enemies.


Non me latet* alium ex hisee verbis. sensum elici posse, nimi^^^ de succul is
and ^lg^nus Daemen. Q^^m a Poetae (...) puritate alienum judi^o and missum
facio.

V. 428. Like Cumbrous Fiesh; Heavy, uneasy, burdensome, that incumbers us
with many Pains and Diseases, of the Ger. Kummer, misfortune, loss; others
think better of (...), a diminutive of (...), the Burden of a Ship: But
Incumber, may be well enough fetched from Incumbere, to lie hard upon, to press
upon.

V. 429. Dilated or condensed; Enlarged or contracted, bigger or less, of
dilat^re, to spread out, to extend; and condensare, to thicken, to crowd
together, used commonly to express the thinness and lightness or the thickness,
and consequently the gravity of the Air.

V. 430. Aerie Purposes; Their quick Designs easily executed by such Aerie
Beings, of the Fr. Propos, as that of the Lat. Propositum, an aim; Execute,
perform, of Exequor, Lat. to bring to pass.

V. 433. The Race of Israel; The Offspring, the Children of Israel: Race,
corruptly of the Lat. Radix, a Root, the first of a Family, Tribe or People,
from whence Posterity springs and grows up.

V. 434. Unfrequented left; Forsook God's Holy Altars, left 'em unattended:
Infrequentatus, Lat. unresorted to, forsaken.

V. 435. To Bestial Gods; In the Forms of Brure Beasts: Bestialis, Lat.
belonging to a Beast. Bestia.

V. 437. Of despicable Foes; Of contemptible Enemies: Despicabilis, Lat. fit to
be despised and slighted. Read how many Kings the Israelites slew under the
Conduct of Joshua, and what mighty Nations they subdued, while they served the
living God, Josh. 12. and compare this Story with what is related Judge. 2. from
Verse the 11th to the end.

V. 438. Came Astoreth. (...), An Idol of the Phoenicians representing the
Moon, by the LXX named (...), 1 Kings 11. 5, and 33. styled the Queen of
Heaven, Jer. 7. 18. Jer. 8. 2. mention is made of a City called Astoreth, Josh.
12. 4. and 9. 10. 1 Chronicles. 6. 71. the Royal Seat of Og King of Basan, and Genesis
14. 5. and in other places, her Temple was (...), as it is translated 1 Samuel
31. 10. where the Philistines hung up the Armor of Saul as a Trophy to their
God, who, whether he borrowed his Name of this City, or the City its Name of
this Idol, is uncertain, though the first is most usual. It matters not, that
this Idol is in Holy Writ called the God of the Sidonians, and therefore not to
be understood of the Moon; for the Sacred Text no where concerns its self with
the Sexes of Idols, nor do the Mysteries of the Heathen Iniquities any where
distinguish 'em. The Romans had their Lunus and Luna: And Arnobi. contra
Gentes, Lib. 3. tells 'em they used to begin their Addresies to their false
Gods, Sive tu Deus Es, sive tu Dea. (...). Phil. Lib. de Isid. (...). Lucian.

Venus Syria, in whose Temple the Sidonian Dames performed those Wanton Rites,
to which the Influences of her Increases did so often incline them. Who desires
to heat his Head with more Quotations, and to fill it with more Uncertainties,
may consult the Learned Seldom, Syntag. 2. Cap. 2.

Ibid. Phoenicians; Inhabitants of Phoenicia, one of the three Provinces of
Syria, so called from Poenix, Son of Agenor, King of that Country, and Founder
of that Nation.

V. 439. With Crescent Horns, which increasing and decreasing she wears. Tertia
jam Lunae se cornua Lumine Complent, AEn. 3. Crescens, Lat. increasing, growing
greater. A Cressent is a Wexing Moon, the Turkish Arms; a Crescendo, for the
Omen sake, though now (God be praised) upon the Wain.

V. 441. Sydonian Virgins; Maids, Natives of Sydon, a famous City of Phoenicia,
not far from Tire, seated on the Mediterranean.

V. 443. On th'Offensive Mountain; The Mount of Olives, as many think, because
full of Idols, thence called, as before, Opprobricus, and the Hill of Scandal,
and the Mountain of Corruption, 2 Kings 23. 13. where it is observable, that
(...), Mons Corruptionis, differs from (...), Mons Olivarum seu Unctionis, by
one Letter only and the additional^, that there might remain an Intimation of
its true Name, not without a lasting Memorial of Reproach.

Offensive, of Offensio, Lat. for displeasure, fault.

V. 444. Uxorious King; Solomon, a King indeed so Uxotious, that his fair
Egyptians Wives took off all his Affections from his God; so mislead by Women,
that he had 700 Wives, Women of Quality, and 300 Concubines. Of his adoring
Asteroth the Goddess of the Sydonians, consult 1 Kings 2. Uxorious, of the Lat.
Uxorius, doting on, fond of a Wife. So Horat. calls the Tyber, (because fond
of Ilia) Uxorius amnis, Carm. Lib. 1. Od. 2.

Ibid. Whose Heart though large; Capacious, as to his Understanding, larger and
more enlightened than any of his Predecessors, or those that were to succeed
him, 1 Kings 3. 12. Largus, Lat. great, spacious.

V. 445. Idolatresses; By his Women that worshipped Idols: Idololatrix, Lat.
for such an one, of (...), Gr. for an Idol, and (...), Worship.

V. 446. Thammuz, (...) of (...) Death, or killing, Ezekiel. 8. 14. a Syrian Idol,
by some esteemed the same with Admis: He was the Favorite of Vanus slain by a
Wild Boar, and by the Adorers of this Goddess lamented in the Month of June.
(...), read the latter end of Metam. 10 Lib. Others affirm Thammuz to have been
a Priest, wrongfully put to death by a King of Babylon, who to make some amends
for his Injustice, appointed Anniversary Mournings for him.

V. 447. Whose Annual Wound; The Commemoration of whose Death, once every Year,
whose Death lamented every Year the Wound the Wild Boar gave him. Annuus, Lat.
yearly, done every Year. (...). And Ovid,
-- Repetitague mortis imago,
Aunna plangoris per aget simulamina nostri. Met. 10.


Lebanon allured, Libanus, the biggest Mountain in Syria, frequent in
Scripture, and famous for Cedars, from the Confines of Arabia and Damascus,
where it takes its beginning: It stretches 125 Miles to the Mediterranean,
where it ends near Tripoli. Allured, enticed, persuaded the Syrian Maids, from
ad and Ludere, to cheat into, allicere.

V. 448. Damsels; The young Syrian Ladies, of the Fr. Damoiselle, a word
signifying a young Woman of Quality.

Ibid. To lament his Fate; To bemoan his untimely Death. Lamentor, Lat. to
bewail: Fatum, Lat. Death.

V. 449. In Amorous Ditties; In Love-Songs made of Venus and Adonis: Amoreux,
Fr. loving: Ditty, quasi dictum, Songs composed and indicted.

V. 450. Smooth Adonis; As unwrinckled in his Flood, as in his youthful Face.
Adonis is the Name of a River arising out of a Rocky part of Mount Libanus,
which runs bloody the Day his Death is commemorated on, as Lucian tells us:
Hence this Rock is named Native, from Nativus, Lat. born.

Adonis, is deducible from (...), Lord, (...), Hesych, the Son of Cinyra King
of Cyprus, by his Daughter Myrrha: He was the Favorite of Venus, and to her
grief killed by a Wild Boar. Meta. Lib. 10.

V. 451. Ran Purple; Of a dark Dye, as stained with the Blood of Thammuz yearly
slain. Purpura, Lat. as (...), Gr. for that Color.

V. 453. Infected Sions, etc. The Love-Story the Jewish Ladies to like pity
moved. Infected, of Inficio, Lat. to corrupt, to stain.

V. 454. Whose Wanton Passions; Whose loose behavior in the holy Porch of the
Temple etc. Ezekiel. 8. is to be read: Sacer, Lat. holy: Porticus, Lat. for a
place raised on Pillars, and covered over head, fit to walk under, free from
the Sun or Shower.

V. 455. When by the Vision led; The two usual ways by which God made known his
Will to his People under the Dispensation of the Old Law, were Visions and
Dreams, Numb. 12. 6. Visio, Lat. for an appearance, a show. This Vision our
Author mentions is recorded Ezekiel. 8. and at the third Verse, The Spirit lift me
up between the Earth and the Heaven, and brought me to Jerusalem, (...), in the
Visions of God.

V. 456. Survay'd; Marked, heedfully beheld, from the old Fr. Surveoir, quasi
supervidere.

V. 457. Of Alienated Judah; Departed from serving the Living God, to worship
Stocks and Stones. To alien or alienate, is a Law-Term, for transferring the
Property of an Estate to one who had before no Right to it; from alienus, Lat.
a Stranger, well applied, to show how God's Children and Inheritance had
alienated and made themselves over to Sin and Satan. Judah was the fourth Son
of Jacob by Leah, from whom the Jews were called Judaei, and the Land of
Promise Judea, Jer. 29. 35.

V. 459. Maimed his Brute Image; Lamed his senseless Image: Maim, from whence
this word, is of Mancus, Lat. Lame, defective in one Member or other.

Ibid. Head and Hands lopt off; A Metaphor taken from lopping and cutting of
the Branches of Trees, with which in a Man (according to the Comparison of a
Tree reverst) the Hands and Feet seem to correspond. Read 1 Samuel 5. 2, 3, 4,
and 5.

V. 460. On the Grundsel-Edge; On the Foot-post of his Temple-Gate, from the
Sax. Ground, the Earth next which it generally lies.

V. 462. Dagon his Name, Sea Monster, (...), is thought to have been half a
Fish and half a Man, a Monster like a Triton, but with the Head of a Fish:
Idolum Dagon, quod Colebatur a Philistaeis, habebat caput piscis; Ideo vocatur
Dagon, quia Hebraeum (...) significat piscem, Lyran. But (...) signifies Corn,
and he was called Oannes and (...), as the Learned Seldom tells us. The
clearest account we have of this Idol, is from Helladius, who relates, that a
Man clothed in a Fishes Skin, first taught the Syrians the manner of Tilling
the Ground and Sowing of Corn, for which he obtained a Temple and Divine
Honors, worshipped in the form of an Image, upward a Man, covered over with
Ears of Corn, and downward a Fish, because of his Habit, and his retiring every
Night toward the Red Sea; a Mysterious involving (perhaps) of the share that
moisture has in all the Productions and Fruits of the Earth. Mention is made of
this monstrous Idol, Judge. 16. 23. 1 Chronicles. 10. 10. 1 Maccab. 10. 84. Ibid. 11.
4.

V. 464. Azotus; Ashdod, once a principal City of the Philistines, now a Village
by the Turks, named Alzete. Of this, and the other four that follow, read 1 Samuel 6. 17.

V. 465. Gath, another of the five Regal Cities of the Philistines, famous for
its Champion Goliath, 1 Samuel 16. 4.

Ibid. Ascalon; Scalona, a City in the Holy Land on the Mediterranean Sea,
between Azo^us and Gaza, one of the five chief Cities.

V. 466. Accaron, or Ecron, heretofore a famous City of the Philistines, now a
poor Village.

Ibid. Gaza's, once a beautiful and rich City of Palestine, taken by the Tribe
of Judah, Judge. 1. 18. It was the fifth Ruling City of the Philistines, seated
near the Shore of the Mediterranean, on the Confines of Idumea, toward Egypt,
and therefore called Frontier Bounds, the Borders, the Confines of a Country,
of the Fr. Frontiere, as this of the Lat. Frons, the Forehead.

V. 467. Rimmon; (...), in the Sacred Language signifies a Pomegranate, and is
mentioned 2 Kings 5. 18. as the chief God of Damascus, holding this Fruit in
his Hand, thence esteemed the Protector of the People, who had it, either in
their Orchards, or their Arms, by some supposed Jupiter Cassius, represented
with a Pomegranate in his Hand, worshipped on the Confines of Mount Cassius,
near to Damascus. The Learned Seldom thinks it more reasonable to derive the
Name of this Idol of (...), high and exalted, because he finds in Hesychius
(...) to signify (...) and (...); The Dissonancy between Raman and Rimmon
after so many Ages, not being worth taking notice of.

V. 468. Fair Damascus; The principal and most ancient City of Syria, seated in
a Plain, surrounded with Hills, uncertain when or by whom built, but because
mentioned by Abraham, Genesis 15. 2. The Steward of my House is this Eliezer of
Damascus, Fame will have it built by Abraham's Servants.

Ibid. Fertile; Fruitful: Fertilis, Lat. increasing, abounding in Fruit, Corn,
etc.

V. 469. Albana and Pharphar; Two Rivers of Damascus, 2 Kings 5. 12. Lucid,
clear, of Lucidus, Lat. bright.

V. 471. A Leper once he lost; Naaman the Syrian, 2 Kings 5. 14. Leper, of
(...), the Leprosy, of (...), Gr. rough, full of Scabs and Asperities like
Scales of Fish: Of this Disease, and the care God himself took of it, see
Levit. 13. and 14 Chapters.

V. 472. Ahaz his sottish Conqueror; His dull, his foolish Conqueror, to fall
down and worship Gods he had vanquished, as it follows. Read the Story 2 Kings
16. 10.

V. 473. Gods Altar to disparage; To slight and contemn: To disparage, is
properly to undervalue a Person or Thing, by a Comparison mean and
disproportionate, from the Detractive Particle Dis, and Pareggio, Ital.
Comparison.

V. 474. Of Syrian Mode; For one of Syrian Shape: Modus, Lat. for manner, or
make.

V. 475. His Odious Off rings; His abominable Sacrifices, and Idol-Offerings
detestable. Odiosus, Lat. hateful.

V. 476. Vanquished; Overcome: Vaincu, Fr. of Vinco, Lat. to conquer.

V. 477. A Crew; A Company, a Gang, used generally for an Assembly of the
meanest sort, of the Fr. creu, or accreu, increased.

Ibid. Of Old Renown; Of Ancient ^ame: Renomee, Fr. Reputation.

V. 478. Osiris, was the Name of an Idol, by which the Ancient Egyptians adored
the Sun, whose Approaches and Recesses gave the Occasions of excessive Grief
and Joy at his (...) and (...). Exclamare libet, Populus quod clamat Osiri
Invento. Juv. Sat. 8.


Hermes Trismeg. says, he was (...), the Guide and Conductor of the
Undertaking, Strength and Power of the People; to which alludes what the
Israelites pronounced of their Molten Calf, These are thy Gods, O Israel, which
brought thee out of the Land of Egypt, Exodus 32. 4. This, and the Golden
Calves, at Dan and Bethel, were Imitations of this Idol, which was (...), a
Golden Bull. -- Atque suum Proles miratur Osirim
Barbara Memphitim, plangere docta bovem. Tib. Eleg. 7.


Hence Moses had the Reason, for the Necessity of the Peoples going into the
Wilderness, to sacrifice to the Lord their God: Can we sacrifice the
Abomination of the Egyptians before their Eyes, and they not stone us? Exodus 8.
26. Shall we venture to sacrifice on our Altars Oxen, the Gods the Egyptians
place and adore on their own?

Others are of Opinion, that by Osiris, Nilus was meant and worshipped: And
considering the Annual Advantages both of Health and Fertility, of which to
them he appeared the immediate Author, he might well be accounted the Egyptian
Neptune. The same Figure of a Bull is consistent enough with the Representation
of a River, the Poets describing them with Horns, to denote the Fury and
Impetuosity of their Overflowings, or the Noise of their many Waters. So the
Grecians style all great Rivers (...); and Achelous, the most famous River of
Greece, is Fabled to have encountered Hercules in the shape of a Bull: Et Gemina
Auratus Taurino Cornua vultu
Eridanus. Georg. 4.
Et sic Tauriformis volvitur Aufidus
Cum saevit, horrendamque cultis
Diluviem Meditatur agris. Hor. Car. Lib. 4. Od. 14.


(...) used by the Prophets for Nilus, Isai. 23. 3. and Jerem. 2. 18. signifies
Black, the color of the Sand and Soil, with which this River cultivates that
Country: Et viridem AEgyptum nigra foecundat arena, Virg. Geo. 4. From this
(...) they fetch (...), and Hesych. tells us, (...). Siris was the Name both of
the Sun and the Dog Star, about the time of whose rising, Nile annually arose
above his Banks, floating the Country into a strange Fertility.

A third Opinion of this Egyptian Idol is, That Osiris was one of their best
and most ancient Kings, who appointed Inquirers into the Lives of his deceased
Subjects, according to whose Verdict, the Virtuous were Interred in beautiful
Gardens and Flowery Meads, but the Vicious were exposed naked, and thrown out
into loathsome places, a Prey to ravenous Birds and wild Beasts: His Good
Government and Laws obtained him Divine Honors, and he was represented by a
Statue clothed in Linen. Et tectum lino spargam per Vulgus Osirim. Luc. Lib.
9.
Et quem tu Plangens, hominem testaris, Osirim. Luc. Lib. 8.


In his Temple at Memphis a Bushel was set over his Head, which made some
mistake him for Joseph, much his Junior, though perhaps placed there, in Honor
of him, and in Memory of that fatal seven Years Famine by him foreseen and
supported.

Ibid. Isis, was the fabulous Io, Daughter of Inachus, one of Jupiter's
Mistresses, turned by him into a Cow, to avoid the discovery of his Jealous
Juno, Meta. Lib. 1. After many Wanderings, she came into Egypt, and was there
worshipped in the shape of a white Cow, one of that kind and color being
always kept in a corner of her Temple, at whose Death extraordinary
Lamentations were made, till another was found exactly so marked. By Osiris the
Egyptians worshipped the Sun, the visible glorious God of the Universe, (as
they supposed; and by Isis they adored his Queen the Moon: The Rabbis make it
a Descendant of (...), Heb. for a Wife; from hence the Israelites took the
Idolatrous Imitation of the Golden Calves. Nos in templa, tuam Romana accepimus
Isim. Luc. Lib. 8.

Ibid. Orus; There were two Kings of this Name that Reigned in Egypt before the
Departure of the Israelites from thence, the first of which was probably
Deified, for Orus was one of their Idols, by which they worshipped their
shining God the Sun of (...), Light, to shine, to be bright: (...). Herod. in
Euterp.

Ibid. And their Train; Their Company, and the rest of their Crew, of the Fr.
Train, properly expressing the attendance of Servants, following Persons of
Quality, from Trahere, Lat. to draw after.

V. 479. With Monstrous Shapes and Sorceries; With misshapen dreadful Deities
and Witchcrafts. See Sands's Travels, Page 133. where he gives you the Cuts of
several with Dogs and Cats Heads, that their Adorers might very well seem to be
bewitched. Omnigenumque Deum monstra, and latrator Anubis. AEn. 8.
Semideosque Canes, and sistra Jubentia luctus. Luc. 8.
-- Qualia demens
AEgyptus portenta colat? Crocodilon adorat
Pars haec, illa pavet saturam Serpentibus Ibim.
Effigies sacri nitet aurea Cercopitheei. Juv. Sat. 15.


Monstrous: Lat. Monstrosus, strange, of unnatural Birth and Shape. Sorceries,
Witchcraft, of Sorciere, Fr. a Witch: Sortiarius, Lat. one that pretends to
tell Fortunes by casting of Lots; sorts.

V. 480. Fanatic Egypt; Furious, Frantic, Fantastic Egypt, full of foolish
Rites and Religions. The Priests among the Heathen were styled Fanatici,
Quoniam in fanis, i. e. Templis Sacra Curabant; thence the word was used for a
Madman, because these Priests seemed to rave, and be possessed when they
pronounced their Lying Oracles. -- Subito non Vultus, non Color unus,
Non Comptae mansere Comae; Majorque videri,
Nec Mortale sonans: Afflata cst numine quando
I am propriore Dei. And a little after;
At Phoebi nondum patiens, immanis in antro
Bacchatur vates, Magnum si pectore possit
Excussisse Deum: Tanto Magis iile fatigat
Os rabidum, fera corda domans, fingitque premendo. AEn. 6.


Fanaticus, Lat. a Mad Frantic Votary, from (...), to shine, a misguided
Zelot, led out of the right way by the Light within him. -- Crine senex
Phanaticus albo
Sacrorum Antistes. Juv. Sat. 2.
-- Sed ut Phanaticus oestro
Percussus Bellona tuo. ^d. Sat. 4.


V. 481. Their wandering Gods, etc. The Poets tell us, when the Giants attempted
Heaven, and upon Mountains piled one above another attacked the Gods, they were
most of 'em so terribly affrighted at the very sight of the Monstrous Briareus,
Egeon and Typhon, etc. that in a shameful manner they deserted, and ran down
right away by the Mountain Atlas into Egypt, where they transformed and hid
themselves under the base sordid shapes of Beasts, and Birds, and Herbs, while
Jupiter, Apollo, Bacchus, and the rest that stood to it, laid about 'em with
their Thunderbolts, and at last cleared the Sky of these bold Invaders: Hence
the Egyptians worshipped those mean Animals, under whose assumed shapes the
Gods were supposed to have disguised themselves, in so much that they held even
their Onyons Sacred, imagining some Dastard Deity might still lie stinking
there for fear. Porrum and Coepe, nefas violare and frangere morsi^
O Sanctas Gentes, quibus hac nascuntur in ^ort is
Numina. Juv. Sat. 15.


Others relate, That those who stayed behind, when Pharaoh and his Host
perished in pursuit of the Israelites in the Red Sea, Deified and made Gods of
whatsoever they were employed in at that time, owning their Deliverance and
Safety to some Fatality in their Occupation, which detained 'em: Thus the Cooks
Consecrated their Onyons, from which they abstained, on another score, though
the Multitude were not Masters of the Mystery, Garlic and Onyons being very
hurtful to the Eyes in those hot Climates, and therefore forbid by their
Priests, who were in those Days also their Physicians.

Ibid. Disguised; Changed into other Shapes, transformed to Brutes: Disguiser,
Fr. to put on a disguise, to alter ones Clothes or Meine so, as not to seem the
same, or to be known. Et se mentitis superos celasse Figuris
Duxque gregis, dixit, fit Jupiter; unde recurvis
Nunc quoque formatus Libys est cum Cornibus Ammon.
Delius in Corvo, proles Semeleia Capro,
Feel soror Phoebi, nivea Saturnia Vacca
Pisce venus latuit, Cyllenius Ibidis alis. Meta. Lib. 5.


V. 483. The Infection; The Poison, the Pollution of this gross Brutal Idolatry,
in worshipping Beasts, or Idols of Beastial Form: Infectio, Lat. for Poison.

Ibid. Borrowed Gold; For so it was, of the Egyptians, by the Israelites at
their departure, Exodus 11. 2. and 12. 35. Of which borrowed Gold the Molten Calf
was made, see Exodus 32. 2, 3, and 4. Composed, made, of Componere, Compositus,
Lat. put together.

V. 484. The Rebel King; Jeroboam, made and chosen King by the Israelites, who
Rebelled against Rehoboam, 1 Kings 12. Rebellis, Lat. for one that throws off,
and resists the Power and Lawful Authority of his Prince.

V. 485. Doubled that Sin; Of making and worshipping the Molten Calf, by making
two Golden Calves, therefore said to double the Offense, 1 Kings 12. 28, and 29.

Ibid. In Bethel and in Dan; These were the two Boundary Cities of the Ten
Tribes which revolted to Jeroboam, where he placed the two Golden Calves, lest
the People going up yearly to worship at Jerusalem, might by their ancient
Religion be put in mind of their former Loyalty, 1 Kings 12. 27.

V. 486. To the Grazed Ox; A mean Representation of the Almighty, whose Name
was held so sacred, that they durst not pronounce the Ineffable JEHOVAH. See
Psalm. 106. 20.

V. 487. When he past from Egypt marching; For God not only brought his People
out with a mighty Hand, and out-stretch'd Arm, but went before them by Day in a
Pillar of a Cloud, to direct the way, and by Night in a Pillar of Fire, to give
them Light, Exodus 13. 21, and 22.

V. 488. Equaled with one Stroke; Made no difference between her bleating Gods
and their dull Adorers, but the same Night, with one Stroke, killed the
Firstborn both of Man and Beast, Exodus 12. 29. which he calls their Bleating
Gods, because worshipped in Brutish shapes. Mutton was Reverenced there, not
Roasted. -- Lanatis animalibus abstinct omnis
Mensa, nefas illic foetum jugulare capellae. Juv. Sat. XV.


V. 490. Belial; (...) Vice, Wickedness, (...) as being without a Yoke, (...),
Men, Sons of Belial, Deuteronomy. XIII. 13. who have broke through all the Restraints
of Virtue and Religion, and thrown off God and all Goodness, therefore called
in Scripture the Sons of Disobedience; and thence by some interpreted (...),
fit for nothing, of no profit, and fit for no purpose.

V. 494. When the Priest turns Atheist; When he who is separated and set apart
for the Service of God, does not believe there is one; or does not Worship him
as he ought. Priest of (...), Gr. Senior; a Name not so much of Age, as
Dignity, as Senator among the Romans. (...), of the Privative (...), and (...),
God.

V. 495. As did Ely's Sons; Ely was the High Priest, of the Tribe of Levi; of
the Iniquity of whose Sons, read 1 Samuel II, from the 12. to the 18.

V. 495. In Courts and Palaces; A Redundancy frequent with the Poets, Palatium
Lat. for a Prince's Court.

V. 498. Luxurious Cities; Great Cities, abounding in all Excess of Pomp and
Pleasure: Luxuriosus, Lat. riotous.

V. 499. Of Riot ascends; Where the Noise of Roaring, Singing and Carousing
rises above their Highest Towers, ascending up to Heaven. Riot, in the most
usual acceptance, and as here understood, signifies, the Excess of Luxury and
Lasciviousness, which often occasion and end in those Riots; which the Law
interprets, a forcible doing of an Unlawful Action, by 3 or more in Company
together; as if from Arietare, to run at one another like Rams: Ascendere, Lat.
to Rise up.

V. 500. And Injury and Outrage; And Force and Violence to Excess: Injuria,
Lat. Wrong, Harm, Damage, Outrage, of the Ital. Oltraggio, Expressive of
Immeasurable Fury and Violent Rage, of the Lat. Ultra, beyond, surpassing all
the Bounds of Just and Equal.

V. 502. Flown with Insolence and Wine; Puffed up with Drink and Pride, raised
and heightened above the ordinary Pitch of Pride and Debauchery; a Metaphor
taken from Birds of a rank Wing, that fly High, for Hearts swollen with Pride,
and Heads heated with Wine, quickly fly out into Extravagancies, above the
reach of Reason: Insolentia, Lat. Haughtiness and Arrorogancy; Vinum, Lat Wine.

V. 503. Witness the Streets of Sodom; A City early mentioned by Moses, Genesis
XIII. 10. Seated in the Plains of Jordan, where Lot dwelt, Destroyed by Fire
and Brimstone: Read Genesis XIX. 13.

V. 504. In Gibeah; A City of Benjamin: Read this Story, Jud. XIX. from the
13th to the 26th.

Ibid. The hospitable Door; The hospitable House of the Good Man, who
entertained the Levite in Gibeah, Jud. XIX. 19. Hospitalis, Lat. belonging to
Hospitality, of Hospes, a Guest.

V. 505. Exposed a Matron; Gave up to Lust and Rage, a Woman, a Wife; Matrona,
Lat. as if Matter Nati, and Married Women, were so styled before they had
Children: Exposed, Lat. Exponere, to set out to Public View, to deliver into
the Power of.

Ibid. To avoid worse Rape; To prevent a worse Sin and Shame, Namely, that
Unnatural Sin of Sodomy: Rape, of Raptus, Lat. for a Ravishing and Deflowering
a Woman by Violence.

V. 506. These were the Prime; The First, the Chief, the most considerable for
Rank and Power: Primus, Lat. First: Order of Ordo, Lat. for Condition and
Degree; Ordo amplissimus, the Senate of Rome, Cic.

V. 508. The Ionian Gods, of Javan's Issue; Javan was the fourth Son of Japhet,
the Son of Noah, Genesis X. 2. This Javan and his Offspring, Peopled that part of
Greece as Josephus tells us, called from him Ionia: whence the Jones, a
considerable People, sprang, Joseph. lib. 1. 8. Issue; Offspring, Posterity; of
the Ital. Uscita, from Uscire, as this of Exire, to go out of, to proceed, as
Children do, out of the Loins of their Parents.

V. 509. Later than Heaven and Earth, their boasted Parents; So Orpheus in his
Hymn to Saturn styles him, (...), the Offspring of the Earth, and the Starry
Heaven: And the same Poet, (...): And Homer in his Hymn to the Earth, (...),
Hail, Mother of the Gods, and Wife of the bright Starry Heaven: See Hesiod.
(...). Virg. tells us, the Bees nursed Jupiter in Crete: Dictaeo Coeli Regem
pavere sub antro, Geor. IV. Ovid, that a Goat suckled him: -- Sidus Pluviale
capellae
Quae fuit in cunis Officiosa Jovis. Fast. lib. II.


And Epiphan. affirms, they showed his Tomb in a Mountain of Crete: To which
Callimach^^ alludes, (...)
(...).


V. 510. Titan Heaven's firstborn; Titan and Saturn, were Sons of (Coeli and
Vestae) of Heaven and Earth: The Elder, at the entreaty of his Mother, yielded
his Birthright in the Kingdom, to Saturn, who obliged himself to destroy all
his Male Children, that the Empire might after him revert to Titan and his
Descendants; but contrary to this Contract, Rhea Wife to Saturn concealed
Jupiter, and bred him up in Crete: Upon the Discovery of which, War arose
between Titan and Saturn, in which the first was Victorious; but Jupiter coming
to his Father's Assistance, recovered all, and re-instared him in his Kingdom,
out of which he drove him not long after, provoked by his Father's designing
against his Life, who had been forewarned by an Oracle, that one of his Sons
should deprive him of his Kingdom. (...). Orph. in Him.

V. 511. Enormous Brood; with his vast, monstrous Offspring, Enormis, Lat. for
Irregular; beyond the ordinary Shape and Size, Terra feros partus, immania
monstra, Gigantes
Edidit, ausuros in Jovis ire domum. Ovi. Fast. lib. 5.


V. 512. By younger Saturn; in respect of Titan, Heavens Firstborn, for Saturn
was one of the most Ancient of the Gods, in whose time the Poets date the
Golden Age. Aurea Prima sata est aetas, etc.
Postquam Saturno tenebrosa in tartara misso,
Sub Jove mundus erat; subiit Argentea Process. Met. 1.
(...)
(...)
(...).


Ibid. Jove; Jovis, a diminutive of Jupiter, from Jovah, an Abbreviation of
Jehovah, the most Sacred Name of God: Jupiter was the Son of Saturn and Rhea.

V. 513. Rhea's Son; Rhea was the Daughter of Heaven and Earth, and Wife to
Saturn (...). Epig. Graec.

Orpheus in his Hymns, has a remarkable Verse of her: (...)
(...).


V. 514. Usurping; Encroaching on his Father's Authority, taking his Power and
Scepter out of his Hand; of the Lat. Usurpare, to invade another Right, or
Property.

Ibid. In Crete; one of the largest Islands in the Mediterranean Sea, now
Candia, lying opposite to the Mouth of the Archipelago, from East to West in
Length 150 Miles, in Breadth 60, in Compass about 540. It took its Name from
Creta, the Daughter of one of its Kings; It was called by Homer, (...), as
having had formerly 100 famous Cities: In which Virg. imitates him. Creta Jovis
magni medio jacet insula Ponto,
Mons Idaeus ubi, and gentis Cunabila nostrae,
Centum urbes habitant magnas. AEn. 3.
See Strab. lib. 10. and Diodor. Sicul. lib. 6. c. 12.


V. 515. And Ida; a famous Mountain in Crete, in a Cave adjoining to which, the
Fables tell us, Jove was Nursed. (...). Callim. Him. in Jovem.

From this he was Named Idaeus: Idaeumque Jovem, Phrigiamque ex Ordine Matrem.
AEn. 7.

V. 516. Of Cold Olympus; Several Mountains were Renowned by this Name, the
Chief of which, is that of Thessaly, where it Borders on Macedonia, so high it
exceeds the Clouds, by the Poets used for Heaven, from its height, termed Cold
and Snowy, and the Gods dwelling there, are said to rule the Middle Air: From
this Mountain Jupiter was called (...). and Heaven (...), its Name is derivable
quasi (...), because never covered and obscured by the Clouds or, (...), the
Cold being so extreme, or rather the dazzling, unshaded Light, that it took away
the Eyesight: Virgil styles the same Jupiter, Superi Regnator Olympi. AEn. 2.

V. 517. The Delphian Cliff; Was a Rock on which the Oraculous Temple of
Apollo, thence called Delphius, was seated, in Delphos, anciently a very great
City of Phoeis in Achaia, at the Foot of Mount Parnassus, never Walled, but by
the steep Rocks that surrounded it, thence styled the Delphian Cliff; or rather
Clift of our English word Cleave, a Clift being properly a ragged Rock, broken
and rising in Points and sharp Eminencies.

V. 518. Or in Dodona; a famous Wood in Chaonia, the Western Part of Epirus,
dedicated to Jupiter, full of Oaks (Trees Sacred to him) consulted and
celebrated for Oracles, hence called, Quercus fatidicae. -- habitae Graiis
oracula quercus, Geor. 2. (...),
(...).
Cum jam glandes atque arbuta sacrae
Deficerent Sylvae, and victum Dodona negaret. Geor. 1.


Two Doves that used to haunt this Wood, and generally sat upon these
Oraculous Oaks, flying away, the one to Delphos, the other to the Temple of
Jupiter Ammon in Lybia, transferred the Spirit of Prediction to those places,
and silenced this Wood, which for a long time was well stored with groaning
Boards.

V. 519. Of Doric Land; Of Greece, a part for the whole: Doris or Doria, was
that Country in Achaia, where the Doric Dialect was Spoken.

Ibid. Saturn Old; Of whom before, well might he be Old and so called, of whom
Sibylla Erithr. (...)

His Greek Name (...), signifying Time, denotes his Antiquity; and Saturnus his
Lat. Appellation, Quod saturetur annis, See Cicer. de Not. Deor. lib. 2. where
he gives the Physical account of what is involved in these Fables.

V. 520. Fled over Adria; Saturn driven out of his Kingdom by his Son, passed
over the Adriatic Sea into Italy, and being well received of Janus, one of the
first Rulers that civilized Men into Cities and Societies, they agreed and
governed so well, that the Golden Age was dated in their days. Primus, ab
AEthereo, venit Saturnus Olympo,
Arma Jovis fugiens and regnis Exul ademptis. AEn. 8.


Adria; The Adriatic Sea, now the Gulf of Venice: Italy is washed by two Seas,
the Adrian on the North, called the Upper Sea, and the Tyrrhen on the South,
the Lower Sea. Omnem Hesperiam --
Et mare quod supra, teneant, quodque alluit infra. AEn. 8.
-- Improbo, Iracundior Adria. Hor. Od. 9. 1. 3.
Et fretis acrior Adriae, Curvantis calabros sinus. Lib. 1 Od. 33.


Ibid. To the Hesperian Fields; Into Italy and Spain, for Hesperia is common to
them both, of (...), the Evening Star; intimating their VVestern Situation. Est
Locus, Hesperiam Graii cognomine dicunt, etc. --
-- Nunc fama minores
Italiam dixisse. AEn. 1.


V. 521. 'Ore the Celtic; That Part of France, which, according to the Roman
division, was called Celtica, lying between Garumna and Sequana; The other
Parts being Belgica and Aquitanica.

V. 523. Downcast and Damp; With dull cloudy Countenances: A Damp is a
suffocating Vapor rising in Mines, used here to express the Fiends down-cast
heavy looks, like Persons in a Swound.

V. 527. Like doubtful Hue; A look that showed some glimmerings of uncertain
Joy.

V. 528. Soon recollecting; Quickly recovering his usual Haughtiness: of
recolligere, Lat. to gather together.

V. 529. Semblance not, Substance; The Show, the Shadow, not the Substance of
true worth: Semblance, as if simulans of simulare, to be like.

V. 530. Dispel'd their Fears; Eased 'em of their Apprehensions, removed their
Fears: of dispellere, Lat. to drive away.

V. 532. Clarions; From the Fr. Clairon, a small, shrill Treble Trumpet: a
Claro, quem edit, sono.

V. 533. Standard; Of the Fr. Estandart, or Ital. Stendardo, a Royal Ensign set
up to summon the whole Body of a Nation to come to the Assistance of their King
and Country.

V. 534. Azazel; (...), signifies the Scapegoat, Levit. 16. of (...), a Goat,
and (...), to escape: This Scapegoat bore all the Sins and Iniquities of the
Israelites into the Wilderness, and our Author has conferred his Name upon the
Standard Bearer of Satan, who carried his mighty Ensign all over emblazon'd
with his Rebellion against The Almighty.

V. 535. Unfurled; Opened, spread out the Ensign that had been wrapped up, from
un and furl, from the Fr. Frester, to fold together.

V. 536. The Imperial Ensign; Insigne Imperiale, Lat. the Royal Banner: Insigne,
Lat. for a Flag: Imperialis, Lat. belonging to an Emperor or King.

V. 537. Shone like a Meteor; Looked like a Comet waving in the Wind: The
Greeks called all those imperfect Mixtures and Exhalations, as Comets, etc.
that were seen blazing in the Air, to the Amazement of Mankind, (...), from
(...), high, lofty, because of their appearance above, among those shining
Bodies.

V. 538. With Gems, etc. With precious Stones, and shining Gold adorned: Gemma,
Lat. Jewel, imblazed, emblasonne, Fr. painted, as Coats of Arms, from
Blazonner, to blaze Arms.

V. 539. Seraphick Arms and Trophies; The Arms and Trophies of Seraphims:
Trophies, Monuments of Victories gained, of the Lat. Trophaeum, (...), of
(...), flight, therefore usually erected near the place where Enemies have been
routed. Bellorum exuviae, Truncis affixa Trophaeis
Lorica, etc. Jun. Sat. 10.


V. 540. Sonorous Metal blowing Martial Sounds; While Warlike Music breathed
through Sounding Brass: Metal blowing, for Sounds made by blowing through
Metal. Sonorous Metal, Trumpets made of Sounding Metals. Sonorus, Lat.
Sounding. Metallum, Lat. Metal. Clypeis atque AEre sonoro. AEn. 12.

Ibid. Martial Sounds; Inspiring Courage, encouraging to Battle: Martius, of
Mars the God of War, the Commendation of Misenus. -- Quo non praestantior alter
AEre ciere viros, Martemque accendere Cantu. AEn. 6.


V. 542. That tore Hells Concave; Which rent the hollow Vault of Hell:
Concavus, Lat. hollow within. Sicubi Concava, passim --
Saxa petunt, the hollow Rocks. AEn. 5.


V. 543. Frighted the Reign of Chaos; A Shout, that not only rent the hollow
Vault of Hell, but far beyond its Bounds, affrighted the Kingdom of Confusion
and uncreated Night. Night was by the Ancients Celebrated as the Eldest of all
the Gods, as being before any thing else was, out of whose dark Womb the
Universe arose. (...)
(...). Orph. in Hymn.


Darkness and Nonentity seem near of kind; and Moses tells us, Genesis 1. 2.
Darkness was upon the Face of the Deep; so that this black Goddess had not only
an Universal Empire before the Creation, but maintains it still, though impaired,
over half the Globe, interrupted and disturbed, sometimes feebly, by the Stars.

V. 545. Banners; Flags, Ensigns, Colors belonging to several Bands, that is,
Companies of Warring Spirits.

V. 546. With Orient Colors waving; Streaming with shining gaudy Colors:
Oriens, Lat. the East, the Quarter of Heaven where the Sun rises, and from
whence the Glorious Light, first strikes our Eyes.

V. 547. Serried Sheilds; Locked one within another, linked and clasped
together, of serrer, Fr. to lock, to shut close.

V. 550. In Perfect Phalanx; In Exact Order. (...) was the Macedonian manner of
embatteling an Army in a square Body, consisting of 20000 Footmen at least, as
Poly. Lib. 5. ^^idas will have the Name from (...), of drawing near to their
Adversaries, whom being so knit together, and covered with their Shields joined
together, they usually broke in upon. (...).

And his Echo, Circum hos utrinque Phalanges
Stant densae. AEn. 12.
At fratres, animosa Phalanx, Ibid.


Ibid. To the Dorian Mood; According to the manner of the Doors, which was
grave, solid, and manly, and had great Influences on Men's Passions, in whose
Praise our Author expatiates. Mood, of Modus, Lat. manner.

V. 551. Of Flutes and soft Recorders; Wind-Instruments, which come nearest
Vocal Music, of all the best. Flutes, of Flatus, Lat. Breath. Recorder, of
Recordari, Lat. to remember, as young Birds are said to sit and record, when
they sing softly to themselves. The Lacedaemonians used Pipes and Flutes in
their Armies, as inspiring more sedate and manly Courage than Trumpets, etc.
(...); (...), etc. Thucid. Thus Homer marches his Grecians silent and sedate.
(...).

Aristotle in his Problems gives for the reason of this Lacedemonian Custom,
that their marching to such moderate Music, made their Alacrity and Security
more manifest, than any other more Noiseful and Clamorous was capable of.

V. 552. Heroes old; The Ancient Worthies, Men of Renown, derived from the
Gods, either by Father or Mother side, or for their Gallant Actions advanced
amongst them. (...). Lucian.
-- Divisque videbit
Permistos Heroas, atque ipse videbitur illis. Virg. Ecl. 4.


V. 554. Deliberate Valor breathed; Inspired 'em with sedate and settled
Courage, not like the Huffing Heats of Vaunting Bravoes, but Valiant
Resolutions not to be shaken by fear of Death, to them less dreadful than
Flight, or a dishonorable Retreat. Deliberate; Deliberatus, Lat. advised,
resolved: Retreat, Fr. Retraicte, of Retrahere, Lat. to draw back.

V. 556. To mitigate and swage; To make easy and supportable, of mitigare, to
appease, to render mild and gentle, to swage, or as more usual, to assuage, is
to give ease to by persuading, as if from suadere, Lat. to reason with: Others
will have it from suavis, sweet, to assuage troubled Thoughts, to sweeten 'em,
and take off their sharpness with which they gaul us.

V. 557. With solemn Touches; With their grave Tones: Touch is put here for the
Tune made by those Touches and Stops upon the Flute, or other Instrument.

V. 558. Anguish; Extraordinary Affliction of Body or Mind, of the Lat.
Augustia, or Angor.

V. 559. From Mortal or Immortal; Music has been in all Ages so justly
admired, that after its first Invention, it was introduced early into the
Service and Worship of the Gods, either as pleasing them, and asswaging their
Anger, or as useful to calm and compose the Minds of their Adorers, and fix
their Wandering Thoughts. The Immortal Minds here meant, are Spirits and Angels,
principally those in pain.

V. 560. Breathing united Force; Being all of one piece: Unitus, Lat. where
many are joined together as if but one, resolute to stand by one another, to
the uttermost.

V. 561. That charmed their painful Steps, etc. The Music so enchanted them,
that they forgot, or at least better endured their fiery March. Charm comes of
Carmen, Lat. for Verse, in which all those foolish Pretenses to supernatural
Power were writ. Cantando rumpitur anguis. Virg.

V. 563. A horrid Front; A dreadful Line of Battle, a terrible Number:
Exercitus frons, Tac. the Vauntguard, or forepart of the Army: Frons, Lat.
Forehead.

Ibid. In guise; According to the manner of: Guise, an old Fr. word for Mode or
Fashion: Hence to disguise, to do something that disorders and hides our former
shape or manner.

V. 568. Traverse the whole Battalion; Quite cross the whole Body of Men: a
travers Pays, Fr. cross the Country: Battalion, Fr. a Gross of Men, drawn up in
greater Numbers, and sit to charge in Day of Battle.

V. 570. Their Visages; Their Looks, of Visage, Fr. Countenance, of the Lat.
Visus.

V. 572. Distends with Pride; Swells with Pride, of Distendo, Lat. to stretch.

V. 574. Such imbodied Force; So great, so vast a Force and Multitude in one
Body joined together, never met, as compared with those, could bear more just
Proportion than Pigmies do to all the rest of Mankind; though all the Giants,
and the Heroes of old, that fought at Thebes or Troy, and all their fabulous
Gods that took their parts, were numbered and enrolled with them, and all who
since, etc.

V. 575. Could merit more; Could deserve any higher Comparison, of mereo, or
mereor, Lat. to deserve.

V. 576. Then that small Infantry warred on by Cranes; A Periphrasis, or
Description of the Pigmies, seated about the Bounds of India, among the
Mountains, about three spans high, continual Adversaries to the Cranes, whom
though our Poet terms Infantry, (a word importing Soldiers serving on Foot) yet
they were wont every Spring, mounted on Rams and Goats, to march with all their
Multitude down to the Sea, armed with Bows and Arrows, there to encounter the
Cranes, and to destroy their Eggs and Young Ones, lest their Winged Enemies
should grow too fast upon 'em. During this Expedition, which took up almost
three Months, they encamped in Huts made of Mud and Feathers, sized over with
the Whites of the Eggs where their Enemies lay in Embryo's. Plin. Lib. 7. Cap.
2. That there was also in Thrace a parcel of this Diminutive People, the same
Author reports, Lib. 4. Cap. 11. with whom Juven. agrees, Sat. 13. Ad subit as
Thracum volucres, nubemque sonoram
Pygmaeus parvis currit bellator in Armis,
Mox impar hosti, raptusque per era curvis
Unguibus, a saeva fertur grue, etc.
-- Ubi tota cohors pede non est altior uno. Ibid.


Of these, and their Conflicts with their Long-neck'd Adversaries, who used to
overreach 'em, (...),
(...),
(...),
(...).


Infantry; L'Infanterie, Fr. Fanteria, Ital. of the old word Fante, a
Foot-Soldier, or a Servant; for the Foot were counted Servants and Followers of
the Cavalry, of Infans, Lat. not only for a Child, but a Boy, and thence a
Servant.

Crane, not unlikely of (...), Greek for that Bird, by leaving out the
Termination, a Bird with a long Neck, whence that useful Engine the Crane took
its Name both in Greek and Latin from from its shape.

Ibid. The Giant Brood; The Race of the Giants, (...), Gr. for one of an
extraordinary Size, exceeding the usual Dimensions of Mankind, such as
Briareos, Typhon and others, of whom before. (...).

V. 577. Of Phlegra; A City of Macedonia, near Mount Pindus, of (...), to burn,
because seated in a Soil abounding in Brimstone, where the Giants are fabled to
have fought the Gods, and by frequent Thunderbolts to have been overcome, the
Sulphurous Nature of the Country affording an occasion of the Fiction.

V. 578. That fought at Thebes; Theba, Lat. a Renowned City of Beotia in
Greece, famous for the War between Eteocles and Polynices, Sons of Oedipus,
recorded by Statius in his Poem: The chief Heroes were, Meneceus, Hyppomedon,
Tydeus, Capaneus, Amphiaraus, etc. There have been several Cities of this Name,
one in Cilicia, another in Egypt with 100 Gates. Atque vetus Thebae centum
jacet obruta Portis. Juv. Sat. 15.

Of this, the Fruitful Province Thebais took its Name; this here meant had but
seven, as the same Satyrist has it: -- Quot sunt
The barum Portae vel divitis ostia Nili.


Now a poor Village called Stives by the Turks.

Ibid. Ilium; Troy, called Ilium of Ilus the Son of Tros, who much enlarged it,
a City of Phrygia in the Lesser Asia, -- Iliacae primus pater urbis and auctor,
AEn. 8. Renowned for its Extent, Riches, and the Ten Years War and Siege it
sustained against united Greece. The Principal Heroes were, Hector, AEneas,
Agamemnon, Achilles, Nestor, Ulysses, the two Ajaxes, Patroclus, Idomeneus,
Diomedes, etc. Immortalized by Homer in his Iliads, who introduces all the Gods
siding in the Quarrel, and therefore here by Milton styled Auxiliaries:
Auxiliaris, from Auxilium, Lat. Aid, Assistance. Mulciber in Trojam, pro Troja
stabat Apollo,
AEqua venus Teucris, Pallas iniqua fuit. Ovid.


Read the Engagement of the Gods. (...).

V. 579. And what resounds; Makes so much Noise, in Stories and Romances of the
Lat. resonare, to sound or ring again.

V. 580. Or Romance; The German Nations, who overthrew the Western Empire, did
for a long time retain their ancient Language, which at last began to be
intermixed with that of their Subjects, and Larded with Latin words, which they
called the Roman Language to distinguish it from their own: In this corruptly
mixed Latin Language, many Military Love-Stories were writ by the Romans, whence
they took the Name of Romances, in this kind of writing; but in their own
Language, the French are very frequent.

Ibid. Uther's Son; Of Either, Wealth for Admirable, a King of the Britains, or
as if (...), the Happy-Hunter: Uther and Arthur, and all their Descendants,
though they gave Noble Subjects for the Histories of the Ages they lived in,
yet by the gross Ignorance that overspread those times, there is nothing
transmitted to us but what is foolishly fabulous and fantastic.

V. 581. Begirt with British and Armorick Knights; Surrounded, encompassed with
English and French Men of Mars. British of Britain; Armorick, of Bretagne in
France, formerly called Aremorica, conquered by the Britains under Maximus,
Anno 389. Vicit Aremoricas, animosa Britannia, Gentes,
Et dedit imposito, nomina prisca, Jugo.


V. 582. Baptized or Infidel; Christians, or Unbelievers, Heathens. Baptized,
of (...), to dip or plunge in Water, as the manner was of St. John's Baptism in
Jordan. Infidel, Infidelis, Lat. one that does not believe in the Messiah, our
blessed Savior Jesus Christ.

V. 583. Jousted in Aspramont or Montalban; Ran a Tilt, of the Fr. Juster, to
encounter on Horseback armed with a Lance, an Exercise frequent and famous in
former Ages. Aspramo^t and Montalban, Romantic Names, of Mons Asper, Lat. a
Rough Rock, and Mons Albanus, perhaps Montanban, a City of France in the Connes
of Aquitaine.

V. 584. Damasco; Dam^scus, of which see V. 468.

Ibid. Marocco; A City and Kingdom in Africa, a considerable part of
Mauritania Tingita^a, extended along the Atlantic Ocean: This, before Fez
became the Capital, was one of the greatest Cities in the World.

Ibid. Trebisond; Trabisonde, Trapezus, the Capital City of Capadocia, in the
lesser Asia near the Euxine Sea, having a large and secure Haven, taken by
Mahomet the Second Emperor of the Turks, in the Year 1460.

V. 585. Whom Biserta sent from Afric; The Saracens, Biserta, the Modern Name
for Utica, a City of the Kingdom of Tunis in Africa, famous for the Surname it
gave to the Immortal Cato Uticensis, who here killed himself. From this Country
the Saracens expelled the Romans, Afric, Lat. Africa, is one of the four
Principal Parts of the Earth, bounded on the North by the Midland Sea, on the
West and South by the Ocean, Eastward by the Red Sea, and the Arabian Gulf
joined to Asia by a small Neck of Land of 60 Miles long. It has its Name from
(...), cold, because there is little or none in that Climate.

V. 586. When Charlemain, etc. Charlemain, or Carolus Magnus, was King of
France and Emperor of Germany, who about the Year 800. undertook a War against
the Saracens in Spain, where Aigoland, Bellingan, Marsiles and Idnabala, had
erected several petty Kingdoms; these joined against Charlemain, who in his
Royal Army had with him, Milon Count of Angiers his Brother-in Law, Ro^land his
Nephew, Renaud of Montauban, Roger the Dane, Arnold of Belland, etc. famous
Warriors, Subjects of the French fabulous Romances, who in that Illiterate
Age, confounded their Story, and covered it with much Confusion and Obscurity.
Aigoland, one of these Saracen Kings, light upon Milen so advantagiously about
Bayon, that he cut him and 40000 French Men in pieces, entered G^scony, and
besieged Again. At another time Bellingand ^lew Rowland, and defeated a
considerable Army: And though this War lasted 14 Years, I can no where find
that this Emperor was killed by 'em, but that by degrees he Mastered them,
dying peaceably in the Year 814, and lies buried at Aix la Chapella.

Ibid. With all his Peerage; With all his Nobility: Peerage, the Privilege of
being a Pe^r or Nobleman.

V. 587. By Fontarabbi^, called by the Spaniard Fuentarabia, F^ns R^p^dus. or
Fl^entum rapidum, a very strong Town in Biscay in Spain, seated on the Shore of
that Bay, at High Water surrounded by the Sea, and so fortified, that at the
lowest Ebb not easily to be attempted: Charles the Fifth added much to its
Strength, and called it his Pillow.

V. 588. These beyond compare of Mortal Prowess; These Warriour-Angels did as
far exceed all Mankind in point of Power and Courage, as all the Heroes of old
Greece or Troy, etc. are above the Comparison of Pigmies encountering Cranes,
Mortal Prowess, Human Courage, of the Fr. Proiiessc. -- He above the rest.

V. 590. In Shape and Gesture proudly eminent; He in Carriage and Behavior
high exalted above the rest. Gesture of Gero, Gestus est compositio corporis
and habitus, quem in dicendo, aut movendo observamus, the Behavior or graceful
Motions of Speech and Carriage. Eminent, of Eminens, Lat. higher; exalted, of
emin^o, to excel.

V. 591. Stood like a Tower; Appeared above 'em all like a stately Tower, that
over-looks the humbler sort of Buildings, of the Fr. Tour. as that of Turris,
and this of (...), Gr. a Tower: Thus Virg. describes the Venerable Cybele,
Mother of the Gods. -- Berecynthia Matter
Invehitur cur^u Phrygias tu^rita per urbes. AEn. 6.


V. 592. All her Original Brightness; His Divine Shape and Heavenly Features
had not quite lost their Primitive first Beauty, nor did he appear other than
an undone Arch Angel, and the h^ighth of Brightness dimmed and overcast.
Originalis, Lat first, that belongs to one from his beginning. Excessus. Lat.
exceeding. Obscured darkened, O^s^urus, Lat. hid.

V. 594. As when the Sun, etc. As when the Sun just up, looks through the Air
that is thick near the Horizon, bereaved of all his Beams, or by the Moons dark
disk Eclipst, a dismal Twilight casts on half the World, and with sad thoughts
of change disturbs its Rulers.

V. 595. Horizontal Misty Air; That is always more gross and thick near the
Horizon. Horizontal, of (...), Lat. Finiens, and Finitor, the Limiter, and is
so named, because it bounds and limits our sight, when we look round as far as
our Eyes will reach, where the Earth (or the Sea) and Sky seem to touch and
kiss one another. -- Nec sidera tota
Ostendit Libycae Finitor Circulus Orae. Luc. Lib. 9.


V. 596. Shorn of his Beams; Bereaved and robbed of the Rays of Light that
surround his Glorious Head. Shorn, as if his shining Head had all its glorious
Locks cut off, and he appeared bald without his Perruque powdered with dazzling
Light, of which our Author assigns the true Reason, the Foggy Air and grois
Mists that verge near the Surface of the Earth. At Genitor circum Cap^t omne
Mic ^ntes
D posuit Radios. Meta. Lib. 2.


V. 597. In dim Eclipse; (...), Gr. for defect, failure, as of Light, when the
Sun is Eclipsed by the intervening of the Moon between him and the Earth,
robbing us of some part of his Light here described. The Moon is said to be
Eclipsed, when the Earth coming between her and the Sun, hinders her of that
borrowed Brightness with which at other times she shines; both which, at
certain times, according to the constant Motions of these three great Bodies,
must inevitably come to pass, and therefore easy to be forescen, though some
greater, and others more partial, according to the Segment of the Sun or Moons
Orb obscured. -- Squallidus interea, and expers
Ipse sui decoris, qualis cum deficit Orbem, esse solet. Meta. 2.


Ibid. Disastrous Twilight sheds; Casts an unlucky dim Light: Desastre, Fr.
unluckiness, misfortune, of (...), Gr. mischance.

Ibid. Twillght; That small doubtful Light that appears Morning and Evening on
the Confines of Day and Night: Some will have it two Lights, as partaking both
of that of the Sun and Stars; others, because it comes between two Lights, that
of the Day past and coming.

V. 599. Perp exes; Disturbs with doubtful thoughts, of Perplexus, intricate,
doubtful.

V. 601. Deep Scars of Thunder had entrenched -- But his Face was furrowed by
deep Wounds by Thunder made. Scar, of the Gr. (...), a hard Crust made by a
Caustic, a Burning Medicine applied to mortify the Flesh, so as it may be cut
out, and is hard like a Scar.

Ibid. Entrenched; Had cut into, of the Particle in and Trencher, Fr. to cut;
so an Army is said to be entrenched, when about their Camp a Trench is cut,
which hinders their Enemies from coming at, or attempting them.

V. 602. Sat on his faded Cheek; Sorrow and sad Concern dwelt on his pale
discolored Cheek: Faded, of the Fr. Fade, as this of the Lat. Fatuus,
properly, unsavory, insipid, as Meats and Drinks that are decayed have lost
their true taste.

V. 603. Of D^untless Courage; Of Invincible Courage, not to be frighted or
overcome. Fearless, of Daunt, from the Fr. Dompter, as that of the Lat.
Domitare, to tame.

Ibid. Considerate Pride, waiting Revenge; Of wary Pride, watching for Revenge:
Consideratus, Lat. heedful, circumspect. Revenge, of the Fr. Revenche, a
return, requital in an ill sense.

From Verse 591, to 594. and from thence to this, the Designer of Lucifer's
Picture, prefixed to this first Book, should have taken the Noble Lineaments of
his Obscured, and yet Glorious, Haughty Looks: He should have expressed his
Furrowed Face and Faded Cheek under those Lofty Brows of steadfast Courage and
of wary Pride, vowing and waiting for Revenge: If he had hit these Lucky
Strokes, he might have spared his Horns and Asses Ears. so unsuitable to the
Description of the Archangel, that Milton has afforded him no hint of 'em, as
not having, amongst his Idol-Deities, enrolled Corniger Ammon.

V. 604. Cruel his Eye; His Look was fierce, but showed Signs of Relenting and
Compassion.

V. 605. Remorse; Fr. Remors, is properly the gnawing of tormenting Conscience,
when it convinces one of having done amiss, of Remordeo, Lat. to bite again,
to gnaw. Passion, Passio, Grief.

V. 606. The Fellows of his Crime, the Followers rather; Fellows, seems to
imply the chief Contrivers, and Complotters of his bold Rebellion; the
Followers those, that by his Authority and sly Insinuations were persuaded to
side with him, therefore not so criminal, though inexcusable, it being
impossible Angelick Beings could sin through ignorance.

V. 608. To have their Lot in Pain; Adjudg'd to have their Portion in Eternal
Pain.

V. 609. Millions, of the Fr. Million, Ten Hundred Thousand, of the Lat. Mill,
a certain for an uncertain Number, frequent and familiar with the Poets; Mill
meae siculis errant in Montibus Agnae. Virg. Ecl. 1.

And of the Colors in the Rainbow; Mill trahens varios adverso sole Colores.
AEn. 4.

Which would be hard for any one to assign.

Ibid. For his Fault amerc'd, etc. Punished with loss of Heaven, Fined by
Eternal Banishment from Bliss. Amerciament is a Law-Term, signifying a
Pecuniary Punishment of an Offender against the King or other Lord, who is in
miscricordia, that is, who has transgressed, and is to stand to the Mercy of
the Lord: But Amerc'd has a strange Affinity with the Greek (...), to deprive,
to take away, as Homer has used it much to our purpose, (...).

The Muse Amerc'd him of his Eyes, but gave him the faculty of singing sweetly.
(...).

V. 610. From Eternal Splendors flung for his revolt; Thrown out from Heavens
Everlasting Light for his Rebellion: Splendour, Lat. Light, Brightness. Revolt,
of the Fr. Revolte, Rebellion, a falling off from.

V. 612. Their Glory withered; Their Beauty and Brightness diminished and
decayed, like withered Flowers.

Ibid. As when Heavens Fire; The Lightning, which Virg. calls Jovis Ignem; Illa
Jovis rapidum jaculata e Nubibus Ignem. AEn. 1.
Dum flammas Jovis and sonitus imitatur Olympi. AEn. 6.


V. 613. Has scath'd the Forest Oaks; Has harmed the Oaks that grow in Forest,
or the Pines that delight in Hills and Mountains. Scath is an old word for
Hurt, Damage. To work new Woe and unprovided Scath. Spen. Bo. 1. Cant. 12. Stan.
34.
Mote breed him Scath unawares. Spen. Bo. 3. Cant. 1. Stan. 37.


Schaden, Dutc. to hurt. The Oak was Jove's Tree, more often singed with
Lightning and Thunderstruck than any other. De Coelo Tactas praedicere
Quercus. Virg. Ecl. 1.

V. 614. Their Stately Growth; Their tall Trunks, their vast high Bodies, a
Noble Comparison of the Angelick Armies, to the tall Sons of Earth, the
Mountain Pines, Actas ad Sydera Pinus, AEn. 11. And of their blasted Beauties
and faded Glory to their singed Crowns. Virgi^ describing Pandarus and Bitias,
thought it not enough to say they were Abietibus Juvenes Patriis and Montibus
aequos, but falls into the same Simile, Quales Aeriae liquentia flumina circum
Consurgunt Geminae Querous, intonsaque Coelo
Attollunt Capita, and sublimi Vertice nutant. AEn. 9.
Et AEtnaeos Fratres Coelo Capita alta ferentes
Concilium Horrendum: Quales cum vertice celso
AEriae Quercus, aut Coniferae Cyparissi
Constiterunt. AEn. 3.


And if this Simile was not too Superlative for the Cy^^ops, this cannot be so
for the Seraphim.

V. 615. Stands on the blasted Heath; The Lofty Trees with their Heads burnt
bare, stand upright on the parched Heath: Blasted, of the word Blast,
signifying a hot killing Breath, a parching Wind, injurious both to Men and
Beasts, as well as Trees and Plants.

V. 617. From Wing to Wing, and half enclose him round; Draw into a half Circle
enclosing him half round. The Romans used the same term for the lesser Bodies
placed on each side of the Gross of their Armies: Tyrrhenique duces, Evandrique
Arcadis alas. AEn. 12.

V. 618. Attention held them mute; With silence they gave heed: Attentio, Lat.
heedfulness as of one that listeneth: Mutus, Lat. for silent, still as well as
speechless: Conticuere omnes, attentique or a tenebant. AEn. 2.

V. 619. Thrice he assayed; Endeavored, tried: Fr. Essayer, to attempt. Ter
sunt conati, AEn. 1. Ter conatus ibi collo dare braehia circum, AEn. 2. a
Number in favor with the Poets, as is also Nine its square.

V. 620. Tears such as Angels weep; Such Tears as from Immortal Eyes can flow:
Thus Hom^r describes Venus wounded and bleeding; (...)
(...).


The Immortal Blood of the Goddess ran down, such Blood indeed as the blessed
Gods have in them. Virgil is less circumspect in his Weeping Venus; Tristior,
and ^acrimis Oculos suffusa Nitentes
Alloquitur Venus. AEn. 1.


V. 621. Words interwove, etc. Words mingled with sad Sighs, Words broke with
interrupting Sighs. Of inter, Lat. between and weave.

V. 624. Was not inglorious; Not mean and disgraceful; of Inglorius, Lat. void
of Renown.

Ibid. Though The Event was dire; Though the Success was sad and dreadful:
Eventus, Lat. Issue.

V. 625. As this place testifies; As this place proves, of testificor, Lat. to
bear witness, to confirm.

V. 626. Hateful to utter; Detestable to speak of: Utter signifies to speak,
Speech being a bringing forth the Thoughts and Conceptions of our Mind framed
within, to the outward hearing of others; of utter, outward.

Ibid. But what Power of Mind? But what Force or Strength of Understanding,
from greatest Knowledge of Things past or present, by Foresight or Foretelling,
could have apprehended, how such a Multitude of Godlike Spirits, so united
thus, and thus embattelled, should ever have undergone an Overthrow?

V. 627. Presaging; Foretelling, of the Lat. Praesagire, to foretell what shall
happen.

V. 630. Could ever know repulse; Could ever have been foiled or worsted:
Repulsus, Lat. a foil, a beating back, of repello, to drive back.

V. 632. Puissant Legions; All these powerful Legions, against all this mighty
Multitude, whose banishment has even dispeopled Heaven, and left it empty.
Legio, Lat. a Number of Soldiers different, in different times generally about
6000. -- Cum longa Cohortes
Explicuit Legio. Virg. Geor. 2.


Puissant; Fr. Powerful. Exile, Lat. Exilium; Banishment, Ejection. Has emptied
Heaeven; Many are of Opinion that one third of the Angelick Nature was for this
Rebellion expelled Heaven, grounding it on Revel. 12. 4.

V. 633. Shall fail to reascend; Shall not be able to climb up again, of the
Fr. Faillir, to be unable to be deceived, of fallo, Lat. to cheat.

Ibid. To reascend; To get up again, of re and ascendere, Lat. to rise again.

V. 634. Self-raised and repossess; Raised by their own inherent Power,
repossess, regain the Possession of their Original Heaven, to the Inheritance
of which they were born: Repossideo, Lat. to enter again into possession of:
Nativus, Lat. Natural.

V. 636. Monarch in Heaven; But he who Governs, Sole and Supreme above. (...),
Monarcha, a King, of (...), alone, and (...), Rule.

Ibid. As one secure; Like one grown careless; safe, Securus, Lat. and
therefore heedless.

V. 639. Upheld by old Repute; Held up, supported by ancient Fame and
Reputation: Repute, from Reputation, Esteem, Renown.

V. 640. His Regal State put forth at full; Made a great show of his Princely
Port; Set all his State to show: Regalis, Lat. Kingly: Status, Lat. Condition.
Concealed, of Celare, Lat, to hide.

V. 642. Which tempted our Attempt; Which drew on our design, which provoked us
to attempt and try his Power: Tempt, of the French Tenter: Tentare, Lat. to
Provoke, to Entice to: Attempt, of Attentat. Fr. a Design, an Enterprise:
Words, tho well chosen, and significative enough, yet of Gingling and
Unpleasant Sound, and like Marriages between Persons too near of Kin, to be
avoided.

V. 644. To Provoke; Provocare, Lat. to Dare to, to Challenge.

V. 646. By Fraud; By Cheat and Cunning, bringing that to pass, which Force
could not effect: Fraus, Lat. deceit; Efficere, Lat. to effect, perform.

V. 649. But half his Foe; Force may affect the Sense, but cannot reach the
Soul. The Mind and Stubborn Will are both invulnerable and invincible, the
Unconquerable Will, And Courage never to submit or yield,
And what is else not to be overcome? In Satan's former speech.


V. 650. Space may produce new Worlds; Several Philosophers were of Opinion,
that there were many Worlds, as Anaxymenes, Aristarchus, Diogenes, Democritus,
and Plato, (scandalized with believing five) because not rightly understood,
Epicurus many, and others that they were infinite, not only the Sun and Moon,
but every Star containing a distinct World; to the continuing of these
Conceits, the Spectacles of Galileus have not a little contributed. Ille ferox
unoqu^e tegi non passus Olympo
Immensum per inane volat, finemque perosus,
Parturit innumeros Augusto pectore Mundos. Claud.
Et Chaos innumeros avidum confundere Mund^s. Luc. lib. 6.


Space is not only used for Place, but Time also; Produce, Producere, Lat. to
bring forth new Worlds different from that the Angels were in, supposed to have
been Created before this lower World.

V. 651. Whereof so rife there went a Fame; Concerning which, there were so
many Reports: Rife, an old Word for Frequent: Fame, of Fama, Lat. Report.

V. 652. To Create; Lat. Creare, to give Beginning to: Creation is the Work of
that infinite Power, that brought All Things ount of Nothing.

Ibid. Therein P^^nt; And place therein, of Plantare, Lat. to set, or cause to
grow, as Herbs, Irees, and Flowers.

V. 653. A Generation, a Brood of Creatures; Of Generare, Lat. to Beget.

Ibid. Whom his choice Regard; Whom his especial Care, of Regard, Fr. for Care,
Consideration.

V. 654. Equal to the Sons of Heaven; Favor as highly as the Heavenly Angels:
Inhabitants of Heaven, and its Offspring: AEqualis, Lat. in the same
proportion, as much: Not only our Poet, but many of the Fathers, supposed the
Angelick Nature created before the World, tho some refer their Original to the
first day's Distinction, comprehending their Creation by Fiat Lux.

V. 655. Thither if but to Pry; Toward Heaven, or where else, this Mighty Work
of Creation is to be performed, tho but to mark and heed it: Of the Fr.
Preuver, to try, to make trial of: To pry into Things, is to look narrowly,
that is, heedfully into it, with contracted Eyes, strengthening the Sight.

V. 656. Our first Eruption; Our first Sally, and brea^ing out of this our
hated Prison: Eruptio, Lat, of Erumpo, to break out.

V. 657. This Infernal Pit; This low dark Dungeon: Pit, of the Fr. Puis, as
this of Puteus, Lat. a Well.

V. 660. Must mature; Must bring to Perfection, of Maturare, Lat. to grow Ripe.
So Virg. Hic. annis gravis, atque animi maturus Alethes. AEn. IX.

V. 661. For who can think Submission; For who is so base and mean, as but to
think of truckling, of humbling our selves before our Adversary: Submissio,
Lat. Yielding, Submitting.

V. 662. Open or Understood: Public or Private, Proclaimed or Concealed.

V. 663. He Spoke; Thus he spoke, an Imitation of Homer's frequent, (...).

Ibid. And to confirm his Words; In approbation of his Speech, in token of
their agreeing to his Opinion.

V. 667. Fierce with grasped Arms; Furious, raging of Fire, Fr. from Ferox, as
this of (...), a Wild Beast: And bold with Armed Hand, brayed on their Sounding
Shields War's dreadful Din, daring outrageous Heaven's Almighty Arm: A Graphick
Description of the Foolish Defiance given by these Damned Spirits, in their
impotent Rage against the Almighty, sitting in Heaven, and having them in
Derision. Clash, and Din, are Words formed of the Similitude of the Sounds of
which they are expressive: Clash, as if of (...), Clango; and Din, of Tinnio;
the Sound that hollow Metal makes when beat upon. Saeva sonoribus Arma. Says
Virg. AEn. 9.

And Homer, (...).
-- Tum scuta, Cavaeque; Dant sonitum flictu Galcae.


V. 669. Hurling Defiance; This Verse seems Declaratory of the Action expressed
in the two preceding, the Reprobate Spirits making a dreadful Noise on their
clattering Shields, turned their disdainful Eyes up toward Heaven, in Looks
that bid Defiance to the Almighty: Defiance, a Challenge; of Defier, to
Challenge, to Dare to the Combat, Fr. Hurl, or, as its Original, Whirl, to
throw, to throw round about.

V. 670. Whose Griesly Top; Whose horrid Head: Griesly, an old Word for Ugly,
dreadful.

V. 671. Belched Fire, and rouling Smoke; Like Virg. of Mount AEtna: Turbine
fumantem piceo and candente favilla. AEn. 3. Belch, as the Latin Ructare,
formed of the Sounds they express.

V. 672. The rest entire, shone with a glossie Scurf; The rest all Ore, was
covered with a shining Crust: Glossie, bright, shining of Gleissen, Ger. to
shine: Scurf, a thin, dry, and lighter kind of Scab: Entire, of Entier, Fr.
whole.

V. 673. In his Womb was hid Metallic Ore; That his Belly, his Entrails were
stored with Mines of diverse Metals: Metallic, Metallicus, Lat. belonging to
Metals; in Greek, (...): Quod vix ulla Metalli vena inveniatur, quin altera in
propinquo inveniatur, unde Graeci videntur dixisse. (...). Plin. l. 33. c. 6.

Ibid. Ore; Is crude Earth, as dug up, unrefined, and containing Metal in
proportion to the richness of the Mind: Lead, Tin, Silver Ore, of the Fr. Or,
Aurum Gold, the Metal, (...).

V. 674. The Work of Sulphur; The Offspring and Production of Sulphur, that
Vivum and fossile, as Celsus calls it, which, as if it were Soli (...), the
Subterranean Fire, concocts and boils up the Crude and undigested Earth into a
more profitable consistence, and, by its innate Heat, hardens and bakes it into
Metals: It is called Sulphur rerum by Paracelsus and the Chemists; it
ordinarily signifies, Brimstone.

Ibid. Winged with speed; It Is usual with the Poets to express Speed by Wings,
those Creatures that are furnished with them being the ^^^blest: Thus Fulminis
Ocyor alis, and Mercury the Messenger of the Gods, is fledged with them both at
head and Foot. Ut primum alatis tetigit magalia Plantis. AEn. 4.

V. 675. A Numerous Brigade; A great Company, Ital. Brigata, a Company of
Soldiers, generally Horsemen: Hence our Brigadeer, the Commander of a Party of
Horse, Numerosus, Lat. for a great many.

V. 676. Pi^^s; Of Pionnier, Fr. a Digger: Of Pion, an old Word derived of the
barbarous Latin Pedito, that is, Pedes a Foot Soldier.

V. 677. To Trench; To draw a Line, or digg a Trench cross a Field: Of
Trencher, Fr. to Cut.

V. 678. Or cast a Rampart; Or to throw up a Defense, Fr. Rempar, the Wall of a
Fortress: Of Re, en, and parer, to defend one against.

Ibid. Mammon lead them on; (...) Riches, Wealth, it is no Hebrew Word, though
found in the Lexicon Rabbin-Philos^^h. St. Austin in his 35th Sermon on the
Words of our Savior, Ye cannot serve God and Mammon, Luc. 16. 13. where the
Greek has (...), which we render Riches, tells us, it is a Punic Word, many of
which were crept into, and mixed with the Hebrew Language: I do not find it any
where used in the Sacred Text, but in the 9th and 11th Verses of the above
quoted Chapter, and Matthew. 6. 24.

V. 679. The least Erected Spirit; The most Abject, Base, and Vile: Erectus,
Lat. for Raised: Erecta consurgit ad Oscula planta, stands on Tip-toes. Juv.

V. 682. Heaven's Pavement trodden Gold; As the Heavenly Jerusalem is described
by St. John, Revel. 21. 21. And the Street of the City is pure Gold:
Pavimentum, Lat. a Floor, a Causeway, of Pavio, Lat. to beat down, to pave.

V. 684. In Vision beatifick; In the happy beholding of God Almighty's infinite
Perfections, in which the supremest Satisfaction consists: Visio, Lat. Sight,
Seeing: Beatificus, Lat. Beatum faciens, making Happy.

V. 685. By his suggestion Taught; Instructed by his Information: Suggestio,
Lat. a Prompting: Of Suggerere, to put in Mind, to Prompt.

V. 686* Ransacked the Center; Dug deep down to the middle of the Earth: To
Ransack, is to search narrowly, and to pry into every Corner, for Prey and
Plunder, as if Reinsaccare, saccos Excutere and Expilare: Center, Centrum, Lat.
the middle Point in a Circle, or any round Body.

V. 687. Rifled the Bowels of their Mother; Tore out the Entrails of the Earth
that bore 'em, and Nursed 'em too; the Earth was called not only Matter magna,
from her many Sons, but as Antiquity thought, the Mother of all the Gods: Alma
matter, was another of her Attributes, from her constant providing for her great
Family. Nec tantum segetes, Alimentaque debita Dives
Poscebatur humus, sed itum est in viscera Terrae
Quasque recondiderat, Stygiisque admoverat umbris
Effodiuntur Opes. Met. Lib. 1.


Rifler, or Rafler, Fr. or the Sax. Reapian, all probably of Rapere, to snatch,
to tear out.

V. 688. For Treasures better hid; In search of Riches, which had better been
still in the Center, locked up there, and close concealed. (...), a Store laid
up for the future. -- Pereunt discrimine nullo,
Amissae leges; Sed pars vilissima rerum,
Certamen Movistis, Opes. Luc. Lib. 3.


V. 690. Ribs of Gold; Continuing the Metaphor of Earths Bowels, he calls the
great Hole made in the Hill, a wide Wound, and here the Ore, Ribs of Gold,
almost refined by the Natural Heat of that Infernal Soil.

V. 692. Deserve the precious Bane; Deserve the dear Destruction: Well may
Riches come from Hell, the Desires and Designs after which will send so many
thither. Bana, an old word for Murderer. Lucan describing Africa, praises it
for its Poverty: In nullas vitiatur Opes, non aere, nec auro
Excoquitur, nullo glebarum crimine, pura
Et penitus terra est. Lib. 9.


V. 694. Of Babel; The Name of the famous Tower, which Nimrod persuaded the
Inhabitants of the Earth, who were then all of one Language and of one Lip,
Genesis 11. 1. to undertake to build as high as might be, to prevent the
Destruction of any future Deluge. It was called (...) Confusion, from that
Confusion of Tongues, whose diversity made 'em desist from their vain design:
Now because Genesis 8. the Diluvian Waters are said to have surpassed the highest
Mountain by 15 Cubits, and there being many Mountains in the World, whose
Perpendicular Altitude is more than four Miles: They intended (as Josephus
tells us, Lib. 1. Antiq.) to raise this Tower five Miles in height: Heylin
reports it was raised 5164 Paces, before interrupted; but Confusion covers it.
And whereas the Sacred Text says, they did attempt this to get 'em a Name, Genesis
11. 4. this word Babel is convey'^ (through all Languages) down to us, to
perpetuate the Memory of their Presumption and Folly: For to Babble, signifies
to say something unintelligible. The Giants attempting Heaven, and Piling
Pelion on Ossa, is probably a Poetic Imitation of this vain attempt. Inseruit
celsis prope se oum Pelion Astris,
Syderibusque vias incumbens abstulit Ossa. Luc. Lib. 6.


Ibid. Works of Memphian Kings; The famous Buildings of Egyptian Monarchs,
called Memphian of Memphis, the Capital of ancient Egypt, seated on the Western
Shore of Nilus, from which, distant about 16 of our Miles, stood the wonderful
Pyramids, the biggest about six Acres high, on which one of their Kings
employed 366000 Men almost 20 Years: These Monuments of mighty Wealth and
Luxury are still standing, and like enough to last till the general
Conflagration. Barbara Pyramidum sileat Miracula Memphis. Mart. Lib. 15.

V. 695. Monuments of Fame; Places erected and built in memory of great Kings,
as those abovementioned of the Memphian Monarchs, Monumentum est structura ad
memoriam defuncti facta, in the same sense that we call the Tombs at
Westminster the Monuments; and such were often made in remembrance of great
Men, though their Bodies lay not there Intombed.

V. 697. By Spirits Reprobate; By Wicked Fiends, of the Lat. Reprobus, evil,
naught, rejected.

V. 698. With incessant Toil; With continual Labor: Incessans, never ceasing,
uninterrupted, of in and cesso, Lat. to give over. Toil of Tuyl, Dutch for
Husbandry, whence to Till, that being an Occupation full of Labor.

V. 699. Innumerable; Numberless, of Innumerabilis, Lat. that cannot be
numbered.

V. 700. Nigh on the Plain; Hard by on the smooth Plain, many small Trenches
were provided, which had underneath 'em Streams of flowing Fire, conveyed into
'em from the flaming Lake, where another numerous Band with admirable Skill,
etc.

Ibid. Cells, of the Lat. Cella, any private secret place: A celando, to hide.

V. 701. Veins; Streams: Vena, Lat. not only for the blew Conduits in Men's
Bodies, but those of Fountains and Metals in the Earth.

V. 702. Sluc'd from the Lake; Let out, of the word Sluice, a Contrivance to
keep in, and let Water out at pleasure, from the Belg. Sluyse, or the Fr.
Escluse, of Excludere, Lat. to shut out.

V. 703. Found out the Massy Ore; Melt down the Golden Ore, of Fondre, Fr. or
Fondere, of the Lat. Fundere, to melt, to cast Metal. -- Fluit aes rivis,
aurique Metallum,
Vulnificumque Calybs vastae furnace liquevit. AEn.


Massy, heavy, of Massif, Fr. Weighty, of Massa, Lat. a Lump. Gold is the
heaviest of all Metals.

V. 704. Sev'ring each kind; Separating each sort: Sever, of separare, Lat. to
divide.

Ibid. And scumm'd the Bullion-Dross; And took the foul Froth that arose out of
its Dross: To scum, of Escumer, to take off the Scum, Lat. Spuma, the Froth.
Bullion, of Billion, Fr. old word for base Money, made of Metal not refined, or
clogged with too much Alloy. Dross, of the Begl. Droes, Lees, the Dross in
Metals being the useless terrene part, separated from the refined and purer Ore.

V. 706. A various Mould; Variety of Moulds, of several Shapes and Figures:
Mould, of Molde, Span: For Figure, Shape, of Modulus, Lat.

V. 708. As in an Organ; As in an Organ the sound Board conveys Breath from
each blast of the Bellows, to many Rows of Pipes, an exact Comparison and new:
Organ, as if (...), Gr. the Instrument, it being one superlatively, and chief
of those of Music.

V. 710. A Fabric huge; A mighty Building, a stately Edifice, of Fabrica, as
this, a Fabricando, Building erecting. Huge, big, of the Sax. Oga, fright,
terror, as the old word Hugy, terrible big, of an affrighting, terrible size.

V. 711. Rose like an Exhalation; Came up on a sudden like a mighty Mist, out
of the warm Womb where it was founded. Exhalatio, Lat. for a Fogg or Mist,
drawn out of the moisture of the Earth.

V. 712. Of Dulcet Symphonies; Of sweet Harmonies and Concordance: Dulcet,
pleasing, charming, of Dulcis, Lat. sweet. Symphonies, (...), from (...) and
(...), a Sound, a Voice, an Agreeing and Justness in Time and Tune.

V. 713. Where Pilasters round; Set about with little Pillars, of Pilasire, Fr.
from the Lat. Pila, called by Vitruv. Parastatae.

V. 714. Doric Pillars; Pillars carved according to the Doric Order. Doria was
part of Greece, where the Doric Dialect prevailed, so named of one of their
Kings Dorus: The Grecians were the most renowned Architects of Antiquity, and
the Terms belonging to that Noble Art are from them transmitted down to us;
hence to this Day the Doric and Corinthian Orders have their Names.

V. 715. Architrave; A word used by Builders, of the Fr. or It. Architrave, the
Head or Chapter of a Pillar.

V. 716. Cornice; An Architectonick Term, signifying the Brow or Projection of
a Pillar or Wall, of (...), the end and finishing of a thing; so Homer
describing the Palace of Alcinous, (...).

And Mart. Si nimius videor, seraque Coronide longus
Esse Liber. Epig. Lib. 10.


Where Farnaby, Cornices ponebantur in calce Libri, quasi signa absoluti
Operis, translatione ab aedificiis, cujus jam absoluti fastigio apponebatur
Cornix.

Ibid. Freeze; That broad flat Band between the Cornice and the Architrave,
from the Fr. Frize, as that from Freze, a Ruff: Others deduce it of the Ital.
Freggio, a Fringe, it being one of the Ornamental parts of a Building.

Ibid. With Bossy Sculptures graven; Adorned and set off with bold swelling
Carved Work. Bosse, Fr. Imboss'd, swelling out: Sculptura, Lat. Carving:
Graver, Fr. to cut, to carve, to engrave.

V. 717. The Roof was Fretted Gold; The Roof was covered over with Fret-Work
all of Massy Gold: Fretted, of the It. Fratto, of the Lat. Fractus, broken, it
being a kind of Work full of many Breakings and Indentures.

Ibid. Babylon; One of the most famous Cities of the ancient World, Renowned
both in Sacred and Profane Story, the Capital of the Assyrian Empire; Semiramis
encompassed it with Walls of Brick, said to be 100 Cubits high, broad enough
for two Chariots to pass, and containing 48 English Miles in Circuit, so that
it might well be accounted one of the Worlds seven Wonders. -- Murisque superbam
Assyrias Babylona domos. Luc. Lib. 8.


V. 718. Nor great Alcairo; The Modern Name for Old Memphis, the Metropolis,
and most Celebrated City of Egypt, seated a little above the Delta, where the
Nile first divides it self, making an Island, which took its Name from the
resemblance it has to the Letter (...).

V. 719. -- Such Magnificence -- Equaled in all their Glories; Neither the
Renowned Babylon, nor Mighty Memphis, when at the height of all her Glory,
Assyria strove in Wealth and Luxury to exceed Egypt in both abounding, ere
could show or Temples of their Gods, or Princely Palaces, that with this
stately Structure could compare, either in Expense or Art.

Magnificence; Lat. Magnificentia, Greatness of Expense in Noble and Sumptuous
Building, Furniture, or Provision.

Ibid. To Enshrine; To place in a stately Temple. See V. 388.

V. 720. Belus the Son of Nimrod, second King of Babylon, and the first Man
worshipped for a God, by the Chaldeans styled Bell, by the Phenicians Baal, both
of the Hebrew (...), signifying Lord, used promiscuously in the Holy Text: The
first, Isai. 46. 1. Jer. 50. 2. and 51. 44. The other is used in many places
with the additions of Peor, Tzephon, and others, as Baalsamaim, of which the
Supreme Lord, to manifest his Detestation, tells his People, Hes. 2. 16. they
shall call him no more Baali, (...) my Lord. Hesiod is the first Poet that
mentionsthis Deified Man in his Catal. Heroin. (...). This Name grew so famous,
that many of the African Heroes subjoyned it to their own, as Hannibal,
Asdrubal, Maherbal. By this Name the Sydonians worshipped the Sun, whom they
termed Baalsamaim, the Lord of Heaven, the Learned Seldom deducing Agalibalus,
or, as corrupted, Heliogabalus, the Sun, from (...), Signifying Circular Lord.
Synt. 2. Cap. 1. Ninus, the Son and Successor of this Belus, having erected his
Fathers Statue, proclaimed Impunity to all such as should repair to it, and
solemnly beg pardon there of whatsoever Crime committed: This procured him many
vile Votaries and impious Adorations, and made him the first instance of the
ancient Egyptian Idolatry, which most Nations of the World, as an allay to the
Learning they brought from thence, conveyed into their own Countries.

Ibid. Serapis, was the same with Apis, (...), in the Hebrew Tongue signifying
a Bull, the same with Apis in the Egyptian, as if a concrete of both (...),
vultus bovis. Certain it is, that the Egyptians kept in a Corner of the Temple
of Osyris, a live Ox which they had in great Veneration, his Color was black,
with a square blaze in his Forehead, and a white Half Moon on his Right Side;
at a certain period prescribed by their Ceremonial, he was to be drowned in the
Nile, that is, sacrificed to that Noble River, as Strab. Lib. ult. Plin. Lib.
8. Cap. 46. -- Aut quo se gurgite Nili,
Mergat adoratus trepidus pastoribus Apis. Papin. Sil. 3.


Great and Universal Lamentations were made all the Country over, till another
so marked was found, which the Prophetic Priests were provided of beforehand,
then their Rejoycings were as extravagant; all this agrees with the (...) and
(...) of Osyris, V. 478.

V. 721. When Egypt with Assyria strove. Egypt has had many Names; first,
Misreia, of Misraim the Son of Chus, the Son of Cham, its first Planter; next
Oceana, of Oceanus, one of its Kings; then Osiriana, of Osiris; lastly, Egypt,
of Egyptus Ramases, one of its Princes of great Power. Assyria, a great Country
in Asia, bounded on the East with Media, on the West with Mesopotamia,
Northward by Armenia, and Southward by Susiana: Most Historians derived it of
Ashur the second Son of Shem, which Sir Walter Rawleigh's History of the World,
Bo. 1. Chap. 10. disproves.

When Egypt grew to that excess of Wealth and Debauchery, that it contested
with dissolute Assyria, which was most corrupted: -- Horrida sane
AEgyptus; sed luxuria, quantum ipse notavi,
Barbara famosa non cedit turba Canopo. Juv. Sat. 15.


Luxuria, Lat. the excess of Riot.

V. 722. Th'Ascending Pile; The rising stately Structure, described before,
rising on a sudden like an Exhalation, V. 711. Ascending, Ascendens, Lat. of
Ascendere, to arise. Pile signifies properly a Heap, but used to express a
great piece of Building, which when finely finished, is styled a Noble Stately
Pile, of the Fr. Pile, or the Ital. Pila, as both of (...), to bind together,
to make firm and complete, rather than of (...), Heaps of Wood erected at
Funeral Piles.

V. 724. Opening their Brazen Folds; So Virg. describing Juno's Temple building
by Dido; Hic Templum Junoni ingens --
AErea cui gradibus surgebant limina, nexaque
AEre trabes, foribus Cardo stridebat Ahenis. AEn. 1.


V. 726. And level Pavement; Over the even Floor: Livel, Fr. of Libella, Lat. a
Line with a Plummet to it, by which Masons and Carpenters try their Work.

Ibid. From the Arched Roof; From the Vaulted sealing: Arch, of Arcus, Lat. a
Bow, because bent, and turning like one.

V. 727. Pendant by subtle Magic, etc. From the Vaulted Roof, hanging by
strange Contrivance many Rows of shining Lamps, and flaming Torches fed with
Oily Naptha and Sulphur, darted Light as from the Starry Firmament.

Pendens, Lat. hanging, hung up by so nice and curious a Contrivance, by a Line
so small, as not to be perceived. Subtilis, Lat. whence Subtle signifies
properly Small, Fine.

Magic, (...) and (...), are Persian Words, expressing the Service of their
Gods, and the Priests that were knowing and conversant in the Administration of
Divine Things, the Philosophers of their Age, who kept all the Learning in
their own hands; Magic in those times being the highest Skill in Natural
Philosophy put into Practice in some Amazing Instances, whose Definition is
thus given us: Magia est connexio a Viro sapiente Agentium per naturam, cum
patientibus, sibi congruenter respondentibus, ut inde Opera prodeant, non sine
eorum admiratione, qui causam ignorant. And says another, Magic is a perfect
Knowledge (as far as attainable in this Life) of the wondrous Works of God,
and their Effects; Hac Magia, Dominum Jesum, fuisse promissum regem,
cognoverunt Magi, qui ad eum adorandum, longissimis e Regionibus profecti sunt:
Scalig. cont. Cardan. So that by Subtle Magic, imports no more than, as we
say, hung up by Geometry, that is, strangely, of which every Beholder cannot
conceive the Contrivance.

V. 728. Of Starry Lamps; Of Lights that shone like Stars, (...), from their
shining.

Ibid. And Blazing Cressets; And flaming Beacons: Cresset, an old Word for any
great flaming Light: Blazing, of the High Dutch Blazen, to blow, because Flame
and Fire are increased by Wind.

V. 729. Fed with Naptha; (...), Gr. (...), from (...), to disperse it self, is
so powerful a Composition, or rather so unctuous a sort of Bitumen, that if it
approach either Fire or the Sunbeams, it immediately breaks out into a Blaze:
(...). Diosco. l. 1. c. 102. The Greeks call it (...), the famous Sorceress
Medea's Oil.

Ibid. Asphaltus; (...), a kind of soft, fat, oily Clay, clammy like Pitch,
abounding with much fiery and flaming Matter, (...), as incapable of being
shaken, or overturned; (...): This Asphaltus mixed with well-burnt Bricks, and
little Stones, gave such a strength and security to Buildings, that they became
stronger and more durable, than if made of Iron; Suidas. The Lake of Sodom
abounded with this Bitumen, thence called (...).

V. 732. The Architect; (...), the Master Builder, the Chief Contriver: Of
(...), Principal, and (...). Gr. a Builder.

V. 733. By many a towred Structure high; By many lofty Buildings adorned with
Towers: Structura, Lat. a Building, an Edifice.

V. 734. Where Sceptered Angels, etc. Where Angels Regent kept their Courts:
Sceptered, allowed Scepters as Ensigns of their State and Command: (...),
Sceptrigeri Reges; as Homer calls them, I A. B. Sceptrum, Lat. (...), Gr.

Angel, of (...), Gr. a Messenger, these Spirits being God's Messengers.
Residence, a Place of Abode: Of Resideo, Lat. to remain, to abide: Residentia,
both in the Canon and Common Law, is the Continuance or Abode of a Parson or
Vicar upon his Benefice.

V. 735. The Supreme King; The most high Governor GOD Almighty, the lofty One
Lord over all: Supremus, Lat. highest.

V. 736. Exalted to such Power; Raised to such Command: Exaltare, Lat. to lift
up, to advance.

Ibid. And gave to Rule; And appointed them Rulers over the bright Orders of
the Angels committed to their Holy Care: G^oe to Rule, gave the Government of;
a Verb used for a Noun, as Tibi duice dedit Deus ridere.

V. 737. In his Hierarchy; In his Holy Government: Of (...), Holy; and (...),
Rule, Principality.

Ibid. The Orders bright; The several Ranks and Degrees of Glorious Angels,
there being, without all doubt, Order and Distinction in that Heavenly
Hierarchy: Ordo, Lat. Degree.

V. 738. Unadored; Not Worshipped: Of In and Adorare, Lat. to Worship.

V. 739. In ancient Greece; Graecia, so called of Grae^us Son of C^crops, one
of the first Kings of that large Country lying in Europe, vast, fruitful, and
populous, the early Seat of Arts and Arms, brought to a mighty height and noble
pitch in about 2000 Years time, now entirely overrun by Barbarity (the
Reproachful Name given by its Inhabitants to all other Nations) in 200 Years by
the Turks ill Government and Tyranny.

Ibid. Ausonian Land; Italy, part of which was so named of Auson Son of
Ulysses, by Calipso, who is said to have Reigned there: Others say, the ancient
Inhabitants of this Country were by the Greeks called (...), whom the Latins
styled Aruncos, (as Auruncos ita far senes, AEn. 7.) by changing r into (...).

V. 740. Mulciber; So called, a Mulciendo, i. e. a Temperando ferro, his more
reputable Name being Vulcan, the Son of Jupiter and Juno, thrown out of Heaven
for rescuing his Mother out of his angry Father's clutches, as he relates his
own Story. (...). (...),
(...).
(...),
(...): According to the Relation of him here given.


Others affirm, his Father and Mother both gave him this unlucky lift (by which
he got his Lameness) for his Ugliness and Deformity, of which Homer makes him
accuse them. (...). (...)
(...)
(...).


The Mystery of all this is, that Thunder and Lightning, begot in the Regions
above by the influence of the Sun on the Air, is thrown from thence in dismal
Noise and terrible Claps down upon the Earth.

V. 741. They Fabled; Told a pretty Story, feigned a well-contrived Tale: Of
Fabula, Lat. a Story, a Fiction.

Ibid. Jove; The Son of Saturn and Ops, born in Crete at the same Birth with
his Sister Juno, whom he took to Wife: He was privately brought up in Ida, and
Nursed by the Nymphs, for fear of his devouring Father, whom he expelled out of
his Kingdom. Jove is not so probable a Diminutive of Jupiter, as a Derivative
of the Venerable and Ineffable (...); and Jupiter rather Jah Pater, than Juvans
Pater. Jovem primo Deum Judaeorum fuisse existimat Varro: As St. Aug. in l. 1.
De consen. Evang.

V. 742. Sheer over; Quite over the bright Battlements of Heaven: Sheer, an old
Word signifying Pure, Bright, Clear.

Ibid. Crystal Battlements; Crystal, of (...), which they tell us, is (...),
Water frozen to a shining Consistence, like Ice. -- (...)
(...), Crystal made of Water. (...).


Battlements are properly Pinnacles and Ornaments of great Buildings, to set
'em off, and please the Eye; they are also Defenses on the top of a Garrison
Wall to defend the Soldiers against the Besiegers.

V. 745. Dropped from the Zenith; Fell directly down, (...), and corruptly (...),
is an Arabian Word for the Crown of the Head, and from thence made to signify
the Pole of the Horizon, the Point of the Firmament directly over our Heads
wherever we are.

Ibid. Like a falling Star; A Comparison well suited to a tumbling Deity. So
Homer: (...).

V. 746. Lemnos; A considerable Island in the Archipelago, about 600 Miles in
circuit, where Vulcan had a Temple, and kept one of his Shops in which he made
Thunderbolts; hence called, Pater Lemnius. Haec Pater AEoliis properat dum
Lemnius oris. AEn. 8.

Ibid. The AEgean Isle; An Island in the AEgean Sea, part of the Mediterranean
near Greece, called now Archipelago. It took its Name either of AEgeus Father
of Theseus, who drowned himself therein, or of AEgis a City in the Island
Eubaea; as Strabo affirms. -- Boreae cum Spiritus alto
Intonat AEgaeo. AEn. 12.


Ibid. Thus they relate; Thus the Poets tell the Story: Relate of, Referro,
Lat. to report, to tell; whence Relation.

V. 747. Erring; Mistaking: Of the Lat. Errare, to Wander, to be Deceived.

V. 749. Escape; Get off, save himself: Of the Fr. Eschapper, to come off, to
free himself.

V. 750. By all his Engines; With all his Tricks and Contrivances: The Word
seems a Derivative of Ingenium, Wit and Cunning, of which a great deal is
requisite to find out those strange Engines, and Mathematical Machines, useful
in raising great Piles and vast Weights.

V. 751. With his Industrious Crew; With his Gang of Cunning Artificers:
Industrius, Lat. Diligent, Laborious.

V. 752. The Winged Heralds; Heraut, Fr. and Heraldo, Span. come all from the
Ger. Herold, an Officer in a formal and remarkable Habit, sent either to
denounce War, or to propose Terms of Cessation and Truce, always held sacred
and secure as to their Persons in Honor of their Office, which is very
ancient, derived of Here, Dut. Army, and Held, Commander, as sent from the
General or Commander in Chief: Milton has given them Wings, not only as Angels,
but to express their speed.

V. 755. A Solemn Council: A general public Meeting, to consider and consult
of their Affairs: Solennis, Lat. public, great: Concilium, Lat. for Council,
and the place it is held in.

V. 756. At Pandaemonium; A Name feigned by our Poet for Lucifer's Palace, the
famous Fabric described before, of the Gr. (...), all, and (...), Gr. for
wise, skilful, knowing, a word not always taken in an ill sense, though the
Devils are called (...), from their extraordinary knowledge and cunning.
All-Devil-Hall, or Satan's Court.

Ibid. The High Capital; Satan's chief place of Residence; of Capitalis, as
this of Caput, the Head, and thence used for Chief: Thus Rome was styled, Caput
Orbis, and Rerum Maxima Roma.

V. 757. Their Summons; Of Semonce, Fr. a calling before one, a Citation, and
this of Summoneo, Lat. to give Notice of.

V. 758. Squared Regiment; Full and complete: Carre, Fr. of Quadrare, Lat. a
Square being a Figure whose four sides are equal. Regimentum, Lat. a Band of
Soldiers, from R^gimen, the Government they are, or ought to be kept under.

V. 761. All access was thronged; Every place that led to the Infernal Palace
was crowded, all the Avenues thronged: Accessus, Lat. for Passage, or Way to.

V. 762. The Porches wide; Open spacious Places, whose Roofs were commonly
supported by Pillars, made to avoid the Violence of Sun or Showers, in which
the ancient Philosophers taught and disputed, of Porche, Fr. and this of
Porticus, Lat.

V. 763. Where Champions, etc. A Champion is properly a Challenger, who to
maintain and defend another Claim or Right, was wont anciently to defy all
Opposers that durst dispute it, and give 'em Combat by way of Decision; of the
Lat. Campus, a Field, in which, enclosed on all sides, the Encounter usually
was made.

V. 764. At the Soldan's Chair; Before the Turkish Emperor seated in his Chair
of State: Sultan or Sultan, are esteemed to be of Arabian, by others of Persian
Original, and to signify Power, Dominion; yet the word seems more naturally
derivable of the Hebrew (...), to Govern.

V. 765. Defied the best of Panim, etc. Challenged the stoutest of the Heathen
Knights. Defy, of Defier, Fr. to provoke to fight: Panim, of the Fr. Payen, as
this of Paganus, Lat. a Countryman, qui in Pagis degere solebat: The Heathens
were called Pagans, because their Temples being Consecrated to Christ, when his
Holy Religion prevailed in the World, and their Churches in all Cities
sequestered to his Service, they were allowed their Idolatrous Worship only in
Country Towns and Villages, which being more ignorant, and less apt to be
enlightened, continued longest there.

Ibid. Chivalry; Horsemanship, Gentlemen serving on Horseba^k: Chevalerie, Fr.
Knighthood, and its cause, Prowess, of Cheval, Fr. a Horse.

V. 766. To Mortal Combat; To deadly fight: Combat, Fr. for Fight, of Combatre,
to Fight, of Con and Batuere, Lat. to beat.

Ibid. Or Carreer with Lance; Or running a Tilt, a famous Exercise formerly, in
which Persons armed from Head to Foot, and bravely mounted, run full speed at
one another; and by breaking their Lances, and continuing firmly seated in
their Saddles, showed their Horsemanship, Strength and Dexterity: This sort of
Encounter is by our Author distinguished from the Mortal Fray, as being but
Ludicrous, and often used with great Pomp and Splendor at Feasts and
Marriages. Carriere, Fr. running full speed on Horseback. Lance, of Lancea, a
Javeline, a Spear, ab aequa Lance, because poised before thrown, or of (...),
Gr. for the same.

V. 767. Thick swarmed; Flew about in swarms like Bees, to which he compares
them in the following Verses. To swarm, comes of the Teutonick Shwarmen, to fly
in great Numbers.

V. 768. Brushed with the hiss; Sounding with the Noise made by their whistling
Wings: Hiss is a word made of the Similitue of the Sound of which it is
expressive, of the Tut. Zischen, of (...), to make such a Noise, as red hot
Iron does when quenched in Water: So the Wind is said (...), to whistle.

Ibid. Russling Wings; Making a Noise, sounding, of the Belg. Ruysselen, to
make a hollow Sound, a coined word.

V. 769. When the Sun with Taurus Rides; When the Sun is in the Celestial Sign
named the Bull, for which Taurus is Lat. placed by Jupiter among the Signs of
the Zodiac, in Memory of that Bull that transported his Mistress Europa from
Phoenicia to Crete. Candidus auratis aperit cum Cornibus annum
Taurus. Georg. Lib. 1. in April.


V. 770. Pour forth their Populous Youth; Send forth their Young Ones in vast
Multitudes: Populosus, Lat. abounding full of People. So Virg. Ut, cum prima
novi ducent examina Reges
Vere suo, Ludetque favis, emissa juventus. Georg. Lib. 4.


V. 771. About the Hive in Clusters; An exact Imitation of Homer, describing
the Crowds that followed Agamemnon after his Haranguing the Grecians. -- (...)
(...),
(...)
(...),
(...).


(...), is exactly expressive of in Clusters, of (...), Racemus, a Bunch of
Grapes.

V. 773. The Suburb of, etc. The Out-part of this little City, thatcht with
Straw: Suburbia, Lat. for Streets and Houses lying without the Walls of a City.
Citadelle, Fr. is properly a small City, also a strong Fort built within a
City, either to defend or curb it.

V. 774. New rubbed with Baum; Balm, or as the Fr. Baulme, is an Herb of a
pleasing and grateful smell: Its Name is Greek, of (...), and by contraction
Balm, of Bees being delighted by all Odoriferous Herbs, and perfumed Flowers.
Virgil, as well as Experience, tells us, Haec circum casiae viridos, and
olentia late
Serpylla, and graviter Spirantis copia Thymbrae,
Floreat --


Ibid. Expatiate; Flee to and fro, wander about, of expatiari, Lat. to go
abroad.

V. 775. And confer their State Affairs; Consider and advise of things
concerning their Government, according to the Opinion of Virgil and others,
that Bees have one, and that Monarchical. Solae Communes Natos, consortia tecta,
Urbis habent, magnisque agitant sub legibus aevum
Et Patriam solae, and certos novere Nepotes. Georg. 4.
-- Regem non sic AEgyptus and ingens
Lydia, nec populi Parthorum, aut Medus Hydaspes
Observant, Rege incolumi men's omnibus una est,
Amisso, rupere fidem. Ibid. --


Confer, of Confero, Lat. to consult, to consider of in common.

Ibid. The Airy Crowd; The Light Spiritual Throng of Angels, of AErius, Lat. of
Air.

V. 776. Swarmed and were straitn'd; Increased, and were confined in narrow
room: Strait, of Estroit, Fr. of strictus, Lat. contracted, crowded together.

V. 778. In bigness to surpass, etc. They who so lately seemed in size t'exceed
the Giant Offspring of the Angry Earth, sent to attempt on Heaven. Surpass, Fr.
Surpasser, to go beyond, to outdo. Brood, of the Belg. Broeden, to hatch.

Giant; One of extraordinary bigness, both for Bulk and Stature. Lat. Gigas;
Geant, Fr. (...), as if (...), Gr. Earth-born. So Virg. -- Partu terra nefando
Coeumque Japetumque creat, saevumque Typhoea
Et Conjurat^s Coelum rescindere Fratres. Georg. Lib. 1.


And Hic genus antiquum Terrae, Titania Pubes
Fulmine dejecti. AEn. 6.


These Giants were by the Poets made the Sons of Titan and the Earth, who made
War on Jove, to revenge the Injury done their Father, (Elder Brother to Saturn)
by depriving him, and consequently them his Descendants, of his Kingdom.

V. 780. Like that Pigmean Race; The Pigmies are said to inhabit about the East
of India, near the rising of the Ganges, where the Cranes lay their Eggs: They
had their Name of (...), Gr. a Fist, as being about a Hand high. Juven.
measures'em by the Foot: Ubi tota cohors pede non est altior uno. Sat. 13.
Ad subitas Thracum volucres, nubemque sonoram,
Pigmaeus parvis currit Bellator in armis,
Mox impar hosti, raptusque per era, curvis
Unguibus a saeva fertur grue.


Pygmaeos quoque, haud long ab his nasci; quorum qui longissimi sint, non
longiores esse, quam pedes du^^ and quadrantem, Aul. Gell. Lib. 11. Cap. 4. the
tallest not exceed 2 Feet in height. Race; The Breed, Offspring, from Radix,
Lat. a Root.

V. 781. Beyond the Indian Mount; The Mountain Imaus, the Northern Boundary of
India. Ibid. Or Faery Elves; Or Dancing Sprights, agreeable to the Old Wives
Fables: Fairies seem derivable from (...), the Ionic word for Fauns, Satyrs,
and such like Wild Creatures, as are Fabled to frequent the Woods.

Elf; A Goblin, a Nimble Spright, from (...), to change, according to the
Erroneous Opinion, that these Fairy Elves do sometimes exchange their Brats for
others more Beautiful.

V. 782. Whose Midnight Revels; Whom sporting and dancing at Midnight, near
some Wood, or Waters-side, a Swain going late home, sees, or imagines that he
sees. To Revel, is properly to Dance or make Merry late, or all Night, from the
Fr. Resveiller, to Watch, to be up late.

V. 783. Belated Peasant; Some Country Swain out late at Night: Paisant, Fr. a
Countryman, a Clown.

V. 784. Or dreams he sees. So Virg. Aut videt aut vidisse putat per nubila
Lunam. AEn. 6.

V. 785. Sits Arbitress; Governess of the Night, looking on like a Judge and
Beholder of their Pastimes. Lucian, in his Book De Dea Syria, calls the Moon
Noctis Arbitram. Arbiter is properly an Umpire, a Private Judge, chosen by
Common Consent to determine between Parties, but most properly it signifies a
Looker on, and is so used by Horace, Non locus effusi late maris arbiter; a
Place that has a free and open Prospect to the Sea-ward. Epist. Lib. Cap. 11.

Ibid. And nearer to the Earth; Beginning to decline and go down, nearer to her
setting, or nearer to the Earth, in regard of the Sun and Stars, that fetch
wider compass round it.

V. 786. Wheels her pale course; Makes her wan way, drives her pale Chariot
nearer to the Earth. Pallidus, Lat. faint, whitish, course: Cursus, Lat. Race,
Journey, Way.

V. 787. Intent, with Jocund Music charm, etc. They wholly busy in their
Sports and Dance, with pleasing. Tunes delight his charmed Ear. Intent,
earnest, set upon a thing, of intensus, Lat. Jocund, of Jucundus, Lat. sweet,
pleasant: To charm, is to gain upon, and as it were bewitch or inchant ones
Ears, so as to deprive him of the power to depart, of Carmen, Lat. for a Charm.
Carmina vel Coelo possunt deducere Lunam. Virg. Ecl. 8.

Music; (...), the Art of Harmony, whether Instrumental or Vocal; A Musis
Inventoribus.

V. 788. At once with Joy and Fear, etc. At the same time both pleased and
scared, delighted and affrighted, his Heart within him leaps, he feels at once
the unequal Motions and Impressions that Fear and Joy make in his beating
Breast. Rebound, of Rebondir, Fr. to leap back again; a Metaphorical
Expression, from the rebounding of a Ball.

V. 789. Thus Incorporeal Spirits; Thus Angels, or Spirits not clothed and
clogged with gross Earthly Bodies, for Incorporeal is Declarative of their
Nature. Incorporeus, Lat. without a Body.

V. 790. Reduced their Shapes immense; Lessened and contracted their vast
Shapes to smallest size: Reducere, Lat. to restrain: Immensus, Lat. vast, huge.

Ibid. And were at large; And were at ease, not crowded, because contracted
into less room; so to go at large, is to be at liberty, to be free, otherwise
to be at large, when they had lessened themselves, would be a plain
Contradiction.

V. 792. Of that Infernal Court; Of Hell, Lucifer's new Court: Infernalis, Lat.
belonging to the nethermost deepest Hell, (...).

V. 793. In their own Dimensions; Not lessened in Shape or Size, but in their
own Majestic make: Dimensio, Lat. Measure, Proportion.

V. 794. Seraphick; Is the singular of Seraphim, and Cherubim the plural of
Cherub, the Rusing Lords, of both which before.

V. 795. In close recess; In strictest privacy: Recessus, Lat. Retirement, a
place to be in private.

Ibid. And secret Conclave; Is a private place into which no Person can come
without a Key, a place appointed and set apart for secret Counsels, of Con and
Claudo, to be shut up together: Hence the place where the Election of the Pope
is made at Rome, is called the Conclave.

V. 796. A thousand Demigods; A great Assembly of consulting Seraphims, called
Demigods, as being Spirits approaching nearest to Divinity, though infinitely
short of it. Demi of Dimidium, Lat. half the word answers to the (...) of the
Heathen, Illustrious Persons, Aiders of Mankind, and Maintainers of Virtue;
Heroes who delivered their Country from Oppression and Tyranny, therefore
reputed the Offspring of the Gods, and at their Deaths mounted among them.
(...)
(...). Hesiod. (...)* So (...).


Ibid. A Thousand; A great many, a certain Number, for one uncertain, so mill
trahens varios adverso sole colores, Virg. of the Rainbow, casting a Thousand
Colors, the many-coloured Bow.

V. 797. Frequent and full; Complete and full, a Pleonasm, Frequens, Lat. for
full, Sylva frequens trabibus.

V. 798. Consult; The Consultation, of Consulo, Lat. to take advice, to
consider of Affairs together.

NOTES On MILTON's PARADISE Lost.
BOOK II.
Verse. 1. OF Royal State; Of Kingly Port and Condition: Royal, Fr. belonging to
a King, of Roy, Fr. from Rex, Lat. a King: State, of Status, Lat. Condition,
Quality, Dignity, Secundum Statum, according to the Quality of of the Person.

V. 2. Outshone; More Glorious and Shining: Of Outshine, to shine beyond, Out
signifying Beyond: As Outdo, to do more, or beyond the power of another.

Ibid. Ormus; Ormusium, once a Rich and Potent City in an Island on the Coast
of Persia, seated at the Mouth of the Persian Gulf. about 12 Miles from the
Continent, called Ormuzia, famous for the Traffic of India, Persia, and
Arabia, for which its Situation made it most convenient: The Arabians used to
say of it, Ibid. Si Terrarum Orbis quaqua patet annulus esset,
Illius Ormusium Gemma decusque foret.


Ind; India, named of its vast River Indus, bounding it on the West, rich in
Mines of Gold and Silver, with precious Stones and Ge^^, and Spices of all
sorts.

V. 3. Or where the Gorgeous East; Or where the Glorious Nations of the East:
Gorgeous, of the Fr. Glorieux, Splendid, Gaudy.

V. 4. Barbarick Pearl and Gold; Pearl and Gold found among the soft Asiaticks,
esteemed and called Barbarous by the Grecians: Barbaricus, Lat. Foreign, found
among uncivilized People. Thus Lucretius terms Exotic Clothes of a Foreign
Fashion: Iam tibi Barbaricae vestes Melibaeaque fulgens. Lib. 2.

So Virgil. Barbarico posts Auro, spoliisque superbi. AEn. 2.

And Lucan. Pharsa. Lib. 1. Barbaricas saevi discurrere Caesaris alas;
Forces raised among Barbarous Nations.


V. To that bad Eminence; Raised to that sad Supremacy, to that wicked Height:
Eminentia, Lat. Excellency, a Station and Degree of Honor more than ordinary,
Son Eminence.

Satan, by much bad Merit raised on high, fat on a Glorious Throne in Kingly
State, outdoing far the Pride of wealthy Ormus, and rich India; or where the
gaudy Eastern Nations pour with profuse hand whole showers of Pearl and Gold
upon their barbarous Kings.

Ibid. And from Despair, thus high uplifted beyond Hope; And from the desperate
Estate in which so late he was, when he lay grovelling on the burning Lake:
Raised up thus high beyond his Hope, Aspires beyond thus high, aims at some
things above this height: Desperatio, Lat. Despair.

V. 8. Insatiate to pursue; Unsatisfied with the pursuit of, unsatisfied in
prosecuting War against the Almighty, tho in vain to pursue successless War
with Heaven, much overmatch'd: Insatiatus, Lat. unsatisfied: Pursuit, Fr.
Poursuivre, to follow after, to push on: Vain, Vanus, Lat. foolish, indiscreet,
and thence unsuccessful.

V. 10. Imaginations thus displayed; Did thus his lofty Thoughts unfold:
Display, of Disployer, Fr. from Displicare, Lat. to unfold, to unwrap; our
Imaginations, till expressed by Words lying close wrapped, and, as it were,
folded up in our Minds, which our Expressions unfold, and lay open to others
Ears and Understandings: Imaginatio, Lat. the Conceptions of the Mind, our
Thoughts.

V. 11. Powers and Dominions, etc. Ye Rulers, Princes, and Heavenly Gods, well
expressed by Satan in the beginning of his Speech, by Power and Dominion in the
Abstract, flattering his Damned Slaves with Absolute Power, and Sovereign
Command, styling them The Deities of Heaven, at the same time they were,
outcast and exiled thence, Captives of Hell. St. Paul uses the same Expression,
Coloss. 1. 16. Thrones or Dominions, Principalities or Powers. Dominium, Lat.
Rule: Dei^as, Lat. Godhead, Deity.

V. 12. For since no Deep, etc. For since no Deep, no not this bottomless Pit
of Hell, is able in its flaming Dungeon to Imprison the everlasting Strength of
Deathless Angels, tho overlaid and foiled: Oppressus, Lat. Overlaid,
Overcharged.

V. 15. From this descent Celestial Virtues; From this low Station our Heavenly
Powers recovering and arising, will much more daring and more dreadful show,
than if not fallen at all, and need to fear no second foyl: Descent, Descensus,
Lat. Descensus Averni, going down into Hell, Virg. Fatum, Lat. Calamity,
Overthrow.

V. 18. The fixed Laws of Heaven; Satan here ascribes his former high Station in
Heaven not to his Maker but to Fate and uncontrolable Necessity, the fixed
unalterable Laws of Heaven, according to the Opinion of the Stoics, well
expressed by Lucan: Sive Parens rerum --
Fixit in aeternum causas, qua cuncta coercet
Se quoque lege tenens, and secula jussa ferentem,
Fatorum immoto divisit limite Mundum. Phar. 2.


V. 21. Has been achieved of Merit; Tho Fate made the at first your Leader,
next your own free Choice, moved to it by what I have merited, either by
Conduct, or my Courage, yet nothing more secures me in this safe unenvied
Throne, allowed me thus by general Consent, than this our overthrow, recovered
in some measure: Achiev'd, or Achieved, of Achever* F^^ to bring to pass, to
finish, to complete.

V. 23. Established; Fixed, assured: Of Establir, Fr. to confirm: Consent,
Consensus, Lat. Agreement.

V. 25. In Heaven, which follows Dignity; The Glorious Train that does in
Heaven's happy Palaces attend on Ruling Angels, well might move Envy from those
below: Dignitas, Lat. Worth, and thence (as the reason of it) Authority.

V. 26. From each Inferior; From every Underling, from those under Command:
Inferior, Lat. Lower.

V. 27. Exposes; Lays open: Of Exponere, Lat. to hazard, to adventure.

V. 28. The Thunders Aim; An Epithete Homer o^^^n gives his Jupiter: (...), and
(...), thundering from on high: (...), Altitonans.

V. 29. Your Bulwark; Your Guard, your Security, that interposeth between you
and Danger, a Bulwark being a Defense made to strengthen a Town against an
Attack, where the Defendants stand unexposed to the Enemies Shot, who assault
it barefaced: Of Boll, Ger. for Round, Spherical; and Werk, a Work,
denominated of its Circular Shape.

Ibid. Condemns; Of Condamnare, Lat. to condemn, to overthrow in Judgment. The
highest Place, Satan's Pre-eminence gives Sentence, as it were, against him,
that he ought foremost to expose himself to the most eminent Dangers, in regard
of his high Station and Command.

V. 32. From Faction; From Plotting, and contriving Parties: Factio, Lat. for
the same, is a siding of great Men generally, rather than good, combining for
their own Interest together against a Prince or Government.

Ibid. Will Claim; Will lay Claim to, will strive for: Of Claim, Fr. for a
public Demand of something belonging to a Person kept out of Possession of it:
Of the Lat. Clamare, Clamando sibi vindicare; thence the barbarous Law word,
Clameum.

V. 33. Precedence; Place, a going before, Authority: None sure will claim
Precedence, will strive for Place in Hell, where the highest Seat may be the
hottest: Praecedentia, Lat. of Praecedere to go before.

V. 34. That with ambitious Mind; Satan here slily sets forth to view all his
Dangers and Undertakings, his Courage, and his Consultations, but hides and
keeps close his proud Ambition, and desire of Rule, Lording it over the fallen
Angels for his sake exposed to Sin and Suffering, for his dire Ambition that
made him Rebel against his Maker, Ambition so insatiate of Command, that in the
first Book, Verse. 262. he says, To Reign is worth Ambition, tho in Hell; which
here he cloaks with such a sly Infinuation, as if his High and Kingly
Exaltation did only raise his Sufferings to a height, in proportion to his
Power: Ambitiosus, Lat. desirous of Command.

V. 36. Firm Accord; Assured and unshaken Agreement: Of Accord, Fr. of
Accorder, to agree, as if Accordare, of Ad and Corda, a Musical Metaphor, from
the stretching and tuning of several Strings to the same Tone: Firmus, Lat. for
settled, sure.

V. 39. Surer to prosper, etc. More certain to succeed, than even Success it
self could have ascertained us: Prosperity, Lat. Prosperitas, which often makes
Men heedless of their Advantages and Dangers.

V. 41. Or Covert Guile; Or secret Practices, cunning Wiles and Stratagems:
Couvert, Fr. hid: Of Couvrir, Fr. to hide: Of the Lat. Cooperire, to conceal.

V. 42. We now debate; Argue, Consider, Dispute: Of Desbatre, Fr. to Fight; a
Debate being a kind of Fight, and engaging of one Reason against another, till
by frequent Refutations the strongest prevail, and are Victorious.

V. 46. The Eternal; with God, who is Everlasting: AEternus, Lat. Eternal.

Ibid. To be deemed equal in strength; His Hope was to be judged equal in Force
and Power with God everlasting: Deemed, Judged, of the Sax. Deman, to judge,
and Dema, a Judge: Equal, AEqualis, Lat. for like in Power, Years, or Size, etc.

V. 47. And rather than be less, cared not, etc. These Words consummate the
Character of Moloc, the boldest and the fiercest Spirit that fought in Heaven,
daring to that degree, that rather than be any thing less than the Almighty,
would choose, to cease to be at all, had rather be destroyed, annihilated, and
reduced from Being, to his Primitive Original Nothing.

V. 48. Cared not to be; Despised his Being, his Nature, and Eternity, with
that Care lost, with that contempt and disregard of Life, lost and vanished
were all his Fears of what might happen to him.

V. 50. Or worse, he reck'd not; Of Hell, or worse, if ought might be so, he
made no account, stood not in aw of: He reck'd not, he reckoned not, an
abbreviation to reck, to reckon, to esteem or make account of.

Ibid. These Words thereafter, etc. And accordingly in these Words expressed
his Mind, his Sentiments.

V. 52. Of Wiles more unexpert; With Tricks and Designs less acquainted:
Inexpertus, Lat. unskilled in, unacquainted with.

V. 53. Contrive; Find out: Controuver, Fr. to invent.

V. 56. Sit lingering here; Stay waiting here, losing their Time and Patience:
Linger, of the Ger. Langerew, to draw out in length, as if to longer.

V. 57. Heaven's Fugitives; the Runaways of Heaven, that have forsaken and fled
from their Native Heaven: Fugitivus, Lat. one that runs away.

V. 58. Opprobrious Den of Shame; A Pleonasme, this dark disgraceful Den of
Shame: Den is properly a lurking Place, where Wild Beasts in Woods and Forests
hide themselves.

V. 59. The Prison of his Tyranny, etc. The Prison into which we are thrown by
his Usurped Power, who Reigns thus much the longer, by the delay we make in
attempting on him.

V. 63. Turning our Tortures, etc. Using our Torments in stead of Arms against
our Tormenter; explained by Arming our selves with Hellish Flames and Fury, V.
61. Tortura, Lat. for any sort of Pain or Punishment usually inflicted on
Malefactors, to make them confess their Crimes and Wicked undertakings.

V. 65. Of his Almighty Engine; A description of the Thunder, God Almighty's
powerful Engine.

V. 67. Black Fire and Horror; The gloomy, dark, and obscure Fire of Hell, from
whose Flames no Light, but rather Darkness visible. Book 1. V. 62.

Ibid. And Horror shot with equal Rage; And trembling and dismay, with the same
force and fury thrown amongst his Angels: Horror, Lat. for Quaking, either by
reason of Fear, or Cold, the one being the consequence of the other: Rage,
Fury, of the Lat. Rabies, Madness.

V. 69. Mixed with Tartarean Sulphur; And his pure Throne, stained and polluted
with Hell Fire, and flaming Brimstone: Tartareus, Lat. Hellish; of (...), Gr.
the deep Gulf of Hell, the bottomless Pit; of (...), to be disturbed, to be in
confusion. -- (...)
(...).
Bis nigra videre Tartara. Says Virg. AEn. 6.

V. 71. And steep to scale, etc. And hard to rise upright upon the Wing against
our Foes, who overreach us from on high: Difficult, Lat. Difficilis, hard to
be brought to pass: Steep, Upright, as Cliffs and Hills are, where we are
forced to climb up step by step: To scale, is properly to mount up to, by a
Ladder, of Scala, Lat. so signifying; hence Scalado, setting Ladders to a
Town-Wall, and endeavoring by them to pass over, here, to mount upright upon
the Wing toward Heaven's high Battlements.

V. 73. If the sleepy Drench, etc. If the dull Draught, we lately took of the
Lethean Lake, does not still seize our Senses, and make us forget our natural
Force and Faculties; Pythagoras, who was the first, or at least the most famous
of the Philosophers, who maintained the (...), the returning of Souls after
Death into other Bodies, to act other parts on the low Stage of this miserable
Life, gave occasion to the Poets that followed his Opinion, to invent this
Lethe, which was one of the Rivers of Hell, where Souls that were to be
re-embodied were first drenched before their return to this World, that they
might forget all that they knew or suffered before, of which it seems
Pythagoras drank not so deep, since he remembered his former Name and Quality.
-- Trojani tempore Belli,
Panthoides Euphorbus eram --


To this Lethean Lake our Poet alludes; of which Virg. -- Animae quibus altera
fato
Corpora debentur, Lethaei ad Fluminis undam,
Securos latices and longa oblivia potant. AEn. 6.
-- Lethes tacitus praelabitur amnis
Infernis, ut fama, trahens oblivia, venis. Luc. lib. 9.


Drench, of the Sax. Drencan, to drink. Benumm not still, does not still
stupifie, and dwell upon our Understandings: A Limb is said to be benumbed, when
so seized on by the Cold as to be useless, and not to be moved; of the Sax.
Niman, to take hold of, to seize on; as the Latins use Membris captus, and
Physicians express the stupifying Distempers that affected the Brain, by (...),
by the same Analogy.

V. 77. To us is adverse; Is contrary to our nature: Adversus, Lat. against,
contrary; the Winged Angels, Spiritual and Light, do naturally ascend; descent
and fall is force, and preternatural to them.

V. 78. Hung on our broken Rear; Followed our routed Army in the Rear: Of the
Fr. Arriere, behind.

V. 79. Insulting; Leaping on us: Of Insulto, Lat. to leap upon, of in and
salto, to jump, from the usage of the Word; for triumphing and bragging over
one is merely Metaphorical, from Insultare, to trample on, to tread under Foor,
and thence to Scorn and Contemn: Through the Deep, through the vast Interval,
the space between Heaven and Hell.

V. 80. With what compulsion; With what constraint and force, what painful
flight, how difficult and hard it was for us to descend, to take our flight
against our Airy Nature downwards: Compulsio, Lat. constraint: Laboriosus, Lat.
difficult, full of labor.

V. 81. The Ascent is easy; To spring upwards on the Wing, is usual and easy
to us: Ascensus, Lat. the act of flying or getting up. Virgil does as truly
observe: -- Facilis descensus Averni
Sed revocare gradus, superasque evadere ad auras
Hic labor, hoc Opus est. -- AEn. 6.


Concerning his Hero's going to visit his Father among the Shades below, Bodies
compounded and elemented of Earth do naturally descend; but to Spirits, those
Divine, Airy, Agile Beings, as our Poet well observes, Ascent is easy, and all
Motion downwards seems forced and contrary.

V. 87. In this abhorred Deep; In this most hateful Dungeon, in this
deterstable loathsome Deep: Of Abhorreo, Lat. to hate.

V. 88. Of unextinguishable Fire; Everlasting Fire, that shall not be quenched:
Inextinguibilis, Lat. unquenchable; as described in Isa. 66. and the last
Verse; and Mark 9. 43, 44, 45, 46, etc.

V. 89. Must exercise us; Must vex and toil us everlastingly, must be our
constant business to be broiled in everlasting Flames: Exerceo, Lat. to vex and
trouble, as well as to employ and busy.

V. 90. The Vassals of his Anger; The Subjects of his Wrath, the Bondslaves of
his everlasting Fury: Vassal does properly signify a Tenant, who, by the
holding of his Lands, was bound to attend his Lord in Person to the Wars;
thence by the Learned Spelman deduced from the Ger. Gesell, a Companion in
Fight and Danger; but at last it was depraved to signify a Slave or Bondman.

Ibid. The Scourge; The Lash, the Whip; of the Fr. Escourgee, a Thong, a Lash:
As the Ital. Scoreggiare, to Scourge, all from the Lat. Corium, a Hide, out of
which Thongs and Lashes were usually made.

V. 91. Inexorably; Without Remission, not to be begged off: Of Inexorabilis,
Lat. that cannot or will not forgive, unpardonably.

V. 92. Calls us to Penance; To Punishment: Of Penance, a contraction of the
Lat. Paenitentia, Repentance, being a Punishment inflicted on our selves by
hearty Sorrow and Grief for our Offenses, that God may be pleased, through the
Merits and Mediation of Jesus Christ, to remit that Eternal One due to our
manifold Transgressions. Our Poet here supposes the Sufferings of the Damned
Spirits not to be always alike intense, but that they had some Intermissions,
during which they might consider of their sad condition, and with more decorum
contrive, and try all ways how to alleviate their everlasting Loss of Heaven
and Happiness.

V. 93. Quite abolished, and expire; Utterly destroyed, and cease to be:
Abolitus, Lat. utterly ruined, quite destroyed. Expirare, Lat. to dye, to
breath ones last; not to be said of the Angels everlasting, a part p^st, Quite
altogether, of the Fr. Quitte, free, as Debtors are when they have paid what
they owe, and are free from all their Obligations; of the Lat. Quietus, at
ease, as being discharged.

V. 94. What doubt we to incense; Why should we be afraid of increasing his
Anger to extremity: Incendere, Lat. to inflame, to set on fire.

V. 95. Which to the height enraged; Which forced into its fiercest Flame,
which to its most outrageous height provoked: Enraged, increased, even unto
Madness, of Enrage, Fr. Mad, Furious.

V. 96. His fiercest Wrath; Which raised to utmost Fury, will either quite
destroy us, and bring back to our first Nothing this our sprightly Being; a
State more happy than to be ever wretched: Consume, of Consumere, Lat. to
waste, to destroy: Reduce, of Reducere, Lat. to bring back to the former place
or condition.

V. 97. This Essential; This our Being: Nothing and Essence are directly
opposite, the one being a Privation of what the other is: Essentiale, Lat. any
thing that is; of Essentia being, of Esse to be, happier far, etc. an Argument
that has more of Subtilty than Solidity in it.

V. 98. It Is happier far not to be at all, than to be miserable; Of this
Opinion, Virgil makes Inturna in AEn. 12. where she complains: Quo vitam dedit
AEternam? Cur mertis adempta est
Conditio? Possem tantos finire dolores
Nunc certe, and misero Fratri comes ire sub umbras,
Jam mortalis ego. --


V. 99. Or if our Substance; Or if our Being Heavenly be, and therefore can
never be destroyed; we never can be in worse condition than now we are, on this
side being nothing at all: Divine, of Divinus, Lat. Heavenly.

V. 102. Sufficient to disturb; Able to disorder and trouble Heaven:
Disturbare, Lat. to toss upside down, to hinder an Undertaking.

V. 103. With perpetual Inrodes to allarm, etc. And with continual Attempts to
shake, tho we can never reach his Throne, so fixed, and by the Fates
established: Inrode, an Invasion into an Enemies Country; of in and ride, to
ride into, to Allarm, is to steal upon our Enemies by surprise, which causes
them on the sudden to sound to Arms, to repel the unforescen onset: Of the Fr.
Alarm, the depravation of Ad Arma.

V. 104. Inaccessible; That cannot be come at: Of Inaccessus, Lat.
unapproachable: Fatal, immovable, Fatalis, Lat. according to the unalterable
Decree of the Fates.

V. 106. His Look denounced; His Looks proclaimed, and threatened desperate
Revenge: Of the Lat. Denunciare, to threaten, to bespeak.

V. 109. In Act more graceful and humane; In Behavior more comely and gentile:
Actus, Lat. for gesture in Speech or Gate: Humanus, Lat. belonging to Mankind,
and thence Gentle and Debonaire.

V. 111. For Dignity composed, and high Exploit; Made to Command, and undertake
great Deeds: Compositus, Lat. fitted, framed: Exploit, Fr. an Attempt, a Noble
Design or Undertaking.

V. 112. But all was false and hollow; Deceitful and empty: Hollow, as having
no true Substance and Solidity, a Metaphor taken from Vessels that sound most,
when empty.

V. 113. Dropped Munna; Dropped Sweetness, overflowed with Eloquence, as Manna is
described, Exodus 16. 31. and Wisdom 16. 20. (...) comes of (...), to number,
because overy one was appointed to gather an Omer thereof according to the
number of the Persons in their Families, tho the Talmud will have it (...),
Quid hoc! by way of Admiration.

V. 114. To perplex and dash; To confound and disorder the wisest Councels; of
the Sax Dwaef, a Fool, one astonished, frighted out of all Thought and
Consideration: Maturest, properly Ripest, of Maturus, Lat. Ripe; Maturest
Counsels, the best chosen Advice brought nearest to perfection.

V. 116. In Vice, industrious, etc. In ill, laborious, in more gallant Deeds,
fearful, and backward: Industrius, Lat. diligent, forward: Nobler, of Nobilis,
Nobilior, Lat. more noble, more excellent: Timorous, of Timidus, Lat. fearful.

V. 118. And with persuasive Accent; And in his winning way did thus begin:
Persuasive, of Persuasio, Lat. for persuading, gaining on our Hearers by
Arguments finely urged, eloquent and graceful Discourse: Accent, Lat. Accentus,
the graceful Tone used in pronouncing Speeches, affecting the Auditory with the
Harmonious turn of the Tongue.

V. 121. Main Reason to persuade; Chief Argument to move us to immediate War:
Main, of the Fr. Magne, as that of Magnus, Lat. great, main Reason, chiefest,
the greatest Reason: Immediate War, without any intermission, incessant,
uninterrupted; of Immediatus, Lat. without any stop, or delay.

V. 122. Did not dissuade me most; Were not the greatest Argument to me against
it: Of Dissuader^, Lat. to advise to the contrary, to advise against.

V. 123. Seem to cast, ominous Conjecture, etc. And seem to raise an ill
Opinion of our Undertaking: Ominosus, Lat. unlucky, for Omen is used in both
senses, and here in the worst; Quod dii prius omen in ipsum, Convertant. AEn.
2. Conjectura, a Guess, an Opinion.

V. 124. In Fact of Arms; In Deeds of War: Of Facta, Lat. valiant, noble Deeds.

V. 127. And utter Dissolution; And entire Destruction of his Being, utter
Abolition: Of Dissolutio, Lat. from dis and solvo, the breaking the Ligaments
and very Bonds of Being.

V. 128. As the scope of all his Aim; As the utmost end of his Intention, as
the chief Design and Mark at which he aims: Scopus, (...), the Mark at which
Archers shoot, and thence the Intention and Design at which Men in their
Undertakings aim.

V. 130. That render all Access impregnable; That make all Approaches to
Heaven's high Towers, vain, and to no purpose: Render, of the Fr. Render, as
that of Reddere, Lat. i. e. E^^icere* to make: Access, Accessus, Lat. a coming
to: Imprenable, Fr. not to be taken, or forced.

Ibid. Often on the bordering Deep; Their Legions of Armed Angels often encamp upon
the gloomy Deep that borders on our flaming Dungeon.

V. 132. Encamp their Legions; Legions of Angels keep their watchful Camp,
Neighboring on the Deep, or Winging through the Dark, search far and wide
through Regions of the Night, disdaining any sudden Onset or Attempt: Encamp,
of in and campus, Lat. Field, Armies being then Encamped, when quitting their
Quarters they take the Fields and lodge in 'em.

V. 133. Scout; To spy, to search diligently, as those who are sent out to
discover the approach or posture of the Enemy: Of the Fr. Fs^cute, a Spy, of
Esco^ter, Fr. to hear, to listen, their Ears (in the Night especially) being on
the Watch, as well as their Eyes at other times.

V. 134. Surprise; Of the Fr. Surprinse, a taking one at unawares, an
unforeseen Assault given on a sudden.

V. 135, etc. By Force, and at, etc. Or suppose us able to force our way, and
at our Heels all Hell, in maddest Mutiny armed with ^ooty Fires, could rise and
mix 'em with Heaven's Purity; yet would our mighty Adversary sit, unsullied on
his Throne, and Heaven the Seat, of his transcendent Brightness, would endure
no Stain, but quickly throw off and disdain the bl^ck Attempt superior, and
soon clear it self from all our gross and baser Flames.

Insurrectio, Lat. arising against; of Insurgere, Lat. to confcund, to mix
with, of Confundere, Lat. to mingle by poaring together: Incorruptible,
Incorruptibilis, Lat. not to be corrupted, incapable of decay or alteration:
Unpolluted, Impollutus, Lat. unstained.

V. 139. Etherial Mould; The Heavenly Substance: Mould properly signifies
Earth, Dust.

V. 140. Incapable of Stain; Heaven's Azure, not to be stained or sullied:
Incapax, Lat. not subject to: Expel, of Expellere, to drive out.

V. 142. T^us repulsed; Thus worsted, and foiled: Repulsus, Lat. beaten back,
defeated.

V. 143. Our final Hope is flat Despair; Our last, our utmost Hope is mere
Despair: Final, last, highest, from Finalis, Lat. last: Flat, plat. Mere,
plain, downright Despair.

Ibid. We must exasperate; We must provoke: Exasperare, Lat. to whet, to make
more rough and severe.

V. 147. Th^^ Intellectual Being; This Spiritual Understanding, this Angelic
Essence, whose Beings are more complete, and of a compass of Understanding more
vast and comprehensive than the Rational: Intellectualis, Lat. belonging to
Knowledge.

V. 150. In the wide Womb, etc. In the empty Womb of dark Confusion; Uncreated
Night is made the Image of Nonentity, for of Things uncreated, or that have no
Being, we have but an obscure Negative Notion: I^creatus, Lat. unmade, not
created.

V. 151. Devoid of Sense and Motion; Without all Sense and Motion: Senseless,
dead, void and devoid, of the Fr. Vnide, emp^^^ This is one of those bad, which
Belial endeavors to make appear a good Reason, according to his Character,
Ver. 113. for certainly it is much better not to be at all, than to be miserable
to all Eternity, as our Savior himself testifies of Jud^^; Woe to that Man by
whom the Son of Man is betrayed: it had been good for that Man if he had never
been born. Matthew. 14. 21. And we see even Kings and mighty Potentates willingly
give up, and desire to resign their Crowns, and all the Affluence and Power,
the Pomp and Pride of Life, when pressed with extreme and remediless Pain, tho
but Corporeal, tho the naked and shivering Soul may (for ought they know)
immediately be summoned and arraigned at Heaven's high Tribunal, and after a
short interval, the lazy Grave may again give up its sad and sinful Associate,
to be consigned over to Eternal Punishment.

V. 154. Is doubtful; Whether it be in his Power to do it, is uncertain, is
more than we know; that is, Whether it be consistent with his immutable
Decrees, to annihilate and destroy our Angelic Beings.

V. 156. Belike through Impotence, etc. As it were through Weakness, or by mere
Mistake: Impotentia signifies properly want of Power, thence used to express
Ras^ness and Disability to Govern our Passions; Will God, who is so Wise and so
Omniscient, manage his Anger so unwarily, as in his wrathful Rage with one
stroke to destroy and end his Enemies, whom his Anger spares, decreed and
doomed to suffer without end?

V. 160. We are Decreed, Reserved, and Destined; We are adjudged and doomed,
kept and appointed for everlasting Pain: Decreed, of Decerno, Lat. to judge, to
sentence: Reserved, Reservatus, Lat. kept, preserved: Destined, Destinatus,
Lat. appointed, designed for. Here Belial makes and answers an Objection; If
destined thus, and doomed to everlasting Sufferance, why should we fear or
scruple to provoke the Victor with immediate War? What have we worse to fear,
or more to feel? Which thus he refutes; Tho our Punishment be endless, yet it
is not so severe as when first we fled, and fell from Heaven into this burning
Lake, nor as it may be, if by our daring we should awake his Anger, (somewhat
abated and allayed) who can make our Torments much more intense and everlasting
too.

V. 165. When we fled amain; As fast as we were able, with might and main; of
the Sax. Maegen, Strength, Power.

V. 168. A Refuge, etc. A shelter from those Sufferings: Refugium, Lat. a place
of safety, to which Men fly in time of danger, of Refugio, to fly to.

V. 172. And plunge us in the Flames? And drowned us in that fiery Flood?
Plonger, Fr. to put over Head and Ears into Water.

V. 173. Should intermitted Vengeance, etc. Or what if from Heaven our angry
Victor, somewhat now appeased, should reassume his Thunder? Intermitted,
Intermissus, Lat. broken off, respited.

V. 174. His red Right Hand; God Almighty's Power is in Holy Text expressed by
his Right Hand, as Psalm. 17. 7. and 44. 4. which is called Red, as being Armed
with his flaming Thunder: Read Deuteronomy. 33. 2. where a Fiery Law is said to be in
his Right Hand.

V. 176. Should spout her Cataracts of Fire; And this flaming Roof of Hell
should shower down her Spouts of Fire, (...), or (...); Locus abruptus and
praeceps in flumine, unde aqua rult potius quam fluit; as Eustathius describes
it: Of (...), to flow, and rush away with violence and imp^tuosity as
overflowing Rivers do. A Cataract, is a headlong fall of Water from a steep
place, like those of Nile, deafning the Neighborhood; and these Cataracts of
Fire do well enough agree with Hell's Firmament vaul^ed with fluid Flames.

V. 177. Impendent Horrors; Dreadfully hanging over us: Impendent, of
Impendere, Lat. to hang over, so as to seem instantly ready to fall on ones
Head: Horror, Lat. shivering, quaking for Cold; and thence any extraordinary
Dread or Fright, that scares into a Trembling.

V. 179. Designing or Exhorting; Contriving or persuading, etc. Designo, Lat.
to mark out: Exhortor, Lat. to persuade.

V. 180, and 181. Caught in a fiery Tempest, etc. each on his Rock transfixed;
Snatched in a flaming storm up, shall be dashed, each on a pointed Rock struck
through; borrowed of Virgil, in his description of the Fate of Ajax Oileus:
Illum expirantem transfixo pectore flammas
Turbine corripuit, scopuloque infixit Acuto. AEn. 1.


Homer has not expressed it half so terribly. (...).

Ibid. The Sport and Prey; Vacuis ludibria ventis: Prey, of Praeda, Lat. for
Spoil and Plunder.

V. 182. Of racking Whirlwinds; Of tormenting Tempests, according to the
Hurricane of Hell, set out by our Poet in the beginning of the first Book;
Overwhelmed with Floods and Whirlwinds of tempestuous Fire, Ver. 64.

V. 184. To converse with, etc. To entertain our selves with dismal Groans to
all Eternity: Conversari, Lat, to be familiar, to be acquainted with.

V. 185. Unrespited, Unpitied, Unreprieved; Without Delay or Pity, or Reprieve:
Unrespited, without the least Respit, a Law Term, of the Fr. Respit, a Delay,
time, or a Term given, of Respectus, Lat. for looking back, and considering
before things are brought to a final determination, so Sentence or Judgment is
said to be respited: Unrespited, without any intermisssion: Unpitied, of Pity,
Fr. for Mercy and Compassion: Unrepriev'd, to reprieve: Reprendre, Fr. is to
bring back from the place of Execution, and to suspend the Punishment for some
time.

V. 187. Open or concealed; Public or private, declared or secret: Concelare,
Lat. to hide, to keep close.

V. 191. Derides; Laughs at: Of Deridere, Lat. to scorn, to expose and laugh at.

V. 192. To resist our Might; To withstand our Power: Resistere, to withstand,
to stand against.

V. 193. To Frustrate; To make vain, to disappoint: Frustare, Lat. to deceive.

V. 194. Thus vile; Thus base, mean, and contemptible: Of Vilis, Lat. of no
worth or account.

V. 195. Thus expelled; Thus driven out, Outcasts and Exiles of Heaven: Of
Expellere, Lat. to drive out.

V. 197. Since Fate inevitable; Since unavoidable necessity o'repowers us:
Inevitabilis, Lat. that is not to be avoided: Subdues, of Subdere, Lat. to
overcome, to subdue.

V. 198. Omnipotent Decree; And the All-powerful Sentence of him who has
subdued us: Decretum, Lat. an Ordinance, a Sentence, Fatorum Decreta, were
accounted unalterable.

V. 200. Nor the Law unjust that so Ordains; Nor is the Law, that orders our
Sufferings to bear proportion with our Sins, unequal or unrighteous: Ordinar^,
to dispose, to order, to appoint.

V. 206. To endure Exile; To undergo Banishment: Endurer, Fr. to suffer, of in
and durare: ^xilium, Lat. Banishment.

V. 210. May much remit; Assuage, diminish, and abate his Anger: Remittere,
Lat. to abate.

V. 214. Will slacken; These raging Fires will be less fierce, will abate their
Heat: Slack, of the Lat. Laxus, loose, remiss.

V. 215. Our purer Essence, etc. Our more Spiritual Beings will overcome their
noisome Fumes: Noxius, Lat. hurtful: Vapor, a hot Breath, or fiery Exhalation.

V. 216. Or enured, not feel; Or used and accustomed to 'em, of in and ure, a
contraction of Usura, Lat.

V. 217. And to the place conformed; Or at length altered, and to our sad Seat
becoming suitable: Conformis, Lat. like to.

V. 219. Familiar the fierce Heat; Will entertain with less disorder the
scorching Flames, familiar and customary grown: Familiaris, Lat. wonted, what
one is acquainted with, and accustomed to.

V. 222. Of future Days; Besides what hope Futurity may help us to: Futurus,
Lat. for what is to come.

Ibid. What Chance, what Change; Here our Haranguer does not consider, that
neither Chance or Change take Place on God Almighty, and his Wife and
Unalterable Determinations: Chance, as if Cheance, of Cheoir, Fr. to fall,
Chance being to poor Purblind Mortals what seems to befall 'em, who see not
from whose Hand their Mischiefs come, or that their own often pull 'em down
deservedly upon their Heads.

V. 225. If we procure not; If we increase not our Unhappiness, if we provide
not for our selves more Woe: Procurare, Lat. to busy ones self in another
Matters, also to increase, augment.

V. 226. With Words clothed in Reason's Garb; Thus Belial clothing his
Discourse with Reason's comely Dress, arraying his Oration with fine
Expressions full of seeming Sense and Reason: Garb, of Garb, an old Fr. Word
for a gentile comely Dress; Words are the Garb Men dress their Thoughts in.

V. 227. Counseled ignoble Ease; Advised dishonorable Ease: Ignobilis, Lat.
base, dishonest; Ignobile otium.

V. 229. Either to Disinthrone; Either to Dispossess the King of Heaven, and to
Displace him from his Throne: (...), Gr. to place on a Throne, whose contrary
is to Disinthrone.

V. 230. Or to regain; Or to recover; of the Fr. Regaigner, to obtain, or get
again.

V. 231. Him to Unthrone; Him to bereave of his Power, to dispossess of his
Sovereignty; Unthrone, Dethrone, Disinthrone, Words of the same import.

V. 233. To fickle Chance; When the fixed and Eternal Laws of the Creation shall
to giddy and uncertain Chance give way, and Confusion decide the Quarrel and
Contest.

V. 234. Argues as vain; Proves the other as vain and hopeless for us to
recover our lost and forfeited Inheritance of Heaven: Arguere, Lat. to make
appear, evident.

V. 237. Suppose he should Relent; Suppose he should incline to Mercy, grow
soft and easy, and proclaim to all free Pardon, on condition of Return to our
Obedience; Relent, Fr. Ralentir, Lat. Relentescere, to wax soft: Publicare,
Lat. to Publish: Grace, Gratia Lat. Pardon, Favor.

V. 239. Of new Subjection; Of new Obedience: Subjectio, Lat.

Ibid. With what Eyes; How ashamed and confounded should we? Shame showing it
self in the Eyes, the Windows of the Soul.

V. 241. Strict Laws imposed; Severe Laws laid upon us: Strictus, Lat. hard,
severe, compulsive, of Stringo to bind: Imposed, Impositus, Lat. of Imponere,
to lay upon.

Ibid. To celebrate his Throne with Warbled Hymns; In solemn manner to surround
his Throne with Tuneful Songs, and to his Godhead sing Thanksgivings forced and
feigned: Celebrare, Lat. to worship, to frequent and haunt.

V. 242. With Warbled Hymns; With Chanted Songs: Warble, of the Belg. Wervelen,
is properly to turn round, thence in Music used for that turn of the Voice
used in shaking a Note: Hymns, (...), Gr. a Song made in Praise of the Deity,
many of which were made by Homer, Orpheus, Callimachus, etc. called (...): And
by the same Name Phi^o calls the Psalms of David.

V. 242. Forced Hallelujahs; Strained Praises, and Thanksgivings forced and
constrained: (...) Praise the Lord, of (...) the Imperative Mood Pihel, and
(...) the Lord, frequently used in the Psalms, as 106. 1. and 113. 1. and
Revel. 19. ^. 1, 3, 4, etc.

V. 245. Ambrosial Odours, etc. While from his Altar does ascend the sweetest
Scents, breathed from Immortal Flowers our Slavish Sacrifice: (...), Immortal,
Divine, of (...) Privative, and (...) Mortal. Hence Homer, (...). Sometimes it
signifies Sweet, Pleasing, (...), per placidam noctem; (...). Liquidum
Ambrosiae diffudit Odorem; Geor. 4. And Ambrosiaeque Comae divinum vertice
Odorem, Spiravere; AEn. 1. Nectar was the Drink, and Ambrosia the Meat of the
Gods, administered to 'em by Ganimedes, and Hebe the Goddess of Youth, tho
promiscuously used. Neptune's Horses had a mash of it, (...). And Thetis used
it for a Preservative to Patroclus, (...) It was sometimes taken for the name
of a Flower, whence (...) signifies Floridus, as Eustath.

V. 246. Our Servile Offering; Servilis, Lat. belonging to a Slave, or Bondsman.

V. 249. -- Let us not then pursue, etc. Let us not then pursue the mean
condition of shining Slavery, by Power unattainable, and if by Prayer,
unwelcome, tho in Heaven unacceptable; of in and acceptus, Lat. welcome,
pleasant.

V. 252. Of splendid Vassalage; Of gay, pompous Slavery: Vassalage, is properly
the Service and Subjection a Tenant owes his Lord, of whom he holds his Land.

V. 254. Live to our selves; Tecum habita and noris quam sit tibi curta
supellex. Pers.

V. 256. Preferring hard Liberty; Esteeming Freedom, tho with Hardship gained,
beyond the Yoke of pompous Servitude, that seems so easy to mean Minds: Pompa,
Lat. for show, such as of Triumphs and Processions.

V. 258. Then most conspicuous; Our Grandeur then will be most manifest:
Conspicuus, Lat. evident. notable, admirable.

V. 262. Through Labor and Indurance; To work Ease out of Pain seems a hard
Task, but our Author's meaning is, To overcome their Punishment by Patience,
and by Sufferance to subdue the Extremity of it to that degree, as by Custom
and Habitude to allay its Rigor: Indurance, of Indurare, to bear, to harden
ones self against; as Virg. Durate and vosmet rebus rebus servate secundis.
AEn. 1.

V. 264. Heaven's all-ruling Sire; The Great Governor and Supreme Lord of
Heaven: Sire, Fr. Lord, in a sense so Superlative, that without any addition it
is used as the most Honorable Appellative in Speaking and Addressing to the
French King, All-Ruling: Tum Pater omnipotens rerum cui summa potest^s. AEn. 10.

V. 265. Choose to reside; Make his Abode; of Resider, Fr. to remain, to stay,
to continue in a place.

Ibid. His Glory unobscured; His Brightness unsullied, his Glory not dimmed or
diminished: Unobscured, of Inobscuro, Lat. to hide, to conceal, to darken.

V. 266. And with the Majesty, etc. Darkness has a kind of Awfulness, by our
Poet well expressed by Majesty, with awful Darkness surrounding his Sovereign
Seat, which some of the European Monarchs seem to imitate by the Concealments
of their Courts.

V. 268. Mustering their Rage; Showing their Fury, proclaiming Heaven's loud
Anger: To Muster, is to show, of the Fr. Monstre; so to muster Forces, is to
make a general show and appearance of Soldiers with their Arms; the foregoing
five Verses are an imitation of Psalm. 8. from v. 9. to v. 13. inclusive; see
also Exodus 19. v. 9, and 18. Resembler, Fr. to be like.

V. 269. Cannot we his Light imitate; Confirmed by St. Paul, who tells us,
Satan himself is transformed into an Angel of Light, 2 Cor. 11. v. 14. Imitari,
to Counterfeit, to do any thing like another.

V. 270. This desert Soil, etc. This Wilderness of Woe wants not its concealed
Wealth, Jewels and Gold; nor want we Power or Art to adorn even Hell it self,
and make it imitate his Heaven: Desertum, Lat. a Wilderness, a Place
uninhabited, uncultivated.

V. 275. Become our Elements; Our Punishments in time, perhaps, may change into
our Pastime, a vain Flattery, and foolish Expectation, as if Fits of Gout or
Stone could be more tolerable for being tedious to Extremity, if so, the Damned
Spirits might hope for Ease on everlasting Racks: Elementa, Lat. the first
Principles of which all things are made and compounded, in this Elementary
World our Punishment might become part of our Being.

V. 277. Into their Temper; Our pure Spiritual Being, changed into these gross
Fires, as before, V. 217.

V. 278. The Sensible of Pain; The Sense, the Pungency of Pain; To Sensibile,
the Adjective used for a Substantive.

V. 282. Dismissing quite; Laying aside, giving over all Thoughts of War; of
Demittere, Lat to send away.

V. 284. He scarce had finished; He had scarce made an end of speaking, scarce
had he finished his Speech: Finir, Fr. to make an end, of the Lat. Finire.

Ibid. When such murmur, etc. When such a sound was heard through the Assembly,
as when in hollow Rocks remains the buz of boistrous Winds, which all night
long had raised and swelled the Seas, but by degrees now falling, do with their
rude hoarse Murmurings incline Seamen (whom Danger had bereaved of Rest) to
sleep, whose Skiff perhaps, or little Vessel, rides at Anchor within a Harbor
hemmed in by broken Rocks, the Storm being now blown over: Murmur, Lat. the
noise of Water running, or any such thing, Coined of the sound it makes; (...),
says Eustathius: Hence Expressive of the Applause and good Liking given by the
Auditors to a public Speech or Action. So Virg. -- Continno vastis cum viribus
effert
Ora Dares, magnoque virum se murmr tollit. AEn. 5.


V. 286. Retain the sound of blustering Winds; Retain, of the Fr. Retenir, to
keep in or back, blustering, noiseful, roaring, we call a swaggering vapouring
Fellow, a Blusterer.

V. 287. Had rouzed the Sea; Had raised and swelled the Sea into angry and
foaming Billows, had wakened it out out of its dull lazy Lethargy, where it lay
sleeping in a dead Calm, and stirred and tossed it into a furious Storm. Virg.
compares the Assent given by the Assembly of the Gods to Juno's Speech in AEn.
10. to the rising Wind which our Author assimulates to its decreasing Murmurs.
-- Cunctique fremebant
Caelicolae assensu vario; ceu flamina prima
Cum deprensa fremunt silvis, and caeca volutant
Murmura, venturos nautis prodentia ventos.


The one as true on Land, as the other at Sea.

Ibid. With hoarse Cadence lull; Words not easy to be altered into others half
so expressive, the Winds with their decreasing hoarsness hush and lay asleep
the o'rewatch'd Seaman: La Cadence, as the Fr. use it in reference both to
Speech and Music, is a round going off of Words, a just and proportionate
Measure falling from some higher Strain, whence it has its Name, from Cadere,
Lat. to fall: Lull, expresses a sort of humming and singing used by Nurses to
get Children to sleep, whence our Lullaby, a Word coined of the sound,
derivable of the Greek (...), used to the same purpose, of (...), Gr. to speak.

V. 288. Seafaring Men; Seamen that travel by Sea, of the Ger. Fharen, to go,
to journey: Bark, of the Fr. Barque, and this of (...), Gr. for a little Ship;
others, of our Bark of a Tree, of which diverse barbarous People do at this day
make Boats.

V. 289. Or Pinnace Anchors, etc. Of the Fr. Pinasse, a Skiff, of the Lat.
Pinus, the Timber Tree of which anciently they were made, and by the best Poets
tropically described. Ne trepidate meas, Teucri, defendere Naves
Neve armate manus: Maria ante exurere Turno
Quam sacras dabitur Pinus. -- AEn. 9.


Anchors, rides at anchor, remains in; Anchora, Lat. of the Gr. (...); And
since this and many other of our Sea-terms are borrowed of the Grecians as well
as of other Nations, why may we not presume that our Island Ancestors, by
situation inclined to Commerce, might bring home and adopt into their Language
many Greek Words, as probably as their Sailing-Successors daily transport
Foreign Commodities and Fashions: -- Unco non alligat Anchora morsu, says Virg.
descriptive both of its shape and design; AEn. 1.

Ibid. In a Craggy Bay; in a Rocky Harbor: A Crag signifies a Rock, derivable
either of the Welsh Craig, signifying the same thing, or of Crag the Neck,
broken and sharp Rocks appearing on the Hills in shape of that similitude. A
Bay, is properly the Sea encompassed by a bending Shore, of Bygen, Ger. to
bend, being a crooked or circular Enclosure of the Sea where Ships may ride
secure, defended from the Fury of the Winds.

V. 290. Such Applause; Such good liking; such Commendation was given Mammon at
the end of his Speech: Applausus, Lat. a clapping of Hands in token of Liking
or Joy, of Applaudo.

V. 291. His Sentence pleased; This Opinion pleased persuading Peace:
Sententia, Lat. Judgment, Council: Advising, of the Fr. Aviser, to give
Counsel, to Advise.

V. 292. For such another Field; The Place for the Action, the Field for the
Battle there fought, for such another Fight was more dreadful and terrible to
'em than all their Torments. Nulla salus bello, pacem te Pos^imus omnes. AEn.
11.

V. 294. The Sword of Michael; Described in the sixth Book, Given him from the
Armory of God so tempered, with which Satan himself was wounded. Read Dan. 10.
v. 13 and 21. and Revel. 12. 7.

V. 296. To found this nether Empire; To lay the Foundations of this Infernal
State, of Hell the Government below: Fundare, Lat. to lay the Groundwork of a
Building: Nether, of the Sax. Nider, downwards below: Imperium, Lat. Command of
Kings Governors, etc.

V. 297. By Policy, etc. Which by State Policy, and length of Time, might rise
to Rival Heaven: Policy, of (...), Gr. for the Government of Kingdoms or
States, of (...), a City, and thence taken for the Subtilties made use of to
support 'em: Process, of Processus, Lat. of Procedere, to go on, as Time is
traveling every minute forward toward Eternity, its Journey's end.

V. 298. In Emulation opposite; In envious Contrariety to Heaven: AEmulatio is
used both in good and bad Sense, for striving to exceed and excel others:
Oppositus, Lat. set against, contrary to.

V. 300. With grave Aspect he rose; With Wisdom in his Face he stood up:
Gravis, Lat. Weighty, Wise: Aspectus, Lat. Countenance, Looks.

V. 302. A Pillar of State; A Supporter of the Government, one on whose
Shoulders the weighty Affairs of State might well be trusted, able to undergo
the burden of Public Business, and therefore fitly compared to Atlas in the
following Verses; a Metaphor taken from Architecture, which under-props mighty
Piles of Building by Pillars: Status, Lat. for Condition, and used to express
the great Men and Governors of Kingdoms and Commonwealths.

Ibid. Deep on his front engraven Deliberation sat, etc. The nice Consideration
of Affairs appeared in his Forehead, and wary Advice dwelt on his Brow: Front,
of Frons, Lat. the Forehead: Engraven, of Engraver, Fr. of Graver to Carve, of
(...), Gr. the Grecians having been great Masters in Sculpture, we may well
borrow their terms of Art: Deliberatio, Lat. for Consultation, an Advising.

V. 305. Majestic tho in Ruin; Awful although undone: Majesteux, Fr. Princely,
of the La^. Majestas, Sage, Wise, of Sagax. Lat. Cunning.

V. 306. With Atlantean Shoulders, etc. Of vast Abilities, fit to undertake the
weightiest Affairs of mightiest Kingdoms: Atlas was King of Mauritania, for his
great skill in Astrology Fabled to support Heaven on his Shoulders. -- Docuit
quae maximus Atlas
Hic canit errantem Lunam, Solisque labores. AEn. 1.
-- Ubi Caelifer Atlas
Axem humero torquet stellis ardentibus aptum. AEn. 6.
-- Maximus Atlas
Edidit, aethereos humero qui sustinet axes. AEn. 8.


Perseus the Son of Jupiter turned him in to a Mountain of the same Name for
refusing him Entertainment, of which read Metam. lib. 4. about the latter end.
It is the greatest Mountain of Africa, of vast height, which gave occasion to
the Fiction of bearing Heaven on his Back: See him described, AEn. 4. -- Latera
ardua cernit
Atlantis duri, Caelum qui vertice fulsit, etc.


Hence Juvenal exposing the multiplicity of the Roman Deities, -- Nec turba
Deorum
Talis, ut est hodie; contentaque sidera paucis
Numinibus, miserum urgebant Atlanta minore Pondere. Sat. 13.


V. 307. His Look drew Audience; His Look obliged 'em all to listen and attend,
silent as Night, and quiet and unmoved as the midday Air in Summer: Audience,
hearing, of Audire, Lat. to hear: Noontide, midday, of Nona, Ital. for that
time, from the ninth hour of the day, when the Romans used to eat, and Tid,
Sax. Time; Night is seldom named by the Poets, without the adjunct of Stillness
and Silence, Sub nocte silenti, AEn. 4. And in great Continents in Summer time,
about Noon the Air is as still, not the least breath of Wind being heard to
break or interrupt its calmness, a Similitude not so obsolete.

V. 310. Thrones, etc. Princes, and commanding Powers, the Birth of Heaven,
Divine Perfections, or these glorious Names, now must we quit, and changing
them be called, etc.

V. 311. Or these Titles, etc. These glorious Names: Titulus, Lat. for a Title
of Honor as we phrase it: Renuntiare, Lat. to renounce, to forsake, to give
over.

V. 312. Changing Style; Altering our Appellations, changing our Names: Style,
of Stylus, Lat. for an Iron with the sharp end, of which the Romans wrote on
Tables, and with the broad end struck it out, hence taken for the manner of
Men's Writing or Speaking, and for their Names, Titles, and Dignities.

V. 313. For so the popular Vote inclines; For to this common Wish, the general
Voice, the public Desire, leads and directs: Vote, of the Lat. Votum, a
Prayer, or any thing much wished for; so to put to the Vote, is to leave the
Matter in dispute to be decided by the choice, desire, or good liking, of the
major part of the Assembly: Popularis, Lat. common, general, as belonging to
the common People: Inclines, moves, of Inclinare, Lat. to bend, to stoop
downwards.

V. 315. Doubtless, while we Dream; No doubt, while we vainly imagine, and will
not know, that Heaven's King has decreed this Place our Prison, not a secure
Abode, beyond the reach of his Almighty Arm, Ah nescis longas Regibus esse
manus! most undoubtedly true of Heaven's Almighty King: To Doom, is to decree,
to judge, to ordain, a Sax. word: Retreat, of the Fr. Retraicte, a retiring, or
withdrawing from Danger, into a place of Strength and Security.

V. 318. To live Exempt from H. h. Jurisdiction; To live free from God's
Supreme Authority, out of the compass of Heaven's all-commanding Power:
Exemptus, Lat. free from, Privileged against, whence the Fr. Military Word Un
Exempt, being an Inferior Officer discharged of common Duty: Jurisdiction,
Jurisdictio, is a Law-Term, signifying the Authority and Power by Law given to
a Person to do Justice in Causes of Complaints made before him. See Cook's
Proemium to the 4 Justitiae.

V. 319. In new League banded against, etc. In a new Alliance combined against
his Power: Banded, of the Fr. Bander, to join together, to combine.

V. 321. In strictest Bondage; But to continue in severest Slavery, tho at this
vast distance by unavoidable Restraint, Retained, Millions of Slaves Imprisoned.

V. 322. Curb; Restraint: A Curb is that Chain that is made fast under a Horses
Chops, serving to retain and withold him, the Word to Curb signifying as
much; of the Fr. Courber, of Curvare, Lat. to bend, to bridle, and restrain:
Reserved, of the Lat. Reservare, to keep in store, to retain: Captive, of
Captivus, Lat. properly a Prisoner taken in War.

V. 325. In height or depth; In Heaven or Hell, the one the highest, the other
the lowest, and consequently deepest, First and Last, etc. Absolutely, without
any Competitor; I am Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the ending, says the
Lord, which is, and which was, and which is to come, even the Almighty; Rev. 1.
8.

V. 328. And with Iron Scepter Rule, etc. And bear Rule over us here in Hell,
by exercising his wrathful Vengeance on us, as he governs by his Eternal
Goodness, and unexhausted Mercies those in Heaven: The Iron Scepter is an
allusion to Psalm. 11. 9. as that of Gold to Esther 5. 2. Of these two Metals
were the Ages of the World so significantly named, the first and happiest The
Golden Age, long before that Precious Bane was found, the other of Iron: Tunc
itum est in viscera Terrae, etc. Iamque nocens ferrum, ferroque nocentius aurum
Prodierat, Met. 1. Sub initio.

V. 330. Projecting; Designing, contriving, of Projicere, Lat. to put forth, to
be inclined, or bent to, whence Project, and Projectors.

V. 331. War has determined us; This one Battle lost, has put an end to all
our Endeavors, has concluded us; of Determinare, Lat. to bring to an end:
Irreparable, Irreparabilis, Lat. not to be restored to its former State,
irrecoverable.

V. 334. Custody severe; Strict and close Imprisonment: Custodia, Lat. Prison,
Restraint: Severus, Lat. harsh, cruel.

V. 335. Arbitrary Punishment; According to the Will of our angry Conqueror:
Arbitrarius, Lat. Voluntary, left to the Will of another: The Civilians
distinguish between Arbitrium and Arbitrarium thus; Arbitrium, est sententia,
ex arbitrio and bona fide lata; Arbitrarium quod in arbitris potestate est pro
arbitrio judicioque suo statuere.

V. 338. Untamed Reluctance; Unbroken, unabated, unwearied Opposition:
Reluctance, Strife, of Relucta^i, to wrestle with: Hostilitas, Lat. Enmity.

V. 340. May least Rejoice, etc. May take least Pleasure in inflicting those
Punishments that are to us most sensible and severe,

V. 343. With dangerous Expedition; With hazardous Attempt to march against the
Almighty: Expeditio, Lat. a March into an Enemies Country, a Warlike Voyage:
Invade, of Invadere, Lat. to go against, or into an Enemies Land.

V. 334. Siege or Ambush, etc. Siege, of Seeds, Lat. a Seat, for to besiege a
Place is to sit down before it, and Insedere is used by Livy to besiege:
Ambush, a lying in wait, ^o surprise or set upon an Enemy at unawares, of the
Fr. Embuscade, properly a hiding in Bushes and Woods, of the Particle En and
Buisson, a Bush.

V. 347. If Ancient and Prophetic Fame; If old Reports in Heaven, and
foretelling Fame mistake not: Ancient, of Ancien, Fr. old: Prophetic, of
Propheticus, Lat. of (...), a Prophet, one who foresees and foretells Things
e're they come to pass: Fame, of (...), Gr. for Report.

V. 355. Pronounced among the Gods; Such was his Pleasure declared among us
[Gods], and ratified with an Oath that shook Heaven's mighty Round:
Pronunciatus, Lat. declared openly, proclaimed: Confirmare, Lat. to ratify, to
ascertain. Homer makes his Jupiter grant Requests by nodding his Head, which he
tells us shook whole Heaven: (...).

Virgil imitates him, but adds an Oath to it: Idque ratum Stygii per flumina
fratris,
Per pice torrentes atraque vor agine rigds,
Annuit, and totum nutu tremefecit Olympum. AEn. 9.


V. 357. How Endu'd; Furnished with what strength of Understanding: Endu'd, for
Endowed, of Dos, Lat. for the Faculties and Powers of the Mind, as well as for
a Dowry.

V. 364. May be Achieved; May be Performed, of the Fr. Achever, to Complete,
to bring to Perfection.

V. 368. The punie Habitants; The weak infirm Possessors, the late made Inmates
of this new World: Puisne, born since, created long since us, Angelick Beings
boasting Eternity.

V. 369. Seduce them to our Party; Entice them to forsake their God, and side
with us against him; this was the dreadful Danger, and Diabolick Design, for
their Force, tho inconceivable, was not to be feared, against that our Maker
had secured us.

V. 371. Abolish his own Work; And may repenting he had made vile Men crush his
Creation: Abolere, Lat. utterly to destroy and deface.

V. 372. Interrupt his Joy in our Confusion; This would disturb and diminish
the Pleasure he takes in having ruined us: Interrumpere, Lat to break off.

V. 375. Their frail Original; Their infirm State, and blasted Happiness,
blasted so soon: Their weak Original Adam, the Protoplast, an Original of
Mankind: Originalis, of Origo, Lat. the first, the Fountain.

V. 379. Hatching vain Empires; Dreaming of Designs that never will succeed: A
mean Metaphor from a Hen sitting on, and hatching her Eggs, well applied to the
trifling Endeavors of these exiled Angels, to establish an Empire against
their Almighty Conqueror.

V. 380. First devised by Satan; See the first Book, V. 642. Space may produce
new Worlds, etc. Devised, found out, thought on, of Deviser, Fr. to invent.

V. 385. To mingle and involve; To mix and wrap up Earth and Hell together, (i.
e.) to seduce Mankind to side with him against his Maker, and thereby to make
the Earth, like his Hell, the Seat of Sin and Suffering: Involvere, Lat. to
wrap up, and thereby to darken.

Ibid. Done all to spite; To vex and anger the Almighty: Spite, a Contraction
of the Fr. Despit, Anger, Spleen, of the Lat. Despicere, to Contemn; nothing
like Contempt provoking Men more readily to Anger.

V. 386. His Glory to augment ^ To increase and raise his Glory and just
Praise, who brings Good out of Evil, and (as at the Creation) called Light out
of Darkness; See V. 217. of the first Book: Augmentare, Lat. to increase.

V. 389. With full assent they Vote; They all agreed to it, and gave their
Voices for undertaking the Design: Assensus, Lat. an Agreement, Liking,
Approbation.

V. 392. Synod of Gods; Assembly of Gods: (...), Gr. an Assembly met to consult
of great and weighty Affairs, a General Council, of (...) and (...), a
Convention.

V. 394. In spite of Fate; In defiance of Fate, notwithstanding all the
envious opposition of our Fate.

V. 396. Of those bright Confines; Perhaps in sight of Heaven's bright Bounds:
Confinia, Lat. are properly the Bounds and Terms of Lands adjoining to one
another.

V. 397. And opportune Excursion, etc. Whereby our Force being nigh, with
easier Invasion we may happen again to enter Heaven: Opportunus, Lat.
convenient, fit, easy: Excursio, Lat. a sudden Onset, or Invasion.

Ibid. We may chance re-enter; Perhaps we may re-enter, it may fall out, we may
regain our Native Habitation, Heaven: Of Cheance, Fr. an old Word: Hap or Luck,
of Cheoir, Fr. to befall.

V. 398. In some mild Zone, etc. Or else in some calm Quarter remain not
banished from Heaven's beauteous Light: Zone, of (...), Gr. a Girdle, or
Swathing-band, because in that manner the Zones begirt and encompass the World;
They were always reckoned five, the middlemost that between the Tropics, called
the Torrid or Roasting; the two outermost placed between the Polar Circles and
the Poles, named the Frigid or Cold; the two styled Temperate; lying each
between the Frigid and the Torrid Zones. Quinque tenent Caelum Zonae, quarum
una corusco,
Semper sole rubeus and torrida semper ab igni, etc. Georg. 1.
Quarum quae media est, non est habitabilis aestu. Ovid. Metam. 1. about the
beginning.

V. 399. -- Not unvisited; Not debarred of, not shut up from: Invisitatus, Lat.
unfrequented.

V. 400. At the brightning Orient, etc. And at the rising brightness of its
Rays, clear of this dusky hue, the pleasing Air shall with her balmy Breath
heal up the Wounds made by these fretting Fires: Oriens, Lat. for Rising, and
also the East, because there the Sun rifeth.

V. 401. Purge off; Cleanse, Scour, of Purgare, Lat. Deliciosus, Lat. sweet,
pleasing.

V. 402. To heal the Scar; To cure the Wounds which commonly leave Scars behind
'em: Scar, of the Gr. (...), as being like the crusty Hardness made by searing
with a hot Iron or Caustic: Corrosive, gnawing, grinding, of Corrodere, Lat. to
gnaw round.

V. 403. Shall breath her Balm; Shall send forth her soft healing Breath: Balm,
Balsamum, both of the Gr. (...), the Balm-tree, from which distilled a most
Sovereign Healing Liquor growing near Engaddi, a City not far from the Lake
Asphaltites, as Josephus affirms, Book IX. Chap. 1. Presented to Solomon by the
Queen of Ethiopia, as the same Author, Book VIII. Chap. 2. Odorato sudantia
ligno Balsama. Geor. 2.

V. 405. Who shall tempt, etc. Who shall Essay to wander through the
bottomless, dark, and unbounded Gulf, and through the thick and sensible
Obscurity seek out his unknown Way: Tempt the Abyss, try, adventure on, of
Tentare, Lat. to undertake, to attempt.

V. 406. Infinite Abyss; The boundless, unlimited Gulf of Darkness, the
incomprehensible State of Nonentity: Infinitus, Lat. unfinished, endless, not
to be taken here in the sense that Infinitude is attributed to the One only
Infinite GOD. Anaxagoras made two First Principles of all Things, the
Intelligence, and the Interminate, the first of which Aristotle called Form,
and the latter Privation.

V. 407. The palpable Obscure; The sensible Obscurity, Darkness so gross as to
be felt, like that Egyptian Plague on Pharaoh, Exodus 10. 21. where the
Translations use the same Word to express its Grossness; Tenebrae tam densae ut
Palpari queant: Whence Palpable, Lat. Palpabilis, that may be felt; Obscure for
Obscurity, an Adjective for a Substantive, as Magnum per inane, and per inane
profundum: Lucret. lib. 1.

V. 408. His uncouth Way; His unknown Road, of the Sax. Uncud; undiscovered,
unknown.

V. 409. Upborn with indefatigable; Or take his nimble Course, raised on
unwearied Wings, over the vast Vacuity, broken off from being, till he shall
Land upon this new World, balanced in the yielding Air like to some fortunate
Island: Indefatigabilis, Lat. unwearied.

V. 410. Over the vast Abrupt; Over the Pathless Deep; Abrupta dicebantur loca
difficilia, and divulsa ac invia: Of Abruptus, Lat. broken off: Vastus, Lat.
large, desolate, uninhabited.

Ibid. E're he arrive the happy Isle; Before he Land upon the happy Island:
Arriver, Fr. to come to the Bank of: Rive, Fr. the Shore, of Ripa, Lat. Bank,
Isle, of Insula, Lat. an Island.

V. 412. Or what Evasion, etc. Or what sly Contrivance can help him to escape
through the strict Watches, and the many Guards of Angels camping round:
Evasio, Lat. a getting off, or out of a dangerous Undertaking.

V. 413. Sentries; Watches, Guards, of Sentry and Sentinel, a Watchman, one set
to watch the approach of an Enemy, of the Lat. Sentire. Statio was a Watch in a
Camp or City in time of War.

V. 415. All Circumspection; All heed and watchfulness imaginable:
Circumspectio, Lat. heedfulness, of Circumspicio, Lat. to look about. He had
need look well and warily about him.

V. 416. Choice in our Suffrage; And we have need to be as careful in the
Choice of him to be Elected by our Votes for this great Enterprise: Suffragium,
Lat. a Voice or Vote given at the Election of one to some considerable Place or
Employment.

V. 418. Expectation held his Look suspense; Uncertainty and Doubt sat on his
Eyes, while he expected who would back or contradict, or undertake the
dangerous Enterprise: Suspensus, Lat. uncertain, doubtful in his Deliberation.

V. 420. To second, or oppose; To uphold, or object and speak against; of
Secundus, Lat. Second, one who stands by, and supports another in any Speech or
Action: Opponere, Lat. ^^ speak against.

V. 421. All sat mute pondering; But they all were silent, weighing the
Danger: Mutus, Lat. Dumb: Ponderare, Lat. to consider of.

V. 423. And each in others, etc. And each in others Face discovered his own
Fear, Confounded.

V. 425. Of those Heaven-Warring Champions; Of those Celestial Leaders:
Champions, of the Lat. Campus, the Place where they performed their Prowess;
Campio (says Hottoman) est certator pro alio, datus in Duello, a Campo dictus,
qui circus er at decertantibus definitus. Here our Author, in imitation of the
Greeks, who delighted in the significancy of Compound Words, uses
Heaven-Warring Champions for Heavenly Warriors, Champions that waged War in
Heaven.

V. 426. So hardy; So bold, so daring, of Hardi, Fr. Valiant, of Ardere, Lat.
to be active and earnest about.

V. 430. Conscious of highest Worth, etc. Relying on his own vast Valor, thus
undaunted spoke: Conscious, knowing, understanding well his own Worth^ of the
Lat. Conscius. So. Virg. Conscius audacis facti. AEn. 11.

V. 431. O Progeny of Heaven; O Heavenly Offspring, and Eternal Powers:
Progeny, of Progenies, Lat. Jam nova Progenies Coelo demittitur alto. Ecl. 4.

V. 432. With Reason, etc. Not without Reason do we silent sit and pause, tho
fearless on this Undertaking; Demur, or Demurrer, is a Law-Term of the Fr.
Demeurer, to stay, to abide in a place; and is a Pause or Stop put to the
Proceedings of any Action, wherein matter of Law arises that is not plain to
the Judge, but hard and difficult, that it breeds just doubt.

V. 434. And hard that, etc. Sed revocare gradus, superasque evadere ad auras,
hoc Opus, hic labor est; an imitation of Virgil, AEn. 6.

V. 435. This huge Unequal of Fire; This vast Vault of Fire: Unequal, of
Convexus, Lat. bending downwards, round about, like the Heavenly Orbs
encompassing the Earth. So Virg. Supera aspectans convexa precatur. AEn. 10.

Convexum is the outward Roundness, the Superficies of the Globe, as Concavum
the inside thereof, used promiscuously by the Poets: Taedet Caeli convexa
tueri. AEn. 4.
Inque modum tumuli concava surgit aqua. Ovid. de Trist.


V. 436. Outrageous to devour, immures us; Fierce to destroy, surrounds us on
all sides: Oultragieux, Violent, Furious, Fr. Immures, encloseth us with
flaming Walls: Immurare, bar. Lat. to Wall in.

V. 437. Ninefold; All the Poets bestow this Epithete on Styx, one of the
Rivers of Hell, Novies Styx interfusa coercet. AEn. 4.

Which, to make the Infernal Prison more strong, our Poet has applied to its
Walls.

V. 438. Prohibit all Egress; Forbid our getting forth: Prohibeo, Lat. to
hinder, to forbid: Egressus, Lat. going forth, an Outlett.

V. 439. The void Profound of unessential Night; The empty Deep of uncreated
Darkness swallows him immediately, and with entire loss of being affrights him,
drowned in that wide gaping Gulf that never brings forth any thing: Night was
by the Ancients esteemed a Goddess, or rather the Mother of all the Gods, as
being before the Creation of any thing, Darkness approaching nearest to, and
being the best resemblance of Nonentity. (...),
(...). -- Orpheus in Him.


The Title of Unessential, is much more suitable and expressive of this great
Gulf, placed by our Poet between Heaven and Hell: Profundus, Lat. deep; Noctem
profundam, in the same sense, AEn. 4. Unessential, void of Being: Essentialis,
Lat. that has Being, or belonging to the Being or Essence of any thing.

V. 442. Plunged into that Abortive Gulf; Thrown headlong into that abortive
Womb of Darkness: Plonger, Fr. to duck, to dive: Abortive, Abortivus, Lat.
born, or brought forth before its time, untimely, cast out of the Womb before
it has attained perfect Life and Form. The State of Nonentity is well compared
to an aborti^e Gulf, where there is no beginning of Being, but even our
Conceptions are swallowed up in confusion.

V. 449. Of public Moment; Of Importance to the Public: Momentum, Lat. Concern,
Esteem: Publicus, Lat. belonging to the Generality, to the Public.

V. 451. Wherefore do I assume, etc. Wherefore do I take this State upon me:
See Sarpedon's Speech to Glaucus, (...). (...),
(...)
(...), etc.


Which will be found as much exalted in the Imitation, as a Seraphim is
superior to a Man even of Homeric make.

V. 458. Intend at home; Make it your business, apply your selves to find out
what may make Hell more easy to be undergone: Intendo, Lat. to give heed to:
Tolerabilis, Lat. that may be suffered or endured.

V. 461. If Cure or Charm, etc. If any Means or Magic may be found to delay or
deceive, or ease and slacken the Miseries of this sad Mansion: Cure of Cura,
Lat. the Care necessary to be taken in working it: Charm, of the Lat. Carmen, a
Verse, in which Charms were usually written, as Virgil testifies: Ducite ab
Urbe domum, mea Carmina, ducite Daphnim:
Carmina vel Caelo possunt deducere Lunam. Ecl. 8.


V. 462. To respite; To put off, to delay: Respit is a Law Word, and in the
Latin called Respectus, a kind of Pause and Stop in a Suit, allowing one time
to look back, or about him: To slack the Pain, to abate it, to give some Ease,
untying as it were; a Metaphor taken from binding strictly, to make it less
intense.

V. 463. Intermit no Watch; Keep strict Guard, be sure not to discontinue the
Watchfulness against our Foes, who are not to be surprised: Intermittere, Lat.
to cease, to give over.

V. 473. Stand his Rivals; Be ranked even with him, be in the Opinion of the
Vulgar esteemed his Equal: Rivales, Lat. for those that make Love to the same
Woman: Repute, Reputation, Honor, of Reputer, Fr. to esteem.

V. 478. Of Thunder heard remote; Of Thunder at a distance: Remotus, Lat.
removed, farther off.

V. 480. Extol him equal; In their Praises raise him equal to God the most
Highest: Extollere, Lat. to Praise excessively: Extollere vires, AEn. 11. to
praise and magnify the Power.

V. 485. Their specious Deeds; Lest ill Men should vaunt their seemly Deeds on
Earth, forced from 'em by Vainglory or Ambition cautiously, concealed and
covered over with godly Zeal: Speciosus, Lat. beautiful, fair to outward
appearance; Speciosa quaero pascere Tygres, Hor. of Europa,' Od. 26. Carm. lib.
3. Exercitare, Lat. to excite, to stir up.

V. 486. Or close Ambition varnished over, etc. A noble Verse, and highly
expressive of those zealous Hypocrites our Author's Contemporaries, an Age so
impiously Godly, and so zealously Wicked, that Prayer was the Prologue to the
Murder of a Monarch at his own Gate: Varnished over, of the Fr. Vernice, a
Composition of Gum of Juniper Trees and Lineseed Oil, setting a Luster on what
it is laid, admirably applied to Zeal, which so glares in the Eyes of the Weak
Populace, that they are not able to discover the dark Designs that it too often
hides: Zeal, of the Gr. (...), of (...), to be hot, as it is too often.

V. 489. As when from Mountain; As when from lofty Hills dark Clouds arise,
while the North Wind lies still and overspread, Heaven's pleasant Prospect, the
thick condensed Air threatens the Earth, o'recast with Snow or Rain.

V. 490. The North Wind sleeps; A Wind that generally clears the Air when it
breaths, and therefore is said to be at Rest while the assembling Clouds
ascend: It Is usual with the Poets to lay the Sea asleep, which can hardly be,
if any Wind be awake; Saeva quierant aequora. AEn. 4. (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...).


Where Jupiter is said to lay the Winds asleep, before he covers the Mountains
with Winter Snow.

V. 491. The Lowering Element; The angry Sky; to Lowre, Sign to look awry upon,
a threatening Aspect, as if by frowning, and drawing down the Brows, it were
looking lower: By Element, is meant the Air, commonly called one of the four.

V. 492. Scouls over the darkened, etc. With Shower or Snow threatens the
darkened Earth: To Scowl, is to look on one with Eyes half shut, as if we
endeavored to hide our selves, to see and not be seen, well applied to the
Cloudy Sky: Lantskip, of the Belg. Landschap, the shape or appearance of Land;
hence we call a Piece of Painting, where a prospect or view of Woods and Trees,
Gardens or Fountains, with adjoining Hills or Plains is imitated, a Landscape;
but it is here meant, a Country overcast by dark Clouds, as by Heaven's
cheerful Face, the clear Sky.

V. 493. If chance the Radiant Sun; If it chance the shining Sun, e're he take
leave, shows himself ere he sets, the Fields recover: Radians, Lat. shining:
Extendere, Lat. to stretch, or spread out: Revive, of Revivisco, Lat. to gain
new Life, to recover.

V. 495. And bleating Herds attest their Joy; The very Beasts do with their
various Voices join to express their general Joy: Bleating, comes of Balatus,
the Cry of Sheep or Lambs, coined in imitation of the Sound: Attest, of
Attestari, Lat. to bear Witness.

V. 497. O Shame to Men; Read Juvenal Sat. 15. about 16. Verses from the end:
Sed nunc Serpentum major concordia, Parcit
Cognatis maculis similis fera, etc.


V. 498. Firm Concord; Lasting Agreement: Firmus, Lat. fast, stable, Concordia,
Lat.

V. 502. Levy War; Raise wastful War, of the Fr. Lever, to raise, hence to
Levy Money.

V. 504. Induce us to accord; Persuade us to agree, and live in Peace;
Inducere, Lat. to persuade, to entice: Accord, of Accorder, Fr. to agree, a
Musical Metaphor of ad and Chorda, a String, from the straining and tuning
Strings up to the same Tone.

V. 507. The Stygian Counsel thus dissolved; The Hellish Counsel thus broke up:
Stygian, of Styx, one of the Rivers of Hell; whence Pluto, its Governor, was
styled, Stygius, Stygii per flumina fratris, AEn. 9. Dissolved, Dissolvere,
Lat. to break up, to dismiss.

V. 509. Their mighty Paramount; Their haughty Chief, of Paramount, a disused
Fr. Word, signifying Supreme.

V. 510. Alone the Autagonist of Heaven; Able alone to oppose The Almighty:
(...), Gr. an Adversary, more properly one that Contends in single Combat; of
(...), against, and (...), Strife, Contention, Fight.

V. 513. A Globe of, etc. A Multitude, a Troop, of the Lat. Globus, a great
Company.

V. 514. With bright Imblazonrie, etc. With shining Ensigns, and affrighting
Arms: Imbla^onrie, of In and Blason, Fr. for the Painting and Embellishing of
Arms, either on Flags, Colors, or Shields: Horrent, Horrens, Lat. terrible.
Horrentia martis Arma. AEn. 1.
Acie dens^ atque horrentibus hastis; In AEn. 10.


V. 515. Of their Session; Of their Meeting and Sitting in Council: Sessio,
Lat. for a Meeting, or Sitting on public Business, an Assize: Result, the
Resolution that is taken, what is done and resolved on, of Resolvere, as
Consult, of Consulere.

V. 518. The sounding Alchymie; The sounding Metal: Alchymy is an Arabic Word,
signifying Hidden, of All the Article, and Chema to hide, to conceal: Hence the
Alchymists and Chemists take their Name, not so fitly from concealing the
Secrets of their Art, as because they cannot find their great Secret The
Philosophers Stone, which lies hid, and is concealed from them: Now this Art
endeavoring the Transmutation of ignobler Metals into more perfect and of
higher Price; our Author uses the word for Metal, a Trumpet of Brass or Silver.

V. 521. Acclaim; Acclamation abreviated; a Shouting for Joy, or in sign of
good Liking and Concurrence, of Acclamare, Lat. to rejoice, or agree with.

V. 523. By false presumptuous Hope; By Hope that often deceives us, by
promising and presuming too much: Presumer, Fr. of the Lat. Presumere, to take
before hand, to be too forward and overweening.

Ibid. The ranged Powers disband; The Infernal Forces that all this while had
stood in Order of Battle, (as Book 1. Ver. 555.) now disperse, and go each his
own way, as Inclination, or the sad Survey of their dark Dungeon leads them:
Ranged, of Ranger or Arranger, Fr. to draw into Order.

V. 526. Truce to his restless Thoughts; Ease to his tortured Mind: Truce,
Treves, Fr. of the Ger. True, Faith is a temporary or short Peace agreed on by
Enemies upon mutual Faith given. The Iroksom Hours, to pass away the unpleasant
Hours; Irksom, as if Werksom, painful, of Werk, the Lincolnshire Word for Grief
or Pain.

V. 531. As at the Olympian Games; One of the four Celebrated Games of Graece
was Instituted by Hercules, in Honor of his Father Jupiter Olympius, not far
from the City Olympia in Elis, after he had revenged himself on Augeas the King
of that Province: It was observed every fifth year, and the Exercises were
five, Cuffing, Running, Dancing, Quoiting, and Wrestling; Cursibus and crudo
decernet Graecia cestu. Geor. 3.
The Victor was Crowned with a Garland of Olive.


That Hercules, and not any of the five Idean Brothers, was the Institutor of
these Olympic Games, Pindar attests. (...)
(...). Pind. in Olymp.


Pisa was part of Elis near the River Alpheus: Aut Alphea rotis praelabi
fllumina Pisae,
Et Jovis in Luco currus agitare volantes. Geor. 3.


Hor. Od. 1. 1. 1. Quos curriculo pulverem Olympicum collegisse juvat.

(...), the Olympic Races, were at first invented in Honor and Memory of the
Sun's Motion.

Ibid. Or Pythian Fields; Where the Pythian Games were, as Ovid tells us,
Instituted by Apollo after he had slain the vast Serpent Python, to perpetuate
the Memory of his Victory. Neve Operis famam possit delere vetustas;
Instituit sacros celebri certamine ludos;
Pythia de domitae Serpentis nomine dictos.
His juvenum quicunque manu, pedibusve rotave
Vicerat, Oesculeae capiebat frondis honorem.
Nondum Laurus erat. -- Met. 1. 1.


But in Memory of the Debauchery attempted by him on the Nymph Daphne, the
Victors were afterward Crowned with Laurel.

V. 532. Part curb their fierce Steeds; Some of them are employed in governing
and taming their high-metled Horses, making them governable and obedient to
Hand and Heel: Part of, Lat. Pars, a Portion: To Curb, is to withold, to hold
in, to stop or keep from running away, of the Fr. Courber, to bend. This is a
manifest imitation of Virg. AEn. 6. -- Quae gratia curruum
Armorumque fuit vivis, quae cura Nitentes
Pascere Equos; eadem sequitur tellure repostos.


Ibid. Or shun the Goal with rapid Wheels; Metaque fervidis Evitata rotis: Hor.
lib. 1. Od. 1. In Charior-Racing, the Art of the Driver was shown in turning
round, and not touching the Goal, attempted often with extreme Hazard: Goal,
Fr. Gaul, a long Pole or Post, used to mark the Place where the Course ended,
and therefore well applied by Virg. Hic tibi mortis erant metae, AEn. 12.
Rapid, swift, Lat. Rapidus.

V. 533. Or fronted Brigad's form; Or range and draw their Troops up, facing
each other; when an Army is Embattled, the Line next the Enemy is called the
Van or Front of the Army, from Exercitus: Form, Lat. Formare, to shape,
fashion, bring into form.

V. 535. Waged in the, etc. Wage comes of the Fr. Gager, to Fight, give
Battle, or Engage, War being the worst of Wagers.

V. 537. Before each Van prick forth, etc. From before each Army the nimble
active Knights (light as the Air where they Encounter) spur their Coursers on,
and point and level their Lances at each other, till the main Grosses join:
Van, the fore Front of an Army, of the Fr. Avaunt, the fore part, so their
Avantgarde, the Vantguard: Prick, of Piquer, Fr. to Ride, to Spur a Horse;
whence to Pickeer, signifies, to Ride out from a Body of Men going to Charge,
and single out some Daring Man, engaging with Sword and Pistol, as formerly
with Lance, generally performed on Horseback, and therefore a Derivative of
Piquer, and not of Pike: Couch their Spears, lower, let fall their Lances, and
drop 'em so, as to run full tilt against the Adversary, Fr. Coucher, to lay
along; Spears in marching being born upright, let fall to a level in an
Encounter.

V. 538. With F^ats of Arms; With Warlike Deeds, with bold Exploits: Fr. Faict,
an Action.

V. 539. From either end of Heaven, etc On every side the Firmament seems on
Fire, where the Heaven seems to our sight to have an End, hard to be found in
Bodies circular: Welki^, the Sky, the Region of the Air, Sax. Welen. These
Warlike Apparitions may be well supposed sent to forewarn Proud and Luxurious
Cities, they being seldom fancied to appear, but in disastrous Times, and
eminent Dangers; our own Stories afford us some of these fighting Phenomenon
about the time of our Civil Wars.

V. 540. Others with vast Typhean Rage, etc. Others more boistrous with
Gigantic Rage tear Hills and Rocks, and in Hurricanes Tempest the Air so
hideous, that Hell it self can scarce contain the dire Turmoil: Typhaean, a
Derivative of Typhaeus or Typhon, one of the Gigantic Invaders of Heaven, of
whom before, Book 1. Ver. 199. Fell, of the old Fr. word Fell, Cruel, whence
Fellon.

V. 541. Rend; Or Rent, of the Sax. Rendean, to tear up.

V. 543. As when Alcides, etc. As raging mad and furious as Hercules, who
having fought with Achelous, and won Deianira the Daughter of Oeneus King
AEtolia, coming to the River Euenus, Nessus the Centaur would needs undertake
to carry the Bride over, to whom, after Hercules was got to the other side, he
offered Violence, but was immediately slain by one of the Arrows that had
killed the Venomous Hydra; the Revengeful Ravisher mixing his Blood with the
Poison that infected the deadly Dart, persuaded the credulous Lady, that the
Garment stained with his Gore would prove a most certain Antidote against her
Husband's wandering Affections, as famous for the Conquests gained over him by
the fair Sex, as he was for his own. Hercules afterward having subdued
Oechalia, (a City of Boeotia) brought thence the Charming Iole Daughter of
Erytus King of that Country, and Landing in Eubaea, was busy in Erecting an
Altar to return Thanks by Sacrifice to his Father Jupiter, when Deianira,
jealous of his new Mistress, sent Lychas to him with the Poisoned Robe, which
stuck so close to him, that he pulled the Flesh from his Bones endeavoring to
get it off, whereupon he made himself a Funeral Pile of Thessalian Pines, and
burnt himself thereon. Venerat Eveus rapidas Jove natus ad undas; Met. 9. Where
read this Story; Hercules was the Son of Jupiter and Alcmena, named Alcides of
his Grandfather Alcaeus, as Euripides testifies: (...),
(...)
(...)
Victor ab Oechalia Cenaeo sacra parabat
Vota Jovi. -- Met. l. 1.


V. 544. The Envenomed; Empoison'd with the Blood of Nessus: Fr. Envenime, of
In and Venenum, Lat. Poison. Praetulit imbutam Nesseo Sanguine vestem. Meta. 9.
Tabem fluenti vulneris dextra excipit
Traditque nobis ungulae insertam suae, etc. Her. Oet. Act. 2.
-- O Mare and Terras, ardeo!
Quantam neque atro delibutus Hercules
Nessi cruore. -- Hor. Epod. 17.


V. 546. Oeta; A Hill in the Borders of Thessaly, where enraged Hercules burnt
himself, which made Seneca give Hercules the Name of Oetaeus in the Tragedy
written of him.

V. 547. Into the Euboic Sea; Eubaea (now Negropont) is an Island in the
Archipelago, from whence the Neighboring Sea was formerly called Euboic. --
Euboica tellus,
Vertice immenso tumens Pulsatur omni latere. Sen. Her. Oet. Act. 3. Sce. 2.
Sternentemque trabes, irascentemque videres
Montibus aut Patrio tendentem brachia Caelo.
Ecce lichan trepidum and latitantem rupe cavata, etc.
Corripit Alcides; and terque quaterque rotatum,
Mittit in Euboicas, tormento fortius, undas. Met. 9.


V. 548. -- Others more gentle; Retired into some secret Valley, sing with
Angels Voices tuned to many a Harp, their own bold Deeds and luckless
Overthrow, by chance of War, complaining that hard Fate, free Virtue should to
Force or Chance enslave.

V. 551. By Doom of Battle; By the Decision of the Sword, by Event of Battle:
Doom signifies Judgment, of the Sax. Dom; hence Domedag, Doomesday, the Day of
Judgment.

V. 552. Should Enthral; Should make subject to, should Enslave, of the Dan.
Trael, a Slave.

V. 553. Their Song was Partial; Their Song was Selfish, but the Notes Divine,
(how could they choose when Souls Immortal sing?) made Hell more tolerable, and
took with strange Delight, those who in Throngs gave ear: Partial, of
Partialis, Lat. one so biased by his Affections to the side he is engaged on,
that right or wrong his Judgment is overborn by Passion for his Party.

V. 554. Suspended Hell; Made 'em forget their Pains, mitigated their Torments,
of Suspendere, Lat. to put off, to stay, to defer: Ravishment, extreme Delight,
of the Fr. Ravissement.

V. 555. The thronging Audience; The thronging Hearers, of Audientia, Lat. the
sense of Hearing, Listening, of Audire, Lat. to hear: An Imitation of Virg. AEn.
6. Pars pedibus plaudunt Choreas and Carmina dicunt,
Nec non Threicius longa cum vest Sacerdos, etc.


But he introduces only an Orpheus or Musaeus his Scholar, far inferior to
this Angelic Quire.

Ibid. Discourse; (Which our Poet so justly prefers to the highest Harmony,
that he has seated his Reasoning Angels on a Hill as high and elevated as their
Thoughts, leaving the Songsters in their humble Valley,) is from the Fr.
Discourse, as this of the Lat. Discursus, Reasoning, Discourse leading from one
Notion or Argument to another.

V. 556. For Eloquence, etc. For Eloquence seizes the very Soul, while Song
only attacques our Ears; the Powers of the first affect all the Faculties of
our Souls, and Captivate 'em, while the Charms of the other work but on Sense,
tickle our Ears, and then vanish with their Airy Trillo's: Eloquentia, Lat. for
the noble Faculty, of Reasoning in free, strong, and copious Speech.

V. 558. In Thoughts more elevate; In Notions more high and refined: Elevatus,
Lat. for raised, of Elevare, to lift up.

V. 559. Of Providence, etc. They Discoursed and Reasoned subtily and refinedly
of the wonderful, various, and unaccountable Providence of that Eternal Being,
who made this beauteous Universe, and manageth it according to the Methods of
his inscrutable Will, not to be fathomed by the most discerning and enlightened
Angels, much less by Minds clothed and immersed in Clay: Providentia, Lat. of
Providere, to foresee, and take care of. Instances of God's continual and
general Providence over the World, are many in Scripture; Psalm. 147. v. 8.
Matthew. 6. v. 26. Read the 39th Chapter of Job. Orpheus styled GOD Oculum
Infinitum, an Infinite Eye, supervising and providing for the whole Creation.

Ibid. Foreknowledge, Will and Fate; The Praescience and Foreknowledge of God
Almighty is indubitable, since he who is Omniscient must needs know and see all
Things at one view, those that are past or yet to come, being only such in
reference to finite Beings, but have no relation to him that is Eternal. From
this Foreknowledge, which in God is Absolute, as the next Verse affirms, the
weak Apologists for Sin and Folly endeavor to draw a Consequential Impunity,
as if whatever God foreknows will be, were by that his Foreknowledge
influenced and compelled so to come to pass, robbing at once the just Judge of
all the Earth (of whom the Psalmist says, The Lord is righteous in all his
Ways, and holy in all his Works, Psalm. 145. v. 7.) of his Glory, and Man of his
Free Will, whom God created after his Image, Genesis 1. 27. and left him in the
hands of his own Counsel, Eccles. 5. v. 14. But to avoid deriving our Finite
Consequences from Incomprehensible Infinitude, many things are by Men
foreknown, on which nevertheless their Foreknowledge has not the least effect
or shadow of Impulse, as the Rising and Setting of the Sun, the Succession of
the Seasons of the Year, the various Appearances of the Moon, and the Eclipses
of both those Luminaries to the end of the World, are easy to be foreknown,
yet no Man will affirm, that his Foreknowledge is the cause of any of them.

V. 560. Fixed Fate Free Will. Omnia fato fieri, was the Dogma of the Stoics;
And Quod fore paratum est, id summum exuperat Jovem. Seneca in his Oedipus
follows their Opinion; Fatis agimur: cedite fatis, non illa Deo vertisse licet,
quae nexa suis currunt causis. It cuique ratus, prece non ulla, Mobilis ordo.
This Inflexibility of Fate seems borrowed of what Sacred Writ has delivered of
the Immutability of the Almighty, I am the Lord, I change not, Mal. 3. v 6. To
this fixed Fate, this fatal Necessity, is opposed Man's Free Will, well
described, Eccles. 15. from v. 11. to the end: Come, now let us reason
together, says the Lord, if you consent and obey, ye shall eat the good Things
of the Land, but if ye refuse and be rebellious, etc. Isa. 1. v. 18, 19, 20. 2
Esdras 1. v. 28, 29, 30. Thus says the Almighty Lord, have I not prayed you,
as a Father his Son, etc. See Luke 13. v. 38. and read the 11th Chapter of
Hosea. Absolute, of Absolutus, Lat. perfect, finished. Man's Free Will will be
made out more clear in the third Book of this Poem.

V. 561. In wandering Mazes lost; And found no way out of the Confusions of the
Controversy, well compared to the turnings and windings of a Maze; Human
Reason may well grow weary, and lose its way among the many amazing turns of
Providence, or become giddy and confounded when it runs into Disputes so far
above its reach, as are those infinite Perfections of God's Omniscience, and
his Eternal Decrees, A Maz, a Labyrinth, contrived with so many turnings, that
he who enters it may easily miss his way, by rounding often the same place,
derived of the Belg. Missen, to wander.

V. 563. And final Misery; They argued and disputed much of Bliss and Misery,
the great Conclusions and Ends of all Things, and all Persons: Finalis, Lat.
bounding, concluding.

V. 564. Passion and Apathie; Of the Unruliness of our Passions and Affections,
and the Care which is to be taken in Governing them; or of Discarding of 'em
quite, and Disrobing our selves even of all Natural Affections, if there be
such a Possibility, well by our Poets styled, Vain Wisdom all, and false
Philosophy. Passion, of the Gr. (...), Sufferance: Apathie, its contrary, of
the Privative (...) and (...), freedom from Passion or Concern, either of Pain
or Pleasure, a settled sedate state of Mind: Philosophy, of the Gr. (...), the
Love of Wisdom.

V. 566. Yet with a pleasing Sorcerie, etc. Yet with a soft Delusion could
allay: Sorcerie, Witchcraft, of the Fr. Sorcier, a Conjurer, one who pretends
to Cun^ing, Per illicatas sorts.

V. 567. Pain for a while, or Anguish, etc. Pain for some time, or Grief, and
could raise up deceitful Hope, and arm the steadfast Heart with persevering
Patience, as with Steel covered threefold: Anguish, properly Grief, Sadness
relating to the Soul, as Pain does to the Body, of the Fr. Angoisse, from the
Lat. Augustia: Excite, of the Lat. Excitare, to raise, rouse, to quicken:
Fallacious, Fr. Fallacieux, Cousening, Cheating: Obdured, hardened, of
Obduratus, Lat.

V. 569. With triple Steel; An imitation of Horace; Illi robur, and aes
triplex, circa pectus erat, etc. Od. 3. His Breast was armed with the strength
of threefold Brass, only our Poet uses the hardest Metal of the two: Triplex,
Lat. threefold.

V. 570. Another part of these Infernal Fiends, in Squadrons and great Bodies,
bold and adventurous, take their quick march four several ways, to discover far
and wide that dismal World, if perhaps any part of it might yield 'em a more
easy Dewlling Place.

V. 575. That disgorge; That empty themselves, Fr. Desgorger, to Vomit, of
Gorge, Fr. the Throat.

V. 577. Abhorred Styx; The Greek Poets give Names to the Infernal Rivers of
Heil, from those noxious Springs found in diverse Parts of their Country: Styx
is a Fountain of Arcadia, issuing from an extreme high Rock near the City
Nonacris, falling at last into the River Crathis, a cold Poison so strong, that
it pierces even Vessels of Gold, and could be contained in nothing but a
Horse's Hoof, as Pausanias in his Arcadicis. It had its Name of (...), to Hate,
rightly styled, The Flood of deadly Hate; and by Virg. Palus inamabilis, AEn.
6. the Heathen Gods were said to Swear by this hateful Stream. (...)

Thus imitated by Virgil. -- Stygiamque paludem,
Dii cujus jurare timent and fallere numen. AEn. 6.
Diis juranda palus Oculis incognita nostris. Met. 2.
-- Stygii quoque conscia sunto
Numina torrentis, timor and Deus ille deorum. Met. 3.


V. 578. Sad Acheron; There were diverse Poisonous Springs of this Name, one in
Elis, the Western Part of Peloponesus, flowing into the River Alpheus, where
Pluto and Proserpina had a Temple, Strab. l. 8. Another in Thesprotia of
Epirus, according to Pausan. in Atticis. Its Name is deduced of (...), Gr.
Grief, and (...), to flow: -- Tenebrosa palus Acheronte re^uso, AEn. 6. Well
agreeing with our Poets, Of Sorrow black and deep: Read, Est locus, Italiae in
medio, etc. AEn. 7.

V. 579. Cocytus; Of (...) Gr. Lamentation, one of the Rivers of Hell, swollen
continually by the Tears of the Damned, of (...) to Mourn; as our Poet expounds
it by the ruful Stream. (...)
(...).
Cocytusque sinu labens circumfluit atro. AEn. 6.

And in the same Book. Hinc via Tartarei quae fert Acherontis ad undas,
Turbidus hic caeno, vastaque voragine gurges
AEstuat, atque omnem Cocyto eractat arenam.


Ruful, Mournful, of the word to Rue, of the Teut. Rewen, to repent; and indeed
even the Heathen Poets did by these Rivers of Mournings and dismal
Lamentations, which were to be passed by all that left Life, describe the sad
and disconsolate Condition of Mankind, when at their Deaths they reflected on
their past and ill-spent Lives.

Ibid. Fiery Phlegeton; Another of the Rivers of Hell, whose Streams are raging
Fire, borrowed (not improbably) of the Sacred Writ, describing the Torments of
the Wicked by Fire that shall never be quenched, Isa. 66. v. 24. -- Rapidus
flammis ambit torrentibus amnis Tartareus Phlegethon, torquetque sonantia saxa.
AEn. 6. From (...) to burn: Torrens, Lat. vehement, furious: Waves of torrent
Fire, Torrents and Floods of Fire. Et quos fumantia Torquens aequora,
vorticibus Pelegethon perlustrat anhelis. Claud.

V. 583. Lethe the River of Oblivion; Diverse Rivers were Renowned by this Name,
one in Portugal commonly called Lima, as Mela; another in Africa near the Great
Syrtis, and the City Berenice, as Solinus; a third in Beotia near the City
Lebas, Pausan. in Baeoticis; and many others reckoned by Strab. l. 14. It took
its Name of (...), Gr. Forgetfulness, because, according to the Opinion of
Pythagoras, and diverse other Philosophers who maintained the Transmigration of
Souls into other Bodies, they were to drink of this dull heavy River before
their re-entry, that they might forget as well the happy Freedom they enjoyed
when released from this low Life, as the Cares and Miseries they were to
undergo again by undertaking it a second time, which no one would submit to
that had the least remembrance of 'em. -- Animae, quibus altera fato
Corpora debentur, Lethaei ad fluminis undam
Securos latices, and longa oblivia potant. AEn. 6.
Quam juxta Lethes tacitus praelabitur Amnis,
Infernis (ut fama) trahens oblivia venis. Luc. l. 9.


The true Description of The Slow and Silent Stream. Oblivio, Lat.
Forgetfulness,

V. 584. Her watery Labyrinth; Her watery Windings and Turnings to and fro:
(...), a Greek Word, to express a Building made on purpose with so many
intricate Turnings, and deceitful Doors, that it was difficult to find the way
out; of which Pliny reckons four: One in Egypt, the Undertaking of many of the
Kings of that Country; the second in Crete, built by Daedalus in imitation of
that, but far short of it; a third in Lemnos, supported by 150 Pillars; and a
fourth in Italy, the Work and Sepulcher of Porsena King of the Thuscians: Plin.
l. 36. c. 13. The Charging and Retreating of the Trojan Youths, and their
turning upon one another, is by Virgil assimulated to a Labyrinth. Ut quondam
Creta fertur Labyrinthus in alta,
Parietibus textum caecis iter, ancipitemque
Mill viis habuisse dolum, qua signa sequendi
Falleret indeprensus and irremeablilis error,
Haud aliter Teucrum nati. -- AEn. 5.


It may therefore as well suit with the various Windings of a River often
turning upon it self, whose intricate Gyres and Meanders withold and check
its Waters from making too much speed unto their Source the Sea.

V. 587. A frozen Continent; A cold Country: Continens, Lat. continual, without
separation. Hence the firm Land is called the Continent, as not interrupted by
the Sea.

V. 590. And Ruin seems of ancient Pile; Looks like the decay and downfall of
some mighty Building, or ancient Structure: Pile, Fr. for a Heap, and thence
used for a vast Building, or Princes Palace, a Noble Pile.

V. 592. A Gulf profound, etc. A gawping Gulf, as deep as the vast Serbonian
Quagmire between the ancient Mountain Cassius, and famous Damiata, a City of
Egypt, on one of the more Eastern Mouths of the Nile, formerly called Tamiata,
and still by the Arabians Damiat.

Ibid. Serbonis was a Lake 200 Furlongs in length, and 1000 in compass, called
by the old Egyptians, The Place of Typhon's Expiration, now Bayrena, dividing
Egypt from Syria. It was surrounded on all sides by Hills of loose Sand, which,
carried into the Water by high Winds, so thickened the Lake, as not to be
distinguished from part of the Continent; where whole Armies have been decoyed
in, and swallowed up, for the Sands for a great way seeming firm Land, slid by
the weight of great Bodies of Men farther off into the Lake, that was but a
deceitful crude Consistence, and engaged 'em beyond possibility of returning
thence, called, like that in AEn. 8. Immane Barathrum. Read Herod. l. 3.

The Mountain Casius, bordered on this Bog, being no other but a vast Mole of
loose Sand, as Lucan testifies: Perfida qua tellus Casiis excurrit arenis
Et vada testantur junctas AEgyptia Syrtes. Phar. 8.


V. 594. The parching Air; -- Burns fror^, etc. Our Poet tells us, that beyond
the flaming Torrent of fierce Phlegethon, there is a frozen Continent in Hell,
dismal and dark, with everlasting Storms of dreadful Whirlwinds, and horrid
Hail that never melts, but grows up in vast heaps, like mighty Ruins of
ancient and decayed Piles: The keen Air in this accursed Climate scorcheth, and
the fierce Frosts perform the Effect of Fire.

V. 595. Burns frore; Boreoe Penetrabile frigus adurit, The piercing cold
North Wind burns, says Virgil, Geor. 1. The scorching Air burns by freezing,
says Milton; the Words Urere and Adurere are applied both to Heat and Cold;
Ureban^ moneana nives. Lucan. l. 4. Perusti artus, membra torrida gelu. Livi.
l. 21. Ambusti multorum artus vi frigoris. Tac. l. 13. (...), etc. Kenoph.
Aristotle, in the fourth Book of his Meteors, tells us, this is effected;
(...), because the natural and innate Heat, hemmed in and befieged on all sides
by the extreme contrariety of the Cold, becomes more fierce and scorching.
Others more probably allege, That Cold performs the effect of Fire, by
extinguishing the Heat, and drying up the thriving Moisture in Plants and
Trees, whereby they become withered as if scorched by Fire, which agrees with
the Philosophy of Eccles. chapter 43. v. 20, and 21. describing a Frost, (...),
etc. (...). When the cold North Wind blows, etc. It devoureth the Mountains,
and burns the Wilderness, and destroys all that is Green, like Fire, Frore,
of Freeze, and this of (...), to shake for Cold, to shiver.

V. 596. By harpy-footed Furies; Harpyiae, who were named from (...), of their
Rapacity and Greediness, were said to be Daughters of the Earth and Sea, styled
Jupiter's Dogs, (...). Apoll. l. 2. They inhabited the Strophades Islands near
Peloponnesus, in the Ionian Sea, described by Virg. Tristius haud illis
monstrum, nec saevior ulla
Pestis and ira Deum Stygiis sese extulit undis.
Virginei volucrum vultus, faedissima ventris
Proluvies, uncaeque manus, and pallida semper
Ora fame. -- AEn. 3.


In the same place one of 'em is styled Furiarum maxima, and afterward Divae
obscenaeque volucres.

V. 597. At certain Revolutions; At certain Times: Revolutio, Lat. for the
turning round of the Heavenly Spheres, coming about to the Point where their
Gyre began, therefore used to express the Terms and Periods of Time, depending
on, and measured by their Motions.

V. 599. Extremes by Change more fierce; Finely Illustrated, by being removed
from Beds of raging Fire, to starve in Ice their soft Spiritual Warmth, there
languishing, fixed, and immovable, and frozen in for certain terms of Time,
and in an instant, motionless and benumbed, hurried back to Baths of flaming
Brimstone. To Pine, is to be punished, thence to wast and decay, of the Sax.
Pin, Paena Punishment: Immovable, Immobilis, Lat. void of Motion: Infixt,
fastened, Infixus, Lat. of Infigere, to drive into.

V. 603. Periods of Time; For certain terms of Time: (...), Gr. a Circuit, a
going about, of (...) about, and (...) a way, Time being computed by the
Heavenly Motions and Circumgyrations.

V. 604. Lethean Sound; This Lethean Straight: A Sound, is properly a Sea
enclosed with Land, as that of Denmark. Of Sound, Dan. for Swimming: Lethean,
Lethaeus, Lat. of the River Lethe.

V. 607. With one small Drop; Virgil, and the rest of the Poets that held the
(...), made no other use of these Waters of Oblivion, but to drench the Souls
that were to be Incorporated anew, with an absolute forgetfulness of lamentable
Life, as was showed before, V. 583. and will be further manifest from these:
Has omnes, ubi mill rotam volvere per annos,
Lethaeum ad fluvium, Deus evocat agmine magno:
Scilicet immemores, super a ut convexa revisant,
Rursus and incipiant in corpor a velle reverti. AEn. 6.


But our Author improves it to the aggravation of Hell's Torments, by Ferrying
his Fiends to and fro over this Lethean Lake, between their Torrid and their
Frozen Zone, passing them over this forgetful Ford, and showing them a whole
River of that Water, one drop of which would be an Anodine to all their
Torments, and end their Sufferings (which else must ever last) in sweet
Oblivion.

V. 611. Medusa with Gorgonian Terror; Medusae with her Snaky Hair, and horrid
Face, defends the Ford. The Gorgons were three, (Daughters of Phorcus) Medusa,
Euryale, and Stbenyo, so named of (...), Gr. Cruelty: Medusa, beautiful beyond
all the Women of her time, and famous for her extraordinary fine Hair, of which
boasting beyond measure, and vying with Pallas her self, the angry Goddess
changed her curling Locks, on which she so much valued her self, into Snakes so
terrible, that all the Beholders were turned into Stones; her horrible Head was
at last, in Mercy to Mankind, cut off by Perseus with the Aid and Advice of his
Sister Minerva, and worn by her in her Shield. Nata Jovis --
Gorgoneum turpes crinem mutavis in hydros,
Nunc quoque, ut attonitos formidine terreat hosts,
Pectore in adverso, quos fecit, sustinet Angues. Met. 1. 4.


Ovid relates the Provocation given the Goddess, to have been of another
nature, but I prefer this, both as more probable, and more modest. -- Rom^ve
fer^ monstra, tuaeque
Saxificos ^ultus, qu^c^nque ea, talle Medusae. Met. 1. 5.
-- Bellumque immane Deorum
Pallados e medio confecit pectore Gorgon. Luc. l. 9.
AEgidaque horrificam, turbatae Palladis arma,
Connexosque angues, ipsamque in pectore Divae
Gorgona, desecto vertentem lumina collo. AEn. l. 8.


This Gorgon's Head was so terrible, that it stood the Gods in good stead when
the Giants attempted Heaven. -- (...)
(...)
(...).


V. 613. Living Wight; Living Creature, of the Sax. Wiht, an Animal, a Creature.

V. 614. Of Tantalus; The Crime, as well as Punishment, of this miserable
Tantalus, is diversely related by the Poets. He was reputed the Son of Jupiter
and the Nymph Plota, punished in Hell with Fugitive Banquers and Eternal
Thirst, because at an Entertainment of the Gods he Dish'd up his slain Son to
heighten the Festival; or, as others affirm, for disclosing the Secrets of the
Gods, at a Banquet to which he was admitted, or, as some would have it, for
Prating impertinently there. Others differ about his Torments, telling us, he
had a great Stone always hanging over, and ready to fall on his Head. Homer
describes his Sufferings without mention of his Offense. (...),
(...).
(...).
(...),
(...).


Virgil in a different manner punishes him with Hunger but omits his Thirst.
-- Lucent genialibus altis
Aurea fulcra toris, epulaeque ante ora paratae
Regifico luxu: Furiarum maxima juxta
Accubat, and manibus prohibet contingere mensas. AEn. 6.
(...)
(...)
(...).
(...),
(...),
(...). Eurip. in Oreste.
Tantalus est illic, and ciroum stagna, sed acrem
Jam jam potuero, deserit unda sitim. Tibull.
Quaerit aquas in aquis, and poma fugacia captat
Tantalus, hoc illi garrula lingua dedit.
Tantalus a labris sitiens fugientia captat
Flumina. -- Hor. l. Ser.
Nec miser impendens magnam timet aere saxum
Tantalus, ut perhibent, cassa formidine torpens. Lucret.


V. 616. With shuddering Horror pale; Pale and shivering, trembling and pale,
shaking and quaking with Cold, not able to hold a Joint still for extreme Cold,
a Word used in Lincolnshire, of the Dut. Schudderen, to quake: Horror, Lat. for
Cold, and thence for a fright. -- Mihi frigidus horror
Membra quatit, gelidusque coit formidine sanguis. AEn. 3.


Ibid. And Eyes aghast; Staring with fixed affrighted Eyes: Aghast, affrighted,
of the Particle a and Gast, Belg. a Ghost.

V. 619. Many a Region dolorous; Many a sad Country: Dolorous, of Dolorosus,
sad, sorrowful, of Dolor, Lat. Grief.

V. 620. Many a Fiery Alpe; They passed over many a Frozen, and many a Flaming
Mountain: Alps, Lat. for the famous Barrier of Hills parting Italy from France
and Germany, called Alps, from Albedine, whiteness, as being covered with
Snow, the old Latins pronouncing Alpum for Album, white: Alpinas, (ah dura)
nives. Virg. Ecl. 10.

V. 622. A Universe of Death; IA World of Death, or rather of never-dying
Torments: Universe, of Universum, Lat. (...), the whole World.

V. 623. Created Evil, for Evil only Good; Which God on purpose made so ill, so
dismal, and so woeful, as proper and most fit for the Punishment of Evil Doers,
Wicked Angels or Men.

V. 624. Where all Life dies, etc. Where all the Pleasures of Life are
consumed, if any thing can be called Life there, when Martial says truly, Non
est vivere, sed valere vita; Death lives, Death everlasting lives and reigns;
well expressed, Where the Worm never dies, and the Fire never goes out. Mar.
9. v. 44.

V. 625. Perverse, all Monstrous and Prodigious, etc. Nature (GOD's Handmaid)
is said to breed in Hell all terrible and astonishing Mischiefs, perversely, as
if turned aside, and diverted from her ordinary course; for as Holy Writ, the
most Authentic Record of the Creation, testifies, GOD saw all that he had
made, and behold, it was very good: So that the production of the place of
Punishment, as it relates either to fallen Angels, or sinful Men, seems a
Deviation from the Infinite Good, created Good for the chastisement of Evil, as
before. Perverse, of Pervertere, Lat. to turn awry. Prodigious, fearful,
dreadful, of Prodigiosus, Lat. Monstrous, contrary to the common course of
Nature.

V. 628. Gorgons; Of this see Verse the 611th, where you will find Virgil's
Imitation of Minerva's Breast Plate thus described by Homer: (...)
(...).
(...).
(...).


Ibid. Hydra's; Hydra was a Monstrous Serpent living both on Land and in the
Water, whence it took its Name of (...), Gr. Water; some say it had Seven,
others Nine, and some Fifty Heads, and when any one of 'em was cut off, two
sprang up out of the Wound. Hercules with Fire and Sword tamed this Monster in
the Lake of Lerna, between Mycenas and Argos, searing with Burning Brands the
Wounds he gave it. Quinquaginta atris immanis hiatibus Hydra. AEn. 6.
-- Non te rationis egentem,
Lernaeus turba Capitum circumstetit anguis. AEn. 8.
-- Lernaeaque pestis
Hydra Venenatis posset Vallata colubris? Lucr. Lib. 5.
Pars quota Lernaeae Serpens eris unus Echidnae!
Vulneribus foecunda suis er at illa: Nec ullum
De centum numero Caput est impune recisum;
Quin gemino cervix haerede valentior esset. Meta. Lib. 9.


Ibid. And Chimera 's dire; Chimera, of (...), or (...), a Goat, was a Monster
that vomired Fire, and had three Heads, one of a Lion, another of a Goat, and
the third of a Dragon, as Hesid. will have it. (...)
(...)
(...).


Homer says it was like a Lion before, a Goat in the middle, and behind a
Dragon. (...),
(...).


With the latter part of this Virgil agrees: -- Ac bellua Lernae
Horrendum stridens, flammisque armata Chimaera. AEn. 6.


A Composition so contrary to all the Miscarriages of Nature, that it was long
since exploded by Lucretius, as a most improbable Fiction, that une Chimere may
well express a Whimsie, a Castle in the Air. Qui fieri potuit triplici cum
corpore, ut una
Prima Leo, postrema Draco, media ipsa Chimaera,
Ore for as acrem flaret de corpore flammam?


V. 632. Explores his solitary Flight; Endeavors diligently to search out his
lonely way. Explores, of Explorare, Lat. to search after, to seek diligent.
Solitary, Solitarius, Lat. of Solus, alone, without a Companion.

V. 634. Now shaves with Level Wing; Now cuts with downright Wing the Deep,
then rises alo^t, up to the Flaming Vaulted Roof on high, fetching a Fiery
Compass. Touring high, taking a turn on high, of Tour, Fr. a Circle, turn
about, of the Lat. Turris, from its round Form.

V. 636. Concave; Of Concavus, Lat. hollow, as Circular Vaults are. Descried,
seen, discovered, of discernere, or of the Fr. Preposition des, Lat. dis, and
the Vetb Cry, to give Notice by Exclamation properly.

V. 637. Hangs in the Clouds by AEquinoxial Winds; As when a Fleet discerned
far off at Sea, seems hanging in the Clouds, while heedfully they sail, by
Winds that blow about the Equinox, through the Gulf of Bengala, or from the
Molucca Islands, Ternate and Tydore, whence our Merchants bring the East India
Spices. The Sailers on the Wealthy Waves use all their diligence to make the
Cape of Good-Hope, yet warily by Night stand off through the vast Ethiopian
Ocean toward the Southern Pole.

Ibid. AEquinoxial Winds; By Winds that blow about the Equinoxes, that is, in
Spring and Autumn, March and September, when Days and Nights are of like
length. Libra die, somnique pares ubi fecerit horas,
Et Medium Luci atque umbris, jam divider Orbem. Virg. Geor. 1.
Our Seamen call them Trade-Winds, as our Poet does the Trading-Flood.


V. 638. Close sailing from Bengala; The City of Bengala lies in a Bay, to
which it gives its Name, and into which the famous Ganges empties his many
Mouths, about whose Borders the Kingdom of Bengala in the East Indies is
situate, under the Dominion of the Great Mogul: The Country is very fruitful,
and from thence and the Gulf of Bengala, a vast Trade is driven with the
European Nations. Close sailing, because of the vast disproportion between this
Bay and the wide Ethiopean Ocean.

V. 639. Ternate and Tidore; Two of the five small Islands called the
Molucques, on the Coast of East India, lying near the Line. Machian, Moties and
Bachian, are the Names of the other three, from whence vast Quantities of Spice
are sent all over the World.

V. 640. Their Spicy Drugs; Their Spices, or other Medicinal Plants used in
Physic, of which the Indies afford many. Drug, of the Fr. Drogue, Herbs and
Simples made use of in the curing Diseases.

V. 641. Ethiopian to the Cape; Through the wide Southern Ocean to the Cape of
Good-Hope; called Ethiopian, of AEthiopia the Lower, the more Southern Part of
Africa, which it bounds. Cape is a Promontory high Mountain, or Headland
running out into the Sea, so called of Caput, Lat. Head, and that meant here is
the Cape of Good-Hope, it is a most famous Promontory in the most Southern part
of Africa, first discovered by Bartho. Diaz a Portuguese, in the Year 1487.
and called Cabo de Bona Speranza, by Emanuel then King of that Country, because
he conceived hope, by doubling this Cape, a passage might be opened to the
East Indies, as afterward was effected.

V. 641. Ply stemming Nightly to the Pole; Use their utmost diligence to make
the Cape, but for their security stand off every Night to Seaward toward the
South Pole. Ply, of the Teur. Pleyen, to be diligent, to take care of.
Stemming, turning their Prows (the Ships Heads) toward the Pole, for fear of
Dangers in the Night, of the Verb Stemm and that of Stem, the Forecastle of a
Ship, from Stem to Stern, as Sailors speak, from one end of a Ship to the
other. Thus to Stem the Tide, a Ship is said when there is Wind enough to carry
it against the Tide.

V. 645. And thrice threefold the Gates; Nine Gates, three of Brass, three of
Iron, and three of Rocky Adamant, not for Ornament, but Strength, according to
the usual Custom both of the Greeks and Latins, who express those things that
were most firm and strong, by Adamant. So Horace, Si figit Adamantinos dira
necessitas Clavos.

Virgil encompasseth his Hell with a threefold Wall: -- Sub rupe sinistra
Maenia lata videt, triplici circumdata Muro. AEn. 6.


And a little after, Porta adversa ingens solidoque Adamante Columnae.

And, Stat ferrea turris ad Auras. Ibid.

But his Barriers were but to keep in the wicked and condemned Sufferers
thereof, our Poet to confine and imprison the Fiends themselves; yet for what
he wants in Gates, he has made good with the detestable River Styx; Novies Styx
interfusa coercet. AEn. 6.

V. 647. Impenetrable, impaled, etc. Unpassable, enclosed with surrounding
Fire, yet undecayed. Impenetrable, impenetrabilis, Lat. not to be pierced
through, not to be broken through. Impaled, encompassed, paled about, enclosed,
of the Lat. Palus, a Hedge-Stake; Circling, round, on all sides, of Circulus,
Lat. for a Figure completely round.

V. 648. A Formidable Shape; A dreadful Figure: Formidabilis, Lat. affrighting,
terrible.

V. 650. In many a Scaly Fold; Sin and Death are placed as Guardians of
Hell-Gates, which all the Power of Satan and his Infernal Legions never could
have unbarr'd, or broken through, if Mankind by offending their Maker, had not
lent their helping Hands, by the Commission of innumerable Sins subjecting
themselves to Death and Hell. This Description of Sin is genuine and exact,
resembled to a fair beautiful Woman down to the Waste, but all below ending in
many Snaky Folds, deformed and ugly as the Night-Hag: Intimating, that how
lovely and alluring soever Sin may seem in its first Approaches, yet after
Commission, it ends in Nauseous Loathings, and severe Remorse, well expressed
by a Serpents deadly Sting. S^aly, Fr. of Escailles, the Scales of Fishes.

V. 652. Voluminous and vast, etc. A twisting mighty Snake, denoting the
intricacy of Sin, enticing us from less to greater, till it involve us in Ruin
inextricable. Voluminous, twisting and twining, besetting us on all sides, of
Volumen, Lat. the most proper word for the Turnings and Windings of a Serpent.
So Virg. Saucius at Serpens sinuosa volumina versat. AEn. 11.

Vast, of Vastus, Lat. huge: This seems an Imitation of Horace; -- Ut turpiter
atrum
Definat in Piscem Mulier formosa superne!


De Art Poet. or of the Story (of Scylla following V. 500.

V. 655. With wide Cerberian Mouths, etc. The yelling of these Hell Hounds that
never gave over Barking, with Mouths as deep as the three-headed Cerberus,
their howling even when returned and hid within the Womb that bare 'em, denotes
to us, the never-ceasing Pa^gs and dire Remorse of Conscience, which though
diverted and disturbed sometimes by Company, Wine, and other Artifices, yet
give us inward Pangs and secret Stings, and break the Sinners meditated Mirth;
and amidst all their feigned Smiles and forced Jollities, lash 'em within
unseen, and howl about their Heart Strings. Cerberian Mouths, as wide as those
of Cerberus, a Dog by the Poets feigned to lie at Hell-gate, so called, as if
(...), greedy and devouring, he is generally described with three Heads,
covered over with many Serpents. Cerberus, (...) ingens latratu regna trifauci,
Personat, AEn. 6. And -- Jan^tor Aul^
Cerberus: Quamvis furiale centum
Muniant angues caput ejus, atque
Spiritus teter, saniesque manet
Ore trilingui. Hor. Lib. 3. Od. 11.


V. 656. A Hideous Peal; And made a dreadful Noise: A Peal is properly the
Ringing of Bells, and is derived of Appeller, Fr. to call, because used to
assemble People to Church, therefore used with Rung, but it is used also for
the discharging of great Guns, called a Peal of Ordinance.

V. 659. Far less abhorred vexed Scylla; Those Sea-Dogs that bark about Scylla,
bathing in the Sea between Italy and the roaring Island Sicily, are not so
detestable as these Hell Hounds. The Scylla here meant, was the Beautiful
Daughter of Phorcus, beloved of Glaucus, and by the jealous Circe, who poisoned
a Fountain, in which she used to bathe, changed from the Waste downwards into a
strange Monster, whereupon, frighted with her own Deformity, she cast her self
into the Sicilian Sea. -- Scyllam quam fama secuta est
Candida succinctam latrantibus inguina monstris. Virg. Ecl. 6.
At Scyllam caecis cohibet Spelunca latebris
Prima hominis facies, and pulchro pectore Virgo
Pube tenus: Postrema immani corpore Pristis
Delphinum Caudes utero Commissa luporum. AEn. 3.


Homer describes this Monster with six Heads, each with three Rows of Teeth:
(...)
(...)
(...), etc. (...).


V. 661. Calabria; The ancient Appellation of the extreme part of Italy, called
now Terra d'Otranto, bounded on the East, West and South, by the Mediterranean
Sea.

Ibid. The hoarce Trinacrian Shore; From the loud, noiseful Shore of Sicily,
occasioned by the furious Eruptions of the bellowing Mount Etna. This Island
was called Trinacria, of the (...), its three Extremities, by the Promontories
Pelorus, Pachynus and Lilybaeum, shaped like a Triangle. Trinacria lentandus
remus in unda. And
Praestat Trinacrii metas lustrare profundi. AEn. 3.
Terra tribus scopulis vastum procurrit in aequor
Trinacris, a positu nomen adepta loci. Ovid. Fast. 4.


V. 662. The Night-Hag when called in secret; None so deformed and dismal
attend the chief Night-Witch, when summoned in private, and allured by the
smell of Infants Blood sacrificed to her, she comes flying through the Air, to
Dance and Revel with her Lapland Consorts, while the sickning Moon faints at
their direful Charms. Hag is by a great Master in Etymologies deduced from the
Lat. Saga, a Witch, by turning S into the Aspiration H, as on the contrary the
H, or its equivalent Aspiration is changed into S; as (...), Gr. super; (...),
sudor, Soegn. Dut. Hog. Of the Flying of Witches, the Modern Tasso gives his
Testimony in his Armida, the famous Inchantress, Calca le nubi, e tratta l'aure
a volo,
Cinta di nembi, e turbini sonori;
Passa i lidi sogetti al' autro polo,
E le terre d'ignoti habitatori;
Passa l'alcide i termini, ne'l suole
Appressa de gli speri, O quel de mori;
Ma su i mari sospeso il corso tiene. Cant. 16. Stan. 70.


The Ancients believed Witches able to turn themselves into Bats and Owls, when
they had a mind to wing it from place to place through the Air; and the
Italians do still call Witches, Strigas.

V. 664. Lured with the smell of Infant-Blood; Invited, allured, drawn by the
reeking smell of some poor Infants Blood. I find Horace in his Invective on
Candia, accuses her of making use of Frogs Blood in her Incantations; Et uncta
turpis ova Ranae sanguine: And of burying a Boy up to the Chin, there to starve
to death, to make a Philtre of his dried Liver, Quo posset infossus puer, Longo
die bis terve mutatae dapis, Inemori spectaculo, Ep. 5. A Lure is a Bundle of
Feathers made something like a Bird, by Falconers thrown up to take down the
Hawk, of the Ital. Luro, of the Lat. Ludere, to cheat.

V. 665. With Lapland Witches; Lapponia and Lappia, Lapland is the most
Northern part of Scandinavia, on the North it has the Frozen Sea, Westward the
Kingdom of Norway, Southward Bothnia and Finia, two Provinces of Sweden, and on
the East the White-Sea, the Emperor of Russia and the Kings of Denmark and
Sweden are Lords of this Country, but the last has the greatest share of it, a
Nation inhabits it full of Heathenism and Ignorance; insomuch, that those that
are converted to the Christian Faith, can hardly be brought to Church but for
the sake of a good Soop of Brandy, which stands at the entrance of all of them,
as the Holy Water does at many other Church-Doors. Their Diabolical
Superstitions, and Vindicative Natures, added to their gross Stupidity, and the
Malicious Imaginations of Melancholy, have made them Infamous for Witchcraft
and Conjuration, an Opinion almost worn out in England with our Ignorance and
Superstition, the Parents and Faustors of such Fables: Quodcunque ostendis mihi
fic, incredulus Odi. Hor.

V. 666. The Laboring Moon Eclipses at their Charms; The Ancients believed the
Moon extremely afflicted by Sorceries, and that Magick-Charms were able to
fetch her out of her Pale Chariot, to give more Efficacy and Virtue to those
Venomous Plants used by those that professed Witchcraft: That her extraordinory
Redness or Paleness, and her want and deficiency of Light, proceeded from the
force of their Incantations; and all her senseless Subjects (that knew no
better) came out to her Assistance with all their Pots and Pans of Metal, and
made a mighty Din to hinder her from hearing those Compulsive Spells that
forced her from her shining Sphere; and they who understood not Eclipses to be
inevitable and natural, according to the certain Motions of the Heavenly
Bodies, might well believe all the Old Wives Tales of Witchcraft. Carmina vel
Coelo possunt deducere Lunam. Virg. Ecl. 8.
-- Polo
Deripere Lunam vocibus possum meis. Hor. Ep. 17.
Tot pariter Pelves, tot tintinnabula dicas
Pulsari; Jam nemo tubas atque era fatiget;
Una laboranti poterit succurrere Lunae. Juv. Sat. 6.


Tasso ascribes the same Power to his Armida: Quante mormoro may profane note
Tessala Maga con la bocca immonda,
Cio, ch' arrestar puo le celesti rote,
E l'ombre trar de la prigion profonda. Cant. 16. Stan. 37.


Laboring, of Laborans, Lat. sick, in pain, laboring of a Distemper. Luna
laborans, the Moon in an Eclipse, of which before Bo. 1. V. 597.

V. 671. Fierce as ten Furies; As terrible as ten Fiends: Furies, of Furiae,
Lat. for Wicked Spirits, the Punishers of Wicked Men after Death.

V. 673. The likeness of a Kingly Crown; Death is the only Universal Monarch,
Conqueror of all, who ever have, or shall pretend to, that unlimited boundless
Power, so large his Empire, that all Mankind, and all Things living on Earth,
must be his Subjects, and pay him humble Homage in Dust and vile Corruption.
Job has described him well, by (...), The King of Terrors, chap. 18. verse. 14.
The Apostle puts his Iron Scepter in his hand, and shows the Commencement of
his Reign: But Death reigned from Adam, Romans 5. v. 14. and it will end only
with the Universe: Crown, of the Lat. Corona.

V. 681. Execrable Shape; Accursed, dreadful, detestable Figure: Execrabilis,
Lat. accursed, and thence terrible.

V. 683. Thy miscreated Front athwart, etc. Thy ill-made Face across my way:
Miscreated, created, made amiss, therefore ugly and ill-favored; His
miscreated Mold, F. Q. B. 2. c. 7. st. 42. Front, of Frons, Lat. for the
Forehead, and thence for the Face: Athwart, cross, of a and thwart; to thwart,
is to cross one.

V. 686. Retire, or taste thy Folly; Begone, or feel thy Folly; hence, or thy
Feeling shall make the Understanding thy foolish vain Prefumption: Taste, of
the Fr. Tastir, applicable to the Feeling, as well as Tasting; so Tastire le
Pouls a, to feel ones Pulse.

V. 688. Goblin; A Sprite, of Gobelin, Fr. for a Hobgoblin, as it is called, of
the old Fr. word Fober, to devour, to eat Ravenously, Nurses using the Word to
affright crying Children.

V. 692. The third part of Heaven's Sons; A third part of the offending Angels,
grounded probably on Revel. 12. v. 3, and 4. Behold a great Red Dragon -- And
his Tail drew the third part of the Stars of Heaven, and cast them to the Earth.

V. 693. Conjured against the Highest; Banded and leagued together against the
most High: Conjured, Conjuratus, Lat. of Conjurare, to bind one another by
Oath, to be true and faithful in a Design undertaken. Et conjuratos Caelum
rescindere fratres. Geor. 1.
Aut conjurato descendens Dacus ab Istro. Geor. 2.


V. 697. Hell doomed, etc. Condemned and Sentenced unto Hell; and dare defy
me here, where I Reign thy Lord and King: Defiance, of the Verb Defy, this of
Defier, to brave, to challenge, of the Lat. Diffidere, to defy, to scorn, as a
faithless and perfidious Enemy.

V. 704. The Grisly Terror; Thus spoke grim Death, th^^^ghastly dreadly
King: Grisly, an old Word for Ugly, used by Chaucher and Spencer, Gnashing
with Grinded Teeth his Griesly Look: Griesled, gray, hoary, of the Fr. Gris, is
either the Offspring, or Parent of Griesly. Spen. B. 6. C. 5. St. 16.

V. 706. And deform; Grew ten times more dreadful and ill-favored: Deformis,
Lat. Ugly.

V. 707. Incensed with Indignation; Set on Fire with Disdain and Rage:
Incensed, of Incendere, Lat. to burn: Indignation, of Indignatio, Lat. Anger,
properly that Rage arising from a sense of some vile Baseness thrown unworthily
on a Man.

V. 708. Like a Comet burned; Satan with Rage enflamed, looked like a Blazing
Star that fires all the Space, possessed by the huge Dragon toward the
Northern Pole, and with his fiery Looks affright the pale Spectators with the
sad Presage of wastful War or Plagues: Cometa, Lat. of the Gr. (...), a hairy
Star, Stella crinita, as here described with his horrid Hair. -- Totoque
ardentis ab ore
Scintillae absistunt; occulis micat acribus ignis. AEn. 12.


V. 709. That Fires the length of Ophiucus huge; (...), Gr. is Anguitenens
properly, of (...) a Serpent, and (...) to have, and is meant of Hercules, who
in his Cradle squeezed two Snakes to death, or of Esculapius, who was worshipped
in the shape of a Serpent, and is expressed by the figure of a Man pressing a
Snake in his hands, and placed in the Equator. Pressasque tandem solvat
Ophiuchus manus
Virusque fundat. -- Sen. in Mede.


Our Author means the famous Dragon that kept the Hesperian Gardens, (robbed by
Hercules of their Golden Fruit) and by Juno afterward translated amongst the
Stars, where he rounds the North Pole, reaching to the Great Bear with his
Tail, and embracing the lesser with his bulk. -- Fuit aurea Sylva,
Divitiisque graves and fulvo germine rami,
Et nunquam somno damnatus lumina Serpens
Robora complexus rutilo curvata metallo. Luc. l. 9.


Thus Virgil describing the Northern Hemisphere. Maximus hic flexu sinuoso
elabitur anguis
Circum, perque duas, in morem fluminis Arctos. Geor. 1.


V. 710. In the Artick Sky; (...) Northern, in the Northern half of the
Heaven: (...), Gr. a Bear, the name of the noted Stars, the Greater and Lesser
Bears, near the North Pole; feigned to have been Calisto (Daughter of Lycaon
King of Arcadia) Mistress to Jupiter, and her Son, by jealous Juno, turned into
that Beast, and placed by her Gallant among the Stars. -- Laudataque quondam
Ora Jovi, lato fieri deformia victu,
Ursaque conspectos in montibus horruit ursos
Et celeri raptos inania vento
Imposuit Caelo, vicinaque sidera fecit. Met. l. 1.
Arctos Oceani metuentes aequore tingi. Geor. 1.


V. 711. Shakes Pestilence and War; Of these fatal Effects the Poets were great
Observers* Non secus ac liquida si quando nocte Cometae
Sanguinei lugubre rubent. -- AEn. 10.
-- Diri toties arsere Cometae. Geor. 4.
-- Crinemque tremendi
Syderis and terris mutantem regna cometen. Luc. l. 1.
-- Augurium qualis laturus in Orbem,
Praeceps san^^ineo delabitur igne Cometes,
Prodigiale ^^^ens. Non illum navita tuto,
Non impune vident populi: Sed crine minaci
Nunciat aut ratibus ventos, aut Urbibus hosts. Claud. de Rap. Pros. l. 1.
Crine ut flammifero terret fera regna Cometes
Sanguineum spargens ignem, vomit atra rubentes
Fax Caelo radios, and saeva luce coruscum
Scintillat sidus, terrisque extrema minatur. Sil. Ital. l. 1.
Qual con le chiome Sanguinose, horrende
Splender Cometa, suol per l'Aria adusta,
Che i Regni muta, e i fieri morbi adduce
A i purpurei Tiranni infausta luce
Tal ne l'Armi ei Fiammeggia, etc. Tasso. Cant. 7. St. 52.


Most of these are used to set off an angry Hero armed for dreadful Deeds, as
our Author hereby expresses Satan's Rage and Indignation; and I give the
judicious Reader his Option, out of the six Quotations to find any one so
expressive of the common Sentiments of Mankind, and the fearful Effects they
apprehend from the appearance of Comets, as is our Author's, And from his
horrid Hair, shakes Pestilence and War.

V. 715. With Heaven's Artillery fraught; As when two pitchy Clouds, big with
Heaven's Cannon, (laden with Roaring Thunder) cross the Caspian, come
grumbling on, then stand Head to Head awhile, staying the grim Engagement, till
appointed Winds sound the sure Signal to discharge, their dreadful Volleys
rending the Mid-Air. Heaven's Artillery, Thunder: Quicquid habent telorum
Armamentaria Caeli. Juv. Sat. 13.

Artillery, of Artillier, a Bow-maker; Bows and Arrows were the Artillery of
former Ages, now the Word is applied to Guns, and more especially to great
Guns, any number of which is called, A Train of Artillery: Fraught, laden, of
the Word to Freight or Lade a Ship, of the Fr. Fretes.

V. 716. Over the Caspian; Over the Caspian Sea, so called of the Caspii People
of Scythia, bordering on it Southward, now called Mer de Bacu, or de Sala.

V. 717. Hovering a space, etc. Delaying a while: To hover, is properly to fly
about, to and fro, as Birds do about their Nests or young ones, not to fix, to
make a feint, as Armies sometimes do, hovering about one place when they design
the Siege of another.

Ibid. Till Winds the Signal blow; Thunder seldom happens without Wind,
therefore described with Wings, and compounded by Virgil with certain Portions
of Wind. Radios rutili tres ignis and alitis austri AEn. 8.
Fulminis afflavit ventis and contigit igni. AEn. 2.


V. 718. Their dark Encounter; Their dismal Shock in the mid Sky: Encounter, of
Encontre, Fr. an Engagement, a meeting and Shocking of Charging Enemies.

V. 719. So frowned the mighty Combatants; The mighty Champions: Combatant, of
Combatans, Fr. of Combatre, to fight.

V. 722. To meet so great a Foe; For never was either of them like to meet so
great an Enemy, but once more, when our Blessed Savior Jesus Christ did at his
Resurrection, encounter, conquer, and triumph over, both Death and Hell, when
he saw Satan like Lightning fall down from Heaven. Luc. 10. v. 18.

V. 723. Had been achiev'd; Great things had been brought to pass: Achiev'd,
done, finished, of the Fr. Acheve, accomplished.

V. 724. The Snakie Sorceress; Sin, the sly insinuating Inchantress; a short,
but significant Delineation of Sin, in two Words: Sorceress, shows her Charms,
and bewitching Delusions: Snakie, admonishes us of her sly Insinuations, and
the bitter Remorse and Repentance here, or the everlasting Sting that follows
it hereafter.

V. 735. The Hellish Pest; The Infernal Plague: Pest, of Pestis, Lat. Plague.

V. 737. So strange thy Outcry; The Noise thou make seems to me so strange,
and the Speech thou usest to part us is so strange also, that my hasty Hand is
withheld, and forbears to show thee by my Actions what I intend to do, till
thou acquaint me, etc. Interposest, the Words thou usest to us are so odd:
Interponere, Lat. to put between.

V. 741. Thou Double-form'd; Of two such different Shapes, described half
Woman, half Snake, V. 650.

V. 743. That Fantasm; That Shadow, Death, that empty Apparition: Fantasm,
(...), Gra delusive Apparition like that of Ghosts, expressive of what is said
at V. 669. That Shadow seemed.

V. 745. More detestable; More hateful, more loathsome: Detestabilis, Lat.
abhorred, abominable.

V. 750. With the Combined, in bold Conspiracy; Linked and joined with them in
the daring Design against GOD Almighty: Combined, of Combinare, Lat. to agree
together: Conspiracy, Conspiratio, Lat. an Agreement against a Prince or State,
a joint Undertaking.

V. 753. Dim thine Eyes, and dizzie swum in Darkness; Dimness seized thine
Eyes, and all things on a sudden seemed to turn round in thy disordered Cloudy
Head, a Graphical Description of that Error with which Satan's Pride blinded his
Understanding, leading him into those dark Designs, in which he lost himself
and his Associates: Dizzie, Giddy, like one that thinks the World turns round,
of the Belg. Duysigh, astonished. The Vertigo, derived a vertendo, from turning
round, is the swimming of the Head through the prevalency of Windy Vapors
therein, a Similitude well suiting Satan's giddy Pride.

V. 754. Thy Head flames thick and fast; It is reckoned among the Symptoms of
the Vertigo, that before the Dimness and Dizziness comes to the height, the
Patient's Eyes seem to sparkle and strike fire.

755. Till on the left side; The left side was by the Romans counted unlucky;
Si men's non laeva fuisset -- Et saepe sinistra,
Cava praedixit ab ilice Cornix. Ecl 1.


As to Intonuit laevum, Auguries were reputed lucky that came from the left
part of Heaven, because the Augurs turning their Faces to the South, the
Eastern Parts were on their left hand, which were always reckoned most
prosperous: In the worst sense, is, -- Si quem
Numina laeva sinunt. -- AEn. 4.


And there is a general Unluckiness laid to the Charge of those that are but
left handed.

V. 757. A Goddess armed -- Out of thy Head I sprung; Sin, that is hatched in
the Imagination, is said to be brought forth out of Satan's Brain-pan, as
Pallas armed Cap-a-pied, (by which the Poets meant Wisdom, etc.) was fabled to
have been the Offspring of Jove's Noddle. This Description is so like Homer's,
of that Warlike and sharp-witted Goddess, that it seems Copied from it. (...)
(...)
(...).


V. 759. Back they recoiled, afraid at first; There are but few, who in the
first entrance on an Evil Life, and Wicked Practices, do not feel some
Reluctance till Folly grow familiar, and Sin habitual: Recoiled, they fled
back, started back; a sign of the Amazement that seized the Heavenly Host at
the first entrance of it, till disguised and varnished over with fair
Pretenses. And well they might be startled at a Sight so ominously ill, when
Homer at the Birth of Pallas (as described above) tells us, -- (...)
(...). --
Amazement seized all the Beholders, tho Gods.


V. 761. A Sign Portentous held me; Esteemed me an unlucky Sign: Portentous,
Lat. Portentosus, unlucky, boding some Mischief, of Portentum, Lat. a Sign of
bad Consequence. Sed variis Portenta Deum terroribus obstant. AEn. 8.

V. 762. -- With attractive Graces won, the most averse; With my enticing
Allurements gained, the most unwilling to Comply; Sin by degrees insinuates it
self, Nemo repent fit turpissimus; We approach to its Pollutions at first
afraid, as Boys shivering enter a River by degrees, till at last we plunge in
out of our depth, and swim down the Stream, With attractive Graces, by my
powerful Charms: Attractif, Fr. alluring, enticing, of Attraire, Fr. to draw to
one, of Ad, Lat. to, and Trahere to draw: Grace, Fr. Beauty, Comeliness:
Averse, the most backward, those that were least inclinable to me at first:
Aversus, Lat. froward, untractable.

V. 765. Becamest Enamored; Becamest in Love with me: Enamored, Fr. Inamoure,
Lat. Inamoratus, in Love with.

V. 766. That my Womb conceived a growing Burden; That thou begatest more Sins
of me, one Sin is the Parent of many more, we pass from one Offense to another,
from a Fault, to the concealing of it by a Lie, and then to the disavowing of
it by many Oaths and horrid Imprecations, by Hypocrisy and Dissimulation, and
many succeeding Crimes that are linked together, and hang in a Chain.

V. 770. Rout; Disorder, Confusion, of the Fr. Route, Lat. Ruptio, the breaking
to pieces of an Army.

V. 771. Through all the Empyrean; Throughout all Heaven; Caelum Empyraeum,
Heaven, the Seat of Bliss, and Region of everlasting Light: (...), Gr. burning,
shining, the Climate of never-dying Day: So in Book 1. Ver. 117. he calls the
Angelic Natures, Empyreal Substance, of their Purity and Brightness.

V. 776. These Gates for ever shut; And they had been for ever so close kept
and barricadoed on Satan and his accursed Crew, had not Mankind fallen from
their Maker by Disobedience, and their Sins opened the dreadful Doors.

V. 777. Pensive here I sat; Thoughtful and sad here I took up my Seat: Pensif,
Fr. of Penser, Fr. to think, of Pensare, Lat. to meditate and weigh things in
ones Mind.

V. 780. Rueful Throes; Sad Pangs: Throws are properly the Pains Women feel in
Childbirth, of the Sax. Drorian, to suffer: Rueful, lamentable, painful, of
the Teut. Rue, Repentance.

V. 781. This odious Offspring; This hateful Issue of mine; a true Description
of Death, Sin's dreadful Offspring; Sin, when it is finished, brings forth
Death, Jam. 1. v. 15.

V. 784. Dist^rted; Drawn awry, burst, of Distortus, Lat. deformed, of
Distorquere, Lat. to writhe.

V. 785. Transformed; Quite changed, of a different shape from what I was
before; showing well the different Aspects our Sins wear, when Lust and heared
Imaginations, untamed Blood, and Thoughts ungovernable, hurry us on, they seem
beautiful and alluring; but when Sickness or old Age sets 'em in a true Light,
and shows 'em in a right Prospect, when Death appears, then Sin, how Charming
soever before, shows snaky and distorted, and with her ghastly end affright us:
Transformed, of Transformare, Lat. to alter the Shape.

V. 786. Brandishing his fatal Dart; Shaking his deadly Dart: Brandir, Fr. to
shake: Fatal, of Fatalis, Lat. deadly: Telum fatale corruscat. AEn. 12.

V. 789. From all her Caves, and back resounded; Insonuere cavae, gemitumque
dedere cavernae: An imitation of Virg. AEn. 2. Resounded, of Resonare, Lat. to
return a Sound back as Eccho's do: Resonantia long littora. Geor. 1.
Resonabilis, Echo. Ovid.

V. 794. Ingendering with me; Begot of me: Engendrer, Fr. of Ingenerare, Lat.
to beget, as coupling Creatures do their young ones: Rape, a forced Enjoyment,
of Rapere, Lat. to snatch by force.

V. 795. These yelling Monsters; These hideous howling Monsters: Yelling, is
properly the howling of hungry famelic Wolves, and seems made of the similitude
of Sound.

V. 796. Surround me; Encompass and enclose me on all sides, of Surronder, an
old Fr. word, to hem in round on all sides.

V. 797. Hourly conceived, and hourly born; A fruitful and a fearful Birth,
excellently describing the perpetual Pangs, the direful Agonies, and gnawing
Remorses, that day and night incessantly corrode the Guilty.

V. 800. Their Repast; Their Food, their Feast: Fr. Repas, of Repaistre, of re
and Pascere, Lat. to feed.

V. 801. With conscious Terrors; With affrighting Guilt harass me on all sides:
Conscious, of the Lat. Conscius, knowing, and thence guilty, of Conscire;
whence Conscience. The Word is used both in a good and bad sense. Occiso
pastore Lupus magnove juvenco
Conscius audacis facti. -- AEn. 11.


As also, Men's sibi conscia recti. AEn. 1.


V. 807. His End with mine involved; That if he destroys me, he must be no
more, for Sin the Provocation ceasing, Death the Punishment must also cease:
Sublata causa tollitur effectus; The last Enemy that shall be destroyed, is
Death, Romans 15. v. 26. Involved, rouled or wrapped up together, of Involvere,
Lat. to fold up.

V. 808. A bitter Morsel; An unpleasant Bit, and unsavory Mouthful, of Morceau,
Fr. of Morsus, Lat. for the same.

V. 809. So Fate pronounced; So it is decreed: -- Sic fata Deum Rex,
Sortitur, volvitque vices, is vertitur ordo. AEn. 3.
Sic fata Jovis poscunt, hic terminus h^ret. AEn. 4.


Pronuntiare, Lat. to decree, to declare.

V. 812. Invulnerable; Invulnerabilis, Lat. free from Wounds, that cannot be
wounded.

V. 813. For that Mortal Dint; That deadly Stroke none but Heaven's Eternal
King can withstand: Dint, of the Sax. Dynt, a Stroke, used for Strength and
Force; By dint of Judgment, by strength of Reason.

V. 815. His Lore soon learnt; Quickly understood what was fit for him to say:
Lore, an old word for Learning, of the Sax. Laeran, to teach: -- Ne would unto
his Lore allured be. Spen. F. Q B. 5. C. 11. St. 61.

V. 827. This uncouth Errand sole; Upon this dark Design alone, alone I
undertake this dismal Journey: Errand, is of the Sax. Errend, a Messenger, Ab
Errando: Uncouth, an old word for Terrible, of the Sax. Uncud, unknown.

V. 829. The Unfounded Deep; The wide Gulf between Heaven and Hell, the vast
Vacuity, the boundless Vacuity: Unfounded, that has no Foundation. Lucretius
his -- Magnum per Inane. Lib. 1.

Ibid. Through the void Immense; Through the vast Vacuity: Per inane profundum,
Lucr. ^. 1. Void, Fr. Vuide, Lat. Vacuus, Empty: Immensus, Lat. Immensurable:
Immensasque trahi nubes, Geo. 4. So Virgil, Magnum per inane coacta, Semina,
Ecl. 6. And he calls Hell, Domos ditis vacuas and inania Regna; AEn. 6.

V. 830. With wandering Quest; Diligently to search every where: Quest, Fr. Une
Quest^, an Inquiry, a Search, hence an Inquest, both of the Lat. Quaerere, to
make search after.

V. 831. And by concurring Signs; By all agreeing Signs and Tokens: Concurring,
of Concurrens, of Concurrere, Lat. to agree.

V. 833. In the Pourlieues of Heaven; Hard by, in the Neighborhood of Heaven:
Purlieu is ^ Fr. word, (as most of our Law Terms are) of Pur Pure, and Lieu a
Place, and denotes Ground adjoining to, and being accounted part of any Forest,
by Hen. 2. and other Kings, was by Perambulation granted by Hen. 3. separated
again from the same, and adjudged Purlieu, that is, pure and free from the Laws
of the Forest: So Satan calls the World, A Seat of Bliss, bordering upon his
Native Heaven.

V. 835. Perhaps our vacant Room; To supply and fill the Places we have lost in
Heaven; Seeds vacantes, Our Seats empty since our Rebellion.

V. 836. Surcharged with potent Multitude; O'recharg'd, o'restock'd with mighty
Multitude: Potens, Lat. powerful: Surcharged, of Surcharger, Fr. to overload,
to overburthen.

V. 842. Wing silently the buxom Air; Fly unperceived thorough the yielding
Air: Buxom* pliable, yielding, of the Sax. Bocrum, tractable, obedient;
Buxomness in Chaucher is put for Lowliness, Humility. Spencer makes it the
Epithete of the Air; And therewith Scourge the Buxom Air so sore. F. Q B. 1. C.
11. St. 37.

Ibid. Imbalm'd with Odours; Scented and delighted with the sweet Fragrancy of
the Spicey ^^dian Air, breathing Perfumes and Aromatic Odours: Imbalm'd,
Embaume, Fr. put up and preserved with Balm and precious Spices, as Princes and
great Persons are at their Death, a Word well applied to caress the ugly
Fantom: Odours, of Odor, Lat. for any sweet Smell or Perfume. ^^

V. 846. Grin'd horrible a ghastly Smile; And grim Death grin'd out a frightful
Smile: Grin'd or Girn'd, of the Ital. Grignare, with opened Mouth to show ones
Teeth between Smiling and Snarling: Ghastly, dreadful, terrible, as if Ghostly.

V. 847. His Famine should be filled, and blessed his Maw; To hear the time
should come, when his famelic hungry Guts should be stuffed, and praised his
mighty Maw reserved for that same lucky hour: Famine, of the Fr. Famine, and
that of Fames, Lat. Hunger: Maw, of the Sax. Maga, the Stomach: Destined, of
Destinare, Lat. to appoint.

V. 858. Into this gloom of Tartarus profound; Into the dark Dungeon of deepest
Hell: Gloom, of the Sax. Glommung, Twilight, Glimmering: Tartarus, Lat. of
(...), Gr. the lowest, deepest Pit of Hell, of (...), Gr. to confound, to
disorder, there being Confusions and Perturbations everlasting: Bis nigra
videre Tartara. AEn. 6. Profound, Lat. Profundus, deep.

V. 860. Inhabitant of Heaven, etc. Who dwelt in Heaven, and am born therein:
Inhabitant, of Inhabitare, to dwell or reside in a Place; Sin calls her self
Heavenly born, Native of the bright Regions above, because the Wicked Angels
sinned probably before the World was made, as our Poet supposes, intimating
that Man was Created to supply the Vacancies made in the Heavenly Quires by
their Downfall, and Ejection from thence, as before, V. 834.

V. 861. Here in perpetual Agony; In continual Anguish, and extreme Pain:
Agony, signifies any great Anxiety, immoderate Anguish, or Trouble; it is
expressive of the last Efforts and Conflicts of the Soul and Body at their sad
Separation, of (...). Strife, Contention, such as those of the famous Games of
Greece, of (...), Gr. Certamen, from the strict Discipline, and the mighty
Concern those Combatants had of succeeding in so renowned and public
Undertakings, made to signify the most tormenting Apprehensions of Shame and
Disgrace.

V. 864. My Author; The first Founder and Inventer of Sin, as Satan was, of
Author, Lat. the Maintainer and Abetter ab Auctoritate.

V. 869. Voluptuous; Pampered with all sensual Delights: Voluptuosus, Lat.
given to Pleasure, of Voluptas, Lat.

V. 873. Rouling her Bestial Train; Drawing after her the Snaky Folds, of which
her lower Parts consisted (as before): Rouling, of Rouler, Fr. to twist and
twine as Serpents do themselves, moving circularly: Bestial, Beast-like, of
Bestia, Lat. a Beast: Train, that Skirt of a Ladies Gown that draws on the
Ground, of Trainer, Fr. to draw.

V. 874. The huge Portcullis; Is a Gate made of Grated Iron Bars, to be let
slip down upon the approach of an Enemy to a City, its own weight, and the Bars
shapened at the bottom, fix it in the Ground; of Port, Fr. a Door, and
Coulisse, Fr. for a thing made to slip up and down, of Color, Fr. to slide.

V. 877. The intricate Wards; The difficult Passages and Turnings in a Lock
that hinder any other Key from passing them, that is not made for the purpose:
Intricatus, Lat. hard to hit, to discover: Wards, of Guarder, to keep, to
secure, no one shall enter without leave.

V. 880. With impetuous Recoile, etc. In a instant Hell Gates fly open with
violent rebound, and jarring noise, which made their grating Hinges imitate
hoarse Thunder, that the very Foundations shook of its dark Dungeon. Impetuous
Recoile, with violent Repulse: Impetuosus, Lat. furious, forcible: Recoile, of
Reculer, Fr. to force back, to Retreat hastily and furiously. Jarring Sound, a
grating Noise; to Jar, signifies here, to make such a sound as Hinges made of
Metal do by a sudden turn and mighty weight, and seems to be Coined on purpose
from the Noise so made, (...). Foribus cardo stridebat ahenis. AEn. 1.

V. 881. On their Hinges grate harsh Thunder; -- Horrisono stridentes carrdine
sacrae
Panduntur Portae. -- AEn. 6.
Does not make so terrible a Noise.


V. 883. The lowest bottom shook of Erebus; Of Hell, the most profound depth of
Hell: Erebus, (...). Of (...) the Earth, or (...) to cover, as being supposed
under, or in the Center of the Earth. Erebi de sedibus imis. Geor. 4. Pallentes
umbras Erebi. AEn. 6.

V. 885. That with extended Wings; The Gates when opened were so wide, that
with its Wings stretched out, and all their Colors flying, with Horse and
Chariots in their loosest Order ranged, a Royal Army with all its square
Banners might pass through them: Banner'd, of Banniere, Fr. for a square Flag
or Standard. Ranked in loose Array, drawn in their open Order: Ranked, Range,
Fr. Array, of the Fr. Arroy, Order; we say, In Battle array, when an Army or
Body of Men is drawn into Order ready to give the Onset: Arroyer, Fr. to order
a Battle.

889. Redounding Smoke, etc. Cast forth a mighty Smoke, of Redundans,
excessive, Parti. of Redundare, to abound: Ruddy, of the Sax. Rudu, Redness:
Furnace, of Furnax, Lat. an Oven.

V. 891. The Secrets of the hoary Deep; Before his Eyes all at once appear, the
inmost Chambers and the dark Recesses of the ancient Deep, where Night
(perpetual Darkness) and Chaos* (everlasting Confusion), the Parents and
Predecessors of all Created Beings, dwell. Hoary, gray, and consequently old,
of the Sax. Haryan, to grow old and gray: Secrets, Secreta, Lat. Things hid and
unknown.

V. 892. Illimitable Ocean; A boundless Ocean: Illimitable, without Bound, as
expounded in the end of the Verse; of Limitare, Lat. to bound, to confine:
Ocean, of (...), Gr. (...), from its swiftness.

V. 894. Where eldest Night and Chaos, etc. Night and Chaos, that is, Darkness
and Confusion, are so near Privation and Nonentity, that they might well be
styled, The Ancestors of the Creation; Things that have no Being, are, as to
us, in unconceivable Darkness. Thus Orpheus in his Hymn on Night, accounted by
him and many others a Goddess, (...)
(...). --


Makes her a Mother of all Things, and not undeservedly, since the Poets, in
those early Ages of the World, had so little Light into the bright Original of
all Things: Ancestors, of the Fr. Ancestres, contracted of the Lat.
Antecessores, those that were before, Predecessors.

V. 895. Eternal Anarchie; Keep everlasting Misrule and Disorder; what can be
less imagined under the Empire of Darkness and Confusion, Beauty and Order were
the Offspring of Creation. Anarchie, (...), Gr. the State of those that have no
kind of Government among 'em, where every one is Lawless, and Might takes
Place, a State of Confusion, described by the four first Qualities, Hot, Cold,
Moist, and Dry, Warring continually on one another.

V. 900. Their Embryon Atoms; Their yet imperfect Atoms, their unfinished and
imperceiveable Individuals, their imperfect Motes: Embryon, of the Gr. (...),
is an imperfect and shapeless Creature enclosed in its Mother or Dam's Womb, of
(...) and (...), to spring and shoot like a Plant in its first Formation.

Ibid. Atoms; (...), Things so minute and small, that they were incapable of
division into lesser Particles, of whose blind and fortuitous Concourse,
Epicurus and Democritus fancied the Glorious Universe to have been made; a
Whimsy so ill agreeing with our Author's Philosophy, that he has allowed their
Atoms a very different Place from any in Nature, esteeming them aright, the
Offspring and Subjects of blind Ignorance, and black Confusion.

V. 901. In their several Clans; In their several Tribes, in their diverse
Companies: Clan is a Word among the Highland Scots, signifying a Tribe, perhaps
of the British Llann Area, to denote those that live on the same Spot, or on
Lands belonging to one of their great Leading Chiefs.

V. 902. Light Armed, or heavy; Having engaged these contesting Atoms, as
before (Amongst the Noise of endless Wars,) at V. 286. he continues the Warlike
Metaphor, some of them are light Armed, or heavy, Levis or Gravis Armaturae,
according to their Inclinations to the Qualities, Dry or Moist, and thence
Swifter or Slower, etc.

V. 904. Of Barca or Cyrene' s torrid Soil; As numberless as the Sands in the
fiery Region of Barca or Cyrene. Barca, the Chief City of the sandy Libya; of
which, Silius Ital. AEternumque arida Barce. Lib. 2.

Of this Country, and its Inhabitants: Hinc deserta siti regio, luteque
furentes Barcaei. AEn. 4.
Barce sitientibus arida venis. Sil. Ital. lib. 3.


Cyrene, a Province of the thirsty Libya, full of Sand, and deficient in Water;
it had five Cities in it, of which Cyrene was the Chief, and gave Name to the
whole Country; it was built by Battus, one of their Kings. Nec non Cyrene
Pelopei stirpe nepotis,
Battiadas parves fidei stimulavit in arma. Sil. Ital. l. 3.


Soil, of Solum, Lat. Earth, Ground; the comparison of these flying Clouds of
Sands, does not only suit well with Atoms as to their Infinitude, but as to
their Motion also, according to the Epicurean and Democritic Hypothesis, of the
Atomical Structure of the Universe.

V. 905. Levied to side with Warring Winds; Raised for the Service of
conflicting Winds, of Lever, Fr. to raise: Warring Winds, fighting Winds, not
engaging one against another, but making War with whatsoever stands in their
way. Regna videt pauper Nasamon errantia vento,
Discussasque domos: Volitantque a culmine raptae
Detecto Garamante casae. Non altius ignis
Rapta vehit: Quantumque licet consurgere fumo,
Et violare diem, tantum tenet era Pulvis. Luc. l. 9.


The Roman Soldiers that marched through Libya with the Noble Cato, had a
terrible Encounter with one of these Storms of Sand and Wind intermixed. Tum
quoque Romanum solito violentior agmen
Aggreditur, nullusque potest consistere miles
Instabilis, raptis etiam, quas calcat, arenis.
Sic orbem torquente noto, Romana juventus
Pr^^ubuit, metuensque rapi, etc. Ibid.


Ibid. To poise their lighter Wings; To give weight to their airy Blasts, and
thereby increase their mighty force; Cambyses, infamous for his Impiety against
the Gods of his Times, as well as for his Cruelty to Men, sent an Army to
overturn the Temple of Jupiter Ammon, (which when Alexander visited, he saw in
four days time neither Man, Beast, Bird, Tree, nor River) seated in the most
Southern part of Cyrene, but the Prince of the Air encountered his Forces with
such a dreadful Tempest of flying Sand, that it overbore them, and buried most
of them in the Libyan Desert. Alligat and stantes affusae magnus arenae
Agger, and immoti terra surgente tenentur. Luc. l. 9.


To Poise, Peser, Fr. the Winds are said to balance themselves with Sand, to
add the more Weight to their Fury. This seems an imitation of Virgil concerning
Bees: -- Adventantibus Euris
-- Saepe lapillos,
Ut cymbae instabiles fluctu jactante suburram,
Tollunt: his sese per inania nubila librant. Geor. 4.


Balance, Poise themselves.

V. 906. To whom these most adhere; He of these four Champions, to whom most of
these aiding Atoms join themselves, is for one moment Master of Misrule. This
place is mistaken by Mr. Hog, the Latin Translator of our Author, who has thus
expressed it: Cui se miscuerant vento, magis ille parumper
Imperat. --


Adhere, of Adhaerere, to stick to, to side with.

V. 907. Chaos Umpire sit; Confusion sits Judge of the Contest, and by his
Judgment does increase the Quarrel, thereby supporting his own Power. An
Umpire, is a Person to whose Judgment and Equity the Determination of any
Controversy is referred: Decision, of Decisio, Lat. for determining, deciding,
of Decidere, to determine or judge.

V. 908. Imbroils the Fray; Makes the Contest more intricate and endless:
Imbroils, of Embrouiller, Fr. to entangle, to confound: Fray, a Quarrel, a
Scuffle, of the Fr. Effrayer, to affright.

V. 910. High Arbiter -- Chance governs all; Chance, or Fortune, most commonly
so called, may well be the chief Substitute of Chaos, a fit Deputy to
Confusion, of which many have as great an Esteem now adays, as the Heathens had
formerly. Sors omnia versat. Ecl. 10. -- Fors incerta vagatur
Fertque refertque vices and habent mortalia casum. Luc. 2.
Fortuna omnipotens and ineluctabile fatum;
Fortune and Fate seeming Contradictions. AEn. 8.


Arbiter, Lat. for an Elective Judge between Man and Man, and seems the same
with Umpire: Chance, of the Fr. Chance, of Cheance, what may happen, of Cheoir,
Fr. to fall out, to chance.

Ibid. Into this wild Abyss, etc. Into this wide gawping Gulf, the Womb of all
Things, and perhaps their Tomb, into this empty Chasma, this vast Hollow that
contains, nor Sea, nor Land, nor Air, nor Fire, but all this mixed together in
their powerful Causes, big with them, struggling and contending, and which must
always do so, unless it shall please GOD Almighty, the Maker of all Things, to
use them as the hidden Materials of more Worlds, and by his powerful Word, to
distinguish and bring them into Being. Abyss, (...), Gr. is here to be
understood, of a bottomless Deep, a vast Emptiness, immeasurable and immense,
styled by him before, The Hoarie Deep, V. 891. and there described of the
Privative (...) and (...), bottom; used Revel. 9. v. 1, and 2. The bottomless
Pit, understood there, and in other places of that dark Book, of Hell.

V. 916. His dark Materials; His secret Materials, how the World, and all
Things it contains, was made of Nothing by the Almighty Architect, is so
obscure to our finite Understandings, that the Materials may well be called
Dark: Materials, of Materialis, belonging to the Matter, Materia, Lat.

V. 919. For no narrow Frith he had to cross; For he had no small Straight to
pass: Frith, of Fretum, a narrow Sea, streighten'd between the Land.

V. 921. To compare, etc. Sic parvis componere magna solebam: Virg. Ecl. 1.
Compare, Comparare, Lat. to liken to.

V. 922. Then when Bellona storms, etc. Nor was his Ear assaulted with Noises
less roaring and destructive than are those made by War, when some chief City
is attacked and stormed with all its battering Rams, or thundering Cannons,
Mortars, and Bombs. Bellona was the Goddess of War, and Sister to Mars,
described with a bloody Whip in her hand, to show how severe a Scourge and
Plague War is. Quam cum sanguineo sequitur Bellona flagello. AEn. 18.

V. 923. Bent to Raze; Resolved to destroy: Raze, of the Fr. Raser, or Rayer,
to lay even with the Ground, to destroy, of the Lat. Radere, or of the Gr.
(...), to break. Engine, B. 1. V. 570. Capital, B. 1. V. 756. Battering Engines,
formerly Rams, now Cannon and Mortars; Battering, of the Fr. Batre, to beat
down.

V. 924. Or less than if this Frame; Or with less noise than if the whole Frame
of Nature, disjoynted now, were falling, and the quarrelling Elements, all in
an Uproar and mad Mutiny, had from her Center rent and torn the Earth, hitherto
immovable; Succidere horrisono posse omnia victa fragore. Luc. l. 5. Pene
reluctatis iterum pugnantia rebus
Rupissent Elementa fidem. Claud. de Rapt. Proser. l. 1.


Seems expressive of the Mutiny here meant: Mutiny, of the Ital. Mutino, and
this of Mutire, Lat. to murmur, Seditions and Mutinies in Armies generally
beginning so.

V. 926. From her Axle; Axle, of Axis, Lat. and this of (...), Gr. an
Axle-Tree, thence made to signify the Diameter of the Earth, being an
imaginary Line drawn through its Center from the North to the South Pole.
Steadfast, immovable Earth, against their Opinion that suppose it to move, and
the Sun to stand still.

V. 927. His Sail-broad Vannes; At last he spreads his Wings as broad as Sails;
Velorum pandimus alas, says Virg. AEn. 1. Nothing is more usual with him, than
to apply Swimming to Birds (or to those who imitated them) through the Air, and
Flying to Ships. Volat ille per era magnum Remigio Alarm. AEn. 1.

And, Mare velivolum -- Gelidas enavit ad Artos. AEn. 2.

Vannes, of Vanner, Fr. to winnow; or of the Lat. Vannus, a Van, with which
they winnow Corn, whence the word Fan.

V. 928. The surging Smoke; The rising, ascending, a Surgendo, Lat. from its
tending upwards.

V. 929. Uplifted spurns the Ground; Spurning the Ground lifts himself up into
the rising Smoke: Spurn, of Sporan, Sax* to k^ck, to strike with the Foot.

V. 932. A vast Vacuity; An absolute Emptiness, a huge Vacuum: Vacuitas, Lat.
Emptiness.

V. 933. Fluttering his Pennors vain; Shaking his Wings in vain downright he
falls: Flutter, of the Sax. Floteran, to beat the Air, to wag the Wings as
Birds when weary, of the Lat. Fluctuare: Pennons, Wings, of Penna, Lat. Plomb
down, directly down; Plomb, Fr. Lead, and a Carpenter's Plummet, being a Ball
of Lead fastened to a String, by which they guide their Work; so that a Plomb,
is perpendicularly, downright, of the Lat. Plumbum, Lead.

V. 935. Had not by ill chance the strong Rebuff; Had not by ill luck the
violent blast of some furious Cloud, laden and big with Fire and Nitre, driven
him back again as many Miles aloft: Rebuff, Fr. of Re the aggravating Particle,
and Bouffee a Blast, and it signifies here, a sudden Storm, and furious
Repulse, burst from something like a Cloud made up of Nitrous Fire, for our
Poet is describing Satan's flight through a Tract where there is nothing
distinguishable, or to be named by any distinct created Being: Tumult^ous,
Tumultuosus, Lat. tempestuous, furious.

V. 937. Instinct with Fire and Nitre; Provoked and pushed on by Fire and
Nitre: Instinctus, Lat. pushed forward: Nitre, (...), Heb. Nitrum, is of a
substance like Salt, of Color ruddy or white, and porous like a Sponge, the
more unknown, the better suiting our description here: Hurried him, forced him
furiously, drove him, Fr. Harier, to toil, to harrass.

V. 939. Quenched in a b^g^y Syr^is; That fiery Rebuff ceased, quenched and put
out by a soft Quick-sand: Syrtis is explained by Neither Sea, nor good dry
Land, exactly agreeing with Lucan. Syrtes, vel primam Mundo natura figuram
Cum daret, in dubio Pelagi, Terraeque reliquit, etc. Phar. l. 9.


Boggy, yielding, sinking, as the Irish Bogs do: Syrtis, as if (...), of (...),
to draw, because it is an indraught of Sand, Mud, and Stones, that compose it,
as Salust. tells us: In hospita Syrtis. Virg.

V. 940. Nigh foundred, on he fares; Almost lamed, on he goes: Foundred, B. 1.
V. 204. Fares, of the Teut. Fahren, to go, to journey; hence Seafaring.

V. 941. Treading the crude Consistence; Treading the Bog, marching over the
yielding Quagmire: Crude, of Crudus, raw, soft, not well disgested:
Consistence, of Consistere, Lat. to hang or grow together.

V. 942. Behooves him now, etc. It behooves him now to use both his Oars and
Sails, as Galleys do, according to the Proverb, Remis Velisque, With might and
main.

V. 943. As when a Gryphon; As when a Gryphon, to his winged haste, adds his
swift Feet through some wild Desert, where over Hill and Dale he eagerly
pursues the trembling Arimaspian; whose sly Hand has from his wakeful Watch
born of the Gold committed to his Guard. Gryphon, (...), Gr. a strange
Creature, like Eagles as to their Wings and Beaks, in all the rest of their
Bodies resembling Lions; they were dedicated to Apollo the God of Gold, whose
Beams have no small influence in the formation of that yellow Metal; and
therefore these Grifons are fabled to have been its Guardians, being found in
sandy Deserts. These Creatures are said to have great Enmity against Horses;
whence Virg. Jungentur jam Gryphes Equis. Ecl. 8.

Pliny esteems 'em Fabulous and Poetical Monsters, Lib. 10. c. 49.
V. 944. With Winged Course; Both of Wings and Feet to fit the Comparison to
Half on foot, half flring and to make it square the better with Both Oar and
Sail, as above: Moary Dale, watery fenny Valley, of Moor, a Fen, a Bog, of Moer,
Belg. Mud.

V. 945. Pursues the Arimaspian; Lucan in his Pharsalia mentions these
Arimaspians and makes 'em Natives of Scythia, adorning their Heads with Gold.
Hinc and Sithoniae gentes, auroque ligat^^
Substringens Arimaspe comas. Lib. 3.
Quodque legit dives summis Arimaspus Arenis. Lib. 7.


Aulus Gellius tells us, that in some fabulous Greek Authors, he found the
Arimaspians placed among the Scythians, and described to be People that had but
one Eye in the middle of their Foreheads like the Cyclops. Nect. Attic. l. 9.
c. 4.

V. 946. From his wakeful Custody purloin'd; The Golden Apples in the Hesperian
Garden were guarded by Dragons that never slept. Et nunquam somno damnatus
Lumina Serpens
Robora complexus rutilo curvata metallo. Luc. l. 9.


The Golden Fleece was guarded by as vigilant and wakeful a Watch. Pervigilem
superest herbis sopire draconem
Qui crista linguisque tribus praesignis and uncis
Dentibus horrendus, custos erat arietis aurei. Met. l. 7.


Both expressive of unhappy Covetousness, that hinders the hoarders of sound
Sleep: Purloin'd, stolen, of the old Fr. Purloigner, as when a Grifon seized of
his Prey. F. Que. Cant. 5. Stan. 8.

V. 948. Dense or rare; Through thick or thin: Densus, Lat. thick, close:
Rarus, Lat. thin, ratified.

V. 951. A Universal Hubbub wild; A strange and general Uproar; the word Hubbub
seems coined of the confused Noise made by many low Voices at a distance, and
is so expounded in the following Verse, of Stunning Sounds and Voices all
confused: Stunning, of Estonans, Fr. astonishing.

V. 960. And his dark Pavilion spread; Chaos (Confusion) is made the Supreme
Power of the nethermost Abyss, and his Royal Tent and dark Throne is said to be
spread at large over the wasteful Deep, appointed to no end as not coming
within the compass of Creation: Pavilion, is a Royal Tent, of the Lat Papilio,
a Butterfly, whose Wings resemble it as Pliny tells us; Pavilion, in Fr. is
used for the Flag of that Country, as Arborer le Pavilion de France, is to
carry the French Flag.

V. 962. Sat Sable vested Night; Sat Night in her dark Dress: Night was by the
Heathen esteemed a Goddess, the Mother of Love, Deceit, old Age, Death, Sleep,
and Dreams, of Fear and Darkness; her black Hair was Crowned with Poppies, in
an Ebony Chariot drawn by black Horses, and had a White Boy (Sleep) and a
Black-a-moor (Death) in her Arms. Sable vested, clothed in her Sable Furs; a
Sable, is a Creature, whose Skin is of the greater Price, the blacker it is:
Vested, of Vestire, Lat. to cloth: (...). Eurip. in Jove.

Ibid. Eldest of Things; As before, V. 894. A Title she maintained, even when
the Creation was Commenced, Darkness was upon the Deep, Genesis 1. v. 1.

V. 963. The Consort of his Reign; The Queen of Chaos, as at V. 896. Consort,
of Consors, Lat. a Partner of his Power.

V. 964. Orcus and Ades; Signify the same thing, the first being Latin, the
other Greek, for a dark dismal Dungeon: (...), of (...) Privative, and (...) to
see, thence used for Hell, as Virgil expresses it: -- Mediisque in faucibus Orci
Et tristes sine sole domos, loca turbida. AEn. 6.


So Homer, (...). -- (...).

V. 965. -- And the dreadful Name of Demogorgon; (...), A Deity that without
danger could behold the Gorgon's Head, which turned all the Spectators into
Stones. -- An ille
Compellandus erit, quo nunquam terra citato
Non concussa tremit, qui Gorgona cernit apertam. Luc. l. 6.


This dreadful Demogorgon is thus hinted at by the Italian Tasso. Per lungo
disusar gia non si scorda
Del' art crude, il piu efficace aiuto:
E so con lingua anch' io di sangue lorda,
Quel nom proferir grande, and temuto,
A cui ne Dite may ritrorsa, o sorda,
Ne trasourato in vibidir fu Pluto.
Che si? Che si? Volea piu dir, ma intanto
Conobbe, che seguite, era lo'neanto. Tass. Ca. 13. St. 10.


Some take this Demogorgon for the Chief of the Gods, the (...) of Plato, and
Creator of all Things, whose Name was concealed in imitation of that ineffable
appellation of God, seldom pronounced by the Jews. Scimus enim and quicquid
dici noscique timetis,
Et turbare Hecaten, ni te Tymbraee vererer.
Et triplicis mundi summum, quem scire nefastum est,
Illud sed taceo. -- Stat. Theb. 1.


Our Poet has followed Spencer in placing this terrible Bugbare in the immense
Abyss. Down in the bottom of the deep Abyss,
Where Demogorgon in dull Darkness pent;
Far from the view of Gods, and Heavenly Bliss,
The hideous Chaos keeps, their dreadful Dwelling is. F. Q. B. 4. Ca. 2. St. 47.
Which was begot in Demogorgon 's Hall,
And saw the Secrets of the World unmade. Cant. 5. St. 22.


Ibid. Rumor next, and Chance, etc. Uncertain Rumor, fickle Chance, enraged
Tumult, mad Confusion, and distracted Discord, able and fit Supporters of such
a jarring and confounded State. Rumor, Lat, Bruit, Report, a Ruendo, from the
speed it makes to disperse it self. -- Rumoresque serit varios. AEn. 12.

Tumult, of Tumultus, Lat. Sedition, a sudden Hurly-burly, as if Tumor multus,
a popular Storm. -- Simul ingens clamor and omnes
Turbati cunei, calefactaque corda tumultu. AEn. 12.


Confusion all imbroil'd; Confusio, Lat. All imbroil'd, disordering and
entangling every thing: Imbroil'd, Embrouille, Fr. of en and brouille, hunddled
together.

V. 967. Discord; Discordia, Lat. Disagreement, with a thousand various Mouths,
of a thousad different Opinions: Varius, Lat. different, disagreeing. Virgil
dresses her in a torn Coat: Et scissa gaudens vadit discordia Palla. AEn. 8.

In another place, he has dressed her Head with as many Snakes as Milton has
given her Mouths. -- Discordia demens
Vipereum crinem vittis innexa cruentis. AEn. 6.


V. 977. Where your gloomy Bounds confine with Heaven; Where the Boundaries of
your dark Empire border on Heaven's illustrious Realms: Confine, of Confinire,
Lat. to border on.

V. 978. Dominion, Lat. Dominium, Empire, Kingdom: Etherial King, GOD Almighty:
AEthereus, Lat. of Heaven. Cui Rex AEtherei breviter sic fatur Olympi. AEn. 10.

V. 980. I Travel this Profound; I Journey through this vast Deep: Per inane
profundum. Luc. l. 1.

V. 982. To your behoof; To your advantage: Behoof, and behooves, of Behere,
Sax. gain.

V. 983. All Usurpation thence expelled; If I bring back that part of the lost
Kingdom, and driving thence all its Usurpers, recover and reduce it to its
ancient state of Darkness, and bring it under your Power again, which is the
aim of this my Undertaking and tedious Travel. Usurpation, Usurpatio, Lat. the
distrubing and invading the Right and Possession of another: Expelled, driven
out, of Expellere, Lat. to drive away: Sway, Rule, Government, of the Verb to
sway, to rule.

V. 986. Erect the Standard; Set up, or display the Banner: Standard, of the
Fr. Estandart, or the Ital. Stendardo, both from Extendendo, to stretch out, it
signifying a large and extended Banner.

V. 988. The Anarch old; Chaos, the ancient Master of Misrule: (...), one that
wants a Governor or Prince, of (...), Gr. without, and (...), a King, or
Leader. (...) is twice used by Homer in (...). where mustering the Troops
commanded by Protesilaus and Philoctetes, of which one was killed, and the
other left behind, he says however, (...):
They were not without a Commander.
But the Power (Chaos) called here Anarch, may well enough be interpreted, that
he was subject to no Command, tho he had but very little over the Subjects of
his confounded Kingdom.

V. 989. With faultring Speech, etc. With Words disordered, and Looks
ill-assured: Faultring, faint, of the Span. Faltar, to faint, and Falta, a
Swound: Visage incomposed, out of Countenance, Incompositus, Lat. disordered,
out of fashion.

V. 995. With Ruin upon Ruin, etc. Totally broken, and utterly ruined: Ruina,
Lat. for undoing: Rout, of the Fr. Route, the running away of an Army, of the
Verb Rompre, to break.

V. 996. Confusion worse confounded; Confounded and driven through the Kingdom
of Confasion.

V. 998. I upon my Frontiers; I upon the Confines of my Kingdom keep my Court,
and reside: Frontiers, of Frontiere, Fr. the Bounds of a Prince's Territories,
from the Lat. Frons, the Forehead.

V. 1001. Encroach'd on still; Gained upon daily by our homebred Quarrels:
Encroach'd, of the Fr. Accrocher, to hook and draw in: An Encroachment, (the
Law Term,) or Accroachment, Accrochement, Fr. is an unlawful gaining or
gathering in upon another Man's Right. Intestine Broils, our Domestic and Civil
Jars: Intestinum, the Bowels, the Intrals, Civil War being in the very Bowels
of a Nation, and thence the more dangerous: Broils, of Brouiller, Fr. to jumble
together, to confound.

V. 1002. Weakening the Scepter; Infeebling and destroying the Empire of
ancient Night, Scepters and Crowns being the Emblems and Representations, as
well as Ornaments of Power.

V. 1009. Havoc; Slaughter, Destruction, of Haroc, Sax. for the bloody and
rapacious Bird a Hawk.

V. 1011 His Sea should find ashore; That his Voyage and Travel should have an
end.

V. 1012. With fresh Alacrity; With more Courage, and renewed Vigor:
Alacritas, Lat. cheerfulness, of Alacer, Lat. sprightly, vigorous.

V. 1013. Springs upward like a Pyramid; Raises himself directly upright like a
pointed flame of Fire: Pyramid, (...), a Geometrical Figure so called, of
(...), Fire, because shaped like ascending Fire and Flame, whose Nature is to
mount. The famous Egyptian Pyramids, the expensive and astonishing Tombs of
their Kings, are of this Figure.

V. 1014. Into the wild Expanse; Into the vast Space, from Expandere, Lat. to
stretch out, the Expanse signifying properly the Air, Firmament, the Heavens,
or whatever else, is spread out over us.

Ibid. Through the Shock, etc. Through the strugle and encounter of the Warring
Elements hudled together in their pregnant Causes, as V. 913. Shock, a
Charging, an Encounter, of the Fr. Choc, and Choquer, to Engage as Armies do.

V. 1016. Environed; Encompassed, surrounded, of Environer, Fr. to enclose.

V. 1017. When Argo past; Argo was either the first Ship, (as the Poets tell
us) or the most considerable of those times, built for the Expedition to
Colchos; it took its Name either of Argos, its Architect, or of the the
Argives, the Grecians who sailed in it, or of (...), Gr. swift, from its good
Sailing. Non Palladia compacta manu, regum referens,
Inclyta remos quaeritur Argo. Sen. Mede.
-- Et altera quae vehat Argo
Delectos Heroas. -- Virg. Ecl. 4.
Inde lacessitum primo mare, cum rudis Argo
Miscuit ignotas temerato littore gentes,
Primaque cum ventis, pelagique furentibus undis
Composuit mortale genus, fatisque per illam
Accessit mors una ratem. Luc. Phars. l. 3.


V. 1018. Through Bosphorus; Through the Streights of the Thracian Bosphorus:
(...), of (...), an Ox, the Passage being so narrow, that Cattle swam over
from one Shore to the other.

Ibid. Betwixt the justling Rocks; Are two Rocks lying in the Mouth of the
Euxine or Black Sea, which are said to justle one another, because they seemed
at a distance to be but one great Rock, and to divide or open as Ships
approached 'em; they were called Symplegades, Syndromides, of which our Poet in
his Justling Rocks has given the true Interpretation: -- Cum duo montes,
Claustra profundi, hinc atque illinc subito impulsu, velut AEtherio, Gemerent
sonitu; spargeret astra Nubesque ipsas mare deprensum. Sen. Med.

Homer's description of 'em may be seen: (...), etc. (...).

V. 1019. Or when Ulysses, etc. When Ulysses avoided Charybdis, leaving it on
his left hand, and past by the dangerous Whirlpool Scylla, as Circe advised
him, (...). Ulysses, one of the Grecian Conquerors of Troy, Son of Laertes King
of Ithaca and Dulichia, two small Ionian Islands; this Hero is Eternized by
Homer, not only in his Iliads, but by a Book as big, composed of his Travels,
and entitled by his Name. Larbord, the left side of a Ship, Leverbord, of the
Lat. Laevits, left. Scylla latus dextrum, laevum irrequieta Charybdis. Met. 13.

V. 1020. Charybdis; A dangerous and tumultuous Sea near Sicily, hard by
Messana; Homer describes it, (...). about 100 Verses from the beginning: Virgil
imitates him in all but his Prolixity. -- Laevum implicata Charybdis
Obsidet: atque imo barathri ter gurgite vastos
Sorbet in abruptum fluctus, rursusque sub auras
Erigit alternos, and sidera verberat undis. AEn. 3.


They derive Charybdis, of (...) to gape, and (...) to suck in, and by all the
Poets recorded a most voracious Whirlpool. -- Ratibusque inimica Charybdis
Nunc sorbere fretum, nunc reddere. Met. 7.


Ibid. The other Whirlpool, Scylla; Of which before, V. 660. To which you may
subjoyn, Cum siculi Virgo Pelori,
Rabidos utero succincta canes,
Omnes pariter solvit hiatus,
Quis non totos horruit artus,
Toties uno latrante monstro. Sen. Med.


Whirlpool, a Gulf, swallowing and sinking all that comes within its Circle, of
Wearelen, Bell. to turn round, and Pool, of Palus, Lat.

V. 1025. Following his Track; Following his Footsteps: Track, of the Fr.
Trace, or Trac, the print of the Foot, or a Path made by Footsteps; of the Lat.
Tractus, a Wheel, or the Tract and Way made by it.

V. 1026. Paved after him a broad, etc. Wide is the Gate, and broad is the Way
that leads to Destruction, and many there be that go in thereat, Matthew. 7. v.
13. Paved, made firm, and fixed with, and pitched with Stones, of the Fr. Paver,
and that of Pavire, to strike, of (...), the Greek signifying also to strike,
Stones being so ram'd and beaten into the Streets.

V. 1031. With easy Intercourse; With free access, with easy and open way:
Intercourse, of the Lat. Intercursus, properly a going between, from place to
place, of Inter the Preposition, and Currere, Lat. to run, to move.

V. 1034. The Sacred Influence; The Divine Streams, the Beautiful and Heavenly
Beams of Light discover themselves: Influence, of Influentia, and this of
Influere, Lat. to flow and stream easily into; a word wonderfully fitted to
express the swift and immediate Influxes of the pure Streams of Light, of which
more in the beginning of the Third Book.

V. 1036. Shoots far -- a glimmering Dawn; And from the Crystal Sky darts far
into the Bosom of dark Night, the cheerful break of Day: Glimmering, B. 1. V.
182. Dawn, the break of Day, of the Sax. Daegian, to grow day.

V. 1038. Her fardest Verge; Here the Creation, and all Created Nature, have
their utmost Bounds: Fardest, is the Superlative of Far, from the Sax. Feor, or
the Belg. Varre, distant from: Verge, of the Fr. Verge, and this is of the Lat.
Virga, a Rod, is in our Law Books called Virgata, and is the compass of the
King's Court, whose most considerable Officers carry Virga's, i. e. White
Staffs, to denote their Authority. See Stat. 33 Hen. 8. c. 12.

V. 1039. As from her utmost, etc. Retreating like an Enemy beaten from his
Outworks.

V. 1040. With less Hostile Din; With less furious Noise: Hostile Din, such a
violent Clamor and Shout as Engaging Armies make: Hostilis, Lat. of Hostis,
Lat. an Enemy. Din, of the Sax. Din, a Noise, coined of such a sort of Sound as
the Lat. Tinnio is.

V. 1042. Wafts on the calmer Wave; Sails more easily over the smoother Sea,
more swift, Wings through the gentle Air his way. I have showed before, that
Flying and Sailing are Metaphors convertible, and used alternately by the
Poets: Calmer, of Calm, of the Fr. Calm, gentle, smooth, applicable both to
the Seas and Skies, as depending on the Winds, which raise and trouble both; it
is very probable, that the Original is from (...), Gr. heat, of (...), to burn,
because in great heats the Weather is generally calm, from want of Wind. Waft
seems a Derivative of Wave, a dancing over the Waves.

V. 1044. -- Holds gladly the Port; And like a Weather-beaten Ship is got safe
into Harbor, where the Sailers rejoice, tho damaged in her Sails and Rigging:
Shrouds, are the Sails, the Clothing of the Ship, of the Sax. Scrud,
Clothing: Tackle, of the Belg. Taeckel, a Rope.

V. 1045. Or in the emptier Waste; Or in the thinner Space, much like the Air,
poises his out-stretch'd Wings, flaps his broad Wings, poizing himself: Waste,
of the Belg. Waest, empty, desolate, of the Lat. Vastus, great, wide:
Resembling, Ressemblant, Fr. like to.

V. 1048. In Circuit, undetermined Square; Stretched out wide in compass, hard
to determine whether square or round as to its Shape and Figure: Circuit, of
Circuitus, Lat. the compass of a City, or any Enclosure. What Figure the
Empyreal Heaven is of, may be very hard to determine, but the Heavenly
Jerusalem, described in the Revelations, is said to be apiece, Revel. 21.
v. 16. Square, of the Ital. Squadrare, the corruption of Quadrare, Lat. to
square: Round, Fr. Rond, of Rotundus, Lat. of a Circular Shape.

V. 1049. With Opal Towers; With Towers of Precious Stones: Opal, Lat. Opalum,
a Stone of diverse Colors, partaking of the Carbuncles faint Fire, the
Amethists shining Purple, and the Emralds pleasing Green.

V. 1050. Of Living Sapphire; Beautiful with Pinacles and Turrets of
never-decaying Sapphire: Living Sapphire, bright and cheerful, full of Strength
and Life: (...), a precious Stone, so named of its clearness; (...), Gr.
bright, perspicuous: Battlements, are Ornaments set on the Walls of great
Cities, Castles, and other Noble Structures, principally intended for Security
against Assaults; thence a Derivative of the Word Battle, of the Lat. Batuere,
to sight.

Ibid. His Native Seat; The Place of his Birth, the Country of his Creation;
Heaven, the Place of his former Happiness: Nativus, Lat.

V. 1051. In a Golden Chain; Our Poet seems to have borrowed this Golden Chain
of Homer, where he says, (...), etc. (...). Jupiter says, if all the Gods, with
the Earth and the Sea, hung upon a Golden Chain, he would Pull 'em all up into
Heaven, etc.

V. 1052. This Pendant World; This well-poized World, the self-ballanc'd Earth;
Ponderibus librata suis, Met. l. 1. Of which, Job gives us the best account,
That God hangs the Earth on Nothing, c. 26. v. 7. And c. 38. v. 6. he dares
Human Understanding to determine, Whereupon are the Foundations thereof set, or
who laid the Cornerstone thereof?

Ibid In bigness as a Star of smallest Magnitude; In bulk like a Star of
smallest size: Many Stars, not only of the first Magnitude, but of smaller
Sizes, surpass and exceed the whole World by many Degrees, as the Celestial
Surveyors of the Heavens assure us, the Earth being but a mere Point compared
with the Firmament, Gassend. l. 1. c. 3. Stars of the first Greatness are 108
times as big as the Earth, and those of the sixth Size 18 times; yet is the
Moon reckoned to be 39 times less than the Earth, and is commonly accounted the
Planet whose Sphere is nearest to it. Gass. l. 2. c. 14.

V. 1055. He hies; He makes have, he makes all the speed he can, of the Sax.
Higan, to use diligence.

NOTES On MILTON's PARADISE Lost.
BOOK III.
Verse 1. HAil Holy Light, etc. Hail Divine Light, Illustrious Firstborn, of
the Almighty Word; Oh thou bright Beam of everlasting Purity, thy self as
everlasting: Hail, the old word used in Salutations, answering to the (...) of
the Greeks, and the Roman Salve, of the Sax. Hael, Health. By this Hail, the
former of 'em, is interpreted, in the Salutation of the Angel Gabriel, to the
Mother of our Blessed Savior, (...), Luc. 1. v. 28. mentioned by our Author in
his Fifth Book. -- On whom the Angel Hail
Bestowed, the Holy Salutation used
Long after to Blessed Mary, second Eve.


Ibid. Firstborn; Light was doubtless the first and brightest Birth of Heaven,
without which even the Deity himself is inconceivable; Speak not of GOD without
Light, was Plato's saying, and what is there among all his Creatures so
expressive of his Goodness, Omniscience, and Purity? Who covers himself with
Light, as with a Garment, Psalm. 104. v. 3. Light, as to the Creation of this
lower World, was the first of all the Creatures that had the Almighty Fiat
pronounced at its Production; Then God said, Let there be Light: and there was
Light. Genesis 1. 3. So our Poet, Forthwith Light Etherial, first of all Things,
sprung from the Deep.

V. 2. Coeternal; Thou bright Beam, as everlasting as thy everlasting Father
GOD Almighty: Coaeternus, Lat. of the same duration with Eternity.

V. 3. May I express thee unblam'd, etc. Blameless may I declare thee, because
God himself is Light, and from Eternity in amazing brightness, disdaining all
approach of Human Eyes, dwelt from Eternity, dwelt then in the, bright
Emanation of the brightest Being, Eternal, Uncreate.

Ibid. GOD is Light; Nothing can give us a clearer Idea of the Divine
Incomprehensible Being, than Light: See him described; His Brightness was as
the Light, Hab. 3. v. 4. God is Light, and in him is no Darkness, 1 John 1. v.
5. Every perfect Gift comes from the Father of Lights, Jam. 1. v. 17.

V. 4. In unapproached Light; Who dwells in the Light that none can approach
unto, whom no Man has seen, nor can see, 1 Timothy 6. v. 16. When our Savior
appeared to St. Paul, the transcendent Brightness blinded him; A Light from
Heaven passing the brightness of the Sun, Acts 26. v. 3.

V. 6. Bright Effluence, etc. Bright overflowing of the bright Uncreated Being:
Effluentia, Lat. the Issue, Offspring, Efflux: Of Essence increate, Essentia
increata, Lat. GOD Almighty, the Creator of all Things, Himself uncreated, and
Self existent.

V. 7. Or hearst thou rather, etc. Or had thou rather be styled, Pure
Heavenly Stream, whose Fountain Head, who can declare? According to that of
Job, Where is the way where Light dwells? And where is the place of Darkness?
That thou should receive it in the Bounds thereof, and that thou should
know the Paths to the House thereof, chapter 38. v. 19, and 20.

V. 9. Before the Sun, before the Heavens, etc. Before the shining Sun, or
rouling Heavens thou were, and at the Voice of God, as with a Garment, did
array, the World arising from the Womb of Waters, gained from the empty and
unfinished Deep: A noble Idea of Light, the usefullest Ornament of the
Creation, without which it had been but a sad Night-piece. Many of the Fathers,
both Greek and Latin, were of opinion, that the Primitive Light created on the
first Day, was the Light of the Sun imperfect and unfinished, which as it
contradicts the Narrative of Moses, who tells us, That the Sun and the Moon
(the two great Lights) were made on the fourth Day, so it derogates from the
Majesty of the Great Maker of the Universe, that any thing, on which his
Omnipotent Fiat was pronounced, should come forth unfinished.

That this first Light was not the Sun, but a shining bright Body, like a
radiant Cloud moving about the Earth, and distinguishing Day from Night, before
the forming of the Sun and other Planets, is the Opinion of Bid in his Exem.
Bonaventure, Nicol. de Lyra, and Tostatus, with many of the School-Divines; and
of this Opinion was our Author, as at large he expresses it, where he handles
the Creation in his Seventh Book: -- Light from her Native East
To journey through the Airy Gloom began
Spheared in a radiant Cloud, for yet the Sun
Was not. -- According to Moses Cosmopoiaea. Genesis 1. v. 3, and 14.


V. 10. As with a Mantle did invest; As with a Glorious Mantle did cover
the dark World coming out of the deep Womb of Waters. Our Poet uses the Word
Invest, B. 1. V. 208. While Night invests the Sea; there Night throws her dark
Coverture over the Waters, here Light with her glorious Garb arrays the Infant
World just at its Birth, arising from the dark Deep; and the same Word does
well express the Metaphor in both places. Mantle, of Manteau, Fr. of Mantelum,
Lat. a Cloak.

V. 11, and 12. The rising World, etc. Won from the Void, etc. A nobler
Description of Chaos, than any made before, and not inferior to that of the
Sublime and Poetical. Job 12. v. 22. He discovers the deep Places from their
Darkness, and brings forth the shadow of Death to Light.

V. 13. Thee I revisit now; Thee, O holy, heavenly Light, I visit now again
more joyful, since I escaped from the black Stygian Lake: Revisitare, Lat.

V. 15. Though long detained in that obscure Sejourn; Though long Imprisoned in
Hell's dark Dungeon: Detained, Detentus, Lat. kept, withheld: Sejourn, stay,
of the Fr. Sejourner, to stay it, to remain in a place.

V. 17. With other Notes than to the Orphean Lyre; While pursuing my strange
Subject through Hell the utter, and through the void empty Gulf, the middle
Darkness, I sung of Chaos and everlasting Night, in Strains more lofty and
sublime, than Orpheus ever Tuned his famous Harp to. Orpheus is reckoned the
Son of Apollo and the Muse Calliope, an excellent Poet and Philosopher, as
those famous ones of Antiquity were. Sylvestres homines sacer, interpresque
Deorum
Caedibus, and victu faedo deterruit Orpheus
Dictus ob hoc lenire tygres rabidosque Leones. Hor. de Art Poet.


The Barbarity of the Age he lived in, was so Civilized by his Moral
Instructions couched under his charming Odes, that he was said to make the
Woods dance after him, by reducing Men from those Salvage Abodes into Civil
Societies. Unde Vocalem temere insecutae
Orphea Sylvae.
Blandum and auritas fidibus Canoris
Ducere quercus. Carm. l. Od. 12.


The Poets feigned him to have followed his Wife-Eurydice down to the Shades
below, and to have obtained her return by his commanding Music, on condition
he looked not on her till their arrival at the light; which Condition the fond
Husband breaking, she was ravished back again for ever from him, to this
fabulous descent of his into Hell, which our Poet in his two former Books has
been busied in describing, it is that he refers to in this place. Read his
Story in the admirable Virgil. Taenarias etiam fauces, alta ostia Ditis
Et caligantem nigra formidine lucum
Ingressus, manesque adiit regemque tremendum, etc. Geor. 4.


Lyre, a Harp, of (...), Gr. Hence one Tribe of the Poets are called Lyricks.

V. 20. To reascend, tho hard and rare; Tho difficult and unusual from thence
to arise up again: Reascend, of the Particle Re, signif. again, and Ascendere,
Lat. to rise, an Imitation of Virgil. -- Facilis decensus Averni
Sed revocare gradus, superasque evadere ad auras
Hic labor, hoc Opus, est: Pauci quos aequus amavit
Jupiter. -- AEn. 6.


V. 22. And feel thy Sov'ran Vital Lamp; And feel thy comfortable enlivening
Warmth: Vital, Vitalis, Lat. lively, or enlivening: Lamp, a Fire, Torch, or
Light, of (...), the same, (...), from its shining.

V. 25. So thick a Drop serene has quenched their Orbs; The French express
incurable Blindness by Goutte serene, and explain it by a thick and continual
dropping from the Head, by which the Optic Nerve is stopped and choked, that
all Sight is thereby hindered, and irrecoverably lost: Serene, of the Fr.
Serain, and the Ital. Sereno, (not of the Lat. Serenus, fair, clear,)
signifying the Mildew, or hurtful Dew that falls in the Evenings sometimes, to
which our Author compares the noxious Distillation that from his Head fell down
into the Optic Nerve, and choked its perspicuous Passage, of the Lat. Serum.

Ibid. Quenched their Orbs; Light and Fire are by Nature so near of Kin, that
the Metaphor of Quenching the Eyesight is easy and proper enough; most
Person's Eyes have a shineing, and many a sparkling, darting Light, especially
in Youth, that issues from them: So Virgil calls, Turnus his, Ardentes
Ocalorum acies, AEn. 12. Inflamed with Anger: Orbs, Orbs, Lat. the shining
Circles of the Eyes.

V. 26. Or dim Suffusion veiled; Or a dark Veil o'respread, or a black Film
like a Veil has o'regrown the shining Circles of mine Eyes, and clouded 'em
with everlasting Night: Suffusion, of Suffusio, Lat. an overspreading, a
covering, of Suffundere, Lat. to cover over. At, si virgineum suffuderit ora
ruborem, Ventus erit. Georg. 1.
Of the Moon covered with a red Suffusion, the sign of Wind.


Here our Poet has hinted at the other Cause of Blindness, by Film or black
Cataracts growing within the Eyes, the White being often remediable by Couching.

V. 27. Cease I to wander; Yet do not I forbear to follow the Muses wheresoever
they meet, at Crystal Springs, cool Groves, or lofty Hills; the Castalian
Spring at the foot of the Hill Parnassas, was a famous haunt of the Muses, so
was Mount Helicon; Pieris was a Grove, in which Jupiter and Memnosyne begat the
Muses: Such Groves and Hills as these are often mentioned by the Poets, and the
Muses named of them. Thus Virgil: -- O qui me gelidis in vallibus Haemi
Sistat, and ingenti ramorum protegat umbra. Geor. 2.


Haunt, of the Fr. Hanter, to frequent, to keep company with.

V. 29. Smit with the Love; Enamored of Divine Poesy: Smit, smitten, struck
with, as Perculsus used in the same sense: Me vero primum dulces ante omnia
Musae
Quarum sacra fero ingenti Perculsus amore
Accipiant. -- Geor. 2.


V. 31. Thy Hallowed Feet; The Brooks Cedron and Siloah ran on the East side,
and the Waters of the Fountains on the South of Mount Sion; John 18. v. 2. Isa.
8. v. 6. 2 Chronicles. 32. v. 3. Whose Feet are called Hallowed, because frequently
styled in holy Writ, The holy Mountain, Psalm. 2. v. 6. The holy City, Isa. 64.
v. 10. God's Dewlling Place, Psalm. 76. v. 2. and Psalm. 74. v. 2.

V. 33. Equaled with me in Fate; As unlucky as my self in the loss of my Sight,
attended with the same misfortune by losing their Eyes: -- Fati quod lege
tenetur, AEn. 12. AEqualis, Lat. equal to.

V. 35. Blind Thamyris; Was a Thracian Poet, so excellent, that he challenged
even his Mistresses the Muses to sing with him, and therefore with the Victory
lost his Eyes. -- (...)
(...)
(...)
(...).
(...), etc. (...).


Plutarch commends his Poem, of the Tytans Warring against the Gods, in his
Book of Music; and Pausanias attributes the loss of his Sight to a natural
Infirmity, which happened to Homer and diverse others.

Ibid. Maeonides; One of Homer's Names, of his Father Maeon.

V. 36. And Tiresias; A Theban Poet, blind also, and a great Southsayer, even
after his Death, as Homer makes him. (...)
(...)
(...)
(...).


His Name is derivable of the Gr. (...), the Stars, of his Predictions drawn
from them, and his Blindness passed into a Proverb, Tiresia caecior; whence,
Nec surdum, nec Tiresiam quemquam esse Deorum, Juv. Sat. 13. Ovid relates his
Story differently, and more merrily, Met. l. 3. -- Gravius Saturnia justo,
Nec pro materia fertur doluisse: suique
Judicis aeterna damnavit lumina nocte.
At Pater omnipotens -- Pro lumine adempto
Scire futura dedit, paenamque levavit honor.


Ibid. Phineus Prophets old; Phineus was King of Arcadia, and a Prophet so
great, that he is said to have been punished with Blindness, for discovering
too clearly the Mind of the Gods to Men. -- (...)
(...)
(...)
(...),
(...)
(...).


Others report him punished with Blindness, for putting out the Eyes of his
Sons by his first Wife, at the Instigation of their Mother-in-Law, and that the
Harpies tormented him, perpetually plucking his Meat out of his Mouth, whom
Calais and Zetes drove away, because he acquainted the Argonauts, their
Comrades, with the Dangers that lay in their way to Colchos, where the Golden
Fleece was kept. -- Phineia postquam
Clausa domus, mensasque metu liquere priores. AEn. 3.


Prophets, (...), Gr. a Prophet, of (...), to foretell Things, anciently the
Heathen Poets and Prophets were the same; their Celebrated God Apollo was
Patron and President both of Poesy and Prophecy. -- Interpres divum qui numina
Phaebi
Qui tripodas, Clarii lauros, qui sidera sentis. AEn. 3.


And the same word, Vates by the Latins, is promiscuously used for both Poets
and Prophets of the noblest Strain and Endowments, Superlative to that other
Poeta. -- Et me fecere Poetam
Pierides: sunt and mihi carmina: me quoque dicunt
Vatem pastores. -- Virg. Ecl. 9.


Musaeus, Hesiod, Orpheus, and Homer, were the Philosophers and Divines of
their Ages; and the Bards were Men of the same Profession among the ancient
Gauls. Of whom Lucan: Vos quoque qui fortes animas, belloque peremptas,
Laudibus in longum vates dimittitis aevum,
Plurima securi fudistis carmina Bardi. Phar. l. 1.


V. 37. Then feed on Thought; Then please your selves my Thoughts, that, of
your own accord, move in Melodious Measures: Feed, in the same Metaphorical
Manner as that of Virgil. Animum pictura pascit inani. AEn. 1.

Voluntaire, Voluntarius, Lat. free, easy, without constraint. Harmonious
Numbers, a Definition of Numbers, which consists in Musical Measures, without
the gingle of Rhyme; Harmonicus, Lat. Musical; Numerus, Lat. Verse. Numeros
memini, si verba tenerem. Virg. Ecl. 9.


V. 38. As the wakeful Bird; That in the Dark sings, while other Birds sleep;
and in the leavy Hedges, and dark Woods concealed, Tunes all Night long her
Charming Notes. A Description of the Nightingale, agreeing with Virgil's, tho
less lamentable: Qualis populea merens Philomela sub umbra
Flet noctem, ramoque sedens miserabile carmen
Integrat, and maest is ^^e loca questibus implet. Geor. 4.


V. 39. Sings darkling; A Word by our Author coined, and which I have no where
else met with: Those whose Eyes fail much, are said to be Dark; and Birds,
whose Eyes are put out, sing better and oftener to divert themselves, deprived
of all the Avocations of Sight, they ply their Song the more: And thus the
Nightingale is called Darkling, chearing the Night with its Charming Serenade.

V. 40. Tunes her Nocturnal Note; Sings her Night-Songs: Tunes, of (...), and
(...), to stretch, to strain and raise the Voice: Noctural, Nocturnus, Lat. of
the Night: Note, Song, of those Marks so called, by which the Tones and
Measures of Sound are distinguished and Pricked down.

Homer comparing the disconsolate Penelope to this melancholy Bird, has these
Verses: (...)
(...),
(...)
(...)
(...).


I think I need not fear to affirm, the Comparison made by our Author is more
suitable to himself, and tho very short, (consisting only of two Verses) is as
expressive of the Melodious Moan of this Night-Singer, as all those before
recited.

V. 42. The sweet approach of Even or Morn; The two most ancient Records of
Time, Genesis 1. 5. In describing of which, few Poets have failed to exercise
their Fancies, as their Comparisons will show hereafter. The holy Poet thought
their Vicissitudes so pleasant, that he tells us, God makes the Outgoings of
the Morning and Evening to sing, (...), tho we render it, Thou shall make the
East and the West to rejoice, Psalm. 65. v. 9. It is observable, that the Hebrew
word for Morning, is a Derivative of (...), to enquire, to search after, that
being the time fittest for Study and Business, Aurora musis amica, as the
Evening is for Retirement and Diversion. -- Cum frigidus era vesper temperat
Ante focum, si frigus erit, si messis in herba. Geor. 3.


Approach, l'Approche, Fr. of Approcher, to draw nigh to.

V. 43. Of Vernal Bloom; Of the beauteous Spring when all things are in
Blossom, of which Bloom seems a Diminutive, of the Ger. Bluhen, to blow, to be
in Flower: Vernal, of the Lat. Vernus, of the Spring.

V. 44. Or human Face divine; Because created in the Image of God his Maker,
Genesis 1. v. 27.

V. 48. Presented with a Universal Blanc; I cannot persuade my self but it
should have been a Universal Blot, and that it is a mistake of the Printer.
Blanc is Fr. for White, and the Phrase, Donner la carte Blanch a, to send one
a Blanc, is to submit absolutely to what Conditions the Conqueror shall set
down: Now Blindness (as well described by Clouds and continual Darkness) does
so fully import an entire Ignorance and Privation of Color, that a Person born
blind has doubtless no notion of any such thing; but for a Man that had for
many years enjoyed his Eyes, to say, his Blindness had cut him off from the
cheerful ways of Men, and, instead of Nature's fair Book of Knowledge, had
presented him with a Universal Blanc, like a piece of white Paper, unspotted
and unstained with any Impression, his Memory retaining still the Idea's of all
Things formerly seen, tho now as to his Eyesight blotted out, seems absurd.
The next Verse, Of Natures Works to me-expung'd and rased, confirms, that it
ought to be an Universal Blot; for Expunged, is of Expungere, Lat. to blot out
a written Word, by covering it with little Pricks or Blots, and Rased, is of
Radere, Lat. to shave; the Romans, (who writ on Waxed Tablets with Iron Styles)
when they struck out a Word, did Tabulam radere, raze it out.

V. 53. Irradiate; Enlighten all the Powers and Faculties of my Mind:
Irradiare, Lat. to shine into.

V. 54. All Mist purge and disperse; Clear my Understanding, and drive away all
the Mists of Error and Ignorance that may overcast my Judgment: Purgare, Lat.
to cleanse; Dispergere, Lat. to drive away, to scatter.

Light, and the Blessings of it, were never drawn in more lively Colors, and
finer Strokes, than by these; nor was the sad loss of it and them ever so
passionately and so patiently lamented. They that will read the most excellent
Homer, bemoaning the same Misfortune, will find him far short of this.
Herodotus, in his Life, gives us these Verses, in which he bewailed his
Blindness. (...), etc.
(...),
(...).


V. 57. From the pure Empyrean; From the highest Heaven, which the holy Page
styles, The Heaven of Heavens, where God is pleased to reveal the unconceivable
Sight of himself and his infinite Perfections; Seeds mentium beatarum, as it is
general phrased, Behold Heaven, and the Heaven of Heavens is the Lords, thy
God, Deuteronomy. 10. v. 14. So 2 Chronicles. 2. v. 6. Psalm. 115. v. 16. Caeli Caelorum;
And Psalm. 148. v. 4. Many of the Fathers take this to be the third Heaven, into
which St. Paul was taken up, 2 Cor. 12. v. 2. Understanding the AErial Heaven
to be the first, the Starry the second, and this third the highest, the
Empyrean, (of which before, B. 2. V. 771.) described to be the Habitation of
holy Angels and blessed Spirits, enlightend with the ineffable Purity and Majesty
of the Divinity, immovable, and shining with a Light resembling the pure
Element of Fire, according to its derivation of (...), Gr. Fire.

V. 58. High Throned above all height; Exalted on his Throne, high above all
imaginable height: God is frequently styled The most high, Psalm. 7. v. 17. and
Psalm. 9. v. 2. Dan. 5. v. 18. The most high God.

V. 60. About. him all the Sanctities of Heaven; About him all his holy Angels
stood, as numberless as Stars: Sanctities, of Sanctitas, Lat. Holiness, well
expressing the Purity and Perfections of the Angelic Nature; The Lord thy God
has made thee as the Stars for multitude, Genesis 10. v. 22.

V. 62. Beatitude past utterance; Unspeakable Bliss and Happiness, which being
unconceivable and infinite, must needs be unexpressible; The Things which Eye
has not seen, neither Ear has heard, nor the Heart of Man has conceived, 1
Cor. 2. v. 9. Beatitudo, Lat. Blessedness.

V. 63. The radiant Image of his Glory; According to St. Paul, Who being the
Brightness of his Glory, and the express Image of his Person, -- sat down on
the right hand of the Majesty on high, Heb. 1. v. 3.

V. 64. His only Son; Let the discerning Linguist compare the preceding
Description of God with this of Tasso's: Dal suo gran seggio il Re del Ciel
volgea,
Sedea col a dond' egli e buono, e giusto
Da leg al tutto, e'l tutto orna, e produce
Soura i bassi confin del mondo augusto,
Oue senso, o ragion non si conduce.
E del' eternita nel trono augusto
Risplendea con tree lumi in una luce,
Ha sotto i piedi il Fatto, e la natura
Ministri humidi, e'l moto, e chi'l misura. Cant. 9. Stan. 55, 56, 57.


[And so on for 14 Verses more.]

V. 68. Uninterrupted Joy, unrivaled Love; Joy without ceasing or intermission,
because Sinless and Innocent; Love unrivaled and undisputed, because in
Solitude; yet the only two, and all of Mankind: Interruptus, Lat. disturbed, of
Interrumpere, to break in upon: Unrivaled, of Rivalis, Lat. a Competitor:
Solitude, Solitudo, Lat. for being alone, Solitariness, thence a Desert, in
calm and undisturbed Retirement and Loneliness.

V. 72. In the dun Air sublime; Aloft in the dark thick Air, the backside, the
bare outside of the Created World, described more fully at V. 428. of this
Book; Dark, wast, and wild, under the frown of Night starless exposed, and
ever-threatning Storms of Chaos blustering round, in clement Sky. Dun, of a
dark color, Dwun, Welsh: Sublime, Sublimis, Lat. high, lofty.

V. 75. Firm Land imbosom'd without Firmament, etc. Seemed firm solid Land,
without any support, enclosed on all sides but uncertain whether with Water or
with Air: Without Firmament, without any support, without any thing to support
and bear it up, agreeable to what Job says of the wonderful Creator, Who
hangs the Earth upon nothing, chapter 26. v. 7. Firmament, Firmamentum, Lat. and
the Gr. (...), signify both, Strength, Solidity.

V. 76. Uncertain which, etc. A Question that may well puzzle the Curiosity of
Mankind, who know so little of Created Nature, that they may easily be ignorant
of the Confines and Boundaries of the World's vast Building.

V. 77. From his Prospect high; From his exalted View, from his all-knowing
omniscient Foresight, in which Things past, present, and to come, all at once
he beholds: Prospect, Prospectus, Lat. a seeing at a great distance, a clear
view without any let or hinderance of Prospicere, Lat. to see far, to foresee.
AEneas scopulum interea conscendit, and omnem
Prospectum late pelago perit. AEn. 1.


V. 80. Only begotten Son; Because God sent his only begotten Son into the
World; 1 John 4. v. 9. and John 3. v. 18.

V. 81. Whom no Bounds prescribed; Whom nothing can withold, not Hell it
self: Prescribed, of the Lat. Praescribere, to appoint, to assign.

V. 84. Wide interrupt can hold; Nor the vast Gulf, wide and broken off from
Being: Interrupt, separated from the Creation, Interruptus, Lat. broken off:
Main, the corruption of the Lat. Magnus, great.

V. 87. Through all Restraint; In spite of all the Imprisonments of deepest
Hell, and the abortive Gulf: Restraint, of Restringere, Lat. to bind again, to
bind fast.

V. 88. In the Precincts of Light; In the Neighborhood of Heaven, and the
Creation: Precincts, of Precinctus, Lat. enclosed on all sides, bordering on,
of Praecingere, to encompass.

V. 90. With purpose to Assay; With design to try, if he may master him by
force: Purpose, of the Lat. Propositum, design: Assay, of the Fr. Essayer, of
the Lat. Ab and Sagire, to grow wiser.

V. 93. Glozing Lies; Flattering Lies: To Gloze, is an old word, to flatter,
cogg, persuade, of (...), Gr. Tongue, too much inclined to it.

V. 94. Easily Transgress; Will, with little persuasion, go beyond the Bounds
of that single Command that I have made the only Trial of his Obedience to me
his Maker: Transgress, of Transgredi, Lat. to go beyond, Sin breaking through
the Boundaries of God's Laws, and therefore styled Transgression.

V. 98. Ingrate all he could have; Unthankful Man, has had of me all I could
give him in the Order and Rank of the Creation where he was placed; I made him
Upright and Just, able to withstand all Temptations, tho liable to offend, if
he suffer himself and his divine Reason to be mis^ed and imposed upon by
glozing Lies: In the same manner I Created all the Heavenly Powers, Angels, and
Spirits, as well those who stood firm in their Obedience, as those Rebellious
that fell from it, all alike endowed with Free Will. Ingrate, Ingratus, Lat.
Unthankful, of all Ingratitudes, Sin is the blackest: Just, of Justus, Lat.
Innocent, Good, in opposition to Wicked, etc. as, Will thou destroy the Just
with the Wicked? Genesis 18. v. 23. Right, of Rectus, Lat. Straight, Upright, the
Character of GOD himself, A God of Truth, and without Iniquity, Just and Right
is he, Deuteronomy. 32. 4. Who made Man in his own Image, Genesis 1. v. 27.

V. 99. Sufficient; Able to have stood firm in their Duty to their Maker:
Sufficiens, Lat. Able.

Here begins the excellent Discourse of Free Will, the Reasons of which are
plainly and very convincingly laid down.

V. 103. What Proof could they have given? For were not both Angels and Men
endued with Free Will, what sincere real Proof could they give of their
Obedience, Love or Faith, to the Universal Lord of all Things, when all their
Actions and their best Performances would not be the Results of Reason and
Choice, but the mere Effects and Impulses of Fate and Necessity, doing nothing
but what was unavoidably for them to leave undone. Sincere, of Sincerus, Lat.
sound, true, perfect.

V. 104. True Allegiance, etc. True Obedience, constant Trust and Love:
Allegiance, of the word Alligare, Lat. to bind to, the Faith we swear to our
King being the highest Bond and Obligation imaginable.

V. 107. -- What Praise, what Pleasure I? What Praise, what Satisfaction, could
Men expect from their best Deeds, or more sincere Endeavors; or what Pleasure
or Delight could God himself take in the most ardent Devotions, Praises or
Prayers of his Saints. when their Wills and Reason (Reason that determines the
choice of Good from Evil) robbed of all their Judicious Powers and Elective
Faculties, were made useless, as if bestowed in vain, or given only to be
subservient to invincible Necessity, not to their Maker GOD Almighty.
Despoiled, Despoliatus, Lat. robbed, of Despoliare, Lat. to bereave.

V. 110. Made Passive both; Will and Reason, instead of being active and free
Principles, should be enslaved, made to obey and undergo the irresistible Power
of Fate: Passive, Passivus, Lat. suffering, of Pati, Lat. to suffer.

V. 113. Their Maker, or their Making; Neither can Mankind justly accuse their
Maker GOD, who made them in his own Similitude, and therefore neither their
Making, the Powers and Endowments of their Souls, nor the various, useful, and
astonishing Organs of their Bodies. In respect of God's absolute Dominion and
Power, the Clay cannot say to the Potter, Why have thou made me thus? Nor, as
to the Riches of his Grace and Mercy, shall any of the Vessels of Wrath be able
to excuse themselves, as being his handy Work; having, after all his
Long-suffering, fitted themselves by Sin and final Impenitence to destruction,
according to the best interpretation of Romans 9. v. 22. a place much
controverted in this matter.

V. 114. As if Predestination, etc. Praedestinatio, Lat. a fore-ordaining what
shall come to pass; the Predestinarians are such, as hold the Elect and
Reprobates to be foreordained such from the beginning of the World, and that
all the Miscarriages and Faults cannot hinder the Salvation of the former, nor
all the Struggles and Endeavors imaginable remedy or stave off the Damnation
of the latter: An Opinion of the greatest Impiety conceivable, destructive of
God's Glory and Mercy, as well as of his Irreproachable Justice. Read St. Paul
to the Ephesians, chapter 1. v. 4, 5, and 6. God (he says) had chosen us (the
Ephosians) in Jesus Christ before the Foundation of the World, That we should
be holy and without blame before him in Love; there is the Condition: Certainly
all the Ephesians were not blameless, nor all therefore Elect; Having
Predestined us, etc. according to the good pleasure of his will, to the
Praise of the Glory of his Grace. But what Praise if the Ephesians were
Elected, without a firm Belief in the Savior of the World, and a Life
conformable to his holy Example, thereby Glorifying the Riches of his Grace and
Forgiveness.

V. 115. Overruled their Will, dispesed; As if Man's Will were overborn, and
influenced by God's absolute decree, (as Lord of all) or by his infinite
Foreknowledge, whereby whatever he fore knows must certainly come to pass;
which Objection he answers in the next Verses. Disposed, Dispositus, Lat.
appointed, ordered.

V. 118. Foreknowledge had no influence; The Foreknowledge of God does not
determine the Minds of Men to good or bad Actions, tho that Foreknowledge be
infinite and infallible; nor does the commission of Good or Evil depend
thereon: But he that knows whereof we are made, and that searches the
Hearts, and tries the Reins, that knows all our Thoughts afar off, clearly
foresees all our Faults and Failings, which we should have committed
undoubtedly, although they had not been foreknown or foreseen by that infinite
Eye. In vain did all the Prophets cry against the Abomination of Israel, and
the Idolatries and Backslidings of Juda, if these People had it not in their
power, to serve God rather than Baal. Choose you this day whom you will serve,
etc. but as for me and my House we will serve the Lord, says Josuab: And when
the People had made and confirmed their Choice, v. 21. Nay, but we will serve
the Lord; he replies upon them, Ye are Witnesses against your selves, that you
have chosen the Lord to serve him; and they said, We are witnesses, Jos. 23. v.
22. Good and Evil, Life and Death, therefore are in the Choice, and balance
the Wills of all Mankind; they have the Election of their Mischiefs and
Miscarriages in their own Power; neither does any Influence of the Stars, or
pretended Power of Fate, bend or incline their Wills to Folly, were there any
Power so coercive, as to constrain and force them unto Wickedness, Mankind, nay
even the worst of them, would not be inexcusable; they Decree therefore their
own Revolt, that Defection from their Maker to his and their Enemy the Devil.
It is observable, that where God cautions the Israelites against the false
Prophets that should go about to turn them away after other Gods, (...) is
used, a word properly signifying a Revolt, Deuteronomy. 13. v. 5. as also Jer. 28. v.
16. and chapter 29. v. 32. in both which it is translated Rebellion.

V. 120. So without least Impulse; So without the least motion, force, or
pretense, of any overruling Power: Impulsus, Lat. for such a force as is
necessary to set an Engine in motion, etc. Mankind must be Engines, if set on
work by any other Motives, than the Impulses of their own Free Will.

V. 121. Immutably foreseen; The celebrated Place in the Controversy of
Free Will, in Romans 9. v. 11, and 13. Jacob have I loved, but Esau have I hated,
for the Children being yet unborn, neither having done any Good or Evil, etc.
seems to imply such an Immutability in God's Foresight, as influenced the
Actions of these two Brethren and their Descendents; but the truth is, God from
his high Prospect foreseeing all the Behavior, not only of these two Brethren,
but of Mankind, infallibly and unerringly, the Divine Foreknowledge and
Foresight had no power or weight on the Wills of them and their Posterity, tho
he foresaw that of the first would endeavor to keep his Commandments and
Statures, and should therefore be his chosen People; and that of Esau, would
forsake his Ways, and become Reprobate to God and all Goodness. To what end are
all the Promises of Happiness, and the Rewards of everlasting Life, and the
Terrors of the Lord, his Threatenings, and the repeated Denuntiations of Eternal
Punishment, Damnation, and Hell, to obstinate and impenitent Sinners? If they
that do well, and those that commit Iniquity, do both not what they would, but
what they are constrained to do, obey not God, but Necessity; how shall the
Judge of all the Earth do Judgment, as Abraham says in his humble Expostulation
with his Maker? Genesis 18. v. 25. Is God unrighteous who takes Vengeance? (I
speak as a Man.) God forbid: for how then shall God judge the World? Romans 3. v.
5, and 6. Immutable, Immutabilis, Lat. unalterable, unchangeable.

V. 122. They Trespass; They Sin, they Offend: Trespass, of the Fr. Trespasser,
to go beyond, to transgress, of the Lat. Trans beyond, and Passus, Lat. going,
Transgression being a Proceeding beyond the Limits of the Law.

Ibid. Authors to themselves; Leaders and Guiders of themselves, in all things
which they judge fit and reasonable to be done, and therefore choose to do:
Author, or, as better writ, Auctor, is one that advises or persuades another.
So Virgil uses it: Italiam petiit fatis Auctoribus. AEn. 10.
Conf^^iis habitus non futilis Auctor. AEn. 11.


Judge, of Judicare, Lat. to esteem; God has not left himself without a
witness, Acts 4. v. 17. A severe one indeed, and irreproachable, which every
Reprobate will bring with him, and against himself at the dreadful Day of Doom.

V. 128. Ordained their Fall; My Decree, eternal and unchangeable, appointed
their Freedom, exempted 'em from all force of any Foreign or Exterior Power,
made sufficient to have stood their Ground against all Temptation, they ill
advised, choose to mistrust me, and fall off from their Maker, and this
Conscience, God's Umpire, the wary Inmate of each Man's Breast, will testify
one day against the Opposers of Mankind's Elective Liberty. Ordained, of the
Lat. Ordinare, to set in order, to appoint, to take care of.

V. 129. The first sort, etc. The Fallen Angels, the Apostate Spirits, fell
from their Obedience by their own Consent and Inclinations: Self-tempted,
Self-depraved, tempting and vitiating themselves: Suggestion, of Suggestio,
Lat. a prompting or enticing, of Suggerere, Lat. to persuade: Depraved, of
Depravare, to corrupt, to make ill.

V. 131. Deceived by the other first; Man sins, deceived and cheated by those
fallen Angels, and therefore shall find Pardon and Compassion, which is denied
those that tempted both him and themselves.

V. 135. Ambrosial Fragrance filled all Heaven; At the first Promise and
Promulgation of God's Mercy, well does our Poet to fill Heaven with this Divine
Fragrance, all Sacrifices and Attonements made to obtain it under the
Ceremonial Law being called, A sweet Savor unto the Lord, Numb. 15. v. 3, 7,
10, etc. The Mercies of God are expressed by the same Epithete by the Royal
Psalmist, Psalm. 129. v. 21. For thy Mercies are sweet. Of Ambrosial, B. 2. V.
245. Liquidum Ambrosiae diffudit odorem. Geor. 4.

Homer makes no scruple of feeding Neptune's Horses with Ambrosia, tho it is
commonly used by him for the Gods own Diet: (...).

Fragrance, of Fragrantia, Lat. a pleasant Smell or Persume.

V. 136. Spirits Elect; Elect, of Electus, Lat. Chosen: This does not
contradict what was asserted before at V. 100. Such I Created all the Etherial
Powers and Spirits: Free and sufficient, yet not secure from falling, for the
Elect Angels and Blessed Spirits above, as to the continuance in their happy
Station, are secured by their Obedience, as well as Gods chosen here on Earth;
Wherefore, the rather, Brethren, give diligence to make your Calling and
Election sure: for if you do these things you shall never fall, for so an
entrance shall be ministered unto you abundantly, into the everlasting Kingdom
of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ,. 2 Pet. 1. v. 10, and 11.

V. 137. Ineffable, diffused and spread; A sense of new Joy, such as they never
felt before, and above all expression, unspeakable over all the Elect Angels:
Ineffabilis, Lat. unspeakable, of In Negative, and Fari, Lat. to speak:
Diffused, poured out, of Diffundere, Lat. to pour abroad.

V. 140. Substantially expressed; According to Hebr. 1. v. 3. where the Son of
God is styled, (...); The brightness of his Father's Glory, and the express
Image of his Person: The Character of his Substance, as the Original expresses
it.

V. 143. Which uttering; All the divine Compassion, everlasting Love, and
immensurable Grace and good Will to Mankind, which so plainly appeared in the
Son of God, now breathing forth in words to his Father thus he spoke: To Utter,
is to speak, that is, to bring forth the most secret and inmost Thoughts of the
Heart, and to render them intelligible to others; of Utter, signifying utmost,
external: Visibly, apparently, to be plainly seen, of Visibilis, Lat. that may
be seen.

V. 150. Finally be lost; Be lost for ever, for so both the Latin and Greek
word for End are used in Scripture; Psalm. 79. v. 5. How long, Lord, will thou
be angry? for ever? The Original (...) signifies to Eternity, which the Lat.
translates In finem: So (...). 1 Thessalonians. 2. v. 16. To the end, to all Eternity:
Finally; of Finis, Lat. the end.

V. 151. Thy youngest Son; In respect of the Angels created, (as our Poet well
enough supposes) long before Man.

V 152. Fail Circumvented; Miscarry, thus deceived by Satan's Wiles, tho made
more dangerous by his own foolish Credulity: Circumvented, of Circumvenire, to
beset, to cheat: Fraud, of Fraus, Lat. deceit, tricks.

V. 158. His Malice, etc. Shall Satan, the Adversary of God and Man, be able to
effect and bring to pass his Hellish Malice, and disappoint thy Mercies?
Malice, of Malitia, Lat. for Forethought Wickedness, Cum quis data opera male
agit. Naught, of the Sax. Naht, Nothing.

V. 165. So should thy Goodness; So should thy Mercy and thy Majesty be called
in question both, and be reproached without reply: Blasphemed, be ill spoken
of, of (...), to reproach, (...), to hurt and violate the Reputation of a
Person; (...), Mar. 3. v. 28.

V. 168. Chief Delight; According to the Voice from Heaven at his Baptism, This
is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased, Matthew. 3. v. 27. Mar. 1. v. 11.
and chapter 12. v. 6. Having therefore one Son, his Well-beloved, in the Parable
wherein our Savior represented himself.

V. 169. Son of my Bosom; As in John 1. v. 18. The only begotten Son which is
in the Bosom of the Father; an Expression of highest Indearment, as appears
from chapter 13. v. 23. Now there was leaning on Jesus bosom, one of his Disciples,
whom Jesus loved.

V. 170. My Word; Suitable to, John 1. v. 1, 2, and 3. In the beginning was the
Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God, etc 1 John 1. v. 1.
Which we have looked upon, and our hands have handled of the Word of Life; And
chapter 5. v. 7. Three that bear Record in Heaven, the Father, the Word, and the
Holy Ghost, and these three are one.

Ibid. My Wisdom; Read the Description of Eternal Wisdom, Prove. 8. The Lord
possessed me in the beginning of his way, before his works of old, then was I
by him, as one brought up with him, and I was daily his delight, rejoicing
always before him, v. 22, and 30. Christ the Power of God, and Wisdom of God, 1
Cor. 1. v. 24.

Ibid. And effectual Might; And my prevailing Power: All Power is given to me
in Heaven and Earth, Matthew. 28. v. 18. Now is come Salvation and Strength, and
the Kingdom of our God, and the Power of his Christ, Rev. 12. v. 10. Effectual,
of Efficax, Lat. able, strong, powerful.

V. 172. As my Eternal Purpose; From all Eternity as I have appointed: Purpose,
of the Fr. Propos, of the Lat. Propositum, an intention, a design.

V. 175. But Grace in me, freely voutsaft; Man was utterly unable, after his
Fall, to recover the favor of his Creator, or to atone in any measure for his
Offenses; nor could all his best Endeavors have so rectified his Free Will,
debauched and depraved in its first Source, but that he must inevitably have
lain under God Almighty's everlasting Displeasure; But God, who is rich in
Mercy, for his great Love wherewith he loved us, even when we were dead in Sins
has quickened us, together with Christ, (by whose Grace ye are saved,) that in
the Ages to come he might show the exceeding Riches of his Grace; for by Grace
are ye saved through Faith, and that not of your selves, but the Gift of God,
Ephesians. 2. v. 4, 5, 7, and 8. Gratia, Lat. Grace, Good Will: Fr^ely voutsaft,
freely bestowed, without any Right or Claim of ours? To voutsafe, is to Grant,
as Superiors do to Inferiors, of their own mere Motion and Generosity, the
Greatness of the Donor vouching, as it were, for the safety and security of the
Gift.

V. 176. His lapsed Powers; Once more I will reinforce his decayed Strength and
Faculties, tho liable and enslaved by Sin to many ungovernable Desires and
Passions extravagant and wild: Lapsed, of Lapsus, Lat. fallen, decayed; So
Virgil in the same sense, -- Lapsis quaesitum cracula rebus, Geor. 4. Forfeit,
lost, of the Fr. Forfaict, a Crime, an Offense, or rather the Punishment of a
Fault, by loss of Goods and Life, there being Forfeitures of both, as well of
as Member, a Law Term: Exorbitant, unmeasurable, ungovernable, of Exorbitare,
to go out of the right way or tract.

V. 180. How frail; How weak, how unable to support it self, of the Fr. Fresle,
of Fragilis, Lat. easily broken.

V. 184. -- Of peculiar Grace elect above the rest; Of my special Grace and
Favor, chosen before others: So the Israelites, The Lord thy God has chosen
thee to be a special People unto himself, above all the People that are upon
the face of the Earth, Deuteronomy. 7. v. 6. Ye are a chosen Generation, a Royal
Priesthood, an holy Nation, a peculiar People, 1 Pet. 2. v. 9. Ye have not
chosen me, but I have chosen you, and ordained you, John 15. v. 16. As he has
chosen us in him, before the foundation of the World, Ephesians. 1. v. 4. So is my
Will; God, who has endowed his Creature Man with Free Will, may be certainly
allowed to be Master of his own; Therefore, according to his good pleasure, he
has mercy on whom he will have mercy, Romans 9. v. 18. But unsearchable are his
judgments, and his ways past finding out, Romans 9. v. 11.

V. 186. To appease the incensed Deity; By Repentance to allay the wrath of God
provoked, while Mercy and Pardon is tendered to 'em: Incensed, angry, of
Incendere, Lat. to burn, as God's wrath is by the Inspired Psalmist described,
Shall thy wrath burn like fire? Psalm. 89. v. 46. And God himself is styled, A
consuming fire, Deuteronomy. 4. v. 24. Heb. 12. v. 29. To appease, Fr. Appaisir, to
assuage, calm, quiet by entreaty: Deity, Lat. Deitas, the Godhead: Invites,
calls, of Invitare, Lat. to bid, to entreat.

V. 195. My Umpire Conscience; An Umpire, is one chosen to decide a Difference,
(of which, B. 2. V. 907.) and Conscience will be an irreproachable one between
God and every Sinner; Their Conscience also bearing witness, and their Thoughts
accusing or excusing one another, Romans 2. v. 15. The answer of a good
Conscience toward God, 1 Pet. 3. 21. The Heathens had a noble sense of this
awful Inmate: -- Prima est haec ultio, quod se
Judice, nemo nocens absolvitur --
Nocte dieque suum gestare in pectore testem.
-- Quos diri conscia facti
Men's habet attonitos, and surdo verbere caedit
Assiduum quatiente animo tortore flagellum. Juv. Sat. 13,


Conscience, Conscientia, Lat. the inward Witness of his good and bad Actions
that every Man bears in his Breast, of Conscire, Lat. to be privy to: Nil
conscire sibi nulla pallescere culpa. Juv.

V. 196. Light after Light; Instruction and Knowledge (if employed to good
uses) they shall not fail of. Information and Instruction are well expressed by
Light, To open thine Eyes, and to turn them from Darkness to Light, and from
the power of Satan unto God, Act. 26. 18. The People which sat in Darkness saw
great Light: and to them which sat in the Region and Shadow of Death, Light is
sprung up, Matthew. 4. v. 16. Attain, obtain, of Attinere, Lat. to gain, to
arrive at, or attain to.

V. 197. Persisting; Standing stoutly, enduring to the end, of Persistere, Lat.
to stand firm, to hold out: He that endures to the end shall be saved, Matthew.
10. v. 22. To them who by patient continuance in well-doing, etc. Romans 2. v. 7.

V. 199. They who neglect; According to the Expostulation of St. Paul,
Despisest thou the Riches of his Goodness and Forbearance, and Long-suffering,
not knowing that the Goodness of God leads thee to Repentance. Romans 2. v. 4.

V. 200. But hard, be hardened; As was Pharaoh, by God's permission, leaving
him in his Obstinacy and Impenitency, who, tho under the Lash, when he saw
there was respite, hardened his Heart, Exodus 8. v. 15.

Ibid. Blind, be blinded more; According to the Psalmist, Let their Eyes be
darkened that they see not, Psalm. 69. v. 23. as they well deserve, who shut
their Eyes against the Glorious Light of the Gospel; But after their Hardness,
and impenitent Hearts, treasure up unto themselves Wrath against the Day of
Wrath and Revelation of the just Judgment of God, Romans 2. v. 5.

V. 202. From Mercy I exclude; None but the Obstinate and Impenitent, that will
neither hear the Check of their own Consciences, nor the Voice of the Preacher,
that hate to be reformed, and cast God's Laws behind them, that will not hear
his Voice, but harden their Hearts, as did the Israelites in the Provocation in
the day of Temptation, shall be shut out from Mercy. Excludere, Lat. to shut
out, to except from.

V. 204. Disloyal, breaks his Fealty; Faithless, has broke the Obligation of
his Obedience in which he stood bound to me his Maker, and in so doing, has
forfeited my Favor: Disloyal, of the Fr. Desloyal, Unfaithful, that has thrown
off his Loyalty, as Rebels do: Fealty is an Oath of Fidelity, of the Fr.
Feaultie, of Fidelitas, Lat. Faith and Truth. There is a double Fealty, one
General, due from every Subject to his Prince; the other Special, owing by
every Tenant to the Lord of the Fee of whom he holds: Hotom. in Comment. de
verbis Feudal. Fidelitas est fidei, obsequii and servitii ligamen, quo
generaliter subditus Regi, particulariter vassallus Domino astringitur. Spel.
The Fealty God required of Adam, the first great Tenant of the Universe, seemed
as reasonable as it was easy; He has showed thee, O Man, what is good; and
what does the Lord require of thee, but to do justly, and love mercy, and to
walk humbly with thy God? Mich. 6. v. 8. agreeing with Deuteronomy. 10. v. 12.

V. 206. Affecting Godhead; Designing and desiring to be a God, aiming at a
Station above that he was placed in, and equal to that of his Creator;
according to that lying Insinuation of Satan, Ye shall be like Gods, knowing
Good and Evil, Genesis 3. v. 5. Affecting, of Affectare, Lat. earnestly to
endeavor after; Affectare regnum, Live. A Word well chosen; as in Ovid,
Affectasse ferunt regnum caeleste Gigantes, Met. 1. An Affectation of like
Folly, and perhaps a Copy of this Original not understood by the ancient Poets.

V. 207. To expiate his Treason; To make amends for, to atone for his Treason
and Unfaithfulness to his Maker: Expiare, Lat. of Ex and Piare, to appea^e by
Sacrifice; as Virg. Et culpam hanc miserorum morte piabunt, AEn. 2. Treason, of
the Fr. Trahison, from the Lat. Traditio, a betraying or giving up, as here the
Obedience and Fidelity due to God and his Vicegerents, to the delusive
Insinuations of Satan.

V. 208. To Destruction sacred and devote; Made liable to Death and
Destruction: Sacred, of the Lat. Sacer, appointed, dedicated. -- Sacer Cybele
Chloreus, AEn. 11. Devoted, Lat. Devotu^, destined; Pesti devota futurae, AEn.
1.

V. 212. The rigid Satisfaction; Make full satisfaction, make satisfaction to
the utmost, Death for Death: The word Rigid, seems to imply a stiffness, an
unrelenting satisfaction to be made to the Almighty Justice, The Soul that sins
must dye, or some other as able and as willing: Rigidus, Lat. hard, stiff; Et
rigidas motare cacumina quereus, Virg. Ecl. 6.

V. 216. Charity so dear? Tantusne Animis caelestibus ardor? Charity, of
Charitas, Lat. as this of (...), Love^, Bounty.

V. 217. All the Heavenly Quire stood mute; All the Angelic Audience kept
silence: Quire, of the Fr. Choeur, as this of the Lat. Chorus, and both of
(...), Gr. a Company that sing Praises, either Divine or Human. -- Laetumque
choro Paeana canentes, AEn. 6.

V. 219. Patron, or Intercessor; Patron, of Patronus, Lat. for an Advocate, one
who among the Romans pleaded the Cause, and made a Defense for a Person
accused, and called in to Judgment: Intercessor, Lat. one who entreats for
Pardon for an Offender, of Intercedere, Lat. to go between, and entreat for.

V. 221. And Ransom set; And pay the Ransom set on Man, made liable to Death,
and devoted to Destruction, by dying for him, Ransom, of the Fr. Rencon, the
Price paid for redeeming a Captive.

V. 231. Comes unprevented, unimplored; The Free Grace of God comes unasked,
being justified freely by his Grace, Romans 3. 24. Unprevented, nor foreslow'd by
our Offenses, of Praevenire, Lat. to come before to prevent: Unimplored, of
Implorare, Lat. to beseech, to ask.

V. 234. Atonement for himself, etc. As the Prophet Micah reasons excellently,
chapter 6. v. 6, and 7. Wherewith shall I come before the Lord, and how my self
before the high God? Shall I come before him with Burnt-offerings, with Calves
of a year old? Will the Lord be pleased with thousands of Rams, or with ten
thousands of Rivers of Oil? Shall I give my Firstborn for my Transgression,
the Fruit of my Body for the Sin of my Soul? No, alas! nothing less than the
Firstborn of the Almighty, The Image of the Invisible God, and the Firstborn
of every Creature, Coloss. 1. 15. could atone, whom God ordained to be a
Propitiation for us, Romans 3. 25. Atonement, under the Mosaic Law, was an
Offering brought to appease God's Anger by Sacrifice out of the Herd or the
Flocks, which was to be slain by him that offered it. Lev. 1. v. 4, and 5. And
he shall put his hand upon the head of the Burnt-offering; and it shall be
accepted for him to make Atonement for him. And he shall kill the Bullock
before the Lord. The Word in the Original is (...), and signifies Redemption,
or Ransom; all the Judaic Immolations being Types and Figures of that
Immaculate Lamb Jesus Christ, The Lamb of God who takes away the Sins of the
World, John 1. 29. In whom we have Redemption through his Blood, Ephesians. 1. 7.
Atonement seems a Musical Metaphor, like Accord, to bring Jarring Differences
and Diffonancies (ad Toman) into Tune.

V. 241. On me wreck all his Rage; On me let Death revenge himself with his
utmost Rage: Wreck, of the Sax. Wpaecan, to be revenged.

V. 249. With Corruption there to dwell; According to the Prophetic Psalmist,
For thou will not leave my Soul in Hell, neither suffer thy holy One to see
Corruption, Psalm. 16. 10. Illustrated and applied to our Savior (who rose the
third day) by St. Peter, Act. 2. v. 20, 21, etc.

V. 253. And stoop inglorious; And be humbled and subdued, disgraced, and
disarmed, of his irresistible Dart. Positis inglorius armis, AEn. 10.
Inglorious, Inglorius, Lat. disgraced.

V. 255. Maugre Hell: In spite of Hell: Maugre, of the Fr. Malgre, against
ones will, of the Lat. Male, and Gratum.

V. 256. The Powers of Darkness bound; According to the Apostle to the
Colossians, chapter 2. v. 15. And having spoiled Principalities and Powers, he made
a show of them openly, triumphing over them; confirmed by St. Luke, chapter 10. v.
17, and 18. Lord, even the Devils are subject unto us through thy Name; and he
said unto them, I saw Satan, as Lightning, fall from Heaven.

V. 259. Glut the Grave; Satisfy, cloy the wide gaping Grave, that, e're it be
satisfied, must devour all Mankind: The last Enemy that shall be destroyed is
Death, 1 Cor. 15. 26. Glut, of the Lat Glutire, to swallow.

V. 269. Filial Obedience; The Duty and Submission which, as a Son, he paid his
Almighty Father, exceeded only his everlasting Love to mortal Men: Filial, of
Filialis, Lat. belonging to a Son: Obedientia, Lat. Duty, Obedience.

V. 273. Thus replied; Answered thus: Of Replicare, Lat. to reply, to speak
again to.

V. 276. My sole Complacence; My only Delight and Pleasure; In whom alone I am
well pleased. Complacentia, Lat. of Complacere, to like well. See before, V.
168. of this Book.

V. 282. Their Nature, etc. Join and unite their Manhood to their Godhead,
Perfect God, and perfect Man, etc. according to St. Athanasius's Creed.

V. 285. By wondrous Birth; Behold a Virgin shall Conceive, and bear a Son,
Isa. 7. 14. and Matthew. 7. 18.

V. 286. The Head of all Mankind, tho Adam's Son; The Answer to the Question,
with which our Savior posed the Pharisees, Matthew. 22. 45. Christ is Adam's and
David's Son as to his Humanity, and David's and Adam's Lord as to his Divinity,
therefore in the holy Page styled The last Adam: The first man Adam was made a
living Soul, the last Adam was made a quickening Spirit, 1 Cor. 15. 45.

V. 287. As in him perish; For as in Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all
be made alive, 1 Cor. 15. 22. Restored, of Restaurare, Lat. to renew, revive.

V. 291. Thy Merit imputed shall absolve; Thy holy Life, and meritorious Death,
accounted and imputed to Mankind, shall obtain Pardon and Forgiveness for as
many as renounce their own Deserts, and through Faith lay Claim to thine: For
as by one man's disobedience, many were made Sinners; so by the obedience of
one, shall many be made righteous, Romans 5. 19. And therrfore it was imputed to
him for Righteousness. Now it was not written for his sake alone (Abraham) that
it was imputed to him, but for us also, to whom it shall be imputed, if we
believe him, etc. Romans 4. v. 22, 23, and 24. Imputed, of the Lat. Imputare, to
reckon, to account: Absolve, of the Lat. Absolvere, to absolve, to acquit, to
free.

V. 292. Who renounce their own both Righteous; For who can justify himself
before God? We must all say, as Job did, If I be wicked, woe unto me; and if I
be righteous, yet will I not lift up my head: I am full of confusion, Job 10.
15. We are all an unclean thing, and all our Righteousnesses are as filthy
rags, Isa. 64. 6. But could we do all that is commanded us, we are unprofitable
Servants, Luke 17. 10. Renounce, of the Lat. Renuntiare, to forsake, to
disclaim.

V. 293. Live in the transplanted; Removed from the killing Letter of the Law,
to the gracious Gospel, that brought Life and Immortality to light, pursuing
the Simile used before at V. 288. of Christ being a second Root, by whom we are
Regenerated: Transplantari, Lat. to be removed, as Trees are, into another
place, a better soil.

V. 304. Degrade thine own; Debase, dishonor, of Degradare, Lat. to disgrace.

V. 307. God-like Fruition; All that God enjoys: Fruition, of the Lat. Frui, to
enjoy: Quitted all, left, forsaken all, of the Fr. Quitter, to leave.

V. 313. This Humiliation; This thy humbling and debasing of thy self to redeem
lost Man. The greatest Humiliation sure, that ever was, where the Son of God
made himself of no Reputation, and took upon him the form of a Servant, and was
made in the likeness of Men: And being found in fashion as a Man, he humbled
himself, and became obedient unto Death, even the Death of the Cross, Phil. 2.
v. 7, 8.

V. 314. Thy Manhood to this Throne; According to our Creed. As also, 1 Timothy 3.
16. God was manifested in the Flesh, justified in the Spirit, seen of Angels,
preached unto the Gentiles, believed on in the World, received up into Glory.
And, Ye Men of Galilee, why stand ye Gazing up into Heaven? This same Jesus,
which is taken up from you into Heaven, shall so come in like manner, as ye
have seen him go into Heaven, Acts 1. 11. Hereafter shall you see the Son of
Man sitting on the right hand of Power, and coming in the Clouds of Heaven,
Matthew. 26. 64

V. 315. Here shall thou sit Incarnate; Here shall thou sit in thy Flesh:
Incarnate, in carne, of Caro, Lat. Flesh.

V. 316. Son both of God and Man; Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten
thee, Psalm. 2. 7. For that which is conceived in her is of the Holy Ghost,
Matthew. 1. 20. Therefore also that holy thing which shall be born of thee, shall
be called the Son of God, Luc. 1. 35. Which was the Son of Adam, which was the
Son of God, Luke 3. 38.

V. 317. Anointed Universal King; Who is the blessed and only Potentate, the
King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, 1 Timothy 6. 16. Kings in Scripture are styled
God's Anointed; Saul the first King of the Israelites was anointed by Samuel, 1 Samuel 10. 1. and his Successor David by the same hand. 1 Samuel 16. 13. Then
Samuel took the Horn of Oil and anointed him; a Ceremony still in use among
most Nations. Therefore God, even thy God, has anointed thee with the Oil of
Gladness above thy fellows, Heb. 1. 9. Acts 10. 38.

V. 321. That bide in Heaven, etc. That have their Abode in Heaven, according
to Phil. 2. 10. That at the Name of Jesus every Knee should ^ow, of things in
Heaven, and things in Earth, and things under the Earth. Bide, and abbreviation
of Abide, to stay in a place.

V. 324. Shall in the Sky; They shall see the Son of Man coming in the Clouds
of Heaven with Power and great Glory, Matthew. 24. 30.

V. 325. The summoning Archangels; The Chief of thy Angels, that shall summon
and call all that are or ever were living. Michael is named one of the
Archangels, Epist. Jude, v. 9. Summoning, of Summonere, Lat. to warn; and
Summonitio, in our Law, is a giving notice to appear in Court. (...), Chief
Angel; For the Lord himself shall descend from Heaven with a shout, with the
voice of the Archangel, and with the trump of God, 1 These. 4. 16.

V. 326. Thy dread Tribunal; Thy dreadful Judgment Seat: For we must all appear
before the Judgment Seat of Christ, knowing therefore the terror of the Lord,
2 Cor. 5. v. 10, 11. Tribunal, Lat.

Ibid. From all Winds; From all Parts and Quarters of the World, from whence
the Winds blow and take their Names: Eurus ad auroram, Nabathaeque regna
recessit
Persidaque and radiis juga subdita matutinis. Met. l. 1.


They shall gather together his Elect from the four Winds, Matthew. 24. 31.

V. 327. The cited Dead; The Dead called to appear at the General Day of Doom:
And I saw the Dead, small and great, stand before God, Rev. 20. 11, Citare, and
Citatio, Lat. are Terms of the Civil Law, signifying a calling one to answer an
Accusation or Crime brought against him.

V. 329. Such a Peal; Such a Sound shall awaken 'em from their long and lazy
Lethargy: He shall send his Angels with a great sound of a Trumpet, Matthew. 24.
31. (...), With a Trumpet and loud Voice, as the Original.

V. 331. They Arraigned shall sink; They, as soon as brought to that bright Bar
self-accused and condemned, shall sink down into Hell, beneath thy Sovereign
Sentence: To Arraign, is to bring a Prisoner to the Bar, to hear the Accusation
laid to his Charge, of Arranger, Fr. to set and digest Things into order by way
of Proof in Trials.

V. 334. The World shall burn; The Heaven and the Earth which are now, by the
same Word are kept in store, reserved unto Fire against the Day of Judgment,
and perdition of ungodly Men. But the Day of the Lord will come as a Thief in
the Night, in which the Heavens shall pass away with a great noise, and the
Elements shall melt with fervent heat, the Earth also, and the Works that are
therein shall be burnt up. 2 Pet. 3. v. 7, and 10.

Lucretius tells us, the World shall be destroyed by a downfall. Principio mare,
ac terras, caelumque tuere:
Horum naturam triplicem, tria corpora, Memmi:
Tres species tam dissimiles, tria talia texta,
Una dies dabit exitio, multosque per annos
Sustentata, ruet moles and machina Mundi. Lib. 5.


Ovid affirms, its Destruction shall be by Fire: Esse quoque infatis
reminiscitur, affore tempus,
Quo mare, quo tellus, correptaque Regia Caeli
Ardeat; and mundi moles operosa laboret. Met. l. 1.


Lucan agrees with him: Hos Caesar, populos si nunc non usserit ignis,
Uret cum terris, uret cum gurgite tonti:
Communis mundo superest rogus, ossibus astra
Misturus. -- Phar. l. 7.


How this lower World, and all therein, may probably enough be liable to a
General Conflagration, is easy to imagine; but how the Heavens, the Celestial
Bodies, the Sun, Moon, and Stars, those bright burning Beings, which many of
the Fathers, as well as Philosophers, believed to consist and be made of Fire,
shall be obnoxious to it, is not so familiar to our Understandings. Certain it
is, the World shall have an end, Generation and Corruption shall cease, Motion
give place to Rest, and Time to Eternity; and then both the Elementary and
Celestial Bodies having performed and finified their Function, and all their
Vicissitudes and manifold Mutations being determined, shall be done away. The
Heavens, the work of thy hands, they shall perish, but thou shall endure, yea
all of them shall wax old like a Garment: as a Vesture shall thou change them,
and they shall be changed, Psalm. 102. 26. And with this agrees the Vision of
St. John; And I saw a great white Throne, and him that sat on it, from whose
Face the Earth and the Heavens fled away, and there was found no place for
them, Rev. 20. 11.

V. 335. New Heaven and Earth; Of which Isaiah Prophesied, Behold I create new
Heavens and a new Earth: and the former shall not be remembered, chapter 65. v. 17.
Confirmed by St. Peter; Nevertheless we, according to his promise, look for new
Heavens and a new Earth, wherein dwells Righteousness, 2 Pet. 3. 13. Foreseen
by St. John; And I saw a new Heaven and a new Earth: for the first Heaven and
the first Earth were passed away, Rev. 21. 1. The number of Beings subject to
Generation and Corruption, to increase and decay, will one day be complete and
fulfilled; then the Heavenly Orbs, the Elements, the Earth and Sea, the Causes,
and the Receptacles and Subjects of those many Mutations of Matter, (through
the Vicissitudes of Time and Motion) shall be no more: And God will make
another World more beautiful, and much more glorious than this, void of all
Alteration, incapable of Decay, the House of Eternity.

V. 336. After Tribulations long; After all the Afflictions of this Life:
Tribulatio, Lat. Anguish, Pain, Suffering.

V. 337. See Golden Days; As the Poets expressed the first happy Simplicity of
the World, by the Golden Age, before that mischievous Metal was discovered, to
disturb it: Aurea prima sata est aetas. Ov. Met. 1.
Toto surget gens aurea mundo. Virg. Ecl. 4.


V. 341. God shall be all in all; According to 1 Cor. 15. v. 24, 25, and 28.
Then shall the Son also himself be subject unto him that put all things under
him, that God may be all in all.

Ibid. All ye Gods, adore him; Worship him all ye Angels, the Powers and
Principalities of Heaven, (...), the Hebrew word Gods, is generally understood
in Scripture of Idols or Angels, as Psalm. 97. 7. Worship him all ye Gods,
Translated by the Latin, all ye Angels; and in the Hebrews, chapter 1. v. 6. where
this very Text is quoted, it is expressed by (...). So Psalm. 95. 3. A great
King above all Gods. Which Title also is bestowed in holy Writ on Princes, as
God's Vicegerents, I have said, ye are Gods, Psalm. 82. 6. Alleged by our
Savior himself, John 10. 34.

V. 342. Who, to compass all this, dies; Who yields himself up to Death, to
bring all this to pass: O faelix-culpa, quae talem ac tantum meruerit habere
Redemptorem. Greg. Our Author has been entertaining us for 264 Lines, with a
Discourse of the highest Nature, as the Mysteries of God's Mercy and Justice to
Mankind; of Free Will, of the inconceivable Incarnation of his Son, and all the
nicest Points of Faith: And has acquitted himself of this great Undertaking as
well as is possible for Human Understanding to do, in things so much exceeding
the compass of our Capacities. He has kept close to the Revelations of Holy
Writ, as appears by the Quotations vouching each Verse, Homer, instead of
Treating the Deities of his Days, with any tolerable Decency, makes them
Quarrelsome, Vulnerable, and of a Behavior below that of a Stoic Philosopher,
as is frequent through all his Iliads: His Venus stands with a Fly-flap in her
hand, to keep the corrupting Insects from infecting the Corpse of her Son's dead
Favorite, (...). etc.

Virgil, tho less blameable, gives the same Goddess the weakness of Weeping:
Lacrymis cculos suffusa nitentes. AEn. 1.

And the Character of his Juno is very angry and spiteful: Nec dum enim causae
irarum, saevique dolores
Exciderant animo, man^t alta mente repostum
Judicium Paridis, spretaeque injuria formae. AEn. 1.


And he styles her frequently, Saeva Jovis conjux; and there is so bitter an
Altercation between her and Venus, AEn. 10. that enraged Jupiter is forced to
end it, by swearing he will take neither of their Parts. The Parallel
therefore, as to the (...) of these Poems and our Authors, is infinitely to his
advantage.

V. 348. With Jubilee; With great shouts of Joy and Rejoicing, from Jubilare,
Lat. to rejoice; a Word that probably enough derives its Original of (...), the
Year of Jubilee, Celebrated with extraordinary Rejoycings every Fiftieth Year
by the Jews, when every Man was restored to his former Estate and Liberty; of
(...), a Ram, because proclaimed by the sound of those Creatures Horns on the
10th day of the 7th Month. Levit. 25. 9.

Ibid. And loud Hosanna's; Songs of Salvation and Deliverance. (...), Mat. 21.
9, 15. Mark 11. 9, 10. and John 12. 13. the joyful Exclamations and Prophetic
Exultations, made not only by a great multitude of Men, but even by Children at
our Savior's riding into Jerusalem, the Original is (...), Heb. Save us, of
(...), to save and deliver. An exstatic Confession of the Savior of the World,
even by those who believed not in him.

V. 352. Down they cast their Crowns; Agreeing with Rev. 4. 10. The twenty four
Elders fall down before him that sat on the Throne, and worship him that
lives for ever, and cast their Crowns before the Throne.

V. 353. Immortal Amarant; (...), Gr. for unfading, that decays not, a Flower
of a Purple Velvet Color, which, tho gathered, keeps its Beauty, and when all
other Flowers fade, recovers its Luster by being sprinkled with a little Water,
as Pliny affirms, Lib. 21. c. 11. Our Author seems to have taken this hint from
1 Pet. 5. 4. To an Inheritance incorruptible, undefiled, and that fades not
away; (...). And 1 Pet. 1. 4. Ye shall receive a Crown of Glory that fades not
away; (...): Both relating to the name of his everlasting Amarant, which he has
set finely near the Tree of Life. Immortal Amarant; Job asks, in chapter 27. v. 24.
Does the Crown endure from Generation to Generation? That is, Is the Crown
Eternal? The Greek has it, (...), Immarcessible: Amarantus Flos, Symbolum est
Immortalitatis. Clem. Alex. Paedag. l. 2. c. 8.

V. 356. Where first it grew; If there be any such immortal unfading Flower, it
must grow in Heaven, for all Things beneath are subject to change and decay;
and it is as true, that there is nothing Everlasting, as that there is nothing
New under the Sun.

V. 358. Where the River of Bliss; The abundant Happiness and immortal Joys of
Heaven, are in Scripture generally expressed by the Fountain of Life, and
Rivers of Pleasure: So, Thou shall make them drink of the River of thy
Pleasures, for with thee is the Fountain of Life, Psalm. 36. v. 8, and 9. For
the Lamb which is in the midst of the Throne shall feed them, and shall lead
them unto living Fountains of Waters, Revel. 7. 17. And he showed me a pure
River of Water of Life, clear as Crystal, chapter 21. v. 1.

V. 359. Rouls over Elizian Flowers; The Elysium Fields, were the imaginary
happy Regions, where the Souls of good Men, that had passed through Life with
the least Infection, after a Purgation by Water, Wind, or Fire, according to
the foulness of their Faults, enjoyed pure and everlasting Ease; hence the
Papists borrowed their Heathen Purgatory, as is evident from Virgil: Ergo
exercentur paenis, veterumque malorum
Supplicia expendunt. Aliae panduntur inanes
Suspensae ad ventos; aliis subgurgite vasto
Iafectum eluitur scelus, aut exuritur igni.
Quisque su^s patimur manes: Ex inde per amplum
Mittitur Elysium -- AEn. 6.


Much Dispute has been about the Situation of these delightful Fields: Virgil
places them beneath, in the Neighborhood of his Place of Purgation. AEneas,
and his Guide, after they had passed by the dreadful Place of Punishment:
Devenere lucos laetos and amaena vireta,
Fortunatorum nemorum, sedesque beatas. AEn. 6.


Others have placed this blessed Abode in the Fortunate Islands the Canaries, and
such might interpret our Author's Amber Stream according to the Letter. Others
fancy it in the Moon's Silver Fields, some in the quiet Sedate Region of the
Air, in the middle between Heaven and Earth; AEris in campis latis, AEn. 6.
Homer placed it in Spain near Gades, now Cales. (...)
(...)
(...).
(...).
(...)
(...).


A Description very indifferent, if compared with that of Virgil's before
cited. Elysium is of Greek Original, either of (...), signif. Going, as being
that desirable Place to which all Men (even the Wicked who would die the Death
of the Righteous) would fain go; or (...), from the Release the blessed Souls
enjoy from the Incumberances of the Body, and the Miseries of this low Life; or
as (...), Eternal, Indissoluble. This happy Seat, and State, free from all
Disturbance, had not its Foundation only from Fancy, but was borrowed from the
Sacred Writings, and was Copied from Moses's Paradise; and accordingly the
Rabbis tell us, that Elysium sounds in the Holy Language, (...), The Grove of
God. The floridness of these Elysium Groves, is expressed thus by Tibullus:
Fert Casiam non culta seges, totosque per agros
Floret odoratis terra benigna rosis. Car. l. 1.


Ibid. Her Amber Stream; Homer, in the Verses abovementioned, tells us, there
were no Showers in the Elysian Fields, which made Virgil, perhaps, so willing
to adorn them with his own Country River the Italian Po. -- Unde superne
Plurimus Eridani per Sylvam volvitur amnis. AEn. 6.


Our Author's River of Bliss runs through the Heavenly Plains more
delightfully, whose Stream he calls Amber colored, from its clearness and
transparency. -- Non qui per saxa volutus
Purior Electro campum petit amnis. Georg. 3.


Amber is generally thought to be the Gums of Trees dropping into the Sea,
where it receives its hardness, according to Ovid's Tradition: Inde fluunt
lacrymae: Stillataque sole rigescunt
De ramis Electra novis: Quae lucidus amnis
Excipit. -- Met. l. 2.


But later Experience has discovered it to be a kind of Petroleum, sweating out
of the Rocks in the Sinus Botnicus, the Botnar Sea, (running into, or rather
being a part of the Baltic) where it has been found hanging down like Isickles,
thence dropping on Flies or small Animals, and Embalming them in transparent
and perspicuous Tombs, is in the Spring when the melted Snows-fill those
Caverns, washed out and set a-floating, and by the Salt-wash its viscosity is
hardened into a sort of Stone, which, when burnt, betrays it self by its smell
to be of the nature of a Bitumen.

V. 361. Resplendent Locks; Their shining Hair, twisted with dazzling Beams of
Light: Locks, of the Sax. Locca, a Head of Hair, of the Lat. Floccus, a Fleece
of Wool, from the Resemblance: Resplendens, Lat. shining, glittering, of
Resplendere, Lat. to shine.

V. 362. In loose Garlands; In Crowns of Flowers: Guirlande, Fr. a Gyrando,
from compassing and going round the Head.

V. 363. A Sea of Jasper shon; A Jasper, (...), Gr. from the Heb. (...), was
one of those twelve Precious Stones appointed to be set in the Breast Plate of
Aaron, Exodus 28. 18. and in its Correspondent, chapter 39. v. 11. it cast diverse
Colors, and the Green (the most esteemed) has most similitude to the Sea;
Ruae. de Gem. l. 2. c. 1. Mention is made of this Stone in the Description of
the Walls and Foundations of the New Jerusalem; Having the Glory of God: and
her Light like unto a Stone most precious; even like a Jasper Stone, clear as
Crystal; Rev. 21. v. 11, 18, and 19. Illi stellatus Jaspide fulva Ensis erat.
AEn. 4.

See its diverse kinds, Plin. l. 37. c. 9.

V. 364. Impurpled with Celestial Roses; The Pavement that seemed a shining Sea
of Jasper, looked lovely, as if dyed in Purple, by the reflection the Heavenly
Roses made in Garlands strewed upon it: Impurpled, turned into Purple; (...),
Gr. as Purpura, Lat. both for the Color and the Fish, out of which is taken
that which dies it. The Poets are much in love with this Color: -- Manibus
date lilia plenis
Purpurcos spargam Flores. AEn. 6.
Et flore comantem Purpureo. AEn. 12.


The Light it self must be tinged with it: Et lumine vestit Purpureo. AEn. 6.
Lumenquae juventae Purpureum. AEn. 1.


But all this is outdone by a Neoteric, Brachra Purpurea candidiora nive;
daring to a Contradiction. Smiled, the Actions of Living Creatures, and
sometimes of Rational, are by the Poets often applied to Things inanimate, as
Cum tacet omnis ager; and Ridet ager, so Laetus ager; so before the North Wind
is said to sleep, B. 1. V. 490. Sylvaeque and saeva quierant oequora. AEn. 4.

V. 367. With Praeamble sweet; With a sweet beginning of Charming Notes:
Praeamble, of the Fr. Preambule, a beginning, something that is played before,
that chiefly designed, of Praeambulare, Lat. to go before: Introduce, they
bring in, they usher in, make way for, of Introducere, Lat.

V. 369. Waken Raptures high; Raise their noble Strains, such as ravish the
Auditory: Raptura, Lat. for Ravishment; hence Rapture, used for any Delight
that does as it were Rapere, snatch us from our selves, raise us above what we
were.

V. 370. No Voice exempt; No one is excused, no Voice is left out, of Exemptus,
Lat. of Eximere, to take away.

V. 371. Melodious Part, etc. No Voice but easily could bear a part in that
Celestial Song, such Harmony is in Heaven: He makes Concord in his high
Places, Job 25. 2. Melodius, Musical, Harmonious, of (...), Music, Singing:
Concord; Concordia, Lat. Agreement, and here that Musical one of Time and Tune.

V. 372. Omnipotent; I am the Almighty God, Genesis 17. 1. 2 Cor. 6. 18.

V. 373. Immutable; That changes not: Immutabilis, Lat. I am the Lord, I
change not, Mal. 3. 6. Jam. 1. 17.

Ibid. Immortal, infinite; Everlasting, and boundless: Immortalis, Lat.
Infinitus, Lat. boundless, infinite; whose Power, Knowledge, Goodness, Mercy,
and Truth, are infinitely perfect, and exceed all human Comprehension.

V. 375. Fountain of Light; Nothing is so expressive of the Glorious and
incomprehensible Majesty of God, as Light: Who only has immortality, dwelling
in the light, which no man can approach unto, 1 Timothy 6. 16. God is light, and
in him is no darkness at all, 1 John 1. 5. The light dwells with him, Dan. 2.
22.

Ibid. Thy self Invisible; Now unto the eternal King, immortal, invisible, the
only wise God, etc. 1 Timothy 1. 17. Whom no man has seen, or can see, chapter 6. v.
16. Invisibilis, Lat. not to be seen.

V. 377. Throned inaccessible; Whose Throne is not to be approached: Oh, that I
knew where I might find him! that I might come even to his Seat! On the left
where he does work, but I cannot behold him: he hides himself on the right,
that I cannot see him, Job 23. v. 3, 9. Touching the Almighty we cannot find
him out, chapter 37. v. 23. Heaven is styled God's Throne, Matthew. 5. 34.
Inaccessible, of the Lat. Inaccessus, that cannot be come at, of the Negative
In and Accedere, to approach.

V. 378. Through a Cloud; According to the Psalmists description, Clouds and
Darkness are round about him, Psalm. 97. 2. The House was filled with the Cloud,
and the Court was full of the brightness of the Lord's glory, Ezekiel's Vision,
chapter 10. v. 4. He holds back the face of his Throne, and spreads his Cloud
upon it, Job 26. 9.

V. 380. Dark with excessive Bright; The excessive Brightness, amazing and
astonishing all created Sight to that degree, that Darkness and Confusion
seizes all approaching Eyes; He that will steadfastly behold the Sun, will in a
short time make the dazzling Experiment end in Darkness, not soon recovered. How
impossible therefore is it for human Eyes to behold him, Who is clothed with
Honor and Majesty, who covers himself with Light as with a Garment; Psalm.
104. v. 1, 2* Our blessed Savior's Face in his Transfiguration in the Mount,
(tho the full blaze of his Glory was shaded by a shrine of Flesh) did shine as
the Sun, and his Raiment was white as the Light, Matthew. 17. 2. His Countenance
was as the Sun shines in his strength, Rev. 1. 16.

Ibid. Thy Skirts appear; The borders of thy shining Shrine. Read Isaiah's
Vision, chapter 6. I saw also the Lord sitting upon a Throne high and lifted up,
and his Skirts filled the Temple. To which our Author seems to have had respect
in this noble description of God's Glorious Majesty. Excessivus, Lat. boundless.

V. 382. With both Wings veil their Eyes; According to the description of God's
Throne by the Prophet Isaiah; And about it stood the Seraphims: each one had
six Wings, with two he covered his face, etc. Isa. 25. 2.

V. 383. Of all Creation first; According to our Creed, The only begotten Son
of God, begotten of his Father before all Worlds; of whom David says, The dew
of thy birth is from the womb of the morning, Psalm. 110. 3. before the World,
or Light, that distinguished Morn from Evening, were brought forth of the Womb
of the Creation; Who is the image of the invisible God, the firstborn of every
Creature, Coloss. 1. 15.

V. 384. Divine Similitude; Exact Resemblance of the Divinity, God of God,
Light of Light, very God of very God; Nicene Creed. Similitudo, Lat. likeness.

V. 385. -- Without Cloud -- the Almighty Father shines; The Law, at its
Promulgation by Moses, was delivered with Thunders and Lightenings, great
Earthquakes and Terrors, and Mount Sinai was covered with a Cloud: Exodus 19. v.
9, and 16. I come unto thee in a cloud, there were thunders and lightenings,
and a thick cloud upon the Mount, and the whole Mount (Sinai) quaked greatly:
But when our Savior appeared, the Cloud was removed, That the light of the
glorious Gospel of Christ, who is the image of God, might shine unto Believers;
For God, who commanded the light to shine out of darkness, has shined in our
hearts, to give the light of the knowledge of the Glory of God, in the face of
Jesus Christ, 2 Cor. 4. v. 4, and 6.

V. 387. No Creature can behold; No man has seen God at any time, the only
begotten Son, which is in the bosom of the Father, he has declared him, John
1. 18. No man has ascended up into Heaven, but he that came down from Heaven,
even the Son of Man which is in Heaven, John 3. 13. Holiness, without which no
man shall see the Lord, Heb. 12. 14. Now the Righteousness of the best of
Mankind being but as filthy Rags, it must be the imputative Holiness of Jesus
Christ, that must qualify and enable us to behold the Lord of Glory.

V. 388. Impressed the Effulgence; Stamped upon thee, the brightness of his Glory
dwells: Impressed, Impressus, Lat stamped, printed, graven; as, Cratera impressum
signis, AEn. 5. Effulgence, brightness, of Effulgere, Lat. to shine bright: Who
being the brightness of his Glory, and the express image of his Person, Heb. 1.
3. And we beheld his Glory, the Glory as of the only begotten Son of the
Father, John 1. 14.

V. 389. Transfused on thee, etc. Poured out on thee, according to those many
Prophecies fulfilled visibly at his Baptism by St. John: And the Spirit of the
Lord shall rest upon him, Isa. 11. 2. I have put my Spirit upon him, Isa. 42.
1. And lo the Heavens were opened unto him, and he saw the Spirit of God
descending like a Dove, and lightening upon him, Matthew. 3. 16. And John bare
record, saying, I saw the Spirit descending from Heaven like a Dove, and it
abode upon him John 1. 32. Transfused, Transfusus, Lat. poured out: Amplus,
Lat. large, mighty.

V. 390. He Heaven of Heavens, etc. God created the World, and the Heavens, and
all their high Inhabitants, by his Son the Word of his Power. All things were
made by him, and without him was not any thing made that was made. He was in
the World, and the World was made by him, John 1. v. 3, 10. For by him were all
things created that are in Heaven, and that are in Earth, visible and
invisible, whether Thrones or Dominions, or Principalities, or Powers: all
things were created by him, and for him, Coloss. 1. 16.

V. 391. By thee threw down the aspiring Dominations; By thee cast down into
Hell the ambitious Angels: God spared not the Angels that sinned, but cast them
down to Hell, 2 Pet. 2. 4. The Angels which kept not their first estate, but
left their own Habitation, he has reserved in everlasting Chains under
darkness, unto the Judgment of the Great Day, Jude 1. 6. Dominatio, Lat. Power,
Authority, as the Angels are styled, Coloss. 1. 16. quoted at V. 390.

V. 394. -- That shook Heaven's everlasting Frame; Well might God's flaming
Chariot laden with Almighty Vengeance shake Heaven's everlasting Basis, Whose
Pillars tremble, and are astonished at his Reproof, Job 16. 11. Juno giving her
self but a jogg on her Throne, shook the wide Olympus, the Homeric Heaven:
(...).

Jupiter, when in good humor, does as much: Annuit, and totum nutu tremefecit
Olympum. AEn. 9.

How much more true is that of the Almighty, He looks on the earth and it
trembles, he touches the Hills and they smoke, Psalm. 104. 32.

V. 396. Angels disarray'd; Disordered, and put to the rout: Disarray'd,
Desarroyer, Fr. disordered, of the old Fr. word Arroy, the Equipage and Order
belonging to Soldiers; hence in our Law Books Arrayer, Arraiatores, were such
as had Commissions of Array, to see the Soldiers well provided of Arms, etc.
Read the Battle of the great Dragon and his Angels, Rev. 12. v. 7, 8, and 9.
And they overcame him by the blood of the Lamb, v. 11.

V. 398. Thee only extolled; Praise thee alone: And I heard a loud voice saying
in Heaven, Now is come Salvation and Strength, and the Kingdom of our God, and
the Power of his Christ, Rev. 12. 10. Extollere, Lat. to lift, to raise up, and
thence to praise.

V. 405. But much more to Pity inclined; A Repetition affected after the
Homeric manner, who often uses the same Verses and Words, in which Commands
were given, or Messages sent, as supposing it not possible to change them for
better. So Jupiter's Message delivered to Juno and Minerva in (...). (...), etc.

V. 410. O unexampled Love! O Love beyond all Example, Precedent, or
Comparison! Herein is love, not that we loved God, but that he loved us, and
sent his Son to be the propitiation for our Sins, 1 John 4. 10. That in the
ages to come, he might show the exceeding Riches of his Grace in his kindness
toward us, through Jesus Christ, Ephesians. 2. 7.

V. 413. Shall be the copious matter; Shall be the ample subject of my Song:
Copious, Lat. Copiosus, large, plenteous: Disjoyn, part, divide, of Disjungere,
Lat. to separate.

V. 416. Above the Starry Sphere; In highest Heaven, above these lower Orbs,
spangled with Stars: Starry, full of Stars; Star seems of kin to the Gr. (...):
Sphere, any round or circular Body, as those carrying the Stars, of (...), Gr.

V. 417. Hymning; Singing of Psalms, and holy Songs of Praise, of (...), Gr. to
Praise, to Celebrate: (...), Ephesians. 5. 19.

V. 418. The firm opacous Globe; The solid round and dark outside of the World:
Opacus, Lat. dark; used by Virgil as an Epithete of obscure Woods and darker
Night: -- Inter opacum allabi Nemus, AEn. 8. And, Dono noctis opacae, Ibid. Of
Globe, B. 2. V. 513.

V. 419. Whose first Unequal; Whose outermost vast Circle separates the enclosed
Orbs of Light, from Chaos, and dark Invasions of ancient and everlasting Night,
of Unequal, B. 2. V. 435. Luminous, Luminosus, Lat. bright, shining, full of
Light: Enclosed, encompassed, Inclusus, Lat. shut in.

V. 423. A boundless Continent; At a great distance it showed like a round
Ball, but now at his alighting on it appears a vast unbounded Country, its
roundness being not very discoverable so near: Continent, Continens, Lat. for
firm Land, not separated and interrupted by the Sea, as Islands are.

V. 424. Under the frown of Night starless exposed; Under the displeasure of
Darkness, without one glimmering Star, laid open to the continual Storms and
Attempts of Chaos roaring round it, a severe and angry Neighborhood: Frowning
implies, not only a wrinkling and contracting the Forehead and Brows, but
hiding and darkening the Eyes, excellently expressed: -- (...)
(...).


Night may well be shaded by her Frowns, when the dawning of the Day is
expressed by the cheerful Eyelids of the Morn, not only by most Heathen Poets,
but by the Poetic Book of Job, His Eyes are like the Eyelids of the morning,
chapter 41. v. 18. Exposed, Expositus, Lat. laid out, or open to.

V. 426. Inclement Sky; Unmerciful, cruel, severe Climate, of Inclemens, Lat.
merciless, rigorous. So it is used by the judicious Virgil: Durae rapit
inclementia mortis. Georg. 2.
Verum inclementia Divum Has evertit opes. AEn. 2.


V. 431. A Vultur on Imaus; A Vultur is a fierce and voracious Bird of Prey, so
named a Vultu, from his haughty look: -- Rostroque immanis Vultur adunco, AEn.
6. Pliny says, they are constant followers of Armies, and could presage
approaching Battles, and three days before death smell a future Carcass; l. 10.
c. 6. With whom in part agrees Plutarch: (...). Et quicquid nare sagaci
Era non sanum, motumque cadavere sentit.
Nunqum se tanto Vulture caelum
Induit. -- Says Lucan, of the bloody Pharsalian Field, l. 7.


Homer mentions this Bird: (...).

And in the same Book he has a Comparison not unlike our Author's, where the
Eagle is named, as here the Vultur, Tyrants Both: -- (...)
(...)
(...).


Ibid. Imaus, one of the largest Mountains in the greater Asia, now named
Dalanguer, rising at Mount Taurus, near the Caspian Sea, and stretching
Southward as far as the Springhead of Ganges, then spreading it self East and
West, becomes the Northern Boundary to the Empire of the Greal Mogul.

V. 432. The Roving Tartar; The Tartars are a People the most barbarous,
bloody, and fierce of all Mankind, Inhabitants of Tartary, the greatest Country
in all Asia; they are here said to be Roving, from their continual wandering up
and down that Country; fruitful in Pasturage, with their Families in little
covered Carts, having anciently no Cities, but living in Companies in the
Fields called Hords; This hardy course of Life has fitted 'em for War, in which
they have often proved themselves the Scourges of God on the Civilized World:
In this last Age one of their Princes broke in upon China, and entirely
Conquered it. Roving, wandering, of the Fr. Roder, to move to and fro, as
Vagabonds, Thieves, and Pirates do, who are called Rovers.

V. 434. To gorge the Flesh; To glut himself with the Flesh of tender Lambs, or
Kids new yean'd: Gorger, Fr. to Cloy, to Gluttonize, of Gorge, Fr. the Throat,
the Gullet: Yeanling, new yeaned, lately born, or fallen.

V. 436. Of Ganges or Hydaspes; Ganges, at this day called Ganga, is the
greatest River of East India, by it divided into two Parts; it rises from
Mount Imaus (as the Ancients say from Emodus) in the Confines of Great Tartary,
and running Southward through the Empire of the Great Mogul, discharges it
self by five Outlets into the Bay of Bengala: So that Virgil seems not to have
been so much mistaken as Interpreters suppose him, when he said of this River,
Ceu septem surgens sedatis amnibus altus
Per tacitum Ganges. AEn. 9.
Qua colitur Ganges, toto qui solus in orb
Ostia nascenti contraria solvere Phaebo
Audet, and adversum fluctus propellit in Eurum. Luc. l. 3.


Ibid. Hydaspes, is a River of East India, tho Virgil calls it Medus Hydaspes,
Geor. 4. On its Banks stood Nysa, the chief City of India when conquered by
Alexander, therefore by Lucan styled Nisaeus Hydaspes, l. 6. From the
disagreement among the Poets about the Native Place of this Rivet, it came to
pass, that Horace calls it Fabulosum -- Vel quae loca Fabulosus lambit
Hydaspes. Car. l. O. 22.

Ibid. Indian Streams; Rivers of India, so named from Indus, its Principal
River, and Western Boundary: Quaque ferens rapidum diviso gurgite fontem
Vastis Indus aquis, mistum non sentit Hydaspen. Luc. l. 4.


V. 438. The barren Plains of Sericana; Cathay, anciently called Serica, (Et
Scythia extra Imaum) the Habitation of the Silk-weaving Seres: This Country is
bounded on the East with the Ocean, Westward with Tartary, Northward with the
Scythian Sea, and on the South with China.

Ibid. Where Chinese drive, etc. Chinese, the Inhabitants of China, a vast
Kingdom in the East of Asia, a People, for their Numbers, Civility, Learning,
and the Fertility of their Country, preferible to all those of the Pagan World.
Some Parts of Tartary, as well as China it self, are so very flat and plain,
that Wagons are usually driven over them, without any other Motive than that
of Sails and Winds. Heyl. Geog.

Ibid. Their Cane Wagons; Their Carriages made of Canes, and therefore the
lighter: Pliny tells us, there were in India, Arundines tantae proceritatis, ut
singula internodia, alveo navigabili ternos interdum homines ferant, l. 7. c. 2.

V. 440. So on this Windy Sea of Land; Beaten by Eternal Storms and Tempests:
The bare outside of this World, that seemed
Firm Land, imbosom'd without Firmament,
Uncertain which, in Ocean or in Air. As described V. 75. Bo. 3.


From the Chinese sailing in their light Wagons over Land, he brings the
Comparison up, and calls this cruel stormy Climate, A Windy Sea of Land.

V. 445. Like AEreal Vapors; Like Mists arising in the Air, light and empty,
and therefore easily mounting aloft: The Philosophers distinguish a Vapor from
an Exhalation, this being the Offspring of the Earth, as that of the Water, yet
both convertible into Air or Water; the Word is used promiscuously by Virgil;
-- Lentusque carinas est vapor, for Fire, AEn. 5. Volat vapor ater ad auras, of
boiling Water, AEn. 7. AEreal, Aereus, Lat. of the Air, and thence any thing
that rises up into it; hence the Cranes are called AEriae, Geor. 1. and the
Alps AErias, by the same Author, from their high situation, Geor. 3.

V. 446. Transitory; Short-lived, trivial: Transitorius, Lat. of short stay and
duration, that quickly pass away, of Transire, Lat. to go by: Vain, Vanus, Lat.
empty, foolish, false.

V. 452. Of painful Superstition; Superstitio, Lat. a vain Esteem and Reverence
of that which deserves none, Will Worship of Saints, etc. not required at our
hands, which the easy Folly of some Men, and the cunning Knavery of others,
have imposed on great part of the World, deservedly called Painful, because the
deluded Votaries take so much pains (in Fastings, Scourgings, Processions,
Pilgrimages,) in vain, and to no purpose. Our Author seems to have had the
advice of St. Paul to the Colossians in his thoughts, Let no man beguile you of
your reward, in a voluntary humility, and worshipping of Angels, etc. Which
things have indeed a show of Wisdom in will worship and humility, and
neglecting the Body, not in any honor to the satisfying the flesh, Coloss. 2.
v. 18, and 23. (...), by us well translated Will Worship, (such as the vain
Devotions of fantastic Zealots choose) is by the Latin Translation rendered
Superstitio, which, among the Heathens, was an excess beyond their established
Religion, tho Idolatrous. -- Non haec solennia nobis
Has ex more dapes, hanc tanti Numinis aram,
Vana superstitio, veterumque ignara Deorum
Imposuit. -- AEn. 8.


V. 454. Fit Retribution; The just Reward, a Recompense as vain and em pty as
their idle Adorations, according to their Fopperies; And all the evil of the
men of Shechem did God render upon their heads, Judge. 9. 57. according to his
most exact and adequate Retributions: Retributio, Lat. a Return, a Repayment,
Reward, of Retribuere, Lat. to restore, to make amends.

V. 455. All the Unaccomplish'd; All the imperfect, unfinished Works of Nature,
such are Abortive, Abortivus, Lat. for any thing born dead, or cast out of the
Womb imperfect, and before due time: Monstrous, Monstrosus, Lat. any thing
contrary to Nature, exceeding the common in size, parts, or proportion:
Unkindly mixed, begotten by different kinds, as the unnatural Mixtures of Men
and Beasts like the Fabulous Minotaure: Unaccomplish'd, Inaccompli, Fr.
Incompletus, Lat. unfulfilled.

V. 457. Fleet hither; Swim and slide hither, of the Lat. Fluitare, to glide as
Rivers do, thence to wander: Dissolved, Dissolutus, Lat. dead, loosed from the
Ligatures that tie Life together: Till final Dissolution, until utter
Destruction overtake 'em at last.

V. 459. Not in the Neighboring Moon; In the Moon of all the Planets, the
nearest Neighbor to the Earth, as before, Bo. 2. V. 1053. This Pendant World
in bigness like a Star
Of smallest Magnitude close by the Moon.


Bold and prying Philosophy has assigned the Moon, the Mother of Moisture and
Mutation, for the Receptacle of monstrous Births, Embryo's, and Creatures
imperfectly and unkindly mixed; our Author rather supposes her Silver Fields
Peopled with Saints removed thither, or Inhabited by Spirits of a kind and make
between Angels and Men, inferior to the first, and transcending the latter.

V. 460. Those Argent Fields; Since the Discoveries made in the Moon, of vast
Provinces, Lakes, Woods, Valleys, Caves, etc. or something very like them by
the Optic Glasses invented by Galilaeus and Kepler, and the manifestation of
three or four Planets moving about Jupiter, within few Degrees of him; many do
not only fancy the Moon to be another World, whose Globe appears so very like
that of our Earth, but that there may be many other Worlds, as well in the
Stars, as in the Sun himself; nor it is easy to disprove the Opinion of those,
who imagine, that this our World does as officiously by turns enlighten the
Moon, and shine on her, as she lends her borrowed Light to us: Argent Fields,
Silver, of Argenteus, Lat. of the Moon's faint white Complexion: Argentum, Lat.
Silver, of (...), Gr. White.

V. 461. Translated Saints; Removed thither from this lower World: Translatus,
Lat. of Transfer, Lat. to carry over.

V. 462. Betwixt the Angelical, etc. Those that please themselves with a
Plurality of Worlds, bring this Argument to support their Imaginations, that
there seems wanting in this lower World many Degrees of Beings; that between
Angels and Men, diverse ranks and kinds of living Creatures (by our Poets styled
Middle Spirits) inferior to the Angelic Agility and Purity, but surpassing the
grossness of Human Debility, might be placed; and another Set, inserted between
the Rational and Animal Life, as also between Plants and other mixed Beings, all
which being not to be found in this World, they suppose there are diverse
others, or at least one more, in which all these seeming Deficients are
supplied.

V. 463. Hither of ill-joyn'd Sons, etc. Hither, not into the Neighboring
Moon, but unto the barren, stormy backside of the World, first of all, the
Giants came from the old World, the Offspring of the Sons of God, ill-joyned
with the Daughters of Men, Genesis 6. 2.

V. 464. Those Giants came from the old World destroyed by the Flood; The
Giants came, whose Oppression, Pride, Tyranny, and all manner of Impiety, were
the Provocations of God's Vengeance poured out on all the Inhabitants of the
Earth by the Deluge, as is implied by Job 26. 5. where the Word (...) is better
Translated Giants, as usually, Deuteronomy. 2. 11. 2 Samuel 21. v. 16, and 18. then Dead
things: Rapha, or the Giant of Gath, with his three Sons, is Recorded. 1 Chronicles.
20. v. 4. to the end; the last of which is, according to the usual Hebraism,
named A Man of Measure, that is, of mighty Stature. That the general size of
Mankind in the vigorous Youth of Nature, before the Flood, was superior to
that of their Successors, is very probable, but not to a degree so incredible
as Barcepha has stretched and racked our first Parents to, for having placed
Paradise beyond the Ocean, he makes Adam and Eve ford through it. From this
hint in the Sacred Writings the Gentiles had their (...). Homer and Virgil have
given good Examples of the sizes of their Hero's by the vast Stones they hurled
at one another, that, with which Diomedes mawled AEneas, two Men, such as lived
then, could hardly move, (...). and that which Turnus threw at the same Person
was so big. Vix illud lecti bis sex cervice subirent
Qualia nunc hominum producit corpora Tellus. AEn. 12.


Of all which, hear Juvenal: Nec hunc lapidem, quali se Turnus and Ajax,
Et quo Tydides percussit pondere loxam
AEneae; sed quem valiant emittere dextra
Illis dissimules, and nostro tempore natae.
Nam genus hoc vivo jam decrescebat Homero,
Terra malos homines, nunc educat atque pusillos. Sat. 15.


V. 465. Though then Renowned; Famous for vain and wicked Deeds that then were
looked on as Glorious: Renowned, according to the Original Men of Name, (...),
of Renommee, Fr. Commendation, Fame. Genesis 2. 4. The same became mighty Men,
which were of old, Men of Renown.

V. 467. On the Plain of Sennaar; After the Deluge, Men being diffident, dwelt
for some time on the tops of Hills for their security, but by degrees, as their
fear decreased, drew down toward the bottoms, and in length of Time
increasing, and finding themselves straighten'd in the Valleys, delighted with
the prospect and verdure of the open Plains, forsook the Neighborhood of
Hills, and in their march from the East, they light on this famous Plain in the
Land of Shinar, Genesis 11. 2. a spacious pleasant place of vast view on all
sides, extremely fruitful, being watered by Euphrates. (...), is by the Rabbi's
said to have been so named, not at the first possession of this place by these
new Inhabitants, but after they attempted building of Babel, (signifying
Confusion) and importing the Judgment sent upon 'em, as if the word were
compounded of (...), Heb. a Tooth, (...) to strike out, and expressed as much
as the place where their Teeth were struck out, relating to the confusion of
Language that there befell them, the Teeth being necessary for the pronunciation
of diverse Letters in all Languages: Of Babel before, Bo. 1. V. 694.

V. 471. Empedocles; The Scholar of Pythagoras, a Philosopher and a Poet, born
at Agrigentum in Sicily: He wrote of the nature of Things in Greek, as
Lucretius did in Latin Verse. He stealing one night from his Followers, threw
himself into the flaming AEtna, that being no where to be found, he might be
esteemed a God, and to be taken up amongst them into Heaven; but his Iron
Pattens being thrown out by the fury of the burning Mountain, discovered his
defeated Ambition, and ridiculed his Folly. -- Dicam, siculique Poetae
Narrabo interitum; Deus immortalis haberi
Dum cupit Empedocles, Ardentem frigidus AEtnam
Insiluit: Nec, si retractus erit, jam
Fiet homo, and ponet famosae mortis amorem. Hor. de Art Poet.


V. 472. Plato's Elysium; The Paradise of Plato, called Divinus, from writing
so finely of the State and Condition of the Virtuous after this Life: He was a
Grecian, Scholar to Socrates, traveled into Egypt and Italy to improve his
Knowledge, a Man of great Integrity of Life, of whom Quintilian gives this
Testimony: Platonem quis dubitet esse Philosophorum praecipuum? Ex quo multum
eloquentiae se tra^^sse Cicero fatetur, sive acumine disserendi, sive eloquendi
facultate, divina quadam and Homerica: Multum enim supra prosam orationem and
quam pedestrem Graeci vocant, surgit; ut mihi non hominis ingenio, sed quodam
Delphico videatur oraculo instructus.

V. 473. Cleombrotus; Not the unfortunate Leader of the Lacedaemonians, but a
foolish Youth of Ambracia, a City of Epirus in Greece, thence called
Ambraciota, so great an Admirer of the Writings of the Divine Plato, that being
thereby both convinced and enamoured of the happy Immortality of the Soul in a
higher and more noble Life, he leapt into the Sea, that he might immediately
enjoy it, therefore deservedly Ranked amongst the Idiots by our Author.

V. 474. Embryo's and Idiots; Men of imperfect Minds, of distempered Brains,
that lack common Sense, which in them (like Embryo's yet in the Womb) was
imperfect and incomplete, of Embryon, Bo. 2. V. 900. before. Idiots, (...), Gr.
for private Men, in opposition, (...), to those that bear the Offices and the
Magistracy; and also in distinction, (...), of those that are Learned; and in
this sense, Idiots is here to be understood, witless and foolish Men.

Ibid. Eremits; (...), Gr. Such as pretend to more Sanctity of Life than
ordinary, by retiring into Solitude in Caves and Deserts; of (...), solitary,
lovely, a cowardly retreating and faint-hearted flying from the difficult
Duties, Temptations, Allurements, and Trials, both of Human Life, and Christian
Conversation and Virtues, often pursued by Pride, Arrogance, Vain glorious
Austerities presumptuous Sanctity, etc. which makes the melancholy Deserts as
dangerous as the busy World.

Ibid. Friars; Of the Fr. Friar, as this of the Lat. Frater, a Brother, of
their Fellowships and Fraternities according to their Habits, named, White,
Black, and Gray; as of their Saints, Founders of their Orders, Franciscans,
Dominicans, etc. of St. Francis and St. Dominic.

V. 475. With all their Trumpery; With all their Beads, Bawbles, Tricks, and
Cheats: Trumpery, of the Fr. Tromperie, a Cheat, Deceit.

V. 476. Here Pilgrims roam; Here those that undertake long and painful
Journeys to the Lady of Loretto, or the Tutelary Saint of distant Countries, or
with the Mahometans go on Pilgrimage to Mecha, have in this wide windy
Continent room enough to wander. Pilgrim, of the Fr. Pelerin, of the Lat.
Peregrinus, one that undertakes to wander on the score of his Religion: To
Roam, is properly to wander, as wild Birds do, of the Fr. Ramage, as Un
Espervier Ramage, a wild Hawk; or of the Ital. Romigare, to wander up and down;
or of Rome, the famous place of Pilgrimages.

V. 477. In Golgotha him dead; Who gave themselves the unnecessary trouble to
go so far out of their way as Golgotha on Mount Moria at Jerusalem, to see the
place where our Savior died, who lives in Heaven. (...); Heb. for a Scull, 2
Jud. 9. 35. by which Name, the Place of Execution near Jerusalem was called,
from the Sculls of Malefactors there Crucified: Matthew. 27. 33. And when they
came to a place called Golgotha, that is to say, a place of a Scull. It is in
like manner interpreted by St. John, chapter 19. v. 17.

V. 479. Dying, put on the Weeds of St. Dominic; Are clothed and buried in the
Habit of St. Dominic. to make sure of their Passage into Paradise, tho not half
so well assured of it, as the order is of a considerable Legacy. Weeds, an old
Word of the Sax. Waede, Clothes.

V. 481. They pass the Planets seven; They get up above the seven Circles
assigned to the wandering Lights, Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Sol, Venus, Mercury,
Luna, styled (...), Wanderers, or (...), Gr. Wandering, because of their various
and unequal Motions.

Ibid. And pass the fixed; And soar above the Firmament, where the fixed Stars
are placed, called (...), Gr. unerring, not as if this Sphere were void of all
motion, but because it moves so slowly on the Poles of the Ecliptic, as not to
complete its compass in less than 25000 years, therefore seeming fixed to the
giddy Planets.

V. 482. And that Chrystalline Sphere; Gassendus tells us, this Caelum
Chrystallinum is so named, being void of Stars; it is transparent and as clear
as Crystal, (...), Gr. The same Astronomer, for the convenience of solving the
(...), has divided this Chrystalline Heaven into two, constituting the 9 and 10
Spears, which are supposed to be so equally poized and balanced, the ninth on
the Poles of the Ecliptic, and the tenth on the Equinoxial Points, that by a
kind of trembling libration the one inclines from the West to the East, and so
back again, and the other from North to South reciprocally, with a trepidation
so slow, that the first is moving two degrees and one third* (which makes one
libration) 1700 years, and the latter is twice as long in performing a
libration but of 24 minutes; an Invention that might have become a Quaking
Astronomer. Gass. l. 2. c. 8.

V. 483. The Trepidation talked; They pass the Chrystalline Orb, so poized,
that it moves forwards and back again by a slow trembling, too much fancied and
talked of, like a Spanish Jennet never standing still, and yet gaining no
ground: Balance, of the Lat. Bilanx, a Beam that holds Scales, poized and
centred upon a Point: Trepidatio, Lat. trembling, of Trepidare, to shake.

Ibid. And the first moved; The eleventh Heaven, the Primum mobile, because the
twelfth is by the Schoolmen made immovable, the Empyrean, of a square form as
to its outside, according to the description of the Heavenly Jerusalem, Rev.
21. 16.

V. 484. At Heaven's Wicket seems to, etc. And now St. Peter. seems to stand
ready to open Heaven's Doors, waiting for 'em with his Keys in his hand. How
the Romanists have conferred this Office of Doorkeeper on St. Peter, and for
what reason I know not, unless they interpret the Power of the Keys our Savior
gave him, (which is generally by them understood, the absolute Power and
Authority of Governing Christ's Church on Earth delegated to him) to be
exercised Literally by him now in Heaven, the Popes (his pretended Successors)
managing the other Magisterially enough on Earth. Read Matthew. 16. v. 18, and
19. Wicket, of the Fr. Guichet, a little Door.

V. 486. At foot of Heaven's Ascent; Now at the beginning of Heaven's high
rise, at the bottom of the going up, or arising up toward Heaven: Ascent, of
Ascensus, Lat. a climbing up, of Ascendere, Lat. to mount.

V. 488. Blows them transverse, etc. Blows them aside; Mutati transversa
fremunt and vespere ab atro Consurgunt venti, AEn. 5. Transversus, Lat. turned
aside, put by.

Ibid. League; At Sea, especially, is three English miles, so called of the Fr.
Lieue, as this of Leuca, Lat. derivable, says Ammi. Marcellinus, a (...), from
white Stones, whereby the Accients distinguished them, as the Romans also did,
Decimus ab Urbe Lapis, 10 miles from Rome.

V. 489. Into the devious Air; Out of the way into this blustering Climate:
Devius, Lat. Devid, out of the way.

V. 490. Cowles, Hoods, and Habits; The Dresses and Habits of Monks and Friars:
Cowle, Sax. Cugle, Fr. Cagoulle, of the Lat. Cucullus, a Monk's Hood: Habit, of
Habitus, Lat. a Dress, Clothes.

V. 491. Fluttered into Rags; Torn and rent into Rags: Fluttered, beaten, B. 2.
V. 933. Relics, Lat. Reliquiae, the Remainders of Saints Bodies, Bones,
Ashes, old Garments, etc. supposed to work miraculous Cures by their credulous
Admirers and Adorers.

V. 492. Indulgences, Dispenses, Bulls; Licenses, Dispensations, Proclamations,
and Edicts of the Pope: Indulgentia, Lat. a Permission from the Pope to do
something otherwise forbid: Dispenses, of Dispensatio, Lat. Leave given to do
things against the Laws of Men, and often those of God, as Murders, incestuous
Marriages, breach of Faith, etc. Bulls, the Popes Letters Patents sealed with a
piece of Lead hanging to 'em; of Bulla, Lat. for the Boss of a Bridle, and
thence a Seal.

V. 493. The sport of Winds; Vacuis Ludibria ventis: Or as Virgil of the Sibyls
Verses writ on Leaves of Trees, Haec turbata volant rapidis ludibria ventis,
AEn. 6.

V. 495. Into a Limbo large and broad; Limbus, Lat. for the Welt or Hem of a
Garment, by the School men supposed the place in the Neighborhood of Hell,
where the Souls of the Just, who dyed before the Ascension of our Savior, were
detained, and into which they consign the Souls of the Infants dying
unbaptized. A daring and enterprizing Opinion, grounded on these following
Texts of Scripture: Jacob mourning for the suppofed Death of his Son Joseph,
says in the bitterness of his Soul; I will go down into the Grave unto my Son
mourning, Genesis 35. 35. The Hebr. word is (...), signifying generally the place
of Human Bodies after Death, and therefore in our Bibles well translated the
Grave. The same word does indeed signify the lowest Place, and is understood
of Hell; As Hell is naked before him, Job 26. 6. Of which Aben Ezra says in his
Commentary on the place, Centrum ipsius terrae, ipsi in aperto and propatulo
est, the very Center of the Earth (where Hell is supposed to be) is open and
plain before him. The next place assigned for a Support and Foundation, is that
where the Witch of Endor tells Saul, I saw Gods ascending out of the Earth, 1 Samuel 28. 13. And in the Eulogy of Samuel, this ascending God, it is said, And
after his death he Prophesied, and showed the King his end, and lift up his
Voice from the Earth, Eccles. 46. 20. Another Text is Zecha. 9. 11. where the
Prophet foretelling the joyful Coming of the Messiah, says, As for thee also,
by the blood of thy Covenant, I have sent forth thy Prisoners out of the Pit,
wherein is no Water. (...), Vinctos tuos, those that are bound; which Place, if
compared with its Parallel, Isa. 61. 1. where it is said of our Savior, He
has sent me to bind up the brokenhearted, to proclaim liberty to the
Captives, and the opening of the Prison to them that are bound; it will be
manifest, that the Captivity and Prison here meant, is to be understood
Spiritually of those that were sold under Sin, and sat in the thick darkness
of Ignorance, and the shadow of Death, not of any such Local Confinement of
Spirits after this Life.

But the Sacred Quotations, on which these Prying Architects do most insist,
are Luke 16. 22. where the Angels carried Lazarus into Abraham's bosom; which
has made 'em add to their Limbus Patrum, that of Sinus Abrahae; which is so far
from being a description of the Place in this Parable of our Savior, that it
leaves us in the same mysterious Incertainty; and whereas the Romanists infer
from v. 26. Between us and you there is a great Gulf fixed, that this Limbus is
not ill situated, and so near the place of Torment as their Adversaries affirm,
the whole proceeding of the Parable shows it to be both within the reach of the
Eye and the Ear: The other is, 1 Pet. 3. 19. By which also he went and Preached
to the Spirits in Prison, a Text as applicable to their Purgatory as to this
Limbus; both which Turrianus tells us, were entirely evacuated by our Savior's
descending into them.

Our Poet has more rationally assigned the backside of the World for the large
Limbus of Superstition and Folly, into which all useless, painful Fopperies,
that disturb Mankind, deserve well to be thrown.

V. 501. His Traveled Steps; Weary took his way: Traveled, of Travaille, Fr.
tired.

V. 506. With Frontispiece of Diamond and Gold; A description of Heaven's high
Forefront, imitated from Ovid's: Regia solis erat sublimibus alta columnis,
Clara micante auro, Flammasque imitante Pyropo. Met. 2.


Well has our Poet adorned Heaven's everlasting Gate with Gold, and the
impassive Diamond, this Stone resisting not only the Anvil and the Iron Hammer
without the least damage, but supporting the fiercest Fires, tho thrown into
the midst of a flaming Furnace for many Days; (whence it derived its Name
(...), Indomitus, untameable:) Gold, of all Metals the finest, comes more pure
and perfect out of the Fire. Frontispicium, Lat. the forepart, the forefront
of a Building, Frontis inspectio.

V. 507. Imbellish'd; Beautified, of Embelli, Fr. adorned.

V. 508. The Portal shon; The place leading to the Gate shon bright with
sparkling Jewels: Portal, Fr. Portail, both of Porta, Lat. a Door, and
signifies a place leading to a Door, and usually Arched, and raised on Pillars.

V. 509. By Model, etc. Not to be imitated by any Carver's or Painter's hand:
Model, Fr. Modelle, Lat. Modulus, a Pattern or Specimen of any great Building,
shaped in small, but in exact proportions: Pencil, Fr. Pinceau, the Instrument
Painters use to draw with.

V. 510. Whereon Jacob saw; Jacob, the second and Twin-Son of Isaac and
Rebecca, his Name (...), sign. a Deceiver, of (...), to deceive, a derivative
of (...), the Heel, by which he took his Brother Esau striving for the
Birthright in his Mother's Womb, of which he afterward supplanted him, Genesis
25. 26.

V. 511. Angels -- Bands of Guardians bright; And he dreamed, and behold a
Ladder set upon the Earth, and the top of it reached to Heaven, and behold the
Angels of God ascending and descending on it; and behold the Lord stood above
it, Genesis 28. v. 12, 13. That by this Vision of the Ladder, God's Universal
Providence and Care of the World is set forth, and his particular Kindness and
Assistance to his Servant Jacob in his flight from his threatening Brother, is
the sense of the best Interpreters: Bands of Guardians bright, Companies of
shining Illustrious Warders, bright shining Guards of Angels; of Gardien, Fr a
Keeper, a Warden; of Garder, Fr. to watch, to keep safe; that God employeth his
Angels in these Ministerial Offices, many Instances in Scripture make it plain;
Are they not all ministering Spirits, sent forth to minister for them, who shall
be heirs of salvation? Hebr. 1. 14. The two destroying Angels that came to
Sodom, proved Protectors to Lot and his Family, Genesis 19. Three Angels appeared
to Abraham, and were Entertained by him, Genesis 18. Jacob, in his return into his
own Country, was met by the Angels of God, and when he saw them, he said, This
is God's Host, Genesis 32. v. 1, and 2. a Guardant Host of Angels to protect him
against his angry and armed Brother Esau marching against him. Elijah has an
Angel for his Providore, 1 King. 19. v. 5, and 7. David saw the destroying
Angel standing between Heaven and Earth, with a drawn Sword in his hand
stretched out over Jerusalem, 1 Chronicles. 21. 16. An Angel appeared to Zacharias,
Luke 1. 11. The Angel Gabriel was sent from God, etc. To the Virgin Mary, Ibid.
v. 26, 27, and 28. With many more both in the Old and New Testament

V. 512. When he from Esau fled; Esau, (...), of (...), to make, as if more
perfect and complete, being all hairy, not so tender as young Infants generally
are, but the Word has another signification, to acquire, and conquer, relating
to the struggle he had with his Brother for the Birthright in their Mother's
Womb. Of Jacob's flight from him, read Genesis 27.

V. 513. To Padan-Aram, etc. The open or plain Country of Syria or Mesopotamia,
whither Jacob was sent, Genesis 28. 2. (...), in the Arabic Language, signif. a
Field, a Champain Country, (...), Aramia, or Syria; Bethuel is styled, the
Syrian of Padan-Aram, Genesis 25. 20.

Luz; So was the name of that City called at the first, Genesis 28. 19. but Jacob
entered not into it, but slept on his hard Pillow, Sub Dio, Under the open
Sky, Genesis 28. 11.

V. 515. This is the Gate of Heaven; This is no other but the House of God,
this is the Gate of Heaven, Genesis 28. 17. Here God, by his especial Favor and
peculiar Providence, has manifested himself to men, as in his Heavenly Palace;
here by this favorable Vision I have had as easy and free access to him, as
if this were the very Gate leading into the Glorious Mansion of his Majesty; in
perpetual remembrance thereof, he calls the Place (...), Bethel, The House of
God.

V. 516. Each Star mysteriously was meant; The meaning of this Visionary Ladder
is diversely allegorized by the Fathers and School-Divines; some make it the
Type and Representation of the Genealogy of our Savior Jesus Christ, which the
Evangelist St. Matthew has delivered, chapter 1. by descending from Abraham to
Joseph and Mary, and St. Luke by ascending up from them to Adam and God, Chap.
3. The many Steps then of this Ladder show the many Generations, and Persons
contained in his Pedigree from Adam. God's Mercy and his Truth are the sides
that support its mighty length, reaching from Heaven to Earth. Others interpret
the Foot of this Ladder standing on the Earth, to foreshew Christ's Human, as
its top reaching to Heaven; does his Divine Nature. Oh that thou would rent
the Heavens, that thou would come down! Isai. 64. Verse. 1. Christ indeed may
well be represented by this Heavenly Ladder, for by him not only the Angels,
but all the Saints and faithful Servants of God, (who in Heaven shall be like
the Angels, Matthew. 22. Verse. 30.) do ascend and descend, that is, have free
access to God, and the Throne of Grace, and attain by his Merits Everlasting
Happiness. So Rupertus, Vatalbus, and others.

Others interpret this Ladder to be the way to Perfection, toward which we
must endeavor to ascend gradually: Many are the Stairs, and Degrees of Faith,
Repentance, and all the Christian Virtues to be persued by perseverance in
well-doing, ere from the bottom, fixed on frail Dust and Ashes, we can climb up
to the highest pitch of Perfection, where GOD stands at the top, ready to
receive us into Everlasting Joy. Mysteriously was meant; Contained some Divine
Matter, was not to be understood according to the Letter, but signified some
Secret more considerable. Of (...), Gr. a Sacred Secret, something concerning
holy Things concealed from being common; of (...), to instruct, to interpret
the knowledge of Sacred Rites.

V. 519. Or of Liquid Pearl; Or of Pearl dissolved, made liquid, and fluid like
Water, of a bright shining White: Praeferuntur Margaritae, quae Candidissimae,
Lucidissimae, Rotundissimae, Levissimae and Minimi Ponderis sunt, Rueus de Gem.
Lib. 1. Pliny tells us the Oysters, (whose precious Offspring Pearls are) are
so knowing of their Treasures, that upon the approach of any Humane Hand, they
compress their Shells harder than ordinary, and if forced open, often bite off
the Invaders Fingers: Justissima tantae temeritatis, Luxus and avaritiae poena;
an Observation very fictitious and fallacious, and contradicted by every Days
Experience, and found by chance as dangerous to the Mouse, caught by the Nose
in this Scaly Trap, as by accident it may have proved to any Man. Of Jasper,
see V. 363. of this Book.

V. 522. Rapt in a Chariot drawn by Fiery Steeds; Snatched up into a Chariot
drawn by Shining Horses, this is meant of Elijah, 2 Kings 2. Verse. 11. as he
that is said to sail over the Liquid Lake of Pearl wafted by Angels, must be
Enoch, Genesis 5. Verse. 24. That both these were translated into the Earthly
Paradise, (which they were of Opinion did still exist) Irenaeus, Hieronymus,
Justinus and others held, where by Eating of the Tree of Life, they remain free
from all Distempers both of Body and Mind, in continual Contemplation of God,
though not in the Beatifick Vision of Him. Others affirm, That without Meat or
Drink, or the want or desire of them, they continue unchanged and
incorruptible, GOD suspending in them the Act and Power of Natural Heat, from
preying upon the Radical Moisture that feeds the Lamp of Life. Others who
believed the entire abolition of Paradise, suppose 'em carried into some
Superior Orb, illustrious and delightful, unknown to Mankind, where free from
all Inconveniences both of Body and Soul, they are to continue, till toward
the end of the World they are to appear against Antichrist, and to be put to
death by him: Tertull. August. Rupertus, Suarez, grounding the last part of
their Opinion on Mala. 4. Verse. 5. Matthew. 17. Verse. 11. and Revel. 11. Verse. 3.

V. 524. Or aggravate his sad Exclusion; Or to make his Banishment from that
place of Bliss more grievous to him; of aggravare, Lat. to render more heavy
and uneasy. Exclusio, Lat. shutting out.

V. 529. Wider by far; Because GOD in the first Ages of the World did more
frequently visit his chosen Servants and People, Abraham, Isacc and Jacob, and
the Children of Israel by his holy Angels, not only calling to them out of
Heaven, but by conversing Face to Face, of which see diverse Instances before
Verse. 511. of this Book.

V. 531. The Promised Land; Canaan promised to Abraham and his Seed after him
by GOD. Abraham dwelt in the Land of Canaan, and the Lord said to Abraham, Look
from the place where thou art, Northward and Southward, Eastward and Westward,
for all the Land which thou see, to thee will I give it, and to thy seed for
ever, Genesis 13. Verse. 12, 14 and 15. See Genesis 12. Verse. 7. Deuteronomy. 34. Verse. 4.

V. 532. Those happy Tribes; Of the Children of Israel, so happy in GOD's
particular Instruction of 'em, and his continual Providence over them. Tribes,
of Tribus, Lat. a Division of the Romans at first into the three parts,
Senators, Soldiers, and the common People: Hence Tribus, of the Numeral Tres.

V. 533. On high Behests; On extraordinary Commands and Occasions: Hest and
Behest are old words of the Sax. Here, a Command. Obeying Natures first Behest,
Spen. F. Q. Book 6. Cant. 4. St. 14. Who his Hest observed, Idem. Book 5. Cant.
12. St. 43.

V. 535. From Paneas the Fount, etc. Was by the Ancient Geographers accounted a
Fount of Mount Libanus, and thought to be the Head of Jordan, till later and
better Discoveries have found its true Sources to be Jor and Dan, whence it
takes its Name, (as our Thames is of Tame and Isis) two Fountains both at the
Foot of Libanus, in the Confines of Caelosyria, running Southward: It is a
rapid River, of a thick Warer, as washing a far Soil, full of Fish, and its
Banks adorned with thick and pleasant Woods, as Monsieur Thevenot, an
Eyewitness of it, testifies.

Ibid. Jordan is perhaps the most famous River in the World, for the many
Miracles and Mysteries there wrought: It was past over by the Israelites on
dry-foot, Josh. 4. Also by Elijah and Elisha in the same manner, 2 Kings 2.
Verse. 8. In it Naaman the Syrian left his Leprosy, Chap. 5. Verse. 14. In it
John Baptized the Jews into Repentance; and afterward our Savior himself was
in this River Baptized by him, Matthew. 3. Verse. 5. and 15. The Talmud derives
his Name (...) of (...) and (...), as descending from Dan, the City anciently
called Lais near Paneas, formerly supposed the Spring and Fountain of Jordan,
by Plin. Lib. 5. Cap. 15. and Solin. Cap. 38.

V. 536 To Beersaba, etc. (...); The Well of the Oaths, because there Abraham
and Abi^^lech swore and made a Covenant together, Genesis 21. Verse. 31. A Town of
Idumaea, at first belonging to the Edomites, afterward to the Tribe of Symeon,
which the Christians warring against the Infidels for recovery of the Holy
Land, (so styled because our Savior wrought there the Salvation and Redemption
of the World) Fortified as bordering on the Arabian, (commonly called) the
Red Sea, not far from Egypt, as our Poet truly says this was the Southern, as
Jordan and Libanus the Northern Limit of the Promised Land.

V. 539. As bound the Ocean Wave; Well has our Poet declared the Bounds
appointed to Darkness and encroaching Night, to be such as those that bound the
enraged Ocean's proud swelling Waves, whose Briny Billows rising much higher
than the shelving Shore, cannot be imagined to be stopped by the yielding Sand,
but by that Almighty Power, that says, Thus far shall thou come, and no
farther; Whose Voice the tumultuous Waves and stormy Winds obey, Matthew. 8.
Verse. 24. 26, and 27. Mar. 4. Verse. 37. Luke 8. Verse. 23. Attend the Boundaries
appointed to that Proud Element, always in Motion, and so easily puffed up. Who
shut up the Sea with Doors, when it brake forth as if it had issued out of the
Womb? When I made the Cloud the Garment thereof, and thick Darkness its
Swaddling Bands, and established my Decree upon it, and set Bars and Doors, and
said, Hitherto shall thou come, but no farther; and here shall the Pride of thy
Waves be stayed, Job 38. Verse. 8, 9, 10, and 11. The same Command established
the Limits and Barriers of Night and Day.

V. 543. As when a Scout; As when one sent through dark and dismal Night,
wandering through dangerous and unknown ways, at break of comfortable Day, has
gained the top of some vast Hill. Scout, of the Fr. Esecute, a Harkener, of
Escouter, to listen, as it behooves a Scout to do, when stealing through the
Night. Dawn, of the Sax. Doegian, to grow Day. Brow, of the Belg. Brauwe, the
Top, or Height of any thing. Peril, of Periculum, Lat. danger.

V. 549. Metropolis; The chief City of a Kingdom. (...), Gr. the Mother-City.
Pinacles; Ornaments on the Tops of Towers, of the Barbarous Lat. Pinnaculum, of
Pinna.

V. 553. The Spirit Malign; The wicked malicious Spirit, Satan. Malignus, Lat.
bearing ill will to, malicious. This word is used in the Translation of many
places of the first Epist. Gene. of St. John, Chap. 2. Verse. 13, and 14. Chap.
3. Verse. 12. Not as Cain, who was of that wicked one, which the Vulgar Lat.
renders, Qui ex Maligno erat, the Greek expressing it by (...), and so Chap. 5.
Verse. 18, and 19.

V. 557. Above the Circling Canopy of Nights Extended Shade; So high above the
darkened Hemisphere, (the dark half of the World) over which Night stretches
her Shade; Satan standing on one of those Golden Stairs leading to Heavens high
Palace, and thereby raised above the compass of Nights dark Veil, that
encloseth half the Globe, while the enlightening Sun visits and enlivens with
his cheerful Rays the other half, from so exalted a Station, well might he look
round, and survey the whole World.

Canopy; Fr. Canopee, Lat. Conopeum, all of the Gr. (...), properly a Net hung
about Beds against the Inconvenience and Importunities of Flies and Gnats;
(...), Gr. The Alexandrians were forced to this Invention by Multitudes of
these buzzing and biting Insects, that arose from the Nile and its
Neighborhood. It was reckoned among the Effeminacies of the Romans, Interque
signa, (Turpe!) Militaria
Sol aspicit Conopeum,
Ut testudines tibi Lentule Conopeo. Juv. Sat. 6.


It is since understood of the Tester of a Bed, and of a State hanging over the
Seats of Kings and Princes in Publiek, called Canopies of Estate.

V. 558. Of Libra to the Fieecy Star, etc. He takes a view of the World from
the most Eastern Point of Libra, to the Constella^ion called Andromeda, carried
by the Ram wide of the Western Ocean, beyond the Horizon, then from North to
South, and without more delay, etc.

Libra, is one of the Twelve Signs of the Zodiac, represented by the Balance
(...), which has occasioned it to be mistaken for Virgo. It took its Name a
Libran^o, because when the Sun enters into this Sign, N^ctes and Dies
librant^r, the Days and Nights being equal, are in a Counterpo^se, I ^b^a die
(...) que (...) Georg. 1.

V. 559. Andromeda; Was the Daughter of Cepheus and Cassiopoea, the Beautiful
Offspring of a vainglorious Mother, who having despised the Beauties of Juno,
or as others say, of the Sea-Nymphs, Neptune punished her Arrogance, by sending
a strange Sea Monster, who depopulating the Country, the Oracle was consulted,
and by it, her Daughter doomed to be devoured by it. Perseus came to her
relief, killed the Destroyer, released the Lady, and Married her for his
reward. Illic Immeritam Maternae pendere Linguae
Andromedam poenas injustus jusser at Ammon
Quam simul ad duras religatam brachia Cautes, etc. Metam. Lib. 4.


By the favor of Minerva they were all placed among the Stars. Jam clarus
Occultum Andromeda Pater
Ostendit ignem. Hor. Carm. Lib. 3. Od. 29.


The Fleecy Star that bears Andromeda; Is meant of Aries, the Phrixean Ram
advanced among the Constellations in memory of the Golden Fleece, just over
whose back Andromeda is placed.

Ibid. Atlantic Seas; The Western Ocean, taking this Name of Atlas, the
greatest Mountain in all Africa, heaving it self up in Mauritania near this
Sea. Ovid makes him a mighty King turned into Stone for his rudeness to
Perseus; Constitit Hesperio Regnis Atlantis in Orb. Metam. Lib. 4.

V. 561. Without longer pause; Immediately without delay: Pause, Fr. stop,
stay: Pausement, leisurely.

V. 563. Precipitant; Headlong, (as before:) Downright: Praecipitans, Lat. to
fall headlong, of Praeceps.

V. 564. The pure Marble Air; Marble Marmoreus, Lat. (...), Gr. white, shining,
of (...), to shine, to glister, is often used to express clearness or
whiteness, without any reflection on its hardness. So Virg. Marmorea Caput a
cervice revulsum. Geo. 4.

Winds his oblique way; Turns and winds up and down: Obliquus, Lat. sidewise,
crooked, away. Obliquatque sinus in ventum. AEn. 5.

V. 565. Amongst Innumerable Stars; That the Stars are Numberless, the Holy
Scriptures seem to assert. Look now toward Heaven, and tell the Stars, if thou
be able to number them, Genesis 15. Verse. 5. The Lord thy God has made thee as
the Stars of Heaven for Multitude, Deuteronomy. 10. Verse. 32. Of God it is said, He
tells the Number of the Stars; He calls them all by their Names, Psalm. 147.
Verse. 4. As if their Number were Incomprehensible to any Creature. Stellae
dinumerari non possint, quia nec omnes eas videri posse credendum est, etc.
August. de Civi. Dei, Lib. 16. Cap. 23. That the Number of the Fixed Stars is
unknown to Mankind, Aristotle in his Book De Mundo, and his second Book De
Coelo, as also Plato in Timaeo, and Seneca in his Natural Quest. Lib. 6. Cap.
16. do all affirm. But the most conspicuous and considerable, and all, that at
so vast a distance can be discerned, are by the best Astronomers reckoned 1022,
and distributed into 48 Constellations, according to their various Magnitudes
and Sizes, those of the sixth Magnitude being bigger than the Earth 18 times;
insomuch that they undertake Mathematically to prove, That if the whole Cavity
of Heaven were as full of Stars of the first Magnitude, (each of which are
bigger than the Earth 108 times) as they could be placed, it could not contain
more than 71209600 of 'em. Perr. Comment. in Genesis Lib. 2. Quaest. 8.

V. 566. Nigh-hand seemed other Worlds; Following the Opinion of diverse
Philosophers, who thought not only the Moon to be such an Inhabitable World as
this Terrestrial of ours is, and by turns enlightened by it: But the Stars,
especially those of the first size, to be shining Orbs possessed by the Souls of
departed Heroes, and Spirits pure and sublimed above sense, accounting it
absurd to imagine, that so many Illustrious Bodies, of so much Beauty, and such
Immense Magnitude, and Motions incredible and almost Spiritual, should be made
to no other end, than to dart and center their Innumerable Beams of Light, in
this dark opaque spot of Earth, a vast Inestimable Tribute paid by so many
Glorious Attendants, on a dull, heavy, unactive Clod.

V. 568. Like those Hesperian Gardens; So called of (...), Vesper, because
placed in the West, under the Evening Star. Those famous Gardens were the Isles
about Cape Verd in Africa, whose most Western Point is still called Hesperium
Cornu. Others will have 'em the Canaries. The Poets tell us, Hesperus the
Brother of Atlas had three Daughters, AEgle, Aretheusa, Hesperethusa, to whose
keeping, and that of a watchful Dragon, these Gardens and their Golden Fruit
were committed. -- Fuit aurea silva
Divitiisque graves, and fulvo germine rami,
Virgineusque chorus, nitidi custodia luci,
Et nunquam somno damnatus Lumina Serpens,
Robora complexus rutilo curvata Metallo. Luc. Lib. 9.
Oceani finem juxta, solemque Cadentem
Ultimus AEthiopum locus est: Ubi maximus Atlas, etc.
Hesperidum templi custos, epulasque Draconi
Quae dabat and sacros servabat in arbore ramos. AEn. 4.


Both these describe the Golden Fruit to hang on the Trees of these Gardens,
and yet Interpreters are not agreed in the matter, because Mala signifies
Apples, (they being probably no other than Mala Citrea vel Aurantia, Lemons and
Oranges) is so near to (...), Gr. for Sheep, having finer Fleeces than those of
other Countries.

V. 573. Allured his Eye; The Sun in his Glorious Majesty most nearly
resembling Heaven, the Habitation of his Maker, drew him to behold it. Allured,
of allicere, to entice.

V. 574. Through the calm Firmament; Through the quiet Air, as V. 564. Through
the pure Marble Air; Aura AEtherea, as Tycho calls it, that (...), though by the
LXX translated (...), and by the Vulgar Latin Firmamentum, signifies Extension,
the pure Expanse of Heaven, the Air, of (...), to extend or stretch out: And
that the Solidity, by the Ancient Philosophers and Astronomers, attributed to
the Heavens and the Celestial Orbs, has encumbered all their Machines and
Motions with innumerable Inconveniences, in so much that they have been forced
to Hammer out of their Heads for the Sun three distinct Orbs, five for the
Moon, and for the Planets 36; so scribbled over with Centrick, Concentrick, and
Excentrick, Cicles and Epicicles, etc. is so well known, that to assert the
Heavens, in which the Stars seem to move, to be liquid like the Air, is an
Opinion most probable, as not being liable to so many Inconveniences,
Confusions, and Crowds of Errors, and the most easy to discover the Motions,
Distances, Altitudes, Aspects, etc. of the Stars, and to give the clearest
Account of the Generation, Agitation, and decay of Comets, and the Appearances
of New Stars, and to solve all other Difficulties.

V. 575. By Center or Excentrick hard to tell; Hard to tell how Satan took his
course toward the Sun, of whose course, though continued so many thousand
Years, Mankind is so ignorant. The Astronomers observing so great Varieties in
the Motions of the Planets, and that the Sun himself in passing through the
Zodiac kept not an equal pace, making 187 Days Journeys in traveling through
his six Northern Inns, and spending only 178 in the six other Southern Signs,
were forced to fancy new Orbs, in which sometimes both they and he their great
King and Governor, moved from, and deviated Excentrically to the Center of the
Earth: Centrum, Lat. (...), Gr. a Mathematical word, importing the middle point
in a round, or circular Body, from which the Circumference is on all sides
equally distant.

V. 576. Or Longitude; The Longitude of the Sun or a Star, is an Arch of the
Ecliptic, intercepted between the beginning of Aries, and the Point where the
Circle of Latitude cuts the Ecliptic. Longitudo, Lat. length.

Ibid. The Great Luminary; The vast Light the Sun, so called by Moses, Genesis 1.
16. And God made two great Lights, the greater Light to rule the Day. Various
have been the Opinions of the most learned of Mankind concerning the Magnitude
of the Sun: Anaximander thought it as big as the Earth, and its Orb 27 times
bigger: Anaxagoras esteemed it greater than Peloponesus: Heraclitus and
Epicurus somewhat bigger than it seems. But by comparing the Suns Diameter with
that of the Earth, (that is, the Globe of Earth and Water) Ptolemy and his
Followers affirm, the Sun to be greater than the Earth 167 times, Tycho Brahee
139, and Copernicus 434; it is hard to determine which of 'em is the best
Celestial Surveyor. Constellatio, Lat. properly an Assembly of Stars.

V. 579. Dispenses Light from far; Sends far and near his cheerful Light:
Despendere, Lat. to bestow, to lay out.

V. 580. In number that compute Days, Months and Years; Days are of two sorts,
one consisting of the time in which the Sun is carried about the Earth, called
Natural, (...); the other accounted by his Duration above the Horizon, named
the Artificial Day. A Solar Month is the time the Sun is in passing through the
twelfth part of the Zodiac; and a Year, that in which he entirely runs through
all the Twelve Signs of that Circle, so named, (...). Thus Homer: (...)
(...).
Vos, O Clarissima Mundi.
Lumina, labentem Coelo quae ducitis annum. Georg. Lib. 1.
-- Tuus jam regnat Apollo
Et incipient Magni procedere Menses. Ecl. 4.
Interea Magnum Sol circumvolvitur Annum. AEn. 3.
A dextra, laevaque dies, and Mensis and Annus,
Saeculaque and positae spatiis aequalibus horae. Meta. Lib. 2.


The reason of all which is, from the Motion of the Sun, the Measure of Time.

V. 583. By his Magnetic Beam; Or are turned toward him by his Attractive
Rays, that draw 'em to him. Magnetic, of (...) or (...), the Loadstone that
draws Iron to it with such eager embraces, that the force, whereby they are
separated, is very perceptible; so called from the Name of its first Finder an
Indian Shepherd. Philosophers having observed a Central Virtue in the Earth,
which draws and allures all weighty things to it, are of Opinion, that the Sun
has a Magnetic and Attractive Power in his shining Orb, that influenceth all
the lesser Lamps of Light, and makes 'em attend his Motions, like an
Illustrious Train, wearing his Gaudy Livery.

V. 584. The Universe, etc. The World, (Natures whole Frame) and into its
Bowels working its easy way, although unseen, darts undiscerned its Virtue
into the Sea. Univers, Universitas, Lat. (...). the whole Fabric of the World.

V. 585. With gentle Penetration; With soft Insinuation, gently sinking, or
making easy way into the Earth: Of Penetrare, Lat. to pierce into.

V. 586. Even to the Deep, to the Sea, his Wonders in the Deep, Psalm. 107.
Verse. 24. properly so called because unfathomable, yet by the Suns Prolisick
Rays, its Briny Bosom is warmed, and its vast Womb enlivened.

V. 587. So wondrously was set his Station bright; So wondrously was his bright
Place appointed, so usefully, even to admiration, was his glorious Course
ordained; and indeed there is nothing more amazing, or that gives Mankind
juster Occasions of admiring GOD Almighty's Incomprehensible Wisdom, than the
Position and Motion of the Sun, the most Glorious of all Inanimate Bodies: Such
is his appointed Place, and such his constant Course, that moving obliquely
between the two Poles, he divides his enlivening Influence through the wide
World, rendering all the Quarters of it Inhabitable, and by his Invisible Virtue
and various Approaches and Recesses, stimulates Universal Nature into those
Vicissitudes that support her.

That the Suns appointed Path is here called his Station, and that said to be
set, so that the Stars dance round him, dispensing Light from his Lordly Eye,
on which they wait by turning themselves toward him, or by being turned by the
force of his Attractive Beams, seems to be said by our Author according to the
Copernican Opinion, of the Earths moving about the Sedentary Sun, of which
more, Book 8. But Station, Lat. Statio, does not imply a want of Motion, but is
referable to the Orb, wherein the Sun is placed, and this very word is used by
Pliny, Statio Syderum, for the Starry Orbs, Lib. 2. Cap. 16. Deprensis Statio
Tutissima Nautis, Georg. 4.

Where though Seamen might ride out a Storm, yet not without violent Motions
and Concussions both of Winds and Waves.

V. 589. Astronomer; (...), one skilled in the Knowledge of the Stars, of
(...), Gr. a Star, and (...), to distribute; one that understands the several
Tribes, Distributions, Places and Motions of the Heavenly Bodies. Lucent Orb,
shining Circle: Lucens, Lat. shining.

V. 590. Glazed Optic Tube; A long and large Perspective Glass, called a
Telescope, having Glasses so framed and ground, that it represents Objects at
so vast a distance as the Stars are, extremely plain, even to the discovery of
Spots, and mighty Inequalities in the Sun, Maculas and Faculas, as they call
'em, and Rivers and Mountains in the Moons spotty Globe, as before, Book 1.
Verse. 288. where it is called Optic Glass, here Glazed Optic* Tube, of Tubus,
Lat. a hollow Pipe, in which the Glasses are placed. Sin Maculae incipient
rutilo immiseerier igni. Geo. 1.

V. 592. Medal; Is a Piece of Gold or Silver Coin, struck at the Coronation of
some great King or Emperor, or in Memory of some great Action. Medal, of the
Fr. Medaille, as both of the Gr. (...).

V. 594. As glowing Iron with Fire; All those who have treated of the Sun,
affirm Light as Essentially in his Nature as Heat in Fire; therefore our Author
tells us, that in his Glorious Body, all parts are not alike; some more thick
and illustrious, compared to Gold; others more rare and less radiant,
resembling Silver: Yet notwithstanding this, they are all alike enlightened, as
red-hot Iron, be it thicker or thinner, is affected by Fire, Informed, shaped,
fashioned, filled with; of Informatus, Lat.

All the Poetic Descriptions of the Sun, are made up of Fire and Light, his
two nearest Resemblances. Medium Sol Igneus Orbem Hauserat. Geo. 4.
Ig^^us est Ollis vigor and Coelestis Origo. AEn. 6.
-- Alto se gurgite tollunt
Solis equi, lucemque elatis naribus effiant. AEn. 12.


Thus Ovid gives the Horses that draw his Flaming Chariot Names suitable to
their work, three of 'em Derivatives of Fire. Interea volucres Pyrois, Eous and
AEthon
Solis equi, quartusque Phlegon hinnitibus auras
Flammiferis implent. Meta. Lib. 2.


V. 595. Part seemed Gold; A Metal appropriated to the Sun, (the Illustrious
Son of a more Illustrious Father) as Lead to Saturn, Iron to Mars, Brass to
Venus, etc. Of this Resemblance Homer styles his Chariot (...), and makes him
look very terrible out of his Golden Helmet, (...).
Ubi pulsam Hyemem Sol aureus egit Sub terras. Geo. 4.


V. 596. Carbuncle most or Chrysolite; A Carbuncle is a Precious Stone, so
named from its Color resembling a burning Coal, the chief of the flaming and
burning Gems. It darts a Fire extremely resembling the Sun, and there are some
found in India and South Arabia of a very Fiery Luster, having within them some
little specks of Gold, in Number and Position like the Hyades. Ruae. de Gem.
Lib. 2. Carbunculus, a Diminitive of Carbo, Lat. a burning Coal.

Chrysolite; (...), Gr. a Golden Stone, so named of its Color imitating that
Prime, Commanding Metal: The choicest come from India, whose Yellowness is so
set off and heighthened with a Glance of Seagreen, that Gold cannot appear
before it, but looks pale and discountenanced. Chrysolithus est aureus Lapis,
aurco vel potius solari color translucens, adeoque fulgens and quasi ardens,
ut aurum cum eo collatum albicare videatur. Plin. Lib. 37. Cap. 9.

V. 597. Ruby or Topaz; Ruby, Rubinus, Lat. a Stone of a Red Color like Blood.
Topaz, (...), Heb. (...), Gr. a Gem of a Golden and Green Color, extremely
delightful, and very illustrious. Pliny derives its Name of the Island
Topazium, where usually found, some of (...), Gold, others of (...), Ophir, of
a Color imitating the Suns Beams.

Ibid. To the Twelve that shone in Aaron 's Brestplate; Or like to the Twelve
Stones by God's appointment, engraven each with the Name of one of the Twelve
Patriachs or Tribes of Israel, Exodus 28. 17.

V. 600. That Stone, or like to that; Like to that called the Philosophers
Stone, which has proved a Stumbling-Stone to the Inquisitive, and conceited
Chemists that have persued it in vain, even to extreme Poverty, of whose
obscure Art, our Poet gives us some of the abstruse Terms, and fruitless
Practices and Pursuits. Philosopher, (...), Gr. a Lover of Wisdom.

V. 603. Volatile Hermes; Nimble Mercury: Quicksilver hard to fix: Volatilis,
Lat. apt to fly away, to take wing, and evaporate. Quicksilver amongst the
Chemists is a great Ingredient in the Composition of their imagined Stone, and
has been often tortured to confess where it lies hid, but hitherto in vain.
Hermes, (...), Gr.

V. 604. Old Proteus from the Sea; Our Poet has fitted the Chemists (fond of
the Mutations of Inferior Metals into their Perfection Gold, with the aptest
Similitude imaginable. Proteus was understood by the Ancients to be the first
Principle of all Things, Keeper of the Keys of the Sea, Author of all, and the
Universal Humidity and Subject Matter of Nature. (...),
(...)
(...). Orph. in Him.


Homer describes him, (...),
(...),
(...)
(...).


Imitated exactly by Virgil, -- Ille suae non immemor artis
Omnia transformat sese in miracula rerum,
Ignemque, horribil^nque feram, sluviumque liquentem. Georg. 4.


This Proteus, after he had turned himself into all these amazing Mutations,
was fabled by the Poets, at last to return to his proper shape, and to answer
truly all Questions put to him; therefore our Author tells us, The Chemists
drain their various Matter, they work upon, through all its Mutations, till
pursued through all its Latent Labyrinths, it assume, Proteus like, its first
shape, and answer their Expectations: A Simile well suited to their uncertain
search.

V. 605. Drained through a Limbeck; Purged and refined by a gentle Fire, till
he assume his first Original Form. Limbeck; Alembicus, an Arabic word, a Still.

V. 607. Breathe forth Elixir pure; Breathe forth a pure enlivening Spirit.
Elixir is an Arabian word, and by it the Chemists understand a powerful
Preservative, and most certain Restorative of Health, which keeps back and
retards Old Age, which they conceive Adam knew by his living 930 Years, and is
one of the Properties of the Philosophers Stone, in search of which most of its
Votaries look pale, and ill complexion'd. Elixir signifies Force and Strength,
and sometimes their Powder of Projection.

V. 608. Potable Gold; Aurum Potabile, Gold so dissolved as to be drank; that
commonly so called, is liquified by diverse Corrosive and Aperative Spirits, and
consequently is only a dead, dispirited Gold: But the true, and that aimed at
by Philosophers, is a living Gold, like red Powder, or granulated Saffron,
extracted from the most pure Seeds of Gold, and so heighthened, that by mere
Contact, it will not only turn the impurer Metals into the finest Gold, but
multiply, even that so made and transmuted, into Mountains.

V. 609. Th'Arch-Chimick Sun: Who would wonder if in the Suns Glorious Region,
and those bright Fields, the Air should be as pure and preservative as the
Alchymists fabulous Elixir, or there should be Rivers of Liquid Gold? Who would
admire at this, that considers how here the Sun, the best of Chemists, though
so far removed from this dark Globe, does by the Virtue of his powerful Touch,
mixed with Terrestrial Moisture, beget so many things of Price, for Color
Glorious, and for Use most Rare and Wonderful? Chymia and Alchymia, is a
Science concerned in explaining the Principles, Causes, Properties and
Qualities of all Metals, and the manifold Alterations they are capable of; and
further pretends to teach, how to change and transmute the gross and imperfect,
as Lead, Iron, Quicksilver, etc. into the most perfect, Gold: To heighten the
Light and Luster of all Precious Stones to Perfection, and of this Philosophers
Stone, to make the most Cordial Preservative of Life, beyond the attack of all
Diseases, and even of Time and Old Age it self. -- Credat Judaeus Apella non
ego. Juv.

Well therefore does our Author show the conceited Chemist the Sun, the Noblest
Chemist, whose Influence with Earth and Water mixed, brings forth such wonderful
Productions, according to that Admirable Alchimie, that with a word brought all
Things out of Nothing, while these Presumptious Imitators of Nature, quickly
bring all theirs to nothing. Chymicus, and Chymia, as well as Alchymista and
Alchymia, and Alembick, are Arabic words though mixed with Greck. Al, is the
Arabic Particle, and Chymia of (...), Gr. to melt; the Arabians of all Nations
having been the first and most famous in this Spagirick Art, of separating and
compounding Metals, when they conquered Egypt and Syria, full of Macedonian
Colonies, adopted many Greek words into their own Language. Virtuous, powerful,
of Virtus, Lat. strength, vigor. Remote, distant, of removere, Lat. to remove.

V. 610. Terrestrial Humor; The Moisture of the Earth. Terrestris, Lat.
earthy: Humor, Lat. Moisture, that succus terrestris, which is Corpus Minerale,
ex liquidis and oleaginosis crassiori terrestri materiae admixtis compositum.

V. 613. To gaze; Is to look earnestly upon, with concern and admiration, it
sounds as if a Derivative of (...), Gr. to admire and wonder at. Obstacle,
hinderance, of obstare, Lat. to stand against.

V. 617. His Beams at Noon Culminate from th'AEquator; As when the Sunbeams at
Midday got to their height, shoot directly upwards from the Equator. The
Equator is that great Circle, which is equally distant from the two Poles of
the World, dividing it into two Hemispheres, the North and South. Equator
dictus, quia ab utroque Mundi Polo, aequis undique distat intervallis.
Culminate, shoot directly, dart perpendicularly, of Culminare, Lat. to get up
to the top of, to come to the highest pitch of a thing; the reason why those
directly situated under the Equator are (...), without shadows.

V. 619. From Body Opace; From a dark Body, which is impervious to the Suns
Beams. Opacus, Lat. dark, shadowy. Nocte tegentur Opaca, AEn. 4.
Domus sanie dapibusque cruentis Intus Opaca, ingens, AEn. 3.
Gressi per Opaca viarum, AEn. 6.


V. 620. Sharpened his Visual Ray; Made his sight more quick, clear and acute.
Sharpness may well be applied to the Eyesight, Acies Oculorum, ab acuendo, a
quickness and sort of piercing sharpness appearing in the Eyes. Visual,
belonging to sight, of Visus, Lat. the sense of seeing. Ray, of Radius, Lat. a
Beam either issuing out of the Eye to the Object, or from the Object to the
Eye, according to the Opinion of the Ancient and Neoterick Philosophers about
the Sense of Seeing.

V. 623. Whom John saw also in the Sun; And I saw an Angel standing in the Sun,
Revel. 19. Verse. 17.

V. 625. A Golden Tiare; A Golden Coronet of shining Rays circled his Head, yet
nevertheless did not hinder his lovely Locks that hung behind over his
Shoulders adorned with Wings, from weaving themselves into Curls and Rings.
Tiar, of (...), the Persian word for a round Cap high, and ending in a point,
the usual Covering and Ornament the Eastern Princes wore on their Heads, (...),
Xen. Curopad. l. 8. wearing his Tiar upright, those that were of kin to Kings
wearing them low and bending. Sceptrumqut Sacerque Tiaras. AEn. 7.

V. 627. Illustrious Fledge with Wings; His shining Shoulders furnished with
Wings. Illustrious, of Illustris, Lat. bright; Fledge, of the Belg. Flederen,
to fly: Young Birds are said to be Fledged, when their Wings and Feathers are
so well grown, as to be able to waft their weight.

V. 628. Lay waving round; Curling like the Circling Waves, of the Sax.
Warrian, to move to and fro, to wave or waver.

V. 634. But first he casts to change; But first he casts and considers in his
mind, how he may so disguise himself, as not to be discovered by this
sharp-sighted Angel seated in the Sun. Proper; Proprius, Lat. particular,
peculiar.

V. 636. A Stripling Cherub; A Youthful Angel, not arrived at full Perfection,
yet such as Youth smiled Heavenly in his Face. Stripling, young, not grown big,
slim and gaunt: Not in his prime, of Primus, Lat. first chief. Humane Membra,
aspetto human si finse;
Ma di Celeste Maesta il compose.
Tra giovine, e fanciullo and a confine
Prose, and orno de raggi il biondo crine.
Tasso. Cant. 1. St. 13. Description of Gabriel.


V. 639. So well he feigned; Counterfeited, disguised himself, of Feindre, Fr.
to dissemble.

V. 640. Under a Coronet; A little Crown: Coronetta, Ital. a Garland, a
Diminitive of Corona, Lat. a Crown.

V. 642. Of many a Colored Plume; Of diverse Colored Feathers: Pluma, Lat.
Feathers.

V. 643. His Habit fit for speed succinct; His Garment girt about him:
Succinctus, Lat. tuckt up. Nigra succinctam vadere palla. Hor. Sat. 8.

V. 644. Before his Decent Steps; Before his Comely Feet. Decens, Lat.
becoming. Poetry is a speaking Picture, and our Author has here described an
Angel as they are commonly painted. Ali bianchi vesti, c'han d'or le cime
Infaticabilmente agili, epieste, etc.
Read Torq. Tasso of the Angel Gabriel, Cant. 1. Stan. 13 and 14.


V. 647. Admonished by his Ear; Having notice given him of his approaching by
his Ear. Admonere, Lat. to inform.

V. 648. Th'Arch-Angel Uriel; (...), of (...), God, and (...), Light or Fire,
thence called Gods Eye, V. 660. Or his Name is deducibe of (...), God, and
(...), a Watchman, as if (...), one of Gods Watchmen, which in this sense may
well be named Gods Eyes, V. 650. 2 Esd. 4. Verse. 1. and Chap. 5. Verse. 20. and
10. Verse. 28.

V. 650. And are his Eyes, etc. According to the Golden Candlestick and his
seven Lamps, Zach. 4. Verse. 3. interpreted by the Angel, Those seven, they are
the Eyes of the Lord, which run to and fro through the whole Earth, Verse. 10.
agreeing with Chap. 3. Verse. 9. to which St. John's Vision refers, Revel. 4.
Verse. 5. And there were seven Lamps of Fire burning before the Throne, which
are the seven Spirits of God: And Chap. 5. Verse. 6. Having seven Horns and
seven Eyes, which are the seven Spirits of God sent forth into all the Earth.
The Monarchy of Persia had seven Noblemen of great Dignity about their King,
and of extraordinary Trust, called (...), the Kings Eyes, as Hesychius, Suidas
and Xenop. in Paed. relate.

V. 653. Thus accosts; Thus bespeaks, of the old Fr. word Accoster, to come
near to, as Men approach to converse together.

V. 656. His great Authentic Will; His high and absolute Commands, his
uncontrollable Decree. Authentic, of (...), Powerful, of (...), Dominus, qui
pro Arbitrio and Autoritate sua quidvis agendi potestatem habet; Well suiting
the God of all Power and Might. Interpreter; Interpres, Lat. one that expounds
and makes known something delivered in a Language not commonly understood.

V. 658. His Sons; The Angels styled Gods Sons, for the Excellency of their
holy Obedience to all his Commands: And all the Sons of God shouted for joy,
Job 38. Verse. 7.

V. 667. Brightest Seraph tell; Inform me, most Illustrious Angel. Seraph the
singular of Seraphim, of which before, Book 1. V. 129.

V. 681. The False Dissembler unperceived; So spoke this Fawning Hypocrite
undiscovered. Unperceived; Imperceptus, Lat. undiscerned. Dissembler, of
dissimulare, Lat. to differ from what we seem to be, to conceal and hide ones
self in order to impose on others.

V. 683. Hypocrisy the only Evil; (...), Gr. Dissimulation, a Counterfeiting
Virtue, Religion and Piety, the better to gain an Opinion of Sanctity, and
under that disguise covertly to commit all manner of Villainy and Impiety; A
Wickedness kept often so secret and so well varnisht over, that it may well be
said to walk invisible to all but God himself: Nay, the Hypocrite supposes God
himself does not discover the holy Cheat, otherwise he would not persevere
therein, speaking Lies in Hypocrisy, having their Conscience seared with a hot
Iron, 1 Timothy 4. Verse. 2. Well therefore might our Savior alone charge the
Scribes and Pharisees with this dark and hidden Iniquity, comparing them to
whited Sepulchers, which indeed appear beautiful outward, but within are full
of dead Men's Bones, and all Uncleanness, Matthew. 23. Verse. 27. In which Chapter
he lays this Charge home to 'em by Name no less than seven times, with a woeful
Denunciation of God's Wrath against 'em, Woe unto you, Scribes and Pharisees,
Hypocrites, Verse. 13, 14, 15, 22, 25, 27 and 29.

V. 686. Suspicion sleeps at Wisdoms Gate; And often, though Men are wise, yet if
heedful Wariness stand not a Wakeful Sentinel at Wisdoms Gate, if at any time
she fall asleep, and trust her Guard to easy Plainness and Simplicity, who
mistrusts no evil, where none appears, these fly Hypocrites will get in.
Suspicio, Lat. mistrust, and therefore Heedfulness. Simplicitas, a plain
openness of Mind; sine plicis, that does not hide and involve it self. Resigns,
of resignare, Lat. to give up, to surrender.

V. 692. To the Fraudulent Impostor; To the deceiving Fiend, to the sly
Deceiver. Fraudulentus, Lat. deceitful. Impostor, a common Cheat, a Jugler: Ab
imponendo, Lat. from Cheating, an admirable Epithet for Satan, Sin being the
most absolute Imposture imaginable.

V. 705. What Created Mind? What Created Mind, Spirit or Angel, can conceive or
understand the Number of Gods Works, or the Infinite Wisdom in which he made
'em all, and set 'em forth to view, but concealed their Causes? He has made
every thing beautiful in his time; and given up the World to their
Disputations, so that no Man can find out the Work that God makes from the
beginning to the end, Eccles. 3. Verse. 11. Foelix qui potuit rerum cognoscere
causas. Comprehend, of the Lat. Comprehendere.

V. 708. I saw when at his word, etc. I was by, and beheld, (says Uriel) how at
his Almighty Word the shapeless Lump, the slimy muddy Matter of this beauteous
World, rose from the Womb of Waters to a heap, and came to fix into Firmness
and Consistency. Massa, Lat. a Lump. Mould, or Mold, of the Belg. Modder,
Slime, or moist Earth. Material; Materealis, Lat. consisting of Matter.

V. 710. Confusion heard his Voice; Confusion obeyed his Command, that Heap and
Chaos of Confusion, in which the Elements of Air, Water, Earth and Fire lay
jumbled and commixt together, covered with Egyptian Darkness and Obscurity, no
sooner heard his Voice, but it began to separate and show ready Obedience.

Ibid. And wild Uproar; The dreadful disorder occasioned by the contesting
Elements enclosed and struggling to get forth, by his Word was overruled and
appeased.

V. 711. Stood vast Infinitude confined; The vast unfinished Gulf of
Nonentity and uncreated Night, that boundless Deep, (Illimitable Ocean without
Bound, without Dimension, where Length, Breadth, and Height, and Time and
Place are lost, as Book 2. Verse. 892.) received its Confines, the Verge of
Nature, and the vast Circumference of all Created Beings, was fixed, and their
appointed compass established.

V. 716. This Ethereal Quintessence of Heaven; This light and pure spiritual
part of Heaven, took wing and flew upwards, enliv'ned and inspirited with
diverse Forms, that moved in Rounds, and at last turned to Stars innumerable, to
the Four Elements, some of the Philosophers added an Ethereal Spirit, void of
Corruption and Contrariety, the purest and most subtle Agility, and the Bond
and Ligature of all the rest, of which they supposed the Stars and Heavens,
those Glorious Bodies, were made, as of a Quintessence arising out of the
Quaternion of Elements.

Ethereal Quintessence; A flaming shining Spirit. Quintessence; Quinta
essentia, Lat. is the purest and highest rectified Spirit, extracted out of any
thing, and separated from its Faeces, admirably applied to the Celestial
Bodies and Heavenly Orbs. Orbicular; Orbicularis, Lat. any thing that is round,
or of a circular shape.

V. 721. The rest in Circuit Walls; The rest of this pure Heavenly
Quintessence, encompasses the Universe round like a Wall.

V. 723. Though but reflected Shines; Looks bright and glorious by the
returning of that Light it has from hence, from the Sun, where Uriel and (...)
stood. Reflected; Reflexus, Lat. returned, turned back again, reverberated,
beaten back and recoyling. Reflection is a returning that Brightness that Light
cast on any Opaque and Solid Body.

V. 725. As the other Hemisphere, etc. which otherwise would be as dark as the
other half of the Globe (or World) is, when the Moon is absent, who yonder
comes to its assistance, and interposes her feeble Light. Hemisphere; (...),
Gr. half the compass of the Heavens.

V. 727. That opposite fair Star; That bright Star, that is over against us,
being in the Sun, from which she as well as the Earth has her lent Light.
Oppositus, Lat. placed over against.

V. 728. And her Monthly Round; And fulfils her Circle in a Month, so named of
the Moon, the Lunar Month, as Mensis, of (...), Gr. for the Moon, from her
increasing, coming to the Full, and her abatement. -- Quid Menstrua Luna
Moneret. Geor. 1.

V. 730. Her Countenanoe trif^rm; Her threefold Face, increasing, full, and
decreasing: Hence fills and empties, from her beginning comes to be complete,
and thence does by degrees decreasing vanish; according to which three
appearances she was called, Luna Sole, Diana Polo, Proserpina in Orco. Ovid.
Nec Par, aut eadem Nocturnae forma Dianae
Esse potest unquam, semperque hodierna sequente,
Si crescit, minor, est major si contrahit orbem. Ibid. Meta. Lib. 15.
Tertia jam Lunae se Cornua Lumine complent. AEn. 3.


Her Horns at her increase regarding the East, as in her decrease they point to
the West. Triformis, Lat. of three shapes.

V. 731. Hence fills and empties; That is, from the Sun, of whom the Moon,
being a Spherical, Opaque and Obscure Body, borrows all her Silver Light, as
Virgil hints very handsomely. Nec fratris radiis obnoxia surgere Luna. Geor. 1.

V. 732. And in her Pale Dominion; And with her feeble Empire curbs the Night,
hinders and opposes the Encroachment of Ancient and Hereditary Night. Checks
the Night; Hinders the progress of dull Darkness. Check, a Metaphor taken from
the Game called Chess, where a Pawn, etc. when placed aright, hinders and
opposes the march of the Enemy, or drives him upon eminent Danger.

V. 734. Adams Abode; The Abiding, the Dewlling Place of Adam, so named of the
Heb. (...), according to his Creation, (...), of the Dust of the Earth, Genesis 2.
Verse. 7. a sort of Colored Earth, of (...), Heb. to look Red.

V. 740. Down from th'Ecliptick; Down from the Suns bright Road: The Ecliptic
is a Line running along the middle of the Zodiac, in which the Sun compleats
his Annual Course; so named of the (...), the Eclipses there happening. Satan
discoursing with Uriel in the Region of the Sun, must needs take his flight
from the Ecliptic, in some part of which the Sun always is.

Ibid. Sped with hoped Success; Heightened with hopes of Success; hasting with
hopes to succeed. Sped, of Spedire, It. and that of Expedire, Lat. to make
haste; or of (...), Gr. to make haste, to be dil^gent.

V. 741. In man^ an AErie Wheel; With many a nimble turn. A Wheel, a round
Circle, according to its shape; hence a Body of Men are said to Wheel, when
they move round.

V. 742. On Niphates top he lights; A Mountain in the Borders of Armenia, not
far from the spring of Tigris, (as Xenophon affirms upon his own Knowledge) so
named of (...), great drifts of Snow covering its Crown; thence styled Rigidum
Niphaten, by Hor. Car. l. 2. Od. 9. Urbes Asiae domitas, pulsumque Niphaten.
Geo. 3.

There is also a River of the same Name in the Neighborhood of this Hill.
Armeniusque tenens volventem Saxa Niphatem. Luc. l. 3.

The Poet lands Satan on this Armenian Mountain, because it borders on
Mesopotamia, in ^^ich the most Judicious Describers of Paradise place it.

NOTES On MILTON's PARADISE Lost.
BOOK IV.
V. 2. WHO saw th'Apocalyps; Who in a Vision saw the Revelation of what was to
befall the Church of God to the end of the World. St. John (who though in the
Front of the Revelation he be named the Divine) is yet held to be the same who
writ the Gospel called by his Name, as Irenaeus, Hieronymus, Eusebius and
others affirm; the difference of the style being no more, than that in the one,
he has used that of a Prophet; and in the other, that of an Historian.
Apocalypse, (...), a Discovery, a Revealing of hidden Mysteries, thence
translated the Revelations, of (...), to discover, though still extremely
obscure, like those Acroatick parts of Aristotle's Philosophy, which he says
were (...). This obscure Discovery was written by St. John, in the Island
Patmos, whither he was banished by Domitian about the 14th Year of his Reign,
64 Years after the Death of our Savior, and four Years before his own, as the
Chronologers relate.

V. 3. When the Dragon put to second rout; Interpreters of Revel. 12. whence
this is taken, are of Opinion, that as Satan was, after his Rebellion, thrown
out of Heaven in the beginning of time, so toward the end of it and the World,
he shall be beaten out of his lower Dominion usurpt by him, and be no longer
Prince of the Air, here called his second rout. The Dragon, Satan.

V. 14. Far off, and fearless; Fearless, yet keeping distance; though
undaunted, yet wary in approaching.

V. 17. A Devilish Engine back recoils; Like a great Gun, that at discharging
its destructive Entrails, runs back with mighty force and rude repulse; so this
malicious attempt of Satan on frail Man, beats back again upon himself in
hideous Horrors and distracting Doubt, of what he was, is, and must be to all
Eternity. Recoils, of Reculer, Fr. to give back, to run back as a Cannon when
fired.

V. 18. Horror and Doubt distract, etc. The amazement of his Guilt, and the
uncertain success of new Mischiefs undertaken, which how much they may add more
to his Punishment than Revenge, confounds all Consideration. Distracts his
Thoughts; Put him upon a Rack, where all his Resolutions against The Almighty,
vain and frivolous, are rent to pieces. Distracts, of distrahere, Lat. to pull
in pieces.

V. 20. For within him Hell he brings; Is his own Hell and Tormentor. Change of
Place gives no allay or intermission to his Pains: He travels with Hell about
him and within him. Coelum non Animum mutant qui trans mare currunt.

V. 30. In his Meridian Tower; In his Noontide Exaltation, in Meridian
Majesty, of Meridianus, Lat. of Noontide: Meridies, Lat. Midday, when the Sun
is at the highest.

V. 31. Then much revolving; Tossing and turning over many direful Thoughts,
risen from Conscience waking of despair that slumber'd, etc. An admirable
Description of tormenting Guilt, discovered when too late to be discharged.
Revolving, of revolvere, Lat. to roll to and fro, thence to think, and in
Virgil to relate. Sed quid ego haec autem, nequicquam ingrata revolvo. AEn. 2.

V. 33. Look from thy sole Dominion; O thou Majestic Monarch, with amazing
Brightness Crowned, that from thy shining Seat look like the Supreme and
Universal God of this low new-created World, at whose glorious appearance all
the Stars discountenanced hide their disappearing Heads.

Like the God; Well does Satan Deifie the Sun, whom he persuaded seduced
Mankind often to adore as such. (...), as the Phoenicians styled him, and the
holy Page shows how easy it was to set up this visible supposed Author of all
things, and of so many Blessings, of such inestimable use to the World, for an
Illustrious Deity; especially when Ignorance and Sin had so depraved and
blinded Men's Minds, that they could not see him, (...), who dwells in
unapproached Light, for which reason God by Moses so strictly forewarned his
People of Idolatry, Lest thou lift up thy Eyes unto Heaven, and when thou see
the Sun and Moon, and the Stars, even all the Host of Heaven, thou should be
seduced to serve and worship them, Deuteronomy. 4. Verse. 19. Thus Homer attributes
Omniscience to the Sun, and from the worship of him in this Island, one of the
Days of the Week took his Name. (...).

V. 35. Their diminisht Heads; Dim their diminisht Lights, which the Sun hides
and hinders from appearing. Diminutus, Lat. impaired, made less.

V. 40. Till Pride and worse Ambition; Pride is a kind of excessive and vicious
Self-esteem, that raises Men in their own Opinions above what is just and
right: But Ambition is that which adds Fuel to this Flame, and claps Spurs to
these furious and inordinate Desires that break forth into the most execrable
Acts to accomplish their haughty Designs; which makes our Author stigmatize
Ambition as a worse Sin than Pride.

V. 45. With his Good upbraided none; Did not with his Bountiful Goodness twit
or reproach his Creatures. Upbraid, of Upgebredan, Sax. to scorn, or reproach
one with any thing received.

V. 50. I 'sdein'd Subjection; I disdained to be subject, to pay Obedience to.
'Isdeind, for disdained, an Italian Imitation of sdegnare, It. dedignari, to
contemn, to despise, 'sdein'd.

V. 58. Powerful Destiny ordained; O that his uncontrollable Decree had
appointed me one of the Vulgar Angels, of the common Spirits! Destiny, of
Destinatio, Lat. Appointment, Decree.

V. 79. O then at last relent! Quit thy hardened Obstinacy, and melt into
Repentance. Relent, of Ralentir, Fr. to grow soft again, of re and lentescere,
Lat. to soften, to melt, as tough viscous and fat things do at Fire.

V. 84. Vaunts; Boastings, of vanter, Fr. to boast.

V. 87. How dearly I abide; How much to my Cost, with how much Pain and Torment
I make good my Vainglorious Undertaking against The Almighty. Abide, signifies
here to sustain, to endure, as in Virg. Tu ne cede Malis sed contra audentior
ito.

V. 96. Ease would recant Vows made in Pain; When reinstated in my former
Condition, I should soon unsay whatever in pain I swore. Recant, of the Lat.
recantare, to retract and unsay something affirmed formerly. Vows, of Votum,
Lat. Protestations, of Vovere, Lat. to vow or protest. As violent and void, as
forced from me, and therefore of themselves void and of no Obligation, as all
things done, or obtained by Duress and Menasse, are by our Laws esteemed of no
effect.

V. 100. To a worse relapse; To falling back into a worse Condition. Relapse is
properly a falling back from some beginnings of Recovery into the same
Distemper, made by its return more dangerous, of Relabi, Lat. to slip back
again, a Metaphor taken from Men climbing up a steep slippery place, whence
they often slide back again down to the bottom.

V. 110. Evil be thou my Good; All real true Good is lost and forfeited by me,
and therefore now my Malice and Revenge, wrecked on Mankind, and so upon his
Maker, by destroying his new-created Favorite, is the only chiefest Good I can
propose to my self, or prosecute. That Evil should be Good, seems a
Contradiction; but by Good is here meant Choice, and as such, deluded Mankind
place their Happiness upon it, mistaking often many Evils which they pursue,
disguised under the Notions and Appearances of Good.

V. 114. Each Passion dimmed his Face; While he made this Speech, full of sad
and dismal Reflections, disquieted with Anger, Envy and Despair, each of these
Passions darkened and overcast his Countenance, which spoiled his disguise, and
discovered him a Cheat and Impostor. Counterfeit, false, of the Fr.
Countrefaict, false Money stamped in Imitation of the true.

V. 120. Each Perturbation smoothed; Calmed all the Storms these Passions had
raised in him. Perturbatio, Lat. disorder.

V. 121. Artificer of Fraud; Master of Deceit, the Arch-Cheat and
Crafts-Master. Artifex, Lat. one perfect in his Trade, a Workman. Fraus, Lat.
Deceit.

V. 122. Under Saintly show, etc. Transforming himself into an Angel of Light,
2 Cor. 11. Verse. 14. Couched with Revenge; Lodged with Revenge, of Coucher, Fr.
to lie down with.

V. 126. On the Assyrian Mount; Niphates, Book 3. V. 742.

V. 127. Saw him disfigured; Disordered in his Looks: Discountenanced, of the
Fr. disfigure, altered in Face, as disfigured with the Smallpox, as if
disfeatured.

V. 128. His Gestures fierce and mad Demeanor; His fierce Carriage and
extravagant Behavior. Gesture, of Gesius, Lat. the Mien and Habit of speaking
and walking gracefully. Demeanor, of Demener, Fr. to move to and fro, to use
handsome and becoming Action in our Deportment.

V. 131. To the Border comes of Eden; So on he marches, till he comes to the
Border of Eden, in which delightful Paradise now more in view, encompasses with
its green Enclosure (that showed like a Country Mount) the lofty open Plain,
spread on top of a steep Wilderness, whose shaggy sides, rude and o'ergrown
with Intangling Thickets, and wild Underwood, hindered all approach. Above
these, over-head, grew up Cedars and Pines, Firr-Trees and Branching Palms,
tall Sons of Earth, that made a lofty shade of height unpassable, a Woody
Scene, and as the Verdant Ranks arose one over another, Shade above Shade, they
formed a Natural Theater of Noblest View.

V. 133. With her Enclosure green; With her natural green Hedge. Enclosure, of
Enclosture, Fr. a Close, a Field hedged in.

V. 134. As with a Rural Mound; As with a Country Mount. Ruralis, Lat.
belonging to the Country. Mound, a high Bank, set with a Hedge, of the Lat.
Mons, a Mount, a Hill.

Ibid. The Champain Head; The open, plain and large Top and Surface of a steep
Wilderness. Champain, Champion Ground, of the Fr. Champaigne, an open wide
Plain, of Campus, Lat. a Field.

V. 135. Whose Hairy Sides; Whose Shaggy Sides o'ergrown with the green
Thicket, covered with Leaves. Leaves, by a frequent Metaphor, are called the
Honor, and the Hair of the Trees. Ille comam Mollis jam tum t^ndebat Acanthi.
Georg. 4.
Redeunt jam Gramina Campis
Arboribusque Comae. Hor. Carmi. Lib. 4. Od. 7.
Hic Tertius December
Silvis Henorem decutit. Hor. Epo. 11.


V. 136. Grottesque and wild; Full of dark obscure Dens and Caverns: Grotesque,
Fr. for dark, and inartificial Paintings and Sculptures, used first in obscure
blind Grotto's, of the Fr. Grotte, a Cave, of the mispronounced Lat. Crypta, a
Cave, an obscure place or recess from the Sun, of the Gr. (...), to hide.

V. 137. Access denied; So Virg. of Circes Grove: Dives inaccessos ubi solis
filia Lucos, etc. AEn. 7.

V. 138. Insuperable Height; A Height not to be overgone, impassable, not to
be surmounted, of Insuperabilis, Lat. unconquerable.

V. 139. Cedar and Pine, etc. Cedar, (...), Gr. a tall growing Tree of a sweet
smell, frequent on Libanus, a Mountain in Syria, famous for them in Scripture,
Psalm. 29. Verse. 5. and 104. Verse. 16. useful and ornamental in Building, and
particularly famous in that of Solomon's Temple, 1 Kings, Chap. 6. Verse. 18,
20, 36, etc. -- Dant utile Lignum
Navigiis Pinos, Domibus Cedrosque. Georg. 2.
-- Olentem scindere Cedrum. AEn. 11.


And expressive of the highest Extravagance: -- Tectisque superbis
Urit Odoratam Nocturna in Lumina Cedrum. AEn. 7.


The Juice of this Tree was esteemed an admirable Preservative against the
Worms and Rottenness; whence -- Speramus Carmina fingi
Posse linenda cedro? Hor. Art, Poet.
Et Cedro digna locutus. Pers. Sat. 1.


Pine; Pinus, Lat. of (...), Gr. a Lofty Tree: Evertunt actas ad sidera Pinus.
AEn. 11.

Firr-Tree, another Montaneer, raising his Gigantick Arms toward Heaven. Abies
in Montibus altis. Ecl. 7. Used by the Ancients for Ship-Service.
Labitur Uncta vadis Abies. AEn. 8.


Ibid. Branching Palm; A celebrated Tree of a tall and strong Body, rising
against all impediment and opposition, and therefore made the Reward and Crown
of Conquerors. Palmaque Nobilis, Terrarum Dominos evehit ad Deos. Hor. Od. 1.
Seu quis Olympiacae miratus praemia Palmae. Geor. 3.
-- Etiam Ardua Palma
Nascitur, and casus abies visura Marinos. Geor. 2.


Palm, of Palma, as this of (...), a Hand, Quia ex ea uvae, ceu digiti ex Palma
prodeunt.

V. 140. A Silvan Scene; A show of loftiest Shade, a prospect of green Tents
and Arbours, arched by Nature, and covered with her youthful Livery. So Virgil,
Tum Sylvis Scena Coruscis
Desuper, horrentique atrum nemus eminet umbra. AEn. 1.


Scene, of Scena, Lat. of the Gr. (...), Umbraculum. of (...), Umbra. A Bower,
and thence a Tent, or Pavilion, that affords a Shade. Sylvan, of Sylva, Lat. a
Wood.

V. 141. A Woody Theater; The Comparison consists in the Resemblance the
ascending Ranks of Trees have to the Rows of Seats and Benches raised one above
another in Theaters and Places of public Shows. Thus Virgil describes AEneas
making use of a Natural Theater: -- Tendit
Gramineum in Campum, quem Collibus undique curvis
Cingebant Sylvae: Mediaque in Valle Theatri
Circus erat. AEn. 5.


Theater, (...), a place where Sports and Stage Plays are usually exhibited, of
(...), Gr. to behold.

V. 143. The Verdurous Wall; The Green Banks of Paradise, which walled it
round. Verdurous, Green, of Verdure, Fr. Greenness.

V. 149. With gay enameled Colors mixed; Curiously shaded and set off with
diverse Colors mixed and blended together. Enameled, Esmaille, Fr. Esmail, is
two parts Lead and one Tin, well calcined in an Oven of Reverberation, fixed
afterward on Rings, and Paintings, by Fire, whence it got the Name of
Encaustum.

V. 151. Or Humid Bow; On which the Sun more pleased displayed his Beams, than
on Gay Western Clouds, or the Gaudy Rainbow. Humid Bow, the Wet, the Rainbow,
of Humidus, Lat. Watery, Wet, according to the Philosophy of its Birth, in a
watery dark Cloud, pierced somewhat by the Sunbeams, which nevertheless are
repelled and reflected. Hence Virgil, -- Et bibit ingens Arcus. Geor. 1.
Qualis ab imbre Solet, percussis solibus, Arcus
Inficere ingenti longum Curvamine Coelum. Met. Lib. 6.


And now, if we compare our Poets Topography of Paradise with Homer's
Descriptions of Aloinous's Garden, (...)
(...).


Or with that of Calypso's shady Grotta, (...)
(...).


We may without affectation affirm, that in half the Number of Verses, that
they consist of, our Author has outdone 'em. But to make a Comparison more
obvious to most Understandings, read the Description of the Bower of Bliss by a
Poet of our own Nation, and famous in his time; but it is impar congressus! and
Rhyme fettered his Fancy. A Place picked out by choice of best alive,
That Nature's Works by Art can imitate;
In which whatever in this Worldly State
Is sweet and pleasing unto Worldly Sense,
Or that may daintest Fancy aggravate,
Was poured forth, with plentiful dispense,
And made there to abo^und with lavish Affluence. Spen. Bo. 2. C. 11. Stan. 42.


V. 157. Fanning their Odoriferous Wings; Now pleasant Gales waving their
perfumed Wings on all sides, bestow Natural Sweetness, and tell from whence
they came, rich with those precious Spoils. Odoriferous, that has a pleasing
Smell: Odoriferus, Lat. Odoriferam Panaceam, AEn. 12.

V. 158. Native Perfumes; Natural Sweets; such as grow, Nativus, Lat. Perfume,
of the Fr. Parfum, quasi per fumum, made by laying sweet smelling Shrubs on
Fire, whose Fumes refresh or please the Scent.

V. 159. Those Balmy Spoils; Those Spicy Spoils. Balmy, sweet, delicious, of
(...), Gr. the Balm-Tree preferable for its smell to all other Odours, growing
only in Judea, and near to Destruction by the Malice of the Jews, at the
sacking of their chief City, as Pliny relates. Saeviere in Arbusculum hunc
Judaei, sicut in vitam quoque suam, contra defendere Romani, and dimicatum pro
frutice est, Lib. 12. Cap. 25. The Juice, the Seed, the Bark, and the Wood it
self are extraordinary Perfumes. Quid tibi Odorato referam sudantia ligno
Balsama. Georg. 2.


V. 160. Beyond the Cape of Hope; Cape de bonna Speranza, a famous Promontory
in the most Southern part of Africa, named The Cape of Good Hope, by Emanuel
King of Portugal, who when it was discovered by Barth. Diaz, conceived great
hopes of finding a passage to the East Indies. Cape, of Caput, Lat. Head,
thence called a Head-Land.

V. 161. Mozambic; Mosambica is a little Island on the Eastern Coast of Africa,
near the Continent, where there is a City and River of the same Name, running
into the Ethiopick Ocean.

V. 162. Sabean Odours; High and rich Perfumes, like the Precious Breaths of
the Sabeans, Inhabitants of Saba, chief City of Arabia Foelix, (Arabie the
Blessed) rich in Balm, Cassia, Myrrh, Cinnamon, Frankinsense, etc. insomuch that
they used nothing but perfumed Wood in their Kitchins. Non alia Ligni Genera in
us^^ sunt quam Odorata; Cibosque coquunt turis Ligno, alii Myrrhae. Plin. Lib.
12. Cap. 17. -- Centumque Sabaeo
Ture Calent arae, sertisque recentibus halant. AEn. 1.


The Spicy Shore; The sweet smelling Coast, the perfumed Country. Spicy, of the
Fr. Espices, Perfumes.

V. 163. Arabie the Blessed; Arabia, a large Country in Asia, is known by three
Names; Foelix the Happy here meant, the largest and most fruitful, washed on
three sides by the Sea, adjoining on the other to that called the Desert and
the Stony.

V. 165. Cheered old Ocean Smiles; Delighted, pleased with, made more cheerful.
Cheer, of (...), Joy, thence used for the Countenance, where soonest seen,
whence the Sea-Salutation, What cheer? How fare you? Old Ocean, the Ancients,
both Poets and Philosophers, reputed the Ocean the eldest of the Gods, meaning
thereby that without Humidity there could neither be any Generation or
Corruption, and so consequently no World. (...).

A smattering of Moses's Deep, Genesis 1. Verse. 1. (...)
(...). Orp. in Him.


V. 166. These Odorous Sweets; These extraordinary sweet Breaths and perfumed
Winds; a Redundancy. Odorous, Odorus, Lat. that smells well, yiedling a good
smell, as also quick of smelling, that has a good Nose, as Odora Canum vis,
AEn. 4.

V. 168. Then Asmodeus; The Name of the Evil Spirit enamored of Sarah,
Daughter of Raguel, whose seven Husbands he had destroyed, therefore well named
of (...), Fire, and (...), to destroy, expressive of a lustful destroying
Angel, and therefore called (...), Rex Vastatorum, Tob. 3. Verse. 8. Fume, a
Smell, of Fumus, Lat. Smoke. Spouse, Fr. Espouse, of the Lat. Sponsa, a Bride.

V. 171. From Media; Now called Servan and Schirvan, a Province in the
North-West of the Kingdom of Persia, toward the Borders of Georgia, and
bounded Northward with the Caspian Sea, Southward by Persia, on the East by
Hircania and Parthia, and West by Armenia and Assyria, famous for the Empire of
the Medes and Persians, once greatly considerable; read Tobit 6. Verse. 13, and
14. and Chap. 8. Verse. 2, and 3. Media fert tristes succos, tardumque saporem
Foelicis Mali. Georg. 2.


V. 172. Savage Hill; That high Woody Hill. Savage, Fr. Sauvage, Woody, wild
like a Wilderness.

V. 179. The Arch Fellon; Satan, the Arch-Rebel, the Ringleader of Rebellion.
Fellon, is of the Sax. Fell, cruel; and Felonia, (in our Law Books) Ideo dicta
est, quia fieri debet felleo animo, Cook, Inst. Lib. 4. Others derive it of
Fehl, Sax. a Fault, of the Lat. falli, to be deceived, and in this sense Satan
is the chief Felon, the Arch-Sinner and Deceiver.

V. 181. At one slight bound, etc. With one easy Leap jumped over all its
Limits: A Bound, a Jump, is from the Fr. Bondir, to leap. Bound, a Limit, as
the Bounds of a Field, of the word Bind, tied up and restrained within its
compass: Or of Bornes, Fr. for the same.

V. 183. A Prowling Wolf; A Ravenous, a Preying Wolf. Prowling, or Proling, of
the Fr. Proyer, and its Diminutive Proyeler, to seek after Prey.

V. 185. Pen their Flocks; Shut in their Sheep. A Pen is a Sheepfold, of the
Sax. Pyndan, to shut up. Eeve, or Eve, a Diminutive of Evening, and this a
Derivative of the Sax. Eren, or the Belg. Avend.

V. 186. In hurdl'd Cotes; In places hemmed in with Hurdles, walled about with
Fences made of small Sticks interwoven and plasht together. Hurdle, of the Sax.
Hyrdl, though some will have it of (...), to shut up. A Cote is a place hurdled
in, of the Sax. Cote, or the Belg. Kott, whence our Cottage, and from its use
is called a Sheep-Cote, an Enclosure made of Hurdles, in which they are Nightly
shut up, either to keep 'em together, or to Dung the Ground more equally by
removing their demolished Mansion.

V. 187. Leaps over the Fence; Leaps over the Hedge of Hurdles that fences 'em
in, of the obsolete fendere, whence defendere, Lat. to guard and secure.

Ibid. Fould, of the Sax. Falad, or Fald, a Stable, a Hedge, whence a
Sheepfold, and place where they are enclosed, of the Sax. Fealden, to enclose.

V. 188. Bent to unhoard the Cash; Resolute, to discover the hid Treasure of
some Rich Citizen. Unhoord, to discover, of the Particle un, and Hoord, to lay
up, of Hord, Sax. Treasure, of Hordan, to treasure up, to hide.

Ibid. Cash; Treasure, properly Money, of the Fr. Casse, a Chest, continens pro
contento; whence Cassier, a Cashier, one entrusted with Money and Receipts, and
Payments thereof, all of the Lat. Capsa, a Coffer, by Barbarous Depravation.
Burgher, Citizen, of the Teut. Burger, both of the Sax. Burgh, Borough, as
Edinburgh, the chief Ci^y of Scotland.

V. 191. Climbs; Get up by help of a Ladder, of (...), Gr. a Ladder.

V. 193. Lewd Hirelings; Wicked Mercenary Priests, Avaritious greedy Hirelings,
of the Sax. Hira, a Mercenary Servant. Lewd, is a word expressing general
Wickedness, of Laerede, signifying a Laick, one of the common People, and
therefore more Flagitious generally than the Clergy, a dissolute Person, as the
word Laxus, Lat. and as the Gr. (...), in the same sense seems to signify.

V. 195. The middle Tree; The Tree of Life also in the midst of the Garden,
Genesis 2. Verse. 9. In the midst, is a Hebrew Phrase, expressing not only the
Local Situation of this enlivening Tree, but denoting its Excellency, as being
the most considerable, the tallest, goodliest, and most lovely Tree in that
beauteous Garden planted by God himself: So Scotus, Duran, Valesius, etc. whom
our Poet follows, affirming it the highest there that grew: To him that
overcomes, will I give to eat of the Tree of Life, which is in the midst of
the Paradise of God, Revel. 2. Verse. 7.

V. 196. Sat like a Cormorant; A very Voracious Sea-Fowl, and a great Devourer
of Fish, its Name is the Corruption of Corvus Marinus, Lat. the Sea-Crow.

V. 199. Of that Life-giving Plant; After many frivolous Disputes concerning
the truth of this Tree of Life, whether it were Natural, etc. which is plain,
from Genesis 2. Verse. 9. where it is said, Out of the Ground made the Lord God to
grow every Tree that is pleasant to the sight, and good for Food: The Tree of
Life also, etc. The best account of it is, that it was a Tree of wonderful
Virtue, whose Fruit, more Physical than for daily Food, tasted sometimes, would
have prolonged and lengthened out the Lives of Men for many Hundreds, or some
Thousands of Years: A Natural Preservative and Panpharmacon against all
Diseases and Decay, by which Mankind, (if sinless) had lived for ever, Genesis 3.
Verse. 23. That is, till it had pleased God to have translated em to Heaven
without tasting of Death, visiting the Grave, or seeing Corruption. Plant,
Planta, Lat. that of which an Herb or Tree grows of. -- Deinde Feraces
Plantae immittuntur, nec longum tempus and ingens
Exiit ad Coelum ramis felicibus arbos. Geo. 2.


V. 200. What well used had been the Pledge of Immortality; Satan made use of
the Tree of Life only to advance his prospect round God's Garden, never
thinking or reflecting on the Virtue, the hidden mystic Power of that Plant,
the Type and Figure of the Son of God, Savior of Mankind, whose Fruit is Life
and Immortality, the repining at whose Power was what occasioned the Rebellion
of the lapsed Angels, and their ambitious Leader. Our Author must in this have
respect to some Allegorick sense, for it is unconceivable that Satan could have
bettered his sad estate by eating of the Tree of Life, for he was already
immortal a part post, to his cost and everlasting misery. Strange is the
Conceit of Rupertus, in his Commentaries on Genesis 2. Verse. 22. Igitur nec Adam
cognovit, nec ipse Serpens Diabolus scivit, quod etiam Lignum Vitae plantasset
Dominus Deus in medio Paradisi, etc. That neither Adam nor the Devil himself
knew any thing of the Tree of Life planted in the midst of Paradise: For if he
had understood there had been a Tree of that vivifying Virtue, he would never
have persued his Malice by halves, but as he persuaded him to eat of the
forbidden Tree, and thereby to sin and become miserable, so he would doubtless
have incited him to have tasted of this Tree of Life, to have made him Immortal
in Immutable Misery. Cap. 30. Lib. 3. Comment. in Genes.

V. 209. Of God the Garden was; Suitable to Genesis 2. Verse. 8. And the Lord God
planted a Garden Eastward in Eden.

V. 210. Eden stretched her Line; The Region of Eden (in which Paradise was
planted) extended and stretched it self from Auran Eastward, to the ancient
City of Seleucia seated on Euphrates, rebuilt by Grecian Monarchs. (...). That
Eden was the Name of a Country, and particularly of Mesopotamia, from its
Fruitfulness and Amenity, well deriving its Title of (...), Heb. to be
delightful, is most certain, from the Testimonies of the LXX Translators, all
the Greek Fathers, and the most Learned of the Jewish Rabbis: And though St.
Hierom has translated Eden by Pleasure, Plantaverat autem Dominus Deus
Paradisum voluptat is a principio, Genesis 2. Verse. 8. very erroneously, which is
by the Septuagint and our Version exactly rendered; and though he has continued
the same mistake Verse. 10. Et Fluvius egrediebatur de loco voluptatis, And a
River went out of the place of Pleasure (Eden) to water the Garden; yet he was
ashamed to say that Cain dwelt on the East of Pleasure, but has there used the
proper Name of the Region Eden, Ad Orientalem Plagam Eden, Genesis 4. Verse. 16.

V. 211. From Auran Eastward; Auran, A City in Mesopotamia, diversely written,
Haran, by the Turks at this day Harran, and Haran, Charran in Holy Writ,
memorable for the remove of Abraham to it from Ur in Chaldea, Genesis 11. Verse.
31. and Acts 7. Verse. 4. and for the famous overthrow of the Covetous Crassus
by the Parthians. -- Miserando Funere Crassus
Assyrias Latio Maculavit Sanguine Carras. Luc. Lib. 1.


This Country was also called Aram and Aramia, of (...), the Seat of the
Syrians, from Aram, one of the Sons of Shem, Genesis 10. Verse. 22. whence the
Region took the Name of Aram, and Aran and Auran; and Ptolomy dividing
Babylonia into three parts, gives one of 'em the Name of. Auranitis.

V. 212. Of great Seleucia, etc. Seleucia, a famous City of Mesopotamia on the
River Tigris, anciently called Chalne and Chalaune, as Appian affirms;
afterward Coche, and then Alexandria, being rebuilt by the famous Conqueror of
that Name. It was again Re-edified by Antiochus King of Syria, and by his
Fathers Name called Seleucia, now Bachad, Bagdad and Bagdett, a great, rich,
and populous City, the Seat of the Califs, often mistaken for Babylon, forty
Miles distant from it, and situated on Euphrates.

V. 214. The Sons of Eden dwelt in Telassar; Our Author has bounded Eden; by
Charran, Seleucia, and Telassar, where the Edenites were Garrisoned on the
Borders of Babylonia, to resist the Assyrians. Two Epistles sent by the
Nestorian Christians inhabiting Mesopotamia, to the Pope in the Year 1552.
mention an Island of Eden in the River Tigris, commonly called Gozoria: See Sir
Walter Rawleigh's History, Book 1. Chap. 3. Sect. 10.

Telassar was a very Strong-hold, on a steep Rock, in an Island of Euphrates,
being a Pass out of Mesopotamia into Babylonia, and as the Name declares was a
Garrison maintained to curb the Assyrians. (...), of (...), a Fort, a Rampart,
and (...), an Assyrian. The Children of Eden that were at Telassar, Isai. 37.
Verse. 12. Haran, and Canneh, and Eden, Ezech. 27. Verse. 23. That the Eden in
these Texts, was not the same with that where Gods Garden Paradise was planted,
Cajetan would infer, from its being so populous, when the Flaming Sword
rendered the other both uninhabitable and inaccessible; which was true before
the Deluge, but Paradise being by that defaced, and as our Poet supposes, -- By
might of Waves removed
Out of his place, pushed by the Horned Flood,
With all its Verdure spoiled, and Trees adrift, etc. Book 11.


What might hinder it from being inhabited, and from either regaining, or
retaining the Name of Eden, as the most pleasant, rich, best watered, and
thence the most fruitful Country imaginable?

V. 218. The Tree of Life, etc. of Vegetable Gold; Satan by his malicious
cunning designing as much as in him lay, to undermine and invalidate the Credit
of the Holy Text, promoted among the Heathen Poets many strange Fictions, that
seem borrowed or imitated from the Sacred Writers, as their Nectar and
Ambrosia, Nepenthe and the wonderful Herb M^ly, by H^siod, Homer, etc. The
Imitations of this wonderful Tree, Just. Mart. in his Second Apol. for the
Christ. Of Vegetable Gold, of growing Gold, according to the conceit of the
Chemists, that their Aurum Potabile, their Liquid Gold, is the highest
Preservative, able to cure all Diseases, and to postpone Old Age and Death for
a long time. Vegetable, Vegetabilis, Lat. any thing that grows, increases and
flourishes, and is productive of its kind, as Plants and Trees, that have a
Vegetative Being.

V. 221. The Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil, as termed Genesis 2. Verse. 9. By
the Hebraism of Good and Evil, is meant the Knowledge of all things; that there
was but one Tree of this sort, to the intent that it might be more remarkable,
and that Adam by no mistake might pretend ignorantly so much as to touch it, is
very probable; but of what kind it was, few are so daring as to determine. This
fatal Tree (to pass over the idle Inventions of the Rabbis) had its Name of
the Knowledge of Good and Evil, as some imagine, from that sad Experimental
Knowledge that our first Father found by eating its forbidden Fruit: Of Good,
the Favor of God, and happy Innocence lost; and the Evil of Sin, and his
Makers Displeasure and Wrath incurred, as our Author, Knowledge of Good bought
dear, by knowing Ill.

Others are of Opinion, it was so named, either by deceived Adam himself, or at
least by Moses, (the Writer of his Story by way of Anticipation) as an
Everlasting Monument of the Glozing Lies of the Tempter, who was a Deceiver
from the beginning, and had promised Eve that their Eyes should be opened, and
they should be as Gods knowing Good and Evil, Genesis 3. Verse. 5. And the Ironical
sad Sarcasm is carried on Verse. 22. And the Lord God said, Behold, the Man is
become as one of us, to know Good and Evil. Rupert. Tostat. Pererius, etc.

V. 223. Southward through Eden; The great River Euphrates, which runs
Southward through Mesopotamia, Genesis 2. Verse. 10.

V. 224. Through the shaggy Hill; Was not diverted or turned aside, but made
its way through the hairy Hill, o'ergrown with Trees and leavy Bushes. Shaggy,
of the Sax. Sceaega, the Hair and Fleece of Beasts. Metaphorically as before,
Whose hairy sides with Thicket overgrown, Verse. 135.

V. 225. Ingulft; Swallowed up, of the Fr. Goulfe, of the Lat. Gula, the
Gullet, Engoufrer, Fr. to draw or suck in.

V. 227. Upon the Rapid Current; On the swift stream. Rapid, of the Lat.
Rapidus, swift, an usual Attribute of Rivers. Rapidum Cretae veniemus Oaxem,
Virg. Ecl. 1.

Current, the Stream, or Channel of a River, a Currendo, from its running
swiftest there.

V. 228. Of Porous Earth, etc. Which drawn up by gentle heat through the Veins
of the hollow Earth, rose like a sweet Spring, and watered the lovely Garden.
Porous, of the Gr. (...), a Passage and Way, whence those small and
imperceptible passages through the Skin in Human Bodies, by which any thing is
received or ejected, as Sweat and other Excrementitious Matters are called
(...) of (...) to pass through. Water is said by our Philosophic Poet to run
through the Earth in the Veins of the Macrocosm, and thence as it were drawn up
and exhaled by the Suns kindly Heat, (the Efficient Cause of Drought and
Thirst) to break forth in fresh and cooling Fountains, wat'ring its Verdant
Plains and Fruitful Surface.

V. 229. A Rill; Is a little purling Stream, a small shallow River: Rill, a
Contraction of Rivulus, Lat.

V. 231. Down the steep Glade; Fell down the steep Mountains side, where it had
worn a Way. A Glade, is an open place made in a Wood, by lopping the Trees, or
cutting some of 'em down: Of (...), Gr. a Bough, (...), signifying to make a
Glade. The River here is said to fall down the steep Glade, by washing down all
that stood in its way, and over-bearing the Trees that opposed its precipitate
fall from the steep side of Paradise.

V. 232. Which from its darksom passage; In which it past diving through the
obscure Hill.

V. 233. Into four main Streams; Into four large Currents, according to Genesis 2.
Verse. 10. so irreconcilable to any Country, that our Poet wisely avoids giving
any further account of 'em, though Sir Walter Rawleigh, with the greatest
probability the undiscovered place is capable of; seems to make Euphrates and
Tigris, both in Mesopotamia, satisfy the Text: Hist. of the World, Book 1.
Chap. 3. Sect. 11. But I will not enter on the inextricable difficulty, but
leave the Rivers to wander their own way. Quaque caput rapido tollit cum
tigride magnus
Euphrates, quos non diversis fontibus edit
Persis. -- Luc. Lib. 3.


V. 237. How from that Sapphire Fount. From that clear Fountain how the curling
Brooks,
Running over shining Pearl and Golden Sands,
With various Windings under hanging Groves,
Conveyed delicious Nourishment to each Plant.


Sapphire, Clear; see Book 2. Verse. 1050. Crisped; Curled, wrinkled, as Water is
by the Wind, or little purling Brooks by opposition of Stones, etc. lying in
their watery way, of the Lat. Crispatus, curled, like Hair.

V. 238. And Sands of Gold; Conformable to the Traditions of the Tagus,
Pactolus, Hermus, and other Rivers ennobled by the Poets for the Gold found
among their Sands. Passaque ab auriferis tellus exire Metallis
Pactolon: Qua culta secat non vilior Hermus. Luc. Lib. 3.
-- Auro turbidus Hermus. Geor. 2.
Pactolusque irrigat auro. AEn. 11.


V. 239. With Mazie Error; With various Turnings, with intricate Wanderings.
Mazie, see Book 2. V. 561. Pendant Shades, Trees hanging over the Streams, or
growing on that Ground the Brooks past under. The Shadow, for the Tree that
casts it, frequent with the Poets, Aut viridi fontes induceret umbra. Virg.
Ecl. 9. A Green Shade.

V. 240. Ran Nectar; (...) was the Drink of the Gods, as Ambrosia their Meat,
which were served up to 'em by Hebe (Youth) as the Poets tells us, the
Preservatives of their Mirth and Immortality; its Name is derivable of the
Privative (...) and (...), Gr. to kill; those that used it, being subject to no
decay. (...),
(...).


A Description of Claret. (...). Vina novum fundam Calathis Arvisia Nectar.
Virg. Ecl. 6.

And by the same word he expresses Honey; -- Aliae purissima Mella
Stipant, and liquido distendunt Nectare Cellas. Georg. 4.


V. 242. Nature boon poured forth profuse; But bounteous Nature lavishly poured
out the Flowers, free and unconfined, in Beds and Artful Knots, on every place.
Boon, of the Fr. Bon, and this of Bonus, Lat. Good, Gracious, as Bounty and
Bounteous, of Bonte, Fr. and Bonitas, Lat. Profuse, Lat. Profusus, Lavish,
Prodigal, of Profundere, to pour out abundantly, an Expression like this of a
Bank o'ergrown with Flowers, is in Book 8. Verse. 286. On a Green shady Bank
profuse of Flowers.

V. 245. Where the unpierc'd Shade imbround the Noontide Bowers: Paradise was
so profuse and prodigal of Flowers, that they continually clothed the Garden
every where, both in the warm Sunshine, and the obscure Shade. Imbround, made
the Bowers that were convenient at Noon, look dark and brown. Embrunir, Fr. to
darken, to make ob^^^re.

V. 248. Wept Odorous Gums and Balm; As Myrrh and Balm, from which at certain
seasons a Gum is distilled, a sort of sweet and odoriferous Sweat, styled in
Lat. Lacrymae, the Tears of those Trees. Flet tamen and tepidae manant ex
arbore Guttae
Est Honor and Lacrymis: Stillataque cortice Myrrha
Nomen herile tenet, Nullique tacebitur aevo. Ovid. Met. 10.
Quid tibi Odorato referam sudantia ligno
Balsama. Virg. Georg. 2.


Gums, of the barbarous Lat. Gummi, as this of the Exotic Greek (...), the
Tears and Distillations of Trees.

V. 249. Burnished with Golden Rind; Whose shining outside glittered like
polished Gold, the Mala Aurea and Citrea of the Poets. Tum Canit Hesperidum
Miratam Mala puellam. Virg. Ecl. 6.
-- Medio nitet arbor in arvo;
Fulva comam, fulvo ramis crepitantibus auro.
Hinc tria forte mea veniens decerpta ferebam
Aurea Poma Manu. Ovid. Metam. 10.


Burnished; Polished, of Burnir, Fr. to give a Luster to, to Furbish or Polish.
Amiable, lovely, amabilis, Lat.

V. 252. Lawns; Uncultivated, rude, shrubby Plains, of the Fr. Land, a Plain
in a Park.

Ibid. Level Downs; Even Plains: The Downs have their Name of Saxon original of
Dune, a Mountain, they being Plains spread on the tops of Hills.

V. 254. Or Palmy Hillock; Or some small Hill with Palm Trees crowned. Hillock,
a Diminutive of Hill, as Bullock, of Bull.

V. 255. Of some Irriguous Valley; Of some well-water'd Valley, set to show her
blessed Abundance. Irriguous, Irriguus, Lat. full of Springs and Rills; it is the
Epither of a Garden in Horace, Irriguo nihil est elutius horto. Sat. Lib. 2. 4.

Of a Fountain in Virgil, Irriguumque bibant violaria Fontem. Georg. 4.

V. 256. Without Thorn the Rose; According to the general Supposition, that the
Earth, before it was accursed for Man's Sin and Punishment, brought forth no
Thorns, Genesis 3. Verse. 18. But whether the charming Rose had not its Guard about
it originally, that every rude Hand might not sully and prostitute its blushing
Beauties, is not determinable.

V. 257. Umbrageous Grots; Cool Shady Arbors: Umbrageous, Shady; Ombragieux,
Fr. as Umbrage, all of Umbraculum and Umbra, Lat. Shade. A Grot is a Cave, a
Hiding Place from the heat of the Sun; of the Fr. Grotte, the Corruption of the
Lat. Crypta, a Derivative of (...), to hide.

V. 258. The Mantling Vine; The spreading Vine exposes to the Sun her Purple
Fruit, and by degrees ^eeps up, wantoning and extravagant. Mantling, of Mantle,
and this of the Fr. Manteau, of the Lat. Mantelum, used by Plautus for a Cloak;
so the Mantling Vine from its covering any thing it grows against, or
overspreads; so Sibma, a Place abounding in Vineyards, is said to be Clad with
Vines, Book 1. Verse. 410. So our Author in his Description of Raphael says, The
Pair (of Wings) that clad each Shoulder broad came Mantling over his Breast
with Regal Ornament, Book 5. Verse. 279. That is, The Wings that covered his
Shoulders, came over his Bosom, like a Royal Mantle. Luxuriant, growing rank,
and running out into Leaves and curling Tendrils, of the Lat. Luxuriare, to
grow rank. At si Luxuria Foliorum exuberat umbra, in the same sense, Geo. 1.

That is bolder of the Horses broad Breast; Luxuriatque toris animosum pectus.
Geo. 3.

V. 260. Murmuring Waters fall down the slope Hills; The Purling Streams run
down the sideling Hills. Murmuring, of Murmurare, of (...), Gr. a word made in
imitation of the sound of Running Streams, when troubled with the Stone or
Gravel: How short, and yet how expressive or Virg. Ecce, supercilio Clivosi
tramitis undam
Eli^^^ Illa cadens raucum per levia murmur
Sa^^ ciet. Geor. 1.


The Etymologists will have Slope derived of the Bell. Slap, loose, remiss,
because a Rope stretched tight, makes a direct, but hanging loose, an oblique
Line.

V. 263. Her Crystal Mirror holds; Or assemble in a smooth Lake, that in his
shining Surface, like a Looking-Glass, shows the Green Bank befringed with
Flowers, and beset with sweet smelling Mirtles. Mirror, of the Fr. Miroir, a
Looking-Glass.

Myrtle, is a little Tree, or rather a Shrub, whose Leaves and Berries yield a
pleasing Fragrancy, clothed with perpetual Verdure, of its Greek Appellation
(...), still retaining its ancient Name. -- Et amantes littora Myrtos, was the
Observation in Virgil's time.

V. 264. Aires, Vernal Aires; Soft Breaths and gentle Gales, perfumed by Flowery
Fields and Orange Groves, move the Trees trembling Leaves into a Tune,
consorting with the Feathered Quire. Aires seem here to be meant of Musical
Airs, sweet and yet brisk, which have their Derivation of the Gr. (...), the
Air; for all Music, either Vocal or Instrumental, is but the beating and
breaking of the Air, according to various Measures and Modulations. Attune, a
word of our Authors Coinage, of Time, which as before of (...), Gr. Intensie.
Avia tum resonant avibus Virgulta canoris. Georg. 2.

V. 266. While Universal Pan, etc. While Universal Nature linked with the
Graceful, and the Flowery Season danced a perpetual Round, and throughout the
Earth, yet unpolluted led Eternal Spring. All the Poets favor the Opinion of
the Worlds Creation in the Spring. -- Ver illuderat, ver magnus agebat
Orbis, and Hyberni parcebant Flatibus Euri;
Cum primum lucem pecudes hausere, virumque
Ferrea progenies duris caput extulit arvis
Immissaeque ferae Sylvis, and sidera Coelo. --
Et exciperet Coeli Indulgentia terras. Virg. Geor. 2.
Ver erat aeternum, placidique tepentibus auris
Mulcebant Zephyri natos sine semine flores. Meta. 1.


Pan; (...), Interpreted by Macrobius, Universae substantiae Materialis
Dominator, the Universal Nature, as the Gr. (...) signifies, All, the whole
Frame of Nature, the Universe. (...). Hom. in Pana.

Hence in the Days of Heathenism taken for the Sun, the visible, most powerful,
and glorious God of the World, governed (as to appearance) by his Eternal
Influence. Suitable to this Opinion Orpheus styles him the powerful Deity, and
makes Heaven, Earth, the Sea, and Immortal Fire, Members of his Immense Body.
(...),
(...),
(...). Orph. in Pana.


Exactly well therefore does our Poet give him the Title of Universal Pan, and
join him with the dancing Hours and Graces, the Fruits of the Earth, and their
Seasons depending on his enlivening Lamp, and the Measures of his Motion.

V. 267. Knit with the Graces and the Hours; By the Graces and the Hours, are
here meant the Flowers and fruitful Seasons, produced on Earth by the Suns
Universal Heat, and the difference made by the Accesses and Recesses of his
Inspiriting Influence. The Graces are reckoned three, the Offspring of Jupiter
and Eurynome, the Daughter of the Ocean, (that is, of Heat and Moisture) the
Composition of all things. (...),
(...),
(...). Hesiod. Theog.


That these Graces were taken for the beautiful Seasons, in which all things
seem to dance and smile, in an Universal Joy, is plain from Horace: Diffugere
nives; Redeunt jam Gramina Campis, etc.
Gratia cum Nymphis, Geminisque sororibus audet
Ducere nuda Choros. Od. 7. Carm. Lib. 4.


Aratus calls the Hours (...), Fruitful, Time being requisite to the Maturity
of all Things. -- (...).

Homer gives 'em the Power of shutting and opening of Heaven; that is, of fair
and foul Weather, equally requisite. (...),
(...)
(...).


And he joins both the Graces and the Hours Hand in Hand, with Harmony, Youth
and Venus, three Charming Companions; (...)
(...),
(...).


V. 269. Of Enna where Proserpin, etc. Proserpina was the Daughter of Jupiter
and Ceres, carried away by Pluto the Subterranean God, as she was gathering
Flowers on the top of Enna, a beauteous Plain, on an Hill not far from a City
of the same Name in the middle of the Island of Sicily. Haud procul Hennaeis
locus est a maenibus, altae
Nomine Pergus, aquae. Non illo plura Caystros
Carmina Cygnorum labentibus audit in undis.
Sylva Coronat aquas, cingens latus omne, suisque
Frondibus, ut velo, Phoebeos submovet ignes.
Frigora dant rami, Tyrios humus humida Flores.
Perpetuum ver est. Quo dum Proserpina luco
Ludit, and aut violas, aut candida lilia carpit;
Poene simul visa est, dilectaque raptaque Diti. Ovid. Meta. 5.


With him agrees the Neoterick Claudian: Forma loci superat Flores: Curvata
tumore
Parvo planities, and Mollibus edita clivis
Creverat in Collem, etc. de Raptu Proserp. Lib. 2.


He that would see more of this Place, may read the Florid Description Cicero
has made of it in his sixth Invective against Verres: Vetus est haec Opinio
Judices, etc.

V. 270. By Gloomy Dis; By the black God of Hell. Dis a Divitiis, as his other
Name Pluto, of (...), Gr. Riches, because the most Precious Metals are found
and dug under ground, out of the Subterranean Vaults and Neighborhood of Hell.

Ceres, the Daughter of Saturn and Ops, Sister to Pluto, Jove, Juno and
Neptune, the first that taught Mankind the Art of Ploughing and Sowing. Prima
Ceres ferro Mortales vertere terram
Instituit. Virg. Georg. 1.
Prima Ceres unco glebam dimovit aratro;
Prima dedit fruges, alimentaque mitia terris. Meta. Lib. 5.
Quas dea per terras, and quoe erraverit undos
Dicere longa mora est, quoerenti defuit Orbis. Ibid.


Dis, or Pluto, being refused by all the Goddesses, because of his ill Looks,
dark Kingdom, and darker Complexion, was forced to make his way through the
Earth into the fair Ennean Field, where, in his Ebon Chariot, he snatched up
Ceres her beautiful Daughter, who, ignorant what was become of her, wandered all
the World over to seek her; and as she made her Enquiries, taught Mankind the
Art of Tillage.

V. 273. Of Daphne by Orontes. Daphne was the most celebrated and delicious
Suburbs of Antioch, the Capital of Syria, or rather of the East, seated on both
the Banks of Orontes: It was a vast Grove of Laurels, (whence it took the Name
(...), Gr. a Laurel) intermixed with tall Cypress-Trees, defying the Suns
piercing Rays, under whose thick Shade nevertheless, the Earth was Luxuriant in
Flowers, it was full of Fountains, and had one supposed to derive its Waters
from the Castalian Spring, and endued with the same Power of promoting the
Spirit of Divination in its Drinkers, as well as that at Delphos; Zozom. in his
Description of Daphne. Orteliu^ has an exact Delineation of this bounteous
Grove in the end of his Maps.

Orontes, a beautiful River of Syria, springing out of Mount Libanus, and
running to Antioch. I am pridem Syrus in Tyberim defluxit Orontes. Juv. Sat. 3.
En quantum Tygris, quantum celer ambit Orontes. Luc. Lib. 6.


V. 274. Inspired Castalian Spring; Was a Fountain at the Foot of the Hill
Parnassus, so named of Castalia, a Virgin Mistress of Apollo, turned into this
cold Stream, for refusing his Flames; those that pretended to Poetry or
Prophecy, washed their Eyes in this Chaste Fountain, to which the enamored
Deity gave the Power of Inspiration. Inspiratus, Lat. one endowed with
preternatural Knowledge. -- Numine afflatus Qui rore puro Castaliae lavit
Crines solutos. Hor. Car. Lib. 3. Od. 4.
-- Qua nulla priorum
Castaliam molli divertitur Orbita clivo. Geor. 3.


V. 275. Nor that Nyseian Isle girt with the River Triton. Nysa was a City in
an Island of the same Name, encompassed and begirt by the River Triton in
Africa, from which Pallos took her Name Tritonia, of her appearing first on
its Banks. Et Pallas Lybicis Tritonides edita Lymphis. Sil. Ita. Lib. 9.

This Island, for its Fertility, the Goodness of the Air and Soil, and for the
Production of the choicest and most delicious Fruits, the coolest Fountains and
most delightful Shades, as well as for abundance of the choicest Vines
naturally growing there, was extremely celebrated. (...)
(...). Hom. in Bacch.
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...). Ibid.
-- Inde datum Nymphae Nyseides antris
Occuluere suis, lactisque alimenta dedere. Meta. Lib. 3.


V. 276. Where old Cham -- Ammon call and Lybian Jove. Cham, or Ham, the second
Son of Noah, (therefore styled Old) Peopled Egypt and Lybia, and was the most
Ancient and Renowned of all the Jupiters: He of the Grecians and Romans, being
an Upstart in Comparison, living not long before the Trojan War, as is evident
by his Sons, Castor, Pollux, Hercules, Sarpedon, and others employed in it.
Ammon therefore is not to be fetched of (...), Gr. Sand, because his famous
Temple was seated in the Sandy Deserts of Lybia, but of Ham, with the Greek
Termination made Hammon, and so Ammon. Chammon, or Chammoun in the Coptick
Tongue, though a seeming Derivative of the Heb. (...), Heat, is undoubtedly to
be referred to this great Cham. -- Templum Lybicis quod Gentibus unum, etc.
Quamvis AEthiopum Populis, Arabumque Beatis
Gentibus, atque Indis unus fit Jupiter Ammon. Luc. Lib. 9.


See the Description of this Temple in Q. Curt. Lib. 4.

Gentiles; Gentes, Lat. the Nations, (...), the People that knew not the true
God, the Heathen Idolaters.

V. 278. Hid Amalthea and her Florid Son, etc. Our Author follows the relation
of Diodorus Siculus, Lib. 2. Cap. 5. of this Lybian Jupiter, who is said to
have been a King of that Country, Married to Rea the Daughter of Saturn, from
whose Jealous Eyes he hid his Mistress Amalthea and her Son Bacchus, the
Planter of Vines, and Deity of Drunkards, in the beautiful Island Nyse, lying
in the River Triton: The same Story is translated by Sir Walter Rawleigh,
History of the World, Book 1. Chap. 6. Sect. 5.

Amalthea; (...), Gr. was a beautiful Lady, whom in recompense of her Favors,
her beloved Jupiter made Queen of a fruitful Country, which lying in the shape
of a Bulls Horn, gave occasion to the Proverb Amaltheae Cornu, and (...), Gr.
to grow rich. Florid, Floridus, Lat. gay, Iusty.

V. 279. Young Bacchus; The famous God of Wine, too well known all over the
World, and too much worshipped. The Poets generally report him the Son of
Jupiter and Semele, etc. as also Rhea the Wife of Saturn and Mother of Jupiter,
confounding their fabulous Histories of their dark Idolatries. Stepdame, a
Mother in Law, of Stief, Belg. and Dame, Fr. a Mistress, a rigid, stiff, and
cruel Mother.

V. 280. Where Abassin Kings; Where the Kings of Ethiopia kept under sweet
retirement their Royal Sons on Mount Amara, encompassed round with Alabaster
Rocks a whole Days Journey high; though this by some was taken to be Paradise
under the burning Line, by Niles long-hidden Head, but distant far from this
fair Syrian Garden, etc. The Upper Ethiopia, (the Dominion of Prester John) was
anciently called Abassine, of its chief River Abas, and Abissinia is the Name
of one of its Kingdoms. Issue, of the Fr. Issue, Children, Successors, of
Issir, and this of the Lat. Exire, to go out from, to proceed from, as Children
from their Parents. Guard, keep under Confinement, of the Fr. Garder, to watch,
to secure.

V. 281. Mount Amara: Amara is a Province about the middle of the higher
Ethiopia, and one of the 70 petty Kingdoms formerly Tributary, and now annexed
to the Abassin Empire: In it there is a Mountain of the same Name (Hamhar,)
about 90 Miles in compass, and a Day^ Journey high, with one only access, and
that impregnably fortified: The Summit of this shining Rock is adorned with
many beautiful Palaces, a most delightful Place, and charming Prospect, where
the Emperors Sons are carefully guarded, and as diligently educated, from
whence the Eldest is taken to succeed his Father, and others to succeed him if
he die Childless.

V. 282. Under the Ethiop Line; Under the Equinoctial Line, the Fertility and
wonderful Pleasantness of the Country, giving occasion to Tertullian,
Bonaventure, and Durandus, to place Paradise under this Burning Line, formerly
thought uninhabitable, though by Experience found to be fanned daily by a Cool
Eastern Breeze, the Nights being temperate by the entire Interposition of the
Earth, that no place is to be found on Earth that approaches nearer to the
Nature, Beauty, and Abundance of Paradise, than this Climate. This Country of
the Abissins lies under the Torrid Zone, stretching from the Tropic of Cancer
beyond the Equator. Ethiop, (...), Gr. scorched, and thence black and burnt,
according to the Complexions of its discolored Inhabitants, of (...), to burn,
and (...), the Countenance.

V. 283. By Nilus Head; Near the Fountains of the Nile, sought after by
Sesostris, Cambyses, Alexander the Great, and others, though with small
Satisfaction. -- Non Fabula Mendax
Ausa loqui de font tuo est, ubicunque videris,
Quaereris: Et nulli contingit Gloria genti,
Ut Nilo sit laeta suo. Luc. Lib. 10.


M. Thevenot tells us, from the Report of an Ethiopian Ambassador he met at
Grand Cairo, that Nile has his Head in a great Well, casting up its Water very
high out of the Ground in a large Plain called Ovembromma in the Province of
Ago: This Well is 12 Days Journey from Gouthar, the Capital of Ethiopia; the
Waters take their course Northward, and pass by seven Cataracts before they
enter Egypt: The Country about this Well is so plain, that there are no
Mountains near it by three Weeks Journey. It is on all Hands confirmed, that
the Cause of the Niles Annual Inundation, is from the excessive Rains that fall
in Ethiopia for three Months together in their Winter, but the Egyptian Summer;
well affirmed by Bapt. Scortia, Lib. 2. Cap. 17. de Increm. Nili. Of Ethiopia
being the Native Country of the Nile, and of its rising by Rains, the Ancients
were of Opinion, though not well assured, AEthiopumque feris alieno gurgite
Campos:
Et te terrarum nescit cui debeat Orbis.
Arcanum Natura Caput, non prodidit ulli,
Nec licuit populis parvum te, Nile, videre,
Amovitque sinus, and gentes maluit ortus
Mirari, quam nosse tuos. Consurgere in ipsis
Jus tibi Solstitiis, aliena crescere bruma, Luc. Lib. 10.


V. 284. Wide remote; Far removed: Remotus, Lat. Assyrian Garden, planted in
Eden, afterward called Assyria, bordering on Mesopotamia.

V. 289. Godlike erect; Upright and tall, not grovelling on the Ground like
other Creatures, according to Ovid. Os homini sublime dedit, Coelumque tueri
Jussi, and erectos ad sidera tollere vultus. Meta. Lib. 1.


Well may he term our first Parents Godlike, the Originals of Mankind, made by
God himself, after his own Image, it better suiting the Protoplast than its
correspondent (...), any of the Homerick Heroes. Erectus, Lat. upright.

V. 290. In Naked Majesty; A glorious Nakedness, heightened and set off by
spotless Innocence, preferable to all the gaudy Disguises, worn by Mankind
since the sad Concealments of our Shame. For in the State of Innocence, there
was such an Agreement between Soul and Body, so exact an Obedience paid by the
Sensual to the Rational and Sovereign part, that no audacious, unbecoming
thought could with a guilty Blush have stained the Cheek of Adam, Majestic
even in Nakedness. And they were both Naked, the Man and his Wife, and were not
ashamed, Genesis 2. Verse. 25. Lords of all, according to the Dominion delegated to
them by the Lord of all things; Be fruitful, and multiply, and replenish the
Earth, and subdue it, and have Dominion over the Fish of the Sea, and over the
fowl of the Air, and over every living thing that moves on the Earth, Genesis 1.
Verse. 28.

V. 293. Truth, Wisdom, Sanctitude severe, etc. Truth and Wisdom, and pure and
strict Uprightness, the absolute Image of their Glorious Creator, shone in
their Heavenly Looks. Sanctitude severe, Severa Sanctitudo, that strict
Conformity to their Makers Commands, exact and conformable to the Rectitude by
him implanted in their Nature, and left subordinate to the Government and
Guidance of their innate Free Will. Sanctitudo, Lat. Uprightness: Severus, Lat.
strict, exact.

V. 294. In true Filial Freedom placed; Consisting in that Frank and ready
Obedience that Sons pay to their Fathers, in which is founded all the Authority
of Mankind, as being the result of Obedience from Children due to Parents,
grounded on Paternal Authority, in respect of Prudence, Truth and Sanctitude.

V. 298. And sweet Attractive Grace; And sweet alluring Charms, from her
pleasing and winning Behavior. Attractive, alluring, winning, of the Lat.
Attrahere, to draw to, to entice.

V. 299. He for God only, she for God in him; This Asseveration of our Author
seems maintainable from St. Paul's Doctrine, The Head of every Man is Christ,
and the Head of the Woman is the Man, and the Head of Christ is God, 1 Cor. 11.
Verse. 3. and at Verse. 7. Man is the Image and Glory of God: But the Woman is
the Glory of the Man. And Verse. 9. Neither is the Man created for the Woman,
but the Woman for the Man. The manifest import of all which is, that Man is the
Glorious and Majestic Image of his Maker, his Vicegerent on Earth, exercising
Rule and Dominion over the Creation: And that Woman is the Glory of the Man;
that is, for his Glory, Satisfaction and Delight, out of him made his
Companion, and as it were his Image, according to our Poets Explanation, Book
8. Verse. 540. For well I understand in the Prime End
Of Nature her the Inferior, in the Mind
And inward Faculties, which most excel;
In outward also her resembling less
His Image who made both, and less expressing
The Character of the Dominion given
Over other Creatures.


V. 301. Hyacinthin Locks; His dark brown Hair hung parted from his Forehead,
curling round, Manly and Majestic. Thus Homer describes Ulysses, aided by
Minerva to render him more Charming. (...)
(...).


He had curled Hair, for Color like a Hyacinth Flower; that Hyacinthin ought
to be understood of black, or very dark-colored Hair, will be manifest from
the Color and Description of this Flower. Hyacinthus est genus Violae vernae,
color obscurae purpurae, quam Romani vaccinium vocant, Fulg. Lib. 3. So
Theocritus, (...)
(...).


Which Virgil imitating, Alba ligustra cadunt, vaccinia nigra leguntur. Ecl. 2.
Et Suave-rubens Hyacinthus. Ecl. 3.
Ferrugineos Hyacinthos. Geo. 4.


From whence we are informed, that the Poets attributed to this Flower, Black,
Red, and a Color of these mixed, that of rusty Iron: But the most Judicious
interpret Ferrugineus to be that Color, which polished Iron, when grown cold,
after having been red hot, represents, which is a sort of Violet, not well
suiting with good colored Hair. It is very observable, that such Epithets as
this are not to be taken in too strict a sense; for Gold being the most
excellent among Metals, Purple among Colors, the Rose, and anciently the
Hyacinth, among Flowers; hence Venus Aurea, AEn. 10. Rosea cervix. and lumenque
juventae Purpureum, AEn. 1. and this Hyacinthin Hair. Of Apollo's beloved Boy
turned into this Flower, read Meta. 10. Te quoque Amyclide, posuisset in
aethere Phoebus.

V. 303. Clustring; Curling in Rings, curled round in Clusters like the Vines
swelling Bunch. Cluster, of the Sax. Clurster, a Bunch of Grapes.

V. 304. She as a Vail, etc. She wore her Yellow Locks, loose and free from all
Ornaments, hanging down to her small slender Waste, like Natures Vail, but
circled into wanton little Rings, like the Vines tender Curls, which betoken
soft Subjection, or Submission rather, to her Husbands sway. Vail, Fr. Voile,
of the Lat. Velum.

V. 305. Golden Tresses; Golden Yellow Locks, in ancient times of great esteem.
Aurea Caesaries Ollis. AEn. 8.
-- Nudo citi vertice fulva
Caesaries. AEn. 11.


(...), Auricomus, Golden Locks, is a Commendation as old as Hesiod, in his
(...). Tresses, of the Fr. Tresse de Cheveux, a Lock of Hair.

V. 306. Disheveled Hair; Dischevele, Fr. loose, hanging down at length.

V. 307. As the Vine curls her Tendrils; As the Vine twists her tender Rings.
Tendrils are those little curling Shoots that catch hold of the Branches of a
Vine, or any thing set to support it; so called a tendendo, from its creeping
forward by that means; others say, a tenendo.

V. 308. Which implied Subjection: St. Paul tells us, That even Nature it self
teaches, that for Men to wear long Hair is a shame; that is, a disgrace, and
sign of a soft and effeminate temper: But if a Woman have long Hair, it is a
Glory to her; for her Hair is given her for a Vail, 1 Cor. 11. Verse. 14, 15.
(...), pro velamine. The Romans, and most other Nations; seem to have learned
the Custom of Vailing Women, especially at their Marriages, from this dictate
of Nature, and the word nubere always applied to Women, was taken a nubendo,
from Vailing them, when Married and put into their Husbands Power; whence the
witty Martial says, Uxori nubere nolo meae. Now this Natural Vail of Womankind,
is by the Apostle in the Chapter above cited, used as an Argument and
Indication of their Subjection, but as our Poet sweetens it, to be required
with gentle sway, on soft and easy terms, to be grounded on Reason, on just
and fit, and supported and maintained by all imaginable Tenderness, and soft
Endearments.

V. 310. Yielded with Coy Submission, etc. Yielded with shy surrender, meek
disdain,
And faint refusal, endearing loves delays.


Modest Pride, seems to imply, that just Value and modest Self-esteem, that the
Fair Sex ought to regard; that Conscience of their Worth, which if well
managed, sets off the soft Submission of a kind Companion, and differences it
from the dull forced Obedience of a Slave. This pretty mixture of Modesty and
Pride, is the Safeguard of the Sex, not too stiff and incompliant, yet
inflexible, and disdaining to descend to any Indecency or Indiscretion; a
little Pride being a necessary Ingredient to preserve both Body and Mind in
their Native Cleanliness and Purity.

Coy; Shy, or Schewen, Bell. to shun, to avoid. Reluctant, of Reluctans, Lat.
struggling; of Reluctari, Lat. to strive.

V. 312. Nor those Mysterious Parts, etc. Those Privy Parts then were not hid.
All the Secrets of Heathen Religion and Philosophy were carefully concealed
from the Vulgar, and therefore called (...), Mysteries, not exposed to common
and profane Eyes, but by constant Concealment made more Awful and Majestic.
Our Author has well applied it to those Parts, which all Civilized Nations are
justly concerned to conceal. Concealed, of con and celare, Lat. to hide.

V. 313. Guilty -- Dishonest Shame; Unseemly Shame, the Offspring of Guilt and
Sin: Difhonest, ugly, disgraceful, of dis, the Privative Particle, and
honestus, Lat. comely. Shame, of the Gr. (...), because discoverable in the
Face, disordered by the guilty Blush.

V. 314. Honor dishonorable; Nihil Natural turpe, is an Axiom most true,
That none of the Works and Acts of Nature are disgraceful; yet Sinful Mankind
have introduced among them Dishonest Shame, and a Dishonorable sort of Honor,
the mere Shows and Pretenses of Purity, which in their first state of
Simplicity and Innocence, were Strangers to the World, when Man, absolute
Master of himself, of all his Thoughts and Passions, that obeyed the
Sovereignty of Reason, dreaded no Indecency, though naked, because innocent;
still visible in Children, that play naked without the Crimson Coverture of a
Blush, till they attain the sense of Guilty Shame.

V. 323. Adam the goodliest Man of Men, etc. That the Protoplast, the first
Man, came most complete out of the Hand of his Creator, perfect in all the
Powers and Faculties both of Body and Soul: That his Consort and Derivative Eve
was also accomplished in like manner, in the full Bloom of Beauty, and all the
Charming Ornaments of which her Sex was capable, is beyond all question: That
they were of Growth fit for Propagation, and of Understanding capable of GOD's
Commands, is evident from the Benediction bestowed on 'em, Genesis 1. Verse. 28.
and the Injunction Genesis 2. Verse. 17. which gave rise to that Opinion of the
Fathers, that Adam was created of the Size that his Sons might arrive at about
Fifty Years old, (Childhood and Youth enlarging and lessening in the times of
different Longaevity;) and therefore doubtless they did not only excel all
their Descendents, as the first Originals of Mankind, but as the most exact
Image of their Maker, while they continued in glorious Innocence, which in
their sinful Posterity is so defaced, that the most accomplished of either Sex,
is but a dull dry Copy of those Masterpieces of the Almighty.

There is in these two Verses something so plain, and yet so full and so close
couched, that it is hard to be expressed so fully, and yet so concisely. Omnes
stirpe sua genitos, superavit Adamus
Frontis honor sui; and nivei dulcedine vultus,
Omnes stirpe sua genitas, superaverat Eva. Hog.
-- Adamus
Ante homines, a se genitos, pulcherrimus unus,
Inter formosas Eva formosissima natas.


Both short of the Beauty, as well as Brevity of the Original.

V. 325. Under a Tuft of Shade; Under a shady Grove, that on a Green allowed
the wanton Winds a whispering place, etc. Tuft, of the Fr. Touffe de bois, a
little Grove, Trees growing thick about a Country Seat.

V. 329. To recommend cool Zephyr; To make the soft West-Wind more pleasing.
Zephyr, (...), as if (...), the reviving Wind that awakens the Spring, in Lat.
Favonius:

Genitalis Mundi Spiritus a fovendo dictus. Plin. Lib. 16. 25. The Favorite of
the Poets, the Inhabitant of Alcinous his Garden celebrated by Homer. -- (...)
(...).
Sive sub incertas Zephyris motantibus umbras. Virg. Ecl. 5.


V. 330. Appetite more grateful; Hunger more pleasant in being satisfied:
Hunger the best Sauce, though seldom served to the best furnished Tables.
Appetite, Appetitus, Lat. of Appetere, to desire, to crave.

V. 332. Nectarine Fruits, etc. Delicious Fruits, which the o'er-loaded bending
Boughs, reached down to them, as leaning, sidelong they sat, on the soft
yielding Bank, bestrew'd with Flowers. Nectarine, of Nectareus, Lat. (...),
sweet like Nectar, better suiting the delicious Fruits of Paradise than Helens
perfumed Petticoat in Homer: (...).

Compliant, willing, yielding, of the Verb to comply, that is, to yield, to
agree to.

V. 333. Sat recline; Sat leaning, as the manner of the Ancients was, whence
accumbere, Lat. to dine. Recline, Reclinus, Lat. leaning, lying down on.
Defigunt tellure hasta^s and Scuta reclinant. AEn. 12.

V. 334. Damask'd with Flowers; Covered all over with Flowers. Damask'd, of
Damasse, Fr. to be wrought in Flowers, like Silk, or Linen, first so made at
Damascus, a Syrian City of great Fame, now called Damas.

V. 335. The savoury Pulp they chew; They eat the soft Juicy inside of the
Fruit. Savoury, pleasant to the taste, of savor, sapor, Lat. taste. Pulp, of
Pulpa, Lat. the Pith or inside of any thing that is soft, as Pulpa Cassiae, Jun.

V. 336. Scoop the Brimming Stream; And in the hollow Rind lave and take up the
Brimful Stream, an expedient more seemly than that of Diogenes Drinking out of
his Hand.

V. 338. Nor Youthful Dalliance, etc. Nor Sportiveness and Youthful Pleasure,
such as becomes Young Persons joined in Matrimonial State, when by themselves
alone. Dalliance, Pleasure, of the Verb to Dally, to play, to divert one,
derived by some, of (...), Gr. to flourish, Youth being the fittest time for
Dalliance; others of Delay, to while, and pass the time away, alluding to the
Fr. Phrase, Passer son envy. Nuptial League, Marriage, the Covenant entered
into by the Married Couple. Nuptialis, Lat. of Nuptiae, Lat. a Wedding.

V. 340. Frisking played; Danced and played about 'em, endeavoring to divert
their Lords. Frisque, Fr. brisk, lively, nimble.

V. 341. Of all Chase; Of all sorts of Game, such as are hunted since either
for Sport or Prey, of Chasser, Fr. to hunt, to pursue.

V. 343. Sporting the Lion Ramp'd; The Lion ramping, sported and played
standing upright. A Lion Rampant is by the Heralds drawn standing on his hinder
Legs, and pawing with the other two, although it be derivable of the Fr.
Remper, to creep.

V. 344. Dandl'd the Kid; Played with, and danced the Kid, of the Ger. Danten,
or the Fr. Dandiner, to play with, as Nurses do with Children. It Is the general
Opinion, and highly probable, that before Adam violated the Command of his
Maker, there was an Universal Peace, even among the fiercest Beasts, throughout
the whole Creation; but Sin being the Parent of Death, disturbed that happy
Concord and Harmony of Nature, and in order to Destruction, introduced Violence
and Slaughter first among the Brutes and Irrational Beings, and early too among
the Sons of Adam. Ifaiah describing the Peaceful Kingdom of the Messiah,
expresses it by the same Similitudes: The Wolf also shall dwell with the Lamb,
and the Leopard shall lie down with the Kid, and the Calf, and the young Lion,
and the Fatling together, and a little Child shall lead them, etc. Chap. 11.
Verse. 6, and 7. and Chap. 65. Verse. 25. The Metrick Similies are much the same:
(...)
(...). Theo. Idul. 31.
Nec Lupus insidias pecori, nec retia cervis
Ulla dolum meditantur, as rendered by Virg. Ecl. 5.


Ibid. Tigers; A Tiger is a swift and very fierce Beast; Tigris is an Armenian
word for swift, signifying this Beast, an Arrow, and the Famous River of that
Name, all from their swiftness and impetuosity. Hence Virgil, Armenias curru
subjungere Tigres, Ecl. 5.

Claudian describes the manner of taking this furious Creature; Arduus Hyrcana
quatitur sic Matre Niphates,
Cujus Achaemenio Regi ludibria natos
Avexit tremebundus eques, fremit illa Marito
Mobilior Zephyro, totamque virentibus iram
Dispergit Maculis, jam jamque hausur a profundo
Ore virum, vitreae tardatur imagine formae. De Rup. Pros. Lib. 3.


Ibid. Ounces; An Ounce is a Beast engendered between a Wolf and a Stag,
therefore e luporum cervariorum genere, exceeding quick of sight, his Skin
speckled and spotted with various Colors. Ounce, of the Span. Lonza, the
Corruption of the Ablat. Lynce, of Lynx, and this of the Gr. (...), or (...).
Quid Lynces, Bacchi variae, and genus acre Luporum? Georg. 3.

Ibid. Pards; Pardi, Lat. the Mass Panthers, or Leopards, covered with Skins
curiously spotted. Pardus is a Derivative of (...), from the ill savor issuing
from the Beast, or as others of (...), Gr. to destroy, from its Fierceness and
Cruelty.

V. 345. Gambold, etc. Played all their tumbling Tricks before 'em. To Gambol,
is of the Fr. Gambader, to show Tricks, and Gambadeur, Fr. for a Tumbler, of
Jambe, Fr. the Leg.

V. 347. Wreathed his lithe Proboscis, the huge o'ergrown Elephant twisted his
Limber Snout to please and divert 'em. Unweildy, overgrown, not able to bear
his Bulk, of the Particle un Privative, and the Sax. Wildan, to Govern, or
Manage. Elephant, of (...), Gr. for the Bulky Beast so called, frequent in
India, and famous in many Battles, with their Castles of Armed Men on their
Backs. Wreathed, turned round, twisted, of the Sax. Wrydan, to twist, whence
Wreathe, a Garland.

Lithe Proboscis, his Limber Trunk. Lithe, of the Sax. Lid, gentle, pliable,
soft. Proboscis, (...), Gr. the Elephants Trunk, so pliant and useful to him,
that Cicero styles it Elephan^orum Manum, common to this Creature with others
much his Inferiors, Flies and Fleas. It Is derived of (...), Gr. to feed.

V. 348. The Serpent sly insinuating; The cunning Serpent wrapping himself up
close together, with many intricate and subtle Turnings, twisted his braided
Tail. Insinuating, insinuans sese, Lat. wrapping, or rolling up, and as it were
embosoming himself: Sinuosus and Sinuare, are words often used by Virgil, to
express the winding Motions of this wily Animal. Sinuatque immensa volumine
terga. AEn. 2.
Saucius at Serpens sinuosa volumina versat. AEn. 11.


Ibid. With Gordian Twine; With many intricate Turnings, twisted and involved
like the Famous Gordlan Knot, hung up in Apollo's Temple, by Gordius King of
Phrygia, but formerly a Husbandman, who coming first on a fatal Day into the
Temple, was by the Oracle declared King of that Country, and in memory of his
Preferment, hung up the Ropes that formerly fastened his Team to the Plough,
pleated in so strange a manner, that the Sovereignty of those Countries (some
say of the World) was predicted to any one that could untie the intricate and
perplexed Knot, whence the Proverb, Nodus Gordianus, for an inextricable
Difficulty; and Horace, Dignus vindice Nodus. Art. Poet.

Alexander the Great cut it in pieces with his Sword, resolving to frustrate,
if he could not fulfill the Prophecy. Twine, of the Belg. Tweyn, Thread, of
Tweynen, to twist, a Twine Thread.

V. 349. His Breaded Train; His Platted Tail. Breaded, or Braided, is of
Bryden, Bell to Weave. Train, of the Fr. Traisner, to draw after, a Trahendo,
Lat.

V. 351. Couched or ruminating; Laid on the Grass. Couchez, Fr. of Coucher, to
lie down, or chewing of the Cud before they go to rest. Ruminare, Lat. to chew
the Cud as many Beasts do, hence Hostiae Ruminales, Plin. Sacrifices of such
Creatures, this Ruminating being one of the Characteristicks of their
Cleanness, Levit. 11.

V. 354. To th'Occan Isles; To the Islands sprinkled over the Western Ocean.
(...), of (...). For now the Setting-Sun, making more speed down-Hill, toward
the Sea, drew near declining, and on the other side of Heaven, the Stars that
wait upon the Evening rose. Declined, of Declinare, Lat. to grow low, was
drawing lower near the Western part of the Horizon. That the Sun set in, and
arose out of the Sea, was at least the Poetic Opinion of the Ancients. (...).
(...).
(...).
-- Cum Sol
Praecipitem Oceani rubro lavit aequore currum. Geo. 3.
Quid tantum Oceano properent se tingere Soles
Hyberni. Geo. 2.
Cum primum alto se gurgite tollunt
Solis equi. AEn. 12.
-- Lux tarde discedere visa
Praecipitatur aquis and aquis nox surgit ab isdem. Meta. 4.


So our Author, The Sun at Even sups with the Ocean. Book 5. Verse. 425.

Ibid. And in the ascending Scale; And on the rising side of Heaven: The
ascending, of ascendere, Lat. to climb, to get up, the side on which the Sun
climbs to his Noon-tyde height.

At the Vernal and Autumnal Equinoxes, the Days and Nights being of equal
length, seem to be weighed in AEquilibrio, and to stand in even Balance: But at
other times, the measure of 'em (caused by the inequality of the Suns Compass
and Career) being different, at his setting, that is, going down into the lower
Hemisphere, the Evening-Stars, forerunners of the Night, rise and appear
earlier or later in the other half of Heaven, as that bright Being, turns the
Scales of Day and Night.

V. 355. That usher Evening is That go before, that precede the Evening, one
extremely bright, being thence named the Evening-Star. To usher, is to wait on,
to introduce. Usher, Huissier, Fr. of Huis, Fr. a Gate, a Door, where he stood
to do his Office.

V. 360. Earth-born perhaps; And the Lord God formed Man of the Dust of the
Ground, Genesis 2. 7. That Mankind was created to repair the Ruin of the
Rebellious Angels, and to repeople the Heavenly Palaces, depopulated by many
Millions of the Celestial Tribes, (the ancient Inhabitants of those blessed
Abodes) was the Opinion of Rupertus. But Pererius and others conceive, that
this World, and Man the height of the Terrestrial Creation, had in the
Almighties appointed time, been made, although the whole Angelick Nature had
stood firm and obedient in their holy state; which our Poet has intimated in
Book 1. Verse. 651. New Worlds --
-- Whereof so rife,
There went a Fame in Heaven, that he ere long
Intended to create, and therein plant
A Generation, whom his choice regard
Should favor equal to the Sons of Heaven.


Now there being three distinct Degrees of Nature, the first and highest, of
Angelick and Incorporeal Beings; the last and lowest, of Corporeal Substances,
Plants and Animals; it seems reasonable, that a third was always intended,
participating of both, Man the Mixture and Mean of these two Extremes, a Being
both Corporeal and Incorporeal, not made as a Supplement, but rather as the
Completion and Commander of the Creation under him, Genesis 1. Verse. 28.

V. 389. Melt; Men are said to Melt into Compassion, Metaphorically from the
dissolving into Tenderness and Pity, as Metals are melted down by Fire. Melt,
of the Ger. Smelten, or perhaps of the Gr. (...), Liquefacere.

V. 390. Honor and Empire, etc. Revenge, Glory, Empire, Honor, and such like
Reasons of State, are Arguments better becoming this Grand Destroyer, the
Arch-Enemy of all Mankind, than any Earthly and Vainglorious Monarch.

V. 395. On that high Tree; The Tree of Life, where our Poet pearch'd him, at
V. 195.

V. 402. He stalks with fiery Glare; Now like a Lion with sparkling Eyes,
Majestickly he walks about 'em. Glare, and to Glare, is of the Fr. Esclairer,
to sparkle, to glitter as the Eyes of Lions, Tigers, Cats, and other fiery,
furious Beasts do. To stalk, is properly to move gravely, step by step,
resembling the Gr. (...), to walk-in order.

V. 406. Changes his couchant Watch; Shifts his Place, alters his wary Watch.
Couchant, lying close, of coucher, Fr. to lie down. Satan is well compared to a
furious ravenous Tiger: Seneca the Tragedian uses it in the same words almost
in Latin; Jejuna Sylvis qualis in Gangeticis
Inter Juvencos Tygris erravit duos
Utriusque praedae Cupida, quo primos ferat
Incerta Morsus, flectit huc rictus suos,
Illo reflectit, and famem dubiam tenet. Sen. Thyestes.


V. 408. Gripped in each Paw; Seized in his Claws: Gripped, of the Fr. Gripper,
to snatch, to lay violent hold on; or of Griffe, Fr. a Claw, an Eagles Tallon.
It has a Similitude of sound with the Gr. (...), to catch. Paw, of the Fr.
Patte, a Claw, the Foot of a Bird or Beast; originally of Pes, Lat, the Foot,
or perhaps of (...), Gr. from its distinction into several parts.

V. 419. Aught; Any thing, generally Ought, of the Sax. Uht.

V. 433. One easy Prohibition; This one easy Injunction; easy, because but
one: Prohibitio, Lat. a Forbiddance, of prohibere, Lat. to forbid, to command
to the contrary.

V. 438. To prune; To cut, to lop off the superfluous Branches, of the Fr.
Provin, the Luxuriant Shoot of a Vine.

V. 447. Prae-eminent by so much Odds; More excellent by diverse degrees; raised
above me by so many degrees. Praeeminens, Lat. raised, high, excellent, of
praeeminere, Lat. to excel. Consort, Companion, of the Lat. Consors, of the
same Size and Condition; hence, a Wife, and especially that of a King, called
Queen Consort, attaining that Title by her Marriage with a Sovereign Prince.

V. 450. When from Sleep I first awaked; The entrance on Life, may well be
resembled to waking when our Exit Death, is so fitly and frequently compared to
Sleep. Our Author, in this Place and its Parallel, Book 8. Verse. 250. where
Adam relates the first Thoughts and Sentiments he had of himself, and that
Great Being that gave him, his; has litt upon something so new and strange,
that as it cannot square with any Persons but those of our two first
Progenitors, so it is exactly suitable to them, created certainly at full
growth, perfect in Body, Mind and Memory. Otherwise what he says in his
Introduction, For Man to tell how Human Life began,
Is hard; For who himself beginning knew? Book 8. Verse. 250.


It had not only been hard, but impossible for any other Man, to have given a
Relation of his Beginning.

Ibid. Reposed, etc. Laid under a Flowery Shade: Reposed, repositus, Lat. of
the Verb reponere, used by the wary Virgil in the same sense; -- Collapsaque
Membra
Marmoreo referunt Thalamo, stratisque reponunt. AEn. 4.


V. 455. Into a Liquid Plain; Into a smooth moist Plain, of the Lat. Planus,
smooth, even, whence Planities.

V. 456. Pure as the Expanse of Heaven; Clear at the out-spread Sky. Expansum,
Lat. the Firmament, answering to the Hebr. (...), the vast and out-streach'd
Firmament, Genesis 1. Verse. 6. of (...), Expandere, to stretch, or spread out.

V. 459. Into the clear smooth Lake; This Natural Looking-Glass, Virgil and
Ovid, as well as our Author, borrowed of Theocritus. (...). Id. 7. -- Nuper me
in littore vidi
Cum placidum ventis staret mare. Virg. Ecl. 2.
Certe ego me novi, liquidaeque in imagine vidi
Nuper aquae. As Ovid translates it.


V. 461. Within the Watery Gleam; Within the Shining Surface of the Water.
Gleam, of the Sax. Leoma, Light, and Leoman, to shine, both of Lumen, Lat.
Light, warm Gleams, the hot Shinings out of the Sun after Showers. Milton has
improved the Fable of Ovid, by representing Eve like a She Narcissus admiring
her self; and has made it much more probable, that a Person who had never seen
any thing like her self, should be in love with her own faint reflected
Resemblance, than that a Man acquainted with the World and himself, should be
undone by so dull a Dotage. Se Cupit imprudens, and quae probat, ipsa probatur,
Dumque petit, petitur, pariterque accendit and ardet. Meta. 3.


V. 465. Of Sympathy and Love; With Looks betokening Love and mutual Affection.
Sympathy, (...), Gr. Compassion, of (...) and (...), to suffer together, to be
alike affected. Quod petis, est nusquam: Quod amas, avertere perdes.
Cupit ipse teneri
Nam quoties liquidis porreximus oscula Lymphis
Hic toties ad me resupino nititur ore. Meta. Lib. 1.


V. 469. With thee it came and goes. Ista repercussae, quam cernis, imaginis
umbra est.
Nil habet ista sui, tecum venitque manetque,
Tecum discedat; si tu discedere possis. Meta. Lib. 3.


V. 478. Under a Platan; (...), the Plane-Tree, so named from the breadth of
its Leaves. (...). Gr. broad, a Tree useful and delightful for its
extraordinary Shade. Jamque Ministrantem Platanum potentibus umbram. Geor. 4.

V. 485. Nearest my Heart, substantial Life, to give thee Being, I l^nt one of
my Ribs nearest my Heart, whereof thou wast made a living Creature. Nearest my
Heart, as being made of one of his Ribs, whose enclosure surrounds it, Genesis 2.
Verse. 22. Substantialis, Lat. belonging to substance, firm, solid, assured.

V. 486. An Individual Solace; An Inseparable Companion and Comfort, made of a
part taken out of Adam's Side, as intended for his Associate, not his Servant.
Individual, Individuus, Lat. inseparable. Solace, Solatium, Lat. Comfort.

V. 491. Wisdom; The Character of our Savior himself: And the Child grew, and
waxed strong in Spirit, filled with Wisdom. And JESUS increased in Wisdom and
Stature, and in Favor with God and Man, Luke 2. Verse. 40, and 52.

V. 492. Of Conjugal Attraction; So said our Universal Mother, and with Eyes
blameless, though full of Matrimonial Love, and Charming Sweetness, with soft
Submission mixed, etc. Conjugal, Conjugalis, Lat. belonging to Marriage.
Attraction, Attractio, Lat. a drawing to, allurement. Meek surrender, gentle
yielding, meekly giving up her Person to his disposal, of the old Fr.
surrendre, to yield.

V. 500. As Jupiter on Juno smiles, etc. As the Air smiles upon the Earth, when
it makes the Clouds fruitful in seasonable Showers and precious Dews, which
produce May 's perfumed Flowery Offspring. By Jupiter and Juno the Poets
represent the Air and Earth, and though of Kin before, as Et Soror and Conjux,
yet Marry 'em together. So Virg. Tum Pater Omnipotens foecundis imbril us ether
Conjugis in Gremium laetae descendit, and omnes
Magnus alit, magno Commistus corpore, foetus. Geor. 2.


Impregns; Makes fruitful, of Impregnare, Lat. to get with Young.

V. 501. Her Matron Lip; His Wives Lip: Her Married Lips. Matron, of the Lat.
Matrona a Matre, or Quasi Matter nati; for Women as soon as Married were
esteemed Matrons; as being obliged to a way of living more reserved and modest.
Si Matrem familias secus quam Matronarum dignitas postulat, nominamus. Cicer.
pro Coelio.

V. 504. With Jealous Leer Malign Eyed them askane; With Envious and Malicious
Look, Eyed 'em askew. Jealous, of the Fr. Jaloux. Leer, of the Verb To Leer, to
look slyly out of the corners of the Eyes, of the Teut. Lauren, to observe, so,
as not to be seen to do it. Askance, Askew, side-ways, of skaunt, Fr. Canton, a
Corner. Thus plained, thus complained, of the Fr. plaindre, to bemoan one self.

V. 506. Imparadis'd; Enjoying a new, another Paradise in each others Lovely
Embraces. Imparadis'd, placed in a state of extraordinary Happiness; a word
coined by our Author, from that superlatively happy place so named.

V. 519. And do they only stand by Ignorance? By Ignorance, Satan would here
insinuate, such a want of Knowledge, as was necessary to secure their happy and
harmless Condition: Under so gross a want of Understanding our first most
perfect Patterns were not created; all the happy Ignorance they were in, was
only want of knowing Ill, by the Commission of it, at once innocent and secure.

V. 522. Hence I will excite; Here is a fair occasion offered me, to move in
their Minds an itching and inordinate desire of dangerous and daring Knowledge.
Excite, of the Lat. excitare, to raise, to stir up.

V. 523. To reject Envious Commands; To despise and contemn the Command of
their Maker, who seems to grudge, and therefore to forbid 'em all Knowledge
that might raise 'em above their low terrene Estate. To reject, of the Lat.
rejicere, to throw away, to refuse.

V. 537. With sly Circumspection; with heedful Wariness, with cunning Caution:
Sly, of the Sax. Slidan, to slip, or be slippery. Circumspection,
Circumspectio, Lat. heedfulness, of Circumspicere, Lat. to look well about one.

V. 338. Through waste; Through every by-place. Waste, of the Get. Wust,
desolate, or of the Lat. Vastus and Vastare.

V. 539. Mean while in utmost Longitude; In the mean while, that Satan was thus
prowling up and down, the Sun, at utmost distance, where the Heaven with Earth
and Sea seemingly join, was by Degrees drawing toward his setting place. Where
Heaven with Earth and Ocean meet; an exact Description of the Horizon of
Paradise, where the Sky, and Earth, and Ocean, (if in view) seemed at the
utmost endeavor of his Eyes to join and meet each other. Descended, went down
to the lower World beneath, of descendere, Lat. to go down. Longitudo, Lat.
length, distance.

V. 541. And with right Aspect; With his Face directly against; With full Face.
Right, of Rectus, Lat. right against. Aspectus, Lat. the Countenance.

V. 543. Levelled his Evening Rays; Shot directly his Evening Beams. Levelled,
of the Fr. Livel and Liveller, to lay even.

V. 544. It was a Rock of Alabaster; It was a white shining Marble Rock, heaped
up among the Clouds, and visible far off, approachable from below but by one
winding away, on whose Top the lofty Entrance was placed; on all sides else
'twas ragged Rock and broken Cliffs, that as they rose above, so overhung each
other, and rendered it impossible to be ascended any other way. Alabaster,
(...), a kind of White Marble described by Diosc. Lib. 5.

V. 545. With one ascent accessible; To be mounted only one way. Ascensus, Lat.
a going up. Accessible, Accessus, Lat. that may be come to. Cliff, of the word
to Cleave, Clift or Cliff, being a ragged, broken Rock.

V. 549. Gabriel; One of the Archangels sent to show Daniel the Vision of the
Four Monarchies and the Seventy Weeks, Dan. Chap. 4. and 9. and to the Virgin
Mary to reveal the Incarnation of our Savior, Luke 1. Verse. 26. I am Gabriel
that stand in the Presence of God: His Name (...), in the Heb. sounds, the Man
of God, or the Strength and Power of God, well by our Author posted as chief of
the Angelick Guards placed about Paradise.

V. 551. Exercised Heroic Games; Exercised themselves in Noble Sports and
Pastimes, an Allusion to the four celebrated Games of Greece, th 'Olympick,
Pythian, Isthmian and Nemaean. Heroic, (...), Gr. such as Hero's and greater
Persons use.

V. 554. Helms with Diamond Flaming and with Gold; Flaming Helms, the Luster
and Brightness of Polished Shields and Helms, is by most of the Poets linken'd
to Fire. (...)
(...),
Of Diomedes's Armor. (...).


So the shining Shield of Achilles is described: (...)
(...),
(...).
Ardet apex capiti, cristisque a vertice flamma
Funditur, and vastos umbo vomit aureus ignes. AEn. 10.
Clypeum tum deinde sinistra
Extulit ardentem. AEn. 10.
AEgidaque Horrificam, turbatae Palladis, arma,
Certatim squamis serpentum, auroque polibant. AEn. 8.


V. 555. Gliding through the Even; Swiftly passing about Evening-Tide. Gliding,
of the Verb to Glide, of the Fr. Glisser, to slip and slide swiftly away as
silent Rivers do.

V. 556. Swift as a shooting Star, etc. Swift like a darting Star, that in the
Autumn crosses the Night, when Fat and Oily Vapors taking Fire, with their
Activity, hurry the Air into Violence, and by their shining Path direct the
Seaman, from what Quarter of the Heavens to beware of stormy, boisterous Winds.
So Virgil, Saepe etiam Stellas, vento impendente, videbis
Praecipites Coelo labi: Noctisque per umbram
Flammarum longos a tergo albescere tractus. Georg. 1.


That the Stars do not shoot, or fall from their Spheres, according to vulgar
Opinion, is the Tenent of Philosophy: But that their shooting is the Redundancy
of their Nutritive Liquor, which sometimes blurts from them as Oil from Lighted
Lamps. Plin. Lib. 1. Cap. 8. Servius thought those descending Traces of Light,
were Particles of the AEtherial Fire blown and fore'd down by softy and
vehement Winds. But according to Aristotle they were esteemed Fat and Oily
Exhalations, drawn up from the Earth into the middle Region of the Air, and
there by the extraordinary Cold so compressed and condensed, that they took
Fire by his unintelligible Antiperistasis; or by their own violent
Circumgyration. -- Longoque per era tractu
Fertur; ut interdum de Coelo Stella sereno,
Ersi non cecidit, potuit cecidisse videri. Meta. 2.


Well might the bright Angel Uriel, Regent of the Sun, and mounted on a
Sunbeam, be compared to a Sho^ting Star, when Homer likens Achilles in his
Brazen Armor to the same Illustrious Meteor. (...),
(...)
(...).
(...),
(...).
(...).


The same Comparison is applied to the Armed Diomede, and the Fiery Reflection
shot from his Shining Shield, and Flaming Helmet. (...)
(...).


But the most Parallel place, at which our Authors imitation seems to have
aimed, and to have outdone, is the Description of Minerva's Descent from Heaven
into the Trojan Camp. (...),
(...)
(...)
(...).


V. 557. In Autumn thwarts the Night; Comes across the Night, thwarts and
affronts the dismal darkness of the Night. In Autumn, Lat. Autumnus, when the
Heats are great. -- Totoque Autumni incanduit aestu. Geor. 3.

V. 558. When Vapors fired impress the Air; Here we have the Philosophy of
these shooting Stars, that they are Unctuous Exhalations, which being fired,
a^ault the Air, and move it violently. Impress, of imprimere, Lat. to use force
upon, to make impression on, and in this sense Impressio, signifies an Assault,
an Onset given by engaging Armies.

Ibid. Shows the Mariner; Marinier, Fr. the Sailer, the Seaman, of Marinus and
Ma^e, Lat. the Sea.

V. 559. From what Point of his Compass; From what part of the Sky, from what
Quarter of the Heaven: The Compass here meant is a Circle set round with the 32
different Points from which the Winds have their Denominations.

V. 561. Thy Course by Lot; Gabriel is supposed to have the Guard of Paradise
fallen to him by Lot. Thus the Promised Land was divided to the Israeli^es;
Notwithstanding the L^na shall be divided by Lot, Numb. 26. Verse. 55. Every
Man's Inheritance shall be where is Lot falls, Chap. 33. Verse. 54. In the
same manner Matthias was chosen and numbered with the Apostles, And they gave
forth their Lots, and the Lot fell upon Ma^thias, Acts 1. Verse. 26.

V. 567. Gods latest Image; The newest, the last Image God was pleased to make
of Himself: For it is not to be doubted, that if Man in part of a Corporeal
Substance, yet bears his Maker's Image; the Angels, those much more Pure and
Spiritual Beings, are more exact Resemblances of that Eternal Purity and
Perfection that Created them, as being more perfect Approximations to their
Maker.

V. 568. And marked his Aerie Gate; Observed his speedy March, or his passage
through the Air, or his giddy and indecent Carriage, not well suiting a Spirit
seemingly so zealous. Aerie, AErius, Lat. of the Air, the Epither of Birds that
mount into it. -- AEriae quo congessere palumbes. Ecl. 3.

Gate; Walk, Passage, March, of the Sax. Began, to go.

V. 569. That lies from Eden North; That lies on the North-side of Eden, the
Mountain Niphates on which Satan alight, Book 3. Verse. 742. where his Hellish
Conscience and Devilish Despair disfigured him, and discovered his seeming
Saintship, Verse. 23. of this Book 4.

V. 571. Alien from Heaven, etc. I soon beheld his Countenance, contrary to
that of Heavenly Spirits, clouded and overcast with dismal Storms of Passions
wild and ungovernable. Alien from Heaven, estranged from God and all Goodness,
of Alienus, a Stranger; Obscured, darkened, of Obscurus, Lat. hid, dark.

V. 574. Of the Banished Crew; One of the condemned Crew, thrown out of Heaven,
and banished, of Bannir, Fr. to expel.

V. 576. The Winged Warrior; The Archangel Gabriel, according to the usual
Description of Angels, adorned with Wings, to denote the Swiftness and Agility
of Spiritual Beings, and as Satan in the assumed shape of a Cherubim is
painted. -- Wings he wore
Of many colored P^me sprinkled with Gold. Book 3. Verse. 641.


V. 580. The Vigilance here placed; The Watch here kept. Vigilance, Vigilantia,
Lat. Watch^^^n^ss; Vigi^i^e Lat. the Watch.

V. 585 Spiritual Substance, etc. It Is hard to restrain and keep out Spirits
and Immaterial (...) wi^^ Corporeal and Bodily Bars. Corp^real, Corporea^is,
Lat. of C^pus, Lat. a Body.

V 5^^. In whats^ever s^ape he lurk; In what disguise ^o^ver he lies hid: To
lurk, is to hide ones ^elf, to lie in wait, of the Bell. Loeren, to lie in
Ambush, or the Fr. Lerre, (an old word) Larron, Fr. Latro, Lat. a Thief.

V. 592. Bene^th the Azores; To the Sun now gone down below the Western
Islands: The Azores are Islands of the Western Atlantic Ocean, Nine in Number,
commonly called the Tercera's, of Tercera, the largest of 'em, Heylin's Geo.
others confound 'em with the Canaries, Bohun's Geog. Dict.

Ibid. Whither the Prime Orb, etc. Uriel returned on the bright Beam that
brought him; whose Point now mounted and raised, carried him, fliding back to
the Sun now sunk below the Western Is^es, to which the first Orb, swift beyond
all belief, had hurried him in a Days space, or this our Earth, less likely to
turn round, taking a shorter and more easy turn Eastward, left him now on her
West Side, gilding and adorning with various Colors and gay Reflections, the
Clouds that wait upon his Western Throne. Prime Orb, Primus Orbis, Lat. the
first, the chief Circle, the Primum Mobile.

V. 594. Diurnal, Volubil; Diurnal, Diurnus, Lat. belonging to a Day, of a Days
length or continuance. Volubil, Volubilis, Lat. that may be turned round; a
volvendo, turning or running round.

V. 598. Twilight gray, etc. Now the quiet Evening came on, and dusky Twilight
with her grave Livery covered every thing: The Sun was described according to
his high Quality, arraying the Clouds with reflected Gold and Royal Purple.
Here the Evening is as exactly delineated suitable to her obscure Condition,
habited in Gray, and bestowing her sad-colour'd Livery on her Attendants. Sober
Livery, Grave Habit, of Sobrius, Lat. not drunk, thence grave and serious.
Livery, of the Fr. Livree, Clothes delivered to Servants, by whose Color and
Ornaments they are known to whom they belong.

V. 601. To their Grassie Couch; To their Beds of Grass. Couch, of Coucher, Fr.
to lie down. Slunk, of the Sax. Slincan, to creep, to steal away.

V. 603. Her Amorous Descant sung; She all Night long repeated her Love-Song.
Descant, of Discantare, Lat to sing over again, to vary, in repeating a strain
in Music. Silence was pleased, such and so delightful was the Harmony, that
the hushed Night and Silence it self was pleased with it.

V. 604. Now G^ow'd the Firmament with living Saphirs; And now the Firmament
seemed all on Fire with Burning Lamps, like shining Saphirs. The Firmament, the
Sphere of the Fixed Stars. Living Saphirs, because shining as if they burnt, as
we use the same word, a live Coal. Glowed, of the Bell. Gloeyen, to burn.

V. 605. Hesperus that lead, etc. (...), the Evening-Star, Venus so called when
she follows the Sun, (...), as (...), the Forerunner of Light when preceding
him. (...)
(...).


Hence the Evening Vesper had its Name. -- Accendit Lumina Vesper. Geor. 1.

V. 608. Apparent Queen, etc. Undoubted Sovereign of the Night displayed her
matchless Light. She is said to rise in Clouded Majesty, in respect of the
gross Mists and Vapors that hang about the Horizon, hiding and veiling her
fair Face, till she get higher and emerge from among them. Apparent, Apparens,
Lat. visible, clear, manifest: An exact and curious Description of a Moonlight
Night.

V. 609. And with her Silver Mantle; And with her Silver Robe arrayed the
Night. -- Nec candida cursum
Luna negat; splendet tremulo sub lumine P^ntus. AEn. 7.


V. 612. Mind us of like repose; Put us in mind of rest, as reasonable and
suitable for us. Repose, Rest, Ease, of the Fr. Repos, of the Lat. Pausa, a
stop: of (...), Gr. to cease from acting, to give over.

V. 614. As Day and Night successive; That follow and succeed one another,
taking their turns, of successivus, Lat. that follows, or comes into the Place
of another, of succedere.

Ibid. The timely Dew of Sleep; Seasonable Sleep is compared to a gentle
refreshing Dew, from its stealing on us, as that descends upon the Earth, at
the same time, and as imperceivably. Virgil hints at this moist Metaphor: --
Fessos sopor irrigat artus. AEn. 3.

V. 615. With soft slumbrous weight inclines; With pleasant sleepy heaviness
weighs down our Eyelids Inclines, bends downward our Eyelids, (Drow iness
appearing first in the Eyes) of inclinare, Lat. to bend down; so Domus
inclinata recumbit, AEn. 12. Slumbrous, drowzy, an old word from sl^mber, to
begin to sleep.

V. 621. Unactive Range; Wander up and down unimploy'd, having no appointed
business. Unactive, having nothing to do but feed; of in and ago, Lat Animals,
Lat. Animalia, Beasts, etc. living Creatures, Animalia (...) as Juven. calls
'em. To range, is to wander to and fro, up and down, to hunt after, as Spaniels
do.

V. 623. To stre^k the East; Ere the Morn begin to color the East, to draw
white streaks of Light in the Eastern part of the Sky. To streak, is of the
Ital. Stricca, a Line, of Striga, Lat. Chalk.

V. 625. To reform you Flowery Arb^rs, etc. To dress and trim those Shades of
Flowers, and those green Walks, our Shelter and cool Bowers at Noon. R^orm,
Lat. R^f^rmare, to bring into better shape and form, to trim. Arbors, Coverts,
made shady by the Boughs of Trees, of Arbor, Lat. a Tree. Allies, Close Walks,
of All^r, Fr. to go.

V. 628. That mock our scant Manuring; That scorn our small Performance, that
despise our poor Days Work, growing too fast for our few Hands, by lopping to
restrain 'em. Scant, narrow, of Cant, a Corner. Manuring, Laboring, Tilling,
Cultivating the Earth of the old Norman Manouvrer, Fr. to Till; whence
Manouvrer, a Workman, a Handicraf^man. M^ck, of the Fr. Mocquer, to scorn, to
deride, of the Gr. (...), a Scoffer.

V. 631. That lie bestrown unsightly; That lie strown about unhandsomly,
unseemly. Bestrown, sprinkled, and thrown about, of Be, a Particle in
Composition signifying about; and strown, of the Verb to strew, of the Ger.
Strawen, to throw or strew.

V. 632. Ask riddance; Require removal, must be removed, if we intend to walk
at ease. Riddance, of the Verb to rid, of ariddan, Sax. to remove, to free from.

V. 635. My Author and Disposer; For whom and from whom I was formed, in our
Poets own words, V. 440. My Author, the Author of my Being out of whom I was
made.

V. 636. Unargu'd; Undisputed, without any gainsaying I submit to. Unargu'd,
of in, Lat. against, and arguere, to dispute, to disprove.

V. 637. God is thy Law, thou, mine, as before at V. 299. He for God only, thee
for God in him

V. 642. With Charm, etc. Sweet is the fresh Morning-Air, her rising sweet,
awakened by the Birds early Song. Charm, of the Ital. Ciarma, Lat. Carmen, a
Song.

V. 645. Glist'ring with Dew; Shining with Pearly Dew-drops. Glist'ring, of the
Bell. Glisteren, to sparkle, to shine. Fragrant, Lat. Fragrans, smelling sweet.
-- Redolentque thymo fragrantia Mella. Geo. 4.

V. 648. With this her solemn Bird; With this her usual Bird, the constant
Companion of the Night: Solemn, of Solemnis, or Solennis, Lat. as Solennes
ludi, and Solennia sacra, Solemnities performed at certain times of the Year,
thence the word is used for accustomed, usual: As, Insanire put as Solennia me?
Do you think I am mad after the usual manner? Hor. Epist. li. 1. Solemn does
also signify serious, grave, stately, as the Shows, Pomps and Assemblies, at
Funerals and other Ceremonious Meetings were. Statas Solennesque Ceremonias
Pontificatu contineri. Cic. Tusc.
Et tumulum statuent, and tumulo Solennia mittent. AEn. 6.


So that in this sense the Nightingal may be esteemed a solemn mournful Bird,
as described by Virgil, Qualis populea maerens Philomela sub umbra. Geor. 4.
E l' Usignol, che plora e gli rispondi. Tass. Cant. 18. Stan. 18.


Warbling her mournful solemn Song, through the desolate sad Night.

V. 656. Without thee is sweet; An Imitation of Virgil's Pastoral Plainness and
Sweetness. Dulce satis humor, depulsis arbutus haedis,
Lenta salix foeto pecori: Mihi solus Amyntas. Ecl. 3.


V. 659. Our general Ancestor; Adam, the Universal Ancestor of Human Nature,
first Father of all, both Man, and Womankind, his Successors. Ancestor, Fr.
Ancestres, both Contractions of the Lat. Antecessores, Forefathers,
Predecessors.

V. 660. Accomp^ish'd Eve; Most perfect, most excellent and complete Consort
Eve: the first, best-^nished Original of the Fair Sex, her charming
Descendants. Accomplished, of accompli. Fr. ^inish'd, completed, of the Lat.
ad and complere, to fulfill, furnished and stored with all the beauties of Body,
and perfections of Mind.

V. 664. Ministering Light prepared, etc. They set and rise, affording Light
prepared for Nations not yet in being. Ministering, of Ministrate, Lat. to
furnish. Jamque ministrantem Platanum potantilus umbram. Geor. 4.

V. 665. Lest total Darkness; The Stars (says our Author) those everlasting
Lamps, afford us their constant Light tho sometimes hid from our eyes by
terrene Mists, Clouds and Vapors) lest universal Darkness should regain her
ancient Empire, and destroy Life in all things, cherished and maintained by
these celestial Fires. Darkness and Night are the privative Notions of
No^en^ity: Light was the first glorious production of the Almighty Word, whose
Spirit moved upon the face of the Deep, covered with Darkness: Genesis 1. v. 2,
and 3, From this Light, and its Co^comitant Heat, is the Original of Life:
Darkness and Cold are the Constituents of Destruction and Death. Extinguish, of
extinguere, Lat. to quench, to put out, as Fire is by Water; hence extinctus,
Lat. d ad, one in whom the vital heat is quite extinguished.

V. 669. Of various influence foment; That the Stars, those soft Fires, do by
their kindly heat not only enlighten the World, but warm and cherish all things
in it, tho their various Influence is very impercept^ble in respect of the Suns
enlivening Rays, is most evident, by their attracting, extenuating, raising and
subliming the terrestrial Vapors, and by the Temperament and Alterations that
from thence affect all Natural Bodies; the intensions and remissions of Cold
and Heat depend on their Associations; and no signal Changes happen here below,
that have not some observable connection with their celestial and superior
Combinations. Foment, Lat. foam tare, to warm.

V. 670. Temper, or nourish; Give due temperament or nourishment to all things.
Temper, of temperar^ Lat. to maintain an equal mixture of the four elementary
qualities, the Ingredients of all things that live and grow. Nourish of the Fr.
Nourrir, the contraction of nutrire, Lat. to feed, to maintain.

V. 671. Their Stellar Virtue; Virtus Stellaris, their St^rry Power and
Influence. There have been, who tell us, That every Species of Plants and
Vegetables, as well as superior living Creatures, have one at least of these
celestial eyes, that with its Astral influence particularly regards and
cherishes all of its kind; hence that Astrological division of 'em into
Saturnine, Jovial, Mertial, Mercurial, Venereal, and Lunar Plants, according to
the respective qualities shed down and infused into them by their presiding
Planets: hence the Telesmatical Traditions of certain Images made and erected
under the concurrent Influence of some powerful Constellations; as the (...) of
Byzantium, the Columna Serpentina, and the Statua equestris Ahenea, while it
stood, esteemed the Preservative of Constantinople against the Plague,
frequently infected with it since the destruction of this Statue.

V. 681. From the steep of ecch^ing Hills; From the hollow sides of upright
Hills. Ecch^ing Hills, Hills where Echoes generally inhabit. (...), of (...),
Gr. a Sound, and (...), to resound; an Echoe being the representation or
repercussion of a Voice or Sound; fabled to have been a fair and modest Nymph,
in love with Narcissus, and by her shamefacedness forced to confess her flames
in broken and repeated Accents. -- (...). Hom.
-- Resonabilis Echo
-- quae infine loquendi
Ingeminat voces: auditaque verba reportat. O^id. Met. 3. where read her Story.


V. 683. Sole or Responsive; Singly or together singing, answering one another.
Sole, solus, Lat. alone. Responsive, Lat. answering, of respondere, Lat. to
return, thence to contest; as, Et cantare pares, and respondere parati. Ecl. 7.

V. 686. Touch of Instrumental Sounds; Touching their heavenly Harps in full
harmonious Chorus. Instrumental, Instrumentalis, Lat. belonging to an
Instrument (here) of Music.

V. 687. In full Harmonick Number; In complete Musical Measure. Harmonick,
Harmonious, Musical; (...), Gr. of (...), Harmony, of (...), to agree, to be
suitable, as concording Sounds are to the Ear.

V. 688. Divide the Night, etc. Interrupt the dull dead silence of the Night,
and raise our thoughts to Heaven; or alluding to the Gallicinia, distinguish
the Divisions and Watches of the Night.

V. 691. The Sovereign Planter; By God, the Sovereign Creator of the World, as
well as the Planter of this particular place, and pleasant Garden. And the Lord
God planted a Garden eas^wa^d in Eden, Genesis 2. 8. Planter, the contraction of
Plantator, Lat.

V. 69^. (...) and My^^le; Two Trees remarkable for their lasting greenness;
the Laurel, Laurus, Apollo's favorite Tree, and from his honoring it, used to
encircle the Victors brows; Myrtle, Myrtus, (...), an everlasting Green, of
pleasant smell, dedicated for its delicacy to Venus. Et vos o Lauri carpam, and
te proxima Myrte,
Sic positae quoniam suaves miscetis odores. Virg. Ecl. 2.


V. 695. Of firm and fragrant Leaf; The blissful Bower's Roof was thickest
shade, the covering of Laurel and sweet smelling Myrtle interwoven, and the
lofty growth of every odoriferous and lasting Leaf. Firm, Lat. firmus, strong,
lasting.

V. 696. Acanthus; Is by some reckoned a Tree, Theoph, l. 3. Hist. Pl. c. 4. by
others a spicy Shrub. (...), Gr. of (...), a Thorn, because beset with
multitudes of 'em: It has a long, large and winding Leaf, therefore used to
embellish the Capitals of Pillars of the Corinthian Order; for its being
imitated in such sort of Ornaments, taken notice of by Virgil. Et molli circum
est ansas amplexus Acantho. Ecl. 8.

V. 697. Fenced up the verdant Wall; Raised up the green Enclosure. Verdant, of
the Lat. viridans, grown green; Odorous, smelling sweet; Odorus, Lat. the same.
-- ut viridante toro consederat herbae. AEn. 5.

V. 700. Wrought Mosaic; Within each lovely Flower, fair to the sight, or
fragrant to the smell, all-colour'd Iris, and the blushing Rose, and snowy
Jessemin advanced their flowery Heads, mixed and inwoven, checkered the
beauteous Bower with the most charming variety of view. Iris, the
Flower-de-luce, called so of its imitating the diverse Colors and their
confusion in the Rainbow, thence interpreted All-bues. Jasmin, Fr. an
Arbor-Plant, bearing a white fragrant Flower. Flourished, flourishing, of
florere, Lat. to spring. Mosaic, Musivum, or Musaicum, Lat. whence the Fr.
Mosaique. (...) Opus eximia concinnitate tessellatum, as Spartianus: A curious
Chequer-work of Stones of diverse colors, and several sorts of Metals, wrought
into shapes of Birds, or pretty Knots, with such exactness, that it seems one
entire Stone, or piece of Metal, the production of Nature, rather than the
performance of Art, abundance whereof are to be seen in St. Mark's Church in
Venice.

V. 702. Broider'd the ground; The blue Violet, and yellow Crocus, with the
purple Hyacinth, inlay'd the fragrant Floor, with soft and sweet Embroidery.
Violet, Lat. Viola. Crocus, (...) Gr. the Saffron-flower. Broider'd,
embroidered the bottom of the Bower, of the Fr. Brother. Homer makes the top of
Mount Ida fertile in some of the same Flowers, where he describes the amorous
Jupiter caressing his jilting Juno. (...),
(...)
(...).


V. 703. Of costliest Emblem; More curious in its natural Colors, than if
inlay'd with Parian Marble, or precious Stones more costly Ornaments. An Emblem
is a Representation, in Painting, or Carving, or Inlaying. Emblema, (...), Gr.
ab inserendo, from Inlaying. Now if we compare the foregoing Description of
this blissful Bower, with one of a Poet our Countryman, and deservedly famous
in his time, we shall find the difference of their Genius to be as great as
that of their Language. And over him, Art striving to compare
With Nature, did an Arbor green dispred,
Framed of wanton Ivy, flow'ring fair,
Through which the fragrant Eglantine did spread,
And all within with Flowers was garnished;
That when mild Zephyrus amongst them blew,


Did breath out bounteous Smells, and painted Colors show. Spen. F. Q. Bo. 2.
C. 5. as far short of ours, as his Garden of Adonis, Bo. 3. C. 6. Stan. 30. is
of inimitable Eden, V. 210.

V. 704. Insect; Insecta, Lat. Flies, Gnats, and suchlike little Creatures, so
called, ab in and secare, to cut, because their Heads seem divided from their
Bodies, and only tacked to 'em by very fine and small hair like Ligament; or,
Quae inferiores aut superiores parts, aut utrasque segment is haberent
discretas atque dissitas. Plin. l. 11. I.

V. 706. More sacred or sequestered; More secret or retired. Sacred, of sacer,
Lat. Holy, set apart for Divine Service: Sacrum est, quicquid est quod deorum
habetur. Trebat Thence secret and mysterious, as if Sacer of the Heb. (...). to
separate, enclose, and shut up. Virgil makes Latinus his Laurel as sacred as
this awful Bower. Laurus erat tecti medio, in penetralibus altis,

Sacra comam, multosque metu servata per annos. Whose Leaves none durst touch
or violate. AEn. 7.

Ibid. Sequestered; Set aside, separated, and thence retired. Sequestrare and
Sequestratio are Law-terms, signifying the separating and setting aside any
thing in Controversy from the possession of those that contend for it. But
Cato used sequestrare, to retire and wean ones self from the Society of those
with whom he held former familiarity; and in this sense sequestered is, retired
and set apart. Though but feigned; Though but imagined and devised. Feigned,
feinct, Fr. of of the Lat. fictus, contrived as the Poets do the imaginary
Groves and Grottoes, where they sent their Rural Gods to Nurse, or under cool
refreshing Shades laid 'em to sleep.

V. 707. Pan, or Sylvanus; The Rural Deities. Pan, the Protector of Sheep and
Shepherds. Pan curat oves oviumque magistros. Ecl. 2. He is described by Homer
dancing over the flowery Meads, among the tripping Nymphs. (...)
(...)
(...).


It Is most probable he had many celebrated Groves and Bowers in his beloved
Arcadia. Pan Deus Arcadiae. Ecl. 10.
Ipse nemus linquens patrium, saltusque Lycaei,
Pan ovium custos, tua si tibi maenala curae
Adsis, O Tegaee favens. Geor. 1.


These were Mountains of Arcadia, famous for his haunts. See more of this
Deity, V. 266. of this IV Book.

Sylvanus; The God of Woods and Groves, a Sylvis dictus. Venit and agresti
capitis Sylvanus honor
Florentes ferulas and grandia Lillia gestans. Ecl. 10.


One of his delightful Groves is described by Virgil, to which our Author seems
to allude. Est ingens gelidum Lucus prope Ceritis amnem,
Religione patrum late sacer: undique colles
Inclusere cavi, and nigra nemus abjete cingunt.
Sylvano fama est, veteres sacrasse Pelasgos,
Arvorum Pecorisque Deo lucumque diemque. AEn. 8.


Caere, a City of Etruria, by Livie called Sacrarium Populi Romani, diversorium
Sacerdotum, as receptaculum Sacrorum, li. 7. From whence the Religious Services
paid to these false Gods, were styled Caeremonies.

Ibid. Nor Nymph nor Faunus haunted; The Poetic Nymphs were Daughters of
Thetis and the Ocean, as Orpheus in his Hymn records them. (...),
(...).


Some of 'em belonged to Rivers, others to the Woods, the rest to Mountains and
Fields, as Homer teaches us. (...).
(...).
(...). (...).
Nymphae Laurentes, Nymphae genus amnibus uude est. Virg. AEn. 8.

That they nursed Pan in Pissa, Homer has testified: -- (...)
(...). (...).


Nymph; Of Nympha, Lat. of (...), Gr. as if (...), looking always young, by
Pausanias recorded for Feminine Deities, not absolutely Immortal, but of an
unaccountable Longaevitie.

V. 708. Nor Faunus haunted; Faunus was the Son of Picus King of the Latins,
who reigned in Italy about the time of Pandion's ruling at Athens: That he was
a pious Prince, and a great Improver of Agriculture, and therefore admitted
amongst the Italian Deities, as the Tutelary God of Husbandmen, of whom
descended all the Fauni; to part of this fabulous Story Virgil subscribes: --
Fauno Picus pater: isque parentem
Te Saturn, refert, tu sanguinis ultimus Author. AEn. 7.


Others will have their Name a fando, or fatu, from their prophetic foretelling
of future Events. Et vos Agrestum praesentia numina Fauni. Georg. 1.

V. 710. Espoused Eve; Married Eve, when she first gave her consent to be the
Companion of her Husband Adam. Espoused, Espouse, Fr. Wedded: of Espouser, Fr.
to marry.

V. 711. The Hymenaean Song; Angelic Voices tuned the Nuptial Song. Hymenaean,
of (...), Gr. a Song usually sung in Praise, and to the Prosperity of the
Married Mates. (...),
(...).


Hymenaeus was the God that presided over Marriages, Son of Bacchus and Venus;
a jolly Deity, the first Institutor of, and Instigator to Matrimony; or, as
others report, the Name of an Athenian, who restored certain Virgins, seized
upon by Thieves, entire and inviolated to their Parents, who was ever after
honored with Memorials and Invocations at all succeeding Marriage Festivals,
AEtas Lucinam, justosque pati Hymenaeos. Geor. 2.

V. 712. The Genial Angel; When the friendly, the benign Angel, that took care
of the Propagation of Mankind. Genial, of the Lat. Genialis, belonging to
Marriage, as Genialis torus. -- Lucent genialibus altis Aurea fulcra toris.
AEn. 6. of Genius, the God of Pleasure. Hence genio indulgere, to make good
Cheer; they derive it a generando.

V. 714. More lovely than Pandora; The Name of a most beautiful Virgin, sent by
Jupiter to ensnare Mankind, as the Poets feign: She had her Name of (...), Gr.
All, and (...), a Gift; all the Gods contributing to her dangerous Endowments.
(...)
(...).


According to the following Explanation, Whom the Gods endowed with all their
Gifts.

V. 716. In sad Event; In the sad fatal Consequence of both: For the lovely
Sorceress brought in her hand a Box close shut, which being opened by the
unwary Epimetheus, filled the World with all manner of Mischiefs, that flew out
of it, leaving only flattering and deceitful Hope at the bottom; a Parallel too
like that Patrimony the charming and audacious Eve transmitted to her sinful
and sad Posterity.

V. 717. Of Japhet brought by Hermes; When Pandora was brought by Mercury to
Epimetheus, the unwary and heedless Son of Japetus. Prometheus and Epimetheus
were the Sons of Japetus by Clymene; the former was famous for having made a
Man of Clay, and informed him by aetherial Fire, stolen from the Sun, whereby he
is said so to have provoked Jupiter, that he commanded Vulcan to form this
Pandora, as a dangerous Allurement, to present him with her Box of Plagues;
which he refusing to touch, she presented it to his Brother; who, to satisfy
his heedless Curiosity, opened it, and gave them opportunity of dispersing
themselves all over the World. (...)
(...).
(...)
(...).
Quam satus Japeto, mistam fluvialibus undis
Finxit in effigiem moderantum cuncta Deorum. Meta. 1.
Audax Japeti genus,
Ignem fraud mala gentibus intulit:
Post ignem aetheria domo
Subductum, macies, and nova febrium
Terris incubuit cohors. Carm. Li. 1. Od. 3.


Japetus being one of the first Instructers of Mankind, who by his Inventions
and Documents seemed to have given 'em new Fire, and to have raised their
Understanding to the exercises of Reason, they being before but so many
stalking Clods of Clay, is supposed by some to have been the same with Japhet
the Son of Noah, whom they take to be old Saturn.

Ibid. Hermes; (...), one of Mercury's Names, a God much given to slight of
hand, and the Messenger of all the rest, Son of Jupiter and Maia, so named of
(...), to bring word. (...),
(...)
(...). (...).


V. 719. Who stole Jove 's Authentic Fire; Who robbed Jupiter of his aetherial
Fire. This was Prometheus as above, V. 717. He was a great Astronomer, much
busied in observing the Celestial Motions, therefore said to have stolen Jove's
Fire, by prying into his Secrets so far removed from human reach; fabled to be
bound on Mount Caucasus, which he haunted day and night to make his heavenly
Observations. Caucaseasque refert volucres, furtumque Promethei. Virg. Ecl. 6.

Nec vero Atlas sustinere Coelum, nec Prometheus affixus Caucaso, nec stellatus
Cepheus, cum uxore genero, filia traderetur, nisi divina cognitio nomen eorum
ad errorem fabulae traduxisset. Cice. Tu^c. quaest. 5.

Authentic; Properly belonging to, Bo. 3. V. 656.

V. 723. The Moons resplendent Globe; Lucentemque globum Lunae. AEn. 6.

V. 736. This said unanimous; This short Prayer being said by them with mutual
consent: Unanimous, Lat. unanimis, agreeing. Tu potes unanimes armare in
praelia fratres. AEn. 7.

Ibid. Other Rites; No other Customs or Ceremonies observing, but standing and
looking up to Heaven, they prayed, as at Ver. 720. Rites; of Ritus, Lat.
Customs observed in the Worship of the Gods. Hence the Books of the Hetruscans,
that contained the Roman Ceremonies, were styled Libri Rituales. -- morem,
Ritusque sacrorum. AEn. 12.

V. 737. But Adoration pure; But humble and holy Reverence. Adoratio, Lat.
Worship. Job describes the ancient manner of Adoration (And my heart has been
secretly enticed, and my mouth has kissed my hand, chap. 31. v. 27.) to have
been by bowing the head, and kissing the hand. Qui adorant, solent deosculari
manum, and capita submitter^. Hieron. cont. Ruffin. l. 1.

V. 740. Disguises; The Clothes, the covertures and concealments of our shame,
the reproach of sin, and yet improved to the height of Pride and Vanity. A
Disguise is something extraordinary worn to hinder one from being known, of the
Fr. desguiser, to hide, to conceal. Ween, an old word, to think, of the Sax.
wenan, to be of opinion.

V. 743. Mysterious of Connubial Love; Nor did Eve (I suppose) refuse the
lawful Customs of the Marriage Bed. Mysterious, before at V. 312. Connubial,
Connubialis, Lat. belonging to Marriage, for which Connubium is Lat. Connubio
jungam stabili, propriamque dicabo. AEn. 1.

V. 744. Whatever Hypocrites austerely, etc. Notwithstanding all the grave and
rigid Opinions sly Stoical Hypocrites broach, of the Purity, Innocence, and the
sanctified seat and state of our first Parents in Paradise; some of the ancient
Fathers and great Doctors were of opinion, That if Adam had not sinned, Mankind
had been multiplied in some more Angelical manner, and not by Carnal
Copulation. Greg. Nissen. li. de Hom. c. 28. Damasc. de fide Orthod. l. 4. c.
25. and l. 2. c. 30. St. Chrysostom. Hom. 18. in c. 4. Genes and Euthymius on
Psalm. 50. Diverse of them fortifying their Reasons with v. 12. of Psalm. 49. Homo
cum in honor esset, non intellexit, and comparatus est jumentis insipientibus,
and similis factus est illis; as if that Text did imply that Mankind (if
sinless) was to have been propagated some nobler way than by that of
Generation, now common to the Beasts with them: A Dogma which some have pursued
to such a height of presumption, as to affirm, That Eve her self was the
forbidden Fruit. St. Augustine himself went so far, as to say, That Carnal
Knowledge and Consanguinity proceeded from sin; that is, That Adam, during his
Innocence and abode in Paradise, knew not his fair Eve. An assertion he could
no way be certain of. That she conceived not during his stay there, is not much
more probable. But that God in the beginning created them male and female, and
blessed them, and said unto them, Be fruitful and multiply, and replenish the
earth, Genesis 1. 27, 28. is plain; and it will be hard to assign any thing in
which Adam wanted a help meet for him more properly, than in that of the
Production of his own Kind. Genesis 2. 18. Austerely, austere, Lat. severely,
hardly, in the sense that Cicero uses it, Austerus homo, one too severe and
supercilious. De Orat. Hypocrites, see Bo. 3. V. 683.

V. 746. Defaming as impure; Reproaching as impure and unseemly. The
beforementioned Tenants were grounded on the seeming deformity and turpitude
that some men would throw on natural Acts, when Nihil natural turpe is an
Axiom extremely true. I doubt not but all the sensitive Appetites were in
absolute obedience to Reason before Adam's transgression, and the most brutal
Passions easily governable; and that by sin entered that irregularity which
brought forth shame, and the disguise of his leaved Apron. Defaming, reporting
ill of; diffamare, Lat. to slander; which is sufficiently refuted by St. Paul;
Marriage is honorable in all, and the Bed undefiled. Heb. 13. 4.

V. 747. Commands to some, leaves free to all; That the necessity of Peopling
the World in its beginning made this Command more universal, is most certain;
and that it is continued still on the greater part of Mankind for their
preservation, till God's appointed time for the consummation of all things: yet
this Command is not so absolute, but it is left to our election, and subject to
the convenience of our condition and choice.

V. 748. Our Maker bids increase; God commands us to increase and multiply: who
commands the contrary, but Satan, the Enemy both of God and Man? This Command
is grounded on the before-cited Text, Genesis 1. 27, 28. which the Catholic
Encouragers of the Celibat will by no means understand as a Command, but as a
Benediction, approving thereby and fulfilling the Prophecy of St. Paul amply
verified in them. Now the Spirit speaks expressly, That in the latter times
some shall depart from the Faith, giving heed to seducing Spirits, and
Doctrines of Devils, speaking Lies in Hypocrisy, having their Consciences
seared with a hot Iron, forbidding to marry. 1 Timothy chapter 4. v. 1, 2, 3. to which
our Author seems to have had regard, from V. 744. to this place. Abstain,
abstinere, Lat. to forbear.

V. 750. Mysterious Law; This seems to relate to Ephesians. 5. 32. This is a great
Mystery: but I speak concerning Christ and the Church. Where the Apostle makes
Matrimony a representative of Christ's Union with his Church by his Incarnation
from V. 23. to the end. Mysterious, Bo. 4. V. 312. Source, the Fountainhead of
human Offspring; Source, Fr. for a Well, or Spring, a surgendo, Lat. from its
rising up.

V. 751. Sole Propriety, etc. The one only thing Adam could have called his
own, had he continued in Paradise a sharer with his Sons. Proprietas, ones own,
Property. So Virgil: Connubio jungam stabili, Propriamque dicabo. AEn. 1.

V. 753. Adulterous Lust; Lust that provokes to the commission of Adulteries.
Adulterous, of adulter, Lat. An Adulterer, quasi ad alteram, who betakes
himself to another, to a strange Woman.

V. 756. And all the Charities; All the endearments of Fathers and Children.
Charity, of the Gr. (...), Friendship, Benevolence, Beneficence, all the good
Offices and reciprocal Kindnesses of Relations. Relatio, Lat. for relatives; of
refer, Lat. to belong to: Relatives do mutuo se ponere, as Father and Child
imply one the other.

V. 760. Domestic Sweets; Of private and peculiar Pleasure. Domestic, of
Domesticus, Lat. belonging to a Family, of Domus, Lat. House; familiar thence,
and continual, that dwell and abide with us.

V. 762. And Patriarchs used; As the Saints and Heads of the Tribes of Israel
were wont to keep their Beds pure and undefiled. Patriarchs, of the Gr. (...),
the Father, and thence Governor of a Family, of (...), Gr. a Father, and (...),
Government, Power. Jacob begat the twelve Patriarchs, Act. 7. 8. All Government
took its Original Power and Authority from that of Fathers over their Children;
and Adam was the first grand universal Patriarch and Monarch of Mankind.

V. 763. His golden Shafts employs; Wounds with his pleasing Darts; here lights
his Lamp that never goes out. The Poets dressed and adorned their Cupid with a
Torch in his hand, a Bow and Quiver at his back, fledged with Wings, to denote
the disorderly heats of that unruly Passion, that burns in the blood, its Pains
and Pangs, and its shifting Inconstancies, often on the wing in pursuit of
change, ranging after vain and imaginary satisfactions. Ovid describes him with
two different Darts: Eque sagittifera promsit duo tela pharetra
Diversorum operum: fugat hoc, facit illud amorem.
Quod facit, auratum est, and cuspide fulgit acuta:
Quod fugat, obtusum est, and habet sub arundine plumbum. Meta. lib. 1.


Of which the Moral is like to last as long as the World; the Golden Darts
being the most prevalent, which made Juvenal observe, -- Veniunt a dote
sagittae. (...)
(...),
(...). Orp. in Him.


Shafts, Arrows, Darts, of Scapus Lat. the round upright Stalk of an Herb, from
its resemblance.

V. 764. Waves his purple Wings; Purple here signifies, as among other Poets,
no more than shining, gaudy, glittering; as Virgil: -- Lumenque juventae
Purpureum. And,
In mare Purpureum violentior influit amnis. Geo. 4.


Horace gives the Swans (whose Whiteness is passed into a Proverb) the same
epithete: Purpureis Ales oloribus. Carm. lib. 4. Od. 1.

V. 765. Revels; Plays and disports himself. See V. 782. Bo. 1.

V. 766. Of Harlots; Not in the purchased smiles and mercenary kindness of lewd
Strumpets, empty of Love, Satisfaction, and all Endearments of the soft Sex.
Harlot, tho some will have it a derivative of Arletta, the Name of William the
Conqueror's Mother, and others his Mistress, is doubtless from the Italian
Arlotta, a proud, insolent Mistress, or a contraction of Hor^let, a Wench a
little wanton.

V. 767. Casual fruition, etc. Accidental Enjoyment, sudden and unsecure, by
chance, and often attended by mischances enough. Casual, of Casus, Lat. an
accident, a chance.

V. 768. Mixed Dance, or wanton Mask, etc. Nor in Court-Addresses, intermixed
with Dancing, or wanton Masquerade, or Balls at midnight, or Music late, under
some Proud One's Window, deserving of disdain.

Amors; Courtship, Love-Addresses, of the Lat. Amor, Love; Mask, of the Fr.
Masque, a Vizard, because the Representers appear commonly masked. Bal, Fr. of
Baller, of the corrupt Lat. Ballare, as this of the Gr. (...), to dance.

V. 769. Or Serenade; An evening Song, performed under the Window of some
Lovely or Beloved Mistress; of the Fr. Serenade, of serain, Fr. the cool, or
the cool Air of the evening. A sort of Song by the Commentators on Horace
called (...), a lamentable Ditty sung at some disdainful door, best rewarded
with Disdain. Extremum Tanaim si biberes Lyce,
Saevo nupta viro, me tamen asperas
Porrectum ante fores objicere incolis
Plorares Aquilonibus.
Audis quo strepitu janua, quo nemus
Inter pulcra situm tecta remugiat
Ventis? and positas ut glaciet nives
Puro numine Jupiter? Carm. lib. 3. Od. 10.


From being exposed to the accidental injuries of the Weather, the sneaking
humble Lover is styled starved.

V. 771. Lulled by Nightingale; Those sung asleep by Nightingales soft trills.
Lulled, see V. 287. Bo. 2.

V. 774. O yet happiest, etc. Oh happy Couple, at the height of Happiness as
yet, if you attempt and seek after no higher Happiness, and understand but to
desire no more, and know your condition so well as to desire nothing above it.
O fortunatos nimium sua si bona norint Agricolas! Georg. 2.

V. 776. With her shadowy Cone; Now Night had stretched her round, yet pointed
shade, half way up to this Worlds vast lower Vault. Necdum orbem medium nox
horis acta subibat. AEn. 3.

'Twas toward Nine at night, a description purely our Poet's own, who calls
the Shades of Night Conical, because the Earth, an opaque spherical Body, being
extremely less than the vast Luminary that enlightens it, casts on its adverse
side a decreasing and sharp shadow, like in shape to a Cone: (...), Gr. a
Figure which from a circular Base rises, lessening by degrees, till it end in a
point.

Shadowy Cone; Conus umbrosus, Lat. into which when the Moon immerges in her
Night-walk, she is eclipsed Sublunar, airy, etherial, beneath the Moon; of sub,
Lat. under, and Luna, Lat. the Moon, she being the Planet nearest the Earth.

V. 778. Ivory Port; It being a Rock of Alabaster, as before, at V. 544. Ivory,
of Ivoire, Fr. both of Ebur, Lat. the Elephants Tooth; as if e Barro, Lat. an
Elephant. Ebor (...). Gloss* Port, of Porta, Lat. a Gate.

V. 780. In warlike Parade; In Martial Order and Array. Parade, Fr. the place
where Soldiers in a Garrison or Town draw up together, in order to a Sally,
Show, or to relieve the Guard; of the Lat. Paratus, or Apparatus, Lat. making
ready.

V. 782. Uzziel; The next commanding Angel to Gabriel; (...) Strength of God,
Heb. of (...) Heb. to be strong, as all God's mighty Angels are.

V. 784. As flame they part; They move like flame, as quick as darting
Lightning; the same Comparison Homer has of Hector. (...) And,
(...). Ibid.


It may then better suit the agile Angelick Nature, of whom the Sacred Page
says, Making his Angels Spirits, his Ministers a Flame of Fire.

V. 785. Half wheeling to the Shield, etc. Half turning to the left hand, in
which they bore their Shield; half to the right, that handled the Spear.
Declinare ad hastam, vel ad scutum, Live. to wheel to the right or left.

V. 788. Ithuriel and Zephon; Two Angels, having their Names as indication of
their Offices. Ithuriel, (...) Heb. Discovery of God; of (...) to search.
Zephon (...) Heb. a Secret, of (...) to hide, whence Joseph had his Egyptian
Name (...) as a Discoverer of Dreams and secret matters, Genesis 41. 45. So these
are denominated from their Nature, as the Searchers and Spies, as Uriel is
styled God's Eye, to visit often his new Creation round. Bo. 3. V. 654.

V. 792. From the Suns decline; About the time of the Sun's going down, as he
does from Noon till at his serting he disappears. Decline, Lat. Declinatio, of
declinare, to bend downwards, as the Sun does from his Meridian Altitude
toward the Verge of the Horizon. Hence aetas declinata. Quint. Old Age. So
Virgil:

Dulci declinat lumina somno. AEn. 4. When men's eyes seem to decline and set as
the Sun does.

V. 798. Dazzling the Moon; So on he led the bright Angelic Guard, amazing the
bright Moon. Dazzling, of the Bell. duyselen, to astonish, to amaze, as excessive
Light does our Eyes. Direct their course, or directly took their way, of
directus, or dirigere, Lat. to go straight to.

V. 800. Squat like a Toad; From the Ital. Quatto, close on the ground.

V. 802. The Organs of her Fancy; Endeavoring by his Devilish skill to find
the means to move her Fancy, and raise in her imagination Cheats and Delusions,
false Appearances and disturbing Dreams. The Organ of the Fancy is the Brain,
in whose dark little Cells among the other Senses it resides. (...), Gr. an
Instrument; as if (...); and in Animals, those parts that are capable of
producing a perfect Action, as the Brain, Heart, Liver, etc. are named Organic.

Fancy; (...), Gr. Imaginatio, Lat. is that Power by which the Images and Ideas
of things absent and unseen, nay incapable of being, are so apparently
represented to us, that we seem to see and handle, to join and sever 'em, and
to be as much affected with 'em as if really true, tho but imaginary.

V. 803. Forge Illusions, Phantasms and Dreams; Frame and make Cheats and
Delusions, Visions, and strange Appearances. Forge, of the Fr. forger, and
Ital. forgiare, to work and hammer out, as Smiths and Mechanics do. Illusio,
Lat. a Trick, a Cheat, of illudere, to impose upon, to deceive. Phantasms,
(...), Apparitions, Visions, (...), Gr. to imagine.

Dreams are the dark Scenes of Night, those Apparitions that busy Fancy forges
(when secluded from the external execution of Sense) out of the humid Mists
that in sleep surround the Brain. Corpus dormit, Anima vigilat, says
Hippocrates de Insom. And most true it is, that the Faculties of the sensitive
Soul, and the animal Spirits, are in continual activity, (although as to the
exterior parts they seem dull and decayed while we sleep) moving incessantly
about the Center of the Brain, as their perpetual Spring: Here Fancy has her
Forge, presenting us with the Idea of the past day, coining over again our most
swift and fugitive thoughts, repeating and representing anew our Fears, Hopes;
Desires and Disturbances, and sometimes affording the judicious Physicians
Indications of the Bodies Distempers, and conjectures of their Cure.

V. 804. Inspiring Venom, etc. Or if breathing into her a poisonous Vapor, he
might infect the nutritive Spirits, that are bred from purest Blood, as
cheerful and soft Airs that breath from clear and limpid streams. Inspiring,
breathing into, of the Lat. inspirare, to blow upon. Venom, Poison; of the Lat.
venenum, contracted.

V. 805. Might taint; Infect, render unsound and corrupt. Taint, of the Fr.
teindre, or atteindre, to touch; according to our vulgar saying, Such a thing
is touched.

Ibid. Animal Spirits; Spiritus Animales, those alimental bland Vapors that
arise from the Blood, the Organs of Motion and Sensation, which our Poet
assimilates to soft breaths arising from clear crystal Rivers; Others liken
'em to Rays of Light issuing out of the Bloods vital and florid Flame, which
the vivid and equal shining that shows it self in the eyes of those in health,
as that dull deadness that appears in those drawing to their end, and the
fierce, sparkling and wild disorders that manifestly discover themselves in the
looks of Lunatics, does sufficiently evidence. Animal, animalis, Lat. belonging
to a Creature that has Life and Motion.

V. 808. Inordinate Desire; Unbounded appetites, disorderly desires, exceeding
the bounds of Reason. Inordinate, excessive, extra ordinem. The first steps and
motions toward sin, are irregular de^^res, and inordinate appetites.

V. 809. High conceits engendring Pride; Swollen with vain self-opinion, apt to
beget Folly and Pride. Blown up; A Metaphor from any thing filled and swollen
with empty Air; or from the swelling of distempered Ulcers filled with pain and
corruption, that taints and infects its neighborhood. Ingendring, of
engendrer, of the Lat. ingenerare, to beget, That the Devil, by his great
sagacity, may be able so to distemper the humors of human Bodies, to heat and
inflame the Blood and animal Spirits, and by them so to disorder the Fancy,
that many evil thoughts, inductive of sinful desires, may assault us, is not to
be doubted: but that God, who is faithful, and will not suffer us to be tempted
above that we are able, (^ Cor. 10. 13.) should let the Temptation surmount the
regency of our Reason, and the freedom of our Will, is not without Blasphemy to
be supposed of that most Pure and Compassionate Being.

V. 812. Touch of Celestial Temper; Well may the touch of Ithuriel's Spear,
heavenly tempered, return Satan to his own shape, when Tasso makes a whole Army
of wild Beasts run away at the sight of Ubaldo's Sacred Switch. Ma pur si fero
essercito, e si grosso
Non vien, che lor respinga, o che resista,
Anzi; (miracol novo) in fuga e mosso
Da un picciol fischio, e da una breve vista. Cant. 15. St. 52.


Temper, Fr. trempe, the temper of a Weapon.

V. 818. Of Nitrous Powder; Of Gunpowder made of Saltpeter. Nitrous, (...),
Gr. consisting of Nitre, a great Ingredient in that smutty Grain; Pulvis
Nitratus, Lat

V. 819. Some Magazine; A storehouse of public Provisions, of Arms, and other
Utensils of all sorts for War. Magazine, of the barb. Gr. (...); and this of
the Arabic Maschan, Treasure.

V. 824. Transformed; Transformatus, Lat. disguised, of transformare, Lat. to
shift shapes. Omnia transformat sese in miracula rerum. Of the various Proteus,
Geor. 4.

V. 832. Superfluous begin; Why do you deliver your Message in such idle words,
and to no purpose? Superfluous, over and above, that might be left out;
Superfluus, Lat. of superfluere, to run over.

V. 843. This place inviolable; Free from force or harm, from being violated
either by force or fraud; Inviolabilis, Lat.

V. 844. Rebuke; Of the Fr. reboucher, to stop ones mouth, as all just
reprehensions do.

V. 846. Abashed; Discountenanced, of the Fr. Esbahi, confounded, dismayed.
Abashed at his rebuke, that bit her near. Spen. F. Q. B. 5. C. 11. St. 64.

V. 848. Saw and pined his loss; Virtutem videant, intabescantque relicta. Juv.
Sat.

V. 859. Chaumping his iron Curb; Biting his iron Bridle. Champing, of (...),
Gr. the Jaws; of (...), to bend, by whose motion the sound is made.

V. 860. Had quelled his heart; Had overcome his Courage, had cowed him; of the
Sax. cuellan, to kill, to destroy.

V. 869. Of Regal Port; Of stately, Kingly Carriage. Regalis, Lat. Kingly;
Port, behavior, of the Fr. Porter.

V. 870. But faded splendour wan; But his former brightness and beauty was grown
pale and impaired. Wane, pale, of Wannon, Sax. to grow pale. Contest, dispute,
a Fray, of the Fr. Contester, Lat. Contestari, to dispute at Law.

V. 873. In his looks defiance lours; His Countenance is over-cast with daring
and defiance.

V. 877. With stern regard; With angry looks. Stern, of the Belg. starren, to
behold with fixed eyes. Regard, Fr. a look, the countenance; answering to the
Homeric, (...), (...) And (...), torve intuitus. (...).

V. 884. To violate sleep; To invade and disturb the rest. Violare, Lat. to
disorder, to impair. Et violare manu, malisque audacibus Orbem. AEn. 11.

V. 894. Dole with delight; Where thou might soonest change pleasure for
pain. Dole, an old word of dolor, Lat. grief; hence doleful, painful.

V. 899. In that dark durance; In that black abode. Durance, imprisonment, or a
Prison, of durer, Fr. of the Lat. durare, to continue and abide in.

V. 912. Presumptuous; Bold, overweening; of Presompteux, Fr. Praesumptuosus,
Lat. bold, arrogant, of praesumere, Lat. to be rash, and apt to dep^^d on ones
own Judgment. Incurr'st, runn'st headlong into, of incurrere, Lat. to run upon.

V. 920. Courageous Chief; Valiant Leader, of Courageux, Fr. and Chef Fr. of
Caput Lat. the Head; thence the Principal Leader.

V. 921. Had thou alleged; Had thou given this for the reason of thy
flight; of allegare, Lat. to plead, to give reason for, whence an allegation.

V. 922. To thy deserted Host; To thy forsaken Army. Of deserere, Lat. to
leave, to forsake; hence a Deserter, one who runs from his Colors over to the
Enemy. Sole fugitive, the only Runaway, the single Deserter, of solus and
fugitivus, both Lat.

V. 924. Frowning stern; For sternly, according to the above-quoted Graecism,
(...). V. 877.

V. 926. Insulting; Jeering, Braving and insulting over us in misery.
Insulting, Insultans, Lat. of Insultare, Lat. to mock, properly at men in
misery, used in the same sense by Virgil: -- Victorque Sinon incendia miscet
Insultans. AEn. 2.

And by the Eloquence of Rome: Number tibi insultare in calamitate videor? Cic.
pro Flac.

V. 928. Thy blasting-voly'd Thunder, etc. When thou were forced to call to thy
speedy Aid the dreadful Thunder, born on Blasting Wings. Blasting voly'd, a
word seemed to be compounded in imitation of the significancy of those of that
sort used by the Grecians, like (...) and (...), Jove's Epithetes, (...). and
(...). Blasting, scorching, of Blast, in the sense the Winds are said to blast
and scorch the Trees and Fruit. Volied, discharged in Peals in great Numbers,
of the Fr. Volee, a Flight, of Birds, shot, etc.

V. 930. But still thy words at random, etc. But still thy unwary words, as
what thou said before, witness thy want of knowledge, how a trusty General
ought to behave himself in hazardous Attempts, and under ill Success and
Disappointments, ought not to venture all in dangerous ways untried and
unessay'd by himself. At random; heedlesly, carelessly, precipitately; of the
French Randon, the violent course of a Torrent; or of Rendon, Fr. rashness,
uncertainty.

V. 936. To wing the desolate Abyss; To take my flight over the solitary deep.
Desolatus, Lat. forlorn, empty, and desert.

V. 945. And practiced distances to cringe; And at due distance servilely to
adore. To cringe, is to bow very low to, as the Russian manner is to lay their
faces on the ground in approaching to their Monarchs, of the Teut. Kriechen, to
creep to.

V. 946. The warrior Angel; Gabriel, the commanding Angel, Leader of the
Heavenly Bands.

V. 949. Track'd; Caught, overtaken, followed close. Track'd, of the Verb to
trace, to follow bp the footsteps. See Bo. 2. V. 1025.

V. 954. The Discipline; Disciplina, Lat. is most commonly used in our Language
for Instruction. Military, of Militaris, belonging to Miles, Lat. a Soldier.

V. 959. Fawned; Flattered, of the Sax. fandian, to impose upon, to cheat.

V. 962. What I arreed thee; Mark what I appoint thee, what I enjoin thee.
Arreed, of the Fr. arrester, to determine, to decree. Ibid. Avaunt, Fr. be
gone; of Avaunt, Fr. before, forward, on.

V. 964. Within these hallowed Limits; Within the blessed Bounds of Paradise.
Limes, Lat. a Border, or Boundary.

V. 965. I drag thee; The present Tense used for the future, to signify the
immediate execution of the menace. To drag, to hale and pull, of the Teut.
tragen, of trahere Lat. to pull.

V. 966. And seal thee so; This seems to allude to the chaining of the Dragon,
that old Serpent, which is the Devil and Satan, mentioned in the Revelations:
And he cast him into the bottomless Pit, and shut him up, and set a Seal upon
him, Chap. 20. ver. 3. Seal, of Sigel Sax. Sigillum Lat.

V. 967. The facil Gates; The Gates of Hell so easy to be opened. Facilis,
Lat. easy.

V. 971. Proud limitary Cherub; Thou proud prescribing Angel that presumest to
limit me, and appoint my Prison. Limitary, of limitaris, Lat. bounding, of
limitare. Lat. to confine, of limes. Limes agro positus, litem ut discerneret
arvis. AEn. 12.

V. 974. Ride on thy Wings; According to Ezekiel's Vision: Then did the
Cherubims life up their Wings, and the Wheels besides them; and the Glory of
the God of Israel was over them above. Chap. 11. ver. 22.

V. 975. His triumphant Wheels; His glorious Chariot, where he rides in State,
in Triumph, Of triumphare, Lat. These Wheels have relation to the forecited
Vision: And when I looked, behold, four Wheels by the Cherubims; and when the
Cherubims went, the Wheels went by them; and when the Cherubims lift up their
Wings to mount up from the Earth, the same Wheels also turned not from beside
them, etc. Ezekiel. 10. ver. 9, 16, and 17.

V. 976. In progress through, etc. When he takes his Journey through Heavens
high Road, paved with Stars. Progress; A Royal March, the stately and leisurely
Journey of a Court, of Progredi, Lat. to move forward by degrees.

V. 978. Sharpning in Mooned Horns, etc. Extending their square Body into a
round one, and so sharpning it into Horns, like those of the increasing Moon,
endeavoring to enclose him. Phalanx, Bo. 1. V. 550.

V. 980. With ported Spears; With their Spears born pointed toward him.
Ported, of porter, Fr, to carry, to bear, a military term, to port the Pike.

V. 981. A Field of Ceres, etc. A Field of Corn. Ceres, the Daughter of Saturn
and Ops, was the first Discoverer, and thence the tutelar Goddess of Corn;
whence used familiarly, for it, and Bread made of it. -- Tum Cererem corruptam
undis. AEn. 1.

V. 982. Her bearded Grove of Ears; Her armed Wood of yellow Ears. That this
Comparison is sufficiently significative of a vast number of armed Men ranged
close together, is evident from its familiar use and occurrence amongst the
best Poets. Homer by it expresses the power Agamemnon's Oration to the Grecian
Army had on the affected Multitude. (...),
(...),
(...).


Virgil brings it nearer, calling a great number of Darts, Telorum segetem
ferream. -- Hic confixum ferrea texit
Telorum seges, and jaculis increvit acutis. AEn. 3.
-- Atraque late
Horrescit strictis seges ensibus. -- AEn. 7.


Thick as a Field, etc. -- Circum hos utrinque Phalanges
Stant densae, strictisque seges mucronibus horret
Ferrea. -- AEn. 12.
Vel quam sole novo densae torrentur aristae. AEn. 7.
Seges undique ferri circumfusa nitet. Clau. in Ruf. lib. 2.


Bearded; Sharp-pointed, of the Fr. Barde, as Javelin de Barde, a barbe^ used
by Horsemen.

V. 986. Dilated stood like Teneriff or Atlas; Out-stretch'd and extended high
he (...) as tall as Teneriff, and as unshaken as the immense Mount Atlas, to
the Sky up reached his haugh^y stature, on his Helm horror supplied a Plume.

Teneriff, Teneriffa, or, as the Natives name it, Thenerife, is one of the
Canary Islands in the Atlantic Ocean, anciently called Nivaria, because its
Peak (supposed the highest in the World) is seldom without Snow. The Basis of
this Mountain is about 48 Spanish Leagues in compass, and its Summit about 15
miles high, to be seen about 120 English Miles at Sea.

Atlas, now Aiducal, the greatest Mountain in all Africa, hiding its head in
continual Clouds: It begins in Mauritania, near the Atlantic Ocean, which
bears its Name, by Cape de Guer, by various windings and turnings, stretching
it self Eastward to the Deserts of Barca. Its prodigious height occasioned the
Fable of Atlas bearing Heaven on his back.

That Lucifer, the Chief Leader and Champion of the lapsed Angelick Host,
should, swollen with rage, be compared to Mountains of such vast Immensity, will
seem modest enough, when paralleled with the liking of AEneas by Virgil to
some others, not so much inferior to these, as his Hero must be allowed to
have been below any one of those Spiritual Beings. Quantus Athos, aut quantus
Eryx, aut ipse coruscis
Cum fremit ilicibus quantus, gaudetque nivali
Vertice se attollens pater Apenninus ad auras. AEn. 12.


Dilated; Stretched out, extended. Dilatus, Lat. of dilatare, to spread out.
Collecting, gathering together, summing up all his strength; of colligere, Lat.

Stature, statura, Lat. height.

V. 989. And on his Crest sat horror plumed; And on his Helm sat horror
hatched; Dreadfully graven and delineated. The Helmets of ancient Heroes were
made terrible, by Horses Tails stuck in their Crests, and by representations of
diverse angry Animals. (...)
(...).
-- (...)
(...).
Et Conum insignem galeae, cristasque comantes. AEn. 3.
Terribilem cristis galeam flammasque vomentem. AEn. 8.
-- tremunt in vertice cristae
Sanguineae. AEn. 9.


Crest, of Crista, Lat. a Comb, or tuft of Feathers on a Bird's head, thence a
Plume of Feathers, or any other Ornament on a Helmet.

Horror plumed; Horror full-fledg'd, ready to fly upon the Enemy; Fury in
perfection. Plumed, of Pluma, Lat. Feathers; in imitation of which, any thing
carved, graven or embroidered was called Opus plumatile, a kind of damasking
Shields and Helms. Virgil has something like it. -- Quem pellis ahenis
In Plumam squamis auro conferta tegebat. AEn. 11.


Sat Horror plumed, has something in it, quod nequeo monstrare, and sentio
tantum.

V. 995. With violence of this Conflict; In the fury of this Engagement.
Conflictus, Lat. a Fray a Fight, of confligere, to encounter.

V. 998. Betwixt Astrea; Or Justice, accounted the Daughter of Jupiter and
Themis, who during the Golden Age, with other Gods frequented the Earth, and
was the last that left it, when defiled by all Abominations, and has her place
among the Signs of the Zodiac. -- Virgo caede madentes
Ultima Coelestum terras Astraea reliquit. Meta.


Ibid. The Scorpion Sign; (...), Gr. another of the twelve Signs, between which
and the Virgin, the Seals, Libra, Lat. the Balance, is placed. Est locus, in
geminos ubi brachia concavat arcus Scorpios. Meta. lib. 1.
Ipse tibi jam brachia contrahit ardens Scorpius. Georg. 1.


Between these two Signs, the Virgin and the Scorpion, the Scales are placed;
which when the Sun enters, the Days and Nights are weighed equally. Libra die,
noctisque pares ubi fecerit horas. Geo. 1.

Those that by Astraea understood Justice, appropriated the Balance to her, to
weigh all Circumstances in, before she made her Determinations: but our Author
has nobled this Sign, The Golden Scales, with a more lofty signification,
placing it among the Stars, in memory of the Almighty Creator, Wherein all
things created first he weighed; Who, as Job says, m^de a weight for the winds,
and weighs the waters by measure, Chap. 28. v. 25. Who knows the ballancing
of the Clouds, Chap. 37. v. 16. Who weighs the mountains in Scales, and the
hills in a Balance, Isai. 40. v. 12.

V. 1000. The pendulous round Earth, etc. Weighed the hanging Earth orbicular,
against the yieldings Air, in due proportion poised; now all Events considers,
furious Fights, and Kingdoms following their Fate.

The pendulous Earth; The round World, that seems to hang, as Job says, on
nothing, Chap. 26. v. 7. For so is the Air, in respect of any basis or
sustentation. Pendulus, hanging, of pendeo, Lat. to poise.

With balanced Air in counterpoise; Sustained and supported equally in the Air
by its own counterpoise, according to the Opinion, That the Earth hangs by an
Equilibration of its parts to the Center of Gravity. -- Ponderibus librata
suis. Meta. lib. 1.

Balanced; Weighed, of Ballancer, Fr. to poise. In counterpoise; In equal
weight. Contrepois, Fr. equal weight, of Contrepeser, Fr. to weigh against, to
countervail.

V. 1002. In these he put two weights; To inform them of the consequence of
fighting or departing, of resistance or submission: An imitation of Homer,
where Jupiter weighs the Success of the engaging Armies of Troy and Greece.
(...)
(...),
(...).
(...).
(...)
(...).


In another place he ponders the Fate of Achilles and Hector in their single
Combat: The two first Verses are the same with the former, and some of the
rest. (...),
(...)
(...).


Thus concisely imitated by Virgil, in the Combat of AEneas and Turnus. Jupiter
ipse duas aequato examine lances
Sustinet, and fata imponit diversa duorum:
Quem damnet labor, and quo vergat Pondere letum.


It is observable, both in the Original and the Copy, that the heaviest Weight
was unlucky and fatal; whereas our Author, keeping closer to the Simile, puts
Satan* as the wicked and weakest, into the mounted Scale, as unable to
preponderate and prevail against the Good and God-like Gabriel.

Sequel; The Consequence; of sequela, Lat. the Issue, what will certainly
follow, of s^qui, Lat.

V. 1004. And kicked the Beam; The less Weighty Scale, signifying the Sequel or
Issue of Satan's encountering the Angelick Guard, was quickly mounted aloft, and
smote the Beam, which is the Cross-piece to whose Extremities the Scales are
fastened; the Balance equally poised upon its central Point.

V. 1015. And with him fled the Shades of Night; Darkness, and the Prince of
it, took their flight together.

NOTES On MILTON's PARADISE Lost.
BOOK V.
V. 1. NOW Morn her Rosy Steps; The sweet appearance of the Morning is by all
the Poets described by Roses, resembling her Beauteous Blushes. Homer calls her
Rosie-Finger'd. -- (...). -- AEthere ab alto
Aurora in Roseis fulgebat lutea bigis. AEn. 7.
-- Ecce Vigil rutilo patefecit ab ortu
Purpureas Aurora fores, and plena Rosarum
Atria; From the gaudy Colors that attend her rising, Meta. Lib. 2.


V. 2. With Orient Pearl; With shining Dew, well enough assimulated to Pearl,
which (as the Naturalists inform us) are at some luckly Seasons bred of Dew
received into the Shells of Oysters, and such sort of Fish. Sat namque nobis
impraesentiarum fuerit, apud omnes Convenire, Chonchas pro sua aetate ac
Magnitudine Majores, pro Roris vero (appetente genitali tempore) concepti
puritate, vel obscuritate, Generofiores vel Ignobiliores Margaritas eniti.
Ruaeus de Gem.

V. 4. Of true Digestion bred, arising of clear good Nourishment, of true and
clean Concoction, whence sleep is pleasant and easy, not drowsy and lumpish,
bred of heavy Vapor, fuming to the Head, and overcharging the Stomach. Qui
been digerit, ingerit, egerit, est been sanus. Digestio, the right concocting
and turning of our Food, into pure Spirits and good Nourishment, of digerere,
Lat. to digest, Stomachus Convaluit, ut diger at multa cruda facilius. Cic.
Attic.

V. 5. And temperate Vapors bland; Gentle pleasing Fumes, that mounting in a
kindly Mist, ^ercast the busy Brain. Temperate, Temperatus, Lat. moderate,
free from excess. Bland, Blandus, Lat. pleasing, as -- Suspensam blanda vicissim
Gaudia pertentant Mentem. AEn. 5.


And Ipsa tibi blandos fundent cunabula flores. Ecl. 4.

V. 6. And fuming Rills; And angry, purling Rivulets, whose motion makes a
Noise, as if disturbed at the Stones that lie in its way. Fuming, angry, of the
word to fume, of the Teur. Faum, Froth, the effect of Anger both in Beasts and
Men, and in Rivers too. Rill, is the contraction of Rivulus, Lat. a small
Stream.

Ibid. Aurora's Fan; Aurora, Lat. for the Morning, accounted the Daughter of
Titan and the Earth, and Mother of Memnon so called, ab Aura, from the pleasant
freshness that Time affords; so that our Poet has well expressed the sound of
the trembling Leaves, moved by that pure fresh Air, by Aurora's Fan. Jamque
rubescebat Stellis Aurora fugatis. AEn. 3.

V. 7. Matin Song; The early Song by Birds on every Bough sung at Daybreak.
Matin, of the Morning, the Lat. Matutinus contracted. Evandrum ex humili lecto
Lux suscitat Alma
Et Matutini volucrum sub culmine cantus. AEn. 8.


V. 16. On Flora breaths; Soft as the West-Wind breathing on opening Flowers.
Flora was a Woman of lascivious Life, who leaving a great Mass of Money, got by
her Lewdness, to the City of Rome, was honored with a Festival; and to sweeten
her Reputation, made the Goddess of Flowers. Zephyr^s, Book 4. V. 329.

V. 21. The prime; The first, the freshest, and the pleasantest Hour. Primus,
Lat. first.

V. 22. Our tended Plants; The Plants we have bestowed our attendance and care
on. To tend, is of attendre, Fr. to wait on.

Ibid. The Citron Grove; The Grove of Lemon Trees. (...), or (...), a Lemon or
Citron-Tree: Hence Citrea mala, Lemons, Plin.

V. 23. What Drops the Myrrh; What precious Drops are fallen from the weeping
Myrrh, and what sweet Distillations from the Balm. Myrrh, Myrrha, Lat. (...),
Gr. the Incestuous Daughter of King Cineras, by whom she had the Beautiful
Adonis. Ovid tells us, that being discovered by her enraged Father, she fled
into the Happy Arabia, where she was turned into a Tree, retaining her Name,
whose perfumed Tears moralize the Virtue of Repentance, purgative of the
blackest Crimes. Myrrha fugit, tenebris and caecae munere noctis
Intercepta neci: Latosque vagata per agros,
Palmiferos Arabas, Panchaeaque rura relinquit.
Perque novem erravit redeuntis cornua Lunae;
Cum tandem terra requievit fessa Sabaea.
Quae quanquam amisit veteres cum corpore sensus,
Flet tamen: Et tepidae manant ex arbore guttae.
Est honor and lacrymis: Stillataque cortice Myrrha
Nomen herile tenet, nulloque tacebitur aevo. Meta. Lib. 10.


Ibid. The Balmy Reed; The Balm-Tree; called a Reed, as not being a Tree of any
great size, or as growing in a moist Oleaginous Soil. -- Sylva
Pastus arundinea. -- AEn. 10. Balmy, Book 4. V. 159.


V. 25. Sits on the Bloom extracting; Sits on the Flowers and blossoming Trees,
gathering thence Honey, the Natural Nectar. Bloom, Book 3. Verse. 43.
Extracting, drawing out, of extrahere, Lat. to draw forth.

V. 35. Till this irksom Night; Till this troublesome, this grievous Night: Of
the old English word to irk, to afflict, or of the Lincolnshire Werk or Wark,
Grief, Irksom, tedious, troublesome.

V. 40. The Night-warbling Bird, the Nightingal, warbling, singing all Night
long. Warbling, Book 2. Verse. 232.

V. 42. Now Reigns full-Orb'd the Moon; Now the Moon, Sovereign of the Night,
complete in full spendour appears: Full-Orb'd, that has completed her bright
Round, now in the Full, of Orbis, Lat. for a round Body.

V. 43. Shadowy sets off; Our Poet has shaded his Night-piece excellently,
Silence and Shade do make great Additions to the Midnight Majesty of the
Full-Orb'd Moon.

V. 52. Of Interdicted Knowledge; The Forbidden Tree, the Tree of Knowledge of
Good and Evil; Not forbidden out of Envy, (as Satan intimates) but set apart,
and secluded, as the Test and Trial of Man's Obedience to his Maker, which while
he stood steadfast in, he had no other Knowledge but of Goodness, Happiness and
Innocence: But his Violation of Gods Command, and the Sacred Tree, (Sacred to
Abstinence) introduced the sad Experimental Knowledge of Evil, ever since
multiplied on Mankind. Interdicted, Interdictus, Lat. forbid, of Interdicere,
the Roman Law-word used in the Praetor's Prohibitory Decrees.

V. 53. Much fairer to my Fancy; In Sleep, when our Senses are locked and shut
up, Imagination has more Strength; and Fancy, free from those many Avocations
that draw us away when waking, exerts its utmost force, and represents its dark
Masquerades and dumb Shows, with strange Advantage.

V. 57. Distilled Ambrosia, dropped with Immortal Sweetness; An Odor by which
the Poetic Gods and Goddesses were discovered, when in disguise appearing to
their Relatives, one of the Dignosticks of a Deity, so Virgil of his Venus
entertaining her Son AEneas, Ambrosiaeque Corrae Divinum Vertice Od^rem
Spiravere. -- AEn. 1.


Distilled, Distillare, Lat. to fall by Drops as Dew.

V. 59. Deigns none; Does neither God nor Man vouchsafe: To deign, to think
worthy, of the Fr. daigner, of the Lat. dignari. -- Haud equidem tali me dignor
honor. AEn. 1.

V. 61. What Reserve? What Reservation? What Exception from the Universal Grant
of all things given to thee, has reserved this Tree of Knowledge from thy
taste? Reserve, une reserve, Fr. a Reservation, an Exception in a Grant.

V. 64. He paused not; He made no stop, delayed no longer, of Pause, Fr. delay,
strangely alluding to the Gr. (...), cessare, to cease.

V. 65. Damp Horror child; Fear put me into a cold sweat. -- Gelidusque per ima
cucurrit
Ossa tremor. -- AEn. 2.
At Sociis subita gelidus formidine sanguis
Diriguit. -- AEn. 3.


The effect of sudden fear. (...).
V. 66. Vouched; Seconded by so daring a Deed; Followed, maintained, of
Voucher, Fr. Law-Term, to make good, to stand by.

V. 71. Good, the more communicated; Bonum est sui ipsius diffusivum: Goodness
is diffusive of it self, and the Sovereign Good, most superlatively
communicative: For by the effusion of the Divine Wisdom and Goodness, which
from all Eternity was with God and is God, the Universe was made, without
impairing his Infinite Perfections, and to his Everlasting Praise.
Communicated, Communicatus, Lat. bestowed on many.

V. 73. The Author not impaired, not lessened, or deprived of ought so
communicated, as Light transmits and diffuseth it self unimpair'd: Impaired
Empire, Fr. made worse, damaged, of Pire, Fr. of Pejus, Lat. worse.

V. 88. Out-stretch'd immense, etc. The Earth stretched out immensely,
immeasurably, a Prospect of vast and various view. Varius, Lat. different,
diverse, generally of Colors. -- Varios errare colores. Geor. 1.

V. 90. To this high Exaltation, to this high Pitch; Wondering at my strange
flight, and the sudden change to such a high Advancement. Exaltatio, Lat.
Preferment, a raising one higher.

V. 93. Thus Eve her Night related, thus Eve repeated her Dream; The dark
Offspring, and the disturbance of the Night. Night, for the Visions and Dreams
frequent in it. So Promissa evolvit somni, noctemque retractat. Sil. Ita. Lib.
3.

V. 94. Answered sad, concerned; Sad here, is no more than serious,
considerative, for sinless Adam was incapable of sadness, sorrow.

V. 101. Many lesser Faculties, many inferior Powers, subordinate and
subservient to Reason. Facultates, Lat. for the Powers and Endowments of the
Mind. Fancy, See Book 4. Verse. 802.

V. 105. Aerie Shapes; Idea's and Conceptions; From the Reasons assenting to, or
disagreeing from which, Opinion and our Knowledge of things results. An
admirable Description. Opinio, Lat. for the Opinion, the Knowledge we have, or
the Judgment we make of things, by our Senses represented to our Reason.
Imaginations, Imaginatio, Lat. Thoughts, the Conceptions of our Minds.
Affirmare, Lat. to agree to, or allow of, to assent unto.

V. 109. Into her little Cell, into her little Withdrawing-Room; Reason, while
we rest, retires into the secret Meanders of the Brain: Of Cella, Lat. whence
the little Apartments of Monks are called Cells; as also the little Habitations
of Bees in their Hive. -- Et liquido distendunt nectare cellas. Georg. 4.

V. 110. Mimick Fancy wakes; Fancy, that Apes and imitates Reason, mismatching
and misplacing, Words and Things, Thoughts and Idea's, that past through our
Minds quick and unheeded when awake. Mimick, (...), imitating and personating
the Actions of others, as Players do, of (...), Gr. of (...), to imitate.

V. 117. Into the Mind of God and Man, etc. Evil Thoughts may arise in the
Minds of Angels and Men, yet unapproved, and disallowed, vanish thence, and
leave no stain behind. God must here be understood, as (...) in the Original
frequently is, of Angels and Pure Spiritual Beings, for Evil can make no
Invasion on the Supreme Sovereign Goodness.

V. 128. Reserved from Night, secured from Dewy Night, that might impair their
scent, enclosed and embosomed in their fragant Buttons, and secured for the,
reserve, of reservare, Lat. to lay up, to keep in store.

V. 133. In their Crystal Sluice, in their shining Outlet, in her bright Eye;
One of the Humors aiding the Eyesight is named Chrystalline, of its resembling
Crystal. Sluice, of the Fr. Escluse, a Dam or Floodgate, by which Water is kept
in, and on occasion let out, whence the Eye is here called the Sluice of Tears.

V. 134. Of sweet remorse, as pleasing signs of soft concern; Gracious,
Gratiosus, Lat. liked, approved of. Remorse, of the Fr. Remors, of the Lat.
remordere, to bite, or gnaw again, as Faults and Folly when reflected on, are
used to do. -- Quando haec te cura remordet. AEn. 1.

V. 137. Arborous Roof; But first as soon as they were come forth, from under
the Leavy Roof of this Shady Bower. Arborous, Arboreus, Lat. of Trees, Arborous
Roof, made shady, and securely covered overhead by Trees, that grew together
into a Natural Arbor; of Arbor, Lat. a Tree. So Virg. Arborei foetus, Georg. 1.

V. 141. Shot Parallel, etc. The Sun, who scarce yet quite up, his Wheels still
wet on the Briny Oceans Brink, shot even with the Earth his level Rays.
Parallel, (...), Parallel Lines, are those, which being in the same Plain, though
infinitely extended, would never meet or touch each other, but be, as their
Name denotes, always one by another. (...),
(...).
(...).


Of the Suns Chariot, see Ovid. Aureus axis erat, temo aureus, aurea summae
Curvatura rotae; radiorum argenteus ordo, etc. Meta. Lib. 1.
-- (...)
(...),
(...).
Postera vix summos spargebat lumine montes
Orta dies, cum primum alto se gurgite tollun^
Solis equi. -- AEn. 12.
(...)
(...).


V. 145. Their Orisons, their Prayers, of Oraison, Fr. of Oration, Lat. a
Supplication.

V. 146. In various Style, in different Words, and with variety of Expressions.
Style, Stylus, Lat. was the Iron Instrument with which the Romans wrote on
their Tablets overspread with Wax, thence applied to the manner of writing, and
to speaking also. Unus enim sonus totus orations and idem Stylus. Cic. de Orat.

V. 147. Nor holy Rapture, they wanted not their holy Heights of Thought, and
Divine and Sublime Expressions of Praises to their Maker. Raptura, Lat. a
Rapture, a sort of Ectasie, a sudden and pleasing Violence, whereby we are (as
it were) snatched from our selves, and raised above the ordinary Heights of
Understanding, and the usual Flights of Fancy. St. Paul describing his being
Caught up into the third Heaven, uses the Greek word, expressive of a Rapture,
(...), 2 Cor. 12. V. 2.

V. 148. In fit Strains, in noble and suitable Flights of Fancy, in lofty
Expressions spoke or sung. A Strain, is commonly applied to Poetry and Music,
and seems so named, from the force of Imagination and Fancy necessary to raise
our Thoughts to such towering and lofty Flights, as if strained to the height.
Pronounced, spoke of Pronuntiare, Lat. to speak, as different from singing.
Quis enim Cautus, moderatae Orationis pronunciatione, dulcior inveniri potest?
Cic. de Orat. Lib. 3.

V. 149. Unmeditated, such prompt, etc. Unstudied, free and unpremeditated,
such ready and fluent Speech streamed from their Lips. Unmeditated,
Immeditatus, unthought of. Meditari, Lat. to think or consider of. Such prompt
Eloquence; Such readiness of Speech. Nihil aliud est Eloquentia, quem copiose
loquens sapientia. Cic. de Orat. Prompt, Promptus, Lat. ready, easy, clear.

V. 150. Or numerous Verse, or pleasing harmonious Verse: Numerous, Numerosus,
Lat. Musical, as being obliged and tied up to Number and Measure. Id numerosum
est in omnibus sonis ^tque vocibus, quod habet quasdam Impressiones, and quod
metiri possumus intervallis aequalibus. Cic. de Cla. -- Numeros memini, si
verba tenerem, Ecl. 9.

Prose, Book 1. Verse. 16.

V. 151. More tuneable, so melodious and musical, as not to stand in need
either of Lute or Harp, to add more charming sweetness: All Instruments of
Music, being but Imitations of Human Voice, made use of to assist, but
incapable of exceeding it; invented to please those, who by some indisposition
of their Organs or their Ears, deprived of Nature's charming Melody, are forced
to divert themselves with artificial sounds, racked from strained Strings and
Wyres, and hollow Wood, etc. as much inferior to the former, as Art is to
Nature.

V. 154. Thine this Universal Frame, the Worlds vast, wonderful Fabric: Frame,
of the Sax. Fremman, to make, to fashion, as if, of Formare, Lat. Here begins
the Noble Paraphrase of the Canticle, (appointed to be sung by our Church after
the first Lesson at Morning Prayer) Oh all ye Works of the Lord, bless ye the
Lord, highly Poetical.

V. 155. Thy self how wondrous then! With whose Beauty, if they being
delighted, took them to be Gods: Let them know how much better the Lord of them
is; for the first Author of Beauty has created them. And if they were
astonished at their Power and Virtue, let them understand by them, how much
Mightier he is that made them. Wisd. 13. V. 3, and 4.

V. 160. Ye Sons of Light: Angels are often in the Holy Page, styled The Sons
of God, Job 38. Verse. 7. Dan. 3. Verse. 25. compared in the former to the
Morning-Stars, well interpreted here, the Sons of Light, since God their
Father, for his Infinite Purity; is pleased to be styled Light, God is Light, 1
St. John 1. Verse. 5. God's Children are honored with the same Title, Ye are
all the Children of the Light, and the Children of the Day, 1 Thessalonians. 5. and
Verse. 5.

V. 162. And Choral Symphonies, with Quires of Concording Hymns: Choral,
Choralis, Lat. of Chorus, (...), a Quire, a Company of Singers, used at
Solemnities of the Heathen Gods, and -- Laetumque Choro Paeana Canentes. AEn. 6.

Symphonies, Book 1. Verse. 712.

V. 166. Fairest of Stars; Venus, one of the seven Planets, and Companion of
the Sun, which at Evening is called Hesperus and Vesper, following the Sun, in
the Morning Lucifer, (...) and Eous, when it precedes him. -- Tibi deserit
Hesperus Oetam. Ecl. 6.
-- Et invito processit Vesper Olympo. Ecl. 8.
Nascere, praeque diem veniens, age Lucifer almum. Ecl. 8.
Jamque jugis summae surgebat Lucifer Idae
Ducebatque diem. -- AEn. 2.
-- Dum Lucifer ignes
Evocat Aurorae. -- Met. 4.


The Evening-Star was accounted the fairest of all Nights-glittering Train,
even by Homer's Testimony: (...)
(...)*
(...)
(...).


Last in the Train of Night. -- Diffugiunt Stellae: Quarum agmina cogit
Lucifer and Coeli statione novissimus exit. Met. Lib. 2.


V. 168. Sure Pledge of Day, etc. Sure Earnest of the coming Day, that do
adorn, with thy bright Coronet, the lovely Morn, the Circlet, a diminitive of
Circle. Qualis ubi Oceani perfusus Lucifer unda,
Quem Venus ante alios Astrorum diligit ignes,
Extulit Os sacrum Coelo, tenebrasque resolvit. AEn. 8.


V. 170. That sweet Hour of Prime; The early Morning Hour, when Air and Earth
are both sweet and fresh. -- Dum mane novum, dum gramina canent
Et ros in tenera pecori gratissimus herba. Georg. 3.


V. 171. Of this great World both Eye and Soul: Thou Sun, the Worlds vast
Universal Eye, Natures Illustrious Polypheme, styled The God of this new World,
Book 4. Verse. 33. early esteemed one, and worshipped in stead of his Creator.
The Ancients thought the Sun not only the General Surveyor of the World, but
the Observer of all that was transacted in it. (...). I invoke the All-seeing
Circle of the Sun, AEscul. in Prometh. and in all Leagues, Confederacies, and
other public Transactions, he was called to Witness, as the Universal Eye,
from which nothing could be concealed. (...). Esto nunc Sol testis. -- AEn. 12.
Sol oculis, juvenem quibus aspicit omnia, vidit.
O Lux immensi Publica Mundi. Met. Lib. 2.


Ibid. And Soul: The most Ancient Philosophers were of Opinion, that there was
one Universal Intellectual Soul, the Emanation of (the Great Mind) God, created
and diffused over the whole World, by whose general Virtue and Plastic Power,
all things are generated and preserved, and the whole Frame of Nature continued
in her uninterrupted Course, and beautiful Order; this the Platonists called
Animam Mundi, and with them Mercurius Trismegistus, Theophrastus, etc. the
Stoics and the Peripateticks agree. Z^roaster styles it a Catholic Invisible
Fire: Virgil, A Mental Spirit, actuating the Heavens, Earth, Seas and Stars.
Principio Coelum, ac Terras, camposque liquentes,
Lucentemque Globum Lunae, titaniaque Astra
Spiritus intus alit: Totamque infusa per artus
Men's agitat molem, etc. --
Igneus est olhis vigor, and coelestis Origo
Seminibus. -- AEn. 6.


So that our Poet has conformably seated this Universal Invigorating Spirit in
the Sun, by the Platonists termed the Sphere of Equality, or of the Soul of the
World, corresponding with the Heart, the Vital Center of the Microcosm.

V. 173. In thy Eternal Course, in thy Continual Course; For the Sun is not
Eternal, not so Ancient as Light by some Days, but was made in time, of which
his Motion is the Measure. Virgil uses the Adverb AEternum in the same manner
for Continually. -- Glebaque versis
AEternum frangenda bidentibus. Georg. 2.
AEternumque Arida Barce. Luc.


V. 176. Fixed in their Orb that flies: The fixed Stars, are not so called, as if
Stationary and Motionless, but because moving constantly in the round of their
own Sphere, without any deviation, and thereby distinguished from the wandering
Planets; therefore styled in the following Verse, The Five wandering Fires,
being Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Venus and Mercury, he having just been speaking of
the Sun and Moon that complete the Septenary.

V. 178. In Mystic Dance not without Song: Pythagoras is vouched for the
Author of the Musical Motion of the Spheres, though misunderstood, the Harmony
he meant relating to their Proportion and Concinnity, rather than their
Consonancy. Many have endeavored to find an Agreement with our Earthly
Harmony, in the Distances and Motions of the Heavenly Spheres, Sound being only
the Noise of Motion diversely modified: And doubtless there are many Proportions
among the Stars, nearly approaching the Harmonick; their benign and favorable
Aspects and Conjunctions, as also the evil ones, do strangely correspond with
Concord and Dissonancy: But all that we certainly understand is, that we cannot
sufficiently comprehend and admire the admirable Proportion and Congruity, the
Regular and uninterrupted Methods and Motions of Nature, charming above all the
strains of Humane Harmony, and obeying his Commands, who from the beginning
ordered all things in measure, number and weight, Wisd. 11. Verse. 20.

Orpheus his Harp had its seven Strings contrived according to the Number of
the Planets, which the Poets tell us, was the reason his Music was so
Compulsive and Irresistible; and he compared the Four Elements, and their
Harmonious Mixture, by which the World is maintained in continual Concord, to
the Tetracordon, resembling the vast Universe to the Monocord.

V. 180. Air, and the Elements, etc. Air, and ye the rest of the Elements,
Fire, Earth and Water, the Constituents of all Corporeal Beings, the eldest
Birth of Natures Womb, according to Genesis 1. Verse. 1.

V. 181. That in Quaternion run, etc. That in their fourfold Mixture run
perpetual Rounds producing diverse Forms. The Generation of all things is
Circular; as of Seed, an Egg; of that, a Bird; of that Bird, Seed again; and of
that, an Egg, in a continual round.

The Quaternion, or (...), was the mysterious and much-admired Number of the
Pythagoreans: It was their most sacred and solemn Oath, (...)
(...) -- Pyth. in Carm. Aur.


^ swear by him who gave my Soul the Quaternion, the Fountain of Everlasting
Nature. It related, as some say, to the Four Elements, the Four Faces of the
Moon, to the Four first Qualities, Heat, Cold, Dryness and Moisture. But the
Pythagoreans had it in so high Veneration, because it contained all Numbers,
that is ten, for ^, beyond which no Nation Numbers, the rest being but
Multiplications of this, wherefore Four contain all Numbers. Quaternion,
Quaternio, Lat. the Number Four, a Quatuor, Lat. Multiform, Multiformis, Lat.
of diverse Fashions and Shape, of Multus, Lat. many, and Forma, Lat. shape, kind.

V. 189. The uncolour'd Sky; The Air, which by reason of its thinness,
clearness and perspicuity, is invisible, can therefore have no pretense to
color, as not being capable to terminate our sight: That more impure part of
it, that moves in the Region of Meteors, is of a duskish and dark Complexion
near the misty Horizon, by reason of the thick Vapors of the Neighboring
Earth; at a greater distance, thinner Exhalations give it a whiteness, and in
serene Seasons, it is of that we call Skie-Colour, but all these are the
Tinctures given to the Uncolour'd Air, as patcht and dressed with Clouds, as our
Author styles them. Virgil seems to have expressed this Uncolour'd Air by Purum:
-- Dum se laetus ad auras
Palms agit laxis per Purum immissus habenis. Geor. 2.


Sky, of Scinan, Sax. to be bright.

V. 192. That from Four Quarters blow; From the Four Cardinal Points, East,
West, North and South, which multiplied by Eight, their Collateral and Circular
Sub-divisions, complete the Compass with 32 distinct Breaths.

V. 193. And wave your Tops, ye Pines; and bow your lofty Heads, ye stately
Pines. Et rigidas mot^re cacumina quercus. Ecl. 6.
-- Factis modo Laurea ramis
Annuit; Utque caput visa est agitasse cacumen. Met. Lib. 1.


To Wave, is to move, a Wave being nothing but Water put into motion, of the
Sax. Wagian, to be in motion, or to move to and fro.

V. 196. Mellodious Murmur; Ye little purling Rills, that by your Motion make a
pleasing sound. Ceu Saxa Morantur
Cum rapidos amnes; Clauso fit gurgite Murmur. AEn. 11.


Is not half so sweet, as the Harmonious Complaint, seeming to be made by
Rivers interrupted in their Watery Way.

V. 200. Ye that in Waters glide, etc. Fish and Beasts, and creeping things.

V. 204. Made Vocal by my Song, made to resound and echo forth thy Praise,
taught by my assiduous and repeated Song. Horace gave Ears to the Woods that
danced after Orpheus: -- Auritas Fidibus Canoris
-- Ducere quercus. Carm. Lib. 1. Od. 12.


And Milton here mentions the Voices inhabiting in Hills and Woody Shades. --
Cujus recinet jocosa
Nomen imago,
Aut in umbrosis Heliconis Oris,
Aut super Pindo, Gelidove in Haemo? Hor. Ibid.


Vocal, Vocalis, Lat. Endowed with a Voice, so he calls the Divine Poet,
Vocalem Orphea, Hor. Ibid. and the Nerves instrumental to the Formation of
Speech, are called Nervi Vocales.

V. 214. Their pampered Boughs, their wanton, luxurious Branches, abounding in
Leaves: Pampered, of the Ital. Pamberato, fat, or of Pamprer, Fr. to be full of
Leaves, of Pampinus, Lat. a Vine-Leaf. Tibi Pampineo gravis Autumno
Floret ager. Georg. 2.


V. 216. The Vine to wed her Elm; Used not only to support Vines, but to
ennoble and meliorate them: Longo usu compertum Nobilia Vina non nisi in
arbustis gigni, and in his quoque Laudatiora summis, sicut uberiora imis: Adeo
excelsitate proficitur, hac ratione and arbores Eliguntur, Prima and omnium
Ulmus: Deinde Populus nigra, etc. Plin. l. 17. c. 23. Viribus eniti quarum, and
contemnere ventos
Assuescant, summasque sequi tabulata per Ulmos. Geor. 2.
Illa tibi laetis intexet vitibus Ulmos. Ibid.


V. 217. Her Marriageable Arms. -- Ergo aut adulta vitium propagine
Altas Maritat Populos. Hor. Epod. 2.
Inde ubi jam validis amplexae stirpibus Ulmos
Exierint. -- Geo. 2.
Haec quoque, quae juncta vitis requiescit in Ulmo,
Si non nupta foret, terrae acclinata jaceret. Met. 14.


V. 218. Her Dower th'adopted Clusters, the fruitful Vine brings her Grapes,
her Noble Offspring, (as her Dower) adopted by the barren Elm. Dower, or
rather Dowry, properly signifies the Portion a Woman brings her Husband in
Marriage, Dower being that settled on her in lieu thereof, for her life, if she
survive him. It is of the Lat. Dos, and this of the Gr. (...), of (...), to
give. Conjugium and quaesitas sanguine Dotes. AEn. 7.
-- Et numeras in Dote triumphos. Juv. Sat. 10.


Adopted, of adoptare, Lat. to take into ones care as a Son: Adoptati, were
such, who for their Courage, Virtuous Education, and promising Parts, were by
the Childless Romans chosen out of other Families, to heir the Estates of those
who did adopt 'em, and past into their Power as absolutely, as if begotten by
'em; better pleased, that Nature left them the choice of a Successor, than if
she had imposed and entailed one on them, unworthy perhaps of their Famous
Ancestors.

V. 221. Raphael, the Sociable Spirit, the Friendly Angel. Raphael, (...),
Health of God, of (...), to heal; by the Cabalists he is made Governor of the
West Part of Heaven, and Ruler of the Coolihg Zephirus, the soft gentle Wind,
named Fovonius, a Favendo, of his cherishing Influence. Scciable, Socialis, or
Sociabilis, Lat. Friendly, of Socius, Lat. a Companion, Tob. 5. Verse. 4.

V. 223. The seven-times Wedded-Maid Sarah, Tob. 7. Verse. 11.

V. 232. To respit with repast, with Food and rest, interrupting his Days Work.
Repast, Repas, Fr. a Meal, of Repascere, to feed.

V. 238. He swerve not too secure, he depart not from his Duty through too much
Security and Presumption. Swerve, of the Bell. Swerven, to wander, to go astray.

V. 249. Thousand Celestial Ardors, but from among a Multitude of Heavenly
Angels, well expressed by Ardors. Ardor, Lat. Brightness, Fervency, Exceeding
Love, etc. to which the Angelick Excellency may well be assimulated, in respect
of their Purity, Activity and Zeal. His Ministers a Flame of Fire, Psalm. 104.
Verse. 4. Hebr. 1. Verse. 7. Ardor is by Virgil used for Fire. -- Cui Pineus
Ardor acervo
Pascitur. AEn. 11. Thence expressive of any Passionate Impulse.
Idem omnes simul ardor habet. AEn. 4.

V. 254. The Gate self opened, of its own accord the Gate opened wide; Hung on
Homer's Hinges. (...).

V. 257. To obstruct his sight, no Cloud or Star stood in his way to hinder his
Immortal Eye: Obstructs, of obstruere, Lat. to build before, to take away ones
Prospect, to stop up. Placidasque viri Deus obstruit aures. AEn. 4.

V. 259. Not unconform, etc. He sees how ever small (showing but like a Point)
the Earth, not unlike other shining Globes, and in it Paradise, the Garden of
God. Not unconform, not unsuitable, of in, Lat. un, and conformis, Lat. alike.
This resemblance of the Earth, to other shining Celestial Bodies, here hinted
at, is more largely treated of Book 8. Verse. 140. -- What if that Light
Sent from her (the Earth) through the wide transpicious Air,
To the Terrestrial Moon, be as a Star
Enlightening her by Day, as she by Night
This Earth.


And that faint Light, which in the New and Waning Moon, in spite of her
Silver Horns, discovers to us her darker Disk, formerly reputed her Native
Luster, now called her Secundary Light, is found to be reflected from the Earth
upon her, when nearer us she moves within the Region of this Terrene
Reflection. Gassend. Lib. 2. Inst. Astron.

V. 262. Of Galileo, less assured; The Angel in his flight from Heaven,
discovering the Earth, is compared to Galileo, the Italian Astronomer, Native
of Florence, and Professor at Padua, whose Glass is said to be less assured,
that is, not so infallible and undeceivable as the Angelick Optics, though it
gave him so clear a prospect of the Moon, that he affirms, Ex quo deinde
sensata certitudine quispiam intelligat, Lun^m superficie leui and perpolita
nequaquam esse indutam, sed, aspera and inaequali, ac veluti ipsusmet Telluris
facies, ingentibus tumoribus, profundis lacunis atque anfractibus undiquaque
confertam, Galil. Nunc. Syd. Hence these Imagined Lands and Regions in the Moon.

V. 264. The Cyclades are the Northern Islands, in number about 53, lying in
the form of a Circle in the Egean Sea, so called of (...), Gr. a Circle. --
Sparsasque per aequor
Cycladas, and crebris legimus freta consita ter^is. AEn. 3.
-- Pelago credas innare revulsas
Cycladas. -- AEn. 8.


V. 265. Delos, an Island of the AEgean Sea, one and the chief of the Cyclades,
named of (...), Gr. appearing, because Fabled to have appeared above Water, or
at least to have fixed it self, and thereby become manifest, before, floating
and uncertain, to receive Latona great with Apollo and Diana, whom all the
Earth, at the angry entreaty of Jealous Juno, had refused a place to Lie-in.
Thence called Latonia Delos, Geor. 3. Sacra Mari colitur medio gratissima tellus
Nereidum Matri and Neptuno AEgaeo;
Quam pius Arcitenens oras and litora circum
Errantem, Mycone celsa Gyaroque revinxit;
Immetamque coli dedit and contemnere ventos. AEn. 3.


Ibid. Samos, is the next Island of Note to Delos, among the Cyclades in the
Archipelago or AEgean Sea. A Cloudy Spot, as Islands at first appearance seem
to be.

V. 268. Between Worlds and Worlds; Laertius tells us, that Anaxagoras the
Philosopher, held a Plurality of Worlds, and that the Moon was habitable, full
of Hills and Dales, Mountains and Rivers, (...), etc. As if so long before
Galileo was born, he had worn his Spectacles. Orpheus and Heraclides believed
every Star to contain a World, (...), Plat. de plac. Philo. Lib. 2. Cap. 13. So
that these Imaginary Worlds are no new-broach'd Fancies of those that will
Nimis altd sapere.

V. 269. Now on the Polar Winds; Now wafted on the Winds that blow from the two
Poles of Heaven; Anon with Nimble Wing, he beats the yielding Air, till about
the distance from the Earth, that high-flying Eagles are able to mount, to all
the feathered kind, he seems a Phoenix, gazed on and wondered at by all the
Flying Nations. Polar Winds, the North and South, blowing from the respective
Poles of the World. Polaris, Lat. belonging to the Pole.

V. 270. Winnows, with his Wings he breaks and beats the yielding Air: To
Winnow, is to toss Corn to and fro, up to the Wind, which clears it of the
Chaff, of Wannen, Teut. to Fan, to Winnow. Buxom, Book 2. Verse. 842.

Ibid. Soar, the rise, the height, the highest flight of lofty Eagles; of the
Ita. sorare, to fly high. Eagle, Aigle, Fr. the Contraction of Aquila, Lat.
towering, Eagles rising as much above other Birds, as Towers do higher than
ordinary Huts.

V. 272. A. Phoenix; (...), Gr. A Phoeniceo Pennarum Color, named of the
Color of her Crimson Wings, or of a Palm Tree, whose Fruit resembles that Hue,
is a (fancied) Arabian Bird, of which the World has never but one, thence
called Sole Bird; he lives 660 Years, and then retiring into a Spicy Nest, is
therein burnt by the Sun in a Fragrant Funeral Pile, out of whose Ashes rises
the Ancestor and Successor joined in one, according to Plin. Lib. 20. Cap. 21.
Una est, quae reparet, seque ipsa reseminet, ales;
Assyrii Phoenica vocant: Non fruge, neque herbis,
Sed Thuris lacrymis, and succo vivit amoni.
Hic ubi quinque suae complevit saecula vitae,
Ilicts in ramis, tremulaeve cacumine Palmae,
Unguibus and pando ni dum sibi construit ore.
Quo simul ac Casias, and Nardi lenis aristas
Quassaque cum fulva substravit Cinnama Myrrha,
Se super imponit: Finitque in odoribus aevum.
Inde ferunt totidem qui vivere debeat Annos,
Corpore de Patrio Parvum Phoenica renasci. Met. Lib. 15.
Sed Pater est, prolesque sui, nulloque creante
Emeritos artus foecunda morte reformat.
-- Nam sponte crematur,
Ut redeat, gaudetque mori, Festinus in ortum. Claud. de Phoenice*
Oue nascon gli incensi, e gli altri odori,
Oue rinasce l'immortal Fenice,
Ch' in quella ricca Fabrica, ch' aduna,
A' l' essequie, a i natali, ha tomba, e cuna. Tass. Cant. 17. St. 20.


Ibid. Gazed by all, looked on and admired by all the winged Inhabitants of the
Air. -- Quis enim non praepite tanto
AEthera respiceret? Of Perseus on the Wing, Luc. Lib. 9.


V. 273. When to enshrine, etc. When to Egyptian Thebes he flies, to place upon
the Suns bright Altar, the Calcined Nest, the Precious Remainder and Residue of
the Original Ashes whence he arose, as all the Poets treat this Fabulous Bird.
Cum dedit hinc aetas vires, onerique ferendo est;
Fertque pius cunasque suas, Patriumque Sepulcrum,
Perque leves aur as, Hyperionis urbe potitus,
Ante fores sacras, Hyperionis aede, reponit. Met. Lib. 15
Aut cinis eoa positi Phoenicis in ara. Luc. Lib. 6.


His Relics. Protinus ad Nilum manes sacrare paternos,
Auctoremque Globum, Phariae telluris ad oras
Far juvat. -- Jam destinat aris
Semina relliquiasque sui. Claud. de Phoenic.


Tasso continues the Fiction, and send the Fabulous Bird to Ethiopia, attended
by all the Winged World in Wonder. Come al' hor, che'l rinato unico Angello
I suos' Ethiopi, a visitar s'invia, etc.
Meravigliando essercito d'Alati. Cant. 17. St. 35.


V. 274. To Egyptian Thebes, to Heliopolis the City of the Sun; The Egyptian
Thebes, famous for 100 Gates, its Namesake of Boeotia having but seven. Atque
vetus Thebae centum jacet obruta portis. Juv. Sat. 15.
Clara per AEgyptum placidis notissima sacris
Urbs Titana colit, centumque immane columnis
Invehitur Templum Thebano monte revulsis. Claud. de Phoen.


V. 277. Six Wings to shade, etc. To cover his Heavenly Shape, those on his
Shoulders, came like a Royal Mantle over his Breast, the middle Pair, come
round him like a Girdle, and like Skirts covered his Loins and Thighs, with
feathered Gold; the third adorned his Feet from either Heel with Colors dipped
in Heaven. Six Wings; Above it stood Seraphim; Each one had six Wings, with
twain he covered his Face, and with twain he covered his Feet, and with twain
he did fly, Isai. 6. Verse. 2. Lineaments, Lineamentum, Lat. the Shape and
Proportion of a Body drawn out by Lines, hence the Form, Features, etc.

V. 281. Girt like a Starry Zone; Came round him like a glittering Girdle
spangled with Stars. Zone, of Z^vn, Gr. a Girdle. Book 2. Verse. 398.

V. 282. Downy Gold; With Golden Down, with Feathers of Gold, or Gold colored.

V. 284. With Feathered Mail; With a Defense of Feathers, from either Heel
covered his Feet: Of Maille, Fr. for little Links of Metal, of which Coats of
Mail are made.

V. 285. Skie-tinctur'd Grain, Dyed of Skie-colour in Grain, as before Colors
dipped in Heaven, resembling the shining Seats above. Tinctured, of Tinctura,
Lat. a Dying, or Tinging, of Tingere, Lat. to Color or Dye. Grain, of the Lat.
Granum, a Berry, such being used in curious Colors, of lasting Complexions, as
Escarlate en Grain; Scarlet, of the Noblest Dye, in Grain.

Ibid. Like Maja 's Son, like the winged Mercury, the Son of Jupiter and Maja,
and Messenger of the Gods, as inferior in his Description, though of the best
Poets, as a Fiction, to a Seraphim. (...)
(...),
(...),
(...).


The same is repeated in (...). and many other places, and thus Translated by
Virgil: Ille Patris magni parere parabat
Imperio: Et primum pedibus talaria nectit
Aurea, quae sublimem alis, sive aequora supra,
Seu terram, rapido pariter cum flamine portant. AE. 4.


Tasso's Gabriel is Copied from the same Original: Fend iventi, e le nubi, and
va sublime
Soura la terre, e soura il mer con queste, etc. Cant. 1. Stan. 13. and 14.


V. 293. Cassia, Nard: Cassia is a sweet smelling Arabian Shrub, whose Bark
yields a smell like Cynnamon. (...), a Chaldee word, of (...), to shave, or
scrape off, used Psalm. 45. Verse. 8. Thy Garments smell of Myrrh, Aloes and
Cassia. Nec Casia liquidi corrumpitur usus Olivi. Geor. 2.

Nard; (...), Heb. Nardus, Spikenard, an Odoriferous Assyrian Plant; My
Spicknard sends forth the smell thereof, Cant. 1. Verse. 12.

V. 295. Her Virgin-Fancies, her Youthful sportive Fancies played, her
undebauched, Virgin-Vigour poured forth; The Earth was more fruitful and
productive, while her Inhabitants were sinless. Virgin, Virgineus, Lat. Maiden.

V. 297. Enormous Bliss; Boundless, immeasurable, excessive Happiness:
Enormous, of the Lat. Enormis, exceeding great, irregular, of En. Preposition,
and Norma, Lat. a Rule, as well expressed before Wild above Rule or Art, a
Wilderness of Sweets, which if compared with Virgil's, Inter Odoratum Lauri
nemus, AEn. 6. the best Grove in his Elysian Fields, in which his happy Souls
and the famous Musaeus sat and sang, will as far outdo it, as Paradise did all
the Poetic Fictions imaginable.

V. 299. As in the Door he sat; And the Lord appeared unto him (Abraham) in the
Plain of Mamre: And he sat in the Tent-door, in the heat of the Day, Genesis 18.
Verse. 1.

V. 301. His Fervid Rays, his hot Beams: Fervidus, Lat. hot, scorching, of
Fervere, Lat. to Boil. Ipsa inter medias Flagrantem Fervida Pinum Sustinet.
AEn. 7.


V. 305. And not disrelish thirst, and not displease, or distaste thirst:
Disrelish, of the Negative Particle dis, and relecher, Fr. to please ones self
with tasting, of re, again, and lecher, Fr. to lick.

V. 310. Another Morn risen on Mid-Noon, like a new Morning risen at Midday,
the Glorious Angels dazzling shape appeared: Nothing is more Glorious than to
see the beauteous blushing Morning with her Orient Beams, chase and disperse
the diminished and decaying Darkness. -- Now went forth Morn, --
Such as in highest Heaven, arrayed in Gold
Empyreal, from before her vanished Night
Shot through with Orient Beams. Book 6. Verse. 12.


What Expression then, can be more noble or exalted, than to appear like
another Morn risen on Mid-Noon.

V. 321. Adam, Earths hallowed Mould; Adam, Earths consecrated Clay, or Earth
cast into this sacred Shape, of the Divine Similitude, because God formed him
of the Dust of the Ground, yet in his own similitude and likeness, and breathed
into his Nostrils the breath of life, Genesis 2. Verse. 7. Of God inspired:
Inspiratus, Lat. breathed on, or into.

V. 327. And Juciest Gourd; A Gourd is a Sappy Plant, such as Melons, Cucumbers
and Quashes, of the old Fr. Gouhourde, the Corruption of Cucurbita, Lat.
Juciest and Juice Moisture, of the Ita. Sugo, whence the Span. Jugo, Fr. Jus,
all of the Lat. Succus.

V. 331. With dispatchful looks, with a busy face, with a face full of
dispatch; Of the Fr. Despescher, or It. Dispacciare, to make haste. Hospitable
thoughts, considering of the entertaining of her Angel-Guest. Hospitalis, Lat.
belonging to Hospitality Hospitium, Lat.

V. 335. Tastes inelegant, not pleasant, not well ordered; as he says not well
joined; Tastes that do not heighten one another by a graceful and elegant
Succession. Inelegant, inelegans, Lat. uncomely.

V. 336. Taste after taste, etc, What Virgil said of smell, Et vos O lauri
carpam, and to proxima Myrte,
Sic positae, quoniam suaves miscetis Odores. Ecl. 2.


V: 338 Earth all-bearing Mother, that bears and brings forth all things
necessary for the maintenance and support of her innumerable Inhabitants. So
Homer styles her the Nourisher of many; (...). Et (...). The Giver of Life, and
all the Necessaries for its support.

V. 339. Or Middle Shore; Or on the Borders of the Midland-Sea, thence called
the Mediterranean.

V. 340. In Pontus, or the Punick Coast in Asia, of which Pontus is a part,
bounded Northward by the Euxine or P^ntick Sea. Has herbas, atque haec Ponto
mihi lecta venena. Ecl. 8.

The Punick Coast, part of Africa, called Phoenicia, of (...), one of its first
Kings, whence Punicus, and Poeni the Inhabitants. -- Punica regna vides --
Huic conjux Sichoeus erat ditissimus Agri
Phoenicum. -- AEn. 1.


V. 341. Alcinous Reigned; He was King of a Grecian Island, in the Ionian Sea,
(now the Gulf of Venice) anciently called Phoeacia, then Corc^ra, now Corfu,
under the Dominion of the Venetians: The Soil is fruitful in Wine, Oil, and
most excellent Fruits, and its Owner is made famous for his Gardens celebrated
by Homer, and admired by his discerning Hero, Ulysses. (...)
(...),
(...),
(...).
Pomaque and Alcinoi Sylvae. -- Geor. 2. Quid bifera Alcinoi referam Pomaria?
Vosque
Qui nunquam vacui prodistis in aethera rami.


V. 343. Tribute large, paid by the all-yielding Earth, as a Contribution from
her various Tribes of Trees, Flowers and Plants: Tributum, Lat. a Tax laid on
the People, raising public Money, according to their several Abilities, either
a Tribuendo, or because paid Tributim, according to the Custom still in some
Cities in Flanders, where the Nations, that is, the several distinct Tribes and
Trades, raise the Taxes. Well then may the vast Productions of the Earth, in
her full Strength and Vigor, especially in Paradise, the Garden of God, be
styled a large Tribute.

V. 345. Inoffensive Moust, Wine new, and yet harmless: Mustum, Lat. is any new
Liquor unsettled, and unfine, thence generally unfit to be drunk and offensive.
Mustus signifies new, as Musteus Caseus, Plin. new, tender Cheese, a Derivative
of (...), Gr. the young tender shoot of a Vine, as (...), Gr. an Orchard, of
(...), Gr. the same. Inoffensive, harmless, of in, Negative Particle, and
offendere, Lat. to hurt. (...). -- Nudataque Musto
Tinge novo mecum direptis crura cothurnis. Geor. 2.


Ibid. And Meaths, sweet Drinks squeezed from pleasant Berries; Sweet like
Mead, which some are fond of deriving from (...), Gr. Wine, as made in
imitation of it.

V. 347. She tempers Dulcet Creams, she mixes sweet Draughts pressed from
Kernels, whose white Juice resembles Cream: Of Cremor, Lat. the thick Juice of
any thing steeped, or pressed. Kernel, of the Fr. Cerneau, of Cernc, Fr. a
Circle, from its shape.

V. 348. Nor wants her fit Vessels, as hinted before. -- And in the Rind,
Still as they thirsted scoop the brimming Stream. Book 4. Verse. 335.


So that it is easy to imagine, how the Rinds and Shells, etc. of those
Fruits, she made her White-Meats of, might afford her wherewithal to serve 'em
in.

V. 349. From the Shrub unfum'd, from the Odoriferous Plants unfired; Odours
not arising from the smoke of perfumed Wood burnt, of Fumus, Lat. Smoke.

V. 350. Our Primitive great Sire, Adam, our great first Father. Sire, of the
Fr. Sire, Lord: Sire is the Father in Brutes, and thence Lord, the Father by
the Law of Nature, having the first and most ancient Dominion over his
Children, the Root and Foundation of all other Power. Primitivus, Lat. the
first, not derived of any other, as Adam was, the Original of Mankind.

V. 352. With his own complete Perfections; attended by all the Perfections
Humane Nature was capable of, which in Adam were in their greatest height, and
most complete Exaltation. Completus, Lat. perfect, fulfilled, accomplished.

V. 354. Tedious Pomp; than those gaudy Shows that march before Princes. Pompa,
Lat. of (...), Gr. of (...), to send before, to proceed. -- Solennes ducere
Pompas. Geor. 3.

V. 355. Their rich Retinue; Their gaudy Liveries: Retinue, of the old Fr.
Retenue, of the Lat. Retinere, to hire, to maintain; A great Retinue being a
numerous Train of Servants, entertained more for Show than Service.

V. 356. Grooms besmeared with Gold; Grooms bedawbed with Gold, as if the
meanness of gaudy Servitude, undervalued the noblest Mineral, and debased Gold
by laying it out, on Servants of the smallest Size, and meanest Employment.
Much more disdainfully than Virgil's. -- Illusasque auro vestes. Geor. 2.

To smear and besmear, are used in the worst sense, to dawb, or spread over
with Dirt. Horace's Aurum Vestibus Illitum, Carm. Lib. 4. Od. 9. comes nearest
to it; for Illinere, Lat. is to bedawb, to smear.

V. 357. Sets them all agape; Expresses well the staring Wonder of Vulgar and
mean Admirers, who stand gaping with their Mouths, as well as Eyes wide open.
-- Hunc plausus hiantem Corripuit. Geor. 2.

V. 359. With submiss Approach ^ With humble Address.

V. 360. Of Superior Nature, of Higher Rank; Of a Degree Superior to himself.

V. 361. Native of Heaven, etc. Offspring of Heaven, for no other place than
Heaven can such a a beauteous Being hold; Since coming down from the Abodes
above, those happy Places thou have chose a while, to leave and honor these,
be pleased with us, etc. Native of Heaven, Son of Heaven, born there, of the
Lat. Nativus, born, as Native of Sicily, one born there.

V. 371. The Angelick Virtue; The Angelick Power; The Angel; An Homericism, who
used (...), the Strenghth of Priam, for Priam himself, (...). and (...), for
Hector, (...). (...). After the Sacred Strength of Alcinous heard that.

Imitated twice by the Cautious Virgil, Odora Canum vis, for Dogs, AEn. 4.
Vimque Deum Infernam, the Infernal Deities, AEn. 12.

V. 378. Pomona 's Arbor; that showed like Pomona 's Bower; She was the
Goddess of Orchards. Rege sub hoc Pomona fuit: Qua nulla Latinas
Inter Hamadryadas coluit solertius hortos,
Nec fuit arborei studiosior altera foetus:
Unde tenet nomen, etc. Met. Lib. 14. Pomona a Pomis dicta.


V. 382. Of three that in Mount Ida, etc. Venus, for when she with Juno and
Pallas strove for the Golden Apple, (which was to be given to the fairest) they
are Fabled to have appeared naked before Paris, the Son of Priam and Hecuba,
then living like a Shepherd on the Mountain Ida, who, bribed by the Promise of
enjoying fair Helena, gave his Judgment for, and the Apple of Discord to, the
wanton Goddess. Tresque simul Divae, Venus and cum Pallade Juno
Graminibus teneros imposuere pedes.
Obstupui; Gelidusque comas erexerat horror.
Cum mihi, pone metum, Nuncius Ales, ait.
Arbiter es formae: Certamina siste Dearum;
Vincere quae forma digna sit una duas. Ovid. Ep. 16.


V. 384. Virtue-proof; Her Virtue was in stead of a Vail, Proof against all
Temptations: Her Innocence was Armor of Proof.

Ibid. No thought infirm altered her Cheek; No weak or wanton Thought infected
her Face, or with a guilty Blush, discountenanced her Cheek. Alterare, Lat. to
change, disguise, of alter, another.

V. 387. Blessed Marie, second Eve. He styles the Blessed Virgin Marie, the
second Eve, who brought forth the Lord of Life, who brought Life and
Immortality to the Sons of the first sinful Eve, who brought forth Death. So
our Blessed Savior Jesus Christ is called the second Man (Adam) the Lord from
Heaven, 1 Cor. 15. Verse. 45, 47. The first Eve was the Mother of all living
according to Nature, Genesis 3. Verse. 20. Mary the second Eve, the Mother of all
living, by Grace and Adoption through her Son Jesus Christ, everlastingly, that
we might receive the Adoption of Sons, and if Sons, then Heirs of God through
Christ, Gal. 4. Verse. 5, 7. The Text related to, in this Angelick Salutation,
is Luke 1. Verse. 28. Of Hail, see Book 1. Verse. 250.

V. 391. Of Grassie Terf; Terf is properly Earth cut and dried for Fuel, of the
Sax. Tirf, Turf, (as it is often writ) is more remote from the Original.
Grassie Terf, Gramineo de cespite, AEn. 11. serves both for Table and Cloth.

V. 392. Mossie Seats; soft Downy Seats: Mossie, of Moss, Fr. Mousse, of the
Lat. Muscus. -- Muscus ubi and viridissima gramine ripa. Geor. 3.

Moss; Downy Grass, growing in moist places, whence Virgil, Muscosi fontes, and
somno Mollior herba. Ecl. 7.

V. 394. Though Spring and Autumn danced Hand in Hand: Though the Trees in
Paradise bore both Fruit and Blossoms; for either the World was Created in
Autumn, or Man and the other Creatures must have been destitute of necessary
Sustenance, or supplied by Miracles, for feeding on Flesh was not introduced
till after the Flood. All Autumn pild, all the Fruits and Production of Autumn,
the Season, for the things then seasonable. Homer tells us the famous Garden of
Alcinous had Fruit hanging on the Trees Winter and Summer, green and ripe
together, as Figtrees have in diverse Climates. (...)
(...)
(...).
(...),
(...).


A Poetic Tradition and Imitation of Paradise.

V. 398. Our Nourisher; God, who provides for all his Creatures. Homer styles
Kings the Pastors of the People, but made them acknowledge their Dependence on
Heaven, by calling them Jovis Alumnos, (...). Nourisher, Nourisseur, Fr. of
Nourir, Fr. to feed, all of Nutrire, Lat. the same.

V. 403. That one Celestial Father, etc. That one great Heavenly Father feeds
us all.

V. 405. To Man in part Spiritual: To Man, who as to his Nobler Part, his Soul,
is Spiritual Spiritualis, Lat. of the Nature of a Spirit.

V. 407. Pure Intelligential Substances; Angels and Spirits, those refined
understanding Beings, whose clearer Intellects and inlighten'd Minds are
sublimed and exalted so far above Mankind immersed in matter, must be sustained
and supported, with some sort of Spiritual Aliment, as the Rational and all
Created Beings are, nothing but the Infinite and the Almighty One, being (...),
Self-sufficient Intelligentia, Lat. Knowledge in the Abstract, such as is
expressive of Angels and Spirits, from the Purity and Sublimity of those
Celestial Minds. See Verse. 414.

V. 412. Concoct; The Office of the Stomach, macerating our Meat, by its
Internal Heat: Of Concoquere, Lat. to boil.

Ibid. Assimilate, turn into their own likeness; As all Creatures turn their
Food into their Corresponding Flesh, Blood and Animal Spirits, of Assimilare,
Lat. to be like.

V. 417. Earth and the Sea feed Air, etc. There being a constant Circulation of
the Elements, they do by continual Mutations and Vicissitudes, make and
maintain one another, Earth being nothing but the Dregs and Faeces of Water
coagulated by Condensation; as Water, is Air by the same means, thickened into
Visibility; as Fire is Air sublimely rarefied; each support other by an
incessant Circumrotation, interchangeably running round. Thus from the Humid
Unctuous Earth, Vapors and Exhalations are rarefied into Water, that supports
the Seas vast source, from the Earth and the Sea, the thinner and lighter
Perspirations are the same way transmuted into Air; and Air, exalted and
inspirited, to Fire; and by the contrary Condensation in Quaternion run
Perpetual Circle multiform, as before at Verse. 181.

V. 420. Unpurged Vapors; gross Exhalations, and foul Mists, mounting up to
the Moon, that look like black Patches on her fair Face; Vapors undigested,
unrefined, not yet clarified, and converted into her clear Complexion.

V. 421. No Nourishment exhale; the moist Moon sends from her humid Globe Food
more refined up to the higher Orbs; to exhale, exhalare, Lat. to breathe out,
as rising Mists seem to be exhaled. Quae tenuem exhalat nebulam, fumosque
volucres. Geor. 2.

V. 423. That Light imparts; That affords and communicates Light to all things:
Imparts, of the Lat. impertire, to bestow a part or share on.

V. 424. His Alimental Recompense; The Sun himself, that on the Universe
bestows his chearing Light, and enlivening Rays, receives in moist Returns, and
unctuous Vapors, his Nourishment from all, as Toll and Tribute paid him in
grateful Recompense. Alimental; Alimentum, Lat. Food, Nourishment.

V. 426. Sups with the Ocean; According to the Opinion of Thales, who supposed
Water the First Matter of the Creation; borrowed of the Description of the
Creation by Moses, Genesis 1. Verse. 2. So Homer, (...),
(...).


Rendered by Virgil, Oceanumque Patrem rerum, Nymphasque sorores. Geor. 4.

Not only the Sun, but all the Homerick Inhabitants of Heaven are entertained
by the Ocean, (...),
(...).


Now these Ethiopians dwelt near the Suns Supping-Room. Oceani finem juxta,
solemque cadentem
Ultimus AEthiopum locus est. AEn. 4.
Audiet Herculeo stridentem gurgite solemn. Juv. Sa^. 15.


V. 429. Mellifluous Dews, and Pearly Grain; A Description of Manna, Angels
Food, the Bread of Heaven. And when the Dew that lay was gone up, behold upon
the Face of the Wilderness there lay a small round thing, as small as the
Hoar-frost on the Ground, and it was like Coriander-Seed, white: And the taste
of it was like Wafers made with Honey, Exodus 16. Verse. 24, and 31. Man did eat
Angels Food, Psalm. 78. Verse. 25. Mellifluous, Mellifluus, Lat. sweet as Honey.

V. 434. To their Viands; their Victnals; Their Food, Fr. Viande, Ita. Vivande,
both of Vivere, Lat. to live, as Victus, Food.

V. 435. Not seemingly, nor in Mist: The Angel did not make, as if he did eat,
nor put the cheat upon 'em, by casting a Mist before their Eyes; according to
the Gloss of Theodoret, in his 68 Question on Genesis 18. Verse. 8. who tells us,
that as those Angels who appeared to Abraham were by Moses styled Men, having
nothing of Human Nature but the outward appearance, so they were said to eat,
when they did but seem to do so: Cibum simulatis illis manibus capientes, and
in simulatum quoque os ingerentes, clam consumpserunt, prout illis placuit. Of
the same Opinion is St. Thomas, Tom. 1. Part. 9. 51. Art. 2. which they support
by the Confession of Raphael himself. All these Days I did appear unto you, but
I did neither eat nor drink, but you did see a Vision, Tob. 12. Verse. 19. The
Angel that appeared to Manoah declared against it; And the Angel of the Lord
said, Though thou detein me, I will not eat of thy Bread, Judge. 13. V. 16. Our
Author on the contrary believes the Angel did with keen and hungry dispatch
eat, digest, and turn (what was convertible of it) into his proper substance,
evacuating the rest by Perspiration; nor does there seem any absurdity in the
Asseveration, since most Texts of Holy Writ, where the Appearances of Angels
are Recorded, make 'em subject to Human Sight, Hearing and Feeling too, why not
then to Eating, as literally affirmed of 'em, as any of the other Actions
falling under Sense? But these Enquiries are too subtle, and exceed the compass
of our Capacities.

Ibid. The common Gloss of Theologians; the usual Interpretation of Doctors and
Divines. Gloss, Glossa, Lat. of the Gr. (...), a Tongue, signifies an
Exposition or Interpretation of an obscure place of Holy Scripture, or other
Writing. Protinus enim potest Interpretationem Linguae Secretioris, (quae
Graeci Glossas vocant) dum aliud agitur, ediscere. Quint. Lib. 1. Cap. 2.

Theologians, (...), Gr. one that writes or reasons concerning GOD and his Holy
Mysteries, that treats and teaches Divine Matters, the School-Divines and
Doctors.

V. 438. To transubstantiate; and heat sufficient to digest and turn into the
substance of the Creature fed, the Food it eats; The proper Office of the
Stomach, aided by its innate vigorous heat. Transubstantiate and
Transubstantiation, Barbarous Lat. Words that have much disturbed the World.

Ibid. What redounds, transpires: What remains, over and above what is
necessary and fit for nourishment, breathes out, vanishes into Air: Is voided
and evacuated, as Sweat evaporates through the Pores. Redundare, Lat. to be
over and above, to exceed, to overflow. Transpirare, Lat. to sweat, to breathe
through.

V. 440. The Emperick Alchemist; The Prying, the Experimental Chemist:
Emperick, of (...), Gr. one that is taught by trial, of (...), Gr. Endeavor,
Experiment; hence a bold, daring, and unskilful Quack is called an Emperick,
from venturing by dangerous Medicines to make hazardous Experiments on his
Patients. Alchemist, see Book 3. Verse. 609.

V. 447. Then had the Sons of God, etc. Seems here to be meant of the Angels;
as if the Text to which this refers, (That the Sons of GOD saw the Daughters of
Men, that they were fair, and they took them Wives of all that they chose, Genesis
6. Verse. 2.) were so to be interpreted; doubtless here it is said in relation
to the Angel, before whom Eve ministered Naked.

V. 449. Love unlibidinous; chaste Love, Love pure, and free from Lust, of the
Negative In, and libidin sus, Lat. Lustful.

V. 450. Jealousy; Jalousie, Fr. of Jaloux, Lat. Zelosus; Ital. Geloso, one
suspicious of the Love of her or him that is beloved, whence this irregular
passion is called The Injured Lover's Hell; not really, but often imaginarily
and self-injured by suspicion.

V. 452. Sufficed, not burd'ned Nature, according to Homer's Conclusion of a
Feast: (...).

Postquam exempta fames epulis. AEn. 1. The just Size of Satisfaction.

V. 454. By this great Conference; by this great Opportunity of discoursing
with an Angel: Conference of Conferentia, Lat. of confer, Lat. to discourse
with.

V. 458. Divine Effulgence; whose shining shape, the brightness of their Divine
Creator. Effulgence, of Effulgere, Lat. to shine bright.

V. 468. The Winged Hierarch; the Angelick Winged Commander Raphael, one of the
Heavenly Hierarchy, of (...), a Commander of the Sacred Bands, a Leader of the
Holy Legions, of (...), Gr. Holy, and (...)* Principality, Government.

V. 470. From whom all things proceed, etc. O Adam, there is one Almighty, the
great Creator of all things, from whom they came down, and to whom they must
return up again, unless turned aside and deviated from the design of their
Creation, by which they were all created Good even to Perfection, according to
the Order and Degree in which God placed 'em; Who saw every thing that he had
made, and behold it was very good, Genesis 1. Verse. 31. Therefore such to
Perfection.

All things proceed, and up, etc. return For of him, and through him, and to
him are all things, Romans 11. Verse. 36. All things are of God, 1 Cor. 11. Verse.
12. One God and Father of all, which is above all, and through all, and in you
all, Ephesians. 4. Verse. 6. For by him were all things created, that are in Heaven,
and that are in Earth, visible and invisible, etc. all things were created by
him and for him, Coloss. 1. Verse. 16. We may speak much, and yet come short:
Wherefore in sum, He is all, for the Lord he has made all things,
Ecclesiastic. 43. Verse. 27, and 33. Depraved, depravatus, Lat. vitiated,
corrupted, debauched from Good. -- Quantum non noxia corpora tardant
T^rrenique hebitant artus. AEn. 6.


V. 472. One first Matter all indu'd, etc. All made of one first Matter,
clothed with diverse Forms, and different Degrees, Sizes of Substance, and of
Life, in living Creatures: The first Matter void of all Form, out of which all
things were made, is as obscure and confounded as the Chaos whence it came: All
that we know of it, is from the Manifestation of Moses concerning the Creation,
Genesis 1. That before the Voice of the Almighty commanded Light to appear, the
Body of the Four Elements lay mixed and confounded together in the black Abyss,
the dark and invisible Materials, out of whose struggling Womb this Beauteous
World arose. Then this unseen and undistinguishable Matter, assumed various
Shapes and Substances of diverse kinds, more light and airy, more opac and
bright, extended or condensed according to their Functions, and the Faculties,
the Spheres and Places of their Activity, appointed and allorted them, through
the vast Universe, by the Sovereign Architect. Indu'd, furnished with, covered,
or clothed withal, of Indutus, Lat.

V. 475. But more refined; But these Forms and Substances are more refined,
more spiritual, light and pure, as placed in nearer Neighborhood to their
Maker; Or gradually rising toward him, each placed in the true station of its
own Activity, till from more gross it does sublime it self, to a more pure, and
more exalted ^^ate, according to the Limits of its Allotment by Nature made.
Refined, made more pure, of Raffiner, Fr. to refine, to purify, as Gold is,
from its Dross, by Fire.

V. 481. The Bright consummate Flour, Spirits Odorous Breaths; the shining and
complete Flour, breathes out its Native Essence. Consummate, Consummatus, Lat.
perfect, finished. Spirits, of Spirare, Lat. to breathe, to smell. Odorous, of
Odorus, Lat. having a sweet smell.

V. 484. Man's Nourishment, etc. Flowers and Fruits the first Primitive Food of
Mankind, by due degrees refined, raise and exalt themselves to Vital Spirits,
Vehicles of Life, which heightened by new ascents to Animal, are subservient to
Sense and Motion, thence at last sublimed to Intellectual Spirits, aid and
assist our Souls in all their Faculties of Fancy, Knowledge and Understanding,
the Handmaid of our Reason. There are in all Animals two kinds of Spirits, the
Vital arising from the Blood, and Animal the Offspring of the Vital Spirits;
and of these a third sort is generated in Man, namely, the Intellectual
subservient to the Soul.

V. 488. Reason discursive or intuitive: Discursive Reason, is that act of our
Minds, by which after previous Perception and Judgment made by comparing and
distinguishing any thing under our Enquiry, with and from others better known,
we form more certain Notions and Conclusions thereof; and by reasoning with our
selves or others in the best manner we can, describe and discover the Nature of
the same. Called Discursus, Lat. a discurrendo, from a Metaphorical Motion in
our Minds, running as it were from one Notion to another, and hunting out our
imperfect Knowledge by the assistance of Sense.

Intuitive Reason, is that more refined, sudden and satisfactory Insight, that
Pure Spirits, and Illuminated Angels have, into the Nature of things, who freed
from a long Chain of Thoughts, and an intricate and entangled Train of
Consequences, easily penetrate into Causes obscure and hid from us; and at
first Glance, uno mentis Ictu, make clear Discoveries of 'em.

V. 490. Differing but in Degree; Human Discourse, and Angelical Intuition, are
of the same kind, and differ only in Degrees, of Certainty and Celerity; for
the difference between our Gradual and Groping Understandings, and their clear
and sudden Illuminations, seem to be like the Operations of Hearing and
Seeing, the first of which is persorm'd by Degrees, word after word, slowly and
consequentially; the latter sprightly and in an instant. Intuitive, seeing,
beholding. Of Intuitus, Lat. a looking on.

V. 494. May participate; May feed and feast with Angels: Of Participare, Lat.
to share; to take part of.

V. 495. Nor too light Fare; Nor find our Food too thin and ^iry: Fare, Food,
of the Sax. Feorh* Life, as (victus a vivendo) being its support.

V. 496. Corporal Nutriments; From this gross Nourishment, and coarse Food:
Nutrimentum, Lat. any thing that nourishes, and feeds, as Fuel is the Food of
Fire. -- Suscepitque ignem foliis, atque arida circum
Nutrimenta dedit. -- AEn. 1.


V. 503. Whose Progeny; Whose Offspring you are: Progenies, Lat. of (...), Gr.
a Forefather. Adam is called the Progeny of God, who was his Maker, as at Verse.
519. Son of Heaven and Earth, because by God raised out of the Dust.

V. 507. Propitious Guest; Friendly loving Visitor: Propitius, Lat. kind,
favorable.

V. 509. The Scale of Nature set, etc. Well have thou described to us the
Compass of the Creation; By instructing us in the several Degrees and Stations
of Created Beings, as placed nearer or more remote, from God the Center, whence
they issue all, to the Circumference of the vast Universe, and from thence tend
to him, each in its appointed distance.

V. 511. Whereon in Contemplation, etc. There is a real visible Ladder,
(besides that Visionary one of Jacob) whose foor, though placed on the Earth
among the lowest of the Creation, yet leads us by Steps in Contemplation of
Created Things up to God, the Invisible Creator of all Things; for as there are
many Degrees of Beings, Superior and Subordinate, there must at last, at the
Top of this Scale, be one Supreme, Sovereignly Good and Great: Contemplatio,
Lat. for Meditation, deep Thoughtfulness.

V. 513. That Caution joined; That Warning given us; That forewarning added to
thy Instruction. Cautio, Lat. a Cavendo, from taking heed to. Cautio est, Ter.
we must beware.

V. 515. His Love desert; Can we forsake and leave him, who has loved us so, as
to place us in this Blessed Paradise? Can we quit our Obedience, and relinquish
his Love? Desert, leave, of Deserere, Lat. to forsake, as Deserters, Runaway
Soldiers do the side they first were on.

V. 524. Perfect, not Immutable; God made thee Good, (as he did all things) but
not Unalterable: He made thee Perfect, but left it in thy Power to continue so:
Well expressed by the Wiseman, God made Man from the beginning, and left him in
the hand of his Counsel, Eccles. 15. Verse. 14. Before Man is Life and Death;
and which he chooses shall be given him, Verse. 17. Perseverare, Lat. to stand
fast, to continue constantly in.

V. 527. By Nature free; God made thy Will in its very Nature free, not
overpowered by uncontrollable Fate, or shackled and bound up by the Compulsive
Power of Necessity. The bare Notion of a Will implies and supposes Freedom and
Choice; for to will is to choose, which no Man can do, if overruled by
Invincible Necessity. Of this before, Book 3. Verse. 96, etc.

Ibid. Fate inextricable; The unavoidable Determinations of Fate, from which
(if there were any such) we could by no means free our selves; Fa^e would be
like a Labyrinth, (in whose Description Virgil uses the same word) from whence
we could find no way out. -- Inextricabilis error. AEn. 6.

Inextricabilis, Lat. that could not be unfolded, not to be avoided.

V. 530. Not our necessitated; God requires our willing Service, our Free Will
Offerings, not such ^^ are forced upon, or from us, such would be unacceptable
to him. Where only what we needs must do appears, not what we would, Book 3.
Verse. 105. Voluntaire, Voluntarius, Lat. free, of ones own accord and consent.
Necessitated, forced, compelled, of Necessitare, Lat. to oblige by force.

V. 534. But what they must by Destiny; But what is ordained and appointed by a
Superior Power unalterable and uncontrollable, against which all struggle and
endeavor is in vain! Destiny, the (...), of the Greeks, and the Latins, Fatum,
of Destinare, Lat. to appoint, to ordain, Destiny being (in their Opinion that
maintained it) an unavoidable appointment of all, that Men were either to do or
suffer, from which they could not depart: Now this Heathenish Destiny, and its
strange Superstructure Predestination, raised on that bad Foundation, our Poet
explodes.

V. 536. In sight of God enthroned; Seated in Bliss, in the Beatifick Sight of
God: Enthroned, of (...), Gr. to place on a Throne, the Characteristick of a
Kingdom, That you may eat and drink at my Table in my Kingdom, and sit on
Thrones judging the Twelve Tribes of Israel, Luke 22. Verse. 30. and Matthew. 19.
Verse. 28. (...), Gr. a Royal or Magisterial Seat, of the obsolete (...), to sit.

V. 544. Our great Progenitor; Our great first Father, the general Ancestor of
Mankind, who proceeded all from his Loins: Progenitor, Lat. of Progignere, Lat.
of (...), to precede, to be before, (...), Ancestors.

V. 545. Attentive; Heedful, giving good ear to: Of Attendere, Lat. to hearken,
and mark well.

V. 547. Then when Cherubick Songs, etc. Then when the Quires of Charming
Cherubims, tune their Celestial Songs by Night; A heightened Imitation of
Virgil, Tale tuum Carmen, nobis divine Poeta,
Quale sopor fessis in gramine, etc. Ecl. 5. See Book 4. Verse. 680.


V. 557. Worthy of Sacred Silence to be heard; A Relation worthy to be attended
to, with as profound a Silence as Men employed in Holy Mysteries are wont to
use. -- Sacro digna silentio. Hor.

A serious devout Silence. Relation, Relatio, Lat. an Account, the rehearsing
of any thing happened, a referendo, from telling and repeating it.

V. 560. In the great Zone of Heaven. For the Sun is not yet arrived at the
South, has hardly reached his Meridian Altitude, and therefore scarce has
finished half his Journey, and is hardly yet entering on the other half, he is
to complete, by circling the World every Day with his Glorious Girdle. Zona,
Lat. a Girdle. See Book 2. Verse. 398.

V. 562. Assenting; Agreeing to, granting his request: Of Assentiri, Lat. to
grant.

V. 571. This is dispensed; This also is allowed and granted: Of the Fr.
Dispenser, and the Lat. Dispensare, to License, whence Dispensatio, a
Relaxation of a Law.

Ibid. What surmounts the reach; What rises above the reach of Human
Understanding; What exceeds the compass of thy Capacity: Of Surmonter, Fr. to
rise, to mount above.

V. 572. Delineate so; I shall so set forth and describe: Of Delineare, Lat. to
draw the form of any thing, by Lines, thence to Paint.

V. 575. But the Shadow of Heavens be but the faint Resemblance of Heaven,
where Spiritual Things and Beings are like to Corporeal, and that Superior
more resembling this Inferior World, than Men imagine.

V. 577. And Chaos wild Reigned, etc. The World was uncreated yet, and
emptiness and wild deformed Darkness ruled over those Orbs where the bright
Heavens now run, and steadfast Earth now balanced rests upon her Central Point.
A short, but full and noble Description of the Creation.

V. 580. For time, though in Eternity, etc. For time, even in Eternity, being
referred to Motion, measures the Duration and Continuance of all things, by
what is present, past, and yet to come. Time, says Plato, is the Image of
Eternity, Fluid and in Motion. Aristotle affirms, Eternity to be a fixed and
permanent Instant, ((...),) and Time an Instant in Flux and Motion: But the
Flux and Duration, the Constituents of Time, can no otherwise be reckoned but
by applying it to Motion. Durable, Durabilis, Lat. lasting, that has
continuance.

V. 583. As Heavens great Year brings forth; On such a Day, as Heavens great
unaccountable Year brings forth, where a thousand Years are in (Gods) sight but
as yesterday when it is past, and as a Watch in the Night, Psalm. 90. Verse. 4.
One Day is with the Lord as a thousand Years, and a thousand Years as one Day,
2 Pet. 3. Verse. 8. Our Poet seems to have had Plato's Great Year in his
Thoughts, of which, and the Great Caldean Months, see Jos. Scaliger in Can.
Isago. Page 252. Magnus ab integro Saeclorum Nascitur Ordo.
-- Et incipient magni procedere menses. Ecl. 4.


V. 589. And Gonfalons, etc. Gonfalon or Gonfanon, Fr. is an old-fashioned
Banner, a little square Flag born on the top of a Lance, used at this Day by
the Popes Forces, whence Le Gonfanon de l'Eglise, the General of the Churches
Forces. Rear; of Arriere, Fr. behind, the hindpart of an Army, that comes last.

V. 592. In their glittering Tissues bear unblaz'd; Or in their gaudy Streamers
painted bear, etc. Tissues, of the Fr. Tissu, woven, as with us Cloth of
Tissue, of Gold, Silver, etc. as being the most Precious Woof. Imblazed,
emblazonez, Fr. to draw and paint Coats of Arms in their proper Colors.

V. 594. Recorded Eminent; Recorded and remembered for their Eminency, and
Excellent Example. Recorded, of Recordari, Lat. to bear in mind, to remember.

V. 602. Hear my desire; Give ear to my Ordinance, which shall stand
irrevocable, I will declare the Decree, Psalm. 2. Verse. 7. Unrevok'd,
irrevocabilis, Lat. not to be recalled, or altered.

V. 603. This Day have I begot, etc. According to the Prophetic and Enlightened
Psalmist, Thou art my Son, this Day have I begotten thee, Psalm. 2. Verse. 7.

V. 605. Him have Anointed; I have set my Anointed upon my holy Hill of Sion,
Psalm. 2. Verse. 6.

V. 608. All Knees in Heaven, etc. That at the Name of JESUS every Knee shall
bow, of things in Heaven, etc. And that every Tongue shall confess, that Jesus
Christ is Lord, to the Glory of God the Father, Phil. 2. Verse. 10, and 11. Let
all the Angels of God worship him, Hebr. 1. Verse. 6.

V. 609. Vicegerent Reign; Under him as my great deputed Governor: Vicegerent,
Vicemgerens, Lat. whom I have constituted and appointed in my place.

V. 610. As one individual Soul; Agreeing and uniting together like one Soul,
incapable of division. Individual; Individuus, Lat. Inseparable, that cannot be
divided.

V. 612. Breaks Union; Violates the Unity, Peace and Concord of my Kingdom.
Unio, Lat. Agreement.

V. 620. Mystical Dance; Strange Mysterious Motions, which the shining Sphere
of the Seven Planets, and that of the fixed Stars does in their various
Revolutions imitate nearest. Mystical, of (...), Gr. Mysterious, containing
some Sacred Secret.

V. 622. Mazes intricate; Entangled and unaccountable Rounds. Mazes, Book 2. V.
561. In^ricate, Book 2. Verse. 877.

V. 623. Excentrick; Intervolv'd, etc. Windings and Turns entangled and
obscure, involving and surrounding one another, although not moving on the same
Center, yet then most regular and orderly, when to our weak and distant
Understanding they seem most unaccountable and disturbed: A just Reproof to the
presuming Sons of Adam. E gli alteri i quali esser non ponno erranti
S' angelica virtu gli informa, e move:


Advanced by the Translation, And those untruly Errant called, I trow,
Since he errs not, who does them guide and move. Tass. Cant. 9. Stan. 6.
Astra, tum ea quae sunt infixa certis locis,
Tum illa, non re, sed vocabulo errantia, etc. Cic. Quaest. Tuscu. Lib. 1.
Sect. 25.


Excentrick, Book 3. Verse. 575. Intervolv'd, rolled within one another, of the
Lat. Inter, between, and volvere, Lat. to turn.

V. 626. So smooths her charming Tones. And in their Motions such Divine
Perfection appears, and their Harmonious Proportion so tunes her Charming
Notes, that GOD himself, pleased and delighted, pronounced 'em Good, Genesis 1.
Verse. 18. There is a Text in Job 38. Verse. 37. that seems to favor the Opinion
of the Pythagoreans, concerning the Musical Motion of the Spheres, though our
Translation differ therein from other Versions. Concentum Coeli quis dormire
faciet? Who shall lay asleep (or still) the Consort of the Heaven? But this (in
that Poetic and Harmonious Book) is to be understood Metaphorically, of the
wonderful Proportions observed by the Heavenly Bodies, in their various
Motions: For Bodies of their vast Size and incredible Celerity, must either
make no Noise at all, or so prodigious a Sound, as would not only be heard here
below, but make us also incapable of hearing any thing besides.

Tones; Tunes, (...), Gr. of (...), to strain, Sounds and Notes being (...),
Strainings and Extensions of the Voice.

V. 633. Rubied Nectar; Nectar as Red as Rubies: An Imitation of Homer, -- (...)
(...).


The true Ruby Color of good Claret, the Remembrance of whose Charming
Complexion, neither of our Poets had lost with their Eyesight. Nectar, Book 4.
Verse. 240.

V. 634. In Pearl; In Diamond, etc. Our Author has dish'd out his Angelick
Banquet, as richly as Homer has the Entertainment of the Gods. (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)


V. 635. Vines the Growth of Heaven; Of Heavenly Growth: These Celestial
Vines, seem to allude to that of our Savior, I will not drink henceforth of
the Fruit of the Vine, until the Day when I drink it new with you in my Fathers
Kingdom, Matthew. 26. Verse. 29. where by new, Interpreters understand Wines of
another and more Noble kind.

V. 637. In Communion sweet; In pleasing Society: Communio, Lat. Fellowship, a
Communiendo, from the security it affords.

V. 638. Quaff Immortality and Joy; Drink plentifully of the Rivers of Pleasure
that are at Gods Right Hand for evermore, Psalm. 36. Verse. 8. For with thee is
the Fountain of Life, Verse. 9.

V. 639. Secure of surfeit; Sure not to surfeit, where satisfaction prevents
excess: Surfeit, of the Ita. sopra fare, to exceed, to burden, and over-do,
supra facere, to over-do, to overreach, to exceed the bounds of Necessity.

V. 642. Now when Ambrosial Night; Now when sweet charming Night. (...). Divine
Night, from the pleasant refreshment and necessary support Sleep affords us:
Ambrosia is used for the Poetic Food by which the Gods maintained their
Immortality, thence used for sweet, delicious and invigorating. -- Liquidum
Ambrosiae diffudit odorem,
Quo totum nati Corpus perduxit; at illi
Dulcis compositis spiravit crinibus aura.
Atque habilis membris venit vigor. Geor. 4. Ambrosial, Book 2. Verse. 245.


V. 643. Whence Light and Shade spring both; More fully described in the
beginning of Book 6. Verse. 4. There is a Cave
Within the Mount of God, fast by his Throne,
Where Light and Darkness in perpetual round
Lodge and dislodge by turns, which makes through Heaven
Grateful Vicissitude like Day and Night, etc.


V. 646. In darker Veil; Night comes not there in darker Dress: Veil, Fr.
Voile, Lat. Velum, a Velando, from covering; Night, well resembling a Veil
thrown over the dark'ned World. Nox ruit and fuscis tellurem amplectitur alis.
AEn. 8.

Ibid. Roseat Dews; Dews resembling Roses both as to scent and show: Roseat, of
Rosaceus, Lat. of a Rose Color, of (...), Gr. for that charming Flower.

V. 647. All but the unsleeping Eyes of God; Behold, he that keeps Israel
shall neither slumber nor sleep: The Lord is thy Keeper, Psalm. 121. Verse. 4,
and 5.

V. 649. Than all this Globous Earth, etc. Larger and more capacious than this
round Earth, if flatted and spread out all into one wide open Plain. Globous,
Lat. Globosus, round, of Globus, any thing of a round shape. So at Verse. 750.
of this Book. -- Regions to which
All thy Dominion, Adam, is no more
Than what this Garden is to all the Earth
And all the Sea, from one entire Globose
Stretched into Longitude.


Then Paradise is in Comparison of Earth and Sea, if from their vast great
Round they both were stretched and drawn out into Length. Longitudo, Lat. Length.

V. 654. Celestial Tabernacles; Heavenly Tents. Tabernaculum, Lat. a Tent.

V. 657. Alternate all Night long; By turns, singing and answering one another,
of Alternare, Lat. to do any thing by turns. Illi Alternantes multa vi praelia
miscent. Geor. 3.

V. 661. Preeminence; Praeeminentia, Lat. a state of extraordinary Splendour and
Dignity, of Praeeminere, Lat. to be raised in Power and Place above others.

V. 664. Messiah; (...), Hebr. of (...), to Anoint, as Christ, of (...), Gr.
for the same, as interpreted by the following words, King Anointed: We have
found the Messiah, which is, being interpreted, the Christ, Joh. 1. Verse. 21.
The Kings of the Earth set themselves, and the Rulers take Counsel together,
against the Lord, and against his Anointed, Psalm. 2. Verse. 2.

V. 671. His next Subordinate; The Angel commanding next under him, of the Lat.
Subordinatus, Lat. next in order and degree.

V. 675. Has past the Lips of Heavens Almighty; According to the Scripture,
where God is spoken of after the manner of Men; But by every word that proceeds
out of the Mouth of God, Matthew. 4. Verse. 4.

V. 677. Was wont to impart; Used to communicate my most secret Thoughts:
Impart, of the Lat. Impertire, to make Partner in, to discover and disclose.

V. 679. Thy Sleep dissent? How come we now so far to disagree, that thou
should sleep so soundly, while I wake disordered and disturbed at the
Almighties new and strange Decree? Dissent, of Dissentire, Lat. to be of
contrary Opinion and Sentiments, to disagree.

V. 697. The Regent Powers; The Commanders, of Regere, Lat. to bear Rule, to
Govern.

V. 700. Had disincumber'd Heaven; Night had disingaged Heaven; Had cleared it
by withdrawing it self, of dis, the disjunctive Preposition, and encumbrer, Fr.
to hinder, to trouble or perplex; or of the Ita. Ingombrare, to hinder, as
Darkness does. Hierarchal Standard, that belonging to Satan's whole Hierarchy.

V. 702. Tells the suggested Cause; Acquaints 'em with the pretended Occasions
of their March: Suggested, of Suggerere, Lat. to prompt, to put in mind, slily
to insinuate.

V. 703. Casts between ambiguous Words; Lets fall doubtful Expressions and
Words that seem to so^ Suspicion. Ambiguus, Lat. doubtful, that may be taken in
a double sense. -- Hinc spargere voces
In vuigum ambiguas -- AEn. 2.


Ibid. Jealousies; Suspicions: Jalousie, Fr. is properly a mistrust arising
between Lovers concerning their plighted Truth and Honor, from thence
translated to signify the Suspicions Cities and Bodies Politic have, of
Encroachments on their Liberties, etc.

V. 704. To sound or taint Integrity; To fathom or infect their Loyalty: To try
or ^aint their Obedience. To sound is a Marine Metaphor, from the Plummet so
necessary to the Seaman's safety, of the Fr. sonder, to try the depth of the
Water. Taint, of the Fr. teindre, Lat. tingere, Gr. (...), to die, to color,
to infect, Corruption shows it self by discoloring. Integritas, Lat. Truth,
Loyalty.

V. 708. As the Morning Star that guides, etc. The Morning Star Lucifer as he
is named at Verse. 760. How art thou fallen from Heaven, O Lucifer, Son of the
Morning? Isal. 14. Verse. 12 -- Diffugiunt Stellae, quarum agmina cogit
Lucifer, and Coeli Statione novissimus exit. Met. 12.
Qualis ubi Oceani perfusus Lucifer unda,
Quem Venus ante alios Astrorum diligit ignes,
Extulit os sacrum Coelo, tenebrasque resolvit. AEn. 8. Translated from Homer's.
(...)
(...).


V. 710. Third part of Heavens Host; Behold a great Red Dragon, etc. and his
Tail drew the third part of the Stars of Heaven, and threw them to the Earth,
Revel. 12. Verse. 3, and 4.

V. 711. The Everlasting Eye; God Omniscient, whose Everlasting Eye beholds the
^nmost Motions of our Minds, as the Psalmist reasons admirably: He that formed
the Eye, shall he not see? The Lord understands the Thoughts of Man, Psalm.
94. Verse. 9, and 11. Discerns, knows distinctly, of discernere, Lat. to see
plainly. Abstrusest, the most hidden, the most secret Thoughts, of abstrudere,
Lat. to thrust into a Corner, out of the way, and search of Men.

V. 713. The Golden Lamps, etc. And there were seven Lamps of Fire burning
before the Throne, Revel. 4. Verse. 5.

V. 716. Among the Sons of Morn; Among the Angels: So called, of their early
Creation, before this lower World, as many suppose, and as the Series of our
Poem assumes, at Verse. 577. As yet this World was not, etc.

V. 720. In full Resplendence; In its fullest and most perfect Brightness.
Resplendescentia, Lat. Brightness.

Ibid. Heir of all my Might, whom he has appointed Heir of all things, Hebr.
1. Verse. 12.

V. 726. Throughout the spacious North; According to that of Isaiah, where he
parallels the insulting Assyrians with Satan: For thou have said in thy Heart,
I will ascend into Heaven. I will exalt my Throne above the Stars of God: I
will sit in the sides of the North, Chap. 14. Verse. 13.

V. 732. Our Sanctuary; Sanctuarium, Lat. Heaven, God's holy Seat: Look down
from thy holy Habitation, from Heaven, Deuteronomy. 26. Verse. 15.

V. 736. Have in derision; Despisest, laughest to scorn: He that sits in the
Heavens shall laugh: The Lord shall have them in derision, Psalm. 2. Verse. 4. Of
deridere, Lat. to laugh at.

V. 739. Illustrates; Gives greater Luster to: Of Illustrare, Lat. to render
Renowned.

V. 741. Be dextrous to subdue; Be ready and resolute to tread down thy
Enemies. Dextrous, successful, quick, of dextra, Lat. for the right, the most
ready Hand. -- Quis rebus dexter modus. AEn. 4.
Et nos, and tua dexter adi pede sacra secundo. Ibid. 8.


V. 746. Or Stars of Morning Dew-Drops: Innumerable as Leaves, Stars, etc. are
usual Similes, but as the Drops of Dew, the Stars of the Gay Morning, and the
Pearls of Day Light, which the Sun hangs on every Leaf and Fragrant Flower, is
our Authors own, and as infinite as any of the others. Impearls, turns by his
reflected Beams into seeming Pearls, or hangs like Pearls.

V. 748. The mighty Regencies; The Dominions and large Governments, of Fr.
Regence, of Regere, Lat. to Govern.

V. 750. In their triple Degrees; In their three distinct Orders, of Seraphims,
Potentates and Thrones, that is, Principalities, Powers and Lords, according to
their several Offices and Distinctions observable in Holy Writ: Of the first
Rank there seem to be seven, from Tob 12. Verse. 15. I am Raphael, one of the
seven Princes which go in and out before the Glory of the Holy One, etc.
Typified by the seven Stars and seven Golden Candlesticks, Revel. 1. Verse. 12,
and 16. Gabriel, another of these Princes, was the Messenger of the Blessed
Incarnation of our Savior, Luke 1. Verse. 26. Of a different Order is supposed
to be the Angel that delivered St. Peter out of Prison, Acts 12. Verse. 7. Of
their Subordination in their Offices, And they answered the Angel of the Lord
that stood among the Mirtle-Trees, and said, We have walked to and fro through
the Earth, Zech. 1. Verse. 11. Some have the Dominion over the Winds, etc. I saw
four Angels, standing on the four Corners of the Earth, holding the four Winds
of the Earth, Revel. 7. Verse. 1. Triple, Lat. Triplex, threefold.

V. 759. From Diamond Quarries hew'n; Hew'n out of Pits of Diamond: Quarry, of
the Fr. Carriere, or Quarrier, a Pit whence Stone is dug, because hew'n out
generally forma Quadrata, in great Squares.

V. 761. In the Dialect of Men Interpreted. The Palace of Lucifer, so called in
the Language of Men, his other glorious Name being razed out, and lost in
everlasting Oblivion, as as V. 659. His other Name is heard no more in Heaven;
see Isai. 14. Verse. 12. How art thou fallen from Heaven, O Lucifer, Son of the
Morning? in the Dialect of Men. So Homer, of one of the bold Invaders of
Heaven: (...)
(...).


Lucifer; Lucem ferens, Lat. being the brightest of the Stars, and as such
relating to the bright Station of Satan: He of the first, if not the first
Archangel, Verse. 660. Lucifer, this Morning Star, is Graphically described by
Homer; (...)
(...).


Dialect, (...), Gr. Speech, and the various forms of it belonging to diverse
Nations, Interpreted, explained, of Interpretari, Lat. to give the meaning of.

V. 766. The Mountain of the Congregation: The Prophet Isaiah has well expressed
the Pride and Rebellion of Lucifer, in Chap. 14. Verse. 13, and 14. For thou
have said in thy Heart, I will ascend into Heaven, I will exalt my Throne above
the Stars of God: I will sit also upon the Mount of the Congregation, in the
sides of the North. I will ascend above the heights of the Clouds, I will be
like the most High.

V. 770. With calumnious Art, etc. With sly, malicious Insmuations resembling
Truth; With probable Surmises. Calumnious, Calumniosus, Lat. of Calumni^^i.
Lat. to (...) to forge malicious Accusations against one. Counterfeited.
imitated, of the Fr. (...).

V. 773. If these Magnifick Titles, etc. If these our Noble Names and mighty
Titles have any thing in them besides the sound: If these our lofty Dignities
are any thing but empty Names. Magnifick, Magnificus, Lat. Noble, Mighty.
Titles, of Titulus, Lat. Honor; hence Titular, one that has the Style, but not
the Estate, or that carries the Name, without the Possession and Advantage
thereto belonging, as several Foreign Titular Bishops, that are so only Titulo
tenus.

V. 778. Hurried meeting; This hasty assembling: Hurried, of Harier, Fr. to
toil, to vex, to weary.

V. 782. Prostration vile; Mean and abominable submission: Proftratio, Lat. a
lying flat on the Ground, of Prosternere, to lie along, to worship by falling
flat on the Earth. Knee-Tribute, an odious and scornful exposing of the Worship
due to the Son of God: See Tribute, Verse. 343. of this Book.

V. 788. If I trust to know you right; If I conceive rightly of you, as I
trust, as I believe I do.

V. 793. Jar not but well consist; Orders and Degrees are Distinctions that do
not destroy Liberty, but agree well with it. To jar, is to quarrel with, to
disagree, of the Fr. Gnerroger, to fall out with, as well as to fight. Consist,
of consistere, Lat. to suit with.

V. 797. Introduce Law or Edict; Can bring or impose on us new Laws and
Ordinances? As if Orders and Degrees and Liberty could be maintained without
'em. Introduce, Introducere, Lat. to begin, to broach a new Opinion. Edict,
Edictum, Lat. a Law, of Edicere, to proclaim, to ordain.

V. 799. Err not; Are faultless, need no Laws to guide us, can do nothing
amiss: Of errare, Lat. to be mistaken.

V. 802. Ordained to govern, not to serve; Another Instance of his
counterfeited Truth; Service being but the subordinate Duty of Degrees and
Orders of Angels or Men.

V. 803. Without control; Without any Contradiction: Control, of the Fr.
Contr^rolle, an Examination and scanning of Accounts. Contreroller, Fr. to
observe, to inspect. Thus far Satan's bold blasphemous Discourse past without
any due Consideration, or Reflections made on it, without check or opposition.

V. 805. Abdiel; (...), Hebr. Servant of God. Of (...), to serve.

V. 809. O Argument Blasphemous; O wicked and malicious Discourse* detracting
from the Honor, Glory and Goodness of GOD Almighty. Blasphemous, (...), Gr.
one who by scandalous and ill report, endeavors to hurt the Fame, and ruin
the Reputation of another. (...), Who is this that speaks Blaspemies? Luke 5.
Verse. 21.

V. 813. With impious Obloquy; With wicked Detraction; With impious Gainsaying.
Obloquium, Lat. scandal, reproach.

V. 825. And circumscribed their Being; Bounded and limited their Powers: Of
Circumscribere, Lat. to draw a Line about, to appoint.

V. 828. How Provident; How careful of our Honor, what Provision he has made
for every ones just esteem: Providens, Lat. heedful, circumspect.

V. 849. The fervent Angel; The zealous Angel, grown warm in his Discourse:
Fervent, of Fervere, Lat. to wax warm. Fervet Opus, AEn. 1. The Work goes on in
good earnest.

V. 850. None seconded; No one backed or supported his Zeal: Of the Lat.
secundus, second.

V. 854. Of secondary Hands; The Workmanship of some deputed Power, not of GOD
himself, but his Son, as a Task or Business shuffled off, from the Father to
his Son. Secundarius, Lat. of the second sort. Transferred, put over, of
Transfer, Lat. to convey, to turn over to.

V. 855. Strange Point and new! A new and strange Opinion: Point of the Fr.
Poinct, a Proposition, an Argument. Doctrine, of Doctrina, Lat. Learning,
Knowledge.

V. 861. When fatal Course, etc. When Powerful Fate had fetched its mighty
Round; Had completed its accomplished Course, we the Sons of Heaven, our
Native Seat, brought our selves into being, the ready Offspring and Sons, of
that fatal season. Mature, Maturus, Lat. ripe, seasonable.

V. 864. Our Puissance is our own, etc. Our Power and Might is our own, not
owing to, or derived from any Superior, like that, Our Lips are our own, who
is Lord over us? Psalm. 12. V. 4. To which he has subjoined, Thy Right Hand
shall teach thee terrible things, Psalm. 44. Verse. 4. Puissance, Fr. Power.

V. 868. Address; Whether we intend by Prayer to make our Applications to him,
or to surround his dreadful Throne with Praises or Approaches, or to attend him
with Tunes, or with Attacks. Address, Fr. a drawing near to; s'addresser, Fr.
to sue to by approaching humbly.

V. 869. This Report; Carry this Answer, this Account: Report, of the Fr.
Rapporter, to carry back word, of the Lat. Reportare.

V. 871. Ere evil intercept; Before some Mischief prevent and hinder thy
escape: Intercept, of Intercipere, Lat. to prevent by coming between, as
Letters are intercepted, when seized, before they come where directed.

V. 880. Contagion spread, etc. I see the Infection of thy Fault, and its
Punishment, that must attend it spread over all thy accursed and condemned
Crew. Contagion, Contagio and Contagium, any infectious, poisonous Distemper.
-- Priusquam
Dira per incautum serpant contagia vulgus. Geor. 3.


V. 883. Those indulgent Laws; Those easy and gentle Commands: Indulgent,
Indulgens, Lat, tender. -- Coeli Indulgentia. Geor. 4.

For the good Temperature of the Air.

V. 886. That Golden Scepter, etc. That easy Empire which thou did refuse,
is changed into an Iron Rod, to break and to correct thy Disobedience: The
first has relation to Esth 8. Verse. 4. Then the King held out the Golden
Scepter to Esther; the last, to Psalm. 2. Verse. 9. Thou shall break them with a
Rod of Iron, etc.

V. 904. Which he sustein'd Superior; Through the flouting and contemptuous
Reproaches of his Enemy, which he bore so as to be much above it: Hostilis,
Lat. of an Enemy; sustein'd, underwent, of sustinere, Lat. to endure.

V. 906. Retorted, etc. At once his Back he turned, and their own disdain
returned upon 'em double. Retorted, thrown and driven back upon 'em; of
Retorquere, to shoot, or throw back again.

NOTES ON MILTON's PARADISE Lost.
BOOK VI.
V. 1. ALL Night the dreadless, etc. All Night th'undaunted Angel unpursu'd,
Held through Heavens open plain his way, till Morn;
Roused by the Hours that keep their constant course,
Blushing unbarr'd the East-Doors of the Dawn.
Within GOD's Holy Mount, Neighboring his Throne,
There is a Cave, where Light and Darkness dwell
By turns, foll'wing each other in a Round
Uninterrupted, which makes through high Heaven
Pleasing Variety, like Day and Night;
Light sallies forth, while at the other Door
Obedient Darkness enters, till her time
To overcast Heaven, though our blackest Night
Shows like Gray Twilight here. And now the Morn
(Such as with us) went forth, adorned with Gold
Refined by Heavens pure Fires, before her Night
Fled vanquished, with the piercing Darts of Light
Shot through and scattered.


V. 3. With Rosy Hand; From those Colors that adorn the Morning, she was
called by Homer (...), the Rosie-finger'd Morn; and (...), from her Gay Morning
Gown. She is said to be waked by the Circling Hours, because appearing exactly,
when the Hour of her rising comes ^ound. -- Ecce Vigil rutilo patefecit ab ortu
Purpureas Aurora fores, and plena Rosarum
Atria -- Met. Lib. 2.
Il di seguente all' hor, ch' aperte sono,
Del Lucido Orient al Sol le port. Tass. C. 1. Stan. 71.
(...)
(...).


Imitated by Virgil, Tithoni croceum linquens Aurora Cubile. AEn. 4.

V. 4. Un^arr'd the Gates of Light; As if Heaven were shut at Night, and opened
every Morning. As Virgil, Ante diem clauso componet Vesper Olympo. AEn. 1.
Jam nitidum retegente diem, noctisque fugante
Tempora Lucifero. Met. Lib. 7.


V. 8. Vicissitude; Vicissitudo, Lat. Changing by turns, succeeding one another.

V. 10. Obsequious; Obsequiosus, Lat. obedient, complying.

V. 13. The Morn such as in highest Heaven: Homer made the Day break in Heaven
as well as on Earth, and the Light as necessary to the Gods as Men. (...)
(...).


From whence our Author seems to have taken the hint of his Heavenly Cave,
where Light and Darkness make their Intercourse. Arrayed in Gold Empyreal,
decked and adorned in flaming Gold, Arrayed; Arroye, Fr. Equipped, furnished,
set out with. Empyreal, Book 1. Verse. 117.

V. 15. Vanished Night shot through, etc. Night fled away, wounded and shot
quite through, with the piercing Rays of Light. Era ne la Flagion, ch'anco non
cede
Libero Ogni confin la notte al giorno;
Ma Orient rosseggiar si vede,
Et anco e il ciel d'alcuna Stella adorno. Tasso. Can. 18. Stan. 12.


Vanished, of Vanescere, Lat. to go away on a sudden, as Mists do.

V. 16. With thick embattel'd Squadrons; With great Numbers set in
Battel-array: Embattel'd, embodied, drawn into great Squadron, of in and
battailler, Fr. to fight, to order and range an Army fit to engage.

V. 18. Reflecting blaze on blaze; Darting sierce Fire from their Flaming Arms.
(...)
(...).
(...)
(...)


So Diomedes in his shining Armor is described: (...)
(...).


Virgil of AEneas's Armor made by Vulcan, says they were,

-- Arma radiantia -- Terribilem cristis galeam, flammasque vomentem,
Fatiferumque ensem, loricam ex aere rigentem
Sanguineam, ingentem; Qualis cum coerula nubes
Solis inardcscit radiis, longeque refulget. AEn. 8.


Blaze, signifies a sudden and fierce flame, of the Teut. Blasen, to blow, as
the effect of a great blast, or the imitation of its noise.

V. 19. War in procinct; All Preparations for War ready: The Angelick Host that
stood for Heaven, ready to march against the Rebel Army. In procinctu stare;
The Roman Soldiers were said to stand, when ready to give the Onset. Cum
praecincti jam milites and expediti ^d bellum erant.

V. 20. Had thought to have reported; This is said (...), after the manner of
Men, for it is unconceivable that an Angel (a Spirit of more pure and
enlightened Perfection than Mankind is) should be a stranger to the Omniscience
of GOD Almighty.

V. 23. Acclamations; Shouts of Joy: Acclamatio, of Acclamare, Lat. to shout
for Joy.

V. 26. High applauded; Highly commended, extremely extolled. Applauded,
applausus, Lat. of applauderc, to clap Hands in token of liking and
approbation. -- Ingeminant plausum Tyrii. AEn. 1.

V. 44. Michael; (...), Heb. the Power of God, of (...) Heb. to be mighty.
Gabriel Book 4. V. 549.

V. 45. Military Prowess; Warlike Courage: Military, of Militaris, Lat.
Soldier-like, of Miles, Lat. a Soldier. Prowess, Prouesse, Fr. Valor.

V. 48. By Millions; By mighty Multitudes: Million, Lat. Millio, 1000000, of
Mill, Lat. a Thousand.

V. 54. Of Tartarus, Book 2. V. 858. Hell, the bottomless Pit that stands
gaping wide to receive 'em, into its Flaming Confusion.

V. 56. The Sovereign Voice; God Almighty, whose Omnipotent Word made all the
World and makes it tremble and melt before him.

V. 58. In Duskie Wreaths reluctant Flames. -- Now Clouds began
To hide his Holy Hill, and rolling Smoke,
Fraught with fierce Fire, contending to get free:
The signal of his rising Wrath.


Reluctant Flames; Striving to break forth: Of Reluctari, Lat. to Struggle.

V. 62. In mighty Quadrate; In a vast square Gross: Of Quadratus, Lat. Square;
whence Agmen Quadratum.

V. 66. Heroic Ardor; Noble Courage, like that of Heroes. Book 1. verse. 552.
Ardor, Lat. Courage. -- Diine hunc ardorem mentibus addunt
Euryale? AEn. 9.


V. 69. Indissolubly firm; So strongly Embattled, and Embodied, as not to be
broken: Indissolubilis, Lat. not to be dissolved.

Ibid. Obvious Hill; No Hill stood in their way, or opposed their March:
Obvious, Lat. what meets or stands in ones way.

V. 73. When the total Kind of Birds; When the Generation of Birds, when the
whole species of Fowls appeared upon the Wing; And Adam gave Names to all
Cattle, and to the Fowl of the Air, Genesis 2. verse. 20.

V. 77. Many^a Province wide; Many a large Country. Province: Provincia, Lat.
for any Country, (not formerly part of Italy) added by fair or foul means to
the Roman Empire; Sicilia Princeps se ad fidem amicitiamque populi Romani
applicuit, and prima omnium Provincia appellata est, Cice. pro Fla.

V. 78. Of this Terrene; Ten times the length of this Earth; of this Terrene
Globe: Terrenus, Lat. Earthly: Of Terra, Lat. the Earth. -- Terreno ex aggere
bustum. AEn. 11.

V. 79, Far in the Horizon to the North; As far as Angels Eyes could see
Northward. The Horizon is a Circle dividing the Heavens into two half Circles,
and thereby determining our Sight; By the Greeks styled (...); By the Lat.
Finiens; The Horizons are various, according to the variety of Situations: Of
(...), Gr. To Terminate, as they do our view. -- Nec sidera tota
Ostendit Lybicae finitor circulus Orae. Luc. l. 9.


V. 80. A fiery Region; The North is called from the Clearness and Brightness
of the many Stars in that Quarter, though the South is better provided with
them than Antiquity was aware of: But fiery seems here to relate to the Bright
Beams that darted from the flaming Arms of Satan's innumerable Host, marching
from the North. -- AEraque fulgent
Sole lacessita, and lucem sub nubila jactant. AEn. 7.


V. 81. Stretched in Battailous Aspect; The whole North had the Face and Front
of one great Battle, set in orderly Array, extended and stretched from skirt to
skirt, from one side to the other: Battalions; Of Battailer, Fr. to Fight, to
wage War, to give Battle.

V. 82. Bristled with upright Beams; The Beams that shot upright into the Air,
from Spears and Helms, and shining Shields, made the flaming Region of the
North appear, as if quite full of fiery Bristles.

V. 84. With boastful Argument Portray'd; Painted with Vainglorious Boastings
of what they now designed: Portraid; Of the Fr. Pourtraire, to Paint; Of the
Lat. Protrahere; as our English, to Draw.

V. 86. They Ween'd; They Thought, they Foolishly imagined; an old Word.

V. 93. In fierce Hostings meet; Join in adverse Encounters, charging each
other in destructive Deeds; such as Hosts and Armies shock one another with: Of
Hostis, Lat. for an Enemy.

V. 105. A dreadful interval; A dismal space: Intervallum, Lat. a space
between, properly that between the Stakes in a Roman Trench, which being but
small, an Interval is put for any small space of Place or Time, and thence a
Rest in Music; which made Virgil add to it long^, to express a great distance.
-- Longo sed Proximus intervallo. AEn. 5.

V. 107. Before the Cloudy Van; Before the black main gross: Van, Book 2. verse.
537.

V. 108. On the rough Edge of Battle; On the bold brink of Battle. Edge is a
word not to be expressed by any other in our Language; and in the Sense here
meant it has a strange Relation to the Lat. Acies, that signified both the
sharp Edge of any Weapon; and also an Army in Battle Array ready for the
Charge, in which it is expressive of this rough edge of Battle. Haud aliter
Trojanae Acies, Aciesque Latinae
Concurrunt. -- AEn. 10.


V. 113. His own undaunted Heart explores; Trys and Sounds his own Courage. --
(...).

Explores; Of Explorare, Lat. to Search, Try, and Consider well. Non lupus
insidias Explorat Ovilia circum. Geo. 4.

V. 115. Realty; Truth, Integrity: Realitas, Lat.

V. 118. Or weakest prove where boldest; Why should not Strength and Might
there be wanting, where Virtue wanting is; Or weakest prove and most inferior,
where Impudently and Impiously relied on; Where Boldest, where most Audacious
and Brutal.

V. 129. At this prevention more incensed; More enraged by Abdiel's being
beforehand with him, and preventing his bold Defiance by his Challenge:
Praeventio, Lat. a getting the Stars of; Praevenire, Lat. to get before, to
gain ground of.

V. 134. His side Abandoned; His party Deserted and Forsaken: Of Abandonner,
Fr. to leave, to quit.

V. 138. Incessant Armies to defeat thy Folly; The Almighty, who Created all
Things out of nothing, could easily raise Armies Everlasting, new, and never
ceasing Forces, to disappoint and humble thy Ambition: Defeat; Defaire, Fr. to
destroy, to unmake.

V. 139. With Sol^^ary Hand; With his own single Arm, without Second or
Assistance: Solitarius, Lat. alone; of Solus, the same.

V. 146. Erroneous to Dissent; When I alone, among thy multitudes mistaken
seemed to disagree with all the Etherial Host. Erroneous, out of the way,
deceived: Of Errare, Lat. to be deceived.

V. 147. My Sect thou see; Those that are of my Party and Opinion: Secta,
Lat. for a Side, Faction, Family of Philosophers, etc. Philosophorum Sectae,
Familiae, Disciplinae. Cice.

V. 149. Askance; Book 4. Verse. 504.

V. 152. Seditious Angel; Thou that love Factious Broils, Mutinous and
Troublesome: Seditiosus, Lat. a maker of Mutinies. -- Seditione potens. AEn. 11.

V. 159. Omnipotence to none; Who while they feel Divine Power and Strength
within themselves, will never allow Almightiness in any one.

V. 162. Some Plume; Some Mark of Honor, to get a Feather in your Cap: Pluma,
Lat. a Feather.

V. 167. Ministering Spirits; Thousand Thousands Ministered unto him, Dan. 7.
verse. 10. And Angels came and Ministered unto him, Matthew. 4. verse. 11. Are they
not all Ministering Spirits sent forth to Minister for them who shall be Heirs
of Salvation? Heb. 1. verse. 14. The various Functions of the Angelick Spirits
to God, our Savior, and his Saints, here by Satan misapplied to their
Reproach: Ministrare, Lat. to attend on.

V. 168. The Minstrelsie of Heaven; The Songsters and Fiddlers of Heaven:
Minstrelsie; Of the old word Minstrel: Of the Fr. Menestrel, a Fiddler, an
ordinary Player on an Instrument.

V. 169. Servility; A word coined by our Author to express the extreme Meanness
and Baseness of Slaves: Of Servilis, Lat. of a Slave, or Bonds-Man.

V. 174. Deprav'st; Do Misinterpret, do Render ill, and in the worst Sense
express: Of Depravare, Lat. to Misi^terpret.

V. 181. To thy self Enthralled; Made a Slave to thy own dire Ambition and vile
Rebellion. Jam illa cupiditas Honoris, Imperii, Provinciarum, quam dura. est
Domina! Cic. Parad. 5. Enthralled, Enslaved; of the Dan. Trael. a Slave.

V. 182. Our Ministering upbraid; Reproach us with our Duty: Upbraid; Scoff,
Jeer at; Of Up-Gebraeden, to Reproach; Of the Part. Up. and the Sax. Gebraedan,
to enlarge upon; as Words are multiplied, and Reproaches enlarged, when Men are
upon the invective.

V, 193. Such ruin intercept; Such downfall come between this noble Stroke that
fell on Satan, swift as a Tempest, and therefore not to be prevented, is called
Ruin; as Rain, Hail, Thunder, Lightning, etc. are called Coeli Ruinae, the
Downfalls of Heaven, because they do, de Coelo ruere. -- Glomerant tempestatem
imbribus Atris
Collectae ex alto nubes: Ruit arduus Ether. Geor. 1.
Fluctibus oppressos Troas, Caelique Rtiina. AEn. 1.

V. 194. Back he Recoiled; Ten huge Steps he was driven backwards, he
Retreated: Paces; Fr. Pas; Lat. Passus, a Stride; Recoiled: Book 2. Verse. 759.

V. 196. Winds underground, etc. Subterraneous Winds and Waters are the
supposed Causes of Earthquakes; when the Earth troubled with the Wind-Cholick,
or the Strangury, is Torn and Rent, Swallowing whole Cities, or ready to Burst,
Trembles, Shaking Mountains from their Seats, or putting them out of their
former Place and Posture.

V. 209. Clashing brayed, horrible discord; Arms smiting, sounding Armor, made
a mighty noise, harsh and unpleasant. Thus Homer of his Engaging Gods: (...),
(...)
Pulsuque pedum tremit excita tellus
Tollitur in Coelum clamor. AEn. 12.


Neither of 'em does so fully set forth the Scene of Horror; Clashing: Of
Clango, Lat. and that of (...), Gr. imitation of Noise, and Coined according to
the Similitude of the Sound, Brayed, Sounded, made a Noise; Of (...), Gr. to
Sound; used by Homer in the foregoing Quotations.

V. 212. Dire was the Noise of Conflict; Dreadful was the Noise of the
Celestial Armies encountering one another. -- Tum scuta cavaeque
Dant sonitum flictu galeae, pugna aspera surgit. AEn. 9.


Conflict; Of Conflictus, Lat. the Charge, the Onset; Of Confligere, Lat. to
engage in Fight.

V. 213. Ore head the disinal Hiss, etc. Aloft the horrible Hiss of Shining
Javelins, took a flaming Flight, and flying, archt each Army ore with Fire;
Hiss: Book 1. Verse. 768. Volies: Discharges, properly of winged Arrows: Of
Volee, Fr. a Flight, as of Birds; since their disuse, applied to shot of all
sorts, winged with Death as sudden and inevitable: Darts; Of the Fr. Dard, a
Javeline; Of Darder, Fr. to Fling: Cope. Book 1. Verse. 337.

V. 214. Vaulted either Host with Fire; Virgil's is an Iron Shower. -- It toto
turbida Caelo
Tempestas Telorum, ac ferreus ingruit imber. AEn. 12.
Tum late ferreus hastis
Horret ager, campique armis sublimibus ardent. AEn. 11.


V. 217. And inextinguishable Rage. (...). All Heaven Resounded.
(...)
(...).
-- Sequitur clamor, caelumque remugit.
Et coelum tonat omne fragore. AEn. 9.


Inextinguishable; Inextinguibilis, Lat. that cannot be quenched.

V. 233. Expert when to advance; Skilful when to march on, when to halt, and c.
Expertus, Lat. knowing, skillful, to advance; Avancer, Fr. to set forward.

V. 236. The ridges of Grim War; Widen when and when to close the Furrows of
fierce War. The Ranks of Arrayed Angels in their due distances, are compared to
the Ridges of Furrowed Fields, widen'd or straightened greater or less as the
Nature of the Soil in the one, and the assault in the other requires. --
Clypeataque totis
Agmina densantur Campis. AEn. 7.


Ibid. No thought of Flight. (...),
(...).


Neither side thought of destructive flight.

V. 239. The moment lay of Victory; As if he only were concerned in, and able
alone, to obtain the Conquest, as if Victory depended on his single Arm.
Moment; Momentum, Lat. the whole weight and concern of a thing.

V. 244. Tormented all the Air; Tore and Rent to Rags all the Air: Of
Tormentare, Lat. to Pain, to Vex.

V. 245. Air then seemed Conflicting Fire; So furious was the Combustion, that
the Air seemed turned into Contesting, Fighting Fire. Expressive of Homer's
Comparison. (...).

Thus they fought like flaming Fire, with unextinguishable Rage; as at Verse.
217. Conflicting, Striving, Struggling: Of Confligere, Lat. to engage, to cope
with.

V. 248. Raunging through the dire Attack; Moving throughout the fierce
assault; acting every where during the hottest of the Fight: Attack; Une
Attaque, Fr. an Encounter, a Shock; Confused, Confounded, and Disorderd: Of
Confusus and Confundere, Lat. to disorder.

V. 258. Surceas'd; Gave over: Of the Lat. Super and Cessare, or Supersedere,
to abstain from, or leave off.

V. 259. Intestine War in Heaven; The Civil War of Heaven: Bellum Intestinum
and Domesticum: Of Intestinum, Lat. the Bowels, because made in the very
Bowels, and to the certain Destruction of that unhappy Country where it breaks
out.

V. 266. And thy Adherents; Thy Companions, thy Followers: Adherents; Of
Adhaerere, Lat. to abide by, to stick close to.

V. 269. How have thou instilled; How Craftily and Slily have thou infected
Thousands with thy Malicious Designs: Instilled; Of Instillare, Lat. to let
into drop by drop; a Metaphor expressing sly Insmuation.

V. 274. Brooks not; Cannot endure, or suffer: Brook; Of the Sax. Brucan, to
digest.

V. 280. Precipitate Thee; Throw three down headlong with augmented pain:
Praecipitare, Lat. Aut pelago Danaum insidias suspectaque dona
Praecipitare jubent. AEn. 2.


Augmented; Augmentatus, Lat. Increased.

V. 286. Easier to Transact; Easier to deal with me: Transact; Of Transigere,
Lat. to finish, to bring a matter to Couclusion, to an End.

V. 292. The Hell thou Fablest; Thou talkst of, of which thou make a Story,
and Dreamst Foolishly: Fablest; Of Fabula, Lat. a Story, a Fiction,

V. 296. They ended Parley; They gave over Talking: Parley; Of Parler, Fr. to
Speak.

Ibid. Addressed for Fight; Betook themselves to their Arms, prepared for the
Encounter; S'addresser a, to make himself ready for.

V. 299. Liken on Earth Conspicuous; To what, on Earth that is to be found, can
one compare or liken these two mighty Combatants, that may be capable of
raising human Understanding to the height of such almost Almighty Power?
Conspicuous; Lat. Conspicuus, that may be seen, perceivable.

V. 306. Expectation stood in Horror; While all the Beholders stood astonished,
in horrible expectation of the Combat.

V. 310. Within the Wind of such Commotion; Unsafe within the swing of such a
fierce Encounter; unsecure within the Whirlwind of such a Hurricane: Commotion:
Commotio, Lat. a hurly burly, a Storm.

V. 311. If Natures Concord broke; If the Bands and lasting Ligaments, by which
the Universe is knit and tied together, were on a sudden dissolved and burst
asunder. -- Sic cum Compage Soluta,
Saecula tot mundi suprema coegerit hora
-- Totaque discors
Machina divulsi turbabit foedera mundi. Luc. Phar. li. 1.
-- Rupisse videntur
Concordes elementa moras. Id. li. 5.


V. 312. Among the Constellations, etc. Among the Heavenly Bodies War arose.
Constellation, Constellatio, Lat. an Assembly of Stars called by one general
Name, as those of Cassiopeia; or their Habitudes and Positions regarded and
observed at certain times, as the four Seasons of the Year.

V. 313. Two Planets rushing, etc. As if the Worlds strong Bands of the sudden
burst, War were broke out among the Heavenly Bodies, two Planets armed with all
their Flaming Fury should, rushing on from fiercest Opposition, shock in mid
Air each other, and confound their shattered Orbs.

Ibid. Aspect malign; The envious Look and malicious Leer the Planets are
supposed by Astronomers to cast at one another, according to their various
Positions, of ill effect not only to Mankind, but weak'ning and controuling
their own Influence. Malign, Malignus, Lat. quasi male ignitus, malicious,
envious. Oculisque malign^. AEn. 5.

Aspect and Opposition, are Astronomick Terms, for the regards, and relative
Positions of the Stars, said to be in Opposition, when placed directly over
against one another. Jarring, see Book 5. Verse. 793.

V. 316. Uplifted imminent, etc. They both together with almost Almighty Power,
raised up one sudden stroke, that was designed to end the Combat, disduining
to need a second to confound their Foe. Imminent, imminens, Lat. ready to fall,
sudden. Quos super atra silex, jam jam lapsura, cadentiquae
Imminet assimilis. AEn. 6.


V. 320. In might or swift prevention; They were equal in force and skill, no
odds appeared either in Power or nimble Guard and quick prevention. Odds,
inequality, they were both equal, of Od, an uneven Number, of Oed, Tent. Empty,
in which something is wanting, incomplete.

V. 322. Keen nor solid; Neither sharp, nor substantial: Solid, solidus, Lat.
sound, massy.

V. 324. To smite descending; Met Satan's Sword falling with a furious Blow
downright, and cut it quite in two; nor stopped there, but fetching its swift
compass round, found way, and cleft him in sunder.

V. 326. Reverse; Returned: Reversus, Lat. of Revertere, to return again.

V. 328. Writhed him to and fro con^olv'd; Twisted himself rolling to and fro:
Twisted himself tossing to and fro. Writhe, of Wrydan, Sax. to wreathe, to
twist. Convolv'd, rolled, of convolvere, Lat. to roll up and down.

V. 329. The Griding Sword, etc. So painfully the slashing Sword with wide
gawping Wound past through him. Griding, an old word for cutting. To her Weapon
run in mind to gride
The Loathed Leacher. Spen. F. Q. Book 3. Can. 1. St. 61.


Discontinuous; Severing and destroying the continuity of the Parts:
Discontinuous, separating, gawping, according to the old Definition, Vulnus est
solutio continui.

V. 331. Not long divisible; The Heavenly Substance soon cemented it self,
incapable of being long divided. Divisible, divisibilis, Lat. separable. Homer
tells us, Paeon cured Mars, wounded in the Grecian Conflict, as soon as Runnate
makes Milk that was fluid before come to a Consisistency; that is, by repairing
the Continuity: Yet the Simile seems not so full, being borrowed of a Body
easily divisible into drops, whose Coagulation is forced and destructive of its
Nature. (...)*
(...).
(...).


Ibid. And from the Gash; From the wide Wound, a Stream of Divine Humor issued
forth in Color like to Blood, such as Heavenly Spirits may be allowed to
bleed. Gash, of the Fr. Hache, and this of the Lat. Ascia, a Hatche^.
Nectarous, (...), Gr. such Humor as proceeds from N^ctar, the Gods Divine
Drink.

V. 333. Sanguin; Blood-like. Sangnineus, Lat. Such as Celestial Spirits, such
as Heavenly Beings may Bleed. An exact imitation of Homer. (...)
(...).


V. 334. All his Armor stained; (...).

V. 336. Who interposed defense: Thus Homer makes the chief of the Trojans
interpose between their wounded Hero when overborn by Ajax; (...)
(...)
(...).


V. 339. From off the Files of War: Satan lighted out of his Sun-bright
Chariet, ^t Verse. 103. and according to the Homerick manner is now wounded,
born son the Shields of Seraphims) back to it, where it was placed out of the
Range and Array of Bartail. (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...), etc. (...).


Much more loose and redundant than our Expressive Author.

V. 145. Vital in every part; Spirits that are all over Life, whose Being does
not depend on Bowels, Heart or Head, Reins, Liver or Lungs, (as weak Man's
does, any of which, if damaged, hasten his Destruction) heal and recover
quickly, and cannot cease to be, unless reduced to nothing by that Almighty
Word that called them forth from thence; A Reason of higher reach, than Homer's
for the Immortality of his Gods. (...)
(...).


Vital; Vitalis, Lat. living.

V. 347. By annihilating die; Angels that are Eternal, a part post, as the
Schools phrase it* cannot die, that is, cease to be, unless reduced to this
Original Nothing. Annihilare, Lat. to reduce or bring back to nothing, utterly
to destroy.

V. 348. Nor in their liquid Texture; Their soft yielding Frame is incapable of
any Blow or Bruise: Their AErial, fine Fabric, can feel no destroying deadly
Wounds, but is as impassive and invulnerable as the yielding Air. Texture,
Textura, Lat. Weaving: So AEneas's Shield is by Virgil called, Clypei non
enarrabile textum. AEn. 8.

V. 352. They Limb themselves; They shape and size themselves, and take what
Color and Complexion pleases 'em best. Size, is referred to height and
talness, of Incisura, as the Fr. Taille, signifying the same as a Descendent,
of Tailler, Fr. to cut; the size of any thing being its Cut and Make. Others
will have it of the Fr. Assise, (whence our Assise of Bread) of asseoir, Fr. to
appoint; Stature and Size being the usual Proportion and just Magnitude by
Nature appointed to limit and bound the several kinds of Creatures.

V. 353. Condense or rare; More substantial, or more aerie, grosser or finer.
Condensus, Lat. thick, solid; Rare, Lat. Rarus, thin, light, aerie. See Book 1.
Verse. 415. and Verse. 781. -- But in what shapes they choose,
Dilated or condensed, bright or obscure,
Can execute their Aerie Purposes, etc.


V. 360. Refrein'd his Tongue Blasphemous; Nor forbore to cast his impious
Reproaches on GOD Himself, The Holy One of Heaven. The Lord is in his Holy
Temple, the Lord's Throne is in Heaven, Psalm. 11. Verse. 4. Refrein'd, of
Refraenare, Lat. to withold, as Horses are with Bit and Bridle, a Metaphor
applied in Holy Writ to that unruly Member, so apt to fly out. (...), Who
bridleth not his Tongue, Jam. 1. Verse. 26. And the same is persued through most
part of the third Chapter.

V. 365. Adramelec and Asmadai, etc. Routed Adramelec and Asmadai, two mighty
Leaders, two mighty Powers, (...), Heb. Mighty Magnificent King, of (...),
Glorious, and (...), a King, one of the Idols of Sepharvaim, worshipped by them
in Sama^ia, when transplanted thither by Shalmaneser. And the Sepharvites burnt
their Children in the Fire to Adramelec, 2 Kings 17. Verse. 31. The same with
Moloc, but with some difference in his wicked Worship and abominable Rites.

Asmadai; The lustful and destroying Angel Asmodeus mentioned Tob. 3. Verse. 8.
who robbed Sarah of her seven Husbands, of (...), Heb, to destroy.

V. 368. Mangled through Plate and Mail: Hacked and hewn through Armor made
of Plates of Metal or Coats of Mail. Mangled, of the Lat. Mancus, maimed,
lamed. Plate, of Pate, Fr. a broad piece of Iron, or the Span. Plata, both
probably of the Gr. (...), broad. Mail, of the Fr. Maille, the Meash of a Net,
Coat of Mail, (Tunicae ferreae reticulatae) consisting of Rings of Iron linked
together, this light, the other heavy Armor.

V. 370. To annoy the Atheist Crew; To disturb and distress the Unbelieving
Crew. Atheist, (...), Gr. One that thinks there is no God, or acts, as if he
were so persuaded. That the Rebel Angels were by Satan seduced into this vain
Imagination, is probable, otherwise they would not have disobeyed him, and
contended with the Almighty. (...), Ephesians. 2. Verse. 12. Without God in the
World, such doubtless was this Satanick Host, who while they feel Vigor Divine
within them, can allow
Omnipotence to none. Verse. 158.


Annoy, of the Fr. Ennyer, to disturb, to distress.

V. 371. Ariel and Arioc; Two fierce Spirits, as their Names denote. Ariel,
(...), Heb. The Lion of God, or a strong Lion, mentioned 1 Chronicles. 11. Verse. 22.
where Benaiah (one of David's Worthies) is recorded for having slain (...), two
Lyon-like Men of Moab. By the same is Jerusalem, the City of David, typified;
Woe to Ariel, to Ariel, the City where David dwelt, Isai. 29. Verse. 1.

Arioc, is of the like signification, (...), Hebr. a fierce and terrible Lion:
Of (...), a Lion, and (...), terrible, whose Plur. (...), found Jerem. 13.
Verse. 21. has troubled Interpreters.

V. 372. Of Ramiel; (...), Hebr. a Name well suited to one of the proud Angels
that exalted themselves against their Maker: Of (...), God, and (...), Hebr. to
exalt and raise one self, in vain Opinion: His Violence and Fury may well be
said to be scorched and blasted in that Combat where all Air seemed conflicting
Fir, Verse. 244.

V. 374. Eternize; Deliver over to perpetual Remembrance, make everlasting to
be remembered. Eternize, aeternare, Lat. Quae cura Patrum -- Tuas
Auguste, virtutes, in aevum
Per titulos memoresque fastos
AEternet? Hor. Carm. Lib. 4. Od. 14.


V. 379. Cancelled; Blotted out, of Cancellare, Lat. to cross out, to strike
out.

V. 381. For Strength from Truth divided, etc. For Power and Prowess when
misimploy'd, not to maintain, but overturn Truth and Justice, is infamous and
mean, deserving nothing but reproach. Illaudare, Illaudabilis, Lat.
disgraceful, as Virgil uses, Illaudatus, Aut Illaudati nescit Busiridis Aras.
Geor. 3.

V. 384. Through Infamy seek Fame; By those vile and infamous Actions which
make Vainglorious and mistaken Monarchs, the Plagues and Butchers of Mankind,
aim at the Renown of Conquest, besmeared and Sullied over with cursed Cruelty.

V. 386. The Battle Swerved with many an Inrode Gored; Now the main Body was
broken, pierced through with many a wide disordering Gap: Swerved; Of the Belg.
Swerven, to wander up and down, the Character of Rout, as standing firm and
unbroken; Of Victory: With many an Inrode Goar'd, bored through and broken with
many a sharp Invasion: Gored, Peirct, Bored through: Of Forare, Lat. to pierce.

V. 391. And fiery Foaming Steeds; According to Virgil's Description of that
Noble Animal. Collectumque premit volvens sub naribus ignem. Geor. 3.

V. 395. Fled Ignominious; Quitted the Field disgracefully: Ignominiosus, Lat.
Shameful.

V. 399. In Cubic Phalanx; Stood firm in their square Battalion: Cubic; Of
Cubicus and Cubus, Lat. for any figure square on all sides, as a Die: Phalanx;
Book 1. Verse. 550. Invulnerable; Invulnerabilis, Lat. that cannot be wounded:
Impenitrably, Book 2. Verse. 647.

V. 404. Unobnoxius to be pained; Incapable of Painful Wounds, though by the
furious onset of their Foes out of their Ranks removed: Unobnoxious, not liable
to: Of Un, the privative Particle, and Obnoxious, Lat. Subject to.

V. 406. Over Heaven enducing Darkness: Now Night drew near, and over Heaven
spread out
Her seasonable darkness, and inforct:
Welcome Cessation, and silence Sweet
On the dire din of Arms.


So Homer, (...)
(...).
(...). Ibid.


Concording with the Command of Night, here intimated by Imposed.

Tasso has employed a whole Stanza to express the same, less significantly. Ma
favor' vsci la notte, e il mondo ascose
Sotto il caliginoso horror de l' ali.
E l' ombre sue pacifiche interpose, etc. Cant. 11. Stan. 82.


V. 407. Inducing Darkness; Has something very natural and like its silent
march, like that of Virgil. Viridi fontes induceret umbra. Ecl. 9.

Inducing, bringing on: Of Inducere, Lat. to bring over. Truce. Book 2. Verse.
526.

V. 408. Odious dinn of War: The hateful noise of Arms. Dinn, signifies a great
noise like that of Clashing Swords and Sounding Metal. It is of Kin to the
Latin Tinnio, or Coined of the Sound, as Tinkling, and others are. Tinnitusque
cie, and Martis quate cymbala circum. Geo. 4.
-- Strepit assiduo cava tempora circum
Tinnitu galea. AEn. 9.


V. 410. Vanquished: Of Vaincu, Fr. Overcame.

V. 411. His Angels prevalent; His Conquering Angels: Prevalent; Of Praevalens,
Lat. Praevalere; to prevail, to overcome.

V. 413. Cherubick waving Fires; Cherubim, that showed like moving Fires,
Angels resem bling Flames of Fire, for their Purity, and Spiritual Activity:
Cherubick, belonging to a Cherub See Book 1. Verse. 157.

The Custom of keeping Watch in Camps, by making Fires all Night, is as ancient
as the Trojan War. (...).

V. 421. Too mean pretense; Too poor an excuse for our taking Arms; Too mean a
color for our Rebellion: Of Praetendere, Lat. to hide, cover, or disguise, as
Men do their ill Designs, by Specious Pretenses.

V. 427. Then fallible of future; Then deceived in Things that are to come,
which may justly call iu Question his Omnisciency and Infallibility: Fallible;
Fallibilis, Lat. that may be deceived, impossible to be affirmed of the Allwise
God: With whom is Strength and Wisdom; the Deceived and the Deceiver are his,
Job 12. Verse. 16. Read his Omniscience, nobly celebrated by the Royal Psalmist,
Psalm. 139. Verse. 19. Show the Things that are to come hereafter, that we may
know that ye are Gods, as God is introduced by the Prophets, reasoning with his
People, Isa. 41. Verse. 23. Omniscient: Of Omnisciens: Of Omnia Scire, Lat.
knowing all Things: Omuiscius, Lat. for the same.

V. 435. Imper^shable; That cannot Perish, or be Destroyed: Of the Lat. in, and
perire, Lat. to Decay. Valid, Strong; Lat. Validus.

V. 445. Will disclose; Discover: Of Desclorre, Fr. the Corruption and
Contradiction of Dis and Claudere, Lat.

V. 447. Nisroc of Principalities, etc. One of the chief of Satan's Peers (...).
An Idol of the Assyrians worshipped at Nineveh, in whose Temple Sennacherib was
Slain by his Sons, 2 Kings, 19. Verse. 37. and Isai, 37. verse. 38. some will
have this Idol to be a Representation of Noah's Ark. as if (...) Tabula Nohae,
others, that it had vultum Aquilium, because (...) signifies an Eagle; but they
may as well affirm it a Saw, which the Word implies, shifting only the Point on
shin to the left. It Is Original is more probably of (...) Heb. to exalt, or be
exalted, and (...) a Spirit: Some Proud Rebellious Spirit that exalted it self
against God, though uncertain in what shape Represented and Worshipped.
Principalities; Principalitas, or Principatus, Lat. the Command and Power of
Sovereign Kings and Princes, by which the Angels are frequently signified in
Holy Text; That now unto the Principalities and Powers in Heavenly Places, etc.
Ephesians. 3. v. 10. Ye are complete in him, who is the Head of all Principality and
Power, Col. 2. Verse. 10.

V. 449. His riv'n Arms, etc. his shattered Armor, hacked and hewed all in
pieces: Riven; Of the Word to Rive, or Rent, in pieces. Havoc; Book 2. Verse.
1009.

V. 445. Impassive; Incapable of suffering any hurt or harm; Impassibilis, Lat.
(...). Unpain'd.

V. 458. Remiss the Hands, etc. Makes the hands of mighty Angels, weak and
feeble. Remissus, Lat. slack, careless; Remiss, the contrary to Intent.

V. 460. And not Repine; Not grudge at it. To Repine is properly to Envy, to be
grieved and grated by the prosperity of another: Of Re, the increasing
Particle, and Pine, to languish with Hunger: Of (...) and (...), Gr. Famine.

V. 462. Pain is perfect Misery; Misery to the highest perfection, and too hard
for Hercules himself. Quid non possit superare dolor.
Quondam Getico durior AEmo,
Nec Parrasio lentior Axe,
Saevo cessit membra dolori;
Fessumque movens per colla caput
Latus alterno pondere flectit. Her. AEteus.


V. 470. Not Uninvented; Not Undiscovered. I make discovery of that which you
rightly esteem so necessary to our Success: Uninvented; Of the Negative Un, in
Lat. and Inventus, Lat. Of Invenire, to find out: Main, considerable, of great
importance; the Corruption of Magnus, Lat. great.

V. 472. The bright Surface, etc. The shining outside of this heavenly Soil:
Surface, Fr. the top of the earth, or any thing else; Of Superficies, Lat. as
if Superfacies.

V. 473. Of this Ethereous Mould; Of this Heavenly Soil. Semine ab AEthereo.
AEn. 7.
AEtherius, (...), Gr. Etherial, Book 1. Verse. 45.


V. 476. So superficially Surveys; So slightly and carelessly considers, so
heedlesly beholds: Superficially; inconsiderately, surveying only the bare
outside, without diving deeper, by considering its dark Entrails and hidden
Causes, productive of those many glorious Effects and Fruits that adorn its
Face: Of Superficies, Lat. the shell and outside of any thing.

V. 478. Materials dark and crude, etc. Deep underneath this Heavenly Soil
there lie, hidden materials raw and undigested, of thin and fiery Foam, till
touched and warmed with Heavens bright Beams, they gain more perfect Being; and
called forth by his cheering Ray, they spring enlivened, spreading into open
day. Crude, Book 2. Verse. 941. Spume; Of the Lat. Spuma, froth, foam, a word
expressing well the crude consistence of Sulphur, and other Subterranean
Materials, the efficients of Fertility. This is a Description of Salt Petre, an
(...), ut Spuma quaedam est and cand^rem habet. Valle, Chap. 77.

V, 481. The Ambient Light; The surrounding Air, which encloseth all things
that are brought forth out of Earths dark and secret Womb: Ambient; Ambiens,
Lat. Of Ambire, to enclose, to compass in.

V. 482. In their dark Nativity the deep; The dark deep Womb of this Etherial
Soil, shall furnish us with these from her obscure and inmost Storehouse,
fraught with furious Flame. Their dark Nativity, the hidden place of Birth,
where formed in the Deeps dark Dungeon they lie. Nativitas, Lat. Birth:
Pregnant; Praegnans, Lat. abounding in, full fraught with. Book 1. Verse. 22.

V. 484. Hollow Engines; Great Guns described. Engine. Book 1. Verse. 570.

V. 486. Dilated and Infuriate; Forced forth with mighty fury, by the touch of
Fire applied to the other lesser Bore Dilated; Of Dilatus, Lat. spread abroad:
Infuriate; Of In and Furiatus, Lat. mad, animated, and inforct, with fury. --
Furiata mente ferebar. AEn. 2.

Bore, a hole; Of the Lat. Forare and Foramen; Of (...), Gr. a passage.

V. 487. With Thundering noise; With a roaring noise like that of Thunder: Of
the Fr. Tonnere; Of the Lat. Tonitru; all of Tonare, to Thunder.

V. 488. Such Implements of Mischief; Mischief in such Perfection: Engines and
Utensils so full fraught with Fury and Destruction: Of Implere, Lat. to fill
full, quasi implementa; Or of the Fr. Employer, to use daily, ones Implements,
being those Things generally used in any Trade, or Manual Occupation.

V. 496. Their drooping cheer enlightn'd; Cheared and gave new Life to their
down cast Looks: Cleared their sad and cloudy Countenances. Drooping; Of the
Belg. Droef, sad: Cheer; Of the Fr. Ch^re; Ital. Ciera; Hisp. Cara; the
Countenance all; Of (...), Gr. Joy, as being there s^onest seen.

V. 504. With Devilish Machination: Inspired with Hellish Wiles and Divilish
Cunning. A Poetic Prophecy finely interwoven, of those Murdering Instruments
long since invented by the German Monk, intent on his Chemical Experiments,
well referred to the Destroyer of Mankind, as the Prime Master of those
Devilish Machinations. Machinatio, Lat. a device, a subtle Invention: Devise,
of Deviser, Fr. to find out, to contrive.

V. 511. Originals of Nature, etc. And underneath beheld
The Beginnings and the Seeds of all that grows
Raw and Imperfect, a^ they lay below
In Beds of Nitrous and Sulphurous Foam.


Sulphur, the Fat and Oily Foam of the Earth, and Nitrum, a Saline Vapor, and
sort of Vegetable Salt, exhaled out of the Earth into the Air, are styled dark
and raw Materials of Spiritous and fiery Spume, Verse. 478. and here the
Originals of Nature, by which all Things that adorn the Beauteous Surface are
Stimulated and brought into Being, when tempered and drawn forth by the Suns
warm Beams, they are raised from their raw and undigested Beds, where till then
they lay concealed in frothy and imperfect Foam; A noble Description of Natures
Tyring Room, where she dresseth her self in that wonderful Variety, that
adorns the Universe: Originals, the first Seeds and Beginnings: Of Origo, Lat.
Birth, Beginning. Igneus est ollis vigor and caelest i^ Origo. AEn. 6.

Conception; Conceptio, Lat. Of Concipere, to conceive, to breed.

V. 514. Con^octed and Adusted, etc. They mingled Sulphur and Nitre, Brimstone
and Salt Petre, together, and by nice and cunning Art, disgesting and drying
them, they brought 'em at last into a black granulated Powder: Pulvis Nitratus,
Gunpowder; Adusted, dried, partcht: Of Adurere, Lat. to scorch.

V. 517. Entrails unlike; Mines of Stone and Metals are well termed the
Entrails (des Entrailles, Fr.) of the Earth, from whence they are dug out.
Entrails; Mineral. Book 1. Verse. 235. Found. Ibid. Verse. 703.

V. 519. Balls of Missive r^in; Bullets that bring Destruction from a far;
Balls sent on Deaths errand at a distance, destroying far and near: So Virgil.
'Non ulli est animus, stricto contendere ferro
-- Missilibus long, and vasto clamore lacessunt. AEn. 10.
Et telum quod missile libro. Ibid.


Missive; a Mittendo, Lat. flinging or hurling at a distance.

Ibid. Incentive Reed; Reeds dry and apt to take Fire: Incentive, Incentivus,
Lat. that quickly catches Fire: Of Incendere, to burn.

V. 520. Pernicious with one touch; Sudden and sure with the least touch, to
set all in a Flame: Pernicious, of Pernix, swift. Talis and ipse jubam cervice
effudit equina
Conjugis adventu pernix Saturnus. Geo. 3.


V. 521. Under conscious Night; While Night was only privy to their dark
Designs: Conscious, Lat. Conscius, knowing of: So Conscia fati sidera. AEn. 4.
And
Conscia numina very. AEn. 2.
-- Quorum nox conscia sola est. Meta. l. 13.


V. 526. The Matin Trumpet Sung: The Morning Trumpet Sounded. Tuba canere, Lat.
to Sound a Trumpet. Et tuba commissos medio canit aggere ludos. AEn. 5.

Matin, Fr. the Morning, the Contraction of Matutinus, Lat. the same.

V. 527. In Golden Panoplie; With Golden Armor from Head to Foot completely
Armed. Panoplie, (...), Gr. Armor at all Points. Refulgent Host, a shining
Army; Refulgent, Refulgens, Lat. of Refulgere, Lat. to shine.

V. 528. Soon Banded, etc. Soon drawn together: Banded; Of Band, Fr. a Troop.
From the dawning Hills; From the High Hills on which the breaking day,
discovers first the early dawn.

V. 529. Each Coast scour; See that each Coast be clear: Scour, to cleanse
and clear: Of the Ital. Scurare, both of the Lat. Curare, a Metaphorical
Expression taken from cleansing Brass or Iron that have lost their bright
complexion.

V. 532. In Motion or in Alt; Moving forwards or standing firm. Alt: Of the Fr.
Fair halte, to make a stand, or rather, of the Ital. Far alto, because when
Soldiers stop in a march, the Pikemen advanced their Arms: Of Altus, Lat. high.

V. 535. Zophiel the swiftest Wing; Zophiel the swiftest flyer of all the
Cherubims, (...), Heb. the spy of God, of (...) to scout and spy out, and (...)
God.

V. 543. His Helm; His Headpiece. Helm; Of Heaume, Fr. for the same: His
orbed, his round Shield, Orbis, Lat. for any round body. Clypeique sub orb
teguntur. AEn. 2. And of AEneas's Shield.
Ingentem Clypeum informant, unum omnia contra
Tela Latinorum; septenosque orbibus orbs
Impediunt. AEn. 8.


V. 545. No drizling Shower; No small, slight shower; But a rattling Storm of
Arrows Armed with Fire: A terrible Tempest of fiery flaming Darts, fiercer than
Virgils. -- It toto turbida Coelo
Tempestas telorum, ac ferreus ingruit imber. AEn. 12.


Drizling Shower; A small Rain: Of the Fr. Gresiller, to sleet, or to Rain like
Dew: Of the Ger. Riselen; Of the Lat. Ros and Rossulus, a small Dew. If I
conjecture, if I guess aright; Of Conjectare and Conjicere, to guess.

Ibid. Barb'd with; Bearded, headed with Fire; Barb'd, Fr. Barbe; Of the Lat.
Barba, a Beard.

V. 548. Quit of all Impediment; Eased of ought that might hinder them. Quit;
Of the Fr. Quite, eased, freed. Impediment; Impedimentum, Lat. hindrance, the
Carriages and Baggage of an Army, were called Impedimenta.

V. 549. Instant without disturb: In an instant without any disturbance.
Instant, Instans, Lat. ready at hand.

V. 553. Training his Devilish Enginrie: Drawing his Train of Divelish
Artillery, in the hollow of his huge gross, hemmed in on every side, with thick
obscuring Squadroms to conceal and darken the deceit and dire design. Cube, V.
399. Enginry, a word Coined by our Author; Of Engine, Engenier, Fr. and
Engegniere, Ital. one skilful in Machines, and strange Inventions; all of
Ingenium, Lat. wit, cunning; as Book I. Verse. 570. Impaled, hedged, or hemmed in
with Pales: Of In and Palus, Lat. a stake; Of (...), Gr. to drive in, to fasten.

V. 555. An interview; Looking on one another: Beholding, and gazing at one
another: Of the Fr. Entreveue; Of Enter, between; and v^oir to see.

V. 558. Vantguard; Is the Forefront of an Army: Avantgarde, Fr. Vanguardie,
Ital.

V. 562. Our Overture: Our proffer, our proposals, and is a word of double
meaning, and scoffingly meant here, of unfolding and opening the front of
Satan's Battle, to send those Balls of Missive Ruin from their murdering
Engines, styled terms of Weight, of hard Contents, and full of force urged
home, at Verse. 621. Overture; Of the Fr. Ouverture; Of Ouvrir, Fr. to open.
Proposals, being the opening and discovery of our Thoughts and Intentions.

V. 564. While we discharge; Another word of doubtful meaning, relating both to
the discharging their new invented Guns, and the desires they seem to pretend
to Peace and Composure, so at verse. 566. Do as you have in Charge, and briefly
touch what we propound; that is, discharge the loaded Engines with a sudden
touch of your fiery Reeds.

V. 568. So Scoffing in Ambiguous Words: Thus mocking in words of uncertain
meaning. Ambiguus, Lat. doubtful, that may admit of diverse meanings.

V. 570. To either Flank retired; On either side drew of. Flank, Fr. side;
Retirer, Fr. to draw of.

V. 572. A Triple mounted row, etc. A Triple row of mounted Pillars laid. A
threefold Rank of Paillars raised on Wheels.

V. 577. With hideous Orifice: With dreadful yawning opened on us wide.
Orifice, Orificium Lat. the Mouth of any thing, Engine, or Vessel.

V. 578. Portending hollow truce; Foreshewing faithless proffers of Peace:
Foretelling unsound Truce. Hollow, empty, vain, not sound and substantial.
Portending, of Portendere, Lat. to betoken, bespeak.

V. 580. While we suspense collected stood, etc. While we i^ doubtful
expectation stood, thoughtful, and musing what the consequence and issue of
this strange sight might be. Suspensus, Lat. doubtful, uncertain. Suspensi
Eurypylum scitatum Oracula Phaebi
Mittimus. AEn 2.


Collected, Wrapped up, gathering together, and summing up our thoughts: Of
Colligere Lat. Amused, astonished, struck with Wonder at so strange a sight, of
Amuser Fr. to amaze with something strange and unusual.

V. 583. To a Narrow Vent; To the small touchhole: Vent. of the Fr. Fente, a
little Crack or Cleft of Fendre Fr. of the Lat. Findere to cleave: With Nicest
Touch, with exact, quick speedy Touch.

V. 584. Immediate in a Flame etc. Immediately all Heaven seemed in a Flame,
but Darkened soon with smoke belc^t from those Engines deep Throats, whose wide
Mouths, with horrid Roarings, filled the empty Air, and Rent her easy
Entrails, hurling out their Dreadful Load, Linkt Thunderbolts, and Ha^l of Iron
Balls: A Wonderful Description of the Dreadful and Destructive Terrestrial
Thunder.

V. 586. Deep-threated Engines: Guns rightly so Termed, as being all one long
deep Throat. Belcht to Belch is to break wind through the Throat, and is coined
of the sound it creates.

V. 587. Embowell'd; Filled, as the Bowels do all that Cavity and Hollow
wherein they are Lodged. Outrageous, Book 2. Verse. 436. Disgorging, Book 7.
Verse. 575. Glut. Book 3. Verse. 259.

V. 596. Evaded by Contraction; Have got off, by lessening their Size, or
shifting Place, Evaded, avoided of Evadere, Lat. to escape; Contractio, Lat. of
Contrahere to draw together, into less Room, as at Book 1. Verse. 781. Thus
incorporeal Spirits to smallest Forms, etc.

Verse. 598. Foul Dissipation; Disgraceful Disorder, Dissipatio, Lat. A breaking
and Scattering abroad,

Verse. 599. To Relaxe their serried Files; To open to their loose Order, to
widen their closed Ranks. Relaxare, Lat. to open. Et quae densa Relaxat. Geo.
1. Serried, Book 1. Verse. 548.

V. 600. Repulse repeated; A New Shock and repeated Disgrace. Repulse, Lat.
Repulsus of Repellere, to beat back. Fracti bello, fatisque Repulsi. AEn. 2.

V. 605. In Posture to displode, etc. Ready to discharge their Second Rank of
Thundering Guns. Posture, of the Lat. Positura, that Position of the Body, or
its parts, suitable to any Action intended: Displode of Displodere, Lat. to
break in pieces with a great Noise Tire, either of Tuger Bell. a Row a Rank, or
Tire, Fr. a draught, of Tirer Fr. to draw, without which Ordnance are
unmovable and unmanageable.

V. 613. Terms of Composition; He means his compounded Nitre and Sulphur and
his Iron Hail, not Terms and Propositions of Peace, according to his former
Ambiguity, and Belials subsequent to this. Compositio, Lat. a mingling and
compounding diverse things together, and also Peacemaking, Agreement, Composing
of differences. Terms, a terminando Lat. from ending and determining all
differences,

V. 614. Into strange Vagaries; Strange fits of Skipping and Jumping to and
fro: Vagaries of Vaguer Fr. Vagari, Lat. to Skip up and down, to make odd and
uncertain Motions.

V. 616. Somewhat Extravagant; Somewhat Giddy, Wandering and Wild, of the Fr.
Extravagant, of the Lat. Extravagari, to wander and rove up and down.

V. 619. To a quick Result; We should force 'em, to come quickly to a
Conclusion; to take as speedy Resolution: Result is another word of Ambiguity,
implying a Resolution, and the Sum or Result of the whole Matter, or a
Rebounding and Leaping back, of Resultus and Resultare, Lat. to Skip back.

V. 620. In like Gamesom Mood; In as Pleasant an Humor, Mood of the Sax. Mode,
the mind, thence used for its Motions and Affections.

V. 628. In Pleasant Vein; In merry Discourse; in Pleasant Talk; Vein, of Vena,
Lat. the Humor, Discourse or Style. Sed vatem egregium cui non sit publica
vena. Juv. Sat. 7.

V. 642. Light as the Lightning Glimps; As Nimble as the Winged Lightning
Glance. Fulminis Ocyor alis, says Virgil. AEn. 5. Meant of the Wind that always
attends Thunder, but nothing is certainly more Nimble or Sudden than the
Glancing Lightnings Glimps, Darting as quick as thought Glimps seems of the Gr.
(...), as sudden darting Light.

V. 654. Main Promontories Flung; Vast Mountains hovering over their Heads:
Promontorium is a vast Eminence hanging over, or running far into the Sea.
Montibus evulsis fuscus subtexitur ether
Noxque super miseros Campis conserta pependit. Luc. Phar. 7.


V. 6^7. Into their Substance Pent; Shut up and Enclosed in their Substance:
Pent of Pen; of the S^x. Pyndan, to enclose; as Book 4. Verse. 185.

V. 658. Pain implacable; Pain not easily allayed; not soon assuaged.
Impiacabilis, Lat. of in Negative and placare to Appease.

V. 665. With Jaculation dire; So in mid Air did Hills encounter Hills, with
horrid Hurlyburly; a Nobler Idea of the Warring Angels, than any of the Poets
have given us, of the Gigantic Invasion of Heaven by the Titans, they
endeavored to make their Scalado, by heaping the Mountains one upon another.
Ter sunt conati, imponere Pelio Ossam,
Scilicet, atque Ossae Frondosum involvere O'ympum. Geor. 1.


And could not rear 'em, though less than these our angry Angels, hurled at one
another Heads. Encountered; Met and opposed, and shockt each other: Encontrer,
Fr. incontrare, Ital. of the Lat. in and contra. Jaculation of Jaculatio, Lat.
a hurling, or casting of Jaculari, Lat. to throw.

V. 670. Had gone to wrack; Had been Torn and Rent in Pieces, Wrack Bell. for
the Ruins of a Ship beaten to Pieces by the Rocks and Waves, called thence
Shipwreck.

V. 672. Consulting on the Sum of things: Considering all things, or advising
on the Result and sequel of things: An Expression suited to the Size of our
short Apprehensions, who understanding imperfectly, and by degrees, gather the
consequences of things, not at one Omniscient Giance, as God Almighty does, to
us Incomprehensible: Sum, Lat. Summa, (...), Rerum Summa, used by Lucret. for
all things imaginable, the Universe. Advised, Resolved, well considering and
decreeing what should end this Tumultuous conflict. Avise, Fr. Resolved.

V. 679. The Assessor of his Throne; Who sat Ent^roned at his Right Hand:
Assessores, Lat. were such as sat on the Bench not as Judges properly, but as
Assistants, Assess^r, Lat. of Assidere, Lat. to sit by.

V. 681. Son in whose Face invisible, etc. Son in whose Face all my infinite
and invisible perfections, are made visibly and plainly to appear, and by whose
Hand* all my Almighty Power, and Everlasting Decrees are manifested; being the
Image of the Invisible God, according to Heb. 1. Verse. 15. Like and Equal to
his Father, who being altogether invisible to us, was by this his Image in the
fullness of time manifested in the Flesh, made known and visible to Mankind.

V. 684. Second Omnipotence; Second Almightiness, as being the Second Person in
the Holy Trinity, of which the Father is Almighty, the Son Almighty, and the
Holy Ghost Almighty, making however but one incomprehensible Almighty,
according to Athanasius Exposition of the Creed.

V. 685. Compute the days, etc. As we reckon the days of Heaven: Computare,
Lat. to Count or reckon.

V. 692, Insensibly; Unperceiveably: Insensibiliter, Lat. so little as not to
be perceived; to escape the Notice of sense: Suspend, delay, defer, of
Suspendere, Lat. to put off.

V. 694. No Solution will be found; No end, no determination of their Conflict
will be found. Solutio, Lat. for loosening or untying, thence for the Answer to
any hard or doubtful question, thence Metaphorically, for the end, or decision
of any dubious Affair.

V. 704. Immense I have Transfused; I have power'd forth such vast Strength and
efficacy on thee. Transfused, Book 3. V. 389.

V. 706. And this perverse Commotion, etc. And have so Ordered this Obstinate
and Wild Tumult. Perverse, Book. 2. Verse. 625. Commotion, Verse. 310 of this
Book.

V. 709. By Sacred Unction; by thy Holy An^inting, Constituting the Heir of all
things and King. Unctio, Lat. Anointing: See Book 5. Verse. 605.

V. 712. That shake Heavens Basis; That shake Heavens Firmament, that make
Heavens foundations shake Basis (...) Gr. a foundation, that supports a
Building. Rapid, Rapidus, Lat. Swift, Fierce, Violent. He beheld and drove
asunder the Nations, and the Everlasting Mountains were scattered, and the
Perpetual Hills did Bow, Haba. 3. Verse. 6.

V. 713. All my War my Bow; All my Instruments and Preparations for War, my
Bow, and Thunder, my Irresistible Arms. God is described by the Royal Psalmist;
Whetting his Sword and bending his Bow, Psalm. 6. Verse. 12. He bent his Bow, and
set me as a Mark for the Arrow, he caused the Arrows of his Quiver to enter
into my Reins, Lam. 3. Verse. 12 and 13. Thy Bow was made quite Naked, Hab. 3.
Verse. 9.

V. 714. Upon thy puissant Thigh; According to that Psalm Prophetic of our
Savior. Gird thy Sword upon thy Thigh, O most Mighty, Psalm. 43. Verse. 3.
Puissant, Book 1. Verse. 632.

V. 720. All his Father full expressed; He Received the fullness of his Almighty
Father expressed in his Face unaccountably, Ineffably, Unspeakably expressed, of
ineffabilis, Lat. not to be uttered.

V. 722. The Filial Godhead; God the Son: Filial, Lat. Filialis, and Filius a
Son.

V. 728. Is all my Bliss; According to his own Testimony of himself; My Meat is
to do the Will of him that sent me, John 4. Verse. 34. For I came down from
Heaven, not to do mine own Will, but the Will of him that sent me, John 6.
Verse. 38. Then said, Lo I come, (in the Volume of the Book it is Written of me)
to do thy Will O God, Heb. 10. Verse. 7.

V, 731. In the End thou shall be all in all; Then comes the End, when he
shall have delivered up the Kingdom to God, even the Father; and when all
things shall be subdued unto him, then shall the Son also himself be subject
unto him, that put all things under him, that God may be All in All, 1 Cor. 15,
Verse. 24 and 28. Resign, Resignare, Lat. to Restore, to give up.

V. 739. The undying Worm; Of gnawing and tormenting Conscience. Where their
worm dies not, Mar. 9. 44.

V. 749. With Whirlwind sound the Chariot of Paternal Deity. The Chariot of the
Almighty, God the Father, came rushing forth with the sound of a mighty
Whirlwind. And I looked, and behold a whirlwind came out of the north, Ezekiel. 1.
4. For behold, the Lord will come with fire, and with his chariots, like a
whirlwind, Isa. 66. 15. Behold the whirlwind of the Lord goes forth with fury,
a continuing whirlwind, Jer. 30. 23. By this terrible Metaphor, God's Wrath and
Fury is frequently described in Scripture: With a tempest in the day of the
whirlwind, Amos 1. 14. -- Turbinis atri
More furens -- AEn. 10.


Paternal Deity, God the Father. Paternalis, Lat. of Pater, Lat. a Father.
W^irlwind, Wirbelwind, Ger. of Wirblen, Ger. to turn round.

V. 751. Wheel within Wheel, instinct with Spirit; And their appearance was, as
it were, a wheel in the middle of a wheel, Ezekiel. 1. 16. Undrawn Instinct, etc.
When the living creatures went, the wheels went by them, for the spirit of life
was in the wheels, Ibid. v. 19, 20. out of which Chapter this noble Description
is taken. Instinct, Book II. V. 935.

V. 753. Four Faces, each had wondrous, etc. Every one had four faces. and
every one four wings, Ezekiel. 1. 16. And every one had four faces, the first was
the face of a cherub, Ezekiel. 10. 14. Convoyed, accompanied, attended on, of the
Fr. Convoyer, to wait on.

V. 755, Wings were sit with Eyes; As for the likeness of the living creatures,
their appearance was like burning coals of fire, like the appearance of lamps,
(here called Eyes) Ezekiel. 1. 13. According to that of Daniel, His eyes as lamps
of fi^e, chapter 10. v. 16. Ezekiel. 1. 18. and chapter 10. v. 12. And their whole body,
and their wings, and the wheels, were full of eyes round about. Cui quot sunt
corpore plum^ tot vigiles oculi subter. AEn. 4.

V. 756. The Wheels of Beril; And the appearance of the wheels, and their work,
was like unto the color of Beril, Ezekiel. 1. 16. And the appearance of the
wheels was as the color of a Beril stone, Ezekiel. 10. 10. In both which places,
and also Exodus 28. 20, the original word is (...), of a Sea-colour, thence
translated a Beril stone; (...), a precious Stone of a Seagreen color, found
in India, by Aquila rendered a Chrysolite, and by Symmachus a Hyacinth, all of
that complexion.

Ibid. And careering Fires between; With quick and darting Fires between. And
the fire was bright, and out of the fire went forth lightnings, Exek. 1. 13.
Careering, Book 1. V, 766.

V. 757. A crystal Firmament; A bright Firmament, like the AErial expanse,
clear as Crystal, the Footstool of God's Throne. And the likeness of the
firmament upon thr heads of the living creature, was as the color of terrible
crystal, Ezekiel. 1. 22.

V. 758. Whereon a Saphir Throne; And above the firmament that was over their
heads, was the likeness of a Throne, as the appearance of a Saphir stone, Ezekiel.
1. 26. And they saw the God of Israel; and there was under his feet, as it were
a paved work of a Saphir stone, and as it were, the body of Heaven in its
clearness, Exodus 24. 10. Saphir, Bo. II. V. 1050.

V. 7^^. Inlaid with pure Amber, etc. Inlaid with brightest Amber, and the
colors of Heaven's various Bow. And I saw as the color of Amber, as the
appearance of fire round about within it, Ezekiel. 1. 27. The Original is (...),
signifying, a burning Coal; or most intense Flame; such as astonisheth the
Eyesight, and is both here, and at v. 4. and chapter 8. v. 2. in the Lat. rendered
Electrum, and thence in our Translation Amber, not meant of that called
otherwise Succinum, but an Aurichalcum, a sort of Aureum aes, outshining Gold
it self, as of a hardness capable of a brighter burnish, or as some will have
it, Gold mingled with a fifth part Silver, whether naturally or artificially,
named (...), of (...), the suns name, whose splendour it vyes with Amber, Bo.
III. V. 359.

Ibid. The showry Arch; From its shape, arched and circular: Of its season
showry, as appearing in rainy weather, and a moist cloud. As the appearance of
the Bow that is in the Cloud in the day of Rain, so was the appearance of the
brightness round about, Exek. 1. 28. And there was a Rainbow round about the
Throne, Rev. 4. 3. Thus far our Author has followed the visionary Chariot of
God, described by Ezekiel, as a Man of War, (as he is styled by Moses, Exodus
15. 3.) sitting in his glorious Chariot warring against the Wicked, and
triumphing over them.

V. 760. Of radiant Urim; He completely Armed in his infinite Perfections,
arrayed with Light divine and unapproachable. Urim was one of those two
mystical words inscribed on the Aaronical Highpriests Breast Plate, (...), of
(...), Light, Exodus 28. 30.

V. 763. Victory sat Eagle-wing'd; Victory, swift and assured, sat at his right
hand. The Eagle was styled Jovis ales, the Minister of his Thunder, the King of
Birds; by the Romans, chosen for their victorious Ensigns; by the Naturalists,
affirmed to fly highest in stormy weather, and to soar above the Clouds: The
Poets assigned him to Jupiter, for his quick and sharp sightedness. AEtherea
quos lapsa plaga Jovis ales aperto
Turbabat Caelo. AEn. 1.


As the swift ships, as the Eagle that hastes to the prey, Job 9. 26.

V. 764. Three-bolted Thunder; Telum trisulcum, as Ovid calls the Thunder:
Threefold, Trifida fumantia flamma corpora; of Phaeton, Thunderstruck. Met. l.
2.

V. 765. Fierce effusion, etc. A furicus Tempest pouring forth Smoke and
fighting Flame, rouling round about him: Effusio, Lat. a pouring out.
Bickering, fighting, and thence destroying, of the Welsh Bicre, a Combat; or of
Picare, Ital. to prey upon, to devour. There went up a smoke out of his
nostrils, and fire out of his mouth devoured, Psalm. 18. v. 8. A fire shall
devour before him, and it shall be very tempestuous round about him, Psalm. 50.
3.

V. 769. And twenty thousand, etc. The chariots of God are twenty thousand,
even thousands of Angels, Psalm. 68. 17.

V. 778. Circumfused on, etc. Spread round on either Wing: Circumfusus, cast
about, of Circumfundere, Lat. to spread about. Circumfusa repent scindit se
nubes. AEn. 1.

V. 784. With fresh Flourets; With new springing Flowers. Flourets, of
Fleurette, Fr. young Blossoms, a diminutive of Fleur, Fr. a Flower.

V. 785. Stood obdur'd; Continued hardened in their wicked Rebellion, of
Obdureo, Lat. to grow hard and obstinate. Lest any of you be hardened through
the deceitfulness of sin, Heb. 3. v. 13. Rallied, Book I. V. 269.

V. 787. Insensate; Foolish, mad: Insensatus, Lat. senseless. Hope conceiving
from Despair. Sola salus miseris nullam sperare salutem

In Heavenly Spirits, etc. Tantaene animis caelestibus irae? AEn. 1.

V. 789. But to convince the Proud, etc. But what manifestation of God's Anger
against Sin, is able to convince and overcome the haughtiness of the Wicked? Or
what Wonders are sufficient to bring the stubborn and stiff-neck'd Sinner to
Repentance? Convincere, Lat. to overcome, either by dint of Power or Argument.
Avail, Book I. V. 153. Obdurate, Book I. V. 58. Relent, Book II. V. 237.

V. 791. By what might most reclaim: They were hardened more by those very
things that should have brought 'em back to their Obedience: As Pharaoh was, by
seeing the Red Sea divided; who, in stead of submitting to God's Commands,
pursued his People and his own Ruin through the midst of it, which returning
to its bounds, overwhelmed and swallowed up him and his audacious Host, Exodus
14. 23. Reclame, of the Fr. Reclamer, Lat. Reclamare, to call back, to call of,
as Faulconers do their Hawks.

V. 797. In universal Ruin last; Or at last to be ruined quite, and in the end
reduced to nothing, to be utterly destroyed.

V. 808. Vengeance is his, or, etc. Revenge is God's, or his whom he empowers.
To me belongs vengeance and recompense, Deuteronomy. 32. 35. Vengeance is mine, I
will repay it, says the Lord, Romans 12. 19. Vengeance, Fr. Vindicta, Lat.
Revenge.

V. 812. Despised, yet envied; Scorn and Envy seem two contrary Passions, yet
they concur in the constitution of racking and tormenting Pride.

V. 822. Of other Excellence not emulous; Endeavoring after no other Praise or
Perfection, pursuing and aiming at no other pitch of Perfection. Emulous,
AEmulus, Lat, one who, spurred on by the desire of Glory, endeavors to exceed
his Equal. Spemque meam, patriae quae nunc subit aemula laudis. AEn. 10.

V. 828. With dreadful shade contiguous; All at once the four Cherubims
strerch'd out their Wings set thick with Eyes, which joined together made a
dreadful shade; according to Ezekiel's Vision, Their Wings were joined one to
another. Contiguous, Contiguus, Lat. that touches, or is joined to any thing.

V. 830. Of torrent Floods, etc. And the Wheels of his fierce Chariot rouled,
as with the noise of a rushing Flood, or of a mighty Host. And when they went,
I heard the noise of their Wings, like the noise of great waters, as the voice
of the Almighty; the voice of speech, as the noise of an host. Ezekiel 1. 24. When
the living creatures went, the wheels went by them, Ibid v. 19. -- Rapidus
montano flumine torrens
Sternit agros, sternit sata laeta, boumque labores,
Praecipitesque trahit Sylvas. AEn. 2.


Torrent, violent; Of Torrens, Lat. a furious Flood.

V. 833. The steadfast Empyrean shook; The Pillars of Heaven tremble, and are
astonished at his Reproof, Job. 26. Verse. 11.

V. 836. Grasping; Of the Ital. Graspare, to embrace.

V. 837. In their Souls infixt; Thunders, such as stuck Ten Thousand Torments
in their Souls. Infixt, fastened; Of Infigere. Lat. to drive and stick into:
Intus figere. Plagues; Of Plaga, Lat. a stroke: Of (...), and the Doric (...),
of (...), Gr. to strike, the Pestilence, properly called the Plague, seems the
more immediate stroke of Gods Vengeance, sent from Heaven to sweep Sinners from
off the Polluted Earth.

V. 841. Prostrate: Felled before him; Of Seraphim grovelling and over thrown.
Prostratus, Lat. lying all along: Of Prosternere, Lat. to fell, to overthrow.

V. 845. From the four fold visaged four; From the four Cherubims that had each
four Faces, as at Verse. 753. Visage, Fr. the Face: Of the Lat. Visus, the sight.

V. 846. Distinct with Eyes; Beset with Eyes, sprinkled all over with Eyes like
Stars, as at Verse. 755. Distinctus, Lat. set full off.

V. 848. One Spirit in them Ruled; One Spirit guided and governed both the four
faced Cherubim, and the living Wheels beset with Starry Eyes. Whithersoever the
Spirit was to go, they went, thither was their Spirit to go, and the Wheels
were lifted up over against them, for the Spirit of Life was in the Wheels,
Ezekiel. 1. 20. Glared, shot out Lightning, Book IV. Verse. 402. Pernicicus, Book
1. Verse. 282.

V. 850. That withered all their Strength; That blasted all their Might, as
excessive Heats, and scorching Winds, kill the Trees by consuming their
exhausted moisture. Drained, emptied; Of the Fr. Trainer, to draw up or out;
Exhausted, quite emptied, and worn out; Exhaustus, Lat. dried up. -- Terraeque
marisque
Omnibus exhaustos jam casibus, omnium egenos. AEn. 1.


V. 854. In mid volie; Stopped his Thunder in the midst of its flight. Checked,
Book III. V. 732. Volie; Of Volee, Fr. a flight not only or Birds, but Arrows
and Shot.

V. 857. A Herd of Goats; To which the Wicked are compared by our Savior in
the Description of the last Judgment. And he shall set the Sheep on his Right
Hand, but the Goats on the Left; Then shall he say unto them on his Left Hand,
Depart from me ye Cursed, etc. Matthew. 25. 33. and 41. Timorous, fearful; Of
Timidus and Timor, Lat. fear.

V. 861. Rolled inward, etc. Turned inward, and opened a wide outlet into the
empty Deep. Gap, a hole, an opening of the word Gape, to stretch the Mouth wide
open.

V. 864. Urged 'em behind; Pursued and terrified 'em from behind. Urgere, Lat.
to push, to press upon. U^gente ruina volvitur. AEn. 10.

V. 865. The Verge of Heaven; Down from Heavens Borders. Verge, Book II. V.
1038.

V. 868. Heaven ruining from Heaven; The Heavenly Angels tumbling headlong down
from Heaven. Ruinare, Lat. to fall down.

V. 869. Strict Fate; Gods unalterable Decree. Strict, Book II. Verse. 239.

V. 873. Anarchie; Through his mad misrule. Anarchie, Book II. Verse. 895.

V. 874. Incumberd him; So vast a rout, and such a huge Confusion disordered
and disturbed him. Incomber, Ingombrare, is of the old Fr. Combre, now Comble,
a heap, whence it signifies to hinder, as heaps of Rubbish that lie in the way
do. Fraught, Book II. Verse. 715.

V. 877. The House of Woe and Pain; Described by our Savior by the Worm that
dies not, and Fire unquenchable, Mark 9. 44, 45, 48. and also by Weeping and
Gnashing of Teeth, Mat. 25. 30. the last part of which (Gnashing of Teeth)
seems to have given our Poet the Rise for heightning Hell, and the Torments of
its Fire, by the intense extremity of Cold, Book II. Verse. 587. A frozen
Continent of Whirlwinds and dire Hail, etc. alluding to Job 24. 19. of which
the Latin Translation comes nearer the Original than ours. Ad nimium calorem
transeat ab aquis niveum; Let him be snatched from melting Snow to extreme Fire.

V. 879. Her mural Breach; The Gap made in her Crystal Wall, Verse. 861. Mural,
Muralis, Lat. belonging to a Wall; Of Murus, Lat. a Wall.

V. 884. With Jubilee advanced; Set forward, came on, with Songs of Joy and
great Rejoicing Jubilee; Of Jubilum, Lat. rejoicing; Of (...), the year of the
Jewish Jubilee, when every Man returned to his Family and Possession Levir. 25.
10.

V. 888. He Celebrated; He praised and extolled. Celebrated; Celebratus: Of
Celebrare, Lat. to Praise and Magnify. Ex illo Celebratus honos. AEn. 8.

V. 894. That thou may beware; The Reason the Schoolmen give, why they
believed, this dismal downfall of the Rebellious Angels was not unrevealed to
Adam, to keep him in humble Obedience to his Maker, and under the Awe of his
Righteous Judgments, who spared not the Angels that Sinned, but cast them down
to Hell, 2 Pet. 2. 4. And the Son of Sirach, discoursing of Gods dealing with
the first Fathers of Mankind, has these Words; He showed them Good and Evil. He
made an Everlasting Covenant with them, and showed them his Judgments, Eccles.
17. 7. and 12. by which Judgments, most Interpreters understand, this terrible
Revelation of the routed Angels. Et Judicia sua ostendit illis, Quae Judicia?
nimirum quibus Deus Revelavit illis transgressionem pessimorum Spiritu^m, and
quomodo judicaver at eos and damnaverat Cathar. Comment. in Genesis Cap. 1.

That the Ruin of these Rebellious Angels was known to the Prophets, is plain
from Isaiah, who. denouncing Gods Judgments against the wicked Belteshasar,
speaks of him as of Satan himself. How art thou fallen from Heaven, Oh Lucifer
Son of the Morning? Thou have said in thy Heart, I will ascend into Heaven, I
will exalt my T^rone above the Stars of God, Isai. 14. 13, 14. Our Savior
speaks plainly of this Arch-Rebel, Into everlasting Fire prepared for the Devil
and his Angels, Matthew. 25. 41. I saw Satan like Lightning fall from Heaven,
Luke 10. 18. And he was in the Wilderness forty days tempted of Satan. Mark 1.
13. The Angels that kept not their Principality, but left their own Habitation,
he has reserved in everlasting Chains under Darkness, etc. Jude 1. 6.

V. 903. Bereaved of Happiness; Robbed of all thy Bliss: Bereaved; Of the Sax.
Bereapan, to spoil: Reapian; Of Rapere, Lat. to snatch from.

V. 906. A despite done; A Dishonor and Affront done against God: Despit, Fr.
a Provocation; Of the Lat. Despicere, to under value, to despise.

V. 909. Warn thy Weaker; Advise thy Wife to have a care. Giving Honor unto
thy Wife, as unto the Weaker Vessel, 1 Pet. 3. 7.

Ibid. Let it profit thee. Profit tibi, Lat. of Prodesse, to make advantage of.

Here I must take leave to show the Latin Translator of our excellent Poet, how
much Virgil would have assisted him if he had not been too hasty in that noble
Description of Satan's Roaring Engines, (hurling linkt Thunderbolts and Iron
Hail) it begins, Verse. 584. Nec mora, flammatis Coelum omne ardescere visum est
Cardinibus, subitaque iterum caligine tectum
Amisisse Diem, commistis igne tenebris;
Machina quas raucis, incendia caeca volutans,
Faucibus eructat: lacerus mugitibus ether
Intonat horrendum! Toto ruit horrida coelo
Tempestas telorum, adamantaeaeque procellae,
Fulmineique globi, and ferrata grandine nimbus
Volvitur alatis animosa per agmina turmis;
Spirituum, quas nulla valet, vis sistere contra,
Montibus immotis quamvis vel Rupibus AEqua.


NOTES On MILTON's PARADISE Lost.
BOOK VII.
Verse. 1. DEscend from Heaven Urania; Come down from Heaven Urania, if that
Name well pleased thou hear'st. Come down from Heaven, O Divine Spirit: (...),
Gr. Heavenly. So horace, Descend caelo, and dic age tibia
Regina longum Calliope mclos. Car. 1. 3. Od. 4.


So Pindar styles his Muse, Daughter of Heaven: (...).

Urania was the name of one of the nine Muses, of (...), Gr. Heaven: Whence
even the Heathen Poets acknowledged all their help. Therefore ours invokes and
calls upon the meaning; not the Muse; the empty Name. V. 5. (...). Calli.
Excipit Urania, fecere silentia cunctae. Ov. Fast. 1. 5.


V. 4 Of Pegasean Wing; O heavenly Spirit, following thy divine Voice and
Dictates, I have raised my self above the lofty Hill Olympus, the Abode and
Heaven of the Heathen Gods; above the reach of the Poetic Pegasus's Wings, I
call on thee for thy assistance, not on that Name faintly resembling and
expressing thee.

Pegasus was the Poets Winged Horse, sprung out of the Blood of Medusa when her
Head was cut off by Perseus. -- Pennisque fugacem
Pegason, and fatrem matris de sanguine natos. Ovid. Met. 4.


This Kephel was famous for opening the Muses beloved Fountain Hippocrene with
a stroke of his Heels; whence he was named of (...), Gr. a Fountain; after many
Exploits he flew up to Heaven, where he is noted among the Stars in Jovis
Praesepe. Hence Perseus's Pegaseium melos. Prolo. Sat. 1. Dicite, quae fontes
Aganippidos Hippocrenes
Grata Medufaei signa tenetis Equi. Ov. Fast. 5.


Olympian, Book II. V. 531. Olympus, Book I. V. 516. Of this famous Mountain,
the Muses were named Olympiades, esteemed the Daughter of Olympian Jove, and
Memory. (...),
(...)
(...). Hesid. in Theog.


V. 9. Thou with eternal Wisdom, etc. His spirit garnished the heavens, Job 26.
13. The Lord possessed me (Wisdom) in the beginning of his way, before his works
of old; when there were no depths, I was brought forth; when there were no
Fountains abounding with water, before the Mountains were settled; before the
Hills, was I brought forth: Prove. 8. 22, 24, 25.

V. 12. Pleased with thy Celestial Song; Then I was with him, as one brought up
with him: And I was daily his delight. rejoicing always before him, Prove. 8. 30.

V. 15. Empyreal Air thy tempting; By thee led up into the bighest Heavens, I
have presumed to soar an Earthly Guest, and breathed that pure Celestial Air,
tempered by thee. He alludes to the Air that on some very high Mountains is so
extremely thin and subtle, that Humane Lungs are incapable of drawing it. His
Presumption, is meant, of the daring flights of his Fancy, singing and
describing this Angelic War, etc. in Heaven.

V. 16. To my native Element; To this lower Region of the Air, in which I had
my Birth,

V. 17. From this flying Steed; Lest by my flying and unruly Fancy thrown and
dismounted, (as heretofore Bellerophon, tho from less lofty height,) I fall
distracted to wander all alone lost and undone. He compares his swift and
towering Fancy to a flying ungovernable Horse, extremely well, considering with
how much celerity Fancy finds her way, through Heaven and Earth, and Hell it
self, through all the Parts and Paths of Nature, and how dangerous it is to lay
the Reins loose on her Neck, or not to have strength of Judgment enough to
guide and curb her.

V. 18. Belleroph^n, was a noble and chaste Youth, Son of Glaucus; who refusing
the amorous Applications of Antea, (as Homer) Sthenobaea, (as others say) the
Queen of Praetus, was by her false suggestions like those of Joseph's Mistress
to her Husband, sent into Lycia with Letters, desiring his destruction; where
mounted upon Pegasus, he killed the Chimaera, and performed diverse other
notable Exploits; but attempting vain-gloriously to mount up to Heaven on his
Winged Steed, Jupiter made his unruly unrein'd Horse so ungovernable, that he
threw his Rider on the Alean Plain, where being struck blind, he wandered,
finding no Relief, till he died with Hunger. (...),
(...)
(...), etc. (...).
-- Quid profuit olim
Hippolito grave propositum? Quid Bellerophonti?
Erubuit nempe haec ceu fastidita repulsa,
Nec Sthenobaea minus, quam cressa excanduit, and se
Concussere ambae. Juv. Sat. 10.
Eques ipso melior Bellerophonte. Hor. Carm. l. 3. Od. 12.


V. 22. Visible diurnal Sphere; Half my work is still unfinished, (Six only of
these Twelve Books, into which he digested it, being completed,) but the
Remainder lies in narrower bounds, within the compass of discerning day, firm
standing on the Earth, not snatched above the Stars with daring slight more
safe, I sing with manly voice, not changed by straining it to hoarsness, or
into dumbness wearied, etc. Diurnal, Diurnus, Lat. daily. Rapt, Lat. Raptus,
snatched up.

V. 28. Solitude, Lat. Solitudo, solitariness, living alone, of Solus, Lat.
alone.

V. 32. The barbarous Dissonance, etc. The harsh rude Noisefulness, the
disagreeable discord and disturbance of Sots and Songsters. Barbarous, Bo. I.
V. 353. Dissonance, Dissonantia, Lat. a disagreeing in Tune, Untunableness.

V. 33. Of Bacchus, and his Revellers. Bacchus was the God of Wine, and Deity
of Drunkards: See Bo. IV. V. 279. Revellers, are such as dance and drink all
night, of the Fr. Resveiller, as of Revigilare, to watch: A word well suiting
the Ciconian Maenades, that ran madding up and down in their drunken Dances,
celebrating the Rites, of Bacchus, who were the Murderers of the Thracian Bard,
here styled the Wild Rout.

V. 34. The Thracian Bard; Orpheus, Son of Apollo and the Muse Calliope, born
in Thrace, a noble Poet and Philosopher; who after the loss of his much
lamented Euridice, not affecting second Nuptials as Virgil, or as others, for
his divine Disswasives against Lust and Incontin^nce, was torn in pieces by the
Ciconian mad Women sacrificing to B^cchus on Rhodope, a Mountain of Thrace. --
Spreto Ciconum quo munere matres
Inter sacra Deum, nocturnique Orgia Bacchi
Discerptum latos juvenem sparcere per agros, Geo. 4.
Non me carminibus vincet nec Thracius Orpheus. Virg. Ecl. 4.


Ovid; to the former subjoyns a more scandalous cause of this Feminine Fury.
Ille etiam Thracum populis fuit auctor, amorem
In teneros transfer mares. Met. 10.


But Horace gives us his true Character: Sylvestres homines sacer interpresque
deorum
Caedibus and victu faedo deterruit Orpheus
Dictus ob hoc lenire Tigres, rabidosque Leones. De Art Poet.


Bard; the Bardi were the Poets and Philosophers of the ancient Gauls and
Britains. Bard is a Welsh word, so signifying still. Plurima securi fudistis
carmina Bardi. Luc. l. 1.

V. 36. Till the savage Clamor drowned; Till the wild Uproar overcame both
charming Voice and Harp. Sauvage, Fr. wild: Clamor, Clamor, Lat. a shout, a
roaring. This is well expressed by Ovid: Cunctaque tela forent cantu mollita:
sed ingens
Clamor, and inflato Berecynthia tibia cornu;
Tympanaque plaususque, and Bacchei ululatus
Obstrepuere sono citharae, tum denique saxa
Non exauditi rubuerunt sanguine vat^^. Met. l. 2.


V. 37. Nor could the Muse, etc. Nor could the Muse Calliope defend Orpheus her
Son. -- Perque os (pro Jupiter) illud
Auditum saxis, intellectumque ferarum
Sensibus, in ventos anima exhalata recessit. Ibid.


V. 41. The affable Archangel; The sociable Spirit, as styled, Bo. V. Verse.
221. Affabilis, Lat. Courteous. Nec visu facilis, nec dictu affabilis ulli:
Part of Polyphemus's cruel Character, AEn. 3.

V. 42. Apostasy, (...) and (...), Gr. a defection, a falling away from, a
quitting. Apostates, Bo. I. V. 125.

V. 46. The interdicted Tree; The forbidden Fruit. The Tree of the knowledge of
the Good and Evil, Genesis 2. 17. Interdicted, Bo. V. Verse. 52.

V. 50. With his consorted Eve; With his espoused Eve. Consorted, of Consort,
Book IV. Verse. 447.

V. 52. And deep Muse, and much Thoughtfulness; With strange Astonishment, and
deep Meditation. Muse, of the Fr. Muser, silently and seriously to meditate on
hard matters. Donner la Muse a, To put one into a brown study.

V. 57. Redounded; Returned back, fell back: Of Redundare, Lat. to return
backward, as Currents stopped and opposed do.

V. 59. Soon repealed; Quickly recalled and dismissed the Doubts arisen in his
Mind: Recalled and cancelled, etc. as Orders sometimes are, of Rappeller, Fr.
to recall.

V. 67. Yet scarce allayed; The desire of Knowledge is well compared to Thirst,
not easily satisfied. So Virg. Tale tuum carmen nobis, divine Poeta;
Quale sopor fessis in gramine, quale per aestum
Dulcis aquae saliente sitim restinguere rivo. Ecl. 5.


Allayed, Fr. Allege, of the Lat. Alleviare, to lessen and diminish. Excites,
stirs up; of Excitare, Lat. to provoke.

V. 88. Which yields or fills all space. How first began the Air, that encloses
the fruitful Earth on all sides, spread and stretched out so vastly wide, that
it affords or fills every place, providing or possessing all space. An
excellent description of the fluid Air, incircling the Terraqueous Globe.

V. 89. Ambient interfused; Denotes the Air not only surrounding the Earth, but
flowing into, and spurn out between all Bodies; and is a fuller and finer
Notation of its Liquid and Spiritual Texture, leaving no Vacuum in Nature, than
that of Ovid: Ncc circumfuso pendebat in aere tellus. Met. l. 1.

Interfus'd, Interfusus, Lat. poured out between, of Interfundere, Lat. Florid,
Floridus, Lat. floury, gay.

V. 92. So late to build. Why God was not pleased to create the World 100000
Years before he did, and how he employed his infinite Power, Wisdom, and other
unaccountable Perfections, before the Creation; are some of those vain and
Atheistical Enquiries of impertinent and daring Men, who, little acquainted
with the turns and motions of their own frail and unruly Wills, would pry into
the Secrets of the Eternal Mind, and ask an account of that Almighty Will,
which created all Things how and when he pleased. Such Doubts are unresolvable,
as not coming within the compass of Human comprehension, for the Question will
at last run up to Eternity it self, and the Enquiry will come to this impious
and absurd Demand, Why God did not make the World coeternal with himself? Ad
quem potius perti^eret momentum Creationis indefinitum definire, ad te qui
dubitas, an ad Deum qui fecit? Val.

V. 94. How soon absolved? In what time perfected and completed? Absolved,
Absolutus, Lat. Opus absolutum, a work done and finished.

V. 103. From the unapparent Deep. The Sun (the great Light of Day) has still
much of his Race to run, tho going down the Hill, delayed and withheld by thy
Voice, he will stop his Course to hear thee relate his glorious Birth, and the
Generation of Universal Nature, rising out of the vast Womb of Waters dark and
deep.

Unapparent Deep; Where nothing was to be seen, according to Genesis 1. 2.
Darkness was upon the face of the Deep.

And longer will delay; Seems an imitation of Virgil, praising the Songs of his
two Shepherds. Immemor herbarum quos est mirata juvenca,
Certantes quorum stupefactae carmine lynces,
Et sua mutatos requierunt flumine cursus. Ecl. 7.


Which our Poet has outgone, by adding, Sleep listening to thee will watch:
Sleep shall forget his drowsy Dullness, or we can bid his Absence, or we can
well want him, and no wonder, when giving ear and audience to an Angel.

V. 115. What thou can attain; As far as thy capacity will reach. Attain, of
Attaindre, Fr. Attingere, Lat. to arrive or reach to. Noscenda est mensura tui.
Juv. Sat. 11.

V. 116. And infer thee also happier; Which may best serve, to increase the
Glory of thy Maker, and to improve and evidence thy own happiness. Infer, of
Infer, Lat. to conclude.

V. 123. Has suppressed in Night; Has concealed, and hid, as unsearchable. Has
hid in the dark: Of Supprimere, Lat. to conceal.

V. 124. To none communicable, etc. Discoverable to none, neither Angels nor
Men, as the dreadful Day of Judgment, of which our Savior himself says, Of
that day and hour knows no Man, nor the Angels of Heaven, but my Father only,
Matthew. 24. 36. Communicable, of Communicare, Lat. to make common, to impart.

V. 127. Her Temporance over Appetite; Knowledge is to the Mind what Food is to
the Body, and stands no less in need of Moderation to check our desires too
eager often after it, than our Stomach does to stint its craving, and must be
suited to our Capacities; otherwise, like Surfeits that turn, what was intended
for our Nourishment, into Diseases, and windy Fumes: Knowledge, in stead of
making us wiser, will degenerate into Folly, Fantastickness, and flatuous
Pride. Surfeit, Bo. V. Verse. 639.

V. 128. What the Mind may well contain; What exceeds not our Capacities. I
gave my heart to seek and search out by wisdom, concerning all things that are
done under Heaven: This sore travel has God given to the sons of men, to be
exercised therewith, Eccles. 1. 13. Ha^c occupationem pessimam (Philosophandi)
dedit Deus filiis hominum, ut occuparentur in ea. Vall. in Praeem.

V. 144. Whom their place knows here no more. And the Place thereof shall know
it no more, Psalm. 103. 16.

V. 149. With Ministeries due; With suitable service, holy Rites and
Attendance. Ministerium, Lat. Attendance. Detriment, Detrimentum, Lat. loss.
Damage, Dommage, Fr. Damnum, Lat. hurt.

V. 162. Inhabit laxe; Dwell more at large. Laxe, Laxus, Lat. wide. large.

V. 163. My Word, begotten Son. By his Son, by whom also he made the world,
Heb. 1. 2. Who created all things by Jesus Christ, Ephesians. 3. 9. His name was
called the Word of God, Rev. 19. 13. In the beginning was the Word, etc. John
1. 1, 14. The Platonists styled the Efflux and Emanation of the First Being, or
Eternal Mind, (...), the Architect and Artificer of the World.

V. 165. My overshadowing Spirit and Might; So is God's Holy Spirit styled, The
Holy Ghost shall come upon thee, and the Power of the Highest shall overshadow
thee, Luke 1. 35.

V. 166. The Deep; That unconceivable state of Nonentity before the Creation.
The dark Abyss of Moses: Darkness, and the shadow of Death, Job 12. 22.
Privation of Being, and Vacuity, the Ancestors and Abominations of Nature: Well
expressed by an Immeasurable, Unfathomable Deep, described before by an
Illimitable Ocean without Bounds,
Without Dimension; where length, breadth, and height,
And Time and Place are lost. Bo. II. V. 892.


Void of all the modifications of Matter, the limits and circumscriptions of
Time and Place. The unsearchable Judgments of God are compared to a great Deep,
Psalm. 36. 7. nothing being more unaccountable, except this dark Original of
Nature, this Emptiness, Deformity, and undiscoverable Deep, this unaccountable
Nothing, out of which all things were framed, unfathomable by Human Reasons
finite Line, but by our Author, dived into as far as earthly Notions are
capable of reaching. V. 179.

V. 168. B^u^dless the Deep -- nor vacuous the Space; For neither is the
immeasurable Deep without its Bounds, nor any space so vast as to be void and
empty; for I alone am Infiaite, comprehend all, my self incomprehensible,
beyond all bounds, fill every place, and am every where. There is but One
Infinitt. Non potest esse virtus Infinita nisi unica, eaque prima and summa,
neque enim in Infinitis est majus. Vacuous, Vacuus, Lat. empty: Vacuity is the
Enemy of Being, and the Reluctance of Nature. Vacuum ^orret Natura, fugitque
bona Mundi partium dispositio, omniumque c^rp^^um continuata series atque
connexio. Per. cap. 1. in Genesis Infinitude, Infinitas, Lat. Infinite Being,
belonging only to God, infinite in all Perfection.

V. 170. Tho I uncircumscribed, etc. Tho uncontro^led, I do my self conceal,
And show not forth my Goodness, at my choice
How to create, and when, for force and chance
Reach not to me, unalterable I decree
What ever I please, and what I will is fixed.


My self retire; God is supposed before the exerting of his Omuipotent
Emanation, in the Creation of the World, and the manifestation of his Goodness
by his wondrous Works, to have concealed himself, and retired into himself.
Monas ante mundi exordium sibi ipsi, and non aliis reluxit; says Hermes, Piman.
12. wherein our Author gives the best Answer imaginable to the bold Question at
Verse. 92. That the Sovereign Being retired into it self, till of his own free
Will he was pleased to make discoveries of his infinite Power and Goodness, by
creating the Universe. Uncircumscrib'd, unlimited, of Circumscribere, Lat. to
bound and appoint.

V. 167. Immediate are the Acts of God; The Works of God are performed all at
once, too swift and sudden to be measured by Time, or Motion, from which Time
proceeds, but yet can^o^ be related to Human Ears but by degrees, and orderly
Succession. It Is a famous Question, Whether the World were not created in an
instant, according to Eccles. 18. 1. Qui vivit in aeternum, creavit omnia
simul: He who lives for ever, created all things together; (tho our
Translation puts it out of doubt, by rendering it In general.) Although this
Opinion seems agreeable to the Almighty Fiat, to which our Author seems to
incline, tho he allows the Creation not easily to be conceivable by Human
Understanding without a distinct Narration, yet nothing can be objected why the
World, that was to have its beginning in time, should not have a distinct and
gradual Creation, for it argues no weakness in the Almighty, that he has been
pleased to order all things in measure, number, and weight, Wisd. 11. 20. who
has revealed to us by his Prophet Moses. Thus the Heaven and the Earth were
finished, and all the Host of them, and on the seventh day God ended his work
which he had made, Genesis 2. 1, 2. Neque vero hoc ullam arguit primae causae
debilitatem; non enim eam causam naturalem ponimus, quaeque faciat semper
quantum potest, sed liberam and sapientissimam, quae facit ut maxim expedit,
atque omnia Pulcherrima and Concinna, in numero, pondere and mensura. Vall.
Phil. c. 1. Immediate, Immediatus, Lat. that has nothing coming between,
sudden.

V. 179. As Earthly Notion; As Human Understanding is capable of receiving.
Notio, Lat. knowledge, of Noscere, Lat. to understand.

V. 182. Good will to future Men, etc. To Men yet unborn, that were to come,
Luke 2. 14.

V. 190. Into their vacant Room; Into their empty Places, dispeopled by their
Rebellion. Vacans, of Vacare, Lat. to be empty. Long saltus lateque vacantos.
Geo. 3.

For a deferted Country.

V. 193. On his great Expedition; Expeditio, Lat. any warlike, or great
Undertaking, Journey, or Voyage. Radiance, Radiatio, Lat. brightness: Sapience,
Sapientia, Lat. Wisdom.

V. 201. Between two brazen Mountains. And behold there came four Chariots out
from between two Mountains, and the Mountains were Mountains of Brass, Zech. 6.
1.

V. 203. Celestial Equipage; Heavenly Furniture ready at hand. Equipage, Fr. of
the Lat. Equus, a Horse. Harnest, made ready: Of Harnois, Fr. the Trappings of
a Horse.

V. 204. Spontaneous; Of themselves: Of Spontaneus, as this of Sponte, Lat.
freely.

V. 206. Her ever-during Gates; Her everlasting Doors. Lift up your heads oh ye
gates, and be ye lift up ye everlasting doors: and the King of Glory shall come
in, Psalm. 24. 7. Ever-during, Eternal; of Durare, Lat. to last, to be durable.

V. 212. Outrageous as a Sea, dark, wasteful, wild: The confusion of Chaos,
well set forth by a tempestuous, dark, wild Sea, turned from the bottom up by
raging Winds, and roaring Waves, that running Mountain high seemed to assault;
the steadfast Empyrean, A description of the boiling Birth of Nature, such at
least as Earthly Notion can conceive. -- Chaos; rudis indigestaque moles.
Nec quicquam, nisi pondus iners, congestaque eodem
Non been junctarum discordia semina rerum. Met. l. 1.


Fills not our Conceptions with half so much confusion. -- Into this wild Abyss,
The Womb of Nature, and perhaps her Grave,
Of neither Sea, nor Shore, nor Air, nor Fire,
But all these in their pregnant Causes mixed
Confusedly, etc. Bo. II. V. 910.


V. 215. And with the Center mix the Pole; A perfect Idea of the fiercest
Confusion, taken from the Figure of a Sphere, which must be broken all to
pieces, cramped and confounded into flatness, before the Pole (the extreme
Point of the Diameter) can touch the Center (the middle Point) of a round Body.

V. 216. Silence. As the same omnipotent and omnific word Incarnate, said to
the tumultuous Sea, Peace, be still, Mar. 4. 39. Omnific, Maker of all Things:
Omnificus, of Omnis, all, and Facere, Lat. to make.

V. 222. Followed in bright Procession; Seems a contradiction, for Procession
shrictly signifies, A going before, and is used to express, a solemn Pomp and
Show, preceding a Prince, or the Sacrament in Catholic Countries carried in
Procession; but the meaning is, that a bright Train of admiring Angels attended
and waited on this Omnific Word, to see the mighty Works of his Creation.
Processio, Lat. of Procedere, to set out, to go on.

V. 224. The fervid Wheels; The warm Wheels, from the swiftness of their
Motion: Motus est causa caloris. Horace his Epithete.
Metaque fervidis evitata rotis. Car. l. 1. Od. 1.


Fervidus, Lat. hot.

V. 228. One foot he centered; One foot of his Golden Compasses he fixed in the
center of the Universe, and turned the other round through the vast and deep
Obscurity, and said, Thus far shall the Creation reach, thus far shall its
Bounds extend, this shall be thy compass, O thou rising World. Profundity,
Profunditas, Lat. Depth, the Deep.

V. 231. This be thy just Circumference; This shall be thy vast Round.
Pronounced by him, who sits on the circle of the Earth, Isa. 40. 22. Who
alone compassed the circuit of the Heavens, Eccles. 24. 5.

V. 233. Matter unformed, and void; (...), Desolation and emptiness, Genesis 1. 2.
Says Moses, Without form, and void, as our Translation. (...), the 70.
Invisible and unadorned. The vulgar Lat. Inanis and vacua, Empty and void,
doubly empty. Aquila vanitas and nihil, Emptiness and nothing. All amounting to
the same sense, and agreeing with our Poets, that God made the Heaven and
Earth, which on the first day of the Creation were one confused heap of
uninform'd Matter, containing Earth, Air, Fire, etc. all mixed and covered over
with a dark Deluge, and black Abyss of Water. So that the Author of the Book of
Wisdom had reason to say, Manus tua creavit orbem terrarum ex materia invisa,
chapter 2. v. 18, Which we translate, Thy hand made the World of Matter without
Form. The Original, (...).

V. 234. Covered the Abyss. Darkness was upon the face of the deep, Genesis 1. 2.
Deep and incomprehensible Darkness covered the vast Abyss, in whose watery Womb
the unborn World yet lay. So the Prophetic Psalmist, Thou covered'st it with
the Deep, as with a Garment, the Waters stood above the Mountains of the
established Earth, Psalm. 104. 6. And Job describing the Original Birth of
Waters, I made the cloud the garment thereof, and thick darkness its swaddling
band, Job 38. 9. Bid in his Exemeron is of opinion, That all that vast space
between the Earth and the Empyrean Heaven was filled with Water, that is, with
a humid, aqueous, and misty Matter, part of which was afterward thickened into
Water, some rarefied and spun out into Air, and the rest miraculously hardened
and fixed into the Matter of the Celestial Orbs, all extracted out of this
immeasurable Abyss, Bo. I. Verse. 21. which, before Light was created, must
necessarily be clothed with Darkness.

V. 235. His brooding Wings the Spirit of God; The Holy Spirit the third Person
of the Blessed Trinity. The spirit of the Lord fills the world, Wisd. 1. 7.
By the word of the Lord were the Heavens made: and all the host of them by the
breath of his mouth, Psalm. 33. 6. The breath of the power of God, Wisd. 7. 25.
I came out of the mouth of the most High, I alone compassed the circuit of
Heaven, and walked in the bottom of the Deep, Eccles. 24. 3, 5. See at Verse.
17. Bo. I. the various Interpretations of Genesis 1. 2. And the spirit of God
moved upon the face of the Waters.

V. 236. And Vital Virtue infused, etc. And spread and dispersed its quickening
Power and enlivening Heat quite through the humid heap, and moving watery mass
of Matter. Vallesius interprets, The spirit of God moving upon the waters, Genesis
1. 2. to signify the Creation of Fire moving through, and actuating the watery
Abyss into warmth and vital Fecundity, esteeming it termed a Spirit, as
approaching nearest of all Bodies, to a spiritual Substance, as being so light
and subtle, as not to fall under the perception of sense, unless when immersed
in, and preying on gross Materials; that it is termed the Spirit of God for its
mighty Power and Excellency, as the Mountains and Cedars of God in holy Phrase
frequently are; Hic igitur spiritus, (nimirum ignis) hoc est, haec substantia
tenuissima ac perfectissima, ferebatur, incubans and faecundans aquas; per hunc
spiritum, factae sunt aquae fluxiles, alioqui futurae concretae. Sac. Phil. c.
1. Nevertheless our Author has rightly attributed this vital Influence and
quickening Emanation to the Spirit of God. Fluid, Fluidus, Lat. thin, liquid.

V. 238. The black tartareous cold, etc. But drove downwards, toward the
Center, the black, cold, gross, and muddy Dregs, Enemies to Life and Being. On
the first day of the Creation, God made the mighty Mass of all Things capable
of Generation and Corruption, consisting of the Elementary Bodies, Earth,
Water, Air, and Fire, heaped up and mixed together; Earth, Water, and dark Air
blended together, the invisible Fire moved together through the muddy Mass,
hindering its congealing into unactive Ice; then God's Spirit breathing upon the
Watery Confusion, disengaged and separated the entangled Elements, bringing like
Things to like, and fixing them together, thereby forming the Earth within the
Womb of Water, and spreading out the ambient Air, then out of deepest Darkness
called forth Light. Tartareous, (...), Gr. of (...), to shake with extreme cold.

V. 239. Conglobed; Gathered together: Of Conglobare, Lat. to gather in heaps.

V. 241. Disparted; Shared, divided: Of Dispertire, Lat. to allot, to divide
into Parts.

Ibid. Spun out the Air; And like the finest Web drew out the Air: An excellent
description of the thinness, purity, and invisibility of the Air, mixing with
all things, as being spun out so fine between.

V. 242. Earth Self-Ballanc'd, etc. Hung on her Center by wondrous
Counterpoise, which Job styles, Nothing; He hangs the Earth upon Nothing,
Chap. 26. 7. Circumfuso pendebat in aere tellus
Ponderibus librata suis. Meta. l. 1.


But how the unconceivable Counterpoise is made, he only knows, Who has
measured the Waters in the hollow of his Hand, and meeted out the Heavens with
a Span; who weighs the Mountains in Scales, and the Hills in a Balance, Isa.
40. 12.

V. 243. Let there be, said God. God who Created all Things out of Nothing, by
his infinite Power, could do it no other way than by his Almighty Word: For
there being no first Matter out of which they were to be Framed, about which
the Eternal Mind was to concern it self, Creation was nothing else but his
Powerful Command, the Almighty Fiat proceeding from his Infinite Goodness,
Wisdom, and Power, that produced this Beauteous All, suitable to his most
perfect Idea. By the Word of the Lord were the Heavens made; and all the Host
of them by the Breath of his Mouth: He Spoke and it was done, He Commanded and
it stood fast, Psalm. 33. 6, 9. And as he at first Commanded all Things into
Being, so he does still uphold them by the Word of his Power, Heb. 1. 3.

Let there be Light, Genesis 1. 3. And immediately Light, the first Bright
Offspring of the Creation, arose out of the gloomy deep. Quintessence pure, the
brightest and most refined Being. See Book III. Verse. 716. whether Light be
Corporeal, or according to Aristotle, Qualitas inhaerens Diaphano, is much
contested among the Philosophers, and has puzzled the greatest Masters of
Nature: This we are sure of, that this visible Light, so necessary to the World
both for its Use, as well as Ornament, was in the Beginning Created by God, and
by his Sovereign Command called out of Darkness. God Commanded the Light to
Shine out of Darkness, 2 Cor. 4. 6.

V. 245. From her Native East; From the East, her Birth place, whence rising
every day, she seems Newborn.

V. 247. Sphear'd in a Radiant Cloud; Placed in a shining Cloud, according to
the Opinion of Bid, Hug. de St. Vict. Bonav. Lyra, Tostatus, and others, who
held Light Created on the first day, to have been a shining Body placed in a
bright Cloud, and moving in that superior part of the World, in which the Sun,
made on the fourth day, was placed, this Light Sojourned in her Cloudy
Tabernacle, wheeling round the Infant, and yet imperfect World, and by her
Motion constituting the three first days and nights. But Pererius imagines this
Light to have been the same with that of the Sun, Created on the first, tho not
completed till the 4th day: The Secret is unsearchable. Sphear'd, of (...),
Gr. to make round. Sojourned, remained, stayed; Of Sojourner, Fr. to reside.

V. 249. God saw the Light was good, Genesis 1. 4. The Eulogie and divine
Approbation of Light, God's brightest Image, and his purest Emanation, amongst
all his Creatures, styled himself the Father of Lights, Jam. 1. 17. Lucem
inhabitans inaccessibilem; Dwelling in unapproachable Light, 1 Timothy 6. 16. From
hence Catharin. would infer, this Primitive Light to have been the Sun, even on
the first day, perfect and complete; because God pronounced nothing good,
before it was entirely finished: Although Moses relates, the Sun, the Moon, and
Stars, to have been the Work of the fourth day, with whose Historical Relation
our Author exactly agrees.

V. 250. By the Hemisphere divided. God divided the Light from the Darkness,
Genesis 1. 4. By half the Globe, says Milton; that is, the new created Light
shining on one side of the great mighty Mass, enlightened one half of it by
Day; the averse half, making its own Darkness, was clothed with Night; whose
alternate Round is still continued constantly. Hemisphere, Bo. III. Verse. 725.

V. 252. The first Day even and morn; Moses thus describes the Natural Day,
consisting of 24 hours, Genesis 1. 5. The newborn Light journying about the
mighty Mass of the, as yet, unseparated Elementary Bodies, the Evening and the
Morning made one complete Day. That this is a plain description of Day and
Night, Basilius affirms in his Second Homily on Genesis: Day doubtless (says
he) had the Precedence, and took place of Night in the beginning of Time; and
therefore the Evening, the close and end of the Day, is by Moses first named,
and then is added the Morning, the end and conclusion of the Night, both
together making but one Natural Day: (...), Gr. Quasi Noctidialis. For the
World's obscure condition, before the Birthday of Light was not named Night,
but Darkness, Night being the part of Time distinguished from, but yet
succeeding and relating to the Day.

V. 281. Let there be Firmament, etc. Genesis 1. 6. This word Firmament, of the
Lat. Firmamentum, corresponding with the Gr. (...), signifying Solidity, has
given occasion to mistake it, for the solid and most firm Body of the Heavens,
incapable of Division, Thinness, or any decaying Alteration. The Maintainers of
this Opinion endeavor to support it by these Texts, Tu forsitan cum eo
fabricatus es Caelos, qui solidissimi quasi aere fusi sunt, Job 37. 18.
Translated much amiss, but in ours rendered aright: Have thou with him spread
out the Sky, which is strong. as a molten Looking-glass? And by that of Job 14.
12. Donec atteratur Caelum; Till the Heavens be worn out; (better expressed by
our Translation, Till the Heavens be no more:) As if that employed their
Solidity. Homer is vouched also in their defense, (...).

But the Original, (...), Heb. signifies Extension and Expansion, and by the
best Interpreters is understood, of the wide, outstretch'd Air, as our Poets
explains it: Expanse of Liquid, pure
Transparent, Elemental Air, diffused, etc.


Spread out on all sides, to the utmost compass of the World's wide Round:
Which Moses seems to agree with in his Discourse of the Fowl that fly above the
Earth in the Firmament of Heaven, Genesis 1. 20. Expressed by the same word, and
said to be stretched out like a Curtain, Psalm. 104. 2. That stretches out the
Heavens like a Curtain, and spreads them out as a Tent to dwell in, Isa. 40.
22. Partition firm and sure for its certainty, not solidity, Non appellatur
Firmamentum, quasi sit corpus Firmissimum, sed quia est Interstitium and
terminus interjectus inter aquas superiores and inferiores, terminus
firmissimus and immutabilis non proper stationem, sed propter firmitatem, aut
intransgressibilem terminum superiorum and inferiorum aquarum. Aug. lib. 2. Su.
Genesis ad Litt. c. 10. Transparent, that may be seen through, of Transparere,
Lat. to appear through.

V. 268. Waters underneath dividing; They who understand the Firmament, to be
the vast Air, expanded and stretched out on all sides to the Starry Heavens,
esteem the Waters above it to be those generated in the middle Region of the
Air, of Vapors exhaled and drawn up thither, from the steaming Earth, and
nether Waters; which descend again in such vast showers, and mighty floods of
Rain, that not only Rivers, but Seas may be imaginable above, as appeared when
the Cataracts came down in a Deluge, and the Flood-gatcs of Heaven were opened,
Genesis 7. 11.

Others, and those many, by these Waters above, understand the Crystalline
Heaven, (by Gassendus made double) by our Author better named Crystalline
Ocean, by its clearness resembling Water, who lays the beams of his chambers
in the waters, Psalm. 104. 3. Praise him ye heavens of heavens, and ye waters
above the heavens, Psalm. 148. 4.

To this sense our Poet agrees, and thus infers, that as God built the Earth,
and founded it on Waters, (stretched out the earth above the waters, Psalm. 136.
6. By the word of God the heavens were of old, and the earth consisting out of
the water and in the water, 2 Pet. 3. 5.) So also he establish the whole Frame
of the Heavenly Orbs, in a calm Crystalline Sea surrounding it, lest the
Neighborhood of the unruly Chaos, Bo. II. Verse. 960. or as others, the furious
Conflict of contesting Winds, should disturb it. But all search, in Works so
wonderful, so distant and undiscernable, as well as undemonstrable, is quite
confounded.

Circumfluous Waters; that flow round about it: Circumfluus, Lat. Circumfluous
Humor. Ultima possedit, solidumque coercuit Orbem. Met. 1.

Crystalline, Bo. III. Verse. 482.

V. 275. Chorus, Lat. Quire; and for that repeated part of a Song, in which all
the Performers join.

V. 277. Embryon immature; The substance of the Earth was made, but still lay
in the dark Womb of many Waters, and like an imperfect Creature enclosed and
hid, appeared not. Embryon, Bo. II. V. 900. Immature, Immaturus, Lat. unripe,
like a Creature yet unfinished in the Womb, unfit for Birth; a Metaphor from
Green Fruit. Involved, Involutus, Lat. propt up.

V. 279. Main Ocean flowed; Who cover'dst it (the Earth) with the Deep, as with
a Garment, the Waters stood above the Mountains, Psalm. 104. 6.

V. 280. With Prolific Humor; With fruitful Moisture: Humidity being the
Subject, and as it were, the Mother of all Generation. Prolificus, Lat.
fruitful.

V. 280. Fermented the Great Mother; Stirred up and excited the Earth, the
Universal Mother, leavened and swelled her, filled with enlivening Moisture, to
conceive, and bring forth her innumerable Offspring. Fermented, of Fermentare,
Lat. to puff up, rise, or heave, as Dow does when leavened, the main Ocean
covering all the Earth, did with its natural Saltness and Acidity, provoke,
stir up, and stimulate the softened Earth into Conception. Fermentum nihil
aliud est, quam penetrantissima, seu spirituosissima quaedam substantia,
alterationum mutationumque variarum Parens. Satiate, Bo. I. V. 179. Genial, Bo.
IV. V. 712.

V. 284. Into one place, Genesis 1. 9. Into their proper place, the Sea, as V. 10.
the one great and most considerable Congregation of the Waters; not but that
many were received into the Earth's vast hollows, Earth and Water making but
one Globe, whose Center is the same with that of the World.

V. 286. The Mountains emergent; Rising up out of the Waters: Of Emergere, Lat.
called Tumid Hills, from their bulk, of Tumidus, Lat. swollen. Jussit and extendi
campos, subsidere valles
Fronde tegi silvas, lapidosos surgere montes. Met. 1.


V. 290. Capacious Bed; Fit to contain: Of Capax, Lat. vast Receptacle of
Waters. Le lict dune Riviere, The Bed or Channel of a River.

V. 291. With glad Precipitancy; The Waters ran down from the haughty Hills to
the wide humble Valleys with glad haste, their natural Tendency.
Praecipitantia, Lat. a fall from a high place.

V. 292. Uproul'd as drops on Dust, etc. Sinking down in vast Circles, as
Water, falling on much Dust, casts it self into round drops, desirous by
drawing it self into that circular, most perfect form, to preserve its native
Purity from the foul Invasion. Conglobing, a Military Metaphor from Soldiers
casting themselves into a Ring when on all sides beset.

V. 294. Such flight; Such speed the Almighty Command imposed on the swift
Floods. At thy Rebuke they fled, at the voice of thy Thunder they hasted away;
they go up by the Mountains, and down by the Valleys, unto the place which thou
have appointed for them. Psalm. 104. 7, 8.

V. 299. With Torrent Rapture; With headlong Fall. Torrent, Bo. VI. Verse. 830.
Rapture, of Rapere, Lat. to snatch away.

V. 302. With Serpent error wandering, etc. Or wandering round about, creeping to
and fro, like the turnings and windings of Rivers in and out: Of Serpere, Lat.
to creep. Error, of Error, Lat. a wandering, of Errare, to go out of the way.

V. 303. Oose deep Channels wore; And on the soft yielding Slime and Mud wore
their easy way. Oose, is the soft Mud and Soil at the bottom of Rivers:
Channel, whence our Kennel, of Canalis, Lat. a Water-pipe, called their Humid
Train, their watery Course.

V. 307. The great Receptacle of Congregated; The vast Spaces that receive the
assembled Waters, he called Seas. Receptaculum, Lat. any thing that contains
another: Congregated, of Congregare, Lat. to gather into a Herd.

V. 310. The verdant Grass; The green Grass. Verdant, of Verdoyant, Fr. of
Viridare, Lat. to grow green.

V. 312. Whose Seed is in her self, Genesis 1. 11. seems to imply, that there is
no Herb or Plant growing out of the Earth, that has not its proper Seed, when
some, as Mushroms and Fern, and diverse others, either have none at all, or so
small, that they are undiscoverable; but most probable it is, that God created
only the most excellent, which were to be perpetuated by their Seed, but the
less noble, and such as out of a mere mixture of the Elements, might in their
Seasons spring up, as being created in their Causes, needed not his particular
Command, as amongst the Animals, Mice, Worms, and Flies, capable of being from
the corruption of other Creatures. Of the Spontaneous Productions of the Earth,
the Heathen Poets had some smattering. Ipsa quoque immunis, rastroque intacta,
nec ullis
Saucia vomeribus, per se dabat omnia tellus. Met. 1.


V. 314. Desert and bare; Wild, unfurnished: Of Desertus, Lat. forsaken, as all
Deserts are, because bare and barren.

V. 321. The Corny Reed embattled, etc. The horny Reed stood upright among the
undergrowths of Nature, like a Grove of Spears, or a Battalion with its Pikes
aloft. Corneus, Lat. of or like Horn. -- Tumulus, quo cornea summo
Virgulta, and densis hastilibus horrida myrtus. AEn. 3.


V. 323. With frizled Hair implicit; The Bush with his frizled Locks entangled.
Frizled, of Frizer, Fr. to turn in curls. Implicit, Implicitus, Lat. entangled,
of Implicare, to twist.

V. 325. Gemm'd their Blossoms; Put forth their Blossoms, of Gemmare, Lat. to
bud forth, and rive Blossoms, are called Gemmae, Lat.

V. 333. A dewy Mist went up, etc. For the Lord had not caused it to rain upon
the earth, and there was not a man to till the ground; but there went up a mist
from the earth, and watered the whole face of the ground, Genesis 2. 5, 6.

V. 337. On the green Stemm; On the green Stalk, Stemm, of (...), Gr. so
signifying. Hence Stemmata, the Stocks and Originals of Families, branching
into their Genealogies. Stemmata quid faoiunt? Quid prodest, Pontice; longo
Sanguine censeri? Juv.


V. 341. For Signs, etc. Genesis 1. 14. Diverse are the Interpretations of these
Words; some understand 'em, of the Solemn Feasts and New Moons celebrated under
the Mosaic Law. Others, for Signs of the changes of the Weather, Winds, Plenty,
Health, and their Contraries. Others, of those Preternatural Signs and Miracles
that appeared in the days of Joshua, Hezekiah, and at the Passion of our
Savior, and that shall be before the Last Day; And there shall be signs in the
Sun, and in the Moon, and in the Stars, Luke 21. 25. The vain Asserters of
Judicial Astrology would have 'em meant, of the Signs placed in the Heavens,
whereon to ground their Presumptuous Predictions. The best and genuine is, That
God appointed them for Signs of the Seasons, of Time, of Days, and Years; for
the motion of the Stars, and chiefly of the Sun and Moon, is the measure of
Time: A Day is the time of the Sun's circuit about the Earth; an Hour, the 24th
part of it; a Year, his complete Journey through the Zodiac; a Month, his
motion through one Sign of it, while the Moon travels quite through it. Now
Celestial Motion, and that chiefly of the Sun, being the most regular,
unalterable, and communicable to all Mankind, is the best and most common
Calculation of Times and Seasons, and of circling Years, completing their
radiant Rounds.

V. 346. Great for their use to Man; Because the Moon, excepting Mercury, is
less than any of the fixed or erratic Stars, though her Neighborhood to the
Earth deceive our sight; therefore she is said to be one of the two Great
Lights, in regard of her illustrious Office, in chearing and illuminating the
Night, more effectually than all the innumerable Stars are able to do with
their vaster, but far more distant Lights.

V. 355. A mighty Sphere; Of all the Heavenly Bodies, first he made the Sun, a
vast round Circle void of Light, though of the same substance with the Heavens.
Ad sidera rursus AEtheria. AEn. 7.

V. 357. The Moon Globose; The Moon round also. Globose as Globous, Bo. V.
Verse. 649.

Ibid. And every Magnitude of Stars; And all the Stars in their different
Magnitudes, and distinctions of Size.

V. 358. The Heaven thick as a Field, is said to be sown with Stars, to express
their vast number. Astra tenent Caeleste solum. Met. 1.

V. 360. Transplanted from her cloudy Shrine; In which, as in a cloudy
Tabernacle, she had sojourned three days, as at V. 248. Shrine, Bo. I. Verse.
388.

V. 361. Made Porous to receive, etc. Made spungy to suck in the streaming
Light, and solid to retain her congregated Rays. Porous, of Pori, Lat. (...),
Gr. of (...), to pass through, those small and unsensible Passages in Human and
other Bodies, by which any thing is received into, or cast out of them.

V. 364. As to their Fountain, other Stars repairing, etc. It Is the received
Opinion, that the Fixed Stars shine and appear by their own Native Light; but
the Planets are Opaque Bodies, illustrated and made bright by the Sun's
borrowed Light; and are the other Stars here said, to draw Light in their
Golden Urns from that great Fountain. The reason why our Author did not affirm
it of all the Stars; as also why many imagine, that even our Opac^us Earth
shines as gloriously on most of the Planets, and their Inhabitants, (if any
such there be,) as they in their turns do on it and us. Urns, of Urna, Lat. a
Pitcher.

V. 366. Guilds her Horns; The Morning Planet is Venus, which, according to the
most exact Observations, moves round the Sun, sometimes above, at other times
below him bor owing all her Light of him, and like the Moon, having the same
threefold appearance, Increasing, Full, and Decreasing, therefore said to Guild
her Horns, as being at some distances from that Great Luminary: Corniculata,
Lat. horned. When this Star appears above the Horizon, proceeding the Sun, it
is called Lucifer; and when it sinks beneath it, after him, Hesperus.

V. 367. By Tincture or Reflection, etc. The Stars better their Complexion by
Tincture, by their Approaches toward the Sun, new-colouring their
Countenances. Tinctura, Lat. Color, or Dye; Or by Reflection, or by his Light
reflected on them, heighten and enhance the little, which may properly be
thought their own; at such vast distances to human sight, appearing much
diminished. Peculiaris, Lat. Particular: Diminutio, Lat. a lessening.

V. 373. Jocond to run his Longitude, etc. Brisk and cheerful in his vast
Diurnal Race from East to West, the length of Heaven's Highway. He rejoices
as a Giant to run his course, Psalm. 19. 5. J^^^nd, of Giocondo, Ital. the
depravation of Jucundus, Lat. merry. Horizon, Bo. VI. V. 79.

V. 374. The gray Dawn, and the Pleiades, etc. Daybreak, or the first approach
of the doubtful Light, is of a gray Color; whence the Morn is styled Gray-eyed
by the Poets. The Pleiades, are seven Stars in the Neck of the Bull, (one of
the twelve Celestial Signs,) so named of (...), to Sail, because they rise
about the Verna! Equinox, (thence called Vergiliae,) the usual time of
venturing to Sea among the unexperienced Ancients. They, as well as the early
Dawn, are said to dance before the Sun, because they constantly rise before him
for one half of the Year, commencing it by their auspicious Influence; Can
thou bind the sweet influence of the Pleiades? Job 38. 31. Taygete, simul os
terris ostendit honestum
Pletias -- Geor. 4.


V. 379. In that Aspect; The regard the Stars and Heavenly Lights have to one
another, by reason of their Places and Positions, are called their Aspects:
Aspectus, Lat. of Aspicere, Lat. to look on. Therefore the Moon placed in the
West just opposite against the Sun, like his Looking-glass, is said to need no
other Light in that Situation.

V. 381. Revolved on Heaven's great Axle; Turned to the East on the World's
mighty Poles by the First Mover. Revolved, of Revolvere, Lat. to turn round.
Axle, Bo. II. V. 926.

V. 382. Dividual Holds; And maintains her Empire over the Night, assisted by
thousand lesser Light, (as to appearance) not like the Sun, sole Sovereign and
Regent of Day, the universal Lord of Light, by all unrivaled.

V. 387. Generate Reptil. Let the waters bring forth abundantly, the moving
creature that has life, Genesis 1. 20. (...), is properly Reptile, Lat. creeping;
a word denoting the motion of Creatures without Legs. Jam maris immensi prolem
and genus omne natantum. Geo. 2.

V. 389. And let Fowl fly above the Earth; According to the Hebrew and Chaldee
Text; for the vulgar Latin and our Version of Genesis 1. 20. And God said, let the
waters bring forth abundantly, the moving creature that has life, and fowl
that may fly above the earth, etc. has given occasion to the Controversy, That
Fowl, as well as Fish, were originally made of Water; contradicting the plain
declaration of Moses, Out of the ground the Lord God formed every beast of the
field, and every fowl of the air, Genesis 2. 19. yet the greatest Philosophers,
and Schoolmen too, affirm the former Opinion; because all solid Bodies are made
of a mixture of Earth and Water, (sicci and humidi crassi,) Fire and Air, being
incapable of Generation, though contributing to the Temper; as Arist. c. 4. l.
4. Meteo. Birds therefore, being of an AErial Nature and Agili^y, are supposed
to have taken their Being in that of the two Productive Elements nearest of kin
to it. viz. Water easily extenuated and spun out into Air, as this is often
crowded and condensed into Water. -- Volucres agitabilis aer
Cesserunt nitidis habitandae piscibus undae. Met. 1.


V. 399. The Sounds; Are narrow Seas between two Lands, as the Baltic,
eminently so called; their Name is borrowed of their Noise: Sounds, as Fretum,
Lat. a Fremendo, such enclosed Seas being more boisterous and foaming.

V. 402. Sculles that bank the mid Sea. Shoals of Fish so vast, that they
appear like mighty Banks in the midst of the Sea. Sculles and Shoals, are vast
multitudes of Fish, of the Sax. Sceole, or the Ital. Stuolo, an Assembly.

V. 405. Through Groves of Coral. (...), Gr. called also (...), the Stony Tree,
because growing in the Sea like a Bush soft and green, (thence called a Grove)
when it gets above the Water, or is taken thence, a molliore aere illico
duratur, it immediately grows hard like a Stone, of a curious Red color when
dressed and cleared from its enclosing Moss. Nunc quoque curaliis eadem natura
remansit,
Duritiem tacto capiant ut ab aere; quodque
Vimen in aequore etat, fiat super aequora saxum. Met. 4.


V. 406. Their waved Coats; Their Scales like little Waves, wrought over one
another, glistering in the Sun like Gold.

V. 407. Pearly Shells; That are of that color, and often contain Pearls in
them, as those of Oysters do. Pearl, of Sphaerula, Lat. from their roundness.

V. 409. In joynted Armor watch; In hard Shells (resembling Armor) that have
their Overtures, at which the fenced and defended Fish takes in its Nourishment.

Ibid. On smooth the Seal; Play on smooth Seas in calm weather, disport
themselves. Seal, Phoca, Lat. the Sea-calf.

V. 410. Bended Dolphins play. Delphinus, Lat. is taken to be the Sea-hog, an
Animal Friendly to Mankind, and delighted with Music, painted crooked or bent
according to the Errors of Antiquity, seeming only so by the force and
swiftness with which he rises out of the Sea, and exceeds all Creatures.
Velocissimum omnium animalium non solum, marinorum; ocyor volueri, ccyo^ telo,
tanta vi exilit, ut plerumque vela navium transvolet. Plin. l. 9. c. 8.
Delphinum similes, qui per maria humida nando
Carpathium, Libycumque secant, luduntque per undas. AEn. 5.


Famous is the Escape of Arion on the back of one of these, who forced to leap
into the Sea to save himself from murdering Pirates, was supported and set safe
on shore by it: Celebrated by Ovid. Inde (fide majus) tergo Delphina recurvo
Se memorant oneri supposuisse novo.
Ille sedens citharamque t^net, pretiumque vehendi
Cantat, and aequoreas carmine mulcet aquas. Fast. l. 2.


V. 411. Enormous in their Gate; Irregular in their Motion: Wallowing unweildy
in their way. Gate, signif. way going; a Lincolnshire word, of the Sax. Began, or
Belg. Gaen, to go. Enormous, Bo. V. Verse. 297.

V. 412. Tempest the Ocean; By their vast bulk, and violent wallowings, rouse
the Sea, and make it roar as in a Tempest. Of these, Job is to be understood:
He makes the deep to boil like a pot, he makes a path to shine after him, one
would think the deep to be hoary. Chap. 41. v. 31, and 32.

V. 414. Stretched like a Promontory; A Comparison not immodest, since Basilius
and Theodoret tell us, That Whales, when they heave their broad Backs above the
Sea, appear like mighty Islands, as Leviathan is liken'd, Bo. I. V. 201. Some
have been taken, capable of covering 4 Acres of Land, Plin. l. 9. c. 30. Upon
the earth there is none like him, Job 41. 33. Pr^montory, Bo. VI. V. 654.

V. 417. The tepid Caves; The warm moist watery places, Pools and Shores: Our
Author seems to intimate, the Waterfowl only to have had their Aqueous Birth
with the Fish on the fifth day, and therefore takes notice here of their
numerous Brood, soon hatched from multitudes of Eggs laid in wet Plashes, fenny
and sandy Shores; which compared with what he says at V. 451. Let the Earth
bring forth Fowl living in her kind, amounts to a confirmation; and had he only
instanced in those Sea or Waterfowl, that breed and live in them, or on their
Banks, or dare, in Aerie Caravans, pass over them, his Opinion had been plain,
but mentioning Cock and Peacock, etc. he has left it dubious and uncertain.
Tepidus, Lat. warm. Unde cavae tepido sudant humore lacunae. Geor. 1.

V. 419. Bursting with kindly Rupture. Opening with seasonable Breach, bring
forth their unfledged, rough-skind Young. Opening, when Hatching Heat has
swelled its Inmate now too big for its small Tenement, mature and struggling to
get forth, with its Bill working its way out. Rupture, Ruptura, Lat. a breach,
of Rumpere, Lat. to break.

V. 420. Their callow Young; Their yet unfeather'd, unfledged Young Ones.
Callow, is of Callum, Lat. for the Skin grown hard on laboring Hands, to which
is compared, that of Birds, rough and harsh upon the breaking out of their
Feathers: Callow, Callosus, Lat. rough and porous: Ova callosa Hor. new-laid
Eggs, whose Shells are rough. Namque marem cohibent callosa vitellum, Lib. 2.
Sat. 5.

Fledge, Book III. Verse. 627.

V. 421. They summed their Penns; Completed their Feathers, had their just
number wherewithal to waft them through the Air. Summare, Lat. to reckon up, to
number.

V. 422. With clang despised the Ground; Forsake the Earth with their shrill
Note, mounted among the Clouds. Clang, Clangor, Lat. and (...), is a word
coined by the Noise that Geese, Cranes, and Swans make, when they rise on Wing,
or light down again. (...)
(...),
(...),
(...).
Magnis quatiunt clangoribus alas. AEn. 3.


V. 424. Their Eyries build; Their Nests, of Eyer, Ger. Eggs. Eagle, Aigle, Fr.
Aquila, Lat Does the Eagle mount up at thy command? and make her nest on high?
she dwells on the rock, upon the crag of the rock. Job 39. 27.

V. 426. Ranged in Figure wedge their way; Ordered and ranked in several
Figures, cut their way more easy through the yielding Air; as Cranes are
reported to fly in the form of a Wedge when crossing the Seas, thence said to
be Palamedes Bird, from whose Figured Flight he found out the Greek (...) and
(...). Some of them not unlike a Wedge. Turbabis versus, nec littera tota
volabit,
Unam perdideris si Palamedis avem. Mart. l. 13. Ep. 75.


V. 428. Their Aerie Caravans; Their vast Assemblies in the Air. A Caravan, of
Kervan, Turk. is a company of Merchants traveling with a Guard of Soldiers for
their security.

V. 430. So stears the prudent Crane, etc. Thus the wise, careful Crane, takes
her Voyage yearly, as well as the Swallow, from one Country to another. Stears,
since the motion of Birds Tayls first gave Invention to the Stearage of Ships.
Strimona sic gelidum, bruma pellente, relinquunt
Poturae te Nile grues. Luc. l. 5.


Prudent, because intelligent of Seasons, and thence shifting the Climate. --
Quales sub nubibus atris
Strymoniae dant signa grues, atque AEthera tranant
Cum sonitu, fugiunt que notos clamore secundo. AEn. 10.


V. 432. The Air floats as they pass; The Air waves under 'em, beaten by
innumerable Wings.

V. 434. Solac'd the Woods; Cheered the solitary Groves, of Solari, Lat. to
comfort. Longum ca^ntu solata laborem. Geo. 1.

V. 436. Tuned her soft Lays; Her pleasing Song. Lays, of the Fr. Lay, an
ordinary Song.

V. 438. The Swan with arched Neck, etc. The Swan with her bent Neck majestic,
placed between her Silver Wings, with her Feet like Oars, rows her self in
state. Arched Neck, seems a more Graphical Description of this proud Bird, than
Homer's (...), Long-neck'd, (...). Oary Feet, from whence doubtless Oars were
first imitated.

V. 441. The Dank; They leave the Water, the Moisture. Dank, wet. of Damp, Dan.
a Vapor. Pennons, Bo. II. V. 933.

V. 443. The crested Cock, whose clarion sounds; The warlike Cock, crowned with
his bloody Crest, whose shrill Trumpet distinguishes the Hours, that else
would steal away in silence. Crested, Cristatus, Lat. Clarion, Bo. I. Verse.
532. Of this wakeful and wonderful Creature, Pliny, l. 10. c. 21. Proxime
gloriam sentiunt, and hi nostri vigiles nocturni, quos excitandis ad opera
mortalibus, rumpendoque somno natura genuit, norunt sydera and aeternas
distinguunt hor as interdiu cantu: cum sole eunt cubitum, quartaque castrensi
vigilia, ad cur as laboresque revocant, etc.

V. 446. Of Rainbows, and Starry Eyes; And the other, the Peacock, whose gaudy
Train is spangled with starry Eyes, and adorned with circling Rainbows. His
Train was beset with Argus his hundred Eyes. Excipit hos, volucrisque suae
saturnia pennis
Collocat; and gemmis caudam Stellantibus implet. Met. 1.
Miraris quoties gemmantes explicat alas. Met. l. 13.


Hue, Bo. l. Verse. 230.

V. 447. With Fish replenished; Abounding in Fish: Of the Lat. Repletus, filled
full: Solemnized, of Solennisare, Lat. to celebrate, to sing and rejoice.

V. 451. Let the Earth bring forth Fowl living. It Is unaccountable how our
Author, who has hitherto kept so close to the sacred Text, should deviate from
it here, and make mention of Fowl, when there is no such in Genesis 1. 24. where
the Works of the Sixth Day are enumerated, having treated of 'em but just
before; unless he would insinuate (according to Genesis 2. 19. above cited,) that
Fowl, or at least some kinds of 'em, were nearer of kin, in their Original, to
Earth, than Water, which their Agility seems to contrary, tho the Elements are
no where so pure, at least these two inferior, but each has more or less some
mixture of the other.

V. 454. Teemed at a Birth; Brought forth all at one Birth innumerable living
Creatures. The Heathen Poet Lucretius, following Epicurus, was of opinion. That
all manner of Animals, in the beginning of the World, sprang up out of the
Earth by the wonderful Fertility of Nature new made, and the first most
powerful Influence and Efficacy of the Heavenly Bodies, not discerning the
Omnific Command and Concurrence of the Creator. Nam neque de Caelo cecidisse
animalia possunt,
Nec Terrestria de salsis exisse lacunis.
Linquitur ut merito maternum nomen adepta
Terra sit, e terra quoniam sunt cuncta creata.
Multaque nunc etiam existunt animalia terris,
Imbribus, and calido solis concreta vapore.
Quo minus est mirum, si tum sunt plura coorta,
Et majora, nova tellure, atque aethere adulta. Lib. 5.


Teemed, of Team, Sax. Issue, Offspring.

V. 455. Perfect Forms; Creatures more perfect and complete: A difference
Interpreters seem to draw from the words of Moses, where he calls the
Productions of the Water, The moving Creature that has life, Genesis 1. 20. but
Terrestrial Animals, the Living Creature, verse. 24. as endued and informed with
a more noble and perfect Being.

V. 457. From his Laire; From his Den, from the place where he Iieth: Of Lager,
Ger. a Couch, a Bed. Wonns, where he haunts; Of Wunian, Sax. to frequent, to
stay in.

V. 463. The grassy Clods now calv'd; The Earth opening her fertile Womb, (as
before,) brought forth living Creatures, limbed, and at their full growth.
Calv'd, of the Belg. Kalven, to bring forth.

V. 466. Rampant shakes his Brinded Main; Rising on his hind legs, shakes his
griezled Main. Rampant, is a Term in Heraldry for a Lion standing upright, and
pawing with his fore Feet: Of the Fr. Ramper, to climb. Brinded, enclining to
Gray. Ounce, Book IV. Verse 344. Tawny, Taken, Fr. of a Chestnut color, is the
usual Epithete of Lions, according to their accustomed Color. Fulvum
descendere monte Leonem. AEn. 4.
-- Levia fulvae
Colla jubae velant -- Met. l. 10.


V. 467. The Libbard; The Leopard, (...), Gr. a Beast of a curious spotted
Skin, Ex Leone and Pardo natus. Tigers, Bo. IV. V. 344. All these rose like the
Moal, working their way out of the Earth. Rose up as Plants, V. 473.

V. 471. Behemoth; (...), Heb. the Elephant, the Plural of (...), Heb. a Beast,
for his vastness seeming an Assembly of 'em. Behold now Behemoth which I made
with thee, etc. Job 40. 10.

V. 473. Ambiguous between Sea and Land; As doubtful to which most they owed
their uncertain Original. The Scaly Crocodile, Crocodilus, Lat. one of the
dangerous Inhabitants of Nile, but venturing often beyond his Banks. Ambiguus,
Lat. doubtful.

V. 476. Insect; Bo. IV. V. 704. The Insects are said to wave (that is, move)
their limber Fans for Wings; those moving Membranes being more like Webs than
Wings.

Ibid. And smallest Lineaments exact, etc. Exactly shaped in their fine
Features, nicely proportioned, and dressed in Liveries, adorned and trimmed
with Summer's gayest Pride, with spots of Gold, etc. Lineaments, Lineamenta,
Lat. the Features, or Lines that distinguish one Face from another. Azur, Bo.
I. V. 297.

V. 480. These as a Line, their long dimension; The Worms drew their long
Bodies like a Line, and by their waving Slime marked out their indented winding
way. Dimensio, Lat. a Measure in length: With Sinuous Trace, with winding
Trail, with waved Train. Sinuous, of Sinuosus, Lat. winding. Trace, Tractus,
Lat. the same.

V. 482. Minims of Nature; Not all small and inconsiderable for their size, but
some Serpents, so called a Serpendo, from their crawling and creeping, and
therefore of the same kind with Worms.

V. 483. And Corpulence involved; Wonderful for length and bulk, twisting
themselves in Snaky Wreaths. Corpulence, Corpulentia, Lat. bulk, size. Cum
medii nexus, extremaeque agmina caudae
Solvuntur, tardosque trahit sinus ultimus orbs.
Squamea convolvens sublato pectore terga. Geor. 3.


V. 484. And added Wings; Of Winged Serpents, hear Lucan, -- Ducitis altum
Era cum pennis, armentaque tota secuti
Rumpitis ingentes amplexi verbere tauros.
Nec tutus spatio est Elephas: datis omnia leto. Phar. 1 9.


V. 485. The Parsimonious Emmet; The frugal, sparing Ant, providing in Harvest
for the wants of Winter; to whom Solomon sends the Sluggard: Go to the Ant thou
Sluggard, and consider her ways and be wise, Prove. 6. 6. And Horace the
covetous: -- Sicut,
Parvula (nam exemplo est) magni formica laboris
Ore trahit quodcunque potest, atque addit acervo
Quem struit, haud ignara ac non incauta futuri.
Quae, simul inversum contristat Aquarius urnam,
Non usquam prorepit, and illis utitur ante
Quaesitis patiens. Hor. Sat. 1. 1.


Parsimonious, thrifty, of Parsimonia, Lar. sparing, frugality. Emmet, of the
Sax. AEmet, of A, always, and Mete, meat, as a provident and perpetual
Providore; or of the Privative A, and Musz, Ger. Idleness, an active Animal,
the Emblem of Industry.

V. 486. Large Heart enclosed. Ingentes animos augusto in pectore versans. Geo.
4.

V. 487. Pattern of just Equality, and of Commonalty; That the Ant seems an
Example of absolute Equality, imitable hereafter by Commonwealths, linked and
joined together in their Popular Assemblies, each industrious for the Common
Good, is deducible from Prove. 6. 7, 8. Which having no Guide, Overseer, or
Ruler, provideth her meat in summer, and gathers her food in harvest: Thereby
excelling the industrious Be, who have their Leaders, and their Kings. -- Nam
saepe duobus
Regibus incessit magno discordia motu.


Yet of them Virgil says, Venturaeque hyemis memores, aestate laborem
Experiuntur, and in medium quaesita reponunt. Geor. 4.


See Plin. l. 10. c. 72. And l. 11. c. 30. It nigrum campis agmen, pars grandia
trudunt
Obnixae frumenta humeris, etc. AEn. 4.


V. 490. That feeds her Husband Drone; Virgil and Pliny, and those that have
writ accurately of Bees, give but a slender account of their Propagation; they
make 'em all Females, and to gather their Offspring of Flowers, etc. Faetus
quonam modo progenerarent, magna and subtilis inter eruditos quaestio fuit:
apum enim coctus visus est nunquam. Plures existimavere, oportere confici
floribus. Plin. l. 11. c. 16. This Opinion is followed by Virgil: Verum ipsae e
foliis natos, and suavibus herbis
Ore legunt. Geor. 4.


The Drones; Supposed here, the idle and lazy Husband of the laborious Be; in
Lat. Fuci, are by others reckoned their Slaves: Sunt quasi servitia apum, his
sunt cellarum minimae: quamobrem imperant iis, primosque in opera expellunt,
tardantes sine clementia puniunt. Plin. l. 11. c. 11. Ignavum fucos pecus a
praesepibus arcent. Geor. 4.

V. 495. The Serpent subtil'st Beast, etc. Now the sepent was more subtle than
any beast of the field, Genesis 3. 1. See Bo. IX. V. 96. Subtle, of Subtilis, Lat.
small, fly, hard to be discerned, as the Threads of a fine Web. Terrific,
Terrificus, Lat. terrible, affrighting. Mugitus veluti cum prima in praelia
taurus
Terrificos ciet. AEn. 12.


V. 501. First wheeled their Course; As God Almighty first set 'em in motion,
whether by the Ministry of his mighty Angels, or by what other means, too high
for Man's Capacity to reach.

Ibid. In her rich Attire; In her costly Dress, in her glorious Garb. Attire, a
Dress, of the word Tire, to dress: Consummate, accomplished. Bo. IV. Verse. 481.

V. 503. By Fowl, Fish, Beast, was flown, was swum, was walked. -- Pecudes,
pictaeque volucres,
Quaeque lacus late liquidos, quaeque aspera dumis
Rura tenent -- AEn. 4.


V. 505. The Master-work; The chief Creature, the Masterpiece, Man, the End of
all yet done, for whose use and delight the World was made.

V. 506. Not Prome and Brute, etc. A Creature, who not grovelling, and void of
understanding, as other Creatures are, might move upright, and with clear
cloudless Brow rule over all the rest; capable of considering himself, and by
reflecting on his own Actions and Innocence, encouraged to converse with
Heaven; but so, as to acknowledge thankfully the many Blessings thence shower'd
down upon him, with cheerful Heart and Voice, and Eyes up-lifted, thither to
direct his due Devotions, and awfully adore GOD his Creator, the Supreme Being,
who made him chief of all his Works, the Masterpiece. Prone, Bo. I. V. 195.
Brute, Ib. V. 371. Erect, Bo. IV. V. 289. Stature, Bo. I. V. 222.

V. 508. Endu'd with Sanctity of Reason; Furnished with upright Reason, able to
guide and direct him in the Practice of all Things just and holy: Reason has
Sanctity applied to it, as a Ray of the Divinity shining in the Soul, the
Immortal part of Man, whereby he was enabled to discover and worship his
Creator. Sanctitas (says Cicero) est scientia colendorum deorum. Endu'd, of
Endowed, Dotatus, Lat. provided of. Sanctius his animal, mentisque capacius
altae. Met. 1.

V. 511. Magnanimous to correspond; Capable of conversing with his Creator,
encouraged by reflecting on God's Goodness, and his own humble Obedience, to
apply and address himself to his Maker. Magnanimous, Magnanimus, Lat. that has
a large Soul; (thence Valiant:) A word well applied to Mankind, in respect of
the Faculties and Powers of their capacious Minds. To Correspond,
Correspondere, Lat. to answer to, or agree with; whence to keep Correspondence,
to converse by Letters, etc.

V. 518. For where is not he (GOD) Present? For he also went Invisible, yet
staid; such Privilege has Omnipresence, V. 588. Who is all in all, and in
every place.

V. 519. Let us now make man, Genesis 1. 26. The first and most ancient Record of
the Trinity. An tibi parvum videtur concilium sanctae Trinitatis, his paucis
dictiunculis esse significatum? Mag^^^^ pla^e concilium in illo sapientiae
concilio, in illo talium personarum Patris, Filii, and Spiritus Sancti, non tam
senatu, quam solilequo venerando, de nobis peccatoribus habitum est. An putas
eorum quicquam, quae circa nes acta, vel agenda sunt, illic defuisse? Plane
ibi, omnis nostra, in medio, causa posita est, mors vel perditio nostra quae
futura erat, illic perspecta est: Et inde totum consilium habitum, ut
unaquaeque persona, suam operis partem susciperet, ut scilicet tum Pater
conderet, postea in plenitudine temporis Filius perditum redimeret, Spiritus
Sanctus remissionem peccatorum, and carnis resurrectionem perficeret, Rupert.
l. 2. de Trinit.

V. 520. Man in our Image and Similitude. In our Image, after our likeness,
Genesis 1. 26. Many are the curious Enquiries concerning the Image of God, in
which Man was Crea^d; Some have thought it to consist in the Dominion given him
over the rest of the Creation; Finxit in effigiem moderantum cuncta deorum,
Meta. lib. 1. Others in his Reason, Free Will, and Immortal Soul. Zanchius, has
presumed to say, there was Nulla pars in homine, quae non fuerit hujus Imaginis
particeps; but Cicero, though a Heathen, had a nobler Idea of the Deity, who
tells us; Ad Similitudinem Dei, propius accedebat humana virtus, quam figura.
The clearest account of this Heavenly Image, and Divine Similitude, in which
Man was made. that he was Created, as to his Soul, an Incorporeal, Immortal,
and Intelligent Being, Endowed with Understanding, Memory, and Free Will;
capable of Wisdom, Virtue, Divine Grace, and everlasting Happiness; and
dignified with Dominion over all the lower Orders of the Creation, placed in
the highest Degree of Nature, though infinite descents beneath the Purity and
Perfection of God his Creator. To this glorious Image of the first Adam, (soon
depraved and sullied by Sin) St. Paul seems to allude; Be renewed in your
spirit of the minds, and that ye put on that new man, which after God is
created in Righteousness and true Holiness, Ephesians. 4. 23, 24.

V. 525. Thee O Man, dust of the Ground; According to the Hebrew, (...) And the
Lord God formed Man if the Dust of the Ground, Genesis 2. 7. to which Job alludes;
Remember, I beseech thee, that thou have made me as the Clay, chap. 10. v. 9.
that is originally in the Protoplast. Formed, Formare, Lat. to make, fashion.
Adam, Book III. Verse. 734.

V. 528. Express and tandou becamest a living Soul; In his own Image plainly
stamped on thee, and thou becamest a Man. consisting of an Earthly Body, and a
Rational and Immortal Soul, the Breath of Life with which God inspired thee,
Genesis 2. 7. Express, Express, Lat. plainly, manifestly.

V. 529. Male he created thee, etc. Genesis 1. 27.

V. 530. Then Blessed Mankind, Genesis 1. 28.

V. 545. Death is the Penalty; Death is the Punishment of thy Transgression:
Penalty, Paenalitas, Lat. of Paena, Lat. Punishment.

V. 552. Desisting, though unwearied; Ceasing to Create any more, according to
his eternal Decree, though not wearied, as weak Mortality every day tired and
exhausted. Natural Causes exert their utmost Ability, and act in proportion to
their Power; but the God of Nature, who is Infinite in Power, Goodness, and
Wisdom, completed the Creation on the Sixth day, according to the Wisdom of
his Eternal Will, not the Infinitude of his Almighty Power. Desisting,
Desistere, Lat. to cease, to leave of.

V. 557. Answering his great Idea; Agreeing with his Eternal Wisdom: Exemplar
ad quod facta sunt singula, est aeterna illa notitia rerum omnium, quam Deus
semper apud se habuit, ab aeterno conceptam, factam autem nunquam. Val. de Sac.
Philo. c. 2. The Lord possessed me (Wisdom) in the beginning of his way, before
his works of old, I was set up from everlasting, from the beginning, or ever
the Earth was, Prove. 8. 22, 23, Idea, (...), or of (...), to see the Conception
or Formation of any thing in the Mind or Imagination; Idea, est eorum quae
natura fiunt, exemplar aeternum, according to Plato. Men's sola cernit, quod
semper est simplex, and uniusmodi, and tale quale est: Hanc Graeci Ideam
vocant, nos recte speciem possumus dicere. Cic. Quaest. Tusc.

V. 559. The sound Symphonious, etc. With a loud Consort of Ten Thousand Harps,
that made a Harmony most Divine. Symphonious, Symphonious, Lat. of (...), Gr.
to sound in Consort, to Sing or Play together. Constellations, Book VI. Verse.
320.

V. 563. The Planets in their Stations listening stood; That the Heavenly
Harmony should stay the listening Planets is not more Poetical, than that two
Singing Shepherds should stop the Rivers course. Et mutata suos requierunt
flumina cursus. Ecl. 7.

Stations, Spheres; (as Statio Syderum, Pli. l. 2. c. 16.) not that they stand
still, but that the Stars are there stative, fixed, and move round with them.

V. 564. Pomp ascended Jubilant; While the bright Train ascended up to Heaven,
shouting for Joy. Jubilant; Of Jubilare, Lat. to rejoice with Songs and Shouts.
Pomp, Book I. Verse. 372.

V. 565. Open the everlasting Gates, Psalm. 24. 7. and 9.

V. 568. Magnificent, Magnificus, magna faciens, according to the Psalmist, O
Lord, how great are thy Works, Psalm. 92. 5.

V. 577. Whose Dust is Gold, and Pavement Stars; This is imitated from the
Description of the new Jerusalem; Revel. 21. 21. And the Street of the City was
pure Gold, as it were transparent Glass: That is, clear and shining like the
Stars that make the Milky way.

V. 579. Seen in the Galaxie; (...), Lacteus Circulus, the Milky way, so named
of its color; Of (...), Gr. Milk. The Poets feigned, that young Hercules
having Sucked too much of Juno's Milk, threw it up and gave that Complexion to
that part of Heaven. E niveo lactis fluxisse colorem
Pectore Reginae Divum, coelumque liquore
Infecisse. -- Quapropter Lacteus orbis
Dicitur and nomen causa descendit ab ipsa. Mar. Manil.


This white Circle was for many Ages held to be a Portion of the Heaven, so
much thicker than the rest, that it was able to reflect the Rays of the Sun and
Stars, whence its brightness was thought to have taken Being: But Galileo's
Glass plainly discovered it to be a vast assembly of innumerable Stars, with
which that Circle is Sowed, or Powdered, which are so small, and at so great a
distance from us, that they appear like one great shining Cloud, disappointing
the distinction of the Eye sight. Zone, Book II. Verse. 398.

V. 590. Of Omnipresence; Omnipraesentia, Lat. the Infinite Presence of God
Almighty in all Places: Excellently described, Psalm. 139. 7. etc. Whither shall
I go from thy Spirit? Or whither shall I fly from thy Presence? etc. and Amos
9. 2, 3, 4.

V. 592. Hallowed the Seventh day. Sanctified it and separated it from the
Business and Cares that take up other days, and appointed and appropriated this
day to his own Solemn Service; Not dedicated to Ease and Idleness, as the
scosfing Heathen imagined; Cui septima quaeque fuit lux
Ignava and vitae partem non attigit ullam. Juv.


But set apart for Gods Worship. Works of Praise, Charity, Instruction, etc.
Solemnized by Angels first, as our Author at Verse. 601. Creation, and the Six
days acts they Sung, taking the hint probably from that of Job, 38. 7. When the
Morning Stars sung together, and all the Sons of God shouted for joy.

V. 596, All Organs of sweet stop; All Instruments of sweetest Sound: Of (...),
Gr. an Instrument, not here meant of that so called, (...), by Pre-eminence.
Dulcimer; Of Dolcemelle, Ital. an old Musical Instrument, so named, a
Dulcedine, Lat. of its Sweetness.

598. Tempered soft Tunings, and e. Joined their soft Notes in Consort with
Angelick Voices in full Quire, or single, sometimes Choral; of Chorus, Lat. a
Quire. Unison, Unisonus; Lat. of one Sound, a Note; Of Unus, Lat. one; and
Sonus, Lat. sound.

V. 608. Who can impair thee? Who can lessen or diminish thee, O thou Infinite
and Almighty? Impair; Of Empirer, Fr. to worst, to hurt.

V. 619. On the clear Hyaline: As before, in wide Chrystalline Ocean, Verse.
271. (...). Revel. 4. 6. And befere the Throne there was a Sea of Glass, like
unto Crystal; By some understood of the Chrystalline Heaven, the Waters above
the Firmament, as our Author; By others of the Empyrean Heaven, the Heaven of
Heavens, from its Calmness, Perspicuity, and Solidity, as well as largeness,
likened to a Glassy or Chrystalline Sea, the Street of the Heavenly Jerusalem
being said to be (...), Rev. 21. 21. Hyaline; Of (...), Gr. Glassy; Of (...),
Gr. Glass. Hyali saturo fucata color vellera. Geor. 4.

V. 623. Thou know their Seasons; The Motions of the Stars, and the Seasons
of their Rising and Setting.

V. 628. In reward to rule over his Works, etc. Large and absolute was Adams
Empire, his Dominion reached over the Fish of the Sea, the Fowl of the Air, and
every living thing that moves on the Earth, Genesis 1. 28. and easy his
Obedience, bounded by one single Injunction, Not to eat of one Tree, rewarded
not only by such a vast unlimited Power here, but by absolute Happiness
hereafter, more Boundless and Eternal; yet all this he forfeited, tempted to
Disobedience by one of his mean brute Subjects, (as to appearaace) insomuch
that he has lost the awe of his Earthy Empire to that degree, as to be forced
to use his utmost Powers, of Body and Mind too, all his Strength, Reason and
Subtilty, to keep under those Animals that at first obeyed his Beck, scorned
and contemned to that degree of Derogation, to his Power, that feeble Insects,
Lice and Locusts, are able to famish, or eat up their Universal Lord.

V. 634. Thus was Sabbath kept; In these Holy Exercises was the first Sabbath
celebrated; A Portion of Time which was appropriated to the Service of him who
is Eternal; and which in Holy Writ he calls his own. The Seventh day is the
Sabbath of Rest, it is the Sabbath of the Lord in all your Dwellings, Lev. 23.
3. Bold therefore was the Blasphemy of him, who durst term it; Lassati mollis
Imago Dei. Sabbath (...), of (...), Heb. to Rest: (...), because in it God
rested from all the Works that he had made, Genesis 2. 3.

NOTES On MILTON's PARADISE Lost.
BOOK VIII.
Verse 1. MR. Hog, who has crowded our Author's six last Books into four, has
joined the Seventh and Eighth together, omitting the first four Verses of this
Book, which, to show him that they are neither ungrateful nor untoward to turn,
are here rendered:

The Angel ended, and in Adam 's Ear
So charming left his Voice, that he awhile
Thought him still speaking, still stood fixed to hear;
Then, as new-wak'd, thus gratefully replied.
Finierat caelo satus, and divina canoris
Eloquiis, bibulas vox sic pellexerat aures,
Ut nondum cessasse ratus, stupefactus Adamus,
Auscultaret adhuc, inhians, fixusque maneret;
Dein velut evigilans, grato sic pectore fatur.
V. 7. Divine Historian; Relator of Things and Actions exceeding Human
Knowledge: Heavenly Historian, of (...), of (...), Gr. a knowing Person.

V. 9. Condescension to relate, etc. Since thou have been pleased thus friendly
to humble and degrade thy lofty Understanding, by stooping to my mean Capacity
and human Measure, in the relation of such high Mysteries, to the knowledge
whereof I could no other way attain. Condescentio, of Condescendere, Lat. to
stoop to, to come down. Solution, Bo. VI. V. 694. Resolve, of Resolvere, Lat.
to untie: Doubts and hard Questions resembling Intricate Knots.

V. 18. An Atom; When I compare the Heavens and the Earth, and reckon what
proportion this Globe (of Earth and Water) bears in bulk to the wide Firmament,
and those many Stars that come within my counting, which seeming to move, in
Compasses so unconceivable, only to enlighten for 24 hours this low dark Earth,
a mere bare Point in respect of those Circles immense and incomprehensible that
surround her; in their vast Journeys useless, as to any thing else, I cannot
choose but wonder, etc.

Atom, Bo. II. V. 900. a Point, as at V. 23. a Punctual Spot, of Punctum, Lat.
a Point, tho the compass of the Earth be reckoned 8810 Leagues, such as make
26400 Italian Miles; yet, in comparison of the Firmament, it is but as a Point,
gathered from half the Heaven being visible from any part of the Earth, and
from the Stars keeping the same size, from what place soever they are observed:
Besides, the Astronomers argue it to be no more in respect of the Sun's Sphere,
because the Shadow moves about the Central Point of a Dial, as regularly as the
Sun moves about the Earth's Center, as if there were no difference between her
Center and her Surface; that Seneca had good reason to say, Hoc est Punctum
quod inter tot Gentes, ferro and igni dividitur! ^O quam ridiculi sunt
mortalium termini!

V. 19. And all her numbered Stars; Not, as if the Stars were numberable by
any, but him, who tells the number of the Stars, and calls them all by
their names, Psalm. 147. 4. But the Earth is said to be but a Spot, a Grain, nay
a mere Point, if compared with the Firmament and those (its Fixed) Stars that
come within the compass of Human Account, reckoned to be 1022, and those so
vast, that they of the sixth size, (the smallest, discoverable by the naked and
unassisted Eye,) are computed to exceed the Earth's whole Round 18 times, those
of the first Magnitude being 108 times bigger; well then may the Earth appear a
Central Spot to the unmeasurable Sphere in which these shine, there being
innumerable others (their Companions) by their vast distance invisible, without
the admirable Invention of Glasses.

V. 20. Spaces incomprehensible; The vast compass the Fixed Stars take in 24
hours, is to Mankind most unimaginable, their distance from us being such, that
whole Herds of 'em are undiscoverable without Telescopes, and some most
probably removed beyond their reach, and the sufficiency of Human Sight.
Incomprehensibilis, Lat. unconceivable.

V. 22. To officiate Light; To administer Light round Earth's dark Globe,
according to the Ptolemaic and Vulgar System, where the Earth is Centered in
the middle of the World's wide Frame, round which unmovable, the Sun, Moon,
and Stars, Fixed and Erratic, wheel their continual Courses. Officiate, to
afford, to do Duty, of Officium, Lat. service.

V. 24. In all their vast Survey useless; As if all these innumerable Eyes of
Night were made for no other end, than to center their shining Rays on this
small spot of Earth.

V. 26. How Nature wise and frugal; How Nature, so wise, (as to make nothing in
vain.) so frugal, and thrifty, (as not to employ many hands where few will do
the work,) could commit such seeming Disproportions, as Prodigally to create so
many nobler and greater Bodies, for the sake of one so much inferior, and less
by so many Degrees? Frugal, Frugalis, Lat. thrifty.

V. 31. Such restiess Revolutions; And from their Spears exact, such endless
Roulings round, every day performed still, and repeated. Revolutions,
Revolutio, Lat. a turning round, of Revolvere, Lat. to turn round. Repeated, of
Repetere, Lat. to return or come again.

V. 32. While the sedentary Earth; While the lazy Earth sits still, that might
better move, as being less than those vast Celestial Orbs, and fetching a
lesser turn. Sedentarius, Lat. sitting still, of Sedere, Lat. the same.

V. 36. As tribute such a sumless Journey; And receives her Warmth and Light,
like a Tribute paid by the more noble and more glorious Bodies of the Sun,
Moon, and Stars, brought from so far, yet with such Spiritual Speed, that it
puzzles Arithmetic to reckon it, Speed inexpressible by Numbers that have name.
Tribute, Bo. V. Verse. 343. Abstruse, Bo. V. Verse. 711.

V. 47. And touched by her fair Tendance; And touched by her fair Hand, more
fresh sprang up. Tendance, of Tender and Attendre, Fr. to tend and wait on.

V. 50. Such Pleasure she reserved; She delayed and put off that Pleasure till
another time, when Adam should relate, she only hear. Reserv'd^ of Reservare,
Lat. to keep in store.

V. 55. Would intermix grateful Digressions; Would mingle with the nice and
abstruse Enquiry other pleasing and diverting Discourse. Intermix, of
Intermiscere, intermixtus, Lat. mingled with. Digressions, Digressio, Lat. a
departing from the first design and aim of a Discourse: Digressio a proposita
Oratione. Cic. de Orat.

V. 56. With conjugal Caresses; Determine the Dispute, and close the
Controversy with Matrimonial Love, and kind Embraces. Conjugal, Bo. IV. Verse.
492. Caresses, Fr. kind Entertainment, Embraces.

Ibid. From his Lip not words alone. So Ovid; Ac mediis interseret oscula
verbis: Met. 10. Of Venus relating a Story to her beloved Adonis.

V. 65. Benevolent and facil; Favorable and Gentle. Benevolens, Lat. friendly.
Facil, Facilis, Lat. easy, affable.

V. 66. Heaven is as the Book of God. The heavens declare the glory of God, and
the firmament shows his handy work, Psalm. 19. 1. He has made every thing
beautiful in his time; also he has set the world in their heart, so that no
man can find out the work that God makes from the beginning to the end,
Eccles. 3. 11. Which the Latin Translation explains: Cuncta fecit bona in
tempore suo, and mundum tradidit Disputationi little, ut non inveniat Homo opus
quod operatus est Deus ab initio usque ad finem. To which our Author alludes at
V. 77.

V. 71. This to attain, imports not; To attain to the knowledge of this hard
Question, Whether Heaven or Earth move, is of no concern or consequence to
thee: N' importe, Fr. it matters not, of Importer, Fr. Importare, Lat.

V. 73. And not divulge his Secrets; Not declare and make common his Secrets,
to be pryed into by Men, who ought to admire, and not hope to discover their
unimaginable Springs and Contrivance. Divulge, of Divulgare, to spread abroad:
To be scanned, to be measured; of Scandere, Lat. to climb up into, as Mankind
would do, if possible, to measure the Heavenly Spears and Bodies.

V. 78. At their quaint Opinions wide; At their Guesses and Conjectures, by
them esteemed so fine and well contrived, and yet so wide and distant from the
Truth. Quaint, of the Fr. Coint, neat, well made of the Lat. Comptus, trim,
fine.

V. 79. To model Heaven; When in After-ages thy Descendants shall come to
contrive Models and Patterns of the Heavens, and to compute their many various
Motions how they will tumble and toss the mighty Frame, how build their
Heavenly Houses, and straight demolish them again, what contrivance they will
use, to solve and satisfy those things, that so apparently confound and
contradict their Suppositions. To Model, is to make a Pattern of a thing in
little, of Modelle, Fr. and Modulus, Lat. Calculate, Calculare, Lat. to reckon,
to compute.

V. 82. To save Appearances; To answer Objections drawn from the Appearances of
the Heavenly Bodies in different Places, Sizes, and Positions, from those
hammered out of their mistaken Heads: As why the Planets appear at some times
bigger than at others; why they move now faster, and anon slower; how it comes
to pass, that the Sun spends 187 Days in passing from the Vernal to the
Autumnal Equinox, and but 178 in his return? With many more; which made the
Searchers after this uncertain Science not only multiply the Spears, but also
gird and encumber them with others, Centric and Excentric, etc.

V. 83. Centric and Excentric; Centric are such Spears as have their Center
the same with that of the World, sometimes (...), Concentric. Excentric, (...),
having their Centers different from the Earth's or World's.

V. 84. Cycle, and Epicycle; (...), and (...), a Circle, with another less in
its circumference, as our Author expounds it, Orb in Orb, Scribled o'cr, a fit
Reproof.

The many Appearances, (...), that puzzle the most perfect Hypothesis of the
Heavens, have forced their Inventors to allow the Sun, Moon, and Stars, more
Orbs than one, some Centric or Concentric with the Earth; others Excentric,
different from it: Eudoxus gave the Sun three partial Centric Spears, the Moon
as many, and to each of the Planets four; the first subject to the Primum
Mobile, the second moved toward the East according to Longitude, the third
afforded the variation of Latitude, and the fourth by a kind of Libration
attended the Direct and Retr^grade Motion of the Planet, Thus the Spears
amounted to 26, by Aristotle increased to 56, and by Fracastorious to 70,
Wheels within Wheels, intric^te Revolutions, ending in Giddiness and Ignorance.

V. 102. And his Line stretched out so far; According with that of Job, W^^
has stretched the Line upon is: chapter 38. v. 5. The Earth is placed in the
middle of the World, and on the same Center, so round, that all its extreme
Parts are equally distant from its Center, and from the Circumference of the
Heavenly Orbs that surround her; and all this is so exactly disposed and
ordered, as if the Sovereign Architect had from Pole to Pole stretched his
Line, and in the center of it placed the Earth, as created out of nothing so
hung upon the same, Job 27. 7.

V. 106. For Uses to his Lord best known; Tho the Heaven's wide Circuit does
well demonstrate its Maker's high Magnificence, yet Man is lodged in a sinall
Apartment of it, as unable to conceive the Uses the rest is ordained for, as to
fill so large an Edisice. Nam quod vastitas tanta reputetur superflua videri
illos qui ita sentiunt summi Opificis magnificentiae injurios, dum non
capientes ^uorsum Deus tam amplum Mundum fecerit, ejus patentiam sapientiamque
ad sui captus and ad suae p^^simoniae augustias deducunt. Gass l. 3. c. 8.
Edifice, Edificium, Lat. a Building.

V. 116. To show invalid; To show the Reason (you urged against the motion of
so many glorious Bodies for the sake of one, so mean and inconsiderable,) weak,
and of no force. Inva^id, Invalidus, Lat. infirm.

V. 122. What if the Sun be center to the World? According to Copernicus his
Opinion, tho first broached by Pythagords and Aristarchus, two Samian
Philosophers; who placed the Sun in the center of the World's Frame,
immovable, as not departing thence, tho proved to turn round on his Axle in
the space of 27 days, by the motion of his Spots, discovered by the Telescope.

V. 125. Incited, dance about him; And other Stars, moved by their own Innate
Vigor, as well as the Sun's Attractive Power, and Magnetic Beams, dance round
him various turns. Incited, Incitatus, stirred, of Incitare, Lat. to provoke.

V. 127. Progressive, Retrograde, etc. The Planets are said to be Progressive
or Direct, Retrograde or Returning back, Standing still or Statonary; not that
they really do so, but because sometimes so situate, that our Eyes cannot make
a right judgment of their Motions. Gassendus tells us, five only of the
Erratics are thus affected, l. 2. c. 11. but something so like these Motions,
at least an extraordinary slowness is sometimes observable in the Moon, that
our Author, according to the Opinion of others, has added her to the number, in
six thou see. Progressive, of Progredi, Lat. to go forward. Retrograde, of
Retrogredi, Lat. to go backward.

V. 129. The Planet Earth? And what if the wandering Earth should be a seventh
Planet dancing round the Sun; and although she seem so fixed and steadfast, should
move three different motions so gently, as to be unfelt and unperceived by
thee? The three different motions the Copernicans suppose in the Earth, are,
the Diurnal, the Earth's wheeling round on her own Axis Eastward, and
completing her compass in 24 hours: Her Annual Motion, is her Progression
through the Zodiac, between Mars and Venus, (still turning Eastward,) finishing
her Circle about the Sun in a Year. Her third Motion, is that of Inclination,
by which she keeps her Axis always Parallel to that of the World. Planet,
(...), Gr. a wandering Star.

V. 132. With thwart Obliquities: If the Earth move not those three Motions,
they must be ascribed to several other Spheres, entangled and encumbered with
strange, contrary, crooked, and indirect Wheelings, crossing and thwarting one
another, intricate and unimaginable. Obliquities, Obliquitas, Lat. crookedness.

V. 134. Nocturnal and Diurnal Romb; Or the Earth must save the Sun his
infinite labor, and the Primum Mobile or First Mover too, that turns the
mighty Sphere, on which depends the Wheel that guides the Intercourse of Day
and Night.

The First Mover, or Primum Mobile, is a vast Sphere, a Superstructure raised
by Astronomers, above that of the Fixed Stars, therefore said to be Invisible
above all Stars, enclosing and snatching away all the Stars and their Spears,
with incredible Rapidity, round from East to West in the space of a Natural
Day, thence termed The Wheel of Day and Night; while the Earth, that better may
with far less compass move, eases the whole Frame of Nature by her narrower
compass, performing that alone with more facility, than all the rest, twisted
and contorted with different and disagreeing Motions, can do; according to the
uncontested Axiom: Frustra fit per plura, quod fieri possit, per pauciora.

R^mb, of Rhombus, Lat. (...), Gr. a Wheel, or turning round: Rotatio, of
(...), to run round; from hence the Rhumbs or the Mariner's Compass, on which
the 32 Winds are circled, took its Name. So that the swift Nocturnal and
Diurnal Rhomb, is the rapid Round by which Day and Night are brought
incessant^y about, the Supreme Whirligigg above the Firmament supposed.

V. 137. If Earth industrious, etc. If the moving Earth, by her own Industry
and Labor earn the Day, by turning one side toward the Sun enlightened by his
Rays, while the other half, averse and turned from him, is covered with Night
and Darkness. Industrious, Industrius, Lat. active* laborious. Luminous,
Luminosus, Lat. enlightened.

V. 140 What if that Light? etc. What if the Light, darted and reflected from
this Earth through the open transparent Air to the Moon (that seems another
Earth) be like a Star, shining on her by day, as she shines on this Earth by
Night? By turns assisting, and enlightening one another, if Lands there be in
the pale Moon's clear Globe, Fields and their Owners: AEqua great aque
permutatione rependit Tellus, parem illuminationem ipsi Lunae, qualem and ipsa
a Luna in profundioribus noctis tenebris, t^to fere tempore recipit. Gal. c. 1.
Non modo Terram and Lunam commutare vices, dum sese vicissim obscurant, and
illuminant, sed etiam quicquid Venus aut Mercurius apparent Terrae, apparere
Terram Marti, Jovi and Saturno, etc. Gass. l. 3. c. 8. Transpicuous,
Transpicuus, Lat. transparent, that may be seen through, of Transpicere, Lat.
to look through. Terrestrial, Terrestris, Lat. of or like the Earth.
Reciprocal, Reciprocus, Lat. mutual, by turns.

V. 145. Her Spots thou s^est; Those great Spots which Antiquity discovered in
the Moon, persuaded Pythagoras to think her a Globe not unlike the Earth: Lunam
scilicet esse quasi tellurem alteram, ejus pars Lucidior terrenam superficiem,
obscurior vero aqueam magis congrue representet. And Galileus, by the aid of
his admirable Glass, discovered so many new ones, and her Surface to be so like
that we live on, that he had good reason to affirm, Lunae superfic^em
inaequalem, asperam, cavitatibus tumoribusque confertam, non secus ac ipsiusmet
telluris facies, quae ^ontium jug is valliumque profunditatibus binc inde
distinguitur. Nun. Sid. c. 1. The Egyptian styled the Moon (...), the
Pythagoreans (...), and the Stoi^s (...).

V. 149. Other Suns with their attendant Moons; Every Fixed Star in the Opinion
of the best Astronomers, and according to the best Hypothesis, is a Sun-like
Body, danced round by diverse Attendant Stars called Lunulae, Little Moons, of
which Galilaeo's Glass gave the first Discoveries, in two that move about
Saturn, and four about Jupiter, two of the Planets: Esse ingentem aliquem
globum, qui mole corporis quatuor decim globos terrestres adaequat, circa quem
quatuor Lunae nostrae huic Lunae non absimiles circumcurrant. Kepl. in Praef.
Diopt. Co^stare potest esse Planetas quosdam primarios ac veluti Principes
M^rcurium, Venerem and quosdam secundarios ^c veluti pedissequos, Lunas
nimirum, tam terrestres quam Joviales, quam caeter as quae reliquis globis
possunt circumduci. Gal. l. 3. c. 2. Zenophanes the Colophonian was long ago of
this Opinion, (...), that there were innumerable Suns and Moons not unlike
those that shine on us.

V. 150. Communicating Male and Female Light; The Sun's Light being the most
pure and powerful, is reputed the Masculine, as full of its own innate Vigor,
and that of the Moon, being but derivative, and borrowed of him, weak and
imperfect, to be of the Feminine Sex; which two great Sexes fill the World with
Living Creatures; nor do these Sexes manifest their Power among the Viventia
only, but the Virentia too, for Trees and Plants afford Instances of the same
distinction. Male, of Masle, Fr. Mas, Lat. a He-Creature: Female, of Faemella,
Lat. a She Creature.

V. 152. Stored in each Orb, etc. Of the Probability of a Plurality of Worlds,
hear what another of our Countrymen, and a Poet excellent in his time, said:
What if within the Moon's fair shining Sphere,
What if in every other Star unseen,
Of other Worlds he happily should hear?
He wonder would much more, yet they to some appear.
Spenc. F. Q. Bo. 2. c. 1. St. 3.


Habitari, ait Zenophanes in L^na, eamque esse terram mult arum urbium atque
montium. Cicer. Quast. Acad.

V. 158. Is obvious to Dispute; It Is doubtful and disputable, that so vast a
Space as that of the Heavens, where so many millions of glorious and mighty
Bodies are, should be quite empty and unpossess'd by any living Creatures, as
if made only to dart each a ray of Light, from so vast a distance, down to this
Habitable Earth, which in her turn sends back her Light to them. Is obvious,
lies fairly in the way of Doubt and Disputation. Obvius, Lat. easy.

V. 160. Whether the Sun Predominant, etc. Whether the shining Sovereign of
Heaven (Great Regent of the Day, Bo. VII. V. 371) rise on the Earth, and from
the East begin his glorious Walk round her. Predominant, Praedominans, Lording
it over her, of Praedominari, Lat. to Rule over. Ad cujus numeros and dii
moveantur, and orbis
Accipiat leges, praescriptaqae faedera servet.


V. 161. Or Earth rise on the Sun, etc. Or whether the errant Earth roll round
the Sun, and from the West proceed in her course unperceived, silent, and
still. Advance, Book VI. Verse. 233.

V. 164. That spinning sleeps on her soft Axle; The Earth's easy and
imperceptible motion round her small Axis, is compared to a Top, spinning and
turning round with so swist, but easy and even motion, so unperceivable, that
it is said to sleep on her soft Axle. By the same Simile is her third Motion
(or rather the modification of her other Motions) of Inclination, explained by
Gasse^dus: Potest autem eodem modo intelligi fieri, quo dum puerorum Turbo
super planum convolvitur, circellosque varios cuspide describit, ipse illius
axis tum continet se sibi parallelum seu in situ semper perpendiculari, tum
continet quoque basin turbinis Horizonti semper parallelum, Just. Astro. l. 3.
c. 3. Ceu quondam terto volitans sub verbere turbo,
Quem pueri magno in gyro vacua atria circum
Intenti ludo exercent: Ille actus habena
Curvatis fertur spatiis. AEn. 7.


V. 166. Soft with the smooth Air along; Is an Answer to an Objection made
against the Earth's motion, that if she wheeled about with such extraordinary
swiftness, as necessarily she must, to return to the same Point in 24 hours,
Mankind would be sensible of the hurry by a continual and mighty Wind, which
the constant breaking and concussion of the Air would cause; therefore the
Copernicans tell us, that the Air (at least the grosser part of it) encloseth
the Earth's Globe, and sticks to it as the Down on a Peach, floating along with
it; and the more pure and yielding part of it gives way, so as not to be
perceived, except near and under the Equator, where the Earth moving most
swiftly toward the East, the Air seems to resist, and occasions that constant
and pleasing Gale of Wind, the Seamen experience breathing toward the West. Ut
nautae illum quasi ventum indesinentem and aequabilem experiantur. Gass. l. 3.
c. 9.

V. 167. Solicit not thy Thoughts; Disturb not thy self, trouble not thy
head: Of Sollicitare, Lat. to vex, to disquiet. -- Ea cura quietos
Sollicitat -- AEn. 4.


V. 172. Heaven is for thee too high: God to remove his ways from Human Sense,
Placed Heaven from Earth so far, that Earthly Sight.
If it presume, might err in Things too high,
And no Advantage gain: V. 119, of this Book.


According to the Verdict of Solomon: Then I beheld all the works of God, that
a man cannot find out the work that is done under the sun; because tho a man
labor to seek it out, yea further, tho a wise man think to know it, yet shall
he not be able to find it, Eccl. 8. 17. Be lowly, wise: Noli altum sapere; is
therefore the most instructive Inference.

V. 181. Intelligence of Heaven; Clear Heavenly Understanding: The best
description of an Angel, which being of a purer make than Mankind, must needs
have more sublime and illuminated Intellects. Intelligentia, Lat.
Understanding. Angel serene, gentle and kind, of Serenus, Lat. calm, applicable
both to the Countenance and Conditions. Quae causa serenos Faedavit vultus?
AEn. 2.

V. 193. What before us lies in daily Life; Useful in the daily Duties of Life.
Seeing there be many things that increase Vanity, what is Man the better? For
who knows what is good for Man in this Life? Which the Latin Version renders
more to our purpose: Verba sunt plurima, multamque in disputando habentia
vanitatem; Quid necesse est homini majora se quaerere, cum ignoret quid
conducat sibi in vita sua? Eccles. 6. 11, 12. Neither make thy self over-wise,
why should thou destroy thy self? Neque p'^s sapias, quam necesse est, ne
obstupescas? Eccles. 7. 16. Concerning which, St. Paul has cautioned us, Colos.
2. 8.

V. 194. Is Fume; Fumus, Lat. Smoke, Emptiness, and Vanity.

V. 212. Of Palm Tree pleasantest to Thirst; The Palm Tree bears a Fruit called
a Date, full of sweet Juice, a great Restorative to dry and exhausted Bodies,
by augmenting the Radical Moisture; there is one kind of it called Palma
AEgyptiaca, which from its Virtue against Drought, was named (...), Sitim
sedans. Palm, Bo. IV. Verse. 139.

V. 216. With Grace Divine imbued; Thy Words full of Divine Sweetness. Imbued,
Imbutus, Lat. filled full, of Imbuere, Lat. of (...) and (...), Gr. to fill.

V. 219. Nor Tongue ineloquent; Nor does thy Tongue want fit and full
Expressions. Ineloquens, Lat. that cannot speak readily and copiously.

V. 223. Each Word each Motion forms; Whether thou speak, or art silent,
Gracefulness and Comeliness wait on thee, and form each winning Word, and each
becoming Motion.

V. 231. On Excursion, Bo. II. V. 397.

V. 235. Incensed; Incensus, Lat. angry, of Incendere, Lat. to fire, to anger:
Behests, Bo. III. V. 533. Enure, Bo. II. V. 216.

V. 241. Barricado'd strong; strongly barred and fortified, of the Fr.
Barriquer, to fence or strengthen a place, with Barrels filled with Earth,
against the Enemies Shot, of Barrique, Fr. a Barrel.

V. 244. Torment, and loud lament, etc. Lament, Bo. I. V. 448. -- Primisque in
faucibus Oris
Luctus and ultrices posuere cubilia curae,
Ferreique Eumenidum thalami, and discordia demens. AEn. 6.


V. 253. To Converse induced me; The desire of conversing and discoursing
longer, persuaded me to this hard Undertaking. Converse, Bo. II. V. 184.
Induced, persuaded, of Inducere, Lat. to lead to.

V. 259. By quick instinctive Motion; Till raised by powerful and provoking
Motion, I started up. Instinctive, stirring, of Instinguere and Instigare, Lat.
to persuade; whence Instinctus, Lat. a natural Persuasion, aad inward Motion.

V. 263. And liquid Lapse of Murmuring, etc. The moist motion, the nimble
gliding of pure purling Streams. Lapse, of Lapsus, Lat. a sliding away; a
quick, yet gentle motion. -- At amnis
Labitur and labetur, in omne volubilis aevum. Hor.


The motions of the Heavenly Bodies is expressed by the same word: Cum medio
volvuntur sidera lapsu. AEn. 4.

V. 267. My self I then perused; I looked my self all over heedfully. Perused,
of Pervidere, Lat. to look over.

V. 269. Witb supple Joints; With yielding Nerves: Of Souple, Fr. soft and
bending, of Sub and Plico, Lat. to yield, to bend as the Joints (Juncturae,
Lat.) do.

V. 272. My Tongue obeyed; And well it might, as being the fittest Instrument
of all Human Organs, to signify and express the conceptions of our Minds,
wonderful in its easy Motion, as well as Situation, in the very way of our
Breath, by the breaking of which against the Palate, Teeth, or Lips, those many
different and distinct Sounds are made: Tho to speak, be natural to all
Mankind, yet this or that Language is artificial, and the difference of 'em
arises from the consent of numbers of Men, to understand such Things by such
Names and Sounds. That Adam spoke Hebrew, is most probable, as well as his
Descendents, till the confusion at Babel; a Language, whose Purity the Jews
have, by their frequent Captivities, their being dispeopled and dispersed all
over the World, as well as by their upstart Pointings, and Antichristian
Depravations and blind Obstinacy, quite lost.

V. 290. To my former State insensible; To my First and Original Condition of
Insensibility, void of all Sense and Being, of which I was able to give no
account. Insensible, Insensibilis, Lat. that comes not under the comprehension
of Sense. Unfelt, not understood.

V. 291. To dissolve; To be broken in pieces, thinking my whole Frame, as
coming together beyond my knowledge, was now forthwith like to be loosed and
united. Dissolve, of Dissolvere, Lat. to untie, and (from the breaking of those
subtle Bands that bind Soul and Body together) to die. Adam, as yet Sinless, is
supposed to have no notion of Death, or but a very imperfect one; What ever
death is, some dreadful thing no doubt, Bo. IV. Verse. 425.

V. 292. Stood at my Head a Dream; Where busy Fancy, in which those strange
dark Scenes are laid, has its Seat and Residence, according to Homer's
Philosophic Observation: (...),
(...)
(...).


V. 293. Whose inward Apparition; Whose Image working inwardly in my
Imagination, gently stirred my Fancy, and persuaded me, I was still in Being;
such as lately I surveyed my self. Apparition, Apparitio, Lat. the appearance
of any thing, of Apparere, Lat. to be seen.

V. 301. By the Hand he took me, raised, and over Fields, etc. The Lord God
took the man, and put him into the Garden of Eden, Genesis 2. 15. On which Text,
Interpreters have these three Opinions: That God either by some inward
Admonishment directed Adam to Paradise, as our Savior is said, To have been
led up of the spirit into the wilderness, Matthew. 4. 1. Or by his Angel
appearing to him, conducted him, as those did Lot out of Sodom: While he
lingered, the men laid hold on his hand, and upon the hand of his Wife, etc.
And they brought him forth, and set him without the City, Genesis 19. 16. Or
lastly, according to the Translation of Enoch, W^^ walked with God, and was
not, because God took him, Genesis 5. 24. And Philip, who having baptized the
Eunuch, was caught away by the spirit of the Lord, and found at Azotus, Acts 8.
39, 40. To this our Author seems to incline, making Adam's unaccountable
Progress, from the Place of his Creation to Paradise, like to a Dream, and
Fancy of the Night.

V. 311. As the Dream had lively shadowed; As my Dream had in the Images of my
Imagination represented it express and plain. Shadowed, is an admirable word,
setting forth the dark Resemblances of Dreams, those imperfect Night-pieces,
dimly presented to our drowsy Senses.

V. 323. Whose Operation brings, etc. Forbear to taste of the Tree, whose
forbidden Fruit, if thou presume to eat of contrary to my command, will work in
thee the Knowledge of Good and Evil; Good lost by thy transgressing my Command,
and Evil brought on thy self by Disobedience: Good lost, by forfeiting my
Favor and thy Innocence; Evil drawn on thy self by Sin, the bitter
Consequence, the sad Sequel of thy Offense, the woeful Effect of thy Folly,
Death. Operation, Operatio, Lat. working. Consequence, Consequentia, Lat. the
Effect, what follows necessarily.

V. 330. Inevitably die; Shall be sure to die, tho not precisely on that day;
but from that day shall become Mortal, as our Author well interprets the
Sentence recorded, Genesis 2. 17. Inevitably, unavoidably; Inevitabilis, Lat. that
cannot be escaped.

V. 333. Sternly he pronounced the rigid Interdiction; Severely he commanded
the strict Forbearance. Sternly, awfully, of the Lat. Austerus. Pronounced, Bo.
II. V. 353. Rigid, Bo. III. V. 212. Interdiction, Interdictio, Lat. a
forbidding.

V. 335. Not to Incur; Tho in my Power, left to the choice and freedom of my
Will, not to offend against, not to violate; of Incurrere, Lat. to run into, or
against. Purpose, Bo. III. V. 172: And thus his merciful Commands renewed.

V. 344. To receive their Names; Names, according to the best Enquiries, have
no other relation to the Things they signify, than the common Consent of those
agreeing, so to difference and distinguish them; tho the Jews pretended, the
Names of Animals in their Language (for on those only Adam imposed them, Genesis
2. 19.) have something respecting their Natures or Necessities.

V. 345. Fealty with low subjection; Moses Barcepha, in his Book of Paradise,
seats Adam on its highest Eminency with awful and majestic look, and his Face
shining like Moses's, Exodus 34. 29. naming the Animals Terrestrial, passing by
in pairs, beneath him, Cowring low with blandishment, cringing before him; and
the Birds humbly stooping on Wing paying their Fealty, as at. V. 350. Fealty,
Bo. III. V. 204.

V. 348. To draw the thinner Air; It Is the general Opinion, that Fish breath
not, because they want Lungs, the Organs in other Creatures prepared for that
purpose; but whether their Gills may not supply the Office, is not determined:
Certain it is, that in the Indian Sea, some there are that fly about a
considerable time to avoid their Persuers, and only dip to wet their Finny
Wings, and get up again. Some Fish live much longer out of their Element than
others; and Gesner from Albertus tells us, That Eels in a long Frost have been
found bedded in a Haycock adjoining to a River lusty and lively, and that an
Eel has in warm Weather lived 5 days out of the Water. Our Author therefore
does not affirm Fish not to breath, but that they cannot draw our Air more thin
and subtle than that embodied with Water, for if Rivers be quite frozen up, the
Fish die for want of it.

V. 350. Cowring low; Creeping lowly, not daring to stalk and gaze upon their
Governor: Cowre, of Couver, Fr. Cubare, Lat. a creeping near the Ground, next
to lying down. Blandishment, Blandissement, Fr. Blandimentum, Lat. fawning.

V. 354. God endu'd my sudden Apprehension; Wonderful was the Knowledge God
bestowed on Adam, nor that part of it least, which concerned the naming Things
aright: As Cicero agrees with Pythagoras; Qui primus, quod summae sapientiae
Pythagorae visum est, omnibus rebus nomina imposuit. Quaest. Tusc. lib. 1.
sect. 25.

V. 355. But in these I found not what I wanted; As it is related in the Holy
Leaf, That after Adam had given Names to every Beast of the Field, to the Fowl
of the Air, and to all Cattle, But for Adam there was not found a help meet for
him, Genesis 2. 20. Four Reasons are alleged, why God brought these living
Creatures to be Named by him: That he might see how much he excelled them, made
of more Noble Frame, and to more Noble Ends: That they might pay him Fealty as
their Lord: That he might enlarge his Language by so many Words: And that
seeing each of 'em in his kind Paired and Mated, he might desire of his Maker a
Companion and Help meet for him, to support his single Imperfection. From which
last our Poet taking the hint, has raised it to an unimitable Height, outdoing
all the Episodes of the most glorious Poems.

Ibid. Thus presumed; Took upon me to speak, thus made bold to say: Of
Presumere, Lat. whence: Presumptuous Daring, often used in an ill sense, but
here, Encouraged by God's Goodness and Condescension to his Creature.

V. 365. In Solitude, what Happiness? Man being made a Communicative and
Conversing Creature, wanted a Help meet for him, not only as to the Propagation
of his Kind, but for the Solace and Mutual Assistance arising from
Conversation, with something Rational and Discursive like himself: In vain had
he found his Tongue, and named all his Brute Subjects, and had all his Crawling
Slaves and Winged Messengers at his Command, if denied an intelligent Companion
with whom he might share his Universal Empire. W^e to him that is alone!
Eccles. 4. 10. Homer describing the Dejected and Solit^ry Bellerophon, tells
us, (...),
(...).


That wandering solitary in the Alean Fields, he avoided the Paths of Men,
gnawing and devouring his own Heart; well expressing Anxious Solitude.
Solitudo, Lat. Solitariness, living alone; Quis beatus in solitudine esse
queat? Horten.

V. 371. Replenished, Bo VII. V. 447.

V. 373. Their Language, and their ways; Following the General Opinion of the
School-Divines, that with good reason held Adam created in a more perfect
knowledge of Nature, than any of his Descendents ever had; not excepting
Solomon himself, and his high Character, 1 King. 3. 12. because created by God
himself in the state of Innocence, of all certainly the most Perfect and
Accomplished. Hence that before: And understood their Nature, with such
knowledge God endued my sudden Apprehension, V. 352.

V. 374. And reason not contemptibly; Sense, by all allowed to Beasts, is
hardly separable from Reason, or something very like it; according to
Hippocrates: Qui part aliqua corporis dolentes, dolorem non sentiunt, iis men's
aegrotat. Of the Ostrich it is said, She leaves her eggs in the earth, and
forgets that the foot may crush them: She hardens her self against her
young ones, as if not hers, (and the Reason is subjoined,) because God has
deprived her of wisdom, neither has he imparted to her understanding, Job 39.
14, 15, 16, 17. After this Instance of a foolish and forgetful Animal, follows
the description of the courageous and docile Horse; He mocketh at fear, and is
not affrighted; he smells the battle afar off, Verse. 22, 25. Intelligentiam
habet belli, and odoratur procul bellum. Man has a superior Reason,
considerative of sensible Objects, and immaterial and immortal Beings: Animals
a subordinate sort, and of that no contemptible Share, exercised in this or
that natural Inclination, applicable in some more, in others less, about their
Safety, Propagation, Food, and Physic: Men's humana, natura sua, and ex sese
nata est rationari simpliciter and circa Quidvis; Brutorum vero nullum
ratiocinari natum est nisi circa Quiddam. Val. de sac. Phil. c 55.

V. 378. And humble Deprecation; And Pardon humbly prayed. Deprecatio, of
Deprecari, Lat. humbly to entreat.

V. 381. Thy Substitute? Have thou not made me thy Deputy below? Have thou not
transferred to me thy Dominion over the Creation, and set all these in the
degrees and order of Nature, inferior far beneath me? Substitute, Substitutus,
of Substituere, Lat. to put one in the stead, place, or power of another.

V. 383. What Society can sort? What Society, Friendship, Agreement, or true
Delight, can arise from Unequals? Treasures different in their Understandings,
and thence insuitable? Sort, suit, agree, of Sortiri, Lat. to order.

V. 386. But in Disparity the one intense, etc. But in Inequality, such as is
between Brute and Rational; the one Intense, Man high, wound up, and strained
to nobler, understand, and of more lofty Faculty; the other, still Remiss, the
Animal, let down, and slacker, grovelling in more low and mean Perceptions, can
never suit together. Intense, Intensus, Lat. strained, Remiss, Bo. VI. V. 458.
a Musical Metaphor, from Strings, of which the stretched and highest give a
smart and sharp sound, the slack a flat and heavy one. Disparity, of Dispar,
Lat. unlike.

V. 390. Fit to participate, etc. Made by thee fit and capable of purest
Pleasure, flowing from Reason, and raised above low sensual Delights.

V. 396. Nor with the Ox, the Ape; The one a dull, gross, heavy Creature; the
other an Airy Animal, Mimic of Mankind.

V. 410. Inferior infinite Descents; All created Beings are by infinite degrees
more beneath me, than the meanest of 'em below thee. Descents, Descensus, Lat.
a going down. Converse, Conversatio, Lat. Familiarity, of Conversari, to keep
company with.

V. 413. To attain to the height and depth, etc. O the depth of the riches,
both of the wisdom and knowledge of God! how unsearchable are his judgments,
and his ways past finding out! Romans 11. 13.

V. 416. Is no Deficience found; No want, nothing can be wanting in him, who
created all things by the Word of his Power: GOD, who is infinite in all his
Attributes, of Power, Goodness, Wisdom, Truth, etc. must be incomprehensibly
most Perfect: Can thou by searching find out God? Can thou find out the
Almighty to perfection? Job 11. 7. Qui omnia habet intra se eminenter, nulla re
caret. Deficience, Defectus, Lat. want, imperfection.

V. 417. Not so is Man, but in degree; Aristotle tells us, The complete or
perfect act of a living Creature, is to beget its like: A Perfection, which
Adam without his Eve could never have attained; Whence his desire by
Conversation with his like, to help and solace his Defects. Nihil est enim
appetentius similium sui, nihil rapacius quam natura. Cic. Solace, of Solari,
Lat. to ease.

V. 420. Already Infinite; Infinite, is incapable of Increase, Pauperis est
numerare, it is impossible for any number, how vast so ever, to be Infinite, for
though so great as to exceed Human Nomination, yet it may still be made greater
by the addition of a Unite; Infinito vero nihil majus. But what is Infinite can
never be Encreast. Propogate, Propagare, Lat. to increase.

V. 421. And through all numbers absolute, though One; Complete in all thy
infinite Perfections, though but One; Gods Power, Wisdom, Truth, Justice,
Omniscience, etc. are not Degrees of his unspeakable Perfections, but his
Essence and all One with him, who as he is, the only One Eternal, is the first
Being, and as the first, the most Simple and only One. Illud vero quia
aeternum, sit primum, quia primum simplex and unum, quod vero ejusmodi, omnes
homines D^um esse dicunt, Vall. de Sacra Philo. c. 1. The Assyrians named God
Achad, doubtless of the Heb (...), One, Macr. 1. Satur. c. 23. and famous is
the ancient Hermes his (...), Unitas, so often by him used to signify God, as
being (...), Solus and Unus, not only one, but before the Creation, Alone.
Monas generat Monadem and in sei^s^m reflexit Ardorem, Pimand. According with
St. John, I and my Father are One, chapter 10. 30. The Cabbalists expressed ^i^ by
their Aleph, Lucidum and Tenebrosum; St. John by his (...), The Beginning and
the Ending, Rev. 1. 8 and both but One: An exact Unire, the Beginning and End
of all, yet it self like no number, unalterable by Multiplication, by which all
numbers proceed from it, it self the Divinity, whose Image it is, immutable and
unchangeable. Through all numbers absolute, most perfect, Omnibus numer is
absolutus; Quicquid Perfectum and Absolutum est, ut Stoici dic^nt, omnes
numeros habet, Cic. de Divinat. Absolute, Absolutus, Lat. perfect and complete.

V. 423. and 425. His single Imperfoction, in unity defective; But Mankinds
particular Imperfection appears, by being unable to preserve his Kind without a
Companion, lame while alone, and imperfect while but one; incapable of his
Makers early and universal Blessing, Be fruitful and multiply, Genesis 1. 28. This
very Multiplication denotes his disability and defect; as removed from the All,
the Self-sufficient Unity.

V. 426. Collateral Love; Which makes me stand in need of a Companion capable
of mutual Love, and endearing Friendship. Collateral; Collateralis, Lat. side
by side, thence mutually Assistant, as Friends and Lovers; as expressed, Bo. IV.
Verse. 483. -- To give thee being I lent
Out of my Side to thee, nearest my Heart
Substantial Life, to have thee by my Side.
Henceforth an individual Solace dear.


Love so Collateral, as none but the first Lover ever could boast.

V. 428. Best with thy self accompanied; Thou in thy Blisful Solitude, though
alone, from all Eternity, art in thy own self Sufficiency, most perfectly
Happy, as. knowing none second unto thy self or like, equal much less, with
whom to hold converse, Verse. 406.

V. 430. Can raise thy Creature to what height, etc. Can raise thy
Intellectual Creature, Angels or Men, to what degree of Fellowship or Communion
thou art pleased, to Dignifie 'em with, by thy Grace and Holy Spirit; Truly our
Fellowship is with the Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ, 1 John 1. 3. If
any Fellowship of the Spirit? Phil. 2. 1. Deified; Of Deificare, Lat. made
partakers (by his Grace) of the Deity; For we are made Partakers of Christ,
Heb. 3. 14. And wore made partakers of the Holy Ghost, Heb. 6. 4. Union, Unio,
Lat. a making one; Communio, Lat. Fellowship, a joining together.

V. 432. Cannot these erect from prone; I by conversing with the Brutes cannot
raise their grovelling Senses to my Understanding, nor in their Natures find any
Satisfaction or Agreement with my own. Complacence, Complacentia, Lat.
pleasure, of Complacere, to please.

V. 435. Freedom used Permissive; And used the liberty granted me; Permissive,
Permissus, Lat. given, allowed.

V. 455. Colloquie Sublime; In that high Heavenly discourse, held with my
Maker. Colloquium, Lat. talk of, Colloqui, to discourse with.

V. 462. Abstract as in a Transe; The Lord caused a deep sleep te fall upon
Adam, Genesis 2. 21. (...), ^^yled, Sopor Domini, 1 Samuel 26. 12. for its force;
Interpreters, by this deep Sleep, understand a Transe or Ecstasy, such as fell
on St. Paul, 2 Cor. 12. 2. In which though his Bodily Eyes were closed, yet the
Cell of his Fancy, his internal sight, was clear and open, by which he saw,
Abstract, and separated from himself, where he lay, and what was done, and c.
Abstract, Abstractus, Lat. plucked away; separated for the same reason that
Exstatics, (...)* are named, (...), quasi extra se Stantes. Transe; Of Transi,
Fr. swoounded; Of Transire, Lat. to go forth, as such seem to do, out of
themselves. Ne quis autem existimaret somnum illum fuisse naturalem, and
naturalibus ex causis profectum, Moses dixit Deum immisisse illum somnum,
Perer. in Genesis

V. 465. Opened my Left Side; Following the common Opinion, that the Heart
inclines more to the left than right Side in Human Bodies, because its
Pulsation is there felt: For the Relation of Moses leaves it unascertained out
of which of Adam's Sides Eve was taken, And he took one of his Ribs, Genesis 2.
21. Cordial Spirits; Warm with quick and active Spirits, proceeding from the
Heart, and passing through it, with the Blood, Life's Crimson fiery Flood.
Cordial, lusty lively; Of Cor, Lat. the Heart, the seat and spring of Life.

V. 476 From her Air inspired, etc. And from her graceful Carriage Breathed, in
all she did or said, the very Spirit of Love and Dear Delight. Air, of the Fr.
Air, the Comeliness that arises from free and good Behavior, consisting in
self Assurance, mixed with Modesty, Graceful and Easy. Inspired, Inspirare,
Lat. to Breath into.

V. 47^. Left me dark; Lest me at a loss in the Dark. To Deplore, Deplorare,
Lat. to lament, bewail.

V. 480. To adjure; To renounce, to forsake; Of Abjurare, Lat. to forswear.
Amiable, Amabi is, Lat. lovely.

V. 488. Heaven in her Eye; The Stars of Heaven compared, seemed less
illustrious than her Beamy Eyes: All that seemed Glorious in the spangled Sky,
by day or night was sum'd up in her Charming Eyes. The Translator has rendered
it by mistake, Spectabat lumine coelum. It Is hard to imitate the Brevity, and
the Abundance, in so few words. -- AEmula coeli
^umina luminibus, plac^d^s radiantibus ignes.


Or, -- Nitidissima coeli
Est regio (vivos astris simulantibus orbs)
Virgineas immit^t^ genas.


V. 491. This turn has made amends; This change has made me large amends. for
my dreaded Solitude; This has to the full Recompensed and removed my Fears, and
fulfilled thy Promise. Amends; of the Fr. Amenda, a Mulct, or pecuniary
Punishment; Of Emender, Fr. from the Lat. Emendare, to make Satisfaction: Extra
mendam ponere; The Word is well enough used here, Adam by his fair Eve being
made completely Happy in a Companion, he was at a loss for.

V. 492. Benign; Favorable, kind. Benignus, Lat.

V. 495. I now see Bone of my Bone, etc. Genesis 2. 23. As if he should say; O my
Creator, those Creatures which thou broughtst to me before, were neither like,
nor suitable to me, but this, that now thou have bestowed upon me, is Bone of
my Bone, my own Similitude, my self. That Adam waking from his deep Sleep,
should in words so express and Prophetic, own and claim his Companion, gave
ground to that Opinion, that he was not only a Sleep, but Intranst too, by
which he saw all that was done to him, and understood the Mystery of it, God
informing his Understanding in his Exsiasie.

V. 497. Woman is her Name of Man extracted; The Jews boast this only true in
their Language, which they bring as a proof of its being the Original one of
the World, (...), Heb a Man, (...) a Woman, (...) in the Gr. having no relation
to (...), nor Virago any true one to Vir, in the Lat. yet M^rcennus well
infers. the Text Genesis 2. 23. may be Translated by the one, (...), or (...), and
by the other Vira or Virissa, since those Nations might justly Coin a new Word
at their Discretion, to express a Mystery unknown to their Forefathers, Custom
obtaining every day the same privilege of bringing forth new Names or at least
adopting 'em from Foreign Language. Woman, if a Derivative of the Sax. W^^,
Mulier, and Man, Home, signifies a Shee-Man, and seems more expressive of her
Primitive Production, and Mysterious Making, than the Hebrew it self.
Extracted, Extractus, Lat. taken out of, Extrahere, Lat. to draw out of.

V. 498. To his Wife adhere, etc. Some take this to be the Inference made by
Adam; others the D^gma of Moses, Genesis 2. 24. however, it was the Dictate of
God's Holy Spirit, and confirmed by his Son, Matthew. 19. 4. 5. Adhere,
Adhaerebit, shall cleave to, as the Lat. Translates it.

V. 502. The Conscience of her Worth; The inward Knowledge and just Esteem of
what she was instructing her, that she ought to be Addressed to, and not obtained
but by Entreaty; Not forward, or coming, but shy, and by that the more
desirable; or to say all, Nature her self, tho yet untaint'd with the least
impure Thought, so governed her, that seeing me, she walked off. Conscience of
her Worth; Co^scia Virtus, as Virg. And Formae conscia conjux, AEn. 8. Obvious,
Obvius, Lat. forward, easy; Obtrusive, coming; Of Obtrudere, Lat. to press
upon, to thrust ones self on.

V. 509. With Obsequious Majesty; With graceful complying with awful yielding,
she allowed what Reason pleaded on my behalf. Obsequious, Obsequiosus, Lat.
ready to oblige. See Bo. IV. V. 481. When Eve repeats his Courtship. Pleaded
Reason; The Reasons I pleaded for my self; Of Plaider, Fr. to allege.

V. 513. Shed their Selectest Influence; All Heaven, and the happy Meetings and
Assemblies of the Stars, looked down upon us with their choicest Regards, and
showered on us their most benign Beams. Constellations, Bo. VI. V. 320.
Selectest, Selectus, Lat. Choice, of Seligere, Lat. to pick out.

V. 514. Gf Gratulation; Of Rejoicing. Gratulatio of Gratulari, Lat. to be glad
at the good of another.

V. 518. Disporting; Playing, of Diporto, Ital. or Deport, Fr. Pastime, Play.

Ibid The Amorous Bird of Night; Till the Nightingale began to tune the Bridal
Song: She is called the Amorous Bird of Night, from her solitary mournful Song,
seeming to bemoan her Misfortune that befell her by the wicked Amors of the
Lascivious Tereus, related at large by Ovid, Met. 6. Et virginem and unam vi
superat, etc. She is indeed well styled, The Bird of Night, from chearing
Darkness with her Passionate Song, that seems to imitate the Solitary
Complaints of Languishing Lovers.

V. 519. Sung Spousal; Sung the Wedding Song. Spousal, Espousaille, Fr. a Song,
generally very Licentious used at Weddings, of Espouse, Fr. Sp^sa, Ital. and
Sponsa, Lat. a Bride.

V. 520. To light the Bridal Lamp; The Romans light the Bride home to her
Husband's House with a Torch of White-thorn or Pine Tree, called Taeda, or Fax
juga is; to which our Poet, as Virgil did before him, alludes, by the Evening
Star on his Hill-top lighting the Bridal Lamp. Sparge marite mices: tibi
deserit Hesperus Oetam. Ecl. 8.

V. 529. Transported I behold transported Touch; Pleased to excess, I find my
Feeling pleasant to excess: Raised above my self, I perceive my Feeling raised
as far above it self: Or carried beyond my self I perceive my sense of Touching
carried too beyond what is usual. Transported, Transportatus, Lat. of
Transpertare, Lat. to carry beyond; whence a Transport of Joy, Grief, etc. an
excess of Joy, ungovernable and destructive often.

V. 530. Here Passion first I felt Commotion strange; From hence first I felt
Excess and Disorder; a sort of Self-tumult, a Commotion, in all things else a
Stranger to me. Passion, of (...), Gr. a sort of Suffering, and Self-violence,
of (...), Gr. to Suffer; our Passions are our Punishments, and by indulging
them, we torment our selves. Commotion, Commotio, Lat. Disturbance, of
Commo^ere, to vex and disquiet, as our Passions do, the inward and unruly Mob
of Mankind. Superior Master, of Superior, Lat. uppermost.

V. 533. Of Beauties powerful glance; Weak and unarmed against the danger of
bright Beauties Darts. Glance, of Esla^cer, Fr. Slanciare, Ital. to dart, of
Lancea; the Rays of Beauty are frequently compared to Darts.

V. 534. Or Nature failed in me; Or Nature did not sufficiently fortify me on
this side, and left this part of me imperfect and unfinished, unfit to sustain
an Object so amazing. Failed, Faillit, Fr. of Faillir, to be wanting. Sustain,
Substinere, Lat. to undergo.

V. 536. Or from my Side subducting, etc. Or Nature taking her out of my Side,
took, perhaps more than enough, something that lay too near my Heart, and ever
since too much affects it. Subducting, Subducere, Lat. to withdraw.

V. 539. E^aborate, of inward less exact; As to her outside, perfect and
complete, inwardly less exactly finished. Elaborate, Elaboratus, Lat. finished.
Exact, Exactus, Lat. perfect and complete.

V. 540. In the prime End of Nature, etc. Because made out of Man, and for him.
As God by Christ is the Head of the Man, so is Man the Head of the Woman; and
Man receiving his Perfection from God, and the Woman hers from Man, therefore
St. Paul styles Man the Image and Glory of God, and Woman the Glory of the Man,
1 Cor. 11. 7. Mas enim ut perfectior, ita prior natura est quam faemina, cumque
sexus faemineus, ut Arist. 1. 4. de Genesis Animal. Sit l^esio quaedam and quoddam
detrimentum, seu quaedam mutatio virilis sexus, constat faeminae generationem,
esse velut multilationem and debilitationem vi^i. Necessario vero, quod
integrum and perfectum, prius est quam debile and mutilatum; Ita secundum
naturam effectum est, ut si quod fuit totius generis initium, id esset a^mare,
^illo vero percusso faemina fieret, ut debilius quiddam, necessarium tamen
propter ipsum virum. Val. sa. Philo. c. 1.

V. 542. In the Mind and inward Faculties; In the Mind, and its inward Powers
and Perfections, Women are generally inferior to Men, to which their Contexture
more soft and infirm, does not only contribute much, but their Education more.
Faculties, Facultas, Lat. Power, Strength.

V. 543. Her resembling les^ ^is Image, who made both; That Eve, as well as
Adam, was made in the Image of God, is plain: Genesis 1. 27. So God created man in
his own image, in the image of God created he him; male and female created he
them. Doubtless Woman was created capable of Reason and Understanding, endowed
with Free Will, with all the Gifts of Nature, with an Immortal Soul, receptive
of Grace and Eternal Happiness as well as Man, in which consists the most
perfect Image of their Creator. But as Man was made the Head of the Creation,
and all Things for him, and he by God for his Service, therefore he is chiefly
said to be the Image of God; and Woman being made out of Man, and for him, is
in that respect esteemed his Image, according to St. Paul; Forasmuch as he (the
Man) is the image and glory of God; but the woman is the glory of the Man, 1
Cor. 11. 7. Which the Apostle backs with this Argument: For the man is not of
the woman, but the woman of the man; neither was the man created for the woman,
but the woman for the man, verse. 8, 9. Resembling, Resembler, Fr. to be like,
of Re and Similis, Lat.

V. 545. The Character of that Dominion given; That Dominion was equally given
both to Man and Woman over the Creatures, is evident: Be fruitful and multiply,
and replenish the earth, and subdue it, and have dominion over the fish of the
Sea, etc. according to the Blessing God gave them, Genesis 1. 28. So that this
seems to refer to Eve, as not being the immediate Image of her Maker, but
rather his from whom she was taken, and thence less Perfect and Complete than
her Original: Or, as being her self under some obligation of Obedience to her
Husband, even in the State of Innocence, as the Schoolmen hold; tho after her
Offense, imposed and heightened into her Punishment. Character, (...), Gr. the
Mark, of (...), Gr. of the Heb. (...), to Engrave.

V. 547. So Absolute, and in her self Completed; So finely finished, and in
her self accomplished. Absolute, Absolutus, Lat. perfect, of Absolvere, to
finish. Complete, Completus, Lat. accomplished, of Complere, Lat. to fulfill,
to finish^

V. 552. Falls degraded; Seems low, is undervalued, of Degradare, Lat. to
debase, to make low.

V. 553. Looses discount'nanc'd; Wisdom it self, in discourse with her, is
worsted and put out of Countenance: Reason is by Beauty too often overborn and
ruined when Sense si^s Judge.

V. 555. As one intended first, not after made occasionally; Authority and
Reason attend on her as if she had been first Created, and not I; not she for
me, but I had been made for her, occasionally, for the sake of Propagation.
Aristotle calls Woman, Animal Occasionatum, non per se and ex principali
naturae intention generatum, sed ex occasion, id est propter imbecillitatem
and defectum virtutis generativae, quae est in semine virili, quod si validum
semper and perfectum esset, semper virum and nunquam faeminam generaret. Pere.
in Genesis c. 2. v. 18. Occasionally, for other ends, upon another account:
Occasionalis, Lat.

V. 556. To Consummate all; To say all at once, of Consummare, Lat. to reckon.

V. 558. Greatness of Mind, and Nobleness; Or take an Addition from her Beauty,
and are set off by it with wonderful advantage, according to that of the
Excellent Virgil: Gratior and pul^ro veniens in corpore virtus,
Adjuvat. AEn. 5.


V. 560. With contracted Brow; Frowning, knitting his Brow. Contracted,
Contractus, Lat. drawn together, of Contra^ere, Lat. to pluck together: Frontem
contrahere. Cic. pro Cluent.

V. 562. Be not diffident of Wisdom; Mistrust not the Understanding God has
given. Diffident, Diffidens, Lat. mistrustful. Deserts, of Deserere, Lat. to
forsake. Dismiss, of Demittere, Lat. to put away.

V. 565. By Attributing, etc. By rateing and esteeming Things more than they
deserve. Attri^uere, Lat. to impute to, to value at.

V. 570. Thy Cherishing, not thy Subjection; Well deserving thy Kindness, not
thy Cringing: That may well deserve thy Love, not thy Submission. Cherishing,
thy Favor and Affection, of Cherir, Fr. to make much of. Subjection,
Subjectio, Lat. Obedience.

V. 575. And to Realitics, etc. And give up quietly all her gaudy Shows, to
those more Real and Essential Abilities that difference thee from her,
acknowledging thee her Head. The Husband is the head of the wife, even as
Christ is the head of the Church, Ephesians. 5. 23. Realitas, Lat. for what is in
deed and fact.

V. 576. Made so adorn; Made so fair and complete, to please thee the more.
Adorn, of Adornare, Lat. to dress, to set out.

V. 578. When thou art seen least wise; Whose greatest Wisdom is to observe thy
weakness, who sees most clearly her Advantages in thy fits of Folly.

V. 585. To subdue the Soul; To conquer or overcome, of Subdere, Lat. to subdue.

V. 587. Attractive, etc. Whatever in her Conversation thou find noble and
reasonable, and thence charming, cherish still. Attractive, Attrabere, Lat. to
draw to, to entice.

V. 591. In reason, and is judicious; Noble, manly Love, is guided by Reason^
not giddy and blind, as that the Poets feign, but rational and judicious,
advisable, able to choose and distinguish. It Is carnal and low Love, of which
Ovid said, Nec in ^na sede morantur Majest^^ and Amor.

The Angelic Reason well advises Adam, not to subject himself to his Desires,
nor to suffer Transported Passion to degrade the Majesty of Man. Judicious, of
Judicium, Lat. Judgment. The Seal^, the way up, of Seal^, Lat. a Ladd^r.

V. 595. Half Abashed; Almost out of Countenance. Abashed, of Esbahir, Fr. to
affright, or Abbaisser, Fr. to humble, to render dejected, shame, disordering
the Face, and (as it were) casting down the Countenance.

V. 597. In Procreation; Procreatio, Lat. the begetting of Children, or by
Beasts their like, of Procreare, Lat. to beget.

V. 598. Of the Genial Bed; Tho I have higher thoughts of the Propagation of
Mankind, and conceive there is something more Mysterious and Awful in it;
because thereby God's Image, first on me imprinted, is to be multiplied by my
Posterity: Genial Bed, the Marriage Bed, Genialis a Gignendo, Lat.

V. 601. Those Decencies; Those many Graces that so wonderfully set off all her
Actions, and become her very words. Decens, Lat. comely, becoming.

V. 605. Harmony to behold; An Agreement more Musical and pleasant in a Wedded
Couple, than any Consort can be to the Ear. Harmony, (...), Gr. an accord and
consent of Voices in Singing, of (...), to agree.

V. 617. Mix Irradiance, virtual or immediate Touch. Mix they their pure
Emanations, like Streams of liquid Light, twisting their bright Celestial Rays
like the Sun's subtle Beams darted at distance, or by close Conjunction and
mutual touch. A curious Enquiry, long since determined by our Savior; For when
they shall rise from the dead, they neither marry, nor are given in marriage:
But are as the Angels which are in heaven, Mar. 12. 25. It Is an Opinion of the
Schoolmen, that one End, tho less principal, of God's creating Man, was to
repeople Heaven, emptied (by the Fall of the wicked Angels) of many of its
Glorious Inhabitants, by Creatures of another Mould, the more to enhance the
loss of those Rebellious. Nimirum diminutio Angelorum ob. ruinam malorum
spirituum, supplemento hominum erat resarcienda. Perer. in Genesis c. 2. v. 18. At
which our Poet hints: Into our Room of Bliss thus high advanced
Creatures of other Mould, Earth born perhaps,
Not Spirits, etc. Bo. IV. Verse. 359.


And further: But lest his Heart exalt him in the harm
Already done, to have dispeopl'd Heaven
My Damage fondly deemed, I can repair
That Detriment, etc. Bo. VII. Verse. 150.


Mirari licet, cur Deus cum posset ruinas Angelorum, novis a se creatis Angelis
reaedificare, etc. Cur inquam homines, alterius naturae and conditionis
fecerit, quos reponeret pro Angelis? Rupert. From all which, it is obvious to
infer, that the Angels are reputed to be of one Sex, otherwise they might have
repaired their decrease by Propagation; as our Author remarks in Adam's
Complaint: -- O why did GOD,
Creator wise, that Peopled highest Heaven
With Spirits Masculine -- Not fill the World
With Men, as Angels without Feminine? Bo. X. Verse. 888.


Irradiance, Irradiatio, Lat. a darting, or shining forth: A word well chosen,
to express our little knowledge of Angelic Beings. Virtual, Virtualis, Lat.
powerful, as things are said to be that act and are efficacious at a distance;
as the Sun is said to be Virtually in the Earth, by the activity and force of
his Light and Heat.

V. 624. In Eminence and Obstacle, etc. We enjoy to the height, without any
hindrance. In Eminence, Eminenter, Lat. in the highest degree, Bo. II. V. 6.
Obstacle, Obstaculum, Lat. hindrance, let, of Obstando, Lat. to stand in the
way of. Membrane, a thin Skin, Membrana, Lat. Parchment. Exclusive Bars, Bars
that hinder and shut out the longing carnal Lover; of Excludere, Lat. to shut
out.

V. 627. Total they mix; Entirely they embrace and mix with one another,
without any opposition; not as Flesh with Flesh, and Soul with Soul,
Mediantibus corporibus; but fully and freely, as Air does with Air.

V. 632. Hesperean Sets; But I can now discourse no longer the Setting Sun
beyond Cape Verd, and the Islands, ever Green, draws near the Western Ocean,
the time of my departure, as before: For these mid-hours, till Evening rise,
I have at will. Bo. V. Verse. 376.


The Earths green Cape, Cape de Verde. Caput Viride, the most Western Point of
Africa, called anciently Hesperium Cornu. Cape, Capo, Cabo, Cap, all of the
Lat Caput, the Head. A Cape, is the utmost End of a high Headland or
Promontory, which shoots it self far into the Sea. Verdant, Green, Bo. VII.
Verse. 310.

Hesperean Sets, is setting in the West. Hesperean, of (...), Gr. Occidentalis,
the Western part of Heaven or Earth. Hesperus, the Evening Star rising there.

V. 637. Thine, and of all thy Sons, the Weal or Woe in thee is placed; Weal,
of the Sax Well: The Welfare, the Happiness or Misery of thy Posterity depends
on thee. -- Prolis spes una futurae
Exemplo est firmanda tuo, sunt fata tuorum
Te penes, in te omnis domus instaurata recumbit. AEn. 12.


V. 641. In thine own Arbitriment, etc. It Is free, and left to thy choice to
stand upright, of fall offending. Arbitriment, Arbitrium, Lat. judgment,
choice. Repel, reject, disdain, of Repellere, Lat. to resist.

V. 645. Benediction; Benedictio, Lat. Blessing.

Ibid. Since to part; Since you must go. Part, of Partir, Fr. to depart.

V. 649. Thy Condescension; Thy Humility to discourse with me, and answer my
Enquiries; has been free and familiar, and shall be kept for ever in thankful
Remembrance. Condescension, Condescentio, Lat. a yielding to, of Condescendere,
Lat. to stoop to, as the Angel is here supposed, to Man's inferior
Understanding.

NOTES On MILTON's PARADISE Lost.
BOOK IX.
Verse 5. VEnial Discourse unblam'd; No more I shall relate, where GOD, or
Angel, his Messenger, Guest-like, was pleased to visit Man, familiar as a
Friend, and with him share a homely Meal, allowing him meanwhile freedom of
Speech, without Reproof. Venial Discourse, Pardonable, such as tho faulty, yet
might be passed by. Venialis, Lat. Pardonable, of Venia, Lat. Pardon.

V. 6. Those Notes to Tragic; I now must change those softer Notes (in which I
sung the Angels good and gracious Admonitions to Enquiring Adam) to others more
dire and dismal, such as suit the Tragedies that Sin and Death brought on his
wretched Offspring. Tragic, (...), Gr. Severe, Unfortunate, such as are the
Subjects of Tragedies full of Death and Destruction.

V. 13. Death's Harbinger; Low and mean Suspicion, Faith forfeited on Man's
behalf, Rebellion and Disobedience: On God's part Offended and Estranged,
Distance and Disgust, Anger and just Reproof, and Sentence given, that filled
this World with woe, by bringing Sin into it, and her Attendant Death, and
Misery manifold, the sad forerunner of Mortality. Alienated, Bo. I. Verse. 451.
Rebuke, of Reboucher, Fr. to reprove, to silence by just Rebuke, of Re and
Bouche, of Bucca, Lat. the Mouth. Harbinger, Herberger, Belg. an Officer that
goes before a King's Retinue to provide Lodging, well allowed to Death the King
of Terrors.

V. 15. Of stern Achilles; Sad Undertaking, yet a Subject much more sublime,
than the Wrath of fierce Achilles, wrecked on his Foe Hector, that fled from
him thrice round Troy's ancient Wall. Achilles, the Son of Peleus and Thetis,
the Valiantest of all the Grecian Hero's, (of whose Anger against Agamemnon,
Homer composed his Ilias:) He slew Hector the Son of Priam, who avoided him, by
flying three times about the City before he durst abide him. (...),
(...), etc.
(...).
(...).


Imitated by Virgil in the Combat between AEneas and Turnus: Quinque orbs
explent cursu, totidemque retexunt
Huc illuc; nec enim levia, aut ludicra petuntur
Praemia, sed Turni de vita and sanguine certant. AEn. 12.


Troy, Troja, a City of Phrygia in the Lesser Asia, famous for its Ruin, after
ten years War. It was situated on the River Xanthus, near Mount Ida, three
miles from the Archipelago, Immortalized by Homer's Ilias, and Virgil's AEneis.
Fugitive, Lat. Fugitivus, a Runaway.

V. 17. Of Turnus for Lavinia disespous'd; A Theme more lofty than the Rage of
Turnus, for the loss of his betrothed Lavinia. Turnus, Son of Daunus and
Venilia, courted Lavinia, only Daughter of King Latinus and Amata, who
betrothed her to him; but diverse Prodigies hindering the Match, and the Oracles
declaring Lavinia was to expect a Foreign Husband, AEneas arriving in Italy,
slew Turnus, and obtained her, therefore said to be Disespoused. Et
consanguineo toties data dextera Turno. AEn. 7.

V. 18. Or Neptune's ire, or Juno's, etc. Or Neptune's wrath, that for so many
years tossed and turmoil'd the Grecian [Ulysses], or Juno's Spleen, that
persecuted the Trojan [AEneas], Son of Venus.

Neptune, Son of Saturn, and Lord of the Sea, was enraged against Ulysses, for
putting out Polyphemus his Eye, his Son by the Nymph Thoosa, and in Revenge
thereof, he Shipwrack'd him diverse times in his return home from the Trojan
War. -- (...),
(...)
(...).
(...),
(...).


V. 19. Cytherea's Son; AEneas, Son of Anchises and Venus, (named Cytherea, of
Cythera, an Island where she was worshipped,) was hated by Juno, (Sister and
Wife to Jupiter,) for diverse Reasons given by Virgil in the beginning of his
AEn. 1. -- Quo numine laeso,
Quidve dolens Regina Deum, tot volvere casus
Infignem pietate virum, tot adire labores
Impulerit, etc.


Perplexed, vexed, and disturbed, of Perplexor, Lat. to entangle. Greek,
Graecus, Lat. a Native of Greece.

V. 23. And Dictates to me, etc. Who nightly visits me unasked, and in my
Dreams informs me, or inspires me with my sudden Song. Unimplor'd, Non
imploratus, Lat. Uninvited, of Un answering the Negative In, Lat. and
Implorare, Lat. to entreat. Dictates, of Dictare, Lat. to indite, to tell one
what he shall write. Unpremeditated, of In and Praemeditatus, Lat. not much
mused and thought upon, but sudden and easy as inspired.

V. 25. Heroic Song; Poema Heroicum, Heroic Poesy, such as described the
Actions of great Men. Hero's, Bo. I. V. 552. consisting chiefly in Warlike
Deeds: Was hitherto the only Argument Heroic deemed.

V. 28. Not sedulous by Nature; Not naturally industrious: Sedulus, Lat.
careful: To indite, Indicere, Lat. to relate, Slaughter and War, as Bella,
horrida bella. Arma virumque cano. AEn. 1.

V. 29. Chief Maistry to dissect, etc. Where the chief Masterpiece is, to hack
and hew in pieces Fabulous Hero's, in feigned Encounters; the nobler and more
commendable Courage of Patience, and generous Suffering, let slip,
uncelebrated. Maistry, of Maistrise, Fr. cunning, skill, of Maistre, Fr. a
Master, an Instructor. To Dissect, of Dissecare, Lat. to cut in pieces. Havoc,
Bo. II. V. 1009. Fortitude, Fortitudo, Lat. Manhood, Courage.

V. 32. Heroic Martyrdom; Noble and gallant Suffering for the sake of Truth and
a good Conscience, (...), Gr. a Witness, a Testimony given to the Truth, by
Christians sealing their Faith by their Blood, thence styled (...), Witnesses,
in the highest sense, as St. Stephen's, whose early Suffering, Acts 7. 59. gave
him the Title of The Proto-martyr, Acts 22. 20.

V. 35. Impreses quaint; Fine Devices and Inscriptions, explaining the Figures
and Emblems painted or carved on Shields, With boastful Argument portray'd, Bo.
VI. V. 84. Impreses, of Impresa, Ital. a Design, an Undertaking, of the Lat.
Impressio. Emblazon'd, Book V. Verse. 592. Quaint, Bo. VIII. V. 78.

Ibid. Caparisons and Steeds; Horses, and their Warlike Harness: Of the Fr.
Caparasson, or Ital. Caparisone, as if Campestris apparatus, Lat. the Furniture
for the Field.

V. 36. Bases; Foot-cloaths, or houses any thing that hangs low, of Bas, Fr.
low.

Ibid. Tinsel Trappings; And their gaudy Ornaments. Tinsel, shining,
glittering, of Estinceller, Fr. to sparkle. Gorgeous, Bo. II. V. 3.

V. 37. At Joust and Torneament; At a solemn Tilting: The same thing twice
expressed. Joust, of the Fr. Jouster, to run with Spear one against another in
fierce or counterfeited Fight. Some will have it of Justa Lat. Funerals,
because these Sports were at first Instituted on those occasions, and called
Funeral Games: The Agmen Trojanum, on the Anniversary of Anchises's Funeral
performed by Julus, something resembling a Tilting. Convertere vias, infestaque
tela tulere,
Inde alios ineunt cursus, aliosque recursus,
Adversis spatiis: alternosque orbibus orbs
Impediunt, pugnaeque cient simulacra subarmis. AEn. 5.


Torneament, Turnament, of Torneamento and Torneare, Ital. to come round, to
fetch a compass, as those that run a-tilt do when they miss their Adversary,
renewing their Course and Encounter.

Ibid. Marshaled Feast; Then sumptuous Feasts in good order ranged, and brought
up in spacious Halls by Stewards and their Trains. Marshaled, of the Fr.
Marshall, the chief Commander of an Army, from the care in ranging the Dishes
at a Feast, as judiciously as the Divisions in a Field against the Day of
Battle, often less dangerous of the two. Sewers, Persons that usher in the Meat
to a King's Table, and place it there, of the Fr. Asseoir, to set down,
anciently writ Asscours. Seneshals, Stewards, Fr. Seneschal, of Sind, Ger. a
Family, and Scalc, Ger. a Servant, Familiae Praefectus.

V. 39. The Skill of Artifice, etc. Profession of mean Trade, and poor low
Employment. Artificium, Lat. a Trade. Officium, Lat. any Employment.

V. 42. Nor Studious; To me unskilful in these low mean Arts, and willing to be
so. A nobler Subject is left untouched, able of it self to raise that Name
(Heroic) higher, unless the World's old Age, or my own, or my Northern
Countries chill Climate, damp my Wings, and hinder me from rising to the
height of so sublime a Subject; and much all these may do, if what I write
were only mine, not dictated by my Celestial Patroness, my Heavenly Urania, who
every night whispers it in my Ear. Studious, Studiosus, Lat. desirous to learn.
Climate, see Clime, Bo. I. Verse. 242. Damp, moisten, of Dampf, Ger. a Mist, a
Vapor. Deprest, Depressus, Lat. born down.

V. 50. Short Arbiter 'twixt Day and Night. Venus, one of the Seven Planets,
always waiting on the Sun, in the Morning called Lucifer, Posphorus, and Eous;
when seen at Evening, Vesper, Hesperus, and Vesperugo, well styled, The quick
nimble Umpire between Day and Night, by turns fore-running both, and uncertain,
to which most enclining. Fairest of Stars, last in the Train of Night,
If better, thou belong not to the Dawn. Bo. V. Verse. 166.


Short Arbiter; Because when he follows the Setting Sun, he soon declares for
the Night, as when he precedes him, he is on the side of Day. Arbiter, Bo. II.
Verse. 910. Twilight, Bo. I. V. 597.

V. 52. Nights Hemisphere, etc. An exact description of Midnight, when Night
had veiled and darkened the Horizon quite round half the Sphere. Night, who
commands over half the Globe, had stretched her Empire to its utmost Bounds
round half the World, from end to end: Ends in a Circle seems contradictory;
but if we conceive the East and West Points of the Earth's Diameter as its
ends, tho merely imaginary, it will not sound so harsh. Hemisphere, Bo. III. V.
725. Horizon, Bo. VI. V. 79.

V. 54. Of Gabriel out of Eden; Bo. IV. V. 1014.

V. 60. Since Uriel Regent of the Sun, etc. Bo. IV. V. 561, and 575. Bo. III.
V. 622.

V. 64. Thrice the Equinoctial Line, etc. Satan traveled three times round the
Equator, in the company of Night. The Equinoctial Line, (or Equator,) is that
Circle, which being equally distant from the Poles of the World, divides it
into two Hemispheres, named AEquinoctialis, Lat. of equal Night, because the
Sun cutting this Circle twice in a Year, in the beginning of Aries and Libra,
makes the Days and Nights of even length.

V. 65. Four times crossed the Ear of Night; Four times he crossed the Night's
dark Road; not wheeling directly round with her, but crossing over sometimes to
the Northern, and sometimes to the Southern Pole. Carr, of Currus, Lat. a
Chariot. Pole, Bo. I. V. 74.

V. 66. Traversing each Colure; Crossing each Colure. The Coluri are two great
Circles, cutting themselves at Right-Angles from the Poles of the World, and
intersecting other moving Circles in such sort, that they describe the Four
Cardinal Points of the Zodiac. One in the beginning of Aries, when the Days and
Nights are of equal length, and the Spring begins; another in the entrance of
Cancer, when the Summer enters, and the Days are at full length; a third in
Libra, when Autumn commenceth, and the Days and Nights again keep the same
size; and the fourth, in the beginning of Capricorn, when Winter begins, and
the Days are at shortest. Whence one is called AEquinoctiorum, and the other
Solstitiorum Colurus, of (...), Gr. Lame, Maimed; because in an Oblique
Position of the Sphere they never entirely appear above the Horizon, but seem
dock'd, lame, and lop'd off. Traversing, Traversant, Fr. crossing.

V. 70. Tho Sin, not Time, first wrought the change; That the Face and Prospect
of Paradise was not so changed in the time of Moses, but that it was well known
to him, and described by him, 850 Years after the Flood, is the Opinion of Sir
Walter Rawley. Probable it is, that Man's first Offense, which brought into the
World a general Alteration, (whereby all Sublunary Things were put into a
Tendency and Motion toward Mortality,) did affect Paradise, from which perhaps
Adam never departed far: But most certainly the Flood, that overran the
Peopled World, gave it a most absolute Defacing; yet not so entire an o^^, but
by the Rivers of Tigris and Euphrates, we may well conclude in what Longitude
it lay.

V. 71. Tigris, into a Gulf shot under ground; Tigris, now called Tigil, a
famous River of Asia, one of the most rapid in the World, whence so named of
Tigris, the Armenian word for an Arrow; has its Rise from the Gordian Mountains
in the Greater Armenia, where, after some space, it diveth into the Earth,
whence mounting more large, it divides Mesopotamia from Assyria, and falling in
with Euphrates, waits on him into the Persian Gulf. Quaque caput rapido tollit
cum Tigride magnus
Euphrates, quos non diversis fontibus edit
Persis, and incertum tellus si misceat amnes
Quod potius sit nomen aquis -- Luc. l. 3.


V. 77. Over Pontus; Properly called Euxinus, now the Black Sea, leading to
Constantinople, called also Mare majore by those who know no bigger, it being
the biggest thereabouts, which gave Pontus so large a signification, as to be
expressive of the Deluge: Omnia Pontus erant, deerant quoque littora Ponto.
Met. 1.

V. 78. The Pool Maeotis; Palus Maeotis, a vast Bay (or, as some imagine, the
Source) of the Euxine Sea, on the Coast of Crim Tartary, known by the Names of
Mar de Bianco, Delle Zabacchee, De Tana, because the River Tanais feeds it.
Pool, of the Lat. Palus. Maeotis, of the ancient Inhabitants the Maecotae, or
(...), Gr. as Eustat. of (...), Gr. a Nurse, as being such to the Euxine Sea.
Pigra palus Scythici patiens Maeotica plaustri. Luc. l. 2.
Quaque fretum torrens Maeotidos egerit undas
Pontus -- Luc. l. 3.
Quos operit glacies Maeotica, ruptaque tandem
Solibus, effundit torpentis ad Ostia Ponti. Juv. Sat. 4.


Ibid. Up beyond the River Ob; Satan is described roving up toward the North
Pole, crossing the Carr of Night, V. 66. Ob, Oby, is a vast River in Tartarian
Muscovy near the Pole, rising out of the Lake Ki^aisko, and with a mighty
Current empties it self at six vast outlets into the frozen Sea, between Obdora
and Samojeda.

V. 79. Downwards as far Antartic; Southwards as far beneath, according to
common apprehension; for to those that live under the South Pole, our Northern
Hemisphere seems below, as Virgil: Hic Vertex nobis semper sublimis; at illum
Sub pedibus Styx atra videt, manesque profundi. Geo. 1.


Antartic, (...), Gr. Southern, of (...), against, and (...), a Bear, the most
conspicuous Star near the North Pole.

V. 80. West from Orontes; Westward from Orontes, a River of Syria, springing
out of Mount Libanus, and running by the Walls of Antioch, into the
Mediterranean Sea. Jam pridem Syrus in T^berim defluxit Orontes. Juv. Sat. 3.

V. 81. To the Ocean Bard at Darien; To the South Sea, stopped by the Isthmus of
Darien. It is a Neck of Land of 18 Leagues over from East to West, by which the
South and North America are tacked together, having on one side Panama, and on
the other Nombre de Dios, both belonging to the Spaniard. This Barricado is
also called, The Straight of Panama, its modern Name.

V. 82. Ganges and Indus; Thence to the East India, where Ganges and Indus
flow. Ganges, the greatest River of East India, dividing it into two parts,
called still by the Inhabitants Ganga; it rises out of Mount Imaus, in the
Confines of Great Tartary, and emp^ies it self into the Gulf of Bengala.
Decolor extremo qua ^ingitur India Gange. Met. l. 4.
Ceu septem surgens sedatis amnibus altus
Per tacitum Ganges. AEn. 9.


From the many Islands that beset and obstruct his entrance into the Sea.
Indus, another great River of East India, whence the Country took its Name; it
has its Rise out of the highest part of Ima^s, (by some called Taurus,) and
empties its four full Mouths (three others being stopped) into the Indian Ocean;
the Natives call it Sinde. Thus the Orb he roam'd, Bo. I. V. 382. thus round
the Globe he roved, in Latitude from Pole to Pole, and in Longitude from West
to Eastern India.

V. 183. With Inspection deep; With nicest View, with thorough search.
Inspectio, Lat. of Inspicere, Lat. to look, to search into.

V. 85. Opportune might serve his Wiles; What Creature was fittest for him to
play his Cheats and Pranks in. Opportune, Bo. II. V. 397. Wiles, of the Fr.
Guille, Deceit, Fraud.

V. 86. The Serpent suttlest Beast, etc. Many Instances are, by the
Naturalists, opposed in Apes, Foxes, Dogs, etc. to the Supreme Suttlety of the
Serpent above other Beasts; but if we consider how many Wiles have been
observed in this sly Animal, it will be hard to produce an equal number in any
other Creature. The first is, that of stopping her Ears, tho the Charmer charm
never so wisely, Psalm. 58. 4, 5. On which words, St. Austin shows us its
Posture; Alteram Aurem terrae admovet, alteram caud^ obturat. The second is,
the fortifying it self, when attacked, by many intricate folds, encircling its
Head, the seat of Safety, and its sleeping in the same posture, as our Author
well observes; In Labyrinth of many around self-rowl'd his Head the midst, well
stored with subtle Wiles, V. 184. A third Remark is, that this cunning Creature
disgorges its Poison when it goes to drink, for fear of infecting its own
Beverage, as Epiphanius. A fourth is, that he feeds on Fennel, the easier to
get rid of his old Skin, Plin. l. 8. c. 27. Fifthly, that he sharpens his
Sight, by anointing his Eyes with the Juice of the same Herb; besides all
which, we have the Testimony of the Inspired Moses, Genesis 3. 1. confirmed by our
Savior, Be wise as Serpents, and harmless as Doves, Matthew. 10. 16. Where, as
the Innocence of the Dove is above comparison, so the Wisdom of the Serpent
seems beyond parallel.

V. 89. Fittest Imp of Fraud; Fittest Stock to graft his devilish Fraud upon.
Imp, of the Sax. Impan, to put into, or of Ente, Fr. a Graft, and Entere, Fr.
to graft upon: Thus Children are called Little Imps, from their Imitating all
they see and hear, Young Grafts just shooting up to Sense. Debate, Bo. II. V.
42. Revolved, Bo. IV. V. 31. Irresolute, Come to no Resolution; of In and
Resolutus, Lat. Undetermined.

V. 90. His dark Suggestions hide; Wherein to hide himself and his dark
Designs. Suggestions, Bo. I. V. 685.

V 93. As from his Native Suttlety proceeding. Diabolus colubrum in Paradiso
corporali, animal, scilicet lubricum, and tortuosis anfractibus mobile, operi
suo congruum, per quem loqueretur elegit. Aug. l. 14. De Civ. D. c. 11. Which
our Author has well explained, by the Serpents natural Suttlety, disguising the
Devil's dark Designs, his natural Slyness leaving less room for Suspicion.

V, 95. Of Diabolic Power, etc. Of being Possessed, and Actuated by the Devil,
and thence assisted by Satan. (...), Gr. of the Devil. (...), Gr. a Slanderer,
of (...), Gr. to slander, misrepresenting God to Man, and accusing Man to his
Maker: The Accuser of the Brethren, as Rev. 12. 10.

V. 101. As built with second Thoughts; After Heaven, for that the Angels were
created contemporary with Man, and their Creation shadowed by those words of
Moses, Let there be light, Genesis 1. 2. and their Ruin notified, by God's
dividing the light from the darkness, V. 4. seems such a huddle, as Human
Understanding cannot comprehend. Quod agebatur in mundo sensibili, imago erant
eorum, quae in intelligibili agebantur: Nam sicuti primo die Deus divisit lucem
a tenebris, ita tunc simul Angelos a Daemonibus, gratiam a peccato, gloriam a
paena, caelum ab inferis dispescuit. Hugo. Victor. l. 1. de Sacr. c. 10.
Conjectural and Allegorical! Our Poet supposes therefore Heaven, the Seat of
Angels, created before the Habitations of Men, who, after Trial and Obedience,
were to supply the Place that Rebellious Crew had forfeited; and therefore in
this most incomparable Prosopopeia of Satan makes him magnify the beautiful
Creation, Terrestrial Heaven, built on second Thoughts more wary and refined,
according to the manner of Men, tho all the Works of God in their destined
degrees are absolutely perfect; Reforming what was old, for what God after
better worse would build? Being the Insinuations of Satan's Misprision of the
Almighty, corresponding with his malicious Character, undervaluing the Allwise
Creator of all Things, as if his Infinite Understanding, like our
Imperfections, were improbable by experience.

V. 103. Terrestrial Heaven; A Heaven on Earth, as hinted at before: -- What if
Earth
Be but the shadow of Heaven, and Things therein
Each the other like, more than on Earth is thought? Bo. V. Verse. 575.


V. 106. In the Concentring all, etc. of Sacred Influence; Darting on thee and
in thy Bosom as their common Center, uniting all the wealthy Rays of vast
inestimable Virtue, and most powerful Efficacy, as if thou alone were the sole
only Object of all their glorious Eyes. Sacred Influence, great, vast Efficacy,
as Homer names a great Fish, (...), a holy Fish, (...). And Darkness Sacred,
that is, Great. (...).


So, (...); And, (...); Hom. The great strength of.

And Virg. Auri sacra fames. AEn. 3.

So the Original in the holy Page calls great Mountains, the Mountains of God,
Psalm. 36. 6. and lofty Cedars, the Cedars of God, Psalm. 80. 10. Concentricus,
Lat. that have one common Center.

V. 107. As God in Heaven is Center, etc. As God above is the Center of all
Created Nature, extending his Goodness round the Circumference of the Creation;
so thou, O Earth below, seem the receiving Center of all that mighty
Goodness shower'd down on thee. Deus est indivisible centrum, cujus irradiatio
in omnium rerum peripheriam extenditur. Mersen.

V. 112. With gradual Life of Growth, Sense, Reason; The three degrees of Life
are set forth by Growth in Plants and Trees, to which Sense being added, makes
that of Animals, and Reason, raising it still a step higher, crowns the
Creation with Man, its Masterpiece. Gradual, Gradualis, of Gradus, Lat. a
Step, a Degree.

V. 120. So much more I feel Torment within me; Satan broke loose from his dark
Prison, Hell, (the dismal Seat of Desolation, and Territory of Eternal
Torment,) was so far from finding any case among all the charming Varieties of
this wondrous World, that all its Pleasures served but to inhance his Pain made
by them more intense, as from the hateful struggle of Contraries, besieging one
another with the most implacable Rage of Antipathy! And worse would be his
state in Heaven, for wheresoe'er he goes is Hell, he himself is Hell, Bo. IV.
Verse. 75. Bane, Bo. I. Verse. 692.

V. 128. Tho thereby worse to me redound; Tho thereby more Misery be multiplied
on my own Head: of Redundare, Lat. to return back upon. Hoc facinus in tuum
redundabit caput. Plaut.

A true Instance of Satan's Malice against the Almighty wrecked on Mankind.

V. 130. To my relentless Thoughts; That scorn all Repentance: Of Ralentir, Fr.
to grow soft, to melt; or Relentless, cruel, that torment me without
intermission, of the same Ralentir, to grow slack, and remiss.

V. 136. In one day to have marred; In one day to have spoiled, what The
Almighty called, was six Days and Nights in making. Marred, of the Ital.
Smarrire, to disturb, to confound.

V. 139. Had been contriving; Considering of, and finding out: A blasphemous
Thought of the Omniscient, All-wise Creator, but suitable to the ambitious and
envious Invader of his Throne. Contriving, of Controuver, Fr. to invent, to
find out by much thinking.

V. 147. Are his Created; If Angels are his Creatures, if they derive their
Being from him their Creator, as in Satan's haughty Speech before presumed. We
know no time when we were not as now;
Know none before us, self-begot, self-rais'd,
By our own quickening Power -- The Birth mature
Of this our Native Heaven, Etherial Sons. Bo. V. Verse. 859.


V. 150. Exalted from so base Original; Raised from so base Beginning, to the
hopes of Heaven, our Inheritance, Man made up of mean Mould. Original, of
Origo, Lat. Beginning, of Oriri, Lat. to rise, to spring up.

V. 155. Subjected to his Service, etc. Humbled the Winged Angels to wait on
him: Placed Angels round about him for a Guard; a mighty Aggravation of Satan's
Grief! Subjected, of Subjicere, Lat. to put under, to make subject and
serviceable to. Vigilance, Bo. IV. V. 580. O Indignity! O grievous Affront! O
vile Disgrace! Of Indignitas, Lat. Unworthiness.

Ibid. Flaming Ministers; Angels a Flaming Fire, Psalm. 104. 4. Nothing better
setting forth the Purity and Activity of the Angelic Nature.

V. 158. To Elude, etc. To avoid whose watchful Eyes, thus I creep along, h^d
in dark Disguise of Midnight's blackest Mist. -- O how fallen! how changed!
From him, who in the happy Realms of Light,
Clothed with Transcendent Brightness did outshine
Myriads, tho bright -- Bo. I. V. 84.


Elude, Eludere, Lat. to deceive. Glide, Bo. IV. V. 555. Vapor, Bo. III. V. 445.

V. 161. In whose mazie Folds; In whose cunning and intricate Turns and
Twistings, to conceal my self and my dark Design. Mazie, of Maze, Bo. II. V.
561. Intent, Intentio, Lat. an Aim, a Design.

V. 165. This Essence to Incarnate, etc. To hide this my Spiritual Being in
Flesh, nay worse, to sink it down into a Beast, and mix my self with bestial
Slime and Filthiness, I who attempted to raise my self above God over all
Supreme. O foul dismal Descent and Downfall! A fierce Reflection, and as furious
and tormenting as hottest Hell it self! A Degradation to ambitious Lucifer,
doubtless most grievous! Constrained, forced, of Contraindre, Fr. Constringere,
Lat. to compel. Slime, of Lumia, Ital. Limus, Lat. a watery and thin Mud. To
Incarnate, Incarnare, Lat. to put on Flesh; as our blessed Savior's taking our
Nature upon him, is styled, His Incarnaation. Imbrute, a word excellently
coined by our Poet, to express Satan's debasing himself into a Beast, to
accomplish his devilish Malice against God and Man: Of In and Brutus, Lat.
dull, heavy reasonless as Brute Beasts are.

V. 169. Who aspires must down as low, etc. Whoever aims to raise himself on
high, must humble himself as low, one time or other liable to court the meanest
Men, and submit to the basest Offices. Maxim, most true. Obnoxious, Obnoxious,
Lat. exposed to, liable to. -- Non ulli obnoxia curae. Georg. 2.

Recoils, Bo. II. V. 880. Reck, Bo. II V. 50.

V. 174. Since higher I fall short; Since I cannot reach the most High, since I
cannot Master God my Maker, I will fall upon his Favorite, Man. Favor, Lat.
kindness, good will.

V. 176. This Man of Clay; According to his Original Composition, and final
Resolution. Remember I beseech thee, that thou have made me as the clay, and
will thou bring me into dust again? Job 10. 19. I also am cut out of the clay,
Job 33. 6. therefore said, To dwell in houses of clay, whose foundotions are in
the dust, Job 4. 19.

Ibid. Son of Despite; Hateful Offspring, the Object of our Envy, formed and
raised out of the Dust, and designed to inherit our Heavenly Habitations, the
more to imbitter and inrage our Ruin. Son of Despite, is a Hebraism, by which
Wicked Men are termed, Sons of Belial, Deuteronomy. 13. 13. Valiant Men, Sons of
Courage, 2 Samuel 2. 7. Untameable Beasts, Sons of Pride, Job 41. 25. The
Disciples, Sons of Light, Luke 16. 8. So Satan calls Man, The Son of Despite,
the Offspring of Hatred and Envy, created to increase his Punishment, by seeing
this Man of Clay substituted into that glorious Station of him, Forlorn,
Outcast of Heaven. Despite, Despit, Fr. Dispetto, Ital. Despectus, Lat.
contempt.

V. 183. In Labyrinth, etc. Who had rouled himself up in many intricate
Windings, like a Maze. Labyrinth, Bo. II. V. 584.

V. 186. Nor nocent yet; The Serpent, as yet unhurtful, did not hide himself in
dreadful Woods, or dismal Den. Fearless, unfear'd; not afraid, because not
feared; obvious and easy, because yet innocent. Nocent, Nocens, Lat. harmful.

V. 189. In Heart or Head possessing, etc. Seizing upon his Brutal Sense,
whether lodged in Heart or Head; in which latter, the best Philosophers place
it: Nam Medici multis neque inevidentibus argumentis indicant sensum and motum
ab eodem principio fluere, puta a Cerebro, ejusdemque animae partis esse (quam
vocqnt facultatem animalem) and iisdem instrumentis deferri and exerceri, puta
Nervis and Musculis. Vall. de Sac. Phil. c. 79.

V. 190. Inspired with Act Intelligential; Endowed his Brutal, Sensitive
Faculties, with power of Understanding and Utterance, altogether Preternatural,
above the ordinary use of Nature. Intelligential, Bo. V. V. 407.

V. 192. Sacred Light; (...), Sacer Dies, (...). Light and Day being by the
Heathen esteemed the Irradiation and visible Emanation of the Sun, the glorious
God of Day. Light may be better styled Holy by Christians, in regard it is the
clearest Emblem of God's Infinite Purity, as at Bo. III. V. 3. as by it is
Typified, the Kingdom of Heaven, and everlasting Happiness. Partakers of the
inheritance of the Saints in light, Colos. 1. 12. And the Knowledge of Grace
and Truth, directing us the way to obtain it: Because the darkness is past, and
the true light now shines, 1 John 2. 8. Ut primum Lux Alma data est. AEn. 1.

V. 193. On the humid Flours; On the Flours wet with the Morn's precious Dew.
Humid, Bo. IV. V. 151.

V. 194. That breathed their Morning Incense; That breathed forth their
precious Fragrancy to wards Heaven, perfuming the ambient Air, their Native
unfum'd Incense. Spiriting odorous Breaths, Bo. V. Verse. 482. as Virgil
expresses it, Sertisque recentibus halant. AEn. 1.

Halare, Lat. to cast out, or breath a sweet smell. Incense, of Incendere, Lat,
to burn, dry and odoriferous Gums in sacrificing burnt.

V. 195. Send up silent Praise; When all things that grow on Earth, Plants,
Shrubs, and Flowers, from her green Altar send up their Sacrifice of Praise,
tho not expressed by any Vocal Sound, but by obeying the Laws of their Creation.

V. 197. His Nostrils fill, etc. Spoken of God, (...), as the Scripture often
does, giving him Eyes, Mouth, a Heart, and Nostrils, to comply with the
Imperfections and Infirmities of our Faculties. And the Lord smelled a sweet
savor, and the Lord said in his heart, Genesis 8. 21.

V. 198. Their Vocal Worship; Their Adoration paid with cheerful Heart and
Voice, joined to the Universal Quire of Creatures wanting Sounds distinct and
articulate, whereby to tune his Praise, tho the warbling Lark, and winged
Voices of the Woods, seem more immediately to bear a part in the general
Thanksgiving, some of which up to Heaven's Gate singing ascend. Vocal, Bo. V.
Verse. 204.

V. 201. Then Commune; Then talk together: Of Communicare, Lat. to discourse of.

V. 203. The hands dispatch of two; For their work grew upon 'em too fast to be
dispatched and kept under by the hands of them two, who had so large a Garden
committed to their care. The Dispatch, the Riddance, the Work, of the Ital.
Dispacciare, to rid.

V. 209. Luxurious by Restraint; Increasing by being cropped, sproughting the
more by being Lop'd and Pruned. Luxurious, rank, Bo. I. V. 498. So, Luxuriem
segetum tenera depascit in herba. Geor. 1.

V. 211. Derides tending to wild; Scorns our scant Correction, and mocks our
Manuring, overrunning our Walks with wild ungoverned growth. Derides,
Deridere, Lat. to laugh at, to despise. Tending, of Tendere, Lat. to spread, to
proceed.

V. 218. Of Roses intermixed with Myrtle; While I in yonder blushing Grove,
where all the Roses of the Spring mingled with Myrtle grow, find what to
reform. Myrtle, Bo. IV. V. 263. To redress, Redresser, Fr. to correct, to amend.

V. 222. Looks intervene, or smiles; Our Looks or Smiles delay and hinder our
dispatch, coming between and interposing betwixt us and our Business.
Intervene, Intervenire, Lat. to come between. Intermits, Bo. II. V. 463.

V. 227. Associate sole; My one only Companion: Of Associare, Lat. to accompany.

V. 229. Well have thou Motion'd; Well have thou moved and mentioned this to
me: To make a Motion, and to move the Court; Law terms, to Entreat something,
of Motio and Movere, Lat. Nor is Speech made any other way, than by the motion
of the Tongue and Air.

V. 234. To Promote; To Encourage: Of Promovere, Lat. to further.

V. 237. Refreshment; Ease, (Refraischissement, Fr. Refrigeratio, Lat.) by
intermission of Labor, or refection by Food. Intercourse of Looks and Smiles,
this pleasant exchange, of charming Looks, and sweetning Smiles. Intercursus,
Lat. a running between, or from one to another.

V. 239. Smiles from Reason flow; Smiling is so great an Indication of Reason,
that some Philosophers have altered the Definition of Man, from Animal
Rationale to Risibile, affirming Man to be the only Creature endowed with the
Power of Laughter, denied to other Creatures, who Reason, though not
contemptibly, as our Author, Bo. VIII. V. 374. yet not perfectly enough to
judge Quid sit Ridiculum, what may move that in them.

V. 249. For Solitude sometimes, etc. For to be alone sometimes, that is, to
keep one self company, to be acquainted with our selves, is highly necessary to
Men, and especially to Christians. Nunquam minus solus, quam cum solus, is the
Result of the Divine (...). Tecum habita, ut noris quam sit tibi curtasupellex.
Pers. Sat. 4.

V. 250. Retirement urges sweet Return; Absence makes Return more sweet and
desirable. Urges, Urgere, Lat. to push and prick forward. Innatus apes amor
urget habendi. Geor. 4.

V. 259. To circumvent; Circumvenire, Lat. to ensnare, to deceive.

V. 264. Excites his Envy; That moves his Malice more against us. Excites,
Excitare, Lat. to stir up, to quicken. Envy, Lat. Invidia.

V. 266. Protects; Defends, of Protegere, Lat. to cover, to hide, and thence
protects from Harm.

V. 270. The Virgin Majesty; The innocent unspotted Eve, faultless as yet, and
unpolluted; or the beauteous blushing Eve. Quae Virgineum suffuderat ore
ruborem. As Virg. Geo. 1.

Virgo, is by the Poets used, not always strictly for a Virgin, but for a
Woman: So in the description of the Harpies by the same Author: Virginei
volucrum vultus. AEn. 3.

Which Interpreters render Faeminei, they had the Countenances of Women, for
they were far from being like Virgins, whose Aspects were, Pallida semper ora
fame. Ibid.

Ovid calls Medea, Adultera Virgo; and after several Visits made by Leander,
cross the Hellespont to his beloved Hero, not all surely in vain, she is said
to be, Moritura super crudeli funere Virgo. Geo. 3.

But the Virgin Majesty of Eve, the Awful Innocence of Eve, will admit of a
severer sense, according to the fancy of many of the Fathers, who were of
opinion, That Adam and his fair Eve were Virgins during their abode in the
happy Garden, because Moses took no notice of his knowing her till the Birth of
Cain, after their Expulsion, Genesis 4. 1. Post inobedientiam, post Paradisi
amissionem, tunc primum usus rei venereae caepit: Chrysostom. Hom. 18. Adam and Eva
ante offensam, in Paradiso virgins fuerunt, at post Peccatum, and extra
Paradisum protinus nuptiae. Nuptiae ergo terram replent, virginitas Paradisum.
Hier. l. 1. cont. Jovi. Contrary to our Poet's Opinion, sufficiently inferrable
from Bo. VIII. V. 510. -- To the Nuptial Bower
I led her blushing like the Morn.


And more plainly, Bo. IV. V. 742. -- Nor Eve the Rites
Mysterious of Connubial Love refused:
What ever Hypocrites austerely talk
Of Purity, and Place, and Innocence.


Our Poet therefore, by the Virgin Majesty of Eve, means her Comely Blushes,
proceeding from some Unkindness conceived at his Advice.

V. 272. With sweet Austere Composure; In a more serious, yet sweet manner
replied. Austere, (...), Gr. serious, grave. Composure, Order, Mood, of
Componere, Lat. to set in order.

V. 273. Offspring of Heaven and Earth; Offspring of God thy maker, and of
Earth thy mould, Genesis 2. 7.

V. 278. At shut of Evening Flowers; A natural Notation of the Evening, the
time when Flowers close their sweet-breathing Buds.

V: 289. Misthought; A thinking amiss of her. Misthought, a word seeming coined
by our Poet, after the manner of Mistrust, Misdeed, Mistake, etc.

V. 291. Daughter of God and Man; Daughter of God thy maker, and of Man the
materials, Genesis 2. 22.

Ibid. Immortal Eve, for such thou art from Sin, and Blame entire; Untainted by
Sin, and Unblameable. Entire, Entier, Fr. Integer, Lat. uncorrupted, sound and
unviolated by Sin, as St. Paul, By one man sin entered into the world, and
death by sin, Romans 5. 12.

V. 296. Asperses with Dishonor; Casts a Disgrace and Disesteem upon the
Person tempted, for the Temptation presupposes him, (...) whom the Tryal's
made, weak and infirm, and liable to be prevailed on. Asperses, Aspergere, Lat.
to bespatter.

V. 300. Would resent; Would be very sensible of, would be extremely
concerned at: of Resentir, Fr. to have sense of.

V. 302. I labor to avert; Think not amiss then, if I endeavor to prevent
such a Disgrace from falling on thee when alone. Misdeem, judge not ill of; of
Mis and Deem. Deman, Sax. to judge. To avert, Avertere, Lat. to put by.
Affront, Bo. I. V. 391.

V. 310. Access in every Virtue; I from the influence of thy Eyes receive,
increase in all the Powers of Soul and Body. Access, Accessus, Lat. Addition.
Virtue, Virtus, Lat. Power.

V. 318. Domesti^ Adam; Careful of his Companion, his Spouse, from whose
Society all Families, and the World with them is filled. Domestic, Domesticus,
Lat. belonging to a Family, of Domus, Lat. a House. Matrimonial Love, as a
loving Husband: Matrimonialis, Lat. of Marriage, Lat. Matrimonium.

V. 333. From his Surmise proved false; From his Opinion of us mistaken, of
Surmise, Fr. an old disused word.

V. 336. Without exterior help sustained? What is Faith, Love, or nicest Virtue
to be valued while untried, if not to be maintained, without assistance of
another? Unassay'd, Inessaye, Fr. untried. Exterior, Lat. outward. Sustained,
Soustenu, Fr. supported, of the Lat. Sustinere.

V. 339. To single or combined; Let us not suspect our happy State, to be left
so imperfect and ill assured by God our wise Creator, as not to be safe and out
of danger, when attempted either alone or together. Singulus, Lat. one.
Combined, of Combinare, Lat. to join together.

V. 342. Fervently; Warmly, concernedly, of Fervere, Lat. to wax warm.
Deficient, Deficiens, Lat. wanting.

V. 352. For what obeys Reason is free; God endowed Man with Free Will, to
listen to, and obey the Dictates of right Reason, without which he cannot be
Master of his own Actions, which are no otherwise his, but by Election and
Choice, manifested and urged by God against Cain: If thou do well, shall thou
not be accepted; and if thou do not well, sin lies at the door: And unto thee
shall be his desire, and thou shall rule over him, Genesis 4. 7.

V. 353. And still Erect; Reason ought to be watchful, and standing on her
Guard. Erectus, Lat. heedful.

V. 359. Firm we subsist, etc. Faithful tho yet we stand, yet it is possible
for us to stray. Subsistere, Lat. to stand, to keep ones ground. Swerve,
Swerven, Belg. to go astray.

V. 361. Some specious Object suborned; Something fair to appearance, made use
of by our Enemy to impose upon Reason, our Guide. Specious, Speciosus, Lat.
fair, plausible. Suborned, Subornare, Lat. to instruct one how to deceive.
Deception, Deceptio, Lat. a Cheat.

V. 366. Thou sever not; If thou depart not from me. Sever, of the Ital.
Scevrare, Lat. Separare, to separate. Attest, of Attestari, Lat. to witness.

V. 373. Not Free, absents the more; For to stay against thy will, is worse
than thy Absence. Absentare, Lat. to withdraw.

V. 376. Thee Patriarch of Mankind; So spoke Adam, the first great Father of
Mankind. Patriarch, Bo. IV. Verse. 762.

V. 377. Persisted, yet submiss, tho last, etc. But Eve unaltered in Opinion,
meekly thus made reply, Persisted, of Persistere, Lat. to stand firm, to
persist in ones Opinion. Submiss, Submissus, Lat. gentle, meek.

V. 387. Oread or Dryad; Of Wood-Nymphs, some took care of, and were worshipped
on the Mountains, as the Oreades, named of (...), Gr. a Mountain. -- Quam mill
sec^tae,
Hinc atque hinc glomerantur Oreades. AEn. 1.


Others were called Dryades, the Goddesses of Groves, of (...), Gr. an Oak;
She-Divinities that, according to Pausanias, were not esteemed Immortal, but of
a Longevity equal to the Oaks they presided over. Dryadum Sylvas saltusque
sequamur. Geo. 3.

V. 388. But Delia's self surpassed; Delia. Diana, the Heavenly Huntress,
Daughter of Jupiter and Latona, named Delia of the Island Delos, in the Egean
Sea. -- Illa pharetram
Fert humero, gradiensque deas supereminet omnes. AEn. 1.


Borrowed of Homer: (...), etc.
(...).


V. 392. Guiltless of Fire had formed; Such as Art simple and imperfect, and
which as yet had not profaned the Fire provided. Fire (which the Poets say
Prometheus stole from Heaven, Jove's Autbentic Fire, Bo. IV. V. 719.) was of so
great use to Mankind, and esteemed so Sacred, that to employ it in forging
destructive Arms, was looked on as a Profanation and Infection of its Purer
Flame. Hence the vast Veneration of the Romans for their Vestal Fire, one of
their Poets tells us: Ast homini ferrum Lethale incude nefanda
Produxisse parum est, cum rastra and sarcula tantum
Assueti coquere, and marris and vomere lassi
Nescierint primi gladios excudere fabri. Juv. Sat. 15.


And in the same Satyr speaking of Fire, which he esteemed of Kin to that Pure
Etherial Element. Hinc gaudere libet, quod non violaverit ignem,
Quem summa caeli raptum de part Prometheus
Donavit terris: Elemento gratulor and te
Exultare reor. Ibid.


Rude, Lat Rudis, imperfect, and unpolished.

V. 393. To Pales; The Goddess of Shepherds and Pasturage, celebrated by Virgil
on that account. Nunc veneranda Pales, magno nunc ore sonandum. Geo. 3.

V. 394. Pomona when she fled Vertumnus; Pomona, the Goddess of Gardens,
Orchards, and Fruit, courted by many Admirers, but obtained at last by
Vertumnus King of Tuscia, who taught the Art of Gardening, described with a
Pruning Hook in one hand, and ripe Fruit in the other: The Romans by him
represented the Changes and Seasons of the Year, whence Vertumnus, or
Vertimnus, vertens annus, the fittest Husband for the Goddess of Fruit, read
their Story. Ovid, Met. l. 14. the description of Pomona suits well with Eve,
Adorned with her Gardning Tools. Rege sub hoc Pomona fuit -- Non Sylvas illa,
nec amnes;
Rus amat, and ramos faelicia poma ferentes.
Nec jaculo gravis est, sed adunca dextera falce, etc.


She had her Name a Pomis, Lat. Apples. -- Sed enim super abat amando
Hos quoque vertumnus: Neque erat faelicior illis. Ibid.


He is said to turn himself into diverse Shapes, according to the several
Seasons of the Year, a Gardner, a Plowman, a Reaper, etc. O quoties habitu duri
messoris arist as
Corbe tubit, etc. Ibid.
Quid mirare meas tot in uno corpore formas? Prop. l. 4.


V. 396. Ceres yet Virgin of Proserpina, etc. Or most like to Ceres in her
Virgin Youth, ever made the Mother of Proserpina by incestuous Jove. Ceres the
Daughter of Saturn and Ops, the Mother of Proserpina by her Brother Jupiter,
whom stolen by Pluto as she sought all over the World; she taught Mankind the
methods of Plowing and Sowing, thence esteemed a Goddess among the Husbandmen.
Prima Ceres unco glebam dimovit aratro;
Prima dedit fruges, alimentaque mitia terris
Prima dedit leges, Cereris sunt omnia munus. Ov. Met. l. 5.


Proserpina, Bo. IV. Verse. 269.

V. 409. With Hellish Rancour imminent; With Devilish Malice waited for thee,
prepared to hinder thy return. Rancour, Rancoeur, Fr. confirmed and settled
Hatred. Imminent, Imminens, Lat. watching for, ready to fall on. Intercept, Bo.
V. Verse. 871.

V. 416. The whole included rare; All Mankind their Offspring, included and
contained in them, shut up as yet in their Loins. Included, Inclusus, Lat. of
Includere, to shut up.

V. 427. The Roses blushing round about her glowed; A Grove of bushing Roses
seemed to be on fire round her. -- Quam sepsit Rosa plurima circum
Flagrantes perfusa genas, queis vividus ignem
Subjecit rubor. AEn. 12.


V. 429. Whose Head, tho gay Carnation; Tho of a fine Carnation Color.
Carnadino, Ital. Color Carnis, the color of Flesh fley'd, that is, Red mixed
with a little White.

V. 436. Then voluble and bold; Then boldly rouling himself to and fro.
Volubilis, Lat. rouling along as Serpents do. Ille volubilibus squamosos
nexibus orbs
Torquet. Met. l. 3.


V. 437. Among thick woven Arborets; Among Shrubs and Bushes twisted together.
Arboret, of Arbret, Fr. a little Tree, a Bush. The Hand of Eve, the Handiwork
and Industry of Eve.

V. 440. Or of Revived Adonis; See Bo. I. V. 446. The Feasts kept in honor of
Adonis, were celebrated at Athens in the Autumn, and all sorts of Fruits
offered to him, as delighting in Gardens. Venus is said to have prevailed with
Proserpina, the Infernal Goddess, to restore Dead Adonis; but the black Deity
was so enamored of the lovely Youth, that she gave him leave to visit her in
these pleasant Gardens six Months in a Year, but kept him the other half of it
to her self in her dark Dominions. Orpheus, by him meant the Sun, (who might be
allowed beautiful Gardens, and made his Death and Restoration expressive of his
sad Recess from, and Enlivening return to us. (...),
(...)
(...). Orph. in Adon.


Revived, Redivivus, Lat. restored to Life. Adonis, seems to be derived of
(...), Gr. Pleasure; and it is very probable, that the Gardens of Adonis were
an ignorant imitation of that of Eden, which St. Hierom translated according to
the signification of (...), Voluptatem, Pleasure.

V. 441. Alcinous, Bo. V. Verse. 341. His Famous Gardens are celebrated by
Homer, (...). Proxima Phaeacum faelicibus obsita pomis
Rura -- Met. l. 13.


Ibid. Of old Laertes Son; Ulisses, Son of Laertes King of Ithaca, entertained
by Alcinous in his unlucky return from the Destruction of Troy, OA. H. Nam mihi
Laertes pater est, Arcesius illi
Jupiter huic. Met. l. 13.


Host, a Guest; of Host, Fr. of Hospes, Lat. the same.

V. 442. Or that, not Mystic, etc. Or that Garden, not Typical and Mystic, but
Real, which Solomon made for the Entertainment of his fair Egyptian Queen. This
Garden is called, The house of the Forest of Lebanon, 1 King. 7. 2. by the
Chaldee, Domum refrigerii Regum; The King's Summer House; named of Lebanon, not
for its Situation there, but its pleasant Resemblance of it. Millo (at first a
public Meeting Place in the vast Valley adjoining to Mount Sion) was by Solomon
converted into Gardens of Pleasure, and Banqueting-houses, for his Egyptian
Spouse, which was one of the Pretenses of Jeroboam's Rebellion, 1 King. 9. 15,
24. and 1 King. 11. 26. The Sapient King Solomon, 1 King. 3. 12. Sapiens, Lat.
wise. Egyptian Spouse, 1 King. 3. 1. Egyptian, of Egypt. Bo. I. V. 339. Mystic,
(...), Mysterious, Bo IV. V. 312.

V. 446. Sewers annoy the Air; Common Sewers fowl infect the Air. Sewer, Evier,
Fr. and Eauvier, a Sink, to discharge and carry away Filth.

V. 450. Tedded Grass or Kine; Of trodden Grass or Cows. Tedded, of the Fr.
Tordre, platted, trampled on. Kine, the Plural of Kuh, Teut. a Cow.

V, 456. This flowery Plat; This Bed of Flowers. Plat, Fr. Plain, as Grass-Plat,
an open plain place covered with Grass, of (...), Gr. broad. The sweet Recess,
the sweet retiring Room of Eve; Recessus, Lat. a Retreat.

V. 457. Her Heavenly Form Angelic, etc. Her Heavenly Beauty, like that of
Angels, but more soft and sweetly winning. Form, Forma, Lat. Beauty. Formae
conscia conjux. AEn. 8.

Gesture, Bo. I. Verse. 590.

V. 460. Over-awed his Malice, and with Rapine sweet, etc. Her charming
Innocence, and every Grace, that waited on each Action, the winning Air, and
Comeliness that each Motion did inspire, amazed his Malice. and with pleasing
Force, and sweet surprising Violence, disarmed his Fierceness of the fierce
Design wherewith 'twas fraught. Bereaved, Bo. VI. Verse. 903.

V. 463. The Evil One abstracted stood, etc. For that short space, the Author
of all Evil stood separated and despoiled, even of the Evil Intentions he
brought with him. Abstracted, Bo. VIII. V. 462.

V. 465. Stupidly good; Dully and unactively good, as withheld from doing
harm, to heedless and unwary Innocence; moap'd and amazed into so much
Goodness, as for a minute to lose the desire of doing the harm he had in hand.
Stupidly, of Stupidus, Lat. senseless, amazed.

V. 471. Fierce Hate he recollects; He rallies his fiercest Hatred, almost
disarmed and allayed by Eves soft Charms. Gratulating, rejoicing in his
mischievous Design, eases thus his malicious Mind: Gratulari, Lat. to rejoice,
to be overjoyed at.

V. 474. Compulsion thus transported; With what pleasing force have ye carried
me, beyond the design that brought us hither! Compulsio, Lat. constraint,
force. Transported, Book VIII. Verse. 529.

V. 481. Opportune to all Attempts; Open and easy to be set on. Opportune, Bo.
II. V. 397. Attempts, Bo. I. V. 642.

V. 483. Whose higher Intellectual; Whose greater judgment, and more lofty
knowledge, I avoid. Intellectual, Intellectualis, Lat. of Intellectus,
Understanding.

V. 486. Foe not informidable; An Enemy not to be slighted and despised.
Informidabilis, Lat. not to be feared. Exempt from wound, not to be attacked by
outward force, Invulnerable; Exemptus, Lat. to be freed from.

V. 487. So much has Hell debased, etc. So much a Coward has the Hell I always
bear about me made me, and perpetual Pain rendered me weak and feeble, that I
fear Adam of Courage haughty, and of Limb Heroic-built, undaunted and secure
from all my mighty Power, while Sinless. Debased, of Desbaisser, Fr. to be of
less worth and price.

V. 490. Tho Terror be in Love; Tho Love be awful, and Beauty command respect.

V. 491. Inmate bad; As lodged in the Serpent. Inmate, of In and Mate, a
Companion in the same House as Lodgers are. Addressed Bo. VI. V. 296.

V. 496. Not with indented Wave, etc. Not moving in and out, and wrigling
himself along upon the Ground, as all of his kind do ever since. Indented Wave,
a Motion in and out, wrything to and fro; for a Wave of the Sea, is of Wagian,
Sax. to move: Unda nihil aliud est nisi aqua mota. Indented, is of Charta
indentata, Deeds and Conveyances, indented and notched in the top answerable to
one another: Of Dens, Lat. a Tooth, the hollowings showing, as if they were bit
out.

V. 498. Circular Base of rising Folds, a surging Maze, etc. But on his bottom
the round Foundation of his rising Rings, round above round, that seemed an
upright Maze. Surging, Surgens, Lat. rising as Waves do, one over another.
Maze, Bo. II. V. 261. Ille volubilibus squamosos nexibus orbs,
Torquet, and immensos saltu sinuatur in arcus,
Ac media plus part leves erectus in aur^s
Despicit omne nemus. Met. l. 3.


V. 500. Carbuncle his Eyes; His lofty Head crowned with a Crest, his flaming
Eyes burnt like two Carbuncles. Crest, Bo. VII. V. 443. Carbuncle, Bo. III. V.
596. Cristis presignis and auro, Igne micant oculi. Met. l. 3.
Ardentesque oculos suffecti sanguine and igni. AEn. 2.


Pliny reports Wonders of the size of Serpents, that in India they are so
monstrous, as to twist about, and master Elephants; in Ethiopia some have been
20 Cubits long, Lib. 9. c. 12, 13, 14. Famous was that destroyed by Regulus at
the River Bragada, near Utica, of 120 Foot long, assaulted like a Town by
Engines and battering Rams. And strange was that Indian Serpent esteemed
Sacred, against which the Inhabitants entreated Alexander, which, roused by the
noise of his marching Army, showed his Head only out of his Den, computed to be
70 Cubits long: Ejus oculi ad magni clypei Macedonici magnitudinem accessisse
dicuntur. AElian. l. 5. c. 21. Hist. Anim.

V. 501. With burnished Neck of verdant Gold, etc. His sleek Neck shone like
polished Gold, shaded with Green, born upright in the midst of his
Wreath-rounds, which on the Grass floated vast and huge. Burnished, of Brunir,
Fr. Brunire, Ital. to polish, that is, make glossy by filing smooth, well
applied to the sleek Neck of a Serpent. Verdant, Bo. VII. V. 310. Spires, Bo.
I. V. 223. Redundant, Redundans, of Redundare, Lat. to exceed, to be over and
above, Book V. V. 438. Caeruleae cui terga notae, maculosus and auro
Squamam incendebat fulgor: Cen nubibus arcus
Mill trahit varios adverso sole colores.


Of the Serpent that came out of Anchises his Tomb: AEn. 5.

V. 506. Hermione and Cadmus; Cadmus, the Son of Agenor King of the Phenicians,
married Hermione, the Daughter of Mars and Venus. He founded Thebes in Beotia,
which for diverse Misfortunes he quitted; and coming to Illyria, (now
Sclavonia,) he and his Wife were turned into Serpents, for having killed one
sacred to Mars. -- Longisque erroribus actus
Contigit Illyricos profuga cum conjuge fines, etc.
Si sacer ille mea trajectus cuspide serpens
Ipse precor serpens, in longam porrigar alvum. Met. l. 4.


V. 507. Or the God in Epidaurus; Into which Esculapius, (the Son of Apollo,)
who was worshipped at Epidaurus, a famous City of Peloponesus, changed himself;
when entreated, he removed to Rome, to stay the Plague that raged there. See
Bo. I. V. 34. -- Cum cristis aureus altis
In Serpente Deus, praenuncia sibila misit
Pectoribusque tenus, media sublimis in aede
Constitit: Atque oculos circumtulit igne micantes, etc.
AEquore pacato patrias Epidaurius aras
Linquit -- Met. l. 15.


V. 508. Ammonian Jove with Olympias; Philip of Macedon was so enamored of
Olympias, that he Espoused her tho of obscure Parentage. Some time after their
Marriage, a great Serpent was seen lying by her asleep, which cooled the
Affection of her Royal Lover, thinking it either to be a God in that disguise,
or fearing his Queen, as an Enchantress: Plut. in the Life of Alex. The
flattering and fabulous Greeks, to please their vainglorious Monarch, reported
That he was begot by Jupiter Ammon in the form of a Snake; which so far
prevailed with him, as to make him undertake that dismal Journey, over the
Desolate Lybian Sands, to his Temple; whereof the Priest was easily persuaded
into the mistake of (...), in stead of (...), with which he saluted him, the
one signifying Son of Jupiter, the other only My Son. The same Juggler being
asked by him, If all the Murderers of his Father Philip had been detected and
punished? Answered, The Traitors against his supposed Father were all justly
punished, but bid him have a care of thinking his true and immortal Father
capable of any Violence.

Ibid. Tum secundum quietem, visus ei dicitur Draco, quem matter Olympias
Alebat. Cic. Ammonian, Bo. IV. V. 276.

V. 510. Or Capitoline with her who bore Scipio, etc. Publius Cornelius Scipio,
Surnamed The Affrican, by conquering Hanibal, (that had almost ruined the Roman
Empire,) and ending the second Punic War, was supposed to be the Son of Jupiter
Capitolinus, who conversed with his Mother in the shape of a S^rpent, which
neither ^e himself, nor any of the wise Romans, gave credit to. Cicero relating
the Opinions of the Augurs concerning Roscius, (the famous Comedian,) embraced
when young by a harmless Snake, says, Miror Deos immortales Histrioni futuro,
claritatem ostendisse, nullam ostendisse Affricano. De Divin. l. 2. sect. 66.
This worthy Roman, well styled, the Height of Rome, the Renown of his Country,
was very young when he undertook that daring Enterprise against that
experienced Commander, but of such steady Courage, so wary in his Conduct, and
so adorned with Temperance, Continence, Clemency, and all other prevailing
Virtues, that far from gaping after Godhead, he got a Name more to be valued,
than all the Conquests of that rash and short lived Hero, Alexander. Silius
Ital. has adorned his Poem of the second Punic War with this Fabulous Serpent:
Ecce per obliquum caeli, squallentibus auro
Effulgens maculis, ferri inter nubila visus
Anguis, and ardenti radiare per era sulco
Quaque ad caeliferi tendit plaga littus Atlantis,
Perlabi resonante polo, bis terque coruscum
Addidit augurio fulmen pater --
-- Iret qua ducere divos
Perspicuum, and patrio monstraret semita signo. Lib. 15.


Jupiter was styled Capitoline: Capitolinus, Lat. of Capitolium, his Temple at
Rome, begun by Tarquinius Priscus on Mount Tarpeius, named Capitolinus, a
Capite. from a Human Head there found.

V. 515. Where the Wind veers often; Often changes. Veer, of Virer, Fr. to turn
about.

V. 516. His tortuous Train curled, etc. Turned his twisted Train in many
curling Rings. Tortuous, Tortuosus, Lat. crooked, twisted. Lure, Bo. II. V. 664.

V. 522. Then at Circean call the Herd disguised; All Beasts of the Field used
to play and sport before her, more obedient to her Voice, than Men turned into
Beasts by the famous Inchantress Circe were at her beck. Circe Daughter of the
Sun, and the Nymph Perses, poisoned her Husband King of the Sarmatae, and fled
into Italy to the Promontory called still Circello, which enclosed on the North
side by the Marshes (Promptinae Paludes) shows like an Island; there she
changed Ulysses Companions into Swine, etc. (...)
(...).
Quos hominum ex facie, Dea saeva potentibus herbis
Induerat Circe in vultus ac tergaferarum. AEn. 7.
-- Perque ferarum
Agmen adulantem media procedit ab aula. Met. l. 14.


Disport, Disporto, Ital. Play.

V. 525. His Turret Crest; His lofty Head. Turret, Turriculus, Lat. a little
Tower, or as Turritus, Lat. lofty like a Tower. -- Gemino demittunt brachia muro
Turriti scopuli -- AEn. 3.


V. 527. Dumb Expression; Made by Signs, and his gentle Gesture, and fawning
Behavior.

V 530. Organic, or Impulse of Vocal Air; That the Devil moved the Serpents
Tongue, and used it as an Instrument to form that tempting Speech he made to
Eve, is the Opinion of some; that he formed a Voice by impression of the
sounding Air; distant from the Serpent is that of others: Of which our Author
has left the Curious to their choice. St. Austin was of the former Opinion:
Diabolus in serpente locutus est, utens eo velut organo, movensque ejus naturam
eo modo, quo vere ille movere and moveri illa potuit, ad exprimendos verborum
sonos and signa corporalia, per quae mulier suadentis intelligeret voluntatem.
Lib. 11. c. 27. Genesis ad li^te. Organic, (...), Gr. Instrumental. Impulse, Bo.
III. V. 120. Vocal, Bo. V. Verse. 204. Fraudulent, Fraudulentus, Lat. deceitful.

V. 549. His Proem tuned; So fawned the Tempter, and pleasingly began to usher
in his Discourse by Flattery, the most dangerous Introduction. Proem, (...),
Gr. Praecentio and Praeludium and Proaemium, Lat. a Voluntary played before the
Song or Music chiefly intended: Hence the beginning of a Discourse or Oration,
Fav^ris conciliandi gratia, well joined with Tuned, to show how easily those
winning words of Admiration, Found their way into the Heart of Eve. Glozed, Bo.
III. V. 93.

V. 557. Mute to all Articulate Sound; Dumb and unable to utter any
distinguishable Sound. Here our Author has obviated all the Difficulties that
Interpreters raise concerning the Srepent's Discourse with Eve, who make it a
wonder, how ^he came not to suspect some ^urking Mischief from his becoming
speakable, who was created mute; which is so handled, as to forward the
Temptation, rather than to have affrighted her from it. Josephus. the great
Historian of the Jews, was credulous to that degree, as to believe the Serpent,
before the Malediction pronounced upon him, had both the use of a Tongue
articulate, and Feet asso, Bo. I. Chapter 2. Articulate Articulatus, Lat. distinct,
distinguishable; Vox articulata est hominum, confusa animalium.

V. 558. The latter I dem^rre; As to the latter, (whether Brutes have any share
or sort of Reason) I am at a stand* I suspend my judgment; because something
like it shows it self in their Looks and Actions. A Demurre, is a Law term,
when in a difficult Point a stop is put to the Proceedings, till the Case be
fully and plainly argued: Of Demurer, Fr. to stop, to stay.

V. 562. Redouble then this Miracle; Repeat this wonder, do this strange thing
once again. Redoubler, Fr. Reduplicare, Lat. to do once again. Miracle,
Miraculum, Lat. a wonder. Resplendent, Bo. III. V. 361. Abject, Bo. I. V. 312.

V. 574. Apprehended nothing high; Understood nothing above the reach of other
Beasts, of Apprehendere, Lat. to learn.

V. 581. Then smell of sweetest Fenel; The contraction of Faeniculum, Lat. an
Herb very useful to Serpents, as at V. 86. of this Book.

Ibid. Teats; The Duggs: Of Tette, of Tetter, Fr. to suck, of kin to (...), a
Breast, and (...), Gr. a Nurse.

V. 585. Those fair Apples; See Bo. I. V. 2. It Is difficult to divine what Tree
the forbidden one was: Non enim interdicta est homini quod per se mala esset,
aut ipsi exitialis, nec scientia boni and mali, naturalis ipsius erat effectus:
sed ad probandam tantum hominis obedientiam, ejus fructus ipsi fuerat
interdictus. Aug. l. 13. c. 20. de Civit. Dei.

V. 598. Sa^ed; Satisfied: Satiatus, Lat.

V. 602. To Speculations high, etc. I employed my Thoughts in deep and
difficult Enquiries. Speculatio, Lat. a Specula, a watching and prying into the
abstruse things of Nature. Physicus est speculator venatorque naturae. Cic.

V. 605. Or middle; In the Air, the Element placed between, and as our Author,
spun out between, Heaven and Earth: Bo. VII. V. 241. Capacious, large, capable
of, Bo. VII. V. 290.

V. 607. In thy Divine Semblance; In thy Goddess-like Appearance, in thy Divine
Resemblance: Semblance, Fr. likeness.

V. 609. Equivalent or second; No Beauty comparable to thine, none that can
equal, or come near it. Equivalent, AEquivalents, Lat. of equal value.
Secundus, Lat. second, next to. Haud ulli veterum virtute secundus. AEn. 11.

Importune, Importunus, Lat. unseasonable, troublesome.

V. 613. The spirited sly Snake; So seemed to say the subtle Serpent, aided by
wicked Spirit that possessed him. Spirited, of Spiritus, Lat. inspired. Viperam
inspirans animam. AEn. 11.

V. 615. Thy over-praising Leaves in doubt, etc. Thy extolling me so extremely,
makes me doubt of the wondrous Power, thou pretendest to have experienced in
that Tree, to raise and enlarge thy Faculties to nobler Speculations.

V. 623. Grow up to their Provision; Till Mankind be multiplied, in proportion
to the large Provision made for 'em, and more hands help to unload Nature, and
deliver her of her bounteous Bearth: Of the word to Bear, to bring forth, as
Trees do. Birth, to be Born, as Animals are.

V. 625. Adder; Natter, Ger. Natrix, Lat. a Water-Snake.

V. 630. If thou accept my conduct; If thou please to take me for your Guide.
Conduct, Conductus, Lat. of Conducere, to guide.

V. 631. Swiftly roul'd in Tangles; Forward swift he rouls in many Rings, and
made his crooked Path seem strait and easy, on sudden Mischief bent.
Int^icate, Bo. II. V. 877.

V. 633. Hope elevates; Hope of succeeding raises his haughty head, and Joy
shines on his Crest. Elevare, Lat. to raise.

V. 634. As when a wandering Fire, etc. As when a moving Fire,
Consisting of fat Vapors, which the Night
Thickens, and the cold Air encloseth round,
By motion's blown at last into a blaze,
Which often they say, etc.


Compact, Compactus, Lat. made up of. Unctuous, Unguinosus, Lat. fat, oily.
Condenses, Bo. I. V. 429. Invirons, Invironner, Fr. to enclose, encompass.
Agitation, Agitatio, Lat. motion. A Philosophic desciption of those wandering
Fires (Ignes Fatui) that mislead unwary Travelers benighted, to which the
First Seducer Satan is well compared.

V. 639. Blazing with delusive Light; Shining with deceitful Light. Delusive,
of Deludere, Lat. to cheat. Hovering, Bo. II. V. 717.

V. 645. Tree of Prohibition; The forbidden Tree: Of Prohibitio, Lat. a
forbidding.

V. 649. The credit of whose Virtue* The belief and truth of whose vast virtue
must remain with thee. Credit, Fr. of Credere, Lat. to believe.

V. 653. That Command sole Daughter of his Voice; Left this as his only
immediate Command, as to all things else left at full liberty, to be guided by
our Reason, as to the rest our Lawgiver. Daughter of his Voice, according to
the Hebraism, (...). So Arrows are called, The sons of the quiver, Lam. 3. 13.
And Corn, The son of the threshing floor, Isa. 21. 10.

V. 656. Indeed? Has God then said? etc. Yea, has God said, Ye shall not eat
of every Tree of the Garden? Genesis 3. 1. In which our Author has followed the
Chaldee Paraphrase, interpreting the Heb. (...), indeed. Is it true. that God
has forbid you to Eat of the Fruits of Paradise, as if he had forbidden 'em to
taste, not of one, but all the Trees; another of Satan's Sly Insinuations.
Quamvis enim, quod sub interrogatione profertur, nec verum, nec falsum sit;
mendacium tamen, hic serpens manifest sibitavit, rem sicut erat, se nescire
simulans, ut paulatim fell suo, miseram audientis venenaret animam. Ruper. l.
3. c. 4. de Trinit. This Heb. Particle, (...), plainly shows, that the short
and summary account that Moses gives of the Serpent's Temptation, has respect
to some previous Discourse, which could, in all probability, be no other, than
what our Poet has pitched upon.

V. 661. Of this fair Tree amidst the Garden; It is evident that the Tree of
Life, as well as that of the Knowledge of Good and Evil, grew in the midst of
the Garden, Genesis 2. 9. Now God having interdicted only the last of these, Genesis
2. 16, 17. Eve seems to prevaricate, by answering the Serpent, Of the fruit of
the tree which is in the midst of the garden, Genesis 3. 3. equally applicable to
the Tree of Life, as to that forbidden one. Ergo jam impatienter ferebat and
murmurabat mulier, quod quasi parcus vel avarus Deus, praetiosa medii Paradisi
reservaret, and viliora quaeque per circuitum colligenda, in cibum homini
concessisset. Rupert.

V. 663. Nor touch it lest you die, Genesis 3. 3. Which words, because not
recorded where the Command is first mentioncd, Genesis 2. 16. are supposed by some
Interpreters to have been the Injunction and Addition of Adam, to deterr his
Wife even from touching the Interdicted Tree; by others, as an Aggravation of
God's Severity, added by Eve her self in this dangerous Dialogue, to whom God's
Command began already to gtow grievous, and therefore by her misreported. Lest
you die, seems also a diminution, and slighting of positive threatening them
with most certain Death: Haec verba mulieris, jam vitiatae mentis indicia sunt.
Diminuit, quia cum certa and affirmativa enunciatione dixerit Deus, in
quocunque die comederis ex eo, morte morieris, haec dubium vel frivolum volens
esse illud, ne forte inquit moriamur. Rupert.

V. 668. Fluctuates disturbed; Moves much concerned, shows by his outward
motion the concern and agitation of his Mind. Immoderate agitatus and
fluctuans. Cice. de Orat.

Fluctuare, Lat. to move up and down, as Waves agitated by the Wind. And in act
raised, acting more loftily.

V. 671. Orator renowned in Athens, etc. As when long since some famous
Athenian Orator. Athens, Athenae, Lat. was one of the most ancient and noble
Cities of Greece, the Capital of Attica, the Mistress of Arts, and by them of
the World more than Rome ever was by her Arms. The Great Athenian Orator was
Demosthenes.

Rome, Roma, Lat. the Capital City of Italy, and Sovereign of the whole World,
her great Orator and Oracle was Cicero. Orator, Lat. one that speaks well, and
fluently, according to Cicero's description: Is Orator erit, mea quidem
sententia, hoc tam gravi dignus nomine, qui quaeounque res inciderit, quae sit
dictione explicanda, prudenter, composite, ornate, and memoriter dicat, cum
quadam etiam actionis dignitate. De Orat.

V. 672. Where Eloquence flourished, since mute; In which free and famous
Commonwealths, the Art of Speaking well was cherished, since every where
Tongue-tied and Dumb. Eloquence, Eloquentia, Lat. the Art of Speaking well,
gracefully, and copiously on any Subject.

V. 673. Stood in himself collected; Stood silent as yet, and summed up in
himself, while every part and motion of his Body, every graceful Action, gained
him Attention e're he began to speak. Collected, of Colligere, Lat. to gather
together.

V. 676. Of Preface brooking, etc. As not enduring to lose time by any Speech
made to obtain favorable Attention. Preface, Praefatio, Lat. a Praefando, the
Beginning and Introduction of a Speech, intended to win the favor of the
Auditory. Brooking, of Brucan, Sax. to digest, for what the Stomach cannot
digest, it will not brook, but discharge.

V. 678. All impassioned; Suiting his Passions to his Discourse, graceing his
Discourse with becoming Concern.

V. 680. Mother of Science; Of Knowledge, Scientia, Lat.

V. 682. To trace the Ways, etc. To discover the Designs of highest Beings,
Angels and God himself, how wise and incomprehensible soever esteemed. To
trace, Tracer, Fr. to follow by the Foot, as Huntsmen do. Agent, of Agens, Lat.
of Agere, to do.

V. 687. It gives you Life to Knowledge; It makes you live a Life more perfect
in all higher Knowledge, as being the Tree of Knowledge, much mistaken by easy
seduced Eve.

Ibid. By the Threatner; An odious Name given by the Tempter to GOD, the
Supreme Goodness, as if he had threatened our first Parents with Death; not so
much to deterr them from Disobedience, as to affright 'em from enjoying that
fair Fruit, useful to augment their Knowledge, and to raise sublimer
Understanding.

V. 688. Me who have touched and tasted; Our Poet has so finely handled the
Serpent's Temptation, as to answer all the Allegations made of Eve's wonderful
Simplicity, etc. He introduces the Devil, reasoning in the Serpent, (...) so
strange a degree, pretending, by his eating of the forbidden Tree, to have
obtained both Speech and Reason, exalted and ennobled thereby above all other
Creatures, that the Objections Pe^erius puts into her mouth, would have been of
no defense to her. Dixisset mulier serpenti, si ita est, ut dicis, cur tu non
edis ex ista arbore, ut quod mihi promittis, ipse consequaris? Abi, prior
comede, ut ex te Periculum faciam, utrum vera sint quae loqueris, mihique
polliceris. Lib. 6. de Laps. Hom.

V. 693. For such a petty Trespass; For so small a fault. Trespass, of
Trespasser, Fr. to exceed, to go beyond: A Trespass, is the going beyond the
Limits of the Law, the Bounds of our Duty, of the Lat. Trans and Passus; so
Death, Trespass, Fr. is a passing beyond Life's Limits, the Punishment of our
Transgressions. Petty, Petit, Fr. small.

V. 696. Detered not from Atchieving; Discouraged not from Attempting, etc.
Deterred, of Deterrere, Lat. to affright. Atchieving, Bo. II. V. 364.

V. 699. If what is Evil be real; If there be any thing really Evil in this
World, wherein GOD the Creator made all, and acknowledged all that he made was
Good, Genesis 1. 31. Real, Bo. VIII. V. 575. Eve had been forewarned of the
dangerous Evil of Temptation and Sin; there was no other Evil in nature to be
dreaded or avoided by her, tho slyly here insinuated by Satan, to hide his dark
Design.

V. 702. The fear it self of Death removes the fear; Justice is inseparable
from the very Being and ^^ssence of God, so that could he be unjust, he would
be no longer God, and then neither to be obeyed or feared; so that the fear of
Death, (for discovering of Evil to avoid it,) which does imply Injustice in
God, destroys it self, because God can as well cease to be, as to be just. A
Satanic Syllogism.

V. 704. Low and ignorant his Worshippers; The consequence of, Ye shall be as
Gods, Genesis 3. 5. as wise and knowing as He, and then no longer his Worshippers.
The account Moses gives of Man's Fall, is by most of the Fathers, and
School-Divines, esteemed Historical, and as such Commented on by them, tho they
often subjoyn diverse Allegorical and Tropological Interpretations. And this
insnaring Discourse of Satan in the Serpent, tempting of Eve, is remarkable for
five notorious and abominable Fashoods. First, That God, as to the Death
wherewith he threatened them, was not to be believed, or would not keep his
word; Ye shall not surely die, Genesis 3. 4. Secondly, That God withheld and
envied them some extraordinary Good, and unknown Happiness, by forbidding them
the Enjoyment of the Prohibited Fruit, to awe and keep 'em low his Worshippers,
For God does know, that in the day ye eat thereof, then your eyes shall be
opened, Genesis 3. 5. Thirdly, That the Interdicted Tree was endued with a Power
and Virtue able to advance their Understanding to a higher pitch; Ye shall be
knowing, Genesis 3. 5. Fourthly, That it was possible for Mankind to attain to
knowledge so perfect and admirable, as thereby to become like God, Ye shall be
as Gods knowing, Ibid. Lastly, That they might obtain this complete Resemblance
of the Divinity, by violating his Commands, and eating of the forbidden Fruit,
Knowing both good and evil as they know, Ibid.

V. 711. Internal Man; Inwardly Man, as to my heightened Understanding.
Internal, Internus, Lat. inward.

V. 714. Human, to put on God's; By raising the dim Understanding to that
transcendent State of Gods, the brightest Intellectual Being. The Phrase of
Putting on, is not only familiar inScripture, to denote the highest and most
exalted Changes that can happen to Humanity, in Immortality, and glorious
Eternity, as, This mortal must put on immortality, etc. 1 Cor. 15. v. 53. where
the Original word is (...), signif. Induere, Lat. to put on. But Virgil uses it
in his Circean Metamorphoses: Quos hominum ex facie Dea saeva potentibus herbis
Ind^erat Circe in vultus and terga ferarum. AEn. 7.


A Change relating and resembling this wrought by the fatal and forbidden Tree.

V. 730. Can Envy dwell in Heavenly Breasts? An imitation of Virgil's: Tantaene
animis caelestibus irae? AEn. 1.

V. 732. Goddess Humane; Thou Earthly Deity, Goddess of this fair World.

V. 733. Replete with Guile; Full of Deceit, his cunning and artful Discourse.
Replete, Repletus, Lat. filled.

V. 738. Impregn'd with Reason, etc. Big with seeming Reason, and undeniable
Truth. Impregn'd, Bo. IV. V. 500.

V. 743. Solicited her longing Eye; Enticed and provoked her desiring Eye, of
Sollicitare, Lat. to tempt, to entice; so used by Virg. Ast ubi concubitus
primos I am not a voluptas
Sollicitat -- Geo. 3.


V. 744. To her self she mused; Thus she bethought her self, thus she thought
in her mind: Of Muser, Fr. to think, to study on. Pausing, Bo. V. Verse. 64.

V. 748. Gave Elocution; Gave speech and utterance to the Dumb. Elocutio, Lat.
a fluent and ready Speech.

V. 760. Such Prohibitions bind not; Such Commands oblige us not, do not bind
us to obey and observe them. Prohibitions; Bo. IV. V. 433.

V. 773 Rather what know to fear under this Ignorance, etc. What should I fear?
Or rather, how do I know what is to be feared? While for want of tasting this
Instructive Tree, I am utterly ignorant both of Good and Evil, of GOD our
Creator, and his Commands, Death or Penalty, or Mortality, the Punishment
threatening our Disobedience. Law, of Loy, Fr. Lex, Lat. Penalty, Bo. VII. V.
545.

V. 778. Of Virtue to make wise; Of Power to enlighten the Understanding. And
when the Woman saw, that the tree was good for food, pleasant to the eyes, and
a tree to be desired to make one wise, Genesis 2. 6.

V. 782. Earth felt the Wound, and Nature sighing, etc. Earth felt the Wound
given her by violating the forbidden Fruit, and Universal Nature fetched a
sigh, that shook her firm Foundation, etc. -- Tot^sque perhorruit Orbis
Attonitus tanto subitae terrore ruinae. Met. l. 1.


V. 791. Greedily she ingorged, etc. Greedily she glutted her self, without any
consideration, and thought not that she was devouring what would not maintain
Life, but breed and bring forth all devouring Death. Engorger, Fr. to raven, to
eat greedily.

V. 803. Till dieted by thee, I grow mature, etc. Till keeping constantly to
thy Fruit as the most divine Diet, I become perfect and absolute in all
knowledge as the Gods, who know every thing. As before, Godhead was not from
her thought; ran in her mind, V. 790. Eve, sick (as she supposed) of innocent
Ignorance, was resolved to diet her self with the Fruit of the Tree of
knowledge of good and evil, as Physicians prescribe a certain Diet to their
disordered Patients. Diet, of (...), Gr. as (...), Gal. Mature, ripe, thence
perfect and complete: Bo. I. Verse. 660. Animi maturus Alethes. AEn. 9. Wise,
Prudent.

V. 807. Experience, next to thee I owe; Next I owe my Thanks to the
Experience, my best guide Experientia, Lat. Trial, the Mistress of Mankind.

V. 812. Heaven is high and remote to see; According to Lucretius: Omnis enim
per se divum natura necesse est
Semota ab nostris rebus, sejunctaque long, Lib. 1.


V. 821. Without Copartner; Without a Sharer and Partner in my new acquired
knowledge. Copartners, and Coparceners, of Con and Particeps, Lat. are
Law-terms, for such as have equal shares in the Inheritance of their Ancestors.

V. 829. I extinct; Dead, destroyed, the Lamp of Life being quenched.
Extinctus, Lat. dead, of Extinguere, Lat. to put out.

V. 837. Sciential Sap; Eve (probably enough) adored and reverenced the
Violated Tree, as conceiving some wonderful Power dwelt therein, which had
bestowed upon the Plant the Juice and Sap productive of extraordinary
knowledge; as if not made by God, to grow, among the rest, out of the Earth;
but being able to make others that eat it such, of its own Innate Virtue: As
hinted before. -- If they all things, who enclosed
Knowledge of Good and Evil in this Tree,
That who so eats thereof, forthwith attains
Knowledge without their leave? V. 722.


Sciential, Scientialis, Lat. belonging to knowledge; Scientia, Lat.

V. 845. Divine of something ill misgave him; Yet often his Heart, foreboding and
foretelling some Disaster, made him fear all was not well; Told him the joy he
promised to his Thoughts, and the new solace in her Return, so long expected,
would disappoint him. Divine, Divinus, Lat. one that foretells what shall
happen. Falli sperat Chaldaeos, caeterosque Divinos. Cic.

So Divinare futura. So Hel^nus foretelling AEneas what was to befall him, is
said, Canere Divino ex ore Sacerdos. AEn. 3.

Misgave, gave him to think something was amiss. Mis, as the Fr. Mes, in
composition depraving and depressing the word to which it is joined, as
Misdeed, Mishap, etc.

V. 846. He the faultring measure felt; He found his Heart kept not true time,
he felt the false and intermitting Measure; the natural description of our
Minds foreboding ill, by the unequal beatings of the Heart and Pulse
discovered. Faulter, of the Span. Faltar, of the Fr Faillir, to fail, to be
wanting.

V. 851. That downy smiled; That covered with soft Down looked sweetly. Down,
of the Belg. Dun, thin, that Lanugo, the soft Beard on Fruits. Ipse ego cana
legam tenera languine mala. Ecl. 2.

V. 852. And Ambrosial Smell diffused; Virgil's very words: Et liquidum
Ambrosiae diffudit odorem. Geo. 4^

Ambrosial, Bo. II. V. 245. Diffused, Bo. III. V. 137.

V. 854. In her face Excuse came Prologue and Apology; In her looks Excuse sat
ready to declare the Reason of, and to defend-the Occasion of her long Absence.
Excuse, Excusatio, Lat. of Excusare, Lat. to lessen an objected Fault.
Prologue, (...), Gr. the Introduction, or entering into, or opening the matter
of a Speech; and among the Poets, a Speech made before the Play, to entreat the
favor of the Auditory. Apology, (...), Gr. a Defense, that part of an Oration,
in which the Accusation is endeavored to be avoided and wiped off. To Prompt,
Prontare, Ital. to mind one of, to suggest; Promptum reddere, Lat. to prepare,
or have in readiness.

V. 855. With bland Words; With fair winning Words: Of Blandus, Lat. soft,
flattering, fawning.

V. 858. Deprived thy Presence; Robbed of thy dear Society, Deprived of thy
Company: Of Deprivare, a disused Latin word, to bereave of.

Ibid. Agony of Love; Strange tormenting Passion, not felt by Eve before she
became sinful, Love (as all other her Passion, while innocent,) easily obeying
the Rule and Reign of Reason. Agony, (...), an inward Conflict and Disturbance.
See Bo. II. V. 861.

V. 876. Dilated Spirits, ampler Heart, etc. My Understanding wider, and my
Heart large and more open. Dilated, Bo. I. v. 429. Ampler, of Amplior, Lat.
larger.

Many are of Opinion, that Eve did not relate to Adam the Promises the sly
Serpent had made her; and that if she had acquainted him therewith, he would
have suspected Satan's design, and have stood upon his Guard; grounding it on
St. Paul's words, Adam was not deceived, but the woman being deceived, was in
the transgression, 1 Timothy 2. 14. But that of mere fondness, and impotency of
Passion, he was persuaded by his lovely and lost Eve to Ear, against his better
knowledge, undeceived; yet the sad Sarcasme, And the Lord God said, Behold the
man is become as one of us, to know good and evil, Genesis 3. 22. intimates, that
Adam was attacked on the side of his Understanding, which he hoped, by eating
of that Fruit, to improve into Perfection: Our Poet therefore has entertained
both these Opinions in his Discourse of Adam's Transgression.

V. 880. Unshared, and Odious soon; Like Juturna. Haud quicquam mihi dulce
meorum
Te sine frater erit. AEn. 12.


V. 885. Too late renounce Deity, etc. Quo vitam dedit aeternam? Cum mortis
adempta est
Conditio -- Ibid.


V. 886. With Countenance blithe; With a cheerful Countenance, pleased and
cheerful: Of the Sax. Blide, or Belg. Bliide, joyful.

V. 890. Blank, while Horror chill, etc. Blank, Blanc, Fr. white, pale.
Obstupuere animi, gelidusque per ima cucurrit
Ossa tremor -- AEn. 2.


V. 891. All his Joints relaxed; Illi solvuntur frigore membra. AEn. 12.

Relaxed, loosened: Of Relaxare, Lat.

V. 895. He inward Silence broke; He thus reasoned with himself, discoursed
with his own Thoughts, inwardly in his Mind.

V. 901. To Death devote; Made liable to Death, given up and destined to
Destruction. Pesti devota futurae. AEn. 1.

V. 914. The Link of Nature drawn; The natural Affection by which I am linked
to thee, who art the dearest, tenderest part of my own self, Flesh of my Flesh,
etc. Link, of Lien and Lier, Fr. to bind together.

V. 917. So having said; So having said to himself, so having thought and
considered in his Mind, as at V. 895.

V. 922. Who thus has dared; Misprinted for, Have dared.

V. 924. Sacred to Abstin^nce; Set apart and secluded from use, Dedicated to
forbearance. Abstinentia, Lat. forbearance. Arbor erat Luci medio, in
penetralibus umbris,
Sacra comam, and nullos morsu violanda per annos,
Quam Pater omnipotens, fertur, cum conderet orbem,
Perpetuae sacrasse fami --
Imitated from AEn. 7. Laurus erat tecti medio, etc.


V. 925. Under Bann to touch; Under Command and Injunction, or under a Curse.
not to touch it. Ban, Fr. for a Proclamation, Command, or Edict, solemnly
published: Or Bann is of the Belg. Bannen, to curse; in the Fol. Edition, it is
misprinted, Bane. See V. 663.

V. 934. Inducement strong; Powerful Persuasion. Inducement, of Inducere, Lat.
to move or persuade. Most probable it is, that Adam had hopes of attaining to a
higher degree of Life and Knowledge, and that the Temptation attacked him on
that side, as well as his weaker Eve; for most Interpreters supposed that meant
of him by way of Rebuke: Job 28. 28. And unto the man he said, Behold the fear
of the Lord, that is wisdom; and to depart from evil, is understanding.

V. 943. With us must fail dependent, etc. Sharing in our Welfare, or Woe,
depending on our Condition, as being made our Servants, and thence subject to
Vanity, as the whole Creation is by St. Paul described, Groaning and traveling
in pain together until now, Romans 8. 20, 21, 22. Even as we our selves groan
within our selves, waiting for the adoption, to wit, the redemption of our
body, v. 23. Dependent, Dependens, Lat. subject to, of Dependere, Lat. to rely
upon.

V. 954. If Death consort with thee; If Death must be thy Portion, thy Lot, of
Consors, Lat. a like, a Companion: Cui communis sors est.

V. 963. Engaging me to emulate; Obliging me to imitate this high Example of
thy Love. AEmulari, Lat. to endeavor to be like.

V. 977. Death menaced would ensue; Could I think Death, wherewith we are
threatened, would follow upon our Eating, would certainly overtake us. Menaced,
of Menacer, Fr. of Minari, Lat. to threaten. Ensue, Ensuyvre, Fr. Insequi, Lat.
to pursue, to follow after.

V. 980. Die deserted; Die alone, forsaken, and forlorn. Desertus, Lat.
Deserere, to forsake. Pernicious, Bo. I. Verse. 282.

V. 989. Fear of Death deliver to the Winds; Throw away, and despise, this vain
fear of Death. (...).
Nec far videt sua gaudia ventos. AEn. 10.
-- Tristitiam and metus
Tradas protervis in mare Creticum
Portare ventis. Hor. Carm. 1. Od. 26.


V. 998. Not deceived; According to the Historical Relation of Moses, he did
not plead for himself, that he was deceived, (the Excuse of Eve cheated by the
Serpent,) but rather enticed and persuaded by her: The woman whom thou gave
to be with me, she gave me of the tree, and I did eat, Genesis 3. 12. Whence St.
Paul, Adam was not deceived, but the woman being deceived was in the
transgression, 1 Timothy 2. 14.

V. 999. Overcome with Female Charm. Credendum est illum virum suae faeminae,
uni unum, hominem homini, conjugem conjugi, ad Dei legem transgrediendam, non
tanquam verum loquenti credidisse seductum, sed sociali necessitudine paruisse.
Aug. l. 11. de Genes. ad litt. c. 42. Which the holy Page styles, Harkening
unto the voice of his wife, Genesis 3. 17. Improbe Amor! quid non mortalia pectora
cogis? AEn. 4.

V. 1003. At completing of the Mortal Sin Original; For till Adam had
transgressed by eating the Forbidden Fruit, the Original Sin, that infected all
the Nations of his Posterity, was not accomplished: See V. 782. Original, Bo.
VI. V. 511. Completing, of Complere, Lat. to fulfill. Mortal, Mortalis, Lat.
deadly, of Mors, Death.

V. 1005. Nor Eve to iterate, etc. Nor Eve to repeat her Transgression: Of
Iterare, Lat. to do over again. So Horace: Cras ingens iterabimus aequor. Carm.
l. 1. Od. 7.

V. 1008. As with new Wine intoxicated; As if disordered by new Wine.
Intoxicated, of Intossicare, Ital. to Poison; Tossico, and (...), Poison, of
(...), a Bow, because barbarous Encmies used to poison their Arrows; at last
Toxicum made Lat. was used to signify any sort of Poison, many of which, as
Phitra, etc. did disturb Men's Minds, and made 'em mad. Operation, Bo. VIII. V.
323. Displayed, Bo. II. V. 10.

V. 1013. Carnal Desire enflaming; Blowing the Desires of the Flesh into a
Flame. Carnalis, Lat. fleshly, of Caro, Lat. Flesh.

V. 1014. Lascivious Eyes; Wanton Looks, Eyes full of Lust. Lascivus and
Lasciviosus, Lat. lustful. Dalliance, Bo. IV. V. 338.

V. 1017. Exact of Taste, and Elegant; Well skilled and curious in thy Taste.
Exact, Bo. VIII. V. 539. Elegant, Elegans, Lat. Choice, of Eligere, Lat. to
pick and choose. Ut in epularum apparatu a magnificentia recedens, non se
parcum solum, sed etiam elegantem videri volet, eliget quibus ut atur. Cice. de
Orat. Sapience, Bo. VII. V. 193. of Sapere, Lat. to taste, to distinguish,
thence to be wise, to know.

V. 1020. Savor we apply and Palate call judicious; We use Taste in many
Senses, and apply Judgment to the Palate: Palatum sagax in gustu. Plaut. Hic
plane nihil sapit. Cic. is an unfavory Fellow, a Fool. Nec enim sequitur, ut
cui cor sapiat, ei non sapiat Palatus. Cic. de Fin. Savor, Sapor, Lat. Tincam
multa ridicule dicentem, Granius obruerat nescio quo sapore vernaculo. Cic. de
Cla. Orat. So we say, This savours of Atheism, etc. Judicious, of Judicium,
Lat. Judgment; so a Man is said to be a good Judge of Wine that has a good
Palate, Palatus, or Palatum, Lat. the Roof of the Mouth. Purveyed, Provided, of
Pourveoir, Fr. Providere, Lat.

V. 1024. True Relish tasting; Did not understand Taste in its height and
perfection. Relish, of Relecher, Fr. to lick over again, as Hauts Gousts entice
us to do.

V. 1036. Darted Contagious Fire; Shot forth Infectious Fire. Darted, of
Darder, Fr. to fling a Dart. Contagiosus, Lat. Infectious.

V. 1040. Pansies, Violets, and Asphodel, etc. Pansies, of Pensee, Fr. Viola
Flammea, of Tricolor, called a Paunsie, or a Fancy. Violets, Violette, Fr.
Viola, Lat. Asp^odel, (...), Gr. Daffodil. Hyacinth, Hyacinthus, a Flower that
sprang out of the Blood of a lovely Boy, the Darling of Apollo, slain by him by
mischance. See Bo. IV. V. 301.

V. 1047. That with exhilerating Vapor bland; As soon as that deceitful Fruit,
whose soft and pleasing Fume had fed their Fancies, and played about their
Animal Spirits, had lost its force, and having misled their Minds, was now
spent and evaporated. Exhilerating, of Exhilerare, Lat. to delight, to refresh.
Bland, Bo. V. verse. 5. Exhaled, of Exhalare, Lat. to breath out.

V. 1050. With Conscious Dreams encumbred; Loaded and perplexed with guilty
Dreams, such as arose from an inward sense of their Transgression. Encumbred,
of the Fr. Encombrer, or Ital. Ingombrare, to vex, disturb, of the Ger.
Kummern, to molest.

V. 1053. Soon found their Eyes how opened; Not as the Serpent had promised
'em, To be as Gods, Genesis 3. 5. but to be less than Men, such as they were while
Innocent, They were naked before, and were not ashamed, Genesis 2. 25. Non quod
eis sua nuditas esset incognita, sed turpis nondum erat, quia nondum libido
membra illa praeter arbitrium commovebat: Nondum ad hominis inobedientiam
redarguendam, sua inobedientia caro quodammodo Testimonium perhibebat. Aug. l.
4. c. 17. de Civit. Dei.

V. 1058. Naked left to guilty Shame; Stripped of their Innocence and Virtue, the
just Assurance of themselves, and Original Uprightness; they were left naked
and open to dishonest Shame, the Son of Guilt: He covered 'em indeed, but 'twas
with Confusion, a wretched Robe, that laid 'em much more open; to which St.
Paul seems to allude, What fruit had ye then in those things, whereof ye are
now ashamed? Romans 6. 21.

V. 1060. The Danite strong Herculean Samson; He was the Son of Manoah of
Zorah, of the Tribe of Dan, thence named the Danite, Judge. 13. 2. Herculean,
Herculeus, Lat. as strong as Hercules the mighty Hero, celebrated by all the
Poets for his Prowess and famous Labors, Son of Alemena and Jupiter, who
assumed the shape of her Husband Amphytrio.

V. 1061. Of Philistean Dalilah; From the Lap of the Harlot Dalilah, a Daughter
of the Philistines, Judge. 16. 4.

V. 1062. Shorn of his Strength; Bereaved of all his Strength by being shorn,
for he was a Nazarite from his Mother's Womb according to the command of the
Angel, Judge. 13. 5, 16, 19. Destitute, Destitutus, Lat. deprived of, forsaken.

V. 1078. Of foul Concupiscence; Of base, vile Lust: Concupiscentia, Lat. a
covetous, disorderly Desire.

V. 1087. Their Umbrage; Their Shadows: Of Umbrage, Fr. Umbra, Lat. a Shade.

V. 1092. May from the present; Misprinted, for the present.

V. 1097 This new-comer Shame; The disobedience of the Flesh, became no small
part of the shameful Punishment of their disobeying their Maker. Ut paena
reciproca inobedientia plecteretur, extitit in motu corporis quaedam impudens
novitas and fecit attentos, reddidit confusos. Aug. de Civit. Dei, l. 14. c. 17.

V. 1103. In Malaber or Decan; Malabria is a vast Peninsula or Promontory of
the East Indies, lying between the Indian Sea West, and the Gulf of Bengala or
Ganges to the East, of which Decan is a considerable Kingdom and Boundary.

V. 1104. Braunching so broad; Of these Indian Fig Trees, Sir Walter Rawleigh
tells us, he saw many thousands in the West Indies, in a Valley near Paria,
after they have shot up 20 or 30 Foot high, having no Twig in the Stem, they
spread a large Top, out of which there issues a a Gummy substance, which
hanging down like a Cord, in some Months time reaches the Ground and there
Rooting, grows speedily up into a Tree, producing others in like manner;
Daughters, as our Poet says, that grow about the Mother-shade, not renowned for
Fruit, which is no bigger than a great Pea: Hist. of the World, Bo. 1. chapter 4. A
Pillar'd Shade, a cool Shade, supported by many Trees that stand by one another
like rows of Pillars. Latitudo foliorum Peltae effigiem Amazoniae habet. Plin.
l. 12. c. 5. Ducit Amazonidum lunatis agmina peltis. AEn. 1.

V. 1110. At Loop-holes cut; At Passages cut through the thick Wood. Loop-hole,
of the Dut. Loopen, Holes to run out at.

V. 1111. Broad as Amazonian Targe; As large as an Amazonian Shield. The
Amazons had their Name of the Privative (...) and (...), Gr. a Breast, because
they burnt off their right Breasts, the better to draw their Bow: They
inhabited the North part of the Lesser Asia, near the Euxine Sea, where they
built a famous City Themiscyra on the Banks of the River Thermodoon. Quales
Threiciae, cum flumina Thermodoontis
Pulsant and pictis bellantur Amazones armis. AEn. 11.


Targe, a Shield, of Tergum, Lat. a Hide, a principal part of it. -- Clypeum
tot ferri terga, tot aeris
Cum pellis toties obeat circumdata tauri. AEn. 10.


V. 1116. Columbus found the American. Columbus, by Birth a Genoese, made the
first Discovery of America, Anno 1492. American, an Inhabitant of America, the
fourth part of the World greater than the other three, named of Americus
Vespucius, a Florentine, who seven years after Columbus, completed the
discovery of that vast Continent.

V. 1117. With feathered Cincture; With a Covering of Feathers girt about their
Waste. Cinctura, Lat. a Girdle: Not only the wild and naked Americans, but the
Gymnosophists, that had their name from Nakedness, who studied Philosophy, in
the vast Solitudes of India, veiled their Wastes, as do every where the most
barbarous Nations, confessing tacitly themselves the Descendents of a finful
and ashamed Adam. Turbulent, Stormy, Turbulentus, Lat. Contentious.

V. 1133. Speech intermitted; His discontinued Discourse. Intermissus, Lat.
left off, broken off: Bo. II. v. 463.

V. 1145. Imput'st thou that to my Default? Lay'st thou the Fault on me?
Imputare, Lat. to blame, to charge with. Default, Fr^ a failing; a fault.

V. 1160. Fixed in thy Dissent; Resolure in thy Refusal, determinate in thy
Denial, Dissent, Dissensus, Lat. a denial, a disagreeing.

V. 1185. If Evil thence ensue. -- Nihil est audacius illis
Deprensis; iram atque animos a crimine sumunt. Juv. Sat. 6.


NOTES On MILTON's PARADISE Lost.
BOOK. X.
V. 1. THe Heinous, etc. The hateful and despightful Deed, for Satan out of
Hatred and Revenge on God, was pushed upon this direful attempt against Man,
his new Favorite. Heinous, Haineux, Fr. hateful; Of Haine, Fr. hatred.

V. 16. Manyfold in Sin; Interpreters give us Eight sorts of Sins, contained
in, or springing from Adam's first Transgression. First, That of Pride, in
desiring to be like God in Knowledge, according to Eccles. 10. 13. For Pride is
the beginning of Sin: The Second, An inordinate Affection and immoderate Love
of his Wife: Thirdly. A wicked curiosity to try the hidden Virtue of the
forbidden Tree: Fourthly, A doubting whether the Sentence, That in the day he
should eat thereof he should surely die, were absolute, or only comminatory and
deterring, because not immediately executed on Eve: Fifthly, That he thought it
a small Fault, as his excuse seemed to infer, The Woman which thou gave me,
gave me of the Fruit, and I did eat: Sixthly, That he was moved thereunto by
his low sensual Appetite, seeing the goodliness of the Tree, that it was good
for food, and pleasant to the eye: The Seventh was the Sin of Disobedience, in
contrarying Gods positive Command, As by one man's disobedience, etc. Romans 5.
19. The Eighth Offense, or its highest Aggravation, was, his wicked excuse,
laying the fault at Gods Door, The Woman that thou gave me, etc. Genesis 3. 12.

V. 25. Violated not their Bliss; Yet their fad concern going no farther than
to Compassion, did not interrupt or hazard their Happiness.

V. 45. With lightest moment of impulse; Or touch with the least motive that
might incline his Freewill, to his own election left in even balance: Moment,
Momentum, Lat. weight. Id est maximi momenti and ponderis, Cic.

Impulse, Bo. III. V. 120.

V. 56. Vicegerent; Bo. V. V. 609. To thee I have transferred all Judgment: For
the Father judges no man, but has committed all judgment to the Son, John 5.
22.

V. 59. Mercy colleague with Justice; That Mercy should go hand in hand with
Justice, and have equal sway. Collega, Lat. a Companion and sharer in Office
and Power.

V. 62. Destined Man, to Judge Man fallen: And has given him Authority to
execute Judgment also, because he is the Son of Man, St. John 5. 27.

V. 83. Convict by Flight; Owning himself Guilty by withdrawing himself from
Trial. Proved Guilty by the Confession of his flight, a strong Presumption of
Guilt in our Law. Convict, Convictus, Lat. cast, proved Guilty.

V. 84. Conviction to the Serpent, etc. No proof is needful against the
Serpent, compelled by Satan to be the ignorant Instrument of his Malice against
Mankind, now mute and unable to answer for himself. Convictio, Lat. a proving
Guilty.

V. 86. Collateral Glory; Bo. VIII. V. 426. in which he sat at his Fathers
right Hand. Ministrant, as Ministering, Bo. VI. V. 167.

V. 92. The Sun in Western Cadence low from Neon; Now was the Sun from his
Midday height, fallen low declining in the West, his setting place* Cadence,
Fr. falling; Of Cadere, Lat. to fall.

V. 95. And usher in the Evening cool: In the cool of the day, Genesis 3. 3.
(...), in the Original, by Symmachus, word for word, (...), In the Breath of
the Day; by Aquila, (...), In the Wind of the Day; by Theodotion, (...), In the
Breath that refreshes the Day. Egypt, where the Hebrews dwelt, and Canaan, the
Promised Land where they were to dwell, were seated on the Sea, bounded on the
West by the Mediterranean, from whence cooling Gales, with their gentle
Breaths, used to refresh the Evening, which the Jews styled, The Air or Breath
of the Day.

V. 96. Mild Judge and Intercessor both; Our Savior, the meek Judge, and
earnest obtainer of our Pardon. Mild, Mitis, Lat. meek, gentle. Intercessor,
Bo. 3. v. 219.

V. 98. The Voice of God by soft Winds brought to their Ears. And they heard
the voice of the Lord God walking in the Garden, Genesis 3. 8. Which words well
considered, our Author has, with great Judgment, followed those, who interpret
this Voice to have been a gentle and soft one, like that small still Voice
heard by Elijah on Mount Horeb, when God appeared to him. 1 King. 19. 12. Not
Ingentem quendam terrificumque sonitum ac fragorem, quo Deus sese Adamo
representavit formidabilem and horribilem, ac velut ira tumentem ruentemque,
etc. as Pererius is of Opinion. Besides, the Son of God is often styled, The
Voice and the Word of his Father, and is said to Walk ((...), after the manner
of Men,) in the Garden: Haec ergo fuere praeludia Humanitatis assumendae, atque
futurae incarnationis: At which our Poet hints, V. 73.

V. 99. While Day declined; While the Day with the Sun was drawing down.
Declined, Bo. 4. v. 792.

V. 100. From his Presence hid themselves; Not, says Irenaeus, as if they
thought they could conceal themselves from God's all-seeing Eye, but ashamed
and confounded by offending him, and terrified by their guilty Conscience, they
durst not presume to appear before his Infinite Purity: Lib. 3. c. 27. Adv.
Haere.

V. 103. Where art thou Adam? Genesis 3. 9. Where, not in relation to the Place,
but thy Condition? Where is thy just and usual Confidence? Thy fear to approach
me, is a confession of thy fault, thy Hiding Place discovers thy Transgression.
Ubi ergo es? Non in quo loco quaero, sed in quo statu, quo te deduxerunt
peccata tua, ut fugias Deum tuum, quem ante quaerebas? Ambros. lib. de Parad.
c. 14. Whom our Author has imitated, Wont with joy to meet, etc.

V. 106. Where obvious Duty erewhile, etc. Where forward Duty, heretofore was
used to show it self unasked. Obvious, Bo. 6. v. 69.

V. 107. Or come I less conspicuous; Or come I less remarkable. Conspicuous,
Bo. 6. v. 299. Detains, withholds, of Detinere, Lat. to keep back.

V. 117. Afraid, being naked, hid my self, Genesis 3. 10. Mistaken Adam, or as yet
unrepenting, assigns, not his Sin, but the ill consequence of it, his Shame, as
the cause and occasion of his guilty Fear.

V. 118. Without Revile; Without Reproach, without any Invective, to Revile, to
Reproach, of the Lat. Re, an Auctive Particle, and Vilis, Lat. base.

V. 122. Have thou eaten of the Tree? Genesis 3. 11.

V. 125. In Evil strait; In a sad and distressed condition; in a hard state,
and sad circumstances, I stand. Strait, Fr. Estroit, Ital. Stretto, both of the
Lat. Strictus, bound up, or hemmed in, and beset on all sides; so, In augustias
compellere, Lat. to bring one to a hard pass, that he knows not which way to
turn himself.

V. 128. Or to accuse the Partner of my Life; As St. Bernard. O Perversitas,
paenam pro ea suscipere refugis, and culpam admittere non recusasti? Perniciose
misericors fuisti, ubi severus esse debebas: Sed perniciosius crudelis fuisti,
uhi misericordiam impendere debebas. Nunquam enim propter alium peccari debet,
quod est justitiae; libenter tamen aliena peccata portare decet, quod est
misericordiae.

V. 131. Strict Necessity subdues me, etc. But cruel and unavoidable Necessity
does overpower me; and this dismal Calamity compels and forces me, least on my
Head both all the Sin, and Punishment, how intolerable soever, should thrown
at once oppress me. Strict, Strictus, Lat. sharp, severe. Subdues, Subdere,
Lat. to overcome. Calamitous, Calamitosous, Lat. miserable. Constraint, force,
of Contraindre, Fr. of Constingere, Lat. to bind. Devolved, Devolutus, Lat. of
Devolvere, to roll down upon. Insupportable, Fr. not to be born, of In, Sub,
and Portare, Lat. Detect, Detegere, Lat. to discover.

V. 140. That from her hand I could suspect no ill; What our Author supposes
Adam to have said in the three preceding and two subsequent Verses to this, is
the genuine Consequence, and general Exposition of all Interpreters on Genesis 3.
12. Mulier quam dedisti mihi sociam, ipsa mihi dedit de ligno, and comedi,
oblique Adam Dominum tangens, quod ipse peccati eorum auctor extiterit, qui
mulierem fecit; sic ergo reatum suum dum defendere molitur addidit ut culpa
atrocior discussa fieret, quam fuerat perpetrata. Greg. l. 22. c. 13. Moral.

V. 144. The Sov'ran Presence; GOD, the Sovereign Lord of all, loftily
expressed.

V. 145. Was she thy God? etc. Sociam quidem mulierem dederat ei Deus, sed non
ut propter eam, Deum ipsum relinqueret; comedit ergo, quia mulier ei praebui^;
at cum esset caput, non obedire, sed imperare, sed arguere, sed docere
debuerat. Mersen, com. in Genesis c. 3. v. 13. See Bo. 8. v. 570, to v. 578.

V. 158. Which thou have done? Genesis 3. 13.

V. 161. Loquaeious; Talkative: Of Loquax, and Loquacitas, Lat. given to talk.

V. 162. The Serpent me beguiled, Genesis 3. 13. (...): Hic Serpens, quem nempe
creasti; as Mercen. This Serpent, one of thy Creatures; an Accusation of
another, but no Excuse of her self. Superbia quaerit in alium refer, quod
perperam fecit: Superbia mulieris in serpentem, superbia viri in mulierem. Aug.
l. 14. c. 14. de Civit. Dei. Hujus erroris Ramum in gevere humano, ex illa nunc
usque radice pertrahi, ut quod male agitur, adhuc p^jus etiam defendatur.
Grego. in Job 3.

V. 165. Serpent tho Brute, etc. Or the Serpent void of Reason, and incapable
of laying the blame on Satan, who used him as the instrument of his malicious
Design on Man, thereby corrupted and defiled against the course of his
Creation. Venomous Serpents, as other wild and dangerous Creatures, were all
innoxious and harmless to Mankind before their Fall and Fault; but the wily
Serpent, here mentioned, was by the Devil made dangerous and destructive to
Eve, as the Organ of his Temptation, even before her failure, therefore well
censured as Polluted and Profaned, and devious from the true intent of his
Creation. To Transferr, Transfer, Lat. to lay upon, Culpam transfer.
Polluted, Pollutus, Lat. defiled.

V. 169. Accursed as vitiated in Nature; Accursed as corrupted in Nature, as
having corrupted and depraved his natural Innocence, made to obey, not to
beguile Mankind; Rebel against the Universal Command given Adam over the
Creation, Genesis 1. 28. and Traitor against Nature's great Universal Lord. If
GOD, in the Deluge, destroyed the Beasts, and the Creeping Things, and the
Fowls of the Air, (who had obeyed the Laws of their Creation,) with vitiated
Mankind, Genesis 6. 7. most justly might he lay his Curse on the Serpent, depraved
and despoiled of his Native Gooduess, and Harmlesness, and made instrumental
(tho ignorantly) in completing Satan's Malice by Mankind on the Almighty.
Vitiated, Vitiatus, Lat. corrupted.

V. 171. Nor altered his Offense; Whether it were a mere Serpent, or Satan
concealed in him, that tempted Man, it altered not the nature of his Offense,
in violating the Forbidden Tree.

V. 177. Upon thy Belly grovelling, etc. Genesis 3. 14. Upon thy belly shall thou
go, and dust shall thou eat all the days of thy life. Which, tho natural to the
Serpent, was converted into his Curse, Punishment, and Reproach: As the
Rainbow, naturally happening, and often seen, doubtless, before the Deluge, is
by God said to have been set in the Clouds, as the Signal and Manifestation of
his Mercy, Genesis 9. 13. Sciendum igitur est, maledicta illa serpentis,
simpliciter loquendo, ei fuisse naturalia: Quodammodo tamen post illam
tentationem and peccatum primorum hominum fuisse ei tanquam paenas and
supplicium; non quidem habito ad serpentem respectu, qui nullam ex illis paenam
sensit, sed habito respectu ad hominem: Nam quae antea fuerant serpenti
naturalia, post peccatum, eidem fuere apud homines, ad magnum dedecus,
opprobrium, odium and execrationem: Qui enim antea non fuisset homini proper
ista invisus and execrabilis, post peccatum infamis, exosus, and abominabilis
extitit. Pere. in Genesis 3. Grovelling, Bo. 1. v. 280.

V. 180. I will put Enmity; The Universal Antipathy between Mankind and
Serpents, seems a particular Instance of some part of the Curse, that light
directly on this polluted and vitiated Creature, there being no Reluctance of
Nature so general, and for which so sad and severe a Reason may be given, as
that of our Original Ruin and Seduction; for to think we were Created with
this natural Hatred and Aversion, which was laid asleep and restrained till the
first Transgression, roused and awakened it into its furious Activity, is mere
Imagination. Enmity, the contraction of Inimicitia, Lat. Hatred.

V. 181. Her Seed shall bruise thy Head, etc. Genesis 3. 15. In Mysterious Terms,
as at V. 173. meant of Satan the Old Serpent: Bruise, of Briser, Fr. to break.

183. Verified when Jesus Son of Mary, second Eve; Then made good, and proved
true, when our Savior Jesus Christ, Son of the Virgin Mary, the second Eve,
Mother of all, that shall by her miraculous bringing forth the Son of God,
become Heirs and Inheritors of Everlasting Life, as the Posterity of the first
inherited from her, only this mortal and decayed Being. Jesus, (...), Gr. of
the Heb. (...), to save; For he shall save his people from their sins, Matthew.
1. 21. Verified, of Verificare, Lat. Verum facere, to prove true.

V. 184. Saw Satan fall like Lightning; Luke 10. 18. And he said unto them, I
beheld Satan as lightning fall from Heaven. Prince of the Air, (...), The
Prince of the Power of the Air, Ephesians. 2. 2.

V. 186. Spoiled Principalities and Powers, triumphed in open show; Exactly
agreeing with Colos. 2. 15.

V. 188. Captivity led Captive. Thou have ascended on high, thou have led
captivity captive, Psalm. 68. 18. applied to our Savior by his Apostle St.
Paul, Ephesians. 4. 8.

V. 189. The Air the Realm it self of Satan. Now is the judgment of this world:
now shall the Prince of this world be cast out, John 12. 31. In whom the God of
this world has blinded the minds, etc 2 Cor. 4. 4. In both places understood
of Satan, exercising his Usurped Dominion over this Inferior AErial World.
Usurped, Usurpatus, Lat. seized against Right, and Reason.

V. 190. Shall tread at last under our Feet. For he must reign, till he has
put all enemies under his feet, 1 Cor. 15. 25. From henceforth expecting till
his enemies be made his footstool, Heb. 10. 13. The God of Peace shall tread
down Satan under your feet, Romans 16. 20.

V. 193. Thy Sorrow by thy Conception; According to the best Exposition of Genesis
3. 16. the Pains and Pangs of Childbearing, are by common Experience known to
be so acute, that our Savior by them was pleased to Typifie the great
Tribulations, Persecutions and Martyrdoms of his Apostles and Followers; A
woman, when she is in travail, has sorrow, because her hour is come, John 16.
21. Nor does all the trouble of that soft Sex consist in bringing forth, but
much also in bearing the burden so many Months; as Juvenal: -- Nam si
distendere vellet
Et vexare uterum pueris salientibus. Sat. 6.


From all which, Womankind had most certainly been exempted, if Sin had not
introduced 'em, as its Afterbirth. In thy Conception, by thy Conceiving:
Conceptio, Lat. of Concipere, Lat. to Conceive, or be with Child.

V. 196. To thy Husband's will, thine shall submit, etc. The subjection of Eve
to Adam was natural, even in Innocence, and before her Transgression, as made
of him, and for him, V. 149. and in other places; but here it is inflicted on
her and the whole Sex as a Punishment, not gentle, easy, and uncontested, as
Originally it would have been, but uncasie and constrained, and often exacted
with too high a hand, Proud and Imperious.

V. 198. Because thou have harken'd, etc. Genesis 3. 17, 18, 19.

V. 203. Thorns also, and Thistles; Grandia saepe quibus mandavimus hordea
sulcis,
Infelix lolium, and steriles dominantur avenae.
Pro molli viola, pro purpureo Narcisso,
Carduus, and spinis surgit paliurus acutis. Ecl. 5.


V. 205. In the sweat of thy Face; -- Pater ipse colendi
Haud facilem esse viam voluit, primusque per artem
Movit agros, curis acuens mortalia corda
Nec torpere gravi passus sua regna veterno. Geor. 1.


V. 210. The instant stroke of Death, etc. Deferred the immediate Execution of
Death, the Punishment denounced against them on the day of their Transgression.
Instant, Instans, Lat. (...), Gr. immediate, that should have been presently
inflicted by God's Justice, if not mitigated by his Mercy, in order to their
Repentance and Pardon, Genesis 2. 17. Denounced, Bo. 2. v. 106.

V. 214. The form of a Servant, etc. But made himself of no reputation; and
took upon him the form of a servant, Phil. 2. 7. As when he washed his servants
feet, John 13. from v. 4, to v. ^^. Disdained, Desdaigner, Fr. Dedignari, Lat.
to refuse, to be too proud for^ Assume, Assumere, Lat. to take upon him.

V. 216. As Father of his Family; He provided Food for his offending Children,
Thou shale eat the herb of the field, Genesis 3. 18. and Raiment, The Lord God
made coats of skins, and clothed them, Ibid. v. 21. Not only to conceal the
Reproach, but to cover and cure the Inconvenience of their Nakedness, against
the Air that now must suffer change.

V. 217. With Skins of Beasts, or slain; Interpreters torment the Text, Genesis 3.
21. with their curious Enquiries, Who flew the Beasts? Who flayed 'em? Quid
ergo, nunquid Dominus Deus suitor aut Pellifex erat, and impensa artis opera
tunicas fecit pelliceas? Fecit utique tunicas pelliceas, quia sic praesens
testatur scriptura: non tamen cogit nos confiteri, quod eo modo quem rideant,
sed eo modo quem flere debeant omnes tunicati, fecerit illas, fecit enim, id
est, faciendi necessitatem illis imposuit. Rupert. 1. 3. c. 27. de Trinit. The
cold inclement Air, now changed by pinching Frosts, forced our first Parents to
provide more substantial Covertures than Fig Leaves, to guard their naked
Bodies; but with Skins of Beasts, how slain? By their own fierce Antipathies,
as our Author observes: -- But Discord first
Daughter of Sin, among the Irrational
Death introduced, through fierce Antipathy. Of this Book, V. 707.


That the Skins of Beasts were the Primitive Clothing of Mankind, and the
first intention of their being slaughtered by 'em, Plato testifies in his
Protag. So Lucretius: Pellibus and spoliis corpus vestire ferarum. Lib. 5.
Curia, praet^xto quae nunc nitet alta senatu,
Pellitos habuit, rustica corda, Patres. Propert.


So Virgil describes some of his ancient Warriors: Cui pellis latos humeros
erepta juvenca
Pugnatori operit; caput ingens oris hiatus
Et malae texere lupi, cum dentibus albis. AEn. 11.


V. 218. Or as the Snake, etc. Mercennus tells us, Jonathan the Caldee
Paraphrast was of Opinion, that the Protoplasts first clothed themselves with
Serpents Skins, which they naturally cast; but certainly, the sense of their
Sin, (wrought by the Temptation of that subtle Animal,) which introduced the
necessity of those dreadful Disguises, must have given them the utmost horror
and detestation for that Creature, so as not to cover their Nakedness with any
thing borrowed from the occasion of their Crime. Our Author better supposes,
there may be some Creatures that cast their Skins as well as Snakes; of whose
manner of putting off his old Clothes, read Plin. lib. 8. c. 27. Cum positis
n^vus exuviis, nitidusque juventa
Volvitur. Georg. 3.
Annosae pellem posuere senectae. Met. 7.

V. 225. Reassumed; Taken again into, of Reassumere, Lat. Appeased, Appaise,
Fr. pacified, reconciled.

V. 229. E're thus was sinned and judged; Before Man had thus sinned, and God
thus sentenced him: Two Impersonals. Recounted, of Raconter, Fr. Racontare,
Ital. to report, relate.

V. 231. In Counterview; Over Against one another, gazing on one another: Of
Country, Fr. Contra, Fr. V^ne, Fr. Visus, Lat. sight. Belching, Bo. 1. v. 671.
Outrageous, Bo. 2. v. 436.

V. 233. The Fiend; The Devil: Of the Teut. Feind, or Viant, an Enemy, or the
Sax. Fandian, to tempt, the Tempter of Mankind.

V. 241. By his Avengers; By his Perusers, those that take Vengeance on him: Of
the Fr. Vengeur, a Revenger.

V. 246. Some connatural force, etc. Or some strange Power, which by Nature
does so influence and affect Things of like kind, as to be able at the widest
distance to bring 'em together with a secret force of Friendship, by ways most
unaccountable: A description of Powerful Instinct. Connaturalis, Lat. natural
to. Sympathy, Bo. 4. v. 465. Amity, Amity, Fr. the contraction of Amicitia,
Lat. Friendship, Love, Kindness. Conveyance, of Convehere, Lat. to carry, to
remove.

V. 250. Thou my Shade inseparable; Thou my constant Companion, must like my
Shadow attend me, where ever I move, for Death from Sin no Power can separate:
Death is the Associate and Salary of Sin, The Wages of Sin is Death.
Inseparabilis, Lat. that cannot be parted, of Separare, Lat. to divide.

V. 261. For Interc^^^se or Transmigration; In their passage to and fro, or
settling there our new Abode. Transmigratio, Lat. a removing.

V. 203. Attraction and Instinct; So strongly drawn by this strange new-felt
Power, and Force irresistible. Attraction, Bo. 4. v. 492. Instinct, Instinctus,
Lat. the unaccountable bent of Nature, the Propensity of all Things toward the
accomplishment of their End, by Cicero often styled, Divinus Instinctus.

V. 264. The meager Shadow; Death, that lean and empty Apparition, thin like a
Shadow. Meager, of Maigre, Fr. lean.

V. 266. Nor err the way; Nor miss my way. Err, of Errare, Lat. to mistake.

V. 268. Such a scent I draw of Carnage; I draw in so strong a smell of
Slaughter. Scent, smell, a Sentiendo, Lat. Carnage, Fr. murder, killing, etc.

V. 272. He snuff'd the smell of Mortal Change; He drew in the scent of all
Things changing to decay. Snuff'd, of the Ger. Snoeven, to draw breath through
ones Nose, seeming to be made of the sound.

V. 274. Of ravenous Fowl; Vultures. Ravenous, greedy, voracious, of Ravineux,
Fr. of R^pina, Lat. violence. See Bo. 3. v. 431. League, Bo. 2. v. 486. Lured,
Bo. 3. v. 664.

V. 277. Of living Carcasses; Of Bodies which, tho yet alive, will suddenly be
slain; or by the smell (strong enough) from the multitudes of Men pent up in
close Incampments. Carcasses, of the Fr. Carqu^sse, Quasi Caro cassa, Flesh
corrupted.

V. 279. So sented the grim Feature; So did ghastly Death, that ill-favored
Figure, draw in the smell of things corruptible on Earth. Grim, Bo. 1. v. 396.
Feature, the figure and shape of the Face, of Faiture, Fr. Factura, Lat. the
make of the Face.

V. 280. Into the murkie Air; Turned up his Nose into the infected Air. Murkie,
seems to come of the Fr. Mucqueux, musty; Spencer calls it, Mirksome Air: F. Q.
C. 5. St. 28. Death is said to discover the Mortal Change on Earth, by drawing
in the altered Air, degenerating from its sirst Purity, an Element soon
infected, and when so Epidemically dangerous. Patu^is captavit naribus Auras.
Geo. 1.

V. 281. Sagacious of his Quarry, etc. Winding his Game at so vast a distance,
as Hell is from this Habitable World. Sagacious, of Sagax, Lat. quick of sent.
Sagire enim, sentire acute est: ex quo sagaces dicti Canes. Cice. de Divinat.
l. 4. A fit comparison for the Chief Hell-hound. Quarry, Game, Prey, of the Fr.
Querir, to seek for, to hunt out.

V. 284. Flew diverse; Diverse ways, separately: Diversus, Lat.

V. 286. Solid or Slimy; Firm, or like to grow so, by reason of its slimy
Consistence. Solidus, Lat. firm. Slime, Schleimig, Teut. tough, viscous, of the
Lat. Limus, Mud.

V. 288. Shoaling toward the Mouth; Heaping it up toward Hell Gates.
Shoaling, of Shole, Sceole, Sax. a multitude.

V. 289. Two Polar Winds blowing adverse; Like two contrary Winds, blowing from
the World's opposite Poles (North and South) upon the frozen Sea, raise and
drive together mighty Mountains of Ice; a Comparison not inferior to Virgil's:
-- Magno discordes aethere venti
Praelia ceu tollunt, animis and viribus aequis:
Non ipsi inter se, non nubila, non mare cedit:
Anceps pugna diu, stant obnixi omnia contra. AEn. 10.


Polar, Polaris, Lat. belonging to the Pole, Polus, Lat. Bo. 5. v. 269.
Adverse, Adversus, Lat. against, opposite.

V. 290. The Cronian Sea; The Northern Frozen Sea: Mare concretum sive
glaciale, Mare Scythium and Cronium: Of (...), Gr. for Saturn, as if affected
by his cold frozen Influence.

V. 292. Beyond Petsora Eastward; Petzora, or Petzorcke, the most North-East
Province of Muscovy, toward the frozen Ocean, through which diverse have
attempted to find this im^gined way to China, choked up by vast Mountains of
Ice, among which the Adventurers have perished.

V. 293. Catbaian Coast; Cathaie, Catay or Catio, is a Province of Tartary,
bounded on the North with the frozen Scythian Sea, on the South with China,
from whence to Cambalu its chief City, where the Great Cham used to reside, a
vast Trade is driven by a mighty confluence of Merchants and Merchandises of
all sorts, insomuch that Ten thousand Carts are reported to come thither yearly
laden with Silks.

V. 294. Death with his Mace petrific, etc. Death with his Mace that turns all
things into Stone, as with a Trident, kneaded and wrought the assembled Slime
into a Consistence, grown cold and dry; and made it as firm and fast, as is the
Island Delos now, that on^e ^^oated uncertain. Aggregated Soil, the slimy
Materials they had heaped together: Aggregatus, Lat. assembled, of Aggregare,
Lat. to gather together. Soil, Slime, Mud, of Souiller, Fr. to daub, to bemire.
Mace, Fr. Mass, Ital. Mazza, Span. Maca, a Club, of the Lat. Massa. Petrific,
Petrificus, Lat. able to turn into Stone, of (...), Gr. a Rock, and Facio, Lat.
to make.

V. 295. As with a Trident smote; With a three-fang'd Fork. The Trident,
Tridens, Lat. the Scepter of Neptune, God of the Sea, was so named, a Tribus
Dentibus, from its three Fangs. Hence he was styled, Tridentifer. Non illi
imperium Pelagi, saevumque Tridentem
Sed mihi sort datum -- AEn. 1.


V. 296. As Delos floating once; Styled Erratica Delos, for its uncertain
floating up and down. Delos, of (...), Gr. manifest, apparent, as fixed and
secured from its former Fluctuations. Quam, pius Arcitenens, oras and littora
circum
Errantem, Mycone celsa, Gyaroque revinxit. AEn. 3. See Bo. 5. v. 265.


V. 297. Bound with Gorgonian Rigor, etc. The rest, his horrid Face, frighted
into a firmness, like the grim Gorgonian Look, and bound immovable, with the
black Slime of Sodom's Sea. Gorgonian, Bo. 2. v. 611. Rigor, Lat. hardness,
stiffness; as Ferri rigor: Geo. 1.

V. 298. Asphaltic Slime; (...), Gr. Clay taken out of the Lake Asphaltites, a
clammy Substance, a sort of natural Mortar extremely viscous and binding.
Josephus tells us, this Lake is near the Land of Sodom, and that this black
Bitumen floats in it (for few things sink there) in great lumps, like Bulls
without Heads, so strangely tough and clammy, that the Boats which bring it on
shore are scarce able to disengage themselves from the glutinous, surprising
Surface of the Lake. Bo. 5. c. 5. See Bo. 2. v. 411.

V. 299. The gathered Beach; The assembled Slime. Beach, Owze, of the Belg.
B^ogen, to sink, to give way.

V. 300. The Mole immensc; Mole, of the Ital. Molo, as this of Moles, Lat. any
great Pile of Building, properly made to secure and fence a Harbor, by
repelling the Sea, of (...), Gr. for an artificial Harbor so made, or of
(...), Gr. Labor, of which that at Tangier is a late Example, of vast Expense,
and Labor in vain. Immense, Bo. 1. v. 790. Forfeit, ^o. 3. v. 176.

V. 307. Xerxes the Liberty, etc. So Xerxes endeavoring to bring the Grecian
Free State under his Yoke. He was the Son of Darius, the greatest of all the
Persian Monarchs, and invaded Greece with 100000 Men, and a Fleet of 2208
Galleys, on 674 of which coupled together, he laid a Bridge over the
Hellespont, by which in 7 days he passed over his huge Army, between Sestos and
Abidos, defeated afterward by a handful of Courageous Greeks.

V. 308. From Susa his Memnonian Palace; Susa, the chief City of Susiana, a
Province of Persia, by Herodotus called Memnonia, of Memnon the Son of Tithon,
its Builder, who by Pausanias is said to have brought Succors from Susa in
Persia, to Priam, at the Siege of Troy. Pliny tells us, Darius repaired it, and
that it was the Seat of the Persian Monarchs during the Winter Season. Eoasque
acies and nigri Memnonis arma. AEn. 1.

See Met. l. 13. Cura deam proprior, luctusque domesticus angit
Memnonis amissi --
-- Cum Memnoniis deducens agmina regnis
Cyrus -- Luc. l. 3. See Sands his Travels, Page 204.


V. 310. Over Hellespont, Europe with Asia joined; The Hellespont, is so named
from Hell, Daughter of Athamas, being unfortunately drowned in it.
Hellespontus, Lat. the narrow Sea by Constantinople, the Streights of
Gallipoli, dividing Europe from Asia, by Sestos standing in that; and Abydos in
this, the Dardanels. Qua Pelago nomen Nepheleias abstulit Hell. Luc. l. 9.
Longus in augustum qua clauditur Hellespontus. Met. l. 13.

Europe, the Name of the third part of the World before America discovered, of
Europa, Daughter of Agenor King of the Phanicians, stolen by Jupiter in the
shape of a Bull, or transported in a Vessel adorned with the Image of one. Read
Met. l. 2. at the end. Sic and Europa niveum Doloso
Credidit Tauro latus, and scalentem, etc.
Mitte singultus: been far magnam
Disce fortunam: tua sectus orbis
Nomina ducet -- Hor. l. 3. Od. 27.


Asia, another third part of the then known World, so called of Asia the Wife
of Japetus, Daughter of Oceanus and Thetis. -- Quibus actus uterque
Europae atque Asiae fatis concurrerit orbis. AEn. 7.


V. 311. Scourged the indignant Waves; Of the extravagant Pride and Vainglory
of Xerxes, Juvenal takes notice: -- Constratum classibus iissdem
Suppositumque rotis solidum mare:
Ipsum compedibus qui vinxerat Ennosigaeum
In Little atque Eurum solitus saevire flagellis
Barbarus -- Sat. 10.
Tales, fama canit, tumidum super aequora Xerxem
Construxisse vias, multum cum potentibus ausus
Europamque Asiae, Sestonque admovit Abydo,
Incessitque fretum rapidi super Hellesponti. Luc. l. 2.


Indignant, Angry, as if foaming at the imposition of this new Yoke:
Indignantes, Lat. as applicable to the Waves, as by Virgil to the Winds. Illi
indignantes magno cum murmr, montis
Circum claustra fremunt -- AEn. 1.


V. 313. By wondrous Art Pontifical, etc. By the strange Art of raising
Bridges. Pontifical, Pontificalis, Lat. of a Bridge, from Pons, Lat. a Bridge,
and Facere, Lat. to make. Pontifex Maximus, the High Priest of the Romans, had
that Name a Ponte; Quia sublicius Pons a Pontificibus factus est primun, and
restitutus saepe. According to Varro, their Successors the Roman Bishops, tho
they found this Infernal Bridge built to their hand, have made bold to erect a
Baiting-place of Purgatory by the way, more Poetical and Fictitious than it; of
which Virgil gave 'em the first Draught: -- Aliae panduntur inanes
Suspensae ad ventos: aliis sub gurgite vasto
Infectum eluitur scelus, aut exuritur igni, etc. AEn. 6.


V. 323. On the left hand Hell, etc. Relating perhaps to our Savior's
description of the Day of Judgment, Then shall he say unto them on the left
hand, Matthew. 25. 41. Interposed, Interpositus, Lat. placed between. Confines,
Bo. 2. v. 396. Descri'd, Bo. 2. v. 636.

V. 328. Betwixt the Centaure and the Scorpion, etc. Between the Signs of
Sagittary and the Scorpion, flying aloft while the Sun rose in the Ram. Chiron
the Centaure was the Son of Saturn and Philyra, Tutor to Achilles, who by
chance having hurt one of his Feet by an Arrow stained with the Hydra's
venomous Gore, prayed the Gods to ease him of his painful Immortality, which
became Hereditary to him by his Father's side, and was thereupon translated
into the Zodiac, where he is to be seen with the fatal Arrow in his hand.
Centaure, (...), Gr. (...) because on Horseback they followed and recovered
their fugitive Droves of Cattle. Others tell us, they were a hardy People
inhabiting Mount Pelius in Thessaly, who first served on Horseback, thence
giving occasion to the Fable, of strange Animals half Men and half Horses; of
these, Phillyrides Chiron was one of the most famous: Geo. 4.

Scorpion, Scorpius, (...), Gr. one of the twelve Signs placed in the Zodiac,
for slaying the vainglorious and vaunting Orion. -- Quis fata putaret
Scorpion, aut vires maturae mortis habere:
Ille minax Nodis, and recto verbere saevus,
Test tulit caelo victi decus Orionis. Luc. l. 9.
Est locus, in geminos ubi brachia concavat arcus
Scorpios -- Met. l. 2.
-- Ipse tibi jam brachia contrahit ardens
Scorpius -- Geo. 1.
Teque senex Chiron, gelido qui sidere fulgens
Impetis AEmonio majorem Scorpion arcu. Luc. Phar. l. 6.


V. 329. In Aries; Lat. for a Ram, one of the Celestial Signs, so named in
memory of Phrixus swiming over the Hellespont on his back. Stearing his Zenith,
Bo. 1. v. 745. guiding his Flight.

V. 335. All unweeting; Much deceived, tho much against her Intention.
Unweeting, heedless, of the old word Ween, Sax. Wenan, to think.

Ibid. Seconded upon her Husband; Saw how his deceitful Deed took place,
prospered and succeeded against her Mate: Secundare, Lat. to prosper.

V. 348. Pontifice; Bridge: Pontificium, Lat. a Ponte faciendo. Stupendous,
wonderful, of Stupere, Lat. to admire, to be astonished at.

V. 353. Enchanting; His fair bewitching Offspring, his dear deceitful
Daughter. Enchanting, of Enchanter, Fr. Incantare, Lat. to charm, to inchant or
bewitch: Bo. 2. v. 762.

V. 355. Which thou view'st as not thy own; -- Et quae non fecimus ipsi
Vix ea nostra voco. Met. l. 13.


Trophies, Bo. 1. v. 539. Architect, Bo. 1. v. 732.

V. 357. In my Heart divined; For my Heart no sooner foretold me thy success,
etc. Divinare, Lat. to guess, to foreshew. Connection, Connexio, Lat. a joining
together, of Connectere, Lat. to bind together.

V. 364. Such fatal Consequence, etc. A Chain so irresistible, links us three
together. Satan the Seducer, Sin, and Death, the fatal Alliance, make an
Irresistible triple League. Consequence, Consequentia, Lat. is properly what
upon things preceding, either in Argument, or Act, must necessarily follow, as
of Temptation, (if admitted,) Sin, and its most certain Reward, Death, tho it
follow Pede claudo.

V. 366. This unvoyageable Gulf; This unpassable Deep. Unvoyageable, of Un,
answering the Negative Particle In, Lat. and Voyager, Fr. to travel. Gulf, Bo.
1. v. 52. Track, Bo. 2. v. 1025.

V. 371. With this Portentous Bridge; Thou have enabled us to lay this amazing
Bridge over the black Abyss. Portentous, Portentosus, Lat. monstrous, and
thence astonishing. Si quando aliqua portentosa, aut ex pecude, aut ex homine,
nata dicuntur. Cic. de Divinat.

V. 375. Our Foil; Our Defeat, our Overthrow. Foil, an old word of the Fr.
Affoler, to trample on, or Foible, Fr. weak, feeble. Alienated, Bo. 1. v. 451.

V. 381. His Quadrature from thy Orbicular World; And henceforth divide the
Dominion of all Things between him and thee, parting by the Empyreal Heaven,
his Square Realm, from thy Round World, won from him by thy Valor. The
Empyreum, or Heaven of Heavens, the Supreme Seat of Blessedness, is by
Gassendus, and others of its Celestial Surveyors, supposed to be of a
apiece Figure: Caelum Empyreum, men^ium beatarum seeds, habetur formae
exterius quadratae, quod Civitas sancta in Apocalypsi descripta, Posita in
quadro dicatur. Rev. 21. v. 16. Gass in Prooe. Instit. Astron. Of which our
Poet. Undetermined, square, or round, Bo. 2. v. 1040. Quadrature, Quadratura,
Lat. a Square, a Figure whose Sides and Angles are equal. Orbicular,
Orbicularis, Lat. round, of Orbis, Lat. a Circle.

V. 383. The Prince of Darkness; Satan, deservedly so styled, when the Holy
Leaf describes his inferior Angels, wicked Spirits, the Executioners of his
dark Designs; Rulers of the darkness of this world, Ephesians. 6. 12.

V. 384. Son and Grandchild both; Death, because by Satan begot on his fair
enchanting Daughter Sin, according to the description, Bo. 2. v. 817. Dear
Daughter, since thou claim'st me for thy Sire,
And my fair Son here show me, etc.


V. 387. Satan Antag^nist, etc. See Bo. 1. v. 82. and Bo. 2. v. 510.

V. 393. Of easy Thorough* fare; Easy to be passed through: Of Fare, Vaeren,
Belg. to go over, to pass. Continent, Bo. 3. v. 423. Triumphal, Triumphalis,
Lat. belonging to a Triumph, Bo. 1. v. 123.

V. 402. Make sure the Thrall; Be sure to make him the Slave. Thrall, Bo. 1. v.
149.

V. 404. Pl^nipotent on Earth; Appoint you my Plenipotentiaries on Earth,
constitute you my Substitutes, endued with full Power and Authority over the
Earth, and all its forfeited Inhabitants, Slaves to Sin and Death. Plenipotent,
of Plenus, Lat. full, and Potens, Lat. Powerful: A Title given to Persons sent
with full Power to conclude a Treaty, or to adjust all Differences between
reconciled Kings and States. Substitutes, Bo. 8. v. 381.

V. 405. Issuing from me; Matchless indeed for might, for the best of Mankind
are often overcome by seducing Sin, and all at last conquered by Death
irresistible. Issuing, Issant, Fr. proceeding from: Of Issir, Fr. to flow from.

V. 409. No Detriment need fear; Need apprehend no Harm or Hindrance; according
to the Charge given to the Roman Consul: Ut videret, ne quid Respublica
detrimenti caperet. Detriment, Detrimentum, Lat. harm, loss, hurt.

V. 413. Planets, Planet-strook, etc. The affrighted Stars looked pale, and the
dim Planets blasted, really lost much of their faded Luster. Planets, Bo. 3. v.
481. Planet-strook, (...), Gr. Sideratus, Lat. blasted. Real Eclipse then
suffered, for the usual Eclipses of the Sun, Moon, etc. seem only to bereave
and rob them of their Light, which by the interposition of some Opaque Body, is
hindered from descending on us. Eclipse, Bo. 1. v. 597.

V. 415. The Causey. Chaussee, Fr. Calzata, Ital. a way made over a boggy
infirm Ground, of (...), Gr. a Flint, with which it is made firm.

V. 416. Disparted Chaos, etc. The dark Abyss, divided by the Bridge built over
it, on both sides roared. Disparted, Dispartitus, Lat. divided in two: Of Dis,
Lat. (...), Gr. twice, and Partire, Lat. to divide. Exclaimed, of Exclamare,
Lat. to cry aloud. Rebounding, Bo. 1. v. 788. Assailed, assaulted the
Barricado, which mocked its impotent Anger; scorned its infirm Fury: Of
Assaillir, Fr. Assalire, Ital. to leap upon, of the Lat. Assilire.

V. 425. Of Lucifer by allusion to Satan paragon'd: Of Satan styled Lucifer,
his bright Station in the Realms of Light, resembling nearest that illustrious
Star that leads Heaven's illustrious Herd. His Countenance, as the Morning Star
that guides
The Starry Flock, allured them. Bo. v. v. 708.


Pandaemonium, Bo. 1. v. 756. Allusion, likeness, of Alludere, Lat. to
resemble. Paragon'd, of Paragonner, Fr. to be equal to, to be like, of (...),
Juxta, and (...), Certamen. An exact Idea, or Likeness of a thing, able to
contest with the Original.

V. 431. From his Russian Foe by Astracan; As when the wild Tartar retreats
from his Musc^vian Enemy, over the Snowy Plains by Astracan. Russian, of
Russia, Muscovy, (called generally Black, to distinguish it from that Province
called Red Russia, and Ruthenia, belonging to the Poles, a vast Country in the
North-East part of Europe, anciently Sarmatia Europaea, now by the Inhabitants
Rutz, separated from the Crim Tartars Southward by the Tanais Minor, now the
River Donetz. Tartar, Bo. 3. v. 432.

Astracan, is a considerable part of the Muscovian Czar's Dominion, formerly a
Tartarian Kingdom, with a Capital City of the same Name, near the Mouth of the
River Wolga, at its fall into the Caspian Sea.

V. 433. Or Bactrian Sophi; Or the Persian Emperor, named Bactrian, of Bactria,
now Corasan, one of the greatest and richest Provinces of Persia, lying near
the Caspian Sea. The Kings of Persia are called Sophies, or Shaughs, of Ishmael
Sophie, Son of Guine Sophie, the Chief of their Seventh Race of Kings.

V. 434. Turkish Crescent; From their Turkish Enemies, who bear the Horned
Moon, the Cressent, in their Ensigns. The Croissant, (of Crescere, to
increase,) is the Turkish Arms, first born, as Justus Lipsius thinks, by
Mahomet the Great, at the taking of Constantinople: Ut signum victae Gentis,
penes quam Orientis imperium esset. But (GOD be praised) this Turkish Moon is
waning into a Decrease.

V. 435. The Realm of Aladule; The Greater Armenia, called by the Turks (under
whom the greatest part of it is) Aladule, of its last King Aladules, slain by
Selymus the First.

V. 436. To Tauris or Casbeen; Tauris, Tabresium, Tauresium, and by the
Inhabitants Tebris, is a great City in the Kingdom of Persia, (in the Province
of Aderbuitzan,) now called Ecbatana, ^ounded (as the Persians boast) in the
Year of our Lord 786. Sometimes in the hands of the Turks, but, an. 1603.
retaken by Abas King of Persia. Casbeen, Caswin, Casbinum, one of the greatest
Cities of Persia, in the Province of Ayrach, formerly Parthia, toward the
Casp^an Sea, where the Persian Monarchs made their Residence after the loss of
Tauris, from which it is distant 65 German Miles to the South-East.

V. 442. Plebcian Angel Militant; Seeming one of the ordinary Angelic Bands.
Plebeius, Lat. common, ordinary, of Plebs, Lat. the common People. Militant,
Militans, Lat. Warfaring, of Militare, Lat. to serve as a Soldier.

V. 444. Of that Plutonian Hall; Of that Hellish Hall. Plutonian, of Pluto, the
Brother of Jupiter and Neptune, and Governor of Hell, of (...), Gr. Riches,
because Hell was supposed to be in the Bowels of the Earth, from whose Mines,
Riches, Gold and Silver, were dug, where the inordinate and wicked Purchase,
and pursuit of which, has, with Millions of mistaken Wretches, Peopled that
dark Dominion.

V. 446. Of richest Texture; Which was placed under a Canopy of State, richly
wrought. Texture, Textura, Lat. weaving.

V. 449. Fulgent Head; His shining Head, and Shape Star-bright, as described,
V. 425. Fulgens, Lat. shining, False Glitter, false, fading Light, like that of
Counterfeit Jewels, of Glitzern, Belg. to shine.

V. 457. Raised from their dark Divan; Rising from their Infernal
Council Chamger, well liken'd to the Turkish Divan, where their most secret
Councils assemble.

V. 458. Congratulant; Rejoicing at his happy Return. Congratulans, Lat. of
Congratulari, Lat. to rejoice with. Acclaim, Bo. 2. v. 521.

V. 471. Voyag'd the unreal Deep; Traveled over the empty uncreated Deep of
dire Confusion. Unreal, Unessential, contrary to Creation, void of Being. The
Void Profound of Unessential Night, Bo. 2. v. 439.

V. 474. To expedite, etc. To make the glorious March more easy; of Expedire,
Lat. to forward, to speed. Uncounth, Bo. 2. v. 408.

V. 476. Untractable Abyss; The unruly boisterous Abyss. Intractabilis, Lat.
unmanageable, ungovernable.

V. 477. Plunged in the Womb of Unoriginal Night, Sunk in the Womb of Uncreated
Darkness, and horrible Confusion. Unoriginal, that has no Being, as Unessential
Night, Bo. 2. v. 440. Or Unoriginal, Eternal, that knows no Beginning; of Un,
answerable to the Lat. In, and Origo, Lat. Being. Plunged, of Plonger, Fr. to
sink into.

V. 480. Protesting Fate supreme; With loud Outcries, declaring and declaiming
against my Proceedings, and calling Fate, the Supreme Power of all Things, as
witness of my violating her fixed Decrees. Protesting, of Protestari, Lat. to
declare, to testify against, to show a public Dislike of Proceedings we
cannot hinder.

V. 500. A World who would not purchase with a Bruise? But it will prove so
fatal an one, as even Eternity will never cure. Our Author has strangely
expressed Satan's Malice against his Maker in the foregoing Taunting Relation,
and as finely robs him of his expected Applause, repaying all his Pains with
Universal Hiss, and Public Scorn.

V. 512. His Legs entwining each other; Twisting about one another, so as to
grow together like a Serpent's Tail. So Cadmus undergoing the same Change, is
described by Ovid: -- Commissaque in unum
Paulatim tereti sinuantur acumine crura. Met. l. 4.


V. 513. Supplanted down he fell, etc. Trip'd up, and overthrown. Supplanted,
of Suppla^tare, Lat. to strike up ones Heels as Wrestlers do. Prone on his
Belly: In pectusque cadit Pro^us. Met. l. 4.

V. 518. But hiss for hiss with forked Tongue; Ille quidem vult plura loqui:
sed lingua repent
In parts est fissa duas, nec verba volenti
Sufficient: Quotiesque aliquos parat edere questus,
Sibilat -- Met. 1. 4.


V. 520. As Accessories to, etc. As guilty Sharers in his bold Attempt.
Accessory, Accessorius, Lat. of Accedere, Lat. to accompany, and thence to
agree with: A Law-term for one guilty of some heinous Offense, not Principally
by committing it himself, but sharing in it, by Advice, Aid, Command, or
Concealment. Riot, Bo. 1. v. 499.

V. 523. Complicated Monsters; With monstrous Serpents, with Heads and Tails
twisted together. Complicated, Complicatus, Lat. of Complicare, Lat. to twist
together.

V. 524. Asp; (...), Gr. of the Privative (...) and (...), because generally
seen in a Circle, seldom extending it self: Plures diversaeque sunt Aspidum
species. Solin. c. 40. -- Quae prima caput movit de pulvere tabes
Aspida somniferam tumida cervice levavit. Luc. 1. 9.


Ibid. Amphisbaena; Called also (...), because it has a Head at each end,
thence named (...), of (...) and (...), because it went forward either way:
Plin. l. 8. c. 23. Et gravis in geminum surgens caput Amphisbaena. Luc. 1. 9.

V. 525. Cerastes horned; (...), of (...), Gr. a Horn. Caerastae praeferunt
quadrigemina cornicula (Nicandro bina tantum) quorum ostentatione, veluti esca
illice, sollicitatas adse aves pe^imunt. Sol. c. 40. See Plin. 1. 8. c. 23.
Spinaque vagi torquente Cerastae. Phar. 1. 9.

Ibid. Hydrus; (...), Gr. the Water-Snake, of (...), Gr. Water. Et natrix
violator aquae. Luc. 1. 9.

Ibid. Ellops drear; (...), Gr. a sort of dumb, silent Serpent, that by hissing
gave no notice of his danger: (...). Drear, sad, dreadful, of the Sax. Dreorig,
or the Belg. Freurigh, sad; so Drerie is by our Author used: See thou yon
Drearie Plain, Bo. 1. v. 180.

V. 526. And Dipsas; (...), Gr. a Serpent, so named of (...), Gr. Thirst,
because those it stung were tormented with Unquenchable Thirst. Thence, --
Torrida Dipsas
Ecce subit virus tacitum, carpitque medall^s
Ignis edax, calidaque incendit viscera tab^
Ebibit humorem circum vitalia fusum
Pestis --
Ille vel in Tanaim missus, Rodanumque Padumque
Arderet, Nilumque bibens per rura vagantem. Luc. 1. 9.


V. 527. Bedropt with Blood of Gorgon; Africa, and more particularly that part
of it called Libya. As Ovid: Cumque super Libycas victor penderet arenas;
Gorgonei capitis guttae cecidere cruentae:
Quas humus acceptas varios animavit in angues.
Unde frequens illa est, infestaque terra colubris. Met. 1. 14.
Itque super Libyen, quae nullo consita cultu,
Illa tamen sterilis tellus, faecundaque nulli
Arva ^ono, virus stillantis tabe medusae
Concipiunt, dirosque fero de sanguine rores,
Quos calor adjuvit, putrique incoxit arenae, Luc. 1. 9.


Gorgon, Book 2, verse. 611.

V. 528. Or the Isle Ophiusa; The Island of Cyprus, called by the Greeks (...),
and by the Latins, Colubraria, from the multitude of Serpents, and Venomous
Creatures, that infested it. Ebusi terra Serpents fugat, Colubria parit. Plin.
l. 3. c. 5.

Ovid writing of Amathus, one of its ancient Cities, of which it was called
Amathusia, mentions this infamous Name: Ispa sua Urbes, Ophiusaque arva parabat
Deserere alma Venus. Met. l. 10.


There is in it still a Cape, called the Cape of Cats, many of which the Monks
of St. Nicholas are forced to keep, to destroy multitudes of Serpents that
molest 'em. Sands his Travels, page 220.

V. 529. Now Dragon grown; (...), Gr. a venomous Serpent, (of the larger size,)
larger than huge Python, which the Sun begot of the slimy Earth, soaked by the
Deucalian Deluge. The Pythian Vale, lay near Pythia a City of Phocis, a small
Grecian Province. Python, (...), Gr. so named of (...), Gr. to Putrify,
because by the Sun's heat raised from slimy Putrefaction. Ergo nbi diluvio
tellus lutulenta recenti,
Solibus aetheriis, altoque recanduit aestu;
Edidit innumeras species: partimque figuras
Rettulit antiquas; partim nova monstra creavit.
Illa quidem nollet, sed te quoque maxim Python,
Tum genuit: populisque novis, incognita serpens
Terror eras, tantum spatii de monte tenebas. Met. l. 1.
-- Hinc maxima Serpens
Descendit Python -- Luc. l. 6.


V. 536. Sublime with Expectation; Exalted in their Expectation. Sympathy, Bo.
4. v. 465.

V. 544. Caught by Contagion; Caught by Infection, that influenced their Eyes;
or more strictly, caught as infectious Diseases are, by immediate Touch, or
dangerous Neighborhood. Contagion, Bo. 9. v. 1034.

V. 546. To exploding Hiss; Changed into scornful Hissing; Exploding, scorning,
deriding, of Explodere, Lat. to hiss off the Stage. Exotes Comaedus, non modo
sibilis, sed etiam convitio e scena explodebatur. Quint. Applause, Bo. 2. v.
290. A Hissing the more horrid, and Shame more insupportable, cast on
themselves from their own Mouths, as proceeding from their own keen Conviction.

V. 549. To aggravate their Penance; To inhance their Suffering; to make their
Punishment more grievous, and more grating. Aggravate, Bo. 3. v. 524. Penance,
the contraction of Penitence, Penitentia, Lat. Punishment, or the fear of it,
being the Parent of Repentance.

V. 557. Could not abstain; Could not forbear. Abstain, of Abstinere, Lat.
properly to forbear eating, to fast from. Delude, Bo. 9. v. 639.

V. 560. That curled Megaera; Hung thicker on those tempting Trees, than
curling Serpents on the dreadful Head of dire Megaera, her hissing horrid Hair!
Megaera, one of the three Snaky Sisters, Daughters of Acheron, and Night-Furies
of Hell, so invidious and detestable* of (...), Gr. to hate. Odit and ipse
pater Pluton, odere sorores
Tartareae monstrum; tot sese vertit in ora
Tam saevae facies, tot pullulat atra colubris. AEn. 7.
-- Tot Erynnis sibilat Hydris
Tantaque se facies aperit -- Ibid.
Quas and Tartaream nox intempesta Megaeram,
Uno eodemque tulit partu: paribusque revinxit
Serpentum Spiris -- AEn. 12,


Curled Megaera: Crinita Draconibus ora. Met. l. 4.

So Medusa's Hair was turned into curling Snakes: Gorg^neum turpes crinem
mutavit in Hydros. Ibid.

V. 562. Bituminous Lake, where Sodom flamed; The Lake Asphaltites, near which
Sodom and Gomorrah (burnt by Fire from Heaven, Genesis 19. 24.) were situated.
Josephus affirms, the Shapes and Fashions of 'em and three other Cities, called
the Cities of the Plain, were to be seen in his Days, and Trees laden with
fair Fruit, (styled the Apples of Sodom,) rising out of the Ashes, which at the
first touch dissolved into Ashes and Smoke: Bo. V. of the Wars of the Jews, c.
5. This Lake is named Bituminous, Bituminosus, Lat. of Bitumen, Lat. a fat
clammy Slime gathered on the Lake. See Asphaltic, Bo. 1. v. 411.

V. 563. This mo^e delusive, etc. This fair Fruitage was more deceitful and
disappointing, than Sodom's cheating Apples, which only deceived the Touch, by
dissolving into Ashes; but this endured the handling, the more to vex and
disappoint their Taste, by filling the Mouths of the Damned with grating
Cinders and bitter Ashes, in stead of allaying their scorching Thirst,
provoking and inflaming it: So handsomely has our Author improved their
Punishment. Gust, Taste, of Gustus, Lat. the pleasure of Tasting.

V. 567. With spattering Noise; As the manner of those is, that disgusted by
any ill Taste, spit out its Cause with a spattering Noise: A word coined of the
Sound thereby made. Rejected, cast out, of Rejicere, Lat. to throw out.

V. 568. Drug'd as often, etc. Vexed as often with hatefullest Distaste. Drug'd,
of the Sax. Drecan, to vex, to toil; whence a Drudge, one employed in the
vilest and most loathsome Offices. Disrelish, Disgust, Distaste, Bo. 5. v. 305.
Illusion, Bo. 4. v. 803.

V. 572. Lapsed; Fallen: Lapsus, Lat. Of Labi, Lat. to fall.

V. 578. Tradition they dispersed; They spread abroad some Account among the
Gentiles. Tradition, Traditio, Lat. an ancient Account; of Tradere, Lat. to
deliver down, as those of the Jews were from Father to Son. Dispersed, Bo. 3.
v. 54. Heathen; the Idolatrous Gentiles: of the Sax. Haeden, or Ger. Heyden, of
Heyde, Ger. a Heath; because when Christianity was received in the great
Cities, the Heathen practiced their wicked Rites in little Villages, and
Country Obscurities, for a long time.

V. 581. Ophion with Eurynome, etc. And reported how the Serpent, whom they
disguised under the Name of Ophion, with his Wife Eu^^nome, that Governed far
and near, was the most ancient of all the Gods. and Reigned on Olympus, till
driven thence by Saturn and Ops long before Jove their Son was born, and Nursed
in Crete.

Ophion, (...), of (...), Gr. a Serpent, was one of the Titans, possessed of
the Empire of all things before Saturn, but overthrown by him, as he was at
last by his Son Jupiter, as Isacius reports.

Eurynome, was the Daughter of the Ocean, and Consort of Ophion; of (...), Gr.
wide, and (...), Gr. Law, thence here styled, The wide encroaching Eve; who by
her powerful sway over the Souls and Bodies of her Sons, subjected 'em to Sin
and Death, encroaching and usurping wide on her Posterity, involved both in her
Crime and Punishment, down to her last Descendent. -- Haec arma Mimantis
Sustinet hos onerat ramos exutus Opion. Claud. de Raptu Proserp. l. 3.


V. 584. Saturn; The Son of Caelus and Vesta, espoused his Sister Ops, on whom
he begot Jupiter, named Dictaeus, of Dicte, a Mountain in Crete. -- Di nempe
su^s habuere Sorores
Sic Saturnus Opim junctam sibi sanguine duxit. Met. l. 9.
Dictaeo caeli regem pavere sub antro. Geo. 4.

V. 587. Once Actual; When the first fatal Transgression was committed, now in
Body, now personally present. Actualis, Lat. done, ab Agendo.

V. 588. Habitual Habitant; A constant Inhabitant. Habitual, of Habitus, Lat. a
custom, a constant habit of Body or Mind. Habitant, Habitans, Lat. of Habitare,
Lat. to dwell, to a^ide constantly in a place.

V. 590. Not mounted yet on his pale Horse; The first Generations of Men were
so vicavious, (there Longevity being necessary to the Peopling the World,) that
Death seemed as then to walk on foot, and follow Sin but slowly: He had not
those dreadful Executions to do, that have since required his mounting on
Horseback, as he is described, Rev. 6. 8. And behold a pale Horse, and his
name that sat on him was Death, and Hell followed with him, etc.

V. 592. Second of Satan sprung; Death is said to be the second Offspring of
Satan, Sin being his first, and Death her Son and his, therefore styled the
Sin-bred Monster, V. 596. according to the Holy Writ: When lust has conceived,
it brings forth sin: and sin, when it is finished, brings forth death, Jam.
1. 15. By one man sin entered into the world, and death by sin, Romans 5. 12.

V. 599. Where most with Ravin I may meet; Where I may best find wherewithal to
glut my self. Ravine, of Rapina, Lat. Pillage, Spoil, all Ravenous Creatures
being violent and rapacious.

V. 601. This vast unhide-bound Corpse; This vast wide Womb of mine: Death is so
all-devouring, that his Body may well be styled Not hide-bound, as those
Creatures are, whose Leanness makes their Skin stick to their Ribs; Death on
the contrary seems of so loose a Constitution, that tho he eats up all things,
nothing stays with him. Maw, of the Ital. Magone, the Stomach. Corpse, the
contraction of Corpus, Lat. a Body.

V. 602. The incestuous Mother; Sin, the Mother of Death, by Satan her own
Sire. Incestucsus, Lat. one that has carnal knowledge with a Person within the
Degrees forbidden: Of Incestare, Lat.

V. 605. No homely Morsels; No course Fare. Morsel, of Morceau, Fr. of Morsus,
Lat. a bit.

V. 609. And season him, etc. Season him with much Sinfulness, thy sweetest and
most delicious Dish, the highest Morsel of Mortality. Season, Assaissonner, Fr.
Sasonare, Ital. to relish with Salt or Spice.

V. 611. Or unimmortal Make; Or to make 'em perishable and less lasting, to put
'em into the condition of Decay and Mortality, and to mature 'em for
Destruction, make 'em ready and ripe for Ruin. Maturare, Lat. to ripen.
Transcendent, Bo. 1. v. 86. Havoc, Bo. 2. v. 1009.

V. 624. Conniving seem to gratify, etc. Winking at their Wickedness, seem to
oblige my proud Enemies. Connivere, Lat. to take no notice of. Gratificari,
Lat. to oblige. Adherents, Bo. 6. v. 266.

V. 630. To lick up the Draff; To drink up the Dregs, to lap up the Lees.
Draff, of Drabbe, Sax. Dregs. Random, Bo. 4. v. 930.

V. 633. With sucked and glutted Offal; Almost burst with indrawn Swill, and
gorging Filth; Sucked, of the Lat. Sugere. Glutted, of Glutire, Lat. to swallow
in. Offal, the Refuse of Beasts thrown to Dogs and Swine. Taint, Bo. 5. v. 704.

V. 636. Obstruct the mouth of Hell; Dam up the mouth of Hell. Obstruct, of
Obstruere, Lat. to stop up.

V. 645. Who can extenuate thee? Who can diminish thee? Who can do any thing to
impair thy Power, Glory, or Goodness? Extenuare, Lat. to lessen, to undervalue.

V. 651. As sorted best, etc. As best agreed, as suited best with the present
state of Things: Of Sortire, Lat. to suit with. Precept, Preceptum, Lat. a
Command.

V. 654. Scarce tolerable; Hardly to be endured. Tolerabilis, Lat. sufferable.

V. 655. Decrepit Winter; Old withered Winter, called from the North, because
the Sun is at that Season farthest from it. Decrepitus, Lat. very old.

V. 656. Solstitial Summer's Heat; Midsummer's roasting Heat. Solstitialis, of
Solstitium, Lat. a Sole stante, because the Sun is then at his greatest,
height, and utmost journey in the Crab, (called Circulus Solstitialis,)
proceeding from his most Southern Elevation, the Days neither increasing nor
decreasing for some time, seem to be at a stand. Solstitium pecori defendite:
Jam venit AEstas
Torrida -- Ecl. 7.


Ibid. The Blanc Moon; The Pale-faced Moon. Blanc, Fr. white. Moon, Mona, Sax.
(...), Gr.

V. 658. Their Planetary Motions; The various Wanderings. Planetaris, Lat. of a
Planet, from (...), Gr. wandering.

Ibid. Aspects; Of Aspectus, Lat. the Countenance: The Aspects of the Stars,
among Astronomers, are those different Positions, in which they variously
behold one another at diverse Distances.

V. 659. In Sextile, Square and Trine, and Opposite; If a Planet, in one part
of the Zodiac, be distant from another by a sixth part of Twelve, that is, by
two Signs; their Aspect is called Sextile, Sextilis, Lat. a sixth. If by a
fourth, a Square: Carre, Fr. Quadrare, Lat. By a third, Trine, of Trinus, Lat.
a third, the Aliquot Parts of Twelve, by which the Zodiac is divided. And if by
one half, Opposite, Oppositus, Lat. over against; which last is said to be of
Noxious Efficacy, of Evil Effect, because the Planets so opposed are thought to
strive, and, like Engageing Enemies, to fight, debilitate, and overcome one
another; deemed of evil Consequence to those born under, or subject to, the
Influence of the distressed Star. Noxious, Noxius, Lat. hurtful. Efficacy,
Efficacia, Lat. power, strength, force.

V. 661. In Synod unbenign; In unkind Conjunctions, in hurtful and severe
Assemblies. Synod, of (...), Gr. an Assembly, a Senate, a General Meeting of
the Stars, in consultation for the Good or Ill of miserable Mankind. Unbenign,
Inbenignus, Lat. unlucky, disastrous.

V. 662. The Fixed their Influence malignant, etc. And instructed the Fixed
Stars, how to dispose themselves so, as to dart down upon us, their unlucky
Rays. Influence, Bo. 2. v. 1034. Malignant, Malignans, Lat. hateful, malicious.

V. 664. Should prove Tempestuous; Which of 'em attending on the Rising or
Setting Sun, should raise Storms and Tempests. Tempestuosus, Lat. stormy. Ipse
Pater statuit, quid Menstrua Luna moneret,
Quo signo caderent Austri:
Frigida Saturni sese quo stella receptet,
Quos ignis caeli Cyllenius erret in Orbs. Geor. l. 1.


V. 665. With bluster to confound Sea, Air, and Shore; When with blustering
Storms to toss Water and Air, and Earth, into a common Confusion. Bluster,
seems coined of the Noise the high blowing Winds make. Confound, of Confundere,
Lat. to mix together, to toss and tumble into Confusion. So Juvenal: Mare caelo
confundas. Sat. 6.

V. 668. His Angels turn ascanse; He commanded his Angels to turn the Poles of
the Earth above 20 Degrees aside from the Sun's Orb. The Poles of the Earth are
two Imaginary Points, directly opposite North and South. Ascanse, Bo. 4. v.
504. Poles, Bo. 1. v. 74. Axle, Bo. 2. v. 926. The Heavenly Orbs are divided
into 360 equal Parts, called Degrees, of Gradus, Lat.

V. 671. Oblique the Centric Globe; They with much difficulty moved awry Earth
on her Center seated. Oblique, Obliquus, Lat. crooked, awry. Centric, Bo. 8. v.
83. Globe, Bo. 2. v. 513.

V. 673. Like distant breadth to Taurus, etc. Others say, the Sun was ordered
to turn out of the Equinoctial Road, driving the same distance in breadth up to
Taurus, Pleiades and Gemini (Northern Signs) up to the Tropic of Cancer, as he
does down again apace by Leo, Virgo, and Libra, (the descending Signs) as low
as Capricorn, thereby to introduce the various Seasons over all the World.
Taurus, Lat. the Bull, placed among the Stars by Jupiter, in memory of the
Trick he played Europa in the shape of one. Hinc qua tepenti vere laxatur dies
Tyriae per undas vector Europae nitet. Sen. Her. Fur.
Vacca sit an Taurus, non est cognoscere pr^mptum:
Pars prior apparet: posteriora latent.
Seu tamen est Taurus, sive est hoc faemina signum;
Junone invita, munus amoris habet. Ov. Fast. l. 4.
Candidus Auratis aperit cum cornibus annum
Taurus. Geor. l. 1.


Equinoctial, Bo. 9. v. 64.

V. 674. The seven Atlantic Sisters; Are seven bright Stars in the Bull's
Neck, Fabled to have been the Daughters of Atlas King of Mauritania, and
Pleione Daughter of Oceanus, whence called also Pleiades. Duxerat Oceanus
quondam Titanida Tethyn,
Qui terram liquidis, qua patet, ambit aquis.
Hinc sata Pleione cum stellifero Atlante
Jungitur, ut fama est, Pleiad^sque parit. Ov. Fast. l. 5.


Six of 'em had Gods for their Gallants, which makes 'em appear so conspicuous;
but Merope being forced to take up with a Mortal, ashamed to show her self, is
out of Countenance. Septima mortali Merope, tibi Sisyphe, nupsit
Paenitet; and facti sola pudore latet* Fast. l. 4.
Ante tibi Eoae Atlandites abscondantur. Geo. 1.

Ibid. The Spartan Twins; The Sign Gemini, Castor and Pollux, Brothers by Leda
their Mother, Wife of Tyndarus King of Sparta: Jupiter was the Father of
Pollux, and Tyndarus of Castor, whence the first was Heir to his Father's
Immortality, unpleasant to him without the company of his beloved Brother, and
therefore shared between 'em by turns. The Fable took its Rise from the nature
of the Stars, called still Tyndaridae, for those that form the two Heads of
Gemini are so placed, that in the very minute of their Rising and Setting, one
of 'em is above the Horizon, while the other is below. Thence Virgil: Si
fratrem Pollux alterna morte redemit
Itque reditque viam toties. AEn. 6.


Homer has recorded 'em both for the Sons of Jupiter: (...)
(...).
(...).
(...) --


Whom Horace follows: Castor gaudet equis: Ovo prognatus eodem
Pugnis --
Hinc clara gemini signa Tyndaridae micant. Sen. Her. Furens.

V. 675. Up to the Tropic Crab; Up as high as the Tropic of Cancer, distant
from the Equator 23 Degrees and 31 Minutes, where when the Sun gets, he is at
his greatest Height and Power. AEthiopum versemus oves sub sidere Cancri.
Virg. Ecl. 10.

Cancer the Crab, was made one of the Celestial Signs, because in imitation of
that Animal, the Sun, when got so high* returns back and is Retrograde; whence
the Tropics took their Name, (...), Gr. of (...), Gr. to return: This Tropic of
Cancer being his farthest Stage Northward, from whence he turns down Southward
to that of Capricorn. Octipedis frustra quaerentur brachia Cancri. Ovid. Fast.
lib. 1.

V. 676. By Leo, Lat. the Lion, slain by Hercules, in the Nemean Forest, whose
Skin he afterward wore, impenetrable like a Coat of Mail: Juno who brought
this Monster out of the Moon, advanced him afterward among the Stars. -- Tu
Cr^ssia mactas
Prodigia, and vastum Nemeae sub rupe Leonem. AEn. 8.
His elisa jacet moles Nemeaea lacertis. Met. l. 9. -- Nempe pro telis gerit
Quae timuit and quae fudit: Armatus venit
Leone and Hydra. Her. Furens.
Nullus per urbes errat Arcadicas Leo. Her. Oetae.

Ibid. The Virgin and the Scales; Astraea and Libra: Justice well described by
Chaste Virgin Purity, and the exact Balance in which she weighs all things;
Before the Flood, weary of this wicked World, she flew up to Heaven, where for
her Equity she is placed, in that part of the Zodiac, where the Sun coming to
the Scales proportions the Days and Nights in equal length. -- Virgo caede
madentes
Ultima coelestum Terras Astraea reliquit. Met. l. 1.
Libra Die, somnique pares ubi fecerit horas
Et medium luci, atque umbris jam dividet orbem. Geor. l. 1.


V. 677. As deep as Capricorn; As low as the Southern Tropic; A Constellation
of many Stars, where when the Sun arrives it is Winter with those that live
Northward, named Capricornus, Lat. the Horned Goat, because from thence the Sun
ascends, like that Climbing Animal. Capricorno, Phaebe, relicto,
Per juvenis curres signa gerentis aquam. Fast. lib. 1.


Chine, Bo. I. Verse. 242.

V. 682. Had unbenighted shon; If the Sun had kept his constant rode along the
Equator, and never deviated from the Equinoctial Path, either to the North or
South, those that had lived in the Neighborhood of the Poles had known no
Night, because the Sun would have been always in sight, rounding their Horizon,
but his company had been so cold (though constant) at so vast a distance, that
as Vallesius well observes it would have been little worth, for their day would
have been weak, and as to warmth imperfect and unproductive. Parts sub Polis
sitae, neque diem neque noctem haberent ullam, sed in Horizonte solemn semper,
cujus dimidium spectarent, quod parum omnino abest ab aeterna nocte: Neque sol
in Horizonte semper volutatus, possit satis calefacere, ac faecundare terras,
quas nunc cum viginti tres gradus supra Horizontem elevetur, tamen calefacit
tenuiter, De Sacra Philo. c. 26. They had indeed known neither East nor West,
the Terms for the Suns Rising and Setting, because he had been always visible
to them, though useless.

V. 686. From cold Estotiland; Estotilandia, Lat. is a great Tract of Land in
the North of America, toward the Artic Circle, and Hudsons Bay, part of
Canada, commonly called New Britain and Terra Laboratoris, a Mountainous
Country overgrown with Woods, and overrun with Wild Beasts, but very fruitful
though very cold.

V. 687. Beneath Magellan; Magellanica, a Country in South America, of large
extent toward the South Pole, which together with its Streights, took their
Name of Ferdinandus Magellanus a Portuguese, who in the year 1520. first
discovered them.

V. 688. As from Thyestean Banquet; Theystes and Atreus, Sons of Pelops and
Hyppodamia, hated one another to that degree, That Theystes having debauched
the Wife of Atreus, was by him entertained (upon a pretended Reconciliation) at
a Feast, where his slaughtered Sons were served up, and their Blood mixed with
his Wine: At this Bloody Banquet, the Tragedians say, the Sun ran back to the
East for fear of seeing so horrid and detestable a Cruelty. -- Caena Thyestae
Aut humana palam coquet exta nefarius Atreus. Hor. de Ar. Poet.
-- Astra Thyestae
Abstulit, and subitis damnavit noctibus Argos. Luc. 7.
Quo terrarum superumque parens,
C^jus ad ortus noctis opacae
Decus omne fugit, quo vertis iter,
Medioque diem perdis Olympo? Seen. Cho. Thyest.
Sol auroram videt occiduus, Hocegit diem
Aversum in ortus. Ibid. Thest. Act. 5.


His Course intended; His wonted way, intended, usual, fixed; Of Intendere, Lat.
to settle. Course, Cursus, Lat. Race.

V. 691. Avoided pinching Cold, etc. Had the Position of the Sphere been from
the beginning the same that now it is, and the Sun at his first setting forth
taken the same way that now he does, the habitable World must in Winter have
been afflicted with extreme Cold, and in Summer scorcht with violent Heat,
though Adam had never tasted the fatal forbidden Fruit; Those contrary
extremities seeming rather a Punishment consequent on the Sin, than on the
situation of Mankind in Sinless Innocence.

V. 693. Sideral Blast; Blastings descending from the Stars, shot from the
squint Eyed Planets. Sideralis, Lat. Sideratio, blasting, a scorching withering
heat. Quid tempestates Autumni, and Sydera dicam? Geor. 1.

V. 695. Corrupt and Pestilent: Hurtful and Pestilential Breath. Corruptus,
Lat. unwholesome. Pestilens, Lat. Infectious; Of Pestis, Lat. the Plague.

V. 696. Of Norumbega; Norumbega, is a Province of the Northern America, styled
Mexicana, having its chief City of the same Name.

Ibid. The Samoed Shore; Samoieda, is a Province in the North East of Muscovy,
upon the Frozen Sea, on both sides of the River Ob, a part of the ancient
Scythia, or Sarmatia. Samoedes, the Russians tell us, (under whose Czars they
are) signifies, Self-Eaters, it being their Custom to Eat Man's Flesh, and that
of their nearest Relations mixed with Venison, as Olearius relates, I have seen
a Man, his Wife, and two Children, Samoedes, in a little Island over against
Archangel, (of whom the Earl of Cars^ile bought the Rain Deer presented to
King^ Charles the Second) who hanging the Guts of Sheep, or Oxen about their
Necks, like an Aldermans Chain, would begin at one end and Eat 'em greedily
with all their filthy Ordure.

V. 697. Bursting their Brazen Dungeon; According to the general Opinion of the
Poets, that the Winds bred in, and break out of the Cavern of the Earth.
Clauserat Hippotades aeterno carcere ventis. Met. l. 4. -- Cavum conversa
cuspide montem
Impulit in latus: ac venti, velut agmine facto,
Quae data porta ruunt. AEn. 1.


Flaw; of Flatus, Lat. a gust of Wind; or of (...), Gr. to break. Gust, a
violent and sudden blast of Wind; Of the Ger. Geissen, to pour out, a sudden
flood of Wind.

V. 699. Boreas, (...), Gr. the North Wind, (...). from its noise as well as
violence. Caecias, (...), Gr. the North West Wind. (...), from the River Caycus
in Mysia. Argestes, (...), Gr. the North East Wind; Of (...), Gr. white, as
clearing the Sky. Thrascius, (...), Gr. (...), Gr. Thracius, blowing from
Thrace. At Boreae de part trucis cum fulminat. Geor. 1. Thracio baccante magis
sub interlunia vento. Hor. Car. l. 1. Od. 25.

V. 702. Notus, (...), the South Wind; Of (...), Gr. Humidity, moisture; Of
(...), Gr. sickness, being a hot and moist Wind, of evil mixture. Afer, or
Africus, the South West Wind, bred and born in Africa. -- Madidis notus evola
talis
Terribilem picea tectus caligine vultum, etc. Met. l. 1.
-- Notusque ruunt, creberque procellis
Affricus. AEn. 1.


V. 703. Serraliona; Cap di Sierra Liona, supposed to be the most Western Point
of Africa, known to the Ancients, and is a vast ledge of Hills, so called,
lying off the Atlantic Ocean, 70 Leagues beyond the Southern Mouth of the River
Niger.

V. 705. Eurus, (...), Gr. the East Wind, named Levant, of the East, so called
of Levare, Lat. because the Sun rises there, as Zephr, Bo. 4. V. 329. is called
the Ponent of the West; of Ponere, Lat. where he sets. Eurique, Zephyrique,
tonat domus. Geor. 1.

V. 706. Sirocco and Libecchio; The South East and South West, called the
lateral noise, because rising on their sides, Lateralis, of Latus, Lat. a side.
Sirocco; Ventus Syrus, Libecchio; Ventus Lybicus. Italian Terms used by Seamen
of the Mediterranean. (...). Arist. de Mundo. (...)
(...). Hom.
Adversi rupto ceu quondam turbine venti
Confligunt, Zephyrus, Notusque, and laetus eois
Eurus equis. AEn. 2.


V. 708. Discord Daughter of Sin: Disagreement and Dissension, a Sister well
suited to Death, and Daughter resembling her ill favored Mother Sin. --
Discordia demens
Vipereum crinem vittis innexa cruentis. AEn. 6.


Outrage, Bo. 1. V. 501.

V. 709. Fierce Antipathy; Antipathy, is a Natural Dread and Abhorrence, which
not only some Creatures have of one another, but Mankind also fot some of them,
and for some kinds of Meats, deservedly styled Fierce, as altogether
ungovernable and incurable; for which as little Remedy, as Reason, is to be
given: Nor is this horrid Aversion only found among living Creatures, but in
Poisons and their Antidotes, this Antipathy is discernable, (...), Gr. of
(...), Gr. against, and (...), Passion, suffering; whence that sudden
recoiling of our Senses into a swound, when we approach any of these our
Natural Abhorrencies, though undiscovered by us. Irrational, Irrationalis, Lat.
void of Reason, brute. Glared, Began, began. Bo. IV. Verse. 402.

V. 717. To sorrow abandonn'd; Given up to Grief; Abandonne, Fr. of Abandon,
Fr. full Liberty, sorrow was let loose upon him; to disburden, to unload his
laboring Mind.

V. 729. Is propagated Curse; Is increasing of my Curse, and Misery multiplied
on Mankind, my Polluted Posterity. Propagated, Propagatus, Lat. increased,
spread abroad; of Propagare, Lat. to beget.

V. 735. Ill fare, etc. May ill betide our wicked and polluted Ancestor Adam;
May he be as unhappy as he has made me. Fare, of the Belg. Vaeren; Of the Lat.
Valere, to be in Health. Impure, Impurus, Lat. unclean, and so, wicked.
Execration, Execratio, Lat. a Curfe Ancestor, Bo. II. V. 894.

V. 739. Shall with a fierce Reflux, etc. Shall with a violent return, like a
Tide, beat back and dash against my Head. Reflux, Refluxus, Lat. a flowing
back, the return of a Tide. Redound, of Redundare, Lat. to flow back again, to
return as Tides do, all the many Wickednesses and Miseries of Mankind, In meum
redundabunt caput.

V. 741. Heavy though in their place; Weighty and Oppressive, though in their
due place, thrown all and devolved upon my head, their Natural Center. All
heavy Bodies, are by the Philosophers, said, naturally to descend, in a
Tendency toward the great Mass of Gravity the Earth, as to their Center: And
it is a Famous Axiom, Nihil in suo loco gravitare, That nothing is heavy in
its place, found to be weighty only to that endeavor which would remove it
thence; But Adam's Case is different, for the Sins of all Mankind, if heaped
upon his Head, their spring and source, would be too heavy for him to bear.

Ibid. O Fleeting Joys; O all ye Joys of Paradise, soon past, departed and
decayed; Fleeting, flowing, running away; Of the Bell: Ulieten, and this of the
Lat. Fluitare. To Solicit, Sollicitare, Lat. earnestly to entreat.

V. 745. From Darkness to promote me: From the dark Womb of my Original
Nothing, to bring me into Being. Promote, of Promovere, Lat. to advance, to
bring forward.

V. 747. As my W^ll c^ncur'd not, etc. As my Consent was no way agreeing to my
being made what I am, so it seems but just, at my desire to bring me back to my
Primitive Dust; That as I undertook not this Being by my own Consent, I may not
be constrained to keep it against my Will, desirous to resign, and give it up.
Concurred, Bo. 2. v. 831. To Reduce, Reducere, Lat. to bring back. Resign,
Resignare, Lat. to give up, restore, surrender. Resigno quae dedit. Hor. Car.
lib. 3. Od. 29.

V. 754. Inexplicable, etc. Thy Justice seems unaccountable, unconceivable;
Inexplicabilis, Lat. that cannot be explained, or understood. Contest, argue;
of Contestari, Lat. to dispute, to reason the case.

V. 759. Then Cavil the Conditions; Then sind fault with the Terms on which it
was allowed. Cavil, of Cavillari, Lat. to wrangle, to make small and trifling
Excuses.

V. 761. And Reproved, Retort; And blamed, turn thy own Argument against thee,
found faulty, should throw in thy Teeth, and c. Reproved; of Reprobare, Lat. to
disallow, to find fault with. Retort; of Retorquere, Lat. to cast back again.

V. 773. Fixed on this day; The day, as of my Disobedience, so of my Doom, as
seeming so appointed, Genesis 2. 17. Fixed, of Figere, Lat. to sasten to, to
appoint: Why do I over live? Why do I out live it?

V. 784. That pure Breath of Life; My Soul. Divinae particula A^rae.

V. 788. Die a living Death; Be eternally miserable. Living Death, everlasting
Misery.

V. 791. The Body properly has neither; the Body has neither Life, nor the
Power of doing Good or Evil, being only the Organ of the Soul, therefore what
had Life, and the faculty of doing well or ill, (my Soul) must Die, All of me
then shall Die.

Ibid. Let this appease, etc. Let this calm my disquieted Thoughts, let this
set my troubled Heart at rest. Appease, Appaisir, Fr. to restore to Peace, to
quiet.

V. 799. Strange Contradiction: To make Deathless Death, immortal mortality, to
make that everlasting and endless that must destroy and make an end of all
Things, is an amazing Contradiction, implying Impossibility of being true, a
Proposition that contradicts and gain-says what it proposes. Contradictio, Lat.

V. 800. Which to God himself impossible is held; The Schoolmen tell us, God
can do, Quicquid non implicat, all things, but those that imply a
Contradiction, for such are absolutely impossible, since the one destroys the
other, Quod enim cum affirmatur, negatur, impossible est. Atque haec
impossibilia non posse, immensae est potentiae; posse, infirmitatis est. An
Argument of Weakness, not of Power: For of two Contradictories, one must be a
Non Entity, a mere nothing; Therefore it would imply the highest Imperfection
and Impotency in the Almighty Power. Operari and nihil efficere, to employ it
on that which can have no Existence, Impossible to be brought into Being But
Deathless Death, that is, Eternal Death, as everlasting Punishment, implies no
Contradiction Argument, Argumentum, Lat. a proof.

V. 802. Finite to Infinite; Will he for the sake of his Vengeance, make me who
am Finite and Mortal, Infinite, endless and everlasting. Finitus, Lat. ended,
limited; Of Finis, Lat. an end. Infinitus. Lat. endless, Eternal. Punished, of
Punir, Fr. Punire, Lat. to afflict.

V. 803. To satisfy his rigor satisfied never; To satisfy his Severity, that
never will be satisfied, to fulfill his Anger, that to all Eternity will be in
filling.

V. 805. Beyond Dust and Natures Laws, etc. That would be to stretch his
Sentence (that to Dust I shall return) beyond this Dust, and beyond Natures
Everlasting Law, by which all other Agents work on their subject matter in
proportion to it; not to the utmost possibility of their own vast Power.
Natural Causes act in proportion to the subject matter which they actuate,
called Sphaera Activitatis and Virtutis Orbis, the compass of their Power,
Terminus Activitatis, quem propter limitatam suam agendi virtutem praeterire
non p^ssunt. Extend, of Extendere, Lat. to stretch out. The Reception of their
matter, the matter which they act upon, Reception, Receptio, Lat, of Recipere,
Lat. to receive according to the capacity of their subject, according as their
matter will admit. Extent. Extensio, Lat. a stretching out, the utmost compass
of. Bereaving, Bo. 6. v. 903. Perpetuity, Perpetuitas, Lat. Everlastingness, In
Perpetuum, for ever.

V. 813. Ay me; Alas: Ahime, Ital. (...), Gr. all of the sighing Sound that
Mourners make.

V. 814. Comes Thundering back, etc. The fear of endless Misery comes rolling
back, as dreadful as a Thunderbolt upon my bare Head. Revolution, Bo. 8. v. 31.

V. 816. And incorporate both; Lodged both together in one mortal Body, as St.
Paul says, even Spiritually, having the sentence of death in our selves, 2 Cor.
1. 9. Oh wretch man that I am! who shall deliver me from this body of death?
Romans 7. 24. Incorporate, Incorporatus, Lat. of the same Body.

V. 820. So Disinherited; So robbed of the Inheritance of Sin and Shame, and
double Death, both Temporal and Eternal, an unlucky and lasting Patrimony
entailed upon my Sons. Patrimonium, Lat. the Estate that descends from Father
to Son, of Pater, Lat. a Father. Disinherited, of Dis, the Privative Particle
In, and Haereditare, Lat. to possess.

V. 825. Both Mind and Will depraved; For a corrupt tree cannot bring forth
good fruit, Mat. 7. 18. Thence the Royal Psalmist's Confession, Behold I was
shapen in iniquity, and in sin did my mother conceive me, Psalm. 51. 5. Death
reigned from Adam, even over them that had not sinned after the similitude of
Adam's transgression, Romans 5. 14. A designation of Original Sin, even in
Infants, as the Commentators observe: Nam peccante Adamo, qui omnium Parens and
Princeps erat, in eo omnes simul peccaverunt, quia omnium voluntates and
consensus erant collocatae in voluntate unius Adami. As all the Greek and Latin
Fathers agree. Acquitted, discharged, Acquitte, of Acquitter, Fr. to absolve,
to free from blame or guilt.

V. 830. All my Evasions vain, etc. All my frivolous Excuses, vain Arguments,
all the sly ways, I try to avoid the imputation of my guilt, lead me through
all their entangled Turnings, but to a plainer Proof, and my own Confession.
Absolve, Bo. 7. v. 94. Evasions, Bo. 2. v. 412. Disputes, Reasonings, Arguing,
of Disputare, Lat. to debate. Mazes, Bo. 2. v. 561. Conviction, V. 84. of this
Book. Support, undergo, of Sub, and P^rtare, Lat. to bear.

V. 840. Beyond all past Example, etc. That Adam, as to the consideration of
his being the first Offender of all Mankind, and the spreading of the Pollution
and Infection of his Fault over all his Posterity, might reflect on himself as
most sinful, and thence most miserable of all Men, his Sons; and so exceeding
all Examples of Futurity, is not hard to be conceived: But that he surpassed
all past Examples, which could be only the fallen Angels, must be understood as
an aggravation of his Guilt, and the excessive Sense of, and Sorrow for it, by
which he was overwhelmed. Refuge, Bo. 2. v. 168. Future, Bo. 2. v. 222.
Lamented, Bo. 1. v. 448.

V. 852. Cursed his Creation; The Day on which he was created, as Job did,
Chap. 3. of Tardy Execution, of slow Dispatch; Tardus, Lat. slow.

V. 859. Mends not her slowest pace. Sequitur pede Paena ^laudo. Hor.

V. 866. With stern Regard; With an angry Countenance. Stern, Bo. 8. v. 333.
Regard, Fr. the looks.

V. 870. Color Serpentine; Color Serpentinus: But that thy Milky Skin, of the
green Serpents color, might discover the hidden Falsehood that lurks underneath
that fair Disguise.

V. 872. Pretended to Hellish Falsehood; Lest thy Divine Angelic Beauty,
disguising thy Devilish Deceitfulness, ensnare 'em. Pretended, Pretentus, Lat.
drawn over, like a Curtain, to hide. Sicanio praetenta sin^ jacet insula. AEn.
3. Morti praetendere muros. AEn. 11.

Form, Forma, Lat. Beauty.

V. 886. More to the part sinister from me drawn; Taken out of my left unlucky
Side, as leaning and inclining to my Enemy, not determined by Genesis 2. 21. The
right Hand and Side is every where accounted more honorable and happy; God's
Power and Glory are frequently expressed by it in Holy Writ: Thy right hand
shall find out those that hate thee, Psalm. 21. 8. Sit on my right hand, Psalm.
110. 1. On the contrary, the Left was esteemed weak and wicked: A wise man's
heart is at his right hand, but a fools heart at his left, Eccl. 10. 2. And the
Discrimination of the Blessed and the Accursed at the Day of Judgment, is
typified by the same distinction, He shall set the sheep on his right hand, but
the goats on his left, Matthew. 25. 33. So Virgil describes the two ways leading
to Happiness and Misery after Death: Hic locus est, parts ubi se via findit in
ambas,
Dextera quae Ditis magni sub maenia tendit;
Hac iter Elysium nobis: at Laeva malorum
Exercet paenas, and ad impia Tartara mittit. And the fiery Phlegethon is
placed,
-- Sub rupe sinistra. AEn. 6.


Sinister, Lat. of the left hand, and thence unlucky.

V. 887. As supernumerary to my just number; The number of Ribs in a Human Body
being twenty four, twelve on each side, has put the Curious upon Enquiry,
whether Adam had thirteen on that side out of which the Rib formed into his
Companion was taken: Those that are of this Opinion, seem to make him a
Monster, and cannot easily disintagle themselves from that Absurdity. Others
therefore say, he had no more than his Descendents, but that one of 'em, which
was subtracted from his Side, was by that Omnipotent Power, who formed him
from the Dust, supplied by another, which the Text, Genesis 2. 21. where there is
only mention, of closing up the Flesh, will as well admit of, at that other at
V. 23. where Adam styles Eve, Flesh of his Flesh, in whose Formation, there is
nothing more named than a bare Rib, of which our Author makes incensed Adam
say, it had been well, if it had been thrown away, as unnecessary, or over and
above the equal number of his Ribs, on each side. Supernumerarius, Lat.
exceeding the usual number.

V. 890. With Spirits masculine, etc. It is generally supposed, that the whole
Angelic Nature, was entirely created at once, without distinction of Sex, that
difference being only necessary to People this inferior World, by Propagation;
our Savior, in his Answer to the Sadduces captious Question, concerning the
Resurrection, having declared, That those, who shall arise to a blessed
Resurrection, shall neither Marry, nor be given in Marriage, but be (...),
Equal to the Angels, Luke 20. 34, 35. Spirits masculine, He-Angels, Masculinus,
Lat. of Mas, a Man, a He Creature.

V. 891. This fair Defect of Nature; This fair Failure in Nature, this charming
Want and Weakness. Male and Female Creatures, being of the same kind, and only
differenced by their Sex, the Feminine seems to be a kind of Lameness and
Weakness, a Hurt and Damage of the more perfect and complete Sex; Nimirum vir
est quod firmum, and proinde efficax, faemina quod debile, and proinde
receptivum and pati idoneum: So that a Woman is, as it were, a maimed and
imperfect Man. Vall. de Sac. Philos c. 1. This Novelty, this strange thing,
this wonderful new thing in Nature; so called, in respect of the supposed
Peopling of Heaven with Masculine Spirits. Nouveaute, Fr. a new, unusual thing,
of Novus, Lat. Defect, Defectus, Lat. a deficiency, something wanting.

V. 894. To generate Mankind; To increase and multiply Mankind, that Men might
rise like Mushroms out of their Mother Earth's moist lap. As Lucretius: --
Maternum nomen adepta
Terra tenet merito, quoniam genus ipsa creavit
Humanum, atque animal prope certo tempore fudit
Omne -- Lib. 5.


V. 902. Through her Perverseness; By her Frowardness, or Obstinacy:
Perversitas, Lat. crossness.

V. 905. To a fell Adversary; Chained by ill-made Marriage, to an angry Enemy,
his Curse or his Confusion. Fell, cursed, cruel of Fell, an old Fr. word, of
Fell, Lat. the Gall, as if Felleus, bitter. Wedlock-bound, Married, as
Wind-bound.

V. 909. He added not; He said no more. Repulsed, Repulsus, Lat. refused,
disheartened, of repellere, Lat. to overthrow, to drive back. Tresses, Bo. 4.
v. 305.

V. 913. Besought his Peace; Begged his Pardon, entreated to be restored to his
Favor.

V. 918. And elasp thy Knees; And humbly embrace thy Knees, an Universal Custom
among all Nations: Hominis genibus quaedam religio inest observatione gentium.
Haec supplices attingunt, ad haec manus tendunt, haec ut aras adorant. Plin. l.
11. c. 45. The Knees were Sacred to Pity and Compassion, as the Forehead to the
Genius, and the Right Hand to Fidelity. -- Genua amplexus, genibusque volutans
Haerebat -- AEn. 3.


The Heathens used to affix their Supplications, or their Vows for obtaining
them, to those parts of their Idol-Gods: Genua incerare Deorum. Juven.

Suppliant, Supplicans, of Supplicare, Lat. to sue, to entreat. Subsist, Bo. 9.
v. 359.

V. 931. I against God and Thee; I have offended both God the supreme Sovereign
Lord of all Things and Beings, and thee also my immediate and particular Lord.

V. 933. Importune Heaven; Beseech God (who dwells in Heaven) with most earnest
Entreaties, etc. Importune, earnestly to Entreat, of Importunus, Lat. Bo. 9. v.
609.

V. 937. And her lowly Plight immovable; Her humble Posture, from which she
refused to rise, till she had made her Peace. Plight, Bo. 1. v. 335.
Immovable, Immobilis, Lat. unremoved. Deplored, lamented, bewailed,
Deploratus, Lat. Commiseration, Commiseratio, Lat. Pity. Reconcilement,
Reconciliatio, Lat. a return to Kindness and Friendship.

V. 955. All Might be visited, etc. That all the Punishment might light on: To
visit, in Scripture Phrase, signif. to Punish: In the day of my Visitation, I
will visit their sin upon them, Ex. 32. 34. Shall I not visit for these things,
says the Lord, shall not my soul be avenged on such a nation as this? Jer. 5.
9. So Jerusalem (because of her Abominations) is called, The City of
Visitation, Jer. 6. 6. Visited, of Visitare, Lat. to go to see, to enquire into
a thing. Exposed, Expositus, Lat. laid open (as here) to danger.

V. 965. To our Seed derived; Streaming down to all Succession: A Metaphor from
Water running forth from its Spring head; Derivare aquam ex font, as Quintil.
As Water issues from its Wellspring, and runs till it mingle with its
Original Ocean; so does Adam's Sins spread over his Posterity, till Time shall
be swallowed up of Eternity. Derived, Derivatus, Lat. flowing down to.

V. 967. By sad Experiment; By woeful Experience. Experimentum, Lat. Trial,
Proof. Erroneous, Bo. 6. v. 146. By just Event, by what is deservedly come to
pass. Event, Eventus, Lat. of Evenire, Lat. to happen.

V. 978. Tolerable as in our Evils, etc. Yet better to be undergone, in this
our ill condition, and sitter to be chosen, and preferable to it. Tolerabilis,
Lat. sufferable.

V. 979. If Care of our Descent, etc. If the Concern of our Offspring, of those
that shall come of and after us, afflict us thus. Les Descendants, Children,
Posterity. Descent, Descensus, Lat. those that descend from us. Perplex, Bo. 1.
v. 599.

V. 983. Of our Loins; The chaste Expression of Holy Writ in matters of
Generation; Kings shall come out of thy Loins. Longes, Fr. Lonza, Ital. Lumbi,
Lat. the Original of both.

V. 988. To Being yet unbegot; Not yet brought into Being, as yet unbegot.
Conception, Conceptio, Lat. before I have Conceived. To Prevent, Praevenire,
Lat. to hinder, to stop.

V. 989. Childless thou art, Childless remain; A mistake of the Printer has
made-our Author seem ambitious to have imitated Virgil in some of incomplete
Verses; or that he had a mind to show E^e's vehement desire to stop and prevent
the miserable Being of Mankind, by breaking of his Verse abruptly; but the next
Verse being too long by what this falls short, plainly shows, that [So Death]
is to be added to this. Childless thou art, Childless remain: So Death.

V. 990. Shall be deceived his Glut; So Death shall miss of his vast Gluttony,
so devouring Death shall be deceived of his Voraciousness. Glut, Gluttony, of
Glutire, Lat. to swallow. Ravinous, Ravineux, Fr. greedy, of Ravine, Fr. a
Torrent, that sweeps all before it.

V. 994. From Love's due Rites; From Love's accustomed Sweets. Rites, of Ritus,
Lat, a custom. Morem ritusque sacrorum. AEn. 12. Crebra nivis ritu. AEn. 11.

To Languish, Languir, Fr. Languere, Lat. to pine away, to decay.

V. 1001. Let us seek Death; By exposing our selves carelessly, either to the
Injuries of the Air, now grown distempered and ill; or to the angry and warring
Animals, who seem to have lost the Awe they formerly had of us, and now, with
Countenance grim, glare on us as they pass: V. 712. of this Book.

Ibid. Or he not found, Supply, etc. Or if Death be not to be found any other
way, let us do Execution on our selves with our own hands. Supply, of Supplere,
Lat. to fulfill, to make up what is wanting, thence to supply the Office, do the
Duty of one absent, or unable to perform it.

V. 1003. Shivering under Fears; Shaking for fear, to which Death only can put
an end. A Metaphor from Boys quaking and shaking as they enter the cold Stream
by degrees, but cured by plunging in. Shivering, of the Belg. Schudderen, this
of the Ital. Scuotere, of the Lat. Excutere, to shake.

V. 1006. Destruction with Destruction, etc. With Death destroying Death, by
our sudden and voluntary Dying, preventing innumerable Deaths that otherwise
must devour our Offspring.

V. 1007. Or vehement Despair, etc. Here she ended her Discourse, or her unruly
Despair, and loath of Life, stifled the rest; Death dwelt so resolutely on her
Mind, that He appeared visibly in her Face, changing the crimson of her Cheek
to his pale hue. Vehemens, Lat. violent, eager. Despair, Desperatio, Lat. the
hopeless Estate of the Miserable, ever to mend. Interfusa genas, and pallida
morte futura. AEn. 4.
-- Multorum Pallor in ore
Mortis venturae est, faciesque simillima fato. Luc. 1. 7.


V. 1016. Self-destruction refutes, etc. Eve, thy despising Life, and its
Delights,
Seems to discover in thee, something more
Noble and high, than what thy Thoughts despise;
But therefore to destroy thy self, disproves
The rising Gallantry of thy Mind, and shows
Not thy Disdain, but Trouble and Concern
For forfeiture of Life, and all its Charms
Valued too much, and overlov'd.
Fortiter ille facit, qui miser esse potest,
Hic rogo, non furor est, ne moreare mori? Martia.


Contempt, Contemptus, Lat. despising, of Contemnere, Lat. to scorn. Argues,
Bo. 2. v. 234. Refutes, Refutare, Lat. to disprove. Implies, Implicare, Lat. to
wrap up, to contain in. Anguish, Bo. 1. v. 558. or Bo. 2. v. 567. Regret, Fr.
sorrow, grief, of Regretter, Fr. to bemoan.

V. 1024. Then so to be forestalled; Then thus by us to be prevented. To
forestall, is a Lawterm, signif. the buying of Corn, Cattle, and other Goods
and Merchandise, before they come to the Fair, Market, or Place where they
ought to be publicly exposed to sale, and is Punishable by Stat. Edw. 6. c.
14. The word is compounded of the Sax. Fore, before, or Fare, away, and Stal,
Sax. standing; or of our Fore, before, and Estaller, Fr. to set forth, a
showing and setting forth of Goods before the time appointed, Vengeful, Bo. 1.
v. 148. Contumacy, stubbornness, Contumacia, Lat. sullenness, of Con and
Tumere, Lat. to swell, to rise against.

V. 1032. Piteous Amends; Sad Satisfaction, poor Recompense, miserable Amends.
Piteous, Piteux, Fr. woeful, miserable. Amends, Bo. 8. v. 491. Conjecture,
Conjicere, Lat. to guess. Contrived, Bo. 2. v. 53. Proposest, of Proponere,
Lat. to offer, to propound.

V. 1044. Savours Rancour; Shows only Grudging and Pride, Unruliness, Contempt,
and wrestling with the Almighty. Savours, of Sapere, Lat. to taste of. Rancour,
Rancoeur, Fr. Quasi cor rancidum, Lat. Malice. Impatience, Impatientia, Lat.
Untractableness. Despite, Dispetto, It. Dispectus, Lat. Contempt or
Indignation. Reluctance, Strife, of Reluctari, Lat. to wrestle with.

V. 1054. The Curse aslope glanced on the Ground; The Curse light not directly
on me, but glanced and slid aside of me upon the Earth: Cursed is the ground
for thy sake, Genesis 3. 17. Aslope, as Slope, Bo. 1. v. 223. Glanced, as an Arrow
or Dart, whose Point falling awry, slides off the Object aimed at, and is said
to Glance, of Eslancer, Fr. to dart, or Glisser, Fr. to slide from. Glissant,
glancing. Inclement Seasons, the severity of the Weather, extreme either in
Cold or Heat. Inclement, Bo. 3. v. 426.

V. 1065. In this Mountain; Which the disordered Sky begins to show us in its
lowering looks upon this Mount of Paradise.

V. 1066. The graceful Locks, etc. Pulling of the Trees Green Periwigs: as Hor.
Arboribusque comae. Car. l. 4. Od. 7.

The Poets speak of Grass, etc. as the Earth green Clothing: Viridi se gramine
vestit. Geo. 2.

V. 1068. Some better Shrouds; Some better Covering. Shroud, of the Sax. Scrud,
Clothing, of Scrydan, Sax. to cloth; to cherish, to take care of, of Cherir,
Fr. Carus, Lat. dear to. Limbs benumbed, our Limbs made useless by the Cold,
grown dead and useless, of the Sax. Benyman, to deprive, Benummen, Sax.
deprived of their usual Faculties.

V. 1069. This Diurnal Star; The Sun, the Star that rules by Day, that guides
and gives the Day its light. Diurnal, Bo. 4. v. 594.

V. 1071. With matter sere foment; How we may get his united Beams together,
made more forcible by Reflection, and hatch 'em with dried Moss into a Flame.
Reflected, Bo. 3. v. 723. Sere, (...), Gr. dry. Foment, Fomentare, Lat. to
warm, to cherish, according to Virgil's exact description: Suscepitque ignem
foliis, atque arida circum
Nutrimenta dedit, rapuitque in fomite flammam. AEn. 1.


V. 1072. Or by the Collision of two Bodies grind, etc. Or by striking two
hard Bodies against one another, force the fretted Air into a Fire. Collision,
Collisio, Lat. of Collidere, Lat. to strike one thing against another, as
Flints on Steel, or Stones against each other, thence forcing Fire. The Air
attrite, the Air fretted into, forced into Fire. Attritus, Lat. ground, of
Atterere, Lt. to bruise, to break. Silici Scintillam excudit Achates. AEn. 1.

V. 1074. Justling or pushed, etc. As lately we observed the Clouds, rushing on
one another, or hurried by the Winds, kindling the sidelong Lightning in their
violent encounter, whose Flame darting across down, fired the uncteous Bark of
Fir or Pine. Justling, of Jouster, Fr. to run a-tilt at. Rude, violent, of
Read, Sax. fierce. Shock, Bo. 2. v. 1014. Tines, Sax. Tynan, to light, a word
still used in the West of England; whence our Tinder, slant, or slanting
Lightning, that is darted awry, of the Ger. Schlange, a Serpent, a Creature
moving indirectly. Thwart, crosswise, oblique, of the Ger. Zwerch, cross.

V. 1076. The Gummy Bark; Fires the fat Juice, that runs down the sides of the
Fir or Pinetrees. Gummy, (...), Gr. of (...), a barbarous Word used by the
Greeks, for the Juice that sweats through the Bark of diverse Trees; whence our
Gum. It is not improbable, but Mankind had the first hint of Fire, its
Usefulness, and the way of obtaining it from some such natural Accident: An
Observation as old as Lucretius; Fulmen detulit in terras mortalibus ignem,
Primitus inde omnis flammarum diditur ardor.
Multa videmus enim caelestibus incita flammis
Fulgere, cum caeli donavit plaga vapores.
Exprimitur validis extrictus viribus ignis:
Et micat interdum flammai fervidus ardor. Lib. 5.


Pine, Bo. 4. v. 139.

V. 1081. Of Grace beseeching him; Entreating and praying for his Favor:
Gratia, Lat.

V. 1085. Dust, our Native Home; From whence we came, and to which we must
return; out of which we had our Being, and in which we must be buried; thence
Native to us: Nativus, Lat. of our Birth, Genesis 3. 19.

V. 1087. Prostrate, Bo. 6. v. 841. Reverent, of Revereri, Lat. to worship.

V. 1091. With our Sighs the Air freqenting; Sending up many frequent Sighs to
Heaven, of Frequentare, Lat. to do any thing often. Contrite, Contritus, Lat.
broken. Humiliation, Humiliatio, lowliness of Mind, and Humility, from a sense
of the vileness of Sin.

V. 1097. Penitent; Repenting: Penitens, Lat. Remorse, Bo. 1. v. 604.

V. 1099. Repairing where, etc. This is an Homeric Repetition of the six
foregoing Verses, it being usual with him to deliver Messages, etc. in the same
words he first conceived them, as in the beginning of (...), etc. where five
preceding Verses are repeated, and in (...). where Talbythius delivers his
Message to Machaon, in the same three Verses that preceeded, and in many other
places, at has been remarked before.

NOTES On MILTON's PARADISE Lost.
BOOK XI.
Verse 3. PRevenient Grace, etc. God's free Grace sent down into their Souls,
had removed all Hardness and Obduracy from their Hearts. Prevenient,
Preveniens, Lat. coming before, Preventive. Grace, Gratia, Lat. Quia gratis
data. The Spirit of Grace and Supplication, promised to be poured out upon
God's People, Zech. 12. 10. Who has saved us, and called us with an holy
calling, not according to our works, but according to his own purpose and
grace, which was given us in Christ Jesus before the world began, 2 Timothy 1. 9.

V. 5. Regenerate grow in stead; And made a relenting Tenderness, like the
Flesh of a newborn Babe, grow in their Hearts, in stead of their stubborn
Hardness, expressed by Rancor, Pride, Impatience, Despite, and Reluctance
against God, Bo. 10. v. 1044. The Conversion of a Sinner, is in Scripture
Phrase styled, Regeneration, a New Birth; Except ye be converted, and become as
little children, Matthew. 18. 3. Of this New Birth, Regeneratio, Lat. our Savior
discoursed with Nicodemus, John 3. 3. Except a man be born again, he cannot see
the kingdom of God. Unto a lively hope of which [kingdom], God, the father of
our Lord Jesus Christ, has begotten us again, by the resurrection of his Son
from the dead, 1 Pet. 1. 3. (...), Regeneravit nos. Regenerate, Regeneratus,
Lat. begot again, anew.

V. 6. Unutterable; That Sighs unexpressible burst forth, which God's holy
Spirit, the Spirit of Supplication and Intercession breathed into 'em, and
wafted up to Heaven with nimbler speed, than the most audible and loudest
Oration could ever reach: According to St. Paul; Likewise the spirit also
helps our infirmities: for we know not what we should pray for as we ought:
but the spirit it self makes intercession for us, with groanings which cannot
be uttered, Romans 8. 26. Oratory, Oratoria, Lat. Rhetoric, the Art of Speaking
well and readily. Port, Bo. 4. v. 869.

V. 9. Nor important less, etc. Yet neither did they for their Persons seem
mean Supplicants, nor was their Request less weighty or considerable, than that
of the ancient Couple; devout Deucalion, and chaste Pyrrha, (less Ancient yet
than Adam and Eve,) when Praying they approached the Temple of just Themis,
begging to be instructed, how to restore Mankind destroyed by a Deluge, as the
Poets write. Important, Fr. considerable, of Importer, Fr. Importare, Lat. to
be of weight, valuable. Petitio, Lat. a Request.

V. 12. Deucalion, and chaste Pyrrha; Deucalion was Son of Prometheus, and
Husband to Pyrrha, his Brother Epymetheus's Daughter. O soror, o conjux, o
faemina sola superstes
Quam commune mihi genus, and patruelis origo
Deinde torus junxit; nunc ipsa pericula jungunt. Met. l. 1.


V. 14. Before the Shrine of Themis; (...), Gr. was a Goddess, supposed to
prompt Men those Petitions that were fit to be asked of the Gods, of (...), Gr.
Fas, Lat. fit and right. She did also preside over Oracles, and General
Assemblies, whose Consultations she prosper'd, or perverted, as she thought
right and just. (...),
(...).


She Summoned the Consulting Gods together: (...). Dic, Themi, qua generis
damnum reparabile nostri
Art sit: and mersis fer opem, mitissima, rebus. Met. 1.


She had a Temple in Baeotia, near the River Cephisus: Adeunt pariter
Cephesidos undas, Ibid.

Shrine, Bo. 1. v. 388.

V. 16. By envious Winds blown Vagabond, etc. Not blown away by blustering
Winds, vain and disappointed. The Poets feigned Prayers and Vows ineffectual,
to be blown away, as not able to obtain Audience of the Gods. -- Voti Phoebus
succedere partem
Mente dedit; partem volucres dispersit in auras. AEn. 11.
Multa patri portanda dabat mandata: sed aurae
Omnia discerpunt, and nubibus irrita donant. AEn. 9.
Nec far videt sua gaudia ventos. AEn. 10.

So Horace: -- Tristitiam and metus,
Tradam pro tervis in mare Creticum
Portare ventis --


Vagabond, Vagabundus, Lat. a Wanderer, a Vagrant. Frustrate, Bo. 2. v. 193.
Dimentionless, Spiritual and Incorporeal, void of all Dimension, Bo. 1. v. 793.

V. 18. Where the Golden Altar fumed. And another Angel came and stood at the
altar, having a golden censer; and there was given unto him much incense, that
he should offer it with the prayers of all Saints upon the golden altar, which
was before the throne: And the smoke of the incense which came with the prayers
of the saints, ascended up before God, Rev. 8. 3, 4. Incense, Bo. 9. v. 194.
Fumed, smoaked, of Fumare, Lat. Intercessor, Bo. 3. v. 219.

V. 23. Implanted Grace; From thy Grace, rooted in his Heart. Implantatus, Lat.
planted in. Censer, Incensoir, Fr. an Instrument to burn Incense in, ab
Incendendo, Lat. Manuring, Bo. 4. v. 628.

V. 33. His Advocate, and Propitiation; His Defense, and Satisfaction, let me
expound his imperfect Prayers, who am his Patron and Surety. We have an
Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous; and he is the
propitiation for our sins, 1 John 2. 1, 2. Advocatus, Lat. one that defends the
Cause of his Client. Propitiatio, Lat. a satisfaction, of Propitiare, Lat. to
appease.

V. 35. Or not good Ingraft; A Gardening Metaphor, used by St. Paul often, Romans
11. v. 17, 19, 23, etc. place all his good Works, or not good, on me, on my
account, my Merit shall complete those, and for the other my Death shall make
satisfaction. Ingraft, of In and Greffer, Fr. to put a slip of one Tree into
another.

V. 38. The smell of Peace toward Mankind; Accept me the Peace Offering for
Mankind, in me be reconciled to him. The Peace Offering in the Levitical Law,
is frequently expressed, by an offering of a sweet savor unto the Lord, Levit.
3. v. 5, 16. and c. 4. v. 31. typifying that most acceptable Sacrifice of our
Savior, who is our Peace, Ephesians. 2. 14. Reconciled, Reconciliatus, Lat. restored
to Favor. His Days numbered, his appointed Time, short and sad, Pauperis est
numorare.

V. 41. To mitigate, not to reverse; Which I entreat to soften, to render more
easy, not to repeal. Mitigare, Lat. to assuage. To reverse, as to reverse a
Decree, to make void a Sentence, of Revertere, quasi Retrovertere, to abrogate.

V. 44. Made one with me, etc. That they may all be one, as thou Father art in
me, and I in thee: And the glory which thou gave me, I have given them, that
they may be one, even as we are one, John 17. 21, 22.

V. 51. No Gross, no unharmonious Mixture, etc. Those fine and undecaying
Elements, that in their mixture have no inequality, or grossness, will not
endure him infected any longer, but throw him off like a Disease. The pure and
well-proportioned Elements in Paradise, (and not improbably in all the World,)
were so equally mixed, as to contribute to its Fruits, Adam's Food, that
wholesome Temperament, which was to have preserved him and his Posterity in an
uninterrupted state of Health, till it had pleased his Creator to have
translated him Sinless into Heaven, without tasting Corruption, or seeing the
Grave, but having transgressed, he was to be driven out of that undecaying
Garden into the distempered World, to Air that now must suffer change, to Earth
affected with Cold and Heat scarce tolerable, Bo. 10. v. 212, and 653. Gross to
Air as gross, and perishing Nourishment, such as might introduce Decay, and
incline him daily to Dissolution, and at last to Death, Sins dire Distemper.
Gross, thick, foul, Grosso, Ital. of Crassus, Lat. thick, unfine. Unharmonius,
(...), Gr. disagreeing. Eject, of Ejicere, Lat. to throw out. Tainted, Bo. 5.
v. 704. Distemper, disorder, of Dis Negative, and Trempe, Fr. of Temperies,
Lat. the proportion and equality of Cold and Heat. Dissolution, Bo. 2. v. 127.

V. 59. Happiness and Immortality; God endowed Adam with two fair Gifts,
Happiness and Immortality, not Absolute, but depending on his Obedience; Happy
while obedient, and Immortal while innocent, because in a condition not to die.
But this possibility of Never Dying, did not result from his Nature, for by
that he was Mortal, and subject to Decay, as living an Animal Life; but had he
kept his Innocence, God would have so preserved and protected him, that after a
long Life here, he would have translated him to immutable, secure, and
unforfeitable Immortality in everlasting Bliss, without passing through
Corruption, and the dark Grave, as Enoch was, that he might not see Death, Heb.
11. 5. For had Man continued Sinless, it is unimaginable how the World could
have maintained, if able to contain, their vast Multitudes always here below.
Therefore Immortality imports a Longevity of undisturbed Happiness, and
undistemper'd Health, which should have transmitted Mankind into Heaven at
God's appointed time. But having lost his Happiness, which depended on his
Innocence, Immortality would have proved a Punishment, an everlasting Disease,
whose only Remedy and Cure is Death, the Restorative of his Primitive State,
and Eternal Bliss. Hence that of St. Paul, To die is great gain, Phil. 1. 21.
-- Praeclusaque janua let i
AEternum nostros luctus extendit in aevum. Met. 1.


Eternize, of Eternare, Lat. to make everlasting.

V. 63. Refined by Faith, etc. And after this Life spent in many Trials, and
sharp Afflictions, and purified by Faith, manifested by Works, Death shall
restore and give him up to a new and everlasting Life, waked at the
Resurrection of the Just, Pure and Unspotted with Heaven, and Earth renewed and
refined by Fire. Tribulation, Bo. 3. v. 337. Refined, Raffine, Fr. purged from
his Dross: A Metaphor from Metals, by melting down, Refined. The fining pot for
silver, and the furnace for gold, Prove. 17. 3. Refined, is well applied to
Afflictions, and the Trials of this Life, which our Savior Typifies by Fire, I
am come to send fire on Earth, Luke 12. 49.

V. 65. The Renovation of the Just; At the Resurrection of the just, Luke 14.
14. for as our Spiritual Resurrection, from Sin here, is frequently styled, A
putting off the old man, and being renewed in the spirit of our minds, Ephesians. 4.
22, 23. So our Corporeal Resurrection at the last Day, shall be a Renovation
(Renovatio, Lat. a Renewing,) of our Mortal Bodies, which shall then put on
Immortality, 1 Cor. 17. 53.

V. 66. With Heaven and Earth renewed. I saw a new Heaven, and a new Earth; for
the first Heaven, and the first Earth, were passed away, Ephesians. 4. 22, 23.
Nevertheless according to his promise, we look for new Heavens, and a new
Earth, 2 Pet. 3. 13. Synod, Bo. 2. v. 392. Peccant, Peccans, Lat. sinning, of
Peccare, Lat. to offend.

V. 74. Heard in Horeb; At the Promulgation of the Law, Exodus 20. 18. And
perhaps not to be heard again till the Day of Judgment; When the Lord himself
shall descend from Heaven with a shout, with the voice of the Archangel, and
with the trump of God, 1 These. 4. 16. Oreb, Bo. 1. v. 7. Amarantinus, Lat. of
Amarant, Bo. 3. v. 353.

V. 79. By the Waters of Life. The Lamb shall lead them unto living fountains
of waters, Rev. 7. 17. The fountain of the water of life, Ibid. chapter 21. v. 6.
and chapter 22. v. 1, 17. Resorting, of Ressortir, Fr. to issue forth, to repair to.

V. 84. O Sons, like one of us Man is become. And the Lord God said, Behold,
the man is become as one of us, to know good and evil, Genesis 3. 22. All
Interpreters expound these words Ironically, as referring to the false Promises
of Satan in the Serpent, Ye shall be as Gods, knowing good and evil, v. 5. To
which our Author subscribes by, Let him boast his knowledge. But he has in part
followed the Opinion of Hieron. Oleaster, that this (ushered in by this Adverb
of Demonstration) was spoken to the Angels, In their State tho firm, yet to
confirm 'em more.

V. 71. Sec, O my Sons, how like to God deceived man has made himself! Defended
Fruit, of the forbidden Tree, of Defendre, Fr. to forbid, of Defendere, Lat, in
the Law sense, to Prohibit, so used by Chaucer: Where can you say in any manner
Age,
That ever God defended Marriage.


V. 92. How variable and vain self left; I know his Heart how foolish and
fickle, if left to its self, and the guidance of his giddy Will. Variable,
Variabilis, Lat. changeable.

V. 95. And live for ever; If Adam had not sinned, he had never suffered Death,
which by sin entered into the world, Romans 5. 12. yet was he even in his
Innocence Mortal, that is, under a possibility of Decay and Death, from which
God would have preserved him; Sin then did not make him Mortal, but with his
Innocence bereaved him of God's wonderful Preservation, and delivered him up to
his natural Mortality. Homo qui mortalis erat, and redigi nature aliter poterat,
in suum cinerem, voluntate Dei viveret semper, nisi peccatum obstitisset; non
est itaque per peccatum factus mortalis, sed qui cum erat innocens voluntate
Dei servabatur, ob peccatum traditus est suae mortalitati. Vall. c. 6.

How this wonderful Preservation depended on the Tree of Life, is hard to
guess; most probable it is, that the Fruit of this Restorative Tree was most
connatural to Man's Life, easiest to be turned into, and assimulated into his
Substance, endowed with a Preservative Power against all Decay, by which our
Lives had been lengthened out to a vast Longevity, till it had pleased our
Creator to have removed and transplanted us into Heaven. For, For ever, does
not imply Eternity, but a long Duration of Time, in Scripture; as of the
Servant, whose Ear was bored through, He shall be thy servant for ever, Deuteronomy.
15. 17. So the Hills are styled Everlasting, Genesis 49. 26. O King, live for
ever, Dan. 3. 9. I will not eat flesh for ever, (...), 1 Cor. 8. 13. etc.

Now lest he put forth his hand, and take also the tree of life, and eat and
live for ever, Genesis 3. 22. This seems to manifest God's Compassion and
Commiseration of lost Man, lest eating of this enlivening Fruit, he should
prolong and lengthen out his miserable Life farther than what was fit, at which
our Author hinted, telling us, God provided Death for Adam, a final Remedy,
lest by that long Life he was capable of, he should Eternize his We, that is,
live under it too long.

Ibid. Dream at least to live for ever; Shows our Author did not understand the
Tree of Life capable of making Adam live Eternally, without Removal into the
Heavenly Regions. Rupertus believed this wonderful Fruit, endued with a Power,
able to have made Adam Immortal, if he had once tasted of it, and that Satan
and he were both ignorant, that there was such a Preservative Plant in God's
Garden, for had the Devil known it, as he made him miserable by Eating of the
forbidden Tree, so he would have endeavored to have made that Misery
perpetual, by persuading him to have eaten of the Tree of Life. Si enim vel
ille scisset, nunquam consilium suae malignitatis ita dimidiasset: sed sicut
illud lignum temerare persuasit, ut miseros faceret: sic and istud praeripere
suasisset, ut aeternaliter miseros and misere aeternos efficeret. Com. in Genesis
c. 30. l. 3. But he forgot what St. Paul tells us, That God is faithful, who
suffers us not to be tempted above what we are able, but will with the
temptation make a way to escape, 1 Cor. 10. 13.

V. 98. To till the ground whence he was taken, Genesis 3. 23. Michael, Bo. 6. v.
44. Behest, Bo. 3. v. 533.

V. 102. Of flaming Warriors; A choice Angelic Guard: His ministers a flaming
fire, Psalm. 104. 4.

V. 103. To invade vacant Possession; Attempt to possess himself of Paradise,
empty and void by Man's expulsion. Invade, Invadere, Lat. to go into.

V. 111. Bewailing their Excess; Sorrowing for their Sin. Excess, Excessus,
Lat. a going beyond. Sin is a going beyond the bounds of our Duty set by God's
Commands, by the same Metaphor, called Transgression. Disconsolate,
comfortless, of Dis and Consolari, Lat. to comfort. Reveal, discover; Revelare,
Lat. to show by removing the Vail.

V. 115. Intermix my Covenant; Bring in, by thy Discourse, my Agreement and
Reconciliation made with them by the Atonement of my Son, to be born of the
Woman's Seed, Genesis 3. 15. Intermix, Intermiscere, Lat. to mingle with.
Covenant, Fr. Conventum, Lat. an Agreement, of Convenire, Lat. to agree.

V. 120. Of a Sword the flame. And he placed at the east of the garden of Eden,
Cherubims, and a flaming Sword, which turned every way, to keep the way of the
tree of life, Genesis 3. 24. Cherubic Watch, etc. a Guard of Cherubims armed with
shining Swords, shooting forth Flame. God set a double Guard before his Garden,
Angels, those vigilant Spirits and Ministers, to forbid the Fiends, and a
flaming Sword to affright Adam and Eve, the Expelled Offenders. Thus the Angel
that withstood Balaam, is represented, And he saw the angel of the Lord
standing in the way, and his sword drawn in his hand, Numb. 22. 31. In the same
manner David saw the angel that smote the people, 2 Samuel 23. 17. Cherubic,
Cherubicus, Lat. of a Cherub: Bo. 1. v. 157. Receptacle, Bo. 7. v. 307.

V. 125. Man once more to delude; Lest Satan, by tempting them with the Fruit
of the Tree of Life, and thereby promising them Exemption from Death, (the
Sentence denounced against them,) might again delude 'em, and interrupt their
Repentance by a new Presumption. Debuisse ^ Paradisi aditu arceri Daemenem, ne
eum in locum penetrans, decerperet fructum arboris vitae, cujus promissione ac
donatione, m^rtales prorogandae vitae avidissimos and curiosissimos falleret,
and ad sui cultum and obsequium adduceret. Perer. l. 6.

V. 127. The Cohort bright; The bright Brigade. Cohors, Lat. was a Band of 555
Foo^-Soldiers, and 66 Horsemen, 10 of which constituted a Roman Logion.

V. 129. Like a double Janus; Each had four Faces like a twofold Janus:
According to Ezekiel's Vision, And every one had four faces, chapter 1. v. 6. And
their whole bodies, and their backs, and their hands, and their Wings were full
of eyes round about, Ezekiel. 10. 12. Double, Duplex, Lat. twofold.

Janus was King of Italy, in whose Court Saturn took Sanctuary; for his great
Wisdom, he was enrolled among the Gods, and Numa Pompilius built him a Temple,
in which his Image stood adorned with two Faces, thence by some taken for Noah,
who saw the restored World, as well as the destroyed; this being Renowned also
for teaching the Use of the Vine. Others say, he was called Biceps, and
Bifrons, from his Skill in Things past, being good at guessing at those to
come. His Temple stood always open in time of War, and was never shut but when
Rome was in perfect Peace, which happened but twice in all the Progress of the
Roman Power. Saturnusque senex, Janique bifrontis imago
Vestibulo astabant -- AEn. 7.


V. 131. Of Argus; Argus was a Shepherd, feigned to have had 100 Eyes, to whose
custody Juno committed the white Cow, into which her wanton Jupiter had changed
his Mistress Io. -- Aristoridae servandam tradidit Argo,
Centum luminibus cinctum caput Argus habebat. Met. l. 1.


V. 132. Charmed with Arcadian Pipe; The Angelic Eyes were more watchful, than
to be ^ull'd asleep by the Shepherds Pipe, named Arcadian, of Arcadia, a part
of Greece, abounding in Pasturage, and therefore resounding with the Pastoral
Pipe. To Drouze, of Droosen, Belg. to be sleepy. Pastoral, Pastoralis, Lat. of
Pastor, a Shepherd.

V. 133. Of Hermes, or his Opiate Rod; Of Mercury, who by the help of his Pipe,
and drowsy Rod, charmed Argus fast asleep, and struck off his Head. Hermes,
Bo. 3. v. 603 Opiate, drowsy, of (...), Gr. Opium, Lat. Poppy Juice, of which
sleeping Medicines are made. This Rod was one of the Utensils of Mercury: --
Virgamque potenti
S^mniferam sumpsisse manu --
Languida permulcens medicata lumina virga. Met. l. 1.


V. 135. Leucothea waked; (...), Gr. the Morning, the White Goddess, as her
Greek Name imports: Cicero says, her Latin Name was Matuta, by which, that the
Morning was meant, he proves out of Lucretius, lib. 5. Tempore item certo
roseam Matuta per auras
AEtheris auroram defert and lumina pandit.


Homer makes her a Sea-Nymph, and a Friend to Saylors. Daybreak, is a Darling
no less at Sea, than on Shore. (...),
(...).


To Resalute, to Revisit, Resalutare, Lat. Orisons, Bo. 5. v. 145. Imbalm'd,
Bo. 2. v. 842.

V. 139. So prevalent as to concern; So powerful as to affect the Mind of God
in Heaven ever happy. Prevalent, Bo. 6. v. 411.

Ibid. Or to incline his Will; Or to render him propitious to our Prayer: Of
Inclinare, Lat. to bend, often applied to God, Humanitus; Let my prayer come
before thee, incline thine ear unto my cry, Psalm. 88. 2. Bow down thine ear, O
Lord, hear me, Psalm. 86. 1. Incline thine ear, O Lord, and hear, open thine
eyes, O Lord, and behold, Isa. 37. 17. Placable, Placabilis, Lat. reconcilable,
of Placare, Lat. to appease.

V. 159. Eve rightly called; (...), of (...), to live, Because she was the
mother of all living, Genesis 3. 20. He had named her (...), Woman, the common
Appellative of all her kind, Genesis 2. 23. expressive of her Original Extraction
out of Man: Now he gives her a proper and particular Name, denoting her
Excellency above all her Sex, that she was to be the Mother of all Mankind
living here, and of those that were to inherit everlasting life, since Mother
to her who bore our Savior, the Seed of the Woman. Some think, Adam gave his
Wife this Name by way of Ironie and cruelest Reproach, because Recorded by
Moses just after their Sentence received, when she deserved, in the bitterness
of his Soul, to have heard her self styled, the Mother of Death and Damnation.
Rupertus is of an Opinion more improbable; that Adam, seeing his Death not
instant, despised the Denunciation of it, and slighting its Sentence, styled
his Spouse, the Mother of all things living. Dicenti Deo, Pulvis es and in
Pulverem reverteris, adeo non credidit, ^t e contrario vocaret nomen ^xoris
suae Evam, id est, vitam, eo quod matter esset cunctorum viventium. Lib. 3. c.
26. de Trinit. But our Poet better applies it to the early Promise of the
Victory over Satan, by our Savior the Seed of the Woman, as do the most
Judicious and Authentic Commentators. Demeanor, Bo. 4. v. 128.

V. 169. The Sourse of Life; The Wellspring of Life: La Source, Fr. the
Fountainhead.

V. 178. Till Day droop; Till Day decline, or decay, as Flowers do that droop,
hanging down their Heads withering.

V. 182. But Fate subscribed not; But God's Eternal Decree consended not to her
Desires. -- Sed fata resistunt. Geo. 4. Non se fata suis patiuntur ducere viam
Auspiciis -- AEn. 4.


Subscribed, of Subscribere, Lat. to under-write, thence to agree to. Impressed,
marked, made manifest, Bo. 3. v. 388.

V. 185. The Bird of Jove; The Eagle, a Bird sacred to Jupiter, and feigned by
the Poets to attend on his Thunder. Fulmen non percutit e volucribus Aquilam:
Plin. l. 2. c. 22. -- Rubra fulvus Jovis ales in aethra. AEn. 12. -- Quem
praepes ab Ida
Sublimem pedibus rapuit Jovis armiger uncis. AEn. 5.


Ibid. Stooped from his aerie Tour; Descended from his lofty Flight. To stoop
at, is a term among Faulconers, when a Hawk got up aloft on the Wings, comes
down at his Quarry. Tour, Fr. a wheeling, such as Birds make in their flight.
-- Cycnos
AEtherea quos lapsa plaga, Jovis ales aperto
Turbabat caelo -- AEn. 1.


V. 187. The Beast that reigns in Woods; The Lion King of the Forest.

V. 194. By these mute Signs; By these dumb shows in Nature: Adam was an early
Augur, and if any Observations were to be made upon the flight of Birds, etc.
had the most Skill therein, as being best acquainted with their Nature. A
Prediction of this kind, Virgil has introduced: -- Alto
Dat signum caelo: Quo non praesentius ullum
Turbavit mentes Italas, monstroque fefellit.
Namque volans rubra fulvus Jovis ales in aethra,
Littoreas agitabat aves, turbamque sonantem
Agminis aligeri. AEn. 12.


V. 204. Darkness ere Day's mind course; Noctis faciem nebulas fecisse volucres
Sub nitido mirata die -- Met. l. 1.


V. 207. With something Heavenly fraught; That comes down laden with something
from Heaven. Fraught, of the Fr. Freter, to load a Ship; whence our Freight.
Jasper, Bo. 3. v. 363. Alt, Bo. 6. v. 532. Apparition, Bo. 8. v. 293.

V. 214. Jacob in Mahanaim; The Vision that Jacob saw in Mahanaim, of his
Angelic Guardians, was not more Glorious than this of the descending Angelic
Host into Paradise, Genesis 32. 1, 2. Mahanaim, (...), a Dual, signif. two Camps,
Jacob's own, and that Celestial one God sent to guard him, of (...), Heb. to
pitch a Camp. The Field pavillion'd, the Field spread over with Tents; a word
coined of Pavilion, Fr. a Royal Tent. Guardians, Bo. 3. v. 511. Jacob, the
younger of the Twin-Sons of Isaac, by Rebecca, Genesis 25. 25, 26.

V. 217. In Dothan, etc. And the Lord opened the eyes of the young man, and he
saw: and behold the mountain was full of horses, and chariots of fire, 2 King.
6. 17.

V. 219. One Man Assassin-like; Elisha, who having discovered the Designs of
the King of Syria to the King of Israel, was suddenly beset by him in Dothan,
levying War against one single Man: And it was told him, saying, Behold he is
in Dothan, therefore sent he thither horses and chariots, and a great host: and
they came by night, and compassed the city about, 2 King. 6. 13, 14.
Assassin-like, like a Murderer: Assassin, Fr. a Cutthroat. Unproclaim'd, War
undenounc'd, solemnly to proclaim War, being a Custom among Generous Enemies:
Hierarch, Bo. 5. v. 468. Potentate, Bo. 1. v. 31^.

V. 234. Nor sociably mild like Raphael; Nor so gentle as Raphael, who
conversed so familiarly with us. Sociably, of Sociabilis, Lat. like a
Companion. Mild, Mitis, Lat. gentle, easy. Raphael, Bo. 5. v. 221. That I
should much confide, that I should hope for much from his Visit; Confidere,
Lat. to have a good hope in.

V. 236. Solemn and Sublime; Grave and Majestic, Serious and Lofty. Solemn,
Bo. 4. v. 648. Sublime, Sublimis, Lat. high.

V. 237. And thou retire; And thou withdraw; for Decency-sake, a Nicety,
occasioned by Shame, Daughter of Sin: For he described Eve attending naked on
the Angel and Adam. -- No Vail
She needed, Virtue proof, no Thought infirm
Altered her Cheek -- Bo. 5. v. 383.


Where the Poets observing the (...), is remarkable.

V. 241. A Military Vest of Purple; A Soldier-like Garment of Purple. Aurea
purpuream subnectit fibula vestem. AEn. 4.

Military, Bo. 6. v. 45. Vest, Vestis, Lat. a Garment. Purple, Bo. 1. v. 451.

V. 242. Livelier than Melibaean; Of a livelier Color, and richer Dye, than
any made at Melibaea, a City of Thessaly, near Mount Ossa, famous for a Fish
called Ostrum, there caught, and used in Dying the noblest Purple. -- Quam
plurima circum
Purpura Maeandro duplici Melibaea cucurrit. AEn. 5.


V. 243. Or the Grain of Sarra; Or the Dye of Tirus, named Sarra, of Sar, the
Phaenician Name of a Fish there taken, whose Blood made the Purple Color. --
Sarrano Dormiat ostro. Geo. 2. -- Et pictae Sarrana ferentem
Ex humeris aulaea togae -- Juv. Sat. 10.


Grain, Dye, of Granum, Lat. (...), Gr. Berries of some Trees used in dying of
Colors. Truce, Bo. 2. v. 526.

V. 244. Iris had dipped the Woof; The Rainbow had dyed it, e're it was wove.
Iris, the Heavenly Bow, Daughter of Thaumas and Electra, of (...), Gr. to
wonder, the Picture of the Sun's Light reflected on a Watery Cloud, whence those
many and wonderful Colors: The thicker and more dense the Cloud is, the more
lively and various the Colors appear; among which, the Purple, Blue, and
Saffron, are the most conspicuous in this Showry Arch. -- Iris croceis per
caelum roscida pennis
Mill trahens varios adverso sole colores. AEn. 4.


V. 247. As in a glistring Zodiac; His Sword, the Terror of Satan, hung in a
shining Belt, embroidered like the Sun's bright Annual Circle: A Belt becoming
an Archangel. Zodiac, ((...), from the Figures of diverse Animals represented by
the Asterisms therein, as the Ram the Bull, the Goat, etc.) is that Circle
through which the Sun runs his Race, reaching to both the Tropics Oblique, by
cutting the Equator as a Belt cross the Wearer, which makes the Comparison the
more complete. Glistring, of the Belg. Glisteren, to shine. Satan's dire Dread,
Bo. 6. v. 305.

V. 250. From his State inclined not; He, like a Monarch Majestic, stooped not
from his State: Status, Lat. Dignity. Nam neque de statu nostrae dignitatis
nobis est recedendum. Cic. Inclinare, Lat. to bow, to stoop. Preface, Bo. 9. v.
676.

V. 254. Defeated of his Seizure; Disappointed for his laying hands on thee for
a long time, allowed thee favorably to repent in. Defeated, Desfaire, Fr. to
undo, whence Defeizance, the disannulling of an Obligation. Seizure,
Possession, of Saisir, Fr. to lay hold on. Rapacious, of Rapax, Lat. Death's
cruel Claim, Bo. 2. v. 32.

V. 264. Chilling Gripe of Sorrow that all his Sense bound; -- Subita gelidus
formidine sanguis
Diriguit, cecidere animi -- AEn. 3.
-- Obmutuit amens
Arrectaeque horrore comae, and vox faucibus haesit,
Attonitus tanto monitu, imperioque Deorum. AEn. 4.


Gripe, Griffe, Fr. a Claw, a Bird's Talon.

V. 266. With audible Lament; With loud Lamentation. Audible, Audibilis, Lat.
easy to be heard. Lament, Bo. 1. v. 448. The place of her Retire, the place to
which she had Retired; Retirer, Fr. Retrahere, Lat. to withdraw.

V. 270. Thee Native Soil; Natale solum, Lat. Paradise was the place of Eve's
Birth, taken out of Adam after God had placed him in his Garden, Genesis 2. 15,
21. 22.

V. 271. The Respit of that Day; The Reprieve granted me till that Day, that
must be destructive to us both. Respit, Fr. delay, forbearance: Respiter de
Mort, Fr. to Reprieve. See Bo. 2. v. 462. My early Visitation, etc. my Morning
and my Evening Care; Visitatio, Lat.

V. 277. From the first opening Buds; Exerere ambrosias caput ut caepistis in
auras,
Et suaves laxare sinus. Tribes, Bo. 3. v. 532.


V. 292. Where he abides, etc. -- Comitemque virumque sequenti
Omne solum nuptae Patria est.


V. 306. Inhospitable appear; All other Places, besides Paradise, seems to us
unf^^ to dwell or harbor in. Inhospitalis, Lat. uninhabitable. -- Inhospita
Syrtis. AEn. 4.

Incessant, Incessans, Lat. continual; Of in and cessare, Lat. to cease, to
give ore; Assiduous Assiduus, Lat. daily, continual.

V. 316. Deprived; Bereaved, robbed of; of the Augmentative de and privare, Lat.
to take away from. Terf, Bo. 5. v. 391. Trace, Bo. 9. v. 682.

V. 335. His Omnipresence fills, etc. God is every where, a like present in all
places, as Present every where as Powerful. Whether shall I go from thy Spirit?
Or, Whither shall I fly from thy Presence? Psalm. 139. 7. etc. Omnipresence,
Bo. 7. v. 590. Surmise, Bo. 9. v. 333.

V. 343. Capital Seat; The place of thy chief Residence: Celebrate, Bo. 6. v.
888. To Reverence, Revereri, Lat. to Honor thee, and pay thee Homage.
Progenitor, Bo. 5. v. 544. Praeeminence, Bo. 5. v. 661.

V. 348. To dwell on even ground; Humbled to live below among thy Sons.

V. 354. His Face express; God's Goodness and Fatherly Love, best expressing,
his infinite Perfections to Mankind. Paternal, Bo. 6. v. 749. Express,
Expressus, Lat. manifest, apparent.

V. 359. Supernal Grace; Grace sent from God above; Supernus, Lat. high.
Enured, Bo. 2. v. 216.

V. 367. (For I have drencht her Eyes;) For I have shed dewie Sleep into her
Eyes; which the Latin Translator mistaking, has rendered, (For I have made her
weep) Ast Eva interea (quoniam nunc ejus ocellos
Vox mea compuler at Lachrymarum fundere rivum)
Dormiat hic placidam capiens per membra quietem.


Rather thus; Ast Evae interea, (medicata papavere multo
Lumina cujus hebent) placidum, sine, serpere somnum.


Drencht, wet, moistened; Of the Sax. Drencan, to water. A Drench, is a
Medicinal Potion. Foresight, the seeing of things yet to come; the seeing them
before they are.

V. 373. However Chastning; How ere it please to punish me. Chastning, Fr.
Chastier, Lat. Castigare, to correct.

V. 374. Arming to overcome by Suffering; Putting on a Resolution to bear with
Patience, and with my Constancy to overcome all my Afflictions. Qui^quid erit
superanda est omnis fortuna ferendo. AEn. 5.

V. 377. In the Visions of God; As in Scripture, the preternatural Revelations
of Futurity are called. And the Spirit brought me in the Visions of God to
Jerusalem, Ezekiel. 8. 3. In the Visions of God brought he me into the Land of
Israel. Ibid. 40. 2.

V. 379. The Hemisphere of Earth; It was the highest Hill of Paradise, from
whose lofty Head, half the Globe of Earth, plain to be seen, lay spread out
wide in open prospect round. Hemisphere, Bo. 3. v. 725. Ken, Bo. 1. v. 59.
Prospect, Bo. 3. v. 77.

V. 383. Our second Adam; Jesus Christ. The second Man is the Lord from Heaven,
1 Cor. 15. 47. The last Adam was a quickening Spirit, Ibid. v. 45. In the
Wilderness, and the Devil taking him up into a high Mountain, showed unto him
all the Kingdoms of the World, Luke 4. 6.

V. 386. Or Modern Fame; Of old or late Renown, Modern, Modernus, Lat. new,
latter.

V. 388. From the Destined Walls of Cambalu; From the designed Walls of
Cambalu, a great City in Cathaie, a Province of Tartary, seated on the River
Pol^sanga, numerous in Inhabitants, and rich in Merchandise; the ancient Seat
of the Tartarian Chams, thence of Cham, Lord and Balu, a City, named in the
Tartarian Tongue, Kambalu, (as Paulus Venetus affirms) City of the Lord; thence
Seat of Cathajan Can. Cathaie, was anciently known by Scythia extra montem
Imaum, Its old Inhabitants, the Cathei of Strabo, giving it this new Name;
Destined, Destinatus, Lat. appointed, as not being then built.

V. 389. Sarmacand by Oxus, Temir's Throne. Sarmacand is a City of Zagathaian
Tartary, famous for having been the Birth and Burial-place of the mighty
Tamerlain, where he kept his Royal Residence, thence called Temir's Throne:
Temir, Iron of his hardy Courage, and Temir-Cutlu, happy Iron, and c. Tamerlain
was the Son of Ogg, and by the Marriage of the Daughter of Ginocham, obtained
the Tartarian Empire, which he so vastly enlarged, that he alone subdued more
Provinces, than all the Romans had done in 800 years, when most flourishing; at
one time he enriched this City, with 8000 Camels laden with the Spoils of
Damascus only.

Oxus, a River in Zagathaie, famous for the overthrow of Cyrus by the
Scythians, and Sabacham of Zagathaian Tartary, by Ismael Sophie of Persia: It
rises out of Mount Taurus, and falls into the Caspian Sea.

V. 390. To Paquin of Sinaean Kings; As far as Paquin, the Royal Seat of the
Chinese Kings. Paquin, Paquina, Lat. Pequin, Pechinum Lat. is a vast and
populous City of China, Capital of the Province of Pekin, to which their
Emperor removed from Naquin, in the year 1404, to reside nearer the Tartars,
their perpetual Enemies, and now their Conquerors.

Sinaean Kings; Emperors of China, called to this day Sinarum Regio, Lat. where
Ptolomy, the old Geographer, placed the Sinae, of which China.

V. 391. To Agra and Lahor of Great Mogul. Agra, Lat. Capital of the Mogul's
Empire, is an Indian modern City, rich and populous, situated in Agra, a
Province of India beyond the River Ganges.

Lahor, Lahorium, Lat. a great City of East India, in a Province of the same
Name, (360 miles from Agra) where the Moguls formerly had their Residence.

Mogul, so called, (says Heylin,) as descended from the Mogul Tartars, there
being others called Sumoguls, Jecomoguls, etc.

V. 392. Down to the Golden Chersonese; Down as far as to the Golden Peninsula,
now called the Promontory of Malaca, (from its chief City,) is the most
Southern Headland of the East Indies between Sumatra and Borneo, two of the
Oriental Islands; it was known anciently by the name of Aurea Chersonesus, Lat.
Chersonese, (...), Gr. is a Peninsula, a Place almost quite surrounded by the
Sea, of (...), Earth, and (...), an Island, being almost an Island, only tied
to the Land by a small Isthmus, or Neck of Land: This, of four others very
considerable, was named the Golden, being very rich by a vast and universal
Trade.

V. 393. The Persian in Ecbatan; Ecbatana, now Tauris and Tebris by the
Inhabitants, the ancient Capital of the Kingdom of Persia, founded anno 786,
once ruined by an Earthquake, often sacked by the Turks, and ever since 1603,
recovered and kept by the Persians.

V. 394. Hispahan; Or Hispaham, Aspahamum, Lat. the Royal City of Persia, where
the Sophies have resided near 100 years, extremely rich and populous, seated in
the Province of Hierach, part of the ancient Parthia.

Ibid. Or Rassian Ksar in Mcsco; Or the Russian Emperor in Mosco. Russia is a
vast Country, in the North-East part of Europe, formerly Sarmatia Europaea.
Ksar or Czar, in the Slavonian Tongue, is the Title of their Great Duke, now
Emperor of Muscovy, so called of his Capital City Mosco, or Mosqua, a Wooden
City, seated on a River of the same name, denominating the whole Nation and
Empire.

V. 395. Or Sultan in Bizance; Or the Grand Signior in Constantinople, of
Tartarian Original. Byzantium, Lat. now Constantinople, is a City of Thrace,
and Capital of the Turkish Empire, so named by Constantine the Great, who
Rebuilt it, and made it the Eastern Seat of the Empire, taken by Mahomet the
Second. The Sultan has his Title of (...), Heb. Dominion, which no Monarch
exercises more absolutely. Turchestan, is a Province of Zagathaian Tartary, so
styled, because inhabited by the Turks before their inrode into Armenia.

V. 396. The Empire of Negus to Ercoco; The Empire of Negus, is that of the
Ab^ssines, whose Emperor is by the Europeans styled Prester John; by the Moors,
Aticlabassi; and by his own Subjects. Acegue and Neguz, that is. Emperor and
King: His mighty Territory stretches from the Red Sea to Niger, ending in the
Ethiopic Ocean, and almost from one Tropic to the other, anciently called
AEthiopia sub AEgypto, etc.

Ibid. Ercoco; Erquico, Erquicium, and by Heylin and others Erroco, a Seaport
Town of Ethiopia in Africa, having a good Harbor on the Red Sea, the ancient
North-East Boundary of the Abyssine Empire.

V. 399. Mombaza, and Quiloa, and Melind; Mombaza, Monbaccia, is a very great
City in Africa, Capital of the Kingdom of the same Name, in Zanguelar, a
Province of the Lower Ethiopia, has a good Haven in the Eastern Ocean.

Quiloa; Queillo, a City in an Island, giving Name to a Kingdom on the Eastern
Shore of Africa, between Mosambique and Melind, South of Quiloa 150 Leagues.

Melind, a City in Africa, in the aforesaid Province. The Kings of these are
called Maritim, of Maritimus, Lat. belonging to the Sea, because their little
Dominions lay on the Ethiopic Ocean.

V. 400. Sofala, thought Ophir; Sofala, or Zofala, is a little Kingdom of
Africa, in the Lower Ethiopia, in the Country of Cafraria, toward the Ethiopic
Ocean, taking its Name of Sofala, a strong City in the Borders of Zanguebara,
50 miles from which there are rich Mines of Gold, called the Mines of Manica;
Sofala, by Purchase, and others, was mistaken for Ophir, to which Solomon sent
for Gold, etc. 1 King. 9. 28.

V. 401. Of Congo and Angola; Congo is a little Kingdom on the Western Shore of
Africa, in a very fruitful Soil: South of which is Angola, such another fertile
and petty Realm, and with diverse others formerly made the Kingdom of Congo,
much harrass'd by the Portugueses.

V. 402. Niger Flood; Niger, or Nigir, the greatest River of Africa, arising
out of a Lake of the same Name in the Upper Ethiopia: It divides Nigritia into
two parts, whose Fertility is heightened by the Annual overflowing of this
River 40 days, as Heylin, De Terra Nigritarum; it runs into the Atlantic Ocean
at six great Outlets. At'as. Bo. 4. v. 986. The Poet seems to mean At'as Minor,
now Errif, parting the Kingdom of Fez from that of Morocco.

V. 403. Fez, and Sus; The Kingdom of Fez is in the West of Barbary in Africa,
bounded Northward by the Streights of Gibraltar and the Meaiterranean, on the
West by the Altantic Ocean, South by the Kingdom of Morocco, and East by that
of Algier. Sus, Susa, another African Kingdom, so named of Sus, its principal
River.

V. 404. Marocco, Algiers, and Tremisen; Marocco, Marochium, a Kingdom of the
Moors in Barbary, 90 miles from Fez, to which the Royal Seat, and the ancient
Glory of its chief City, is removed.

Tremisen, Tremisa, a Kingdom, and a great City of Barbary.

Algiers, a City and Commonwealth of Africa, on the Borders of Barbary on the
Mediterranean Sea, over against Minorca, too well known by its Piracies: These
are said to have been the Kingdoms of Almansor, the famous Moor, Heroised by
Mr. Dryden.

V. 405. Europe, Bo. 10. v. 310. Rome, Bo. 9. v. 671. Maxima rerum Roma: AEn. 7.

V. 406. Mexico of Montezume; Mexico, Mexicum, a rich Kingdom of North America,
whose Capital City is of the same name, and seated in a Lake so called also.
The unhappy Montezuma the Second, was King of it, when Francis Cortez, the
Spanish General, overcame him in the year 1521. Adam is said perhaps to have
seen this in Spirit, because it lay not within the compass of the Earth's
Hemisphere, nor within his Prospect as to the Site of the highest Mount of
Paradise, on which our Poet had placed him.

V. 408. Cusco in Peru; Peruvia, is a vast Country in South America; rich in
Gold and Silver Mines, whose Royal City Cusco was, at the Conquest of the
Spaniards, since depopulated and ruinous.

V. 409. Atabalipa, and Guascar; Were the Sons of Guaimacapa, the happiest
Peruvian King, who extended his Empire to the vast Bounds it now has, for which
his Sons being at strife, Francisco Pizarro a Spaniard, of as base Conditions
as Birth, parted 'em, by killing the first, and taking the other Prisoners,
whom (after he had ransomed himself with a House full of refined Gold and
Silver) the Ignoble Hogherd murdered.

V. 410. And yet unspoil'd Guiana; And yet unrifled Guiana: It is a large
Country in South America, directly under the Equinoctial Line, the most
fruitful part of Peru. Unspoil'd, Inspoliatus, Lat. unrob'd.

Ibid. Geryon's Sons; The Spaniards: For Geryon was King of Catalonia, and a
celebrated Hero, Fabled to have had three Bodies, because he commanded Majorca,
Minorca, and Ebusa, three Islands adjacent to Spain, or of the unexampled
Concord of his three Sons. Gerunda, a City of Catalonia, is said to have been
built and named by him: He was overcome and spoiled of his Herds by Hercules.
-- Nam maximus ultor
Tergemini nece Geryonis, spoliisque superbus
Alcides aderat: Taurosque hac victor ageba^
Ingentes -- AEn. 8.


V. 411. Eldorado; Otherwise Mancoa, the greatest City of South America, if not
of the World. Diego Ordas, one of Cortez's Companions, is said to have entered
it at Noon, and traveled all the next day, till night, before he came to the
King's Palace, where he saw such abundance of Gold, in Coin, Plate, Armor, and
other Utenfils, that the Spaniards gave it the gaudy name of Eldorado, the
Golden City.

V. 412. The Film removed; Removed the Mist from Adam's Eyes, etc. So Pallas
cleared up Diomedes his Eyesight. (...)
(...).


Imitated by Virgil: Aspice namque omnem, quae nunc obducta tuenti
Mortales hebetat visus tibi, and humida circum
Caligat, nubem eripiam. AEn. 2.


Film, is a thin white Skin or Membrane, growing over the Eyesight; Of
Velamen, Lat. any thing that hides, as if Vilm.

V. 414. Purged with Euphrasie and Rue, etc. Cleared the Organs of his Sight
with Rue and Eyebright. Enphrasie, (...), Gr. the Herb Eyebright, so named of
its clearing Virtue. Rue, (...), Gr. an Herb, whose warmth renders it
Corrosive. Visual, Bo. 3. v. 620. Nerve, Nervus, Lat. (...), Gr. Instilled,
dropped into it, of Instillare, Lat.

V. 417. These Ingredients. Ingredients are called such Things as are mixed or
blended together to make a Medicine, or other sort of Composition.
Ingredientes, Lat. as going into one another by the mixture.

V. 418. Of mental Sight; To the Eyes of his Understanding, to his Mind, the
inmost Seat of his Soul. Mental, Mentalis, Lat. of Men's, Lat. the Mind.
Intranst, Bo. 1. v. 301.

V. 426. Nor with the Snake conspired; Nor agreed with the Devil, nor consented
to the tempting Serpent: Of Conspirare, Lat. to agree with.

V. 430. Part arable and tilth; Part of which was plowed and sowed. Arable,
Arabilis, Lat. of Arare, Lat. to Plow. Tilth, Tilled, of Tilian, Sax to dress,
to manure Ground.

V. 433. Rustic, of Grassy Sord; A plain Altar raised of Grassy Turf. Rustic,
Rusticus, Lat. clownish, of Rus, Lat. the Country; whence Ala Rustique, Fr.
homely Draughts or Representations of Country Affairs. Sord, perhaps misprinted
for Sod, Turf, of the Belg. Sode, Ital. Terra Soda, of Solidum or Solum, Lat.
But if there be any such word as Sord, for dried Earth, it must be a derivative
of Swart, Belg. black, from its color, when fit for Fuel; whence our Sword,
the Rind of Bacon, of its blackness.

Most admirable and excellent are these Episodes, which here begin, and adorn
our Author's Poem to the end, surpassing all those tedious Stories, and the
vainglorious Boastings of the Homeric Heroes, and Virgil's artful Enumeration
of the Roman Conquerors, down to Augusius Caesar, and the bemoaned Marcellus,
AEn. 6. as much as a Relation of what was to come to pass, from the beginning
of the World, to Adam and all Mankind, to the end of it, and in order to a
better, (taken out of Sacred Story,) must excel any particular or Humane
History whatever.

V. 436. Uncull'd; Some green, and others ripe, not picked and culled.
Uncull'd, unchosen, of Cueiller, Fr. Colligere, Lat. to gather, thence to pick
and choose.

V. 437. The Firstlings of his Flock; Lambs, Genesis 4. 4. according to God's
Precept: Thou shall not delay to offer the first of thy ripe fruits, likewise
thou shall do with thine oxen and thy sheep: seven days it shall be with its
dam, on the eighth day thou shall give it me, Exodus 22. v. 29, 30. Choicest and
best; if his oblation be a sacrifice of peace offering, if he offer it of the
herd, whether it be male or female, be shall offer it without blemish before
the Lord, Levit. 3. 1.

V. 439. The Inwards, and their Fat; According to Levit. 3. 3, 4.

V. 442. Consumed with nimble glance; The Lord had respect to Abel, and to his
Offering; says Moses in the Holy Record, Genesis 4. 4. which all the Fathers
interpret, to have been manifested by Fire coming down from Heaven, and
consuming his Sacrifice; the same Sign signalized the offering of Aaron and
God's acceptance thereof, And there came a fire out from before the Lord, and
consumed the burnt-offering upon the altar, and the fat, which Moses styles,
The glory of the Lord appearing to the people, Levit. 9. 23, 34. In the same
manner was Gideon's Sacrifice accepted, Judge. 6. 21. Thus David was of God
answered by fire upon the altar of burnt-offering, 1 Chronicles. 21. 26. And
Solomon, 2 Chronicles. 7. 1. Elijah also received the same Miraculous Approbation, 1
King. 18. 38.

Ibid. And grateful Steam; An offering made by fire, of a sweet savor to the
Lord, Levit. 1. v. 9, 13, 17. and frequently so expressed in Scripture.

V. 443. For his was not sincere; Cain's Sacrifice was left untouched by the
Heavenly Fire, and therefore unaccepted, because not offered in Truth, and
sincerity of Heart; for God had respect unto Abel, and then to his Sacrifice,
Genesis 4. 4. Sincere, Sincerus, Lat. Pure, Upright.

V. 445. Smote him into the Midriff with a Stone; Our Author has followed the
most probable Opinion, that Cain killed his Brother with a blow on the Breast
with a great Stone, that beat out Life. that beat the Breath out of his Body;
as they talked, Genesis 4. 8. as they were in Discourse about the success of their
Sacrifice; Abel maintained God's Omniscience and Omnipresence, the Rewards and
Punishments of good and bad Actions, both in this Life, and that everlasting
one in the other World, which introduced a Dispute of the Immortality of the
Soul, and its eternal State; whereupon careless and unbelieving Cain, enraged
at his Brother's grave Admonitions, slew his innocent Adviser, and sent him to
experiment the Truth of his Pious Assertions; as the Jerusal. Targum guesses.
Cain was of that wicked one, (who was a Murderer from the beginning, John 8.
44.) and slew his brother, because his own works were evil, and his brothers
righteous, 1 John 3. 12.

V. 447. With gushing Blood effus'd; Poured out his Blood and Soul together.
Undantique animum diffudit in arva cruore:
Purpuream vomit ille animam. AEn. 9.


Whatsoever the deadly Instrument was, with which Cain slew his Brother, his
Death was most certainly attended with Effusion of his Blood, that being
mentioned, To cry unto the Lord from the ground, Genesis 4. 10. Remembered also by
our Savior, Matthew. 23. 35. Effus'd, Effusus, Lat. poured out, spilt.

V. 449. Dismayed. Bo. 1. v. 57. Nothing in the World could be more terrible,
than the first Night, and the first dismal Scene of Death: Mons. Balsac.

V. 457. From Heaven acceptance; If thou do well, shall thou not be accepted?
Genesis 4. 7.

V. 472. By Intemperance more; By Excess in eating and drinking, undermining
and sapping Life by its Supports Pius Gula, quam Gladius. -- Saevior armis
Luxuria incubuit, victumque ulciscitur orbem. Juv.


V. 476. The Inabstinence of; Which Eve's want of Abstinence, and command over
her Sensual Appetite, shall bring on her Descendents. In and Abstinentia, Lat.
Forbearance.

V. 479. A Lazar house; Lazaret, Fr. Lazaretto, It. an Hospital. Maladies,
Malady, Fr. Sickness, of Malum, Lat. as Illness, in the same sense, of Ill.

V. 481. Of ghastly Spasm; The Disorders of ugly Cramps, and strange
Distortions. Spasms, (...), Gr. a Cramp, of (...), Gr. to Contract, of which
one ill-favored kind is called Spasmus Cynicus, when the Nostrils are so
convulsed, that the Teeth appear, like those of a snarling Dog.

Ibid. Or racking Torture; Or tormenting Pains, that put the wretched Patient
on the Rack: Of Reckon, Ger. to stretch, to extend. Torture, Tortura, Lat. of
Torquere, Lat. to twist, to torment.

V. 482. Qualms of Heart-sick Agony; Fainting Fits that affect the Heart with
Life's last struggle. Qualms, Swoonings, Death's Sisters, of Crealm, Sax.
Death, a short one, and sometimes absolute. Agony, Bo. 2. v. 861.

Ibid. All feavorous kinds; All sorts of Feavors: Febris, Lat. Convulsions,
Convulsiones, Lat. a Convellendo, from plucking the Nerves up together with
painful twitches.

V. 483. Epilepsies; (...), Gr. the Falling Sickness: Of (...), Gr. to seize
upon, it being a seizure of such a sort, as for the time deprives the Person
afflicted there with both of Sense and Understanding.

Ibid. Fierce Catarrhs; Salt sharp Rheums, and furious Defluxions, Catarrhs,
(...), Gr. a Torrent, of (...), to flow down, as Rheums do from the Head to the
Laboring Lungs.

V. 484. Intestine Stone and Ulcer; The Stone in the Bladder or Kidneys, often
attended with putrefying Ulcers. Intestine, Intestinus, Lat. inward. Ulcer,
Ulcus, Lat. (...), Gr. a Sore full of Corruption.

Ibid. Cholic Pangs; Pains of the Cholic, twisting and tearing the Guts.
Cholic, (...), of (...), Gr. one of the great thick Guts so called, from whose
fullness, either with Wind or Filth, those piercing Pains arise. Pangs, of Pain,
Paena, Lat. (...), Gr.

V. 485. Daemoniac Phrenzie; Raving Madness, that looks like being possessed by
an Evil Spirit; like those two possessed with Devils, coming out of the tombs
exceeding fierce, Matthew. 8. 28. Daemoniac, (...), Gr. Possessed, and thence
furious. Phrenzie, Phrenesis, Lat. (...), Gr. Madness, of (...), Gr. the Mind,
the Understanding, hurt and disturbed ^n Feavors, by overheating the Membranes
of the Brain. Downright Madness -- Manifiesta Phrenesis. Mart.

Ibid. Moaping Melancholy; A sullen silent Madness, occasioned by abundance of
black adust Choler; whence Melancholy, (...), Gr. the Distemper takes its Name.
Moaping, dull, sullen, stupid, because their Vital Spirits are choked and
oppressed by black Clouds of Choler.

V. 486. Moon-struck Madness; Madness depending on the Moon, whence those
affected with it are styled Lunatics, of Luna, Lat. the Moon, whose Increases
augment the Malady. Moonstruck, (...), Gr. a Luna percussus, a Lunatic.

Ibid. Pining Atrophie; A continual Consumption, by some defect in those Parts
that should digest and turn our Meat and Drink into wholesome Nourishment.
Pining, wasting, starving, of (...), Gr. Hunger. Atrophie, (...) Gr. want of
Nourishment.

V. 487. Marasmus; (...), Gr. another kind of Consumption, proceeding from an
Habitual, Hectic Heat over-drying the Body, and quite consuming the Radical
Moisture; of (...), Gr. to dry up, to parch. Pestilence, Pestilentia, Lat. the
Plague, Wide-wasting, that slays by wholesale.

V. 488. Dropsies, etc. (...), Gr. Aqua intercus, of (...), Gr. Water, which
getting between the Flesh and the Skin, overflows and swells into an incurable
Inundation, and at last drowns with Death.

Ibid. Asthma's; (...), Gr. the Tissick, a difficulty of Breathing, of (...),
Gr. to breath hard and hot. Joint-racking Rheums, Gouts and Rheumatisms, that
rack and rend our Joints in pieces, by torturing and tearing our Nerves
asunder. Rheums, of (...), Gr. a Flux of Humor, of (...), Gr. to flow.

V. 490. Despair tended the Sick; They were all in so sad a condition, that
they despaired of their Recovery: Despair, Desperatio, Lat. a sad, but usual
attendant on the Sick, Deform, Bo. 12. v. 706.

V. 496. Compassion queld his best of Man; Pity overcame all his Manhood;
Conquered all his Courage, though he had no natural weakness, as not Born of
Womankind, his Offspring. Queld, Bo. 4. v. 860.

V. 504. Obtruded on us; Why is Life thus forced upon us, without our Consent?
-- Quae lucis miseris tam dira Cupido? AEn. 6.

Degraded, Bo. 8. v. 552. Wrested, forced by violence from; of Reissen, Ger. to
pluck from. Obtruded, Obtrudere, Lat. to force upon.

V. 510. To such unsightly sufferings debased; Humbled to such abominable
Diseases, under such loathsome Loads to suffer such excessive Pains. Deba'st,
Desbaisse, Fr. degraded.

V. 516. When themselves they vilified; When they disparaged and undervalued
themselves, by yielding to unruly Lust. Vilifi'd, Vilificare, Lat. to render
Vile, Vilis, Lat. base.

V. 519. Inductive mainly, etc. Ungoverned Appetite, that Brutish Vice, our
inordinate Lusts and Desires, were the main persuasives which prevailed with
Eve to Transgress God's Command, which has made the punishment of her Posterity
so Beastly and Abominable, suitable to her Brutish Sin. Inductive, Inducere,
Lat. to lead. Abject, mean, base; Abjectus, Lat. vile, naught.

V. 529. With our Connatural Dust! Be mingled with our Original Clay!
Connaturalis, Lat. of the same kind with us; Dust out of which Adam originally
was raised.

V. 531. The rule of not too much; The Golden Rule of Temperance in Meats and
Drinks, Ne quid nimis. Eating to support, not oppress Nature; by Gluttonous
Delight, by pleasing of thy Palate and indulging thy Appetite; Gluttonois,
greedy; Of Glouton, Fr. Gluto, Lat. a greedy and voracious Eater.

V. 534. Years over thy head return; The years made by the circular Revolutions
of the Heavenly Bodies, are well said to return, their Seasons moving in a
perpetual round, In sese vertitur annus.

V. 537. For death mature; Ripe for thy Dissolution, not like green Fruit with
difficulty pluck from the Tenacious Tree, but ripe and ready for the Grave,
Earth thy Mothers Lap, whence thou grewst up. Mature, Maturus, ripe, thence
Matura viro virgo.

V. 540. Thy Senses then obtuse; Thy Senses then will grow dull and blunt,
their edge will be quite worn away. Obtusus, Lat. blunted. All taste of
Pleasure must forgo. Non eadem vini, atque cibi torpente palato
Gaudia: Nam dudum gustus perit, etc. Juv. Sat. 10.


V. 546. The Balm of Life; A dull, cold and dry Vapor, will overcast and cloud
thy Spirits, and at last lick up the Oil of Life, and put out its Lamp, by
consuming the radical moisture, well assimulated to Balm, which the Jews say,
is named so, Balsamum, as if (...), the Lord of Oil, the principal of all
Juices.

V. 549. This combrous charge; Of this troublesome, uneasy load. Combrous, of
Komeren, Belg. to trouble, to molest. Charge, une Charge, Fr. a burden.

V. 559. That made melodious Chime; That made a sweet Musical Harmony.
Melodious, Bo. 3. v. 371. Chime is properly the Sound of Bells; Of Chiamare,
Ital. to call People to Church, as there is use.

V. 561. Their Stops and Chords; Who moved the Stops upon the Organ, and struck
the Harps shrill Strings. Chords, Chorda, Lat. (...), Gr. a Gut, of which the
Strings of Instruments are generally made.

V. 562. His volant Touch instinct, etc. His nimble Fingers, as if inspired,
flew through all the various distances of Sound, over all proportions, low or
high, Treble or Base, and through all its Parts, followed the Sounding
Symphony. Volant, Volans, Lat. flying. Instinct, Bo. 2. v. 935. Transverse,
crosswise, both-ways, Bo. 3. v. 488. Resonant, Resonans, Lat. loud Sounding. A
Fugue, (of Fuga, Lat. a flight) is in Music the correspondency of Parts,
answering one another in the same Notes, either above or below; therefore
exactly and graphically styled Resonant, as Sounding the same Notes over again.

V. 566. Found where casual Fire, etc. Found at first, where Fire by chance had
burnt the Woods down to the Mineral Entrails of the Earth, or washed from
thence, by Waters underground: One of which, most likely, gave discoveries of
the Earths hidden Stores. Casual, Casualis, Lat. accidental, by chance. Ore,
Bo. 1. v. 673.

V. 573. Fusil or Grav'n; By Melting and Carving. Fusil, Fusilis, Lat.
meltable; Of Fundere, Lat. to cast Metal. Graven, of Graver, Fr. to Carve, to
Grave.

V. 575. From the high Hills their Seat: That Seth and his Descendents,
separated themselves from the Tents of Cain and his wicked Race, who slew the
Righteous Abel, is easy to be imagined; but how they came to Seat themselves
on the Hills, leaving the fruitful Plains to the Murderers, unless for the
convenience of their Celestial Observations, Seth being reputed the first
Institutor of Astronomy is hard to be conjectured: That there was a separation
between 'em, Moses hints, In that the Sons of God saw the Daughters of Men that
they were fair, Genesis 8. 2. which had not been so remarkable had they always
converst and lived with them. The Master of the Scholastic History, says, Cain
dwelt in the Fields where he flew his Brother, but Seth in Cordan, a Mountain
near Paradise. Hist. Lib. Genesis c. 31. whom our Author has followed. Guise, Bo.
1. v. 563.

V. 582. A Beavy of fair Women; A company of handsome Women. Beavy, of Beva,
Ital. a Covy of Partridges: Of Bevere, Ital. Bibere, Lat. because they Feed and
Drink together; Or of Belle veve, Fr. a goodly sight. Gems, Geminae, Lat.
Jewels. Ditties, Bo. 1. v. 449.

V. 588. The Evening Star; Hesperus, of which before: Sparge marite nuces, tibi
deserit Hesperus AEtam. Ecl. 8. Harbinger, Bo. 1. v. 13.

V. 590. Hymen then first invoked; Denotes their forsaking the true God, and
setting up abominable Idols. Hymen, or Hymenaeus, was the reputed Son of
Bacchus and Venus, and thence ^he Institutor of, and President over Marriages.
Hic Hymenaeus erit. AEn. 4. Invoked, Bo. 1. v. 13.

V. 595. Attacked the Heart of Adam: Seized with pleasing violence; Attacked,
of Attacher, Fr. to lay Hands upon, to take hold of; Hence our Law Term,
Attachiare, to take into Custody.

V. 597. The Bent of Nature; His Natural Inclination and Biass. Portends, Bo.
6. v. 578.

V. 606. Conformity Divine; The true resemblance of thy Heavenly Maker.
Conformitas, Lat. likeness.

V. 610. Of Arts that pollish Life; Of Arts and Inventions that set of and
garnish Life. Polire, Lat. to adorn.

V. 618. Completed to the Taste, etc. Accomplished only to the highest pitch of
wanton Dalliance. Completed, of Complere, Lat. to fill up. Appetence,
Appetentia, Lat. Lust, Desire.

V. 620. To troule the Tongue; To talk wittily, and look wantonly. Troule, of
the Belg. Drollen, to roll, to turn.

V. 622. Titled them the Sons of God. The Posterity of Seth, for their
Religious Observation of Gods Holy Worship, were by Moses styled the Sons of
God; as the Descendents of Cain and his perverse Posterity, the Sons and
Daughters of Men, according to the best Interpretation of his Words; The Sons
of God saw the Daughters of Men, that they were fair, Genesis 6. 2. Titl'd them,
gave 'em the Name and Title of, Titulare, Lat. to Style, to Entitle. Ignobly,
Ignobiliter, Lat. disgracefully.

V. 625. Of these fair Atheists; To the Smiles and Snares of these fair
Unbelievers. Atheists, (...), Gr. are such as either believe there is no God,
or live as if there were none: As the Apostle says, Being without God in the
World, Ephesians. 2. 11. The Trains, the Allurements; of Trainer, Fr. to draw after,
to entice.

V. 632. The tenor of Man's Woe; The constant course of human Woe is still the
same. Tenor, Lat. a settled State and Order, a regular proceeding, a tenendo,
Lat. from holding on. Tenor unus Algoris aestusque constans. Plin.

V. 634. Man's Effeminate slackness: Man's Misery takes its rise from his
Remissness, from Folly and weak Wanttonness, that soften his Understanding,
betray his Judgment, and enervate his superior Gifts and Powers, Effeminate,
Effaeminatus, Lat. Womanish, soft. Territory, Territorium, Lat. (of Terra, Lat.
the Ground) is any considerable space, whithin the Command of Prince or State.

V. 641. Concourse in Arms; Concursus ad Arma, Lat. an Assembly of armed
Troops: Concursus, Lat. a running together, a sudden Assembly.

V. 643. Giants of mighty Bone, etc. Giants of mighty size, and daring
undertaking. Giants, Bo. 3. v. 463. Emprise, an old word for Entreprise, Fr. an
undertaking. Mustring, Bo. 2. v. 268.

V. 646. A Band Select; A Commanded Party. Band, Bo. 1. v. 356. Select, Bo. 8.
v. 513. Forage, Fourrage, Fr. Fodder for Cattle. Booty, Butin, Fr. Butino,
Ital. spoil, prey.

V. 652. With cruel Tournament, etc. With bloody onset and dire shock the
Horsemen engage. Tournament, Torneamento, Ital. the wheeling of Horsemen; of
Torneare, Ital. to turn, to fetch a compass. Squadron, Bo. 1. v. 356. Pastur'd,
fed; Of Pastura and Pascere, Lat. to feed.

V. 654. The ensanguin'd Field deserted; The Bloody Field of Battle, forsaken;
by the vanquished fled, by the Victors following the pursuit. Ensanguin'd,
Sanguin, Fr. Sanguineus, Lat. Bloody. Carcasses, Bo. 10. v. 277. Deserted,
Desertus, Lat. forsaken; of Deserere, Lat. to leave.

V. 656. By Battery, Scale, and Mine; Attack 'em by Batteries, beating down
their Walls, as did the Romans by their Rams, or as now by Cannon; Of Batre,
Fr. to beat down, to batter. Scale, by Scaling Ladder, assaulting 'em by
Surprise; Of Scala, Lat. a Ladder, thence Scalado: Or by Mines, digging under
the Foundations of their Walls, and by the force and fury of Powder,
overthrowing them; of Miner, Fr. to dig under ground. Seige, Siege, Fr. of
Seeds, Lat. a Seat, an Army that Besieges a place, is said to sit down before
it. Encampt, Bo. 2. v. 132. Assaulting, Bo. 1. v. 277. Javelin, of Jaculum,
Lat. a Dart, or Spear. Sulphurous, Bo. 1. v. 171.

V. 659. Gigantick Deeds; Great Actions, mighty Exploits. Gigantick, Giganteus,
Lat. great. Gigas, Lat. a Giant. Seepter'd, Harals, Bo. 1. v. 752. bearing
Scepters, the Ensigns of their Authority. Harangues, Des Harangues, Fr.
Orations. set Speeches.

V. 664. In factious opposition; But quickly Factious Parties thwart and
contrary one another. Factious, of Faction, Bo. 2. v. 32. Opposition,
Oppositio, Lat. Resistance; Of Opponere, Lat. to be against.

V. 666. Of Wise Deport; Of Grave and Prudent Behavior; Deport, Deportement,
Fr. Carriage, Behavior. This Prudent Person was Enoch. Exploded, Bo. 10. v.
546.

V. 670. A Cloud descending snacht him, and Enoch walked with God; and he was
not, for God took him, Genesis 5. 24. By Faith Enoch was Translated, that he
should not see Death, and was not found, because God had Translated him, Heb.
11. 5.

V. 679. Of whom such Massacher; Of whom, but of their Brethren do they make
such horrid Havoc, and universal Slaughters? Massacher, Fr. Massacre, a great
Slaughter; Of the Ital. Mazzacre, Amazzare, to kill; of Mazza, Ital, a Club, a
Mace: But I rather think, of Missae Sacra, the Holy Mass; for propagating of
which, the most abominable Massacres of Mankind have been made. Juvenal has
justly exposed Mankinds inhumane Cruelty to their own kind, beyond the Natural
Ferity of Wild Beasts. -- Saevis inter se convenit ursis
Ast homini ferrum lethale incude nefanda,
Produxisse parum est, etc. Sat. 5.


V. 682. Had not Heaven rescued; Had not God delivered them out of their hands.
Rescued, Rescourre, Fr. to deliver, to free; of the Lat. Re and Excutere: Hence
Rescous, Rescussus, Lat. ^he Law Term for an illegal setting a Person, or thing
seized, at liberty. Ill-mated, ill-joyn'd; of ill, evil, and mate, a companion.

V. 687. Produce prodigious Births, etc. When the Sons of God came in unto the
Daughters of Men, and they bare Children to them; the same became mighty Men,
of old Men of Renown, Genesis 6. 4. From whence Interpreters infer, That the Sons
of Seth, titled the Sons of God, by their Temperate and Virtuous lives, were
bigger and larger of size, than the enervated and wasted Sons of Cain,
exhausted by their vicious Intemperance; that from the mixture of the Godly and
goodly Sons of Seth, with the Debauched Daughters of Men, sprang a Race more
Robust, and Mighty than their decayed Pregenitors, esteemed Giants, being as
perverse and wicked, cruel and bloody, as strong, potent, and able of Body;
which our Author calls Prodigious Births, for the enormity both of their Bodies
and Minds, mighty and malicious. Achieved, Bo. 2. v. 364.

V. 700. The Seventh from thee; Enoch; That is in the Holy Lineage of which our
Savior was to come. Adam, Seth, E^os, Cainan, Mahalaleel, Jared, Enoch. Enoch
also the seventh from Adam Prophesied of these things, Jude 5. 14. Genesis 5. 19.
and Luke 3. 37. 38. Rapt, Raptus, Lat. snatched away.

V. 703. The Brazen Throat of War; The Trumpets, Wars hoarse voice, were heard
no more Trumpets and Instruments used to incite Men to Battle, were usually
made of Brass. AEre ciere viros, martemque accendere cantu. AEn. 6.

Jollity, Joliete, Fr* mirth, Prostituting, Prostituere, Lat. to become common.

V. 717. Where passing fair, etc. Where any extraordinary Beauty enticed 'em;
Passing fair, that exceeded the ordinary, as if surpassing.

V. 719. A Reverend Sire; Noah, who found Grace in the Eyes of the Lord, Genesis
6. 8.

V. 724. To Souls in Prison, etc. By whom our Savior Preached to the Spirits
in Prison, (bound and chained under the dark Delusions of Sin,) which sometime
were disobedient, when once the long-suffering of God waited in the days of
Noah, 1 Pet. 3. 19, 20.

V. 730. Measured by Cubit; Noah's Ark: The length shall be 300 cubits, Genesis 5.
15. Cubit, (...), Gr. the length from the Elbow to the end of the middle
Finger, generally.

V. 735. Came sevens and Pairs; Seven of the clean Beasts, such as were used in
Sacrifice, that Noah might have at least an odd one to offer in grateful
Thanksgiving for his Deliverance. And two, of beasts not clean, Genesis 7. 2. Genesis
8. 20. Insect, Bo. 4. v. 704.

V. 737. God made fast the Door. And the Lord shut him in, Genesis 7. 16. His
three sons, and their four wives, v. 13.

V. 738. The South Wind rose, and with black Wings; -- Madidis notus evolat
alis;
Terribilem picea tectus caligine vultum
Barba gravis nimbis; canis fluit unda capillis:
Front sedent nebulae: rorant pennaeque sinusque. Met. l. 1.


V. 740. To their Supply; To their Aid and Increase: Of Suppleer, Fr. to
furnish, to store. Dusk, of Duster, Ger. dark. -- Alimentaque nubibus addunt.
Ibid.

V. 743. Like one dark Ceeling stood; The Heavens overcast, like one great
cloudy Cieling showed. Ceeling, or Cieling, of the Ital. Cielo, Lat. Caelum;
and from thence any lofty Roof, that interposes between us and it.

V. 746. With beaked Prow, etc. With its pointed Prow ran a-tilt over the
Waves. Beaked, of Bec, Fr. a Bird's Bill. Prow, Prove, Fr. It. Proda, Lat.
Prora, Gr. (...), the Head of a Ship. Tilting, moving to and fro, of Tealtrian,
Sax. to shake, as Tilters do their Lances.

V. 747. All Dwellings else; Pressaeque labant sub gurgite turres. Met. 1.

V. 750. Sea without Shore; Omnia pontus erant, deerant quoque littora ponto.
Ibid.

Stabled, Stabulare, Lat. to house Cattle. Embarked, Embarque, Fr. on board.

V. 756. Depopulation; An universal Dispeopling of all the World at once,
Depopulatio, Lat.

V. 765. Each Day's Lot enough, etc. Sufficient unto the day is the evil
thereof, Matthew. 6. 34. Lot, chance, share.

V. 767. The Burden of many Ages; Those Evils, that by the Ordinance of Heaven,
and God's Dispensations, are to be Punishments of many Generations yet to come,
do all this minute, at once fall heavy upon me, my Foreknowledge affording 'em
untimely Birth, to torture me before they are in being with the most cruel,
killing Thought, that one Day they most certainly must be. Dispensed, designed,
of Dispensare, Lat. to dispose. Abortive, Bo. 2. v. 442.

V. 775. In Apprehension then in Substance; The Notion and Foreknowledge of an
Evil, that certainly will come to pass, will be as painful as the feeling it,
tormenting us by advance, often for once. Apprehensio, Lat. Conceit, knowledge.

V. 779. Wandering that watery Desert; Wandering over that watery Wilderness, that
yields no supply. Desert, Bo. 7. v. 314. -- Quibus unda pepercit,
Illos longa domant inopi jejunia victu. Met. 1.


V. 795. Hostile Deeds in Peace; Wrong and Oppression, that often are the
Offspring of Luxurious Peace. Hostile, Hostilis, Lat. of Enmity.

V. 802. Worldly and dissolute; Worldly or wantonly: Dissolutus, Lat.
debauched, or loose of Life. Practice, learn, Practiquer, Fr. Praxis, Lat.
(...), Gr. Exercise.

V. 807. The only Son of Light, etc. A Graphic Description of Righteous Noah.
Derided, scorned, Bo. 2. v. 191.

V. 818. A wondrous Ark; Of Arca, Lat. a Chest, any close and capacious hollow,
in which things are kept safe. Quod arceat fures, says Varro.

V. 820. Devote to universal Ruck; The World designed for universal Deluge,
destined universally to be drowned. Rack, should have been printed, Wrack,
implying the general Punishment by the Flood, wherein the whole World at once
suffered Shipwreck. Devote, Book 3. verse. 208.

V. 822. Select for Life; Chosen by God's great Goodness, to be saved from the
general Destruction. Select, Bo. 8. v. 513.

V. 823. All the Cataracts of Heaven; All Heaven's Floodgates were set open,
called by Moses, The windows of Heaven, Genesis 7. 11. of which the most
reasonable account is, That the middle Region of the Air, the Generative Womb
of Rainwater, was against the Day of that dismal Deluge, stored with vast
quantities of Vapors, and multitudes of black, thick Clouds, which being
converted into Water, came rushing down, like so many tumbling Torrents falling
from Heaven. (...), the word interpreted, Windows, and Cataracts, seems to
belong to the Bed-chambers of the Rain, since used in other places of Scripture
in relation to it, as 2 King. 7. 2. and by Malachi, Prove me now herewith,
says the Lord of Hosts, if I will not open you the windows of Heaven, and pour
out a blessing, etc. c. 3. v. 10. meant of moderate Rain, and seasonable
Showers. Cataracts, Bo. 2. v. 176.

V. 825. The Fountains of the Deep; The (...) of Moses, All the fountains of
the great deep, Genesis 7. 11. By which, tho most Commentators understand, the
vast Abyss and General Assemblies of Waters, contained in the Earth's many and
mighty Caverns, the sourse and support of the Seas, and which in the days of
the Deluge being let loose, heaved 'em above and beyond all their Bounds; yet
diverse of the Fathers, by this Great Deep, take the Waters above the Firmament
mentioned, Genesis 1. 7. to be meant; and that without their spoughting down their
Chrystalline Cataracts, there could not have been, by whatsomever quantities of
Rain, or condensation of the A^rial Region, so vast a Wilderness of Wet
produced, as to have overwhelmed the whole Earth, 15 Fathoms above the highest
Hills: And tho this Opinion forces 'em, not only to open the Windows of
Heaven, but to make wide and unanswerable Breaches through the Inferior Orbs;
nay, and to make use of God's high hand, to depress the motion of these Waters,
which could not in 40 days, no not in 100 years falling, have prevailed so
eminently over the haughty Hill, (as Dr. Gregory, one of its Maintainers,
confesses,) according to received Nature, and the ordinary course of Motion;
yet fortifying their Opinion by diverse Texts of Scripture, as, of God's laying
the beams of his chambers in the great waters, Psalm. 10. 4. 3. and that of the
Angel, How many springs are above the f^rmament? 2 Esdr. 4. 7. they seem to
satisfy themselves in that, of which no Man can be sure. If the Astronomical
Supposition, (that the Earth compared with the Heavens, is but a Spot, a
Point,) have any Truth in it, it is easy enough to imagine, how the greatest
part of the vast Aerial Expanse, condensed into continual Rains, and assisted
by the Sea, and all its Subterraneous Sourses, might raise so vast an Invasion,
able to overrun the whole Earth with that dreadful Inundation.

V. 826. Heave the Ocean to usurp; Shall swell the ocean, to invade Earth's
Territories beyond Nature's Laws and Boundaries. Usurpare, Lat. to seize upon
what is not our own: A word well chosen, to express the Preternatural Invasion
of the Waters over the Dry Land's ancient Right. Ocean, Bo. 1. v. 202.
Inundatio, Lat. the overflowing of the Sea.

V. 830. Pushed by the horned Flood; Great Rivers are by the Poets expressed in
the shape of Bulls, and styled Horned, to denote the strength and violence of
Torrents. Sic tauriformis volvitur Aufidus. Hor. Carm. 4. Od. 14. -- Gemina
auratus taurino cornua vultu
Eridanus -- Geo. 4.
Corniger Hesperidum Fluvius Regnator aquarum. AEn. 8.

Well then may our Author suppose, the Deluge, that General Assembly of all the
Seas, and all other Tributary Rivers, able to displace Paradise. Verdure, of
Verdure, Fr. greeness: Viriditas, Lat. adrift, driven away.

V. 832. Down the great River; Down the great River Tigris, into the Persian
Gulf, where he emptieth his open mouth.

V. 833. An Island Salt, etc. Salt, according to its situation in the Sea:
Insula, quasi in salo sita. Sir Walter Rawleigh is of opinion, That the Flood
might spoil the Beauty, and destroy the Plenty of Paradise, but not so displace
and remove it, from its Original Site, but that it may still be very well
known. Haunt, Bo. 3. v. 27.

V. 834 Seals and Ores, and Sea-mews clang; Now frequented by Sea Monsters, and
wild Birds. Seals, of Sell, and Selhund, Dan. a Sea-calf: Phoca, Lat. Ores, of
(...), Gr. a great Fish, Enemy to the Whale. Sea-mew, a Sea-bird so called, of
Sea and Mew, a word coined of their Note. Clang, Bo. 7. v. 422. Attributes, Bo.
8. v. 565. Nunc ibi deformes ponunt sua corpora phocae. Met. 1.

V. 839. Hull on the Flood; Swim to and fro on the Deluge. Hull, of Hollen,
Belg. to run apace. Abated, grew less, of Abbatre, Fr. to beat down.

V. 841. Driven by a keen North Wind; The North is a clearing Wind, that
dissipates the Clouds, thence said to blow dry; and therefore by Ovid, in
Dcucalion's Deluge, locked up. Protinus AEoliis Aquilonem claudit in antris,
Et quaecunque fugant inductas flamina nubes. Met. 1.
-- Nimbisque aquilone remotis. Ibid.

V. 842. Wrinkled the face of Deluge, Genesis 8. 1. Made the Deluge grow wrinkled,
signs of of its decaying and growing old, Wrinkles metaphorically (tho natural
to Water furrowed with the Wind) applied to the decreasing Flood; being the
marks of old Age, preying on the plumpness of Faces formerly fine and smooth.
Deluge, Bo. 1. v. 68.

V. 843. The Sun on his watery Glass; The Sun warming the Waters, by beholding
his glorious Face in that large Looking-glass, exhaled great quantities of 'em
by his Potent Beams. Ergo ubi diluvio tellus lutulenta recenti
Solibus aetheriis, altoque recanduit aestu. Met. 1.


V. 846. To tripping Ebb; Which made the mighty Flood shrink from a vast
Universal Lake, to a soft gentle Ebb that insensibly stole away. Tripping, of
To trip, to go softly on the Toes end, of Tripudiare, Lat. to dance. Lake, Bo.
1. v. 229. -- Flumina subsidunt. Met. 1.

V. 851. Tops of Trees as Rocks; Which expresses the Sea-Scene better than
Ovid's: Postque diem longam nudata cacumina silvae
Ostendunt -- Ibid.


V. 854. A Raven flies, Genesis 8. 7.

V. 856. A Dove sent forth, etc. Genesis 8. 8, 10.

V. 859. An Olive Leaf, Pacific Sign, Genesis 8. 11. Sign of Peace, of God's Mercy
to Mankind; the Olive was sacred to Pallas, and born by those that sued for
Peace, as being the Emblem of it and Plenty. Placitam paci nutritor olivam.
Geo. 2. Ramis velatos Palladis omnes. AEn. 7.

Pacific, Pacificus, Lat. Peaceful.

V. 865. A Bow conspicuous with three listed Colors; A Bow remarkable for its
gaudy Verge, stained with three shaded Colors. Three listed Colors, like a
List of three Colors. List, of Lez, Fr. the edge or brim of Cloth.
Conspicuous, Bo. 2. v. 258. Erst, Bo. 1. v. 359.

V. 879. Distended as the Brow of God appeased; Arched like the Eyebrows of
God reconciled, as many things are spoken of God, after the manner of Men. As
his eyes, are said, to behold, and his eyelids to try, the children of men,
Psalm. 11. 4. Distended, Distentus, Lat. stretched out.

V. 880. As a floury Verge to bind, etc. Or do those colored Streaks in Heaven
serve like a flourished Border, to bind up the bottom of that watery Cloud, lest
it should break, and wet the Earth again? Verge, of Virga, Lat. a Twig, of
which Bandages are made. Fluid, Bo. 7. v. 236.

V. 883. Dexterously thou aimest; Thou judge luckily, or properly. Aimest,
taking aim at a Mark, being something like giving a guess at things.
Dexterously, Dextere, Lat. happily.

V. 886. Grieved at his Heart. It repented the Lord that he had made man on the
earth, and it grieved him at his heart, Genesis 6. 6.

V. 887. The whole Earth filled with Violence, etc. God looked upon the earth,
and behold it was corrupt, and the earth was filled with violence, Genesis 6. 11,
12.

V. 891. And makes a Covenant, etc. And I, behold I establish my covenant with
you, and with your seed after you: and with every living creature that is with
you, of the fowl, of the cattle, and of every beast of the earth, etc. Neither
shall all flesh be cut off any more by the waters of a flloud, neither shall
there be any more a flood to destroy the earth, Genesis 9. 9, 10, 11.

V. 895. A Cloud, will therein set his triple-colour'd Bow; That the Rainbow,
and its various Colors, proceed from the Reflection of the Sun's Beams, beaten
back by a watery Cloud opposite to him, taking its Arched Figure from his
circular Face, is the general Opinion, as has before been hinted. The cause of
its three most distinct Colors is thus assigned; Its deep full Red proceeds of
the Sun's bright Beams reflected from the Clouds greatest opacity, or
thickness; The Green, of that part next to the most opace, and the light Red
[Puniceus Colour], of the thinnest and easiest pierced part of the Cloud. Vall.
de Sac. Phil. c. 9. Triple, Book 5. verse. 750.

V. 897. And call to mind his Covenant. And the bow shall be in the cloud; and
I will look upon it, that I may remember the everlasting covenant between God
and every living creature, of all flesh that is upon the earth, Genesis 9. 16.
That the Rainbow was seen in the Clouds often before the Deluge, is not to be
doubted, because its Natural Causes were then in being, the Sun shining on
opposite Clouds: But God made choice of it for a sign of his Covenant with Noah
and his Posteritp, it being naturally the most fit and proper, as the Token of
decreasing Rain, as never to be seen but when the Clouds are thin, and the
cheerful Sun shines on them; as Vallesius has well observed, c. 9. Those that
suppose the Rainbow was, at God's Covenant with Noah, first set in the Clouds,
are forced to believe, that till the 600 years of his Life, God had not caused
it to rain on the Earth, but watered it with Mists, or by overflowing of
Rivers, as Egypt by the Nile, otherwise it must have been there before. Of
which Opinion, among others, the Learned Dr. Gregory seems to be, chapter 23. on
Genesis 1. 7.

V. 898. Day and Night, Seed-time, etc. While the earth remains, seed-time
and harvest, and cold and heat, and summer and winter, and day and night, shall
not cease, Genesis 8. 22.

V. 899. Till Fire purge all things new; Refining them, like Gold by Fire, at
the last Day: Wherein the heavens being on fire shall be dissolved, and the
elements shall melt with fervent heat. Nevertheless, we according to his
promise look for new heavens and a new earth, wherein dwells righteousness, 2
Pet. 7. 12, 83. This last Purgation by Fire, is mistaken by Mr. Hog, and odly
rendered Lustralibus undis, Cleansing Waters; contrary to the plain words of
our Poet, and the express Promise made by Covenant with Noah.

NOTES On MILTON's PARADISE Lost.
BOOK XII.
Verse 1. BAtes at Noon; Refreshes himself with necessary Food. To bate, or
rather, bait, is, to feed; of Baisse, Belg. Meat. Noon, Ital. Nona, Midday, a
nona diei hora, The ninth hour of the day, at which the Romans used to eat.
Interpose, Bo. 2. v. 737. Paused, Bo. 5. v. 64.

The first Five Verses of this Book are omitted by Mr. Hog, in which, tho the
Simile be modern, yet is it neither mean, unseemly, nor untractable in turning.
As one who in his Journey bates at Noon
Tho bent on speed, so here the Archangel paused
Betwixt the World destroyed, and World restored,
If Adam aught perhaps might interpose;
Then with Transition sweet, new speech resumes.
Interrumpit iter, medio ceu sole viator
Accelerans licet, ut victu vinoque refectus
Sit potis exercere viam, hic Archangelus haesit
Inter demersum medius, mundumque renatum,
Forte rogaturo ceu responsurus Adamo;
Deinde habili nexu, seriemque and verba resumpsit.


V. 5. Then with Transition, etc. Then handsomely passing on, the Archangel
renewed his Discourse. Transition, Transitio, Lat. passing over, or forward, of
Transire, Lat. to go over; used here for passing from one thing to another in
discourse. Relate, Bo. 1. v. 746. Sours, or Source, Bo. 11. v. 169.

V. 18. Laboring the Soil; Ploughing the Earth, Tilling the Ground, of
Laborare, Lat. to take Pains with: Hence Country Employments, and Rural
Business, are by Virgil styled, -- Hominumque boumque labores
Versando terram experti -- Geo. 1.


Soil, or Soil, Solum, Lat. the Ground.

Ibid. Reaping plenteous Crop; Gathering happy Harvests of Corn, Wine, Oil.
Plenteous, abounding, of Plenus, Lat. full. Crop, of the Verb, to crop, to
gather, Lat. Carpere. Wine, Vinum, Lat. Oil, Oleum, Lat. Paternal, Bo. 6. v.
749.

V. 26. With fair Equality, etc. Who not content to live in that equal
condition which becomes Brethren. That all Primitive and Natural Power was
Paternal, that is, the Authority Fathers of Families had over their
Descendents, is undoubted; whence the Head of every Tribe was its Patriarch,
governing all its Particulars for their common Peace, and mutual Support,
according to the Dictate of right Reason, the Law of Nature, under whom all the
easy Subjects were of the same common size, and equal condition, as being
Brethren: Which is evident from Holy Writ, where Noah, who was the Universal
Patriarch of Mankind after the Flood, as Adam was before it, denounced the
Dominion of Brethren over one another, as a Curse on the Posterity of wicked
Cham. Cursed be Canaan: a servant of servants shall he be unto his brethren,
Genesis 9. 25. Equality, AEqualitas, Lat. likeness of Condition. Fraternal,
Fraternalis, Lat. of a Brother.

V. 27. Will arrogate Dominion; Will take upon himself undeserved Power. Not
deserved by him as more Worthy, Wise, or Virtuous, than his Brethren, over whom
he shall usurp this unjust Authority. Arrogate, Arrogare, Lat. to lay claim to,
to assume. Dominion, Book 2. v. 978.

V. 29. Concord, and Law of Nature; Utterly displace peaceful Agreement founded
on Nature's Laws. The Law of Nature, is thas Rule of Rectitude, which God has
implanted in the very Nature of Man, resulting from his Reason, known to all,
and obliging all Mankind. Lex est naturae vis, men's, and ratio prudentis, Juris
atque Injuriae regula. Non scripta lex, sed nata: quam non didicimus,
accepimus, legimus; verum ex natura ipsa arripuimus, hausimus, expressimus: ad
quam non decti, sed facti: non instituti, sed imbuti sumus. As Cicero
excellently, Pro Mile. Dispossess, Desposseder, Fr. to put out of Possession,
of the Privative Dis, and Possidere, Lat. to enjoy, to use. Concord, Bo. 2. v.
498.

V. 30. Hunting and Men not Beasts; This proud, ambitious Man, is by Holy
Scripture styled, A mighty hunter, Genesis 10. 9. Hunting being a Preparatory
Exercise, both as to the Fatigue, and Fury of the War, a Preliminay to the
slaughter of Mankind, by that of Wild Beasts: As Xenophon observes in the first
Book of his (...).

V. 34. Before the Lord, Genesis 10. 9. So famous for his Power, that he became
Proverbial. Most Interpreters take the words, Before the Lord, in the worst
sense, as our Author does, In despite of Heaven; others expound 'em, Under
Heaven, from Heaven claiming second Sovereignty, taking upon himself all
Authority next under God. Nimrod, says St. Hierom, arripuit insuetam primus in
populos tyranidem: In traditi: Hebr. in Genesis Despite, Bo. 10. v. 1044.
Tyrannous, Tyrannicus, Lat. (...), Gr. cruel, like a Tyrant.

V. 36. From Rebellion shall derive his Name. Nimrod, (...), Heb. of (...), to
rebel, as being the Arch-rebel against the Universal Law of Nature, which
allowed only of Paternal Power. This Nimrod is with great probability thought
to have been the ancient Belus, the Builder of Babylon, and Father of Ninus, as
well from Genesis 10. 10. And the beginning of his kingdom was Babel; by the 70,
rendered Babylon, as from Profane Authority. Tyrannize, Tyrannizare, Lat.
(...), Gr. to Govern Arbitrarily.

V. 40. From Eden toward the West. And it came to pass, as they journeyed from
the east, Genesis 11. 2.

V. 41. Wherein a black bitumenous Gurge. That they found a plain in the land
of Shinar, Genesis 11. 2. And slime had they for mortar, Ibid. v. 3. This Plain of
Shinar, near Babylon, is famous for a great Pool, out of which much bitumenous
clammy Slime is gathered. Babylone locus est amplissima magnitudine, habens
supernatans liquidum bitumen: quo bitumine and latere testaceo, structum murum
Semiramis Babylonicum circumdedit. Vitruvi. l. 8. c. 3. Bituminous, Bo. 10. v.
562. Gurge, of Gurges, Lat. a Gyrando, a Pool. -- Matter, quae gurgitis hujus
Ima tenes -- Geo. 4.


This black Bituminous Pool, is by our Poet styled, The Mouth of Hell, for the
same Reasons that the Lago d' Averno, between Bajae and Puteoli in Campania,
was for its Sulphurous Streams, mixed with Sulphur, Nitre, and Bitumen,
called, Alta Ostia Ditis: Geo. 4.

V. 44. Whose top may reach to Heaven. Let us build us a city and a tower,
whose top may reach to heaven, and let us make us a name, lest we be scattered
abroad upon the face of the whole earth, Genesis 11. 4. Whose top may reach to
Heaven, that is, of a vast and incredible height. Dispersed, Dispersus, Lat.
scattered abroad.

V. 51. Comes down to see their City, Genesis 11. 5. Spoken of God, after the
manner of Men, and denotes in Scripture the greatness of the Provocation, and
the immediate approach of the Punishment: Because the cry of Sodom and Gomorrah
is great, I will go down, etc. Genesis 18. 20.

V. 52. Obstruct Heaven's Towers; Before their Tower was raised high enough to
hinder his Prospect from Heaven's lofty Towers, said in Derision. Obstruct,
Obstruere, Lat. to stop up, to dam up: Strue quadam obstare. Derision, Bo. 5.
v. 736.

V. 53. A various Spirit to raze their Native Language; In derision of their
proud and impious Attempt, God set upon their Tongues a various Spirit; a
Spirit and Breath of Confusion, which made 'em quite forget that which had,
till then, been the Universal Language, and turned and tuned their Tongues to
different Speeches not heard before, with which he inspired on the Sudden the
Families and Tribes proceeding from the three Sons of Noah. Hoc nempe modo
Linguarum illa confusio, and divisio facta est: Primo quidem fecit Deus omnes
illos homines (praeter Heber and familiam ejus) oblivisci primae linguae, quae
antea fuerat hominum communis. Deinde pro diversitate illarum gentium, quae
tribus ex filiis Noe proseminatae concurrerant ad aedificationem Civitatis and
Turris, diversos habitus variarum linguarum, mentibus eorum insevit Deus.
Peter. in Genesis A Miracle, no less wonderful this, of dividing the one Universal
Languagage into so many, and so various, and thereby dispersing Mankind over
the Face of the Earth, than that of assembling all sorts of Tongues and
Languages in the Apostles mouths on the Day of Pentecost, Act. 2. in order to
reunite all the Inhabitants of the Earth into one Faith and Holy Communion, as
the same Author observes. Raze, Bo. 1. v. 362.

V. 55. A jangling Noise; A scolding clamor of Words not understood. At the
confusion of Tongues strange was the Astonishment, and mighty the Mockery and
Madness, that befell so vast a Multitude in one moment, distracted as if
deriding one another with their jangling, unintelligible Nose. Jangling, of
Jangler, Fr. to scold; or Jancken, Belg. to bark and bawl at one another: Well
styled, A hideous Gable, a dreadful Prattle, an astonishing Din. Gable, of the
obsolete Javioler, Fr. of Jayon, a Jay, a noisie Bird; or of Habler, Fr.
Hablar, Span. both of Fabulari, Lat. to Prate, to tell incredible Stories.
Hideous, Bo. 1. v. 46.

V. 58. Not understood; That they may not understand one another speech, Genesis
11. 7. Hubbub, Bo. 2. v. 951. Din. 6. v. 403.

V. 61. The Work confusion named; (...), Confusion, of (...), to confound. And
they left off to build the City; therefore is the name of it called Babel,
because the Lord did there confound the language of all the earth, Genesis 11. 8,
9. Ridiculous, Ridiculus, Lat. Reproachful. Execrable, Bo. 2. v. 681.

V. 68. Over B^ast, Fish, Fowl, Dominion absolute, Genesis 1. 28. God's Donation,
his Deed of Gift to Mankind, and the Delegacy of his Power over his Irrational
Subjects. Donation, Donatio, Lat. a Gift. Usurped, Bo. 1. v. 514.

V. 71. Human left from human free; Left Mankind in full and free possession of
their Liberty. Rationalem factum ad imaginem suam, noluit nisi irrationalibus
dominari, non hominem homini, sed hominem pecori. Aug. c. 15. l. 19. de Civit.
Dei.

V. 74. To God his Tower intends Siege and Defiance. The common Opinion is,
That the Tower of Babel was, by Nimrod and his Adherents, intended to secure
'em against any second Deluge; grounded on that which Josephus has recorded of
him, c. 5. of Bo. 1. of his Antiq. That he promised them to raise a Tower
beyond the reach of the Waters, nay such an one as should reach to Heaven, and
give 'em opportunity of Revenging the Destruction of their drowned Progenitors:
For which, there being no Foundation in the Historical Relation of Moses, Genesis
11. our Author thought it fitter to come out of Adam's, than the enlightened
Angel's mouth. Gigas ille Nemrod erigebat cum suis popularibus turrim contra
Dominum, qua est impia significata superbia. St. Aug. l. 16. c. 4. de Civit.
Dei. Encroachment, Accrochement, Fr. a hooking in, and plucking to, of what is
another's Right. Defiance, Bo. 1. v. 669.

V. 78. And famish of Breath, etc. And starve him for want of Breath, if not of
Bread? Some Mountains so far exceeding the Clouds, that the Air is there so
thin and refined, as not to be drawn by Human Lungs, at least not without great
difficulty, and for a short space. Famish, Starve, of Fames, Lat. Hunger,
Famine.

V. 82. Rational Liberty; To destroy the freedom of Mankind (as Rational
Creatures) founded in Reason. Original Lapse, since thy first Fault and
Failing. Original, Bo. 1. v. 592. Lapse, Lapsus, Lat. a Fault, an Offense, of
Labi, Lat. to offend, to slip; Sin is often styled, Backsliding.

V. 85. With right Reason dwells Twinn'd; Twisted together with upright Reason,
the Sourse and Soul of all true Liberty. Twinn'd, of the Ger. Twiinen, to
twist, or double. Individual Being, cannot subsist, separate from her:
Dividuus, Lat. that may be separated.

V. 86. When Reason is obscured, etc. When a Man suffers his Reason to be
discountenanced or slighted, immediately an Invasion of violent Lusts, and
headstrong Desires, an Insurrection of unruly Passions, usurp upon her
Soverignty, and degrade the Man (till that mad Minute free) to meanest Slavery.
No wonder then, if God in his just judgments suffer him to lose his outward
Freedom also, who has forfeited to such vile Powers his inward Liberty, subject
to Vice, and self enslaved. Obscured, Obscurare, Lat. to darken. Upstart, an
excellent Epithete for our Passions so suddenly raised, and oftentimes from
small and unknown Causes, and of mean Original. Servitude, Servitudo, Lat.
Slavery. Reduce, Bo. 10. v. 727. Subjects, of Subjicere, Lat. to bring under.
Enthral, Bo. 6. v. 181.

V. 98. Virtue which is Reason; Reason which is given us for our guide, must be
of kin to our Virtue; otherwise she could not lead us right, nor dictate what
in the whole course of our Lives is fit and decent to be done. Virtus est recta
Ratio, and animi habitus, naturae modo, rationi consentaneus. Cic. in Tusc.
Decline so low, debase themselves so far; of Declinare, Lat. to go down.

V. 99. Some fatal Curse annexed; Some Curse following their Folly as a just
and necessary Punishment by Heaven's appointment. Fatalis, Lat. unavoidable.
Annexed, Annexus, Lat. tied, fixed to. Deprives, Bo. 9. v. 858.

V. 101. The irreverent Son; Witness Cham the Father of Canaan, and shameful
Son of Noah, who for the Reproach done to his Father, by discovering his
Nakedness, heard the heavy Curse pronounced by him on his wicked Posterity, the
Canaanites: Cursed be Canaan; a servant of servants shall he be unto his
brethren, Genesis 9. 22, 25. Avert, of Avertere, Lat. to turn away. To Select,
Seligere, Lat. to choose.

V. 113. A Nation from one faithful Man. Abram, I will make of thee a great
nation, and I will bless thee, and make thy name great, Genesis 12. 2.

V. 115. Bred up in Idol-worship; Bred an Idolater, and living among them in
Chaldea, on this side Euphrates, Bo. 1. v. 420. Residing, living, of Residere,
Lat. to abide, remain.

The Opinion of Abraham's being Educated in Idolatry, (tho much controverted,)
is grounded on Josh. 24. 2. Thus says the Lord God of Israel, The Fathers
dwelt on the other side of the flood in old time, Terah the father of Abraham,
and the father of Nachor: and they served other Gods. Upon which Text, Andreas
Masius thus Comments: Quod porro ait, majores ipsorum trans fluvium coluisse
Dcos alienos, valet ad explicandam Dei benignitatem, quam ille in Populum
Israeliticum contulit. Hoc enim solum agitur, ut constet gratuito ipsos esse a
Deo adoptatos, pro populo; neque gratis solum, verum, cum etiam hosts essent,
and divinum cultum, atque honorem non vero Deo, cui debebatur, sed alienis
falsisque diis adhiberent, etc. Neque enim eos audire possum, qui magno conatu,
Abrahamum ab hoc Idololatriae turpissimo scelere vindicare, nescio quibus
argutiis student. Quasi vero non tanto illustrior sit Dei gratia, qua illum est
complexus, quanto ipse fuit sceleratior, minusque tanto dignus favore. The
sense of all which is, That God, by calling Abraham when he was an Idolater,
and leading him forth from among the Heathenish Chaldeans, did thereby the more
magnify and manifest the Riches of his Free Grace, both to him, and to his
Chosen People the Children of Israel, his Descendents.

V. 117. While yet the Patriarch. Noah, who lived after the flood 350 years,
Genesis 9. 28. During whose Life time Abraham was born, 292 years after the Flood,
as is evident from Genesis 11. 26. Stupid, Stupidus, Lat. senseless.

V. 121. To call by Vision. Now the Lord said unto Abram, Get thee out of thy
country, and from thy kindred, and from thy fathers house, unto the Land that I
will show thee, Genesis 12. 1. Which St. Steven interprets, The God of Glory
appeared unto our Father Abraham, etc. Acts 7. 2. Vision, Bo. 1. v. 455.

V. 126. All Nations shall be blessed. In thee shall all families of the earth be
blessed, Genesis 12. 3. and Acts 3. 25.

V. 128. With what Faith he leaves his Gods, etc. This people are doscended of
the Chaldeans, and they sojourned heretofore in Mesopotamia, because they would
not follow the Gods of their fathers which were in the land of Chaldea, but
they left the way of their Ancestors, and worshipped the God of Heaven, the God
whom they knew, Judith 5. 6, 7, 8. Abraham believed God, and it was counted to
him for righteousness; who, against hope, believed in hope, that he might
become the father of many nations, Romans 4. 3, 18. and Genesis 15. 6.

V. 130. Ur of Chaldaea; (...), Ur, Uris, (now Horrea,) the chief City of
Chaldaea, had its Name of (...), Heb. Light, because the Idolatrous Chaldeans,
its ancient Inhabitants, worshipped the Sun, Heaven's everlasting Light.
Chaldaea, so named of Chaldeus the 14th King from Ninus, was in Holy Writ
styled (...), now Curdistan, a vast Province in Asia, bounded West by
Euphrates, East by Tigris, North by Turcomania, and South by Alidulia.
Abraham's first Peregrination from this place, is recorded Genesis 11. 31.

V. 131. Passing the Ford to Haran; Fording over the River Euphrates to Haran,
lying 60 miles from it Eastward. Haran, formerly a considerable City of
Mesopotamia, is by the Turks called Heren, or Harran; by Pliny and Ptolemy,
Charrae; by St. Stephen, Charran, Acts 7. 4. remarkable for Abraham's
sojourning here, and burying his Father Terah in it before he went into the
Land of Canaan, Genesis 11. 31, 32. as also for the slaughter of Crassus the rich
Roman. -- Miserando funere Crassus
Assyrias latio maculavit sanguine Carras. Luc. Phar. l. 1.


Ford, of the Ger. Fahren, to go, a place where People may pass over.

V. 135. Canaan he now attains; He is now arrived at the Land of Canaan, so
called of Canaan the Son of Cham, the Son of Noah, Genesis 11. 18. Part of whose
Territory reaching to Mediterranean Sea, made (...), a Canaanite, to signify a
Merchant. Attains, Attinere, Lat. to get, to obtain.

V. 137. Sechem and the Plain of Moreh. And Abraham passed through the Land,
unto the place of Sichem, unto the Plain of Moreh, Genesis 12. 6. Progeny, Bo. 2.
v. 431.

V. 139. From Hamath Northward, etc. From Hamath now Hems, a City of Syria
North, to the great desert of Arabia South, called the Wilderness of Zin. This
shall be their North Border: From the great Sea (the Mediterranean) to Mount
Hor, and from Mount Hor, unto the entrance of Hamath, Numb. 34. 7, and 8. And
the South quarter shall be, from the Wilderness of Zin, etc. Ibid. v. 3.

V. 142. From Hermon to the Western Sea: From Mount Hermon to the Mediterranean
or Western Sea, was the East and West Boundary of the Promised Land. Hermon, a
Mountain beyond Jordan, on the North East, the Boundary of the Tribe of
Manasses. From the River Arnon unto Mount Hermon, Deuteronomy. 3. 8.

V, 144. Mount Carmel. Carmelus, a Mountain on the Mediterranean Sea, fifty
miles North of Jerusalem, famous for Eliiah's confounding the Priests of Baal,
1 King. 18, 19, 20, etc.

V. 145. Jordan true limit Eastward; The River Jordan, its true Bounds on the
East-Jordan, Jordanus, now Scheriah, a celebrated River of the Holy Land,
rising in the Confines of Coelosyria, from two Fountains, Jor and Dan, at the
Foot of Mount Libanus, thence here styled Double Founted. Rising on the North
of Canaan, it runs Southward, enclosing all the East Side of the Holy Land.
Then Lot chose him all the Plain of Jordan; and Lot journied East, Genesis 13. 11.
And ye shall point out the East Border from Hazar Enan, etc. and the Border
shall go down to Jordan, Numb. 34. 10, and 12.

V. 146. Shall dwell to Senir; Shall enlarge their dwelling places, as far as
Senir or Saner, a long ridge of Hills, called of its many sharp Rocks,
Trachonitis, and Ituraea, and Petraea, on the East of Palestine; some part of
which was by the Jews named Hermon and Gilead; by the Sydonians, Syrion; and by
the Amerites, Shenir; Deuteronomy. 3. 9. Ponder, Bo. 2. v. 421.

V. 148. All Nations shall in his Seed be Blessed; The earliest Promise of the
Messiah, made implicitly to Abraham, Genesis 12. 3. which St. Paul so interprets,
Galat. 3. 8. Now to Abraham and his Seed were the Promises made, he says not,
and to Seeds, as of many, but as of one, and to thy Seed which is Christ, v. 16.

V. 152. Whom faithful Abraham, etc. Who in due time (when he shall be Born)
shall be called Faithful Abraham; His Father Terah, named him Abram, (...),
Great Father, of (...), Heb. Father, and (...), Heb. High, Excellent, Genesis 11.
26. which God changed when, he was 99 years old, to Abraham, (...), consisting
of, (...), Father, (...), many, and (...), a Nation, a Father of many Nations,
Genesis 17. 5. whose Faith, is much celebrated by St. Paul Romans 4.

V. 153. A Son, Isaac, the Son of Abraham by Sarah, Genesis 21. 3.

Ibid. A Granchild; Jacob, the Son of Isaac, and Grandson of Abraham, Genesis 25.
26. who, with his twelve Sons went into Egypt, Genesis 35. 22. Egypt, Bo. 1. v.
339.

V. 158. Disgorging at seven Mouths; Emptying his seven wide Mouths into the
Sea. Nile, Bo. 1. v. 413. Et septem gemini turbant trepida Ostia Nili. AEn. 6.

Disgorging, Bo. 2. v. 575.

V. 160. Invited by a younger Son. Thus says thy Son Joseph, God has made me
Lord of all Egypt; come down unto me, tarry not, Genesis 45. 9. Sojourn, Bo. 7. v.
247. Invited, Invitat^s, Lat. desired.

V. 163. Second in that Realm of Pharoa. Only in the Throne will I be greater
then thou, Genesis 41. 40. Pharao, Bo. 1. v. 342.

V. 165. Suspected to a sequent King; By their numbers grown suspected, to a
King that knew not Joseph, least when War should happen they might join with
the Enemies of Egypt, and get them up out of the Land, Exodus 1. 8, and 10.
Sequent, Sequens, Lat. next that succeeded, the Successor of Pharao.

V. 168. Kills their Infants Males; And by the Artifice of the Midwives,
destroyed their young Male Children, Exodus 1. 17. Infant, Infans, Lat. a young
Child.

V. 170. Moses and Aaron; The Sons of Amram by Jochebed, of the House of Levi,
Exodus 6. 20. and c. 2. 1.

V. 176. To blood unshed, etc. Their Rivers must be turned into Streams of
Blood; Unshed, not by slaying any Creatures living therein, but by Moses's
Miraculous Rod, Exodus 7. 20. This first Plague had relation to the drowning the
Innocent Hebrew Males in their Rivers; therefore it pleased God to turn their
Rivers into Blood: For they have shed the Blood of Saints and Prophets, and
thou have given them Blood to drink, for they are worthy, Revel. 16. 6.

V. 178. With loathed Intrusion; With hateful importunity, the Plagues of the
Frogs, Lices, and Flies, are Recorded, Exodus 8. Intrusion, Intrusio, Lat. a
pressing into Company; of Intrudere, Lat. to thrust in rudely.

V. 179. Of Murren Die; Murrain is the Name for the Plague among Cattle; as if
Moriana, of Mori, Lat. to Die, Exodus 9. 6.

V. 180. Botches and Blains. Imboss; Swellings and Ulcers must raise all his
Flesh, tumid and rank, like high Embrodery, Exodus 9. 9, and 10. A Botch, Bosse,
Fr. Bozza, Ital. all of the Lat. Pusa, Pusula, and Pustula, a Swelling, as that
of (...), Gr. a Bladder. Imboss, of Embosser, Fr. to rise in Bunches and great
knobs. A Word used by our Spencer. -- Felt our feeble Hearts
Embost with bale. Fai. Q. Cant. 9. St. 29.


V. 182. Must rend the Egyptian Sky; A Thundering Storm of Hail mixed with fire
and flashing Lightning must tare the Egyptian Sky, overrunning all the Land,
and ruining all where ere it roul'd. So there was Hail, and Fire mingled with
the Hail, very grievous, such as as there was none like it in all the Land of
Egypt, since it became a Nation, Genesis 9. 24, and 25. This fiery Hail, is said,
to wheel on the Earth, from its Rotundity and Orbicular Shape. To Rend or Rent,
is to tare in pieces; Of the Gr. (...), to break in pieces.

V. 185. A Cloud of Locusts; Exodus 10. 4, and 5. A Creature so distructiue,
that in Africa, (especially that part of it called Abissina,) they often
desolate whole Countries, and force the Inhabitants to dislodge by Famine, well
Styled by the Prophet, Gods mighty Army, Joel 2. 25. Locusta, Lat.

V. 188. Palpable Darkness, etc. Darkness that may be felt, Exodus 10. 21. which
by most Interpreters is taken as an Hyperbole, expressive of the greatest and
most gross darkness, not to be overcome by Sun, Moon, or Stars, or the
Artificial Aids of Fire or Lamps, expounded in the subsequent verse 22. And
there was thick darkness in all the land of Egypt three days, which our Author
says therefore were blotted out.

V. 190. All the first Born of Egypt must lie Dead. It came to pass, that at
Midnight the Lord smote all the first Born in the land of Egypt, Exodus 12. 29.

V. 191. The River Dragon; Pharao; Who oppressed the Children of Israel, thought
to be Cencres, according to that of Ezekiel. Behold I am against the Pharaoh,
King of Egypt, the great Dragon that lies in the midst of his Rivers, which
has said, my River (Nile) is my own, and I have made it for my self, Chap. 29.
3.

V. 194. As Ice more hardened after Thaw: For Ice warmed gently into a Thaw, is
made more receptive of those Saline and Nitrous Particles which fill the
freezing Air, and insinuating themselves into the Water already weakened, are
the cause of a harder Concretion. Stiriaque impexis induruit horrida barbis.
Geor. 3.

Isicles, freeze as they drop, into a wonderful hardness.

V. 197. On dry land between two Crystal Walls; The Children of Israel went
into the midst of the Sea upon the dry ground, and the Waters were a Wall unto
them on their right Hand, and on their Left, Exodus 14. 22.

V. 198. Awed by the Rod of Moses, etc. Compelled by the potent Rod of Moses to
stand on either hand, divided like a watery Wall. Lift thou up thy Rod, and
stretch out thine hand over the Sea, and divide it, Exodus 14. 16. Rescued, Bo.
11. v. 682.

V. 203. By Day a Cloud, by Night a Pillar of Fire. The Lord went before them
by Day, in a Pillar of a Cloud, to lead them the way; and by Night in a Pillar
of Fire, to give them light to go by Day and Night, Exodus 13. 21. which God
performed by one of his Ministering Angels, whom he appointed to be their
Guardian. The Angel of God, which went before the Camp of Israel, removed, and
went behind them, and the Pillar of the Cloud, went from before their face and
stood behind them, Exodus 14. 19. Obdurat, Bo. 1. v. 58.

V. 209. Will trouble all their Host; Exodus 14. 24, and 25. And craze their
Chariot Wheels, break 'em in pieces; of the Fr. Escraser, to bruise or break;
as Exodus 14. 25.

V. 214. And overwhelm their War. Drowned their whole Army, as Exodus 14. 27.
and 28.

V. 216. Not the readiest way, etc. least War terrify 'em inexpert. God led
them not through the way of the Land of the Philistines, although that was
near; But God led the People about, through the way of the Wilderness of the Red
Sea, Exodus 13. 17, and 18. Terrify, Terrificare, Lat. to affright. Inexpert,
Inexpertus, Lat. untrain'd, undisciplined.

V. 219. Fear return them back to Egypt. As is manifest by their Murmuring
Expostulations with Moses, when Pharaoh persued them. Because there were no
Graves in Egypt have thou taken us away to die in the Wilderness? Is not this
the word that we did tell thee in Egypt, saying: Let us alone that we may serve
the Egyptians, Exodus 14. 11. and 12.

V. 225. Found their Government and their Senate, etc. Exodus 18. 25. and 26.
Found, Fr. Fonder, Lat. Fundare, to lay the Foundations of, to establish.

V. 227. Whose gray top shall tremble, he descending. Whose hoary Head shall
shake, while God comes down upon it. Gray, Lat. Canus, is the usual Epithete of
Mountains, because the Snow lies longer there than in the Valleys, and upon
some of their lofty brows all the year long. Gelidus canis cum montibus humor
Liquitur. Geo. 1.


Sinai, Bo. 1. v. 7. Of the Promulgation of the Law there, with Thunder,
Lightning, and loud Trumpets Sound, Exodus 19. 16, and 18. Tremble, Trembler,
Fr. Tremere, Lat. to shake.

V. 232. By Types and Shadows; By Signs and dark Resemblances: Type, Typus,
Lat. (...), Gr. the Mark or Impression made by striking a hard Body against one
more yielding; of (...), to strike; hence taken, for obscure and Mystical
Representations of things to come, such Images, as the Jewish Sacrifices were
of the Lamb slain from the Foundation of the World, Revel. 10. 8. Read, Hebr. 9.

V. 238. And terror cease; And the fear that fell on them, by hearing the
Almighties Dreadful voice might be removed. They said unto Moses, speak thou
with us, and we will hear: but let not God speak with us, lest we Die, Exodus
20. 19. Report, Rapporter, Fr. to relate.

V. 240. Without Mediator* And Moses alone shall come near the Lord, Exodus 24.
2. according to his own Testimony of himself. Behold I have taught you Statutes
and Judgments, even as the Lord my God commanded me, Deuteronomy. 4. 5. to which that
refers. The Law was ordained by Angels in the hand of a Mediator, (Moses)
Galat. 3. 19. One Mediator between God and Man, the Man, Christ Jesus, 1 Timothy
2. 5. Mediator, Lat. (...), one that comes between the Offended and Offender,
an Intercessor.

V. 241. Moses in Figure bears; That Moses was a Type of Christ, and the
Deliverance of the Children of Israel, from their Egyptian Bondage, and their
Purifications by Sacrifices, a mysterious Representation of our Saviors Death,
and Redeeming us from the Slavery of Sin and Eternal Punishment, is most
manifest, St. Paul draws the Parrallel very plain between 'em: For Moses took
the Blood of Calves, and of Goats, etc. for Christ is not entered into the holy
places made with hands, which are the Figures of the true, but into Heaven it
self, now to appear in the presence of God for us, Heb. 9. 19. 24.

V. 243. And all the Prophets. And beginning at Moses, and all the Prophets, he
(Christ himself) expounded to them in all the Scriptures, the things concerning
himself, Luke 4. 27. The Lord thy God will raise up unto thee a Prophet like
unto me, Deuteronomy. 18. 15. Propheta, Lat. (...), one that foretells things to come.
Messiah, Bo. 5. v. 664.

V. 257. To set up his Tabernacle. Let them make me a Sanctuary, that I may
dwell among them according to all that I show thee, after the pattern of the
Tabernacle, Exodus 25. 8, and 9. Tabernacle, Bo. 15. v. 654.

V. 250. By his Prescript, a Sanctuary of Cedar; According to his appointment;
Praescriptum, Lat. form, fashion. Sanctuary, Bo. 1. v. 588. of which, the Ark
and Mercy Seat. Read Exodus 25. 8, 9, 10. 17, 18, etc.

V. 252. His Testimony, the Records of his Covenant; In the Ark thou shall put
the Testimony, that I shall give thee, Exodus 25. 21. Records, Bo. 1. 361.
Testimony, Testimonium, Lat. the Witness and Evidence of God's Covenant made
with his People, obliging them to Obedience, and promising his Blessings
Temporal and Eternal.

V. 256. Seven Lamps representing the Heavenly Fires; And thou shall make the
Seven Lamps thereof, Exodus 25. 37. This Sevenfold Candlestick was the Image of
the Heavenly Sphere, representing the Seven Planets, as Philo Tropologizes on
the Text. Mystice Candelabrum hoc septifidum, imago erat caelestis Sphaerae
septilustris, sive septem Planetarum. Tabernaculum Typus Mundi^ Sanctum
Sanctorum, Typus Caeli Empyrei Beatorum.

V. 257. A Cloud by day, a fiery gleam by night. The Cloud of the Lord was upon
the Tabernacle by day, and Fire was on it by night, in the sight of all the
house of Israel, throughout all their Journeys, Exodus 40. 38. Gleame, Bo. 4. v.
461.

V. 264. And Nights due course adjourn; By putting off, and delaying the usual
approach of Night. To Adjourn, Adjourner, Fr. is to put off to another Day, as
Night was here Postponed by a Day twice as long as ordinary; Was not one Day as
long as two? As this Miracle is Descanted on, Eccles. 46. 4. Recorded, Josu.
10. 12, and 13.

V. 265. Sun in Gibeon stand, etc. The Word of Command given to the restless
Sun, Jos. 13. 12.

V. 267. Israel, third from Abraham, Son Isaac. Abraham's Grandson was first
named Jacob, (...), Heb. a Deceiver, a Supplanter, of (...), Heb. a Heel,
because by taking hold of his Brother Esau by that part, he strugled with him
for Precedence in his Mothers Womb, Genesis 2 26. Afterward wrestling with God's
Angel, he was by him named Israel, (...), Heb. of (...), To be a Prince, to be
Powerful, and (...) God, For as a Prince have thou Power with God and with Men,
and have prevailed, Genesis 32. 28. Both which are Recorded together by Hosea, He
took his Brother by the Heel in the Womb, and by his strength he had Power with
God, yea he had Power over the Angel and prevailed, c. 12. 3, and 4. From this
new Name, all his Descendents, the Chosen Seed, God's People, were Named, the
Children of Israel, and Israelites. Descent, Descensus, Lat. Posterity.

V. 274. First, mine Eyes true opening; Relating to that false Promise, made
Adam by the lying Serpent; Your Eyes shall be opened, Genesis 3. 5. so does what
follows, Forbidden Knowledge by forbidden means, relate to the same Text, and
his Transgression.

V. 288. Law was given to evince their Natural Pravity; The Law of God was
given to convince us, like a Rule, of the Crookedness and many Deviations of
our depraved Nature: For by the Law is the Knowledge of Sin, Romans 3. 20. Where
no Law is, there is no Transgression, Chap. 4. 15. And in many other places of
that Epistle: Wherefore then serves the Law? It was added because of
Transgressions, Galat. 3. 19. Evincere, Lat. to prove.

V. 289. Sin against Law to Fight. Moreover the Law entered that the offense
might abound, Romans 5. 20. Of the terrible Conflict between Sin and Law, St.
Paul gives a lively Idea, his Soul being the place of Combat: I see another Law
in my Members, warring against the Law of my Mind, and bringing me into
Captivity to the Law of Sin, which is in my Members, Romans 7. 23. Pravity,
Pravitas, Lat. Crookedness and Wickedness.

V. 290. Law can discover Sin. Sin by the Commandment, becoming exceeding
Sinful. (as St. Paul, Romans 7. 13. (was to be expiated by the Sacrifices of
Bulls and Goats, according to the Mosaic Institution, under the Law: So that
without shedding of Blood there was no Remission, Heb. 9. 22. These Types and
weak Shadows of Expiation, and Pardon, were to inform Mankind of some Sacrifice
of more absolute Satisfaction, of the Just for the Unjust, Jesus Christ, who
not by the Blood of Goats and Calves, but by his own Blood entered once into
the holy place, having obtained Eternal Redemption for us, Heb. 9. 12.
Expiatio, Lat. a cleansing by Sacrifice, thence Pardon.

V. 295. To them by Faith imputed; That Christ Righteousness and Satisfaction
being by Faith made and reckoned as their own, etc. By the Righteousness of
one, came the Free-Gift upon all Men, unto Justification of Life, by the
Obedience of one shall many be made Righteous, Romans 5. 18, and 19. Therefore
being justified by Faith, we have Peace with God, through our Lord Jesus
Christ, v. 1.

V. 298. Nor Man the Moral part perform: No Man is able to keep God's
Commandments, called the Decalogue, or Moral Law: Therefore by the Deeds of the
Law, there shall no Flesh be justified in his sight, Romans 3. 20. From which ye
could not be justified by the Law of Moses, Act. 13. 39. Moralis, Lat.
appertaining to Manners.

V. 300. So Law appears imperfect; for the Law made nothing perfect, Heb. 7. 19.

V. 303. From Shadowy Types to Truth; From the Types and Shadows of the Legal
Sacrifices, to Christ's real Satisfaction, From the Law having a shadow of good
things to come, Heb. 10. 1. To Grace given by Jesus, who fulfilled all
Righteousness, Matthew. 3. 15.

V. 305. To free acceptance of large Grace, etc. Much more the Grace of God,
and the Gift by Grace, by one Man, Jesus Christ has abounded unto many. The
Freegift is of many Offenses unto Justification, Romans 5. 15, and 16.

V. 306. Works of Law, etc. By what Law? of Works? Nay, but by the Law of
Faith, Romans 3. 27.

V. 307. Shall not Moses lead his People into Canaan. Moses Died in Mount Nebo,
in the Land of Moab, from whence he had the prospect of the Promised Land, but
not the honor of leading the Israelites in to possess it, which was reserved
for Joshuah, (...), Heb. Jesus, a Savior; of (...), Hiph. (...), Heb. to save,
Deuteronomy. 34. 1. Jos. 1. 2. Commentators on the Death of Aaron in Mount Hor, Numb.
20. 28. Remark, that neither Mariam, that is, the Prophets, nor Araon, the
Priests, nor Moses, the Deliverer of the Law; but Josuah, that is, Jesus
Christ, was able to lead Gods People into the Promised Land, to Heaven and
Everlasting Bliss. St. Jerome. Theod. Rabanus, etc.

V. 320. By Judges first; Such as were Othoniel, Deborah, Gideon, Jeptha,
Sampsen, Eli, Samuel, Recorded in the Book of Judges and Samuel.

V. 324. His Regal Throne for ever, etc. Thy House and thy Kingdom shall be
established for ever before thee: Thy Throne shall be Established for ever, 2 Samuel 7. 16.

V. 326. That of the Royal Stock of David, etc. I have found David my Servant,
with my Holy Oil have I anointed him. Thou art my Father, etc I will make him
my first Bern, higher than the Kings of the Earth, His Seed will I make to
endure for ever: And his Throne as the days of Heaven, Psalm. 89. 20. 26. 29.
Interpreted of our Savior, Heb. 1. As the sure Mercies of David, Esa. 55. 5.
are also applied to him, Acts 13. 34. David, (...), of (...), Heb. Beloved. He
that is feeble among them shall be as David, and the House of David as God, as
the Angel of God before them, Zechar. 12. 6.

V. 329. Shall trust all Nations. There shall be a Root of Jesse, and he shall
rise to rule over the Gentiles, in him shall the Gentiles trust, Esai. 11. 10.
Acts 15. 12. And in his name shall the Gentiles trust, Matthew. 12. 21.

V. 330. For of his Reign no end. He shall be great, and shall be called the
Son of the highest, and the Lord God shall give unto him the Throne of his
Father David, and he shall reign over the House of Jacob for ever, and of his
Kingdom there shall be no end. Luke 1. 32. and 33.

V. 332. His next Son for Wealth and Wisdom, etc. Solomon, to whom God gave a
Wise and an Understanding Heart, etc. as also gave him what he asked not,
Riches and Honor, 1 Kings 3. 12. 13. of his Building the Temple, read 1 Kings
6. Enshrine, Bo. 5. v. 272. Registered, Recorded in their Chronicles, where
their Stories are to be Read; Of Registare, Lat. to enter into the Public
Rolls and Records.

V. 343. Babylon thence called, Bo. 1. v. 717. Believed to have been built by
Nimrod, and named Babel, Confusion, from that of Tongues, afterward Walled by
Semiramis, and beautified and enlarged by Nabuchadneser, Dan. 4.

V. 345. The space of seventy years. This Captivity happened in the beginning
of Jehoiakim's Reign, whom Nabuchadneser carried with all his People, and the
Wealth of the Land, and the Holy Vessels of the Temple, to Babylon, 2 Kings 24.
6. 11, 12, and 13. according to the Prophecy of Jeremiah; This whole Land
shall be a Desolation, and an Astonishment, and these Nations shall serve the
King of Babylon seventy years, c. 25. 11. As long as she lay Desolate she kept
Sabbath; to fulfill threescore and ten years, 2 Chronicles. 36. 21. at the end of
which, Cyrus King of Persia, releast them out of Captivity, v. 23.

V. 347. Stablisht as the days of Heaven: Everlastingly firm, and as
indefeisable as Eternity. His Throne as the days of Heaven, Psalm. 89. 29.
Stablisht, of Stabilire, Lat. to make steadfast.

V. 350. They first reedifie; First they Rebuild Gods House, begun in the Reign
of Cyrus, and by his Decree, according to Isaiah's Prophecy; That says of
Cyrus, he is my Shepherd, and shall perform all my pleasure, even saying to
Jerusalem, Thou shall be built, and to the Temple thy Foundation shall be laid,
chapter 44. 28. and finished in the sixth year of Darius, Ezra. 1. 2. and chapter 6. 15.
Reaedificare; Lat. to rebuild.

V. 357. At last they seize the Scepter, etc. Though the Posterity of
Jeconia's, viz. Zerobabel, the Son of Salathiel, were styled the Princes of
Juda, and of the Jews, as Hagai 1. v. 1. yet great part of the Power remained
in the hands of the High Priests, as is evident out of Josephus, Antiq. l. 20.
c. 81. and descended down to the Machabaeans. Judas, surnamed Aristobulus,
being the first who joined the Kingdom to the Priesthood, which was at last
utterly lost, the Romans Creating Herod King of Judea.

V. 360. That Messiah might be Born, bard of his Right. According to the
Prophecy of Jacob. The Scepter shall not depart from Judah, nor a Lawgiver
from between his Feet, until Shilo come, Genesis 49. 10. which came to pass in the
36th year of Herod, when the Jews, after many struggles, submitted quietly to
his Government. Messiah, Bo. 5. v. 664. Bard, of Bazze, Fr, hindered, deprived
of.

V. 362. The Eastern Sages; The Wise Men that came from the East to Jerusalem,
Matthew. 2. 1. 2. Sages, Sage, Fr. Saggio, Ital. Wise; of Sagire, Lat. to be Wise.

V. 363. To offer Incense, etc. Matthew. 2. 12.

V. 367. By a Quire of Squadron'd Angels hear his Carol, etc. Luke 2. 9, 13,
14. Carol, Carolle, Fr. a Song of Rejoicing, used at Festivals, and anciently
at Christmas; of the Sax. Carl, or Ceorl, a Rustic sort of a Song, as being
first Sung to Shepherds, or, as some will have it, of (...), Gr. Joy, the glad
tidings of a Saviors Birth.

V. 368. A Virgin, but his Sire the Power of the most High. The Virgins Name
was Mary. The Holy Ghost shall come upon thee, and the Power of the highest
shall over shadow thee, Luke 1. 27. and 35.

V. 370. His glory with the Heavens. -- Imperium Oceano, famam qui terminat
Astris. Virg.

V. 387. As of a Duel; As of a Personal Fight; Duel, Duellum. Lat. a Combat
between two; of Duo, Lat. two, Recure, Recurare, Lat. to heal again.

V. 395. His Works in thee and in thy Seed; For this purpose the Son of God was
manifested, that he might destroy the Works of the Devil, 1 St. John 3. 8.

V. 402. The Law of God exact he shall fulfill; According to his own Testimony
of himself. Think not that I am come to destroy the Law and the Prophets, I am
not come to destroy, but to fulfill, Matthew. 5. 16. as appears by those more
excellent and spiritual Precepts, refined and raised, far above those of the
Law, delivered in that Chapter.

V. 404. Though Love alone fulfill the Law, Romans 13. 10.

V. 407. Proclaiming Life to all, etc. For God so loved the World, that he gave
his only begotten Son, that whosoever believes in him, should not perish, but
have everlasting life, John 3. 16.

V. 410. Not their own, though Legal Works. Knowing that a Man is not justified
by the Works of the Law, but by the Faith of Jesus Christ, even we have
believed in Jesus Christ, that we might be justified by the Faith of Christ,
and not by the Works of the Law: for by the Works of the Law shall no flesh be
justified, Gal. 2. 16.

V. 411. Be Blasphemed; Be spoken of Reproachfully; And many other things
hlasphemously spoke they against him, Luke 22. 65. Blasphemed, of (...), Gr. to
reproach, to revile, (...), to destroy, to take away ones good Name or
Reputation.

V. 413. To a Death shameful and accursed. Christ has Redeemed us from the
Curse of the Law, being made a Curse for us: For it is written, Cursed is every
one that hangs on a Tree, Gal. 3. 13. and Deuteronomy. 21.

V. 415. But to the Cross he nails the Law that was against thee. Blotting out
the hand writing of Ordinances, that was against us, nailing it to his Cross,
Gal. 2. 14. Crucified, Crucifigere, Lat. to fasten to the Cross.

V. 420. Soon revives; Returns to Life: Christ's Resurrection; Of Reviviscere,
Lat. to live again.

V. 421. Ere the third dawning Light. As it began to dawn toward the first day
of the Week, Matthew. 28. 1. Very early in the morning* as St. Mark, 16. 2. to
which St. Austin applies Prophetically that of Psalm. 57. 8. I my self will
awake right early.

V. 427. By Faith not void of Works. For as the Body without the Spirit is
Dead, so Faith without Works (the evidence and activity of it) is dead also,
Jam. 2. 26.

V. 428. Annuls thy Doom; Cancels and Blots out the Sentence given against
thee. Annuls, Anuller, Fr. to make void; of Annihilare, Lat. to destroy, to
bring to nothing.

V. 435. A gentle Wafting, etc. An easy and safe passage to Immortality: to
Waft, is properly to guard, as Convoys do Fleets of Merchant Ships; of Wachten,
Bell. to guard, to watch over.

V. 438. To appear to his Disciples, Mat. 28. 16, 17. Mark 16. 14. Luke 14. 36.
John 20. 19. Discipulus, Lat. a Scholar, a Learner.

V. 440. To teach all Nations, etc. Go ye therefore and teach all Nations,
baptizing them, etc. Mat. 28. 19. Mark 16. 15.

V. 442. Baptizing in the profluent Stream; Washing them in the pure running
Stream. To Baptize, is of (...), Gr. to dip or wash, whence that and (...), are
both used for the washing of Hands and Cups, and Pots, Mark 7. 3, 4. But among
Christians it is used for the Symbol of Regeneration, a washing from the Guilt
and Pollution of Sin, engaging us to Newness and Purity of Life: Thus St. John
(thence Styled the Baptist) Baptized in Jordan all that came unto him,
Confessing their Sins, Matthew. 3. 6. and our Savior also, though Sinless, that
he might fulfill all Righteousness, v. 15. Profluent, Profluens, Lat. flowing,
as Rivers do.

V. 449. To the Sons of Abraham's Faith. Therefore it is of Faith, that it
might be by Grace; to the end the promise might be sure to all the Seed, not to
that only which is of the Law, but to that also which is of the Faith of
Abraham, who is the Father of us all, Romans 4. 16.

V. 451. Then to the Heaven of Heavens. So after the Lord had spoken unto them,
he was received up into Heaven, and sat on the right hand of God, Mark. 16. 19.

V. 454. The Serpent Prince of Air. Having spoiled Principalities and Powers,
he made a show of them openly, triumphing over them in himself, Col. 2. 15. The
Devils are subject to us through thy Name, and Jesus said unto them, I beheld
Satan as Lightning, fall from Heaven, Luke 10. 17, 18. Thou have ascended on
high, thou have led Captivity Captive, Psalm. 78. 18. applied to our Savior,
Ephesians. 4. 8. Satan is styled, The Prince of the Power of the Air, Ephesians. 2. 2.

V. 457. At Gods right hand, above all Names in Heaven; Which he wrought in
Christ when he raised him from the dead, and set him at his own right hand in
the heavenly places, far above all Principalities and Powors, and Might and
Dominion, and every name, that is named, not only in this world, but also in
that which is to come, Ephesians. 1. 20, 21.

V. 460. To judge both quick and dead. The Father judges no man, for he has
committed all judgment unto the Son, John 5. 22. Because he has appointed a
day in which he will judge the world in Righteousness, by that man whom he has
ordained, whereof he has given assurance unto all men, in that he has raised
him from the dead, Acts 17. 31. I charge thee therefore, before God, and the
Lord Jesus Christ, who shall judge the quick and the dead, at his appearing,
and his Kingdom, 2 Timothy 4. 1. Period, Bo. 2. V. 603.

V. 477. To God more Glory, etc. According to the Heavenly Hymn, Glory to God
in the highest, etc. Luke 2. 14.

V. 480. What will betide? What will befall his Servants here? Betide, of Be,
and Tid. Sax. time.

V. 487. A Comforter, the Promise of the Father. When the Comforter is come,
whom I will send unto you from the Father, John 15. 26. And behold, I send the
promise of my Father unto you, Luke 24. 49.

V. 490. To guide them in all Truth: When he, the Spirit of Truth is come, he
shall guide you into all Truth, John 16. 13.

V. 498. The Spirit Powered first on his Apostles. They were all filled with the
Holy Ghost, and began to speak with other Tongues, Acts 2. 4. These Signs shall
follow them that believe in my Name; They shall cast out Devils, they shall
take up Serpents, etc. they shall lay hands on the sick and they shall recover,
Mark 16. 17, 18. Verified throughout the Acts of the Apostles: (...), Gr. a
Messanger; of (...), Gr. to send; thence Christ's chosen Messengers, sent into
the World with the glad Tidings of his Gospel, to Evangelize the Nations, to
bring the joyful news of Salvation to the Gentiles. (...), to bring joyful
News; of (...), Gr. well, and (...), Gr. to Report: Hence the Four Apostles,
who writ the History of our Saviors Birth, Life, Doctrine and Passion, are
styled, The Evangelists.

V. 508. Wolves shall succeed for Teachers; Of which St. Paul forewarned the
Church; After my departure shall grievous Wolves enter in among you, not
sparing the Flock, Acts 20. 29.

V. 511. Of Lucre and Ambition; Aiming at worldly Wealth and Honor, turning
Godliness into gain; Teaching things which they ought not, for filthy lucres
sake, Titus 1. 11. Lucre, Lucrum, Lat. gain.

V. 512. With Traditions Taint; Corrupt the Truth with Men's vain Inventions,
delivered down from one to another; Laying aside the Commandments of God, and
following the Traditions of Men, as our Savior observed of the Pharisees, Mark
7. 8. against which St. Paul cautioned the Colossians; Beware least any Man
spoil you through Philosophy, and vain Deceit, after the Tradition of Men, chapter
2. v. 8. such as St. Paul calls, The Doctrines of Devils and old Wives Fables,
1 Timothy 4. 2. 7. Traditio, of Tradere, Lat. to deliver. Superstition, Bo. 3. V.
452.

V. 515. Tavail themselves of Names, Places and Titles: Of Names; Christ Vicar
General, Universal Bishop, Successor of St. Peter: Places; Bishop of Rome; Ti
les; His Holiness, Infallibility, assuming to themselves worldly Power, and
human Authority. Avail, Bo. 1. 153. Secular, Secularis, Lat. worldly, temporal.

V. 518. Appropiating the Spirit of God promised to all; Confining to
themselves, seizing and converting to their own use, the Free Gift of God's
Spirit, promised to all Believers: I will pour out my Spirit upon all Flesh,
Joel 2. 28. Appropriating, of Approprier, Fr. Proprium facere, Lat. to make
ones own.

V. 522. Laws which none shall find left them inroul'd: From the pretense of
having God's Holy Spirit in their Possession, and at their disposal; shall
impose Spiritual Laws on Men's Consciences, backed and supported by Secular
Power; Laws no where to be found in Holy Writ, nor by that Holy Spirit dictated
within, and written on their Hearts, contrary to his Promise, who has said, I
will put my Laws into their Hearts, and in their Minds I will write them, Jer.
31. 33. Inroul'd, Enrollez, Fr. entered on Record. Engrave, Engraver, Fr. cut
or Carved.

V. 526. Bind his Consort Liberty; What is this but to lay violent hands on
God's Free Grace, and to shakle his Free Spirit, to control its liberty of
breathing when and where he pleases, Joh. 3. 8. This Liberty is every where
expressed by a Gift; On the Gentiles was poured out the Gift of the Holy Ghost,
Acts 10. 45. Unto every one of us is given Grace, according to the measure of
the Gift of Christ, Ephesians. 4. 7. of which diverse Gifts an enumeration is made, 1
Cor. 12. to v. 11. All wrought by one and the self same Spirit, dividing to
every Man severally as he will. Consort, Consors, Lat. Companion.

V. 527. His living Temples: Know ye not that ye are the Temple of God, and
that the Spirit of God dwells in you? If any Man defile the Temple of God,
him will God destroy, for the Temple of God is Holy, which Temple ye are, 1
Cor. 3. 16. 17. Your Body is the Temple of the Holy Ghost that is in you, 1
Cor. 6. 19. Now that these living Temples stand founded on their own Faith,
(not that of the Church of Rome) as St. Paul, Thou stand by Faith, Romans 9.
20. By Faith ye stand, 2 Cor. 1. 24. is manifest in that Glorious Catalogue of
the Faithful Patriarchs, Heb. 11. Manifested by their Works; By Works a Man is
justified, and not by Faith only, Faith by Works being made perfect, Jam. 2.
24. 22.

V. 530. Who against Faith and Conscience can be Infallible? Who can pretend to
Infallibility over the Belief and Consciences of Christians? Their Consciences
bearing witness, and their Thoughts accusing, or else excusing one another; for
which reason they are charged by the Apostle, To hold the Mystery of the Faith
in a pure Conscience, 1 Timothy 3. 9. Independent of Rome's Infallible Chair.
Infallibilis, Lat. unerring, undeceivable.

V. 534. In outward Rites, and specious Forms; In Ceremonies, Rituals, gaudy
Processions, and fair shows. Rites, Bo. 10. v. 994. Specious, Speciosus, Lat.
beautiful, goodly.

V. 536. Truth bestuck with Slandrous Darts: Truth shall be hardly to be found
on Earth, loaded with Lies and foul Aspersions, disgraced with the Reproaches
of Heretic and Schismatic, Puritan, etc. Malignant, Bo. 10. v, 602. Benign,
Bo. 8. v. 492. Slandrous, Reproachful; of Esclandre, Fr. Lat. Scandalum,
disrepute.

V. 540. The day of Respiration to the just: The day of ease and comfort to
Gods People, in which the Righteous shall take Breath, releast both from the
Persecutions of Sin and Wicked Men, When God shall wipe away all Tears from
their Eyes, Revel. 7. 17. Respiratio, Lat. a breathing, refreshing, comfort.

V. 547. To dissolve Satan with his perverted world; To destroy the Kingdom of
Satan, When the judgment of this world shall be, and the Prince of this world
shall be cast out, John 12. 31. When the Prince of this world shall be judged,
John 16. 11.

V. 543. From the Conflagrant Mass, etc. Then from the flaming Globe, of all
the World on Fire at once, Kept in store and reserved unto Fire against the day
of Judgment, and Perdition of Ungodly Men, 2 Pet. 3. 7. Shall raise new Heavens
and a new Earth, in which dwells Righteousness, v. 7. of which before.

V. 553. Seer blessed measured this Tranfient World: How soon has thy Prophecy,
happy Foreseer of all things to come, run through this fading world? The
Prophets were called Seers, as Gad, David's Seer, 2 Samuel 24. 11. from their
foresight of Futurity; The Original is (...), of (...), Heb. to see, because
God revealed to them things afar of in dark Futurity. Prediction, Praedictio,
Lat. foretelling, Prophecy. Transient, Transiens, Lat. passing away, as the
world does, 1 John 2. 17.

V. 555. Till time stand fixed; Till time have finished his Race and stand still.
Till time always in motion, and the measure of it, stand fixed and move no more,
firm and fixed in unalterable Eternity.

V. 567. By weak subverting worldly strong etc. God has chosen the foolish
things of this world to confound the wise, and the weak things to confound the
things which are mighty, 1 Cor. 1. 27. Subverting, over-turning, Subvertere,
Lat.

V. 570. Is fortitude to highest victory; That to suffer for Christ and his
Truth, is the noblest Courage, and the most considerable Conquest: Such as
manifested it self in St. Stephen, the Protomartyr, Acts 6. 8. Full of Faith
and Power.

V. 571. Death the Gate of Life; The entrance by which we are admitted into
Everlasting Life; Death being swallowed up in victory, 1 Cor. 15. 54.

V. 584. Charity the Soul of all the rest. Add to your Faith, Virtue; and to
Virtue, Knowledge; and to Knowledge, Temperance; to Temperance, Patience and
Charity, 2 Pet. 1. 5, 6, 7. Charity by name to come, so to be named when the
world increased found objects for it. Charitas, Lat. is of (...). Gr.
good will, whose excellencies are set forth, 1 Cor. 13. Now abides Faith,
Hope, Charity, these three, but the greatest of these is Charity, v. the last.

V. 589. From this top of Speculation: From this visionary height, from this
high Hill of Prophecy and Prediction, from which I have given thee a clear
prospect of what, most considerable to Mankind, shall come to pass to the
Worlds end. Speculation, Speculatio, Lat. a watching on a Tower, or high place,
thence a discovery, therefore applied to the Prophets in the sacred Page, who
are called Seers and Watchmen; Speulatores, of Specula, Lat. a Watch Tower. Son
of Man I have made the a Watchman to the House of Israel, Ezekiel. 3. 17. more
exactly described, chap. 33. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7.

V. 590. The hour precise exacts our parting hence; The appointed hour is come,
that requires and presses our departure from Paradise. Precise, Praecisus, Lat.
cut of, ended, and determined; of Praecidere, Lat. to cut of. Exacts; of
Exigere, Lat. to require, to command strictly.

V. 595. With gentle Dreams have calmed; For I, with pleasing Dreams,
betokening Happiness, have quieted her troubled Breast; have tuned her Spirits,
and inclined her will, to meek submission and surrender of her self, and this
her Paradise. Calmed, Calmer, Fr. to appease, to quiet. Composed, settled; of
Componere, Lat, to order, to settle. Vix Defessa senem passus componere membra.
Geor. 4.

Of Proteus, settling himself to sleep. Portending, Bo. 6. v. 578. Unanimous,
Bo. 4. v. 736.

V. 611. Dreams Advise; Inform, instruct; of Aviser, Fr. to Counsel, give
advise to. That God often revealed his Will, and signified his pleasure, to his
Prophets, and others, in Dreams and Visions of the Night, is remarkable,
through the whole Tract of Holy Writ; If there be a Prophet among you, I the
Lord, will make my self known unto him in a Vision, and will speak unto him in
a Dream, Numb. 12. 6. Propitious, Bo. 5. v. 507. Presaging, Bo. 1. v. 627.

V. 616. With thee to go, is to stay here, etc. To go along with thee is as
pleasant as to stay here; But to stay here without thee, would be as sad, as to
go hence against my will; Thou, and where ere thou art, is Paradise to me.

V. 625. Now to nigh the Archangel stood: Our Poet observes, the (...), the
Decorum to the last degree, making our first Parents such perfect Patterns of
Modesty, as to forbear their Endearments, though but in Words, at the Angels
approach.

V. 629. Gliding Meteorous, as Evening Mist; Sliding ore the Surface, as a Mist
at Evening that rises from a Fuming River, slides ore the moist Marshy Ground,
its Nursery. Meteorous, (...), Gr. high, quick, sliding along insensibly,
silent and swift, as a Mist does over the Ground; aloft, as Homer uses the
Word. (...).

Gliding, of Glisser, Fr. to slide, or slip swifty along. Marish, or Marsh.
Marais, Fr. a moist, moorish Ground, of Mariscus, Lat. Rushes, commonly growing
there. Brandisht, Shaken, Waved round, Bo. 2. v. 786. Blazed, Bo. 6. 18.

V. 634. Which with Torrid heat, etc. Which with roasting heat, and fiery
vapor, like the scorching Air of Sun Burnt Afric, began to inflame that
moderate Climate. Torrid Torridus, Lat. burnt, scorched, whence the Torrid
Zone, so named of its (supposed) insupportable heat. -- Quarum una corusco
Semper sole rubens, and torrida semper ab igni. Geor. 1.


V. 635. The Libyan Air adust: The burning Air of scorching Africa, Libya, so
named, of Libya, the Daughter of Epaphus, was by the Ancients used to express
Africa, and was the most Southern part of the World known to them, though
properly, it is but a part of it, now known by the Name of the Kingdom and
Desert of Barca. -- Mundus premitur Libyae devexus in austros. Geor. 1.


Adust, Adustus, Lat. scorcht, burnt.

V. 637. In either hand, etc. The Angel led our Parents, loath to depart from
their beloved Seat, in each hand, which the Designer of the Copper Plate has
not well expressed, representing him, shoving them out, as we say, by Head and
Shoulders. Lingering, staying, delaying, of the Ger. Leangern, to delay and
protract the time.

V. 640. To the subjected Plain; To the Valley that lay below it; Subjected, of
Subjicere, Lat. to put under.

V. 643. Waved over by that flaming Brand; Over which God's flaming Sword made
many fiery Circles. Brand, of the Fr. Brandon, or Belg. Brand, a Torch, a
Firebrand, of Brande, Belg. to burn. Waved, Bo. 5. v. 193.

FINIS

