THE BALM OF GILEAD Or, COMFORTS For the DISTRESSED; Both Moral and Divine.
Most fit for these woeful Times. By Jos. HALL, D. D. and B. N.

London, Printed by Thomas Newcomb; and are to be sold by John Holden, at the
blue-Anchor in the New-Exchange. 1650.

To all the distressed Members of Jesus Christ, wheresoever, whose souls are
wounded with the present sense of their sins, or of their afflictions; or
with ^he fears OF Death and Judgment:

The Author humbly recommends this Sovereign BALM, which God has been pleased
to put into his hands for their benefit; earnestly exhorting them to apply it
carefully to their several sores; together with their faithful prayers to God
for a blessing upon the use thereof:

Not doubting but (through Gods mercy) they shall find thereby a sensible ease
and comfort to their souls: which shall be helped on, by the fervent devotions
of the unworthiest servant of God and his Church J. H. B. N.

The CONTENTS.
Comforts for the sick Bed. 1 The Preface. Sect. 1. AGgravation of the misery
of sickness. 2 Sect. 2. 1 Comfort, from the freedom of the soul. 4 Sect. 3. 2
Comfort, from the Author of sickness, and the benefit of it. 7 Sect. 4. 3
Comfort, from the vicissitudes of health. 12 Sect. 5. 4 Sickness better then
sinful health 14 Sect. 6. 5 Comfort from the greater sufferings of holyer men,
and the resolutions of Heathens 17 Sect. 7. 6 Our sufferings far below our
deservings 24 Sect. 8. 7 Comfort from the benefit of the exercise of our
patience 27 Sect. 9. 8 The necessity of our expectation of sickness 29 Sect.
10. 9 Comfort from Gods most tender regard to us in sickness 31 Sect. 11. 10
Comfort, from the comfortable end of our suffering 34 Sect. 12. 11 Comfort,
from the favor of a peaceable passage out of the world 36
Comforts for the sick soul 39 Sect. 1. The happiness of a deep sorrow for sin
39 Sect. 2. Comfort from the wel-grounded declaration of pardon 41 Sect. 3.
Aggravation of the grievous condition of the patient, and the remedies from
mercy applied 43 Sect. 4. Complaint of unrepentance and unbelief satisfied 47
Sect. 5. Complaint of a misgrounded sorrow, satisfied 49 Sect. 6. Complaint of
the insufficient measure of sorrow for sin, answered 52 Sect. 7. Complaint of
the want of faith, satisfied 57 Sect. 8. Complaint of the weakness of faith
satisfied 63 Sect. 9. Complaint of inconstancy, and desertions, answered 66
Sect. 10. Complaint of unregeneration, and deadness in sin, satisfied 72
Sect. 11. Complaint of the insensibleness of the time and means of conversion,
answered 87 Sect. 12. Complaint of irresolution, and uncertainty in matter of
our election, answered 87
Comforts against Tentations 101 Sect. 1. Christ himself assaulted. Our trial
is for our good 101 Sect. 2. The powerful assistance of Gods Spirit; and the
example of S. Paul 106 Sect. 3. The restraint of our spiritual enemies, and
the infinite power of God overmatching them 109 Sect. 4. The advantage made to
us by our Temptations and foyles 113 Sect. 5. Complaint of relapses into sin,
with the remedy of it 118
Comforts against weakness of Grace 125 Sect. 1. Comfort from the common
condition of all Saints 125 Sect. 2. Comfort from the improvement of weak
graces; and the free distribution of the Almighty 128 Sect. 3. Comfort from
Gods acceptance of the truth of grace, not the quantity 131 Sect. 4. Comfort
from the variety of Gods gifts; and the ages and statures of Grace 132 Sect. 5.
Comfort from the safety of our condition even in leasurely progresses in Grace
134 Sect. 6. Comfort from our good desires and endevors 136 Sect. 7. Comfort
from the happiness of an humble poverty in spirit 137 Sect. 8. An incitement to
so much the more caution and faster adherence to God 139
Comforts against Infamy and Disgrace 142 Sect. 1. Comfort from the like
suffering of the holiest men, yea, of Christ himself 142 Sect. 2. Comfort of
our recourse to God 145 Sect. 3. Comfort from the clearness of our conscience
147 Sect. 4. From the improvement of our reason 148 Sect. 5. From the cause of
our suffering 149 Sect. 6. From our envyed virtue 150 Sect. 7. From others
sleighting of just reproaches 153 Sect. 8. From the narrow bounds of infamy 154
Sect. 9. From the short life of slander 155
Comforts against public calamities 157 Sect. 1. Comfort from the inevitable
necessity of changes 157 Sect. 2. From the sense and sympathy of common evils
159 Sect. 3. From the sure protection of the Almighty 161 Sect. 4. From the
justice of Gods proceedings 165 Sect. 5. The remedy, our particular repentance
167 Sect. 6. The unspeakable miseries of a Civil War 168 Sect. 7. The woeful
miseries of Pestilence, allaid by consideration of the hand that inflicts it 173
Comforts against the loss of Friends 180 Sect. 1. The true value of a friend;
and the fault of over-prizing him 180 Sect. 2. The true ground of an
undefeisible enjoying our friends 183 Sect. 3. The rarity and trial of true
friends 185 Sect. 4. It is but a parting, not a loss 187 Sect. 5. The loss of
a virtuous wife mitigated 189 Sect. 6. The mitigation of the loss of a dear
and hopeful Son 190
Comforts against poverty and loss of our estate. 193 Sect. 1. Comfort from
the fickle nature of these earthly goods 193 Sect. 2. They are not ours, but
lent us 196 Sect. 3. The estimation of our riches is in the mind 198 Sect. 4.
It may be good for us to be held short 200 Sect. 5. The danger of abundance 201
Sect. 6. The cares that attend wealth 202 Sect. 7. The imperiousness of ill
used wealth 203 Sect. 8. Consideration of the causes and means of
impoverishing us 204 Sect. 9. Examples of those who have affected poverty 207
Comforts against Imprisonment 209 Sect. 1. Comfort from the nature and power
of true liberty 209 Sect. 2. The sad objects of a free beholders eye 211 Sect.
3. Comfort from the invisible company that cannot be kept from us 213 Sect. 4.
Comfort from the inward disposition of the Prisoner 215 Sect. 5. The willing
choice of retiredness in some persons 217 Sect. 6. Comfort from the causes of
Imprisonment 218 Sect. 7. Comfort from the good effects of retiredness 222
Sect. 8. The souls imprisonment in the body ibid.
Comforts against banishment 224 Sect. 1. Comfort from the universality of a
wise man's Country 224 Sect. 2. From the benefit of self-conversation 227 Sect.
3. From the examples of those holy ones that have abandoned society 228 Sect.
4. From the advantage that has been made of removing 231 Sect. 5. From the
right we have in any Country, and in God 233 Sect. 6. From the practice of
voluntary Travail 234 Sect. 7. All are Pilgrims 235
Comforts against the loss of our senses, of seeing, and hearing 236 Sect. 1.
Comfort from the two inward lights of reasan and faith 236 Sect. 2. The supply
of better eyes 239 Sect. 3. Comfort from the better object of inward sight ib.
Sect. 4. The ill off^ices done by the eyes 241 Sect. 5. The freedom from
temptations by the eye, and freedom from many sorrows 243 Sect. 6. The
cheerfulness of some blind men 247 Sect. 7. The supply which God gives in
other faculties 248 Sect. 8. The benefit of the eyes which once we had 252
Sect. 9. The supply of one sense by another 255 Sect. 10. The better condition
of the inward ear 258 Sect. 11. The grief that arises from hearing evil things
260
Comforts against barrenness 261 Sect. 1. The blessing of fruitfulness,
seasoned with sorrows 261 Sect. 2. The pains of childbearing 263 Sect. 3. The
misery of ill disposed and undutifull children 265 Sect. 4. The cares of
Parents for their children 267 Sect. 5. The great grief in the loss of
children 273
Comforts against want of sleep 276 Sect. 1. The misery of the want of rest;
with the best remedy 276 Sect. 2. The favor of freedom from pain 280 Sect. 2.
The great favor of health without sleep 281 Sect. 4. Sleep is but a symptom
of mortality 284 Sect. 5. No use of sleep whither we are going 286
Comforts against the inconveniences of old age 287 Sect. 1. The illimitation
of age and the miseries attending it 287 Sect. 2. Old age is a blessing 292
Sect. 3. The advantages of old age. 1 Fearlesness 295 Sect. 4. The next
advantage of old age, Freedom from impetuous passions of lust 298 Sect. 5. The
third advantage; Experimental knowledge 301 Sect. 6. Age in some persons
vigorous and well-affected 306 Sect. 7. The fourth advantage of age; near
approach to our end 308
Comforts against the fears and pains of death 311 Sect. 1. The fear of death
natural 311 Sect. 2. Remedy of fear, acquaintance with death 313 Sect. 3. The
misapprehension of death injurious 315 Sect. 4. Comfort from the common
condition of men 318 Sect. 5. Death not feared by some 320 Sect. 6. Our
deaths-day better then our birthday 322 Sect. 7. The sting of death pulled out
323 Sect. 8. Death but a parting to meet again 324 Sect. 9. Death but a sleep
326 Sect. 10. Death sweetened to us by Christ 330 Sect. 11. The painfulnesse of
Christ's death 332 Sect. 12. The vanity and miseries of life 334 Sect. 13.
Examples of the courageous resolutions of others 338 Sect. 14. The happy
advantages of death 341
Comforts against the terrors of Judgment 347 Sect. 1. Aggravations of the
fearfulness of the last Judgment 347 Sect. 2. Comfort from the condition of
the elect 350 Sect. 3. Awe more fit for thoughts of judgment, then terror 354
Sect. 4. In that great and terrible day, our Advocate is our Judge 356 Sect. 5.
Frequent meditation, and due preparation, the true remedy of fear 361
Comforts against the fears of spiritual enemies 364 Sect. 1. The great power
of evil spirits, and their restraint 364 Sect. 2. The fear of the number of
evil spirits, and the remedy of it 368 Sect. 3. The malice of the evil
spirits, and our fears thereof remedied 373 Sect. 4. The great subtilty of
evil spirits, and the remedy of the fear thereof 376
The universal Reeeipt for all Maladies 385
I Have perused this excellent Treatise, entitled, The Balm of GILEAD,
containing in it many singular medicines, and soverain Salves, compounded and
made up with so many sweet and spiritual Ingredients of holy and heavenly
consolations, as may be sufficient and effectual, being rightly applied, to
cure and heal all sicknesses and sores of body and mind, caused by the fearful
apprehension of imminent dangers, or the sense of present evils; unto which I
subscribe my probatum est, and do allow it to be Printed and Published:

JOHN DOWNHAM.

THE COMFORTER.
Comforts for the sick Bed.
The Preface.
WHat should we do in this vale of tears, but bemoan each others miseries?
Every man has his load, and well is he whose burden is so easy that he may
help his neighbors. Hear me, my son; my age has waded through a world of
sorrows; The Angel that has hitherto redeemed my soul from all Genesis 48. 16.
evil, and has led me within few paces of the shore, offers to lend thee his
hand, to guide thee in this dangerous foard; wherein every error is death; Let
us follow him with an humble confidence, and be safe in the view and pity of
the woeful miscarriages of others.

1. Aggravation of the misery of sickness.
Thou art now cast upon the bed of sickness; Ps. 32* 3
roaring out all the day long for the extremity of thy pain, measuring the
slow hours, not by minutes, Job 10* 1.
but by groans; Thy soul is weary of thy life, through the intolerable
anguish of thy spirit; Job 7. 11
Of all earthly afflictions this is the soarest. Job himself, after the sudden
and astonishing new^^ of the loss of his goods, Job 1. 21
and children, could yet bear up, and bless the God that gives and takes; but
when his body was tormented, and was made one boil, Job 3. 3.
now his patience is retched so far as to curse (not his God, but) his
Nativity. The great King questioning with his Cupbearer NEHEMIAH, Neh. 2. 2
can say, Why is thy countenance sad, seeing thou art not sick? as implying,
that the sick man of all other has just cause to be dejected; worldly crosses
are aloof off from us; sickness is in our bosom; those touch ours only,
these our selves; here, the whole man suffers; what could the body feel
without the Soul, that animates it? how can the soul (which makes the body
sensible) choose, but be most affected with that pain, whereof it gives sense
to the body? Both partners have enough to do to encounter so fierce an enemy:
The sharper assault requires the more powerful resistance; Recollect thy self,
my son, and call up all the powers of thy soul, to grapple with so violent an
enemy.

2. 1 Comfort, from the freedom of the soul.
Thy body is by a sore disease consined to thy bed. I should be sorry to say,
thou thy self were so: Thy soul (which is thy self) is, I hope, elsewhere;
That, however it is content to take a share in thy sufferings, soars above to
the heaven of heavens; and is prostrate before the throne of grace, suing for
mercy and forgiveness; beholding the face of thy glorious Mediator,
interceding for thee: woe were to us if our souls were coffined up in our
bosoms, so as they could not stir abroad, nor go any further then they are
carried; like some snail, or tortoise, that cannot move out of the shell;
Blessed be God, he has given us active spirits, that can bestirre themselves,
whiles our bodies lie still; that can be so quick and nimble in their motions,
as that they can pass from earth to heaven, ere our bodies can turn to the
other side* and how much shall we be wanting to our selves, if we do not make
use of this spiritual agilitie; sending up these spirits of ours, from this
dull clay of our bodies, to those regions of blessedness; that they may thence
fetch comfort, to alleviate the sorrows of their heavy partners? Thus do
thou, my son, employ thy better part; no pains of the worse can make thee
miserable; That spiritual part of thine shall ere long be in bliss, whiles
this earthen piece shall lie rotting in the grave: Why should thou not, even
now before thy separation, improve all the powers of it, to thy present
advantage? Let that still behold the face of thy God in glory* whiles thy
bodily eyes look upon those friends at thy bed side, which may pity, but cannot
help thee.

3. 2 Comfort from the author of sickness, and the benefit of it.
Thou art pained with sickness: Consider seriously whence it is that thou thus
smartest; Affliction comes not out of the dust; could thou but hear the
voice of thy disease, Job 5. 6.
as well as thou feel the stroke of it; it says loud enough, Am I come up
hither without the Lord to torment thee? 2 Kings 18. 25.
The Lord has said to me, Go up against this man, and afflict him. Could
thou see the hand that smites thee, thou could not but kiss it; Why man, it
is thy good God, the Father of all mercies, that lays these stripes upon thee;
He that made thee, he that bought thee at so dear a rate as his own blood,
it is he that chastises thee; and can thou think he would whip thee but for
thy good? Thou art a Father of children, and art acquainted with thine own
bowels; Did thou ever take the ^od into thy hand, out of a pleasure that thou
tookest in smiting that flesh which is derived from thine own loins? Was it
any ease to thee to make thy child smart, and bleed? Did thou not suffer more
then thou inflictedst? Could thou not rather have been content to have
redeemed those his stripes with thine own? Yet thou saw good reason to lay
on, Prove. 19. 18.
and not to spare for his loud crying, and many tears; and can say, thou
had not loved him, if thou had not been so kindly severe: And if we that
are evil, know how to give loving and beneficial correction unto our
children, how much more shall our Father which is in heaven know how to beat us
to our advantage? so as we may sing under the rod, with the blessed Psalmist;
Ps. 119. 75.
I know O Lord that thy judgments are right, and that of very faith fullness
thou have afflicted me. Might the child be made arbiter of his own
chastisement, do we think he would award himself so much as one lash? yet the
wiser parent knows he shall wrong him, if he do not inflict more; as having
learned of wise Solomon; Prove. 23 14.
Thou shall beat him with the rod, and shall deliver his soul from hell; Love
has his strokes, says Ambrose, which are so much the sweeter, by how much
they are the harder set on: Do thou not remember the message that the two
sisters sent to our Savior; Joh. 11. 3
Lord, behold, he whom thou love is sick: Were it so that pain, or
sickness, or any other the executioners of Divine justice should be let loose
upon thee, to tyrannize over thee at pleasure, on purpose to render thee
perfectly miserable; there were just reason for thy utter disheartening; now
they are stinted, and go under commission; neither can they be allowed to
have any other limits then thy own advantage: Tell me whether had thou rather
be good, or be healthful: I know thou would be both, and think thou may
well be so. Who is so little in his own favor as to imagine he can be the
worse for faring well? But he that made thee looks farther into thee then
thine own eyes can do; he sees thy vigor is turning wanton; and that if thy
body be not sick, thy soul will: if he therefore find it sit to take down thy
worse part a little, for the preventing of a mortal danger to the better, what
cause have thou to complain, yea, rather not to be thankful? When thou have
felt thy body in a distemper of fullness, thou have gone to sea on purpose to
make thy self sick; yet thou knew that turning of thy head and stomach would
be more painful to thee then thy former indisposition; why should not thine
al^wise Creator take liberty to cure thee with an afflictious remedy?

4, 3 Comfort, from the vicissitudes of health.
Thou art now sick: Were thou not before a long time healthful? Can thou not
be content to take thy turns? If thou had had more days of health then
hours of sickness, Job 2. 10
how can thou think thou had cause to repine? Had the divine Wisdom
thought sit to mitigate thy many days pain, with the ease of one hour, it had
been well worthy of thy thanks; but now that it has beforehand requited thy
few painful hours, with years of perfect health, how unthankfully do thou
grudge at the condition? It was a foul mistake, if thou did not from all
earthly things expect a vicissitude; they cannot have their being without a
change; As well may day be without a succession of night* and life without
death, as a mortal body without sits of distemper; and how much better are
these momentany changes, then that last change of a misery unchangeable? It was
a woeful word that Father Abraham said to the damned glutron; Son, remember
that thou in thy life time receivedst thy good things, Luk 16* 25.
and Lazarus evil things; but now he is comforted, and thou art tormented: Oh
happy stripes wherewith we are here chastened of the Lord, that we may not be
condemned with the world! 1 Cor. 11. 32.
Oh welcome fevers that may quit my soul from everlasting burnings!

5, 4 Comfort Sickness better then sinful health.
Thou complainest of sickness; I have known those that have bestowed tears
upon their too much health, sadly bemoaning the fear and danger of Gods
disfavour for that they ayled nothing; and our Bromiard tells us of a devout man
in his time, Bro. Sum. V. Infirmitas
that bewailed his continued welfare as no small affliction; whom soon after
God fitted with pain enough: The poor man joyed in the change, and held his
sickness a mercy; neither indeed was it otherwise intended by him that sent
it. Why are we too much dejected with that, which others complain to want? why
should we find that so tedious to us, which others have wished? There have
been Medicinal Agues, which the wise Physician has cast his Patient into, for
the cure of a worse distemper. A secure and lawless health, how ever Nature
takes it, is the most dangerous indisposition of the soul: if that may be
healed by some few bodily pangs, the advantage is unspeakable. Look upon some
vigorous Gallant, that in the height of his spirit, and the heat of his blood,
eagerly pursues his carnal delights, as thinking of no heaven, but the free
delectation of his sense; and compare thy present estate with his: Here thou
lie groaning, and sighing, and panting, and shifting thy weary sides,
complaining of the heavy pace of the tedious hours; whiles he is fro licking
with his jocund companions, carousing his large healths, sporting himself with
his wanton mistress, and bathing himself in all sensual pleasures; and tell me
whether of the two thou think in the happier condition: Surely, if thou be
not shrunk into nothing but mee^ Sense, if thou have not cast off all thoughts
of another world, thou shall pity the misery of that godless jollity; and
gratulate to thy self the advantage of thine, humble and faithful suffering; as
that which shall at last make thee an abundant amends, by yielding thee the
peaceable fruit of righteousness. Heb. 12. 11.


6. 5 Comfort: The greater sufferings of hol^er men; and the resolutions of
heathens.
Thy pain is grievous; I apprehend it such, and pity thee with all my soul. But
let me tell thee, It is not such, but that holier men have susfered more. Do
thou not hear the great precedent of patience crying out from his dung ^ hill;
Job 6. 2, 3, 4.
Oh that my grief were thoroughly weighed, and my calamities laid in the balance
together! For now it would be heavier then the sand of the sea: therefore my
words are swallowed up. For the arrows of the Almighty are within me, the
poison whereof drinks up my spirits: The terrors of God do set themselves in
array against me? Psalm. 22. 1.
Do thou not hear the man after Gods own heart speak of the voice of his
roaring? Psalm. 6. 6
Do thou not see him that shrunk not from the Bear, the Lion, the Giant,
drenching his bed with his tears? Do thou not hear the Faithful crying out,
Lam. 3. 1, 3, 4.
I am the man that has suffered affliction by the rod of his wrath, etc.
Surely, against me is he turned; he turns his hand against me all the day: My
flesh and my skin has he made old; he has broken my bones. Might I not easily
show thee the Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs, (the great favorites of heaven)
some on the Gridirons, others in boiling Call drons, some on the Spits, others
under the Sawes, some in the Flames, others crashed with the teeth of Wild
beasts: some on the Racks, others in fiery furnaces: most of them in such
torments, as in comparison whereof thy pains are but sport? Yea, what speak I
of these mortal, and (at the best) sinful men; when thou may see the Son of
God, the Lord of life, the King of glory, God blessed for ever, sweating drops
of blood in his dreadful agony; and may hear him cry upon the tree of shame
and curse, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? Alas, what are we capable
to suffer in proportion of these tortures? Who are we, that we should think
much to share with the best of Gods Saints, yea with the dear and eternal Son
of his love, our ever blessed Redeemer? Had not God found this the way to their
heaven, they had not trod so deep in blood: Why do we grudge to wet our feet
where they waded? Yea, if from these holy ones, thou shall turn thine eyes to
some mere Pagans, let me show thee the man whom we are wont to account infamous
for voluptuousness; Epicurus, the Philosopher; who on his dying day, when he
lay extremely tormented with the stone in the bladder, and a tearing Colic in
his bowels, as it were gasping for life; yet even then writing to his
Idomeneus, can out of the strength of his resolutions profess his cheerfulness;
and can style even that day blessed. It was the same mouth that could boast,
that if he were frying in the brazen Bull of Phalaris, he could there find
contentment. What should I tell thee of a Mutius Scaevola, who in a glorious
revenge voluntarily burns off his own right hand, not without the envy and
pity of his enemies: or of a Regulus, that after so high a provocation, offers
himself to the worst of the merciless fury of his tormentors? Why should thou
think it strange (says wise Seneca) that some men should be well pleased to be
scorcht, to be wounded, to be rackt, to be killed? Frugality is a pain to the
riotous; labor is a punishment to the lazy; continence is a misery to the
wanton; study is a torture to the slothful: All these things are not in their
own nature difficult; but we are feeble, and false-hearted. Shall these Pagans
attain to this height of magnanimity, out of the bravery of their manly
resolutions; and shall we Christians droop, and pule under gentler sufferings?
whiles we profess to have moreover the advantage of Faith to uphold and cheer
us? Poor Heathen souls! they never heard of any gracious Engagements of a
merciful God to stand by them, and to comfort them: they never had met with
those sweet messages from heaven; Call upon me in the day of thy trouble, Psalm.
50. 15.
and thou shall glorify me: Come unto me, Mat. 11. 28.
all ye that labor and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest: Strengthen
ye the weak hands, Isai. 35. 3, 4.
and confirm the feeble knees: Say to them that are of a fearful heart, Be
strong, fear not; behold, your God will come with vengeance, even God with a
recompense; he will come and save you. They had not the heart of a Job, to say,
I know that my Redeemer liv^th; nor the eyes of a Steven, to pierce the heaven,
and to see their Savior standing at the right hand of God: but merely tugged
it out in the strength of their natural courage, heightened with a
vainglorious ambition of that fame which they did believe would survive them;
whereas we Christians know that we have a God, the Father of all mercie^* to
stand by us; a Redeemer, to deliver us; a Comforter, to strengthen and refresh
us; sweet and unfail able promises, to sustain us; and at last, a crown of
eternal glory, to recompense us.

7. 6 Comfort: Our sufferings far below our deservings.
Thou art pained with Sickness: Look not at what thou feel, but at what thou
have deserved to feel. Why does the living man complain? Man suffers for his
sin. Lam. 3. 39.
Alas, the wages of every sin is death; a double death; of body, of soul^;
temporal, eternal: Any thing below this, is mercy. There is not the least of
thy many thousand transgressions but has merited the infinite wrath of a just
God; and thereby, more torments then thou art capable to undergo. What do
thou complain of ease? Luke 1^*
Where thou owedst a thousand talents, thou art bidden to take thy bill, and
sit down and write fifty: will thou not magnify the clemency of so favorable
a creditor? Surely, were every twig wherewith thou smartest, a scorpion, and
every breath that thon sendest forth, a flame; this were yet less then thy due.
Oh the infinite goodness of our indulgent Father, that takes up with so gentle
a correction! Tell me, thou nice and delicate patient, if thou can not bear
these stripes, how will thou be able to endure those that are infinitely sorer?
Alas, what are these to that hell which abides for the impatient? There are
exquisite pains, without mitigation; eternal pains, without intermission; which
thou can neither suffer nor avoid; fear them, whiles thou grudgest at these;
lay thy self low under the hand of thy good God, and be thankful for a
tolerable misery. How graciously has the wisdom of our God thought fit to
temper our afflictions; so contriving them, that if they be sharp, they are not
long; and if they be long, they are not over-sharp; that our strength might not
be over-laid by our trials, either way! Be content man; either thy languishment
shall be easy, or thy pain soon over. Extreme and everlasting, are terms
reserved for Gods enemies in the other world: That is truly long, which has no
end; that is truly painful, which is not capable of any relaxation. What a
short moment is it that thou can suffer? short, yea nothing, in respect of
that eternity which thou must either hope for, or fear. Smart a while
patiently, that thou may not be infinitely miserable.

8. 7 Comfort: T^^ benefit (...) the exercise of our pat^^ence.
Thou complainest of pain: What use were there of thy Patience, if thou a^ledst
nothing? God never gives virtues without an intent of their exercise. To what
purpose were our Christian valor, if we had no enemy to encounter? Thus long
thou have lien quiet in a secure Garrison, where thou have heard no trumpet but
thine own, and have turned thy drumshead into a Dicing table, lavishing out thy
days in varieties of idle Recreations: now God draws thee forth into the field,
and shows thee an enemy; where is thy Christian fortitude, if thou shrink back,
and cowardly wheeling about, chusest rather to make use of thy heels, then of
thy hands? Does this beseem thee, who professest to fight under his colors,
who is the Great Conqueror of Death and Hell? Is this the way to that happy
Victory, which shall carry away a crown of glory? My son, if thou faint in the
day of thine adversity, thy strength is but small: Stir up thine holy courage;
Ephesians. 6. 10.
Be strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might: Buckle close with that
fierce enemy wherewith thy God would have thee assaulted; looking up to him who
has said, and cannot fail to perform it; Be faithful to the death, and I will
give thee a crown of life.

9. 8 Comfort: The necessity of expecting sickness.
Thou art surprised with Sickness; whose fault is this but thine own? Who bade
thee not to look for so sure a guest? The very frame of thy body should have
put thee into other thoughts: Do thou see this living fabric made up as a
clock consisting of so many wheels, and gimmers? and could thou imagine that
some of them should not be ever out of order? Could thou think that a
Cottage, not too strongly built, and standing so bleak in the very mouth of the
Winds, could for any long time hold tight, and unreaved? Yea, do thou not
rather wonder that it has out-stood so many blustering blasts, thus long,
utterly unruined? or that the wires of that engine should so long have held
pace with time? It was scarce (...) patient question which Job Job 6. 12
asked: Is my strength the strength of stones? or is my flesh as brass? No,
alas, Job, thy best metal is but ^lay; and thine, as all flesh, is grass; the
clay mouldereth, and the grass withers; what do we make account of any
thing but misery and fickleness in this woeful region of change? If we will
needs over-reckon our condition, we do but help to aggravate our own
wretchedness.

. 10. 9. Comfort.
Thou art retired to thy sick bed; Be of good comfort; God was never so near
thee, Gods most tender regard to us in sickness
never so tenderly indulgent to thee as now: The whole, says our Savior, need
no^ the Physician, but the sick: Lo, the Physician, as being made for the time
of necessity, Ecclus. 38. 1.
comes not but where there is need; and where need is, he will not fail to
come. Our need is motive enough to him, Mat. 8. 17.
who himself took our infirmities and bare our sicknesses; our health
estranges him from us: Whiles thou art his patient, he cannot be kept off from
thee; The Lord, says the Psalmist, Psalm. 41. 3
will strengthen thee upon the bed of languishing. Thou will make all his bed
in his sickness: Lo, the heavenly comforter does not only visit, but attend
thee; and if thou find thy pallet uneasy, he shall turn, and soften it for
thy repose. Can thou not read Gods gracious indulgence in thine own
disposition? Thou art a Parent of children; perhaps thou find cause to
affect one more then another, though all be dear enough; but if any one of
them be cast down with a feverous distemper, now thou art more carefully busy
about him then all the rest; how thou pitiest him, how thou pliest him with
offers and receipts? with what silent anxiety do thou watch by his couch?
listening for every of his breathings; jealous of every whispering that might
break off his slumber; answering every of his groans with so many sighs; and
in short, so making of him for the time, that thy greatest darling seems the
while neglected in comparison of this more needful charge: How much more shall
the Father of mercies be compassionately intent upon the sufferings of his
dear children, according to the proportion of their afflictions?

11. 10 Comfort. The comfortable end of our su^ferings*
Thou art wholly taken up with the extremity of thy pains; Alas poor soul,
thy purblinde eyes see nothing but what is laid close to thee: It is thy sense
which thou followest, but where is thy faith? Could thou look to the end of
thy sufferings, thou could not but rejoice in tribulation* Let Patience have
her perfect work, and thou shall once say, It is well for me that I was
afflicted; Thou mights^ be jo^ond long enough ere thy jollity could make thee
happy; Yea, wo^ be to them that laugh here: Luke 6. 25.
But on the contrary, our light affliction, 2 Cor. 4. 17.
which is but for a moment, works for us a far more exceeding, and eternal
weight of glory. Oh blessed improvement of a few groanes^^ Oh glorious issue of
a short brunt of sorrow! What do we going for Christians, if we be nothing but
mere flesh and blood? And if we be more, we have more cause of joy then
complaint; For whiles our outward man perishes, 2 Cor. 4. 16.
our inward man is renewed daily: Our outward man is but flesh, our inward is
spirit; infinitely more noble then this living clay that we carry about us;
whiles our spirit therefore gains more then our flesh is capable to lose, what
reason have we not to boast of the bargain? Let not therefore these close
curtains confine thy sight, but cast up thine eyes to that heaven whence thy
soul came, and see there that crown of glory which thy God holds forth for
all that overcome; and run with patience the race that is set before thee,
looking unto Jesus the Author and Finisher of our faith, Heb. 12. 2.
who is set down at the right hand of the throne of God; And solace thy self
with the expectation of that blessedness, which if thy torments were no less
then those of hell, would make more then abundant amends for all thy sufferings.

. 12. 11. Comfort. The favor of a peaceable passage out of the world.
Thou art sick to die; having received the sentence of death in thy self; thy
Physician has given thee up to act this last part alone; neither art thou like
to rise any more till the general resurrection; How many thousands have died
lately, that would have thought it a great happiness to die thus quietly in
their beds? whom the storm of war has hurried away furiously into another
world, snatching them suddenly out of this; not suffering them to take leave of
that life which they are forced to abandon; whereas thou have a fair leisure to
prepare thy self for the entertainment of thy last guest; to set both thine
house in order, and thy soul: It is no small advantage, my son, thus to see
death at a distance, and to observe every of his paces toward thee; that thou
may put thy self into a fit posture to meet this grim messenger of heaven,
who comes to fetch thee to immortality; That dying thus by gentle degrees, thou
have the leisure with the holy Patriarch Jacob, to call thy children about
thee, to bequeath to each of them the dear legacy of thy last benediction; and
that being encompassed with thy sad friends, now in thy long journey to a far
country (though thine, and their home) thou may take a solemn farewell of
them, as going somewhat before them to the appointed happy meeting place of
glory and blessedness: That one of thine own may close up those eyes, which
shall in their next opening, see the face of thy most glorious Savior, and see
this flesh (now ready to lie down in corruption) made like to his, in
unspeakable glory.

Comforts for the sick Soul.
1. The happiness of a deep sorrow for sin.
THy sin lies heavy upon thy soul: Blessed be God that thou feel'st it so;
many a one has more weight upon him, and boasts of ease. There is music in
this complaint; the Father of mercies delights to hear it, as next to the
melody of Saints and Angels. Go on still, and continue these sorrowful notes,
if ever thou look for sound comfort: 2 Cor. 7. 10.
It is this godly sorrow that works repentance to salvation, not to be
repented of. Weep still, and make not too much haste to dry up these tears; for
they are precious, and held fit to be reserved in the bottle of the Almighty:
Psalm. 56. 8.
Over-speedy remedies may prove injurious to the Patient: and as in the body,
so in the soul, diseases and tumors must have their due maturation, ere there
can be a perfect cure: Lev. 1. 9.
The inwards of the Sacrifice must be three times rinsed with water; Hebr.
doct. in locum.
One ablution will not serve the turn: but when thou have emptied thine eyes of
tears, and unloaded thy breast of leasurely sighs, I shall then, by full
commission from him that has the power of remission, say to thee, Son, be of
good comfort, thy sins are forgiven thee.

2. Comfort from the welgrounded* declaration of pardon.
Think not this word merely formal, and forceless: Rev. 1. 18.
He that has the keys of hell, and of death, has not said in vain, Whose sins
ye remit, they are remitted. The words of his faithful Ministers on earth, are
ratified in heaven: Only the Priest under the Law had power to pronounce the
Leper clean: Lev. 13. 3.
had any other Israelite done it, it had been as unprofitable, as presumptuous.
It is a precious word that fell from Elihu; Job 33. 22, 23, 24.
When a man's soul draws nigh to the grave, and his life to the destroyer, if
there be a messenger (of God) with him, an interpreter, one among a thousand,
to show unto that man his uprightness; then he ( i. e. God) is gracious unto
him, and says, Deliver him from going down into the pit; I have found a
ransom. Behold, this is thy case, my son; the life of thy soul is in danger of
the Destroyer, through his powerful temptations: I am (howsoever unworthy) a
messenger sent to thee from heaven; and in the Name of that great God that sent
me, I do here, upon the sight of thy serious repentance, before Angels and men,
declare thy soul to stand right in the Court of heaven: the invaluable ransom
of thy dear Savior is laid down and accepted for thee; thou art delivered from
going down into the pit of horror and perdition.

3. Aggravation of the grievous condition of the Patient, and remedies from
mercy applied.
Oh happy message, thou say, were it as sure as it is comfortable! But,
alas, my heart finds many and deep grounds of fear and diffidence, which will
not easily be removed: That smites me, whiles you offer to acquit me; and tells
me, I am in a worse condition then a looker on can imagine; my sins are beyond
measure heinous, such as my thoughts tremble at, such as I dare not utter to
the God that knows them, and against whom only they are committed: there is
horror in their very remembrance; what will there then be in their
retribution? They are bitter things that thou urgest against thy self, my son;
no adversary could plead worse: But I admit thy vileness; be thou as bad as
Satan can make thee: It is not either his malice, or thy wickedness that can
shut thee out from mercy. Be thou as foul as sin can make thee, yet there is a
fountain opened to the house of David (a bloody fountain in the side of thy
Savior) for sin, Zech. 13 1.
and for uncleanness. Be thou as leprous as that Syrian was of old, if thou
can but wash seven times in the waters of this Jordan, 2 Kings 5. 18.
thou can not but be clean; thy flesh shall come again to thee, like to the
flesh of a little child; thou shall be at once sound and innocent. Be thou
stung unto death with the fiery serpents of this wilderness, yet if thou can
but cast thine eyes to that Brazen Serpent which is erected there, thou can
not fail of cure. Wherefore came the Son of God into the world, 1 Timothy 1. 15.
but to save sinners? Add, if thou will, whereof I am chief; thou can say no
worse by thy self then a better man did before thee; who in the right of a
sinner, claims the benefit of a Savior. Were it not for our sin, what use
were there of a Redeemer? Were not our sin heinous, how should it have required
such an expiation as the blood of the eternal Son of God? Take comfort to thy
self, my son; the greatness of thy sin serves but to magnify the mercy of the
Forgiver: to remit the debt of some few farthings, it were small thank; but to
strike off the scores of thousands of talents, it is the height of boun^y: Thus
does thy God to thee; he has suffered thee to run on in his books to so deep a
sum, that when thy conscious heart has proclaimed thee bankrupt, he may
infinitely oblige thee, and glorify his own mercy in crossing the reckoning,
and acquitting thy soul. All sums are equally dischargeable to the munificence
of our great Creditor in heaven: as it is the act of his Justice, to call for
the least; so of his Mercy, to forgive the greatest. Had we to do with a finite
power, we had reason to sink under the burden of our sins: Now there is neither
more nor less to that which is infinite: Only let thy care be, to lay hold on
that infinite mercy which lies open to thee: And as thou art an object fit for
mercy, in that thou art in thy self sinful, and miserable enough; so find thy
self (as thou art) a subject meet to receive this mercy, as a penitent
believer. Open and enlarge thy bosom, to take in this free grace, and close
with thy blessed Savior; and with, and in him, possess thy self of remission,
peace, salvation.

4. Complaints o^ unrepentance an^ unbelief.
Sweet words (thou say) to those that are capable of them: But what is all
this to me, that am neither penitent nor believer? Alas, that which is honey to
others, is no better then gall and wormwood to me, who have not the grace to
repent, and believe as I ought. Why will thou, my son, be so unwise, and
unjust, as to take part with Satan against thine own soul? Why will thou be so
unthankfully injurious to the Father of mercies, as to deny those graces which
his good Spirit has so freely bestowed upon thee? If thou were not penitent
for thy sins, wherefore are these tears? What mean these sighs, and sobs, and
passionate expressions of sorrow which I hear from thee? It is no worldly loss
that thus afflicts thee; it is no bodily distemper that thus disquiets thee:
Doubtless, thou art soul-sick, my son, thy spirit is deeply wounded within
thee; and what can thus affect thy soul, but sin? and what can this affection
of thy soul be for sin, but true penitence?

5. Complaints of a misgrounded sorrow, satisfied.
Alas, thou say, I am indeed sorrowful for my sin, but not upon the right
grounds; I grieve for the misery that my sin has brought upon me, not for the
evil of my sin^; for the punishment, not the offense; for my own danger, not
for the displeasure of my good God. Beware, my son, lest an undue humility
cause thee to belie the graces of Gods Spirit: thou art no meet judge of thy
self, whiles thou art under temptations: Had not thy sorrow a relation to thy
God, why would thou thus sigh^ toward heaven? why would thy heart challenge
thee for unkindness in offending? why do thou cry out of the foulness, not
only of the peril, of thy sin? What is it that makes the act of thy sin to be
sinful, but the offense of the Divine Majesty? how can thou then be sorry
that thou have sinned, and not be sorry that thou have offended? Tell me, What
is it that thy conscience primarily suggests to thee in this deep impression of
thy sorrow? Is it, Thou shall be punished? or i^ it not rather, Thou have
sinned? And were it put to thy choice, whether thou had rather enjoy the
favor of God, with the extremest smart, or be in his displeasure with ease;
whether would thou pitch upon? Or if liberty were tendered unto thee, that
thou might freely sin without the danger of punishment; whether does not thy
heart rise at the condition, as ready to flee in the face of the offerer?
Besides fear and horror, do thou not find an inward kind of indignation at
thy miscarriage, and such an hatred of thy sin, that were it to be done again,
if it were possible to be hid from God, and men; and if there were not an hell
to avenge it, thou would abho^ to commit it? All these are strong convictions
of the right grounds of thy repentance, and of the wrong which thou do to
thine own soul, in the unjust scruples which thou raisest against it.

6. Complaint of the insufficient measure of sorrow, satisfied.
If the grounds (thou say) of my repentance be right, yet the measure is
insufficient: I am sorrowful for my sins, but not enough: An effectual grief
for sin should be serious, deep, hearty, intensive; mine is slight, and
superficial^: I sigh, but my sighs come not from the bottom of an humbled
heart: I can sometimes weep, but I cannot pour out my self into tears: I mourn,
but I do not dwell upon my sorrow. My son, thou have to do with a God, which in
all the dispositions of our soul regards truth, and not quantity: If he find
thy remorse sound, he stands not upon measure: He does not mete out our
repentance by inches, or by hours; but where he finds sincerity of penitence,
he is graciously indulgent: Look upon David, and acknowledge his sin formidably
heinous; no less then adultery seconded with inebriation and murder; yet no
sooner did he in a true compunction of heart cry Peccavi, 2 Samuel 12* 13.
I have sinned against the Lord; then he hears from the same mouth that
accused him, The Lord also has put away thy sin, thou shall not die; you do
not hear of any tearing of hair, or rending of garments, or knockings of breast,
or lying in sackcloth and ashes; but only a penitent confession availing for
the expiation of so grievous crimes. Thou art deceived, if thou think God
delights in the misery and afflictedness of his creature: So far only is the
grief his dear ones pleasing unto him, as it may make for the health of their
souls, in the^ due sensibleness of their sin, in their meet capacity of mercy.
I do not, with some Casuists, flatter thee with an opinion of the sufficiency
of any slight attrition, and empty wishes that thou had not sinned;
doubtless, a true contrition of spirit, and compunction of heart, are
necessarily required to a saving repentance; and these, were thou but an
indifferent censurer of thine own ways, thou could not choose but find
within thy self; why else is thy countenance so dejected, thy cheeks pale, and
watered so often with thy tears, thy sleeps broken, thy meals stomacklesse?
wherefore are thy so sad bemoanings, and vehement deprecations? But after all
this, be thou such (...) thou accusest thy self, defective in the measure of
thy repentance; d^st thou rest contented in this con^ition? do thou not
complain of it as thy greatest misery? Art thou not heartily sorry that thou
can be no more sorry for thy sin? Comfort thy self, my son* even this, this
alone is an acceptable degree of repentance: Our God, whose will is his deed,
accounts ours so; What is repentance but a change of mind from evil to good?
and how sensible is this change, that thou who formerly delightedst in thy
sin, now abhorrest it, and thy self for it, and art yet ambitious of more
grief for being transported into it? Let not the enemy of thy soul, who
desires nothing more then to make thee perfectly miserable, win so much of
thee, as to render thee unsatisfied with the measure of that penitence which is
accepted of thy God; rather turn thine eyes from thy sins, and look up to
heaven, and fasten them there upon thine all-sufficient Mediator at the right
hand of Majesty; and see his face smiling upon thine humbled soul, and
perfectly reconciling thee to his eternal Father; as being fully assured, Romans
5. 1, 2.
That being justified by faith, we have peace with God, through our Lord Jesus
Christ; By whom also we have access by faith into this grace wherein we
stand, and rejoice in the hope of the glory of God.

. 7. Complaint of the want of faith, satisfied.
Yea, there, there, thou say, is the very core of all my complaint; I want
that faith that should give me an interest in my Savior, and afford true
comfort to my soul, Ephesians. 3. 12.
and boldness, and access with confidence to the throne of grace; I can
sorrow, but I cannot believe: My grief is not so great as my infidelity: I see
others full of joy and peace in believing; Romans 15. 3.
but my earthen heart cannot raise it self up to a comfortable apprehension of
my Savior; so as, me thinks, I dwell in a kind of disconsolate darkness, and
a sad lumpishnesse of unbeleef; wanting that lightsome assurance which others
profess to find in themselves. Take heed, my son, lest whiles thou art too
querulous, thou prove unthankful; and lest whiles thine humbleness disparages
thy self, thou make God a loser: Many a man may have a rich mine lying deep in
his ground which he knows not of; There are shells that are inwardly furnished
with pearls of great price, and are not sensible of their worth: This is thy
condition; thou have that grace* which thou complainest to want: It is no
measuring of thy self by sense, especially in the time of temptation; Thou
could not so feelingly bemoan the want of faith if thou had it not; Deny it
if thou can, thou assentest to the truth of all the gracious promises of God;
thou acknowledgest he could not be himself if he were not a true God; yea
truth it self; Thou can not doubt but that he has made sweet promises of
free grace and mercy to all penitent sinners; thou can not but grant that
thou art sinful enough to need mercy, and sorrowful enough to desire and
receive mercy: Can thou but love thy self so well, as that when thou see a
pardon reached forth to thee to save thy soul from death, thou should do
any other then stretch forth thy hand to take it? Lo, this hand stretched forth
is thy faith, which so takes spiritual hold of thy Savior, that it calls not
thy sense to witness. As for that assurance thou speak of, they are happy
that can truly feel, and maintain it; and it must be our holy ambition (what we
may) to aspire unto it; but that is such an height of perfection, as every
traveller in this wretched pilgrimage, cannot, whiles he is in this perplexed,
and heavy way, hope to attain unto: It is an unsafe and perilous path, which
those men have walked in, who have been wont to define all faith by assurance;
Should I lead thee that way, it might cost thee a fall; so sure a certainty of
our constant and reflected apprehension of eternal life, is both hard to get,
and not easy to hold unmovably; considering the many and strong temptations
that we are subject unto in this vale of misery and death: Should faith be
reduced to this trial, it would be yet more rare then our Savior has
foretold it: For, as many a one boasts of such an assurance, who is yet failing
of a true faith, (hugging a vain presumption in stead of it) so many a one,
also, has true faith in the Lord Jesus, who yet complains to want this
assurance. Can thou in a sense of thine own misery, close with thy Savior?
can thou throw thy self into the arms of his mercy? can thou trust him with
thy soul, and repose thy self upon him for forgiveness and salvation? can
thou lay thy self before him as a miserable object of his grace and mercy? and
when it is held forth to thee, can thou lay some (though weak) hold upon it?
Labor what thou may for further degrees of strength daily; set not up thy
rest in this pitch of grace; but, cheer up thy self, my son, even thus much
faith shall save thy soul: Thou believe; and he has said it, Joh. 3. 36.
that is Truth it self; He that believes on the Son, has everlasting life.

8. Complaint of the weakness of faith, satisfied.
I know, thou say, that Jesus Christ came into the world to save sinners;
And that whosoever believes in him, shall not perish, but have eternal life:
Joh. 3. 15.
Neither can I deny, but that in a sense of my own sinful condition, I do cast
my self in some measure upon my Savior, and lay some hold upon his
All-sufficient Redemption: But alas, my apprehensions of him are so feeble, as
that they can afford no sound comfort to my soul. Courage, my son; were it that
thou lookedst to be justified, and saved by the power of the very act of thy
faith, thou had reason to be disheartened with the conscience of the weakness
thereof: but now that the virtue and efficacy of this happy work is in the
object apprehended by thee, which is the infinite merits and mercy of thy God
and Savior, (which cannot be abated by thine infirmities) thou have cause to
take heart to thy self, and cheerfully to expect his salvation. Understand thy
case aright: Here is a double hand that helps us up toward heaven: our hand of
Faith lays hold upon our Savior; our Saviors hand of mercy and plenteous
redemption lays hold on us: our hold of him is feeble, and easily loosed; his
hold of us is strong, and irresistible. Comfort thy self therefore, in this,
with the blessed Apostle; When thou art weak, then thou art strong; when weak
in thy self, strong in thy Redeemer. Should thou boast of thy strength, and
say, Tush, I shall never be moved; I should suspect the truth and safety of thy
condition: now thou bewailest thy weakness, I cannot but encourage and
congratulate the happy estate of thy soul. If work were stood upon, a strength
of hand were necessary; but now, that only taking and receiving of a precious
gift is required, why may not a weak hand do that as well as a strong? as well,
though not as forcibly. Be not therefore dejected with the want of thine own
power, but comfort thy self in the rich mercies of thy blessed Redeemer.

9. Complaint of incon^tancy, and desertion, answered.
Now thou say; Sometimes, I confess, I find my heart at ease, in a
comfortable reliance on my Savior; and being well resolved of the safety of my
estate, promise good days to my self; and after the banishment of my former
fears, dare bid defiance to temptations: But alas, how soon is this fair
weather over? how suddenly is this clear sky over-clouded, and spread over
with a sad darkness, and I return to my former heartlesness? Did thou
conceive, my son, that grace would put thee into a constant, and
pepetually-invariable condition of soul, whiles thou art in this earthly
warfare? Did thou ever hear or read of any of Gods prime Saints upon earth,
that were unchangeable in their holy dispositions, whiles they continued in
this region of mutability? Look upon the man after Gods own heart, thou shall
find him sometimes so courageous, as if the spirits of all his Worthies were
met in his one bosom. How resolutely does he blow off all dangers, trample on
all enemies, triumph over all cross events? Another while thou shall find him
so dejected, as if he were not the man. One while, The Lord is my Shepherd,
Psa. 23. 1
I shall lack nothing: Another while, Why art th^^ so sad, 42. 14.
my soul, and why art thou so disquieted within me? Psalm. 3 6.
One while, I will not be afraid for ten thousands of the people, that have set
themselves against me round about: Another while, Psalm. 17. 8, 9.
Hide me under the shadow of thy wings, from the wicked that oppress me, from
my deadly enemies who compass me about. One while, Thy loving kindness is
before mine eyes, Psa. 26. 3
and I have walked in thy truth: Another while, Lord, Psalm. 89. 49.
where are thy loving kindnesses? Yea, do thou not hear him with one breath
professing his confidence, and lamenting his desertion? Lord, Psa. 30 7
by thy favor thou have made my mountain to stand strong: Thou did hide thy
face, and I was troubled. Look upon the chosen vessel, the great Apostle of the
Gentiles, one while thou shall see him erecting trophies in himself of victory
to his God: In all these things we are more then conquerours, Romans 8 37
through him that loved us: Another while thou shall find him bewailing his
own sinful condition; Oh wretched man that I am, Romans 7* 2^
who shall deliver me from the body of this death! One while thou shall find
him caught up into the third heaven, and there in the Paradise of God: another
while thou shall find him buffeted by the messenger of Satan, and sadly
complaining to God of the violence of that assault. Hear the Spouse of Christ,
(whether the Church in common, or the faithful soul) bemoaning her self, I
opened to my Beloved, Cant. 5. 6.
but my Beloved had withdrawn himself, and was gone: my soul failed when he
spoke. I sought him, but I could not find him; I called him, but he gave me no
answer. Thus it will be with thee, my Son, whiles thou art in this frail flesh;
the temper of thy soul will be, like her partner, subject to vicissitudes.
Should thou continue always in the same state, I should more then suspect
thee. This is the difference betwixt Nature and Grace, That Nature is still
uniform, and like it self; Grace varies according to the pleasure of the giver:
The Spirit breathes when and where it lists. ^oh. 3. 8.
When therefore thou find the gracious spirations of the holy Ghost within
thee, be thankful to the infinite munificence of that blessed Spirit; and still
pray, Arise, Cant. 4. 1^.
O North, and come thou South wind, ^blowe upon my garden, that the spices
thereof may slow out. But when thou shall find thy soul becalmed, and not a
leaf stirring in this garden of thine; be not too much dejected with an
ungrounded opinion of being destituted of thy God; neither do thou repine at
the seasons, or measures of his bounty: that most free and
infinitely-beneficent agent, will not be tied to our terms, but will give what,
and how, and when he pleases: Only do thou humbly wait upon his goodness;
Phil. 1. 6.
and be confident, that he who has begun his good work in thee, will perform
it until the day of Jesus Christ.

10. Complaint of unregeneration, and deadness in sin, answered.
It is true (thou say) if God had begun his good work in me, he would at the
last, for his own glories sake, make it up: But for me, I am a man dead in sins
and trespasses; neither ever had I any true life of grace in me: some show,
indeed, I have made of a Christian profession; but I have only beguiled the
eyes of the world with a mere pretense; and have not found in my self the
truth, and solidity of those heavenly virtues whereof I have made a formal
ostentation. It were pity, my son, thou should be so bad as thou make thy
self: I have no comfort in store for hypocrisy; no disposition can be more
odious to the God of truth; in so much as when he would express his utmost
vengeance against sinners, he has no more fearful terms to set it forth, then
I will appoint him his portion with the hypocrites. Mat. 24. 51.
Were it thus with thee, it were more then high time for thee to resolve thy
self into dust and ashes, and to put thy self into the hands of thine Almighty
Creator, to be molded anew by his powerful Spirit; and never to give thy self
peace, Ephesians. 4. 23.
till thou find thy self renewed in the spirit of thy mind: But in the
mean while, take heed lest thou be found guilty of mis-judging thine own soul;
and mis-prising the work of Gods Spirit in thee: God has been better to thee,
then thou will be acknown of; Thou have true life of grace in thee, and for the
time perceivest it not: It is no heed to take of the doom thou passest upon thy
self in the hour of temptation: When thy heart was free, thou were in another
mind, and shall upon better advice return to thy former thoughts. It is with
thee, as it was with Eu^ychus, that fell down from the third loft, and was
taken up for dead; yet for all that, his life was in him. We have known those
who have lien long in trances, without any perception of life; yea, some (as
that subtle Joannes Duns Scotus) have been put into their graves for fully
dead, when as yet their soul has been in them, though unable to exert those
faculties which might evince her hidden presence. Such thou may be, at the
worst: yea, were thou but in charity with thy self, thou would be found in a
much better condition. There is the same reason of the natural life, and the
spiritual: Life, where it is, is discerned by breathing, sense, motion: Where
there is the breath of life, there must be a life that sends it forth: If then
the soul breathes forth holy desires, doubtless there is a life whence they
proceed. Now deny, if thou can, that thou have these spiritual breathings of
holy desires within thee? Do thou not many a time sigh for thine own
insensateness? Is not thine heart troubled with the thoughts of thy want of
grace? Do thou not truly desire that God would renew a right spirit within
thee? Take comfort to thy self; this is the work of the inward principle of
Gods Spirit within thee: as well may a man breathe without life, as thou
could be thus affected without grace: Sense is a quick discrier of life:
pinch or wound a dead man, he feels nothing; but the living perceives the
easiest touch. When thou have heard the fearful judgments of God denounced
against sinners, and laid home to the conscience, have thou not found thy heart
pierced with them? have thou not shrunk inward, and secretly thought, How shall
I decline this dreadful damnation? When thou have heard the sweet mercies of
God laid forth to penitent sinners, has not thy heart silently said, Oh that I
had my share in them! When thou have heard the Name of Christ blasphemed, have
thou not felt a secret horror in thy bosom? All these argue a true spiritual
life within thee. Motion is the most perfect discoverer of life: He that can
stir his limbs, is surely not dead: The feet of the soul are the Affections:
Have thou not found in thy self an hate and detestation of that sin whereinto
thou have been miscarried? Have thou not found in thy self a true grief of
heart for thy wretched indisposition to all good things? Have thou not found a
secret love to, and complacency in those whom thou have thought truly godly and
conscionable? Without a true life of grace, these things could never have been:
Are not thine eyes and hands many times lifted up in an imploration of mercy?
Can thou deny that thou have a true, though but weak appetite to the means,
and further degrees of grace? What can this be but that hunger and thirst after
righteousness, to which our Savior has pronounced blessedness? Discomfort
not thy self too much, son, with the present disappearance of grace, during
the hour of thy temptation; it is no otherwise with thee, then with a ^ree in
winter-season, whose sap is run down to the root; wherein there is no more show
of the life of vegetation by any buds or blossoms that it might put forth,
then if it were stark dead; yet when the Sun returns, and sends forth his
comfortable beams in the spring, it burgens out afresh, and bewraies that
vital juice which lay long hidden in the earth: No otherwise then with the
hearth of some good huswife, which is toward night swept up, and hides the
fire under the heap of her ashes, a stranger would think it were quite out;
here is no appearance of light, or heat, or smoke, but by that time she has
stirred it up a little, the bright gleeds show themselves, and are soon raised
to a flame: Stay but till the spring, when the Sun of righteousness shall call
up thy moisture into thy branches; stay but till the morning, when the fire of
grace, which was raked up in the ashes, shall be drawn forth and quickened,
and thou shall find cause to say of thy heart, as Jacob said of his hard
lodging, Surely the Lord is in this place and I knew it not; Genesis 28. 16.
Only do thou, not neglecting the means, wait patiently upon Gods leisure;
stay quietly upon the bank of this Bethesda, till the Angel descend and move
the water.

. 11. Complaint of the insensibleness of the time and means of conversion.
I could gladly, thou say, attend with patience upon God in this great and
happy work of the excitation of grace, were I but sure I had it; could I be but
persuaded of the truth of my conversion; but it is my great misery that here I
am at a sad and uncomfortable loss; for I have been taught that every true
convert can design the time, the place, the means, the manner of his
conversion; and can show how near he was brought to the gates of death, how
close to the very verge of hell, when God by a mighty and outstretched arm
snacht him away, in his own sensible apprehension, from the pit, and suddenly
rescued him from that damnation; and put him into a new state of spiritual
life, and undefaisible salvation: All which I cannot do; not finding in my
self any such sudden and vehement concussion, and heartbreaking; any such
forcible, and irresistible operation of Gods Spirit within me, not being able
to design the Sermon that converted me, or those particular approaches that my
soul made toward an hardly-recovered desperation. My son, it is not safe for
any man to take upon him to set limits to the ways of the Almighty; or to
prescribe certain rules to the proceedings of that infinite Wisdom; That most
free, and all-wise agent will not be tied to walk always in one path; but
varies his courses according to the pleasure of his own will: One man he calls
suddenly, another by leisure; one by a kind of holy violence, as he did S.
Paul, another by sweet solicitations, as Philip, Nathaniel, Andrew, Peter,
Matthew, and the rest of the Apostles; One man he draws to heaven with
gracious invitations, another he drives thither by a strong hand; we have known
those who having misspent their younger times in notoriously lewd and debauched
courses, living as without God, yea, against him, have been suddenly
heart-stricken with some powerful denunciation of judgment, which has so
wrought upon them that it has brought them within sight of hell; who after
long and deep humiliation, have been raised up through Gods mercy, to a
comfortable sense of the divine favor, and have proceeded to a very high
degree of regeneration, and lived, and died Saints: But this is not every man's
case; Those who having from their infancy been brought up in the nurture and
fear of the Lord; Ephesians. 6. 4.
and from their youth have been trained up under a godly and conscionable
Ministry; where they have been continually plied with the essectuall means of
grace; Precept upon precept, Isai. 28. 10.
line upon line, here a little, and there a little; and have by an insensible
conveyance received the gracious inoperations of the Spirit of God, (though not
without many inward strifes with temptations, and sad fits of humiliation for
their particular failings) framing them to all holy obedience, these cannot
expect to find so sensible alterations in themselves; As well may the child
know when he was naturally born, as these may know the instant of their
spiritual regeneration; and as well may they see the grass to grow, as they
can perceive their insensible increase of grace; It is enough that the child
attaining to the use of reason, now knows that he was born: and that when we
see the grass higher then we left it, we know that it is grown. Let it then
suffice thee, my son, to know, that the thing is done, though thou can not
define the time, and manner of doing it: Be not curious in matter of particular
perceptions, whiles thou may be assured of the reality and truth of the grace
wrought in thee: Thou see the skillful Surgeon, when he will make a
fontinell in the body of his patient, he can do it either by a sudden incision,
or by a leasurely corrasive; both sort to one end, and equally tend toward
health: trust God with thy self, and let him alone with his own work: what is
it to thee which way he thinks best to bring about thy salvation?

12. Complaint of irresolution, and uncertain^y in matter of our election,
answered.
All were safe, thou say, if only I could be ascertained of mine election to
life: I could be patient, so I might be sure: But, wretched man that I am,
here, here I stick^: I see others walk confidently, and comfortably, as if they
were in heaven already; whereas I droop under a continual diffidence; raising
unto my self daily new arguments of my distrust: could my heart be settled in
this assurance, nothing could ever make me other then happy. It is true, my
son, that as all other mercies flow from this of our election, so the securing
of this one, involves all other favors that concern the well-being of our
souls. It is no less true, that our election may be assured; else the holy
Ghost had never laid so deep a charge upon us, to do our utmost endeavor to
ascertain it: and we shall be much wanting to our selves, if hearing so
excellent a blessing may be attained by our diligence, we shall slacken our
hand, and not stretch it forth to the height, to reach that crown which is held
out to us: But withal, it is true, that if there were not difficulty more then
ordinary in this work, the Apostle had not so earnestly called for the utmost
of our endeavor to effect it. 2 Pet. 1. 10.
Shortly, (...).
the truth is, in all Christianity there is no path, wherein there is more need
of treading warily, then in this: on each side is danger and death; Security
lies on the one hand, Presumption on the other: the miscarriage either way, is
deadly. Look about thee, and see the miserable examples on both kinds: some
walk carelessly, as if there were no heaven; or if there were such a place, yet,
as if it nothing concerned them: their hearts are taken up with earth; neither
care nor wish to be other then this world can make them: The god of this world
has blinded their minds that believe not: 2 Cor. 4. 4.
Some others walk proudly, being vainly puffed up with their own ungrounded
imaginations, as if they were already invested with their glory; as if, being
rapt up with the chosen vessel into the third heaven, they had there seen their
names reco^^ded in the book of life; where as this is nothing but an illusion
of that lying spirit, who knows the way to keep them for ever out of heaven,
is, to make them believe they are there. It must be thy main care to walk even,
in a jus^ equidistance from both these extremes, and so to compose thy self,
that thon may be resolute without presumption, and careful without
diffidence. And first, I advise thee to abandon those false Teachers, whose
trade is to improve their wits for the discomfort of souls, in broaching the
sad doctrines of uncertainty and distrust: Be sure, our Savior had never
bidden his disciples to re^joyce that their names are written in heaven, Luke
10* 20.
if there had not been a particular enrolment of them* or if that Record had
been alterable; or if the same Disciples could never have attained to the
notice of such inscription. Neither is this a mercy peculiar to his domestic
followers alone, but universal to all that shall believe through their word;
even thou and I are spoken to in them, so sure as we have names, we may know
them registered in those eternal Records above. Not that we should take an
Acesius his Ladder, and climb up into heaven, and turn over the book of Gods
secret counsels, and read our selves designed to glory: but that as we by
experience see that we can by reflections see and read those Letters, which
directly we cannot: So we may do here, in this highest of spiritual objects.
The same Apostle that gives us our charge, gives us withal our direction: 2
Pet. 1. 10, 11.
Wherefore (says he) brethren, give all diligence to make your calling and
election sure; ((...), as diverse copies read it; by good works:) For if ye do
these things, ye shall never fall: For so an entrance shall be ministered to you
abundantly into the everlasting Kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.
Lo, first our Calling, then our Election: not that we should begin with heaven,
and thence descend to the earth; (it is enough for the Angels on that celestial
Ladder of Jacob, to both descend, and ascend:) but that we should from earth
ascend to heaven; from our Calling to our Election: as knowing that God shows
what he has done for us above, by that which he has wrought in us here
below. Our Calling therefore first; not outward, and formal, but inward, and
effectual. The Spirit of God has a voice, and our soul has an ear: that voice
of the Spirit speaks inwardly, and effectually to the ear of the soul, calling
us out of the state of corrupt Nature, into the state of Grace; out of darkness
into his mavelous light. By thy calling therefore may thou judge of thine
election: God never works in vain, neither does he ^ver cast away his saving
graces, (what ever become of the common;) But whom he did predestinate, Romans 8.
30.
them also he called; and whom he called, them he justified; and whom he
justified, them also he glorified. This doubtless, thou say, is sure in it
self; but how is it assured to me? Resp. That which the Apostle adds, (as it
is read in some copies) By good works, (if therein we also comprehend the acts
of believing, and repenting) is a notable evidence of our election: But not to
urge that clause, which (though read in the vulgar) is found wanting in our
editions; the clear words of the Text evince no less; For, if ye do these
things, ye shall never fall: here is our negative certainty: And for onr
positive; So, an entrance shall be ministered unto you abundantly into the
everlasting Kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ: Lo, if we shall never
fall, if we shall undoubtedly enter into the Kingdom of Christ; what possible
scruple can be made of the blessed accomplishment of our election? What then
are these things, which must be done by us? Cast your eyes upon that precious
chain of graces which you shall find stringed up in the fore going words; 2
Pet. 1. 5, 6.
If you add to your faith, virtue; and to virtue, knowledge; and to knowledge,
temperance; and to temperance, patience; and to patience godliness; and to
godliness, brotherly kindness, and to brotherly kindness, charity. If you
would know what God has written concerning you in heaven, look into your own
bosom, see what graces he has there wrought in you: Truth of grace (says the
divine Apostle) will make good the certainty of your election. Not to instance
in the rest of that heavenly combination; do but single out the first and the
last, Faith and Charity: For Faith, how clear is that of our Savior, He that
believes in him that sent me, Joh. 5. 24.
has everlasting-life, and shall not come into condemnation, but has passed
from death to life? Lo, what access can danger have into heaven? All the peril
is in the way: now the believer is already passed into life: This is the grace,
by which Christ dwells in our hearts; Ephesians. 3. 17*
and whereby we have communion with Christ, and an assured testimony of, and
from him: 1 John ^* 10*
For, he that believes in the Son of God, has the witness in himself: And
what witness is that? 1 John 5. 11, 12.
This is the record, that God has given us eternal life; and this life is in
his Son. He that has the Son, has life. O happy and sure connection! Eternal
life first; This life eternal is in and by Christ Jesus; This Jesus is ours by
faith; This faith witnesses to our souls our assurance of life eternal.
Chari^y is the last; which comprehends our love both to God and man: for from
the reflection of Gods love to us, there arises a love from us to God again:
The beloved Disciple can say. 1 John 4. 19*
We love him, because he loved us first: and from both these, resulteth our
love to our brethren: Behold, so full an evidence, that the Apostle tells us
expressly, That we know we are passed from death to life, 1 John 3. 14.
because we love the brethren: For the love of the Father is inseparable from
the love of the Son: He that loves him that begets, 1 John 5. 1*
loves him that is begotten of him. Now then, my son, deal unpartially with
thine own heart; ask of it seriously, as in the presence of the searcher of all
hearts, Whether thou do not find in thy self these unfailing evidences of
thine election: Art thou not effectually (though not perfectly) called out of
the world, and corrupt nature? Do thou not inwardly abhor thy former sinful
ways? Do thou not think o^ what thou were with detestation? Do thou not
heartily desire and endeavor to be in all things approved to God, and
conformed to thy Savior? Do thou not gladly cast thy self upon the Lord
Jesus, and depend upon his free all sufficiency for pardon and salvation? Do
thou not love that infinite good^ness, who has been so rich in mercies to
thee? Do thou not love and bless those gleams of goodness which he has cast
upon his Saints on earth? In plain terms, Do thou no^ love a good man because
he is good? Comfort thy self in the Lord, my son; let no fainting qualms of
fear and distrust possess thy soul: 1 These. 5 24.
Faithful is he that has called thee, who will also preserve thy whole spirit,
1 These. 5 23.
and soul, and body blameless unto the coming of oer Lord Jesus Christ.

Comfort against Temptations.
1. Christ himself assaulted: our trial is for our good.
THou art haunted with Temptations: that which the Enemy sees he cannot do by
force or fraud, he seeks to effect by importunity. Can this seem strange to
thee, when thou see the Son of God in the Wilderness forty days and forty
nights under the hand of the Tempter? He that durst thus set upon the Captain
of our salvation, Heb. 2. 10.
God blessed for ever; how shall he spare frail flesh and blood? Why should
that Savior of thine (think thou) suffer himself to be tempted, if not to
bear thee out in all thy temptations? The keys of the bottomless pit are in his
hands; he could have shut up that presumptuous spirit under chains of darkness,
so as he could have come no nearer to him then hell; but he would let him
loose, and permit him to do his worst, purposely, that we might not think much
to be tempted, and that he might foyl that great enemy for us. Can thou think
that he, who now sits at the right hand of Majesty, commanding all the powers
of heaven, earth, hell, could not easily keep off that malignant spirit from
assailing thee? Can thou think him less merciful then mighty? Would he die
to save thee? and will he turn that bandog of hell loose upon thee to worry
thee? Do thou not pray daily to thy Father in heaven, that he would not lead
thee into temptation? If thou know thou have to do with a God that hears
prayers, oh thou of little faith, why fear thou? Lo, he that was led by his
own divine Spirit into the Wilderness to be tempted of that evil Spirit,
bids thee pray to the Father that he would not lead thee into temptation; as
implying that thou could not go into temptation, unless he led thee; and
whiles he that is thy Father leads thee, how can thou miscarry? Let no man
when he is tempted, James 1. 13.
say, I am tempted of God, for God cannot be tempted with evil, neither
tempts he any man: God tempts thee not, my son; yet know, that being
his, thou could not be tempted without him; both permitting, and ordering
that temptation to his own glory, and thy good. That grace which thy God has
given thee, he will have thus exercised, thus manifested; So we have known
some indulgent Father, who being assured of the skill and valor of his dear
son, puts him upon Tiltings, and Barriers, and public Duels, and looks on
with contentment, as well knowing that he will come off with honor: How had
we known the admirable continency of good Joseph, if he had not been strongly
solicited by a wanton Mistress? How had we known David's valor, if the
Philistims had not had a Giantly Challenger to encounter him* How had we
known the invincible piety of the three Children, if there had not been a
Furnace to try them? or of Daniel, if there had been no Lions to accompany him?
Be confident, thy glory shall be according to the proportion of thy trial;
neither could thou ever be so happy, if thou had not been beholden to
temptations.

. 2. The powerful assistance of Gods Spirit, and the example of S. Paul.
How often (thou say) have I beaten off these wicked suggestions, yet still
they turn upon me again, as if denials invited them, as if they meant to tire
me with their continual solicitations; as if I must yield, and be over-laid,
though not with their force, yet with their frequence? Know, my son, that
thou have to do with spiritual wickednesses; Ephesians. 6. 12.
whose nature is therefore as unweariable, as their malice unsatisfiable: Thou
have a spirit of thine own, and besides, God has given thee of his; so as he
looks thou should, through the power of his gracious assistance, match the
importunity of that evil spirit, with an indefatigable resistance: Be strong
therefore in the Lord, Ephesians. 6. 10, 11, 13.
and in the power of his might; and put in the whole armor of God, that thou
may be able to withstand ^n the evil day, and having done all to stand: Look
upon a stronger Champion then thy self, the blessed Apostle; thou shall find
him in thine own condition; 2 Cor. 12. 7.
see the missenger of Satan sent to buffet him; and he did it to purpose; how
soundly was that chosen vessel buffeted on both sides, and how often? Thrice
he besought the Lord that it might depart from him; but even yet it would not
be; the temptation holds, only a comfort shall countervaile it, My grace is
sufficient for thee, Verse 8, 9.
for my strength is made perfect in weakness* It is not so much to be
considered how hard thou art laid at, as how strongly thou art upheld: How many
with the blessed Martyr Theodorus, have upon racks and gibbets found their
consolations stronger then their pains? Whiles therefore the goodness of thy
God sustaines, and supplies thee with abundance of spiritual vigor and
refreshment answerable to the worst of thine assaults, what cause have thou to
complain of suffering? The advice is high and heroical, which the Apostle
James, gives to his Compatriots; My brethren, James 1. 2.
count it all joy, when ye f^ll into diverse temptations; Let those temptations
be rather trials by afflictions, then suggestions of sin; yet even those
overcome yield no small cause of triumph; for by them is our faith no less
tried, and the trying of our says works patience; and the perfect work of
patience is a blessed entirenesse of grace; The number of enemies adds to the
praise of the victory; To overcome single temptations is commendable, but to
subdue Troops of temptations is glorious.

3. The restraint of our spiritual enemies, and their overmatching by the
power of God.
Alas, thou say, I am overlaid not with multitudes only, but with power: In
all challenges of Duels, there is wont to be respect had to the equality both
of the Combatants and weapons; But woe is me, how am I overmatched! For me, I
am a weak wretch; and we wrestle not against flesh and blood, Ephesians. 6. 12.
but against Principalities and powers; against the rulers of the darkness of
this world, against spiritual wickedness in heavenly places: Amos 2. 9.
Behold, the Amorite, whose height is like the height of the Cedars, and their
strength as the strength of oaks: What are we but poor pismires in the valley,
to these men of measures? Who can stand before these sons of Anak? I did not
advise thee, my son, to be strong in thy self; alas, we are all made up of
weakness: One of those powers of darkness were able to subdue a whole world
of men; but to be strong in the Lord, whose lowest Angel is able to vanquish a
whole hell of Devils; and in the power of his might, who commands the most
furious of those infernal spirits to their chains: Woe were us, if we were left
in our own hands; there were no way with us but foiling, and death: But, our
help is in the Name of the Lord, Psa. 124. 8.
who has made heaven and earth. Psa. 28. 7
The Lord is our strength and our shield; he is our rock and our salvation;
Psalm. 62. 2, 6.
he is our defense, so as we shall not be moved. Psalm. 18. 29, 40.
It is he that has girded us with strength unto battle, and that subdueth
those that rise up against us. Take courage therefore to thy self, man; there
cannot be so much difference betwixt thee, and those hellish powers, as there
is betwixt them, and the Almighty: their force is finite, and limited by his
omnipotence. How fain do thou think Jannes and Jambres, the great Magicians
of Egypt, by the conjoined powers of hell, would have made but a Louse, in an
affront to Moses? yet they could not. How earnestly was that legion of Devils
fain to beg but for leave to prevail over a few Gaderene-swine? How strong
therefore soever they (...) to thee, yet to him they are so mere weakness, that
they cannot so much as move without him. Who can fear a Bear or a Lion, when he
sees them chained to their stake? Even children can behold them baited, when
they see their restraint. Look not upon thy self therefore; look not upon them;
but look up to that overruling hand of the Almighty, who ordinates all their
motions to his own holy purposes, and even out of their malice, raises glory to
himself, and advantage to his servants.

. 4. The advantage that is made to (...) by our temptations and foils.
It is a woeful advantage, thou say, that I have made of temptations: for,
alas, I have been shamefully foiled by them; and what by their subtilty, and
what by their violence, have been miscarried into a grievous sin against my
God, and lie down in a just confusion of face to have been so miserably
vanquished. Had thou wanted tears, my son, for thine offense, I should
willingly have lent thee some: It is indeed a heavy case, that thou have given
thy deadly enemy this cause to triumph over thee, and have thus provoked thy
God: Be thou thoroughly humbled under the consci^ence of thy sin, and be not too
sudden in snatching a pardon out of the hand which thou have offended: be
humbled; but after thou have made thy peace with God, by a serious repentance,
be not disheartened with thy fa^lings; neither do I fear to tell thee of an
advantage to be made, not of thy temptations only, but even of thy sin: What
art thou other then a gainer, if having been beaten down to thy knees, thou
have in an holy indignation risen up, and fought so much the more valiantly? A
wound received, does but whet the edge of true fortitude: Many a one had never
been victorious, if he had not seen himself bleed first. Look where thou will,
upon all the Saints of God; mark if thou can see any one of them without his
scars: Oh the fearful gashes that we have seen in the noblest of Gods Champions
upon earth, whose courage had never been raised so high, if it had not been out
of the sense of some former discomfitures! As some well-spirited wrestler,
therefore, be not so much troubled with thy fall, as zealous to repay it with a
more successful grapling. We know (says the blessed Apostle) that all things
work together for good to them that love God: ^om. 8. 28.
All things; yea, even those that are worse then nothing, their very sins. The
Corinthians offended in their silent connivence at the incestuous person: the
Apostles reproof produces their sorrow: what was the issue? Cor. 7. 11.
For behold, this self-same thing that ye sorrowed after a godly sort, what
carefulness it wrought in you? yea, what clearing of your selves; yea, what
indignation, yea, what fear, yea, what vehement desire, yea, what zeal, yea,
what revenge? Lo, what a mavelous advantage is here made of one offense? What
has Satan now gotten by this match? One poor Corinthian is misled to an
incestuous copulation: The evil spirit rejoices to have got such a prey; but
how long shall he enjoy it? Soon after the offending soul, upon the Apostles
holy censure is reclaimed; he is delivered over to Satan, that Satan should
never possess him. The Corinthians are raised to a greater height of godly zeal
then ever. Corinth had never been so rich in grace, if it had not been defiled
with so foul a crime. Say now, whether this be not, in effect, thy case?
Should thou ever have so much hated thy sin, if thou had not been drawn in
to commit it? Should thou have found in thy self so fervent love to thy God,
if it had not been out of the sense of his great mercy in remitting it? Would
thou have been so wary of thy steps as now thou art, if thou had never
slipped? Give glory to God, my son, whiles thou give shame to thy self; and
bless him for the benefit that he has been pleased to make of thine offending
him.

5. ^omplaint (...) relapses (...) to sin; ^ith the ^^medy ^ereof.
But, alas, thou say, my case is far worse then it is conceived; I have been
more then once miscarried into the same sin: Even after I have made profession
of my repentance, I have been transported into my former wickedness: Having
washed off my sin (as I thought) with my many tears, yet I have suffered my
soul to be defiled with it again. I may not flatter thee, my son; this
condition is dangerous. Those diseases, which upon their first seizure have
without any great peril of the Patient received cure, after a recidivation have
threatened death. Look upon the Saints of God, thou shall find they have kept
aloof from that fire wherewith they have been formerly burnt: Thou shall not
find Noah again uncovered through drunkenness in his tent; thou shall not
find Judah climbing up again to Tamars bed; Thou shall not take Peter again in
the Highpriests hall denying his Master; or (after Paul's reproof) halting in
his dissimulation. Gal. 2. 11, 12, 13.
But, tell me, notwithstanding, art thou truly serious with thy God? have thou
doubled thine humiliation for the reduplication of thine offense? have thou
sought God so much the more instantly with an unfeigned contrition of heart?
have thou found thy soul wrought to so much greater detestation of thy sin, as
thine acquain^tance with it has been more? have thou taken this occasion to
lay better hold on thy Savior, and to reinforce the vows of thy more careful
and strict obedience? Be of good cheer; this unpurposed reiteration of thy sin,
shall be no prejudice to thy salvation. It is one thing for a man to walk on
willingly in a beaten path of sin; another thing for a man to be justled out of
the way of righteousness by the violence of a temptation, which he soon
recovers again by a sound repentance. The best cannot but be overtaken with
sin: but, 1 John 3. 9.
he that is born of God, does not commit sin: he may be transported whither he
meant not, but he makes not a trade of doing ill: his heart is against that
which his hand is drawn unto: and if in this inward strife he be overpowered,
he lies not down in a willing yeeldance, but struggles up again, and in a
resumed courage and indignation tramples on that which formerly supplanted him.
Did thou give thy self over to a resolved course of sinning, and betwixt
whiles should knock thy breast with a formal God forgive me, I should have no
comfort in store for thee, but send thee rather to the Whipping-stock of the
Almighty for due correction, if possibly those seasonable stripes may prevent
thine everlasting torments: But now, Romans 7. 15, 16, 17.
since what thou hate, that thou do; and thou do that which thou
would not; and it is no more thou that do it, but sin that dwells in thee;
cry out as much as thou will on the sinfulness of thy sin; Romans 7. 13.
bewail thy weakness with a better man then thy self; O wretched man that I am,
Romans 7. 24.
who shall deliver me from the body of this death! But know, that thou have
found mercy with thy God: thy repeated sin may grieve, but cannot hurt thy
soul. Had we to do with a finite compassion, it might be abated by spending it
self upon a frequent remission; like as some great river may be drawn dry by
many small out-lets: But now that we deal with a God whose mercy is as himself,
infinite; it is not the greatness or the number of our offenses that can make a
difference in his free remissions: That God who has charged our weak charity
not to be overcome with evil, Romans 12* ult*
but to overcome evil with good, justly scorneth that we should think his
infinite and incomprehensible goodness can be checked with our evil. It was not
without a singular providence, that Peter came to our Savior with that
question in his mouth, Lord, Mat. 18. 21.
how often shall my brother sin against me, and I forgive him? till seven
times? that it might fetch from that blessed Son of God that gracious answer,
for our perpetual direction and comfort; Mat. 18. 22.
I say not unto thee, Until seven times, but until seventy times seven. Lord,
if thou would have us sinful men thus indulgent to one another, in the case
of our mutual offenses; what limits can be set to thy mercies in our sins
against thee? Be we penitent, thou can not but be gracious.

Comforts against weakness of grace.
. 1. Comfort from the common condition of all Saints.
THou complainest of the weakness of grace; some little stirrings thou feel
of Gods Spirit within thee; but so feeble, that thou can not find any solid
comfort in them: Thou see others (thou say) whose breasts are full of milk,
Job 21. 24.
and their bones moistened with marrow, whiles thou languishest under a
spiritual leanness and imbecility: Thou want that vigorous heat of holy
affections, and that alacrity in the performance of holy duties, which thou
observest in other Christians. I love this complaint of thine, my son; and tell
thee, that without this thou could not be in the way of being happy. Think
thou that those whom thou esteemest more eminent in grace, make not the same
moan that thou do? Certainly, they never had any grace, if they did not
complain to have too little: Every man best feels his own wants, and is ready
to pass secret censures upon himself for that, wherein he is applauded by
others: Even the man after Gods own heart can say, Psalm. 69. 29.
But I am poor and sorrowful: He was a great King when he said so; it was not
meanness in outward estate that troubled him, but a spiritual neediness: for he
had before, in the same heavenly Ditty, professed, O God, Psalm. 69. 5.
thou know my foolishness, and my guiltiness is not hid from thee: It was
an old observation of wise Solomon; Prove. 13. 7.
There is that makes himself rich, and has nothing; there is that makes
himself poor, yet has great riches; In this latter rank are many gracious
souls, and thine (I hope) for one; who certainly, had never been so wealthy in
grace, if they had been conceited of greater store: Even in this sense many a
Saint may say with Saint Paul, When I am weak, then I am strong: Since the very
complaint of weakness, argues strength; and on the contrary, an opinion of
sufficient grace, is an evident conviction of mere emptiness.

. 2. Comfort from the improvement of weak graces; and Gods free distribution.
But suppose thy self, so poor as thou pretendest; It is not so much what we
have, as how we improve it. How many have we known that have grown rich out of
a little, whereas others out of a great stock have run into debt and beggary?
Had that servant in the Gospel, who received but one talent, employed it to the
gain of a second, he had been proportionably as well rewarded as he that with
five gained ten. In our temporal estate we are warned by the wisest man to
take heed of making haste to be rich; Pro. 28. 20.
and the great Apostle tells us, 1 Timothy 6. 9.
That he that would be rich falls into many temptations; Surely, there is no
small danger also in affecting to be too suddenly rich in the endowments of the
soul; this cannot but be accompanied with the temptation of an unthankful
distrust; for on the one side, he that believes makes not haste; and on the
other, we cannot be sufficiently thankful for what we have, whiles we do
overeagerly reach after what we have not. Tell me, thou querulous Soul, do
thou not ackowledge what thou have to be the gift of God? And will thou not
allow the great Benefactor of heaven to dispense his own favors as he
pleases? If he think fit rather to fill thy vessel with drops of grace, art
thou discontented because he does not pour out his Spirit upon thee in full
v^als? If thou have have any at all, it is more then he owes thee, more then
thou can repay him; Take what thou have as an earnest of more; and wait
thankfully upon his bounty for the rest: Is it not mee^ in a free gift to
attend the leisure of the donor? What sturdy, and ill mannerd beggars are we,
if we will not ^^ay at the door till we be served; and grudge at our alms
when it comes? Look upon the Father of the faithful, thou shall find him
fourscore and six years childlesse; and at last after he had got an Ismael,
he must wait fourteen years more for the promised seed; and when he had
enjoyed him not much longer then he expected him, he must then sacrifice him to
the giver: Thus, thus my son must our faith be exercised in attendance both
for time, and measure of mercy.

. 3. Comfort from Gods acceptance of truth, not quantity.
Thy graces are weak; yet, if true, discomfort not thy self; how many weak
bodies have we known which with careful tendance, have enjoyed better and
longer health, then those that have had bigger limbs, and more brawny arms?
neither is it otherwise in the soul; Soundness of grace is health; increased
degrees of grace make up the strength of that spiritual part; if thou have but
this health tenderly observed, thou may be happy in the enjoying of thy God,
although more happy in a comfortable sense of a stronger fruition. We have to
do with a God that stands not so much upon quantity, as truth of grace; he
knows we can have nothing but what he gives us, and inables us to improve;
and where he sees our wills and endeavors not wanting, he is ready to accept
and crown his own gifts in us: Mat. 12. 20.
He will not break the bruised reed, nor quench the smoking flax.

. 4. Comfort from the variety of Gods gifts, and the ages and statures of grace.
Thou art weak in grace: Be not discouraged, my son, there are all ages, all
statures in Christ: Shall the child repine that he is not suddenly grown a man?
Shall the Dwarf quarrel that he is not a Giant? Were there a standerd of
graces, less then which would not be accepted, thou had reason to be
troubled; but it is so far from that, as that our Savior has encharged, Mat.
19. 14.
Suffer little children to come to me, and forbid them not, for of such is the
kingdom of heaven. In some legal oblations it pleased God to regard time and
age; Lev. 3 7.
The Lamb for the Passover, and for the peace offering; Lev. 4. 14
the Bullock for the sin offering of Israel, have their date assigned; Lev 1. 14
And in diverse cases he has called for two Turtle Doves, Lev. 5. 7, 11.
or two young Pigeons: Young Turtles, Lev. 12. 8
and old Doves, in the mean while, (according to our Jewish Doctors) were
unlawful to be offered; Lev. 15. 14.
but in our spiritual sacrifices all ages are equally accepted; He that is
eternal regards not time; he that is infinite and almighty regards not
statures; Even the eleventh hour carried the penny as well as the first: and,
Let the weak say, Joel 3. 10.
I am strong.

. 5. Comfort from the safety of our leasurely progress in grace.
It troubles thee that thou have made so slow progress in graces; thy desire
is to heavenward, and thou checkest thy self for no more speed: It is an happy
ambition that carries thee on in that way to blessedness. Quicken thy self
what thou may, with all gracious incitations in that holy course: But know,
my son, that we may not always hope to go thitherward on the spur; in that
passage there are ways that will not admit of h^ste; how many have we known
that by too much forwardness have been cast back in their journey, whether
through want of breath, or mistaking their way, or mis-placing their steps? I
praise thee, that it is the desire of thy soul to run the way of Gods
Commandments; Psalm. 119* 32.
and do encourage thine holy zeal in speeding that holy race; ever praying thou
may so run, 1 Cor. 9: 24.
as that thou may obtain. But withal, I must tell thee, Psalm. 119* 1^
that, Blessed is the man that does but walk in the Law of the Lord: Whiles
thou passest on, though but a foot-pace, thou art every step nearer to thy
glory: so long as thou riddest way, thou art safe: Blessed is the man whose
strength is in thee, Psalm. 84. 5, 6, 7.
O God; in whose heart are thy ways; who passing through the vale of misery,
goes on from strength to strength, till he appear before thee his God in Sion.

. 6. Comfort from our good desires and endeavors.
Thy grace is little; but thou wishest and labourest for more; this is a good
beginning of heavenly wealth: He is in a good way to riches, that desires to
thrive: Never any holy Soul lost her longing: If thy wishes be hearty and
serious, thou have that which thou cravest, or at least be sure thou shall
have: If any man ^ick wisdom, Jam. 1. 5.
let him ask of God, who gives to all men liberally, and upbraideth no man,
and it shall be given him: Were this condition offered us for Worldly riches,
who would be poor? If we embrace it not in spiritual, either we distrust the
promises, or neglect our own mercies: In these temporal things how many have
so eagerly followed the chase of the world, that they have over-runne it, and
whiles they have greedily swallowed gain, have been choked with it? but in
those better blessings, earnestness^ of desi^^, and fervor of prosecution, was
never but answered with a gracious impetration.

. 7. Comfort from the happiness of an humble poverty.
Thou art poor in grace, but in an humble self-dejection longest for more;
know, that an humble poverty, is better then a proud fullness; Were thou poor
and proud, there were no hope of thy proficiency: thy false conceit lies in the
way of thy thrift; and many a one had been gracious, if they had not so thought
themselves: but now, that thou art meaner in thine opinion, then in thine
estate, who can more justly challenge our Saviors blessing, Blessed are the
poor in spirit; Mat. 5. 3.
for theirs is the kingdom of heaven? Thou art weak in grace; It is thine own
fault if thou gettest not more strength: Wherefore serves that heavenly food of
the Word and Sacraments, but to nourish thy soul to eternal life? Do but eat
and digest, and thou can not but grow stronger: God will not be wanting to
thee in an increase of grace, if thou be not wanting to thy self: He offers his
Spirit to thee with the means; it is thy sinful neglect, if thou separate them:
Thou know in whose hands is the staff of bread; pray that he who gives thee
the food and the mouth, would also give thee appetite, digestion, nourishment.

8. An incitement to more caution, an^ faster adherence t^ God.
Thy grace is weak: It concerns thee so much the more to be cautious in
avoiding occasions of temptation. He that carries brittle glasses, is chary of
them, that they take not a knock; whereas strong metal fears no danger. He that
has but a small Rushcandle, walks softly, and keeps off every air: Thou art
weak, thy God is strong: Do thou not see the feeble child that finds he
cannot go alone, how fast he clings to the hand of his mother; more trusting
to her help, then his own strength; Do thou so to thy God; and say with the
blessed Psalmist; Hold up my goings in thy paths, Psalm. 17. 5.
that my footsteps slip not; Psalm. 119. 117, 116.
Hold thou me up, and I shall be safe; Uphold me according to thy Word, that
I may live, and let me not be ashamed of my hop^^ Peter was a bold man, that
durst step forth and set his foot upon the liquid face of the waters; Mat: 14:
^9, 30, 31
but he that ventured to walk there, upon the strength of his faith, when he
felt the stiff wind, and saw the great billow, began to sink in his
weakness; but no sooner had Jesus stretched forth his hand, and caught him,
then he takes courage, and walks now with the same confidence upon the Sea,
that he wont to walk on the L^nd: Together with a check, he receives more
supportation from Christ, then his own legs could afford him: Fear no
miscarriage through thine own weakness, whiles thou art held up by that^
strong helper.

Comforts against Infamy and Disgrace.
1. Comforts from like sufferings^ of the holiest, yea, of Christ himself.
NExt to our body and soul, is the care of our reputation; which whosoever has
lost, is no better then civilly dead. Thou suffer under a public infamy, I
do not ask how justly: He was a wise man that said, It was fit for every good
man to fear even a false reproach: A good name is no less wounded for the time
with that, then with a just crimination. This is a sore evil, my son, and such,
as against which there is no preservative, and for which there is hardly any
remedy: Innocence it self is no antidote against evil tongues: Neither
greatness nor sanctity can secure any man from unjust calumny. Might that be
any ease to thy heart, I could tell thee of the greatest of Kings, and holiest
of Saints, that have grievously complained of this mischief, and yet were not
able to help them selves: Thou have the company of the best that ever the
earth bore, if that may be any mitigation of thy misery: Yea, what do I speak
of sinful men, whose greatest purity might be blurred with some imperfections?
Look upon the Lord of life, the eternal Son of the ever-living God, God
clothed in flesh; and see whether any other were his lot, whiles he sojourned
in this Region of mortality; Do thou not hear him for his gracious
sociablenesse, branded as a man gluttonous, a Wine-bibber, a friend of
Publicanes and Sinners? Mat: 11: 19:
Do thou not hear him for his powerful and merciful cure of Demoniacks,
blazoned for a fellow that casts out Devils through Beelzebub the Prince of the
Devils? Mat: 12: 24:
Do thou not hear him sclandred to death for treason against Caesar, Io. 19.
12
and blasphemy against God? Do thou not hear the multitude say, Mat: 26: 65:
He is madd, and has a Devil? Joh: 10: 20:
Do thou not hear him after his death charged with Imposture? Mat: 27: 63:
And can there be any worse names then Glutton, Dtunkard, Conjurer, Traitor,
Blasphemer, Mad man, Demoniack, Impostor? Who now can henceforth think much to
be sclandered with meaner crimes, when he hears the most holy Son of God,
Joh: 14: 30:
in whose mouth was no guile, and in whom the Prince of this world could find
nothing, laden with so heinous calumniations?

1. Comfort of our recourse to God.
Thou art smitten with a foul tongue; I marvel not if it go deep into thy
soul; That man gave an high praise to his sword, that said it was sharper then
sclander; And if a rasour be yet sharper, such did David find the Edomites
tongue: Ps. 52: 2:
And if these wea^pons, reach not yet far enough, Ps: 57: 4:
he found both spears and arrows in the mouths of his traducers. Lo, thou art
but in the same case with the man after Gods own heart: What should thou do,
but for David's complaint, make use of David's remedy? I will cry unto God most
high; Psalm. 57. 2, 3.
unto God that performs all things for me: He shall send from heaven, and
save me from the reproach of him that would swallow me up: God shall send forth
his mercy and his truth. Do by thy slander, as Hezekiah did by the railing
lines of Rabshak^h, spread them before the Lord, and leave thy quarrel in the
just hands of that great arbiter of heaven and earth, who will be sure in his
good time to revenge thy wrong, and to clear thine innocence, 2 Samuel 16 12.
and will requite thee good for these causless curses.

3. Comfort from the clearness of our conscience.
In the mean while, thou say, I stand blemished with an odious aspersion; my
name passes through many a foul mouth. Thou hear, my son, what some others
say; but what do thou hear from the bird in thy bosom? If thy conscience
acquit thee, and pronounce thee guiltless, obdure thy forehead against all the
spite of malice: What is ill fame, but a little corrupted, unsavory breath?
Do but turn away thine ear, that thou receive it not, and what art thou the
worse? Oh thy weakness, if thou suffer thy self to be blown over by the mere
air of some putrified lungs, which if thou do but a little decline by shifting
thy foot, will soon vanish.

4. Comfort from the improvement of our reason.
Thou art under ill tongues; This is an evil proper only to man; Other
creatures are no less subject to disease, to death, to outward violence then
he; but none else can be obnoxious to a detraction; since none other is
capable of speech, whereout a sclander can be formed; they have their several
sounds and notes of expression, whereby they can signify their dislike and
anger; but only man can cloathe his angry thoughts with words of offense; so
as that faculty which was given him for an advan^tage, is depraved to a further
mischief; But the same liberal hand of his Creator has also endued him with
a property of reason, which as it ought to direct his language to others, so
also to teach him how to make use of others language to him; and where he
finds it wrongful, either to convince it by a just apology, or to contemn it;
If therefore thou understandest thy self to lie under an unjust obloquie, have
so much of the man in thee, as either to confute or despise it.

5. Comfort from the cause of our suffering.
Thou art shamefully traduced; I could pity thy suffering, but withal give me
leave to enquire not so much what thou suffer, as for what; If for a good
cause, I shall turn my pity into envy: Truth it self has told thee, thou art
in the way to blessedness: Who can pity thee for that wherein thou have cause
to rejoice? Mat. 5. 11.
Blessed are ye when men revile you, and persecute you, and shall say all
manner of evil against you falsely, for my sake: Rejoice, and be exceeding glad;
for great is your reward in heaven. Yea, rather pluck up thy spirits, and take
up the resolution of holy Job; Job 31. 35, 36.
If mine adversary had written a book against me, surely I would take it upon
my shoulders, and bind it as a crown to me: And say with that gracious King of
Israel, 2 Samuel 6. 22.
I will be yet more vile for the Lord.

6. Comforts from our env^ed virtue.
Thou art reproached by lewd men: Thank thine own virtue that thou art envied;
were thou so bad as thy detractors, thou should sit quiet enough; If ye were
of the world, John 15. 19
says our Savior, the world would love his own; but because ye are not of
the world, but I have chosen you out of the world, therefore the world hates
you. Whiles the Moon sits, no dogs bark at her; it is her shining that opens
their mouth: Were thou either obscure or wicked, thou might be safe; but if
thou will needs be eminently good, look for the lashes of ill tongues: 1 Pet.
4. 4
They think it strange that ye run not with them into the same excess of
riot, speaking evil of you, says the prime Apostle. It was not without reason
that the great Musician in the story struck his scholar, because he saw the
multitude applaud his skill; as well knowing that had he been true to his art,
those mis-judging ears could not have approved him: What more excellent
instruments had God ever in his Church then the blessed Apostles, and what
acceptance found they on the earth? Being defamed, 1 Cor. 4. 13.
we entreat; we are made as the filth of the world, and are the offscouring
of all things unto this day: We are made a Spectacle to the World, to Angels,
and to men. Complain if thou can of a worse condition then these great
Ambassadors of the high God; 1 Cor. 4. 9.
otherwise, resolve with the chosen vessel, to pass cheerfully through
honor, and dishonor, through evil report and good report, toward the goal
of immortality.

7. Comfort from others s^eighting of reproaches.
Thou art disgraced through sclanderons reports. It is not mere air that we
live by; How many have thou known that have blown over a just infamy with a
careless neglect? pleasing themselves to think that they have thriven even
under curses; and shall their guiltiness be entertained with more courage then
thine innocence? Let those whose heart is as foul as their name, be troubled
with deserved censures; do not thou give so much way to malice, as to yield
any regard to her misraised suggestions; thou can not devise how more to vex
a detractor, then by contempt; thus thou shall force spite, as that wise
heathen truly said, to drink off the greatest part of her own poison.

. 8. Comfort from the narrow bounds of infamy.
Thou art disgraced with an ill fame: What a poor matter is this? How far
do thou think that sound reaches? perhaps to the next village, perhaps
further to the whole Shire wherein thou dwell; it is like the next County
never heard of thy name; and if thou look yet further off; as soon moist thou be
talked of amongst the Antipodes, as in the neighboring region: and what a small
spot of earth is this to which thy shame is confined? Did thou know the vast
extent of this great world, thou would easily see into how narrow a corner
our either glory, or dishonor can be pent up: and should confess how little
reason we can have to affect the one, or be disheartened with the other.

. 9. Comfort from the short life of slander.
Thou art wronged with an unjust disgrace; Have patience a while; sclanders are
not long lived: Truth is the child of time; ere long she shall appear and
vindicate thee. Wait upon the God of truth, who shall cause thy light to break
forth as the morning; Isai. 58. 8
and thine health to spring forth speedily: But if otherwise, what speak
thou of his name, which as it is local, so it is momentany, soo^ passed over
in silence, and oblivion; There is a shame, my son, which is worthy of thy
fear; which is both Universal, before the face of all the world of Angels, and
men, and beyond the reach of time, eternal; fear this, and contemn the other;
On the contrary, if fame should befriend thee so much, as to strain her cheeks
in sounding thy praises; and should cry thee up for virtuous, and eminent every
way; Alas, how few shall hear her, and how soon is that noise stilled, Eccles.
9. 1.
and forgotten? Shortly then, let it be thy main care to d^ mean thy self
holily and conscionably before God and men; leave the rest upon God, who shall
be sure to make his word good in spite of men and devils; The memory of the
just shall be blessed, Prove. 10. 7.
but the name of the wicked shall rot.

Comforts against public Calamities.
. 1. Comfort from the inevitable necessity of changes, and Gods overruling
them.
THOU art afflicted with the public calamities; so it becomes thee as a good
man, a good Christian, a good Patriot. We are not entire pieces, but are all
limbs of a community both of Church and Kingdom; whiles the whole body
suffers, how can we be free? This should be no news to us; what earthly
Kingdom or Sat has ever enjoyed a constant felicity? These public bodies,
like as single persons, have their birth, their infancy, their youth, their
vigor, their declinations: Even the white marble of that famous Emblem, and
type of Gods Church, after not many centuries of years felt the dint of time,
and mouldred to nothing; It is as much as those heavenly bodies above can do,
to avoid change: well might we be distracted with these troubles, my son, if we
did not well know whence they come, even from a most wise, holy, powerful,
just providence: He that sits in heaven orders these earthly affairs
according to the eternal counsel of his will; It is that Almighty hand that
holds the stern of this tossed vessel, and steers it in that course which he
knows best: it is not for us that are passengers to meddle with the ^ard or
Compass: Let that all-skilful Pilot alone with his own work; he knows every
rock and shelf that may endanger it, and can cut the proudest billow that
threatens it, 1 Samuel 3. 18.
with ease: It is the Lord, let him do what seems him good.

2. The sense and sympathy of common evils.
Were there no other respects then personal, I cannot blame thee if thy fears
strive with thy grief for the public evils: every man's interest is involved in
the common: And if the Ship sink, what will become of the passengers? But
withal, there is a kind of inbred sympathy in every good heart, which gives us
a share in all others miseries, and affects us more deeply for them, then for
our own. Old indulgent Eli loved his sons too well, and was therefore no doubt
very sensible of their death; yet that part of the news passed over with some,
not mortal, passion: But when he heard of the Ark of God taken, 1 Samuel 4. 17,
18.
now his neck and his heart were broken together: and his religious daughter in
law, though she were delivered upon this report, of a son, yet she died in
travel of that heavy news, and could live only to say, 1 Samuel 4. 21, 22.
I^habod, The glory is departed from Israel, for the Ark of God is taken:
disregarding her new son, when she heard of the loss of her people, and of her
God. How many Pagans have we read of, that have died resolutely for their
Country, cheerfully sacrificing themselves to the Public? How many that would
die with their Country, hating to think of over-living the common ruin? How
many that have professed a scorn to be beholden for their lives to their
peoples murderer? We shall as soon extinguish both grace and nature, as quit
this compassionate sense of the common calamities.

3. Comfort from the sure protection of the Almighty.
Thou grievest for the public distempers: Mourn not as one without faith: Be
sure, He that keeps Israel, will neither slumber nor sleep. Wherefore was the
holy Tabernacle over-spred with a strong tent of skins, Exodus 26 7.
but to figure out unto us Gods Church sheltred under a sure protection? He
that was so curious of the custody of his material Temple, by night as well as
by day, that a sleeping Levite might not escape beating, and burning of
garments; how careful do we think he will ever be of his spiritual and living
house? How unmeet Judges are we of his holy proceedings? We are ready to
measure his love still by an outward prosperity, then which nothing can be more
uncertain: The Almighty goes by other rules, such as are most consonant to his
infinite justice and mercy. I am abashed to hear a Pagan, though no vulgar one,
Senec. Epist. 107
say, Whatsoever is brought to pass, a wise man thinks ought to be so done;
neither goes about to rebuke nature, but finds it best to suffer what he
cannot alter. And shall we Christians repine at those seemingly harsh events,
which we see fall out in Gods Church, whiles we are ignorant of his designs?
and be ready to bless a thriving profaneness? Look abroad upon the ancient lot
of Gods inheritance, and their corrivals in glory; thou shall see the Family of
Esau flourishing and renowned, yielding besides Dukes, eight Kings of his line,
whiles poor Israel was toyling and sweating in the Egyptian furnaces; yet we
know the word to stand inviolable, The elder shall serve the younger; and,
Jacob have I loved, Esau I have hated: What if that great and wise God (who
works oft-times by contraries, and brings light out of darkness) have purposed
to fetch honor and happiness to his Church out of this sad affliction? Metals
are never so bright as when they are scoured: Perfumes and spices never so
redolent, as when they have felt the fire, and the p^stle. Will thou not give
the Physician leave to make use of his Mithridate, because there are vipers in
the composition? how unworthy art thou of health, if thou will no trust the
fidelity and skill of the Artist in mixing so wholesome a Cordial?

4. Consideration of the justice of Gods proceedings.
Thou art troubled with the public miseries: Take heed that thy grief be clear
of all impiety. Would thou not have God to be just, that is, himself? Would
thou not allow it an act of his justice to punish sins? Can thou deny that
our sins have reached up to heaven, and called for judgment? Lam. 3. 39.
Why is the living man sorrowful? man suffers for his sins. I read of a
devout man that was instant with God in his prayers for a Nation not far off,
and was answered, Suffer the proud to be humbled: Whether we will suffer it or
no, the just God will humble the proud, and punish the sinful. The wonderful
patience, and infinite justice of the Almighty, has set a stint to the
wickedness of every people: The iniquity of the Amorites is not yet full, Genesis
15. 16.
says God to Abraham; when the measure is once made up* it is time for God to
strike; we shall then complain in vain, and too late. Would thou know then
what is to be done for the preventing of a destructive vengeance? there is no
way under heaven, but this, To break off our sins by a seasonable and serious
repentance: by the united forces of our holy resolutions, and endeavors, to
make an head against the over-bearing wickedness of the time; and not to suffer
it to fill up toward the brim of that fatal Ephah; till which time the
long-suffering God only threatens and corrects a people; but then he plagues
them; and stands upon the necessity of his inviolable justice: Shall I not
visit for these things, Jer. 5* 9.
says the Lord? and shall not my soul be avenged on such a Nation as this?

5. The remedy; our particular repentance
Thou mournest for the common sufferings: thou do well; our tears can never
be better bestowed. But the while, is not thine hand in them? have not thy sins
helped to make up this irritating heap? have no* thou cast in thy symbol into
the common shot? May not the times justly challenge thee in part, as accessory
to their misery? Begin at home, my son, if thou wish well to the Public; and
make thine own peace with thy God for thy particular offenses. Renew thy
Covenant with God of a more holy and strict obedience; and then pour out thy
prayers and tears for an universal mercy: so shall thou not only pull away one
brand from this consuming fire, but help effectually to quench the common
conflagration.

6. The unspeakable miseries of a Civil War.
Thy heart bleeds to see the woeful vastation of Civil discord, and the deadly
fury of home-bread enemies: Certainly there is nothing under heaven more ghastly
and dreadful then the face of an intestine War; nothing that does so nearly
resemble hell: Woe is me; here is altogether killing, and dying, and torturing,
and burning, and shrieks, and cries, and ejulations, and fearful sounds, and
furious violences, and whatsoever may either cause or increase horror: the
present calamity oppresses one, another fear: one is quivering in death,
another trembles to expect it: one beggs for life, another will sell it dearer:
here one would rescue one life, and loses two; there another would hide
himself where he finds a merciless death: here lies one bleeding, and
groaning* and gasping, parting with his soul in extremity of anguish; there
another of stronger spirits, kills, and dies at once: here one wrings her
hands, and tears her hair, and seeks for some instrument of a self-inflicted
death, rather then yield her chaste body to the lust of a bloody ravisher;
there another clings inseparably to a dear husband, and will rather take part
of the murderers sword, then let go her last embraces: here one tortured for
the discovery of hid treasure, there another dying upon the rack out of
jealousy. Oh that one man, one Christian, should be so bloodily cruel to
another! Oh that he who bears the image of the merciful God, should thus turn
fiend to his own flesh and blood! These are terrible things, my son; and worthy
of our bitterest lamentations, and just fears. I love the speculation of
Seneca's resolutely-wise man, Sen. Ep* 76.
that could look upon the glittering sword of an executioner with erected and
undazeled eyes, and that makes it no matter of difference whether his soul pass
out at his mouth, or at his throat; but I should more admire the practice;
whiles we carry this clay about us, nature cannot but in the holiest men shrink
in at the sight and sense of these tyrannous and tragical acts of death: Yet
even these are the due revenges of the Almighties punitive justice, so provoked
by our sins as that it may not take up with an easier judgment: Do thou not
see it ordinary with our Physicians, when they find the body highly
distempered, and the blood foul, and inflamed, to order the opening of a vein,
and the drawing out of so many ounces, as may leave the rest meet for
correction? Why art thou over-troubled to see the great Physician of the world
take this course with sinful mankind? Certainly, had not this great Body, by
mis dieting and wilful disorder, contracted these spiritual diseases under
which we languish; had it not impured the blood that runs in these common
veins, with riot, and surfets, we had never been so miserable, as to see these
torrents of Christian blood running down our channels. Now yet as it is, could
we bewail and abandon our former wickedness, we might live in hope, that at the
last this deadly issue might stop, and dry up; and that there might be yet left
a possibility of a blessed recovery.

7. The woeful miseries of Pestilence, allaid by consideration of the hand that
smites us.
Thou art confounded with grief, to see the pestilence raging in our streets;
in so frequent a mortality as breeds a question concerning the number of the
living, and the dead: That which is wont to abate other miseries, heightens
this, The company of participants. It was certainly a very hard, and sad option
that God gave to King David, after his sin of numbering bring the people; Choose
thee whether seven years famine shall come unto thee in thy Land, 2 Samuel 24* 13.
or three months flight before thine enemies, or three days pestilence: We may
believe the good King, when we hear him say, I am in a great strait: Doubtless
so he was: but his wise resolutions have soon brought him out: Let us fall now
into the hand of the Lord, (for his mercies are great;) and let me not fall
into the hand of man. He that was to send these evils, knew their value, and
the difference of their malignity: yet he opposes three days pestilence, to
seven years famine, and three months vanquishment: so much odds he knew there
was betwixt the dull activity of man, and the quick dispatch of an Angel! It
was a favor that the Angel of death, who in one night destroyed an hundred
fourscore and five thousand Assyrians, 2 Kings 19. 35.
should in three days cut off but seventy thousand Israelites; It was a great
mercy that it was no worse: We read of one (City shall I call it, or Region, of
Cayro) wherein eighteen hundred thousand were swept away in one years
pestilence; enough, one would think to have peopled the whole earth: and in our
own Chronicles of so general a mortality, that the living were hardly
sufficient to bury the dead. These are dreadful demonstrations of Gods heavy
displeasure; but yet there is this alleviation of our misery, that we suffer
more immediately from an holy, just, merciful God; The Kingly Prophet had never
made that distinction in his woeful choice, if he had not known a notable
difference betwixt the sword of an Angel, and an enemy, betwixt Gods more
direct and immediate infliction, and that which is derived to us through the
malice of men; It was but a poor consolation that is given by a victorious
enemy, to dying Lausus, in the Poet; Comfort thy self in thy death with this,
that thou fallest by the hand of great Aeneas: but surely, we have just reason
to ^aise comfort to our souls, when the pains of a pestilentiall death compass
us about, from the thought and intuition of that holy and gracious hand, under
which we suffer; so as we can say with good Eli, It is the Lord. It is not
amiss that we call those marks of deadly infection, Gods Tokens, such sure
they are: and ought therefore to call up our eyes and hearts to that Almighty
power that sends them, with the faithful resolution of holy Job, Though thou
kill me, yet will I trust in thee: It is none of the least miseries of
contagious sickness, that it bars us from the comfortable society and
attendance of friends, or, if otherwise, repaies their love and kind
visitation with death: Be not dismayed, my son, with this sad solitude; thou
have company with thee whom no infection can endanger, or exclude, there is an
invisible friend that will be sure to stick by thee so much more closely, by
how much thou art more avoided by neighbors, and will make all thy bed in thy
sickness, and supply thee with those cordialls which thou should in vain
expect from earthly visitants: Indeed, justly do we style this, The sickness,
eminently grievous both for the deadliness, and generality of the dispersion;
yet there is a remedy that can both cure and con^ine it; Let but every man look
well to the plague of his own heart, and the Land is healed. Can we with David,
but see the Angel that smites us, and erect an Altar; and offer to God the
sacrifices of our prayers, penitence, obedience; we shall hear him say, 2 Samuel
24* 16.
It is enough: The time was, (and that time may not be forgotten) when in the
days of our late Sovereign, our Mother City was almost desolated with this
mortal infection, When thousands fell at our side, Psalm. 91. 7.
and ten thousands at our right hand* upon the public humiliation of our
souls, the mercy of the Almighty was pleased to command that raging disease in
the height of its fury (like somehead-strong horse in the midst of his career)
to stop on the sudden, and to leave us at once (ere we could think of it) both
safe and healthful: This was the Lords doing, Isai. 59. 1
and it was mavelous in our eyes: Behold, the Lords hand is not shortened that
it cannot save, neither his ear heavy that it cannot hear; The same mercy is
everlasting, the same remedy certain; Be we but penitent, and we cannot be
miserable.

Comforts against loss of Friends.
1. The true value of a friend, and the fault of over-prizing him.
THou have lost thy friend; Thy sorrow is just; the earth has nothing more
precious then that which thou have parted with: For what is a friend, but a
man's self in another skin, a soul divided into two bodies, both which are
animated by the same spirit: It is somewhat worse with thee therefore, then
with a palsied man, whose one half is stricken with a dead kind of numnesse,
he has lost but the use of one side of his body, thou the one half of thy
soul. Or may I not with better warrant say that a true friend has as it were,
two souls in one body, his own, and his friends? Sure I am, so it was with
Jonathan and David; The soul of Jonathan was knit with the soul of David, 1 Samuel 18 1.
and Jonathan loved him as his own soul: Still the more goodness, the
stronger union; Mere nature can never be so fast a cement of souls, as grace;
for here the union is wrought by a better spirit then our own, even that
blessed spirit who styles himself by the name of Love; 1 Ioh. 4. 16.
By how much greater thine affection was, so much heavie^ is thy loss. But let
me tell thee, I fear thou art too much accessory to thine own affliction:
Did thou look for this loss? Did thy heart say, What if we should part?
Did thou not over-enjoy this blessing whilst thou had it? Surely, these
are no small disadvantages; As every other evil, so this especially is
aggravated by our unexpectation; neither had thou been so oppressed with this
sorrow, if thou had foreseen it, and met it on the way: It is our weak
inconsideration, if we do so welcome these earthly comforts, not as guests, but
as in-mates; and as some that are importuntely hospitable, so entertain our
friends, that we cannot abide to give them leave to depart: Whereas we ought,
according to the wise advice of our Seneca, Sen. Ep. 63.
(not much abluding from the counsel of that blessed Apostle with whom he is
said to have interchanged Letters) so to possess them, 1 Cor. 7. 30, 31.
as those that make account to forgo them; and so forgo them, as if we
possessed them still.

2. The tru^ ground of a^ undefeisible enjoying of our friends.
Thou art grieved for the loss of a dear friend: Take heed lest thy love had
too much of the man, and too little of God: All blessings, as they come down
from the Father of mercies, so should be enjoyed in him: and if we enjoy them
as in themselves, our love begins to degenerate into carnal. It is a sure rule,
that all love that depends upon a thing affected, when that thing cease, then
the love cease: as he that loves a face only for beauty, when that beauty is
defaced by deformity, presently cools in his affection: he that respects a man
for his bounty only, disregards him when he sees him impoverished. Did thou
value thy friend only for his wit, for his ready compliances, for his kind
offices; all these are now lost, and thy love with them: but if thou did
affect him for eminence of grace, for the sake of that God that dwelt in him;
now thy love is not, cannot be lost, because thou still enjoyest that God in
whom thou lovedst him. Comfort thy self therefore in that God, in whom he was
thine, and yield him cheerfully into those hands that lent him thee.

. 3. The rarity and trial of true friends.
Thou have lost a true friend: That Jewel was worthy to be so much more
precious, by how much more rare it is. The world affords friends enough, such as
they are; Friends of the purple, as Tertullian calls them; friends of the
basket, as the Poet: such as love thy loaves and fishes, and thee for them:
Prove. 14 20.
Wealth makes many friends, Prove. 19 4.
says the Wise man; but where is the man that loves thee for thy self? that
loves thy Virtue, and thee for it, divested of all by-respects? Whiles there is
honey in thy gally-pot, the wasps and flies will be buzzing about it; but which
of them cares to light upon an empty vessel? Was he so much thine, that he
would not be set off by thine adversity? Did he honor thee when thou were
despised of the world? Did he follow thee with applause whiles thou were hooted
at by the multitude? Would he have owned thee if he had found thee stripped and
wounded in the Wilderness? Such a friend is worthy of thy tears: But take heed
thy love prove not envious: If thy God has thought him fitter for the society
of Saints and Angels, do thou repine at his happiness? Thou have lost his
presence; he is advanced to the beatifical presence of the King of glory:
Whether is thy loss, or his gain the greater?

4. It is but parting, not a (...)
Thou have lost thy friend: say rather, thou have parted with him. That is
properly lost, which is past all recovery, which we are out of hope to see any
more: It is not so with this friend thou mournest for; He is but gone home a
little before thee; thou art following him; you two shall meet in your Fathers
house, and enjoy each other more happily then you could have done here below.
How just is that charge of the blessed Apostle, that We should not mourn as men
without hope, 1 These. 4. 13, 14.
for those that do but sleep in Jesus? Did we think their souls vanished into
air, (as that Heathen Poet profanely expresses it) and their bodies resolved
into dust, without all possibility of reparation, we might well cry out our
eyes for the utter extinction of those we loved: but if they do but sleep, Joh.
11. 12.
they shall do well. Why are we impatient for their silent reposal in the bed
of their grave, when we are assured of their awaking to glory?

. 5. The loss of a virtuous wife, mitigated.
Thou have lost a dear wife, the wife of thy youth, the desire of thine eyes:
Did ye not take one another upon the terms of redelivery when ye should be
called for? Prove. 5. 18.
Were you not in your very knitting put in mind of your dissolution? Isai. 54.
6.
Till death us depart. Ezekiel. 24 16.
Was she virtuous? know thou not that there was a Pre-contract betwixt thy
Savior, and her soul, ere thou could lay any claim to her body? And can
thou now grudge his just challenge of his own? Will thou not allow him to call
for a consummation of that happy match? Did thou so over-love her outside,
that thou would not have her soul glorious: If thou lovedst her not as a man,
but as a Christian, envy her not to that better Husband above, who gives her
no less dowry then immortality.

6. The mitigation of the loss of a dear and hopeful son.
Thy son is dead: What marvel is it, that a mortal Father has begot a mortal
Son? Marvel rather, that thy self has lived to have or to lose a son: We lie
open to so many deaths, that our very subsistence is almost miraculous. Thou
have lost a piece of thy self: for what are our children, but as colonies
deduced from our own flesh? yea rather, our selves made up in other models.
This loss cannot but go near thee: But tell me, What was the disposition of the
son thou mournest for? If he were graceless and debauched, as thy shame, so thy
sorrow should die with him: set the hopes thou might have had of his
reclaiming, against the fears of his continuing, and increasing wickedness, and
thou could have made no other present account but of dishonor, and
discomfort: If it be sad that he is taken away in his wildness; it had been
more heavy, that he would have added to the heap of his sin, and therein to
his torments. If he were gracious, he had a better Father then thy self, whose
interest was more in him then thine: and if that heavenly Father have thought
good to prefer him to a crown of immortal glory, why should thou be afflicted
with his advancement? Why should thou not rather rejoice that thy loins have
helped to furnish heaven with a Saint? Were it put to thy choice that thy son
might be called off from his blessed rest, and returned to his former earthly
relations; could thou be so injurious in thy self-love, as to wish the misery
of so disadvantageous a change to that soul, which, as it was never of thy
production, so it were pity it should be at thy disposing? Rather, labor to
have thine own soul so disposed, that it may be ready to follow him into those
blessed mansions, and that it may love and long for heaven so much more for
that one piece of thee is there beforehand.

Comforts against Poverty, and loss of our estate.
1. The fickle nature of these earthly goods.
THou art driven into want, and that which is worse, out of abundance. Those
evils that we have been inured to, as being bred up with us from our cradle,
are grown so familiar, that we are little moved with their presence: but those
into which we fall suddenly, out of an outward felicity of estate, are ready to
overwhelm us. Let thy care be, not to want those better riches, which shall
make thy soul happy, and thou shall not be too much troubled with the loss of
this trivial, and perishing stuff: Had these been true goods, they could not
have been lost: for that good that is least capable of loss, as it is
unsatisfying in the time of an imperfect and unsure fruition, so in the losing
it turns evil. Did thou not know that riches have wings? Prove. 23 5.
and what use is there of wings, if not to fly? If another man's violence shall
clip those wings, even this very clipping is their flight. Set thy heart upon
that excellent and precious wealth which can never be taken from thee, which
shall never leave thee, nor thou it, thou shall easily slight these poor
losses. As these were not goods, so they were not thine: Here thou foundst
them, 1 Timothy 6. 7.
and here thou leavest them: What had thou but their use? Neither can they be
otherwise thine heirs whom thou leavest behind thee. I am ashamed to hear the
Heathen Philosopher say, All that is mine I carry about me; when many of us
Christians are ready to bug those things as most ours, which are without our
selves. It was an unanswerable question which God moves to the rich man in the
Parable, upon the parting with his soul: Luke 12. 20.
Then, whose shall those things be which thou have provided? perhaps a
strangers, perhaps (as in case of undisposed Lands) the occupants, perhaps a
false Executors, perhaps an enemies Call that thine, that thou shall be sure to
carry away with thee; that shall either accompany thy soul in its last passage,
or follow it: such shall be thy holy graces, thy charitable works, thy virtuous
actions, thine heavenly dispositions: Lo, these are the Treasures which thou
shall lay up for thy self in heaven, Matthew. 6. 20.
where neither moth nor rust does corrupt; where thieves do not break through
nor steal.

2. Consideration that they are not ours, but lent us
Thou have lost thy goods: May I not rather say, Thou have restored them? He
parted with more then thou, that said, The Lord has given, and the Lord has
taken: Job 1.
Lo, whether it were by way of patrimony, or by way of providence and industry,
the Lord gave it; and whether it were by the hands of Chaldeans, or Sabeans,
the Lord has taken it: the Lord is in both; he did but give and take his own.
Is it not just so with thee? What reason have thou then to complain? Or may I
not yet rather say, It was not given, but lent thee, for a while, till it were
called for? and do thou grudge to restore what thou borrowedst? Nay, (that
thou may have yet less claim to this pelf) was it not only left in thy hand
by the owner, to employ for his use, till he should re-demand it with the
increase? What is it to thee, but to improve, and to account for? If others
have taken off thy charge: whiles they have spoiled, they have eased thee.

3. That the right valuation of riches is in the mind.
Thy wealth is gone: Have thou necessaries left? Be thankful for what thou
have, forget what thou had: Had thou had more, thou could have made use
of no more then Nature calls for; the rest could but have lien by thee, for
sight, for readiness of employment: Do but forbear the thought of
superfluities, and what art thou the worse? Perhaps, thy fare is coarser, thy
dishes fewer, thy utensils meaner, thy clothes homelier, thy train shorter;
what of this? how is thy mind affected? Cuntentment stands not in quantities,
nor in qualities, but in the inward disposition of the heart; that alone can
multiply numbers, and raise prices; that alone can turn honest freezes into
rich velvets, pulse into delicates, and can make one attendant many Officers:
Senec. Ep. 107.
Wise Seneca tells thee truly, that the true mold of wealth is our body, as the
Last is of the shoe; if the shoe be too big for the foot, it is but
troublesome, and useless; and how poor an answer would it be of the Cordwainer
to say, that he had Leather good store; it is fitness which is to be regarded
here, not largeness; neither is this any other then the charge of the blessed
Apostle, Having food and raiment, 1 Timothy 6. 8.
let us be therewith content; And if we have no more, we shall be but as we
were, as we shall be, 1 Timothy 6. 7.
For we brought nothing into the world, neither shall we carry any thing out.

. 4. It may be good for us to be held short.
Thou have parted with thy wealth; perhaps for thine own good; how many have
we known that have been cumbred with plenty, like as the ostrich, or bustard
with bulk of body, so as they could not raise their thoughts to spiritual
things; who when their weight has been taken off, have mounted nimbly toward
their heaven? How many have we known that had lost their lives, if (with the
Philosopher) they had not forgone their gold? Yea, how many that had lost their
precious souls? The whole vessel had sunk in this boistrous sea, if the
luggage of this earthly freight had not been cast over-boord; And why art thou
so troubled to lose that which might have undone thee in the keeping?

. 5. The danger of abundance.
Thou had wealth; Have thou not parted with that for which many a man has
been the worse? worse both in body and soul: and by which never any soul was
better: Have we not seen many good corn fields marred with rankness? have we
not seen many a good bough split with the weight of too much fruit? whereas
those fields, had they been either thinner sown, or seasonably eaten down, had
yielded a fair crop; and those boughs had they been but moderately laden, had
outlived many Autumns: Do thou not hear thy Savior say, How hardly shall
they that have riches enter into the kingdom of God? Mark 10 23.
Art thou troubled that there is a rub removed out of thy way to happiness?
That the bunch of the Camel is taken off, if yet thou may pass through the
eye of the needle?

. 6. The cares that attend wealth.
Thou had riches? But have thou not cares to boot? Surely, else thou have
fared better then all thy neighbors? No body but thy self could ever handle
these roses without pricking his fingers: Rab. Gamaliel.
He was famous amongst the Jewish Doctors, whose rule it was, He that
multiplies riches, multiplies cares: and our blessed Savior has coupled these
two together, The cares of the world, Mar. 4 19.
and the deceitfuln^sse of riches; We have heard of one who was glad to be rid
of his lately found bag, that he might sleep, and sing again: He was noted
and envied at Rome for his wealth, Sen. Ep. 80.
which could experimentally say, The poor man laughs more often, and more
heartily then the rich; Epist. 36.
and tells us, That outward felicity is an unquiet thing, never ceasing to vex
it self: Thy sides are now rid of these thorns, why do thou grumble at thine
own ease?

. 7. The imperiousness of ill used wealth.
Thou lately possessedst great riches; yea, may thou not rather say, thou
were possessed of them? That wise Roman truly observed that many a one has
wealth, Ep. 109.
as we are wont to say, a man has taken an ague, when indeed the ague has
taken him, and holds him in a painful manner: The truth is, many a man's wealth
is his Master, and keeps him under hard conditions, not allowing him sufficient
diet, not competent rest, not any recreation; If thou were thus a drudge to
thine estate, thou art now thine own man; enjoy thy liberty, and together with
thy patience, be thankful.

. 8. Consideration of the causes and means of impove^ishing us.
Thou art very poor; who made thee so? If thine own negligence, laziness,
improvidence, unthriftinesse, rash engagements; thou had reason to bear that
burden which thou have pulled upon thine own shoulders: and if thou be forced
to make many hard faces under the load, yet since thy own will has, brought
upon thee this necessity, even the necessity should move thy will to trudge
away as lightly, and as fast as thou may with that pressing weight: If the
mere oppression and injury of others, thou shall the more comfortably run away
with this cross, because thy own hand has not been guilty of imposing it;
how easy is it for thee here, to see Gods hand chastising thee by another man's
sin? and more to be grieved at the sin of that others wrong, then at thine own
smart; How sad a thing is it for any good soul to see brethren a prey to each
other? that neighbors should be like the reed and the brake set near
together, whereof the one starves the other? that we should have daily occasion
to renew that woeful comparison of our Bromiard, Brom. v. Elcemosyna.
betwixt the friends and enemies of Christ; That Jews do not suffer beggars,
that Christians make beggars? In the mean time, if God think fit to send
poverty to thy door upon the message of men, bid it welcome for the sake of him
that sent it, and entertain it not grudgingly for its own sake; as that, which
if it be well used, will repay thee with many blessings; the blessings of quiet
rest, safe security, humble patience contented humility, contemptuous valuation
of these earthly things; all which had balked thy house in a prosperous
condition.

9. The examples of those who have affected poverty.
Thou art stripped of thy former conveniences for diet, for lodging, for
attendance. How many have purposely affected to do that out of choice, which
is befaln theee upon need; some out of the grounds of Philosophy^, others of
Religion? Senec. Ep: 108.
Attalus the Philosopher might have lien soft, yet he calls for, and praises
the Bed and pillow that will not yield to his body: Epist: 83
And Neroe^ great and rich Master bragges of his usual dining without a Table;
what should I tell then of the Pharisees uneasy couches, and p^nall garments;
of the Mats of the elect Manichees; of the austere usages of the ancient
Eremiticall Christians; their rigorous abstinences, their affamishing meals,
their nightly watchings, their cold groundlyings, their sharp disciplines?
Thou art in ease, and delicacy, in comparison of these men, who voluntarily
imposed upon themselves these hardnesses, which thou would be loath to
undergo from others cruelty: It was a strange word of Epicurus the
Philosopher, Epic. in Ep. Sen. 110
not savouring of more contentment, then presumption; Give us but water, give
us but barley meal, and we shall vie with Jupiter himself for happiness; and
if this Ethnic, who was in an ill name for affectation of pleasure, could rest
so well pleased with a poor mess of water-gruell; what a shame were it for us
Christians not to be well apaid with a much larger (though* but homely)
provision?

Comforts against Imprisonment.
1. Consideration of the nature and power of true liberty.
THOU art restrained of thy Liberty. I cannot blame thee to be sensible of the
affliction. Liberty is wont to hold competition for dearnesse, with life it
self; yea, how many have lost their life to purchase their liberty? But take
heed lest thou be either mistaken, or guilty of thine own complaint; for
certainly, thou can not be bereaved of thy liberty, except thou will:
Liberty is a privilege of the will; will is a sovereign power that is not
subject to either restraint, or constraint: Have thou therefore a freedom
within, a full scope to thine own thoughts? It is not the cooping up of these
outward parts, that can make thee a Prisoner: Thou art not worthy of the name
of a man, if thou think this body to be thy self: and that is only it
which humane power can reach unto. Besides, art thou a Christian? then thou
have learned to submit thy will to Gods; Gods will is declared in his actions;
for sure what he does, that he wills to do. If his will be then to have
thee restrained, why should it not be thine? and if it be thy will to keep
in, what do thou complain of restraint?

2. The sad obj^cts of a free beholder.
Thou art restrained; Is it such a matter that thou art not suffered to rome
abroad? How ill have thou spent thy time, if thou have not laid up matter both
of employment and contentment in thine own bosom? And what such goodly
pleasure were it for thee to look over the world, and to behold those objects
which thine eye shall there meet withal; here men fighting, there women and
children wayling; here plunders, there riots, here fields of blood, there
Towns and Cities flaming; here some scuffling for Patrimonies, there others
wrangling for Religion; here some famishing for want, there others abusing
their fullness; here schisms and heresies, there rapines and sacriledges: What
comfortable spectacles these are to attract, or please our eyes! thy closeness
frees thee from these sights; the very thought whereof is enough to make a man
miserable; and in stead of them presents thee only with the face of thy
Keeper, which custom and necessity has acquitted from thy first horror.

. 3. Comfort from the invisible company that cannot be kept from us.
Thou art shut up close within four walls, and all company is secluded from
thee; Content thy self, my son, God and his holy Angels cannot be kept out;
thou have better company in thy solitude, then thy liberty afforded thee; the
jollity of thy freedom robbed thee of the conversation of these spiritual
companions, which only can render thee happy: they which before were strangers
to thee, are now thy guests, yea, thy inmates, (if the fault be not thine) to
dwell with thee in that forced retiredness. What if the light be shut out from
thee? this cannot hinder thee from seeing the invisible; The darkness hides
not from thee, Ps. 139. 12.
(says the Psalmist) but the night shines as the day; the darkness and the
light are both alike to thee. Yea, I doubt not to say, God has never been so
clearly seen as in the darkest Dungeons; for the outward light of prosperity
distracts our visive beams, which are strongly contracted in a deep obscurity:
He must descend low, and be compassed with darkness, that would see the
glorious lights of heaven by day: They ever shine, but are not seen save in the
night: May thine eyes be blessed with this invisible sight, thou shall not
envy those that glitter in Court, and that look daily upon the faces of Kings
and Princes; yea, though they could see all that the Tempter represented to the
view of our Savior upon the highest Mountain, all the Kingdoms of the world,
and the glory of them.

4. Comfort from the inward disposition of the Prisoner.
Thou art forced to keep close; but with what disposition both of mind and
body? If thou had an unquiet and burdened Soul, it were not the open and
free air that could refresh thee; and if thou have a clear and light heart,
it is not a strict closeness that can dismay thee; thy thoughts can keep thee
company, and cheer up thy solitariness: If thou had an unsound and
painful body; as, if thou were laid up of the gout, or some rupture, or
luxation of some limb, thou would not complain to keep in; thy pain would
make thee insensible of the trouble of thy confinement: but if God have
favored thee with health of body, how easily may thou digest an harmless
limitation of thy person? A wise man (as Laurentius the Presbyter observed
well) does much while he rests; his motions are not so beneficial as his
sitting still: So may thou bestow the hours of thy close retiredness, that
thou may have cause to bless God for so happy an opportunity. How memorable
an instance has our age yielded us, of an eminent Person, Sir Walter Raleigh.
to whose encagement we are beholden, (besides many Philosophical experiments)
for that noble history of the World, which is now in our hands? The Court had
his youthful and freer times, the Tower his later age; the Tower reformed the
Court in him, and produced those worthy monuments of art and industry, which we
should have in vain expected from his freedom and jollity. It is observed, that
shining wood, when it is kept within doors, loses its light. It is otherwise
with this and many other active wits, which had never shined so much, if not
for their closeness.

5. Comfort from the will^ng above of ^^^rednes in some persons.
Thou art close shut up: I have seen Anachorites that have sued for this as a
favor which thou esteemest a punishment, and having obtained it, have placed
merit in that wherein thou apprehendest misery; Yea, our History tells us of
one, who when the Church, whereto his cell was annexed, was on fire, would not
come out, to live, but would die, and lie buried under the ashes of that roof
where his vow had fixed him. Suppose thou do that out of the resolution of
thine own will, which thou do out of another necessitating, and thou shall
sit down contented with thy Lot.

6. Comfort from the causes of imprisonment.
Thou art imprisoned; Wise men are wont in all actions and events to enquire
still into the causes: Wherefore do thou suffer? Is it for thy fault? Make
thou thy Jail Gods correction house for reforming of thy misdeeds: Remember
and imitate Manasses, the evil son of a good Father, who upon true
humiliation, by his just imprisonment, found an happy expiation of his horrible
Idolatries, Murders, Witchcrafts, whose bonds brought him home to God, and
himself. Is it for Debt? Think not to pay those who have entrusted thee with
a lingering durance, if there be power in thine hand for a discharge; there is
fraud and injustice in this closeness; Fear thou a worse prison if thou will
needs wilfully live and die in a just indebtment, when thou may be at once
free, and honest: Stretch thine ability to the utmost, to satisfy others with
thine own impoverishing: But if the hand of God have humbled and disabled thee,
labor what thou can to make thy peace with thy Creditors: If they will needs
be cruel, look up with patience to the hand of that God who thinks fit to
afflict thee with their unreasonableness; and make the same good use of thy
sufferings, which thou would do from the immediate hand of thy Creator. If it
be for a good cause, rejoice in this tribulation, and be holily proud and glad,
with the blessed Apostles, Acts 5. 41.
that thou art counted worthy to suffer shame and bonds for the Name of the
Lord Jesus: for every just Cause is his; neither is he less a Martyr that
suffers for his conscience in any of Gods Commandments, then he who suffers for
matter of Faith and Religion. Remember that cordial word of thy Savior,
Blessed are they that are persecuted for righteousness sake; for theirs is the
kingdom of heaven. In such a prison thou shall be sure to find good company:
there thou shall find Joseph, Micaiah, Jeremiah, John Baptist, Peter, Paul and
Silas, and (what should I think of the poll?) all the holy Martyrs, and
Confessors of Jesus Christ from the first plantation of the Gospel to this
present day: repent thee if thou can to be thus matched, and choose rather to
violate a good conscience, and be free, then to keep it under a momentary
restraint.

. 7. The good (...) of retiredness; and the partnership of the souls
imprisonment
Thou art a Prisoner; make the best of thy condition; close air is warmer then
open; and how ordinarily do we hear Birds sing sweeter notes in their cages,
then they could do in the wood? It shall be thine own fault if thou be not
bettered by thy retiredness. Thou art a Prisoner; so is thy soul in thy body;
there, not restrained only, but fettered, yet complains not of the
straitness of these clay walls, or the weight of these bonds, but patiently
waits for an happy Gaole-delivery: so do thou, attend with all long-suffering
the good hour of the pleasure of thy God; thy period is set, not without a
regard to thy good, yea, to thy best; he in whose hand are all times, shall
find, and has determined, a fit time to free both thy body from these outward
prison-walls, and thy soul from this prison of thy body; and to restore both
body and soul from the bondage of corruption to the glorious liberty of the
sons of God. Rom: 8: 21:


Comforts against Banishment.
1. Comfort from the universality of a wise man's Country.
THOU art banished from thy Country: Beware lest in thy complaining thou
censure thy self; A wise man's Country is every where; what such relation has
the place wherein thou were born, to thy present being? What more then the time
wherein thou were born? what reason have thou to be more addicted to the
Region wherein thou fell'st, then to the day of the week, or hour of the day
in which thou salutedst the light? What are times and places of our birth but
unconcerning circumstances? Wherever thou farest well, thou may either find
or make thy Country; But thou say, there is a certain secret property in
our native soil, that draws our affection to it, and ties our hearts to it,
not without a pleasing kind of delight, whereof no reason can be yielded; so
as we affect the place, not because it is better then others, Senec: Ep. 66.
but because it is our own; Ulysses does no less value the rockie soil of
his hard and barren Ithaca, then Agamemnon does the noble walls of his rich and
pleasant Mycenae: I grant this relation has so powerful an influence upon our
hearts naturally, as is pretended; yet such a one as is easily checked with a
small unkindnesse; How many have we known, who upon an actual affront (not
of the greatest) have diverted their respects from their native Country, and
out of a strong alienation of mind have turned their love into hostility: We
shall not need to seek far for Histories, our times and memories will furnish
us too well: Do we not see those, who have sucked the breasts of our common
Mother, upon a little dislike, to have spit in her face? Can we not name our
late homebred compatriots, who upon the disrelish of some displeasing Laws
have flown off from their Country, and suborned Treasons, and incited foreign
Princes to our invasion? So as thou see this natural affection is not so
ardent in many, but that it may be quenched with a mean coffeehouse. If
therefore there were no other ground of thine affliction, thy sorrow is not so
deep-rooted, but that it may be easily pulled up.

2. Comfort from the benefit of self-conversation.
It is not the air or earth that thou stand upon; it is the company, thou
say, from which it is a kind of death to part; I shall leave all
acquaintance, and conversation, and be cast upon strange faces, and languages
that I understand not; my best entertainment will be solitude, my ordinary,
inhospitality; What do thou affright thy self, my son, with these bugges of
needless terror? He is not worthy of the name of a Philosopher, much less of
a Christian Divine, that has not attained to be absolute in himself; and
which way soever he is cast, to stand upon his own bottom; and that, if
there were no other men left in the world, could not tell how to enjoy
himself: It is that within us, whereby we must live, and be happy: some
additions of complacency may come from without: sociable natures, (such is
man's) seek and find pleasure in conversation, but if that be denied,
sanctified spirits know how to converse comfortably with their God, and
themselves.

3. Examples of those holy ones that have abandoned society.
How many holy ones of old have purposely withdrawn themselves from the
company of men, that they might be blessed with an invisible society; that
have exchanged Cities for Deserts, houses for caves, the sight of men for
beasts, that their spiritual eyes might be fixed upon those better objects,
which the frequence of the world held from them? Necessity does but put thee
into that estate, which their piety affected. Oh! but to be driven to forsake
Parents, kinsfolk, friends, how sad a case must it needs be? What is this
other then a perfect distraction? What are we but pieces of our Parents? and
what are friends but parts of us? what is all the world to us without these
comforts? When thou have said all, my son, what is befalne thee other, then it
pleased God to enjoin the Father of the faithful? Get thee out of thy Country,
Gen: 13: 1:
and from thy kindred, and from thy Fathers house into a Land that I will show
thee; Lo, the same God by the command of authority calls thee to this
secession; If thou will show thy self worthy to be the son of such a Father,
do that in an humble obedience to God, which thou art urged to do by the
compulsion of men; But what so grievous a thing is this? Do thou think to
find God where thou go? Do thou make full account of his company both all
along the way, and in the end of thy journey? Has not he said (who cannot
sail) I will not leave thee nor forsake thee? Certainly, he is not worthy to
lay any claim to a God, that cannot find parents, kindred, friends in him
alone: Besides, he that of very stones could raise up children unto Abraham,
how easily can he, of inhospital men, raise up friends to the sons of Abraham?
Only labor thou to inherit that faith wherein he walked; that alone shall
free-denizen thee in the best of forain States, and shall entertain thee in the
wildest deserts.

4. The advantage that has been made of removing.
Thou art cast upon a foreign Nation: Be of good cheer; we know that flowers
removed, grow greater; and some plants which were but unthriving, and
unwholesome in their own soil, have grown both safe and flou rishing in other
Climates. Had Joseph been ever so great, if he had not been transplanted into
Egypt? Had Daniel and his three companions of the Captivity eve^ attained to
that Honor in their native Land? How many have we known, that have found that
health in a change of air, which they could not meet with at home? In Africa
the Southwinde clears up; and the North is rainy. Look thou up still to that
hand which has translated thee; await his good pleasure: Be thou no stranger
to thy God, it matters not who are strangers unto thee.

5. The rig^^ that we have in any country, and i^ God.
Thou art a banished man: How can thou be so, when thou treadest upon thy
Fathers ground? The earth is the Lords, and the fullness of it: In his right,
where ever thou art, thou may challenge a spiritual interest: 1 Cor. 3* 21,
22, 23*
All things, says the Apostle, are yours, and you are Christ's, and Christ is
Gods. No man can challenge thee for a stranger, that is not thy Fathers child.

Thine exile separates thee from thy friends: This were no small affliction, if
it might not be abundantly remedied. That was a true word of Laurentius, That
where two faithful friends are met, God makes up a third: But it is no less
true, That where one faithful spirit is, there God makes up a second: One God
can more then supply a thou sand friends.

6. ^he pra^tice of voluntary travel.
Thy banishment bereaves thee of the comfort of thy wonted companions: Would
not a voluntary travel do as much? Do thou not see thousands tha^ do
willingly for many years change their Country for foreign Regions; taking long
farewells of their dear friends and comerades; some out of curiosity, some out
of a thirst after knowledge, some out of covetous desire of gain? What
difference is there betwixt thee and them, but that their exile is voluntary,
thy travel constrained? And who are these whom thou art so sorry to forgo? Do
thou not remember what Crates the Philosopher said to a young man, that was
beset with parasitical friends; Young man, said he, I pity thy solitude:
Perhaps thou may be more alone in such society, then in the Wilderness: such
conversation is better lost then continued: if thou can but get to be well
acquainted with thy self, thou shall be sorry that thou were no sooner solitary.

7. All ar^ pilgrims
Thou art out of thy Country: Who is not so? We are all pilgrims together with
thee: 1 Pet. 1^
Whiles we are at home in the body, Heb. 1* 1^
we are absent from the Lord: 2 Cor. ^
Miserable are we, if our true home be not above; Heb. 1* 1^
that is the better Country which we seek, even an heavenly: And thither thou
may equally direct thy course in whatsoever Region. This center of earth is
equidistant from the glorious circumference of heaven: if we may once meet
there, what need we make such difference in the way?

Comforts against the loss of the Senses; of Sight, and Hearing.
1. Comfort from the ^^o in^ard ^ghts of ^ason and faith.
THou have lost thine eyes: A loss, which all the world is incapable to repair:
Thou art hereby condemned to a perpetual darkness; For, the light of the body
is the eye: Matthew. 6. 22, 23.
and if the light that is in thee be darkness, how great is that darkness?
Could thou have foreseen this evil, thou had anticipated this loss, by
weeping out those eyes for grief, which thou must forgo. There are but two
ways, by which any outward comfort can have access to thy soul; The Eye, and
the Ear: one of them is now fore-closed for ever. Yet know, my son, thou have
two other inward eyes, that can abundantly supply the want of these of thy
body; The eye of Reason, and the eye of Faith: the one, as a Man; the other, as
a Christian: Answerable whereunto, there is a double light apprehended by them;
Rational, and Divine: Solomon tells thee of the one; Prove. 20. 27.
The spirit of man is the Candle of the Lord, searching all the inward parts of
the belly: The beloved Disciple tells thee of the other; God is light; Joh. 1.
9, 7.
and we walk in the light, as he is in the light: Now these two lights are no
less above that outward and visible light, whereof thou art bereaved, then that
light is above darkness: If therefore by the eye of Reason thou shall attain to
the clear sight of intelligible things; and by the eye of Faith, to the sight
of things supernatural and Divine; the improvement of these better eyes, shall
make a large amends for the lack of thy bodily sight.

2. The supply of better eyes.
Thy sight is lost: Let me tell thee what Antony the Hermit (whom Ruffinus
doubts not to style blessed) said to learned (though blind) Didymus of
Alexandria; Ruffinus Hist. l. 2. c. 7.
Let it not trouble thee, O Didymus, that thou art bereft of carnal eyes; for
thou lackest only those eyes which Mice, and Flies, and Lyzards have: but
rejoice that thou have those eyes which the Angels have, whereby they see God,
and by which thou art enlightened with a great measure of knowledge. Make this
good of thy self, and thou shall not be too much discomforted with the absence
of thy bodily eyes.

3. The better object of our inward sight.
Thine eyes are lost: The chief comfort of thy life is gone with them: Eccl.
11. 7.
The light is sweet, says Solomon; and a pleasant thing it is for the eyes to
behold the sun. Has not God done this purposely, that he might set thee off
from all earthly objects, that thou might so much the more intentively fix
thy self upon him, and seek after those spiritual comforts, which are to be
found in a better light? Behold, the Sun is the most glorious thing that thy
bodily eyes can possibly see: thy spiritual eyes may see him that made that
goodly and glorious creature, and therefore must needs be infinitely more
glorious then what he made. If thou can now see him the more, how have thou
but gained by thy loss?

4. The ill officer done by the eyes.
Thou art become blind: Certainly, it is a sore affliction. The men of
Jabesh-gilead offered to comply with the Tyran of the Ammonites, 1 Samuel 11. 1.
so far as to serve him: but when he required the loss of their right eyes, as
a condition of their peace, they will rather hazard their lives in an unequal
War; as if servitude and death were a less mischief then one eyes loss; how
much more of both? For though one eye be but testis singularis, yet the
evidence of that is as true, as that of both; yea, in some cases more: for when
we would take a perfect aim, we shut one eye, as rather an hinderance to an
accurate information: yet for ordinary use, so do we esteem each of these
lights, that there is no wise man but would rather lose a limb then an eye:
Although I could tell thee of a certain man not less religious then witty,
Bromiard v. Sensus.
who when his friends bewailed the loss of one of his eyes, asked them, Whether
they wept for the eye which he had lost, or the eye which remained? Weep
rather, said he, for the enemy that stays behind, then for the enemy that is
gone. Lo, this man looked upon his eyes, with eyes different from other men's; he
saw them as enemies, which others see as officious servants, as good friends,
as dear favorites: Indeed, they are any or all of these, according as they are
used: good servants, if they go faithfully on the errands we send them, and
return us true intelligence: Good friends, if they advise and invite us to holy
thoughts; enemies, if they suggest and allure us to evil: If thine eyes have
been employed in these evil offices to thy soul, God has done that for thee,
which he has in a figurative sense enjoined thee to do to thy self; Matthew. 5.
29.
If thy right eye offend thee, pluck it out, and cast it from thee; for it is
better for thee that one of thy members should perish, and not that thy whole
body should be cast into hell.

5. Freedom from temptations by the eyes, and from sorrows.
Thou have lost thine eyes, and together with them much earthly contentment:
But withal, thou art hereby freed of many temptations: those eyes were the
in-lets of sin; yea, not only the mere passages by which it entered; but busy
agents in the admission of it; the very Pandars of lust, for the debauching of
the soul. How many thousands are there, who on their deathbeds, upon the sad
recalling of their guilty thoughts, have wished they had been born blind? So
as if now thou have less joy, thou shall sin less; neither shall any vain
objects call away thy thoughts from the serious and sad meditation of spiritual
things. Before, it was no otherwise with thee, then the Prophet Jeremich
reports it to have been with the Jews, That death is come up by the windows.
Jer. 9. 21
So it was with our great Grandmother Eve; she saw the tree was pleasant to
the eyes, Genesis 3. 6
and thereupon took of the fruit. So it has been ever since with all the fruit
of her womb, both in the old, and later world: Genesis 6. 2
The sons of God saw the daughters of men that they were fair, and they took
them wives of all which they chose: In so much as not filthy lusts only, but
even adulteries take up their lodgings in the eye: there the blessed Apostle
finds them; Having eyes (says he) full of adultery, 2 Pet. 2. 14.
and that can not cease from sin. Whiles therefore, Job 31. 7
thine heart walked after thine eyes, as Job speaks, it could do no other but
carry thee down to the chambers of death: Prove. 7. 27.
thou art now delivered from that danger of so deadly a misguidance.

Has not the loss of thine eyes, withal, freed thee of a world of sorrows? The
old word is, What the eye views not, the heart ^ues not: Had thou but seen
what others were forced to behold, those fearful conflagrations, those piles of
murdered carcases, those streams of Christian blood, those savage violences,
those merciless rapines, those sacrilegious outrages, thine heart could not
choose but bleed within thee: Now thou art affected with them only aloof off,
as receiving them by the imperfect intelligence of thine ear from the unfeeling
relation of others.

. 6. The cheerfulness of some blind men.
Thine eyes are lost, what need thy heart to go with them? I have known a
blind man more cheerful, then I could be with both mine eyes: Old Isaac was
dark-sighted when he gave the blessing (contrary to his own intentions) to his
son Jacob, yet it seems he lived forty years after, and could be pleased
then to have good cheer made him with wine and v^nison; Genesis 27. 25.
our life does not lie in our eyes; Pro. 18. 14.
The Spirit of man is that which upholds his infirmities; Labor to raise that
to a cheerful disposition; even in thy bodily darkness, there shall be light
and joy to thy soul. Esth. 8. 16.


. 7. The supply which God gives in other faculties.
Has God taken away thine eyes? But has he not given thee an abundant supply
in other faculties? Are not thine inward senses the more quick? thy memory
stronger, thy fantasy more active, thy understanding more apprehensive? The
wonders that we have heard, and read of blind men's memories, were not easy to
believe, if it were not obvious to conceive that the removal of all
distractions gives them an opportunity both of a careful reposition of all
desired objects, and of a sure fixednesse of them where they are laid: Hence
have we seen it come to pass that some blind men have attained to those
perfections which their eyes could never have feoffed them in: It is very
memorable that our Ecclesiastical Story reports of Didymus of Alexandria, who
being blind from his infancy, Ruffin. Eccl. hist l. 2. c. 7.
through his prayers, and diligent endeavors reached unto such an high pitch of
knowledge in Logic, Geometry, Arithmetic, Astronomy, as was admired by the
learned Masters of those Arts; and for his rare insight into Divinity, was by
great Athanasius approved to be the Doctor of the Chair in that famous Church.
What need we doubt of this truth, when our own times have so clearly seconded
it? having yielded diverse worthy Divines, Gods Seers, bereaved of bodily eyes;
amongst the rest, there was one in my time, Mr. Fisher of Trinity College in
Cambr.
very eminent in the University of Cambridge, (whom I had occasion to dispute
with for his degree) of great skill both in Tongues and Arts, and of singular
acuteness of judgment. Suidas ex Aristophane.
It is somewhat strange that Suidas reports of Neoclldes, that being a blind
man he could steal more cunningly then any that had use of eyes; Sure, I may
say boldly of our Fisher, that he was more dextrous in picking the locks of
difficult Authors, and fetching forth the reasures of their hidden senses, then
those that had the sharpest eyes about him; in so much as it was noted those
were singular Proficients which employed themselves in reading to him; If they
read Books to him, he read Lectures the while to them; and still taught more
then he learned. As for the other outward senses, they are commonly more
exquisite in the blind; We read of some who have been of so accurate a touch,
that by their very feeling they could distinguish betwixt black and white; And
for the ear, as The Lord Verul. Fr. Bacon in his Natural History.
our Philosophers observe, that sounds are sweeter to the blind, then to the
sighted; so also that they are more curiously judged of by them; the virtue of
both those senses being now contracted into one. But the most perfect
recompense of these bodily eyes, is in the exaltation of our spiritual, so
much more enlightened toward the beatisicall vision of God, as they apprehend
more darkness in all earthly objects; certainly, thou shall not miss these
material eyes, if thou may find thy soul thus happily enlightened.

. 8. The benefit of the eyes which once we had.
Thine eyes are lost; It is a blessing that once thou had them; had thou
been born blind, what a stranger had thou (in all likelihood) been to God
and the world? had thou not once seen the face of this heaven, and this
earth, and this Sea, what expressions could have made thee sufficiently
apprehensive of the wonderful works of thy Creator? What discourse could have
made thee to understand what light is? what the Sun the fountain of it, what
the heavens, the glorious region of it, and what the Moon and Stars
illuminated by it? How could thou have had thy thoughts raised so high, as to
give glory to that great God, whose infinite power has wrought all these
mavelous things? No doubt, God has his own ways of mercy, even for those
that are born dark; not requiring what he has not given; graciously supplying
by his spirit in the vessels of his election, what is wanting in the outer-man;
so as even those that could never see the face of the world, shall see the face
of the God that made it; But in an ordinary course of proceeding, those which
have been blind from their birth, must needs want those helps of knowing and
glorifying God in his mighty works, which lie open to the seeing: These once
filled thine eyes, and stay with thee still after thine eyes have forsaken
thee; What should thou do but walk on in the strength of those fixed
thoughts, and be always adoring the Majesty of that God whom that sight has
represented unto thee so glorious, and in an humble submission to his good
pleasure strive against all the discomforts of thy sufferings. Our Story tells
us of a valiant Soldier (answerable to the name he bore) Polyzelus, Suidas v.
Hippias.
who after his eyes were struck out in the Battle, covering his face with his
Target, fought still, laying about him as vehemently, as if he had seen whom to
smite. So do thou, my son, with no less courage; let not the loss of thine eyes
hinder thee from a cheerful resistance of those spiritual enemies, which labor
to draw thee into an impatient murmuring against the hand of thy God: wait
humbly upon that God who has better eyes in store for thee, then those thou
have lost.

9. The supply of one sense by another
Thou have lost thy hearing: It is not easy to determine whether loss is the
greater, of the Eye, or of the Ear: both are grievous. Now all the world is to
thee as dumb, since thou art deaf to it: How small a matter has made thee a
mere cipher amongst men! These two are the senses of instruction: there is no
other way for intelligence to be conveyed to the soul, whether in secular or in
spiritual affairs. The eye is the window, the ear is the door by which all
knowledge enters: In matter of observation, by the eye; in matter of faith,
Romans 10. 17.
by the ear. Had it pleased God to shut up both these senses from thy birth,
thy estate had been utterly disconsolate: neither had there been any possible
access for comfort to thy soul: and if he had so done to thee in thy riper age,
there Had been no way for thee but 1 to live on thy former store: But now that
he has vouchsafed to leave thee one passage open, it beh^ves thee to supply
the one sense by the other, and to let in those helps by the window, which are
denied entrance at the door. And since that infinite goodness has been pleased
to lend thee thine ear so long, as till thou have laid the sure grounds of
faith in thy heart; now thou may work upon them, in this silent opportunity,
with heavenly meditations, and raise them up to no less height, then thou
might have done by the help of the quickest ear.

It is well for thee, that in the fullness of thy senses thou were careful to
improve thy bosom as a Magazine of heavenly thoughts, providing with the wise
Patriarch for the seven years of dearth: otherwise, now that the passages are
thus blocked up, thou could not but have been in danger of affamishing. Thou
have now abundant leisure to recall and ruminate upon those holy counsels, which
thy better times laid up in thy heart, and to thy happy advantage find the
difference betwixt a wise providence, and a careless neglect.

10. The better condition of the inward ear.
Thine outward hearing is gone: But thou have an inward and better ear, whereby
thou hear the secret motions of Gods Spirit, which shall never be lost: How
many thousands whom thou enviest, are in a worse condition? they have an
outward and bodily ear, whereby they hear the voice of men; but they want that
spiritual ear, which perceives the least whisperings of the holy Ghost: Ears
they have, but not hearing ears; for fashion, more then use: Wise Solomon makes
and observes the distinction; Prove. 20. 12.
The hearing ear, and the seeing eye, the Lord has made even both of them: And
a greater then Solomon can say of his formal auditors, Hearing they hear not.
Mat. 13. 13.
If thou have an ear for God, though deaf to men; how much happier art thou
then those millions of men, that have au ear for men, and are deaf to God?

11. The grief that arises from lear^ing evil.
Thou have lost thy hearing; and therewith no small deal of sorrow: How would
it grieve thy soul to hear those woeful ejulations, those pitiful complaints,
those hideous blasphemies, those mad paradoxes, those hellish heresies,
wherewith thine ear would have been wounded, if it had not been barred against
their entrance? It is thy just grief that thou missest the hearing of many good
words; it is thy happiness that thou art freed from the hearing of many evil.
It is an even lay betwixt the benefit of hearing good, and the torment of
hearing evil.

Comforts against Barrenness.
. 1. The blessing of fruitfulness seasoned with sorrows.
THou complainest of dry loins, and a barren womb: so did a better man before
thee, even the Father of the faithful: What will thou give me, Genesis 25. 2.
seeing I go childless? So did the wife of faithful Israel, Genesis 30. 1.
Give me children, or else I die. So desirous has Nature been, even in the
holiest, to propagate it self, and so impatient of a denial: Lo, Psa. 127. 4.
children and the fruit of the womb are an heritage and gift that comes from
the Lord. Happy is he that has his quiver full of such shafts. Verse. 6.
It is the blessing that David grudged to wicked ones, Psalm. 17. 14.
They have children at their desire. It was the curse which God inflicted upon
the family of Abimelech King of Gerar, Genesis 20. 17, 18.
that he closed up all the wombs in his house for Sarahs sake: And the
judgment threatened to Ephraim, Hos 9. 14
is a miscarrying womb, and dry breasts: And Jechoniah's sad doom is, Jer. 22.
30.
Write this man childless: As on the contrary, it is a special favor of God,
that the barren has born seven: 1 Samuel 2. 5.
And it is noted by the Psalmist, as a wonder of Gods mercy, Psa. 113. 8.
That he makes the barren woman to keep house, and to be a joyful mother of
children. It is pity he was ever born, that holds not children a blessing; yet
not simple and absolute, but according as it may prove: She has a double
favor from God, that is a joyful mother of children: many a one breeds her
sorrow, breeds her death. There is scarce any other blessing from God seasoned
with so much acrimony both of misery and danger. Do but lay together the sick
fits of breeding, the painful throws of travel, the weary attendances of
nursing, the anxious cares of education, the fears and doubts of mis-guidance,
the perpetual solicitude for their provision, the heartbreaking grief for
their miscarriage; and tell me whether thy bemoaned sterility have not more
ease, less sorrow.

. 2. The pains of childbearing.
It is thy sorrow then that thou art not fruitful: Consider that thou art
herein freed from a greater sorrow: In sorrow shall thou bring forth children.
Genesis 3. 16.
Do but think upon the shrieks and torments that thou have seen and heard in
the painful travels of thy neighbors: One thou have seen wearying the days and
nights in restless pangs, and calling for death in a despair of delivery:
Another after the unprofitable labors of Midwives, forced to have her bowels
ransackt by the hand of another sex. One has her dead burden torn from her by
piecemeal; another is delivered of her life and birth together: One
languisheth to death after the hand of an unskilful Midwife; another is weary
of her life through the soreness of her breasts: All these sorrows thou have
escaped by this one: In these regards, how many whom thou enviest, have thought
thee happier then themselves?

. 3. The misery of ill-disposed and undutiful children.
Thou art afflicted that thou art not a mother: Many a one is so, that wishes
she had been barren: If either the child prove deformed and misshapen; or,
upon further growth, unnatural and wicked; what a Corrosive is this to her that
bore him? Rebecca thought it long to be (after her marriage) twenty years
childless; Genesis 25. 20, 21.
her holy husband (at sixty years age) prays to God for issue by her: his
devotion (as the Jewish Doctors say) carried him to Mount Moriah for this
purpose, that in the same place where his life was miraculously preserved from
the knife of his Father, it might by the like miracle be renewed in his
posterity: God hears him; Genesis 25. 22.
Rebecca conceives: but when she felt that early combat of her struggling twins
in her womb, she can say, If it be so, Genesis 25. 25.
why am I thus? And when she saw a child come forth all clad in hair, and
after saw his conditions no less rough then his hide, Genesis 27. 41.
do we not think she wished that part of her burden unborn? Certainly, children
are according to their proof, either blessings, or crosses. Have thou a child
well disposed, well governed? Prove. 10. 1.
A wise Son makes a glad Father. Prove. 15. 20.
Have thou a child disorderly and debauched? Prove. 10. 1.
A foolish son is the heaviness of his Mother; Prove. 19. 13.
and the calamity of his Father. Have thou a son that is unruly, stubborn,
unnatural? (as commonly the cions overrule the stock:) He that wastes his
Father, Prove. 19. 26.
and chaseth away his Mother, is a son that causes shame, and brings
reproach. And if such a son should live and die impenitent, what can be
answerable to the discomfort of that Parent who shall think that a piece of
himself is in hell?

4. The cares of parents for their children.
Thou have no children: As thou have less joy, so thou have loss trouble: It is
a world of work and thoughts that belongs to these living possessions.
Artemidor. de Insomniis, l. 1. c. 16.
Artemidorus* observes, that to dream of children, imports cares to follow.
Surely, as they are our greatest cares, so they bring many lesser cares with
them: Before thou had but one mouth to feed, now many. And upon whom does
this charge lie, but upon the Parent? not Nature only, but Religion casts it
upon him: 1 Timothy 5. 8.
For, if any provide not for his own, especially for those of his own house, he
has denied the Faith, and is worse then an infidel. Do thou not see that
many suckers growing up from the root of the tree, draw away the sap from the
stock? and many rivulets let out from the main Chanel, leave the stream
shallow? So it must be with thee, and thine: But this expense is not more
necessary then comfortable. I remember a great man coming to my house at
Waltham, and seeing all my children standing in the order of their age, and
stature, said, These are they that make rich men poor: But he straight received
this answer; Nay, my Lord, these are they that make a poor man rich; for there
is not one of these whom we would part with, for all your wealth. Indeed,
wherefore do we receive, but to distribute? and what are we but the Farmers of
those we leave behind us? And if we do freely lay out of our substance
beforehand for their good, so much of our rent is happily cleared. It is easy
to observe that none are so gripple and hard-fisted, as the childless: whereas
those who for the maintenance of large Families are inured to frequent
disbursements, find such experience of Divine providence in the faithful
managing of their affairs, as that they lay out with more cheerfulness then
they receive: Wherein their care must needs be abated, when God takes it off
from them to himself; and if they be not wanting to themselves, their faith
gives them ease, in casting their burden upon him who has both more power, and
more right to it, since our children are more his then our own: He that feeds
the young ravens, Psa. 147. 9.
can he fail the best of his creatures? Worthy Mr Greenham tells us of a
Gentlewoman, who coming into the cottage of a poor neighbor, and seeing it
furnished with store of children, could say, Here are the mouths, but where is
the meat? but not long after she was paid in her own coin, for the poor woman
coming to her after the burial of her last, and now only child, inverted the
question upon her, Here is the meat, but where are the mouths? Surely, the
great Housekeeper of the world, whose charge we are, will never leave any of
his menialls without the bread of sufficiency; and who are so fit to be his
Purveyors as the Parents for their own brood? Nature has taught the very Birds
to pick out the best of the grains for their young; Nature sends that moisture
out of the root which gives life to the branches, and blossoms. Sometimes
indeed it meets with a kind retaliation; some Stork-like disposition repaies
the loving offices done by the Parents in a dutiful retribution to their age
or necessity: But how often have we seen the contrary? Here, an unsatisfiable
importunity of drawing from the Parent that maintenance which is but necessary
for his own subsistence: So we have seen a young Bat hanging on the teat of her
Damme for milk, even when she is dying: So we have seen some insatiable Lambs
forcing the udder of their dammes, when they have been as big as the Ewe that
yeaned them: There, an undutifull and unnatural neglect, whether in not owning
the meannesse of those that begot them; or in not supporting the weakness of
their decayed estate by due maintenance. Ingratitude is odious in any man, but
in a child, monstrous.

. 5. The great grief in the loss of children.
It is thy grief that thou never had a child; Believe him that has tried
it, there is not so much comfort in the having of children, as there is sorrow
in parting with them, especially, when they are come to their proof; when their
parts, and disposition have raised our hopes of them, and doubled our affection
toward them; And as (according to the French Proverb) he that has not cannot
lose; so contrarily, he that has must lose; our meeting is not more certain
then our parting; either we must leave them, and so their grief for us must
double ours; or they must leave us, and so our grief for them must be no less
then our love was of them. If then thou will be truly wise, set thy heart upon
that only absolute good, which is not capable of losing: Divided affections
must needs abate of their force; now since there are no objects of dearnesse
which might distract thy love, be sure to place it wholly upon that infinite
goodness which shall entertain it with mercy, and reward it with blessedness.
If Elkanah therefore could say to his barren Wife Hannah, 1 Samuel 1. 8.
Why weepest thou? and why is thy heart heavy? am not I better to thee then ten
sons? How much more comfortably may thou hear the Father of mercies say to
thy soul, Why is thy heart heavy? am not I better to thee then ten thousand
sons?

Comforts against want of Sleep.
1. The misery of the want of rest; with the best remedy.
THOU art afflicted with want of sleep: A complaint incident to distempered
bodies, and thoughtfull minds: Oh how wearisome a thing it is to spend the
long night in tossing up and down in a restless bed in the chase of sleep,
which the more eagerly it is followed, flies so much the farther from us!
Could thou obtain of thy self to forbear the desire of it, perhaps it would
come alone; now that thou suest for it (like to some froward piece) it is coy
and overly, and punishes thee with thy longing: Lo, he that could command an
hundred and seven and twenty Provinces, yet could not command rest; Esth 6. 1
On that night his sleep departed from him; neither could be either forced, or
entreated to his bed. And the great Babylonian Monarch, though he laid some
hand on sleep, yet he could not hold it, Dan 2. 1.
for his sleep brake from him: And for great and wise Solomon, it would not so
much as come within his view, Eccl. 8* 16
Neither night nor day sees he sleep with his eyes: Surely, as there is no
earthly thing more comfortable to nature then bodily rest, Jer. 31. 26.
so there is nothing whose loss is more grievous and disheartning; If the
senses be not sometimes in meet vicissitudes, tied up, how can they choose but
run themselves out of breath, and weary and spend themselves to nothing? If the
body be not refreshed with a moderate enterchange of repose, how can it but
languish in all the parts of it? and as commonly the soul follows the temper
of the body, how can that but find a sensible discomposure and debilitation in
all her faculties, and operations? Do we not see the savagest creatures tamed
with want of rest? Do we not find this rack alone to have been torture enough
to fetch from poor souls a confessionall discovery of those acts they never
did? Do we not find raveries, and frenzies the ordinary attendants of
sleeplesness? Herein therefore thy tongue has just cause to complain of thine
eyes. For remedy, in stead of closing thy lids to wait for sleep; lift up thy
stiff eyes to him that gives his beloved rest: Ps. 127. 2
what ever be the means, he it is that holds thine eyes waking: Psa. 77. 4
He that made thine eyes, keeps off sleep from thy body, for the good of thy
soul: let not thine eyes wake without thy heart. The Spouse of Christ can say,
I sleep, Cant. 5. 4.
but my heart waketh; how much more would she say, Mine eyes wake, and my heart
waketh also? When thou can not see sleep with thine eyes, labor to see him
that is invisible: one glimpse of that sight is more worth, then all the sleep
that thine eyes can be capable of: give thy self up into his hands, to be
disposed of at his will: What is this sweet acquiescence, but the rest of the
soul? Which if thou can find in thy self, thou shall quietly digest the want
of thy bodily sleep.

2. The favor of freedom from pain.
Thou want sleep: Take heed thou do not aggravate thine affliction: It is
only an evil of loss, no evil of sense: a mere lack of what thou wishest; not
a pain of what thou feel. Alas, how many besides want of rest, are tortured
with intolerable torments in all the parts of their body; who would think
themselves happy, if they might be put into thy condition: might they but have
ease, how gladly would they forbear rest? Be not therefore so much troubled
that it is no better with thee, but rather be thankful that it is no worse.

. 3. The favor of health without sleep.
Thou lackest sleep; A thing that we desire not so much for its own sake, as in
a way to health. What if God be pleased so to dispose of thee, as to give thee
health without it? So he has done to some. It is a small matter that Goulart
reports out of Gaspar Wolfius, Goul. Histoires Memorables. c. Ve^lles.
of a woman in Padua that continued fifteen days and nights without sleep. That
is very memorable which Seneca tells us of great Mecaenas, that in three years
he slept not ( ne horae momento) so much as the space of an hour: which however
Lipsius thinks good to mitigate with a favorable construction, as conceiving
an impossibility of an absolute sleeplesness yet if we shall compare it with
other instances of the same kind, we shall find no reason to scruple the
utmost rigor of that relation: That a frantic man (of whom Fernelius writes)
should continue a year and two months without any sleep at all, Patholog. l.
5. c. 2.
is no wonder, in comparison of that which learned Heurnius tells us, Lib. De
morbis capitis, c. 16.
upon good assurance given him, when he was a Student in Padua, that Nizolius
the famous Ciceronian, lived ten whole years without sleep* And even in our
time and climate, I have been informed by credible testimony, that Monsieur L'
Angles, a French Physician at London, lived no fewer years altogether
sleepless. But that exceeds all example, which Monsieur Goulart reports out of
an Author of good reputation, Goulart ibidem.
of a certain Gentlewoman, who for thirty five years, remained without any
sleep, and found no inconvenience or distemper thereby, as was witnessed by her
husband and servants. Lo, the hand of God is not shortened: He who in our time
miraculously protracted the life of the Maid of Meures so many years, without
meat; has sustained the lives of these forenamed persons thus long, without
sleep, that it might appear, Matthew. 4. 4.
Man lives not by meat or sleep only, Deuteronomy. 8. 3.
but by every word that proceeds out of the mouth of God. If he should please
to bless thee with a sleepless health, the favor is far greater, then if he
allowed thee to short out thy time in a dull unprofitable rest.

. 4. Sleep but a symptom of mortality.
Thou want sleep: Behold, he that keeps Israel does neither slumber nor
sleep: and those blessed spirits that do continually see the face of God, never
sleep. Sleep is but a symptom of frail mortality; whereof the less we do or
can partake, we come so much the nearer to those spiritual natures whose
perfection makes them incapable of sleep. Hereupon it was, that those retired
Christians in the Primitive times, which affected to come nearest to an
Angelical life, Sozomen. l. 6. c. 29.
wilfully repelled sleep, neither would ever admit it, till it necessarily
forced it self upon them. Lo then, thou suffer no more out of the distemper
of humors, or unnatural obstructions, then better men have willingly drawn
upon themselves out of holy resolutions. It is but our construction that makes
those things tedious to us, which have been well taken by others.

. 5. No use of sleep whither we are going.
Thou want sleep: Have patience, my son, for a while; thou art going where
there shall be no need, no use of sleep: and in the mean time, thy better part
would not, cannot rest: Though the gates be shut, that it cannot show it self
abroad, it is ever, and ever will be active. As for this earthly piece, it
shall ere long sleep its fill, where no noise can wake it, till the voice of
the Archangel, 1 These. 4. 16.
and the trumpet of God shall call it up in the morning of the Resurrection.

Comforts against the inconveniences of Old age.
1. The illimitation of age; and the miseries that attend it.
OLd age is that which we all desire to aspire unto; and when we have attained,
are as ready to complain of, as our greatest misery: verifying in part that old
observation, That Wedlock and Age are things which we desire, and repent of. Is
this our Ingratitude, or Inconstancy, that we are weary of what we wished?
Perhaps this accusation may not be universal: There is much difference in
constitutions, and much latitude in old age: Infancy and youth have their
limits, age admits of no certain determination: At seventy years David was old,
and stricken in years; and they covered him with clothes, 1 King 1. 1.
but he gat no heat: Whereas Caleb can profess, Josh. 14. 10, 11.
Now lo, I am fourscore and five years old: as yet, I am as strong this day, as
I was in the day that Moses sent me to spy out the Land: as my strength was
then, even so is my strength now, for war, both to go out, and come in. And
beyond him, Moses was an hundred and twenty years old, Deuteronomy. 34 7.
when his eye was not dim, nor his natural strength abated. Genesis 5. 27.
Methuselah was but old, when he was nine hundred sixty five. But as for the
generality of mankind, the same Moses, who lived to see an hundred and twenty
years* has set man's ordinary period at half his own term: Psalm. 90. 10.
The days of our years are threescore years and ten: and if by reason of
strength they be fourscore years, yet is their strength labor and sorrow: Lo,
fourscore years alone, are load enough for the strength (much more for the
weakness) of age: but when labor and sorrow are added to the weight, how can
we but double under the burden? Sen. Ep. 58*
He was both old and wise, that said out of experience, that our last days are
the dregs of our life: the clearer part is gone, and all drawn out, the lees
sink down to the bottom. Who can express the miserable inconveniences that
attend Old Age! wherein our cares must needs be multiplied according to the
manifold occasions of our affairs: For the world is a Net, wherein the more we
stir, the more we are entangled. And for our bodily grievances, what varieties
do we here meet withal? what aches of the bones, what belking of the Joints,
what Convulsions of Sinews, what torments of the Bowels, Stone, Colic,
Strangury? what distillations of Rheums, what hollow Coughs, what weaknesses of
retention, expulsion, digestion, what decay of Senses? So as Age is no other
then the common sewer into which all diseases of our life are wont to empty
themselves: Well therefore might Sarah say, Genesis 18. 12.
After I am waxed old shall I have pleasure? And good Barzillai justly excuses
himself for not accepting the gracious invitation of David: 2 Samuel 19. 35.
I am this day fourscore years old, and can I discern between good and evil?
Can thy servant taste what I eat, or what I drink? Can I hear any more the
voice of singing men, and singing women? Wherefore then should thy servant be
yet a burden unto my lord the King? Lo, Eccl. 12. 1, 2, 3.
these are they which the Preacher calls the evil days, and the years wherein a
man shall say, I have no pleasure: wherein the Sun, or the Light, or the Moon,
or the Stars are darkened, and the clouds return after the rain: when the
keepers of the house shall tremble, and the strong men shall bow themselves,
and the grinders cease, because they are few, and those that look out of the
windows be darkened. Shortly, what is our old age, but the Winter of our life?
How can we then expect any other then gloomy weather, chilling frosts, storms
and tempests?

2. Old Age a blessing.
But whiles we do thus querulously aggravate the incommodities of age, we must
beware lest we derogate from the bounty of our Maker, and disparage those
blessings which he accounts precious; amongst which, Old Age is none of the
meanest: Had he not put that value upon it, would he have honored it with his
own style, calling himself, Dan. 7. 9 13. 22.
The Ancient of days? Would he else have set out this mercy as a reward of
obedience to himself, ( I will fulfill the number of thy days) and of obedience
to our Parents, Exodus 23 26.
To live long in the Land? Exodus 20 12.
Would he have promised it as a mavelous favor to restored Jerusalem (now
become a City of Truth,) That there shall yet old men, Zech. 8. 4.
and old women dwell in the streets of Jerusalem, and every man with his staff
in his hand for very age? Would he else have denounced it as a judgment to
over-indulgent Eli, 1 Samuel 2. 32.
There shall not be an old man in thine house for ever? Far be it from us to
despise that which God does honor, and to turn his blessing into a curse. Yea,
the same God, who best knows the price of his own favors, as he makes no small
estimation of age himself, so he has thought fit to call for an high respect
to be given to it by men, out of an holy awe to himself: Lev. 19. 32.
Thou shall rise up before the hoary head, and honor the face of the old man,
and fear thy God. I am the Lord. Hence it is, that he has pleased to put
together the Ancient and the Honorable; Isai. 9. 15.
and has told us, that an hoary head is a crown of glory, Prove. 16 31.
if it be found in a way of righteousness: Prove. 20. 29.
And lastly, makes it an argument of the deplored estate of Jerusalem, that
they favored not the Elders. Lam. 4. 15.
As therefore, we too sensibly feel what to complain of, so we well know what
privileges we may challenge as due to our age; even such as nature it self
has taught those heathens which have been in the next degree to savage: If
pride and skill have made the Athenians uncivil, yet a young Lacedemonian will
rise up, and yield his place in the Theater to neglected age.

. 3. The advantages of old age: 1. Fearlesnesse.
It is not a little injurious so to fasten our eyes upon the discommodities of
any condition, as not to take in the advantages that belong to it; which
carefully laid together, may perhaps sway the balance to an equal poise: Let
it be true that old age is oppressed with many bodily griefs; but what if it
yield other immunities which may keep the scales even? whereof it is not the
least, that it gives us firm resolution, and bold security against dangers and
death it self; For the old man knows how little of his clew is left in the
winding, and therefore, when just occasion is offered, sticks not much upon so
inconsiderable a remainder. Old age and orbity, as Cesellius professed, were
those two things that emboldened him. And when Castritius refused to deliver
the hostages of Placentia to Carbo the Consul, and was threatened with many
swords, he answered those menaces with his many years. And that we may not
disdain homebred instances, and may see that brave spirits may lodge in
cottages; In my time a plain Villager in the Rude Peake, when thieves taking
advantage of the absence of his family, breaking into his solitary dwelling,
and finding him sitting alone by his fire side, fell violently upon him; and
one of them setting his dagger to his heart, swore that he would presently kill
him, if he did not instantly deliver to them that money which they knew he had
lately received; the old man looks boldly in the face of that stout Villain,
and with an undaunted courage returns him this answer in his Peakish Dialect,
Nay, even put fro thee, son, I have lived long enough, but I tell thee,
unless thou mend thy manners, thou will never live to see half my days; put
fro thee if thou will. What young man would have been so easily induced to part
with his life, and have been so ready to give entertainment to an unexpected
death? Surely, the hope and love of life commonly softens the spirits of
vigorous youth, and disswades it from those enterprises which are attended with
manifest peril; whereas extreme age teaches us to contemn dangers.

. 4. The second advantage of old age, Freedom from passions.
Yet a greater privilege of age is a freedom from those impetuous passions
wherewith youth is commonly over-swayed; for together with our natural heat is
also abated the heat of our inordinate lusts, so as now our weaker appetite may
easily be subdued to reason: The temperate old man in the Story, when one
showed him a beautiful face, could answer, I have long since left to be
eyesick: And that other could say of pleasure, I have gladly with drawn my self
from the service of that imperious mistress. What an unreasonable vassalage
our youthful lusts subject us unto, we need no other instance then in the
strongest, and wisest man; How was the strongest man Sampson effeminated by his
impotent passion, and weakened in his intellectuals so far, as wilfully to
betray his own life to a mercenary Harlot, and to endure to hear her say, Tell
me wherewith thou may be bouud to do thee hurt: Judge. 16. 6.
How easily might he have answered thee, O Delila, Even with these cords of
brutish sensuality, wherewith thou have already bound me to the loss of my
liberty, mine eyes, my life? How was the wisest man, Solomon, besotted with his
strange Wives, so as to be drawn away to the worship of strange gods! And how
may the fur trees howl, when the Cedars fall! who can hope to be free from
being transported with irregular affections, when we see such great precedents
of frailty before our eyes? From the danger of these miserable miscarriages our
age happily secures us, putting us into that quiet harbor, whence we may see
young men perillously tossed with those tempests of unruly passions, from which
our cooler age has freed us.

. 5. The third advantage of age, experimental knowledge.
Add hereunto the benefit of experimental knowledge, wherewith age is wont to
enrich us, every dram whereof is worth many pounds of the best youthly
contentments; in comparison whereof, the speculative knowledge is weak and
imperfect; this, may come good cheap, perhaps costs us nothing; that, commonly
we pay dear for, and therefore is justly esteemed the more precious: If
experience be the mistress of fools, I am sure it is the mother of wisdom;
neither can it be (except we be too much wanting to our selves) but the long
observation of such variety of actions and events as meet with us in the whole
course of our life, must needs leave with us such sure rules of judgment, as
may be unfailing directions for our selves, and others: In vain shall this be
expected from our younger years, which the wise Philosopher excludes from
being meet Auditors, much less Judges of true morality: In regard whereof,
well might the old man say, Ye young men think us old men fools, but we old
men know you young men to be fools: Certainly, what value soever ignorance may
put upon it, this fruit of age is such, as that the earth has nothing equally
precious. It was a profane word, and fit for the mouth of an Heathen Poet, That
Prudence is above Destiny: But surely, a Christian may modestly and justly say,
That, next to Divine Providence, Humane Prudence may challenge the supreme
place in the administration of these earthly affairs; and that Age may claim
the greatest interest in that Prudence: Young Elihu could say, Job 32 7
Multitude of years should teach wisdom: And the wise man, Ecclus 25. 4, 5.
Oh how comely a thing is judgment for gray hairs, and for ancient men to know
counsel! Oh how comely is the wisdom of old men, and understanding and counsel
to men of honor! In regard whereof, the Grecians had wont to say, that young
men are for Action, old men for Advice: And among the Romans we know that
Senators take their name from age. That therefore which is the weakness of old
men's eyes, that (their visual spirits not uniting till some distance) they
better discern things further off, is the praise and strength of their mental
eyes; they see either judgments or advantages afar off, and accordingly frame
their determinations. It is observed that old Lutes sound better then new: and
it was Rehoboam's folly and undoing, 1 Kings 12. 6, 7, 8* 9, 10, etc.
that he would rather follow the counsel of his green heads that stood before
him, then of those grave Senators that had stood before his wiser father. Not
that mere Age is of it self thus rich in wisdom and knowledge; but Age well
cultured, well improved: There are old men that do but live, or rather have a
being upon earth, (so have stocks and stones as well as they) who can give no
proof of their many years, but their gray hairs, and infirmities. There are
those, who, like to Hermogenes, are old men, whiles they are boys; and
children, when they are old men: These, the elder they grow, are so much more
stupid. Time is an ill measure of age, which should rather be meted by
proficiency, by ripeness of judgment, by the monuments of our commendable and
useful labors. If we have thus bestowed our selves, our Autumn will show what
our Spring was; and the color of our hair will yield us more cause to fear our
pride then our dejection.

. 6. Age in some is vigorous and well affected.
We accuse our Age of many weaknesses and indispositions: But these imputations
must not be universal: Many of these are the faults of the person, not of the
age. He said well, As all Wine does not turn sour with age, no more does every
Nature. Old Oil is noted to be clearer, and hotter in Medicinal use then new.
There are those who are pettish and crabbed in youth; there are contrarily
those who are mild, gentle, sociable in their decayed years: There are those
who are crazie in their prime; and there are those who in their wane are
vigorous: There are those who ere the fullness of their age have lost their
memory; as Hermogenes, Cornivus, Antonius Caracalla, Georgius Trapezunti^s, and
Nizolius. There are those, whose intellectuals have so happily held out, that
they have been best at the last: Plato in his last year (which was fourscore
and one) died, as it were, with his Pen in his hand: Isocrates wrote his best
Piece at ninety four years: And it is said of Demosthenes, that when death
summoned him at an hundred years, and somewhat more, he bemoaned himself, that
he must now die, when he began to get some knowledge. And as for spiritual
graces and improvements; Psalm. 92. 12, 13.
Such as be planted in the house of the Lord, shall flourish in the courts of
our God: They also shall bring forth more fruit in their age; and shall be fat
and well liking.

7. The fourth advantage of Age, Near approach to our end.
But the chief benefit of our Age is, our near approach to our journeys end:
for the end of all motion is rest; which when we have once attained, there
remains nothing but fruition: Now our Age brings us (after a weary race) within
some breathings of our goal: for if young men may die, old men must. A
condition which a mere carnal heart bewails and abhors, complaining of Nature
as niggardly in her dispensations of the shortest time to her noblest creature;
and envying the Oaks, which many generations of men must leave standing and
growing. No marvel; for the worldling thinks himself here at home, and looks
upon death as a banishment: he has placed his heaven here below, and can see
nothing in his remove, but either annihilation, or torment. But for us
Christians, who know, that whiles we are present in the body, 2 Cor. 5. 6.
we are absent from the Lord; and do justly account our selves forraigners, our
life a pilgrimage, heaven our home; how can we but rejoice, that after a
tedious and painful travel, we do now draw near to the threshold of our Fathers
house; wherein we know there are many mansions, and all glorious. I could blush
to hear an heathen say, Cicero de Senect.
If God would offer me the choice of renewing my age, and returning to my first
childhood, I should heartily refuse it; for I should be loath, after I have
passed so much of my race, to be called back from the goal, to the bars of my
first setting out; and to hear a Christian whining and puling at the thought of
his dissolution. Where is our faith of an heaven, if having been so long
sea-beaten, we be loath to think of putting into the safe and blessed harbor of
immortality?

Comforts against the fears and pains of death.
. 1. The fear of Death natural.
THou fear death: Thou were not a man if thou did not so* The holiest, the
wisest, the strongest that ever were, have done no less. He is the King of
fear, and therefore may and must command it. Thou may hear the man after Gods
own heart say, The sorrows of death compassed me: Psa. 116. 3.
And again, My soul is full of troubles, Psalm. 88. 3, 4, 5.
my life draws nigh to the grave: I am counted with them that go down to the
pit, as a man that has no strength; free among the dead. Thou may hear good
and great Hezekiah, upon the message of his death, Isai. 38. 14.
chattering like a Crane or a Swallow, and mourning as a Dove. Thou fear as
a man; I cannot blame thee: But thou must overcome thy fear, as a Christian:
which thou shall do, if from the terrible aspect of the messenger, thou shall
cast thine eyes upon the gracious and amiable face of the God that sends him:
Psalm. 18. 5, 6.
Holy David shows the way; The snares of death prevented me: In my distress I
called upon the Lord, and cried unto my God; he heard my voice out of his
Temple, and my cry came before him, even into his ears: Lo, he that is our God,
Psalm. 68. 20.
is the God of salvation; and unto God the Lord belong the issues of death:
Make him thy friend, and Death shall be no other then advantage. Phil. 1. 21.
It is true, as the Wise man says, Wisd. 1* 13. 2. 24.
that God made not Death; but that through envy of the devil Death came into
the world: But it is as true, that though God made him not, yet he is pleased
to employ him as his messenger to summon some souls to judgment, to invite
others to glory: and for these later, Precious in the sight of the Lord is the
death of his Saints: Psa. 116. 15.
And what reason have thou to abominate that which God accounts precious?

. 2. Remedy o^ fear, Acquaintance with death.
Thou art afraid of death: Acquaint thy self with him more, and thou shall fear
him less: Even Bears and Lions, which at the first sight afrighted us, upon
frequent viewing lose their terror: snure thine eyes to the sight of death,
and that face shall begin not to displease thee. Thou must shortly dwell with
him for a long time, (for the days of darkness are many) do thou in the mean
time entertain him; Ecel. 11. ult.
let him be sure to be thy daily guest: Thus the blessed Apostle; I protest by
our rejoicing which I have in Christ Jesus, ^ Cor. 15* 31.
I die daily. Bid him to thy board, lodge him in thy bed, talk with him in thy
closet, walk with him in thy garden, as Joseph of Arimathea did; and by no
means suffer him to be a stranger to thy thoughts: This familiarity shall bring
thee to a delight in the company of him whom thou did at first abhor; so as
thou shall with the chosen vessel say, Phil. 1. 23.
I have a desire to depart, and to be with Christ, which is best of all.

3. The misapprehension of death injurious.
Thou art grievously afraid of death: Is it not upon a mistaking? Our fears are
apt to imagine and to aggravate evils: Even Christ himself, walking upon the
waters, was by the Disciples trembled at, as some dreadful apparition. Perhaps,
my son, thou look at death as some utter abolition, or extinction of thy
being; and Nature must needs shrink back at the thought of not being at all:
This is a foul and dangerous misprision: It is but a departing, which thou
call a death. See how God himself styles it to the father of the faithful;
Genesis 15. 15.
Thou shall go to thy Fathers in peace, thou shall be buried in a good old age:
And of his holy grandchild Israel, the Spirit of God says, When Jacob had
made an end of commanding his sons, Genesis 49. 33.
he gathered up his feet into the bed, and yielded up the ghost, and was
gathered unto his people. Lo, dying is no other, then going to our Fathers, and
gathering to our people, with whom we do and shall live in that other and
better world, and with whom we shall re-appear glorious. Let but thy faith
represent death to thee in this shape, and he shall not appear so formidable.
Do but mark in what familiar terms it pleased God to confer with his servant
Moses concerning his death; Deuteronomy. 32 49.
Get thee up into this mountain Abarim, unto mount Nebo, which is in the land
of Moab, and behold the land of Canaan which I give unto the children of Israel
for a possession; And die in the mount whither thou go est up, and be gathered
to thy people, as Aaron thy brother died in mount Hor, and was gathered to his
people: Lo, it is no more, then Go up and die: Should it have been but to go a
days journey in the Wilderness to sacrifice, it could have been no otherwise
expressed; o^^s if it were all one to go up to Sinai, to meet with God, and to
go up to Nebo and die. Neither is it otherwise with us; only the difference
is, that Moses must first see the land of Promise, and then die; whereas we
must first die, and then see the promised Land.

4. Comfort from the common condition of men.
Thou art troubled with the fear of death: What reason have thou to be
afflicted with that which is the common condition of mankind? Remember, my
son, the words of Joshua, the victorious Leader of Gods people; Josh. 23. 14.
Behold, this day (says he) I am going the way of all the earth. If all the
earth go this way, could thou be so fond as to think there should be a
by-path left for thee, wherein thou may tread alone? Were it so that Monarchs
and Princes, that Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles were allowed any easier
passage out of the world, thou might perhaps find some pretense of reason to
repine at a painful dissolution, but now since all go one way, and (as the
wise Philosopher says) those which are unequal in their birth, Sen. Ep. 91.
are in their deaths equal, there can be no ground for a discontented murmr:
Grudge if thou will, Psalm. 89. 49.
that thou art a man, Psalm. 90. 3, 5, 7.
grudge not that being a man thou must die: It is true that those whom the last
day shall find alive, shall not die, but they shall be changed; but this
change of theirs shall be no other then an analogicall death, wherein there
shall be a speedy consumption of all our corrupt and drossie parts* so as the
pain must be so much the more intense, by how much it is more short then in the
ordinary course of death: Briefly, that change is a Death, and our Death is a
change, Job 14. 14.
as Job styles it; the difference is not in the pain, but in the speed of the
transaction: Ecclus. 41. 3.
Fear not then the sentence of death; remember them that have been before thee,
and that come after, for this is the sentence of the Lord over all flesh.

. 6. Death not feared by some.
Thou fear death: So do not infants, children, distracted persons, as the
Philosopher observes: Sen. Ep. 36.
Why should use of reason render us more cowardly, then defect of reason does
them? Thou fear that which some others wish: Ecclus. 41. 2*
O death, how acceptable is thy sentence to the needy, and to him whose
strength fails, that is now in the last age, and is vexed with all things,
and to him that despaireth, and has lost patience: Wherefore is light given
(says Job) to him that is in misery, Job 3. 21,
and life unto the bitter in soul? which long for death, but it comes not,
and dig for it more then for hid treasures; which rejoice exceedingly, 22, 23.
and are glad when they can find the grave?

How many are there that invite the violence of death, and if he refuse it,
do, as Ignatius threatened he would do to the Lions, force his assault? Death
is the same to all: the difference is in the disposition of the entertainers;
Could thou look upon death with their eyes, he should be as welcome to thee,
as he is unto them: At the least, why should thou not labor to have thy
heart so wrought upon that this face of death, which seems lovely, and
desirable to some, may not appear over-terrible to thee?

. 6. Our death day, better then our birth day.
Thou art afraid to die; Could thou then have been capable of the use of
reason, thou would have been more afraid of coming into the world, then thou
art now of going out: for why should we be more afraid of the better, then of
the worse? Better is the day of death, then the day of ones birth, says the
Preacher: Eccles. 7. 2. Better every way; Our birth begins our miseries, our
death ends them: Our birth enters the best of men into a wretched world, our
death enters the good into a world of glory: Certainly, were it not for our
infidelity, as we came crying into the world, so we should go singing out of
(...) And if some have solemnized their birthday with feasting and Triumph,
the Church of Old has bestowed that name and cost upon the deaths-day of her
Martyrs, and Saints.

. 7. The sting of death pulled out.
Thou abhorrest death, and fleest from it as from a Serpent: But do thou
know that his Sting is gone? What harm can there be in a Sting-lesse Snake? i
Cor. 15. 35.
Have thou not seen or heard of some delicate Dames that have carried them
(thus corrected) in their bosom for coolness, and for the pleasure of their
smoothness? The sting of death is sin; He may hiss, and wind about us,
but he cannot hurt us when that sting is pulled out: Look up, O thou believing
soul, to thy blessed Savior* who has plucked out this sting of death, and
happily triumphs over it, both for himself and thee; O death where is thy
sting? O grave where is thy victory?

. 8. Death is but aparting to meet again.
Thy soul and body (old companions) are loath to part: Why man, it is but the
forbearing their wonted society, for a while; they do but take leave of each
other till they meet again in the day of Resurrection, and in the mean time
they are both safe, and the better part happy: It is commendable in the Jews
(otherwise the worst of men) that they call their grave ( Beth Chajim) the
house of the living; and when they return from the burial of their neighbors,
they pluck up the grass, and cast it into the air, with those words of the
Psalmist, Ps. 72. 16
They shall flourish and put forth as the grass upon, the earth: Did we not
believe a Resurrection of the one part, and a re-uniting of the other, we had
reason to be utterly daunted with the thought of a dissolution; now we have no
cause to be dismayed with a little intermission. Is it an Heathen man, Sen.
Ep. 36.
or a Christian (such I wish he had been) whom I hear say, The death which we
so fear, and flee from, does but respite life for a while, does not take it
away, the day will come which shall restore us to the light again. Settle thy
soul, my son, in this assurance, and thou can not be discomforted with a
necessary parting.

9. Death is but a sleep.
Thou art afraid of death: When thou art weary of thy days labor, art thou
afraid of rest? Hear what thy Savior, who is the Lord of life, esteems of
death, John 11. 11. Our friend Lazarus sleeps. And of Jairus his daughter,
Matthew. 9. 24.
The maid is not dead, Luke 8. 52.
but sleeps: Neither uses the Spirit of God any other language, concerning
his servants under the Old Testament: Job 7. 21.
Now shall I sleep in the dust, says holy Job: And of David, 2 Samuel 7. 12.
When thy days be fulfilled, and thou shall sleep with thy fathers. Nor yet
under the New: 1 Cor. 11* 30.
For this cause many are weak and sickly among you, and many sleep, says the
Apostle. Lo, the Philosophers of old were wont to call sleep the brother of
death; but God says death is no other then sleep it self; A sleep both sure and
sweet: When thou lie down at night to thy repose, thou can not be so
certain to awake again in the morning, as when thou layest thy self down in
death, thou art sure to wake in the morning of the Resurrection. Out of this
bodily sleep thou may be affrightedly startled with some noises of sudden
horror, with some fearful dreams, with tumults, or alarms of War; Psalm. 94. 17.
but here thou shall rest quietly in the place of silence, free from all inward
and outward disturbances, whiles in the mean time thy soul shall see none but
visions of joy, and blessedness. But, Oh the sweet and heavenly expression of
our last rest, and the issue of our happy resuscitation, which our gracious
Apostle has laid forth, for the consolation of his mournful Thessalonions:
For, if we believe (says he) that Jesus died and rose again; even so them also
which sleep in Jesus, will God bring with him. Lo, our belief is antidote
enough against the worst of death: And why are we troubled with death, when we
believe that Jesus died? And what a triumph is this over death, that the same
Jesus who died, rose again? And what a comfort it is, that the same Jesus who
arose, shall both come again, and bring all his with him in glory? And lastly,
what a strong Cordial is this to all good hearts, that all those which die
well, do sleep in Jesus? Thou thoughtst, perhaps, of sleeping in the bed of the
grave; and there indeed is rest: but he tells thee of sleeping in the bosom of
Jesus; and there is immortality and blessedness. Oh blessed Jesu, in thy
presence is the fullness of joy, and at thy right hand are pleasures for
evermore. Who would desire to walk in the world, when he may sleep with Jesus?

10. Death sweetened to us by Christ.
Thou fear death: It is much on what terms, and in what form death presents
himself to thee: If as an enemy, (as that is somewhere his style, the last
enemy death) thy unpreparation shall make him dreadful; thy readiness and
fortitude shall take off his terror: If as a messenger of God to fetch thee to
happiness, what reason have thou to be afraid of thine own bliss? It is one
thing what death is in himself, a privation of life; as such, Nature cannot
choose but abhor him: Another thing what he is by Christ made unto us; an
introduction to life, an harbinger to glory. Why would the Lord of Life have
yielded unto death, and by yielding vanquished him; but that he might alter and
sweeten Death to us; and of a fierce Tyrant, make him a Friend and Benefactor?
And if we look upon him thus changed, thus reconciled, how can we choose but bid
him welcome?

11. The painfulness of Christ's ^eath.
Thou art afraid of the pangs of death: There are those that have died without
any great sense of pain: some we have known to have yielded up their souls
without so much as a groan: And how know thou, my son, what measure God has
allotted to thee? Our death is a Sea-voyage, (so the Apostle, Phil. 1. (...)
I desire to lanch forth) wherein some find a rough and tempestuous passage;
others, calm and smoothe: such thine may prove; so as thy dissolution may be
more easy then a fit of thy sickness. But if thy God have determined
otherwise. Look unto Jesus the Author and Finisher of our faith, ^eb. 12. 2
the Son of God, the Lord of glory; see with what agonies he conflicted, what
torments he endured in his death for thee: Look upon his bloody sweat, his
bleeding temples, his furrowed back, his nailed hands and feet, his racked
joints, his pierced side: Hear his strong cries, consider the shame, the pain,
the c^rse of the Cross which he underwent for thy sake: Say, whether thy
sufferings can be comparable to his. He is a cowardly and unworthy Soldier,
that follows his General sighing. Lo, these are the steps wherein thy God and
Savior has trod before thee: Walk on courageously, in this deep and bloody
way; after a few paces thou shall overtake him in glory: For if we suffer with
him, 2 Timothy 2. 12.
we shall also reign together with him.

. 12. The vanity and miseries of life.
Thou shrinkest at the thought of death: Is it not for that thou have,
over-valued life, and made thy home on earth? Delicate persons that have
pampered themselves at home, are loath to stir ab^^ad, especially upon hard and
un^^uth voyages: Perhaps it is so with thee; wherein I cannot but much pity thy
mistaking, in placing thy contentment there, where a greater and wiser man
could find nothing but vanity, and vexation. Alas, what can be our exile, if
this be our home? What woeful entertainment is this to be enamoured on? What
can thou meet with here, but distempered humors, hard usages, violent
passions, bodily sicknesses, sad complaints, hopes disappointed, frequent
miscarriages, wicked plots, cruel menaces, deadly executions, momentany
pleasures sauced with lasting sorrows; lastly, shadows of joy, and real
miseries: Are these the things that so bewitch thee, that when death calls at
thy door, thou art ready to say to it, as the Devil said to our Savior, Art
thou come to torment me before the time? Matthew. 8. 29.
Are these those winning contentments, that cause thee to say of the world, as
Peter said of Mount Tabor, Master, Mat. 17. 4.
It is good for us to be here. If thou have any faith in thee, (and what do
thou profess to be a Christian without it?) look up to the things of that other
world, whither thou art going; and see whether that true life, pure joy,
perfect felicity, and the eternity of all these, may not be worthy to draw up
thy heart to a lo^ging desire of the fruition of them, and a contemptuous
disvaluation of all that earth can promise, in comparison of this infinite
blessedness.

It was one of the defects which our late Noble and learned Philosopher the
Lord Virulam Lo. Ba^^^ his Advancement of learning.
found in our Physicians, that they do not study those remedies that might
procure (...), the easy passage of their Patients (since they must needs die)
through the gates of death: Such helps I must leave to the care of the skilful
Sages of Nature; the use whereof I suppose must be with much caution, lest
whiles they endeavor to sweeten death, they shorten life. But (...) me
prescribe, and commend to thee, my son, this true spiritual means of thine
happy Euthanasia; which can be no other then this faithful disposition of the
laboring soul, that can truly say, I know whom I have believed: 1 Timothy 1. 12.
I have fought a good fight; 2 Timothy 4. 7, 8.
I have finished my course; I have k^pt the faith: Henceforth there is laid up
for me a crown of righteousness, which the Lord the righteous Judge shall give
me at that day.

13. Examples of courageous resolutions in others.
Thou startest back at the mention of death: How can thou but blush to read
of that Heathen Martyr, Socrates, who when the message as death was brought to
him, Plato Phaedone.
could applaud the news of most joyful: Or of a Cardinal of Rome, F* Cosfin. de
morte Bella^mini, p. 28.
(who yet expected a tormenting Purgatory) that received the intimation of his
approaching death, with Bu^na nuova, buona nuova, O che buona nuova e questa!
Is not their confidence thy shame; who believing that when our earthly house of
this Tabernacle is dissolved, 2 Cor. 5. 1.
we have a building of God, an house not made with hands, eternal in the
heavens, yet shrinkest at the motion of taking the possession of it? Can thou
with dying Mithridates (when he took his unwilling farewell of the world) cry
out, oh light! when thou art going to a light more glorious then this thou
leavest, then the Sun is more weak then a Rush-Candle? It is our infidelity, my
son, it is our mere in^ idelity that makes us unwilling to die: Did we think
(according to the cursed opinion of some fanatic persons) that the soul sleeps
as well as the body, from the moment of the dissolution, till the day of
Resurrection: Or did we doubt lest we should wander to unknown places where we
cannot be certain of the entertainment; or did we fear a scorching trial (upon
the emigration) in flames little inferior, for the time) to those of hell,
there were some cause for us to tremble at the approach of death: But now that
we can boldly say, with the Wise man, `The souls of the righteous are in the
hand of God, Wisd. 3. 1, 2, 3.
and there shall no torment touch them: In the sight of the unwise they seemed
to die, and their departure is taken for misery, and their going from us to be
utter destruction; but they are in peace. Oh thou of little faith, why fear
thou? Why do thou not chide thy self, as that dying Saint did of old, Go
forth, my soul, go boldly forth; what art thou afraid of? Lo, the Angels of God
are ready to receive thee, and to carry thee up to thy glory; neither shall
thou sooner have left this wretched body, then thou shall be possessed of thy
God: after a momentany darkness cast upon nature, thou shall enjoy the
beatifical vision of the glorious God: Be not afraid to be happy; but say, out
of faith, that which Jonah said in anger; Jona. 4. 3
It is better for me to die then to live.

14. The happy advantages of death.
I am afraid to die: This is the voice of Nature: but will thou hear what Grace
says? To me to live is Christ, and to die is gain. If therefore mere Nature
reign in thee, thou can not but be affrighted with death: But if true grace
be prevalent in thy soul, that guest shall not be unwelcome: Was ever any man
afraid of profit and advantage? Such is death to the faithful: Whosoever he be
that finds Christ to be his life, shall be sure to find Death his gain, for
that he is thereby brought to a more full and near communion with Christ:
whereas before he enjoyed his Savior only by the dim apprehension of his
Faith, now he does clearly and immediately enjoy that glorious presence, which
only makes blessedness: This is it which causes death to change his Copy;
and renders him who is of himself formidable, pleasing and beneficial; I
desire to depart and to be with Christ, says the man who was rapt up to the
third heaven; Had it been only departing, surely he had had no such great edge
to it; Phil. 1. 23.
but to depart, and be with Christ, is that which ravisheth his soul. When the
Heathen Socrates was to die for his Religion, he comforted himself with this,
That he should go to the place where he should see Orphaeus, Homer, Musaeus,
and the other Worthies of the former ages; Poor man! could he have come to have
known God manifested in the flesh, 1 Timothy 3* 16.
and received up into glory, and therein that glorified flesh sitting at the
right hand of Majesty; could he have attained to know the blessed order of the
Cherubim, and Seraphim, Angels, Archangels, Principalities, and Powers, and the
rest of the most glorious Hierarchy of heaven; could he have been acquainted
with that celestial Chore of the Spirits of just men made perfect: Heb. 12. 23.
could he have reached to know the God and Father of Spirits, the infinitely,
and incomprehensibly glorious Deity, whose presence transfuses everlasting
blessedness into all those Citizens of glory: and could he have known that he
should have an undoubted Interest (instantly upon his dissolution) in that
infinite bliss; how much more gladly would he have taken off his Hemlock; and
how much more merrily would he have passed into that happier world? All this
we know, and are no less assured of it, then of our present being; with what
comfort therefore should we think of changing our present condition with a
blessed immortality? How sweet a song was that of old Simeon? Luke 2. 29.
Lord, now let thou thy servant depart in peace, according to thy word, for
mineties have seen thy salvation: Lo, that which he saw by the eye of his
sense, thou see by the eye of thy faith; even the Lords Christ; Verse. 26.
he saw him in weakness, thou see him in glory; why should thou not
depart, not in peace only, but in joy and comfort? How did the holy
Protomartyr Stephen triumph over all the rage of his enemies, and the violent
fury of death, when he had once seen the heavens opened, Acts 7. 56.
and the Son of man standing on the right hand of God? Lo, God offers the same
blessed prospect to the (...) of thy soul; Faith is the key that can open the
heaven of heavens; Fix thy eyes upon that glorious and saving object; thou
can not but lay down thy body in peace, and send up thy soul into the hands
of him that bought it, with the sweet and cheerful recommendation, of Lord
Jesus receive my spirit.

Comforts against the terrors of Judgment.
. 1. Aggravation of the fearfulness of the last judgment.
THOU apprehendest it aright; Death is terrible, but Judgment more; Both these
succeed upon the same decree, It is appointed unto man once to die, Heb. 9. 27.
but after this the judgment: Neither is it mo^e terrible, then less thought
on; Death, because he strikes on all hands, and lays before us so many sad
examples of mortality, cannot but sometimes take up our hearts; but the last
judgment, having no visible proofs to force it self upon our thoughts, too
seldom affrights us: Yet who can conceive the terror of that day? before
which the Sun stall be turned into darkness, Acts 2. 20.
and the Moon into blood; That day, which shall burn as an Oven, Mal. 4* 1.
when all the proud, and all that do wickedly shall be as the stubble; 2 Pet.
3. 10.
That day, in which the heavens shall pass away with a great noise, and the
Elements shall melt with fervent heat; the Earth also, ^^d the works that are
therein shall be burnt ^p: 2 These. 1* 7, 8.
That day, wherein the Lord Jesus shall be revealed from heaven with his mighty
Angels; In flaming fire, taking vengeance on them that know not God, and that
obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ; Isai. 66. 15, 16.
That day, wherein the Lord will come with fire, and with his Chariots like a
Whirlewinde, to render his anger with fury, and his rebuke with flames of fire;
For by Fire, and by his Sword will the Lord plead with all flesh: Mat. 25. 31,
32.
That day, wherein the Son of man shall come in his glory, and all the holy
Angels with him; and shall sit upon the Throne of his glory; and all Nations
shall be gathered before him; Rev. 1. 7.
That day, wherein all the kindreds of the earth shall wail because of him:
S^ortly, Joel 2. 31.
that great and terrible day of the Lord, wherein if the Powers of Heaven shall
be shaken, how can the heart of man remain unmoved? wherein, if the world be
dissolved, who can bear up? Alas, we are ready to tremble at but a Thundercrack
in a poor cloud; and at a small flash of lightning that glances through our
eyes; what shall we do when the whole frame of the heavens shall break in
pieces, and when all shall be on a flame about our ears? Oh, who may abide the
day of his coming; and who shall stand when he appears?

. 2. Comfort from the condition of the elect.
Yet be of good cheer, Mal. 3. 2.
m^ son; Amids all this horror there is comfort* Whether thoube one of those
whom it shall please God to reserve alive upon earth to the sight of this
dreadful day, he only knows in whose hands our times are; This we are sure
of, that we are upon the last hours, of the last days: Justly do we spit in
the faces of S. Peter's scoffers, that say, 2 Pet. 3. 4*
Where is the promise of his coming? 2 Pet. 3. 9.
Well knowing, that the Lord is not slack, as some account slackness; but that
he that shall come, Heb. 10. 37.
will come, and not tarry. Well may thou live to see the Son of man come in
the clouds of heaven, and to be an Actor in this last Scene of the world: If
so, let not thy heart be dismayed with the expectation of these fearful things:
Thy change shall be sudden and quick; one moment shall put off thy mortality,
and clothe thee with that incorruption, which shall not be capable of fear and
pain: The majesty of this appearance shall add to thy joy and glory: 1 These.
4. 16.
Thou shall then see the Lord himself descend from heaven with a shout, with
the voice of the Archangel, and with the Trump of God: Thou shall see thy self,
and those other which are alive and remain, Verse 17
to be caught up in the clouds to meet the Lord in the air; and so shall thou
be ever with the Lord. Upon this assurance, how justly may the Apostle subjoyn,
Verse 18
Wherefore comfort one another with these words. Certainly, if ever there were
comfort to be had in any words, not of men or Angels only, but of the
ever-living God, the God of Truth, these are they that can and will afford it
to our trembling souls.

But if thou be one of the number of those whom God has determined to call off
beforehand, and by a faithful death to prevent the great day of his
appearance; here is nothing for thee, but matter of a joy unspeakable and full
of glory: 1 These. 4. 15.
For those that sleep in Jesus, shall God bring with him; they shall be part of
that glorious train which shall attend the Majesty of the great Judge of the
world: yea, 1 Cor. 6. 1.
they shall be co^^se^^ors to the Lord of heaven and earth, in this awful
Judica ture; as sitting upon the Bench, when guilty men and Angels shall be at
the Bar: Verse 3.
To him that overcomes, Rev. 3. 21.
says the Lord Christ, will I grant to sit with me in my throne, even as I
also overcame, and am set down with my Father in his throne. What place* then
is here for any terror, since the more state and heavenly magnificence, the
more joy and glory?

3. Awe more fit for thoughts of judgment, then Fear.
Thou art afraid to think of Judgment: I had rather thou should be awful,
then timorous. When Saint Paul discoursed of the judgment to come, Acts 24. 25.
it is no marvel that F^^ix trembled: But the same Apostle, when he had pressed
to his Corinthians, 2 Cor. 5. 11.
the certainty and generality of our appearance before the Judgment Seat of
Christ, that every one may receive the things done in his body, whether good or
evil; adds, Knowing therefore the terror of the Lord, we persuade men* but
we are made manifest to God, etc. Lo, the holiest man may not be exempted from
the dread, but from the slavish fear of the great Judge: We know his infinite
justice; we are conscious to our selves of our manifold failings: how can we
lay these two together, and not fear? But this fear works not in us a malignant
kind of repining at the severe Tribunal of the Almighty, (as commonly whom we
fear we hate) but rather a careful endeavor so to approve our selves, that we
may be acquitted by him, and appear blameless in his presence. How justly may
we tremble, when we look upon our own actions, our own deserts? but how
confidently may we appear at that Bar, where we are beforehand assured of a
discharge? Being justified by faith, Romans 5. 1.
^we have peace with God, through Jesus Christ our Lord. When we think of an^
universal conflagration of the world, how can we but fear? but when we think of
an happy restitution of all things in this day; Act. 3* 21
how can we but rejoice in trembling?

4. In that great and terrible Day, our Advocate is our Judge.
Thou quakest at the expectation of the last Judgment: Surely, the very
Majesty of that great Assize must needs be formidable: And if the very
delivery of the Law on Mount Sinai were with so dreadful a pomp of Thunder and
Lightning, of Fire, Smoke, Earthquakes, that the Israelites were half dead with
fear in receiving it; with what terrible magnificence shall God come to require
an account of that Law at the hands of the whole sinful generation of mankind?
Represent unto thy thoughts, that which was showed of old to the Prophet Daniel
in Vision: Imagine that thou saw the Ancient of days sitting upon a Throne
like the fiery flame (...), Dan. 7. 8, 9, 10.
a fiery stream issuing and coming forth from before him; thousand thousands
ministering unto him, and ten thousand times ten thousand standing before him;
the judgment set, and the Books opened. Or as John, the Daniel of the New
Testament saw, a great white Throne, and him that sat on it, from whose face
the earth and the heavens fled away, and the dead both small and great standing
before God; and the Books opened, and the dead judged out of those things which
were written in those Books, according to their works. Let the eyes of thy
mind see beforehand that which these bodily eyes shall once see; and tell me
how thou feel thy self affected with the sight of such a Judge, such an
appearance, such a process: And if thou find thy self in a trembling
condition, cheer up thy self with this, That thy Judge is thine Advocate; That
upon that Throne there sits not greater Majesty then Mercy: It is thy Savior
that shall sentence thee. How safe art thou then under such hands? Can thou
fear that he will doom thee to death, who died to give thee life? Can thou
fear he will condemn thee for those sins which he has given his blood to
expiate? Can thou fear the rigor of that Justice which he has so fully
satisfied? Can thou misdoubt the miscarriage of that soul which he has so
dearly bought? No, my son, all this divine state and magnificence makes for
thee: Let those guilty and impenitent souls, who have heaped unto themselves
wrath against the day of wrath, Romans 2.
quake at the glorious Majesty of the Son of God; Heb. 10. 27
for whom nothing remains, but a fearful expectation of judgment, and fiery
indignation, which shall devour the adversaries: But for thee, who art not
only reconciled unto God by the mediation of the Son of his love, but art also
incorporated into Christ, and made a true limb of his mystical Body; thou art
bidden (together with all the faithful) to look up, Luke 21. 28.
and lift up thy head; Ephesians. 4. 30.
for now the day of thy re^emption is come. And indeed, how can thou do
other, since by virtue of this blessed union with thy Savior, this glory is
thine; every member has an interest in the honor of the Head. Rejoice
therefore in the day of the Lord Jesus; Phil. 2. ^
and when all the Tribes of the earth shall wail, Rev. 1* 7.
do thou sing and rejoice; and call to the heavens and the earth to bear thee
company: Psalm. 96* 11.
Let the heavens rejoice, and let the earth be glad: let the sea make a noise,
and all that is therein: let the field be joyful, Verse 12
and all that is in it. Then shall all the trees of the wood rejoice before the
Lord: Verse 13
for he comes, for he comes to judge the earth, and with righteousness to
judge the world, and the people with his truth.

. 5. Frequent meditation and due prepa^ation, the remedies of our ^ear.
Thou art affrighted with the thought of that Great Day: Think of it oftener,
and thou shall less fear it. It will come both surely, and suddenly; let thy
frequent thoughts prevent it. It will come as a thief in the night, without
warning, without noise: let thy careful vigilance always expect it; and thy
soul shall be sure not to be surprised, not to be confounded. Thine Audit is
both sure, and uncertain: sure that it will be, uncertain when it will be. If
thou will approve thy self a good Steward, have thine account always ready; set
thy reckoning still even betwixt God and thy soul: Blessed is the servant whom
his Master shall find so doing: Mat. 24. 46.
Look upon these heavens, and this earth as dissolving; and think, with Jerome,
that thou hear the last Trump, and the voice of the Archangel shrilling in
thine ears, (as once thou shall) Arise, ye dead, and come to judgment.
Shortly, let it be thy main care, to live soberly, righteously, and godly in
this present world; looking for that blessed hope, and the glorious appearing
of the great God, and our Savior Jesus Christ, who gave himself for us, that
he might redeem us from all iniquity; Who shall change our vile body, Phil. 3.
21.
that it may be fashioned like to his glorious body; according to the working
whereby he is able to subdue all things to himself.

Comforts against the fears of our spiritual enemies.
1. The great power of evil spirits, and their restraint.
THou art affrighted at the thought of thy spiritual enemies: No marvel;
Neither earth nor hell has any thing equally formidable: Those three things
which are wont to make enmity dreadful and dangerous* (Power, Malice, Subtilty)
are met in them: neither is it easy to say in which of these they are most
eminent. Certainly, were we to be matched with them on even hand, there were
just cause, not of Fear only, but Despair. I could tremble, thou say, to
think what Satan has done, what he can do* what contestation he enabled the
Egyptian Sorcerers to hold with Moses; Exodus 7* 12.
how they turned every man his rod into a Serpent; so as they seemed to have
the advantage, for the time, of many Serpents crawling and hissing in Phoraoh's
pavement, for one: How they turned the waters into blood: Verse. 22.
How they brought Froggs upon the Land of Egypt (...) as if thus far the power
of hell would presume to hold competition with heaven: Exodus 8. 7.
What furious tempests he raises in the air, as that which from the Wilderness*
beat upon the four corners of the house of Job's eldest son, Job 1. 19
and overthrew it: Lo, Job 1. 3.
Job was the greatest man in the East; his heir did not dwell in a cottage;
that strong Fabric could not stand against this Hurricane of Satan. What
fearful apparitions he makes in the upper regions: what great wonders he does,
Rev. 13. 13.
causing fire to come down from heaven on the earth, in the sight of men:
Lastly, what grievous tyranny he exercises upon all the children of
disobedience. Ephesians. 5. 6.
Could thou look for any less, my son, from those, whom the Spirit of God
himself, Ephesians. 6. 12.
styles Principalities, and Powers, and rulers of the darkness of this world,
and spiritual wickednesses in high places, and the Prince of the power of the
air. Ephesians. 2. 2.
Surely, it were no Mastery to be a Christian, if we had not powerful
opposites: But do thou not withal consider that all this power is by
concession, and the exercise of it but with permission, with limitation? What
power can there be in any oreature, which is not derived from the Almighty?
This measure the infinite Creator was pleased to communicate to them, as
Angels, which they retain, and exercise still as Devils; their damnation has
stripped them of their glory; but we know not of how much of their strength:
And see thou not how their power is bounded? Those that could in appearance
turn their rods into Serpents, could not keep all their Serpents from being
devoured of that one Serpent of Moses: Those that could b^ing Frogs upon Egypt,
Exodus 8. 8, 9, 10, 11
cannot bring a baser creature, Lice: Those that were suffered to bring Frogs,
shall not have power to take them away: Restrained powers must know their
limits; and we knowing them, must set limits to our fears; A Lion chained up
can do less harm then a curre let loose: What is it to thee how powerful the
evil Spirits are, whiles they are by an overruling power tied up to their
stake, that they cannot hurt thee?

. 2. The fear of the number of evil spirits, and the remedy of it.
Thy fears are increased with their number; they are as many as powerful:
One, Demoniack was possessed with a Legion; How many Legions then shall we
think there are to tempt those millions of men, which live upon the face of the
earth, whereof no one is free from their continual solicitations to evil?
That holy man, whom our counterfeit Hermites would pretend to imitate in the
vision of his retiredness, saw the air full of them, and of their s^ares for
mankind; and were our eyes as clear as his, we might perhaps meet with the
same prospect: But be not dismayed my son: Could thou borrow the eyes of the
servant of an holier Master, 2 Kings 6. 16.
thou should see that there are more with us, then they that are against us;
thou should see the blessed Angels of God, pitching their Tents about thee,
as the more powerful, vigilant, constant guardians of thy soul: Lo, these
are those valiant ones, which stand about thy Bed; Cantic. 3* 7, 8.
They all hold swords, being expert in War; every one has his Sword upon his
thigh, because of fear in the night: Fear not therefore, but make the Lord,
even the most High, thy Habitation: Ps. 91. 9.
Then there shall no evil befall thee, Verse. 10,
neither shall any Plague come nigh thy dwelling: Verse. 11.
For he shall give his Angels charge ever thee to keep thee in all thy ways.
Verse. 12.
They shall bear thee up in their hands, lest thou dash thy foot against a
stone; yea, (and besides this safe indemnity) Thou shall tread upon the Lion,
Verse. 13.
and Adder; the young Lion, and the Dragon shall thou trample under feet. In
secular enmity, true valor may be oppressed, will not easily be d^unted with
multitude; Psalm. 3. 6*
I will not be afraid of ten thousand, (says David) They came about me like
Bees, Ps. 118. 12*
but in the name of the Lord will I destroy them: It was a brave resolution in
that General, who when one of his Soldiers could tell him, that the cloud of
Persian arrows (shot at them) darkened the Sun; Be of good cheer, (said he) we
shall sight in the shade: Answerable whereunto, was that Heroical
determination of Luther, who (after his engagements) against all threats, and
disswasions. would go unto the City of Worms, though there were as many
Devils in it, as Tiles upon their houses; and why should not we imitate this
confidence? What if there were as many Devils in the air, as there are spires
of grass on the earth? God is our refuge and strength, Ps. 46. 1, 2.
a very present help in trouble; therefore will we not fear, though the earth
be removed; though the mountains be carried into the midst of the Sea. Isai.
12. 2
Behold, God is our salvation, we will trust, and not be afraid; for the Lord
Jehovah is our strength and our song, he also is become our salvation. Let God
arise, Psalm. 68. 1* 2.
and let his enemies be scattered; let them also that hate him flee before him;
like as the smoke vanishes, so shall thou drive them away.

. 3. The malice of the evil spirits, and our fears thereof remedied.
But oh the malice of those infernal spirits, implacable, and deadly; whose
trade is temptation, and accusation; whose delight is torment; whose music is
shrieks, and howlings, and groans, and gnashing; and whose main drift is no
less then the eternal death, and damnation of miserable mankind! Why should
we, my son, expect other from him, who is professedly the manslayer from the
beginning? that carries nothing but destruction both in his name and nature?
that goes about continually like a roaring Lion, seeking whom he may devour?
Surely, this malignity is restless; neither will take up with any thing on this
side hell. But comfort thy self in this, that in spite of all the malice of
Hell, thou art safe* Do thou not know that there stands by thee the
victorious Lion of the Tribe of Judah, whom that Infernal Ravener dare not
look in the face? Do thou not remember, that when the Sentence was pronounced
of eternal enmity, between the seed of the Woman, and the seed of the Serpent,
it was with this Doom, It shall bruise thy Head, Genesis 3. 15.
and thou shall bruise his Heel: Lo, a bruise of a man's heel is far from the
heart; but a bruise of the Serpents head is mortal; there his sting, there his
life lies: Neither did the seed of the woman (Christ Jesus) this for himself,
(who was infinitely above all the power and malice of the Devil) but for us the
impotent and sinful seed of man: Romans 16* 20.
The God of peace shall bruise Satan under your feet, says the blessed
Apostle: Under your feet; not under his own only: of whom God the Father had
long before said, Ps. 11^* ^*
Sit thou on my right hand, till I make thine enemies thy footstool. Yea, what
do I speak of the future? Already is this great work done; already is this
great work achieved: Col. 2. 15.
For the Lord of life, having spoiled principalities and powers, has made a
show of them openly, triumphing over them on his Cr^ss. Lo, all the powers of
hell were dragged after this glorious Conqueror, when he was advanced upon
that Triumphant Chariot. Look therefore, my son, upon these hellish forces, as
already vanquished; and know, that in all things we are more then Conquerours
through him that loved us. Romans 8. 37.
Only do thou by the power of thy faith, apply unto thy self this great work,
that thy victorious Savior has done for the salvation of all the world of
believers.

4. The great subtilfy of evil spirits, and the remedy of the fear of it.
Power without malice were harmless; and malice without power were impotent:
but when both are combined together, they are dreadful. But, whereas Malice
has two ways to execute mischief, either Force, or Fraud; the malice of Satan
prevails more by this latter; so as the subtilty of these malignant spirits is
more pernicious then their power: Genesis 3. ^*
In regard of his power, Rev. 12* 9.
he is a Lion; in regard of his subtilty, Rev. 20* 2.
he is a Serpent, yea, that old Serpent, whose craft must needs be marvellously
increased by the age and experience of so many thousand years. So much the more
careful ought we to be, my son, 2 Cor. 2. 11.
Lest Satan should get an advantage of us: This is that he seeks; and if our
spiritual wisdom and circumspection be not the more, will be sure to find. It
is a great word, and too high for us, which the Apostle speaks; 2 Cor. 2. 11.
For we are not ignorant of Satan's devices. Alas, he has a thousand
stratagems, that our weak simplicity is never able to reach unto: The wisest of
us knows not the deceitfulness of his own heart, much less can he dive into the
plots of hell that are against us. We hear, and are forewarned of the wiles of
the Devil: Ephesians 6. 11.
but what his special machinations are, how can we know, much less prevent?
Luke 16* 8.
Even the children of this world (says our Savior) are in their generation
wiser then the children of light: how much more crafty is their Father, from
whom their cunning is derived? Be as mean as thou will, my son, in thine own
eyes; say with Agur the son of Jakeh, Prove. 30* 2.
Surely, I am more brutish then any man, and have not the understanding of a
man: I neither learned wisdom, Verse 3.
nor have the knowledge of the holy. But what ever thou art in thy self, know
what thou art, or may be in thy God: Consider what the man after Gods own
heart sticks not to profess; Psalm. 119* 98.
Thou, through thy Commandments, have made me wiser then mine enemies; for they
are ever with me: Lo, the spirit of wisdom is ours; Deu^* 3* 9*
and he who is the eternal Wisdom of the Father, Ephesians. 1* 17*
is made unto us wisdom, 1 Cor. 1* 30*
as well as righteousness: And he who overrules hell, has said, The gates of
hell shall not prevail against his Church: What are the gates of hell, but the
deep plots and consul^tations of those infernal powers? The Serpent is the
known emblem of subtilty: The Serpents of the Egyptian Sorcerers, were all
devoured by Moses his Serpent: wherefore? but to show us, that all the crafty
counsels and machinations of hellish projectors, are easily destroyed by the
power and wisdom of the Almighty: when all was done, it was the Rod of God that
swallowed them all, and was yet still it self, when they were vanquished: So as
that whereby Satan thought to have won most honor to himself, ended in his
shame and loss. What an infinite advantage did the powers of darkness think to
have made, in drawing our first Parents (by their subtle suggestions) into sin,
and thereby into perdition; as imagining either mankind shall not be, or shall
be ours? the incomprehensible wisdom and mercy of our God disappointed their
hopes; and took occasion by man's fall, to raise him up to a greater glory; and
so ordered it, that the Serpents nibbling at the heel cost him the breaking of
his head. What Trophies did that wicked spirit think to erect upon the ruins
of miserable Job? and how was he baffled by the patience of that Saint? and how
was that Saint doubled both in his estate and honor, by his conquering
patience? How confidently did the subtilty of hell say, concerning the Son of
God exhibited in the flesh; Mat. ^*
This is the heir, Mark* ^*
come, let us kill him, and the inheritance shall be ours? Luke* ^*
How sure work did they think they had made, when they saw him, through their
subtle procurement, nailed to the Cross, and dying upon that tree of shame and
curse; when they saw him laid dead under a sealed and guarded Gravestone? And
now, behold, even now begins their Confusion, and his Triumph; now does the
Lord of Life begin to trample upon Death and hell; and to perfect his own
glory, and man's redemption, by his most glorious resurrection. And as it was
with the Head, so it is with the members: when Satan has done his worst, they
are holier upon their sins, and happier by their miscarriages; God finds out a
way to improve their evils to advantage, and teaches them of these Vipers to
make soverain Treacles, and safe and powerful Trochisces. Shortly, the
temptations of Satan sent out from his power, malice, subtilty, are no other
then fiery darts, for their suddenness, impetuosity, penetration: If we can but
hold out the shield of faith before us, they shall not be quenched only, Ephesians*
6. 16.
but retorted into the face of him that sends them; and we shall, with the
chosen vessel, find and profess, Romans 8. 37.
that in all things we are more then conquerours, through him that loved us;
and in a bold defiance of all the powers of darkness, shall say, I am
persuaded, Romans 8. 38.
that neither death, nor life, nor Angels, nor Principalities, nor powers, nor
things present, nor things to come; nor height, nor depth, nor any other
creature, shall be able to separate us from the love of God, which is in Christ
Jesus our Lord; To whom be all honor, glory, praise, power and dominion, now
and for evermore.

The Universal Receipt for all Maladies.
THese are, my son, special compositions* of wholesome Receipts for the several
Maladies of thy soul: wherein it shall be my happiness to have suggested unto
thee such thoughts as may any whit avail to the alleviation of thy sorrows.
But, there is an universal Remedy, which a skilfuller Physician has ordained
for all thy grievances; and I from his hand earnestly recommend to thee: Is any
among you afflicted? James 5. 13.
let him pray. Lo here the great and soverain Panpharmacum of the distressed
soul, which is able to give ease to all the forementioned complaints.

Art thou cast^ down upon thy sick bed? Call for the Elders of the Church,
James 5. 14.
and let them pray. This was Hezekiah's receipt, when he was sick unto death; He
turned his face to the wall, ^ Kings ^0. 1, 2.
and prayed. This was David's receipt; Have mercy on me, Psalm. 6. 2.
O Lord, for I am weak; O Lord heal me, for my bones are vexed. Take therefore
the counsel of the Wise man; My son, ^cclus ^8* 9.
in thy sickness be not negligent, but pray unto the Lord, and he will make
thee whole.

Art thou soul-sick? Psalm. 18. 5, 6.
pray: So did holy David; The sorrows of hell compassed me about, and the
snares of death prevented me: Psalm. 116* 3, 4.
In my distress I called upon the Lord, and cried unto my God.

Art thou infested with importunate temptations? Pray: So did S. Paul, when the
messenger of Satan was sent to buffet him: ^ Cor. 1^* 8.
Thrice I besought the Lord that it might depart from me. Psalm. 88, 15, 16.
So did David; Whiles I suffer thy terrors, I am distracted; thy fierce wrath
goes over me: But unto thee have I cried, Verse 13
O Lord, and in the morning shall my prayer prevent thee.

Art thou disheartened with the weakness of grace? Pray: so did David: Psalm. 38.
8, 9.
I am feeble, and sore broken, I have roared by reason of the disquietness of
my heart: Lord, all my desire is before thee.

Art thou afflicted with the slanders of evil tongues? Pray: Psa. 109. 2.
So did David; The mouth of the wicked, and the mouth of the deceitful are
opened against me: they have spoken against me with a lying tongue: Hold not
thy peace, Verse 1.
O God of my praise.

Art thou grieved or affrighted with the Public Calamities of War, Famine,
Pestilence? Pray: So good Jehosaphat presses God with his gracious promise
made to Solomen: 2 Chro. 7. 13, 14, 15.
If when evil comes upon us, 2 Chronicles. 20. 19, 12.
as the sword, judgment, or pestilence, or famine, we stand before this house,
and in thy presence, and cry unto thee in our affliction, then thou will hear
and help: and shuts up his zealous supplication with, Neither know we what to
do, but our eyes are upon thee.

Art thou afflicted with the loss of friends? Pray, and have rec^urse to thy
God, as Ezekiel, Ezekiel. 11* 13.
when Peletiah, the son of Benaiah died: Then fell I down upon my face, and
cried with a loud voice, and said, Ah Lord God! will thou make a full end of
the remnant of Israel?

Art thou distressed with Poverty? Pray: So did David: Psa. 109* 22, 25, 26.
I am poor and needy, and my heart is wounded within me: I became also a
reproach to them, when they that looked upon me, shaked their heads: Help me, O
Lord my God; Oh save me according to thy mercy.

Art thou imprisoned? Pray: So did Jonah, when he was shut up within the living
walls of the Whale; Jonah 2. 1, 2.
I cried by reason of my affliction unto the Lord; Ps. 79. 11.
so did Asaph: Let the sighing of the Prisoner come before thee; according to
the greatness of thy power preserve thou them that are appointed to die.

Art thou driven from thy Country? pray; This is the remedy prescribed by
Solomon, in his supplication to God; 2 Chronicles. 6.
If thy people be carried away into a Land far off, or near: yet if they
bethink themselves in the Land whither they are carried and turn, 36, 37.
and pray to thee, in the Land of their Captivity. 38, 39.
If they return to thee with all their hearts, and pray toward the Land which
thou gave to their Forefathers, etc. then hear thou from heaven their
prayer, and their supplication.

Art thou bereaved of thy bodily senses? Make thy address to him that said,
Exodus 4. 11.
Who has made man's mouth, or who makes the dumb, and the deaf, or the seeing,
or the blind? have not I the Lord? Cry aloud to him with Bartimeus, Mark 10.
47, 51.
Lord, that I may receive my sight: And if thou be hopeless of thine outward
sight, yet pray with the Psalmist, Psalm. 119. 18.
O Lord open thou mine eyes, that I may see the wondrous things of thy Law.

Art thou afflicted with sterility? Genesis 25. 21.
pray; so did Isaac, so did Hannah; 1 Samuel 1. 10.
she was in bitterness of soul, 1 Samuel 2. 21.
and prayed unto the Lord, and wept sore and received a gracious answer.

Art thou troubled and weakened with want of rest? pray; Ps. 77. 3.
so did Asaph, I complained, and my spirit was overwhelmed. Verse 4.
Thou hold mine eyes waking, I am so troubled that I cannot speak: Verse 1.
I cried to God with my voice, unto God with my voice, and he gave ear unto me.

Do thou droop under the grievances of old age? pray; so did David; Ps. 71. 9.
Oh cast me not off in the time of old age, forsake me not when my strength
fails. O God thou have taught me from my youth: Verse. 17, 18.
Now also when I am old, and gray headed, O God forsake me not.

Art thou troubled and dismayed with the fears of death? Ps. 88. 3
pray; so did David, My soul is full of troubles, and my life draws nigh unto
the grave; Verse 4.
I am counted with them that go down into the pit, Verse 5.
I am as a man that has no strength. Free among the dead, Verse. 6.
thou have laid me in the lowest pit, in darknese, in the deeps: But unto thee
have I cried, Verse. 13.
O Lord, and in the morning shall my prayer prevent thee.

Do thou tremble at the thought of judgment? So did the man after Gods own
heart; Psalm. 119* 120.
My flesh trembles for fear of thee, and I am afraid of thy judgments; Look
up with Jeremiah, and say to thy Savior, Lament. 3. 58, 59.
O Lord, thou have pleaded the causes of my soul, thou have redeemed my life: O
Lord, judge thou my cause.

Lastly, art thou afraid of the power, malice, subtilty of thy spiritual
enemies? pray: so did David; Deliver me from mine enemies, Ps. 59. 1.
O my God, defend me from them that rise up against me; Oh hide me from the
secret counsel of the wicked; Consider mine enemies, Psalm. 25. 19, 20.
for they are many, and they hate me with cruel hatred; O keep my soul, and
deliver me: So did S. Paul pray, 2 Cor. 12*
that he might be freed from the messenger of Satan whose buffets he felt, and
was answered with, My Grace is sufficient for thee; so he sues for all Gods
Saints, May the God of peace tread down Satan under your feet shortly. Romans 16*
19.


Shortly, what ever evil it be that presses thy soul, have speedy recourse to
the throne of Grace; pour out thy heart into the ears of the Father of all
mercies, 2 Cor. 1. 3.
and God of all comfort, and be sure, if not of redress, yet of ease: We have
his word for it that cannot not fail us; Call upon me in the day of trouble,
Psalm. 50. 15.
I will deliver thee, and thou shall glorify me: Fashionable suppliants may
talk to God; but be confident, he that can truly pray, can never be truly
miserable: Of our selves we lie open to all evils; our rescue is from above;
and what intercourse have we with heaven but by our prayers? Our prayers are
they that can deliver us from dangers, avert judgments, prevent mischiefs,
procure blessings; that can obtain pardon for our sins, furnish us with
strength against temptations, mitigate the extremity of our sufferings, sustain
our infirmities, raise up our dejectedness, increase our graces, abate our
corruptions, sanctify all good things to us, sweeten the bitterness of our
afflictions, open the windows of heaven, shut up the bars of death, vanquish
the powers of hell: Pray, and be both safe, and happy.

FINIS.

