DORCAS REVIVED THE SECOND TIME: OR A Sermon preached at the Funerals of Mrs.
Anne Mickle-thwait, the one and twentieth of March 1658.

By JOS. HUNTER, Master of Arts, and Minister of Ousburne.

A gracious Woman retains honor, Prove. 11.16.

Sensus pravae voluntatis mulieribus, non aute^ sexus in vitio est, Greg. lib.
3. moral. ca. 7.

LONDON, Printed by Tho. Leach for Thomas Firby, at Grayes-Inn gate. 1660

TO THE Right Worshipful, and my Honored friends, John Mickle-thwait Esquire
Joseph Mickle-thwait Gent. the Lady Anna Dickinson, and Mrs. Dorothy
Stillington, the surviving Issue of the Worshipful Mrs. Anne Mickle-thwait,
late deceased.
IT has ever been the custom (partly to give, partly to gain respect) to
commit nothing to the Press, but under the inscription of some persons name, to
whom their work might be acceptable, and by whom it might be rendered more
acceptable unto others: Now whilst I thought on the Dedication of the ensuing
Sermon, my thoughts never strayed farther, than one of you; to whom, I
concluded, that all men; for the argument of it (set aside other respects)
would adjudge it due, but to which of you, I had none to direct me, and
therefore followed mine own fancy, which was this, not to dis-joyn you, who
were so nearly joined in the same common relation, and have already approved
your selves to be the genuine children of the same mother: It is not my purpose
to commend you, but to commend your mother to you, the fruits of your religious
education, do (to the credit of your family and the observation of the world)
in a great measure show themselves: but let me tell you, you lie under a
greater engagement than ordinary: many eyes are upon you, that expect you
should bring forth fruit answerable to the stock that bare you: though you be
virtuous, yet you will not be thought worthy of commendation, except you
excel. Paul tells us how he might boast, that he was an Hebrew of the Hebrews,
3 Phil. 5. that is, an Hebrew both by the father and the mothers side; this it
seems was esteemed a great privilege among the Jews: it was deemed a privilege
to be a Proselite, a greater privilege to be an Hebrew, but the greatest
privilege to be an Hebrew of the Hebrew: so may every one of you boast, that
you are a Christian of the Christians, descended on both sides from believing
and religious parents, such as did so profess themselves to be, and were
accounted really so by all that knew them: this is your privilege, it will be
your praise, if your practice arise to the height of it. Valor. Max. lib. 3.
cap. 7.
The Romans forced the lewd son of Scipio Africanus to pluck off from his
finger a signet-ring, whereon the face of his father was engraven, accounting
him unworthy to wear his picture, that would not resemble his virtue: and if
you should degenerate, you will be thought unworthy the name of your parents.
This I tell you, not so much because I fear you, but because I would not be
thought to flatter you: as you have therefore begun well, gone on worthily, so
continue and abound, knowing (...) have for an example: let the fruits (...)
more; that the name of Mickle-thwait may be greater, and yield a sweet and
fresh perfume in the Churches of Christ to succeedings generations. To this end
it is, that I present this Sermon to you, desiring that you would accept of it,
and take in good part my freeness with you.

Now for the Sermon it self, I expect to meet with Censures from two sorts of
persons. They that knew her better than I, will think that I have said too
little: and they that knew her not so well, will think that I have said too
much: In answer to the former, I confess I have said too little: When a
Painter is about to paint a man, he first draws some rude lines and this is
called (...): then he adds the black colors, this is called (...): lastly
the vive colors, and this is called (...)* now I acknowledge, that toward the
resemblance of your mother, I have only given some rude draughts, the most that
I have done is the adding of black colors: the perfecting of the work which
consists in super-adding the vive and lively colors, I leave to a more skilful
hand and learned pen, who will lay his foundation lower than I have done, and
therefore raise his superstructure higher. For those that think I have said too
much, I will only say as the Fathers of old to them that doubted of the
Trinity, Go with John to Jordan and there thou shall see: Comitare Johannem ad
Jordanem and videbis.
so go but to York and there you shall be assured; repair to those that were
her intimate acquaintance, enquire of them concerning the truth of what I have
said, and you will say, as the queen of Sheba concerning Solomon, it is a true
report that you have heard of me, yea the half was not told you, 1 Kin. 10.6, 7.

I have but one thing more to add I acknowledge, that I have here and there
made add^tions and alterations in the Sermon from what I preached: and though I
had never so much time exactly to pen any thing, yet I should always judge it
necessary before it come to public view, lambere foetum, to look and lick it
over again, which when I have done, it will be still unpolished, and my best
homily naught a kin to Chrysostom. Yet if some persons, reputedable enough to
judge had not thought it fit to be printed and were earnest to have it so, it
had been buried within the same walls where is your mothers grave.

Now the Lord make you to abound more and more in knowledge and in all
judgment, that ye may approve things that are excellent, that ye may be
sincere and without offense till the day of Christ, being filled with the
fruits of righteousness, which are by Jesus Christ unto the glory and prai of
God: thus prays

October. 13. 1659 Your Worships obliged and affectionate Servant, JOSIAH HUNTER.

DORCAS REVIVED The Second Time.
9 ACT. 36, 37. Now there was at Joppa a certain Disciple named Tabitha, which
by Interpretation is called Dorcas: This Woman was full of good Works and
Almsdeeds which She did. And it came to pass in those days, that She was
Sick and Dyed.


WE are now met to celebrate the Funerals of a most grave and Religious
Matron, to whose worth (while She was alive) Flattery it self could add
nothing; and from whose worth (being now Dead) Malice and Envy it self cannot
detract any thing. Set aside the Name of the Person mentioned in the Text, and
the place of her Habitation, and what the Holy Ghost affirms of Dorcas, may be
as confidently asserted of her: She was a Disciple, full of good Works and
Almsdeeds which She did: and it is come to pass in these days, that She has
been Sick, and is now Dead.

The words contain in them the description of a good Woman of the Primitive
times, a Woman that excelled most of our Women now, as much as those times for
Purity and Integrity excel ours, those times were more Pure and Savouring of
Christian simplicity than ours, though not so pleasant and delicate, and so it
is likely were their Women. Concerning her in the Text, you may observe 1st.
her Sex, a Woman: 2d. her Name, Tabitha or Dorcas: 3d. the Place of her
Residence, Joppa: 4th. her Profession, a Disciple: 5th. her Practice, full of
good Works and Almsdeeds which she did: Lastly, her Sickness and Death; And
it came to pass in those days, that she was Sick and Dyed. Something of each
of these.

Jeremiahs Figs, those that were good, were very good; 1 Kin. 21.25. 2 Chronicles.
22.10.
those that were evil, very evil, 24 Jer. 3. So those Women which we read of in
Scripture, that were wicked, were very wicked, as Jezebel and Athaliah: but
those that were good, very good, as Mary, Anna, Elizabeth, and Dorcas: and
whatever may be Salomons meaning, 7 Eccl. 28. Yet it is easy to observe, that
the New Testament affords good store of good Women; therefore when Soloman
says, that he had not found one Woman amongst a thousand, perhaps he means,
not one good Woman amongst his thousand Wives and Concubines that he had. 1
Kin. 11.3. Or else his meaning is, that in respect of the discovery of Hearts
and Natures, whether in good or evil, it is harder to find out thoroughly the
perfect disposition of a Woman than of a Man: Take his words in the most
rigorous manner, and all that can be with soundness gathered from them is,
that good Women are rarer than good Men; grant it, yet when they are good,
they are (as we say) rarely, 2 Luke 37. 1 Luke 6. 15 Mat. 28.16 Act. 14.15. 9
Act. 39. 2 Timothy 1.5. 2 Epist. Joh. 4.
that is, very good, and do equal, if not exceed men. How famous is Anna for
her Devotion? Elizabeth for her blameless Conversation? the Canaanitish Woman
for her Faith? Lydia for her diligent attendance unto the Word? Dorcas for her
Charity? Lois and Eunice for their pious education of Timothy? The Elect Lady
and her Children for walking in the Truth? And though Eve eat that Fruit, which
occasioned the fall of Mankind, yet Mary bare and brought forth that Fruit,
which has raised and restored Man to a greater happiness than he lost, 1 Luke
48.
and therefore all Generations call her blessed. I care not for making
Comparisons between Men and Women, seeing they are both one in respect of
Nature, and differ only in Sex; Let those that please themselves in playing
upon Women, remember that when God created Man, he made them Male and Female, 1
Genesis 27.
and both after his own Image. I will only say this, that if God send Man to
School to Learn of such a despicable Creature as the Pismire 6 Prove. 6. Let him
not think it any disparagement to learn sometimes of a Woman, especially such
an eminent and virtuous Woman as Dorcas: Paul, the great Preacher of the
Gentiles, disdaineth not to acknowledge Priscilla one of his helpers in Christ
Jesus, 16 Romans 3. And there are writings of Learned Men extant de illustribus
Foeminis, as well as de illustribus Viris. I will shut up this with one word of
exhortation to women; for should I not exhort women to be as good as they have
been, I might be thought to flatter them; I would have you know therefore, that
whilst I commend women that have been good, my purpose is not to flatter those
that are not good, or at least not so good, as the Holy women in old time who
trusted in God, and adorned themselves, not with plaiting of hair, wearing of
Gold, and putting on of Apparel so much as with the adorning of the hidden man
of the Heart, in that which is not corruptible, even the ornament of a meek and
quiet Spirit, which is in the sight of God of great price. 1 Pet. 3.3, 4, 5. I
would have women therefore for their encouragement to take notice, that they
have as fair Copies of their own to write after, as notable Patterns of their
own Sex to imitate, as men have; Study therefore to be as Modest, Meek, Humble,
Obedient, Chaste, Temperate, Devout, and Charitable, as the Holy women of old
time, that you may deserve such an Honorable Testimony, as the Holy Ghost
gives unto Dorcas. Whether Dorcas was Maid, Wife, or VVidow, is to us
uncertain, nor is it much material to enquire; Labor ye to be full of good
works, as she was; and it shall be your Honor, and an Honor to your Sex, be
your Estate what it will. So much of the first particular.

The second follows, and that is her Name; Tabitha, which Dorcas. Dorcas now
stands in need of interpretation, as Tabitha did then. Tabitha is a Syriack
word, Dorcas a Greek word, they both signify in English, a Roe or Goat. Many
Parents (I suppose) have given their Children, since, this name for Dorcas
sake; but why Dorcas Parents should choose to call her so, may seem strange to
us, who are ignorant of the reason. However let us not be offended at the name,
when we can find no fault with the Person: with God there is no respect of
persons, much less of names; but if it were before verbum Soeculi, it is now
become verbum Ecclesiae. 10 Act. 34.
Jacob signifies a supplanter or deceiver, yet God disdaineth not to call
himself the God of Jacob. The Person if good, dignifies the Name be it never so
mean; and the Name, though never so good, cannot dignifie the Person, if he be
evil and unworthy. Abel was a good man, yet his name signifies vanity. Lydia
was a virtuous woman, yet her name signifies a standing Pool. Absalom was a
traitorous and troublesome Son, yet his name signifies a Father of Peace; and
Michol the Daughter of Saul was none of the best women, yet her name signifies
one who is perfect. To be sure, it can be no disparagement to Dorcas to be so
called, seeing the Church compares Christ to that thing, which her name
imports, scil, a Roe, 2 Cant. 9. And the Roe is commended to us in Scripture
for a loving, pleasant Creature 5 Prove. 19. Thus much we may take notice of,
that the Lord knows every one that belongs to him by name, which he reckons
unto Moses as a special favor 33 Ex. 17. And when the famous names of the
wicked shall rot, the obscurest names of his own people shall be had in
everlasting remembrance. 10 Prove. 7. 112. Psalm. 6.


Joppa. Joppa was a Town situated by the Sea side (Port-Towns have been
observed to be great inlets to the Gospel) it was part of the inheritance of
the Tribe of Dan, formerly known by the name of Japho, 19 Josh. 46. 2 Chro.
2.16. now it is called by the Inhabitants Sappho. We find no mention made of
Joppa, but in this and the next Chapter, throughout the whole New Testament;
and it is very probable, had not Peter Sojourned there, and Dorcas Lived and
Dyed there, that we had not heard of it at all. Now so long as Dorcas is had in
memory, Ioppa will not be altogether forgotten. Of Zion it shall be said (in
Way of honor) this and that man was Born there. 87 Psalm. 5. Good Persons are
an honor to the places that they live in, and together with their own names
transmit the memorial of their Habitations to posterity. Bethlehem was but
little among the thousands of Judah, 5 Mich. 2. yet it is become famous,
because it was the place of Christ's birth, 2 Mat. 6. We read how Cities, yea
whole Countries have contended for the birth and breeding of famous men.
Religious persons are not only a blessing to the places of their abode, whilst
they live; but a credit also, after they are dead. As you know, that little
Spring amongst us is become famous, because of that great River of Ouse flowing
from it, which is so advantageous to the Country round about: So many places,
though in other respects obscure and ignoble, and might have continued so
without observation or remembrance, have become famous, and their memories
perpetuated in succeeding generations, by the birth or residence of some
honorable person. Let us learn from hence to live so, that we may not be a
discredit to the places we live in; There are three things that are the glory
of a Country, Arts, Sciences, and Religion; If we desire to honor the places
of our Nativity or abode, we must neither be Idle, Ignorant, nor Profane; if
we be, the Earth that we tread on bears us, but we are a burden to it; the Air
we breath in, enlivens us, but we are an infection to it.

Her profession, a Disciple. Disciple was the usual appellation by which those
that professed the truth, were called at the first plantation of the Gospel; at
its first original, it was appropriated to those who were the special
Attendants of our Savior, so the twelve Apostles are called the twelve
Disciples, 10 Math. 1. Afterward as the Church increased, so the name grew
more common; so that in Christ's time they that were frequently his Auditors,
are called his Disciples, 6 Joh. 66 and those which afterward were first called
Christians at Antioch, 11 Act. 26. were before that time called Disciples; now
this title is given to Dorcas 1. ad Honorem, 2. ad Documentum. 1. ad Honorem
for Honors sake. To be a Christian, a Disciple, a Professor of the Gospel, is
a great honor to any Person, to be such an one, not in a large sense as the
name of Christian and Professor is now used (for it would make a man's heart
even abhor and loath to see what kind of Professors and Christians we have in
our days) but to be such an one in that strict acceptance, that Dorcas is
entitled here, is a Persons great honor: Certainly, if holiness be the
greatest Honor, and piety the best Nobility, then they are to be reputed the
most Noble and Honorable Persons, who are Professors of Holiness, wicked men
themselves cannot gainsay it, when they see that the Profession of holiness is
accompanied with the Practice of Piety. How often do we meet with that of David
in the Psalms? Lord I am thy Servant, and no doubt but he thought it a greater
honor to be the Servant of God than the King of Israel. There are three
callings in Honor styled Professions, and they are the calling of the Lawyer,
the Physician, and the Divine; all other callings are accounted less noble,
Liberal and Ingenuous: but there is a calling and Profession for Nobility
beyond all these, and that is the calling and profession of Christianity. How
have the greatest Princes and Personages on the Earth Gloried in titles of this
nature? as the King of Spain in being called the Catholic Prince; the King of
France in being styled the most Christian King; and our Kings of England have
thought themselves more famous for the title of Defenders of the Faith. Sure it
is, that as there is nothing more honorable than Christ and the Gospel, so
there is no Profession more honorable than the Profession of the Gospel and
Christianity; 1 Phil. 27.
when they that profess the Gospel have but a care to honor it by walking, as
becomes the Gospel: and what though there be some Professors, who are vile
Persons, the profession, though less honored, is no less honorable. The
Ministry is a most honorable calling, though there be many unworthy Ministers.
As soon may we think to scour the spots out of the Moon, as purge the Church of
all unworthy Members. Let the shame be cast, where the blame is, there is no
shame in being a Christian, or in professing to be so, but it is a shame to
profess the Gospel and practice quite contrary to it: indeed the profession of
the Gospel is so honorable, that Loose-Livers, Profane Persons, and
Hypocrites (if we knew them) are not worthy the name of Professors.

If then to be Professors be our honor, let us glory in it; and if our
profession of the Gospel shall make us vile in the eyes of wicked men, 2 Samuel
6.21 22.14 Rev 1 (...). 9 Rev. 4.
let us resolve with David in another case, I will make yet a greater
profession, I will be more vile. They who received the mark of the Lamb, had it
in their foreheads a visible place, to note, that they should not be ashamed of
it. I will speak of thy testimonies before Kings (says David) and will not be
ashamed. 119 Psalm. 46. We live in an age, wherein Nazianzens complaint of old
may be renewed, nothing is so delightful as the deriding of a Christian;
applause and preferment waits upon them that can (...) rail upon honest men in
handsome language. Michol was barren until her death, 2 S^m. 6.23.
for scoffing at David dancing before the Ark; but I know not how (says a
learned man) Michol is become fruitful, after her death, of a scoffing
generation. What then? shall any that makes profession of the glorious name of
Christ be afraid of words? 12 Heb. 2
then may Profane Persons scoff indeed: let us rather despise the shame, yea
we may glory in this shame; the Apostles rejoiced, that they were accounted
worthy to suffer shame for his name, 5 Act. 41. Oh that ever men, who desire to
be called Christians, should yet be ashamed to make profession of Christianity,
that they should judge that their shame, which is their greatest glory. Let us
remember what our Savior says 8 Mark 38. Whosoever shall be ashamed of me and
my words in this adulterous and sinful generation, of him also shall the Son
of man be ashamed, when he comes in the Glory of his Father, with the holy
Angels. For such of us as have begun to make a more than common profession of
the Gospel, let us hold fast the profession of our faith without wavering; and
let us consider one another to provoke unto love and unto good works, not
forsaking the assembling of our selves together, as the manner of some is, but
exhorting one another, and so much the more, as we see the day approaching,
whether of judgment or of persecution, as it is, 10 Hebr. 23, 2, 4 25.

Dorcas is called a Disciple here, ad Documentum, as for her Dorcas a Discple,
that is, as one observes, a Scholar in the School of Christ, and submitter of
her self to the Ordinance of God for the saving of her Soul; now if Christian
and Disciple be aequivalent and convertible terms, then it is easy to make the
observation; That he who is indeed a Christian, is a Learner, one that depends
upon, and submits himself to the means of instruction. To this end were the
Scriptures written, namely for our learning 15 Romans 4. and when Christ sent out
his Disciples, he bade them go (...) teach, that is, make Disciples, 28 Math.
19. when Christ would show, what mark his sheep have, He declares it to be an
ear-mark, 10 Joh. 27. my sheep hear my voice; and therefore are Ministers of
the Gospel called Teachers, 30 Isa. 20.4 Ephesians. 11. to note, that they who hear
them should be Learners. Nor ought any of Christ's Disciples to think it a
disparagement to be Learners; for if they look at the Person of whom they
learn, they are Christ's Ministers, 1 Cor 4.1, Christ's Ambassadors, 2 Cor.
5.20. they represent no meaner a person than the Lord of Life and Glory, the
great Prophet of the Church and Savior of the World: and how meanly soever
they may be accounted of by men, yet they are called the glory of Christ, 2
Cor. 8.23. If they look at the things which they learn, they are of an
excellent nature, and it will ennoble, elevate and help much to the perfection
of their understandings: for we speak the wisdom of God in a mystery, even the
hidden wisdom, which God ordained before the World unto our Glory, 1 Cor. 2.8.
We Preach such things, as the very Angels desire to look into, 1 Pet. 1.12. We
Preach Christ Crucified, 1 Cor. 1.23. the knowledge of whom is so excellent,
that Paul counted all things but loss to gain it. 3 Phil. 8. And as we preach
concerning things of the greatest excellency, so likewise of the greatest
advantage, for unto us is committed the Word of Reconciliation. 2 Cor. 5.18. So
that we are appointed to teach the lost Children of Adam the way to Paradise
again; how they may, not only make their Peace with God, but be restored to his
favor, friendship, and familiarity, so that they shall be admitted to eat of
the Tree of Life, and live for evermore. Is it any disparagement for a man to
be a learner of things that are so excellent and advantageous? Lastly, let the
Disciples of Christ consider their Estate, and it is no disparagement unto them
to be learners; for their State is a State of imperfection, and the Ministry
was set up for the perfecting of the Saints. 4 Ephesians. 12. When Eunomius, that
proud Heretic, boasted how he knew the Divinity, Basil gravelled him in no
less than one and twenty questions about the Body of an Aunt, or Pismire. Sure
it is, a Wise Man will hear and increase Learning. 1 Prove 5. Give instruction
to a Wise Man, and he will be yet Wiser, teach a Just Man, and he will increase
in Learning. 9 Prove. 9. Therefore let none think it a disgrace to them to sit
in the Learners form, till they be advanced to the University of Heaven, to
have Society with the Spirits of Just Men made perfect. 12 Heb. 23. Si
moribundus etiam aliquid didicisset. Melch. Adam.
David Chytraens, when he lay a dying, lift up himself to hear the discourses
of his Friends, that sat by him; and said, that he should dye with better
cheer, if he might dye learning something.

By this then let us make trial of the truth of our Profession. We do
confidently persuade our selves, and profess unto others, that we are the
Disciples of Christ, if we be so indeed then we are Learners, that is, such as
hear instruction and grow Wise, and refuse it not, watching daily at Wisdoms
Gates. 8 Prove. 33, 34. It is the property of a Learner to be humble, sensible
of his ignorance, and self-denying; not proud, self-conceited, or wise in his
own eyes. The Rabbis have a saying, that he who learneth of himself, has a
Fool to his Master: and Solomon tells us, that there is more hope of a Fool,
than the man that is wise in his own conceit. 20 Prove. 12. Therefore he that
would be wise, must be a Fool, that he may be wise. 1 Cor. 3.18.
It is another property of a learner to reverence his teachers; So are we
commanded to know them that Labor amongst us, and are over us in the Lord, and
admonish us, and to esteem them more highly for their works sake. 1 Thessalonians.
5.12, 13. Heretofore they have accounted the very feet of them beautiful, that
brought glad tidings of Peace. 10. Romans 15. And Herod an Hypocrite, did for a
time not only rejoice in hearing John's Doctrine, 6 Mark. 20.
but was also very observant of his Person, Now if these be the
characteristical Notes of a Disciple, we may justly suspect, that as there were
many, who said they were Jews, but were not; 3 Rev. 9.
so there are many, who call themselves Disciples, that are not so indeed, yea
that would take it in scorn to be thought learners. 2 Mala. 7.
For though the Priests lips preserve knowledge, and the people should seek the
Law at his Mouth, because he is the Messenger of the Lord of Hosts; yet
generally men are so conceited of themselves, and have such under-valuing
conceits of their Teachers (because their fellow creatures, and subject to like
passions as they are) 5 Iam. 17.
that they judge this a very servile, and therefore too submisse a course; This
makes me think, as he said (...), there were more Imitators than true Citizens;
so that in our days we have more Imitators, than true Christians, even amongst
those that are more strictly so taken.

So I pass from Dorcas Profession, to her Practice; those two must not be
separated; for the most glorious profession of Religion without good works, is
most gross Hypocrisy, and he that is barren in good works, and yet bears high
and broad the sail of Profession, seems to be afraid lest the World should not
take notice of him for an Hypocrite. Good works likewise, without a knowledge
and profession of Christian Religion, Splendida peccain.
are no better than glorious Sins, as Augustine calls them; no better than the
virtues of Heathens, Quid vobis (ethnici) cum virtutibus, qui christum dei
virtutem ignoratis?
unto which though we give the name, yet they want the nature of virtue. For as
Bernard said, What have you Heathens to do with virtues, who are ignorant of
Christ, the virtue and power of God unto Salvation? But where a profession of
Religion, and a practice of good works are in conjunction, they make integrum
sanctum, an entire, sincere, complete Saint. Such an one was Dorcas in those
days, such an one was the Dorcas of our days. First in general, Full of good
works; then more particularly, and Almsdeeds which she did.

She was full of good works. When it is said that Dorcas was full of good
works, it is not meant, that she was perfect, 3 Jam. 2.
for in many things we offend all; and every Sin is a defect. Much less may we
think, that She did works of supererrogation; They are super-arrogant, that
think themselves righteous above the Rule; As full as Dorcas was, I dare say
for her blessed Soul, that She thought her self empty and barren. Ears that are
most laden with Corn, hang lowest down to the ground; and holiest Persons have
always the humblest thoughts of themselves. Hereby therefore I conceive, are
meant three things. 1. She was full of, that is, abundant in good works, as
when it is said, 2 Chro. 24, 25,
that Jehojada waxed old, and was full of days, the meaning is, he grew very
old: and when it is said of wicked worldly men, that they are full of Children,
17 Psalm. 14. the meaning is, they have many Children: So Dorcas was full of
good works, that is, she was a very good woman, and did abound in good works;
To be full of good works, is as much as to be fruitful. Dorcas her good works
were not few, as the gleaning Grapes, 24 Isa. 13.
when the Vintage is done, or as the shaking of an Olive Tree, two or three
Berries in the top of the uttermost bough, four or five in the most fruitful
branches thereof; 17 Isa. 5,
but she was full of good works, like the Vine before it is gathered, and the
Olive Tree before it be shaken. 2. She was full of good works, that is, She did
not only abound, but in some sort super-abound, considering her condition: She
did very many good works, even beyond the expectation of those that knew her,
when they compared what She did, as they imagined with what She had: they would
not have thought, that She had so rich a Treasury, that would have furnished
her to expend so liberally. They could not but think, that her fullness of good
works abroad, would bring her to want at home: Yet so it was, She did many good
works; nor did they draw her dry, but some way or other She was supplied, that
She still did more; it is very probable that Dorcas was not a woman of great
worldly Estate, and if she had not been notable for her good works, She might
in other respects have lived obscurely enough: But whatever her estate was She
had a free heart, and did not for fear of wanting her self, hold back her hand
from supplying the necessities of others. The Widow that cast her two Mites
into the Treasury, is said to have cast in more than they that cast in greater
gifts, 21, Luke 1, 2, 3.
because what they gave was out of their abundance; but she cast in all that
she had. So Dorcas was full of good works, that is, She did abound, yea she did
super-abound comparing her abilities with her expense, She did more than she
was supposed able to do, 3. She was full of good works, that is, her works were
not only abounding, but abiding; She did not satisfy her self with what good
she had done, 3 Phil. 13.11 Eccles. 6.
but still she did more; with the Apostle she forgot that which was behind; and
though she had done very much good, yet still she withheld not her hand;
according to the injunction 6 Gal. 9, 10. Let us not be weary in well-doing, for
in due season we shall reap, if we faint not, as we have therefore opportunity,
let us do good. Out of the good Treasure of her heart, She was still bringing
forth good things. 12 Math. 35
She was like the Orange-tree, of which they write, that it is bringing forth
fruit all the year long as some are ripe, so others are still budding: And as
it is said of the Church of Thyatira, 2 Rev. 19.
her works were more at the last, than at the first. Hereby She made it appear
that she was no Hypocrite, who is moved by an external principle, and does his
good works only for particular ends, and therefore continues not always to do
good: But She was a sincere Christian whose good works flowed from an inward
Principle of grace, and were directed to an universal end, Gods glory. So then
Dorcas was full of good works, that is, She did very much good, more than could
be expected from such a Woman, and thus she continued to her death; 24 Mat. 46.
and so was one of those blessed servants, whom her Lord, when he came, sound
well-doing.

Good works are sometime strictly taken for works of Charity because that Love
is the fullfilling of the Law, Aug. lib. 10. de civ. Dei ca. 1.
and hac sibi Deus vel pro sacrificiis, vel prae sacrificiis placere testatur,
God accepts of works of Charity for sacrifices, with such sacrifices God is
well-pleased, 13 Hebr. 16. Yea he accepts them before sacrifices, I will have
mercy and not sacrifice, 9 Math. 13. But oftentimes good works are taken more
largely for the whole obedience of a Christian, so we are said to be Gods
workman-ship created in Christ Jesus unto good works. Sure it is, 2 Ephesians. 10.
the Law is the Rule of good works and therefore obedience to any branch 1 John
3.4.
of the Law is a good work; as the breach of any part of the Law is an evil
work; and as the Logicians say, there is no created being, but it is reduced
into one of the ten predicaments; so there is no duty or good work commanded of
us, but it is contained in one of those ten words, 10 Deuteronomy. 4.
as Moses calls them, that is Commandments. These good works in other places of
Scripture are called good Fruits, 3 Jam. 17. Fruits of righteousness, 1 Phil.
11. Fruits of the Spirit, 5 Gal. 2. Fruits worthy of Repentance, 3 Luke 8. and
amongst many other expressions, they are called armor of light, 13 Romans 12.
Good works therefore are of a very large extent; yet it has pleased the
Holy Ghost, to reduce them under three heads, 2 Tit. 12. Sobriety toward our
selves, Honesty toward our neighbor, and Godliness toward God. So that when
it is said, Dorcas was full of good works, the meaning is this, She was very
Sober, Honest and Godly in respect of her disposition; and full of Acts of
sobriety, honesty and godliness in her conversation.

Only take notice of this, before I come to the Doctrine. Though Dorcas be here
commended for her good works, yet the Scripture speaks sometimes of good
works by way of Diminution and debasing of them; which in what respect it is
done, is very necessary for us to observe. Take notice therefore, when good
works are compared with the righteousness of Christ, in relation to
justification, then they are rejected as unable for any such use, and called
menstruous rags, 64 Is. 6. dross and dung, 3 Phil. 8. when the best works we
do, are considered in the Court of Justification, there they are damnable and
have so much dross in them, that God does reject them as wholly insufficient:
but look on them as fruits of Faith, done out of obedience to Gods command, and
with respect to his Glory, and so the Scripture does highly commend them. Thus
then the Scripture commends good works against the Antinomian, who holds them
unnecessary: but condemns good works, yea the best works, against the Papist,
who holds them to be meritorious whereas when we have done all, Nisi Deus per
misericordiam pareret; non haberet quos per justitiam coronaret, in Ps. 100.
we must say that we are unprofitable, and acknowledge with Augustine, that
unless God did spare in mercy, he should find none, whom he might Crown in
justice; surely he that relyes upon his works, does like a man that on a
moon-shinie night mistakes his own shadow for a bridge, and so falls into the
River and is drowned.

Now let the observation be this; All that make profession of the Gospel should
accompany their profession with fruitfullness in good works, So Paul gave in
charge to Titus, These things I will that thou affirm constantly, that they
which have believed in God be careful to maintain good works 3 Tit. 8. two
greek words are observable (...) that it be their care and study, the bent of
their minds, (...) to maintain, or rather to be examples and presidents, going
before others in good works; these are the richest and most usual styles of
commendation in Scripture. Moses, a man mighty in words and deeds. Cornelius, 7
Act. 22. 10 Act 2. 7 Luk 4.5. 9 Act. 39. 16 Romans 23. 2 Timothy 1.16.
a man fearing God and giving much Alms. The Centurion worthy of favor, for He
has built us a Synagogue. Dorcas made so many Coats for the poor. Gaius, the
Host of the Church. Onesiphorus has Paul his earnest Prayers for mercy,
because he often refreshed him; and as one observes wittily, the Scripture
speaks but little of the learning of the Apostles, but much of their Acts.

The reasons why Professors of the Gospel should be full of good works are
these, 1 because true Christian Religion does not consist merely in Negatives.
It is not sufficient to abstain from evil, except we do good; cease to do evil,
learn to do well, 1 Isa. 27. That Tree which bears not good Fruit, 13 Luke 7.
is a Cumberer of the ground, and shall be cut down for the Fire; as well as
that which boars ill fruit and poisons the ground. We must not only put off
Wrath, Malice, Blasphemy, 3 Colos. 8. etc.
filthy Communication and Lying, but put on also bowels of Mercy, Kindness,
Humbleness of mind, Meekness, Long-suffering, and above all Charity, which is
the bond of Perfection. 18 Luk 11.
Thou say that thou art no Extortioner, unjust, or Adulterer; but this is not
sufficient; thou tellest of the evil works which thou do not; but where are
the good works thou do? though he be usually accounted a good man, that does
no evil; yet he is rather an evil man (says Chrysostom) that does no good.
And we read that at the day of Judgment men shall be condemned, not only for
the evil that they have done, 25 Matthew.
but for the good that they have left undone. Many there are that seem to be
Religious, when they deceive their own hearts; For pure Religion and undefiled
before God and the Father is this, to visit the Father-lesse and the Widow, and
to keep our selves unspotted from the world. 1 Jam. 27.
Hereby we give testimony of the truth of our Profession, when we are fruitful
in good works; For he that professes himself to be a Christian and is barren
in good works, is like a painted Tree, that stands only for show; like Zeuxes
Vine, painted so lively, that the Birds came to pick at it, thinking to have
filled their bellies, but went away hungry, as they came: or like the Fig Tree
in the Gospel, of which Christ thought to have eaten, 21 Mat. 18, 19. Ruffin.
Eccles. Hist. lib. 2. c. 10.
but when he came near, it had nothing but leaves; as one Moses renowned for
piety, said to Lucius reputed an Arrian Bishop, tendering the confession of his
Faith to clear himself; Tush says he, what tellest thou me of the Faith of the
Ears? let me have the Faith of the Hands: So thou tellest me, that thou art a
constant hearer of the word, thou art able to discourse out of it; but (Oh man)
what tellest thou me of the Faith of the Ears, or the Faith of the Tongue? let
me see the Faith of the Hands; Few (I confess) troubled with the deaf and dumb
Spirits in these times, Ubi bona opera non apparent ad extra, ibi fides non est
ad intra. Mr. Burgess.
but most having withered Hands. It was a saying of John Husse, that where good
works are not without, there Faith is not within; and so some learned men say,
that good works are necessary to preserve a man in the State of Justification,
though they do not immediately concur to the Act: as in a man, although his
Shoulders and Breast do not immediately concur to the Act of Seeing, yet if a
man's Eyes and Head were not knit to those parts, he could not see; and though
the Fire do not burn, as it is light, yet it could not burn, unless it were
so. The chief scope of St. James his Epistle, is to urge hearers to be doers,
and vain boasters of justifiing Faith, to justify their Faith by their works.

2. God is gloryfied by good works; therefore says our Master, 5 Mat. 16. Let
your light shine before men, that they may see your good works, and gloryfie
your Father, which is in Heaven. The men, 31 Job 20. 29 Job 15. 1 Jam. 25.
for whom our Heavenly Father is Gloryfied, are such whose works shine before
men, who warm the Loins of the Poor, and by their knowledge are an Eye to the
blind. For such men God is blessed of men, and such men shall be blessed of God
in their Deeds. The Sun it self, if it did not shine, and give warmth unto the
Creatures, were the glorious Face thereof ten times more glorious than it is,
none would half so much bless God for it.

3. Good works were one end of Christ's death. 2 Tit. 14. there the Apostle
says, that Christ dyed, to purchase unto himself a peculiar people, zealous of
good works, not only followers but zealous; and lest men should think, that we
should only preach free grace, these things speak (says he) and exhort. So it
is said, that he suffered for Sin, 1 Pet. 1.21
leaving us an example that we should follow his steps: Now he went about doing
good. 10 Act. 38. And himself bare our Sins in his own body on the Tree, that
we being dead unto Sin, should live unto righteousness. 1 Pet. 2.24.

4. Good works are an ornament to our profession. 1 Phil. 27. 2 Tit. 10*
When we are full of good works, we walk as becomes the Gospel, and adorn the
Doctrine of God and our Savior. A Christian, though, like Leah, tender-ey'd,
and cannot see far into the mysteries of Religion, yet if fruitful, is more
honorable than barren Rachel, though fair and beautiful for parts and
knowledge; The credit of the Gospel should be dear to the Professors of it,
and woe to him who makes that worthy name, by which he is named, to be evil
spoken off. 2 Jam. 7.
Hence flows another, Good works being an honor to our profession, they will
put to shame, and silence profane persons, 1 Pet. 2.15. 1 Pet. 3.16. 1 Pet.
3.1. (...):
who are ready to take all occasions to Blaspheme; yea through our good
conversation, we may be instrumental for the gaining of those that are without.
Chrysostom calls good works, unanswerable syllogismes, invincible
demonstrations, to confute and convert Pagans

1. Then if this be our Doctrine; Appl.
it is manifest that the Papists do most falsely charge us to be (...),
despisers, yea condemners of good works. We condemn them in no other sense than
the Scripture condemns them, otherwise we commend them as the best signs of a
living Faith, and the expressions of thankfulness to God for redeeming us by
his Son. And therefore we think Ursine has very fitly entitled his tractate
of good works de gratitudine. We say that God commands good works, is well
pleased with them, and glorified by them, and though they cannot merit eternal
life (for that is the gift of God) yet there is in them an ordinability to
eternal life, 6 Ro^. 23.
which is not in evil works; And they do render the Subject capable of Heaven,
whereas evil works do wholly unfit him. Therefore we are ever pressing upon our
Auditors, to learn to maintain good works for necessary uses, that they be not
unfruitful, 3 Tit. 14. And we teach them, that good works are necessary in a
fourfold respect. 1. Necessitate praecepti, by the necessity of precept; this
is the will of God. 1 Pet. 2.15. 2. Necessitate ordinis, by the necessity of an
inviolable order, whereby a rational Creature is obliged to yield all obedience
to his Creator. 3. Necessitate consequentiae, by a necessity of consequence,
because good works do flow from the very essence and being of Faith. Lastly,
Necesit^^e med^i sive hypotheseos, by a necessity of the means, or a
conditional necessity; for though no man can be saved for his works* yet
without good works he shall not be saved; for if ye live after the flesh, ^
Romans 13. 6 Galat. 7.
ye shall dye: and whatsoever a man sows, that shall he also reap: therefore
good works are according to Bernard, Via ad regnum, though not causa regnandi.

2. It reproves such, as make profession of the Gospel, and yet instead of
being full of good works, are full of evil works; concerning whom it may be
said, 32 Deuteronomy. 32.
that their Vine is the Vine of Sodom, and of the fields of Gomorrha, their
Grapes are Grapes of Gall, their clusters are bitter. Their works are works of
the flesh, Adultery, Fornication, Uncleanness, Lasciviousness, Idolatry, 5
Gal. 19.
Witchcraft, Hatred, Variance, Emulations, Wrath, Strife, Seditions, Heresies,
Envyings, Murders, Drunkenness, Revellings, and such like; Of some one, or more
of these they are full. These men are the scandal of the Gospel, and by how
much Christian Religion is the best of Religions, by so much are these the
worst of men; and no man so vile in the eyes of God, 10 Luke 33.
and Men, as a debauched Christian, he does not only bring shame, 4 Joh. 22.
but also suspicion upon his profession; for however the Samaritan, not the
Jew, relieved the distressed Traveller; yet the Jews Religion was true, not the
Samaritans; So in other cases, truth of causes must not be judged by Acts of
Persons: Yet as he said, it must needs be good that Nero persecutes, so many
are ready to say, it cannot be good, surely it cannot but be evil, that such a
wicked wretch professes. What shall I say to such? do ye think it enough to
say, that you have Abraham to your Father? 3 Mat. 9, 10.
Will you Steal, Murder, commit Adultry, Swear falsely, and come and stand
before God in the House called by his name, 7 Jer, 9, 10. 8 Joh. 4^.
and say, we are delivered to do all these abominations? shall I tell you, that
ye are of your Father the Devil, and his works you do? take it how you will,
the Scripture says expressly, that the Devil works in Children of
Disobedience, 2 Ephesians. 2.
such as thou art. Or Lastly, Shall I tell thee* that for such works, comes the
wrath of God upon the Children of Disobedience. 5 Ephesians. 6.
Thou art full of evil work^, God is full of patience, that does not as yet
pour out of the Vials of his wrath upon thee, but take heed, what thou do,
God is pressed under thee as a Cart, 2 Am. 3.
that is full of sheavs; if the Axeltree of his Patience break, the burden
will fall on thee, a burden so heavy, 6 Rev. 57.
that thou would be glad to change it for Rocks and Mountains.

3. Let us all be exhorted, in this to make Dorcas our pattern. She was neither
Idle, Evil, nor Unfruitful; Not Idle, for we read of her works: nor Evil, for
her works were good: nor Unfruitful, for she was full of them. 1. Dorcas was
not Idle, 1 Timothy 5.13.
for we read of her works. She was none of those women, that learn to be idle,
and wander about from House to House. Good works (says Gerrhard) in Scripture
are taken, In Loc. Com.
not only for external actions, but for inward affections to good; but it
pleased the Holy Ghost to use the name of works, rather than habits or
affections, because the praise of true virtue consists in action. Sure it is,
man was made for action: and though some Sciences, in comparison of others more
operative, are termed speculative; yet not one of them, whose speculation tends
not to, and ends in some operation, whereby man is advantaged, and God
honored; specially Divinity, which is, scientia affectiva and effectiva. We
lose the sweetness of all our speculations, reading and discoursing about
Divinity, if we reduce them not into good works; It is the profit of practice,
which makes the study of the Law so sweet; and that is accounted the best
pasture, which is seen in the flesh and fleece of the Sheep. To little purpose
it is, that we do excolere animum, Till and sow our minds with the Seeds of
good notions, if these Seeds bring not forth fruit in our works and actions.
The blessing of Daniels pulse and water, 1 Dan. 15.
was seen in the fatness and well-favourednesse of his countenance: So the
blessing, that God gives to all our Meditating, Reading, Hearing, and
Discoursing, is seen by our fruitfulness of good works. What is a man the
better for the Seed he sows, if it rot in the ground, or bring not forth a
crop, that will reward him for his labor? If a man's Meat be sweet, and does
not nourish him, it is a sign of an ill digestion; and thy notions are raw,
indigested notions, if they turn not into actions and operations. And as we
lose the sweetness, so others lose the benefit of our speculations, if not
converted into good works; therefore an idle person is not unfitly compared to
the dumb jack in a Virginal, whilst the other dance out a sweet and winning
Music, it disturbs the whole body with an ill-distemper'd laziness. 2. Dorcas
was not Evil, for her works were good. One might better be idle, than not
well-employed, for to be sure, 1 Cor. 3.15.
his work shall be burnt, if he be not burnt for his work: so that he is sure
every way to receive loss; and he that is not employed in doing a good work,
suffers a double loss, both propter lucrum cessans and propter damnum
emergens: For whilst a man has been doing evil, he might have been doing some
good, which would have proved an advantage to him, therefore in that respect he
suffers loss; but he has been doing evil, which will prove unto him evil, and
here is a double loss. Now unto the Constitution of a good work, many things
are required; especially these four, a right Rule, a right Motive, a right
Principle, a right End.

1. A right Rule, that is, the Law of God. As the Artificer can draw no good
line, which is not commensurate to the Rule; So neither is any work thou do,
good (though never so specious) if not conformable to the Word. In vain do they
worship me, teaching for Doctrines the Commandments of men. 15 Mat. 9. The
blind whelps of will, worship, and ignorant devotion, God regards not.
Counterfeit Coin is so far from being current, that the Coining of it is a
capital Crime; and all works which have not the stamp of Gods word upon them,
are so far from being acceptable, that they are abominable to him; and he
rejects them with a, who has required these things at your hands.

1 Isa. 12.
2. A right Motive; Unto a good work it is requisite that we do not only what is
commanded; but that we do it ex intuitu voluntatis, because it is commanded. In
all good works, there must be not only a knowledge of, but a respect to the
will of God, 1 These. 4.3. 1 These. 5.18. 1 Pet. 2.15. 12 Romans 2. 5 Ephesians. 17. 7
Mat. 16. 4 Jer. 14. 18 Ezekiel. 31.
which is therefore used so frequently, as an argument to enforce our
obedience, because we ought to do every thing in conscience to Gods command:
For to do that which God wills, and not to do it, because he wills it, is not
obedience, and therefore not a good work.

3. A right Principle, and that is a good heart. Do men gather Grapes of
Thorns, or Figs of Thistles? a corrupt Tree cannot bring forth good fruit. Such
as the Fountain is, such are the Streams. Therefore we are commanded to wash
our Hearts; to make unto our selves new Hearts; because we must be good, before
we can do good. When the People of Israel promised, that they would do all that
God had commanded them by Moses; What says God, Oh that there were such an
Heart in them, 5 Deuteronomy. 29. It is not for thee to promise, that thou will lead a
new life, endeavor to be full of good works; 11 Romans 2.^
Oh labor to get such an Heart in the. By nature we are wild Olives,
therefore we must by Humiliation be cut off from our own Stocks, and by Faith
put into Christ, and so the property of the ground of our Hearts altered and
meliorated, 8 Romans 8.
ere we can bring forth good Fruit. Therefore we affirm, that an unregenerate
man cannot do a good work; for they that are in the flesh, 1 Samuel 24.13.
cannot please God; and wickedness will proceed from the wicked.

4. A right end, and that is Gods glory; whereunto all our Actions must be
referred, or else seem they never so good, 1 Cor. 10.31.
they are no better than Pharisaical. Therefore the Apostle prays, that the
Philippians might be filled with Fruits of Righteousness, to the glory and
praise of God, 1 Phil. 11. It is the mark, 1 Phil. 11.
that directs the eye; Therefore where a man's mark is not good, his aim is
naught, and so is his Action. No Creature, we say, was made by it self; and
therefore not made for it self, but him that made it: So there is no good work,
which we can do of our selves, therefore we ought not to do it for our selves;
but for his praise, from whom we have the power. 2 Cor. 5.5.
And I make no question, but so far as a man is convinced, that what good he
does is from God, and not himself, so far will he direct, the good that he
does unto God and not to himself. Therefore a true Christian ascribes the glory
of his good works to God, as the Author; and directs his good works to the
glory of God, as his end.

Lastly, Dorcas was not unfruitful, for she was full of good Romans, that they
were full of goodness, 15. Romans 14. of Stephen, that he was full of Faith and
power, 6 Act. 8. and of Barnabas, that he was a good man, and full of the
Holy Ghost, and of Faith, 11 Act. 24. This was their praise, and will be ours
if we be such, or in truth endeavor to be so: Yet this is a small thing in
comparison of the Glory, that shall redound to God (for what is our praise to
Gods glory) now herein (says our Lord) is my Father glorified, that ye bear
much Fruit, 15 Ioh. 8. A Christian in Scripture is compared to a Vine; and a
Vine brings forth Fruit by Glusters, not here and there a Grape, but clusters
of Grapes: Beloved, you all profess your selves to be engrafted into Christ, I
tell you, it is a dishonor to the Root, on which you profess your selves to
grow, to bear such unprofitable branches. A garden enclosed is my Sister, my
Spouse, thy Plants are an Orchard of Pomgranates with pleasant fruits, Camphire
with Spikenard, Spikenard and Saffron, Calamus and Cinnamon, with all Trees of
Frank-Incense, Mirrhe and Aloes, with all the chief Spices; thus Christ sets
out his Church 4 Cant. 13. She was a Garden full of all the varieties of the
heavenly Trees and flowers of Grace. And it may be said of every Tree of this
Garden, as of the teeth of Christ 4 Cant. 2. they are like a flock of sheep
even shorn, which come up from the washing, whereof every one bears twins and
none is barren amongst them. It is a great shame for any of us not to be
fruitful, whom God has planted in a soil so fruitful of all things
pertaining both to Life and Godliness. But our barrenness in good works may
justly provoke God to turn our fruitful Land into barrenness; 107 Psalm. 34.
2. Hos. 9. 21 Math. 41.
and not only take away his own Corn and his Wine and his Oil, his Wool and his
Flax from us, but even the Gospel it self and give it to a Nation that will
bring forth the fruits of it. Especially I have it in charge from the Apostle,
1 Timothy 6 17. 9 Jud. 8.
to charge such as are rich in this world, to be rich in good works. I read,
that when the Olive and Vine and Fig Tree were invited to be Kings over the
rest of the Trees; they pretended, that they would not leave their Fatness, and
Sweetness, and Fruitfulness for promotion; as though a man could not bear fruit
and bear Rule together. God forbid, that any of you should make your riches or
greatness an excuse for your barrenness in good works* But it was intended only
as a Parable by him, that spoke it; and so I leave it.

I pass from Dorcas commendation in the general, to that thing for which she
is especially commended to our imitation, which is that she was full of
alms-deeds, which she did. By alms-deeds are meant works of mercy to those that
are in necessity. Now works of mercy respect either Soul or Body; those which
respect the Soul are six; usually comprehended under this verse, Instrue,
Castiga, Remitte, Solare, Fer, Ora, Instruct, Reprove, Forgive, Comfort,
Sustain, and Pray. They which respect the Body are likewise six, contained in
another verse, Visito, Poto, Cibo, Recolligo Vestio, Condo, Visit the Sick,
Refresh the Thirsty, Feed the Hungry, Redeem the Captive, Cloth the Naked, and
Bury the Dead. Now those works of mercy which respect the Soul, are of the two
the better Alms-deeds; therefore for certain Dorcas did not omit them; though
else I think that by Alms-deeds in the Text, are chiefly understood works of
mercy respecting the Body. Observe.


Professors of the Gospel ought to be very charitable to the Poor, I have not
eaten my morsels alone (says Job) I have seen none to perish for want of
Clothing, 31 Job. 17. 19 Luke 8. 10 Act. 2. Philem. v 7. 2 Timothy 1 16. 16 Romans
23.
the loins of the Poor have blessed me, because he was warmed with the fleece
of my sheep. To pass by the example of Zacheas, Cornelius, Philemon,
Onesiphorus, Gaius and others; the example of Christ is most notable, who
though he lived by contribution himself, yet gave out a share to the poor, and
had his Almoner to that purpose, 13 Joh. 29. though this be a common Doctrine,
yet because it is not commonly practiced, it will not be unnecessary to add a
reason or two to enforce it.

1. Distributing to the necessities of the poor, is a work which God does
stricktly enjoin. Amongst many places I will select two; one out of the Old
Testament 15 Deuteronomy. 7.8. If one of thy brethren with thee be poor, thou shall
not harden thine heart nor shut thy hand from thy poor brother, but thou shall
open thine hand wide unto him. The other is out of the New Testament 1 Timothy
6.17. Charge them that are rich in this world, that they do good, that they be
rich in good works, ready to distribute, willing to communicate, laying up in
store for themselves a good foundation against the time to come, that they may
lay hold on eternal life. Hearken then (my Brethren) it is not left arbitrary
to you, Bishop Hall in a Sermon. on 1 Timothy 6.17
that you may do good if you will; but it is laid upon you as your charge and
duty, and woe be to you, if ye do it not, Do good, if ever ye look to receive
good. If ever ye look to be rich in Heaven, be rich in good works upon the
Earth. There must be a Date, ere there can be a Dabitur; Give and it shall be
given. 19 Prove. 17.
He that gives to the poor, lends to the Lord, who pays large increase for all
he borrows: but how shall he give you the interest of Glory, where he has not
received the principal of beneficence? As the Grecian said of very tall men,
that they were Cypress Trees, (...) fair and tall but fruitless; So may I say
of strait-handed rich-men; and these Cypresses are not for the garden of
Paradise; none shall ever be planted there but the fruitful. If the first
Paradise had any Trees in it, only for pleasure; I am sure the second, which is
in the midst of the new Jerusalem, 22 Rev. 2.
shall have no Tree that bears not twelve Fruits; yea whose very leaves are not
beneficial.

2. Give me leave to ask you this question: if you knew what to offer unto God,
that might be pleasing and acceptable to him, would ye not do it? 43 Genesis 11.
are ye not glad, that ye have any thing wherewith to present a great man
(whose favor you need) that he delights in and will accept of? and methinks,
you should be glad, that you have any thing, wherewith you may do a work that
is pleasing to the Majesty of Heaven and Earth. Well mind that of the Apostle,
13 Hebr. 16. To do good and to communicate forget not, for with such sacrifices
God is well pleased. the word is (...) God is delighted or more properly (as he
observes in his Critickes) hilariter affectus, cheerfully affected with such
sacrifices. Beloved, I beseech you, consider; shall not we poor men, we sinful
men, who are worms and no men, between whom and God there is such an infinite
distance as cannot be expressed, shall not we rejoice from our hearts, that we
can do any thing, which may be acceptable and well-pleasing to God, which may
delight and give complacency to him? you see, what will please him. Oh be not
so backward to do that which God is so forward to accept of: be not so unkind
as to withhold that from God, which he is so ready to take as so great a
kindness from you. 22 Job. 2.3.
The Lord stands not in need of any of your gifts, yet he is pleased with your
ingenuity: you cannot be profitable to the Almighty, but you may be pleasing to
him; and what is there you can desire more than acceptance with God and Christ,
who tells you, that whatever ye do to the least of his Brethren, he takes it as
done unto himself, 25 Math. 40.

3. 14 Math.
Lastly consider, that by giving you shall gain; as the bread broken in the
Gospel, multiplied. Ask and have is the rule of Prayer; but give and have is
the rule of Liberality. He has dispersed, he has given to the poor, His horn
shall be exalted with honor, 112 Psalm. 9. He shall have a Cornu-Copia of
blessings, Riches, and Honor too, to boot: and his Arms shall be an horn
effundent in a barren Field. Miseros pro patientia, misericordes pro
benevolentia.
That saying of Leo is worthy our observation; the Divine justice and wisdom
(says he) suffers many to labor under great miseries, that he might crown the
miserable for their patience, and the merciful for their benevolence. Paul
compares giving of Alms to the sowing of Corn, Ad semi nantis potius quam ad
suscipientis lucra cedit. A^nbr.
2 Cor. 9.6. now as sowing Corn turns more to the benefit of him, that sows
it, than of the Earth that receives the Seed; so in giving of Alms, the
advantage is more to the Giver than the Receiver. This is one advantage you
see: The times we live in are times of great sickness and visitation now God
has promised, that he will have a special care over such, as are merciful to
the poor, 41 Psalm. 1. Blessed is he that considers the poor, the Lord will
strengthen him upon the bed of languishing, thou will make all his bed in his
sickness, thou know not how soon it may be thy lot, to be visited with
sickness: If thou considerest the condition of thy poor Brethren in distress,
thou art sure to have careful attendance, honorable attendance, not only an
attendance of Angels, but God himself; he will make thy bed and strengthen thee
upon thy bed. This Certainly is a great Privilege, and thou can not believe
it and be inconsiderate in this case. Again, hereby thou shall convey a blesing
to thy Posterity, 37 Psalm. 26. he is ever merciful and lends, and his seed
is blessed. Thirdly, this is a means to sanctify your Estates to you; 11 Luke
41. give Alms of such things as ye have, and behold all things are clean unto
you. But Lastly, 19 Math. 29.
what is all this to that hundredfold, which you shall receive in the life to
come? when you shall for the bread that ye have dealt to the hungry, be fed
everlastlngly with heavenly Manna, Angels food: for the water wherewith you
have refreshed the Thirsty, drink of the Well of life for evermore: For the
Garments wherewith you have covered the naked, walk with the Lamb in white: and
for every pecuniary act of charity, receive a Crown and a kingdom glorious,
incorruptible, and that fades not away. Appl.


Be pleased likewise to receive this Doctrine with all readiness of mind. 8
Amos 11.
I cannot but complain of a great Famine and Dearth of Alms-deeds, though
(blessed be God) we have neither a Famine of Bread nor of hearing the Words of
the Lord. What should be the reason of it, I know not, it is because men are
afraid of Popery and dare not give much, lest they should be thought ambitious
to merit thereby? No, No; the reason is, because the pride and private luxury
of our days are such, 4 Jam. 2.3. Auro parietes, auro laquearia, auro fulgent
capita columnarum, and nudus atque esuriens ante fores nostras Christus in
paupere moritur. Hieron. ad Gaudeat.
that they cannot maintain these but with the starving of Charity: this makes
men that they are ever coveting, and yet so far from giving that they never
have enough: Like unto Kites and Gleads that are ever watching and catching for
prey, and yet remain Carrion-lean, because converting the greatest part of of
their nourishment into long feathers. We see it is ordinary for walls to be
clothed and men to go naked, yea as Jerome complaind, Walls and Pillars of
Houses shining with Gold, and Christ in a poor man ready to dye, naked and
hungry before the doors. Oh surely, much of this might be spared and given to
the Poor; but so it is come to pass, that the lean Kine have devoured the fat
and it cannot be known (but by their pride) that they have eaten them up. 41
Genesis 19.20 21.
This makes the Papists to call us Solisidians; and gives occasion to others,
to break such jests on the heads of men eminent in the Church, as he did upon
the Jesuits (whom in forain Nations they call Apostles) the Apostles indeed
showed the World Heaven, left the Earth to Earthly men and got Heaven
themselves: but we are more beholding to our new ones, For they show us Heaven,
leave it to us to purchase, in the mean time seeking only for themselves
earthly possessions. I beseech you therefore, as ye tender the credit of your
Profession, that you would make more conscience of this duty, as ye abound in
Faith, in Utterance and Knowledge; see that ye abound in this grace also, 2 Cor.
8.7. and remember the words of our Lord Jesus how he said, it is more blessed
to give than to receive. You cannot say, 20 Act. 35.
(as they 25 Math.) When saw we any hungry or athirst, or strangers, or naked,
or sick, or in Prison, and did not minister unto them? you either see or hear
of such every day; the world is an Hospital full of them, why then do ye not
minister unto them Bernard shall tell you; Sermon. 21 sup. Cantic.
ask a covetous rich man, what he thinks of those, that laying out what they
have for Gods glory and the relief of those that are in necessity, do thereby
purchase unto themselves the rich merchandise of heaven with their earthly
substance whether they do wisely or no? Procul dubio respondehit, sapienter.
without doubt he will say, that they do wisely. Ask him again, why he himself
does not that, which he so well approves of in another? Profecto domina
avaritia non permittit.
I cannot, will he say, why? Madam Covetousness (or Madam Pride) will not
suffer me. But remember that he shall have judgment without mercy, that has
showed no mercy, 2 Jam. 13. whereof we have an example in Dives, 16 Luke.
who because he would not give Lazarus a crum on Earth to alay his hunger, was
denied a drop in Hell to quench his own thirst.

But whilst I am stirring you up to this duty, I may not forget to give you
some directions in the practice of it. 1. The Alms which you give, give them
freely. This is the rule, Let him that shows mercy, do it with cheerfulness
12 Romans 8. For God loves a cheerful Giver 2 Cor. 9.7. if your Alms are
extorted from you, they cannot be called benevolence, because not coming with
good will. I know not well what to call it, but give it what name you will, I
am sure it is not acceptable to God. For the will is so greatly concernd in
this business, that where there is not ability, God accepts it for the deed, 2
Cor. 8.12 therefore whatsoever ye do, do it heartily, as unto the Lord* 3
Colos. 23.
let thy fountains flow forth (says Solomon) 5 Prove. 16. To note how free we
should be in works of this nature, that our Alms should come from us like water
out of a Fountain, and not like water out of a Still, that is forced by Fire.
And to show this Freeness, we should not always stay till we be asked, but
consider the Poor and so take a course to relieve their modesty, 41 Psalm. 1.
as well as their necessity. For there are many needful, that yet are
unwilling to ask. We should not expect, but prevent the crying of the Poor. God
Forbid, the Heavens should not rain, till the Earth first open her mouth; For
there is some ground, that will sooner burn then chap.

2. What Alms you give, give them with compassion. Aliud est dare indigenti,
aliud affectum misericordiae cum indigente partiri. Ansalm.
So we are commanded to remember them that are in Bonds, as bound with them, 13
Hebr. 3. This is called a drawing out of the Soul to the hungry, 58 Isa. 10. It
is one thing to give our goods, another thing to give our affection. He that
gives his goods to the Poor, gives that which he is without himself, but he
that gives compassion, gives part of himself.

3. What Alms you give, give discreetly. I think, I need not advise any to give
more than he is able; For every one will be careful enough to look to that.
And indeed it is a man's wisdom, so to help to light his neighbors candle,
that he do not put out his own. Surely none need be more bountiful in giving,
than the Sun is in shining, which though freely bestowing his beams on the
World, keeps notwithstanding the body of light to himself. But we should be
discreet in judging of the persons, to whom we give. Paeuperes Christi.
Some have ranked the Poor into three sorts. First Gods poor, or Christ's poor,
such as have suffered loss of Estate for Christ, or being otherwise fallen into
poverty make profession of the Gospel. Secondly, Pauperes mundi. Pauperes
Diaboli.
the Worlds Poor; such as have descended from poor Parents and so live in a
poor estate. Thirdly, the Devils poor; such as have Riotously wasted their
substance, whatever it was, more or less; that by wickedness have consumed
their Estates, and after they are consumed, do yet continue in their wickedness
being notoriously vicious and debauched. Now certainly we are to have pity on
all these, but not all alike. Christ's poor are most to be pittyed, the Worlds
poor next, the Devils poor least of all. Yet they must not be wholly neglected,
but as we would do all good offices to their Souls, so we must not deny the
doing of necessary offices to their bodies. Do good to all, but especially to
the household of Faith. 6 Gal. 10.


4. What Alms you give, give them in simplicity, 12, Romans 8. Not like the
Hipocrite, that blows a trumpet before his Alms, that he may have glory of
men. Our left hand must not know what our right hand does 6 Math. 3. upon which
some have commented thus, Vid. Maldonate.
let not thy left hand, that is, thy wife, know what thy right hand, that is,
thy self does. Others thus, let not thy left hand, that is, thy most familiar
Friend, know what thy right hand, Qui laudem hominis intuens dedit, sibi non
pauperi dedit aut siquid dedit vendidit non donarit.
that is, thy self does. But the scope of our Savior is plain, which is to
warn us against Hypocrisy and vainglory in giving Alms, For as Maldonate well
observes upon the place; He who gives Alms to get the praise of men gives them
to himself and not to the poor; or if he give any thing, he has rather sold
than given it: The poor could not pay him for his Alms, but others do it for
him; For whilst they only behold him that receives, they commend him that
gives, et praetium est illi videri: It is a reward to him to be seen to give.
Therefore Jerome taxed a noble Roman Dame, Vt Religio sior videretur.
who being at St. Peter's Church, there with her own hands gave pieces of money
to the poor people, that she might seem to be more religious. This says
Hierome in his Epistle to Nepotian, is rather to be called an hunting after
praise, Venatio magis quam eleemosyna dicenda.
than a giving of Alms in simplicity.

5. What Alms we give, let us give them seasonably. Let us not put them off
till our death. In the morning sow thy seed, (begin soon) and then hold on: In
the Evening withold not thine hand, Poenitentia vora nun quam sera, sed raro
vera, si sera.
11 Eccl. 6. I do not condemn Funeral beneficence, but I prefer the other; and
I think the same may be said of Liberality, that is usually said of Repentance;
true liberality is never too late, but late liberality is seldom true. He that
gives not till he dies, shows that he would not give, if he could keep it
longer. That which men give thus (says Bishop Hall) they give it by their
Testament, but I can scarce say, that they give it by their Will. 112 Ps.
The good man's praise is, Dispersit, he has dispersed his goods, and not left
them behind him.

Mr. Hieron on the Text.
I read lately an Emblem of Charity comprehending all or most of these
directions. A child with a merry countenance, covered in a cloud, with a bloody
heart in his hand, giving honey to a Be without wings. First a child, to note
that we should begin this work early: looking merrily, to note, that we should
do it cheerfully: covered in a cloud, to note, that we should do what we can,
to hide our Liberality: with a bloody heart in the hand, to note, with what
sensible compassion we should do it: Lastly, giving honey to a Be without
wings, to a Be, not a Drone that will not work; and to a Be without wings,
that cannot work; to note, that we should give discreetly not to the Loyterer,
but to the Labourer, whom God has disabled from working. So much of Dorcas
practice, She was full of good works in the General, and likewise of Alms-Deeds
in Particular; As Mr. Hieron calls her, a discreet, compassionate, cheerful
and Simple-hearted Almoner. I come now to the sad part of my Text, and that is
her sickness and death. It may be, you have heard me hitherto with delight; if
I now stir up your grief, I cannot avoid it; But I must go, as I am led by the
Text and the occasion. Who would not be ready to say, it was pity that Dorcas,
so good a Woman should all any thing, that she should be sick, but much more,
that she should die? But so it seemed good to Divine Providence. For it came to
pass in those days, that she was sick and died.

And it came to pass. Observe.
There is a providence in and to be observed in the Sickness and Death of Gods
Saints. Precious in the sight of the Lord, 116 Psalm. 15^
is the Life and also the Death of his Saints: And if they be so precious to
God, how can we think, but that there should be a special providence in their
Sickness and Death? If the hairs of their Heads are numbered, 10 Mat. 30.
much more the days of their Sojourning; and if one of their hairs cannot fall
to the ground, but by the providence of their Heavenly Father, much less can
their whole bodies. There is a threefold Providence of God; First, General,
which he exercises over all his Creatures; Secondly, Special, which he
exercises over Man; Thirdly, Particular, which he exercises over his own
People. Of this last the Psalmest speaks, 56 Psalm. 7. Thou tellest my
wanderings, put thou my Tears into thy Bottle, are they not all in thy Book; God
in his providence orders the time, when his people shall be sick and Dye; the
place where; the Disease of which; with all other circumstances of that nature;
and which is above all, he does fashion their Hearts by the same providence to
bear Sickness, and so disposes of things, that they are not taken away by
Death, till they have finished their work, and are fit to enter into Glory.
Well then, let us see his providence, and submit to it, acknowledging the
Justice, Wisdom, and Goodness of it. We are apt often times to wonder, that God
should cast his people into Sickness, and take them away by Death at such a
time, that he casts them into such places (it may be) where they are at a
distance from their Habitation, that they are taken away by such a sharp
Disease and violently, that he does not spare them a little to recover their
strength, before they go hence; and be no more seen. 39 Psalm. 13.
Now we must answer all such questions as these, with a sic evenit, so it came
to pass by the most wise providence of God, whose respect to his Children is
such, that if he had seen any thing better, this had not been.

Observe.
It came to pass in those days, that She was Sick. Gods dearest Children are
not exempted from Sickness, no more than any other affliction, Si amatur,
quomodo infirmatur.
it is said, 11 Joh. 3. Behold, he whom thou love is Sick, Augustine asks, if
he were beloved, how came he to be Sick? But in outward accidents of this life,
God makes no difference; Nay it is usual in providence, that they who have Gods
Heart, (...).
feel Gods Hand most heavy. It is a very pretty saying of Clemens Alexandrinus,
Gods Children are not near him, unless they be within the reach of his Rod.
They sit, as Augustus said he did, when he sat between Virgil and Horace,
Inter suspicia and lachrymas.
(the one melancholy, the other troubled with sore eyes) between sighing and
weeping. All the day long have I been plagued and chastned every Morning says
David, 73 Psalm. 14. When yet it is said of some wicked worldly Men, 73 Psalm. 7.
that they were not in trouble like other Men, neither were they plagued like
other Men. You have read (it may be or heard the Story of the holy Hermit,
that having lived to a complete Age, (though very piously) yet made a question
of Gods love to him, because all that while he had not (which he could
remember) felt one hours sickness: It pleased God in some short time, before
he dyed to visit him with an Ague, which he blessed God for, (...).
and received as a Love-token, not scrupling that so much afterward, which
formerly had troubled him. Paul had a racking pain, which he expresses by a
Thorn in the flesh, 2 Cor. 12. Mr. Manton.
A learned Man thinks that he alludes to such kind of punishment, as Slaves, or
Men not free, were put to for great offenses. They sharpened a Stake, and
pointed it with Iron, and put it in at his Back, till it came out at his Mouth,
and so with his Face upward he Dyed miserably: And therefore by that
expression, the Apostle intends some grievous bodily distemper, or racking
pain. 2 Coo. 12.5.
Certainly he speaks of such an infirmity, wherein he would Glory; and
therefore it is not probable, that it should be meant of Sin, or some
prevailing Lust, as many expound it; but rather of some extreme corporal pain.
Yet I have observed, that Gods Children are not apt to question his Love, so
much, as in Sickness. For Satan takes the advantage of the solitude of a Sick
person, to tempt him more: and makes use of the pain and distemper of the Body,
to disturb and disquiet the mind. But however Gods people have no more cause to
doubt of Gods love in Sickness, than any other affliction. That which troubles
them most is, that hereby they are rendered unserviceable; but where God
disenableth from duty, he looks not for it, but accepts of the desire for the
deed. Besides, Sickness it not such an unserviceable Estate; may not one serve
God acceptably in suffering, as well as doing? As it is said in the Revelation,
14 Revel. 12.
here now is the Faith and Patience of the Saints. Therefore if God shall cast
your Bodies into Sickness, be not dejected, cast not down your Spirits. 38 Isa.
1. 7 Job. 3, 4. 38 Psalm. 7. 2 Phil. 27.
Gods dearest Saints have had experience of sore Sicknesses, such as Hezekiah,
Job, David, and Epaphroditus. The Children of God have Bodies of the same
matter and making with other men. They are but earthen vessels, subject to
knocks and cracks as others are; only they have a more precious Lamp shining in
these earthen pitchers, than others have, I mean a more precious Soul.
Therefore comfort your selves, and remember that in Sickness, all your desire
is before God, and your groaning is not hid from him, 38 Psalm. 9. And though
your bodily distemper indispose you for duty, yet God accepted Hezekiahs
prayer, 38 Isa. 5. though when he prayed, he did but chatter like as a Crane or
a Swallow. 38 Isa. 14. So much of Dorcas Sickness.

I come now to her Death. It is very probable, that Dorcas had been Sick
before, but not unto Death, but now She was Sick and Dyed. (...).
I will not break forth into any Rhetorical Declamations against the cruelty of
Death, yet the Scripture calls it an Enemy, and the last Enemy, 1 Cor. 15. and
it does the worst it can, even to Gods own people; But it may be said of it, as
Socrates said of his Enemies, they may kill me, but they cannot hurt me. For
what Basil said of Martyrdom, (...).
is true of any kind of Death to Gods Children; it is but a way to pass from a
Temporal Life to an Eternal. She Dyed. The Holiest and most Religious persons
are subject to Death. The Apostle speaking of the Patriarchs, these all Dyed
(says he) 11 Heb. 13. Grace gives comfort in Death, but not power against it.
It is one of the Statutes of Heaven, which cannot be revoked. Statutum est 9
Heb. 27. it is appointed for all Men once to die. There is no man has power
over the Spirit to retain the Spirit, neither has he power in the day of
death, and there is no discharge in that War, 8 Eccl. 8. no union unseperable,
but that between Christ and a believer. Death will separate the union between
Husband and Wife, between Children and Parents, between David and Jonathan, yea
the union between Soul and Body for a time; Privilegia singularia regulam non
faciunt, regulam non infringunt* Personalis Actio moritur cum persona, nec sunt
amplianda privilegia.
but not the union between Christ and the Soul: for when the people of God are
dissolved, then they go to be with Christ, which is best of all. If it be
objected, that Enoch and Elias never saw Death; the Answer is, that singular
privileges neither make a Rule, nor break a Rule; these were personal
privileges, and a personal Action ever dies with the person; Neither are
privileges to be amplified, for then they are no privileges. Though Christ has
taken away the sting of Death that it cannot hurt us; the strength of Death
that it cannot always hold us; yet has he not as yet, altogether destroyed it:
But the best men must dye, that as Sin brought in Death, so Death may again
cast out Sin. Death was first inflicted as the punishment of Sin, now it is the
end of it. 2 Cor. 5.4.
Therefore do the holiest men dye, that their mortality may be swallowed up of
life. Again, sometimes God takes away his dearest Children by Death, 2 Chro.
34.28. ^7 Isa. 1.
as he did Josiah from the evil to come. Lastly, that of the Apostle is
considerable, speaking of the Martyrs he says, of whom the World was not
worthy. 11 Hebr. 38. The World is apt to deride, revile, malign, and cast
aspersions upon good men; they will not profit by their Admonitions and good
Examples; therefore the World is worthy no longer of their Society, and God
takes them away; He thinks, that he has let them live but too long, to have no
kinder usage, and therefore he takes them up (...), as Justin Martyr speaks, to
their heavenly kindred where they shall be more made of.

5 Wisd. 4.
Hence we learn, that as they are Fools, who account the Godly man's life
madness; so are they that think their end to be without honor. It is not the
misery of good men that they die. For he is not miserable, that dies but once
and for a moment, that death may for ever be swallowed up of life: But he is
miserable, that is ever dying and yet lives in torments infinitely worse then
death: Thus it is with the wicked in Hell, who passing out of this life are
immediately seized on by the second death. but for the Godly, the Scripture
says, blessed and holy is he that has part in the first Resurrection, on such
the second death shall have no power, but they shall be Priests of God and of
Christ. Secondly, the Godly are desirous of death; 20 Revel. 6. 1 Phil 23.
for love is an affection of Union; Now Christ is with the Saint here, there is
security in that; but the Saint also would be with Christ, for in that there is
full foelicity. Lastly, though the holiest Persons die, yet God suffers not
Death to put in his Sickle before they be ripe. There is no question, what age
soever Dorcas was of, being so full of good works, She could not but be fit for
Heaven. For this reason a Christian can never die out of season. Paul says,
that he was as one born out of season, 1 Cor. 5.8
because he had not seen Christ on Earth; but he could not die out of season,
because he was sure to see Christ in Heaven.

That Dorcas died, the Text tells us? but how she died, it does not tell us,
neither was it very necessary, for we may be confident, that She who lived so
piously, could not but die peaceably. She that was so full of good works in her
life, we may probably think, that she was not full of fears at her death. The
wise man tells us, that the wicked is driven away in his wickedness, but the
righteous has hope in his death. 14 Prove. 32, Dorcas being so righteous a
woman, could not but have hope in her death, and it is very probable, She had
(...) The full assurance of hope, 6 Heb. 11. It is likely, She had that full
assurance of hope, that filled her with joy; But to be sure, She had that hope
in her death, 5 Rom 5.
which would not make her ashamed at the day of Judgment.

I will only add this, now Dorcas is gone, her works we are sure have followed
her long since; and our praises can add nothing to her glory, only they are an
excitement to our selves. To him that sows righteousness there shall be a
sure reward, 11 Pro. 18. Which reward Dorcas now has. For God is not
unrighteous, that he should forget Dorcas works and labor of love, which She
showed toward his name, in that She ministered unto the Saints, 6 Hebr. 10.
That Dorcas Soul is blessed I can tell you; But how blessed, if I had the
tongue of Men and Angels, I could not tell you. The Scripture has left us but
a Negative description of the Saints blessedness, Eye has not seen nor Ear
heard etc. 1 Cor. 2.9. Paul was translated out of himself to behold it, 2 Cor
12.
and being returned into himself could not express it. Do not envy Dorcas her
happiness, but imitate her holiness. 14 Rev. 13. 2 Pet. 1.13. 25 Math. 4.
She has rested from her labors and received her Crown; but left us still to
sweat and toil in Gods Vineyard; Nor must we think to come to Heaven upon
easier terms than Gods Saints have done before us; Wherefore let us gird up the
loins of our minds, let us every day be adding more Oil to our Lamps, that an
entrance may be ministered unto us abundantly, into the everlasting Kingdom of
our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. 2 Pet. 1 11.


It is time now that I hasten to a conclusion. I have spoken what I intend, of
Dorcas in the Text. Let us now (...) Give me leave to parallel the Dorcas that
is dead in our days, 27 Pro. 9.
with the Dorcas that was sick and dyed in those days: And surely in water,
face cannot answer to face more adaequately, than her conversation that is now
dead, did answer to Dorcas whilst she was alive. But before I fall on this, I
beg leave to enter two Pleas in this Holy Court: The one on the behalf of
others, the other on the behalf of my self. First, I profess, that I was not
desired, either directly or obliquely by the Person deceased or any of her
Relations, or other to speak any thing of her, Alas, it needed not; 11 Hebr. 4^
31 Prove. 31.
for though dead, she yet speaks; and her own good works, whereof she was
full, were sufficient to praise her in the Gates. The second Plea I enter on
the behalf of my self and that is this, if I had been desired yet I should not
have said any thing of her, had I not known her my self and took it for granted
that many others knew her to be a person exemplary for Piety, and so worthy to
be commended as a pattern for our imitation. Therefore what I do in an
extraordinary case, I do not intend to bring into an ordinary use, or encourage
others to do it. And now having put in these two Pleas, I set my self to the
work. I know, Ne immittas pecus tuum in pratum, ubi non est sepes.
I have matter enough, if not more than I can Methodically dispose. But I
remember the council of the Proverb; Put not thy Cattle into a pasture, where
there is no hedge. Therefore I will bound my self within the limits of the Text.

First then, it is said of Dorcas that she was a Disciple; so was the
Gentlewoman deceased, and as it is said of Maason, not only a Disciple, but an
old Disciple, 21 Act. 16. and her Age rendered her Disciple-ship the more
Honorable; for the hoary Head is a Crown of Glory, if it be found in the way
of righteousness, 16 Prove. 31. hoariness is then honorable, Canities tunc
venerabilis est, quando ea gerit, quae canitiem decent. Chrysostom.
when it does such things, as becomes such an Age. So did she behave her self,
as Paul bids Titus direct the Aged Woman, 2 Tit. 3. She was in behavior as
becomes Holiness, and a teacher of good things. Her conversation was a daily
Sermon to the young women about her; Now when I say, that she was a Disciple,
my meaning is (as in the entrance I explained it) first that she was a
professor of the Gospel, and this she was not ashamed of, but accounted her
glory, and therefore would not dissemble her profession in any place, or
amongst any company. She was not like those effoeminate women, Tertullian
speaks of, who were pudoris magis ne mores quam salutis; And though she did not
(as she did not expect to) escape the scoffings and reproaches of wicked
persons, yet being conscious to her self of nothing, whereof they might accuse
her, having the witness of a good Conscience, she accounted her accusations,
(...)..
her glory; and thought that they did but (according to the Attick phrase) wash
her fairer with such aspersions. (...).
I have often observed it in her, how she despised the shame, which attended
the profession of the Gospel.

She was a Disciple, that is, a Learner; one that had her dependence 1 Pet.
2.2, 3.
She was converted by the Ministry of the word, and so she desired the sincere
Milk of it, to grow thereby, having once tasted how gracious the Lord is. The
Ministry she always looked on as a Divine calling, and the ordinance of
preaching as the means, 4 Ephesians. 11, 12, 13.
whereby God would gather in and build up the Saints till the coming of
Christ; and though she had attained to a great measure both of understanding
and holiness more than ordinary, and had her abode in a place, where she
enjoyed the best helps to increase them, yet she despised not the weakest
means. Two Two things there were indeed, which she disliked; that men should
take upon them the Ministry as a calling, who had not a lawful calling to it.
5 Heb. 4.
The other was, that very young experienced men should take upon them this
weighty Office: She thought them like young Children, that would be feeding and
serving themselves, before they knew with what hand to do it, or were able to
distinguish between the right hand and the left; So do they take on them, to
feed not only themselves, but others, not only with Milk, 5 Heb. 14.
but strong Meat, before they have their Senses exercised to put a difference
between the right hand and the left, between Truth and Error. She was
sensible, what advantage such Preachers give to Papists and Sectaries: and
therefore it was a desire of the credit of the Ministry, together with the
success of it, that made her wholly to dislike the one, and in a great measure
to dislike the other.

Dorcas was full of good works, so was this our Dorcas. Good works are
twofold, either inhoerent wrought in us, or transient wrought by us. She was
full of both; First, of good works inhoerent wrought in her, that is, of the
graces of the Spirit. 45 Psalm. 13.
Like the Kings Daughter, all glorious within. And her adorning was chiefly of
the hidden man of the heart, in that which is not corruptible; for after this
manner in the old time, 1 Pet. 3.4, 5.
the holy women also, who trusted in God, adorned themselves. She accounted
Gods Image her greatest brightness and glory: 3 Romans 23.
grace was her Jewel, and her Soul was a Cabinet full of such Jewels. The first
means of her conversion unto grace (I have heard her sometimes say) was the
ministry of one Mr. Rhodes, a painful Preacher, who at that time lived in or
not far distant from Hull. Before that time, she would say, she was very vain,
ignorant and inconsiderate: and yet, it may be, her vanity then was as good, as
that which passes for great grace among many now, I mean strict civility: but
being once spiritually illuminated, with Paul, she accounted that which the
World esteems precious, to be but dross and dung in comparison of the
excellency of the knowledge of Jesus Christ her Lord. 3 Phil. 7, 8.
More particularly.

She was full of the Grace of Faith; and therefore notably well acquainted with
the promises, Pabulum fidei.
which are the food of Faith: A diligent attender on the word, Organum fidei.
10 Romans 17. Nutrimentum fidei.
the instrument of Faith: An earnest desirer, and a most conscientious
frequenter of the Lords Supper, the means to increase it: and by reading the
promises, hearing the Word, receiving the Sacrament, joined with a special Act
of application in them all, she had attained to a kind of Plerophorie, a full
assurance of Faith. 10 Heb. 22.
When she was now Sick, she told me that since her conversion, she had at
several times many doubts and fears arising in her Heart, Satan desired to
Winnow her as Wheat, but (said she) my Faith failed not. God did enable her
still to hold fast her integrity, 22 Luk 31.32. 2 Job. 3.
and Satan's shaking her with his temptations, did but help to establish her the
more afterward, and well indeed might she hold fast the integrity of her
Faith, who continued to hold fast the integrity of her Obedience, walking as
Elizabeth in all the Commandments and Ordinances of the Lord blameless, 1
Luke. 6.
making such Conscience of the discharge both of her personal and relative
duties, that so far as I have observed or been acquainted, though many
Daughters have done virtuously, yet she excelled them all. The strength of
Faith is best judged of, 31 Prove. 29.
when brought to the Trial. And I shall never forget her deportment under the
sad death of her most dear Husband. Mrs. Stillington.
When I took upon me the boldness to ask her in private (her Daughter being
then only present) whether she did under this affliction doubt of Gods Fatherly
love, or whether the guilt of any Sin, but those which are called Sins of daily
incursion, Quotidianae incursionis. Te^t.
pressing her Conscience did render the affliction more bitter? her answer was,
she did not doubt, she was assured of Gods love: She looked on God at that time
as an angry Father, but she had ever found him, and then knew him to be a
loving Father. And for the guilt of any Sin pressing her Conscience, she
acknowledged that her infirmities were many, 1 Nehem. 11. 119 Psalm. 5.
and though her desire was to fear Gods name, and to direct her ways according
to his Statutes; Yet she was defective in many things: and fell short of her
duty (that was her grief) of her desire likewise (that was her comfort) but she
professed that her Conscience did not accuse her of any wicked or willful
disobedience, 119 Psalm. 104. 119 Psalm. 6.
she hated every false way, and had respect unto all Gods Commandments at all
times: 79 Psalm. 8.
only she feared that in this affliction God might remember former iniquities
long since committed, which, it may be, she had not thoroughly humbled her self
for. I asked her then, why she was so sorrowful? the substance of her reply
was, that she thought a more than ordinary measure of sorrow was in such cases
lawful, being warranted out of the Scripture by the examples of good men; and
also convenient to express the sense of Gods hand upon her; but yet she desired
(she said) and would endeavor so to restrain her grief, that it might neither
offend others, nor dishonor God.

Being thus full of the grace of faith, she could not but be full of love,
seeing faith where it is, works by love. A great lover she was of the
ordinances, 5 Galat. 6.
a lover likewise of Gods people* her delight was in the Saints of the earth,
in her eyes a vile person was contemned, 16 Psalm. 3. 15 Psalm. 4. Christum
hospitantem in Augustino.
but she honored them that fear the Lord: where she saw any thing of Christ,
she loved the person, as Ambrose loved Christ dwelling in Augustine. I think
one of the greatest arguments of a man's love to Christ, is, when it puts him
upon endeavors to gain others to the love of him: and in this very thing she
spent most of her time (wherein through Gods blessing) she labored with such
success, that beside her natural daughters, I doubt not but she has many
other daughters in the faith, 1 Timothy 1.2.
who may arise up and call her blessed: such whom she was a special instrument
either to beget unto Christ, 31 Prove. 28.
or afterward to build up in their holy faith.

She was full of the spirit of prayer and supplication; in which duty she was
very frequent according to the injunction of scripture: 12 Za. 10. 4 Colos. 2.
1 These. 5.17.
and though she was not an Euchite, so as to neglect all other duties of her
calling, yet she remembered that all things are sanctified by prayer, 1 Timothy 4.5.
and therefore would never omit it. Nazianzen would have men so much in this
duty, that they might be able to show the wounds of the knees, (...).
and there is a figure in the Heavens which Astronomers call, in the knees.
Sure I am, this Gentlewoman, if any, might have showed the wounds of the knees;
for set aside her private and family devotions, I have seen her my self once,
twice, and more than the third time in private meetings use this gesture for
four or five hours together: and though age and her infirmities might have
tolerated her another posture, yet I have observed to my admiration, that for
so long time she has seldom changed her gesture, when others more young and
strong have made use of their liberty to sit or stand. 12 Romans 12.
It is not enough that we be frequent in prayer, unless fervent; no more did
this servant of God think it. The Orator said once of the Athenians (comparing
them to men running up an hill) they breath much, (...).
but have little strength; so many men in prayer breath much, but have little
strength: whereas Basil would have us with an holy impudence to make God
ashamed, 32 G^n. 26. (...).
that he cannot look us in the face, if he deny our importunity. Such a
powerful faculty had this Gentlewoman in prayer, as I have heard those that
lived with her acknowledge and admire. One thing of her practice in this duty,
I may not omit; and that is, she used to go to prayer with her children always
about five of the clock in the afternoon, and then examined them: and because
she was sensible, how much the welfare of the Church depends upon Gods guidance
of the Governors thereof, therefore in her devotions she never forgot to pray
for the King, and taught her Children, while they were yet young, to do so. 1 Timothy 2.2.


She was full of humility, which is the grace of all other graces. She would
often say, that she was the chiefest of Sinners. 1 Timothy 1.15.
Her Eyes were ever full of her own wants; none (she would say) enjoyed such
means and mercies, and none had profited less by, or walked more unworthy of
them. She was still jealous of herself, and suspected that which others were
ready to applaud. 9 Ez. 13. 32 Genesis 10.
She thought the greatest Evils were below her Sins, and the least favors
above her deservings; The more we receive said she, the more we are in debt,
and therefore should be more humble, for will any man be proud of his debts?
She was observed never to speak of Pride, but with Vehemence of detestation;
for she would often mention a saying of Mr. Strong, that we are neither able to
work grace, nor act grace, nor keep it in being, without a fresh supply from
God, and therefore what had we to be proud of? 2 Phil. 3.
She remembered that of the Apostle, in lowlyness of mind let each esteem other
better than themselves: and therefore was apt to admire that in another, whilst
the same or better in her self, 12 Romans 10.
she thought unworthy to be mentioned. She was ever ready in honor to prefer
others before her self and therefore would often give that respect to some, as
superiors, which by others were judged to be her inferiors: and though some
judge this meanness of Spirit, yet they are blades of the best metal and
making, which will bend most. To her inferiors she was exceeding
condiscending; and when she thought that she had in anger spoken ^nadvisedly,
she would afterward as freely acknowledge it to them. In her apparel she would
observe a grave decency: Her ordinary saying was, that she would not be first
in a fashion, neither would she be singular: Yet some about her observed, that
she never did wear a Silk Gown (though lying beside her) since these
troublesome times; till they were hoped to draw nigh some Settlement. She was
ever ambitious in studying to avoid any appearance of vain glory: For this
reason it was (as I conjecture) that when any of her Childrens Servants
happened to be at her House in her Husbands absence, she was not willing that
they should be present, when she went to prayer with her own Servants. Thus
when she sent out her Alms (I perceive since her Funeral) she would make
choice for a Messenger, one that was least known in the City, that it might be
less suspected from whom they came; and always gave the Messengers this
charge, that they should not reveal who sent the Alms, but only to say that a
Friend sent them. For this reason, when she had set a part a day on purpose for
private Prayer and Fasting in her Chamber alone, if any Friend or Stranger came
to visit her, She bad those that knew or guessed how she was employed, not to
say that she was busy; but to come and tell her; and she would come down and
give entertainment to those that visited her, and afterward return to her
Devotion. And this she did (as I think) lest it should be suspected, that she
was so well employed. Her Humility appeared at her Death; in that she willed
(for the avoiding of ostentation, as much as cost) to be buried in this obscure
place; when her Son offered, that he would of his proper charges, take care to
have her Body removed to York, and there with Funeral Solemnity, interred in
the Cathedral-Church by her Husband, 2 Samuel 1.2, 3.
who were lovely and pleasant in their lives, and therefore their ingenuous
Heir would not have had them at their deaths divided. She showed her Humility
likewise in making choice of me by her Will to Preach at her Funeral, one
indeed not able or worthy to commend a woman of such virtues; and whom she
thought knew but little of her, and therefore could not say much. This her
avoiding of vain glory showed her to be like the Silkworm, which hides it self
within the curious Silk it works, therefore we may upon her inscribe the same
Motto, that is usually given to the Silkworm, operitor dum operatur, she is
all covered, whilst she works. Let not any wonder, that a person so Holy should
be so Humble; For seeing the Scripture says, that God gives grace to the
Humble, it is no marvel, that gracious persons are most Humble, and Humble
persons the most full of grace.

1 Pet. 5.8.
I cannot insist on every particular. I pass from her inhoerent good works
wrought in her, to her transient good works wrought by her. I will nor presume
so far, as into her Closet: but her House was an House of Prayer, wherein the
Morning and the Evening sacrifice were daily offered up to God, consisting of
two set services always, prayer, and reading the word; and as occasion would
give leave, of a third, viz. singing a Psalm: to these were added Catechizing.
It is said of Abraham, that he had three hundred trained servants, (or as the
Original will bear it) catechized servants, 14 Genesis 14. she had (though not
such a number) yet those she had, were catechized servants. One thing I have
observed that when she had any strangers lodged in her house, she took care
that they had a Bible laid in their chamber; that so they might have provision
for their souls, as well as their bodies: her care was commendable in making
such provision, if they were so careless as not to make use of it, that was
none of her fault.

She was a strict observer of the Lords day, and saw that her son and her
daughter, 20 Exodus 10.
her manservant and her maidservant observed it likewise. On this day she
would not lie till the ringing of the bell called her up; but, if want of
health hindered not, rose the sooner, that she might set her heart and house in
order, so as that her self and family might attend upon God with the less
distraction. Her ordinary saying was, if our dear Savior rose so early in the
morning for the work of our redemption, 1 Cor. 7.35. 28 Matthew. 1.
shall we think much to rise early for his service? this I took notice of and
have heard her say, that she observed the Lord's Day always as a day of solemn
thanksgiving; and her servants (though plentifully fed at all times) were sure
to have a mess more than ordinary that day, yet not till night, because she
would not detain any of them from a better feast of the ordinances. 25 Isa. 6.


She was a most humble and constant attender upon the preaching of the word.
She never went to Church, either Lord's Day or other day, but first begged of
God a blessing upon what she should hear. For the help of her memory, she took
notes her self, and caused them under her to do the like; and at evening for
the advantage of her family, she used repetition: besides she spent three
hours every Monday in revising of, and ruminating upon her own notes. She has
gone many times three miles on foot in an afternoon to sermon, not out of
novelty, but necessity: for being forced from York in the beginning of these
times, she lived in Holdernes, where the Minister preached but once a day: she
was his auditour so often as he preached, yet could not satisfy her self with
hearing but once, as he did in preaching once; and therefore (though it was
winter) she would have gone so far, often even on foot (I suppose for the
encouragement of her servants) to sermon. I have heard her frequently admire
Gods great goodness to this sinful Nation, in vouchsafing unto it such
abundant provision both for life and Godliness; 1 Pet. 1.3.
for (said she) brown bread with the Gospel is good fare: and I am verily
persuaded, she could have lived on the coursest bread, so she might but have
had the water of life with it: but however, she could have been content to have
lived with the Gospel, yet she ever desired that they who labor in the word
and doctrine might fare well. To this purpose she would have opened her hand
wide; though a minister had a competency of temporal estate, yet she would say,
that was nothing to them that lived under his ministry; as he labored among
them, so the Labourer was worthy of his hire, 1^ Tim. 5.18.
not only what might be necessary for subsistence, but something for
encouragement.

19 Levit. 17.
She was a woman, that would not suffer sin to lie upon those that were her
charge, for want of seasonable reproof: yet she always tempered her reproofs
with the spirit of meekness, 6 Gal. ^.
was wise to observe the fittest time and place, together with the disposition
of the person, and having done this, committed the success to God by prayer.
If she saw that she did not reclaim one by her admonitions, as she desired, she
would conclude her reproof and advice with that pathetical expression, well, 13
Jer. 17.
if you will not hear, my soul shall weep in secret places for your pride: and
her sincerity appeared in this, that she was as willing others should admonish
her, and would desire them to do it: she would say to her daughters and others
under her, it may be, you are afraid to anger me, but I pray, if you see any
thing amiss in me, tell me of it.

She was one of a very peaceable and courteous conversation: dissension she
hated, and was grieved very much when any fell out in her family: if that her
self had taken an offense at any person in her house (though most justly) yet
she could not have been satisfied, till reconciled to them; yea, she would have
condescended to have sought peace of her inferior, although she had been the
party that had received the injury. She was sometimes troubled at the
strangeness of friends, but then she remembered a saying of Mr. Aiscough, and
would say, oh that I could do as he prescribed! the saying was this; it may be
thou art troubled for Gods peoples not loving of thee, but do thou labor to
love them, and thou shall never answer for their not loving of thee.

She was very frequent in meditation; when she had been conferring with others,
then she used to go aside, to commune with her own heart and discourse with her
self: 4 Psalm. 4.
And though she was alone, yet she was not alone, for the Father was with her.
She often would mention a Speech of Mr. Birchalls with tears; 16 Ioh. 32.
Ah Soul, if thou had meditated on God more, thou had loved him more.

She was a woman, whose Speech was seasoned with salt, 4 Colos. 6. 5 Ephesians. 29.
10 Prove. 20.21.
ever ministering some good to the hearers. Her Tongue was as choice silver, and
her Lips did feed many. I have observed, how ready she would be upon all
occasions, to administer matter of gracious discourse. I have condemned my self
and others of mine own calling for our sluggishnesse. I considered, that out of
the abundance of the Heart, the Mourh speaks, 12 Mat. 34.
and concluded that she had a greater Treasure of good things in her, than we
had. (...).
At Meat-times she would especially move such conference, the better to season
the meat. She thought (according to the Greek saying) A plentiful Table to feed
the Body, without good discourse to feed the Mind, is little better than a
Manger.

She was a woman of a sound mind, 2 Timothy 1.7.13. 4 Ephesians. 14. 13 Heb. 9. 2 Timothy
3.14.
holding fast the form of sound words, and not tossed about with every wind of
Doctrine* indeed she was so established with grace (the best preservative
against Errors) and with Timothy so assured of the things that she had
learned, knowing of whom she had learned them, that she was not easily,
removed. This may serve as a taste to show, how full she was of good works. I
proceed.

Dorcas was full of Alms-deeds which she did, 6 Mat. 3.
so was our Dorcas. How full I know not, for I believe she did not let her left
hand know, what her right hand did. 7 Mark 36.
But I read in the Gospel, how Christ when he had cured an infirm Man, charged
him that he should not publish it, but the more he was charged to conceal it,
the more did he divulge it: So I suppose, though she charged those, to whom she
gave Alms, that they should not divulge it, yet they could not be kept secret.
I have heard, that her House was a little Hospital, not so much because the
poor came thither for relief, but because relief went from thence for the poor:
So that what Hierom said of Pammachius, that he was munerarius pauperum et
egentium candidatus; The like may be said of her, she was the candidate of the
Poor, as ambitious of their Prayers, as others are of their praises, accounting
when she had given an Alms, to have received rather than done a good turn,
Whilst her Husband was alive, the poor had both Food and Physic. And whatever
he gave himself (as his disposition was well enough known) I do believe, and
not upon slender grounds, that she kept a Stock of her own, with her Husbands
approbation, for the poor, and pious uses. I have given you a brief account of
the life of our Dorcas, I come now to her Sickness and Death, which because
they were but short, therefore I will not be long about them.

She was Sick and Dyed. I told you, there is a providence of God to be observed
in the Sickness and Death of his Saints; and so there was a remarkable
providence in the Sickness and Death of this Saint, so well known and
observed, that I forbear to mention it.

And it came to pass in those days; So it is come to pass in these days,
these calamitous and distracted days, wherein the Church stood in great need of
her Prayers, that she was Sick and is Dead. The times are bad already, we have
cause to fear, because of her death, Cum stellae cadu^t, venti sequentur. Arist.
and others like her, that they will be worse. When such Stars fall, it is a
sign of storms about to arise. The Lord in mercy prevent them.

She was Sick and Dyed. Sickness is the summons to Death, and the time of
Sickness is that, which God in mercy vouchsafes to his Children to fit them
for Death. Her Sickness was but short, therefore you may say, her time of
preparation was not long. There was no such need of it, her whole life had been
a preparation for Death, and now she had little else to do, but to render her
Soul into Gods hands. Her Disease was judged to be a Plurisie, it began with a
pain in her side, and so increased, It brings to my mind, that which I read of
Peter, 12 Act. how the Angel smote him on his side, saying, arise up quickly,
and his Chains fell off from his hands: So did the Lord smite her on her side,
and her Chains of Sin and Sickness, and Mortality, quickly fell off from her;
And now her Soul being unpinioned, is mounted up above the Clouds till the day
that she shall come with Christ in the Clouds to Judgment. In her Sickness I
apprehended her very patient, yet she desired me that I would beg of God for
her a greater measure of patience, for though the Spirit was willing, yet the
flesh (she said) was weak.

26 Mat. 41.
She was Sick and Dyed. So our Do^cas not inferior to her in the Text, though
so holy a woman, yet could not be exempted from paying her last debt to nature.
Some, it may be, will be inquisitive to know, how she Dyed? I answer, first,
though she Dyed soon, yet not suddenly I perceive, she has for a long time
Dyed daily in her expectation, and has frequently told her Friends, that she
might not stay long with them. There are many events and second causes, that
help to hasten Death, and beside the infirmities of her Body, I believe the
late loss of her most dear Husband, might be a means to shorten her days,
Secondly, She Dyed most comfortably. Being asked of one about her, the Morning
before she Dyed, how she did; She said, she was all peace, peace within and
peace without. About two days before she Dyed, when I asked her, how it was
with her; Her answer was; Sir I am very ill, I have a great pain in my side,
and spit blood: But I thank God, I have passed the great Gulf, for I am
assured, and she went over with it again (speaking more heartily than at other
times) Ey, I am assured that God has pardoned all my sins: and then she fell
into an admiration of Gods mercy to her; but (said she) how unworthily have I
walked off, and unsutably to such great love! and at the uttering of these
words, I know not, whether she did refrain her self from weeping. When I
farther asked her, whether she did not believe, that God had pardoned this Sin
to her, as well as the rest? She answered, she doubted it not, yet it could not
but trouble her to think of it. Thus she continued to her Death, for any thing
I heard to the contrary. She knew (she said) her State was safe; but she
desired, if God saw good, that he would rebuke Satan, that it might be
comfortable, so long as she lived: To this purpose we prayed with her several
times, and it pleased God to grant her request.

So I have given you the Parallel between Dorcas and this worthy Gentlewoman
deceased. I am sure, I have not represented things to you in such lively
colors, as they deserved; but I have not set a false Gloss upon any thing.
What remains, but as I have done this to excite you to follow her steps, so
that I exhort you in the words of the Apostle, 6 Heb. 11, 12. I desire, that
every one of you would show the same diligence, to the full assurance of hope,
to the end; tint you be not slothful, but followers of them, who through faith
and patience inherit the promises.

FINIS.

