A SEASONABLE VINDICATION OF THE Supreme Authority and Jurisdiction OF
CHRISTIAN KINGS, LORDS, PARLIAMENTS, As well over the Possessions, as Persons
of Delinquent Prelates and Churchmen; OR, An Ancient Disputation of the famous
Bohemian Martyr John Hus, in justification of John Wickliffs 17. Article;
Proving by 43. Arguments taken out of Fathers, Canonists, Schoolmen, the
Supreme Authority and Jurisdiction of Princes, Parliaments, temporal Lords, and
other Laymen, (who have endowed the Church with Temporalties) to take away and
alien the Temporal Lands and Possessions of Delinquent Bishops, Abbots and
Churchmen, by way of medicine or punishment, without any Sacrilege, Impiety or
Injustice.

Transcribed out of the printed Works of John Hus, and Mr. John Fox his Acts
and Monuments printed London 1641. Vol. 1. p. 585, etc.

With an Additional Appendix thereunto of Proofs, and Domestic Presidents in
all ages, useful for present and future times.

By William Prynne Esquire a Bencher of Lincolns Inn.

Acts 1. 20. Let his habitation be desolate and no man dwell therein and his
Bishopric let another take. Bernard. De Consideratione ad Eugenium. l. 3.
Parvi dejectique animi est de Subditis non profectum quaerere Subditorum, sed
quaestum propriu^, in summo praesertim Pontifice nihil turpius.

London, Printed by T. Child, and L. Parry, and are to be sold by Edward
Thomas at the Adam and Eve in Little Britain, 1660.

To the most Illustrious MONARCH Charles the II. BY THE Singular Grace, and
Wonder-working Providence of Almighty God, of England, Scotland, France and
Ireland KING, Defender of the true Christian Faith; and Supreme Governor over
all Ecclesiastical Persons, as well as Temporal, throughout his Dominions.
Most Gracious Sovereign,
I Humbly crave license to prostrate at your Royal feet, a learned Disputation
of the famous Bohemian Martyr John Hus, in defense of our renowned John
Wickliffs 17. Article; largely evidencing the Supreme Authority of Christian
Kings, and Temporal Lords, over the Temporalties, and Persons of Delinquent
Prelates and Churchmen, backed with an Additional Appendix, (hastily compiled
in the midst of my other distracting public Employments in few hours space,)
not unseasonable, or unworthy public Consideration, in relation to ancient and
late alienations of Abbots, Bishops. Cathedral lands, now under your Majesty's
and your Parliaments Deliberation, in order to their Purchasers satisfaction,
for the prevention of future Animosities, suits, and establishment of Cordial
Unity, Amity between all Your Subjects, after their many years sad Intestine
bloody Schisms and Discords.

The sole Occasion of this Publication, was the many late Petitions of
Purchasers, and others complaining of some Quem dabis mihi de numero
Episcoporu^ qui non plus invigilet subd^^orum evacuandis marsupiis, quam vitus
extirpandis? Ubi est qui orando flectat iram? Ubi est qui praedicet annum
acceptibilem Domino? Pauci admodum sunt, qui non quae sua sunt quaerunt.
Diligunt munera; nec possint pariter deligere Christum, qui a manus dederunt
mammonae. Bernard. Sermo 77. super Cantica.
Bishops, and Churchmens covetousness, or averseness to give them such
competent satisfaction for their Purchases, by new Leases or otherwise, as Your
Majesty's Royal Declarations, the Commons-House Votes, and Your Noble Generals
Engagements, (in order to Your Highness most joyful, peaceable Restitution to
Your Throne) induced them to expect; and of their violent, or vexatious
proceedings, contrary to Your Gracious Proclamation, and Commission. The
principal design of it is, to Vindicate Your Majesty's ancient Sovereign
Jurisdiction, with the Legal power of your Parliaments and temporal Lords, over
the Possessions and Persons of the greatest Prelates, in cases of Delinquency,
See Grotius de Jure Bell. l. 3. c. 10.
War, or Public Necessity; and the Lawfulness of seizing, alienating their
Temporalties, imprisoning, banishing, executing their persons for Criminal
Offenses, and Contempts (of which they have been frequently guilty) without any
Sacrilege or Impiety. The contemplation whereof (I presume) will henceforth
perpetually bind them to their good behaviors, both toward Your Majesty, your
Parliaments, and People; and engage them to a charitable, sober, religious use
of all their Temporal endowments, to a most heavenly, humble, world-contemning
Conversation, a diligent faithful discharge of their Episcopal function, by
Acts 5. 42. c. 20, 21, 28, 1 Cor. 9. 14, to 24. 2 Timothy 4. 1. 2. Romans 15. 18. 19
20. Mar. 16. 16.
daily constant preaching, fasting, praying, and administration of the
Sacraments to the Souls committed to their pastoral charge; and to an aemulous
imitation of our pious, primitive Archbishops and Bishops, Wilfrid, Aydan,
Ceadda and others, of whom Eccles Hist Gentis Auglorum, l. 3. c. 4. 28. l. 4.
c. 3.
Venerable Beda, and Actus Pontisicum Cant. col. 1636, 1637.
Gervasius Dorobernensis render us this account: Non Equitando, sed pedibus
ambulando, verbum Dei instantissime praedicabant. Tota tunc fuit sollicitudo
Doctoribus illis Deo servire, non seculo; tota cura cordis excolendi non
ventris. Nulla causa fuit sacerdotibus Dei vicos adeundi, nisi ut praedicarent,
vel baptizarent, vel animas curarent. Cuncta quae sibi a Regibus vel divitibus
seculi donabantur, mox pauperibus qui occurrerent erogate gaudebant. In tantum
erant ab omni peste Avaritiae castigati ut nemo territoria vel possessiones ad
construenda Monasteria a potestatibus seculi, nisi coactus acceperet. All their
Oblations and revenues were Beda Eccles. Hist. l. 1. c. 27. Spelman. Council. p.
96. Surius Council. Tom. 1. p. 359.
equally divided into 4. parts. The 1. for the sustentation of the Bishop and
his family, not in a pompous Lordly splendour, but sober and Christian
hospitality; The 2. for the maintenance of his Clergy or Chapter; The 3. for
the relief of the Poor; The 4. for the repair of Churches: and if any
surplusage remained, it was bestowed in alms and other pious uses; not spent in
Luxury or worldly pomp. No part of it was treasured up in the Bishops own purse
to enrich himself, or Leased to, or bestowed on his wife, children, kenred,
servants, or Courtiers as in later ages, (as real Spalato de Repub. Eccl. l. 9
c. 7. 2. 36. Bernard super Cantica Sermo 77. and Goncio ad clerum in concilio
Rhemensi.
Sacrilege as any now declaimed against.) Their Angelical and Evangelical
Conversations, purchased them such veneration and high esteem among all sorts
of people, Gervasius Dorob. actus Pontif. Cant. col. 1636, 1637. and Beda.
Ut ubicunque Clericus aliquis adveniret gaudenter ab omnibus, tanquam Dei
famulus exciperetur. Etiam si in itinere pergens inveniretur, occurrebant, and
flexa cervice vel manu signari, vel ore illius se benedici gaudebant; verbis
quoque horum exhortatoriis diligenter auditum praebebant. Et si quis Sacerdotum
in vicum forte deveniret, mox congregati in unum vicani, Uerbum vitae ab illo
expetere, et operibus implere curabant. Such an Episcopal life as these then
led in our Bishops and Clergy now (without future contests, Lu. 22, 24, 25, 26.
Vidos omnem ecclesiasticum zelum fervere sola pro dignitate tuenda? Honori
totum datur, sanctitati nihil aut parum, Bern. de consid. ad Eugenium. l. 4. c.
2.
which of them shall be the Greatest, Richest, Highest, but best, holiest,
humblest) would speedily reconcile both them, their Purchasors and Opponents,
yea produce such a reverend estimation and entertainment of their Persons and
Ministry in the Laity, as Your Majesty by your most pious Declarations,
Proclamations, Speeches, and unwearied Endeavors have exhorted, and conjured
them unto; that so all your Subjects 1 Timothy 2. 1, 2, 3.
may henceforth live a quiet and peaceable life in all godliness and honesty,
under Your most just and gracious Government; Which as it ought to be their
daily prayer, so it is their bounden duty, and will be the only means of their
future felicity.

Let those Deuteronomy, 33. 26, 27.
everlasting Arms of the Eternal God, riding upon the heavens for Your help,
which have so miraculously protected, supported, restored Your Royal Majesty to
Your Kingdoms, and thrust out the Enemy from before You without sword or spear,
for ever embrace, defend, preserve Your Sacred Person in perfect health and
safety, to reign over them in all Prosperity, Tranquillity, Felicity and Glory,
till extreme old age (and no other casualty) shall translate You from a
temporal to an eternal Crown in the Highest Heavens; Which bath been, is, and
always shall be the daily Prayer of

From my Study in Lincolns Inn, Novem. 24. 1660. Your Majesty's dutiful and
Loyal Subjects, WILLIAM PRYNNE.


An Ancient Plea in Justification of the late taking away, and Sales of
Cathedral-lands, etc.
IN the year of our Lord 1378. John Fox Acts and Monuments, London 1641. Vol.
1. p. 563, 564. 565, 566, 587.
John Wickliffe in the University of Oxford in his Sermons and Writings
publicly asserted,

That the Lords temporal, may lawfully and meritoriously take away their
Temporalties from the Churchmen offending habitually.

That if any temporal Lord do know the Church so offending, he is bound under
pain of damnation to take the Temporalties from the same.

That it is lawful for Kings, in causes licensed by the Law, to take away the
Temporalties from the Spiritualty sinning habitualiter, that is, which continue
in the customs of sin, and will not amend.

That whether they be temporal Lords, or any other men whatsoever they be,
which have endowed the Church with Temporalties, it is lawful for them to take
away the same Temporalties, as it were by way of medicine, to avoid sin,
notwithstanding any Excommunication or other Ecclesiastical Censure; for so
much as they are not given but under a conditon.

The Bishops of England, conceiving their Great Lordly Minors, and Temporalties
to be much endangered by these Positions of Wickliff, drew up these and other
Positions of his into Articles of complaint against him, and sent them
diligently to Pope Gregory the XI. at Rome, with other Articles of a diffrent
nature to the Number of 18. where they were condemned for heretical and
erroneous by 23. Cardinals. Hereupon Pope Gregory sent his Bulls to the
Chancellor and Universitie of Oxford, King Richard the 2d. and the Archbp. of
Cant. to apprehend, imprison and persecute Wickliff; who was thereupon summoned
to appear before a certain Convocation of Bishops at the Archbishops Palace in
Lambeth; where he justified these Positions by reason, Scripture, Canon and
Civil Law. After Wickliffe death, 45 Articles being exhibited against him in
the Council of Constance, and these 3. amongst the rest.

That to enrich the Clergy was against the rule of Christ.

That the Pope with all his Clergy having those possessions as they have, be
heretics in so having; and the secular powers in so suffering them do not well.

That the Emperor and secular Lords be seduced which so enrich the Church with
ample possessions.

Thereupon John Hus a most learned pious Bohemian Divine, particularly
justified these Positions of his amongst others, against the censure of the
Pope and Council of Constance, before the whole Universitie of Prague in Charles
College, in a particular Treatise, De ablatione bonorum temporalium a Clericis
delinquentibus, printed at large in his Works in Latin, November. 1558. pt. 1,
etc. For the most part translated into English by Mr. John Fox, in his Acts and
Monuments London 1641. Vol. 1. p. 595. Which Book all Archbishops, Bishops,
Deans, Archdeacons, and Canons Residentiaries, were bound to have in their
Cathedrals, Halls and Great Chambers, that it might be publicly read by their
Servants and Strangers, by the Canons made in the Provincial Synod of London,
Anno 1571. p. 5, 6, 7. whereby this Doctrine of Wickliff and Hus is not only
tolerated, but justified by them, as orthodox, and no ways sacrilegious or
heterodox, as some now repute it.

Fox Acts and Monuments, Vol. 1. p. 595. etc,
The second Disputation in the University of Prague, upon the seventeenth
Article of John Wickliffe, most fruitful to be read; proving by 25 Reasons out
of the Scriptures, How that Princes and Lords Temporal have lawful Authority
and Jurisdiction over the Spiritualty and Church men, both in taking from them
their Temporalties, and correcting their Doings and Deserts.
TO the honor of almighty God, and of our Lord Jesus Christ, both for the
trying out of truth, and the profit of holy mother the Church, according to the
congregation of our University of Prage, which, avoiding always to do that
which shall be prejudicial to the truth, has deferred to give their consent
unto the condemnation of the forty five Articles, wishing even unto this
present sufficient probation to be given of the condemnation of the said
Articles, and particularly of every one of them. Whereupon the said University
does always require due proof of the same, for so much as Pope Damasus in his
canon distinction sixty eight chapter, Chorepiscopi, says thus; That it is
necessary that whatsoever thing stands not by due reason should be rooted
out. Whereby it appears, that the condemnation of the five and forty
Articles, if it stand not with proof and sufficient demonstration for every
Article, is necessary to be rooted out.

But if any man will object and say, that to require a reason of every thing,
is to derogate from Gods divine power. Unto this answer Master William does
answer himself in his Philosophy, the first book, almost at the end; where he
entreating of the place, in the second Chapter of Genesis, God made man of the
slime of the earth, etc. has these words; For in what point (say we) are we
contrary to the holy Scriptures, if we seek by reason to declare wherefore any
thing is done, which is said in the Scriptures to be done? For if that a wise
man should say that a thing is done, and do not declare how it is done, and
another man speaks the very self-same thing, and declares how it is done,
what contrariety is there? But for so much as they themselves know not the
force of nature, to the intent that they might have all men partakers with them
of their ignorance, they would have no man to inquire it out. But they would
have us believe as ignorant people, neither to seek any reason of our belief,
that the prophecy might be fulfilled; Such as the people is, such shall be the
priest. But we truly do say, that in all things a reason is to be sought, An
allegory upon the Paschal lamb.
if it may by any means be found. But if that any man do stay at any thing
which the Scriptures does affirm, let him commit the same unto Faith, and unto
the Holy Ghost. For Moses says, If the lamb cannot be eaten, let it not be by
and by consumed in the fire; but let him first call his neighbor which
dwells next house unto him; and if they also be not sufficient to eat the
lamb, then let it be turned in the fire. So likewise, when as we go about to
seek any thing as touching the Godhead, and that we be not able of our selves
to comprehend the same, let us call our neighbor which dwells next house
unto us; that is to say, let us seek out such a one as dwells in the same
Catholic faith with us; and if then neither we, neither yet he be able to
comprehend the same, let it then be burned with the fire of faith.

But these men, albeit they have many neighbors dwelling near unto them, yet
for very pride they will not call any man unto them, choosing rather to continue
still ignorant, then to ask any question. And if they do know any man to
enquire for his neighbor in such case, by and by they cry out upon him as an
heretic; presuming more upon their own heads, than having confidence in their
wisdom. But I exhort you to give no credit unto their outward appearance, for
already it is verefied in them, which the Satirical Poet says; No credit is to
be given unto the outward show: for which of them all is it that does not
abound with most shameful and detestable vices? And in another place he says;
They are very dainty of their speech, and have great desire to keep silence.
And thus much has Mr. Wilhelmus. Let all such hear whom this parable does
touch: for I with the rest of the Masters, Bachelors and Students of our
University, considering how hard a matter the condemnation of the forty five
Articles of Wickliff, without reason, is, and how grievous a thing it were if
we should thereunto consent, do call together my neighbors, the Doctors of
this Universitie, and all others which would object any thing against the same,
that we might presently find out the reason of the condemnation of this
article, concernning the taking away the temporalties from the Clergy.

Notwithstanding I do profess that it is not my intent, A Protestation,
whereby he gives light unto the Reader, how the proposition aforesaid is to be
understood, and adds, that the goods of the clergy are not utterly to be
taken away but in case they do abuse the same.
like as it is not the meaning of the Universitie to persuade, that Princes or
secular Lords should take away the goods from the clergy when they would, or
how they would and convert them to what use they list. But our whole intent is,
diligently to search out whether this Article, as touching the taking away of
temporalties from the Clergy, may have in it any true sense, whereby it may be
defended without reproof. Wherefore this Article, being the seventeenth in the
number of the forty five is, propounded under this form: The Lords temporal may
at their own will and pleasure, take away the temporal goods from the Clergy,
if they do offend, and therein continue. It is thus proved: The Kings of the
Old Testament took away the temporal goods at Gods commandment from the
Clergy; that is to say, from the Priests offending. Therefore the Kings of the
New Testament, at Gods commandment, may do the like, when as the Priests of the
new law do offend. The consequence depends upon a similitude. And the
antecedent is evident. First, it is proved by Solomon in the 3. of the Kings,
2. chapter, which Solomon deposed Abiathar the high Priest, because he had
taken part with Adonias the brother of Solomon to make him King, without the
advice either of David, or of Solomon himself, which ought to reign, and set up
Sadoc the Priest in the place of Abiathar, because he had not consented with
Abiathar unto Adonias, as it is written in the 3. book of Kings, 1. chapter,
where it is said, Adonias, the son of Agithe, exalted himself, and said, I will
reign: and made unto himself chariots and horsemen, and forty men which should
(...) before him neither did his father rebuke him at any time, saying,
Wherefore have thou done this? For he was very comely, being second son, next
to A solon, and his talk was with I^^b the son of Sa^via, and Abiathar the
Priest, which took part with Adonias. But Sadoc the Priest, and Benatas the son
of Ioiada, and Nathan the Prophet, and Semei, and Serethi, and Felethi, and all
the power of David's host, were not on Adonias part.

This was the cause of the deposing of Abiathar, because he took part with
Adonias, that he should be King against Solomon the eldest Son of King David:
wherefore it is written in the third book, and second chapter of the Kings; The
King said unto Abiathar the Priest, Go your ways unto Anathoth thine own
field, for thou art a man of death; but this day I will not slay thee, because
thou have carried the Ark of the Lord before my father David, and did labor
in all things wherein my father labored. Then did Solomom cast out Abiathar,
that he should be no more the Priest of the Lord; that the word of the Lord
might be fulfilled, which he spoke upon the ^ use of H^li in Silo.

Behold, the most prudent King Solomon, according to the wisdom which was given
him of God, did exercise his power upon the said Priest, putting him out of his
priesthood, and setting in his place Sadoc the Priest. This was a greater
matter than to take away the temporalties. If then in the Law of Christ, which
now reigns over us, a Bishop should likewise rebel against the true heir of
the kingdom, willing to set up another for King; why should not the King or his
heir have power, in like case, to take away the temporalties from him so
offending?

Nabuchodonozor, Nabuchodonozor,
which had power given him of God to lead away the children of Israel, with
their Priests and Levites, into the captivity of Babylon, as it is written 4
book of the Kings, 25 chapter.

how that Ioas the most godly King of Judah, Ioas.
according to the wisdom which God had granted him, took away all the
consecrate vessels which Iosaphat, Ioram, and Ochosias, his forefathers Kings
of Judah had consecrated, and those which he himself had offered, and all the
treasure that could be found in the temple of the Lord, and in the Kings
Palace, and sent it unto Azthel King of Syria, and he departed from Jerusalem.
Mark how this most holy King exercised his power, not only in taking away the
temporalities of the Priests, but also those things which were consecrate in
the Temple of the Lord, to procure unto the Commonwealth, the benefit of peace.

Item, in the 4. book, and 18. chapter of the Kings, it is Ezechias took all
the treasure that was found in the house of the Lord, Ezechias.
and in the Kings treasury, and brake down the Pillars of the Temple of the
Lord, and all the plates of gold which he himself had fastened thereupon, and
gave them unto the King of the Assyrians; yet was he not rebuked of the Lord
therefore, as he was for his other sins, as it appears in the 2d. book of
Kings 18. chapter. For So Much then as in time of necessity, all things ought to
be in common unto Christians, it follows, that the secular Lords in case of
necessity, and in many other common cases, may lawfully take away the moveable
goods from the Clergy, when they do offend.

Item, it is also read in the 12. of St. Matthew, that the Disciples of Jesus,
to slak their hunger, upon the Sabbath David.
Have ye not read what David did when he was hungry, and ^^ose that were with
him: how he entered into the house of the Lord, and did eat the show bread,
which it was not lawful for him, neither for them that were with him to eat,
but only for the Priests? This story is written in the first Book of the Kings,
and 21. chapter. And the commandment in the 12. chapter of Deuteronomy. Case
of necessity.
Whereby it appears, that it is lawful in time of necessity to use any
thing, be it never so much consecrate. Otherwise children by giving their
movables to the consecration of any Temple, should not be bound to help their
parents; which is contrary and against the Gospel of St. Matthew in the 16.
chapt. whereas our Savior sharply rebuked the Pharisees, that for their own
traditions they did transgress the commandment of God.

Titus and Vespasian secular Princes, Titus and Vespasian.
had power given them of God, twenty four years after the Lords ascension, to
take away the Temporalities from the Priests which had offended against the
Lords holy one, and thereby also bereft them of their lives: and it seems
unto many, they did and might worthily do the same according to Gods good will
and pleasure. Then for so much as our Priests in these days may transgress and
offend as much, and rather more against the Lords anointed, it follows, that
by the pleasure of God, the secular Lords may likewise punish them for their
offense.

The example of Christ paying of tribute.
did give tribute unto Caesar, as it appears in the 17. chapt. of St.
Matthews Gospel, and commanded the Scribes and Pharisees to give the like unto
Caesar, St. Matthew 22. Whereby he gave example unto all Priests that would
come after him to render tribute unto their Kings: whereupon blessed St.
Ambrose in his 4. book upon these words in the 5. of St. Luke, St. Ambrose his
mind.
( Cast cu^ your nets) writes thus: There is another kind of fishing amongst
the Apostles, after which manner the Lord commanded Peter only to fish, saying,
Cast out thy hook, and that fish which comes first up, take him. And then unto
the purpose he says; It is truly a great and spiritual document, whereby all
Christian men are taught, that they ought to be subject unto the higher powers,
and that no man ought to think that the Law of a King here on earth are to be
broken. For if the Son of God did pay tribute, who art thou so great a man,
that think thou ought not to pay tribute? He paid tribute which had no
possessions; and thou which daily seek after the lucre of the world, why
do thou not acknowledge the obedience and duty of the world? Why do thou
through the arrogance of thy mind exalt thy self above the world, when at,
through thine own miserable covetousness, thou art subject unto the world?
Thus writes St. Ambrose, and it is put in the 11. cause. qu. 1. Magnum quidem.
Christ commanded tribute to be paid unto the Emperor.
He also writes upon these words in Luke 20. Show me a penny, whose Image has
it? if Christ had not the Image of Caesar, why did he pay any tribute? He gave
it not of his own, but rendered unto the world, that which was the worlds: and
if thou will not be in danger of Caesar, possess not those things which are
the worlds; for if thou have riches thou art in danger of Caesar.

Wherefore if thou will owe nothing unto any earthly King, forsake all those
things, and follow Christ. If then all Ecclesiastical Ministers, having riches,
ought to be under the subjection of Kings, and give unto them tribute; it
follows that Kings may lawfully, by the authority which is given them, take
away their temporalities from them.

Hereupon St. Paul, acknowledging himself to be under Caesar, as it appears.
Acts 25.

I stand, says he, at Caesar's Judgment seat, Paul appealed to the Emperor.
St. Ambrose there in the 8. distinct
there I ought to be judged. Whereupon in the 8. Distinction, chapter Quo jure.
St. Ambrose allegeth, that all things are lawful unto the Emperor, and all
things under his power. For the Confirmation whereof it is said, Daniel 2.
chapter; Daniel 2.
The God of heaven has given unto thee a Kingdom, Strength, Empire, and Glory,
and all places wherein the children of men do dwell, and has given into thy
power the beasts of the field, and fowls of the air, and set all things under
thy subjection,

Also in the 11. question and 1, he says; if the Emperor require tribute, we
do not deny that the Lands of the Church shall pay tribute; if the Emperor have
need of our lands, he has power to challenge them, let him take them, if he
will; I do not give them unto the Emperor, neither do I deny them. This writes
St. Ambrose, expressly declaring that the secular Lord has power at his
pleasure to take away the Lands of the Church; and so consequently the secular
Lords have power at their own pleasures to take away the Temporal goods from
the Ecclesiastical Ministers, when they do offend.

Augustine writes; St. Augustine.
If thou say, what have we to do with the Emperor? But now as I said, we
speak of man's Law. The Apostles would be obedient unto Kings, and honor them,
saying, Reverence your Kings; and do not say, what have I to do with the King?
What have thou then to do with possessions? By the Kings Law thy possessions
are possessed. Thou have said, what have I to do with the King? but do not say,
what have thy possessions to do with the King? For then have thou renounced the
Laws of men, whereby thou did possess thy Lands. Thus writes St.
Augustine in his 8. distinction, by whose words it is manifest, that the King
has power over the Church goods, and consequently may take them away from the
Clergy, transgressing or offending.

Boniface, he says, Magistrates, keepers of both Laws.
What sober man will say unto our Kings, Care not you in your Kingdom, by whom
the Church of the Lord is maintained, or by whom it is oppressed; it pertains
not unto you, who will be either a religious man, or who will be a Church
robber? Unto whom it may be thus answered: Does it not pertain unto us in our
Kingdom, who will either live a chaste life, or who will be an unchaste
whoremonger? Behold, The duty of Kings to punish the Clergy.
this holy man shows here how that it is the duty of Kings to punish such as
are robbers of Churches, and consequently the proud Clergy when as they do
offend.

Si de Rebus; The secular Lords may lawfully take away the Temporal goods from
heretics; and for so much it is a case greatly possible that many of the Clergy
are users of Simony, and thereby heretics, therefore the secular Lords may
very lawfully take away their temporalities from them. For what unworthy thing
is it, says St. Augustine, if the Catholics do possess, according unto the
will of the Lord, those things which the heretics held? For So Much as this is
the word of the Lord unto all wicked men, Matthew 21.
Mat. 21. The Kingdom of God shall be taken away from you, and given unto a
nation which shall do the righteousness thereof; is it in vain which is
written in the 17. chapter of the book of wisdom? Wisdom 11.
The just shall eat the labors of the wicked.

And whereas it may be objected as touching the desire of other men's goods; An
objection of the desire of other men's goods.
St. Augustine answers, That by that Evidence the seven Nations, which did
abuse the Land of Promise, and were driven out from thence by the power of God,
may object the same unto the people of God, which inhabit the same. And the
Jews themselves, from whom, according unto the Word of the Lord, the Kingdom is
taken away and given unto a people, which shall do the works of righteousness,
may object the same unto the Church of Christ, as touching the desire of other
men's goods; but St. Augustines answer is thus.

We, says he, do not desire another man's goods; for so much as they are ours by
the commandment of him, by whom all things were made. By like evidence the
Clergy having offended, their temporal goods are made the goods of others, for
the profit of the Church. To this purpose also, according to St. Augustine, St.
Augustine 14. quest. 4.
serves the 14. question 4. Unto a mis-believer it is not a halfpenny matter,
but unto the faithful is a whole world of riches: shall we not then convince
all such to possess another man's goods, which seemed to have gathered great
riches together, and know not how to use them; for that truly is not another,
which is possessed by right: and that is lawfully possessed, which is justly
possessed; and that is justly possessed, which is well possessed. Ergo, all
that which is evil possessed is another man's, and he does ill possess it,
which does evil use it.

If then any of the Clergy do abuse the temporal goods, the temporal Lords may
at their own pleasure, according unto the rule of charity, take away the said
temporal go^d^ from the Clergy so transgressing. For then, according, to the
allegation aforesaid, the Clergy does not j^^l^ p^ssesse those temporal goods,
but the temporal Lord, proceeding according to the rule of charity, do justly
possess those temporalities, for so much as all things are the just man's. 1
Cor. 3.
1 Cor. 3. chapter, All things, says the Apostle are yours; whether it be
Paul, or Apollo, or C^^^^, either the world, either life or death, or things
(...), or things to come: for all things be yours, you be Christ's, ^
and Christ is Gods. Also in the 23. question 7. Qui^^^q^e, it is written, Iure
divino omnia sunt just^^^^. The words of St. Augustine in that place, ad
Vin^^^^um, be these; Whosoever, says he, upon the occasion of this Law or
Ordinance of the Emperor, does molest or persecute you, not for love of any
charitable correction, but only for hatred and malice to do you displeasure, I
hold not with him in so doing.

And although there is nothing here in this earth, that any man may possess
assuredly, but either he must hold it by Gods law, by which cuncta justorum
esse dicuntur; that is, all things be said to pertain to the possession of the
just: or else by man's law, which stands in the Kings power to set and to
ordain, etc. Here, by the words of St. Augustine alleged, ye see all things
belong to the possession of the just, by Gods law.

The clergy subject unto the Emperor and King by means of their possessions.
it follows, that if they do offend, the Emperor or King may lawfully take
away their possessions from them. The consequence depends on this point,
for so much as otherwise they were not in subjection under the Emperor or King:
and the antecedent is manifest by the 11. question and first Parag. His ita
respondetur. Whereas it is specified in Latin thus: His ita respondetur,
Clerici ex officio Episcopo sunt suppositi, ex possessionibus praediorum
Imperatori sunt obnoxii: ab Episcopo unctronem, decimas, and primitias
accipiunt; ab Imperatore vero praediorum possessiones nanciscuntur: that is to
say, The Clergy by means of their office are under the Bishop, but by reason
of their possessions they be subject unto the Emperor: Of the Bishop they
receive unction, tithes, and first fruits; of the Emperor they receive
possessions. Thus then it is decreed by the Emperial law, that livelihoods
should be possessed: whereby it appears, that the Clergy by the possession of
their livelihoods are in danger of the Emperor for him to take away from them,
or to correct them according to their deservings, and to have the controulment
of them, as it shall seem good unto him.

Item, The temporal Lords may take away the temporalities ^
because they are heretics. Ergo, this Article is true.

The antecedent is manifest for so much as the secular Lords may refuse such as
use Simony, and punish them except they do repent. For by the decree of Pope
Paschasius in the first and last question it appears, Paschasius in (...).
cap. (...).
that all such as used Simony were to be refused of all faithful people, as
chief and principal heretics; and if they do not repent after they be warned,
they are also to be punished by the extreme power. For all other faults and
crimes, in comparison of Simoney, be counted but light, and seem small offenses.

Whereupon the gloss, expounding the same text, says, that by this word
externe, is understood the laity, The (...) the Clergy.
which have power over the Clergy, besides the Church, as in the 17. distinct.
Non licuit, and 23. question 5. principes. Whereby it is evident, that the
temporal Lords may take away the temporal goods from the Clergy when as they do
offend.

Item, St. Gregory in the Register upon his seventh Book French Queen: Gregory
writes to the French Queen.
For So Much as it is written that righteousness helps the people, and sin
makes them miserable: then is that Kingdom counted stable, when as the offense
which is known, is soon amended.

Therefore, for so much as wicked Priests are the cause of the ruin of the
people, Wicked Priests the destruction of the people.
(for who shall take upon him, to be intercessor for the sins of the people, if
the Priest which ought to entreat for the same, have committed greater
offenses) and under your dominions the Priest do live wickedly and unchastly;
therefore that the offense of a few might not turn to the destruction of many,
we ought earnestly to seek the punishment of the same. And it follows, if we
do command any person, we do send him forth, with the consent of your
authority, who together with other Priests, shall diligently seek out, and
according unto Gods word correct and amend the same. Neither are these things
to be dissembled, the which we have spoken of, for he that may correct any
thing, and does neglect the same, without all doubt he makes himself partaker
of the sin or offense.

Therefore foresee unto your own soul, provide for your nephews, and for such
as you do desire to reign after you, provide for your country, and with
diligence provide for the correction and punishment of that sin, before our
Creator do stretch out his hand to strike.

And in his next Chapter he writes unto the French King: Whatsoever you do
understand to pertain either unto the honor and glory of our God, to the
reverence of the Church, or to the honor of the Priests, that do you
diligently cause to be decreed, and in all points to be observed. St. Gregory
to the French King
Wherefore once again we do move you, that you command a Synod to be
congregate, and as we wrote lately unto you, to cause all the carnal vices,
which reign amongst your Priests, and all the wickedness and Simony of your
Bishops (which is most hard to be condemned and reproved) utterly to be
banished out of your Kingdom; and that you will not suffer them to possess any
more substance under your dominion, then Gods commandment does allow.

Behold how carefully blessed Gregory does exhort the Queen and the King to
punish the vices of the Clergy, lest through their negligence they should be
partakers of the same; and how they ought to correct their Subjects. For as it
is convenient to be circumspect and careful against the outward enemies; even
so likewise ought they to be against the inward enemies of the soul. And like
as in just war against the outward enemies it is lawful to take away their
goods, so long as they continue in their malice; so also is it lawful to take
away the goods of the Clergy, being the inward enemy. The consequence is proved
thus; for so much as the domestical enemies are most hurtful.

Item, it is thus argued; if God be, the temporal Lords God is able even of
these stones to raise up Children unto Abraham.

Whereupon it is thus argued; for if God be, he is omnipotent, and if he so be,
he may give like power unto the secular Lords. And so consequently they may
meritoriously and lawfully use the same power. But lest that any man may
object, that a proof made by a strange thing is not sufficient; it is therefore
declared how that the temporal Lords have power to take away their alms
bestowed upon the Church, the Church abusing the same, as it shall be proved
hereafter. And first thus; It is lawful for Kings, in cases limited by the
Law, to take away the movables from the Clergy when they do offend: it is thus
proved; For the temporal Lords are most bound unto the works of greatest mercy
most easy for them: but in case possible, it should be greater alms, and
easier temporal dominion, to take away their alms from such as build
therewithal unto eternal damnation, through the abuse thereof, than to give
the said alms for any bodily relief, Ergo, the assumption is true.

Whereupon first this sentence of the Law of Christ in the second Epistle to
the Thessalonians the third Chapter is noted, whereas the Apostle writes thus;
When we were amongst you, we declared this unto you, that he that would not
work should not eat. Wherefore the law of nature does license all such as have
the governance of Kingdoms, to correct the abuse of the temporalities, which
would be the chief cause of the destruction of their Kingdoms; whether the
temporal Lords, or any other, had endowed the Church with those temporalities
or not. It is lawful for them in some case to take away the temporalities, as
it were by way of Physic to withstand sin, notwithstanding any
excommunication, or other Ecclesiastical censures; for so much as they are not
endowed, but only with Beneficium propter affictum.
condition thereunto annexed.

When and how the title of any gift is l^st.
Hereby it appears, that the condition annexed to the endowing, or enriching
of any Church; is, that God should be honored: the which condition if it once
fail, the contrary taking place, the title of the gift is lost, and
consequently the Lord which gave the alms ought to correct the offense.
Excommunication ought not to let the fulfilling of justice. Secondly, according
to the Canon Law, 16 question 7. this sentence is noted, where it is thus
spoken, as touching the Children, Nephews, and the most honest of the kindred
of him which has builded or endowed the Church: That it is lawful for them to
be thus circumspect, that if they perceive the Priest do defraud any part of
that which is bestowed, they should either gently admonish or warn him, or else
complain of him to the Bishop, that he may be corrected. But if the Bishop
himself attempt to do the like, let them complain of him to his Metropolitan:
and if the Metropolitan do the like, let them not defer the time to report it
in the ears of the King. For so says the Canon, Let them not defer to report
it in the ears of the King. To what end I pray you, but that he should do
correction: neither is it to be doubted, but that correction does more
appertain unto the King in this point for their goods, whereof he is chief
Lord, by a substraction proportional according to the fault or offense.

It is lawful for the civil rulers to correct the Clergy.
Ergo, by like reason it is lawful for them by their power to do such
correction, by all kind of fearful discipline pertaining unto their secular
power. For so much then as the taking of their temporalities is a kind of
fearful discipline pertaining unto the secular power; it follows, that it is
lawful for them thereby to do such correction. And consequently it follows
that the truth is thus to be proved. The consequence is evident; and the
antecedent is proved by Isidore 23. quest. 5. Principes, where it is thus
written; There should be no secular powers within the Church, but only for this
purpose, that whatsoever thing the Priests or Ministers cannot bring to pass
by preachings or teachings, the secular powers may command the same by the
terror and fear of discipline. For oftentimes the heavenly Kingdom is profited
and bolden by the earthly Kingdom: that they which are in the Church, and do
any thing contrary unto faith and discipline, by the rigor of the Princes may
be trodden down, and that the power of the rulers may lay that discipline upon
the necks of the proud and stif-necked, which the utility and profit of the
Church cannot exercise or use.

Item, all things that by power ought to work or bring

Item, it is lawful for the Clergy, by their power to Clergy of Christ, as the
Apostle says, 1 Cor. 9. It follows, that it is also lawful for them by
their power to take away the temporalities from the Clergy, when they do
customably sin and offend.

The Kingdom shall be taken away from you, and given unto a people which shall
bring forth the fruits thereof.

Romans 13. and many other places, it is evident that it is lawful by their
power to punish the Clergy, by taking away of their temporalities, if their
offense do so deserve.

Who were very poor and had no Lands nor Temporalities Mat. 8. 20. c. 19.27.
Luke 8. 3. c. 9. 58 Acts 3.3,5,6. 1 Cor. 4.9, to 15. 2 Cor. 6. 4, 10. c 8.9.
Phil. 2. 25. c. 4. 11, to 20.
Christ and the Apostles, and most profitable unto the Laity, that the Clergy
should not live contrary unto Christ's institution, seems to be the taking
away of their alms, and those things which they had bestowed upon them. And it
is thus proved: That medicine is most apt to be laid unto the sore, whereby the
infirmity might soonest be helped, and were most agreeable unto the patients:
Such is the taking away of the temporalities: Ergo, this article is true. The
minor is thus proved, for so much as by the abundance of temporalities, the
worm or serpent of pride is sprung up, whereupon unsatiable desire and lust is
inflamed, and therefrom proceeds all kind of gluttony and leachery. It is
evident in this point, for so much as the temporalities being once taken away,
every one of those sins is either utterly taken away, or at the least
diminished, by the contrary virtue induced and brought in^ It seems also most
pertinent unto the Laity, for so much as they ought not to lay violent hands
upon their Ministers, or to abject the Priestly dignity, By the Law of that age.
neither to judge any of the Clergy in their open Courts. It seems also by
the Law of Conscience to pertain unto the lay people, for so much as every man,
which works any work of mercy, ought deli^ently to have respect unto the
ability of them that he bestows his alms upon, lest that by nourishing or
helping loyterers, he be made partaker of his offense. Whereupon, if Priests do
not minister of their temporalities, as Hostiensis teaches in his 3d. book of
their Tither, First Fruits and Oblations, the people ought to take away the
alms of their Tithes from them.

Item, it is confirmed by the last chapter of the sevententh Quicunque. Whereas
the case is put thus, That a certain man having no children, neither hoping to
have any, gave all his goods unto the Church, reserving unto himself the only
use and profits thereof: it happened afterward that he had children, and the
Bishop restored again his goods unto him not hoping for it. The Bishop had it
in his power, whether to render again, or no, those things which were given
him; but that was by the law of Man, and not by the law of Conscience. If then
by the decree of the holy Doctor St. Augustine, in his Sermon of the life of
the Clergy, Aurelius the Bishop of Carthage had no power by Gods law to
withhold that which is bestowed upon the Church for the necessity of children;
by the which law, the wanton, proud, and unstable Clergy, being more then
sufficiently possessed and enriched, do detain and keep back the temporalities
to the detriment and hurt of their own state, and of the whole militant Church,
the secular patrons being thereby so impoverished, that they are compelled by
penury to rob and steal, to oppress their tenants, to spoil and undo others,
and oftentimes by very necessity are driven to beggary.

Judas Iscarioth: of the religious Monk Sergius, of Pope Leo the heretic, and
many other Priests, of whom the Scripture and Chronicles make mention, and
daily experience does teach us the same: it is evident that, as it is supposed,
the Priests in the Kingdom of Boheme grievously offending,, it is the Kings,
part, for so much as he is supreme head next under God, and Lord of the Kingdom
of Boheme, to correct and punish those Priests. And for so much as the gentlest
correction and punishment of such as be indurate in their malice, is, the
taking away of their temporal goods, it follows, that it is lawful for the
King to take away temporalities. Wherefore it should seem very mavelous and
strange, if that Priests riding about should spoil Virgins, violently corrupt
and defile honest Matrons; if in such case it were not lawful for them to take
away their Armours, Weapons, Horses, Guns and Swords from them. The like reason
were it also, if they had unlawfully conspired the death of the King, or that
they would betray the King unto his enemies.

Ergo, the secular power ought in such case, by the law of Christ, to take upon
them the office or duty of getting, keeping, and distributing all such manner
of riches. The minor is hereby proved, that no man ought to have riches, but to
that end, that they be helps, preferring and helping unto the office which is
appointed of God. Therefore in case that secular possessions do hinder the
Clergy from their duty, the secular power ought to take it away, for so did the
Apostles, Acts 6. saying, It is not lawful for us to leave the Word of God
untaught, and to minister unto tables.

It is confirmed, Every good Christian is bound to be 2 Timothy 2. 4. Mat. 10. 9
10. Phil 3 Id. 19. 20. 2 Timothy 4 1^.
retard him from his duty due unto God; Therefore the person more sufficient is
bound in such a case by the Law of Christ, to deprive him of temporal
possessions; But Kings and Lords temporal are the most sufficient for this,
being truly said to be Lords and Possessors of temporal estates: and
undoubtedly this would especially concern the public good, to make such a
de-generation of temporals, which in their nature are but a burden to a Clergy
man, Luke 8. 7, 14.
retarding him in his spiritual duties, and so many thorns (as our Savior
speaks it in the 8. of St. Luke) Choking the Word of God.

Moreover, Kings and secular Princes are the chief or capital Principes, where
by the authority of Isiodore 30. Etymol. 53. It is thus written: Let secular
Princes know, that they must render an account to God for the Church which they
are to maintain for Christ. And in the same question it follows, It is proper
to Kings to execute Justice, and Righteousness, and to deliver from the hand
of the gain sayers and slanderers, those who are orpressed by force, and to
assist the Stranger, Orphan, and Widow, who more easily are oppressed by the
powerful. The duty of Kings.
And in the same question it follows, The King ought to prohibit thesis,
punish adulteries, destroy the wic^ed from the earth, not suffer paricide and
perjured persons to live, nor their own sons to live wickedly. And by declaring
where a Bishop abuses the goods of the Church, Blessed Gregory writes thus, as
it is recited in the Decretals, 16. quest. 7. Decret. where having taught, that
the goods of the Church are common, he subjoyneth, We have received a bad
report that some Bishops confer not the Tithes belonging to their Diocese, and
the Oblations of charitable Christians on the Priests, or ^oor, but on Lay
persons, viz. Soldiers, or their own Servants, or, which is worse, on As most
do now.
their Kindred; If therefore any Bishop shall be found to be a transgressor of
this Precept, he is to be ranked amongst the greatest Heretics, and
Antichrists. And as the Nycen Council censured of persons guilty of Simony,
Bishops conferred ^thes ^n unworthy persons
both the Bishop who gives, and the Lay men who receive, are without ransom,
price, or benefit to be condemned to the punishment of everlasting fire.
Therefore what faithful King, Prince or Lord would not resist such contagious
persons who infect their own mother. Whence 3. quest. 2. Si Episcopus, The
Canon speaks in these words, If a Bishop by his ill life shall wast the goods
of the Church, he is to be removed from his Patrimony until full knowledge be
had of the dilapidation he has made, after the Example of Tutors and Curats,
who being suspected are removed from their Cure or Tutelage, until a more full
knowledge he had of the suspected person. But the Doctors say, that the
dilapidation ought first to be proved, which being done, an assistant ought to
be given to him to the end of the Trial, but the Correction would then be taken
from the secular Prince; It seems therefore the correction of the Prelate
being wanting; It belongs to the King to dispose of his goods according to
the Civil Law.

Romans 13 being sufficient for this; And by consequent it being superfluous to
appoint another, it seems they have a power whether some case does extend it
self to the correction of the Clergy. For if I ought to help even the beast of
my enemy being out of the way, or lying down, Exodus 21. How much more in the
new Testament, having the opportunity and power so to do, ought I to free from
the jaws of the Devil, the Soul of my Curate ensnared with the Mammon of
Inquity.

There being a power of Fact, and a power of Right; It de facto may take away
the Temporals from a Clergyman, being a Delinquent; and it is granted withal,
that the taking away of the said Goods may be an occasion to that Ecclesiastic
person, Mark 10. 21. to 31. c. 28. 34 2 Timothy 2.4.
for the abandoning of all wordly affairs, and devoting himself more peculiarly
to the worship of God. This Case will not be denied by any faithful Christian,
not over-blinded with the dross of Temporal things. For as St. Augustine says,
It is expedient for many to fall into manifest sins, that knowing their own
frailty they may live more humbly, and by grieving for their sins, they may be
more cautious how they sin again. A Sin committed and acknowledge, does render
us more careful.
It is therefore much more expedient that many be poor, and to be without the
civil Dominion. The Case admitted, it is manifest, that the King does a good
work in the General; now every such work may be well done; therefore he may
well take away the Goods from an Ecclesiastical person: for if the greater part
of evil works may in the generality of them be well done, much more may every
good work in the generality of it; For it is not repugnant to Grace or Alms
that this good work proceeds from it: neither is it to be doubted, but that
God in such a Case does give a power to the King, which he eternally ordains
to the performance of his pleasure. It being granted then that the King, and
the said Ecclesiastic may reign together in Heaven, there would be both notice
and joy for the taking away of such a Temporal estate, although by our Childish
blindness it appears to men of a gross understanding to be disadvantageous.

Again, if this be an error, that Temporal Lords may at Augustine often
affirms; and by consequent, since this way should be a falsehood, it follows
that it would be contrary to the holy Scripture. And certain it is, that it is
pertinaciously and strongly defended, because Kings and Princes believe that it
pertains to their Sovereignty to have this powers; for grant the contrary, it
will follow, that Ecclesiastical persons, seeing they are great Trangressors,
may destroy both Kingdoms and their People, to prevent which it may be lawful
for the King to resist the Clergy, or to impugn his Charity, by the ablation of
his proper Alms, and those Temporal goods, which are the Fire exciting
hereunto. Now the King could not lawfully punish the bodies of such Traitors,
if he could not lawfully take from them, and alienate their Temporal estates,
over which he has a special Dominion. And since this power is the chiefest
Royalty of the King, it would be the same thing to infringe this power, and
subtly to overthrow the Government of the Kingdom.

have oftentimes exercised that power; it were the same, according to such a
form, to assert the assumption, and afterward to condemn the Lives and Souls
of those Heretics, which the Heirs of Kings, and especially their Sons have
stoutly opposed; for thus, according to the Priests and Pharisees accusing
Christ of Heresy, they would impose a manifest Error, and Heresy on the King,
of whom they have so great a Temporal assistance: But God when he pleases will
move the heart of the King, to overthrow their madness.

The Lord Prelates have the fourth or third part of the Revenues of this
Kingdom.
or they are not; if they are, it truly follows, that for the greatest part
those Ecclesiastical men are the chief Lords of our Kingdoms; and so, as to
their Temporals, not subject to the King, which it seems they themselves do
conceive. The first consequence is manifest by this, because the Clergymen of
our Kingdom have the fourth, or third part of the Revenues of it. And from
hence it is, that they will not be called Presbyters, but Lord Prelates, L.
Praepositors, L. Canonicals, L. Prebends, Note.
L. Presbyters. And if any man shall call them Presbyters, they are presently
angry, as if you had called them Common-cryers, or Tormentors. But if the
Clergymen, Note.
are not the chief Lords of those Revenues, and Temporal estates which the King
has given them, as holy men are of opinion, who say, That Ecclesiastical
Persons are not Lords, but Attorneys or Procurers only for poor men; it then
follows, That the King is the Sovereign Lord of their Goods and Estates, and
by consequent, can take them away from those Ecclesiastical persons, who are
Delinquents, and bestow them on the poor of Christ. And from hence it is the
Canon affirms, St. Ambrose.
that in the time of necessity, to provide for the poors relief the Goods of
the Church may be sold by the Priests, 12. quest. 2. cap. Sicut Ecclesiast.
Parag. Secundo. On which St. Ambrose limiteth the cases in which they may break
and sell the Vessels consecrated to the Church, as it is manifest, Did. 96.
Whatsoever in Gold, The selling of Gold and Silver Vessels and Vestments.
Pearls or Jewels, or in Silver, or in Vestments shall appear to be less
useful, which cannot long be kept, or continue for the service of the Church,
let them be sold according to their full value, and the profit thereof be given
to the poor. Saint Ambrose does insist also at large upon this particular in
his fifth book of Offices.

Again, many Kings have oftentimes wholly taken away the The Templers.
as it is manifest by the destruction of the Templers, and many other private
ablations; but they never did, or could do so lawfully, as is manifest by the
This argument is by way of retorsion. These Lands being taken from the Templers
by the Pope and Clergies consents and solicitations.
Adversaries. Therefore in this they did that which lawfully they could not do.
And moreover, in this they did that which they could not do meritoriously, or
according to the law of God. And seeing that every work of man proceeding from
deliberation is either lawful, or unlawful, meritorious, or demeritorious, it
follows that they did it unlawfully or demeritoriously; and it follows
moreover, that inso doing they fell into a dangerous error, and as destructive
to the Soul as to the Body: and that this error is directly contrary to the
Catholic truth, it does appear by a threefold consideration. First, That Kings
by so doing did that which neither was nor could be lawful. Secondly, Because
they took away the Goods of other men against a commandment of the second
Table. And thirdly, Because they did it not in Alms, which is against the
Catholic truth, Let all things what you do be done in Alms. All the
Antecedent is granted by the Adversaries; and this error being in Fact, i^
Kings pertinaciously shall defend it, resolving by their power (as if a lawful
one) to take away from Ecclesiastical persons, though Delinquents, their
Temporal Goods, they are in a Heresy. From which it further follows, that
Kings persisting in so doing are Heretics; and if they shall defend what they
have done unto death, it follows that they are Heretics, and damned; and
from this again, it farther follows, that Clergymen benesiced who do believe
what here is said, should not pray for the said Kings deceased.

Emperor or a King, not only oughteth, but it becomes him so to indow the
Church, A (...) end^wed (...).
that he may lawfully take from it his gifts of Alms, in case that the abuse
thereof does tend to the detriment of his Kingdom, and the hinderance of the
preaching of the Gospel. Suppose therefore, that under such a condition he has
endowed such a Church, it may thereupon be thus argued. If according unto that
form the Emperor or the King had endowed the Church of Prague, he might
lawfully in the case of the Detriment of his Kingdom, or in the contempt of his
own person, or in the case of the not preaching of the Gospel, take away his
gifts of Alms. But the Emperor or the King could under such a condition have
endowed the Church of Prague; Therefore for the contempt of the Clergy he could
lawfully take away the said gifts of Alms he had given. The condition
therefore being lawful and honest, and the custom both of the King and
kingdom, do show that condition in facto to be added. It seems to be too
presumptuous an assertion, that our Princes cannot take from them their gifts
of Alms, be the faults they have committed never so enormous; yea when it was
properly in their power to add such a condition. And again, when as those who
received those gifts of Alms could commit never so grievous offenses, as
already I have said. It is manifest, that our Princes have a simple and an
absolute power to withdraw their gifts of Alms, a possible danger being
imminent, and by the same rule it follows, that on the like po^sible
emergencies they may do it for the time to come.

Again, the King of Bohemia, or the Emperor indowing neither ought, or (...)
it to the weakening, or the worsting of his kingdom. For all power is from God,
Romans 13.
which cannot give any power to this end. But suppose it so should come to
pass, that a King or the Emperor had absolutely endowed a Church without such
a condition to be understood, yet such a condition ought to be understood; Note.
and by consequent, when such a condition of the Clergy does fall out, the King
by taking the Temporals from them into his own hands does do no injury to the
Clergy, the condition being dissolved and made null by his or their defect. The
minor of the Argument is thus proved, If all those Goods with which our Church
is endued did immediately and directly so pertain to the Pope, that the King
had no interest neither in the possessions nor the persons, the fourth part of
the kingdom and more being devolved to a Mortmayn, it would follow, that our
King is not King of all Bohemia, more than the fourth part thereof being fallen
into a Mortmayn for the Clergy; The fear least the whole possession of the
Kingdom of Bohemia be dev^lved to the Clergy, as in the Rhene.
and the possessions of the Clergy every day increasing; and the possessions of
the Barons, Knights, and other Seculars every day decreasing, it may easily
come to pass, that the whole possession of the Kingdom of Bohemia, may be
devolved to the Clergy, as it has come to pass in the Rhene.

If this comes to pass, the Dominion of our King, and of the Barons will be
extinguished, and by consequence all Sovereignty; for it is not lawful for the
King (as the Clergy do affirm) to interpose in matters concerning themselves,
or their possession, be their offenses never so heinous; neither is it lawful
for the King to meddle with their Temporals, how great soever the abuse does
tend to the indangering of the kingdom, because (they say) they are exempted
from all Kingly jurisdiction, both in Body and in Goods, and immediately
subject to the Pope, The Clergy unwilling to be subjected to the King.
And thereupon committing insolences in the kingdom, they will not be
corrected by the King, but are like good or evil Angels, not subject to the
King in his own kingdom.

Gregory, 2. quaest. 3. He ought altogether to lose his privilege, who abuses
the Power that is committed to him; but every Clergyman abusing the Kings
gifts of Alms, does abuse the power committed to him; That indowment therefore
being a Privilege, it directly follows, The abuse of gifts.
that he ought altogether to lose it.

And to whom, but to the King who did impriviledge him? for it is his
privilege to interpret, and to defend, or take away, whose privilege it is to
make.

Matthew, Chap. 23. To every one that has it shall be given, and he shall
abound: and to him that has not, even that shall be taken which he has. When
the King is obliged so to abound by the Title of his Justice, it seems that
the Ablation, or the taking away from him whom he has endowed with Church
gifts, ought to proceed from the King himself; it being supposed it may so
come to pass, that he may seem to have those gifts of Alms which he has not.

coactive castigation, to continue such works of Alms which he ought to see
performed. The Clergymen therefore who take the greatest offense at the taking
away of Temporals, do yet challenge, that the Seculars do defend the gifts of
their Progenitors remaining in their strength; which cannot be, unless the
Church has the profit from such gifts of Alms, in such a manner, that being
put together it may remain upon the account of Privilege, or of free gifts of
Alms, which is extinguished when the said Clergymen do abuse their gifts,
according to the Decrees of Gregory alleged in the foregoing confirmation. If
therefore the Temporal Lords (as the Clergymen who enjoy these Gifts of Alms
do challenge) are bound to continue the charitable Donations of their Fathers,
whose Heirs they are; they are then bound to conform themselves to that which
follows; for otherwise they would be obliged to Contradictories against the
possibility of the Divine law, viz. both to continue the said Gifts of Alms,
and to defend their abuses in the several species of them; according to which
sense, they do want the form and the very essence of a spiritual Gift of Alms.
Therefore when Kings and Secular Lords are bound to continue the Alms of their
Progenitors in the perpetuity of them, they are obliged also by the law of
Spiritual alms to chastise their Liege-people abusing them. They are obliged
also by that Obligation, to do justice to their Subjects, and to extinguish
those injuries which most dangerously tend to the ruin of their Subjects.

It is manifest, that in some case they are bound to restore their Goods to the
Holy Church, and to take them away from the Despisers of God and his Kingdom;
for this was the condition of the first and ancient Donation. Therefore if our
King have not the power over these his Peers to correct the abuse of Alms in
his Clergy, he has not the power of governing politickly over all his Kingdom;
But yet if we do well attend to the holy Scripture, we shall know what is
spoken of the privilege of the King, to wit, that he has a coercive power
over the Clergy; and the Clergy have a privilege also, that they have such a
One set over them, to whom deservedly they may submit themselves.

Again, Kings and Princes, and all Lords Temporal are a Brotherly correction of
him may be most needful and effectual, by merely taking away from him those
Temporals which he abuses.; Therefore it may so come to pass, the Temporal
Lords by the Law of Christ are bound unto it; neither does it any thing avayl
to say, that the Dispens^cion of the Pope, or any Privilege, or Exemption does
exclude it; for God forbid, that a Catholic should affirm, that it is lawful
for Christ's Vicar to do that by his Traditions, which may hinder, or derogate
from the Practick law of Christ, and impede Catholic Lords from an effectual,
and a profitable correction of the Church; for it is not lawful for a man so
to exempt any, as if he shall fall into a sin, it shall not be in his Power to
correct him.

Dispensation.
Upon this account it is, that St. Bernard in his third Book to Pope Eugenius,
calls a Dispensation which is not for the Public good, a Dissipation; And
hereupon he has these words, What? Do you forbid to dispense? No, but to
dissipate; I am not so silly as to be ignorant that you are made Dispencers but
to edification, not to destruction. Amongst Dispensators, or Dispensers it is
required, that a man be found faithful: when Necessity urges, a Dispensation
is excusable; when Profit inviteth it, the Dispensation is laudible; but this
Profit must be public, and common, and not private and particular; for where
neither of these two are, it is not a faithful Dispensation, but a cruel
Dissipation.

From the words of this Saint it is manifest, that priviledging or exempting is
not a faithful Dispensation, but a cruel Dissipation. If Clergymen be
exempted, let their sin be never so enormous to from being corrected by any but
the Pope only. For what is the profit of the Church, that Clergymen should be
wanton and rampant as Bulls, and like untamed Horses, neigh unto their
Neighbors wives; unless in such grievous exorbitancies, some yoke, or curb be
imposed upon them by the Princes. For Priviledging, Dispensation, or Exemption,
ought not to be an Authority to them for the committing of sin; for St.
Augustine in his fourth Book, entitled Authority, Quaest. 23. says, That he
who sins, sins not by the Authority, but against the Authority of the Law.

as the taking away of the Abuse is near to the last necessity of the perpetual
Salvation both of Soul and Body; As it is a work of greater mercy to take away
a Sword from a Madman that would kill himself, than to give a Sword to a
persecuted man to defend himself from one that does endeavor to kill him; for
it is worse for a man to be killed by himself than by another; for the first is
damnable, the second just, or meritorious. And to this sense is that of Saint
Augustine 5. Quaest. 5. Not every one who spares is a Friend, nor every one who
scourges is an Enemy; for the wounds of a Friends are better than the
fraudulent kisses of an enemy; it is better to love with security, than to
deceive with lenity. The wounds of a Friend are better than the deceitful
kisses of an Enemy.
And to the same purpose is that which follows, It is safer to take Bread
from a hungry man, if having abundance of Bread he neglects Justice; than to
give Bread to a hungry person, that being seduced he may acquiesce in
Injustice. And again, He who binds a Madman, and he who awakens and rouzeth up
a Lethargick-man is a friend to them both, although he is troublesome to them.
Thus for Saint Augustine, by whose example, if Lords Temporal are bound to give
charitable Gifts to the Clergy, that they may be the better encouraged to the
performance of their Duties, they are also bound by the same law of Alms to
take away the said Gifts from those that do abuse them, least by suffering the
abuse, they destroy their own Souls.

And hence it is, that amongst all the sins to which the Superiors of our
Kingdom of Bohemia are most obnoxious, the greatest are Blind zeal, False
mercy, and a Consentanious, omission, In the Superiors of the Kingdom, Blind
zeal, False mercy, and a consentaneous Omission.
either by negligence, or which is above all most horrible, when money i
received, for giving consent unto a Crime, and the Enemy of Christ is unjustly
defended by the Alms given to the Clergy; Whereupon St. Augustine in his 3.
Epist. to Macedonia writes, We more mercifully do draw back than give to such
Persons; for he does him no good, who helps a man, but rather does pervert
him and oppress him; Whereupon it is to be admired, why a Clergyman who has
a thorn in his foot, will suffer a Layman to pull it out, that he might walk
the better, Note.
and will not suffer him when Riches do choke his affections to take them away
from him, that so walking uprightly in the footsteps of Christ, he might save
his Soul, unless peradventure he would show thereby, that he loves the soal of
his Foot better than he does his Soul: For if he loved his Soul better, he
would then with joy sustain the plunder of his Temporals; for so those
Christians did to whom the Apostle writes, Heb. 10. you took joyfully the
spoiling of your Goods, knowing in your selves, that you have in Heaven, a more
enduring substance. And since our Savior having no fault in himself, did
humbly and willingly endure the loss of his Garments, and a most bitter and
ignominious Death; the example of our Savior, and the consciousness of his own
Guilt should move every Clergyman even patiently to endure the taking away of
his Goods. Note.
But if a Clergy man does so grievously murmur against the taking away of the
mammon of Iniquity, how would he endure reproach, and blows, and spittle, and
martyrdom, and Death it self for the Name of Christ? Such a Clergyman never
thinks of that in St. Ambrose, concerning the contempt of the world; In which
he has these words, O most wretched man! with what a fraud art thou
circumvented? with what a grief art thou deceived? with what a snare art thou
captivated? who fear that thy wordly possessions should be taken from thee,
and have no fear in the mean time of losing of that most excellent Creature,
thy own Soul?

that they may deserve to be plundered of their possessions, neither does he
cause the plundering of them, but by setting Temporal Lords on work to see such
an Execution thoroughly performed. Obj.
This Article therefore is true. But peradventure it will be objected, That by
the addition of this Particle that it is in their lawful Power so to do,
according to their own arbitration, the whole strength of the Instance
abovementioned is taken away. Ans.
Nevertheless, according to the five Rules of Logic, and Metaphysics it is
manifest, and plainly consequent, that if the King and Temporal Lords cannot do
so according to their own Arbitrament, it must be so, because that Arbitrament
is either a Power Judicial, or a Judicial Act of the same Power; and grant what
may be granted: If the Temporal Lords could not act so according to that Power,
or such an Act, it would follow, that they have no power to act any thing at
all. Note.
For if they ought to expect the Arbitration of the Bishop of Rome, or of the
Archbishops, and all the Clergy of this Kingdom, the chief Power would reside
in the Clerks only, and the great Prelates, and Bishops of the Kingdom; and so
our King should not be King of Bohemia, neither any of the Peers of the Land,
or Lords Temporal should have any visible Power, which must wholly and
necessarily be reduced to the Clergy, The Dominion of the Clergy over the Power
Politic.
and by consequence the Clergy it self should be secularly over the King; which
is directly against the Law of Christ, Luke 22. where our Savior says, That
the Kings of the Gentiles do exercise Lordship over them, and they that
exercise Authority upon them are called Benefactors. But you shall not be so.
On which place Saint Bernard, writing to the Pope Eugenius, says, that
Lordship was forbidden the Apostles.

Again, An excellent Reason.
as Ecclesiastical Persons do joyfully receive Prayers from Kings and Dukes,
for their good works: so by the same account when they do offend, they
obediently ought to receive punishment from them for their evil work. The
consequence holds, for punishment for sin, being humbly and patiently received,
is more profitable to a Man, than Praise for a good work. Whereupon St. Gregory
writes to Mauritius the Emperor that did persecute him, I do believe that by
so much the more you do please Almighty God, by how much the more you do punish
me that am an evil Servant to him.

If therefore the Pope without offense did so humbly receive punishment from
the Emperor, why should not an inferior Clergyman be as patient, who justly,
nay peradventure, who grievously offends? why should not, he I say, receive
patiently punishment from him who is his King, or Prince, or Duke, and to whom
he is subjected? Saint Peter, the imediate Vicar of Christ, says in his first
Epistle and second Chapter, Submit your self to every Creature for the Lords
sake, whether it be to the King as Supreme; Or unto Governors, as unto those
who are sent by him, for the punishment of Evil doers, and for the praise of
them that do well, for so is the will of God.

Leo the Pope subjected himself to Ludovick the Emperor.
In order to this Rule Pope Leo did subject himself to Ludovicus the Emperor, as
it is written, 2 Quaest. 7. in these words, If we have done any thing
incompetently, and have not to your Subjects observed the true rule of the Law,
we are ready to amend and correct all things according to yours, and your
Counsels judgment; for if we who ought to correct the sins of other men do
commit greater offenses our selves, certainly we are not the Disciples of
Christ, but as with grief we speak it, we shall be above all others the Masters
of Error; And in his tenth Distinction writing to the Emperor of Obedience,
he has these words, As for the most faithful, and irrefragable keeping and
observing of the Imperial Orders and Precepts, and of the Bishops our
Predecessors, ( Gloss, that is of the Emperors who are anointed after the
manner of Bishops) we profess, that both now, and always, to the uttermost of
our Power, by the Grace of God we will be most careful; and if per adventure
any other Man either has or shall inform you otherwise, be assured for certain
that he is a Liar.

Behold how that holy and devout Pope, calling even Emperors by the Name of
Bishops, according to the rule of the Apostle Saint Peter, did submit himself,
as well to obedience as to punishment. Why therefore should not a Clergyman of
the Kingdom of Bohemia submit himself for the Lords sake to the King in
obedience? and if he has offended in punishment also; The pride and tyranny of
the Clergy..
and not only to the King, but unto Dukes; and not to Dukes only, but also to
every humane Creature? for by how much the more he humbles himself in this
world for God, by so much he shall be the more exalted by God in the world to
come; And what binders that this should be done, but Pride only? by which
Antichrist does extol himself above our most humble Lord and Master Jesus
Christ.

Hildegardis the Virgin, Hildegardis Prophecy.
which she puts down in her Books under Eugenius the Pope in the Counsel of
Treverse, approved and allowed by many Bishops of France, Italy, and Almaine,
which were there present, whereas also Saint Bernard himself was present; the
which Virgin prophesying spoke in this manner, The Kings and other Rulers of
the World, being stirred up by the just judgment of God, shall set themselves
against them, and run upon them, saying, We will not have these men to reign
over us with their rich Houses and great Possessions, and other worldly riches,
over the which we are ordained to be Lords and Rulers; and how is it meet or
comely, that those shavelings with their tools and chisils should have more
soldiers, or more or richer armor or artillery than we? So is it not
convenient, that one of the Clergy should be a man of War, neither a Soldier
to be one of the Clergy. Wherefore let us take away from them that which they
do not justly, but wrongfully possess. And immediately after she says, The
Omnipotent Father equally divides all things, that is to say, the Heavens he
gave unto the heavenly Creatures, and the Earth unto the earthly. And by this
means was there a just division made between the Children of men, that the
Spirituality should have such things as belong unto them, and the Secular
people such things as are meet and necessary for them, so that neither of these
two sorts do oppress each other by violence; for God does not command, that
the one Son or Child should have both the Cloak and the Coat, and the other
should go naked: but he willed, that the one should have the Cloak, and the
other the Coat. Wherefore the secular sort ought to have the Cloak for the
greatness of their worldly cares, and for their Children, which daily
increase and multiply. The Coat he gives unto the Spiritualitie, that they
should not lack clothing, and that they should not possess more than necessity
does require. Wherefore we judge and think it good, that all these aforesaid be
divided by reason and equity. And whereas the Cloak and the Coat are both
found, there the Cloak should be taken away, and given unto the needy, that
they do not perish for lack or want. These aforesaid spoke the Virgin
Hildegardis, plainly foreshowing the taking away of the Temporalities from the
Clergy by the secular Lords, and showing for what cause they shall be so taken
away. And what manner of division shall be made of those things that are taken
away, that they be not consumed, and spent unprofitably.

This blessed Hildegardis, whose Prophecy this, flourished about the year of
our Lord 1046. as it is written in Martins Chronicles.

Hugo de Sa^am. part 2.
Also Hugo in his second Book of Sacraments, in the second part, third Chapter
and 7. says, The Laity forasmuch as they intermeddle with earthly matters
necessary unto an earthly life, they are the left part of the body of Christ.
And the Clergy, for so much as they do dispose those things which do pertain
unto a spiritual life, are as it were the right side of the body of Christ. And
afterward interpreting both these parts himself, he says, A spiritual man
ought to have nothing but such as pertains unto God, unto whom it is
appointed to be sustained by the Tithes and Oblations which are offered unto
God: but unto the Christian and faithful Laity the possession of the Earth is
granted; and unto the Clergy the whole Charge of Spiritual matters is committed,
as it was in the Old Testament. And in his seventh Chapter he declares, how
that certain things are given unto the Church of Christ by the devotion of the
Faithful, the power and authority of the Secular power reserved, lest there
might happen any confusion; For So Much as God himself cannot allow any
disordered thing. Whereupon oftentimes the worldly Princes do grant the bare
use of the Church, and oftentimes use and power to exercise Justice; which the
Clergy cannot exercise by any Ecclesiastical Minister, or any other person of
the Clergy, Notwithstanding they may have certain Lay-persons Ministers unto
that office. But in such sort, says he, that they do acknowledge the power
which they have to come from the Secular Prince or Ruler, Note.
and that they do understand their Possessions can never be alienate away from
the Kings power; but (if that necessity or reason do require) the same
Possessions in all such case of necessity do owe him obeisance and service. For
like as the Kings power ought not to turn away the defense or safeguard which he
owes unto other: so likewise the Possessions obtained and possessed by the
Clergy, according to the duty and homage which is due unto the Patronage of the
Kings power, cannot by right be denied.

Thus much writes Hugo, with whom John Hus concludes his Disputation.

Mat. 5. 39, 40. But I say unto you, that you resist not evil; And if any man
will sue thee at the Law, and take away thy Coat, let him have thy Cloak also.

Phil 3. 8, 17, 18, 19, 20. Yea doubtless, I count all things but l^sse, for
the excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord, for whom I have
suffered the loss of all things, and do count them but dung, that I may win
Christ. Brethren be followers together of me, and mark them which walk so, as
ye have us for an example. For many walk of whom I have told you often, and now
tell you weeping, that they are the enemies of the Cross of Christ; whose end
is destruction, whose God is their belly, whose glory is their shame; who mind
earthly things. But our conversation is in heaven.

Col. 3. 1, 2, etc. If ye then be risen with Christ, seek those things which
are above, where Christ sits at the right hand of God. Set your affection on
things above, not on things on the earth; for ye are dead, and your life is hid
with Christ in God. Mortify therefore your members which are upon the earth,
inordinate affection, evil concupiscence, and covetousness, which is idolatry;
for which things sake the wrath of God comes upon the children of disobedience.

A supplemental Appendix to the premised Disputation of John Hus, irrefragibly
evidencing the Supreme Jurisdiction of our Kings, Lords, and Parliaments, not
only over the Persons, Liberties, Lives of our Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots,
Priors, Churchmen, in cases of High Treason, Rebellion, Disobedience, Contumacy
and Disloyalty; but likewise over their Temporal Lands and Estates, to seize
and confiscate them without Sacrilege or Injustice.
HAving presented the Readers with the memorable Disputation of this famous
learned Bohemian Marty John Hus, in justification of our English Apostle, and
prime Assertor of the Reformed Religion, we now profess, whose Doctrine spread
it self into Mr. Fox Acts and Monuments, vol. 1. The Preface to John Hus his
work, Bishop Jewel, Dr. Jo. White, Bishop Usher, Dr. Fearly, Ill^ri^. Catalogus
Testium. Veritatis, and others.
Bohemia, Germany, and other parts, to the subversion of the Popes and Prelates
usurped Authority over Kings, and Popery by degrees. It will not be
unseasonable, by way of Appendix, to subjoyn some memorable domestic Evidences
and Presidents in all Ages, to justify their opinions in point of practice:
Not with the least intention to deprive the faithful, painful Ministers and
Preachers of the Gospel, or any true Evangelical Bishops of the ancient Glebes,
Tithes, Dues belonging to their respective Parochial Churches, or of that
liberal competent Maintenance, or 1 Timothy 5. 17, 18. Mat. 10. 10 1 Cor. 9 4, to
16. Gal. 6.6. H^b 7. 2, to 11.
double Honor which belongs unto them by a divine right, and common natural
Justice, for their labor in the work of the Ministry, which I have In the
first and second part of A Gospel Plea for the Tithes and settled, Maintenance
of the Ministers of the Gospel. London, 1656.
publicly and largely asserted: But only to vindicate the just Prerogative of
our Kings, and Jurisdiction of the Temporal Lords and Commons in Parliament,
over the Persons, and superfluous large Temporal Manors, Lands and Possessions
of delinquent Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Priors, Deans, Chapters, Monks, and
other religious Persons, which are not of Divine or Apostolical, but mere
Humane institution, and not absolutely necessary to the being of the Church of
Christ, as true Evangelical Bishops and Ministers are, whose principle office
and duty is frequently to preach the Gospel, and administer the Sacraments; not
to domineer over their people, or suspend them from the Lords supper. Mat. 28.
19. 20. Mar. 16. 15. 1 Cor. 5. 7, 18, 21, c. 9. 14, to 19. 2 Timothy 4. 2, 5. Romans
10. 19, 20. 1 Pet. 5. 2, 3.

To this end, I shall desire our Archbps. Bps. and other Cathedralists to
consider 1. That Distinctio 80.
Gratian the Canonist, Sentent. l. 4. Did 14.
Peter Lombard the School-man, with most other Canonists and Scholmen in their
Glosses or Commentaries on their Texts; Antiq. Eccl. Brit. p. 7.
Matthew Parker Archbishop of Canterbury, Mr. Acts and Monuments, Land. 1641.
vol. 1. p. 138, 139.
John Fox, Description of England l. 2. c. 1, 2.
William Harrison, Chron. part 7. p. 83.
Richard Grafton, History of Great Britain, p. 132.
John Speed, and no less than thirty more of our ancient Historians and other
Authors, quoted by De Brit. Eccl. Primordiis, c. 5. p. 56, 57, 58, 59, 1^^, 101.
Archbishop Usher for this purpose, affirm, That the ancient Britains before
their conversion to Christianity had 28. Flamines, and 3. Archflamines in this
our Island, to whom the other Priests were subject, having distinct Cities,
Sees, Diocesses, and Temples wherein they resided and exercised their
Ecclesiastical Jurisdictions; that King Lucius upon his conversion to
Christianity, about the year of our Lord 175. by Pope Elutherius his direction,
took away their Sees, Lands and Temples from them, and placed 28. Bishops, and
3. Archbishops in their steads, turning their Sees into Archbishopricks and
Bishoprics, and their Temples into Cathedral Churches. Yea Gratian himself
Distinctio 21. and the Glossers on him resolve, That the distinction among
Priests, whence some are styled Priests simply, others Archpriests, others
Choral Bishops, others Bishops, others Archbishops or Metropolitans, others
Primates, others Chief Priests (...) a Gen^^b is maxim introducta est, etc
Gratian (...). 21.
WAS PRINCIPALLY INTRODVCED BY THE GENTILES (not the Apostles or Primitive
Christians) who called their Flamines, some simple Flamines, others
Arch-flamines, others Proto-flamines. If then these their Hierarchical orders
were originally derived from, and they succeeded the Pagan Flamines,
Arch-flamins, Proto-Flamins, in their Sees, Jurisdictions, Temporalties, and
Cathedrals, which King Lucius took from them without sacrilege or impiety;
then by the like reason and president our Kings or Temporal Lords and Commons
in Parliament may divest our peccant Prelates of their Sees, Temporalties,
Cathedrals, and convert them to other uses for the publik ease and benefit of
the Kingdom, when they see just cause, being originally dedicated to these
Flamines, Arch-flamines, Proto-flamines, and their Pagan Gods.

2ly. That admit these former Authors relations touching Flamines,
Arch-flamines, and King Lucius erecting Bishops and Archbishops in their Sees,
to be false and fabulous, as Defense of the Ap^l^g part 2. Ch 4. divis. 2.
Bishop Jewel, A discourse of the conversion of Britain. p. 26, 27. 28.
Bishop Godwin, De Brit. Eccl (...) p. 57, 58, 92, 92, 99, 100
Bishop Usher, Subve^si^n of Father Pa^s^ns ^. c^nversions.
Doctor Suteliffe, and 1 Con^il. T^m. 1. p 13, 14.
Sir Henry Spelman repute them; yet it is agreed by all, that the primitive
Evangelical Bishops from our Saviors time, had no Temporal Lands or
Possessions; till the year of our Lord 319. when the Emperor Constantine the
Great first endowed Bishops and Churchmen with them, as ^^^^es Hist^^. An. ^19
p. 33.
Matthew Westminster and others record, though his pretended Donation of Rome
and other Temporalties to Popes and their successions, as St. Peter's
Patrimony, be a mere forgery, as De donatione Constantin^.
Laurentius Vall^, His defense of Constantine.
Dr. Crakinthor^e, and others quoted by them prove at large. Now De utra ^ue
potestate, c. 21.
Iohannis Pa^^siensis, Peli^h^^^^n. l. 4. c. 26.
Higden, Dialog. l 4. ^. 15, 16, 17, 26.
Wickliffe, the Lord Fox Acts and Monuments, p. ^17, ^^.
Co^^am, Purvey, Answer to the Pre^^^^ of Mr. Moore p 116.
John Frith, Chron in vita Sylvest.
Nauclerus, Sermon in Hag. 1. ^. 1 ^ ^^sence of the (...) part ^ c. 9. divis 3.
Bishop Jewel, Reports of certain men, vol. 3. p 341.
Thomas Beacon, and others relate, That when Constantine endowed the bishops
and Church with Temporal Lands and Possessions, the voice of an Angel was heard
in the air, crying, Hodie venenum infunditur in Ecclesiam, This day is Poison
powered into the Church of God; and from that time (they observe) because of the
great Riches and Temporalties the Church and Bishops had, they were made the
more Secular, and had more worldly business, than Spiritual devotion; and more
outward Pomp and Splendour, than inward Holiness; the Daughter, riches which the
Church brought ^orth, devouring her Mother. Which if an experimental verity, as
sundry of our own and foreign Writers attest, (as I have The Antipathy of the
English Lordly Prela^y to Monarchy and Unity, chapter 8, and 9. A Breviate of the
Prelates intolerable Usurpations upon the Kings Prerogative Royal, and
Subjects Liberties, An. 1637.
elsewhere proved at large;) then it can be no Sacrilege or Impiety, but
wholesome physic, for the King and Temporal Lords and Commons in Parliament for
just causes, to take away this poison from Bishops, and Cathedral Churches,
which has so much poisoned, corrupted them; and to reduce them to the
condition of the Primitive Bishops, who by the Decrees of the Surius Council.
T^m. 1. p. 513. Gratian Distinct. 41. Vt Episcopus non long ab Ecclesia
Hospitiolum habeat. Vt Episcopus vilem supellactilem, and mensam, ac Victum
pauperem habeat, and dignitatis suae authoritatem, fide and vitae meritis
quaerat.
4th. Council of Carthage, c. 14: and the Exceptions of ^g^^rt Archbishop of
York, Anno 750. c. 26. were only to enjoy mean Household Stuff, course Food, and
HOSPITIOLVM, a little Cottage near the Church; not a Royal Palace or Lordly
Manors, which made them more Proud, Lordly, Secular Tyrannical, Pompous,
Covetous, than any Temporal Lords, and to take precedence of them both in great
Councils, Parliaments, and other public Assemblies, yea to intrude themselves
into the greatest Temporal Offices, to the great neglect of their Spiritual
Functions, they scorning to hold and follow the Plough of Christ, after they
became Lords and Barons of the Realm, Spel^^anni Council. T^m. 1. p 261.
(as Bishop Latymer proves at large in his 4th. Sermon of the Plough) and
forgetting these Canons of the 4th. Surius, T^m. 1. p. 525. Gratian cause 2. qu.
7. cause. 13 qu. 1.
Council of Carthage, c. 19, 20. Vt Episcopus pro rebus transitoriis non
litiget provocatus. Vt Episcopus nullam rei familiaris curam ad se revocet, sed
Lectioni et Orationi, et ver^i Dei praedicationi tantummodo vacet, as the
primitive Bishops did; which would gain our present Bishops more love, respect,
reverence with God, and all good men, than all their Lordly Pomp, Temporal
Lands or Baronies, which in all Ages have made Bishops and Cathedral-men more
Secular than Spiritual, more proud, luxurious, covetous, vicious, than
religious or virtuous, as Gregory Nazianzen, Oration 26. and 35. Isiodor
Pelusiota, Epist. l. 2. Epist. 125. and l. 3. Epist. 223. Gregorius Magnus,
lib. Pastoralis Curae, part 2. c. 6. Moralium in Job, l. 24. c. 29, 30. and
Homil. 17. in Evangelia, Gildas acris Correptio c'eri Britanniae, St. Bernard
Sermo. 22, 23, 77. Cantica. ad Clerum in Concilio Rhemensi, de Consideratione
ad Eugenium, l. 1, 2, 3, 4. Epist. 42. Henrico Senoniensium Archiepiscopo,
Johannis Sarisburiensis de Nugis Curialum, l. 8. c. 17, 23. Petrus Blesensis,
Archdeacon of Bath; Tractatus de constitutione Episcopi, Johanni Wigorniensi
Episcopo and Epistola 15, 18, 22, 25, 43, 64. Robertus Holcot in lib. 5.
Sapientiae Lect. 77. Alexander Frabricus Destructorium Vitiorum, pars 4. c. 8,
14, 21, 22. pars 5. c. 2. pars 6. c. 2. 26, 40. John Wickliff Dialogorum, l. 3.
c. 14, 17, 23. Alvarus Pelagius de plancotu Ecclesiae, l. 1. Artic. 70. D. l.
2. Artic. 1. to Artic. 17. Nicholaus de Clemangis, de Corrupto Ecclesiae statu,
c. 17, 18, 19. Episcopus Chemnensis; Onus Ecclesiae, cap. 14, to 27. Joannes
Aventinus Annal. Boyorum. l. 5, 6, 7, 8. Albertus magnus in Evangelium
Johannis, c. 10. Picus Mirandula, Oration ad Leonem, 10. Petrus de Aliaco, de
reformatione Ecclesiae, Abbas Uspergensis Paralip. p. 164. Fasciculus Rerum
expetendarum, p. 173. Ma^s^l. Patavinus Defensoris Pacis, part 2. c. 11.
Theodoricus a Niem. l. 3. c. 41, 45. and l. 2. and Nemore Unionis, c. 19
Guicciarden Historiae Ital. l. 6. St. Brigets Revelationes passim, Petrus de
Vinels, Epist. l. 1. c. 35. Illi^icus Catologus Testium Veritatis, Fox Acts and
Monuments vol. 1. p. 529. 530, 532.
Pierce Plowman his complaint of the Abuses of the World; Sir Geofry Chaucer in
his Ploughmans tale, Fox Acts and Monuments, ^^nd. 1610 p 46, 463.
Lucifer Prince of Darkness his Letters to the Prelates of England, written, as
is supposed by William Suinderby a Martyr, Dr. Barnes his Supplication; his
Articles, p. 210, to 216. and Mr. William Tyndal his obedience of a Christian
man, and Practice of Popish Prelates, John Bale, de Vitis Pontificum, Centuriae
Scriptorum Brit. and Image of both Churches on the Apocalypse; John Frith a
Martyr, in his Answer to Mr. M^res Preface; Roderick M^rs his Supplication to
King Henry the 8th. and Parliament, c. 23, 24. Another Supplication to King
Henry the 8th. printed 1544. The Image of a very Christian Bishop, and of a
counterfeit Bishop, printed Cum Privilegio Regali under King Henry the 8th.
William Wraghton his Hunting and Rescuing of the Rhomish Fox, dedicated to King
Henry the 8th. Henry S^albridge his Exhortatory Epistle to his True Countrymen
of England against the pompous Popish Bishop thereof, printed in H. the 8th.
his reign at Basil, Martin Bu^er Regins Professor of Divinity in Cambridge; D^
Regno Christi, dedicated to King Edward the 6th. l. 2. c. 1, 2, 12. and De vi
and usu sancti Ministerii; The Image of both Pastors, printed at London Cum
Privilegio 1550. Bishop Hooper on the 8th. Commandment, p. 78, 79. Bishop
Latymer his 4. Sermon of the Plough; Matthew Parker (or Iocelin) Antiquitates
Ecclesiae Brittannicae, p. 139, to 144. Thomas B^acon his Reports of certain
men, and in his Supplication, vol. 3. Bishop Jewel in his Sermon on Haggai 1.
p. 176. and on Matthew 9. p. 198. (All which the Studious may See my
Supplementum ad Flagellum Pontisic^, etc. And my Antipathy of the English
Lord^y P^^la^y, etc. ch 8. where most of their words are quoted at large
elsewhere peruse at leisure) and sundry others jointly attest. Upon which
consideration, not only Wickliff and Hus, but several of our Martyrs, as Fox
Acts and Monuments, vol. 1. p. 609, to 618, 622, 642, 653. 711, 514, to 522.
vol. 2. p. 609, 610.
William Suinderby, Walter Bruce, John Purvey, Sir John Oldcastle Lord Cobham;
Sir John Borthick, justified the lawfullness and necessity of taking away the
Bishops abused Temporalties which were such poison to them.

3ly. That many of our Kings by the Laws and Customs of the Realm, and by
virtue of their Royal Prerogative have kept our Archbishops and Bishops
Temporalties in their hands, and taken the profits of them as their Demesne
rents, keeping their Sees when void by death, translation or resignation for
sundry years together; as Cum vocave rit Arichiepiscopatus. Episcopatus, vel
Abbatia vel P^^natus in D^m. Regis, esse (...) m^nes ^^^^i^us, Scut Dominicos
^e^ditus ^uos Mat. Paris, p. 9^, 9^. (...). col. (...) 86. (...), An. 11^4
all the Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Priors, and Great-men of the Realm
acknowledged, and ratified by their Oaths in their famous Recognition in the
Great Council held at Clarendon, Anno Domini 1164. which these Presidents will
abundantly evidence. In the year of Grace 653. after the death of Honorius
Archbishop of Canterbury, that See continued void 18. months. Anno 669. after
Adeodatus his death it remained void almost 4. years, Anno 690. after Theodorus
his death it was kept void almost two years, and as long after T^twins decease,
Anno 734. After Cuthberts death Anno 758. it was vacant above one year. Anno 7.
2. two years after Bregwins death, Anno 790. three years after Lamberts death,
Anno 830. above one year after VVilfreds decease, Anno 958. almost three years
after Odo his expiration, Anno 1089. four years after Lanfrankes departure,
Anno 1109. five years after Anselmes death, Anno 1136. two years after William
Corbel, G^dwi^s Cata^^gue of Bish^ps, p. 52, 53, 55, 56,57,58, 59, 76, 81, 83.
84, 111, 112, 114, 119 See Malmesbury de Ges^^, P^tisi^^^, (...) Radu^s de
Di^eto, Chron. Johan. Brompt. Gerv. Dorobe^n. Actus Pontif. Cant. Huntindon,
Hoved. Antiq. Eccl. Brit. Mat. Westminster. Mat. Paris, Walsing. and others
accordingly.
Anno 1151. three years after Richard VVethershed, Anno 1242. two years after
St. Edmond, Anno 1270. as long after Boniface, Anno 1502. two years after Henry
Dean, An. 1558. one year after Cardinal Poole, Anno 648. After Paulinus the
first Archbishop of York, that See was kept vacant 20. (some say 30.) years,
Anno 1114. sundry years after Thomas the second, Anno 1140. almost two years
after Thurstan, Anno 1151. ten years after Rogers death, Anno 1213. four years
after Geoffry, Anno 1255. thirteen months after Walter Gray, Anno 1303. after
Thomas de Corbridge, above two years, Anno 1315. two years after William de
Greenfield, Anno 1240. two years after William de Melton, Anno 1405. two
yearrs and an half after Henry Scroop, an Arch-traytor beheaded for Treason,
Anno 1423. two years after Henry Bluet, Anno 1449. almost four years after John
Kemp, Godwin. p. 559, 587, 598, 599, 607, 608, 623. Tho. Stubs, Actus Pontif.
Ebor. S^^^. Dunelm, Radulph. de D^ceto, Malmesb. de Gest. Pontif. l. 3. Flor.
Wig^rn.
Anno 1464. two years after William Booth, almost a full year both after
Cardinal VVolsie, and Edward Lee, Anno 1559. after Nicholas Heath, two years,
1568. after Thomas Young, above one year. Thus long have both our
Archbishopricks been kept void, and their Temporalties held in our King, hands
to their own use, by virtue of their Prerogative Royal, without any Sacrilege,
Injustice, Impiety, or any real prejudice to Church or State. Godwin p. 1^3,
184. 189, 190, 191, 19^, 202, 224,21^, 220.230,24^. 245, 24^
An. 619. after M^llitus Bp. of London his translation to Canterbury, that See
continued void 32. years together, An. 664. 2 years, An. 1133.7. years after
Gilbert, Anno 1187. after Gilbert Foliot above two years, An. 1279. above one
year after John de Chishul, Anno 1303. almost two years after Richard de
Graneford, Anno 1^01. after Thomas Savage above two years. Anno 1171. after the
death of Henry de Bloyes, the Bishopric of Winchester was kept void above 3.
years, Anno 1238. after Peter de la Roch five years, Anno 1243. after William
de Rawley sixteen years, Eth^lmarus by the Kings donation holding it nine years
without consecration, Anno 1259. after Henry de VVengham six years, Anno 1493.
after Peter Coventry above one year, Anno 1500. after Thomas Langton two years,
Anno 1528. after Richard Fox two years, Anno 1530. after Cardinal VVoolsey
almost 4. years, Godwin p. 255, 256,261, 262, 264,265, 266,275,277, 279, 281.
Anno 1131. after the death of Hervetus first Bishop of Ily, that See was void
above two years, Anno 1169. after Nigellus the second Bishop five years, Anno
1197. after William Longchamp above one year, Anno 1214. after Eustachius
above five years, Anno 12. 6. after William de Rilkenny above one year, Anno
1297. after William de Luda two years, Anno 1373. after John Barnet two years,
Anno 1434. after Philip Morgan three years, Anno 1500. after John Alcock one
whole year, Anno 1533. as long after Nicholas West, Anno 1581. after Richard
Coxe almost twenty years together, Godwin, p. 294, 295, 297, 308, 3^9.
Anno 1163. after the death of Robert de Chisney the fourth Bishop of Lincoln,
that See continued vacant almost seventeen years, Geoffry ( Henry the second
his base son) taking the profits thereof without any consecration, by the Kings
Concession, Anno 1584. after Walter de Constantiis two years, Anno 1200. after
St. High almost three years, Anno 1206. after William de Breyos three years,
Anno 1^90. after John Russel two years, Anno 1513. after Will. Smith one year,
Godwin. p. 317 3^8, 319, 321, 322,343, 347, 348.
Anno 1085. the Bishopric of Coventry and Lichfield was kept vacant two years
after the death of Peter, and as long, An. 1127. after Robert Peach, as long,
An. 1180. after Guaccus P^^^n, as long, An. 1208. after G^^ffry de Muschamp,
An. 1238. almost 3. years after Alexander de Savenshy, An. 1243. after Hugh
Pat^shull 2. years, An. 1386. as long after Richard Scroop, An. 1490. as long
after John H^sse, Godwin. p. 33^, 338.344, 345, 355,356.
An. 1099. after Osmond his death, the second Bishop of Salisbury, that See was
8. years kept vacant, An. 1225. after Richard Poor ^. years, An 1270. 4. years
after Walter de la Veil, An. 1588. 3. years after John Pierce, 1596. 2. years
after John Co^^well, Godwin, p. 3^4, 3^5,368, 3^0, 383,385, 3^^.
An. 1166. the Bishopric of Bath and Wels upon the death of Robert continued
void 8. years, 8. months, and 15. days, An. 1242. after Ioceline, 2. years,
An. 1262. after William Burton, An. 1503. as long; after Oliver King, An.
1547. as long; after William Knight, An. ^3^^. 3. years; after Gilbert
Barkely, An. 1590. 2. years after Thomas Godwin, Godwin, p. 396, 398,420, 421,
429.
An. 1103. the Bishopric of Exeter after. O^bertus decease was kept vacant 4.
years, An. 1182. after Bartholmeus Iscanus, 2. years, An. 1119. after William
Herbert, the last Bishop of Thetford, his death, that See (now Norwich) was
kept vacant 2. years, 1214. after John de Gray it was kept vacant 7. years,
1222. after Pandulfus 3. years, An. 1236. after Rodulphus almost 3. years, and
as long after William de Raleigh, An. 1240. after Henry Spencer, An. 1406.
almost 2. years, Godwin, p. 439. 440,444, 445, 446, 449.
An. 1095. after the death of VVolstan Bishop of Worcester, that See was kept
vacant 2. years, An. 1113. as long after Sampson, An. 112^. almost as long
after Theulphus, and An. 1179. after Rog^^, An. 1184. after William de
Northale 5. years, An. 119^. after John de Constantiis two years, An. 1212. as
long after Maugere, An 1373. as long after William de Lyn, An. 1417. as long
after Thomas Pondrell, An. 1427. 7. years after Thomas Polton, An. 1590. 3.
years after Boniface Brent, Godwin, 453, 454, 455,456, 5^1.
An. 1056. the Bishopric of Hereford, after Leoneards death continued four
years vacant, An ^127. after Richard above 4. years, An 1167. after Robert de
Melim, above 6. years, An. 1539. after John Skip above 13. years, An. 1585.
after Herbert West full 17. years, An. 1526. the Bishopric of Chichester was
void almost 4. years; after John Reempale his death, An. 1006 after Richard
Fitz-Iames 2. years, An. 1235. the Bishopric of Godwin, 484, 485, 486,487,
488,452, 496, 501, 502.
Rochester after Henry de Sandfords death was kept vacant 3. years, An. 1277.
2. years after Walter de Merton, An. 1316. after Thomas de VValdham 3 years,
An. 1401. as long after John Baltisham, An. 1538. after John Fisher two years,
An. 1557. the new created Bishopric of Oxford, after the decease of John King
first Bishop there, was kept vacant ten years; An. 1568. after Henry Curwin the
second Bishop it was kept void twenty one years together, An. 1592. after John
Underhill the third Bishop, it continued void 11. years, so little want was
there of a Bishop in that poor See, An. 1559. the new created Bishopric of
Gloucester; after James Brooks the third Bishop his death was kept vacant three
years, An. 1578. as long after Edmond Cheyney, An. 1538. the new erected
Bishopric of Bristoll; after Paul Bresh the first Bishop was kept vacant four
years, An. 1578. three years after Richard Cheyney, which See continued void
otherwise than by Commendam thirty one years together, An. 1593. it continued
vacant ten years together. So little need was there of a Bishop in this See,
Godwin, p. 512, 514,530, 536,558,547, 549, 531.
An. 1397. the Bishopric of St. David's; after John Gilberts death, was vacant
four years, An. 1592. after Marmaduke Middleton almost two years. An. 1133. the
Bishopric of Landaffe upon Vrbans decease was kept void six years, An. 1183.
after Nicholas ap Georgant five years, An. 1240. after Elias de Raynor above
four years, An. 1287, after William de Brews nine years, An. 1213. the
Bishopric of Bangor after Robert of Shrewstury was kept vacant two years, An.
1374. as long after John Gilbert, An. 1378. after John Swassham twenty years,
An. 1266. after Amanus the first Bishop of Rangor, that See was vacant two
years, An. 1313. after Lew^lin six years, An. 1406, after John Trevour five
years, An. 1439. after Robert five years, Ma West An. 1020. p. 403. Godw. p
931, 643, 647,65^, 652, 663,656, ^^^, 671,^85, ^^^.
An. 1017. after Aldbanus of Durham, that See continued void above three years,
An. 1096. as long after William Carlapho, An. 1140. after Geoffry Rusus above
five years, An. 1207. after Philip of Poytiers above ten years, An. 1226. above
two years, the King threatening the Covent that they should have no Bishop in
seven years, An. 1237. after Richard P^ore two years, till Ethelmate his half
Brother (whom he commended to the Monks election) should be of age, An 1505.
after William Severus two years, An. 1587. after Richard Barnes almost two
years, An. 1577. the Bishopric of Chester was kept vacant two years.

If then all our Bishoprics in several ages (to omit the long vacancies of
later times) have been thus kept void, 2,3,4,5, 6,7,8,10,15,20, and 30. years
or more together at diverse times (to omit all annual vacancies) without any
prejudice to the Church or State, and with very great benefit to the Kings of
England, who enjoyed the Temporalties in the mean time; then certainly
Diocaesan Bishops are no such necessary Creatures of divine institution in the
Church of Christ as some esteem them, but that they may be spared, and their
Lands, Temporalties sold or leased, as well as thus seized by our Kings without
Sacrilege or Injustice, when as no Parish Churches can spare or want their
Parochial Ministers who are of Gods institution, above six months at most.
Rastal Advows^n 1, 2, Council. 5. Late ranense, 2 Can. 29. Summa Angelica
Benefictum. sect. 31. Summa Resella Beneficiam, 1.
After which if the Patron present not in the interim an able and sufficient
Clerk the Ordinary by the Canon and Common Law may collate, and sequester the
profits in the mean time, only to defray the officiating of the Cure, which
must be at no time intermitted or neglected because of Divine institution, and
so absolutely necessary both for the Peoples instruction and salvation, which
these long vacancies prove Diocaesan Bishops are not.

4ly. That as our Bishops, Abbots, Priors, Ingulphi Hist. p. 896, 908, Eadmerus
Hict l. 2, 3, 4. Malmesbury, De Gestis Pontificum, c. 1. Antiqu. Eccles and
Godwin in Auseb, Spelman Glossari^m, Tit Fidelitas, Homagia Ligeum and
Investitura; and the first part of my Brief Register and Survey of
Parli^mentary writs, p. 195, to 207. where it is largely proved. Chron.
Iohannis Brompton, p. 1038, 1039. Co^ks 1. Instit. p. 64,65.
did originally for some hundreds of years receive their actual Investitures
into their Churches Temporalties from the King alone, per Annulum and Baculum,
by a Ring and Pastoral staff; delivered to them in nature of a Livery and
seilin, extorted from our Kings by the violence and tyranny of Pope Urban and
Pascal the 2. and Treason of Archbishop Anselme, against the Right of the
Crown, and Custom of the Realm; so they did likewise hold all their Baronies
and Temporalties from, swear Fealty, and do Liege Homage to our Kings for the
same as their Supreme Liege Lords, like other Barons, and were as far forth
responsible for them to the Kings Justices and Ministers, as Lay-Barons and
Tenants were; which they all acknowledged in their Recognition to King Henry
the second, in the Council of Clarindon as our Mat. Paris, p. 96, 97.
Histories assure us; and were liable to forfeit them for their Treasons,
Rebellions, Disloyalties and Contempts against the King and his Crown, as well
as Laymen, our Kings being alike Sovereign Lords and Kings to them, as well as
other Subjects and Tenauts; and that Iure Domini, as their Supreme Landlords
and Patrons, from, by and under whom alone they held their Temporalties.

5ly. That the Kings of England as Supreme Heads and Governors under Christ of
the Church of England, have in all ages enjoyed and exercised a Sovereign Power
and Jurisdiction over all Archbishops, Bishops, Deans, Chapters, Abbots,
Priors, and other Ecclesiastical Persons in all Causes whatsoever; as well as
over their Temporal Subjects, to visit, reform, order, correct, restrain,
amend, punish all their Errors, Heresies, Offenses, Contempts, Enormities,
Treasons, Rebellions against their Persons, Crowns, Dignities, and Royal
Authority punishable by any Spiritual, Ecclesiastical or Temporal Authority or
Jurisdiction, and to punish their Persons by imprisonments, banishments, death,
scisure, sequestration, confiscation of their Temporalties, Bishoppricks, real
and personal Goods and Estates, as is enacted by the several See Rastals
Abridgement, Title, Provision and Praemunire, and Rome.
Statutes against Provisors, and the express Statutes of 25 H. 8. c. 19, 21. 26
H. 8. c. 1, 3. 27 H. 8. c. 10. 28 H. 6. c. 7. 10. 31 H. 8. c. 14. 32 H. 8. c.
22, 24, 26. 33 H. 8. c. 29. 34, and 35 H. 8. c. 17, 19. 37 H. 8. c. 17. 1 Ed.
6. c. 2. 1 Eliz. c. 1. 5 Eliz. c. 1. 8 Eliz. c. 1. 13 Eliz. c. 12. and other
Acts; The several Writs De Excommunicato capiendo, De Excommunicato
deliberando, De Cautions admittenda, Register of w^its, pars 2. p. 20, to 70.
Fitz. Not. Brev. and in the Clause ^^lls.
Quare impedit, Quare incumbravit, Quare non admisit, Quod Episcopus admittat,
Ne admittas, Ne exeas Reguum, Vi Iacca removenda; and especially by the several
Writs of Prohibition, and ad Iura Regia, and Capias pro contemptu, wherewith
our Records and Law Books are full fraught; I shall only recite some memorable
Presidents of our Kings and Parliaments proceedings against our Archbps. and
Bishops in seizing their temporalties, confiscating their Estates, banishing
them the Realm, suspending from, and depriving them of their Bishoprics, yea
in imprisoning, executing their Persons for their rebellions Treasons,
Conspiracies, Contempts against them, and their Royal Prerogatives in former
ages, worthy their and our most serious consideration, and remembrance.

To begin with our Archbishops, about the year of Christ, 765. Will.
Malmesburiensis de Gestis Pontif, l. 1. c. 4. Mat. Westminster. An 765, 766, 767,797.
Evidentiae Ecclesiae Cantuar. col. 1212, 1213, 1214. Spelmanni Council. Tom. 1.
p. 318, to 334. Antiq. Eccles. Brit. p. 26, 27, 28. Godwin in the life of
Iambert Chron. Will. Thom, col. 1774.
Offa King of Mercians being highly offended with Iambertus (or Lambert as some
style him) Archbishop of Canterbury for his oppositions against him, seized and
took away all his Temporalties within his Kingdom, detaining some of them to
himself, and giving the rest of them to his Soldiers and Courtiers; and
moreover by the Popes consent, erected a new Archbishopric at Litckfield, took
away six Bishoprics formerly subject to the Sea of Canterbury, and detained
the Lands above thirty years, till at last restored by the judgment of two or
three Parliamentary Great Councils, after many Petitions and Complaints, upon
full hearing and examination. Eadmerus Hist. Novor l. 1. 2. Malmesbur. de
Gestis Regum. l. 4. De Gestis Pontif. l. 1. p. 204, 205. Chron. Johan Brompton,
col. 962, 968. Gervasius Dorob. Actus Pontif. Cant. col. 1652, 16^5. Radulsus
de Diceto Abbreviationes Chron. col. 412,490. Henr. de Knighton de Event.
Angliae. l. 2. c. 2. Polychronicon. l. 7. Mat Paris, p. 13, 14. Mat. Westminster. An.
1070, 1083, 1089. Hoviden, Annal. pars prior, p. 453. Antiq Eccles. Brit. and
Godwin in Stigand and Lenfrane, Holinsh, Speed, Grafton, Daniel. An. 1070.
Stigand Archbishop of Canterbury, for refusing to Crown King William the
Conqueror, and holding the Bishopric of Winchester in Commendam with his
Archbishopric, together with many other Bishops and Abbots was deprived by the
Kings procurement, and kept Prisoner at Winchester during his life, receiving
only a small allowance out of the Exchequer to support him; dying in Prison;
his Bishopric remained void two years space in the Kings hands, no less than
twenty five Manors being taken away from it, till recovered by ^ ansraue his
Successor, in a famous Council of the Noble: and Elders of England held at
Penindene. Eadmerus Hist. N^v. l. 2, 3,^, 5. and vita Anse^m. Ma^n^e^^^^. De
Gestis Pontif l. 1. p. 210. to 230 Mat Westminster. and Hoveden An 1102, 1104, 110^.
Mat Paris, p. 56. 57, 6^. Radulphus de Di^e^o. Abbrev. Chron fol. 4^4,495, 496.
Chron. Iohannis Brompton. col. 999. Gorvasius Dorobem Actus Pomsle. Cont. col.
1658 1659. Antiqu Ecclesiae B^it. and Godwin in Anselm. Mr Tyndals practice of
Popish ^elates, p. 374 Holinshed. vol. 2. p 21, to 36. 469, 472, Speed p 462,
to 473. F^x Acts and Monuments, p. 169, 170.
King William Rufus banished Anselme Archbishop of Canterbury out of the Realm
for Treason, against him and his Sovereign Power, and seized his Temporalties
till his death; after which King Henry the first recalling him, he most
traitorously and obstinately oppugned the Kings Prerogative of investing
Bishops in their Bishoprics by a Ring and Pastoral-slast, and refusing to do
homage to the King, or to consecrate any Bishops who received Investitures from
him, or did Homage to him; for which he was banished for three years out of the
Realm, all his Temporalties and Goods moveable and immovable seized into the
Kings hands, with the Temporalties and Goods of those Bishops who renounced
their Investistures by the Kings donation by Anselmes persuasion. King Stephen
seized all the Goods and Temporalties of Neu^rigensis, l. 1. c. 10. Radolfios
de Diceto Abbrev. Chron. col 509. Gervisius Darobernensis, col. 1330. 1363,
1371, 1666. Antiqu Eccles Brit l. 117, 118. Holinshed, vol. 3 pl 57, 59.
Godwins Gatalogus p. 85, 86. Speeds History, p. 496, 497.
Theobuld Archbishop of Canterbury, and banished him the Realm, for departing
out of England to Rome upon the Popes summons, contrary to his express royal
Prohibition; and for interdicting the King and whole Realm. After which being
restored to his Archbishopric by the other Bishops mediation, his Goods and
Temporalties were again consiscated and seized into the Kings hands, Anno 1152.
for refusing to Crown Eustace King Stephens Son, and he forced to fly the
Realm, which he caused to be infested with fire, sword, and bloody wars. Mat
Westminster. An. 1186 p. ^^ 49 59. Mat. Paris. p 94. to 117 (...) Annal p^^^ p^s^^^
p. ^91. to ^3^. Chron ^e^^^asii ^spa^ ^^^3, to 13^9 Radul^hus de D^^to,
Ymogines Hist col. 53^. 543, 54^, 547. Her^betus and I^han^es ^arn^^ensi^ in
^i^a ej^^, Gu^. Neubr^ge^sis, Hist l. 2. c. 16. Anti^u. Eccles. B^^t. p. 118,
to 1^^ Ho^inshed, p. 69, to 81. (...). p. 80, to 96. F^x Acts and Monuments, p.
186. to 200. Speech H^st^ry p. 503 to 516.
Thomas B^cket Archbishop of Canterbury, an infamous perjured Traitor to, and
Rebel against King Henry the second his (advancer and indulgent Sovereign)
grand Oppugner of his Royal Prerogatives, and of the Customs of the Realm,
contrary to the Oath and Recognition of himself and all the Bishops, Clergy,
and Temporal Lords, in the famous Great Council of Clarindon, endeavoring
totally to exempt the Clergy from all Temporal power, jurisdiction, and
judicature, for the most detestable Crimes and Murders, had all his Goods and
Movables by judgment of the Bishops and Peers condemned and confiscated to the
King, his Temporalties seized into the hands, all his Moneys, Jewels, Plate,
confiscated together with all the Clergymen; goods who adhered to him; Mat.
Paris, p 264 An^i^u. Eccles. Br^t p 144. Holinshed, p. 1^9 Speed. p. 565.
all his Kindred, Man, Woman, and Child secured, and afterward banished the
Realm, together with himself, for sundry years; and was at last slain in the
Cathedral Church at Canterbury, for his manifold Treasons and Rebellions
against the King, to the great disturbauce both of the Churches and Kingdoms
peace. Mat. Paris Histor. p 26^. An^i^u Eccles. Brit p. 1^4. H^linshed p. 169.
Sp^ed p. 565.
King John An. 1205. seized upon all Archbp. Huberts Lands and Possessions after
his death, for his manifold Contempts and Oppositions against his Royal
authority and resolutions during his life. Mat. Pa^is. p. 213, to 278. Mat.
Westminster. An. 1207, to 1214. Mr. Tyndals practice of Popish Prelates p. 374, 375.
Dr. Ba^ns his Supplication to King Henry 8. p. 189. Fox Acts and Monuments, p.
226, to 234. Antiqu Eccles Brit and Godwin in Stephen Langhton, Polychron^^^n,
Fabian, Holinshed, Grafien, Speed in Hen. 3.
Stephen Langhton his next Successor in the Archiepiscopal See of Canterbury,
for his manifold Treasons and Rebellions against King John, had all his
Temporalties and Goods seized by the King, and was suspended from his
Archbishopric, and threatened to be deprived of it by the Pope. Mat Paris, Mat.
Westminster. Holinshed in H. 3. Antiqu Ecclesiae Brit p. 191. G^dwin p. 114, to 119.
Archbishop Boniface being commanded by King Henry the third to relinquish his
Archbishopric, and depart the Realm, by reason of the grievous Complaints both
of the Clergy and Commonalty against him, thereupon selled his Woods, leased
out his Lands, extorted what moneys he could from his Tenants, and carried all
with him in to Savoy, where he dyed. Mat. Westminster. An. 1294. 1295, 1296, 13^0,
1^^^ 1305, 1036. Wa^singham Hist. Angl. p 34, 35,40,63 Antiqu. Eccles. Brit p.
209, to 213. Holinshed, p. 301, 302, 313. Godwin p. 125, 126, 127. Fox Acts and
Monuments. p. 320, 321, 337. Bishop Jewels defense of the Apol^gy part 6. c 2.
p. 521, 522. Cromptons Jurisdiction of Courts, ^. 19,
King Edward the first, Anno 1301. put Robert Winchelsie Archbishop of
Canterbury, with all the other Bishops and Clergy out of his Protection, and
the Parliament House, and seized the Archbishops Temporalties, Goods, Debts.
After which diverse High Treasons, and Rebellious Conspiracies were laid to his
Charge by the King; who thereupon the second time seized all his Temporalties
and Goods moveable and immovable, appealed him to the Pope, banished him the
Realm, forbidding any of his Subjects under grievous penalties to harbor him;
and seized all the Lands of the Monks of Canterbury, and banished them the
Realm, for furnishing this Arch-traytor secretly with necessaries. Walsingham
Hist. Angl p. 136, to 147. Antiqu. Eccles. Brit. p. 236, to 258. Fox Acts and
Monuments, p. 349, 350, 409. Godwin, 13^, to ^^7. Speed, p. 699. Holinshed, p.
161.
King Edward the second caused all the Goods of John Stratford Archbishop of
Canterbury to be seized, and his Temporalties to be sequestered into his hands,
whiles Bishop of Winchester for taking that Bishopric by Provision from the
Pope, against his Royal command. After which being advanced to Canterbury by
King Edward the third, he was soon after accused of Treason, Treachery and
Conspiracy with the French and Pope against the King, whose designs against
them he crossed all he could; whereupon the King resolved to commit him
Prisoner to the Tower of London, whither he sent the Bishop of Chichesier, then
Lord Chancellor, and the Bishop of Lichfi^ld then L. Treasurer Prisoners for
the like offenses. Whereupon this Archbp. flying to Canterbury, and there
standing on his Guard, refused to render himself, carrying himself very
insolently and rebelliously against the King both in his Sermons and
Excommunication; saying, That he had received no honor nor advancement from the
King, but ONLY FROM GOD, and that he would give an account of his Actions in
no. Court, and to no Person but in Parliament; Whereupon a Parliament was
summoned, and diverse heinous Crimes charged against him by the King; which the
King after great suit and entreaty pardoned. Walsingham Hist. Angl. p 161
Yp^digma Neustri^, p. 132. Antiqu. Eccles Brit. p. 275, to 282 and Godwin in
his lif^.
Simon Langham Archbishop of Canterbury, Chancellor of England, Anno 1371. was
put from his Office, his Temporalties seized, and stripped of all his
Archiepiscopal ensigns, for receiving from Pope Urban the Cardinalship of St.
Sixtus without King Edward the third his privity, who was highly offended with
him for it. Anno 1386. Walsingham p 261.262.263. Ypodigma, p. 139. Antiqu.
Eccles Brit p. 283, to 295. Godwin, p. 102, 203 Graftons Chron. p 336.
Simon Sudbury Archbishop of Canterbury in the insurrection of Jack Straw was
beheaded on Tower Hill, his Head fixed on a Poll and set on London Bridge, as a
Traitor and Enemy to the King and People. Antiq Eccles. Brit p 196, to 300.
Holinshed, p. 475,476.
King Rich. the 2d. highly offended with Will. Courtney Archbishop of
Canterbury, for receiving his Archbishopric by provision from the Pope,
against the Law and his Prerogative Royal, and for other Misdemeanors,
commanded all his Goods and Temporalties to be seized, and forced the
Archbishop himself to hide his Head for fear of imprisonment, till he made his
peace with him. Rot. Parl. An. 21 R. 2. n. 15. 10 17. Exact abridgement of the
Record in the Tower, p. 368. 1 H 4. Re^ ^a^l. n. 33, 48. Wa^singham Hist p.
397, 403. Polychion. i. ult. c. 8. Holinshed, p 488, to 514. Antiq. Eccles.
Brit p. 303. to 311. Godwin, p 152, etc. Fox Acts and Monuments. p ^33. etc.
Graf^^n, p. 390,391. Trussel. An 21 R 2.
Thomas Arundel Archbishop of Canterbury was impeached and condemned of High
Treason against the King in the Parliament of 21 Rich. 2. by judgment of
Parliament; for which he was ordered to be banished the Realm, his Temporalties
seized, his Lands and Goods forfeited. Holinshed p. 1091. 1093. Cromptons
Jurisdiction of Courts, fol. 12, Fox, vol. 3. Antiqu Eccles. Brit. and Godwin
in his life
Thomas Cranmer Archbishop of Canterbury, was committed Prisoner and impeached,
convicted of High Treason against Queen Mary, for aiding the Usurper Queen Jane
against her, and his Goods and Temporalties seized. Continuation of Holinshed,
p. 1322, to 1329. Martins Chronicl. p. 654, 655.
Edmond Grindon Archbishop of Canterbury falling into Queen Elizabeth's
displeasure, was suspended from his Archiepiscopacy by her order till his
death. See Sandersons History of King Charles the first, and Sir George Paul in
his life.
Archbishop Abbot for killing his Keeper by Chance-medly in shooting at a Back,
was suspended from his Archiepiscopal Jurisdiction by King Charles the first
for sundry years, and his Archiepiscopal Jurisdiction, power delegated to
others. And See my Canterburies Do^m, the Parliaments Iournals, and A
Collection of Ordinances.
Will. Laud the last Archbishop of that See, in the Parliament of 16 Caroli,
was impeached of sundry High Treasons and high Misdemeanors against the King
and Kingdom, by the Commons of England, and Scots Commissioners; for which he
was upon full Trial and Hearing, imprisoned, atttainted, condemned and beheaded
on Tower Hill, his Goods and Temporalties sequestered, seized, sold by Judgment
and Ordinances of both Houses of Parliament.

To these numerous Presidents of the Archbishops of Canterbury, I shall annex
some parallel ones of the Archbishops of York.

Will. Malm. de Gestis Pontif. l. 3 p. 260, to 166 Mat. Westminster. An 871.
Florentius Wigorniensis. An. 677, 691. Thomas Stubs. Actus Pontif Eboracens^um,
col. 1691, 1741. Simeon Dune^m. Hist c 9 and Epistola de Archiepiscopis Ebor.
col. 78. Richardus Hagustaldensis Hist. c. 8. col. 294. Rodolfus de Diceto,
Abbrev. Chronicorum, col. 440. Chron. Iohannis Brompton, col. 792. Antiqu
Eccles. Brit. p 4, to 19,74. Holinshed History of Britain l. 5. c. 34,35,36 l.
2. c. 2. G^dw. Catalogue of Bishops, p. 560, 561, 562. Hen. Spelmanni Council.
p. 146, 14^, 149, 157, 161, 162, 163, 178, 179, 200, to 206.
VVilfred Archbishop of York for his Treason in favoring and aiding the
rebellious Danes, and persuading Queen Ermenburga to desert her Husband the
King, was by King Egfreds prosecution twice condemned and deprived of his
Archbishopric in two several Councils, his Temporalties and Goods seized, his
Person imprisoned, his Archbishopric divided into two or three more
Bishoprics, and himself exiled, some write for ten, others for eight years
together, till at last with much importunity and many Letters from the Pope and
others, he was restored to his See. Malmesh de Gestis Pontif. l 3 p. 260. Mat.
Westminster. Grafton, Roger Hoveden, and Florentius Wigoruien. sis, An. 951, 952,953
Thomas Stubs, col 1699. Holinshed Hist. of England, l 6. c. 23. p. 158. Godwins
catalogue, p. 567.
Wolstan Archbp. of York, for his hamous Treason in deserting his natural
Christian King Edgar, against his Oath, Allegiance, Piety, Function,
Christianity, and adhering to the invading heathen Danes, who wasted the
Country, and endeavored to rout out the Christian Religion; and for murdering
diverse Citizens of Hertford, was deprived of his Bishopric, and imprisoned by
the King for a year; and at last murdered himself.

Eadmerus Hist Novor. l. 5. and 6. Malmesbury de Gestis Pontif. l. 3. p. 274.
275. Polych^onicon, l 6. c. 1^ Simeon Dunelmersis H^st. col. 141 Chronicon
Johannis Brompton col. 1008. Gervasius Dorob. Actus Pontif. Cantuar. col. 1661.
Thomas Stubs, Actus Pontif. Eboracensum, col. 1716. Antiqu Eccles B^i^. p 112,
113. Godw. Cat p 5^9, 580. Holinshed, p 41, 42, 49.
Turstan Archbishop of York for receiving his consecration from the Pope at the
Council of Rhemes, against King Henry the first his express command, and his
own Oath and Faith to the King, was banished the Realm, his Temporalties seized
by the King for five years space, and he hardly permitted to return into
England, after many mediations and menaces of the Pope in his behalf. Gul.
Neubrigensis Hist. l. 4. c. 17. Mat Paris p 146, 147, 212, 212. Mat. Westminster.
Anno 1207. Chronicon Johannis Brompton. col. 1166, 1169,1171. Thomas Stubs,
Actus Pontif. Ebor. col. 1724. Hoveden in Ricardo ^. and Johan. Holinshed. p.
143, 147.163, 170. Godw p 587, 588.
Geoffry Plantaginet Archbishop of York for breaking his Oath with King Richard
the first, was kept from his Temporalties, and imprisoned by William Longchamp.
After this, Anno 1194. upon several complaints against him in Parliament, for
hindering the Kings Officers to gather a Tax in his Diocese, and sundry
contempts against King John, his Lands and Goods were seized, and returned into
the Kings Exchequer by the Sherift of Yorkshire by the Kings command; for
which he excommuniting the Sheriff, was suspended his Bishopric, and forced to
pay a Fine of 1000 l. for his restitution. After which, for excommunicating
those who collected a Tax for the King, he was banished the Realm, and his
Temporalties seized for above five years time; the Sea being kept void above
ten years space in the Kings hand, when he was first made Archbishop. Thomas
Stubs, Actus Pontif. Ebor. col. 172^. Godwins Catalogue, p. 597, 598.
Thomas Corbrig Archbishop of York for obeying and preferring the Popes
commands before the Kings, in admitting the Popes Clerk to the Chapel of St.
Sepulchers in York, and rejecting the Kings, about the year 1300. had for this
his contempt three Baronies, anciently belonging and annexed to his
Archbishopric, taken away and kept from him by King Edward the first, during
the Archbishops life, without restitution. Walsingham Hist. Angl. p. 354, 368
Grafton, p, 458, 460,463,464. Speed p. 748, 749. Trussel. Godwins Cat. p.
601,602. l 1 R. 2. c. 1. 6, 7.
Alexander Nevil Archbishop of York was attainted of High Treason in the
Parliament of XI. King Richard the second, his Temporalties and Estate seized,
and his Person adjudged to perpetual imprisonment in Rochester Castle; who
flying the Realm, Pope Urban made him Archbishop of St. Andrews in Scotland;
but the Scots refusing to own his Papal Authority, he was stripped of both
Archbishopricks, and forced to live a poor Parish Priest in Lovain till his
death. Walsingham Hist. Angl. p. 416, 417. Ypodigma Neust, p. 168,170.
Polychronicon, l. 8. c. 10. f. 326. Caxton. part 7. 430. Fabian, an. 611. 4.
Halls Chronicle, part 1 f. 25. Holinshed, p. 522, 529, 530. Speed Hist. l. 9.
c. 14. p. 775. Stow, Martin, Grafton, Baker, in 6 H. 4. Godw. p. 604,605,606.
Richard Scroop Archbishop of York was condemned and beheaded for High Treason
against King Henry the fourth, and all his Temporalties, Moneys, Goods seized
and consiscated to the King An. 1405. Halls Chronicle, Anno 8, and 12 E 4. f.
201,202,22^, 224 Holinshed, p. 683,690. Grafton, f. 678,714. Speed, l. 9. c. 17
p 887. Godw. p. 609, 610, 611.
George Nevil Archbp. of York (Brother to Henry Nevil the Great Earl of
Warwick) a perfideous Traitor both to King Edward the 6th. and Edward the 4th.
in the year 1472. was arrested of High Treason at Windsor by King Edward the
4th. all his Plate, Money, and other movable Goods (to the value of 20000 l.)
seized for the King, together with a Miter of inestimable value, by reason of
the many rich stones adorning it, which the King broke and made a Crown thereof
for himself; the profits and temporalties of hi-Bishoprick were taken into the
Kings hands for above 4. years space, and himself long imprisoned at Calis and
Guisnes for his Treason against the King. Mr. Tyndals practice of Pop^sh
Prelates, p 369, to 376 Halls Chronicle. 21 H 8. ^. 18^, 185. 1^0, 190. Antiqu.
Eccles Brit. 355, to 37^. Fox Acts and Monuments. p. 899. to 909. Holinshed, p.
835, to 930. Hall, Grafton, St^w, Martin Baker, and others in 21, and 22 H 8.
Godwin, p 620. to 623 See the Articles against him in Cooks 4. Institutes, c^ 8
p. 89, to 98.
Cardinal Thomas Wolsie Archbishop of York (a most insolent, proud, ambitious,
covetous Prelate) for his manifold misdemeanors, Oppressions, and high crimes
against the King, kingdom, people, and Kings royal Prerogative, was first
attainted in a Praemunire An. 21 H. 8. whereupon the K. seized all his Goods,
and took away the Great Seal from him. After which the Lords and Parliament
exhibited sundry Articles of High Treason and other Misdemenours against him.
Upon which by the Kings command he was arrested at Cawood of High Treason by
the Earl of Northumberland in November 1536. his Plate, Goods and Temporalties
seized, himself carried Prisoner toward London, with intent to bring him to the
Tower, to be further proceeded against; to a void which infamy, he poisoned
himself with a strong Purgation, whereof he died at Leycester Abbey, after which
the King seized all his Lands and Manors, though a Cardinal and Archbishop.

To these Presidents of the Archbishops of Canterbury and York, I shall annex
the like of some other inferior Bishops. Mat. Westminster An. 1108 p. 86, etc. Mat.
Paris p. 217.218, 214. Polychron l 7. c. 33 Fabian, pars 1. An. 1205. p 18.
Holinshed, p. 171, 172 Martins Chronicle, p. 40 47, 48. Godwin, p. 194. Henry
de Knyghton, De Event. Ang. l. 2. c. 14.
William de sancta Maria Bishop of London, for interdicting the whole Realm,
and excommunicating King John, together with Edward Bishop of Ely, and Maugerus
Bishop of Worcester, who concurred with him in this interdict and
excommunication to gratify the Pope, had all their Goods and Temporalties
seized upon by the King, Anno 1201. their Castles demolished, and themselves
banished the Realm for five years space. Mat Paris, p. 186,^8^,944, 957.
Godwin, 194, 125.
Fulco Basset Bishop of London, a great Stickler for the Pope against King
Henry the third, whom he often affronted; ^^^^essed the King and Pope might take
away his Bishopric, his Miter, and Crosier, but not his Helmet and Sword,
wherein he most gloried and consided. Mat. Westminster. An. 1259, 1165, 1296. p.
182,330, to 314. Mat. Paris, p. 961, 970. Godwin, p. 196. Holinshed, p. 171.
Speed, p. 641.
Henry Sandwich Bishop of London, against his corporal Oath of Fealty and
Homage to King Henry the third, was a prime Stickler in the Barons wars against
this King, and Promoter of the Articles of Oxford in the forty second year of
his Reign, which took away his just Regal Power and Government of the Realm,
and delegated it to twelve Commissioners; which Articles all the Bishops
consented unto and sealed with their Seals, and this Bishop amongst the rest;
for which in a Council held at Westminster he was suspended both from his
Episcopal Office and Bishopric, which were sequestered into the Kings hands.
Fox Acts and Monuments, 1641. vol. 2 p 215,378.379, 380, 350,554.672, to 699.
vol. 3. p. 105,106, 107,251, to 284,759,8^9,878,974 Martins Hist p 453
Holinshed, p. 1259, 1260 Godwin, p. 144.
Edmond Bonner Bishop of London, a grand Persecuter and Burner of Gods true
Saints, yea a bitter Enemy to King Edw. the 6th. and Queen Elizabeth, was twice
deprived of his Bishopric for his Contempts and Misdemeanors, once in King
Edward the 6th. his Reign, and again in the first year of Queen Elizabeth, for
refusing the Oath of Supremacy and Allegiance, and murdering so many
Protestants under Queen Mary; and by Authority of the Queen and Parliament
committed Prisoner to the Marshalsee among Rogues, where he died amongst Rogues
and Murderers, and was buried at midnight in obscurity. Mat Westminster, An 666, p.
234. G^dw p. 13 ^^^^
Wina Bishop of Winchester, so highly offended Kenewalchus King of the West
Saxons who advanced him, that in the year 666. he drove him out of his Country,
and deprived him of his Bishopric. About the year of Christ 1107. Mat. Westminster.
An 110^, 1107. ^. 1^^ ^^2, Godw p. 1^^,170. Hol^n^h^d, p. 3.
King Henry the first was so far incensed against William Gifford, whom he had
formerly invested in the Bishopric of Winchester by the delivery of a Ring and
Crosier, for renouncing th^^ (...) Investiture, and refusing his Consecration
out of fear to displease Archbishop Anselm, that he seized his Temporalties,
and banished him the Realm. Will. Malmesb. Nov l. 1, and 2. p. 178, to 194
Roger H^veden Annal. paris p^ie^. p. 48^. 482 Mat. Paris. p. 71. to 76. Mat.
Westminster An. 1^5, to 1150. Gul. Neub^^g Hist. l. 1 c. 9, to 11. H^linshe^^^ 54.
Godw. p. 92 to 22^. 223 Speed, p. 483, 484, 493, 494. Fox Acts and Monuments.
p. ^81.
Henry de Bloys Bishop of Winchester, against his Oath of Fealty and
Allegiance to Q^. Maud, dis-inherited her of the Crown, and set up K. Stephen
in her stead; who not long after falling out with this Bishop, seized all his
Castles; whereupon he revolted to Maude, and procured a Pall from the Pope, to
be made Archbishop of Winchester, and to have seven Bishoprics annexed to his
Province. Mat. Westminster. An. 1243, 1244, p. 1^4, 175,178,179. Mat. Paris p.
788,^89.616, 619. Holinshed, 231, ^32. Godw. p. 227, 228.
William Raley Bishop of Winchester for excommunicating the Mayor, Citizens,
and Monks of Winchester for obeying King Henry the third his Edict, not to
give him or his any victuals or lodging, and interdicting the Cathedral there,
was forced to fly the Realm, and relinquish his Bishopric, till by Archbishop
Bonifaces, and the Popes mediations (which cost him a gratuity of 6000 l.) he
made his peace with the King. Mat. Paris, p. 774,775 780, 788, 789, 794, 824,
830, to 834, 847, 890,900,904,90^, 946,9^9. Additamenta p. 215. 219. Mat.
Westminster. Holinshed, Daniel, Speed, Craften in H. 3. Godwin p. 176.177.
Ethelmar Bishop of Winchester, caused the Barons assembled in a Parliamentary
Council at Oxford to take up Arms against him for his intolerable
Insolences, Tyrannies, Exorbitancies, Oppressions, and to drive him out of the
Realm; who seizing on all his Goods and Treasure they could meet with, writ
Letters and sent Agents to Rome to stop his return into England, which neither
the King, Lords, nor Commons would permit upon any Letters or solicitations
from the Pope on his behalf to King Henry the third, and the Lords. Mat Westminster.
An. 1265. 1266. Mat. Paris p. 951.970 972. Godw p 177. Holinsh^d 271.
John Gernsey Bishop of Winchester was excommunicated by the Popes Legate, his
Temporalties seized, and he forced to fly to Rome for an absolution, for taking
part with the Barons against King Henry the third, subscribing and ratifying
with an Oath the Antimonarchical Provisions of Oxford in derogation of the
Kings Royal Power and Government, against his Oath and Allegiance to the King.
Antiq Eccles Brit. p. 286, 287. Godw. p. 231.
Henry VVoodlock Bishop of Winchester, interceeding to King Edward the first,
for Robert VVinchessie Archbishop of Canterbury banished for Treason, and
calling him his good Lord, had his Temporalties seized, Goods confiscated, and
was put out of the Kings protection. Antiqu. Eccles. p 286. 287. Holinshed p
526. 527. Godw p. 184 185.
William Wickham Bishop of Winchester for wasting and embesselling the Kings
Treasure to a great value, wherein he was condemned, had all his Goods seized,
his Temporalties bestowed on the young Prince of Wales, and was likewise
banished above twenty miles from the Court. Fox Acts and Monuments Ed. 1641.
vol. 2 p. 711 to 740 vol. 3 16, 40 1^3 527. Holinshed p. 1154 to 1161. Balaeus
Scriptorum Brit Centur. 8. sect 88.
Stephen Gardener Bishop of Winchester, for a seditious Sermon preached before
King Edward the sixth, and disobeying the Kings Injunctions, was committed
Prisoner to the Fleet, and afterward to the Tower of London, for two years
space and an half, after which he was deprived of his Bishopric, seized into
the Kings hands, and sent to Prison again, being an implacable enemy to King
Edward the sixth, and the Lady Elizabeth, afterward Queen of England, whose
death he often contrived, and had well-nigh accomplished. William Harrisons
Description of England l. 2 c 1 p 138. Martins History. p. 452. 453. 454.
Bal^us Cent. Script Brit. l. 9 sect. 97.
John White Bishop of Winchester, to obtain this fat Bishopric promised to
give the Pope 1600 pounds a year out of it during his life; which Sin the Pope
seemingly detesting, he was forced to pay much dearer ere he could obtain it;
he threatened to excommunicate Queen Elizabeth in the first year of her reign,
for which he was committed to Prison. After that for refusing (...) take the
Oath of Supremacy and Allegi^^^^ (...) the Queen, he and thirteen more Bishops
were deprived of their Bishoprics, and others placed in their rooms. Mat.
Westminster An. 750 p. 273 Hoveden Annal. pars. prio, p. 402.
Kenulph the tenth Bishop of Durham, in the year of Christ 750. was apprehended
and committed Prisoner of the Castle of Bebba, and his Church besieged by
Egbert King of Northumberland for misdemeanors against him. Simeon Dunelmensis
Hist. l. 3. c 9. col 34 Malmesh. de Gestis Pontif l. 2 p. ^7^. Mat Paris. Mat.
Westminster An. 1096. p. 5. Godwin, p. 632.
Fgelrick 16. Bishop of Durham, charged with Treason and Conspiracy against
William the Conqueror, Pyracy on the Sea, and disturbing the peace of the
Kingdom, was for these offenses committed perpetual Prisoner to Westminster
Abbey, where he lamented his misdemeanors, and dyed very penitently. Simeon
Dunelm. Hist col. 200. Mat. Paris Mat. Westminster. Flor. Wigorn. Roger Hov. An.
1069. 1070. 1071. Godw. p. 636, 627. Thomas Stubs, col. 176. Henr. de Knyghion,
col. 2347.
Egelwyn the 17. Bishop of Durham for raising two Rebellions against King
William the Conqueror, and excomm^^ the King, with all his Followers, as
Invadors and Robbers of the Church, was banished the Realm, deprived of his
Bishopric, and at last invading the Realm, was taken Prisoner in the Isle of
Fly by the King, and committed close Prisoner to Abyngdon Anno 1071. where
refusing to take any sustenance, he died of anger, grief, and hunger. Not
mention the tragedy of Malmesh l 3. Hist. Angl. p. 110 Mat Paris, An 10^5. p.
9. Hoveden Annal pars prior, p. 95^, 9^5. 956 Godw p. 6^7. to ^41. Simeon
Dune^m Hist. ed. 208. 204 210 Chron. Iohannis Breuspton, col 977.
VVa^cher Bishop of Durham, created Bishop, and likewise Earl of Northumberland
by Wiliima the Conqueror (the first Spiritual and Temporal Lords of this See)
who turning a very great Oppressor of the People, so far incensed them by the
murder of Leulsus by Leoswin and Gilbert his Chaplain and Kinsman, that they
assaulted him and his Followers in the Cathedral Church, where they fortified
themselves, slew the Bishop himself, and all his retinue, to the number of one
hundred Persons, and set the Church on fire. Malmesh. de Gestis Regum, Angl. l.
1. p 120, 121. De Gestis Pontif. Angl. l. 3. p. 2^7. Mat Paris, p. 13, 14. Mat.
Westminster. Flor. Wigorn. Hoveden, Walsingham, Ypodigma Neustr. An. 1088 Holinshed,
p. 17, 18 G^dw. p. 643, 644.
William Kairlipho, his next Successor in the Sea of Durham, though advanced
to that Office by King William Rufus, and made one of his Privy Counsel, yet
he most treacherously and ungratefully conspired with Odo Bishop of Bayon, and
other Great men Anno 1088. to deprive him of his Crown; which the King (who
most trusted and favored him of any other) took very grievously at his hands;
whereupon he marched to Durham in person with his Army, which this Bishop by
strong hand held out against him, till at last he was enforced to surrender the
City, and himself to the Kings mercy; who thereupon banished him the Realm for
three years, taking the profits of his Temporalties till September 11. An.
1100. at which time the King received him into his favor, and restored him to
his Bishopric. After which he fell again into the Kings displeasure, and dyed
of grief, that he could not clear himself of the Rebellion charged against him,
which he was summoned to answer. In the year of our Lord 1101. Mat. Paris. p.
51, 54. Will. Malm. De Gestis Pontif. Angl. l. 3. p 277, 278, Godwin, p. 645,
646, 647. Simem Dunelm. Hist col. 59, 1062. De Gestis Regum, col. 226. Radulsus
d^ Diceto, col. 499. Chron. Iohannis Brompton, col. 909. Henry de Knyghton, De
Event. Hist. l 3. c. 8.
K. Henry the first, upon the innumerable complaints to him made against
Ranulph Flambard Bishop of Durham by the Vote of a whole Parliamentary Council
clapped him up Prisoner in the Tower of London, for a most notable Oppressor,
Extortioner, Rebel, Traitor, prepared to act any wickedness, who was likewise
created by William Rufus both Chancellor and Treasurer of England. This Bishop
afterward escaping into Normandy, persuaded Duke Robert to invade the Realm,
to the great disturbance thereof, and effusion of much Christian blood. After
which having purchased his peace with large Gifts, ^et the K. exacted from him
great sums, and seized on all his Goods and Bishopric. Holinshed History of
Scotland, p. 181.
Edgar (King of Scots) about the year 1100. gave the Town of Berwick to the
Bishop of Durham; but because he afterward wrought Treason against him, he
lost the Gift, the King thereupon resuming the Town into his own hands. Chron.
Iohannis Brompton. col. 1259. Hoveden Annal pars posterior, p. 615. Holinshed,
p 105.
Hugh Pusar Bishop of Durham, (who purchased the Earldom of Northumberland of
King Richard the first) for giving a rude saucy answer to King Henry the
second, had his Castle of Durham seized into the Kings hands, Anno 1184. and
otherwise was afflicted by him. Henr. de Knighton de Eve^^. Angl. l. 3. c. 5.
Godw, p. 521, 522.
Anthony Beak, or Bek, Bishop of Durham, excommunicating the Prior and Monks of
Durham, notwithstanding their Appeal to the Pope and King, and going to Rome
without the Kings License; King Edward the first thereupon seized his
Temporalties and Liberties; and appointed a new Chancellor, new Justices, and
other Officers of Durham. During this his disgrace, this King for his con^empts
took away three Manors, and the Church of Symondbury from the Bishopric, with
diverse other Lands. He being with other Bishops put out of the Kings protection
for denying to grant him an aid, he and they were forced to make their peace
with large Gifts, and the grant of the fifth part of their Ecclesiastical Goods
and Revenues for one year. Godwins Catalogue, p. 524.
After the death of Lewis Beaumont, the Monks of Durham electing a Monk of their
own for their Bishop, the Archbp. of York consecrating him without the Kings
License: the King thereupon refused to restore his Temporalties to him, and
caused Richard de Bury without any election of the Monk or Chapter, to be made
and consecrated Bishop in his place; whereupon the Monk retired into the
Monastery. Fox Acts and Monuments, 1610. p 1. 80. An^iqu. Eccles. Brit. Godw p.
670.
Cuthert Tonstall Bishop of Durham for his disobedience to King Edward the 6th.
was committed Prisoner to the Tower of London, December. 20. 1551. where he
continued all his Reign, the King being so highly offended with him, that in
Rastals Abridgement of Statutes, Title Durham. Cambden^ Brit. p. 736, 741.
Holinshed, p. 1184. Godwin, p. 533. Martins History, p. 452, 453, 454.
7 E. 6. by a special Act of Parliament, the Bishopric of Durham was
dissolved, and all the Lands and Hereditaments thereof given to the King, his
Heirs and Successors; though afterward the Bishop and Bishopric were restored
by Queen Mary; but in 1 Elizabeth this Bishop was deprived of his Bishopric by
Act of Parliament for refusing the Oath of Supremacy, and opposing the Queens
proceedings, and committed Prisoner to Lambeth. Our learned Martyr Practice of
Popish Prelates, p. ^74.
William Tyndal, writing of this Bishop Tonstall, observes, That the cause why
he left the Bishopric of London for Durham, was only covetousness and
ambition. Neither (adds he) is it possible naturally, that there should be any
good Bishop, so long as the Bishoprics be nothing save wordly pomp and honor,
superfluous abundance of all manner of Riches, and Liberty to do what a man
list unpunished; things which only the evil desire, and good men abhor.

Chroni^on Ge^. col 1345. 1346. Chron Iohannis Brompton, col. 1023 1^26, ^0^7.
Henry de Knyghton. De Event Angl l. 2. c. 10. W. Malm. Hist Nov. l. 2. p. 18^
to 190. Gul Neubrigensis, Hist l. 1. c. 6. Mat. Paris, Mat. Westminster. Hoveden,
Hygden, Fabian, Holinshed, Gra^t^n. Speed, Daniel, Fox in the life of King
Stephen, Godwin, col. p 319, to 322.
Roger the great rich Bishop of Salisbury, (who contrary to his Oath, Duty, and
Allegiance to King Henry the first his Advancer, and Maud his Daughter, set up
and made Stephen, (a Usurper) King, thereby involving the Kingdom in intestine
bloody wars and feuds all his Reign; by a divine retaliation of his Perjury and
Treachery, had his Person imprisoned, his 2. newly repai^ed Castles of Sh^rborn
and Malmesbury, with his stately new built Castle of Devises, and all his
ammunition and treasures in them seized upon, with the ^astles of his Nephews
and Creatures ( Nigellus Bp. of Ely, and Alexander Bp. of Lincoln) for real or
pretended offenses, which Castles K. Stephen refused to restore, or to be judgd
by the Bishops, or their Canons in the Council of Winchester, sommoned by the
Popes Legate, to debate the legality of their seizure by the King, and to
restore them to the Bishops, which the King would by no means give his consent
to do; the Archbp. of Rhoan justifying the lawfulness of these Castles seizure
in the Council, as well as the Kings Lawyers. Godw. Catalogue of Bishops, p.
281. Walsingham, Trussel, Holinshed An. 1388.
Richard Milford Bishop of Salisbury, was by order of the Barons in Parliament
in XI R. 2. removed from the Court, and imprisoned in the Castle of Bristol, as
a pernicious Whisperer, Flatterer, evil Counselor, Traitor to the King and
Kingdom. Fabians Chronicle, part 7. An. 1050. p. 453. Caxton, part 6 Grafton,
Hall Speed, Martin, An. 1450. Holinshed, p. 636. Godwin, p 351.
William Ayscoth Bishop of Salisbury Confessor to King Henry 6. by his
oppressions, ill dealing, and consenting to the yielding up of Anjou and Mayen
to the hands of the French King, so far incensed the Nobles and vulgar Rabble
his Tenants too against him, that in the insurrection of Jack Cade, June 29.
1450. some of these Bishops Tenants coming to Ed^ndon in VVilishire whiles he
was there saying Mass, seized upon him even in the Church, drew him from the
Altar arrayed in his Pontifical Massing Vestments, carried him to the top of a
Hill not far off, and there whiles he was kneeling on his Knees cleft his Head
in two, stripped him naked to the skin, and renting his bloody shirt into several
pieces, took every man a rag to keep it as a monument of this their exploit.
Which though tumultuous and illegal in them, was yet a just judgment of God
upon himself, for opre^sing his Tenants, and other public misdemeanors.

Mat Westminster. An. 873. Godwin, p 926.
Anno. 873. Alfred Bishop of Leicester was deprived of his Bishopric for his
misdemeanors by King Elfred. Simeon Dunelmensis Hist Flor. Wigorn. Mat. Westminster
Brampton Anno 1052. Godwin, p. 130.
Vl^ Bishop of Lincoln was banished the Realm, and hardly escaped with his
life, together with Robert Archbishop of Canterbury, and William Bishop of
London by Edward the Confessor, by the advice of his Nobles assembled in a
Parliamentary Council, for giving this good King wicked Counsel, an incensing
him against the English; causing the King to infringe his good Laws, and not to
administer upright Justice to his People, which he promised to reform upon
their banishment. Mat. Paris, Anno 10^0. p. 6 Simeon Dunelmensis, Florentius
Wigorniensis Ingul-Malmesbury, Hoveden, Brompton in Anno 1070. Holinshed, p. 18.
Alexander Bishop of Lincoln was banished the Land, forced to fly into
Scotland, and deprived of his Bishopric, Anno 1070. for opposing, William the
Conqueror, as an Invador of the Church and ravishers of Ecclesiastical things,
the Norman Conquerors making bold with all the Money, Chattels, Charters they
could find in any Monastery, which they diligently searched by the Kings
command, who appointed how many Soldiers every Bishop and Abbot which held of
him by Barony, should find for the King in times of war, from which they were
formerly exempted. Ch^^^i^on Iohannis Brompton, (...) 10.7. Gal. Neub 1 (...),
l. (...) Han^ingd^n H^st. l ^. p. 389, 3^^. H^^e^^^. Annal (...) Mat Westminster, Mat
Westminster ^^ 1^^^ to 11^^ Fox Acts and p 1^2 Sp^^^, p. 4^8, 4^^, 494. Holinshed p.
^0. Godwin, p. 233
Alexander Bishop of Lincoln, Nephew to Roger the great Bishop of Salisbury,
built three new Castles at Banbury, Newark, and Sleford, which King Stephen
seized upon and took from him, upon some pretended or actual Misdemeanors,
together with all the Ammunition and Treasure this Bishop had laid up in them,
and imprisoned the Bishop himself, for holding the Castle of Devises against
him, and refusing to surrender it till constrained. Mat. Paris Hist. p. 103,
195, 1^^. Hoveden Annal. pars ^ ste^^^^. p. 756, 777. Holinshed p. ^73
Riha^enira, Fleu^^s des ^ies des Saints par. 2 p. 428. 429. W^ll^^s Synop^^s
papi^ini. con^s. 5. qu 5. p. 280
St. Hugh Bishop of Lincoln did much oppose the payment of any Subsidies or
Taxes to King Henry the second, Richard the first, and King John; he resisted
King Richard the first to his face when he demanded Taxes from his Subjects, by
means whereof; and of another Bishop joining with him, he could gain no moneys
from them. Whereupon the King in a great rage banished both these Bishops,
confiscated all their Goods, and seized the Goods of the other Bishops, who
thereupon submitted to the King. Mat. Paris. Hist. Angll p. 22^, 288 Ami^a
Eccles Hist p. 149 Fox Acts and Manu (...), vol. 1. p. 335. Willets Synopsis,
P. p. contr. 5 qu. 3. p. 250.
Hugh Wallis or de Wills Bishop of Lincoln, about the year 1209. owning that
Arch-traytor Stephen Langhton for Archbishop of Canterbury, and receiving his
consecration from him, contrary to King John's express command, had all his
Temporalties seized, and himself kept fasting for four years space before they
were restored. After which he joining with Lewis the French King, and the
Barons siding with him against King John, he was for these new Treasons, not
only prosecuted by the King, but also excommunicated by the Pope, and not
absolved till he paid the Pope one thousand Mark, and his Legate one hundred
Marks; sundry other of our Bishops being then fined for the like Crimes, and
that so deeply, that they were compelled to sell all they had to satisfy the
King. Walsingham Hist. Angl. Anno 1320, 13^7. p. 101 104. 105. Godwin, p. 303
Speed. Histo^y. p. 678, 680, 681.
Hugh Burwash Bishop of Lincoln, though advanced by the special favor of King
Edward the second to that See, fell so far into his Royal displeasure within
two years after his consecration, for some contempts and offenses against him,
that the King seized his Temporalties into his hands for two years space, Anno
1324. he being restored to the Kings favor and his Temporalties again, the
grudge thereof stuck so far in his stomach, that none was so forward to assist
the Queen with money, arms, forces, nor so eager against the King to depose
him, as this Bishop of Lincoln, and the Bishops of Ely, Dublin, and Canterbury,
by whose assistance and advice the King was not only deposed, but murdered.
Martins History, p. 453. Godwin, p 24^. Antiqu. Eccles. Brit. p. 416, 427.
Thomas Watson Bishop of Lincoln in the first year of Queen Elizabeth, ^as by
the Queen and Parliament deprived of his Bishopric, and committed to Prison
for refusing to take the Oath of Allegiance and Supremacy, and threatening to
excommunicate the Queen for altering Religion.

King Stephen about the year 1140. banished Rodulfus de Diceto, Abbrev.
Chronicorum, col. 508. Mat. Paris, p. ^4. Mat. Westminster. An. 1339. p. 36. Godwin.
p 201. Henr. de Knyghton, de Event. Angl l. 2 c 10.
Nig^llus Bishop of Ely for his Treason and Contempts against him, seized his
Castles and Temporalties during his life, and kept them in his hands at least
five years space after his death. Mat. Paris. p. 147. Godwin, p. 202. Rodulfus
de Diceto, Martins Hist. ecl. 677.
G^offry Rydel his next Successor (commonly called the proud Bishop of Ely) had
all his Moneys, to wit, 3060 marks of Silver, and 205 pounds of Gold seized
upon, and confiscated by King RICHARD the first. Ch^^ni^^^ Iohannis (...). vl.
1.24, 1217. H^^eden Annal. p^^^^ s^^^i^r, (...) 7 ^^. ^18, 719, 720, 735. Mat
Paris. p 151, 155. 156 15^. 162. etc. N^^^rig^nsis, Hist. l. 4. c. 1^, 15, 16,
17, 18. H^lins^^d. p ^^0 ^ 1^3. F^x Acts and Monuments p 114. ^^3, ^^4, ^ec^.
531, ^^c. (...) p 147 Henry (...) ^ent. Angl. l 2. c. 13. Ch(...).
William Longchamp Bishop of ^ly, both Protector, Chancellor, and Chief
Justice of the Realm, and Popes Legate, during King Richard 1. his absence in
the holy wars; as he seized and spoiled the Temporalties and Goods of Geoffry
Plantaginet Archbishop of York, stripped him and his Followers of all they had,
dragged him by his Officers out of St. Martyns Church in Dover by force from
the very Altar it self, without the least respect to the greatness of his
Person, or holiness of the Place, and thrust him Prisoner into Dover Castle; so
himself was soon after seized upon, dragged by the Heels, and imprisoned at
Dover by the vulgar Rabble, then forced out of the Realm by the Nobles, and
other Prelates, and his Estate confiscated for his intolerable Tyranny and
Misdemeanors Mat Westminster Mat. Paris, An. 12^3 p. 217. 218. Holinshed, p 171,
172, etc. Godwin p. 291. Henry de Knyghton de Event. Angl. l. 2. c. 13.
Eustathius Bp. of Ely, for pronouncing the Popes excommunication against King
John, and interdicting the whole Realm, had all his Temporalties seized into
the Kings hands, his Goods confiscated, himself forced to fly the Realm, and to
continue in exile many years; all the Prelates and Clergy of England
confederating with him herein being likewise commanded to depart the Realm,
their Possessions, Baronies, temporalties, Goods seized, confiscated, and all
of them put out of the Kings proteon, Anno 1208. Mat. Paris, p 906, 941, 969
Godwin, p. 207.
King Henry the third was so highly offended with Hugh Balsam Bishop of Ely,
that he seized upon his Temporalties, caused all the Woods thereon to be cut
down and sold, the Parks to be spoiled, the Ponds to be fished and wasted, and
havoc to be made of all things, for harboring the Rebels then in arms aganst
him. Godwin, p. 269. to 272. Walsingham Hist. An. 1318. p. 1^^ Ypodigma Ne^sts.
p 125 Holinshed, p. 391. 392. Antiqu Eccles. Brit p 271, to 275 Har^isons
History of England l 2 c 1 p. 143, 144. Fox Acts and Monuments, vol. 3.
Thomas Lilde Bishop of Ely, a furious indiscreet Prelate, upon King Edward the
third his complaint to the Parliament was banished the Court during his life,
and his Possessions seized on by the King till his death. Godw. p. 225, 229,
339. Martins History, p. 453, 454.
Thomas Thurlby Bishop of Ely, for denying the Oath of Supremacy, and opposing
the reformation of Religion intended by Queen Elizabeth, was committed Prisoner
to the Tower, and deprived of his Bishopric by the Parliament in the first
year of Queen Elizabeth, with other Popish Bishops deprived for the like
offenses the same year.

Fabians Chron. part 7. p. 181, 182. Holinshed, 338. 1305. Walsingham Hist.
Angl. p. 104, 105. Godwin. p. 330.
Walter Stapleton Bishop of Exeter, Anno 1326. was assaulted by the people in
London, at the North-door of Paul's, and dragged thence by them into Cheapside
by the heels, where they proclaimed him an open Traitor, a Seducer of King
Edward the second, (who left the charge of the City to him) and a Subverter of
their liberties; after which stripping him of his Pontifical Garments, they
took off his Head from his Shoulders, and set it on a Poll for a spectacle,
that the remembrance and cause of his death (never questioned) might continue.
Malmesh. de Gestis Pontif. l. 2. c. 12. p. 77. Mat. Westminster. An. 1040. Godwin, p.
436.
Living the 23d. Bishop of Worcester, Anno 1040. was accused by Elfrick
Archbishop of York, for procuring the death of Alfred eldest Son of Ethelred:
Whereupon King Hardeknute degraded him, and gave his Bishopric to Elfrick. So
Mat. Westminster, An. 120^. Mat Paris. p. 217. 232. Walsingham Ypodigma Neustriae. p.
53. Godwin, p. 362. Holinshed, Speed, Grafton, An. 1208. in King John.
Alfred Bishop of Worcester for his misdemeanors and opposition against King
Hardeknute, and having likewise a hand in the death of his half Brother Alfred,
was expulsed that See, till his money purchased his peace. Holinshed, l. 7. c.
15. p. 1851, Speeds History, p. 405, 411.
Maugere the third Bishop of Worcester, being one of the four Bishops who
excommunicated King John, and put the whole Kingdom under an Interdict, Anno
1208. had all his Goods confiscated, his Temporalties seized by the King, and
being forced to fly the Realm for these misdemeanors died in exile. Malmesh.
de Gestis Pontif. l. 4 p. 287 Godwin, p. 473.
Raynelmus the 30. Bishop of Hereford receiving his investiture from King Henry
the first, by the delivery of a Ring and Crosier, according to the Law and
Custom of that Age, and afterward resigning them into the Kings hands again to
pleasure Anselme, against the Kings Prerogative, the King was so highly
offended with him (as he had just cause) that he presently banished him the
Realm, and seized his Temporalties. Mat. Westminster. An. 1208, 1215. Godw. p. 375.
Giles de Bruise Bishop of Hereford for siding with the Barons in their wars
against King John, and consenting to the Interdict, had all his ^oods and
Temporalties; seized, and was banished the Kingdom by King John. Mat. Paris, p.
881, to 889, 90^, 90^, 916, 917, 924, 934. 960, 961. Holinshed, p. 251, 252,
1258. Godw p. 375.
Peter de Eveblancks 42. Bishop of Hereford for his intolerable Oppressions,
Treacheries and Exorbitances, was arrested by the Barons in the year 1263. in
his own Cathedral Church, where they seized upon his Goods, divided his
Treasure amongst their Soldiers before his face, and then imprisoned him a
long time in Ordley Castle, as a mere Pest and Traitor both to Church and
State. Walsingham Hist. Angl. p 98, 99, 101, 104. Ypodigma, Neustriae An. 1326,
1327. Holinshed, p. 329, 339, 340, 1245. Speed. p. 7730, 680. Antiq Eccles.
Brit. p. 217 Godwins Catalogue, p. 232, 233. Cambdens Britan. p. 575 My
Antipathy to the English Lordly Prelacy to Unity and Monarchy, p. 55, 56, 265,
266, 236.
Adam de Orlton or Tarleton the 46. Bishop of Hereford, was arrested of High
Treason for aiding the Mortymers with men and arms, against King Edward the
second, and being indicted and brought to the King's Bench Bar at Westminster to
be arraigned for this Treason, the Archbishops of Canterbury, York, and Dublin,
accompanied with their Suffragan Bishops, came forcibly with their Crofiers,
rescued, and took him away from the Bar, and protected him from the Kings
Justice; but the Indictment being found true upon proof, his Temporalties were
thereupon seized into the Kings hands, till by this Bishops instigation he was
deposed from the Crown, and soon after murdered by his advice. When Queen
Isabel and her Son Prince Edward were with their Army at Oxford, this Bishop
steps up into the Pulpit, and there taking these words for his Text, My Head
grieved me: he made a long Discourse to prove, That an Evil Head, not otherwise
to be cured, must be taken away; applying it to King Edw. the 2 d. that he
ought to be deposed; and afterward he counseled the Queen to depose and make
him away; which being effected at Berkley Castle, by thrusting a hot Spit into
his fundament; none then appeared so earnest a Prosecutor of these Murderers as
this Traitorous Bishop, who set them on work: to whom when many of his own
Letters were produced and showed concerning this most traytorous inhuman Act,
he eluded them by sophistical interpretations, and utterly denied he was any
way consenting thereunto, when as in truth he was the chief occasion and
adviser thereof. Rot. Parl. 1 H. 4. Walsingham, Hist. Angl. p. 401. Holinshed,
p. 507, to 510. Speed, p. 763. Grafton, How, Baker, Trussel, Hall in R. 2. and
H. 4. Godwin, p. 378.
John Trevenant the 51. Bishop of Hereford was one of the prime Actors in the
deposition of King Richard the second, and setting up King Henry the 4th. in
his Throne; for which he demerited not only a sequestration of his
Temporalties, but a Decollation, though he escaped both. Mat. Westminster.
Wigorniensis, Mat. Paris, Malmesbury Hoveden, Chron. Iohannis Bromptou,
Huntindon. Anno 1070. Godwin, p. 383.
Charles Booth Bishop of Hereford was excepted out of the General pardon of the
Praemunire granted by King Henry the 8th. to the Clergy in Parliament, 22 H. 8.
c. 15. for which his Goods and Temporalties were confiscated to the King. 11 R.
2. c. 6. Walsingham Hist. Angl. An. 1388. p. 3^5. Grimston, Holinshed, Trussel,
An. 11 R. ^. Godw. p. 388.
Agelrick Bishop of the South Saxons (since Chichester) was deprived by
William the Conqueror, Anno 1078. with sundry other Bishops and Abbots in the
Councils of Winchester and Windsor, for their Treasons and Conspiracies
against him, and afterward imprisoned. 11 R. 2. c. 6. Walsingham Hist. Angl.
An. 1388 p 305. Grimston, Holinshed, Trussel, An. 11 R. 2. Godw. p. 388.
Thomas Rushock the 20th. Bishop of Chichester, a lewd pernicious Prelate, Anno
1388. was banished the Court as a Traitor and pernicious Counselor to King
Richard the second, his Lands and Goods confiscated, himself banished and
deprived of his Bishopric by Act of Parliament, and had suffered death too as
a Traitor, but that his Guiltiness made him fly before he could be apprehended.
Holinshed, p. 951.
Richard Sampson, the 37th. Bishop of Chichester, Anno 21 H. 8. was committed
Prisoner to the Tower, for relieving certain traiterous Persons who denied the
Kings Supremacy. Godwin, p 390. and Fox, vol. 2.
George Day Bishop of Chichester, October. 10. 1551. was deprived of his
Bishopric for denying the Kings Supremacy, maintaining the Popes, and other
Misdemeanors; and his Temporalties seized. Martins History, 452, 453, 454.
Antiqu. Eccles. Brit. in Mat. Parker, Godwin, p. ^90.
John Christopherson Bishop of Chichester was deprived of his Bishopric by Act
of Parliament, 1 Eliz. for denying the Queens Supremacy, and to take the Oath
of Supremacy and Allegiance.

Walsingham Hist. p 278, 319, to 334, 338. Polychronicon, l. 7. c. 5. Antiqu.
Eccles. Brit. p. 248 Holinshed, p. 442,443. Speed, p. 795, 797. Godwin, p. 350,
357, 352. Exact Abridgement of the Records of the Tower, p. 288, 289, 291,
292,293.
Henry Spencer Bishop of Norwich a Martial Prelate, more employed in the Field
than in the Pulpit, and the Popes General against the Flemmings, Anno 1385. had
all his Temporalties seized into the Kings hands for two years, for raising an
Army and passing the Seas without and against King Richard the second his
command, and was likewise questioned, fined and ransoned in Parliament for his
misdemeanors in that military employment. Godwin, p. 952.
Alexander Bishop of Norwich being elected by the Monks against the Kings
consent Anno 1406. had his Temporalties kept from him by the King, and his
Person imprisoned at Windsor almost a year. Hill 25 H 8. coram Rege, r^^. 15.
Godwin, p. 354.
Richard Nyx Bishop of Norwich in the 25 of H. 8. was attainted in a
Praemunire, put out of the Kings protection, his Person imprisoned, his Lands,
Goods and Chattels seized and forfeited to the King, for citing the Mayor of
Thetford into his Spiritual Court, and forcing him to revoke a Presentment upon
Oath, contrary to Law.

Roger Hoveden Annal. pars p^ste ^or. p. 734 737,752,776. Mat. Paris, p. 180
Mat. Westminster. Anno 1198 p ^^. Holinshed, p. 112, 147, Godwin, p. 258. Speed, p.
5^1.
Hugh Novant Bishop of Chester (or Coventry and Litchfield as some style him)
for conspiring with the King of France and Earl John, against his Sovereign
King Richard the first, to detain him still in Prison, and plotting all the
Mischief he could for the destruction of the King and Kingdom, was in a Grand
Parliamentary Council held at Nottingham, about the year 1198. adjudged to
Ecclesiastical censures, and the seizure of his Temporalties as a Bishop, and
also to banishment, and a Fine of 5000 Marks by the Temporal Lords, as an
Officer to the King. Mat. Westminster. Anno 1301. p. 419 Walsingham, Hist. Angl p. c.
8. Holinshed. p. 313. Speed. p 667. Godwin, p. 260, 261.
Walter Langton Bishop of Chester, by King Edward the second his command, was
arrested by the Constable of the Tower, and imprisoned above two years space in
several Castles, his Lands and Temporalties seized into the Kings hands, his
Goods confiscated and after that compelled to answer to diverse heinous Crimes
whereof he was accused. Godwins Catalogue, p. 545.
Cutbert Scot Bishop of Chester for his disobedience to Queen Elizabeth was
committed Prisoner to the Fleet, and displaced.

Malmesb. De Gestis Pontif. Angl p. 231. Godwin, p. 392, 393.
Edilred King of M^rcia for some just displeasure against Putta Bp. of
Rochester, burned his Church and City, and forced him to desert his Bishopric;
to which he would never afterward return. Malmesb. de Gestis Regum Angl. l 2.
c. 10. p. 60 Mat. Westminster. Anno 983. p. 379. Antiqu. Eccles Brit p. 62. Speed, p.
414. Godw. p. 394.
Godwin Bishop of Rochester was for many months besieged in his City of
Rochester by King Ethelred, for some contempts against this King, who would not
raise his Siege upon any entreaty, till the Bishop had submitted himself, and
likewise paid him an hundred pounds Fine. Halls Chronicle, 25 H 8. s 2^8
Holinshed p 936 937. (...) Cent. (...) Brit. Cent. (...) ^8 100 Fox Acts and
Monuments p. 95. 976 Speed, (...) 9, 1046. Godwin p. 402.
John Fisher Bishop of Rochester was grievously questioned in Parliament by the
House of Commons, Anno 25 H. 8. for saying, That all their doings against the
Clergy, was for lack of Faith; after which he was indicted and condemned of
High Treason, for countenancing the Revelations of Elizabeth Barton, and
denying to acknowledge the Kings Supremacy over Ecclesiastical Persons and
Causes; for which Treason be was executed upon Tower Hill, (though a Bishop,
and new-made Cardinal) June 21. 1535. and his Head set upon London Bridge.

Godwin, p. 539.
Edmond de Bromfield the 48th. Bishop of Landaff was for a long time committed
Prisoner to the Tower, his Temporalties seized, and Goods confiscated by King
Richard the second, for procuring and bringing in the Popes Bulls of Provision,
contrary to his own Oath, and the Laws of the Land, to make himself Abbot of
Bury.

Godwin, p. 538.
Richard Bishop of Bangor, siding against King John his Sovereign, with L^olin
Prince of Wales, was taken Prisoner by the King in his own Cathedral Church,
and put to a ransom of 200. Hawks. Godw p. 538, 539.
Roger Young Bishop of Bangor was imprisoned two or three years for his
disobedience against King Henry the 4th. and confederating with that Rebel Owen
Glendor. Trin. 36 H. 8. Coram. Rege, R^t. 9^ Godwin, p. 540.
Arthur Bishop of Bangor was attainted in a Praemunire in the 36. year of King
Henry the 8th. for suing for the right of Patronage and Tithes of the Church of
Langeyneiin, in his Spiritual Court, which belonged only to the Kings Temporal
Courts, for which he was put out of the Kings protection, his Goods
confiscated, Temporalties seized, and his Person adjudged to be imprisoned
according to the Statute; he sold away 5. fair Bells out of the Steeple of his
Cathedral. Godwin p. 360, 361.
Giso Bishop of Bath and Wells, had many conflicts with King Herald, who forced
him to fly the Realm, and seized his Temporalties all his Reign. Mat. Paris p.
217. Mat. Westminster. Anno 1208. Godwin Edit. 2. p. 107, 366.
Ioceline Bishop of Bath and Wells, joined with Archbishop Langhton and other
Bishops, in excommunicating his Sovereign King John, and interdicting the
Kingdom, for which offenses his Temporalties were seized, his Goods
confiscated, himself forced to fly and banished the Realm for five years space.
Halls Chron. 2 R. 2. s. 25. Speed p. 933. Holinshed and Lord Verulam in H. 7.
G^dwin Edit. 2 p. 377, 378.
Robert Stillington Bishop of Bath and Wells, for siding with the bloody
Usurper Richard the third at whose Coronation he was specially employed, and
for yielding assistance to Lambert the Counterfeit Earl of Warwick, and other
Treacheries was publicly accused of High Treason, against King Henry the 7th
and also arrested of High Treason in the University of Oxford, whether he fled
for Sanctuary, imprisoned in the Castle of Windsor till his death Anno 1491.
and his Goods and Temporalties seized. Brooks Abridgment Tit. Praemunire sect.
21.
William Barlow Bishop of Bath and Wells, was attainted in a Praemunire, by
which his Temporalties and Goods were forfeited to the King. Antiq Eccles.
Brit. in Mat. Parker, Martyns History p. 492, etc. Godwin p. 311. See the
Commons and Lords Journals August 4. 1641.
Gilbert Bourne the 47. Bishop of Bath and Wells, for denying the Queens
Supremacy, and refusing the Oath of Supremacy and Allegiance to her, 1 Eliz.
was deprived of his Bishopric.

And to mention no more Presidents in so plain a Case, August 4. 1641. Walter
Bishop of Winchester, Robert Bishop of Coventry and Lichfield, Godfry Bishop of
Gloucester, Joseph Bishop of Exeter, John Bishop of Asaph, George Bishop of
Hereford, Matthew Bishop of Ely, William Bishop of Bangor, Robert Bishop of
Bristol, John Bishop of Rochester, John Bishop of Peterborough, Roger Bishop of
Landaffe, and William Bishop of Bath and Wells, were all of them jointly, and
2. of them particularly, impeached by the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses of
the Commons House of Parliament, for several high Crimes and Misdemeanors,
contrary to the Kings Prerogative, the Fundamental Laws of the Land, the Rights
of Parliament, the Property and Liberty of the Subject; and matters tending to
sedition, and of dangerous consequence: After which most of them, with the
Archbishops of Canterbury and York, were committed Prisoners to the Tower,
their Goods and Temporalties sequestered, and sold by sundry Ordinances of
Parliament.

If any out of Ignorance or Prejudice, should deem all these proceedings
against the Persons and Temporalties of our Archbishops and Bishops from age to
age illegal, unjust or sacrilegious, let them peruse the Statutes of 1 E. 3. c.
2. 14 E. 3. c. 3. 25 E. 3. c. 6. 2 R. 2. c. 7. 13 R. 2. Stat. 2. c. 8. 43. 16
R. 2. c. 5. 6 H. 4. c. 7. And the year books of 20 E. 2 Fitz. Corone 237. 16 E.
3. and 14 E. 3. Fitz. Quare non admisit 3, 7, 8, 11 21 E. 3. 3, 30, 60. Book
Contempts 5. 19. 22 E. 3. 22, 26. Ass. 19. Brook Forfeiture 82. 106. 29 E. 3.
42. Fitz. Execution 159. 38. Ass. 22. Grant 1. 38 E. 3. 12. 46 E. 3. Praemunire
1. 10 H. 4. 6. 14 H. 4. 14. 8 H. 6. 3. 9 E. 4. 28. 27 H. 8. 14. 22 Brook
Exigent 3 Stamford l. 2. c. 45. Cook 5. Report f. 12, 13. 8. Report f. 68.
Cooks 3. Institutes c. 36. 54. Sir John Davis Reports f. 84. the case of
Praemunire. Upon perusal of all which it will most evidently appear, that both
our Parliaments and Judges have frequently declared, resolved, that both their
Persons may lawfully be attached, imprisoned, banished, executed, their
Temporalties seized, and Goods confiscated to the King, for their Offenses,
Contempts, Rebellions, both by the Common and Statute Laws of England, and
therefore by like reason their Lands may be alienated and taken from them for
their offenses or abuses of them, without sin, sacrilege or injustice, by our
Kings and Parliaments, beyond all contradiction, as they have been from time to
time both by the Emperors of Rome, Greece, Germany, the Kings, and Kingdoms of
France, Spain, Hungary, Italy, Denmark, Sweden, Poland, Scotland and Ireland,
as well as England.

6ly. That as the Lands and Temporalties of Bishops, Abbots, Cathedrals, by
their very first Charters of Endowments and Foundations, were always liable to
Evidentiae Eccles Christi Cantuar. Col. 2207. to 2230. Ingulphi Hist. 853. etc.
Monasticon Anglicanum, and Spelmanni Concilia.
these 3. Temporal charges, and Secular services, though dedicated to God and
his Church, to wit, Military Expeditions, and Charges of War, for the defense
of the King and Kingdom; the building, and repairing of Castles and Bridges,
(commonly expressed in ancient Charters under this exception, Exceptis
Expeditione, Pontis and Arcis constrictione, vel necessariis defensionilus
Arcium, quae nulli unquam possint laxari:) So if the Bishops and Abbots upon
the Kings writs of Summons, refused to send in their Proportions of Horse and
Arms, according to the Number of the Knights sees they held by, and perform
these Services to our Kings in times of War or Danger; or denied to grant
competent Aids and Subsidies to our Kings when demanded, their Temporalties,
Lands, Goods and Movables, were usually seized into the Kings hands for this
Contempt, as is evident by Claus. 4^ H. 3. m. 3. 6. Dorso; the presidents of
Archbishop Winchelsie, and other Bishops forecited p. 52, 53, etc. So our Kings
in times of War, have frequently seized upon Archbishops, Bishops and
Church-mens Lands, and given them to their Commanders and Soldiers, witness
the presidents of Evidentiae Eccles. Cant. Col. 1212, 1213, 1214. Spelmani
Concilia, Tom. 1. p. 318, to 334.
King Osfa and Kenulphus of old, who took away sundry Manors and Lands from
the Archbishops of Canterbury, which they partly divided amongst their Captains
and Soldiers, and partly retained to themselves, with other presidents since.
And not only so, but the Knights, Citizens, Burgesses, and sundry Lords in
successive Parliaments, even in times of Popery, have often pressed our Kings
to take away, sell and alienate the great superfluous Manors, Lands,
Temporalties, of Bishops, Abbots and Churchmen, for easing the Kingdom and
people from Taxes, and maintaining of Earls, Nobles, Knights and other Military
men, to aid our Kings in their Wars; and have actually taken away diverse
Manors, Lands and Tenements from our Archbishops, Bishops and Cathedrals, as
well as from Abbots, Priors, Monasteries, and given them to our Kings, or such
as they should appoint. The House of Commons in two Walsingham Hist. Angl p.
414, 415,416. Ypodigmal Neust^iae p. 166. Antiq. Eccles. Brit. p. 307, 308.
Holinshed p. 526. Speed, p. 775.
several Parliaments, held in the years of our Lord 1403. and 1404. under King
Henry the 4th. when this King wanted and demanded aids and moneys from them to
carry on his Wars against the Welch-men at home, and the French, with other
Enemies abroad, counseled and pressed the King, to seize upon the Lands of the
Bishops, Abbots and Spirituality, to supply his wants with their Temporalties
and Superfluities; Whereupon there grew a great contest in the Parliament,
between the Clergy and Laity; the Speaker of the Commons House, and the Knights
affirming, That they had often served the King in his Wars, not only with their
Goods, but also with their Persons, in very great Dangers and Ieopardies,
whiles the Prelates and Spiritualty sat idle at home, and helped the King
nothing at all. Whereupon the Bishops and Clergy to preserve their Temporalties
from being taken away in these two Parliaments, readily gave the King a Tenth
in the first of these Parliaments, and a Tenth and an half in the second. After
this the Walsingham Hist. Angl. p. 422. Ypodigma Neustrae p. 174. Holinshed p.
536. Fabian Anno 1410. part. 7. ^. 386, 387.
Knights and Commons in the year 1410. presented this Petition to King Henry
the 4th. and the Lords in Parliament. To our Most Excellent Lord the King, and
all the Nobles in this present Parliament assembled, all your faithful Commons
humbly demonstrate, and truly affirm, that our Lord the King might have out of
the Temporal Possessions, Lands and Tenements, which are occupied, and proudly,
leudly and unprofitably spent, consumed and wasted by the Bishops, Abbots and
Priors within this Realm, so much in value as would suffice to sustain in food
15. Earls, 1500. Knights, 6200. Esquires, and 102. Hospitals more then now be;
Pressing the King and Lords to take away these Temporalties, which they proudly
and unprofitably consumed, and to employ them on other public uses. But by the
subtilty and potency of the Bishops, Abbots and Clergy, from whom the King
demanded a Tenth to be annually granted to him during his life, Fabians
Ch^^n^cle, part 7. p. 30 39^. Halls Chronicle, 2 H. 5. 3^,36, etc. Holinshed,
p. 545, 547,583.
wherein they were ready to gratify him; they preserved their Temporalties for
that present. Yet afterward the Commons in Parliament, Anno 1414. renewed this
their old Petition to King Henry the 5th. and the Lords, to seize upon the
Bishops and Abbots Temporalties, showing how many Earls, Knights and Esquires
they would maintain, exhibiting a Bill to that purpose. Hereupon the Bishops
and Abbots whom it touched very near, much fearing the issue, determined to
assay all ways to put by and overthrow this Bill, minding rather to bow than
break, agreeing first to offer the King a great sum of money to put by his
demand; and afterward intituling the King to sundry Provinces, and the whole
Realm of France in this Parliament, and stirring up the King and Nobles to
regain the same by force of arms. Toward the recovering and regaining of
which ancient Right and Inheritance, they granted the King in their Convocation
such a sum of money, as by Spiritual persons never was to any Prince, though the
whole Christian world, before these times given and advanced. By which policy
and grant they preserved their Temporalties from being taken away from them by
that Parliament. Yet some of their Manors and Temporalties were parted with to
the King and Lords to purchase their peace, after every of these Parliaments.
In the Parliament of King Henry the 8th. in the 22d. year of his Reign, there
were sundry Halls Chron. 22 H. 8 f 188, 189, etc. Holinshed, p. 911, 212 Fox
Acts and Monuments, vol. 2. 21 H. 8. c. 4, 5, 13.
Bills exhibited in Parliament against the abuses of the Bishops and Clergy,
and many hot contests between the Commons and Prelates, who at the last brought
them within the compass of a Praemunire in this Parliament, to the
confiscation of all their Goods, Temporalties, and imprisonment of their
Persons, for submitting to Cardinal Wolsie his Power legatine from the Pope,
contrary to the Laws of the Realm, and the Kings Prerogative. Whereupon upon
the Bishops and Clergy of the Province of Canterbury proferred to give the King
the sum of one hundred thousand pounds; and those of the Provinces of York
eighteen thousand pounds more, and likewise agreed to give the King the Title
of THE SUPREME HEAD OF THE CHURCH OF ENGLAND NEXT UNDER CHRIST (which they
would never do before) to take off the forfeiture of the Praemunire Which the
King accepting of, 22 H 8. c. 15.
granted all the Bishops and Clergy a General Pardon in Parliament, out of
which John Archbishop of Dublin, and the Bishop of Hereford, with six more
Clergymen only were excepted; and soon after this Parliament many of the
Bishops Temporalties and Manors were granted by them to the King by their
special conveyances, besides others of them leased or granted to Courtiers,
great Officers and Favorites, to preserve the remainder of them. In the
Parliament of 37 H. 8. c. 16.
37 H. 8. by a special Act of Parliament, printed in our Statutes at large,
under a feined pretext of Exchanges, and other Recompenses, the Manor of Rippon
in Yorkshire, together with 69. other Manors there named, their members and
appurtenances, were alienated and taken away from the Archbishopric and
Archbishop of York, nine Manors, one Castle, with sundry Parks and Rectories
belonging to the Archbishopric to Canterbury; the Manors of Chelmesford and
Crondon, with the Park of Crondon, and all their Members, Rights and
Appurtenances were alienated and taken quite away from the Archbishops of
Canterbury and Bishops of London, and their Successors, and by these Bishops
Indentures, and this Act of Parliament settled on the King, his Heirs and
Successors for ever, as well against the said Archbishops and Bishop of London,
and their respective Successors, as against the respective Deans and Chapters
of York, Canterbury, London, and their Successors, and every of them; any Law,
Custom, Statute, or other thing to the contrary hereof, had or made
notwithstanding; as in and by the said Act (worthy perusal) is more at large
recorded. Besides these, the City of Bath, the Manors Markford, Chedder, Chew,
Claverton, Compton Dando, Compton Panel, Congesbury, Clanmore, Everchurch,
H^riton, Kineston, L^d^ord, Pucklechurch, Wellington, Westerleigh, VVatton,
VVecke, VVile, Yatton, with sundry other Farms, Tenements, Hundreds and
Appropriations, have been alienated by and taken from the Bishopric of Bath
and Wills, the Manors of Sherburn, Sunning, and sundry others from the Bp. of
Salisbury; and sundry other Manors Lands, Tenements, Farms, from the Bishops
of Winchester, Lincoln, Ely, Chichester, Norwich, Exeter, Hereford, Coventry
and Litchfield, Durham, Carlisle, before and since 37. Henry the 8th. And had
not the Statute of 1 Lac. c. 3. restrained the Alienations of Bishops Lands and
Revenues, they had long ere this had no Lands or Rents at all to dispose of. In
the Parliament of Rasta's Abridgement of Statutes, Title Durham.
7 E. 6. by a special Act of Parliament the Bishopric of Durham, with all the
Lands and Hereditaments thereof were taken away, and settled in the King, his
Heirs and Successors. And no longer since than 21 Iac. c. 30. York-house in the
Strand was by special Act of Parliament by way of Exchange taken from the
Archbishop of York, and settled on King James, his Heirs, Successors and
Assigns, and after that on the Duke of Buckingham, upon pretext that it was for
the benefit of the Archbishops. By all which Acts and Presidents it is most
evident, that our Kings, Parliaments and Temporal Lords, may not only seize,
sequester the Temporal Lands, Goods, Estates of Bishops and Churchmen, in
cases of Delinquency and Contumacy, but likewise substract, alienate and sell
them to supply the necessities of the King and Kingdom, in times of war and
extreme necessity without Sacrilege or Impiety; which should cause our present
Archbishops, Bishops, and Cathedralment to carry themselves with greater
Loyalty and Dutifullnesse toward his Sacred Majesty, with greater humility,
sobriety, meekness and respect toward the Temporal Lords, Commons and People,
than their Predecessors have done, and make them very careful of giving just
offense, or provocation to all or any of them, especially at this present
juncture of our Ecclesiastical and Civil Officers, in so hopeful a way of
future Settlement, if their pride, avarice, ambition or indiscretion do not
interrupt them.

7ly. That Archbishops, Bishops, Deans and Chapters themselves, by their common
consent, may lawfully alienate, sell, and give away, not only their Lands and
Possession, (which were never solemnly consecrated) but even their very
consecrated Chalices, Vestments, and Ornaments of their Churches themselves,
though more peculiarly consecrated by Episcopal benedictions, more immediately
devoted to Gods service, than their Lands and other Temporalties; and that in
cases of public necessity or charity, as to relieve the Poor in time of
famine, to redeem Captives, to ransom their lawful Kings, to support their
decayed Patrons and Benefactors, to defend their native Country against
invading Enemies, or Christians against Infidels, to prevent a greater
mischief, and for the benefit of the Church in general, as sundry (...), 2.
^an. 5. Ca^^ha (...) ^. c. 32. Ca^thaginense 5. ^ 4 Agath^n. (...) ^5 Su^nes
and B^nius Con^^^ T^m 1.
ancient Councils, and the ^erra^^us, c. ^^ cause. 17. ^^. 4 and the Cl^sses
thereon, Angelus de Clavasi^. Summa Angelica and Pa^^^sta T^oumalasum Rosel^a,
Tit. Alie (...) Iunocentius, Parnent^n. with others the e cited.
Popish Canonists themselves have resolved. Yea by the Popes consent, without
any of these Causes, our Archbishops and Bishops might alienate, sell, morgage,
give away, and dispose of the Lands belonging to their Bishoprics; as the
express Dr. B^nes his works p 195, 196. Fox Acts and Monuments, vol. 2 p. 332.
clause in their Oath to the Pope, not to do it without the Popes council and
consent, imports. Rudulphi de Diceto, Imagines H^stor. col. ^0. Roger Hoveden
Annal. pars poste^ p 716, 728. 731, 732. Mat Paris in Ri^h 1. An. 1193.
When our King Richard the first was most injuriously taken in his return from
the Holy Land, and for a whole year and three months space kept Prisoner by the
Emperor of Germany, and at last put unto a ransom of one hundred thousand
pounds of Silver, after the weight of Colen, Anno 1093 the Kings Collectors
being unable to levy so great a mass of moneys; thereupon Majores quidem
Ecclesiae thesauros ab antiquis congestos temporibus, Ecclesiae Parochiales
argenteos calices praemiserunt; the Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots and Priors of
all Conventual Churches gave the fourth part of their annual Rents, and other
inferior Clergymen the Tenth of their Tithes; and the Cistercian Monks all
their Wools, toward his speedy ransom. Yea the Walsingham Ypodigma p. 48.
Chron I^hannis Brompton, col. 1250. Higden, l 7. c. 28. Henry de Knyghton, de
Event. Angl. l. col. ^108. See Holinshed. Fabian, Grafton, Speed, Daniel, Baker
in Ri^h. ^ 1.
Chronicle of Brompton and others inform us, that the Kings Collectors wanting
moneys, after a double exaction of what they could scrape together from all
parts, Postrenis ut nulla vacaret occasio ad vasa sacra et utensilia Ecclesiae
ventum est; Ieaque per omnem Anglica regni latitudinem sacri Calices
exactoribus regiis traduntur, vel paulo infra pondus redimuntur. Vasa etiam
alia, Cruces Praelatorum, anu^^ cum auro de Sanctorum fere^ris abra^o sunt
conflaia, Nota.
Nec erat hoc secundum Patrum decreta illicitum, cum urgen^tisimus necessiiatis
ar^^enlus instaret. Nec ulla erat distin^^^o (in this necessity) Clerici and
Laici, secularis and religiosi, rustici and urbani, s^a omnes indifferenter
juxta substantiae suae vires vel redditum quantitatem pro redemptione Regia
portionem suam solvere cogebantur. Privilegia, Praerogativae, Iunnunitates
Ecclesiarunt tunc silebant penitus et vacabant. Omnis enim dignitas and
libertas os suam oppilabat. Cisterciensis quoque ordinis Monachi, qui ab omni
exactione Regie hactenus immunes extiterant, tanto magis tunc onerati suerant,
quanto minus antea publici oneris senserant gravitatem. Exacti quoque and
conctilanam suarum ovium resignarunt. And should not our Bishops and Cathedral
men now for and toward his Majesty's most glorious redemption, and his three
whole Kingdoms ransom from near twelve years exile and captivity, and for the
future settlement of our Churches, Kingdoms, in sound and lasting peace, in
pursuance of his Majesty's most gracious Declarations and Engagements at Breda,
and the Generals Parliaments Engagements before his happy return into England,
to give competent satisfaction to Purchasers of their Lands, not only part with
their ancient Treasures, Chalices, Miters, Crosiers, Church Ornaments, Copes,
but likewise with their late alienated Temporalties and Revenues for competent
terms of years of lives, reserving the ancient, or an improved rent, rather
than violate the public says, peace of the King, Kingdom, Parliament, oppugn
his Majesty's royal Commands, the Lords, Commons, Parliaments, Soldiers and
Peoples desires, by unreasonable demands, or indiscreet, covetous and violent
proceedings, against Purchasors and Tenants, which may endanger if not demerit
the forfeiture, reseisure, and new sales of all their Lands and Temporal
Revenues in case of obstinacy and dis-satisfaction herein? The rather, because
our Bishops by the Laws of England, before the Statute of 1. Iac. c. 3. and
other restraining Acts, might with the consent of their Deans and Chapters, not
only lawfully lease their Lands for how many years or lives they pleased, but
likewise alien and sell the Inheritance thereof, or charge them with what
Rent-charges they pleased, especially by the Kings consent, ( as the grant of a
Rentcharge out of the Glebe of a Parsonage by the Patron or Ordinary in time
of vacancy, or of the Parson, Patron and Ordinary jointly to a Layman, shall
bind the Successors in perpetuity) as is evident by the Statutes of 37 H. 8.
c. 16. 1 Jac. c. 3. 33 H. 8. c. 31. Littleton, sect. 648. Cooks 1. Institutes,
f. 343, 344, 44, 45. and many other Lawbooks. Not to add many Presidents to
those forecited in so clear a case, it is registered by Bishop Catalogue of
Bishop^, p^ 137.
Godwin of John V^sly Bishop of Exeter in King Edward the 6th. his Reign, That
of all the Bishops of the Land he was esteemed the best Courtier, being better
liked for his civil Behavior than his Learning, which in the end turned not so
much to his credit, as to the spoil of his Church, for of twenty two Lordships
and Manors which his Predecessors had left unto him, of a goodly yearly
Revenue, he left but three, and them also leased out; and where he found 13.
Houses and Palaces (too many by 12. for any one Apostolical Bishop) well
furnished, he left only one House, bare and unfurnished, yet charged with
sundry fees and annuities; whereby this Bishopric, which sometime was
accounted one of the best became in Temporal Lands one of the meanest. If then
our Bishops and Cathedral men themselves may thus alienate, sell, charge,
exchange their Temporal Lands and Possessions, or lease them out to their
Wives, Children, Kindred, Courtiers, Friends, without Sacrilege or Impiety; No
doubt the King, Temporal Lords and Commons in Parliament, may much more
alienate, lease, charge them upon any public necessity, for the Kingdoms ease,
peace, settlement, after so many years Wars and Revolutions, without any
Sacrilege or Injustice, all circumstances duly considered.

8ly. That the Lands formerly given to Abbeys, Priories, Monastries, Templers,
Hospitalers, and other Religious Orders, were dedicated to God and the Church,
with greater Ceremonies and Solemnities, ratified by more Charters,
Confirmations of our Kings and Parliamentary Councils, and by more solemn
Anathemaes, Curses, Excommunications, then any Lands settled on Bishops, Deans,
Chapters or Cathedrals, as the Charters themselves yet extant, and our Beda,
Ingulphi Historia, Malmesbury de Gestis Regum and Pontisicum Angliae, Mat.
Paris, Mat. Westminster, Simaeon Dunelmensis, Radulfus de Diceto, Thom. Stubs
Chronicon Gervasil, Chronicon Johannis Brompton, Evidentiae Eccles. Christi
Cantuar. spelmanni concilia Tom. 1. Monasticon Anglicanum. The Legger Books of
most Abbeys, Chartae Antiq. and Patent Rolls in the Tower.
Histories resolve beyond dispute: Yet our Kings in all ages before and since
the Conquest, have not only seized their Temporalties in times of War, but
likewise detained them in their own hands, to their own use, and given them to
their Officers, Captains and Soldiers, by way of pay or recompense for their
salaries, and that both before and since the Conquest, as the Emperors of
Germany, and Kings of France, Spain, Hungary, Poland, Denmark, Sweden, Russia,
have frequently done, and that of late years too, as well as anciently by the
Jesuits persuasion, who affirm it to be lawful, and Iustas esse causas
Monasteriorum fundationes in meliores usu^ convertendi jam Pontifex, Caesar,
Episcopi, Principes judicarunt et verbis et factis, Data sunt Monasteria in
Belli sumptus, data multa Episcopis, data ad seminaria, data Parochiis, as
Alphonsus de Vargas, Relatio de Stratagem, Iesuiticum, c. 49. relates their
words, which he amplifies from c. 43, to 54. I shall instance only in some few
Domestic presidents.

Beored King of the Mercians, in the years of Christ 870. and 871, when the
invading barbarous Danes, plundered, sacked, burnt sundry Monasteries, and the
Manors belonging to them, putting the Monks and Abbots they met with to the
Sword, as well as others, without discrimination, seized upon diverse
Monasteries and their Lands, retaining most of them in his own hands, and
giving the residue of them to his Commanders and Soldiers, for the better
maintenance of his Wars and Forces against the Danes, for defense of the
Kingdom and People, against their invasions, thus recorded by Historia
Francosurri 1601. p. 86^, 869, 878, 879.
Ingulphus Abbot of Croyland. B^orredus autem Rex Merciorum hoc intermedio cum
Britonibus occupatus, qui crebris eruptionibus Occidentalem partem Regni sui
Merciae inquietabant, audiensque, Danos plagam ejus Orientalem plaga miserabili
percussisse, venit Londonias: and contracto maximo exercitu, pertransiens per
Regni sui plagas Orientales, totam Heliensem insulam fisco suo applicavit:
procedensque in patriam Girniorum omnes terras de Medeshamstedensi monasterio
in manum suam cepit, scilicet quicquid inter Stanford, Huntingdon, and Wischect
dicto monasterio dudum pertinuerat; remotiores vero terras sparsim per patriam
jacentes stipendiariis militibus exercitus sui assignavit: id secit de terris
monasterii S. Pegae de al. peiki^k.
Reifir^, quasdam sibi retinuit, quasdam militibus suis dedit: id fecit etiam
de terris monasterii Gutblaci de Croyland, quasdam stipendiariis militibus
distribuit, quasdam sibi confiscavit. Et licet venerabilis pater Godri^us
saepius repetendo penes Regem and Ministros suos multos sudores consumeret, and
chartas donatorum, Regumque confirmationes una cum suo proprio chirographo
saepissime offenderet: nihil semper nisi vacua verba reportans, demum de
negotii sui proposito penitus desperabat. Cernens itaque malitiam temporis
nimiam, and al militiam.
malitiam Regis terrarum cupidissimam, statuit tandem secum hujusmodi Regias
donationes surdo tempore petransire, ac usque mel^ora tempora succederent,
deinceps sub silentio dissimulare; laetus nimium, and exultans, quod totam
circumjacentem insulam liberam, and ab omni exactione Regali absolutam multum
specialius sibi, quam multis aliis monasteriis tunc contigerat, Regia gratia
concessisset. Recesserunt ergo illo tempore de dicto monasterio Croyland, and
usque ad praesentem diem non redierunt illae possessiones: scilicet manerium de
Spalding, datum Adelwulpho Comiti, cum omnibus pertinentiis suis; manerium de
Deping, datum Langfero militi, and panetario Reg cum omnibus pertinentiis suis;
manerium de Crox^on, datum F^rnodo militi, and vexillario Regis, cum omnibus
pertinentiis suis; manerium de Kirsoton and Kunerby in Lindefie, cum omnibus
pertinentiis datum Comiti Turgoto. Bufenha^e vero, and Halington tunc fisco
appropriata, postea per industriam Domini Turketuli Abbatis Croyland, and
donationem piissimi Regis al Edredi.
Edrad restauratoris dicto monasterio fuerant restituta. Similiter omnes
caeterae teriae aliquando Croylandiae pertinentes, quas Rex B^orredus cisco suo
assumpserat, scilicet, Quarpelade, Su^turton, Langtoft, Baston, Repingale,
Nirfby, Draiton, Chirning, Glaphtorn, Adington, Standon, and Badby, per gratiam
inclyti Regis Edredi, and diligentiam Abbatis Turketuli Croylandiae (who
redeemed them with very great sums of money, whith he mentions p. 878, 879.)
reddebantur. Transiens tunc Rex B^orredus cum sito exercitu in Lyndes^e,
latissimas terras monasterio de Bardney dudum pertinentes fisco suo accepit;
al. remotas.
immotas vero, and in diversis patriis al. iacentes div^sim.
divisas jacentes, militibus suis dedit.

Besides, the same Historia p. 895, 896.
Ingulphus records, that in the 6. year of King Edward the Confessor, (though a
great Patron of Abbots, Monks and Monasteries) Anno Dom. 1048. Wulgat Abbot of
Pegeland, by sundry suits in the Kings Courts of Justice, not only lost the
site of his Monastery, but after that, all the Manors and Lands formerly given
thereunto, after the Abbot of Burge has recovered the former site of the
Monastery, and enforced him to rebuild the Abbey in another place. Illo in
tempore venerabilis pater Dominus Wulgatus Abbas Pegelandiae diutissimam
calumniam passus ab Abbatibus Burgi Elfino, A^wino and Leofrico, Abbatiae suae
sedem amittens tandem succubuit, and (proh nesas) totum situm monasterii sui
judicio regalis curiae perdidit. Tantum tunc potuit super justitiam pecunia,
contra veritatem versutia, and in curia Regis Hardecnuti Comitis Godwini
potentia. Cumque praedictus Abbas Wulgatus amisso situ monasterii sui, juxta
proximi fluvii crepidine^ Weland nomine, in suo manerio magis vicino de
Northamburgt fundamenta novi monasterii jecisset, and illuc Abbatiam suam
transfer disponeret, Ecclesiamque ac dormitorium cum caeteris claustralibus
officinis, adjutus multorum fidelium Eleemosyuls reaedificare non segniter
insudaret, Fernotus miles, and Dominus de Bosworth dictum manerium de Northburt
datum fuisse de progenitoribus ejus monasterio sanctae Pegae, and monachis
ibidem Deo servientibus ex Abbatis propriis chirographis patenter ostendit.
Unde consequenter allegavit, quod cum Deo and sanctae Pegae Abbas Wulgatus and
monachi sui a modo ibidem non servirent, dictum manerium a modo non haberent.
Acceptatum est hoc a Regis justitiario, and confestim adjudicatum est dictum
manerium de Northburt cum omnibus suis pertinentiis praedicto militi Fernoto,
and tanquam jus suum haereditarium, de monachis Ecclesiae sanctae Pegae
alienatum perpetuo and sublatum. Quod cum per universum Regnum citius fuisset
cognitum, scilicet Abbatem de Peikirk prius amisisse monasterium suum, and
consequenter manerium ad monasterium quondam pertinens; similiter Edmerus miles
and Dominus de Holbrok calumniam movit contra eundem Abbatem and monachos suos
de manerio suo de Makley; and Horsingus de Wathe calumniatus est and pro
manerio suo de Badington; and Siwardus Comes de manerio suo de Bernack; and
Hugolonus thesaurarius de manerio de Helieston; and alii plures de aliis
maneriis dicto monasterio dudum pertinentibus; and omnes eadem ratione in dicta
causa contra monachos obtinuerunt; and tam de maneriis, quam de monasterio suo
dictus Abbas de Peikirk and monachi sui nequiter ac crudeliter ejecti sunt: ut
nunquam alicui veniat damnum solum. Cum itaque Abbas Wulgatus and conventus
suus, monachi scilicet 18. sic de monasterio destituti vagabundi and in proximo
dispergendi in omnem ventum pro extrema miseria fluctuarent: misertus eorum
piissimus rex Edwardus omnes in suam curiam suscepit, and usquequo eis
provideret,, suam capellam, ac aulam quotidie frequentare imperavit. If then
Lands formerly dedicated to God and Monasterial Churches, may thus be taken
away and recovered from them by Law, without sacrilege or injustice; they may
by like reason upon most occasions be alienated and taken from them by the
King, Parliament, and Temporal Lords.

De Nugis Curialium.
Gualther Mapes, and In his Britannia Glocestershire, p. 177, 1^8. See John
Bale his Acts of English Vo^^ries.
Mr. Cambden out of him inform us, that in King Edward the Confessors reign,
Godwin Earl of Kent having a design to gain the Manor of Barkley in
Gloucester-shire to himself, belonging to a Nunnery there situated where the
Castle now stands, passing by the Nonnery, left his Nephew, a very beautiful
and elegant young man in the Nunnery, who lodged therein so long under pretext
of sickness, that with his costly Gifts, Beauty and Courtship, he so far
corrupted the chastity of the Abbess and Nuns, (who attended him by turns)
that he begat and left them all great with child, and turned these lambs into
Wolves. After which posting thence to Earl Godwin, and acquainting him
therewith; he thereupon informing the King that the Abbess and all the Nuns
were pr^stituted Strumpets, and great with Child; the King issued a Commission
to enquire thereof, and finding it to be true, the Nuns were cast out, and the
Manor given to Earl Godwin, who begged it of the King, from whom it came to the
Barons of Barkly, who have enjoyed it as the Head of their Barony for any
Generations, without any Sacrilege or Impiety. By the Common law of England
our Kings in all Ages by their Prerogative Royal in times of war, danger, and
upon sundry other occasions have seized the Lands, Benefices, Rents, Revenues,
Moneys, Goods of Priors, Abbots, Monks, and other Ecclesiastical Persons, who
were aliens to their own uses, without Sacrilege or Impiety; as is evident by
the Fine Rolls of 23 E. 1. m. 1, 2. claus. 23 E. 1. dors. 4. cl. 24 E. 1. m.
11. claus. 25 E. 1. dors. 12, 20, 22. claus. 20 E. 2. dors. 9. Rot. Fin. 20 E.
2. m. 9. Rot. Fin. 14 E. 3. m. 11, 12, 18, 19, 20, etc. cl. 15 l^. 3. pars 3.
dors. 6. Rot Fin. 16 E. 3. m. 26. cl. 19 E. 3. pars 1. m. 17. Rot. Fin. ^3 E.
3. m. 26. and sundry other (...) and Cla^s^ Roll, in t^^ Tower, ^y sundry ^
Parliament l^o^ls, and our ^
l^^w^ooks too. And upon the Commons Petition in the Parliament of 2. H. 4. ^
the Prior aliens Lands we^e not only ^ei^ed into the Kings hands, but likewise
sold and ahea^red into Laymens hands, to maintain the wars against the French
and Welshmen.

To pre^e^mit all particular seisu^es, alienations, sale, substractions of
Abbots, Priors, Monasteries, and Religions Persons Lands, mentioned in our
Histories and Record, the respective Parliaments of 27 H. 8. 31 H. 8. c. 1^. 37
H. 8. c. ^1 E. c. 14 by several Acts (collected by Rastall, Title, Monasteryes)
upon Mr. Fish his supplication of Beggars, several Petitions and Complaints of
the Commons, and Inquisition taken upon oath, and returned into the Exchequer
of the Sodomitical, adulterous, incontinent, vicious lives of Abbots, Monks,
Nuns, and other religious Persons, remaining on Record in the Exchequer,
published at large by John Speed in his History, Weaver, and ^
others, totally suppressed all Monasteries, Prio^ies, Nunneries, Cells, and
other religious Houses, and settled the inheritance of all their Lands, Rents,
Revenues, Possessions whatsoever in the Crown of England, and that without any
sacrilege, impiety or injustice; never since resumed, nor ever likely to be
restored to them in succeeding Ages, being for the most part alienated, sold
and distributed by our Kings into the hands of the Nobility, Gentry, Commonalty
and Corporation, of the Kingdom; See John Bale his Acts of English ^otaries.
and into the hands of all or most of the Archbishops, Bishops Deans, Chapters,
Prebends, Colleges in England and Ireland; who repute it neither Sin, nor
Sacrilege in themselves to receive, detain, enjoy these Monastical Lands and
Possessions; out of whose spoil; the Bishoprics Deans and Chapters of
Gloucester, Ch^t^r, Oxford, Peterborough, and Westminster it self were first
erected by Parliaments and Statutes of 31 H. 8. c. 15.33 H. 8. c. 31, 34, and
35 H 8. c. 12, 15, 17. and the Letters Patents of King Henry the eight, See the
Patent Rolls of 3^ and 34, and 35, and 36 H 8.
under his Great Seal, translating the Conventual Churches of Bristol,
Gloucester, Oxford, Peterborough, and Westminster into Cathedral Churches, and
Sees of Bishops, and the Abbots, Priors, Covents of these Churches into
Bishops, Deans, Chapters, limiting the bounds of their Diocese, (taken out of
other ancient Bishoprics) and granting them all their Episcopal and
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, as derived only from our Kings, the Supreme heads
of the Church of England under Christ, and to be exercised only in their Names,
Styles, Rights, steeds by these Bishops and their Officers, as the Statutes of
26 H. 8. c. 1. 37 H. 8. c. 16, 17. 1 Edw. 6. c. 2. 1 Eliz. c. 1. 5 Eliz. c. 1.
8 Eliz. c. 1. and their very Patents resolve us; not by any real, or adherent
Divine Episcopal Jurisdiction derived to them immediately from Christ himself.
If then it were neither Sac^iledge, Impiety, nor Injustice in these Parliaments
and our Kings, to take away, sell, alienate these Lands and Revenue, of Priors,
Monks, Monasteries, and divert them from their primitive uses, as our Bishops,
Dean, and Chapters must grant as well as others; or else renounce resign most
of the Temporalties, Rents, Appropriations and Revenue, they now enjoy,
originally belonging to Monasteries; then by the self-same reason, it can be no
Sacrilege, impiety or injustice, for the King, Lords, Commons and Parliament
upon the like grounds and considerations to take away, sell, alienate the
temporal Land, of Bishops, Deans and Chapters, if they offend, or obstinately
refuse to give the late Purchasers of them competent satisfaction, for the
Kingdoms Peace and Tranquillity, upon their commands and votes.

9ly. That is evident by our Beda, ^^gulphus, Mat. Westminster, Mat. Paris.
Simeon Dunelm. Thomas Stubs, Gervan^^us Dorobernensts, Ricardus Hagustaldensis.
Spelmanni Council. Tom. 1. Monasticon Anglicanum, Antiqu. Eccles. Brit. Godw.
Catalogue of Bishops, ^v^dentiae Ecclesiae Christi Cantuar. Chartae Antiquae,
and the Patents Rolls in the Tower.
Histories, Records, Leager-books, that all or most of the Manors, Lands,
Tenements in England and Wales, now in the possession of the King, Queen,
Nobility, Gentry, and Commons of England, have heretofore in some Age or other
been solemnly consecrated, devoted, and given by their Ancestors to some
Cathedral, or Collegiate Church, Abbey, P^io^y, Nunnery, Cell, religious House
or other, or else Magna Char^n, c. 3^. 7 E. 1. Rasta^ M^rt main 2. 15 R. 2. c.
^. See Brook and (...), Tit. Mat main, and Abby^
by art, fraud, monyes vested in and settled on them in perpetuity as the
Churches Patrimony; Yet notwithstanding they have been alienated, subtracted
or taken wholly from them in successive Ages, and the inheritances of them
settled in our Kings, Nobles, Gentry and Yeomanry, without any scruple of
Consciences, or real or imported guilt of Sacrilege. From whence it inevitably
follows, See Rastals A^^idgement Tit. Monasteries, 3^ H. 8. c. 16.
That is the greatest part of all the Temporalties, Lands and Revenues which
our Archbishops, Bishops, Deans, Chapters, Prebends, Abbots, Priors, Monks,
Templars, Hospitallers, and other Ecclesiastical or religious persons, formerly
enjoyed by as good right, title, in Law, Conscience, as those now or any of
them yet enjoy them, might be lawfully alienated, or justly taken from them by
our Kings, Parliaments, and Temporal Lords, and may be still detained from them
by the Purchasers of them, their Heirs or Assigns, without Sacrilege, Impiety,
or Injustice; Then by the self same reason, the Lands and Temporalties they
lately possessed or yet possess, may upon any public necessity or just
occasion be alienated, sold and taken from them by our Kings, Parliaments,
Lords and Common, without the guilt of Sacrilege or Impiety; so as there be a
competent maintenance left for the Evangelical Ministers, Bishops and Pastors
of Parochial Churches, for the instruction, edification and salvation of the
Peoples souls committed to their charge; There being the self-same Is it be a
real Sacrilege to alienate any Lands or Houses formerly dedicated to
religious, idolatrous or superstitious uses, as Prel^tical Clergy men assert,
then ^ll such Lands ought to be restored to their primative uses, or else none
at all.
reason of Sacrilege, and no Sacrilege, in alienating, substracting, selling,
detaining the major part of their Lands and temporalties as of the Minor: Or
else if it be real Sacrilege to alienate, sell, detain any parcels of Lands or
Temporalties, formerly given by our ancient Parliaments to others, or vested in
the Church or Churchmen; then all our Kings, Parliaments, Nobles, Commons,
must be actually guilty of these sins; and as far forth obliged in Justice,
Conscience, to make full restitution of all Church Lands whatsoever, formerly
alienated or subtracted, as the late Purchasers of Bishops and Cathedral
Lands, and then the whole Kingdom, or far greatest part thereof, must
henceforth become the Churches and Churchmens Patrimony, and our Kings, Nobles,
Gentry, Commonalty of all degrees, their mere Homagers, Vassals, Farmers, and
Tenants at sufferance; the antiquity of former alienations, sales of
Church Lands by our Ancestors, if Sacrilegious and Impious, rather aggravating,
than extenuating the Crime; but no ways justifying the Legality thereof; it
being a Maxim in our Law, Regulae juris.
Quod ab initio non valet, tractu temporis non convalescit, and a Principle in
Divinity, that the 1 Cor. 5. 7, 8. Col. 3. 9. 1. Pet. 1. 18.
older any sin is, and the longer persevered in, the more execrable, and fit to
be repented, redressed: and that Alexander Alensis Sum. Theol. pars 4. quaest.
24. Summa Angelica, and summa Rosella, Tit. Restitutio.
Heirs, Assignees, and Successors are obliged to make restitution of
sacrilegious Rapines as well as the immediate Authors of them.

10ly. That the Dispensation and Indulgence of Pope Julius the 3d. himself,
Cardinal Pole Archbishop of Canterbury his Legate, upon the Petition of all the
Bishops and Clergy of England, though Papists, and the memorable Act of the
whole Parliament of 1, and 2 Philip and Mary, c. 8. reciting them, and
confirming all alienations, seisures, sales of the Lands, Manors, Rents,
Revenues, Goods, as well of Archbishops, Bishops, Deans, Chapters, Prebends,
Cathedrals, as of Abbots, Priors, Monks, and other Religious Persons and
Monasteries, made by our Kings, or Parliaments to the Crown, and the Purchasers
of all and every of them, and their Heirs, from the twentyeth year of King
Henry the 8th. till the first of Queen Mary, during their revolt and pretended
scisme from the Church of Rome, and of all Ordinations, Presentations,
Ecclesiastical Sentences and Proceedings, for the public peace, benefit,
tranquillity of the Church and Realm of England, and satisfaction of Purchasors,
may for ever silence our Prelates and Cathedral men's loud cries against the
sacrilege of the late Sellers and Buyers of Bishops and other Cathedral men's
Lands, and enduce them to give the Purchasors of them full satisfaction by
confirming their sales for a competent time. For which end I shall transcribe
so much of that memorable Act as concerns our present case and condition.

1 and 2 Phil. and Mary, ch 8.
We the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the Commons in this present Parliament
assembled, representing the whole body of this Realm, reduced received by your
Majesty's intercession to the unity of Christ's Church, and the obedience of the
Sea Apolike of Rome, and the Popes holiness governing the same, make most
humble suite unto your Majesty's, to be likewise means and intercessours, that
all occassions of contention, hatred, grudge, suspicion and trouble, both
outwardly and inwardly in men's Consciences, which might arise amongst us, by
reason of disobedience, may by authority of the Popes holiness, and by
ministration of the same unto us, by the most reverend Father in God the Lord
Cardinal Poole, by dispensation, toleration, or permission respectively, as the
case shall require, be abolished and taken away, and by authority sufficient
these Articles following, and generally all others, when any occasion shall so
require, may be provided for, and confirmed.

First, that all Bishoprics, Cathedral Churches, Hospitals, Colleges, Schools,
and other such foundations now continuing, made by authority of Parliament, or
otherwise established, according to the order of the Laws of this Realm,
since this scisme, may be confirmed and continued for ever.

Item that marriages made infra gradus prohibitos consanguinitatis, affinitatis,
cognationis spiritualis, or which might be made void propter impedimentum
publicae bonestatis, justitiae, or for any other cause, prohibited by the
Canons, only may be confirmed, and children born of those marriages declared
legittimate, so as those marriages were made, according to the Laws of the Realm
for the time being, and be not directly against the laws of God, nor in such
case, as the Sea Apostolic has not used to dispense withal.

That institutions of Benefices, and other promotions ecclesiastical and
dispensations, made according to the form of the Act of Parliament, may be
likewise confirmed.

That all judicial Processes, made before any Ordinaries of this Realm, or
before any Delegates upon any Appeals, according to the order of the Laws of
the Realm, may be likewise ratified and confirmed.

And finally where certain Acts and Statutes have been made in the time of the
late scisme, concerning the lands, and hereditaments of Archbishopricks, and
Bishoprics, the suppression, and dissolution of Monasteries, Abbyes, Priories,
Chauntries, Colleges, and all other the Goods and Cattels of religious Houses.
Since the which time, the right and dominion of certain Lands, and
hereditaments, goods and cattels belonging to the same, be dispersed abroad,
and come to the hands and possessions of diverse and sundry persons, who by
gift, purchase, exchange, and other means, according to the order of the Laws
and Statutes of this Realm, for the time being have the same. For the avoiding
of all scruples that might grow by any the occasions aforesaid, or by any other
ways or means whatsoever: It may please your Majesty's, to be Intercessours
Mediators to the said most reverend Fathers, Cardinal Pole, that all such
Causes and Quarrels as by pretense of the said scisme, or by any other
occasion, or mean whatsoever, might be moved by the Popes holiness, or Sea
Apostolic, or by any other Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical, may be utterly removed
and taken away, so as all persons having sufficient conveyance of the said
Lands, and hereditaments, Goods and Cattels, as is aforesaid, by the Common
Laws, Acts or Statutes of this Realm, may without scruple of Conscience enjoy
them without impeachment or trouble, Nota.
by pretense of any general Council, Canons or Ecclesiastical Laws, and clear
from all dangers of the censures of the Church.

And conformable hereunto, the Bishops and Clergy of the Province of Canterbury
have presented to your Majesty's a supplication in this tenor that follows.

The Supplication of the Clergy.
Nos Episcopi and Clerus Cantuariensis provinciae in hac Synodo more nostro
solito, dum Regni Parliamentum celebratur, congregati, cum omni debita
humilitate and reverentia, exponimus Majestatibus vestris, quod licet
Ecclesiarum, quibus in Episcopos, Decanos, Archidiaconos, rectores, and
vicarios praefecti sumus, and animarum, quae nobis and curae nostrae subjectae
sunt, and earundem bonorum jurisdictionum, and jurium, ex sacrorum Canonum
dispositione, defensores et curatores constituti sumus, et propterea ipsarum
bona, jurisdictiones, et jura in pernicioso hujus Regni praeterito scismate
deperdita et amissa, omni studio, and totis nostris viribus, recuperare, and ad
pristinum Ecclesiarum jus revocare, juris remediis niti deberemus: Nichilominus
tamen habito prius per nos super hac re maturo Consilio, Nota.
and deliberatione ingenue fatemur, nos optime cognoscere, quam haec bonorum
Ecclesiasticorum difficilis, and quasi impossibilis esset recuperatio propter
multiplices, ac pene inextricabiles super his habitos contractus, and
dispositiones, and quod si ea tentaretur, quies and tranquillitas Regni facile
perturbaretur, and vnitas Ecclesiae Catholicae, quae jam pietate, and
aucthoritate Majestatum vestrarum hoc in Regno introducta est, cum maxima
difficultate suum debitum progressum; and finem sortiri non posset. Nota.
Ideo nos bonum and quietem publicam privatis commeditatibus, and salutem tot
animarum praecioso Christi sanguine redemptarum terrenis bonis anteponentes,
and non quae nostra, sed quae Jesus Christi sunt quaerentes, Majestates vestras
enixe rogamus, eisque humiliter supplicamus, ut reverendissimo in Christo
patri, Domino Reginaldo Cardinali Polo, ad ipsas and universum hoc Angliae
regnum sanctissimi Domini nostri, Domini Iulii, Papae tertii, and Apostolicae
sedis de latere legato, haec nomine nostro insinuare, and apud eum intercedere
dignentur, ut in hiis bonis Ecclesiasticis in part, vel in toto arbitrio suo
juxta facultates sibi ab eodem sanctissimo Domini nestro Papa concessas,
eorundem bonorum detentoribus clargiendis et relaxandis publicum bonum privato;
Nota.
pacem and tranquillitatem dissidiis, and perturbationibus, atque animarum
salutem bonis terrenis prae^erre, and anteponere velit, Nos enim in omnibus
quae ab ipso legato statuta, and ordinata circa haec bona fuerint, exnune,
prout extune, and econtra consensum nostrum praestamus, Nota.
imo etiam ut in praemissis se difficilem aut restrictum reddere non velit,
Majestates vestrae nostro nomine cum hortari, and rogare dignabuntur.

Forasmuch as the said most Reverend Father the Lord Legate, at the
intercession of your Majesty's, has by the authority of the Sea Apostolic,
sufficiently dispensed in the matters specified in the said several
Supplications, as in his said Letters of Dispensation is contained more at
large. The tenor whereof ensues.

Reginaldus miseratione divina Sanctae Mariae in Cosmodin Sanctae Romanae
Ecclesiae Diaconus Cardinalis Polus nuncupatus, The Dispensation of the
Cardinal.
ad Serenissimos Philippum and Mariam, Angliae Reges, fidei defensores, and
universum Angliae regnum, Sanctissimi Domini nostri Papae, and sedis
Apostolicae de latere legatus, eisdem Serenissimis Philippo and Mariae Regibus
salutem in Domino sempiternam. Cum supremum Consilium istius regni Parliamentum
nuncupatum Majestatibus vestris, per suos supplices libellos exposuisset, quod
perniciocissimo scismate, in hoc regno alias vigente, quod nunc dei
mis^ricordia, and Majestatum vestrarum pictate extinctum est, aucthoritatem
ipsius Parliamenti, nonnulli Episcopatus divisi, and ex his aliquae inferiores
Ecclesiae, in Cathedrales erectae, and scholae, atque hospitalia fundata,
necnon plurimae dispensationes and beneficiorum provisiones sactae fuerunt, ac
multae personae quibus persuasum suerat, Iuris Canonici dispositiones, hoc in
Regno amplius locum non habore: inter se in gradi^us consunguinitatis vel
assinitatis de jure prohibitis, and aliis impedimentis Canonicis f^^i
obstantibus watrimonia, per verba de praesentii contraxerunt, and multi actus
judiciarii, and processus, ram in primis, quam vlteriori us instantiis super
rebus spi^itualitus, and Ecclesiasticis coram Iudicibus tam Ordinariis quam
delegatis, qui authoritate laicali procedebant, habiti and servati, ad super
eis etiam sententiae ^atae, and promulgatae fuerunt, and bona Ecclesiastica per
deversas einsdem regui personas occupata, and apprehensa fuerunt. Quae quidem
licet ex sacrorum Canonum institutis irrita declarari possent, tamensi ad alium
statum, quam in quo nune sent, revocarentur, publica pax, and quies universi
regni turbaretur, and maxima confusio oriretur, praesertim si dictorum honorum
possessores molestarentur, and propteria majestatibus vestris humiliter
supplicaverint, ut apud nos intercedere dignentur, at premissarum rerum
firmitati, and stabilitati, and simul hujus reqni quieti, et tranquilitati de
benignitate Apostolica providere velimus. Cumque Episcopi quoque deinde, ac
reliq^us provinciae Canterburiensis Clerus totum sere corpus Ecclesiasticum
regui representans, ad quos haec bonorum Ecclesiasticorum causa maxim
pertinet, expositerint, quod haec bona ad jus ecclesiarum re vocare non
pessunt, cum pax universalis, et avies hujus regni turbetur, et causa fidei
atque unitatis Ecclesiae, jam toto omnium consensu hoc in regno introducta, in
maximum periculum adducatur, et propterea ipsi quoque supplicaverint, ut apud
nos intercedere velint, ut in his bonis Ecclesiasticis possissorilus relaxandus
restrictier difficiles esse nollemus, majestates autem vestrae, ad quas maxim
spectat providere, ut regnum ipsarum potestati, regimini et curae commissum in
pace et tranquillitate conservetur. His supplicationibus et postulatis cognitis
et mature consideratis, judicaverint ea omnia, et maxim illa, quae in bonorum
Ecclesiasticorum causa petuntur, pro causa fidei et pro pace publica, per nos
debere sine ulla dilatione concedi, et quemadmodum rogatae suerunt, apud nos
intercedere dignatae fuerint, prout in supplicationibus per idem supremum
consilium, et Episcopos ac clerum praelatum majestatibus vestris porreois,
atque in libello intercessi nis per easdem majestates vestras nobis simul cum
aliis supplicationibus exhibito, latius apparet. Ideirco nos qui ad majestates
vestras, et hoc nobilissimum vestrum regnum a Sanctissimo Domino nostro Iulio
Papa tertio ipsius et sedis Apostolicae de latere legati missi sumus, ut regnum
istud, quod jam diu ab Ecclisiae Catholicae unitate separatum fuerat, Deo et
Ecclisiae Christi, ejusque in terris vicario rereconciliaremus: et ut ea omnia
quae ad pacemet tranquillitatem hujus regni pertinerent, omni studio
procuraremus, postquam dei benignitate, et majestat^m v^strarum pietate, per
authoritatem ejusdem Sanctissimi Domini nostri Papae, cujus vices hic
sustin^mus, reconciliatio jam facta est, ut paci et tranquillitati regni
praesati consulamus, atque utunitas Ecclesiae, ex qua salus tot animarum
praecioso Christi sanguine redemptarum dependet, hoc in regno jam introducta
corroboraretur, et salva permaneat, cum utrinsque rei stabilitatem in eo maximo
consistere, si borum Ecclesiasticorum bonorum poss^ssoribus molestia nulla
inferatur quo nimus ea teneant, tot et tam gravia testimonia nobis fidem
faciant, et majestatum vestrarum intercessio, quae pro unitate Ecclesiae, et
sedis Apostolicae aucthoritate hoc in regno instauranda tam studiose, and tam
pie elaborarunt, eam quam par est aucihoritatem apud nos habeat, and ut
universum hoc regnum sedis Apostolicae maternam vere indulgentiam, and
charitatem erga se agnoscat, and re ipsa experiatur: quoscunque ad quos infra
scripta pertinent, ^ quibusvis excommunicationis, suspensionis, et inter dicti,
aliisque Ecclesiasticis sententiis, censuris, and poenis a jure, vel ab homine
quavis occasion vel causa latis, si quibus quomod^libet innodati existunt, ad
effectum praesentium dumtaxat consequendum harum serie absolventes, and
absolutos sore consentes, aucthoritate Apostolica, per litteras Sanctissimi
domini nostri D. Iulii Papae tertii nobis concessa, and qua fungimur in hac
part, tenore praesentium dispensamus: Cathedral Churches, Hospitals and
Schools.
quod omnes and singulae Cathedralium Ecclesiarum erectiones, hospitalium, et
scholarum fundationes tempore praeleriti scismatis, licet de facto et nulliter
attentatae in eo statu, in quo nunc sunt, perpetus firmae et stabiles
permaneant, illisque Apostolicae firmitatis robur adjicimus, it a ut non ea
aucthoritate, qua prius, sedea, quam nunc eis tribuimus, fact^ ab omnibus
censcantur, et cum omnibus et singulis personis regnipraedicti, quae in aliquo
consunguinita vel affinit atis `gradu etiam multiplici, vel cognationis
spiritualie, Marriages and Children.
sen publicae honestatis justitiae impedimento de jure positivo introductis,
and in quibus sanctissimus Dominus noster Papa dispensare consuevit, matrimonia
scienter vel ignoranter de sacto contraxerint, ut aliqua impedimentorum
praem^ssorum, non obstante coru^ matrimoniis sic contractis, libere, and licite
remanere, seu illa de novo contrahere possint, misericorditer in Domino
dispensamus, prolem susceptam, suscipiendam legitimam, provisio.
decernentes; ita tamen ut qui scienter and malitiose contraxerint, a sententia
excommunicationis, and ab incestus sue Such marriages defined Sacrilege by this
Cardinal.
sacrilegii reatu, absolutionem a suo ordinario, vel curato, quibus id faci^n^i
facultatem concedimus, obtineant, ac omnes Ecclesiasticas seculares, seu
quorumvis ordinum regulares personas quae aliquas impetrationes,
dispensationes, concessiones, gratias, and indulta, tam Ordines quam beneficia
Ecclesiastica, Dispensation; and privileges.
seu alias spirituales materias praetensa aucthoritate supremitatis Ecclesiae
Anglicanae, licet nulliter, and de facto obtinuerint, and ad cor reversae
Ecclesiae unitati restitutae fuerint, in suis Ordinibus, and beneficiis per nos
ipsos, seu a nobis ad id deputatos misericorditer recipiemus, prout jam multae
receptae fuerunt, secumque super his opportune in Domino dispensavimus. Ac
omnes processus in quibusvis instantiis coram quibusvis judicibus, Process
judicial.
tam ordinariis quam delegatis, etiam laicis super materiis spiritualibus
habitos and formatos, et sententias super eis latas, licet nulliter et de
facto, quoad nullitatem ex defectu jurisdictionis praefato tantum insurgentem
sanamus, illosque et illas aucthoritate Apostolica confirmamus. Ac quibusvis
hujus regni personis, ad quarum manus bona Ecclesiastica ex quocunque contractu
seu titulo oneroso vel lucrativo jam devenerint, Possessors of Church-goods.
illaque tenuerint, seu etiam teneant, omnes et quoscunque fructus ex eisdem
bonis, licet indebite perceptos, in totum remittimus et relaxamus: Volentes ac
decernentes, quod dictorum bonorum Ecclesiasticorum tam mobilum quam immobilium
possessores praesati non possint in praesenti, nee in posterum, seu per
Conciliorum generalium, vel provincialium dispositiones, seu decretales
Romanorum pontifioum Epistolas, seu aliam quamounque censuram Ecclesiasticam in
dictis bonis, seu corundem possessione molestari, inquietari, vel perturbari,
nec eis aliquae censurae vel poenae Ecclesiasticae propter hujusmodi
detentionem, seu non restitutionem irrogari vel infligi, and sic per quoscunque
judices and auditores sublata eis, qua suis aliter judicandi and interpretandi
facultate, and aucthoritate judicari and diffiniri debere, and quicquid secus
attemptari contigerit, irritum and inane fore decernimus, non obstantibus
premissis defectibus, and quibusvis Apostolicis, ac in provincialibus, and
synodalibus conciliis editis, specialibus vel generalibus constitutionibus,
caeterisque contrariis quibuscunque. Admonemus tamen cum divisio Episcopatuum,
and erectio Cathedralium Ecclesiarum sint de majoribus cansis, quae summo
Pontifici sunt reservatae, recurrendum esse ad suam Sanctitatem, and ab ea
suppliciter postulandum, ut haec confirmare, seu de novo facere dignetur. Et
licet omnes res mobiles Ecclesiarum indistincte iis, qui eos tenent
relaxaverimus, eos tamen admonitos esse volumus, ut ante oculos habente divini
judicii severitatem contra Balthasarem Regem Babilonis, qui vasa saera non ase,
sed a Patre e templo ablata in prophano usus convertit ea propriis Ecclesiis si
extant, vel aliis restituant. Hortante, etiam, and per viscera misericordiae
Jesus Christi obsestantes cos omnes, quos haec res tangit, ut salutis suae non
omnino immemores, hoc saltem efficiciant, ut ex bonis Ecclesiasticis, maxim
iis, quae ratione personatunm and vicariatuum populi ministrorum sustentationi
fuerint specialiter destinata, seu aliis Cathedralibus, and aliis quae nunc
extant, inferioribus Ecclesus curam animarum exercentibus ita provideatur, et
earum pastores, personae et vicarii commode, et honest juxta little qualitatem,
et statum sustentari possint, et curam animarum laudabiliter exercere, et onera
incumbentia congrue supportare. Datum Lambeth prope Loudinum Wintonien.
Diocese. Anno Nativitatis Domini Millessimo, quingentesimo, quinquagesimo
quarto. Nono Call. Ianuarii Pontif. Sanctissimi in Christo patris, et Domini
nostri, Domini Iulii, divina providentia Papae tertii. Anno quinto.

Reginaldus Cardinalis Polus Legatus.
We the said Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons in this present
Parliament assembled, rendering most humble thanks to your Majesty's, by whose
intercession and means we have obtained the said Dispensations of the Popes
holiness by the most reverend Father in God, his Legate, most humbly beseeches
the same, that it may be ordained as follows.

And therefore be it enacted by the Authority of this present Parliament, that
all and singular Articles and Clauses contained in the said Dispensation, as
well touching the establishment of Bishoprics, and Cathedral Churches, as also
the confirmation of marriages in degrees prohibited by the Canons of the Church,
the legitimation of Children, and the ratification of Process, and of Sentences
in matters Ecclesiastical, touching the invalidity of them for want of
Jurisdiction, and the institutions and destitutions, of, and in Benefices and
Promotions ecclesiastical, dispensations, and graces, given by such order, as
the public Laws of the Realm then approved, Nota.
and all other things before contained, in the said Letters of dispensation,
shall remain and be reputed and taken, to all intents and constructions in the
Laws of this Realm, lawful, good, and effectual to be alleged and pleaded in
all Courts ecclesiastical and temporal, for good and sufficient matter, either
for the Plaintiff or Defendant, without any allegation, or objection, to be
made against the validity of them, by pretense of any general Council, Canon,
or Decree, to the contrary made, or to be made in that behalf.

And whereas diverse and sundry late Monasteries, Priories, Nota.
Commandries and late Nunneries, Deaneries, Prebends, Colleges, Hospitals,
Houses of Friars, Chauntries, and other religious ecclesiastical Houses and
places, and the Manors, Graunges, Messuages, Lands, Tenements, Rectories,
Tithes, Pentious, Portions, Vicarages, Churches, Chapels, Advowsons,
Nominations, Patronages, Annuities, Rents, Reversions, Services, and other
Possessions and Hereditaments to the late Monasteries, Priors, Nunneries,
Commaundries, Deaneries Chauntries, Prebends, Houses of Friars, Colleges,
Hospitals, and other religious and ecclesiastical Houses and Places, Nota.
and to sundry Archbishopricks and Bishoprics within this Realm, late
appertaining and belonging, came as well to the hands and possession of the
said King of famous memory Henry the 8. father unto your Majesty, our said
Sovereign Lady by dissolution, gift, grant, surrender, attainder, or otherwise,
as also to the hands and possession of diverse and sundry other persons, and
bodies politic and corporate, by sundry means, conveyances, and assurances,
according to the order of the Laws and Statutes of this Realm.

And where also diverse Manors, Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments, Nota.
parcel of the possessions of Archbishopric and Bishoprics, and many and
sundry late Deaneries, Colleges, Chauntries, Rectories, Prebends, free Chapels,
Guyldes, and Fraternityes, Manors, Houses, Graunges, Lands, Tenements, Rents,
Services, and other Ecclesiastical Possessions, Hereditaments, Goods, and
Cattels to the said Archbishopricks, Bishoprics, Deaneries, Colleges,
Chauntries, free Chapels, Rectories, Guyldes, and Fraternityes, late
appertaining and belonging, or appointing, to and for the finding of Priests,
Obyttes, Lyghts, or other like purpose, came as well to the hands and
possession of the late noble King Edward the sixth, Brother unto your Majesty
Sovereign Lady, by virtue of an Act of Parliament thereof made, or otherwise, as
also the hands and possessions of diverse and sundry other persons, and bodies
politic and corporate by sundry means, conveyances and assurances, according
to the order of the Laws of this Realm: a great number of which said late
Monasteries, Priories, Nunneries, Commaundries, Deaneries, Colleges, Hospitals,
Prebends, Chauntries, free Chapels, Guyldes, and Fraternities, and the Manors,
Granges, Messuages, Lauds, Tenements, Rents, Reversions, Services, Tithes,
Pentions, Portions, Vicarages, Churches, Chapels, Advowsons, Nominations,
Patronages, Annuities, and Hereditaments, Goods, and Cattels, to the said
Monasterie^, Nunneries, Commaundries, Deaneries, Colleges, Hospitals,
Chauntries, free Chapels, Guyldes, Fraternities, and other Ecclesiastical
Houses, Archbishopricks, and Bishoprics belonging, Nota.
as well for great sums of money, as for other good and reasonable causes and
considerations, have been conveyed, and assured to diverse the Subjects, and
bodies politic of this Realm, as well by the said King Henry the eight, the
said King Edward the sixth, and by your Highness our Sovereign Lady, and
jointly by both your Majesty's, as also by diverse the Owners of the said
Ecclesiastical possessions, which said conveyances and assurances by their
sundry Letters Patents, and other writings more plainly do and may appear.
Forasmuch as the said most reveverend Father, has also by the said
Dispensations, removed and taken away all matter of impeachment, trouble, and
danger, which by occasion of any general Council, Canon, or Decree
Ecclesiastical, might touch and disquiet the possessions of such Goods
movables, lands, tenements, possessions, and hereditaments, as were of late
belonging to any of the said Archbishopricks, Bishoprics, Monasteries,
Priories, Nunneries, Commaundries, Deaneries, Houses of Friars, or other
religious Houses or Places, of what nature, name, kind, or quality soever they
be of. Yet for that the Title of all lands, possessions and hereditaments in
this your Majesty's Realm and Dominions is grounded in the laws, statutes, and
customs of the same, and by your high jurisdiction, authority royal, and crown
imperial, and in your Courts only to be impleaded, ordered, tried, and
adjudged, and none otherwise; and understanding, that the whole, full, and most
gracious intent, mind, and determination of your most excellent Majestyes be,
that all and every person and persons, bodies politic and corporate, Nota.
their heirs, successor and assigns, and every of them, shall have, keep,
retain, and enjoy all, and every their estates, rights, possessions, and
interests, that they and every of them now has, or hereafter shall have, of
and in all and every the Manors, Graunges, Messuages, Lands, Tenements,
Tithes, Pentions, Portions, Advousons, Nominations, Patronages, Annuities,
Rents, Revertions, Services, Hundreds, Wapentakes, Liberties, Franchises, and
other the possessions and hereditaments of the said Monasteries, Abbeys,
Priories, Nunneries, Commaundries, Deaneries, Colleges, Prebends, Hospitals,
houses of Friars, Chantries, Rectories, Vicareges, Churches, Chaples,
Archbishopricks, Nota.
Bishoprics, and other Religious or Ecclesiastical houses or places, or of any
of them within this Realm, or the Dominions of the same, by such Laws and
Statutes as were in force before the first day of this present Parliament, and
by other lawful conveyance to them thereof made.

That it may be therefore enacted by the authority of this present Parliament,
that as well your Majesty our Sovereign Lady, your heirs and successors, Nota.
as also all and every other person and persons, bodies politic and corporate,
their heirs, successors and assigns, now having, or that hereafter shall have,
hold, or enjoy any of the scites of the said late Monasteries, and other the
Religious or Ecclesiastical houses or places, and all the said Manors,
Graunges, Messuages, Lands, Tenements, Tithes, Pentions, Portions, Glibe-lands,
Advousons, Nominations, Patronages, Annuities, Rents, Revertions, Services,
Hundreds, Wapentakes, Liberties, Franchises, Profits, Commodities, and other
the possessions and hereditaments of the said late Monasteries, Abbeys,
Priories, Nunneries, Commaundries, Deaneries, Colleges, Prebends, Hospitals,
houses of Friars, Rectories, Vicariges, Chauntries, Churches, Chapels,
Archbishopricks, Bishoprics, and other Religious and Ecclesiastical houses and
places, or any of them, of what name, nature or kind soever they be, shall
have, hold, pos^ede, retein, keep and enjoy, all and every the said Scites, Nota
Manuors, Graunges, Messuages, Lands, Tenements, Possessions, Profits,
Commodities and other Hereditaments, according to such Interests and Estates,
as they and every of them now have or hold, or hereafter shall have or hold of
and in the same, by due order and course of the laws and Statutes of this
Realm, which now be, or were standing in force before the first day of this
present Parliament, in manner and form as they should have done if this Act had
never been had ^e made: This Act, or any thing herein contained to the
contrary, in any wise notwithstanding.

Saving to you our said Sovereign Lady, your heirs and successors, and every of
them, and to all and every other person and persons, Subjects of this Realm,
and bodies politic and corporate, and to their heirs and successors, and to
the heirs and successors of all and every of them, other then such whose right,
title or interest is bounded or taken away, undone, or extinct by any Act of
Parliament heretofore made, or otherwise, all such right, title, claim,
possession, interests, rents, annuities, commodities, commons, offices, fees,
leases, liveries, livings, pentions, portions, debts, duties, and other
profits, which they or any of them lawfully have, or of right ought to have, or
might have had, in, of, or to any of the premises, or in, of, or to any part
or parcel thereof, in such like manner, form and condition, to all intents,
respects, constructions and purposes, as if this Act had never been had he made.

And that it may be further enacted by authority aforesaid, that all and every
Article, Clause, Sentence and Proviso, contained or specified in any Act or
Acts of Parliament, concerning or touching the assurance or conveyance of any
the said Monasteries, Priories, Nunnerie, Commaundries, Deaneries, Prebends,
Colleges, Chantries, Hospitals, houses of Friars, Rectories, Vicariges,
Churches, Nota.
Chaples, Archbishopricks, Bishoprics, and other Religious and Ecclesiastical
houses and places, or any of them, in any wise concerning any Manors, Lands,
Tenements, Profits, Commodities, Hereditaments, or other the things before
specified, to the said King Henry the 8th. or King Edward the 6th. or either of
them, or any other person or persons, or body politic or corporate, and every
of them, and all and every Writing, Deed and Instrument, concerning the
assurance of any the same, shall stand, remain, and be in as good force, effect
and strength, and shall be pleaded and taken advantage of, to all intents,
constructions and purposes, as the same should, might or could have been by the
Laws and Statutes of this Realm, in case this present Act had never been had ne
made.

And that all Feostaments, Fines, Surrenders, Forfeitures, Assurances,
Conveyances, Estates and Interests, in any wise conveyed, had or made to our
said late Sovereign Lord King Henry the 8th. or to our said late Sovereign Lord
King Edward the 6th. or either of them, or to any other person or persons,
bodies politic or corporate, or to any of them, by Deed or Deeds, Act or Acts
of Parliament, or otherwise, of any of the Sites, Manors, Lands, Tenements,
Possessions, Profits, Commodities or Hereditaments, of any of the said
Archbishopricks, Bishoprics, late Monasteries, Priories, Nunneries,
Commaundries, Deaneries, houses of Friars, Colleges, Chantries, Hospitals,
Prebends, free Chaples, or of any Manors, Lands, Tenements, Revertions,
Services, Tithes, Pensions, Portions, Annuities, or of any other Hereditaments,
of, by or from any Ecclesiastical or Spiritual person or persons, or by or from
any Spiritual or Ecclesiastical corporation, or body politic, shall be as good
and available in the Law, to all Intents, Constructions and Purposes, as they
were by the Laws and Statutes of this Realm, standing in force before the first
day of this present Parliament: And that the same may and shall be pleaded,
alleged, and taken advantage of, in such sort, and to such effect: as they
should, could or might have been by the Laws and Statutes of this Realm,
standing in force before the said first day of this present Parliament: And
that all and every Clause and Article of saving, contained in all and every the
said Acts and Statutes, shall stand, remain and be in such force, strength and
effect, as they were before the said first day of this present Parliament; any
thing contained in this present Act to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding.

And that it may be in like manner enacted by authority aforesaid, that
whosoever shall by any process obtained out of any Ecclesiastical Court within
this Realm, or without, or by pretense of any Spiritual Jurisdiction, or
otherwise, contrary to the Laws of this Realm, inquiet or molest any person or
persons, or body politic, for any of the said Manors, Lands, Tenements,
Hereditaments, or things above specified, contrary to the words, sentences and
meaning of this Act, shall incur the danger of the Act of Fraemunire, made in
the 16. year of King Richard the 2d. and shall suffer and incur the forfeitures
and pains contained in the same.

To which Act I shall annex Pope Julius his Letters and Reasons sent to Queen
Mary Anno 1554. for the granting of the forecited Dispensation, which
occasioned this Statute.

Dr. Hackwells Answer to Carrier, p. 249, 250. Dr. Burges his No Sacrilege nor
Sin to alienate o^ purchase Cathedral Lands, p. 52, 53, 54.
That all such as by just Title according to the Laws or Statutes of this
Realm, for the time being, have any Possessions, Lands or Tenements lately
belonging to Monasteries, Priories, Bishoprics, Colleges, Chantries, Obits,
etc. whether they have purchased them for their money, or are come to possess
them by gift, grant, exchange, or by any other legal means whatsoever, may
retain and keep the same in their Possessions, and have the same ratified and
established unto them by the confirmation and dispensation of the Sea
Apostolic.

Causes and Reasons why such Dispensations may be justly granted with honor
and conscience.
1. The State of the Crown of this Kingdom cannot well be sustained to govern
and rule with honor, if such Possessions be taken from it: Note.
for at this day, the greatest part of the Possessions of the Crown, consists
of such Lands and Possessions. 2. Very many men have with their moneys bought
and purchased great portions of those Lands, from the most Excellent Kings,
Henry the VIII. and Edward the VI. who, by their Letters Patents have warranted
the same: of which Lands and Possessions, if the Owners should now be
dis-possessed, the King should be bound to repay unto them all their money;
which would arise to such an huge Mass, that it would be a very hard matter
for the Crown to restore it. 3. The Nobles and Gentry of this Realm, most of
whom have sold and alienated their ancient inheritances, to buy these new,
cannot live according to their degrees, if these Possessions should be taken
from them. 4. The Purchasors, or Owners of such Lands and Possessions, in as
much as they came to them by The Henchers and Lawers of both Temples and
Lincolns-Inne must hold so as well as other Purchasors.
just Title, according to the Ordinance of the Kings of this Kingdom, have held
and do still hold a good and justifiable course in obtaining of them. 5. The
enjoying of such Lands and Possessions, is so common unto every state and
condition of Men, Cities, Colleges, and Incorporations, that if the same be
taken from them, Nota.
there will necessarily follow thereupon throughout the Kingdom, a sudden
change and confusion of all Orders and Degrees. 6. Seeing the Goods and
Possessions of the Church, even by the authority of the Canon Laws, may be
aliened for the redemption of Captives, and that the same may be done by that
Church only, to whom such Possessions do belong: It is fit and reasonable that
such Dispensations should be granted for continuing of possession already
gotten, for so great a good of public concord Mark this well.
, and unity of the Church, and preservation of this State, as well in body as
in soul.
The consideration of this Statute, Letter and Reasons of the Pope himself, and
our Popish Prelates, Clergy in Queen Mary's days, may persuade our present
Prelates and Cathedral men to the like Moderation, Candor and Ingenuity, for
the satisfaction of the King, Parliament, Purchasors, and preservation of the
Kingdoms, Churches Tranquillity now and hereafter.

Finally, because there is now an extraordinary great clamor against
Sacrilege in most Pulpits, new Pamphlets, and in the Commons House it self, by
many who understand not truly and thoroughly what Sacrilege is, I shall for a
close of this Appendix inform them.

1. That the word Sacrilege ((...)) is only once and no more used in sacred
writ, Romans 2. 22. What the Apostle there means by committing Sacrilege, and
what this Sin should be, both old and new Expositors do very much disagree. I
shall render them an account of 10. several opinions of Expositors concerning
it, who comment on this Text; neither of them suiting with that which now alone
is declamed against as the sole and only Sacrilege.

1. See Dr. Wil^ets sixfold Commentary on Romans 2. qu. 39.
Origin, Ambrose, and some others interpret Sacrilege, The Jews violating of
Christ the true Temple of God, by crucifying him with their sins, stealing him
out of the Scripture, and denying Christ, MAGNO SACRILEGIO. 2ly. Chysostome,
Theodulus, Theophylact, Peter Martyr, and Dr. Willet expound it to be, the Jews
sparing of Idols, and using of things consecrated to idolatry, out of
covetousness, to their own private commodity, which by the Law of God they
should have destroyed; which Calvin and Gualter mislike not. And Peter Martyr
thence infers, Potest quidem Respublica and Magistratus noster, ea quae
superstitiosa sunt auferre, et little pretia in usus pios et bonos convertere,
without any Sacrilege. 3ly. Gorhan defines this Sacrilege to be, the giving
of divine worship unto Idols. 4ly. Calvin and Piscator expound it to be, the
contempt of the Divine Majesty. 5ly. Haymo informs us, that Spiritual,
sacrilege, est sacrorum verborum prevaricatio; the praevarication of Gods word:
but according to the Letter he defines it, Sacrarum rerum surtum: verbi gratia:
Quisquis de the sauro Ecclesiae, vel de substantia Dei familiarium aliquid
occulte abstrahit, Sacrilegium perpetrat; which extends only to Goods, not
Lands, with whom Lyranus, the Syriack interpretation, and some Popish
Commentators accord. 6ly. Peter Martyr, and Lucas Osiander interpret it to be,
the buying and selling of the Priests Office, Orders, Benefices, Bishoprics,
as many have done, and still do, who are really guilty of Sacrilege as well as
Symony. 7ly. Paraeus and others expound it, of polluting Gods Service with
Jewish and humane inventions. 8ly. Grynaeus understands it, of arrogating to
their own merits, that which was peculiar to the grace of God. 9ly. Peter
Martyr, applies it to Fly his Sons, and such other Priests who violently took
away and appropriated to themselves the things offered and consecrated unto
God. 10ly. Primasius Bishop of Vtica in Africa, (St. Augustine Disciple
flourishing in the year 440.) in his Commentary on this Text resolves, The very
Heathens deemed this Sacrilege, not to worship their Gods. Deos inquitis, non
colitis, and pro Imperatoribus sacrificia non impenditis.
SACRILEGIVMEST QUOD PROPRIE IN DEVM COMMITTITVR, QVASI VIOLATIO, VEL
PRAEVARICATIO MANDATORVM, Adding that the Apostle in the next words, Per
praevaricationem legis Deum inhonoras; EXPOSVIT SACRILEGIVM: Rhemigius and
Haym^ concur in substance with him. And indeed this definition of Sacrilege,
that it is the breach or violation of the sacred law of God, is most agreeable
to the Apostles meaning and proper etymology of the word. Hence Laurentius de
Pinue a great Canonist, Iraque Sacrilegu, and Majestatis rei invenimur.
and Angelus de Clavafio in his Summa Angelica, Sacrilegium, derive and define
Sacrilegium, quasi Sacrae legis lesio, a more proper etymology, than that of
Innocentius the Pope, quasi Sacriledium. Now none of all these ancient or
modern Expositors, Tertul. Apolog. adv. Gentes, and ad Scapul.
define Sacrilege, to be a taking away, alienating, or selling the Lands of
Bishops, Deans, Abbots, Priors, Cathedrals, Covents, or Chapters, never
intended by the Apostle in those primitive times of the Gospel, when the
Apostles themselves, and Evangelical Bishops in and immediately after their
Age, had neither Silver nor Gold, nor Temporal Lands or Possessions, to take
away, plunder, steal or alienate, as is evident by Acts 3. 5, 6. c. 4: 34, 35,
37. 1 Cor. 4. 11, 12. 2 Cor. 6. 10. and other Texts, though now decry'd in
Press and Pulpit as the only Sacrilege: when none of these other kinds of
real Sacrilege are once writ or preached against by them under the name or
crime of Sacrilege; which savors more of Passion than Devotion, of Avarice
than Prudence, of Calumny then Verity, of Self-interest than Christ's interest.
On whom we may retort that of Ad sc^pulam, lib. and Apolog. adv. Gentes.
Tertullian, in defense of the primitive Christians against the Pagans, who
reputed them sacrilegious for not adoring their Idols. Tantum nos quos
Sacrilegos existimatis nec in facto unquam deprebendistis, nec in sacrilegio.
Omnes autem qui templa despoliant, and per Deos jurant, and eosdem colunt, and
Christiani non sunt, and Sacrilegi tamen deprehenduntur. But how are they found
to be such? to wit, by their sacrilegious crucifying and dishonouring Christ
through their sins, by wresting the Scriptures, breaking the sacred Law of
Christ, by contempt of his divine Majesty, by polluting Gods worship with
humane inventions, innovations, superstitions, by buying and selling of Orders,
Benefices, Bishoprics and Ecclesiastical Preferments, and by mispending the
Temporal Revenues of the Church upon their own Pomp, Luxury, Children, Wives,
Kindred; which in Bernard super (...) Se^no. ^3. Time^n^ Epicopi (...) and
Minestis v^ eclesia, qui in ^c^tu Sanctorum qua^ pesisdent^^m ^niqua gerunt, ut
stipondus quae sufficere coberet mini^^ contenti, superflus quibus egi^^
sustrutendi foro^^, Imple Sacriligoque sibi retineant, and in ^fu^ (...)
superb^a and (...): ^^ploci pros^^^o ^^quitate p^c^ante^^, quod and a^ena
dirip^unt, and sicris in sais vanitaribus and turpitudi^ibus abutuntur. Bernard
de Consideratione, l. ^. O m^^^randa^ spons^^^ ^alibus (...) Pa^anymphr^, qui
assignata (...) proprio ^^tine. ^o quos^^s ^^u ^e^centur.
St. Bernards judgment is not only SACRILEGE, but likewise A DOUBLE INIQVITY;
which should cause them both to fear and tremble.

2ly. That the Popish Petr^^ Lombar^us, Sent. l. ^. did. ^7. Aquinas ^. ^. qu,
89 Alexand. All^^sit, Serem. Theolog. T^^. 2. qu. 1^^. Bonaventura in 3. Sent.
^est. 17. dub. 7. and other Schoolmen i^ this distinction.
Scholemen and Canonists themselves define Sacrilege formally and properly, to
be a quite other manner of sin than it is now reputed. Formaliter and proprie,
Sacrilegium est illud peccatum, quod persona sacra agit contra ejus Sanctitatem
direct: That is, Sacrilege is that sin which a sacred person commits directly
against his Consecration. As if a Bishop, Minister, Monk, Nun, (not Lay man)
Clergy man, commits Adultery, Fornication, Drunkenness, or any other sin
whereby he pollutes his soul or body, which are the Temple of God and the holy
Ghost, and Members of Christ, to the dishonor of his holy function, and that
Christian Religion and holiness he professes. Whence they resolve, Omne
peccatum quod committet persona Ecclesiastica, matet raliter and quasi per
accidens decitur Sacrilegium: (...) Angelica, Tit. Sacrile^^^r, Hostien^^a
Summal. 5. De Crimine Sacrilegii, f. ^43.
unde dicit Hieronimus; Nugae^n ore Sucerdotis sunt Sacrilegium. Hence
Chrysologus Sermon. 26. thus determines. Ebrietas in alio crimen, in Sacerdote
How many Drunken Priests are now guilty of Sacrilege?
Sacrilegium, quia alter animam suam necat vinc, Sacerdos spiritum sanc^itatis
extinguit. Salvian de Providentia l. 8. and Bochellus Decreta Eccles. Gal. l.
^. Tit. 61. p. 1308.
Bochelius, Sacrilegii genus est Dei odisse Cultores. And Pope Innocentius,
cited by Alexander Alensis, Sum. Theolog. Tom. 2. quest. 171. m. 1. Quid sit
Sacrilegium, resolves, committunt Sacrilegium qui contra divinae legis
sanciitatem, aut nesciendo committunt, aut negligendo violant and offendunt:
which Alensis acknowledges likewise to be Sacrilege. And in verity the
Scripture it self resolves nothing else to be properly Sacrilege under the
Gospel, but the violation of the sacred Law of God, by Bishops, Ministers or
Christians, and poluting, profaning their souls and bodies (which are or should
be spiritual Temples of God, and Members of Jesus Christ) with gross and
scandalous Sins, as is evident by Romans 2. 22, 23, 24. Thou that say a man
should not commit adultery, do thou commit adultery? thou that abhorrest
Idols, do thou commit SACRILEGE? Thou that make thy boast of the Law,
through breaking the Law dishonorest thou God? For the name of God is
blasphemed among the Gentiles, thorough you. Compared with the 1 Cor. 3. 16,
17. chap. 6. 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20. Know ye not that ye are the Temple of God,
and that the spirit of God dwells in you? If any man defile (or destroy) the
Temple of God, him will God destroy, for the Temple of God is holy, which
Temple ye are. Know ye not that your bodies are the Members of Christ? shall I
then take the Members of Christ, and make them the Members of an Harlot? God
forbid. What, know ye not that he which is joined to an Harlot is one body? for
two (says he) shall be one flesh. But he that is joined unto the Lord is one
Spirit. Flee Fornication: he that commits Fornication, sins against his
own body. What, know ye not that your body is the Temple of the Holy Ghost
which is in you, which ye have of God, and ye are not your own? For ye are
bought with a price: therefore glorify God in your body and in your spirit,
which are Gods. Since then every violation of Gods sacred Law, and pollution of
our souls and bodies, by Fornication, Drunkenness, and other scandalous sins,
is the only formal and proper sin of Sacrilege, by the resolution of Canonists,
Casuists, Scholemen, Fathers, and God himself in the Gospel. And if as In Romans
2. and 1 Cor. 11.
St. Ierom, Bernard Summa Theologiae pars 2. qu. 171. in 1. p. 7^0.
Alensis, and others determine, those Bishops and Church men, Sacrilegium
profecto committu^^, do verily commit Sacrilege, who take the Revenues and
Lands of the Church, first given in Frankalmoigne, to feed and relieve the poor
and pervert them to support their own Pomp, Luxury, Avarice, or to enrich
themselves, their Children, Kindred or Posterities; I wonder our Bishops and
Cathedral men, are so mute in declaiming, preaching, printing against these
real Sacrileges in themselves, and so Clamorous only against that which really
is no Sacrilege in others.

3ly. The (...) Angelica. Summa R^sella, A^^^. In. S^^ti^gi in Gl^s^n ^^atian
C^us 17. qu 4.
Canonists and Petrus ^^nla^^es Sert l. 3 destinct ^7. B^naventu^^, AEg^dius
Bruliter and others in 3. Sent. (...) 37 A^u^ans se^unda secundae, qu. ^^. Alex
Alensis Summa Theol. pars 2. q. 171. in. 1.
Scholemen do generally define Sacrilege to be committed 3. manner of ways.
1. Ratione personae, as if any Layman lay violent hands upon, hurt, wound,
strike or abuse any Ecclesiastical or Religious person (and why not likewise
upon any King, or pious Christian, if Psalm. 105. 14, 15. Zech. 2. 8. be
Canonical, on whom Popes, Prelates can lay violent hands, dethrone, murder,
without any Sacrilege?) 2ly. Ratione loci, as when any Mensis, Sum Theol. pars
2. q. 171. m. 3. Sacrilegium, est contra immunitatem Ecclesiae extrahere
aliquem per vim, cum confugit ad sa^sidium Ecclesiae in periculo.
Civil Magistrate or other Officer takes a Thief, Murderer, Traitor, Rebel,
Fugitive, Malefactor, or person indebted, out of a Church, Chapel, Churchyard,
Monastery, or other Sanctuary, consecrated by a Bishop, by force, without or
against the Bishops, Abbots, Ordinaries or Parsons consent, (and why not as
well out of any Tenement, Glibe, House, or other Lands belonging to Bishops or
Churchmen, or out of any Hospitals, Colleges, Schools, dedicated to pious
uses?) 3ly. Ratione rei, which is threefold. 1. Auferendo sacrum de sacro, by
taking a sacred thing out of a sacred place, as consecrated Priests, Nuns,
Vessels, Vestments, Utensils, Ornaments, out of a consecrated Church, Chaple,
Sanctuary or Churchyard. 2ly. Auferendo n^n sacrum de sacro, by taking things
not consecrated, as Money, Plate, Goods, Armor, Ammunition, Cattle, hid or laid
up in Churches, Chaples, Chuch yards, Monasteries, Sanctuaries or Malefactors
out of them, or taking away any Goods, Moneys, Chattles from Church men or
Religious persons. 3ly. Auferendo sacrum de non sacro, by taking any Person or
things consecrated by a Bishop out of a profane place though a Brothel, See
Onus Ecclesia John B^le his Acts of English V^^o^^^, de Continentia Gravamin^
Germaniae. Balaeus de Vitis Pontificum.
Tave^n, Alehouse, Inue, which consecrated Prelates, Priests, Monks, overmuch
freequented of late and Gal. Nubrigenses. Hist. l. 10 Mat Paris p. 365, 366^
374 375 83^, ^^ 834. Mat. West. An. ^2^. p. 132, 133. 134. An. ^233. p. 141.
Wasingh. H^^^. Angl. p. 210, 217, 218. Ha^'s Chron. ^ 8, 9, 10 8^. Speeds Hist.
503, 504, 606, 60^. Holinshed, p. 420. 2^5. ^^5. Am. Eccl. B^^^. p. 1^8, 263,
^word 258, 2^^.
former times, as well in England, as in foreign parts. Now all these Sacrileges
as they have no real ground or foundation in Gods word, tending only to secure
the persons, goods of Prelates, Church men, and other Ecclesiastical persons,
and all kinds of Traitors, Malefactors, Debtors, Bankrupts, Cheates, flying
unto them and their Churches for Sanctuary, and hiding their Goods within their
precincts, to protect them from the Kings and Civil Magistrates power, Laws,
Officers, Executions, as our own See (...) D^^ret Eccles. Gal l. 8. Tit. 61.
Histories, Statutes and Law Books resolve, in the several cases of Thomas
B^cket Archbishop of Canterbury, Hubert de Burgo Earl of Kent, John Sa^age, and
sundry others, (See 50 E. 3. c. 6. 2 R. 2. c. 3. 21 H. 8. c. 2, 7.4 H 8. c. 2.
26 H 8. c. 13. 28 H. 8. c. 7, 13. 32 H. 8. c. 12, 15. 2 E. 6 c. 2, 13. 1 and 2
Philip and Mary c. 4. 1 Mary c. 6. 5 Eliz. c. 10, 14, 19, 20. 13 Eliz. c. 7. 14
Eliz. c. 5. 18^ Eliz. c. 3. Kelway f. 91, 188, 190, 1 H. 7, 10, 23, 29.
Stamford l. 2. c. 38, 39. Brook, and Ash Title Sanctuary.) So the bare
alienation or ablation of Bishops, Abbots and Cathedral men's Lands, by our
Kings, Parliaments, or Clergy men themselves, fall neither within the words,
nor intention of any of these Sacrileges, extending only to Sum. l. 5. De
Sacrilegi^. Ioannis T^ier^. and the Gl^sse in Gratian ^aus. 17
sacred persons Goods and Chattels, not to the sale of Manors, Land^,
Tenements Rents, Temporalties of Churchmen, which is no Sacrilege, either
within the Canonists or Scholemens definition or division of Sacrilege.

4ly. That (...) Aut (...), ut Sacril^^^^^
Hostiensis and other Canonists cited by him, inform us, That whoever does any
injury to Ecclesiastical persons, commits Sacrilege; and not only so, but that
it is Sacrilege for any man to question or dispute the Judgment or Decrees of
the P^pe, or to transgress, dis-respect any public Laws, not to yield due
reverence to the Popes or Bishops Canons, to violate an Holy Day, to employ a
Jew in any Office, or to oppress any pious Place or Hospital under the
Patronage or Protection of the Church. But these things I presume our Bishops
and Cathedral men themselves, will ingenuously confess to be no Sacrilege at
all, notwithstanding the Popish Canonists and Schole men's resolutions. And by
like reason the Kings or Parliaments alienation or ablation of their supefluous
or abused Church-Land, Temporalties, must prove no real Sacrilege, though some
Popes, Popish Canonists and Scholemen, have concluded it to be so.

5ly. That Summ^ Theol. pa^^ 2 pa. 1^1. (...) p ^^1.
Alexander Alensis and others resolve, That it is Sacrilege for any Laymen,
with their Families, Cattle and Goods, to be received, or enter into Churches,
Chaples or Churchyards, or to eat, drink and lodge in them, in times of Peace:
But if they do it in times of War and Necessity, to preserve themselves against
the Enemies, in cases of eminent danger, (as they did frequently during the
(...) Historia.
Danish and Norman Invasions, and during our Civil Wars) then it is no
Sacrilege at all: Vbi est hujusmodi necessitas non est Sacrilegium. If then the
case of eminent danger, necessity and War will make that to be no Sacrilege in
this case, which otherwise would have been Sacrilege; Then by the self-same
reason, See Bernardus ^^^terius. de Potestate seculo^i super Eccle suit.
Gratius de turi Bettel. 3. c. 10.
the Kings or Parliaments ablations, sales of the Lands of Bishops, Deanes,
Chapters, Abbots, Priors in times of War and public Necessity, to defray the
vast debts and expenses of the Kingdom, will prove to be no Sacrilege at all,
by the definition of Popish Scholemen of old, yea of some late Alphonsus de
Vargas, Relat. de Strategem. Iesuitarum, An. 1641. cap. 40. to 56.
Jesuits both in Germany and Spain, as well as of John Wickliff, John Hus, and
other forecited Protestant Divines and Martyrs, concurring in Judgment with
them.

FINIS.
ERRATA at the P^es^e.
P. 3. l. 3.25 r. 43. p. 26. l. 6. Alms, ^ Char^^ p. 33. l. ^^, (...), r.
praises. p. 36. l. 9. r. this is, p. 4^. l. 28. Successors. (...) l. 19.
Plancta. p. 49. l. 19. dominii. p. 50. l. 7. ^aica. p. 62. l. 31.
excommunicate. p. 63. l. 5. Lord. p. 65. l. 11. Monks. p. 84. l. 4. Officers, r
affairs p 91. l. 9. most, r. just. p. 93. l. 16. iuherent. p. 94. l. 15.
impated. p. 100. l. 2. praesenti. l. 26. relaxandi. p. 101. l. 16. minus. l.
29. consentientes. r. 101. l. spiritualis. p. 57. l. 38. Edward 6. r. Henry. p.
63. l 1. r. N^^^. Margin. p. 48. l. 19. r. l. ^. l 20. r. Anselm. Glessarum
Hunagium.


