REASONS for the Indictment of the D. of York, Presented to the Grand Jury of
Middlesex, Saturday June 26. 80. By the Persons here under-nam'd.
I. BEcause the 25. Car.II. when an Act was made to throw Popish Recusants out
of all Offices and Places of Trust; The Duke of YORK did lay down several Great
Offices and Places, (as Lord High Admiral of England, Generalissimo of all His
Majesty's Forces both by Land and Sea, Governor of the Cinque Ports, and
diverse others;) thereby to avoid the punishment of that Law against Papists.

II. 30. Car. II. When an Act was made to Disable Papists from sitting in
either House of Parliament; There was a Proviso inserted in that Act, That it
should not extend to the Duke of York; On purpose to save his Right of Sitting
in the Lords House, though he refuses to take those Oaths which the Protestant
Peers ought to do.

III. That His Majesty in his Speech March 6. the 31. Year of his Reign, does
give for a Reason to the Parliament, why he sent his Brother out of England;
because he would leave no man room to say, that he had not removed all Cause
which might influence him to Popish Councels.

IV. That there have been diverse Letters read in both Houses of Parliament, and
at the Secret Committees of both Houses, from several Cardinals, and others at
Rome; and also from other Popish Bishops, and Agents of the Pope, in other
Foreign parts, which do apparently show the great Correspondencies between the
D. of Y. and the Pope: And how the Pope could not choose but weep for Joy, at
the reading some of the Dukes Letters; and what great satisfaction it was to
the Pope to hear the D. was advanced to the Catholic Religion. That the Pope
has granted Breev's to the D. sent him Beads, ample Indulgences, with much
more to this purpose.

V. That the whole House of Commons has declared him to be a Papist in their
Votes, Sunday, April 6. 1679. Resolved, Nemine Contradicente, That the Duke of
York's being a Papist, and his hopes of coming such to the Crown, has given the
greatest Countenance and Encouragement to the present Conspiracy and Designs of
the Papists against the King and Protestant Religion. -- What this Conspiracy
and Design is, will appear by a Declaration of both Houses of Parliament, March
25. 1679. Resolved, Nemine Contradicente, by the Lords Spiritual and Temporal,
and Commons in Parliament Assembled; That they do Declare, That they are fully
satisfied, by the Proofs they have heard, There now is, and for diverse Years
last past has been a Horrid and Treasonable PLOT and Conspiracy, Contrived,
and carried on by those of the Popish Religion, for the Murdering of his
Majesty's Sacred Person, and for the subverting the Protestant Religion, and
the Ancient well Established Government of this Realm.

VI. That besides all this Proof, and much more to this purpose, It is most
Notorious and Evident He has for many Years absented from Protestant Churches
during Religious Worship.

These are the Reasons why We believe the Duke of York to be a Papist.

Huntingdon. Shaftsbury. Gray of Wark. L. Russel. L. Cavendish. L. Brandon.
Thomas Wharton. Sir Will. Cooper Bar. Sir Gilb. Gerard Bar. Sir Edw.
Hungerford. Knight. of the Bath. Sir Henry Calverly. Sir Scroop How. Tho. Thyn Esquire
W. Forrester Esquire J. Trenchard Esquire


The Jury were sent for up by the Court of Kings Bench whilst they were on this
Indictment, and Dismissed; so that nothing was further done upon it, saving that
the Jury received the Presentment: And by the Dismission of the Jury, a very
great number of Indictments were Discharged; A thing scarcely to be paralleled,
and of very ill Consequence, not only to many Private Persons, but chiefly to
the Public.

And on Wednesday July 30. the former Lords and Gentlemen with the L. Clare,
Sir John Cope Bar. Sir Rowland Gwin, and Mr. Wandsford, Presented the same to a
second Grand Jury, who were Discharged as the former.


