(...). THE REVIVAL OF GRACE, IN THE Vigor and Fragrancy of it.

By a due Application of the Blood of Christ to the Root thereof. OR
Sacramental Reflections on the Death of Christ a Sacrifice, a Testator, and
bearing a Curse for us; particularly applying each for the exciting and
increasing the Graces of the Believing Communicant.

By Henry Hurst, M. A. formerly Fellow of Merton College Oxon: Now Domestic
Chaplain to the Right Honorable Arthur Earl of Anglesey, Lord Privy Seal.

-- (...), Gal. 2.20. Domine! cum te in ara crucis suspensum video, quodcunque
oculis meis spectandum objicitur, me in amerem tui inducat! Signum, Figura,
Mysterium, vulneraque tui corporis, and prae caeteris, intimus ille affectus
clamat ut ad Amorem tui properem, nec tui obliviscar. Did. Stella meditat.
LONDON, Printed, and are to be sold by Tho. Parkhurst, at the Bible and Three
Crowns, the lower End of Cheapside, and the Bible under the Gate at Land.
Bridge. 1678

Imprimatur,

Guil. Jane.
Jan: 9. 1677.
TO THE Right Honorable ARTHUR, Earl of Anglesey, Lord Privy Seal, etc.
May it please your Lordship,
THese Papers (which humbly offer themselves to your favorable acceptance and
Patronage) were conceived and formed, but laid aside some years before you did
me that great honor to command my attendance on you and your Family, since
which time by unusual accident, they have fallen into a hand kinder than my
own, who judging them worth the publishing, and persuading me to it, they claim
a Right to this Honor of appearing in the world under your Lordship's
Patronage; if I had refused to let them be made public, perhaps I should have
been culpable; since they are thus published, I am sure (without omitting a part
of my duty) I could not but tender them to Your Lordship, which I do with a
sense of their meanness and disproportion which they bear to your Lordships
Great Abilities, Learning and Judgment. Yet herein this will be somewhat of an
Apology for me, though some have owned their obligations and duty to Your
Lordship in Pieces less disproportioned, none have done it, or are likely to do
it in a Piece equal to Your Lordship's Learning and measures of Judgment. The
small sums of chief Rents are too poor to be made a Present to any whose
abundance would refuse such an Offer; but when tendered as their Right, they
give a kind acceptance and acquittance for few shillings or pence. In this
humble offer I wave all pretense but this, That Your Lordship has the best
Right to any Public Acknowledgment I can make of my obligations to You, of
which I pray Your Lordship's favorable resentment

From

Your Lordship's most Obedient Servant, and Domestic Chaplain, H. Hurst.

To the Reader.
Reader,
THOU art presented here with a Subject of which very many have treated, and of
which perhaps it may be thought more need not have been spoken; and of which,
what I have written, must now run the hazard of thy judgment or censure; if it
profit and please thee, the thanks is due to me, but in Partnership, with a
Learned and Judicious Divine, who by an unthought of accident came to the
knowledge of the two latter parts of what is here published: somewhat also will
be due to the Bookseller, who adventured the uncertainty of the Gain or Loss,
which will be more or less, as the Subject and Manner of handling it appears to
the Peruser. The good success of thy Reading I commend to the Divine
Benediction, which can make it contribute to the increase of thy Grace and
Comfort: The Defects in Composing I submit to thy Christian Candor and
Ingenuity which will cover them, and excuse the Author. Those mistakes of the
Printer which are most material, may be charged on him, and I with him will
jointly desire they may be mended with a little labor bestowed on the places
where the Errata's are marked. Finally, I pray no labor of mine in Writing, no
labor of thine in Reading, may prove waste of time to either of us in the day
wherein we both must account for our selves unto the Lord, to whose Guidance
and Blessing thou shall be commended

By

From Anglesey- House in Drury- Lane, April 10. 1678. The meanest Servant of
the Best and Greatest Lord, our Lord Jesus Redeemer of Thee, and of thy Soul's
Friend, H. Hurst.

Advertisement.
There is in the Press one Hundred Sermons on several select Texts of
Scripture, Preached by Tho. Horton, D. D. left perfected under his own hand.

THE REVIVAL OF GRACE.
LUKE 22.19. (...).
Do this in remembrance of me.

The Introduction.
Reader,
I will for once suppose thou art able on thy own view of these words, and
their context to discern what Christ is treating of; how he instituteth and
ordains the holy Sacrament of his Supper, and for what end he ordains it. I
suppose thou would not look over these lines if thou did not already
understand that Christ would have us use and celebrate this Sacrament to the
end we might renew the remembrance of his Dying for us, in which the matter of
fact, viz. that he did die for us is professed, yet so as the manner how he did
die is (I think) more principally to be attended and considered, as being the
chief primary thing in effecting our salvation, and as affording the greatest
and sweetest comforts; and finally, as binding us most strongly to Gospel
Obedience. I shall therefore recommend unto thy thoughts what is the ((...),
modus, ratio moriendi) particular manner of thy Savior's Dying. And am bold to
say the words of the text, (Do this in remembrance of me,) do the like. Let my
Death be the subject of your thoughts at a Sacrament. Let the manner of my
Death be the mould into which your thoughts are cast. At a Sacrament show forth
the truth and certainty of your Redeemer's Death; show forth the singular and
peculiar manner of it also. Renew the thoughts of this, what kind of Death it
was which could have such a mighty salvisick virtue in it to deliver us and
save us. Set before you at the the Lord's Table, Plutarchus in Conviv. Sept.
Sapiertum.
not such a Death's Head as Plutarch reports Ptolomaeus was wont to set before
his guests, to admonish them; but such a Death as none but Christ would or
could undergo for us. Our Lord will have his own Death set forth to the eye of
his friends and guests at his Table, and he commands them to remember it. The
Lord's Supper is a commemoration of the Lord's Death; there we may view him on
the Altar dying a Sacrifice for us, to atone the divine displeasure: there we
may view him in the unparalleld address of himself for Death, disposing his
vast treasures of Grace, Peace, Comfort and Glory unto his indigent friends for
whom his love brought him to die, and the same love and care makes him die a
Testator, giving them rich Legacies. At a Sacrament we may and should view
Jesus Christ, the Blessed One, nailed to the Cross, loaded with a Curse, and
dying an accursed Death, that we might escape it. Thus we owe our Peace to his
Sacrifice, our spiritual treasure to his will and testament, our blessed hope
and life to his accursed Death; and by particular reflections on these we
should awaken, exercise and improve our graces. The facilitating this work, and
the attaining this effect, is the design of the following Discourse, which does
first endeavor to promote grace by a particular improvement of Christ's Dying
a Sacrifice for us, let us then (the other two having their due place) begin
with this great truth.

Our Lord Died a Sacrifice for us, and under this notion ought we to
commemorate his Death, and in meditating thereon we may make an improvement of
grace. That I may proceed distinctly, I resolve the whole subject into these
following particulars.

1. The general proof and confirmation of his DYing as a Sacrifice, or Victim
for us, Cap. 1.

2. How this could be that a man should be a Sacrifice for us, Cap. 2.

3. What particularly is contained in this being made a Sacrifice, and so
dying, Cap. 3.

4. That these are fit foundation to lay for Sacramental graces, and how our
graces may be increased, awakened, confirmed, and acted, in due meditation on
Christ our Sacrifice, Cap. 4. and seq.

CAP. I. Christ died a Sacrifice for us prefigured.
THE Holy Scriptures do abundantly testify to us, that Christ our Lord died
our Sacrifice and Victim, and so do the writings of all Christians, who have
treated of our Redemption and Salvation by Christ; if you would have foreign
testimonies, you require what is not needful, and should we attempt to seek
them, we should lose our time and labor; for no other Pen makes mention of
this but the Scriptures, and the Pens which write after this Copy. Now among
other arguments the Scripture affords us these five for proof of Christ's
Dying a Sacrifice. 1. The Type. 2. Prophecies. 3. Promises. 4. Historical
declaration of it. 5. Assuming it as a matter unquestionably true; and certain
of all which briefly in their order.

Sect. 1.
This manner of Christ's Death, viz. as a Sacrifice was prefigured, and
foreshewn in the Type thereof. The very enemies of this Doctrine do not quite
deny this, though they doubt, Socin. lib. 2. c. 8. de Servatore.
or deny some particular places to refer hereto. Let us however look to some
few places of Scriptures, where we may find Christ our Sacrifice in his Death
typified out to us. 1 Cor. 5.7. Christ our Passover is slain for us. The
allusion used by the Apostle proves that the old Paschal Lamb was a type of
Christ, and that Christ was the Antitype of the Paschal Lamb. Again, Joh. 1.24.
The Lamb of God which takes away the sin of the world; whether in reference to
the Lamb daily offered, or whether to the Paschal Lamb, it alters not the
case: It is a Lamb, and a Lamb that must be slain in Sacrifice; yea in an
Expiatory Sacrifice to take away the sin of the world. We are assured, Heb.
9.22.
that without sheding of blood there is no remission; and we are sure it is not
every sheding of blood, but it is the sheding of the blood of a Sacrifice which
procures remission of sins, and this blood-sheding was not by opening and
breathing a vein, but by dying to take away sin. The Baptist then applying unto
Christ that ancient and lively type, tells us, that Christ was prefigured in
his state, life and death, by it. And that Heb. 9.23, 24. tells us of patterns
of things in the Heavens, v. 23. and of figures of the True, v. 24. yea v. 8,
9. the whole Tabernacle, and the service of it were a figure for the time then
present. Among other services, that of Sacrifices is specified as a figure
serving for the present, until Christ should come and enter into the Holy Place
without blood of Bulls and Goats, but by his own blood, v. 11, 12, 14. In a
word, the whole of Mosaical positive instituted service was a figure and type.
This part of the Law had the shadow of good things to come, Heb. 10. v. 1. In
Sacrificiis id manifestissimum quae Sacrificium, and expiationem Messiae
praesignificabant. Joh. Hoornbeek (...), de convertend. Judaeis, lib. 7. c. 1.
page 452.
This very thing is most manifest in the Sacrifices which did presignifie the
Sacrifice and Expiation of the Messiah, as the Learned Hoornbeek has rightly
observed to our hands; from all which I do not ill to conclude, that he died a
Sacrifice to take away sin, who was praesignified by the Dying Expiatory
Sacrifices under the Law.

Sect. 2.
Secondly, It was foretold, and by the Prophetic impulses of the infallible
Spirit of God revealed to the Church of old, that the Messiah should die, and
particularly that he should die a Sacrifice to expiate sin; in this cause we
have, among others, the testimonies of the Prophet Isaiah, Isa. 53.7.
cap. 53.7. He is brought as a Lamb to the slaughter; where possible may be
more than a general symbolizing between the Innocence, Humility and Sufferings
of the Lamb slain, and Christ typified thereby; like enough there is a
particular symbolizing between them both as they were Sacrifices; the footsteps
whereof I might trace out somewhat in 1. the word slaughter, which Prove. 9.2.
seems to be determined to the slaying of a Sacrifice: And 2. in the word, he
is brought, which Isa. 18.7. expresses the bringing of a present to the Lord.
But much more in the word 3. Lamb, (...), (...) used, Lev. 5.7. and 12.8. and
22.28. Deuteronomy. 18.3.
which is the very word that expresses the Paschal Lamb, Exodus 12.3. and 5.
which was a Lamb to be sacrificed, Deuteronomy. 16.6. And 4. from the place which
parallel to this, Act. 8.32. He was led as a Lamb to the slaughter ((...)) what
kind of slaying this was, A pecudum mactatione 72. alio nomine (...) vocarunt.
Amos 5. v. 25. Cloppenb. Schol. Sacrif. page 3.
let Rev. 13.8. determine where it is, the Lamb of God slain from the
foundation of the world. Isa. 53.10.
If this be not full enough to our purpose, yet the 10th verse affords a
plain and express Prophecy of the Messiah's dying a Sacrifice; Thou shall make
his soul an offering for sin. Indeed the Hebrews read it conditionally (if or
when) but then adds a promise what shall be the fruit and effect of his Dying a
Sacrifice. Now we do see the promise fulfilled in the numerous seed of Christ;
therefore with reason we conclude the condition performed. (...), Si posuerit
hostiam pro peccato and reatu (...) proprie est d^lictum per Metonymiam
significat oblationem pro delicto, Lev. 5.6, 7, 15. Joh. Hoornb, Socin. Confut.
Vol. 2. l. 3. c. 1. p. 562.
The words of the Learned Hoornbeeck cited in the margent, shall suffice for
clearing the text to Scholars, and the true reading of the words of the text in
our translation, shall suffice the unlearned. In a word or two, if thou
believe that this Chapter foretells the sufferings of thy Savior; if thou
believe that this text speaks of his death; if thou believe that he is
come so long ago, and died so long since, thou need only read plain English;
He has then in his Death made his soul an offering for sin; and this was
foretold by the Prophet, not in this verse only, but also in the 11th and 12th
verses: He shall bear their iniquity, Ita in caput Hostiarum olim reatus
offerentium quasi manibus imponebatur luendus caeremonialiter ibi, in Christo
vere. Joh. Hoornb. lib. 3. vol. 2. Socin. Confut. c. 1.
and he shall bear the sin of many. So of old, the guilt of those who brought
the Sacrifices, was as it were laid on the head of the Sacrifices by their
hands, that it might be punished. Observe then how Sacrifices of old times did
bear the iniquity and sin of those that brought the Sacrifices: So did Christ
dying bear our iniquity and our sin; He did bear them truly, they ceremonially,
as the learned Author notes.

To these passages of Isaiah, let us farther add those of David and Paul
compared together, and we shall there find David foretelling what Death Christ
should die, and Paul explaining what Death he did die, Psalm. 40.6, 7, 8. with
Heb. 10.5, 6, 7, 8. When he (i. e. Christ) comes into the world, he says,
Sacrifice and Offerings thou would not, etc. putting the very words of the
Psalmist, and thereby assuring us that the place was to be understood of
Christ, who was hereafter to be born, and die, whenas David wrote this; and who
was now born, and had died whenas Paul wrote this, or rather interpreted these
words of Dau^^ leading us from the Sacrifices under the Law, to Christ our
Sacrifice, and from the Death of those ceremonial and inefficacious Sacrifices,
to this real and meritorious Sacrifice, ver. 10th and 12th. Now the whole
discourse of Christ's dying a Sacrifice for us, had been mislaid on David's
words, if he had not prophesied that Christ should die a Sacrifice for us.
Either this kind of Dying must be in the Prophetic words of David, which are
the Apostle's premises, or it could not Logically be put into his Conclusion.

Sect. 3.
Thirdly, Christ to die for us a Sacrifice was promised to the Church; and if
it were promised, it may well be concluded that it either shall be accomplished
(which is as little as an unbelieving Jew will gather from the promise,) but
not so much as a believing Christian must gather, who is verily persuaded that
our Jesus, the true Messiah, is already come, and has died for us, and died a
Sacrifice fo us according to the promise which is made to Sion, Zech. 9.11. As
for thee by the blood of thy Covenant I have sent forth thy prisoners out of
the Pit wherein is no water. In the words you have a relation of a double
deliverance, set forth in figurative expressions.

1. First, A relation of their deliverance out of the seventy years Captivity,
which God wrought for them for the Covenant sake he had made with them in
Christ: this was a temporal deliverance. The

2. Second deliverance is spiritual, and wrought by the Lord Jesus dying and
sheding his blood for us. Now it is plain, This [1.] Blood denotes a death,
whoever it be that it is spoken of. [2.] Blood of a Covenant speaks the Death
of a Sacrifice in the blood whereof the Covenant was confirmed and ratified,
and it is therefore called the Blood of the Covenant: this I will a little
farther treat and clear. It was a very ancient rite of making and confirming
Covenants in the blood of Sacrifices offered up at the time when the Covenants,
and their terms or conditions were assented unto, and approved. Possibly the
Feast we read of Genesis 26.30. made by Isaac, was after a Sacrifice offered, when
he made a Covenant also with Abimelech, and confirmed it by Oath. However, we
are assured it was a rite among the Politer Nations of the Earth, as in Homer,
who brings in his Graecians and Trojans making a covenant ((...)) Iliad. 3.
Carm. 94. and 105. and confirming it by Sacrifice; (...)
but these are alien and foreign we have surer testimony, Exodus 24.7. where a
Covenant is mentioned, and this Covenant wrote in a Book, and read to the
people, who therein heard the terms God proposed, and to these the people
answer, All that the Lord has said, we will do, and be obedient; they give
their assent to the Covenant, on which Moses forthwith sprinkleth the people
with the blood of the Sacrifices which were offered on the Altar mentioned ver.
4. and were brought by young men of Israel, ver. 5. This blood is called
eminently, the blood of the Covenant, ver. 8. applied by St. Peter, 1 Ep. 1
cap. 2 ver. to Christ. So then the Covenant confirmed in blood, leads us to a
Sacrifice dying and sheding its blood, in which sprinkled, according to the
Rite or Custom, the Covenant is confirmed. So that to me there remains no
farther scruple in this point. If any would have it cleared, that this blood is
to be understood of the blood of Christ, I shall refer them to the context,
viz. ver. 9. and 10. and unto Isa. 61.1. where the like delivering of the like
prisoners is mentioned, and unto the Heb. 13.20. where this blood of the
Covenant is called the blood of the everlasting Covenant: And let them who
desire farther satisfaction, consult Commentators on the place.

Sect. 4.
Christ's Death was the Death of a Sacricrifice, for so it is historically
declared and asserted in the history of his Life and Death, and in the writings
of his Apostles penned on this subject since his Death and Resurrection. They
that have wrote the story, and they who have improved it, assert the same I do.
Heb. 9.26. Now once in the end of the world has he ( i. e. Christ, ver. 24.)
appeared to put away sin by the Sacrifice of himself. And again, ver. 28.
Christ was offered to bear the sins of many, places so full and clear, that
nothing needs be subjoyned for explication, Christ expressly named, and he is
offered a Sacrifice, and this an Expiatory Sacrifice, and he that offered it up
was the same with the Sacrifice. He offered up himself a Sacrifice, etc. So
again Heb. 7.27. this [speaking of the Sacrifices offered up often underthe
Law] viz. offering for the peoples sins he did once, when he offered up
himself. What the daily, weekly, monthly and yearly reiterated Sacrifices of
the Levitical Priests could not effect, though they were continually offered,
that Christ by one offering has effected. This man (says the Apostle) after
he had offered one sacrifice for sins, sat down on the right hand of God, Heb.
10.12. For by one offering he has perfected for ever them that are sanctified,
ver. 14. He needed no more to offer any Sacrifice, for so much as he had obtained
Eternal Redemption by that one Sacrifice of himself; and it was necessary he
should once offer himself a Sacrifice, because no other Sacrifices could
purify the conscience, and clear from guilt; Christ therefore did what was
necessary, and having done it, sat down on the right hand of God, expecting
till his enemies were made his footstool, and interceding that his Redeemed
might be blessed with a full deliverance. In one word, the Apostle Ephesians. 5.2.
tells us what Christ did, and what acceptance it found with the Father. Christ
also has loved us, and has given himself for us an offering and a sacrifice
to God for a sweet smelling savor. Thus express is the Scripture in this point.

Sect. 5.
Lastly, It is more than once assumed and taken up as an unquestionable truth,
and of indisputable certainty. So Heb. 8.2. we have such an High Priest who is
set on the right hand of the Majesty in the Heavens. Here it is assumed without
particular proof, that he had offered a Sacrifice before he sat down, etc. and
so ver. 3. makes it necessary he should have somewhat to offer; and ver. 4.
assures us, that the Levitical Priesthood and Sacrifices, were examples and
shadows of this our High Priest, and the Sacrifice he has offered which was
more excellent than those typical ones were; to this add Heb. 5.5. Christ made
an High Priest, and ver. 6. a Priest for ever, and after the order of
Melchisedeck, ver. 10. Now whoever is an High Priest, is ordained for men in
things pertaining to God, that he may offer both gifts and sacrifices for sins,
ver. 1. Christ then our High Priest as such, and because he is an High Priest
for us, must offer some sacrifice for us. Now the blood of Bulls and Goats, and
in a word, all corruptible things, are secluded from being this sacrifice; and
the Lord Jesus in his own person is supposed and taken undoubtedly to be this
sacrifice. Without dispute, the 9th chap. 25th verse, speaks this truth; for
the Levitical High Priest went into the holy place with the blood of others,
but Christ did not so enter when he entered, for he entered not in by the blood
of Goats and Calves, but by his own blood, cap. 9. ver. 12. did he enter into
the holy place, having obtained eternal redemption for us. These, with many
more which might be added, comprize what we affirm, That the Scriptures do in
many places assume it as a thing certain in it self, that Christ died a
Sacrifice for us. To conclude this Chapter, and this general head of our
discourse in a few words, thou who professest thy self a Christian, either
professest thy self a Christian, either professest this truth, or know not
what a Christian is made up of, and need to be catechized in the principles
of thy Religion; to which I recommend thee for better instruction.

CAP. II. Christ a Man, yet a Sacrifice for us, and how this could be.
OUR next undertaking must be, what stands second in our Promise, a discovery
how this can be, that a Man should be a Sacrifice. Is it not an inhumane
cruelty to offer a reasonable creature in sacrifice to God? Are not the Nations
abhorred as barbarously salvage and bloody who used it? and has not God
expressly forbidden it? How then could Christ so excellently and transcendently
holy, pure and innocent, be made a sacrifice for us? This I shall endeavor to
answer in these following particulars.

Sect. 1.
There is no doubt to be made whether sacrificing of men were abominable in the
sight of God and sober men; God infinitely detested it, and sober men have
unanimously condemned it. This was, and ever will be, a bloody murdering of
the creatures, never an acceptable worshipping the Creator.

He that was a murderer from the beginning, and delights in the death of man,
put his Idolatrous worshippers upon this diabolical practice; and they who
exercised their pretended Religion in such sacrifices, did sacrifice to Devils,
not to God, Psalm. 106.37. and shed innocent blood, ver. 38. In which passage
you see whom such sacrisicers worshipped, and in what account they and their
worship was had with God; the Lord tells you truly who it was these men
worshipped, and what truly was the thing they did, it was murder. Israel had a
strict prohibition against this practice, Levit. 20.2, 3, 4, 5. and God does
dreadfully threaten him that shall dare to do so. The blood of Bulls or of
Goats could not by their own worth please the Lord. The blood of man could not
but by its cry to the Lord awaken him to an abhorrence of the deed, and
punishing the doer.

Sect. 2.
Albeit none may shed the blood of man in Sacrifice, yet the life, strength and
whole of man should be Sacrificed, that is, consecrated to, spent for, and
offered unto God, which in a borrowed or figurative manner of speech is called,
and well may be so called, a Sacrifice. The scripture gives this name where
there is neither life of Beast or Man taken away. The Contrite heart is a
Sacrifice which God will not despise Psalm. 51.17. In this sense the Apostle
would persuade the Romans to give up themselves, their bodies Sacrifices unto
God, Romans 12.1. And conversion of the Gentiles was an Offering or a Sacrificing
of them unto God, Heb. 13.15.
Romans 15.16. The praises we offer to God; but much more the whole Duty of a
Christian is a Sacrifice. 1 Pet. 2.5.
This Metaphorical Sacrificing our selves and ours, is both our duty, and
acceptable to God. Although none may in Sacrifice take away the life of another
man or of himself; yet every man ought to make his life a sacrifice unto God:
This kind of Humane Sacrifice is our Reasonable service.

Sect. 3.
When the Scripture is express in any point, I have noe reason to be doubting
whether it were so, nor liberty allowed to my curiosity to enquire how it could
be so, or to Dispute that it either could not be, or that it ought not to be
so. My Faith tells me, and my Reason consents to it, That it is so, because
God says it, and that it might well be so, because God has done it. God sent
his Son in the likeness of sinful flesh; this speaks the Incarnation of
Christ our Lord, and for sin, this speaks the end why God sent him, viz. that
by a Sacrifice for sin he might condemn sin in the flesh, Romans 8.3. ver. And
the same Apostle informs me 2. Cor. 5.2. That God has made him to be sin
for us, and if you enquire how Christ was made sin, I shall answer in the words
of a learned pen, viz. He was a Sacrifice not for his own sin, but for our
sin. -- Nimirum hostia fuit pro peccator non suo, sed nostro. Joh. Hoornbeek.
Socin. Conf. Vol. 2. l. 3. cap. 1.
Or if these places seem to be more obscure than to be clearly discerned by you
who read them; yet when you read that he is our High Priest, Heb. 8.1. a
minister of the true Tabernacle which the Lord pitched, ver. 2. That he was
ordained to offer sacrifice (answerably to the type) ver. 3. and all this by
God's appointment; either find me out a more likely sacrifice, or conclude with
me that he did by divine ordination offer up himself a sacrifice for us. In the
Apostle's words Christ being come an High Priest of good things to come, by a
greater and more perfect Tabernacle not made with hands, etc. Neither by the
blood of Goats and Calves, but by his own blood he entered in once into the holy
place, etc. Who through the eternal Spirit offered himself without spot to God,
etc. Heb. 9.11, 12, 14. In these words, I say, my doubts find a full answer. My
God tells me it was done, and if my reason do not comprehend why it should, or
how it could be done, yet it subscribeth the certainty which is revealed, and
the congruity of it, because he has done it, who does all things with wisdom
and holiness.

Sect. 4.
I answer, that whosoever will compare Christ with others in this case, compares
those who cannot be found just equals, there is a very great disparity between
our Lord Jesus and any other who shall be compared with him, and therefore I
doubt not to averr, that there must be allowed as great disparity in the thing
debated, as there was disparity between the persons; albeit none else might,
yet he might do this extraordinary thing. There are four things wherein he
excelled all others. As

First, He was absolute Lord of his own life, he had power to lay it down for
his, if he so pleased, John 10.18. I have power to lay it [life] down. This is
more than an ordinary person can say of his own life, which he is accountable
for to many others, as to Governors, Relations, and such as he may benefit,
for whom he should live. Christ therefore might manifest by an unusual and
Extraordinary disposal of his life, how he was, more then ordinary men can be,
Master of his life.

Secondly, He had power in his own hand to raise himself from the dead, which
is more then the combined power of created Agents could do, for any man that
should yield himself a Sacrifice for others. He had power to take up his life
again, John. 10.18. now this does alter the case much, others may not because
they cannot rescue themselves from Death. He might, for having laid down his
life and died for his, he might resume his life and live as he does to the
unspeakable good and safety of his.

Thirdly, He had special commission from God to do this, Joh. 10.18. Now
undoubtedly where the authority of the Father concurreth with the authority of
the Son, there can be no reasonable question asked why Christ might become a
sacrifice for us, when we may not become sacrifices for others. The case is
infinitely different.

4. Fourthly and lastly, Christ was Sacrificer as well as Sacrifice, and that
no ordinary person could say for himself; if any other be made a Sacrifice, the
Sacrificer must be some other man who is under a strict law of God, not to lay
his hand on the life of his Brother; so that if a strong impulse moved me to be
Sacrifice for other, yet as strong Prohibition lay on him not to touch my life.
But in this extraordinary Person both do concur, he is the Lamb of God slain,
and he the great high Priest to offer it unto God.

Next I am engaged to enquire what is comprised in every such Sacrifice, dying
for him that offers it, and so what particularly is comprised in Christ's
dying a Sacrifice for us. In answer, to this I conceive that every such
sacrifice does comprize really or intentionally these six things, of which
briefly.

Sect. 1.
1. Substitution or being set in the stead and room of the person or persous
for whom it was to be offered Lev. 1.4. who brought the sacrifice, was required
to put his hand upon the head thereof, and it should be accepted for him. And
Levit. 4.15. They must put their hand on the head of the Bullock, etc. by which
ceremony was denoted the substitution of the sacrifice in the stead of him who
brought it. As in the substitution of the Levites for the service of the Temple
instead of the firstborn of all Israel, Numb. 8.10. The children of Israel
shall put their hands upon the Levites, for they are wholly given unto me from
among the children of Israel, instead of such as open the womb, even instead of
the firstborn of all the children of Israel have I taken them unto me, ver.
16. Here the substitutions of these persons is signified by laying on of the
hands of Israel; so also in sacrifices.

Sect. 2.
A second thing contained in a Sacrifice, was the imputing or transferring of
guilt and crime, the Sacrifice stood charged with sin and guilt. The Hebrews
had the same name for sin and sacrifice, as it is well known to every
sinatterer in their tongue or customs; and the Apostle does imitate them when
he affirms that Christ was made sin for us, Lev. 10.16.
2 Cor. 5.21. and Romans 8.3. for sin (Gr. (...)) i.e. a sacrifice for sin,
Levit. 16.16. The sin-offering did bear iniquity, viz. the iniquity of the
Congregation; and the Scapegoat had the sins of Israel put upon it, Hazazel --
[^hircus peccati] atque omnes iniquitates Israelis super illum sunt juxta
illud, and feret, etc. Rabbi Eliezer.
and the Goat did bear the iniquity, and carry it away into a land of
forgetfulness, Levit. 16.21, 22. Whatever sacrifice for sin either the
superstition and will worship of men without direction from God did substitute
in their own stead, and did offer for their own sins, on it they thought they
did transfer both their crime and its guilt, and hence promised an impunity
to themselves. And whatever Sacrifice by God's own appointment was offered for
expiation of sin, had certain ceremonies prescribed, whereby was signified this
transfering of guilt, this imputing of the crimes of the offerers.

Sect. 3.
3. The Substitution and Imputation were followed by a confession of the
offerer acknowledging his offense against his God whom he did tacitly (at
least) justify as one who was injured by the offense, and who might justifiably
destroy the offender. Every one confessed his guilt who brought an Expiatory
Sacrifice. There needs no other evidence of my crime, than my own entreaty,
that my Sacrifice may expiate for me, who prays for a pardon, confesses by his
guilt he needs a pardon. If the Poet had not spoken of transgressors, and who
had offended, he would not have brought in the person speaking thus -- Sanguine
placavi Divos, Cum sis ipse nocens moritur cur victima pro te.
by blood of Sacrifice I have appeased the incensed Deities. He was nocent for
whom a Sacrifice died. In a more lofty strain the Prophet Micah, cap. 6. ver.
6, 7. ascertaineth us that the Sacrifice, whether Rams or Calves, or fruit of
the body, in what exuberance of measure can be imagined, it is all for
transgression, for the sin of the soul. In the solemn offering on the day of
Expiation, God commanded that the iniquities of the house of Israel should be
confessed over the head of the Scapegoat, Levit. 16.20, 21.

Sect. 4.
4. Then must the Sacrifice be slain, the Penalty due to the offense, and the
execution thereof hanging over the head of the offender, are thus derived upon
the head of the offender his Sacrifice. That creature which was made a
sin-offering, was sure tody for it. I might exceed in prosecuting this
particular, but I will not; you read the General rule, Lev. 1.2. The offering
of the cattle, herd or flock, God required, if a Bullock it must be slain,
ver. 5. If of the flock, whether Sheep or Goat, it must be killed, v. 10, 11.
If a Fowl be offered, it must be killed; also ver. 15. Sacrifices were ever
next door to death, Nay Scripture speaks concisely, calls Sacrifice the
Killing of an ox Jsai. 66.3. And the Author to the Hebrews speaking to them
in their own dialect concerning matters of their own intimate acquaintance,
compriseth all in one word (...), shedding of blood Hebr. 9..22. Which must not
be understood of the shedding of a little blood by opening a vein or giving a
wound, but of that shedding of blood which was in use in slaying their victimes
which bled all out of their veins, and which blood [the Horns of the Altar
being sprinkled with some small portion of it] was wholly poured out at the side
of the Altar, Lev. 4.34. This was so in separable to Sacrifices that when
Superstition had devoted a child [though to an idol] the Fathers will spare the
dearest pledges of their love, They could see, they must kill their Sacrifices,
they could not see, they ought not Sacrifice their Children. Natural affection
was not able to divert them from cruelty and unnatural inhumanity when
Idolatrous superstition had engaged them in a Murtherous vow. But the Ignorance
of these salvage brutes may somewhat enervate the testimony I bring from them;
be it so, yet hear one that cannot be excepted against in this point: when
Abraham was commanded to sacrifice his Son, he obeyed the command, and showed
at once how he understood God's command, and wherein his own obedience
consisted when he put out his hand to slay his Son Genesis 22.10.

Sect. 5.
5. Expiation made in order to settling a Peace between God and the offender,
was a fifth thing comprised in a Sacrifice. It is not much to my present
purpose to discourse on the Nature of this Peace, and the connection of it unto
sacrifices which does depend primarily on the institution and warrant we have
to offer them. He rested in a false Peace, who offered up a Sacrifice without a
warrant from Heaven; and he found no true Peace, who offered otherwise, with
other heart, affections and design than God required. The Sacrificer aimed at
an expiation of his crime, (...). Homer. Il. 10. car. 495, 496, 497.
a settling of that peace which his offense had disturbed, and a reconciling
himself to an incensed Deity, which I might trace out in the Victims of
Idolatrous Heathens; but I shall choose a fairer, and a more sure path to
follow, until I have given you view of this thing. Levit. 1.4. He shall put his
hand upon the head of the burnt-offering, and it shall be accepted for him to
make atonement for him. Here is the main end of Sacrifice and Sacrificer, viz.
that the Sacrifice may be accepted, and an atonement may be made for the
Sacrificer. So the sin-offering was to make atonement, that the sin might be
forgiven to the Sacrificer, Levit. 5.20, 26, 35. In like manner Sacrifices for
sins of ignorance were appointed of God himself to take away guilt, to make
atonement, and to procure forgiveness of the error, Levit. 5.17, 18. lest
farther displeasure broke out against him.

Sect. 6.
6. A recovery of the favor of God, or the restitution of the offender to that
good opinion and esteem which he had before he offended. The Sacrificer hoped
that his errors being expiated and forgiven, he should regain the Love of his
God, who justly might be displeased with him for his offenses. The conscience
once set upon removal of guilt, judges his work but half done, unless it
recover the Favor and Love of its God, on better principles, and stronger
desires it sueth [as Absolon] for a sight of the King's face. 2 Samuel 13.32.
And this seems to me the chief and ultimate end of Sacrificers, who know
what they go about when they sacrifice unto God; and indeed it seems
contained in the Hebrew phrase, which we render accepted, Lev. 1.4. (...), and
I am sure is contained in the promises God has made of accepting the Sacrifice
of every one who offers to him according to his mind and will. The
benevolence or good will of God which is his (...), and (...) satisfies the
soul, and the soul seeks it in its sacrifice. Wherewithal shall I come
before the Lord? Mich. 6.6. seems the proper and natural enquiry of each
Sacrificer. How shall I meet the Lord as my friend and favourer [so the Heb.
(...) importeth] and so the other part of the question imports, Neh. 13.2.
Deuteronomy. 22.4.
will he be pleased, etc. ver. 7. (...). The recovery of the Divine Favor is
worth our best and costliest sacrifices, and may well be made our aim in
sacrificing. In brief therefore, Christ a Sacrifice for us was substituted in
our room, was charged with our guilt, recognized our faults, submitted to their
punishment, made our atonement, and recovered the Favor of God for us. This
great achievement is comprised in this small and short phrase, Christ Died our
Sacrifice. Each of which particulars might easily be showed in Christ's
Sacrifice; but when we have showed they are contained in all sacrifices, it
cannot be reasonably doubted whether they are contained in the Sacrifice of
Sacrifices. This most excellent and transcendent Sacrifice could not want what
was found to perfect less worthy Sacrifices. He that was the completion of all
Mosaical Sacrifices, must in reason be supposed to comprehend all perfection
typified in those which were shadows of him. And so I pass unto the fourth
proposed General.

CAP. IV. Particular Graces hereby Improvable.
THE consideration of Christ dying our Sacrifice, will afford us arguments well
suited to excite our languishing graces, and to strengthen our infirm graces,
which ought to be more especially found in us, and acted by us in our
approaches to the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, as shall particularly be be
showed in these that follow.

Sect. 1.
Repentance is unquestionably a Sacramental Grace. None is fit to commemorate
the Death of Christ, who repents not of the sin which occasioned his Dying.
The weeping eye, and mourning heart, are exceeding lovely to the Lord at his
Table. A Repenting soul is a welcome guest there. Now let me trace Repentance
through these paths. and see as we go how it may be suitably fitted with
improveing arguments from Christ our Sacrifice.

1. Repentance begins ordinarily in a conviction of sin, not in general
only, but particularly in the convictions of our own sin. The righteous need
no repentance, Mat. 9.13.
it is the Sinner which is called to repent; so long as a proud Pharisaical
opinion of our own Righteousness is maintained by us, we shall never embrace
the practice of Repentance.

2. Apprehension of danger either attends or flows from this conviction of the
sinner, and this forwardeth his repentance; the shameful, cursed death sin
deserves, and the sinner fears in the midst of his sorrows, has strong
influence upon the soul to grieve for selfundoing sin. Although a secure
unconvinced sinner blesses himself, and fears no danger, the awakened
convinced Penitent apprehends greatest danger from his sin.

3. Consternation of mind, or Amazement at the sight of sin and danger
unavoidable, for ought the man can do of himself for his own help, this I might
call [if none will be offended at it] a seasonable and profitable despair of
our selves, while we consider our selves and observe what we have done, what we
deserve what God has threatened, and what millions do, and must for ever suffer
for sin.

4. A mixture of Hope that there may be, and of Desires that there should be,
and of enquiry whether there be not some effectutal help and remedy to be
obtained. The awakned soul does as it were look about to see what or whence
it is help may come. Enquireth what shall I do to be saved? How shall I escape?
etc. Now when it descryeth mercy to be had upon it is Humbling of it self before
God, upon condition of sorrow for what is past, and of hatred of sin for time
to come, the Penitent soul set's it self to exert all these, and in a vigorous,
constant, uniform exerting these, consists the whole life and Practice of
Repentance: And I hope I shall clear it. Christ considered Dying, our
Sacrifice will be an awakening consideration preparatory to, and promoting of
this Repentance in its farther Exercise and Growth.

Sect. 2.
Christ Dying a Sacrifice well considered, will conduce much to the Convincing
us of a state of sin, and that we were in particular involved in it, we were
sinners, and the righteous Law of God imputed the sin to us, and the righteous
Judge [whose it was to execute the Law] accounted thee and me, and every one of
the children of Adam [as we are] transgressors of the Law; if thou see not
this, look to the Lord Christ a Sacrifice for sin, and ruminate what answer
thou can make to these few Questions.

1. What need had there been of a Sacrifice for sin, if there had been no sin
to expiate by Sacrifice? There is certainly sin committed where it is necessary
to take away wrath by a Sacrifice. There is sin of the soul, wheresoever an
offering for sin is appointed. Tell me then, seeing Christ was made an offering
for sin, what was thy state and mine? and what was the state of all men for
whom he became a Sacrifice?

2. Could thou escape the imputation of sin, when Christ a Sacrifice for sin
could not escape it? Could he not be a sacrifice for sin by a voluntary
susception of our cause, but he must bear our guilt? and shall we judge it
likely, reasonable, or indeed morally possible, that our wilful transgressings
of the Law should be passed over, not imputed? If thy sins were imputed to thy
sacrifice, doubtless they had been imputed unto thy self, if thou had not had
a sacrifice. Stand then a while, and view this: No need of Sacrifice to expiate
where no sin is; but alas I needed such a Sacrifice: No need of Sacrifice where
no guilt is imputed; but I see my sin, I see it is imputed, I must not delay or
trifle in this matter; my sin is evident, its imputation is certain; it will be
laid on my own head, or on my Sacrifice, and oh how impossible is it I should
escape the imputation of it, if I carelessly neglect this great Sacrifice! For,

3. Whose is the guilt? is it his? or is it mine? who deepest in the guilt? he
who did no guile, or I who am full of guile? who nearest the crime? he who
never did it, or I who very wickedly committed it? Did God impute it to him,
and can an unhumbled sinner think God will not impute it unto the committer of
the sin?

4. With whom was God angry? who was it against whom offended justice was most
incensed? was it against him that was the Sacrifice, or against him that needed
the Sacrifice and brought it? undoubtedly the Sacrifice can bear no other
displeasure than what it bears for him whose Sacrifice it is, and for whom it
is offered. And can thou hope guilty offenders may escape, when guiltless
victims are charged with another's guilt, and suffer another's punishment?

5. Who has greater share in the Love of God? had Christ, thy Sacrifice for
sin, or had thou, for whom he became a Sacrifice? I know thou will not
pretend a comparison with Christ the only begotten of the Father; thou dare
not think but his share was greater in his Fathers love, as his love, obedience
and likeness to his Father was greater, infinitely more excellent than thine
was, or could be. Tell me then, if God imputed sin to the Son of his Love, when
his Son had undertaken to bear the fault and punishment of offenders, will he,
think thou, spare those who hate him, and might justly be hated of him?

6. Would God admit his Son, his eternal Delight, to be thy Savior on no other
terms than that he should as a Sacrifice take upon him, and bear the sins of
his people imputed to him, that they might not be imputed unto them; and do
thou not believe, can thou persuade thy self to imagine that thou may,
though a sinner, yet not be charged with thy sin? Do thou not clearly discern
that God will charge sin either on the sinner, or on his Sacrifice?

In a word or two, whoever knows that Christ was made a Sacrifice for sin,
knows also that they were under a state of sin, for whom he was made a
Sacrifice; and if thou art a Christian, and professest that Christ was thy
Sacrifice, thou do thereby confess that thou were under a state of sin; that
unless mercy toward thee impute thy sin to Christ, justice will impute it unto
thy own self. View these these things, and weigh them impartially, possibly
they may prevail to the convincing of the heart of its sinful state, and of the
certainty of a future imputation of sin, unless it be prevented by repentance.
And lest thou should flatter thy self that there is little or no danger in
appearing before God under imputed sin, I advise thee to consider

Sect. 3.
The greatness of thy danger, as it will appear in thy Sacrifice. See if thou
may not descry

1. Death as certainly following thy Sacrifice, as imputation of sin did follow
the substitution of a Sacrifice. He must die who took thy sin upon him; he
cannot escape who is thy Sacrifice. If Christ taking thy sin on him, could not
have the Cup pass from him, think thou there can be any thing but death
awaiting thee under thy sin? is not here danger? is not here great danger? I
know not what may be accounted danger, if death be not; I know not what is
greatest danger if death under imputed sin be not.

2. Was not the Death of Christ thy Sacrifice full of sorrows and grief; he was
a man of sorrows, and acquainted with grief, Isa. 53.3. and if his life were
spent in sorrows, I am sure his death was full of them. Look on him his in
agony in the garden; explain me the meaning of those unparalleld drops of
blood; tell me the story of his enemies cruelly buffetting, spitting, crowning
him with thorns, and forcing those into his tender temples, his blessed head:
These were preparatory griefs; was ever grief like this? this thy sin deserved;
this thou must if Christ had not suffered; thou must have been the scorn and
triumph of Devils, who forever would torment and wrack thee. What then judge
thou of death thus aggravated? what think thou of the grief and pain of his
soul when hands and feet were nailed to the Cross? when he hanged there under
the sharp pains of a lingriug death? what grief was that breathed out it self
in that, My God, My God, why have thou forsaken me? I speak not of the
acuteness of his pains, which the Schoolmen speak of. Let me obtain thy sober
thoughts of the sorrows of our Dying Savior and Sacrifice, and then say
whether there is danger, and how great the danger of thy sin is? then say,
can thou think of thy danger without fear and astonishment? what will become
of sinners under the burden of sorrows which their sins deserve, and God will
heap upon them?

3. View the person who thus suffered, view him, I say, in all his Interresse
in the Father's love, in all the Privileges of his nature, person and office,
in all the perfection and excellency of his obedience; and see whether any one,
or all these could exempt him from, or defend him against that flame thy sins
had kindled, and which his blood alone must quench, or it will burn for ever;
and when thou have thought of this, then tell me thy danger.

4. Was not his power and strength, the power and the strength of a God, united
to the Humane Nature, to support it, and yet for all this his Fears, Dangers,
Sorrows, were enough to try all his power; and albeit he conquered, yet not
without a bitter conflict. How then could thou have escaped or born these
dangers? Thus make an unconvinced heart look on sin in it is Sacrifice, make a
self flattering, secure, fearless heart look on the certainty, and greatness of
it is own danger in the sorrows and grief which fell upon Christ our Sacrifice;
when thou have proceeded thus far in this Matter, bring thy self to determine
these two things, (1.) whether thou can bear all the misery which sin
deserved, and all the sorrows this Sacrifice did sustain? Can thou bear the
displeasure of the Almighty? if thou think thou can, I pity, and mourn for
thee; if thou think thou can not, then (2.) say, can thou find out a way
for thine escape? if the infinite wise God has not found out any expedient
beside this; do thou think thou can find it out? well then, if it be
intolerable, and thou can not bear it, if unavoidable, and thou can not
fly from it; what remains but being shut up under sin [as the Scripture
speaketh] thou should also be shut up in Prison, reserved for the day of
Execution, without any hope in thy self, for thou read thy guilt in the
Imputation of sin to thy sacrifice, thou read thy death and danger in the
death of thy sacrifice, thou read despair in the unsupportableness of the
misery, and in the unavoidableness of it is approaches; thou art undone, and
miserable in thy self, which cannot but end in consternation of mind, and
amazement, and likely may break out into such enquiries, who can dwell with
devouring Fire, with everlasting Burnings? who shall deliver us from wrath to
come? how shall I escape such great misery? what shall I do to be saved? Is
there not yet Balm in Gilead? is there not a Physician there? may not this
wound be healed? do thou begin thus to fear and enquire? I send thee to this
Sacrifice for hope and help.

Sect. 4.
4. Although the death of thy Sacrifice did preach thy danger, and thy helpless
state in thy self, yet does it also preach help for thee in another; it
proclaims hope of escape; for here is a Sacrifice for sin, and where a
Sacrifice is admitted, the offense may possibly be remitted, and the offender
may be reconciled. They that sought out and prescribed their own sacrifices for
their Gods, maintained their false hopes by this mean. And the carnal Jew
mistaking the nature of his sacrifices, kept up his presumptuous hopes by the
same means, concluding his peace was made, because the sacrifice is offered:
But he among the Jews who understood the Institution, Nature, End and Use of
the Propitiatory Sacrifices, did obtain at first, and did maintain unto the
last a sound peace between his God and his soul. Where there is an appointed
sacrifice, there is an open and plain declaration of our apprehensions, that 1.
Our sins are expiable. 2. That sacrifice is the way of expiation. And 3. That
this sacrifice is believed by us, fit to expiate our offense. These are the
common, if not universal suppositions of all sacrificing offenders. Now beside
these common inducements of our hopes, let me acquaint my Reader with two
things.

1. That God has admitted this sacrifice whose Death we commemorate in the
Sacrament. Albeit he checked the formal Jew, and rejected the Idolatrous
Heathen and their sacrifices witha Who has required this at your hands? yet he
never will discourage any one who tenders to him by a hand of faith this
Propitiatory Sacrifice: He will admit this, if thou can present it to him by
faith. Lift up therefore the feeble hands, the drooping head, the fainting
heart; there is hope, nay assurance that sins may be expiated. For

2. This Sacrifice is of God's own appointment, he provided it; when we were at
a loss, and could not find wherewith we should come before the Lord, and bow
our selves before the most High God; when the fruit of our body could not
expiate the sin of our soul; when finite wisdom was non-plus'd, then the Lord
discovered his Grace and Mercy, and chose out a sacrifice for us; he prepared
this sacrifice: We may (as Abraham said, (...)) varying the tense say, God has
provided himself a Sacrifice. This he shadowed out to us by prescribing all his
Sacrifices. This he tells us when he says, He prepared a body for Christ,
when he says, He sent him, and gave him to be a propitiation for us, and
sealed him, etc. and such like expressions. He, the Lamb of God, because
ordained of God, was our Sacrifice. These two things considered, let the
guilty, convinced, fearing and almost desponding soul, debate the case against
his own fears and distrusts. Put such Questions to an issue.

1. Shall I despair when I have a ground to hope? Let him embrace his
despondencies who cannot see a ground for hope; my heart breaks not while my
hope is whole and unbroken.

2. Are not those hopes well bottomed which are built on the assurance that
sins (my only dangers and fears) are pardonable? Cain perhaps would have hoped
if he had apprehended his sin pardonable. And I am bound to hope, because God
assures me by this sacrifice, that my sins are expiable, and may be pardoned.

3. Why is there an Expiatory Sacrifice admitted, nay provided by God himself,
who is the supreme vindex culpae, and who alone had jus poenae, the power of
executing punishment on the offenders? Has he appointed a Sacrifice to expiate
my sin, and can it be that my sin remains inexpiable, unpardonable? Is not
that sacrifice sufficient which God himself sindeth out? Away with unreasonable
fears! banish forever sinful distrust! Here Is a Sacrifice to atone my offended
Lord, of his own providing, and will he not accept it? I will tender it, I will
mention it; he will not refuse his own choice.

4. Can any one be found who missed the benefit of a pardon, that sought it in
the blood of this Sacrifice? Oh that I could believe and hope until I heard of
one so disappointed! then should I never be ashamed. Has he not put away sin
by once offering of himself? and has he not by one sacrifice forever perfected
those that believe, that are sanctified?

5. Am I not one who may betake my self to this sacrifice? What should more
hinder me than others? Am I excepted out of the Act of Oblivion? Why may not my
sins be laid on this Sacrifice? Do I not read that he lives for ever to make
intercession for those that come to God by him? Oh glorious hope! Intercession
for all that come to God by him! Then cheer up doubting heart, here is a
sacrifice for all that come to God by him; for this Intercession is an act or
exercise of Christ's Sacerdotal Office subsequent to, and dependent upon his
foregoing Sacrifice. He sacrifices for as many as he intercedeth; if then the
Intercession of Christ can impetrate and obtain favor, it is because the
Sacrifice of Christ has expiated thy sin and crime.

Sect. 5.
5. Thus far Guilt, Danger, and Fears may by eyeing the Sacrifice, convince
the sinner how seasonable a good hope would be, and this Sacrifice shows how
good the believer's hope is. Now would it well become the soul to humble it
self, and if thou find thy heart remain still proud and unhumbled, ask it these
Questions over thy Sacrifice.

1. Can thou be proud, and yet be found worthy to die in thy Sacrifice? can
this be born? will thou confess death is thy desert, and yet bear up as if thou
were innocent, and in no deserved danger?

2. Can thou be proud of any thing so long as thy life is the fruit of an
Expiatory Sacrifice? Thou live by the death of another, and will thou pride
thy self as if thou neededst not any ones help?

3. Can thou confess guilt, and yet profess a thought of worth in thy self?
How shameless is that pride which at the bar confesses it is Guilt against the
Law, and advances it self against the Lawgiver! It is a most unseemly thing
to behold a heart rising with pride, and falling in a Sacrifice. Let thy
humility then suit thy state as it appears in thy Sacrifice, and I dare say
it will suit the state of thy soul in it is repentance, and mourning for sin.

Sect. 6.
6. Fountains and Springs lie deep, and where the soul is laid thus low, if it
does not freely and spontaneously weep, bring it is Sacrifice into sight, let
that be viewed; see it standing before an offended and displeased God, who was
provoked by thy sin, look on it loaded with imputed guilt. Alas my sin lies
upon it; observe thy Sacrifice falling before the Altar, and say, alas! was not
this for my sake? should not I have fallen thus if he had not? He bled, and out
of excess of love to me, poured out his life for me; he groaned, sighed,
breathed out his soul for my sake, and could he do more? alas! have I brought
my Sacrifice to this? was ever man more unhappy to his friend, to his Brother?
how hard are those stony Rocks? how dry that flinty heart which gusheth not out
with tears in Remembrance of these things? My dearest Lord pity unrelenting
souls, and oh! give a mourning heart that may be more equal in it is griefs,
and sorrows, in it is tears and sympathies! how many eyes weep at news of an
endangered, troubled, imprisoned and wrackt friend! How many hearts are
softened, melted, and broken with the sweats, burning -- fits and Agonies of a
dying man? yea how many melting hearts, and weeping eyes? how many
compassionate discourses on the death of some one deserving more than Law
inflicts for his breach of the Law? But how few over a suffering, bleeding,
dying Savior and Sacrifice? whither are the compassions of men and women fled?
where may they be found? where shall we seek? or how shall we woo and prevail
with them? Lo! their friend and Lord charged with their guilt, sweating under
its weight, groaning under its penalty, sighing with sobs that drew blood out
of his veins, bleeding, dying a Sacrifice, loaded with our deserved punishment.
And few alas! very few grieving hearts, weeping eyes, or mourners for their
want of tears Lord! give more, that I may give some tears, to wash thy bleeding
wounds.

A second grace requisite to a Christian in the commemoration of the Lord's
Death at the Lord's Supper, 2d. Grace, Faith exercised and improved.
and improveable on consideration of Christ dying a Sacrifice is Faith, a grace
indisputably necessary to him that will come duly to that Ordinance; and
therefore I lay not out any time or pains on the proving thereof; a grace well
improveable, by consideration of Christ dying our Sacrifice, on which I intend
to insist next.

The Death of Christ under the notion of the Death of a Sacrifice, will improve
the Believer's Faith; which I hope will be manifested when we have viewed the
grand concern of Faith in these three particulars. 1. It Is Expectation, or the
things it waits for. 2. The grounds of its Expectation and waiting. 3. The
present actings of Faith, whilst it is assured there are such things to be
expected, and whilst it is persuaded and resolved to wait for them. Of all
which in order.

Sect. 1.
1. Faith has its expectation, and looks for things that are not seen.
Things hoped for, as Heb. 11.1. And these are great things. As,

1. A publck, solemn, full and clear absolution from the charge of sin and
guilt, which Satan, Conscience or the Law might load us with. Faith looks to
that word, John 5.24. He that believes shall not come into condemnation. Faith
waits for that day, 2 These. 1. v. 10. When the Lord shall come to be glorified
in his Saints, and to be admired in all them that believe. Faith hearkneth for
that awakening voice, Matthew. 25.6. Behold the Bridegroom comes, go ye out to
meet him. The Believer expects a justification from all things from which he
could not be justified by the Law of Moses, Act. 13.38, 39. when he shall be
declared blessed, when he shall be accounted righteous; and as such shall enter
into the possession of a Kingdom of Righteousness, Mat. 25.34, 37. with 46. ver.

2. The Believer expects, Totus mundus expectat illud tempus quo illi qui
sunt Filii Dei manifestabuntur.
and with Faith waits for a public declaration or manifestation of his
Adoption and Sonship, Romans 8.19. The whole world expects that time wherein
they who are the children of God shall be made manifest; as Vatablus notes on
the place. And this I take to be the Apostle's meaning, Col. 3.4. You shall
appear with him, i. e. you shall be publicly declared the children of God
through Christ. And though it do not appear what Believers shall be, yet when
the Lord appears, they shall appear his Sons and daughters also, 1 John 3.2.

3. The Believer looks for a public and glorious inauguration or coronation.
Come inherit the Kingdom, Matthew. 25.34. is the happy investiture which Faith
expects. Now there is a Crown laid up for us, then it shall be set upon our
heads, 2 Timothy 4. ver. 8. It is already intended and promised, then it shall be
given. Faith expects that joyful day of rewarding the Spiritual Champions. Here
they run, there they are crowned. Now the Believer warreth, then Faith
triumphs, 1 Cor. 9.24.25.

4. The Faith of a Believer looks after a reward for all its obedience,
whether active, conforming to the Precepts and Rule of Christ, or passive,
bearing the Cross of Christ. It is one of the excellencies of the Law of Faith,
that as it commands no more than it enableth us to do; so it rewards no less
than we have done. The distribution grace does make, is first so much as we
need to work, and next, so much as we have wrought, the Believer receives
according to his works, Matthew. 25.35, 36. And when grace has thus distributed
to each, then shall we find our labor was not in vain, 1 Cor. 15. v. 58. That
the Lord was not unrighteous to forget our labor, Heb. 6.10. Then shall we
fully understand that the Believer is blessed, for that his works do follow
him, Rev. 14. v. 13. Faith expects that the light and momentany asslictions
should work for him a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory, 2 Cor.
4.17, 18. We expect a glory to be revealed, with which these light afflictions
of this life are not worthy to be compared, Romans 8.17. Such are the
expectations of Faith, and may well be confirmed as rational and justifiable,
by the consideration of their being built upon the Death of Christ our
Sacrifice. For

1. Does a Believer expect absolution? why should he not? Christ his Sacrifice
has born his guilt and punishment. Or Secondly

2. Does a Believer expect a declaration of his adoption to be a Child of God?
this is no more than the promise of the Covenant ratified in this Sacrifice,
God will be his Father.

3. Does the Believer expect an investiture into a Throne, Kingdom and Crown?
why all these are by Christ our Sacrifice procured for us, after they were
forfeited by us.

4. Does the Believer expect a reward for all his obedience both active and
passive? well. He may; For all his obedience is advanced in it is worth by this
blood sprinkled on it. This Sacrifice has merited it, albeit our obedience
could not; this, [in the Apostle's words] one Sacrifice has for ever perfected
them that are sanctified, Heb. 10.14. Faith exceeds not its bounds when it
expects consumate, and full Perfection of happiuess. These are the Grand
expectations of faith, let us view how justifiably faith may expect all these
since that the foundation and ground of faith's expectation is secured and made
good by the Death of Christ our Sacrifice.

Sect. 2.
2. The Foundation or ground of Faith's expectation is the promise and covenant
of God; upon this Faith builds it is hopes: before God promises we may repose
some kind of trust that he will do good for us, but we cannot firmly and
properly believe: the Mariners Jonah. 1.6. had some hope and trust that God
would show them mercy, but this amounted not properly to a degree worthy the
name of faith, it rested still upon the Divine Goodness; possibly God will
think on us, but it had no promise on which it might conclude, God will think
on us for good. But now when once God has promised, and given out the word of
Grace and Mercy, the soul finds a fit ground to build it is faith upon, thus
God spoke to Abraham, and gave him the promise, so shall thy seed be, Genesis
15.5. Then did Abraham believe God, ver. 6. And he believed in the Lord, and he
had no ground for faith before the promise. And he gave no ground to unbelief
after he received the Promise. Hence the Apostle speaking of the greatness of
Abraham's Faith, tells us, that it was against hope in hope, Romans 4.18. it was
against all hope, (...).
in Natural and Second Causes, but it was in hope, ((...)) according to what
was spoken to him by his God, who could make good his word what ever he spoke.
It is a blind and bold presumption, not Faith which builds on other foundation
than what God lays; Behold I lay in Sion for a Foundation, a stone, a Tried
stone, etc. Isa. 28.16. On this we may build our faith and not be confounded,
(...).
1. Pet. 2.6. The word of promise is the word of faith, Romans 10.8. And when we
hear that word, we ought to believe it; for it is the word of God, who is
(...), out of possibility of failure. And it is our happiness that we do
believe the word of which there shall be an accomplishment, Luke 1.45. Now this
promise the foundation of our Faith is greatly confirmed to us in the Death of
Christ Dying a Sacrifice; so that as it confirms the foundation of our Faith,
it cannot but add strength and stability to our Faith. As whatever strengthens
the foundation of the building, adds stability to the whole superstructure.
Now Christ Dying a Sacrifice, gives us assurance

1. That the promise is the word of a God reconciled to us, who has in a most
tender compassion to us forgiven us our sins, and given his woad of promise to
be our claim of further mercy. In Christ our Sacrifice we may read remission of
sin, a Propitiation for us, and a gracious acceptance of us with our God. Now
what is there which a believing soul may not rationally expect from the love of
his reconciled God? He will heal backslidings, he will love freely; he will be
as the dew unto Israel, when Israel is reconciled to him, Hos. 14.3, 4, 5. God
will then have mercy upon such as had not obtained mercy, and be their God,
Hos. 2.23. So then, let Faith see what foundation for its expectation it can
find in the love and kindness of a reconciled God, and see how God becomes
reconciled to it; and certainly this Sacrifice will appear the effectual means
of reconciliation and atonement.

2. Christ offered a Sacrifice for confirmation of the Promise, assures us the
Promise is cast into the mould of a most solemn Covenant, which may not be
violated. In this manner were the Eastern people used to confirm and ratify
conditions of Peace, and the promises of Friendship, by the solemn offering up
sacrifice and feasting together; as Genesis 26. v. 28, 29, 30. between Isaac and
Abimelech, and between Jacob and Laban, Genesis 31.44. with 54. who ratified the
covenant of their friendship by Sacrifice, Eorum more qui foedus pepigerant.
According to the manner of those who had made covenant; as Vatablus glosseth
the words. According to this sense I suppose is that of David, Psalm. 50.5.
Gather my Saints, those that have made a covenant with me by sacrifice.
Quirapportent les Sacrifices a leur droit fin. Qui est de seeler and confermer
Palltance d'adoption qui dieu a fait avec les fideles. Gal. 3.17.
Rightly paraphrased by a French Annotatour; Who refer Sacrifices to their
right end, which is to seal and to confirm the Covenant of Adoption which God
has made with the faithful. Lo then promises of friendship between God and a
Believer reduced to the form and certainty of a Covenant by this Sacrifice! And
were it but a man's covenant once ratified, none adds to it, or takes from
it: who then shall dare to alter a Divine Covenant? How unmoved might our Faith
stand on the Covenant thus confirmed? View thy bottom on which thou stand,
poor doubting Believer, and tell me whether it be not in thine judgment, like a
Rock that cannot be shaken?

3. To these is also added the oath of God which was wont still to attend every
alliance or league, which of old was confirmed by Sacrifice as is evident from
the places cited concerning Abimelech, Genesis 26.28, 29, 30, 31, 44. and 54.
and Isaac; and Jacob, and Laban. Yea the Lord who is not a man that he should
lie dealing with the sons of men, who are ready to suspect his Truth, is
pleased to give them his promise, his Covenant, his oath, Luke 1.72, 73.
Luke 1.73. So when God made the promises to Abraham, by the Sacrifice of the
Ram, Genesis 22.13. In stead of his son Isaac and in the Typical resemblance of
Christ our Sacrifice. He confirmed the Promse of the covenant by oath, ver.
16.17. and 18. Which the Apostle cites and enlarges on, Heb. 6.13, 14. and
seq. Strongly arguing the immutability of the covenant from the oath of
Confirmation, ver. 17, 18. When thou look to Christ thy Sacrifice, look also
to the oath which God has interposed, and then tell me thythoughts what thou
apprehendest of the Foundation of thy Faith? and what thou apprehendest of it is
stability? come with me, let us view our grand hopes, full absolution from
guilt, public declaration of our Adoption, Glorious investiture which a Crown
and a proportioned reward of all our obedience. These are the grand
expectations of faith; will it is foundation bear them? sure it will, be thou
judge thy self in the case; what is there in any of the particulars which thy
interresse in the Friendship of thy reconciled, God may not warrnnt thee to
expect? which of them all is not comprised in the covenant, thy God has made
with thee? which is there not procured by Christ's Sacrifice? which of them is
not confirmed by the Oath of the Almighty? if the Friendship of God can afford
them, if the Covenant has promised them, if the oath of an immutable God has
ensured them, if a most immaculate Sacrifice has procured them, what can
intercept them? what can shake such a foundation of Faith? have thou not all
assurance given that reason or religion can devise? and tell me (1.) would you
not trust a man under hand and seal confirming articles of agreement, and
ratifying them by oath? would thou not say, I have him fast enough? And
would not thou rest secure? (2.) could thou allow thy self to be worse
than thy promse? would thou not perform thy covenant with others? would
thou be persuaded or frighted into a falsifying of thy oath? would thou not
judge him unreasonably distrustful, who were not satisfied with this assurance
from thee who meanest plainly and uprightly? (3.) Will thou not much more trust
and believe thy God who has condescended to bind himself unto thee by all that
is inviolable? by all the bonds that men account sacred? Has he not removed
whatever difficulties lay in the way to hinder his entering into Covenant with
us; and difficulties being once removed, has he not power enough to keep them
still from returning and interposing? Our sins lay a bar on our part, making us
unfit to enter Covenant. These are done away by this Sacrifice. The Justice of
God, honor of his Law and Government, might be obstacles on God's part. But
this Sacrifice has satisfied Justice, advanced the honor of God's Law and
Government, and so prepared a way for our being received into Covenant with our
God, whose wisdom is so perfect he could not entangle himself in his Covenant,
or make it so that he should see a necessity of breaking or altering it; and
whose riches of grace and mercy are such, he will never fail frankly to give
what he has faithfully promised he will give. He will never think any mercy
too good to give, which he did not think too great to promise. This is the
foundation of Faith, and thus surely and immovably laid for us to build on;
which is the second part of the grand concern of Faith.

Sect. 3.
3. The third and last concern of Faith is, its present actings or fruit which
it does in some measure sustain the soul by; whilst it waits for those great
things to come; for Faith is not all taken up with expectation; it does now
possess much, though it expect more; all is not in reversion, though the most,
though the best be. Faith looks unto things hoped for, (...). Vt igitur (...)
significat aliquando sisto, sic (...) significare potest actum habitumve
fiducialem habentem vim non tantum statuminandi sperantem, sed and sistendi rem
speratum. Capellus in Heb. 11.1.
yet in some sort gives them subsistence; not only confirms the person who
hops, but sets before him as a thing present that good he hops for; as the
learned and judicious Divine Jacobus Capellus observes on the word the Apostle
uses, Heb. 11.1. Indeed it sees what is far off, yet brings that which it
sees so near, that it embraces what it sees, Heb. 11.14. Faith is of very
great and present advantage to the soul, and exerts its power and virtue on the
soul; in these four particulars.

1. Faith does by the improvement of the Promises ratified in the blood of
Christ our Sacrifice, quiet and settle the soul in some good measure of peace
and assurance. This is one of the sweet and first fruits of Faith, that it
quieteth the heart, and pacifieth it, whereas unbelief does fill the heart with
fears. And a convinced soul under doubts, is as restless as fears can make it;
for it is full of them. Where there is little Faith, there are usually on every
awakening alarm (as in Peter's case) great fears. Let not your hearts be
troubled [saith Christ] cast out disquieting thoughts; for, says he, Ye
believe in God, Joh. 14.1. And indeed the Believer may well be quiet, for he
believes on Christ, of whom the God of Truth has said, That whosoever believes
on him shall not be confounded, 1 Pet. 2.6. Now this greatly pacifieth the
soul; it knows it shall not be confounded; it has received the earnest of a
glorious inheritance, and is sealed with the holy Spirit of Promise upon its
believing, Ephesians. 1.13, 14. Amidst the many and great troubles the Apostle met
with for the Gospel, his Faith kept his heart in a very quiet and pacate frame.
I know, says he, whom I have trusted, 2 Timothy 1.12. He speaks of himself as
of one whom no troubles could much disquiet; for he did both know that he
believed, and he knew whom he believed. Hence it is that when he prayed for
Peace and Joy to fill the believing Romans, cap. 15.13. He makes express
mention of their Faith as the means of their Peace; Pax acquiritur fide.
Vatablus in loc.
Now the God of Hope fill you with all Joy and Peace in believing, etc. Peace
and sedateness of mind is one of the firstborn of Faith; as on the contrary,
disquietude of mind is the firstborn of despondency and unbelief. So David's
experience assures us, who found his quiet of mind decrease, and the disquiet
thereof to increase, as his trust in God did decrease; therefore he rowseth up
himself to trust in God, that he might recover the calm of his spirit: Why art
thou cast down, oh my soul! and why art thou disquieted within me? hope thou in
God, for I shall yet praise him, who is the health of my countenance, and my
God, Psalm. 42.11. This then is one of the present great businesses of Faith, to
quiet the heart, and bring it into a peaceable state.

Now what can give the heart rest, if such glorious things expected and secured
to us do not? The Believer may see all his hopes most inviolably, and under the
most sacred seals, confirmed to him in the Death of Christ by Sacrifice; and
certainly if greatness of hopes, accompanied with immutable assurance of a
future enjoying them, do not satisfy and quiet for present, nothing ever will
be able in this world to compose the spirit of any man. How quietly does an
expectant about Court wait for his preferment and advance upon the promise of
his Friend and Patron who possibly may fail! How well will it become us to wait
quietly for our great advancement on the Promise, Covenant, and Oath of our
God, in which it is impossible he should fail us?

2. Faith does at present revive and refresh the soul; it administreth cordials
to it: I had fainted if I had not believed, says David, Psalm. 27.13. And he
prescribes waiting or believing as an excellent preservative against such
faintness and despondence of spirit, v. 14. on which he resolves, at what time
he is afraid he will trust in God, Psalm. 56.3. No support, no reviving
comparable to that Faith does aford. That Peace and that Joy which the Apostle,
Romans 5.2. has annexed unto Faith, is a Peace with God, and a Rejoicing in hope
of the glory of God, viz. That God will make us glorious in that glory which he
has prepared for all that believe. Now they that expect on unfailing promises
such Glory, may justifiably say, that their inward man is renewed [not in
strength only, but in comfort also] day by day, 2 Cor. 4.16. We faint not, ver.
16. though our outward man perish; why, what kept up their spirit? did any
thing but Faith? The Apostle mentions nothing else; For our inward man is
renewed day by day, while we look not at the things which are seen, but at the
things which are not seen, v. 18. While we look, i. e. with an eye of Faith.
(...), etc. Grotius paralleleth it with Heb. c. 11. v. 1. (...) if from (...),
or (...), Sir. Laetari, etc. if from Arab. it is either amicum se praebuit, or
else quievit, quietavit.
So Grotius paralleleth the place with Heb. 11.1. And the Syriack, whether it
use a native or a foreign word in its translation, does use a word which
implies an eminent act of Faith. When the heavy burden of guilt overloadeth
the heart; when the violence, strangeness and frequency of temptations sadneth
the soul; when fierce, long and wasting persecutions make havoc of the Church;
when spiritual dullness and deadness of soul afflicts a Believer, what but his
Faith can or does comfort and revive him? Faith carries him to his Sacrifice
in the blood whereof he sees his God atoned and reconciled, who then shall
condemn? A Covenant of grace and mercy, what grace then can he want? In this
Sacrifice he sees, Christ has perfected all that are sanctified and done, all
that which Legal Sacrifices shadowed out, but could not work out, viz. Perfect
Reconciliation to God, and full pacification of Conscience. This revives the
heart; God speaks peace, and Conscience speaks peace, and Faith does at present
employ it self in ensuring and improving both these for the comfort of the
Believer. And this part of the life of Faith is so evidently maintained upon
the Death of Christ, as our Sacrifice making our peace with God, confirming the
promises of grace and glory, ensuring to us the grand expectations of this and
the other world, that I think it needless to insist farther on this particular
Christ dying our Sacrifice is the great reviving comfort of an awakened,
convinced, fainting, yet believing soul.

3. The third thing in the present Actings of Faith, while it on good and sure
grounds waits for the great things which are to be revealed, is the active
diligence of Faith to do the whole work which is appointed for it to do. Faith
gives not a discharge from any one degree of our required industry in good,
nor does it release to us any one of the Moral Precepts of the Law; no, Faith
makes not the Law void, Romans 3.31. The Apostle assures us that the Faith of a
believer engages him to walk and to labor, so as to be accepted with God; so
2 Cor. 57. and9. We walk by Faith not by sight [saith S. Paul] ver. 7.
Wherefore we labor that whether present or absent we may be accepted of him.
ver 9. It is but the counterfeit of Faith which lies unactive and regardless
to do the will of God; when once the soul can judge [which carries in it both
an act of discerning, and an act of beliveing or assenting to the truth] That
one [ viz. Christ] died for all, it does presently conclude that henceforth
they who live, should not live to themselves but to him that died for them, 2.
Cor. 5.14, 15. It is the rational conclusion Faith draws from the Grace of
God toward us in Christ dying for us, that our life which we have of mercy,
must be laid out in duty; and the reward we expect should animate us to the
service God expects. Mark the Apostle St. Peter's manner of arguing, 2 Pet.
3.12. Since, says he, We look and hasten to the coming of the day of God; and
again, ver. 13. We according to his promise, look for new Heavens; and ver. 14.
seeing Beloved that ye look for such things. For as much as we are verily
persvaded of the truth of these future things, and for as much as we do by
Faith expect an assured fulfilling of them; Be diligent that ye may be found of
him in peace without spot and blameless; so the Apostle intimates to us, nay
presses it upon us as the proper business of Faith as it is whole employ to be
pure, and without blame, and to be diligent herein. Now what can be thought
will excite and animate a believer unto this, if the great things purchased and
ensured to him by the Death of Christ his Sacrifice do not? The Apostle well
knew the weight of the argument, your labor you know, shall not be in vain in
the Lord; therefore see that ye abound in the work of the Lord, 1 Cor. 15.58.
When thou art backward or sluggish, take thy heart, and discover to it what a
Kingdom, what a glorious Reward thy Lord has secured to thee, and ask if it be
not worth thy greatest diligence, and thy most active industry?

4. The fourth concern of Faith in its present deportment, and the influence it
now has on the heart, is to strengthen and support it under all kind of
sufferings and afflictions, be they common to us as men, or peculiar to us as
Christians. Our Faith is our life in the midst of these deaths. Hence we find
Faith joined with patience, Heb. 6.12. When Abraham had received the promises,
Heb. 6. ver. 13. which God made to him when he believed God would do all that
for him which God had promised to him he did patiently endure, and so obtained,
v. 15. The Apostle recounteth his many and great sufferings which with others
he suffered for Christ. Troubled on every side, 2 Cor. 4.8. Perplexed ver. 8.
Persecuted, cast down, ver. 9. Always bearing about in the body, the dying of
the Lord Jesus, ver. 10. Always delivered unto Death; for Jesus sake, ver. 11.
These were their sufferings and troubles; now see their support, which was a
spirit of Faith, ver. 13, 14, etc. Read over the 11th chapter of Hebrews, see
what afflictions those faithful ones did through Faith undergo; and it will be
past controversy with you, that for the present Faith does mightily sustain
the spirit under the variety and sharpness of afflictions and sufferings, which
it does among other helps principally, by looking to the greatness of its
expected reward and glory, secured unto it by the most immutable Covenant and
Oath of God, ratified in the blood of Christ our Sacrifice. So the Apostle
directs us to look to Jesus, etc. Heb. 12.2, 3. enduring the Cross, and
despising the shame; to Jesus who endured contradictions of sinners against
himself, ver. 3. This will be a means to prevent the fainting of our minds
under our troubles and sufferings. The reconciliation between God and us, his
Promise to us, his Covenant with us, his Oath and Christ's Sacrifice all assure
us he is faithful who has promised us our pardon and absolution from guilt and
punishment, our adoption and right of children to a glorious Inheritance; our
solemn and public investiture and admission into possession of a Crown and
Kingdom. He is faithful who has by means of most sacred obligations, assured
us a reward for every duty, active and passive; therefore let us hold fast our
Profession without wavering, Heb. 10.23. And who will not hold his Profession
fast, when he is assured that the Sacrifice Christ has offered, has
reconciled us to God; so that our sufferings are not expresses of his
vengeance, but necessary exercises of our graces, and proofs of the Love of God
to us? who would be weary of bearing, who is persuaded that his sufferings are
but light and momentany; and that they do infallibly work out a far more
exceeding and eternal weight of glory? How do things infinitely less valuable,
and extremely uncertain, prevail with men to undergo hardships; to adventure
through fire and water, to bear watchings, toil, nakedness, hunger and thirst?
How patiently does the Husbandman, Merchant, Soldier and Courtier, submit to
utmost hazards at utmost uncertainties to obtain their hopes, which often do
make them ashamed? But now, who looks to the establishing of the Promise, and
to the greatness of the things promised, and vieweth them in the Death of
Christ as a Sacrifice, expects greatest joys, rewards and glory on the surest
ground, and most infallible certainty; and therefore resolves neither to yield
to fainting, or to sit down under weariness; he will look to Jesus the
Mediator of the New Covenant, and see what he may expect after sufferings, and
will suffer that he may enjoy what he does expect.

Thus Faith may be confirmed and improved as to each part wherein it is
concerned, by duly considering Christ's dying our Sacrifice, ensureth on most
inviosable bonds, the most desirable good things for future, and does for
present sufficiently influence our Faith to quiet, revive, quicken and support
the soul under fears, languishings, dulnesses and sufferings. Go then aside,
and take a view of the particulars, and meditate on them in the certainty which
Christ suffering and dying our Sacrifice, has given to us concerning them; and
when thou have so done, observe well whether thou art not persuaded to believe
in hope against hope; and whether thou art not enabled to believe the Promises
without staggering, and to say, thou faintest not, because thy afflictions are
light, and yet do work out for thee a far more exceeding and eternal weight of
glory, while thou art able to look to, and see both him that is, and the things
that are invisible? such a Faith will be our victory, by it we shall more than
conquer. Having discoursed somewhat on the Improvement of our Divine sorrow,
and our Faith in the Commemoration of Christ Dying our Sacrifice, I have made
way for the Improvement of our Peace and Quiet of soul likewise; 3d. Grace
improved, viz. Peace of Soul.
for this is a sweet fruit of our sound Repentance and sincere faith, and
carry's a proportioned dimension with the increase of those Graces. But I
purpose to attempt a more particular discovery of the influence Christ's Death
our Sacrifice has upon the Tranquillity and Peace of the soul of a
Communicant, who discerns this Death as it was a Sacrifice, and under that
notion improveth his Redeemer's love to him. Now if I can show my Reader that
there is in this Sacrifice somewhat sufficient to remove all that disquieteth
the soul, I need take no further care to persuade an opinion that Peace will
follow, Let the storm cease, and a calm will follow; if the Earthquake end, the
old Foundations will stand firm, and well settled, Let that be removed, which
alarmed the soul, and all will be in Peace. Amongst other (lesser which I pass
over) there are four grand disquietudes of the soul.

1. Danger of divine displeasure and wrath in condemnation for our sin. The
drawn sword of Divine vengeance hanging over the head, is enough to affright
all peace out of the heart, and to fill it with amazing horror, and
overwhelming terrors. How did Adam's fears seize him, when his sin had laid
him open to that threat, Thou shall die the death? Genesis 2.17. then his guilty
conscience did chase, Ea [conscientia] est quae filgat, terret, accusat and
damnat Parents nostros: Certissimum testimonium. Deum tandem ultorem futurum
omnis mali. Fagius in cap. 3. Genesis 8.
affright, accuse and condem him, forebode a severer Judge and Avenger, whom he
could not escape or shun, whom he could not stand before, whom he fears and
flies. The Apostle elegantly expresses the disquietude of a self-condemning
heart by the trouble of bondage, Heb. 2.15. The fear of death kept them in
bondage all their life; the expectation of death was death to them or ere they
died, and they scarce lived, because they continually tortured themselves with
the preapprehensions of a hastening death, (...). Aristot.
which to secure nature, is the greatest of terrors, though ignorance of what
is consequent to death, did hide the most dreadful part of death from the eyes
of nature, Psalm. 55.4. Psalm. 116.3.
yet in David's phrase, terrors of death will make the heart sigh under pain,
and fill it with trouble and sorrow too, unless the heart be assured of the the
removal of guilt, the freedom from condemnation; Joh. 8.21, 24. Rev. 2.11.
that the man dies not in his sins, nor shall be hurt of the second death. No
man's heart was strong under the apprehensions of the wrath of an Almighty and
Eternal God; nor can the greatest cheats of the world [I mean hypocrites, who
can counterfeit almost every thing] put on the counterfeit of boldness, Isa.
33.15.
when they see the everlasting burnings, and the devouring fire, they are then
surprised with fearfulness.

2. Loss of the wonted sweetness of Divine favor, and the refreshing expresses
which God by his spirit did formerly give to the soul. When once the soul has
been favored with an acquaintance and knowledge of a Heaven upon earth it
cannot without disquietude live on earth, without it is Heaven. Darkness cannot
but greatly afflict the soul which enlightened, once did rejoice in the light of
God's Countenance shining on it. What is said of the great darkness which fell
on Abraham in his sleep, Genesis 15.12. may be verified of all the desertions
which fall upon the children of Abraham; they are attended with horror and
trouble. When God hid his face from David, he was troubled, Psalm. 30.5. and his
soul refused to be comforted, Psalm. 77.2. his spirit was overwhelmed, ver. 3.
so troubled he could not speak, ver. 4. All which proceeded from the spiritual
desertion he then lay under. God has cast off, and he feared it was for ever,
ver. 7. that he would be favorable no more, etc. verse 8, and 9. So that when
David had lost the sense of God's love, he could find peace or joy in nothing
about him. An Idolater once expostulated with a great deal of trouble, you have
taken away my Gods, and do you ask what aileth me? But whilst we deride or pity
his blindness, we should resent the real troubles of the soul, which has lost
the sense of the Love of his God and Father; and indulge him in a more than
usual trouble for the suspense or intermission of his desired rest and peace,
wherein he found, though imperfect, yet a growing happiness; and in David's
words expressed his felicity, He heard the joyful sound, and walked in the
light of God's countenance, Psalm. 89.15. but now fears his misery will recall
his former happiness only to prove him as much sunk in woes, as he was exalted
in joys above other men; Miserrimum est fuisse felicem.
this disquieteth the soul, that it has been what now it is not, blessed.

3. Sense of sinful weakness, and suspicion of worse insincerity, and want of
uprightness in its duties, and the exercises of its Devotion toward God, are a
trouble to the soul in its reflections on its services and examination of it
self; it sees sin adhere to every one of its best works, and it sees
imperfection still dwelling in its perfectest graces; so that when he finds
to will, yet how to perform he finds not, as Romans 7.18. On which observation
of his defects, he judges himself in a miserable perplexity, and under
apprehensions hereof cries out wretched man that I am! who shall deliver me?
etc. ver. 24. This worthlesness of persons and performances is the subject of
the Church's complaints, Isa. 64.6. We are all as an unclean thing -- And our
iniquities, as the wind, have taken us away: iniquities (says David in his
complaint) prevail against me, Psalm. 65.3. And elsewhere prays God would
search him, and try him, and see whether there be any way of wickedness in him,
Psalm. 139.23, 24. It is that which gives a trouble to God's Children, that
they are not perfect that their heart retains too much of its native guile,
and is deceitful above all things, Jer. 17.9. (...) Isa. 6.5.
In brief, with the Prophet they cry ont each one in sight of his Pollution, woe
is me I am of Polluted heart and lips. When David saw the Divine jealousy
breaking out on Vzza, 2 Samuel 6.9. He was afraid and durst not bring up the Ark
of the Lord, whither he first intended. He was afraid of the Lord that day, and
said how shall the Ark of the Lord come to me? he feared, and fears are
troubles, and questionless disquiet the mind; his fears, and the trouble of
them arose from his foreseen unmeetness to entertain the Arc of so holy a God;
he was not, as he desired, a meet and prepared Receiver, and lodger of that
glorious guest. This David's trouble, this the disquieting thought of every
good heart, it cannot offer a Sacrifice pure enough, immaculate, and perfect,
as becomes the purity, perfection, and Majesty of his God.

4. A Fourth and the last I shall now mention, is a succession of doubts and
jealousies lest guilt and unworthiness should hinder his acceptance with God,
and at last cut off his hope of every desirable blessing from God. For
although the believer is delivered from danger of condemnation, and has had
often experiences of the favor of his God, and is made upright and without
prevailing guile in all his services, which might in very reason be sufficient
ground of a constant peaceful hope, confidence and assurance that God will ever
accept him, and delight to bless him, and at last reward him; yet for all this,
many doubts, and the same frequently returning, do disquiet the soul, putting
it to suspect the worst, and what shall never befall it. Oh says one, my sins
make me doubt, lest that be my sad state which was Israel's complaint, or
should have been in Jeremiah's words, Sins have hidden good things from me,
Jer. 5.25. And another is ready to suspect, though I might be established, yet
my unbelief suggesteth apprehensions that I shall not; for I have not been
obedient, I have been guilty of much unbelief. A third complains of
backslidings, and what doubts arise thence. And almost every one has his
peculiar doubts, or a peculiar ground for those which disquiet others as
himself. Now it is, I judge, needless to exemplify the troublous nature of
doubts, and endless to enumerate the particular doubts of Christians, or the
easy returns they make on the souls who have frequently removed them, and have
thought sure now they should no more be disquieted with them. I shall rather
address my thoughts to the second thing I suggested, viz. that there is in the
Sacrifice of Christ for us somewhat which may remove these disquietudes of the
soul. And so

Sect. 1.
1. In the first place, for removal of the danger of condemnation, the first
disquietude mentioned there, is sufficient in Christ dying our Sacrifice to
effect this, as will appear on these Considerations.

1. Christ dying our Sacrifice, was pleased to stand in our stead; he was
substituted in our room, for us, in this he became what is necessary in every
Sacrifice, a representative of us for whom he made himself a Sacrifice; so the
Sacrifice does vices ejus, qui reus agitur subire, take the place or turn of
the guilty, of which substitution I have already spoken somewhat, cap. 3. sect.
1. This Substitution of the Sacrifice was so generally received an Opinion, and
an inseparate appendage to every Sacrifice expiatory, that thou shall easily
discern it both in the writing of Heathens mentioning their Sacrifices as also
in the writings of Moses relating the particularities of Jewish Sacrifices, if
an ordinary care be used in reading. But I do not farther insist on that, come
we rather to see what quiet this substitution may afford to the soul, how full
of peace may the soul be which can carry all that is laid to it is charge to
Christ, which can say Christ stand's for me, is substituted in my stead; and if
there be ought of danger, it first falls on him, in whose hand never did any
one miscarry who had Christ undertaking for him. Christ now substitute for us
stands between us and danger, who are thus in Christ [to allude to that of the
Apostle, Romans 8.1.] Are exempt from condemnation. For in this substitution of
our Sacrifice there is.

2. A due, sufficient and full transferring our guilt on our Sacrifice, so that
the guilty soul may now say; mercy has transmitted my guilt from me upon my
substitute, and he has voluntarily taken that upon himself, to answer it
before my Judge against all accusers; and how then can condemnation be justly
feared when no guilt is found lying upon the person? what servant, or child,
needs fear a chiding for that fault which the Master, or Father, has on the
interposing of a Mediator transferred from the servant, or child? solicitous
fears may de facto disquiet the soul, for whom Christ made himself a Sacrifice;
but were such fears arrested, examined and discovered, they would be checked,
discarded and cast out as groundless; for it would then appear that they come
intruders on innocent, acquitted, and imputatively guiltless souls. Does any
such fear of future condemnation perplexe? look to thy Sacrifice, consider,
guilt (which only can condemn) is by thy Judge in a valid, sufficient form
transferred from thee to thy Sacrifice, and certainly thy Judge will as justly
acquit the from thy guilt, as he did mercifully transfer it, he whose mercy
so contrived to make thee innocent, that thou might not be condemned. His
Justice will find thee what mercy made thee, and thou shall not be condemned.
Read that text, 2 Cor. 5.2. He has made him to be sin for us, who knew no sin,
that we might be made the righteousness of God in him. Certainly then the
danger of Condemnation is over when we are made Righteous in Christ, and he our
Sacrifice made sin for us. The Righteous Judge of Heaven and earth will do so
justly, that he will not codemn one whom grace has made Righteous. Though all
we like lost-sheep have gone astray, yet there is hope, for the Lord has laid
on him the iniquity of us all, Isa. 53.16.

3. Christ our Sacrifice standing in our stead, and admitting the transferring
of our guilt from us upon himself by his dying our sacrifice did undergo that
punishment, and did bear that wrath which our sin deserved that we might be
absolved and acquitted; so that now either we must doubt an after-punishment
will be inflicted on us for the sin Christ has born and suffered, and we shall
be condemned, though he died to the end we might not be condemned, which how
little consistant with either the justice of God or his mercy, any one may
easily discern who will consider. It is a matter of justice not to condemn a
person for whom satisfaction has been made; and it is matter of mercy to
acquit him through another's sufferings, who stood condemned for his own
offenses; or if we judge, as fit we should, that neither the justice or mercy
of God will permit he should be condemned for whom Christ died a Sacrifice, we
can conclude no less from such a death, than the absolution and future
acquittance of a Believer, whose Sacrifice Christ died, who hereby has (as
Isa. 43.4.) born our griefs, and carried our sorrows, i. e. the punishment due
to our sins, for the which he has suffered and made satisfaction. Say the
Generva Notes in loc. yet what follows ver. 5. is fuller, Vt integrae essent
res nostrae, and nobis been esset, etc. placuit, etc. verbera and plagas quas
nos commeriti eramus filius susciperet, etc. Castigatione and verberibus filii
reconciliati sumus Patri and efferbuit ira Patris. Fozerius in loc.
He was wounded for our transgressions -- the chastisement of our peace was
upon him, and by his stripes we are healed. The strokes and blows which we
deserved, the Son took upon him, to the end that our affairs being restored, it
might be well with us, etc. by the chastisement and stripes of the Son, we are
reconciled to the Father, and the anger of the Father has asswayed and ceased
toward us. Whosoever can look with the eye of faith on Christ thus dying, Christus
Dominus pro peccatis nostris dolor affectus est ergo peccata nostra deleta,
ergo ira Dei remisit conseditque ergo reconciliatus enim nobis ergo pax,
integritas, salus, and omne bonum in nos dimanavit. Fozerius.
may in the words of the late mentioned Commentatour triumph; Christ the Lord
was grieved for our sins, therefore our sins are blotted out, the wrath of God
is appeased and cease; God is reconciled to us, therefore peace, restitution,
salvation, and every good thing has flowed in to us. But one thing possibly
may be suspected, viz. Albeit such an atonement and reconciliation be made now,
yet may not wrath at last break forth in fury to the utter condemnation of the
soul, which now has its pardon? To this I shall answer by subjoyning

4. That Christ Died a Sacrifice, which he himself offered through the Eternal
Spirit, to the end that he might purge our conscience from dead works, that we
might serve the Living God; as Heb. 9.14. By which one offering, he has
perfected forever them that are sanctified, Heb. 10.14. Which great Truth the
Apostle confirms by an Argument drawn from the very letter of that Covenant
which is confirmed in this Sacrifice, according to which Covenant God promises
remission of sins; so ver. 17. Their sins and iniquities will I remember no
more. Now where remission of these is, there is no more offering for sin, ver.
18. The ground whereof is the perfect Reconciliation wrought for those to whom
God does grant remission of sin; so that hence I may justifiably argue from the
real expiation made at first to the perpetual continuation of it, by the blood
of this most perfect Sacrifice. Let our Faith therefore be directed to fetch
our absolution from guilt and condemnation, let us ensure this to our selves
through Christ dying our Sacrifice, and take that comfort to our selves; he
has by one offering for ever perfected them that are sanctified. And he is
able to save to the uttermost all that come unto God by him, Heb. 7.25.

Sect. 2.
2. The second Disquiet of the soul I mentioned, was a fear lest it should lose
the refreshing apprehensions, and sweet enjoyments of the Divine Favor; how
much this would disturb the peace of the soul, I am not here to discourse,
having said all I intended already on it. But now it is my business to show
that Christ's Death as our Sacrifice is sufficient to prevent this fear, or to
secure unto the soul an enjoyment of the Divine Favor, which I now attempt to
show.

1. In that this Sacrifice duly apprehended by us, does very much abate of the
ground of our fears, of the withdrawing the Divine Favor from us. Now the
apprehension of the dread and terror of spiritual desertions arises from our
doubts, that they are but precursory to a final and eternal displeasure, that
they are but the Primordia dolorum, the beginnings of sorrows; that the full
measures will be at last for everlasting poured out upon the soul: Oh this
afflicts! This, Will God be gracious no more? is the sword which wounds to the
heart? and whilst this fear abides on the soul, it can take no rest. Now see
Christ our Sacrifice has atoned vindictive displeasure, reconciled us to God,
delivered us from wrath to come; so that undoubtedly these present seasons of
darkness are but seasons. These sorrows may endure for a night, but joy comes
in the morning. Christ in the merit of his blood does ever appear for me with
God; though God appear not to me now as of old, yet I shall enjoy him.

2. Christ Dying a Sacrifice for us, has now changed the nature of all our
afflictions, and turned them into wholesome corrections, and into necessary
exercises of our graces, not only our outward afflictions are so changed, that
there remains not any deadly poison in them, but our spiritual troubles among
which this I speak of, is to be accounted chief, these are much more altered in
their nature, as indeed it was expedient they should; for as they sink deeper
into the soul, and do more speedily seize the spirit, and have an immediate
influence on the soul, so they would be of more dangerous consequence, if they
retained an unrebated poison in them; These would undo the soul, whereas
outward afflictions can approach to the soul but intermediately, and being kept
still about the outworks, can only disquiet and alarm cannot kill the soul nor
its comforts. Now we are beholden to the excellency of this Sacrifice for this.
By this sacrifice our afflictions are rendered only corrections whatever is
vindictive, and which the soul cannot bear is derived upon our Sacrifice,
being hereby secured from wrath. For if when we were enemies, we were
reconciled to God by the death of his Son, much more being reconciled, we shall
be saved by his life, Romans 5.10. The Apostle argues from our reconciliation
once effected, unto our salvation in due time to be accomplished. And happy they
who have Christ once dying a Sacrifice to make their peace, but ever living a
merciful and a faithful High Priest to maintain their peace with God. Such he
is to all for whom he is a Sacrifice.

3. In midst of spiritual desertions Christ our Sacrifice preserves inviolate
the state of our peace, though we have not the sense and sweetness of that
peace. The Covenant of peace between God and the soul stands unaltered still;
and this in the virtue of this blood of Christ our Sacrifice, (for so were
Covenants of old made and confirmed, as has been observed) a very pregnant
place to our present purpose we met with in Psa. 89.30. and seq. If his
children forsake my Law, Psalm. 89.30, 31, 32.^^.
and walk not in my Judgments; if they break my Statutes, and keep not my
Commandments, then will I visit their transgressions with a Rod, and their
iniquity with stripes. 2 Samuel 7.14. Virga hominum, i.e. moderata correctione,
and in eorum commodum. Poli Synops. Crit.
This Rod, 2 Samuel 7.14. is the Rod of men; that is, with moderate correction,
and for their good. But, or Nevertheless my loving kindness will I not utterly
take from him: Here Is a rich Cordial to the drooping soul which smarteth under
the didivine corrections. God has not, nor will he take away his loving
kindness, nor suffer his faithfulness to fail, ver. 33. My Covenant will I not
break, nor alter the thing that is gone out of my lips. Now then when thy sin,
whether of folly or frowardness, is corrected, and thou mournest under sense of
divine displeasure, call to mind the Covenant made in Christ thy Sacrifice, and
be comforted; sense of thy peace may, but the Covenant of thy peace shall not
be broken.

4. Under the apprehension of divine displeasure and present dereliction, yet
this Sacrifice may soon quiet and sufficiently support the soul, in that it
will be its present refuge against the violence of this trial; still the soul
may interpose the Propitiatory virtue of this Sacrifice between it self on the
one part, and God's displeasure with its own fears on the other part; hitherto
this Altar may the troubled, and the trembling soul fly as Joab to the horns of
the Altar, and certainly when the blood of this Sacrifice is found sprinkled on
the soul, God will speak a present peace, or support with a secret infused hope
of life, and at least seasonably let the Believer know he will never take him
from the Altar that he may die; but yet as a Father he may correct his
offenses, without violating the privilege of sanctuary. And indeed this is the
utmost God intends in the exercise of his Sons and Daughters, who are
reconciled to him through Christ their Sacrifice. In virtue whereof all
Believers might, and I believe the most of them do one time or other in this
life, after such spiritual troubles, recover some degree of spiritual peace and
joy in the favor of God; however, seldom go off the stage without the joy of
good old Simeon, departing in peace, because they have seen the salvation of
God. But they never fail to see and rejoice in God through Christ, when they
receive the peace which after death is to be obtained with God by virtue of
this Expiatory Sacrifice, the truth hereof they firmly believe, and hope for it
also. Romans 5.11.
We may then joy in God through our Lord Jesus Christ, through whom we have now
received the atonement. Joy in God is a fruit of atonement, and this an effect
of the Sacrifice of Christ: So near alliance there is between our Joy in the
Divine Favor, and Christ procuring and maintaining it for us in the virtue of
his Sacrifice. Much to the same purpose is that of the Apostle, Heb. 10. v. 19.
Having boldness to enter by the blood of Christ. Now at least this boldness is
a fruit or consequent of our persuasion, and hope that God bears a gracious
respect to us, And ver. 21. and 22. Having an High Priest (and consequently a
Sacrifice) let us draw nigh with a true heart, in full assurance of faith, etc.
If any complain notwithstanding all this, I must assure them their own
inability to improve the virtue of Christ our Sacrifice, is the reason why they
draw not out the excellent Oil which would make their face to shine; it is not
want of excellency in him, or in his death our Sacrifice.

Sect. 3.
3. A third thing a soul is disquieted at, is the sinful imperfections of
duties; weakness of graces, and unworthiness of his person; all which
concurring, do oftentimes occasion a doubt, whether such shall be accepted with
a God of infinite holiness, and glorious Majesty. Can God indeed take pleasure
in such? will such persons be accepted, such graces allowed, such duties
approved? and if not, where shall the troubled soul seek rest?

For removal of this Disquietude from the soul, there is sufficient in Christ
dying our Sacrifice. For,

1. It is that which procures an acceptance of our persons; it restores us
to the Favor of God, who delights in every one who has by faith a real
interess in this Sacrifice. The Grace of God through Christ looks to our
persons, Qua gratos nos sibi reddidit per illum dilectum. Vatab.
(...), etc. So that he makes us accepted, Ephesians. 1.6. He has respect to our
persons, and this through Christ our Sacrifice; as ver. 7. By whom we have
redemption through his blood. Expounding the material cause, how we are made
acceptable to God in Christ, for it is he only, whose Sacrifice by the mercy of
God is imputed to us for forgiveness of sin; as some note on these words. It is
the order observed in the New Covenant, Semper igitur sentiendum est nos
consequi remissionem peccatorum. Et personam pronunciari justum, i. e. gratis
acceptari propter Christum per fidem postea vero placere etiam obedientiam erga
legem, and reputari quandam justitiam, etc. Augustan. Confess. Ar. 6.
confirmed in the death of this Sacrifice, to look to the person first through
the precious blood of his Sacrifice, and next to the performance of his duties
subsequent. As God is said to have had respect to Abel first, and then to his
Sacrifice. So here, the person of the Believer is through Christ accepted with
God; thus the fears lest our unworthy persons be rejected, are removed. God
valueth them not as in themselves, but in the superadded favor which for
Christ's sake he bears to them.

2. Secondly, The excellency of this Sacrifice removes the fears which arise
from the weaknesses and perfections of our gracious works too: For the
excellency of this Sacrifice ennobleth every spiritual Sacrifice we offer unto
God by faith, Rev. 8.3. And another Angel came and stood at the Altar, having a
golden Censer, and there was given him much incense, that he should offer it
with the prayers of all the Saints upon the golden Altar which is before the
Throne, On which words Junius has this passage among others; This is that
Great Emperor the Lord Jesus Christ our King and Savior, who makes
intercession to God the Father for the Saints, filling the heavenly Sanctuary
with most sweet odours, and offering up their prayers, etc. in such sort as
every one of them (so powerful is that sweet savor of Christ, and the efficacy
of his Sacrifice) are held in reconcilement with God, etc. You see then our
duties are compared to incense; and if the native scent of our duties cannot be
pleasing to God, yet the superadded sweetness of Christ's incense will render
them very acceptable to our God; though their savor be unpleasing which
ascends with them out of our hands, yet the savor which they carry with them
ascending from the golden Altar does delight the Lord; do not give way then to
discouraging fears, that imperfect duties, and unsavory offerings will
estrange God from thee. God has removed this fear also; the Sacrifice of
Christ will perfume thy Sacrifices, which now become acceptable to God by Jesus
Christ, 1 Pet. 2.4.

3. Thirdly, That there may remain no scruple or fear beside what he does
reconciling our persons to God, and ennobling our Duties through the excellency
of this Sacrifice, he has by the same Sacrifice made an atonement or expiation
for the sinful defects of all the duties of Believers. Although it is true, so
many culpable defects adhere to our duties, that God might in the strict
examination of them, justly reject them; yet he will not impute these defects
to the persons, nor for them reject the duties of his Saints, because in
Christ's Sacrifice he has received an atonement, and will pardon those defects
an atonement, and will pardon those defects to his children. Let us then hold
fast our profession of particular hope, and delight in duties as of the general
Doctrine of the Gosple, Seeing we have a great High Priest, who is passed into
the Heavens Jesus the Son of God, Now the Apostle presents us with Chrst as
having Sacrificed, and with the blood of that Sacrifice entering into Heavens,
i. e. to intercede for us in the virtue of that excellent Sacrifice; so that we
may well take boldness to draw unto God with hope, that neither unworthiness of
persons, nor the worthlesness of duties shall ever be able to divert divine
acceptance, seeing that if the intercession of a High Priest, of a Great High
Priest, in the Heavens, in the presence of God, if the intercession of Jesus
the Son of God, can prevail for the removeal of whatever might possibly impede
our acceptance, both we and our obedience shall be acceped. In sum, art thou a
believer? do thou by faith commemorate the death of Christ thy Sacrifice?
do thou believe there is virtue and worth in this Sacrifice? how much virtue
think thou in it? certainly either there is enough to reconcile thy person,
to recommend thy services, to pardon thy sins, or else Christ died in vain; for
as good not at all, as not to purpose, will be verified in this case, he died a
Sacrifice that he might bring these to good effect, viz. That we might be
reconciled, that our duties might be a sweet smelling Sacrifice, that our sins
also might be pardoned, which either are attained by the virtue of this
Sacrifice, or else Christ does not attain his purposes of love toward true
believers, which who but an infidel dares to surmise?

Sect. 4.
4. The fourth and last disquietude of the believing soul, I mentioned to be
the return of his doubts and fears, lest God should withold the most
desirable mercies and comsorts of this present state, and hide good things from
him who has forfeited them all. Many are the fears of those who shall never be
condemned, who have enjoyed the light of God's countenance, who are persuaded
God accepts their persons and duties also unto all the purposes of rewarding
them hereafter, who yet are apt to sear overmuch the strokes of a smart rod
here, or the darkness of this present condition. Now the Sacrifice of Christ
well considered would remove all such fears and perplexing jealousies for.

1. This Sacrifice removing sin, removes what would hide good things from us.
When the blood of this Sacrifice has effected our reconciliation, God will not
think any mercy too good or great for us. He that spared not his own Son, but
gave him up for us all, how shall he not with him give us all things also, Romans
8.32. Facilius enim dare amicis factis quam adbuc hostibus; and facilius omne
quam filium dare. Grot. in loc.
It is easier to conceive, he should give to us made his friends then when we
were enemies; and it is easier to give every thing then to give a Son. On a
just stating matters it will appear that the Sacrifice of Christ removing
guilt, removes the ground of all perplexing, tormentful fears of what nature
soever. I do not say it removes them actually; I know the contrary by
observation: But I say, there is no justifiable ground for such wracking fears
of future occurrences in our life; for the Believer has through this Sacrifice
a Covenant of Promises, 2 Cor. 1.20. with 1 Timothy 4.8.
both of this life, as of that to come, ratified and confirmed to him.

2. This Sacrifice gives the believer a justifiable title to every mercy
whether temporal or spiritual, that he is capable of receiving, and enjoying
with safety, and good to himself, as with gloty to God; and if any one
particular mercy, notwithstanding the believers desire of it, and earnest
labor after it, be withheld, it is because his weak foresight, and small
scantling of wisdom cannot discern what the All-seeing Eye of God does see, and
what his Infinite Wisdom knows, viz. that it is fittest for the present to
withold that particular desired mercy, and to reserve it unto a season
wherein it will be a choicer mercy, and more advantageous. Now a small measure
of patience might quiet the heart in the absence of such blessings, if the man
would reflect upon his condition so well settled by Christ his Sacrifice, that
he has by this a title to every good, and that the time and the manner of
entering on the possession of this good is assigned by the Lord in greatest love
to us, that we should not by our haste snatch an unseasonable blessing, nor by
our sloth lose a seasonable mercy. It cannot enter my thoughts what may pacify
the soul, dispel murmuring discontents, and prevent perplexing fears, if these
will not, viz. Christ by his Sacrifice has reconciled me to the Eternal God,
and wrought me into such favor with God, that he has made over himself to me,
to be mine for ever; and he has assigned me (with his Elect) a portion in his
alsufficiency: and because I know not what measure, and what season is fittest
for me, he does employ his own Wisdom to determine both; so that I know he has
love enough to give more, if his Wisdom saw it not greatest love to give but so
much.

3. The hovering fears and doubts from uncertainties whether we shall enjoy our
desired mercies for this present state, might be scattered, did we consider
that this Sacrifice of Christ was not only expiatory of guilt, but also a
Peace Offering. In which kind of Sacrifices, (...), portio Domino Deo, (...),
portio Sacerdoti, and (...), portio viro, qui attulit.
as the Priest who offered had his share, so the person who brought them had a
share in them likewise; tacitly intimating that there was a purchase, or
procurement of good blessings (shadowed to the bringer under the portion he
carried away to eat and feast on) made by this Offering, whence they had the
name (...), Peace Offerings, Dr. Cudworth's Discourse concerning the true
Notion of the Lord's Supper.
because they brought Peace to the Altar to the Priests, and to the owners.
These Sacrifices were also called by the name (...)] a Sacrifice of fulnesses
or plenties, Quod repleret voluntatem omnium. Sic P. Fag. ex D. Kimchi.
being offered pro beneficio obtento vel obtinendo a Domino, as Mercer. for a
benefit as obtained, so for one to be obtained. Let then the natural tendency
of the Sacrifice of Christ, as it was a (Sacrificium postulationis)
Peace Offering for all blessings to be obtained from God, be considered, and
see what reason Faith has to rest confidently and quietly, assured it shall
not be left destitute of any blessings, which the efficacy of this Offering
could procure, the friendship of God reconciled can afford, and the enlarged
regular desires of the soul can demand. I need as little prove that Christ's
Sacrifice was vertually all kind of divinely instituted Sacrifice, as I need to
prove to a considerate Christian, that as an Eucharistical Sacrifice and
Euchtical jointly it was designed [pro obtinendis beneficiis] to obtain
blessings, whereof certainly it has no whit failed; as I might at large prove
if it were needful. The promises are made to godliness, 1 Timothy 4.8. and these
promises confirmed in Christ, 2 Cor. 1.20. It is for his sake we may ask what
we will in Faith, and receive it when we ask, or better than that we ask. Vt
illa inserviant vobis in vestrum commodum and salutem. Vestris inserviunt
commodis. Clar. in loc. Deredias licet, ingentis spiritus res est cum -- tantam
copiam rerum quas natura beatissime fundit aspexeris emittere hane vocem --
Haec omnia mea sunt. Sic fit ut nil sapiens cupiat quia nihil est extra omnia.
Seneca l. 7. c. 3. Lauda. Jac. Cappello.
When God gave us his Son, with him he gave us all things also. And whosoever has
by Faith a title to Christ as his, the same man has by Christ a title to all
things. Note well that of the Apostle, Whether things present, or things to
come, all are yours, for you are Christ's, and Christ is God's, 1 Cor. 3.21. So
all is yours; away then with those disquietudes which a Philosopher would
control; which a Christian should conquer. Let not their reason outgo our
Faith. Though thou may deride, it is the business of a great spirit, on view
of that abundance which nature happily pours forth to say, all these things
are mine. So comes it to pass that a wise man covets not any thing, because
more than all (which is his) there is not any thing. Banish therefore thy
disquieting thoughts, and turn thy cares into a stream of diligence, to secure
to thy self that Christ is thy Sacrifice, that he is thy Passover, and then
this as consequent of thy interess in Christ, will be thy comfort and thy
peace, whatever I can need bona fide, whatever I can desire sana mente, I may
expect from the recovered Favor of my God, and the transcendent worth of
Christ's Sacrifice. And truly I would be content to miss what I cannot find in
these jointly; nor would I seek what others have to their loss gained out of
Christ. Let my portion be what this unparalled Sacrifice has procured for me
in the Eternal world among Saints and Angels, and let mine allowances in this
transitory world, be the additionals which the wisest love, and the safest
moderation can give and receive. It is not possible we should want any one
mercy which is but a few degrees removed from the least and lowest, after God
has given one which is infinitely greater than all we enjoy beside. Who gave
him who is more than all, will not fail to give every one that we can ask,
seeing such are infinitely lesser than that he has given already. Well may I
blush at my own unreasonable fears and doubts which return upon me, and
disquiet me when I compare my self and my deportment after this expiating,
pacifying, perfecting Sacrifice offered to God for me, with the Heathen or a
Jew and their deportment after the offering up of their Sacrifices. They would
rejoice, rest content, and confidently promise themselves a wished for
prosperity, and abundant confluence of good things: They promised themselves
great things on slight or no gronnds, and oh distrustful heart of mine! I can
hardly believe and expect conveniences from God on the highest assurances. But
hereafter I will endeavor my Faith and Hope with Joy and Peace, shall exceed
theirs as much in its constancy and sweetness, as it does exceed theirs in the
ground and foundation, i. e. as a substance exceeds a shadow which was Jews,
or nothing which was the Gentiles Sacrifice.

The End of the First Part.
REVIVAL OF GRACE: FROM Consideration of Christ Dying a Testator. PART II.
Among some other Considerations of Christ's Death, let me acquaint you with
this, that Christ Dyed a Testator; one peculiar, and singular circumstance in
his dying was this, that he was to die, and by death confirm his last Will and
Testament; and this is very fit, seasonable and proper for a Sacramental
meditation; this is a very fit and seasonable object, and matter for our
meditations at a Sacrament, and from whence our graces may be actuated and
improved. In order whereunto I shall do these five things.

1. I shall show that Christ did die as a Testator, as a loving careful friend,
making his Will. Next,

2. That the Remembrance of this kind of Death of our Lord, does well suit with
a Sacrament. Next,

3. That such a Remembrance will advance grace in its growth; this more
general. Next,

4. What particular graces the renewed Remembrance of Christ dying, and
ordaining his last Will or Testament, will advance and improve. And Lastly,

5. What are the singular motives proper to each of the forementioned graces,
and peculiarly arising from this kind of Death, which improve grace. All which
I will with what brevity and plainness I can dispatch in so many Chapters.

CAP. I.
THE First thing which I stand bound unto, is the clearing of the truth of this
Position, or Foundation of my discourse, viz. That Christ Dying, did Die as a
loving and careful Friend, considering the state, and providing by Will for the
future good of his kindred and people; Christ Dying, died as a Testator, as one
ordaining his last Testament. Let therefore these things be considered. As,

Sect. 1.
1. That he died seized, and possessed of a great and vast estate of which he
had the absolute disposal. He was Lord of Heaven and Earth; and could give what
ever he pleased of the one or other unto his peculiar people. It is true, he
acquired a new title and right by his death, but it is as true that he had an
unquestionable title and right to all, both the Glory of Heaven, with the grace
that prepares and fits for it, and to the goods of the Earth with power to give
to best pleased him. He did veil his glory, and in the days of his flesh
forewent the exercise of that glorious royalty which was his due equally with
his Father; but he never did disseize, or dispossess himself of that
inheritance which by the right of eternal generation from the Father, and which
by the right of creation jointly with the Father he was, and will be still
seized and possessed of, thus the Heavens were his, the Earth also; Heb. 1.2.
He was heir of all things. Now could it be likely or indeed imaginable that so
great an heir, seized of such an estate, should die and not dipose of it? had
it not been wisdom to dispose of it to some or other, if he had had no
dependances that needed it? the worth of the estate would have advised this if
the indigency and want of the kindred had not persuaded to it. But Indeed,

Sect. 2.
2. This great heir had a very great kindred and alliance, Psalm. 2.8.
who were even poor enough; for the greatness of his kindred, they were
scattered over all the earth, Romans 15.11 Psalm. 110.3. Rev. 7.9. Heb. 11.12.
he has some of all Nations; they were as the dew from the womb of the
morning, an innumerable company which no man could number; as the sand on the
sea shore, so was his kindred to be. And as they were many, Rev. 3.17.
so likewise were they exceeding poor; they wanted much, for they had by
prodigality spent all; they had wasted their goods, God gave them a good
portion, did set them up bravely furnished, but all was gone unless a little
which the mercy of their Creditor spared to them to live upon. There was a
Judgment taken out, only mercy forbore the Execution. Now could such a mulof
poor needy kindred be forgotten and neglected think you by such a Dying Friend?
and how should he have showed himself of the kindred, but by giving them
legacies at his death? If their unworthy deportment was such as would disengage
any other, yet it could not disengage him, who would do what best became his
affection, not what best suited with their deserts. Take therefore this farther
into consideration.

Sect. 3.
3. That this great Heir had a most hearty and unparalled affection of pity
and love for all his poor kindred. He loved them with a love greater than the
love of women; he did bear the love of a friend, a father, of a husband; his
love to his was so great, none could have greater; for it was that caused him
to die for them. Now having thus loved his own, he loved them to the end; and
love has a good memory, it will not easily forget. I am sure Christ did
neither abate of his love, nor forget them he loved, which persuades me to
conclude, that this great Heir so dearly loving his poor kindred, would
certainly provide for them, and leave a Will or Testament behind him, which
they should all be the better for; which I the rather incline to believe he
would do, because

Sect. 4.
4. His poor kindred needed some such due, lawful, and valid Act or Deed to
convey his estate unto them. For Christ knew, and he has given us to know,
that we were not his Heirs at Law; nor could we have claimed or recovered any
part of it by the Law; we had lost all our right, made forfeiture of all we
once were possessed of, and God the great Governor and Lord of all, had (as we
know Kings sometimes do) given all the estate of the condemned Traitors to his
Son, and by especial gift had estated him in it. Ask of me, Psalm. 2.
and I will give thee the Heathen for thine inheritance, and the uttermost
parts of the earth for thy possession. And we are blessed with all spiritual
blessings in him. Our sin was our death, and cut off all our claim and title to
every desirable good. Peccatum abolevit Naturalem eam communionem quae
Creaturam cum Creatore consociabat. These. Salm. de trib. Foeder. sect. 33.
Sin abolished that Natural Communion which joined the Creature in friendship
with the Creator; as the Learned Professors of Saumur observe. And God has
set forth this emblematically in the dispossessing and ejecting Adam out of
Paradise. Whatever God bestow's now, he bestow's it in, and through Christ with
him he gives all things also. This being the case of Christ's poor friends,
what more likely way of befriending them than by Will? what surer way than by
ordaining his last Will and Testament? since they had no title by Law preceding
his gift; nor could they have any title any other way. He gave it therefore by
Will, that it might be sure to come to them.

Sect. 5.
5. This great Heir died in perfect memory, and with wisdom that excelled the
measures of the wisest men who set and keep their houses in order; he died not
(as some men do) of a disease that should disable him to ordain his last
Testament, but was his own man unto the last; he manifested this in his care of
his mother, his charity toward the sinful murderers, for whom he prayed etc.
I would add more proofs, but that it would wrong your Christianity, and call
that into question. He is not worthy the name of a Christian, that is so much a
stranger to the Death of Christ. In a word, he as well knew his friends needed
he should give to them, as he knew his enemies needed he should forgive them;
as he did in pity pray for the one, so he did in love and care provide for the
other. And dying friends usually do provide in their last Will or Testament,
especially if they have what Christ had.

Sect. 6.
6. Time enough to dispose of his estate. Some wise men leave their friends
whom they dearly loved ill provided, because the surprise and suddenness of
death preventeth them. But our Lord, this great Heir of all things, could not
be surprised; he knew when his hour was, how it approached; he knew all that
concerned others; he knew what was in Man, and therefore could not but know all
that concerned himself, and his Death. Out of all which circumstances I do
adventure to conclude, That Christ did before his Death ordain his last Will
and Testament, and in it provide for his poor kindred, out of that vast estate
which he was seized of, which he possessed and inherited in the right of his
infinitely Excellent Nature, his Primogeniture, his Powerful Creation, and the
Donation of his Father, when Man had forfeited all, and all estreated unto God
the King and Sovereign of Man. In sum, Christ had time enough wherein to do
this; he had good will enough to move him to it; he had estate enough to
furnish and enrich them, and his poor kindred had need enough. And what then
think we could hinder him from making his Will; or what should dissuade us from
believing it?

from his humiliation unto death. He humbled himself, and became obedient unto
death, etc. Wherefore God has given him a name, etc. that every tongue should
confess that Jesus Christ is Lord. Christ who died, and because he died, has
this title given him, He is Lord, and this title is given to him of God
himself, ((...)) God has exalted him, and given to him a glorious Title: Now
this is not a swelling Title without power, or riches to befriend and help his
people; such vain Titles are sometimes given by man to man, but never unto any
by God himself; for he ever invests power with the Title he conferreth; and
such a power or Authority as became both the greatness of the giver, and the
greatness of the receiver could not be less then a full uncontrolled, and
lawful power of making a Will or Testament, giving out legacies to his
indigent kindred and friends; suitable to all this is that of John 10.17.
Therefore does my Father love me, because I lay down my life etc. Note well how
Christ's laying down his life, i. e. Dying for his sheep, is is set down as one
cause why the Father did so love him. Now because the Father loved him, he has
given, or put all things into his hand, John 3.35. Left them all to his
disposal. These two places of St. John do in effect speak this very language,
That the voluntary Death of Christ should procure his Father's love to him, and
this love of his Father should bestow a power and right on Christ to dispose of
all things. All which was exactly, and punctually performed to Christ after his
Death, as well as largely promised, and contracted for, upon condition that he
should die; the promise was made on condition he would die, and the right to
all contained in the promise, was conferred upon him, because he died, and this
right is expressed by St. John thus, he has put all things into his hand,
because he loved him, and he loved him because he laid down his life. Thus
Christ acquired a right over all by his Death, and at his Death disposed of it
for the good and benefit of his people, whom he made his Heir by Will or
Testament, which is yet farther confirmed by these two places, viz. Luke 22.29.
I appoint unto you a Kingdom. I appoint (so we read it at large) but the Greek
does point out an appointing by Will or Testament: on which passage the Learned
Beza has this Note (beside what is cited in the Margent) These words being the
words of Christ, (...) vulg, dispono, alii, Lego. Ex illa formula d^, Lego in
Testamentis usitata. Nomen enim (...), peculiariter de Testamento dicitur. Beza
in loc. Haec Christi ad mortem proporantis verba speciem habent Testamentariae
cujusdam dispositionis quo allusit Apostolus, Heb. 9.17.
approaching now to his Death, do carry the form and show of a certain
Testamentary Disposition, to which the Apostle alludeth, Heb. 9.17. More might
be added to clucidate and clear the word in this its most proper and native
signification but I forbear that now. Vox Testamenti Latina, Graecam vocem
(...) restringit ad Foederis gratiae oecononiam Testamentariam -- etc. Joh.
Cloppenb. de V.T. Disput. 1. sect. 2. (...), notat declarationem voluntatis
ultimae, etc. Joh. Cocceius de Foeb. c. 13. sect. 470.
Let it suffice that Christ uses a word in this place, which naturally imports
the making of a Will, and so leads us to consider him as a Testator, as one
before his each appointing and ordaining his ast-Testament.

The second place is that of St. Paul, Latinis auribus nota erat. (Vox
Testamentum) significare -- in rebus oivilibus extremam voluntatem de rebus
quas post mortem quis fieri velit, etc. Bened. Aretius in prologum. ad Nov.
Test.
Heb. 9.16, 17. For where there is a Testament, there must of necessiity be the
Death of the Testator: For a Testament is of force after men are dead,
otherwise it is of no strength at all whilst the Testator lives. In which
words the Apostle does argue the certainty and perfection of the Covenant or
Promises in Christ, and proves it by this known Argument. They are the
Testament or last Will of Christ, which Christ the Testator has by his death
confirmed beyond possibility of a change. Est Oeconomia Testamentaria cui
confirmandae mors intercedit Testatoris, Heb. 9.16, 17. Joh. Cloppenb. de Test.
Vet. disp. 1. sect. 2.
That look how sure and firm the last Will is when he who made it is dead; so
sure and firm are the Promises to us; Voluit Foedas suum -- babere rationem
Testamenti proprie dicti -- Jacob. Cappellus in soc.
for they are the Testament of our Lord confirmed to us by his Death. For
Christ would have his Covenant cast into the mould of a Testament or last Will
properly so called.

On these places I conclude this first point; Christ did not die intestate, but
did ordain his last Will ere he died; and so his Death may be considered by us
as the Death of a Testator, who being our friend, made his last Will for our
good and benefit; for by Will he has bequeathed very great things to us.

CAP. II Christ a Testator proper Object to mediditate on at the Sacrament.
HAving in the Former Chap. Proved what I undertook or at least done so much,
that we may without error in our meditation consider Christ Dying a Testator.
I am in this Chapter to show that the meditations of Christ's Death, as it was
the Death of a Testator, do very well suit with the Sacrament.

Sect. 1.
1. First such thoughts are suggested to us by Christ himself in those
expressions which he used in the first appointing and administering of this
Ordinance when he chose to speak of it at a Testament. Among many names which.
might have been used, and which are gotten into use since, none so much pleased
our Lord as this; Mat. 26.28. Mark 14.24 Luke 22.20.
It is the blood of the New Testament, and it is The New Testament in my Blood,
Now a Testament leads our thoughts to the Testator; and indeed primarily, or
in the first place though secondarily it signify a Covenant; And though now the
frequent use of it in the notion of a Covenant makes us the labor to prove
this, (...), Testament to signify a Testamentary Disposition or Will, yet we
can prove it from the Scripture, as from Heb. 9.16, 17. Where beyond doubt it
denotes a last will. And the Third of the Gal. ver. 15. If it be buta Man's
Covenant (or Testament) (for it is (...), may with very good sense be
understood of a Testamentary Disposition, Paraeus in loc. Crellius in loc.
or last Will as it is also intrepreted by some. Humane testimony both from
Historians and Lawyers pleading this use of ((...)) Testastament might be
added. But I refer you to the foregoing Chap. latter end. In one word, we may
well suit our thoughts to Christ's words. His words may very well be both the
matter, and the rule of our meditations; so that we need not fear that we err
in our thoughts at a Sacrament, when our thoughts do not wander from Christ's
own words; we do surely entertain right, and seasonable meditations, when we
entertain such as Christ suggesteth, who no doubt did purpose to lead our minds
by his select phrases and words. For,

First, This bears an uniform analogy, this exactly suiteth with the manner of
Ancient Sacraments which afforded seasonable matter of meditations in the
Sacramental phrases, and expressions then used as circumcision of the foreskin
etc. Directed them to think of circumcising the heart, and the cutting off the
lusts of the flesh, the Passover by it is very name led the thoughts of the
Jews to meditate on the Angels passing over their Houses, (...) Transivit per
intervalla, Transilire unde (...), Agnus mascnlus qui mactabatur 15 die mensis
primi -- quo admonebantur Israelitae liberationis quae ipsis contigerat per
saltum quem Deus fecerat, etc. Conr. Kitcher. in verbum.
when he did smitethe Egyptians. This, Pesach, spoke, the Angels observing
Israel's habitations, and his leaping as it were over them, but laying his hand
on the Egyptians. The mercy remembered is Israel's escape, for as much as the
sword of the Angel rebounded from Egyptians to Aegytian, still flying over
Israel, and the name of the Memorial is Passover. In like manner God has set
his Bow in the Clouds, a sign which he has appointed to mind us of his
Covenant promise, no more to destroy the World by Water; such Analogy between
Sacraments and Things exhibited under them was of old; and there is not any
reason why it should not continue still.

Secondly, Each Sacramental action does lead us, and guide our thoughts to
Meditations that befit the Season, and suit well with the Ordinance. The
taking, giving Thanks, breaking, the Bread, pouring out of the Wine, Giving,
etc. these all have their proper significations, and suggest suitable and
seasonable Meditations. And no doubt if each action do so offer matter for our
meditation; every expression will do it as well, especially considering.

Thirdly, (...)
That words and expressions are the most proper and natural signs of things,
They represent things to our thoughts more lively than actions do words are the
Candles which light you; things are the rare pieces which should entertain your
thoughts; words are but like glass Cases through which you may discern, and
view, and recreate your thoughts in beholding the curious Needlework, or Pensil
of exactest Artist. Such are the words of Christ; here they show us what kind
of love he bare toward us, what tender care he had of us, what full, sure and
seasonable Provision he made for us, etc. This is that admirable and
unparalled piece which lies within the Glass of his words, and which we may
seasonably meditate on any time, and most seasonably when we show forth his
Death.

Fourthly, The words and expressions of other places of Scripture, and in other
matters, have been the guide and matter of the Saints Meditations. So David
meditated on the word of God. Psalm. 119.148. Daniel thus employed his thoughts.
Dan. 8.15, 19. And the blessed Virgin laid up the words which were spoken, and
pondered them, Luke 2.19. Now if there be any special exception against the
like entertaining our thoughts in weighing the words of Christ in this case,
let it be produced.

Lastly, Debuit ejus oration cum ipsa re consentire ut vera esset and Christo
digna, qui sese ip^am veritatempraedicaverat. These. Sal. de usu etc. Caenae,
etc. Sect. 14.
Plain, significant, instructing words do hardly awaken, raise, keep up, and
strengthen our Meditations, and Considerations suitable to the nature, end and
solemnity of this ordinance; and Christ who knew our great dullness, who pitied
us under it, and who purposed to help us against it, would never puzzle and
perplex our minds with words and expressions Aliene, unsuitable, and far remote
from the things we ought to consider; Christ would rather make it a more easy
thing, than a more difficult, to fall into seasonable meditations by following
the drift, meaning and design of of his words, which containing a Testament or
last Will, lead us at a Sacrament to consider Christ dying as a Testator, as
our Friend in love, care, bounty and fidelity providing for us by Will, such
thoughts well suit the Ordinance of the Lords Supper.

Sect. 2.
2. Secondly, In his (lib. Novi Test.) vere exprimitur extrema Filii Dei
voluntas quam ratam voluit inter nos post mortem suam. Eam habemus expressam in
Caenae dominicae institutione. etc. D. Aretius in Prolegom; ad Matthew.
Such thoughts well suit the Sacrament of the Lords Supper. For then our
thoughts, and the things themselves agree; there is an harmony between the
things themselves contained in the Sacrament, and the thoughts of the
Communicants. The nature of the things and our thoughts do then center and meet
together; and there is most suitableness, where there is nearest agreement. Now
I have sufficiently proved, that Christ did make his last Will, and that he
died a Testator; the Sacrament of his last Supper is a showing forth this
Death; and unto this do your thoughts agree, when they run out into Meditations
on Christ dying and making his last Will. So that more needs not be added to
this Second Argument; by which it appears how suitable such thoughts are,
agreeing well with what is represented to us, and how seasonable our thoughts
are, being drawn out at such time, as these things are represented to us.

Thirdly, Meditations on Christ dying and making his last Will and Testament,
do well suit this Sacrament; for they do well suit with the ends of this
Sacrament. There are among others four eminent and unquestionable ends of this
Sacrament; to all which, these thoughts exactly agree, of all which in as few
words as I may, I do purpose to speak. And so,

1. First, A public and solemn Declaration or Profession of this great Truth,
That Christ Jesus the Messiah has died according to the Scriptures, and is
risen again living in the glory of his Father, with whom we have Communion in
every Sacrament until he take us to the Glory of the Father, or come again to
us in the Glory of the Father. Every Sacrament is a taking out a Certificat
that Christ died, and was buried, but that he is risen from the Dead. (...)
Isa. 53.
Every time the Bread is broken in a Sacrament, we tell the world that our Lord
was cut off out of the Land of the Living. The pouring out of the Wine speaks
his pouring out his blood unto death; and for proof hereof, we produce his
Testament and last Will; the last Will of our great Commander, who made it (In
Procinctu) when he was girt, and in his Armor just ready to enter the
conflict, wherein he laid down his life for us. The excellent Moralist and
Historian Plutarch tells us, (...), etc.
it was the custom with the Roman Soldiers to make their Wills when they
stood in Battel-aray. -- Facientibus Testamenta in procinctu veluti ad Certam
mortem eundum foret. Velleius Paterculus. lib. 2.
I am sure when they went on a hard and dangerous design, the more considerate
amongst them, made their last Will, as the Roman Historian reports of their
Soldiers assaulting Trebonia in Spain. Our great, and Glorious Captain knowing
that his hour was come and that he must dye for us; disposed thus his estate by
Will or Testament, which proves the truth of his Death as fully as any Will
duly proved by course of Law proves that the Testator is dead. Now certainly
good evidence to the truth of Christ's death must needs be very suitable to our
public declaration and Profession of his death and so must suit with this
first End of the Sacrament, which is to show forth his Death until he come. The
valid and irreversible Testament proves the Death of the Testator. Now such a
Testament we have exhibited in the Sacrament; and who employs his thoughts on
this meditation, employs them so as they agree with the End of the Sacrament.

2. Secondly, Christ intended the renewal of our lively affections toward him
Dying for us as another end of the Sacrament of his body and blood. He did
therefore appoint this Ordinance to continue after his Death, that it might
keep the affectionate remembrance of his love alive in our hearts. He would not
have his Death forgotten, neither would he have it kept in memory without the
vigor and strength of our love. His friends were dead in sin and misery; at
that time he remembered these dead friends with life of affections, and now his
living friends must not remember him with dead affection. A lifeless affection
is next neighbor to no affection; and to remember with such affection, is very
little more than quite to forget. Now none of us should so forget our Dying
Lord; we could not see him dying as they did, Luke 23. v. 27. who followed him
to Mount Calvary, and saw him with their bodily eyes; yet in every Sacrament of
his Supper he is evidently set forth dying among us; and so every one of us
must remember him; every place in the Church may put us in mind of our Lord;
but the Table and the Cross do more particularly and lively set our remembrance
on work, Sic oculos! Sic ille manus! etc. Let me ask the question, did you ever
lose a dear friend who made you a Legatee in his Will? or appointed you
Executor of it? how did your affections stir, move, yea melt your heart when
you read over the Will? when you came to demand your Legacy, did you receive it
with dry eyes? Let us bestow our affections in reading over Christ's Will, as
we would bestow them in reading over the Will of a tender careful Friend, and
then I am sure we shall frame our hearts to this second end of the Lord's
supper, and demean our selves as Christ expects we should at his table. We
shall remember him with love for his loving remembrance of us; we shall
remember him with desires of his return and coming in glory to make good all
that he has bequeathed to us, to put us in possession of all that which the
Sacrament represents and seals to us, we shall say make have come quickly
oh! Lord.

3. Thirdly, A solemn, public and constant return of Thanks and Praise to the
Lord, is a third end of this Sacrament. Christus voluit sacram suam coenam esse
mortis and passionis suae, nostraeque per eam a peccato morte and diabolo
liberationis perpetuum (...), and nostrae ea propter gratitudinis and
observantiae publicum Testimonium. Ludoy. Cappel. These. Salm. de Liturg. and
Ling. Ignot. part 1. th. 5.
Christ would have his holy Supper be a perpetual remembrance, as of his Death
and Passion, and as of our deliverance from sin, death and the Devil, so of our
gratitude and observance would he have it be a public Testimony; as that
Learned Professor has expressed his sense and apprehension of this matter. We
can scarce meet with any one person amongst the lowest and meanest Professors
of Christian Religion, so little instructed in the nature and end of this
Ordinance, as not full well to know and openly profess it is an Ordinance
appointed for continuing a thankful Remembrance of our Dying Lord. We cannot
read any Writer Popish, or other, but in their writings of the Sacrament, every
page is full of it; the most usual name of it is Eucharist, (...), and the
Syriack Version has borrowed this Greek word to express it self, in Act. 2.42.
and 20.7. where (...) is rendered by (...)
which sounds out Gratitude and Thankfulness; so some render and translate
Bread, in Acts 2.42. and 10.7. broken in the Sacrament, and call it the
Breaking of the Eucharist; but I will spare my time, pains and paper, and
appeal to thy pretenses and professions who go to the Lord's Table: I know
thou can not acquit thy self to thy Brethren with whom thou communicatest,
nor to thy own Profession, unless thou declarest thy desire to remember
thankfully the Death of thy Lord.

Now the Love of Christ remembering thee by Will in his Testamentary
disposition, has in it very many strong and prevailing perswasives to
thankfulness, and will certainly awaken the sober considerate soul unto
gratitude, and so will excellently well suit with the season and the duty of
feasting with our Lord. Of which more shall be said in our following discourse
if the Lord give leave. Mean while the greatness of our legacy, the freeness of
love in the legator, the unworthiness of the legatees, the certainty of our
future receiving it, the present enjoying more if so be we would set our selves
with more diligence and search to enquire into the deed of gift our Lord has
made to us. These I say will certainly persuade us to constant acknowledging
our debt of thankfulness to our dying Lord.

Our life should be a perpetual thanksgiveing to Christ, but a Sacrament is the
solemn day of Thanksgiving which Christ has appointed. He did find the Jews
keeping the Passover, so he has ordained the Christian Feast of his supper in
the stead thereof, and so to be kept: the Apostle tells us that he received of
the Lord what he delivered to his Corinthians, (...), 1 Cor. 10.16
and he delivered unto them this cup of Blessing: this minds you of the
greatest gift God could give, and must not be looked on without your heart in
your eye. Go too then, think as you can of him who has made you heirs by his
will, speak of it as you can. Inusitata and incognita quadam felicitate.
I mistake if you do not think and say (this came to pass by an unusual and
wonderful happiness) as the Historian said of that will which made the people
of Rome heir to a Kingdom. Be you as just to the Remembrance of your Lord, and
show it in your thankfulness.

4. Fourthly, Another great End of the Sacrament, and which Christ intended in
appointing, Coena in eum finem comparata est, ut sit communioris and charitatis
Christianonum vinculum inter ipsos. Th. Thalm. de usu coen. Dom. dis. 1. sect.
42.
it was, that union and communion might be preserved and continued among
Believers. It does therefore bear the name of a Communion; and Christ has
prepared this Spiritual Feast to keep up spiritual friendship. Christ would
have but one Table for Believers, that Believers might have but one heart for
each other. Christ has put them all together at his table, that they might
keep all together in love, and be but one. Mark well with what text the Apostle
urges this Union and Communion among Saints, 1 Cor. 10.17. We being many are
one body, for we all partake of one bread. But now alas! that is made a cause
of contention and separation, which was appointed a means of union and
Christian friendship; of which I might justly complain, were this fit time and
place. But I conclude this in the words of the Learned Professors; Sacra
Synaxis est dilectionis fidelium inter se contesseratio quaedam. P P. Salmur.
de usu and neces. coen. Dom. Disp. 1. Sect. 42.
The holy Communion is a certain signal mark of the love of the faithful one to
another. Now I say, the last Will of Christ dying a Testator, conduces unto
this; and therefore the meditations of Christ dying a Testator, will suit with
the Sacrament, and do well become a Communicant. View but a while, oh ye
quarrelling Believers, how you have all one common great friend! ought you not
be one in him? Have you not all one title? and may you overthrow your Brother's
hope without overthrowing your own? are all men careful to preserve unity,
whose welfare is endangered by discord? and will you be less than men? In one
word, Christ has put you all into his own Will, and made you Legatees,
Joint-heirs: how well does one Will become them, who are thus one in the Will
of Christ! oh divide not in your wills and affections, you are undivided in the
Will of Christ! suit your considerate thoughts to the blessed ends your Dear
and Dying Lord intended to promote; enlarge your thoughts on the particular
considerations and respects in which he died; draw down these respects unto the
several graces and duties which they will awaken and strengthen, and I hope in
a Sacrament you shall find your Profession and Faith confirmed, your Affections
enlivened, your Thankfulness enlarged, your Union and Communion with Saints
strengthened and secured, by a due application of your meditations to the Death
of Christ dying a Testator, and so will find by experience what I have said,
that these thoughts well suit a Sacrament, because they well suit the ends of
the Sacrament.

CAP. III. Christ's Testament Influenceth our Graces.
I Am now to treat my Reader with the entertainment of his thoughts on the
third proposal which pretends to make it appear, that due considerations of
Christ's dying a Testator, making his will, and comprising all his friends in
it, may improve the growth of grace; such reflections on this kind of death do
well comport to the communion; they do also well advance the graces of the
communicant; they do befit the solemnity; they benefit the solemnizer, which I
shall attempt to illustrate and prove in the genetal by these following
arguments.

Sect. 1.
1. First. 1 Argument
That which awakens the soul to a diligent search and enquiry into the word,
and into its own state, will advance the growth of grace. Grace is of such a
nature, it grows best when most searched, as health by medicines which
penetrate the secretest places of the disease, and expel the most hidden,
hurtful humors: our spiritual Balm heals best when self-examination opens
our wounds and makes way that the Balm may sink and soak to the bottom. Now
the consideration of Christ dying a Testator, and making his Will or Testament,
will awaken us to such a search and enquiry. It is almost natural to us when
our rich friends dye to enquire what Will they made, and who are remembered, and
what they are remembered in, especialy when they hear that all the kindred and
all the friends are remembered in the Will, and have somewhat given them; upon
this the considerate Christian begins his search of these two things at least.

1. The last Will of Christ which is contained in, and to be gathered out of
his word. And next, He

2. Searches his own Pretenses to the Friendship and Kindred of Christ; for
the word assures him that the Lord Christ has bequeathed all to his Brethern
and Friends, Hence

3. A Third thing is concluded by the considerate Christian viz. The
strengthening his alliance to Christ, and making it more firm and sure, which is
most effectually, and only done by adding grace to grace, and bringing forth
fruits of grace; thus will this search occasioned by this Death of Christ
improve grace.

Sect. 2.
2. That which answers the doubts, and which removes the disquieting fears of
the gracious soul does improve grace in the soul. Doubts are the souls
earthquakes, which shake the foundations, and weaken the superstructure; these
doubts once well removed, and these fears once well blown over; the soul
rests on a good, strong, solid foundation; and all that is laid upon it
stands the faster and steadier. These disquieting fears are Languores animae,
The consumptive decaies of weak grace, let these be taken away, and grace
recovers to a healthful vigorous and strong habit; they are part of that spirit
of bondage which attends a weaker, and less grown grace; and as these fears are
dispelled, and the prevalence of the spirit of bondage abateth, so (the
Pharrhesia) that boldness and child-like confidence of grown grace increases
with an increasing measure of the spirit of Adoption, from which springs an
universal increase of grace: Atque adoptionis illius vim senserunt in Spiritu
Sanctificante, PP. Salmur. de Sp. Adop. Sect. 12.
so they who are sealed with the spirit of Adoption, have still found the power
of that Adoption by the spirit of Sanctification. Now, I say, Christ Dying a
Testator, and leaving us his last Will or Testament to meditate upon, has left
us a good answer to our doubts, and the due meditations of the soul on the last
Will of Christ, will much dispel our fears, and quiet the soul. For whereas
there are two sorts of fears which afflict a gracious soul.

1. A fear it shall miss of Glory. And

2. A fear it does want truth of grace. Christ by his last Will has secured
the believing soul against both these fears; against the first by giving a
Kingdom and Glory to such by Will; he appointed them unto a Kingdom, to a
Glorious Crown. Against the second by bequeathing the spirit of Truth and Grace
unto them, to lead them in holiness unto the end; and this Will of our best
Friend who Died to confirm it, is a very sure Title on the sacred reverence and
authority of last Wills and Testaments, -- Legum servanda fides, suprema
voluntas
Quod mandat, fierique subet parere necesse est.
Aug. Imper. de vol. Virg.

which must be sacred and inviolate when the man is dead; Command of Laws must
duly be fulfilled
And so must that our dying friend last willed,

how much more when he who died once, has for ever conquered death, and lives
for ever to see his own Legacies both bestowed and enjoyed, which peculiar to
Christ our dying friend, gives greatest encouragement against such doubts, and
might very well ease us of all such fears, and so be an excellent defense and
prop to weak grace; whence will soon follow a considerable growth in grace.

Sect. 3.
3. That which confirms the truth, certainty and immutability of the promises,
improveth Grace. I need not give long Proofs of so known a Truth, Praecipuum
and maxim proprium objectum Fidei situm est in promissionibus. PP. Salm. de
Fide. sect. 7.
the promisies are the objects of our faith, the good things contained in the
promises are the object of our hope, the grace and mercy making the promises is
the Lodestone of our love. In one word, we are made partakers of the Divine
Nature, we do purify our selves, and perfect holiness through these promises.
Grace is as the vine, the promises are the frame which bears up and carries
the vine which thriveth best when it rests on the surest and stedfastest
frame. Grace is a spiritual building which needs a sure Foundation. (...).
Such is the promise which, as the word of God, is in it self sure and
steadfast, for it is impossible that God should lie, Tit. 1.2. and Heb. 6.18.
Yet to this the Lord has superadded the confirmation and certainty of a
Testamentary disposition, or last Will, making, all the promises in Christ, and
making them all sure, and unchangeable by the death of Christ, whereby they
become to us ((...)) yea and Amen, 2 Cor. 1.20.
that we might have such assurance as should render it next to a moral
impossibility for us soberly and deliberately to doubt them. Now all this is
excellently effected by resolving and moulding the promises into a last Will or
Testamentary disposition, which is of such a nature, that it becomes
unalterable on the Death of the Testator; Heb. 9.17.
for a Testament is of force after men are dead, and so the law maxim ensureth
us, In publicis Lex, in privatis Testamentum firmissimum habetur.
that what the law is in public concerns, that a last Will in private concerns
is for ensurance and firmness. In brief therefore, the last Will of Christ
Dying confirms the Promises to us, what confirms the promises confirms our
faith and hope with other graces, faith and hope confirmed do greatly tend to
purifying and sanctifying our hearts, and making our life fruitful: in these
things lies the growth and improvement of grace; so that due reflections and
right manage of our thoughts on Christ dying a Testator do as is said, improve
the communicants Graces.

Sect. 4.
4. That improves grace which does soften the heart, and as it were ripen it
unto a mellow temper, as the showers which soak into the earth in the spring
time, which soften the earth do both prepare the way that tender roots of trees
and plants may spread abroad and root deeper; and also do afford nourishing
moisture and sap whence the verdure, blossom and the fruit it self; so it is
here a hard and rocky heart is as unkind, a soil for grace as stony ground is
for Corn; neither can take root to any good purpose. Trees of righteousness are
planted by the rivers of waters, which is a tender soil, (...)
where the water courses divide themselves and run out into many branches,
gently and kindly softening the ground. And though some vines of the Lord are
planted in high Mountains naturally hard and barren, in proud and hard hearts,
yet these hearts are like plowed ground, laid a fallowing and mellowing, and so
prepared for the seed time every high Mountain is laid low before Christ. In
one word, the pleasant Lillies do grow in the Valleys, low and softened grounds;
so grace thrives best in the humble and tender soul. Now there are in the last
Will of Christ many, both common and ordinary, as also Singular and
extraordinary motives and inducements to tenderest affections toward Christ.
Whatsoever cause any true friend, any kind Brother, any dutiful Child can see
in the care, love and bounty of his Dying Friend, Brother or Father, expressed
and contained in the porvision made by such one for him, that, all that, and
more, may the meditating and considerate soul see in the last Will of Christ to
melt him into affections for Christ, in whose Death he may see love living, and
growing strong when life fainted and grew weak. And as his veins, and heart
grew empty of blood, both grew full of love to you and me. So he loved his own
to the end. What in particular these common and special motives are, I shall
not now specify, but reserve them to another more fit place, thus you have the
sum of this fourth argument before you in the next place.

Sect. 5.
5. That improves our graces which endeareth the Lord Jesus to us; what
increases our love to Christ does increase our holiness, and adds to our
graces; love will long for a more close union; love will study the most entire
compliance; it will ambitiously strive to advance, and honor; it will without
ceasing endeavor to please. That soul is most endeared to holiness and most
studious of holiness, which is most endeared to Christ, and most in love with
him; such a soul keeps his Commandments.

Now the view and consideration of Christ*s last Will and Testament will surely
endear Christ unto the soul; there the soul sees the real Testimonys of his
Savior's love. Last Wills or Testaments are those in which we profess all our
affection. Quibus affectum omnem fatemur. Brisson. de Form.
After this men can do no more, at this time therefore they will do what they
can for their beloved Friends. This love is an immortal love attempting to fill
the cistern and to leave it full when the spring head dryes up; it is a love
surviving Death, when the lover cannot, a piece of Friendship rescued from the
hand and power which kills thy Friend. When Jacob could live no longer to love
his Joseph, his love could not die but fleeteth from his feeble dying heart,
and reposeth it self in the sacred and unviolate treasury of Jacobs last Will,
where it does, and shall still survive both the Lover, and the Beloved, (...)
Genesis 48.22. 1 King. 1.
in this you discover Joseph had a double share in Jacobs love. When David was
to make his last will you may see which of all his Sons had most of David's
heart; so true is it that last Wills are open windows of the heart through
which we may see the living affection of our Dying Friend. This is undeniably
true of the last Will of Christ, who looks into it shall see the dearest love,
the tenderest affection, the faithfullest friendship, the seasonablest care,
and the fullest provision, and who sees this can do no less than wish he had a
more dear affection to return for that which is so incomparably grater than all
other.

Sect. 6.
6. That improves Grace which shakes off security and awakeneth out of sloth;
security is the lethargy of the soul; and it must be cured or the soul Dies,
sloth is that scorbutic disease of the soul which weakens all its graces, and
takes off the edge of them, and this must be removed by a vigorous exercise of
that strength and life which yet remains in Grace, or Grace will decay,
wither, and dye; rid the soul of these two, and Grace will suddenly recover it
self and grow. Now it is unquestionable that the last Will of Christ carries
in it sufficient considerations to awaken the soul out of pernicious security
and to quicken it unto vigorous diligence. For all the legacies of Christ are
conditional, requiring either precedent conditions, or enjoining subsequent
conditions of love and obedience; and this love with obedience will be found
such as will take up all thy time and strength; set to it so soon as thou will,
here will be work enough for thy Christian care. Thou will find life short,
love long, work weighty, strength weak. The Philosopher rowsed himself with
this, Vita brevis ars longa, life is short, Art is long. Christian, look over
Christ's expectation expressed in his Will and Testament, and write this
presently as thy monitory, Vita brevis, Fides longa, The time of Life is short,
the work of Faith is long; and rowse up thy self both from security and sloth;
make haste to do thy Lord's will, that thou may have large share in the last
Will of thy Lord. When a very rich gist is given by Will upon conditions and
reservations, and all revoked from every claimer who performs not those
conditions, and disposed to others who will do, and have done and performed the
conditions; how great care and diligence does this awaken? how speedy is the
considering Legatee! what haste does he make to perform! lest nonperformance
of his duty should disappoint his hope, and cut off his claim. Christian, thou
have the Inheritance given by Will, and that Will prescribes thee thy duty; and
if ever thou intendest to put in claim for it, look thou put thy hand speedily
to the doing of what is there enjoined thee. For I tell thee, thy Lord who made
the Will, who prescribed the terms, who enjoined thy performance, and before
whom thou must make thy claim, is not now dead, but lives; is not far off, but
near to thee, sees and observes all thy sloth and laziness, and will reject
thy suit, and dash thy pretenses, and confound thy hopes, unless sight of his
Will quicken thee to do his will.

CAP. IV. Graces enumerated Improvable by the last Will of Christ.
I Have performed, (...), at potui ^amen.
if not as I would, yet (as Bernard said) as I could the three first parts of
my Promise. I shall now endeavor the performance of the fourth, viz. in a
particular enumeration of those graces which I apprehend may be much improved
by the consideration of Christ's last Will or Testament renewedly remembered at
the Communion of the Lord's body. And

Sect. 1.
1. First, Faith is one Grace which is improvable by due managing our thoughts
of Christ's ordaining his last Will ere he died, and dying, to ratify and make
his last Will firm and irrevocable. This gives us greatest assurance of the
truth of the Promises, and so adds to the evidence of things that are not
seen. Man verily believes, and boldly pleads his title and right to the
Legacy which his dying friend bequeathed to him.

Sect. 2.
Secondly, Hope and Expectation of enjoying the good things promised, is
another grace improvable by the application of Christ's Death dying a Testator
and ordaining his last Will. The certainty of future enjoying, and the goodness
of the thing to be enjoyed, is the life of hope, the root and strength of it.
Now, the goodness of that we expect, (...), and (...).
and the certainty of our future enjoyment, are jointly contained and declared
in the last Will of our Lord, to which in more particular manner we hope to
speak.

Sect. 3.
3. Longing desires of surer interess in the Covenant or Testament of Christ,
and desire of nearer union unto Christ, is improvable upon the reflections of
our serious thoughts on the Death of Christ dying and making his Will. Every
one who needs, would wish himself of the kindred, and affinity of that rich,
bountiful and kind friend, who enricheth all his kindred by his large Legacies
at his Death; and he will desire to be so related unto Christ, who duly
considers what may be obtained by Christ.

Sect. 4.
4. Love to the Lord, and a high prizing of his person and concernments is an
other Grace of the believer improveable by this meditation of Christ's Death as
the Death of a Testator. Every one honors the remembrance, and speaks well
of him who does liberally, and wisely provide for his indigent and needy
relations; strangers do value such an one, and much more does his ingenuous and
considerate Friend.

Sect. 5.
5. Zeal to his glory and honor, a spiritual fervency of heart in all that
such a Friend is any whit concerned in is another qualification of a believer
and this also is improved by the due manage of our knowledge of Christ's last
Will and Testament. Were there but little cordial Friendship in the heart of a
believer toward Christ, yet a little Friendship would kindle much Zeal for such
love and bounty as is expressed by Christ in his Will and last Testament, to us.

Sect. 6.
6. Joy and Gladness in the Lord the heart will rejoice in its own interess in
Christ, and glory in Christ, when the great and good things done for it by
Christ, and settled upon it by the last Will of Christ, are known and duly
considered. It is a vanity yet common among men to glory and rejoice in their
rich Relations, and in their ample estates given to them by the will of such
Friends; but it is no vanity in a believer to rejoice and glory in his large
Legacyes bequeathed to him by Christ for the greatness and goodness of these
things (with the unbeleif and vilifyings which others cast upon believers)
their hopes and their Lord do warrant, yea call for it.

Sect. 7.
7. Thankfulness and grateful return of praise unto him who has so remembered
us, is another grace improveable upon the considerate observance of Christ
making his last Will; and upon our meditating on his will it is so apparently
due, that every one does usher in the mention of a Legacy or great gift by will
with thanks to the Giver; I thank him he remembered me. etc.

Sect. 8.
8. Humility and a lowly temper of soul, a sober esteem of our selves (who have
what we have, and do hope for all that we can expect, of free gift) is another
grace or Christian habit improvable by due and serious considering Christ's
last Will and Testament made by himself before his Death, and confirmed by his
Death. We had been all poor sheaks, and pitiful beggars, if it had not been
for this rich and great Friend of ours. I have heard men blow down the pride of
some, (who were set up as we are by another bounty,) with one blast such had
not been worth one groat if his Friend had not put him into his Will; so do
thou Christian consider, and so say.

Sect. 9.
9. Patience in suffering for Christ's sake; nay Patient bearing all the
afflictions of our whole life, is another grace which may be much increased by
our due observing and applying our thoughts unto Christ's last Will or
Testament. He can never suffer too much for Christ, who has so much given to
him by Christ; nor may he be at any time weary of the labor he undergoeth for
Christ who understands what is his legacy in the Testament or Will of Christ.

Sect. 10.
10. Sorrow for doing so little for him, and grief for doing any thing at any
time against Christ, is another effect of our meditations and due observations
of the love of Christ manifested to us in his last Will. This part of
repentance is improveable by these like reflections on Christ Dying a Testator,
and putting us into his last Will. If there be any ingenuity lest among the
Friends of a Dying person who gives largely to them all, though they all did
slight reproach, oppose and wrong him, this gift will draw out tears for their
former carriage toward him.

Sect. 11.
11. Settled purpose to live in future days more worthy of, (at least with
endeavors after a carriage and deportment which may be more answerable to) the
love of Christ Dying for us, and so carefully and bountifully remembering us
before he died. Renewed obedience is another effect which will be promoted and
advanced by such thoughts.

Sect. 12.
12. A loving and peaceable disposition toward believers, our joint Legatees,
who were in the heart of Christ as well as we, and who are by the Will of
Christ made joint-heirs with us. Charity and Brotherly-kindness is a grace
improvable by these sweet influences of Christ's love equally providing for
them and us by his Will; we shall be constrained to love those whom we know
Christ so loved. And thus you have in this Chapter the brief Summary of what
graces may be increased. Now the special influence which the last Will of
Christ dying has on the soul for the increase of each of these graces, will
occasion the resuming of them in the order I have here laid down, and so will
be our employment, and your farther entertainment in the next Chapter.

CAP. V. Faith Improved by the last Will of Christ.
IN this Chap. I foresee I shall be much longer than in all the former; and its
length will necessitate me to cast it into more branches: for I must discourse
particularly and distinctly on those twelve Graces mentioned in the fourth
Chapter. I shall allot therefore a particular Section to each particular Grace,
in which Sections I hope to clear it, That the last Will of Christ has a
special Influence on the considerate meditating soul to improve its Grace.

Sect. 1.
1. The believing, meditating and considerate Communicant may improve his Faith
by the consideration of Christ's last Will: there lie hidden many inducements
unto Faith, and very strong supports of Faith; all which consideration will
draw forth, and likely enough in some such order as this some of them may be
drawn out.

Now the Scripture tells me, that Faith is the substance of things hoped for; a
persuasion of the certain future accomplishment of those things which are
promised to the Believer. Credere est persuasum esse de veritate alicujus rei.
PP. Salmur. de Fide, sect. 15.
To believe, is to be persuaded of the truth of any thing proposed to be
believed. So that the more, the clearer, the surer our perswasives and
arguments are to believe, the stronger will be our Faith and Assent to the
Truths which are proposed and argued; the stedfaster and more unmoved will our
persuasion be, Persuasio non fit aliterquam admittendo aut introducendo in
intellectum eas rations caque argumenta quibus unaquaeque res sese veram esse
demonstrat. PP. Salmur. de Fide Disp. 1. sect. 15.
Which is wrought in no other manner than by admitting or letting into the
understanding those Reasons and Arguments whereby each thing demonstrateth it
self to be true: Which passage of the Learned Professors is a very fit
Exposition of the Apostles words. (...).
Heb. 11.1. Faith is the evidence of things which are not seen, it is the
conclusion of the soul, arguing with it self from the evidence of truth, and
from the certainty of those reasons which are discussed, and thoroughly
pondered; as then, there is more or less evidence and certainty in the promise
or word on which our faith and persuasion is built; so there is more or less
strength in our faith or persuasion, Confirmat -- fidem quod magis ac magis
persuadet vera esse promissionem, etc. P.P. Sal. de Sacram. in genesis sect. 54
and a certainty which grows greater and greater, will produce a says which
grows greater and greater like wise. Let us then see what increase of our
persuasion and faith, may be made by the last Will and Testament of our Lord.
In which thou have.

First, All the common inducements of a firm persuasion which are as much in
this as in any. No man's last Testament, can have more grounds for the ensuring
us it is firm and stable, than his last Will of Christ. He was in strictest
propriety, a Person who might optimo jure, in best right make his Will. He had
wealth and riches, spiritual Riches, fullness of Grace and merit; Testes suntin
primis discipuli ejus Apostoli sancti man tyres quoque testes sunt.-Testes
etiam bom ministri omnes Testes etiam Angeli omnesque Pii. Ben. Aretius in
Prolegem. ad Matthew.
he had large demeasnes, was heir of all things, he could sua legare, bequeath
his own; he did also make his Will by his death; he confirmed all the
promises, and made them the Legacy of every Believer. He did condere
Testamentum, ordain his Testament. To which he added sufficient VVitnesses: to
him give all the Prophets and Apostles witness, that whosoever believes in him
has good title and right to eternal Life; he bequeathed it by Will, and
adhibuit testes, * called in Witnesses. And farther, he published his Will,
sent out his Apostles, who declared Christ's death, and the Believers life.
Every Minister of Christ is one by whom Christ still publishes this Will of
his. Now if thou who read this, had such a Ground of Plea for an
inheritance; would thou not say, thou had a good Title? would thou fear
to claim thy Legacy? would thou not sue the Executor rather than lose thine
inheritance? when thou should read what thy dying Friend commanded to be
written, what witnesses are to it, how plain and full he made every thing be
written and published, would not thy persuasion grow as thou read? So then it
is in this case, every promise is reduced into the form of a will, and the more
thou read and considerest, the more will thou discern the stability and the
certainty of the promises. The words which thou believe, and on which thou
may claim, and make good thy claim to any promise, it is the Legacy thy
dying Lord has bequeathed thee. Say then before thou go to the Lords Table,
I am now preparing to renew the memorial of Christ's death, and what thoughts am
I to entertain? ought they not to be thoughts of the precious promises which
are comprised in the Lord Jesus, in whom they are all yea and amen, made to us
in him before he died; made most sure to us by him when he died. And who dares
go about to reverse what he has so consirmed? who shall presume to annul and
make void his will? I see others believe their interest in the last will of
their Friends: I know I am the Friend of Christ, and in his Will, what then
should make me doubt? Nay I will endeavor to have as inviolatam fidem,
inviolate and unshaken Faith as I have inviolate and Sacred ground of Faith in
the last Will of my Lord.

Secondly, The Believer has yet more to increase his faith, and to confirm him
in the persuasion that there shall be a performance of all that is promised.
For it is all made sure by the last Testament of him who could not exceed his
own treasures; he has not given larger Legacies than his estate will bear;
though his Gifts are great, yet his Estate will make them good. He is heir of
both Worlds, with all that is in both: he is heir of the world to come; and he
is proprietary of all grace which fits for Glory; and he is also Proprietary of
all Glory fitted unto Grace, that is prepared and apportioned unto Grace. He is
Lord of this present world: although we do not yet see all things put under
him, yet he is the man of whom David spoke, Psalm. 8. witness the Apostle, Heb.
2. He shall inherit all Nations: he is a King, whose dominion is over all. In
one word, the greatest wants, the largest desires, the highest expectations of
his kindred could not be too much for his Treasures. Though none ever gave as
he has given; yet none ever did or ever shall be put to abate or to forgo any
part of his Gift. This oh believing soul is! peculiar to thy Lord; his Riches
will pay all his Legacies.

Say then to thine unbelief, what is it thou stickest at? where lies the
difficulty? are the promises so rich, they exceed the Estates and Treasures of
this world? do they amount to more than all the world can make up? why still
they are not greater than the Riches of both worlds: and remember thy self; he
has both this, and that world which is to come, at his disposal, and his
Bequests are to be disbursed and paid out of both: (...) which the Arab. reads
Quicquid est in ea.
will both be enough? cannot the fullness of the Earth fill thy emptiness? why
the Earth is the Lord's, and the fullness thereof; the World is his, and they
that dwell therein. Banish thine unbelief which ordinarily stumbles most at the
wants and streights of Christians in this life; and look to the last Will of
Christ which is unto Godliness. (...).
He bequeaths all the promises of the life that now is, and of that which is to
come. Oh now where is thy faith? what forbids thee to be persuaded of the truth
of the promise of Christ; 1 Timothy 4.8.
he has not laid it on an uncertainty, much less on an untruth: he has not
given so much, if his Goods will amount to it. He has not as that beggarly
Cardinal, given much, but his Legatees must find it out. No, but he had enough
to give what he has given; and every one shall in due time have all that
Christ has given; there are Assets to pay these debts; believe, than that thou
may receive. See how much greater cause thou have to believe, than any man
can have to expect from the Testamentary disposition of a mortal friend who may
possibly out give his Estate, but Christ thy Friend, did not, could not
out-give his.

3. Next consider, as he had wealth both spiritual, eternal and temporal
sufficient to discharge his leagacies, so he had wisdom which could not, and
love in sincerity which would not err in the ordaining of his Will that so any
Legatee should lose through the ambiguity or defect of his last Will. He needed
none to direct him how to make a will which should hold good, and be valid to
all the intents and purposes of his love toward his poor Friends. He is that
(...), that one Lawgiver whose wisdom directs to the making Laws good,
profitable and seasonable for his Church. He is that Lawgiver whose sovereign
authority gives validity, and warranteth his word for a law to his Church. He
is the King of his Church, and his Church knows not a law beside the word of
his mouth. And the words of his mouth are right; there is nothing forward or
perverse in them, Prove. (...) Prove. 8.7.
8.8. Now then see what farther ground of firm persuasion thou have. Oh
believing soul, to assent to, wait for all that he has promised! all which he
has comprised and ratified by his last Will. Read over the promises, weigh
them duly, and say to thy self at a Sacrament, all these promises were
confirmed by the last Will of my Lord. Whose death I am to remember and
consider with respect to the nature and notion of his Death; and this his Death
was the Death of a Testator, of one who made his Will so wisely, so consonantly
to the law, viz. Of grace and mercy, so agreeable to the holy will of God, so
plainly and fully for the consolation of his poor Friends, that no one of his
poor Friends shall ever be defeated, disappointed, or injured in their claim,
and plea, their title by gift and will is so good, that nothing but a narrow
desire, a straightened heart a scanty apprehension of it can lessen their portion
in it; the fullest apprehension, the largest heart, and the vastest desire
according to Christ's own Will, shall have the best and greatest share in these
gifts: get then apprehensions suited to these excellent mercies: enquire and
learn what mercies are offered, represented confirmed and sealed in the
Sacrament, what privileges are there, (by God's charter and grant) given, and
conclude of them; all these were put into Christ's hand. He has disposed of
them to his, as they need, as they desire, as they want, or wish. And that they
might be sure, has ordained them by his last Will a Legacy for all who
understand, desire, seek and wait for them; and lest any doubt should
discourage you, I pray you remember; Christ the wisdom of his Father could not
want sufficient skill, and Christ Dying for us could not want good will to
ordain his Testament, so that none should disappoint or defeat it in part or in
whole. Consider then how little cause you and I have to doubt; consider how
great cause we have to be fully peswaded of the truth and certainty of the
promises. Nay farther, yet

4. All the Promises thus confirmed, by the last Will and Testament of Christ,
are Legacies given by one who now does, and ever shall live to be his own
Executor. This Testament is not the Testament of a man who dies and must
entrust others to see his Will performed; but it is the Testament of one who
was once dead, but behold he lives, Rev. 1.18. For evermore. O happy soul who
art Heir of those Promises which he made who lives to perform what his love
has bequeathed to thee! (...).
Thou art surer to enjoy the Crown which he bequeaths thee, than ever was the
child of any dying Emperors, or Kings, whose last Wills have been wickedly
violated because they were dead, and could not prevent the violence of such
Traitors, nor avenge the wickedness of the Treason. But behold here is a friend
who lives after death, and will thou know why he does? Amongst others, this is
one reason, Heb. 7.25.
That he might save to the uttermost all that come unto God by him; and to
intercede for them, viz. that they may enjoy what he has given, that they may
possess what he has purchased. Now then, compare the grounds of other men's
persuasions and confidences, upon the Will of their dead friends; see what is
in them, weigh them, and write upon each of them Tekel, Dan. 5.27.
thou art found too light to be weighed against the confidences and persuasions
of a Believer; for all other Legacies are the gifts of the dead, but the
Believers Legacies are the gifts of him who was dead, but is alive, and lives
for ever more. Others may have the assurance of an unchangeable Testament, and
ordination of their will, but yet want an assurance of just and faithful
execution of it. If their Friend be dead, the Legacy is due and cannot be
recalled. But their Friend is dead, and possibly the Legacy may never be paid:
here is that defect which makes it too light to be weighed with the believers
confidence, which is as sure, for his Friend was dead to confirm, and is yet
surer than all others, for his Friend does live. Christ will make all sure (as
we say) his own eyes shall be overseers, and his own hands executors of his own
Will.

Now then at the Lords Table view the riches of the promises, take a particular
of what is contained in them, a particular of what grace, what consolation,
what glory, say, All these are (by the last Will of my Dying Lord) bestowed
upon me. I may claim them, I may sue and plead for them, I may avow my title to
them; for they are a Legacy given to me by my Lord: and who then can change or
alter his Will which has been ratified by his Death? or who shall dare to
violate it, and defeat me? or any other Believer? So long as my Lord lives to
prevent the attempt, and to avenge himself for the violence; Oh that our
persuasion of the truth of the Promises were firm and steadfast as the Promises
themselves! Oh that we could give more credit to the Promises, as God has
given us more arguments and inducements to credit them! well Reader, I know not
how my weak and dark reasoning with thee does prevail; but I assure thee, there
is in the Promises a most sure and unfailing truth asserted and declared to
thee by this, That they are the bequests of Christ Jesus, who ever lives to
make them good. Remember this at the Sacrament, where the Promises are all
tendered to thee in Christ, I doubt not it will strengthen thy Faith.

5. Fifthly, Consider, the Promises are the Legacies of thy friend, who would
not alter his Will, and dispose of them otherwise than he has already disposed
them. He is yesterday, Heb. 12.8.
to day and for ever the same, in his love, care, wisdom and bounty; were he
now to make his last Will, he would not alter any thing; he would not blot out
one name, nor abate any one Legacy. I stand the less to prove this, because
nothing can fall out to change infinite wisdom; and such was the wisdom of
Christ who is the Testator, and disposed all as you see them disposed. And in
this appears a certainty in Divine Promises, which is (seldom? nay) never
found in the promises of men, although confirmed by an irrevocable Testamentary
disposition; for it seems past doubt, that if any one of the rich and wealthy
Princes, or Grandees of the world, were to live again, and to ordain their
Wills anew, they would alter much, leaving out some, abating to others, etc.
Either upon discovery of unworthiness in the Legatees, or upon discovery of
other persons and uses more excellent; all which would proceed from experience,
and afterknowledge; the least of which cannot be supposed, or found in Christ.
He would do what he has done, were it all to be done over again. Now this does
add new evidence of the certainty of the Promise, and ought to add new degrees
of strength to our Faith. How sure must those Promises be which are the
Promises of one unchangable, and who repents nothing which he has spoken!
Away then with unbelief and doubts banish them all from thy soul. If thou
would but love thy Lord in truth of heart; if thou grievest for thy deadness
and nonproficiency; if thou strivest to walk more worthy of thy relation unto
Christ, and of his love to thee; be not too much dejected. Thy Lord foresaw
this, and has provided a pardon for, and help against it; and notwithstanding
all the baseness thou confessest and bewailest in thy self, Christ would make
the same Will if he were to make it anew, and give thee as much as he has
done. Raise up thy Faith therefore, and at the Sacrament be think thy self;
Here are the Promises reduced to the form of a last Will, that they might be
sure; and they are so disposed by my Lord who foresaw all that can discourage
me, and who would not change any thing, were all to be new done. Surely he
intends as he speaks; is in very good earnest; he will perform that at last,
which he would not change or alter in the least. Oh then! I must persuade my
self it is all truth which is in these Promises, and I should believe them more
steadfastly if I did understand them more clearly. None can have such equal
ground of believing his friend; none shall equal me in believing Christ my
friend and Lord.

6. Lastly let it be considered for ensuring the promises, they are the
legacies of one who is sole, and supreme judge of all pleas and causes which
can arise concerning our Right and Title to them. Symbol. Nicen. John 5.25.
We believe that he shall come to be our Judge, is an article of our faith, and
the Father has committed all judgment to the Son, having appointed a day
wherein he will judge the world by the man whom he has ordained, Acts 17.31.
who was adjudged by man unto death, died and was buried, but rose again, and
shall come to judge Quick and Dead; whose sentence shall stand for ever good,
so he has a Prerogative Royal, peculiar to himself; for others last wills are
by other men decided, if any thing of controversy arise concerning them. No man
is judge in the case and plea of right between those he has made joint
Legatees, but one is the Testator, and dies; another is the Judge and
interpreter of the Testament whence it does not seldom fall out that the
Legatees are defeated of their right, and lose the gift of their Friend; and
the mind of the Testator is not fulfilled because it is either not understood
by the judge, or because it must not be understood (although indeed it is well
enough known) this therefore leaves some uncertainty in a man's claim, and the
event upon trial is sometime a disappointment. But here is no such uncertainty
in the event, for he is Judge who is Testator, and he is to declare his own
mind, of whom we expect the gift, and who certainly does well understand his
own mind. Besides, in expecting and claiming, the Legatee shall assuredly have
all the favor showed him that he needs. It is a rule in law, that wills
should be interpreted in the more favorable sense. That love which was so
great to give the Legacy, will be great enough to adjudge it to the Legatee.
Moreover it is not possible that a case should arise between the Legatees of
Christ wherein the one should gain, and the other lose, for such are the gifts
of Christ that they are entire and whole to each one; none has the less for
any ones having much; so the controversy shall never be but between the soul
and its unbeleif, fears, and doubts: between the soul, and Satan accusing and
impleading it. And in this case Christ being Judge of his own Will, you may
soon say what favorable, gracious and merciful judgment he will give; and how
surely he will adjudge their title good, whose faith, love and desires sue for
it to him. Awaken thy self then! and look on what sure ground thou stand!
who have Promises so full of certainty and unchangeable truth. Let thy soul
admit no more unbelief than the Promises, (confirmed by Christ framing them
into his last Will and Testament,) do admit uncertainty. Let not unbelief
enter until thou see uncertainty attend thine expectation from the Will of
Christ. Reason with thy soul; propose the case to thy serious thoughts. At a
Sacrament I do remember the Death of my Lord Dying, and making his Will,
wherein is given to me all that which the Sacrament represents to me;
remission of sin, peace in believing, strength to walk with God, and after, my
drinking this wine with his people at his Table. Luke 22.
The drinking it new with him in his Father's Kingdom. This Ordinance is (as
all other Ordinances of Christ are,) exceeding full of grace for every one that
heartily wills it; and this fullness of grace is bequeathed by Will; this
Will valid, and to be judged, (if any case arise) by him who made it. Come
then! Will Christ think you enervate his own Will? Can it be imagined that he
will not see it performed, who lives to be his own Executor? who would make no
other if he were now to die and make his Will again? Fear not oh believing
soul! thy claim will be adjudged good; doubt not thy Plea of right, he is Judge
who gave thee the right; stagger not through unbeleef. He did designedly give
thee all assurance possible, not to prevent any unfaithfulness in himself but,
to prevent all infidelity in thee. Not to confirm his own word by any new
arguments, or new bonds which might be sure to hold if others did break; for
his word, and promise is faithfullness and truth; but to confirm thy faith, and
that if unbeleef broke through some, yet it might not break through others; if
it did prevail with the soul against any one, it might not prevail against
every one of the encouragements and perswasives to believe. Weigh well the
certainty of those promises which are confirmed by the last will of such, (I
say, of such) a Testator who changes not, who cannot be overruled by any
superior Judge, and then say how great your persuasion of the truth of them
should be. It should be great faith that has such great assurance, and strong
persuasion which has such perswasives. Oh that our faith were porportioned to
the ground of faith laid down before us in this very matter! there can be no
color of doubt where these grounds and perwasives of our belief are rationally
considered. Bring therefore to the Sacrament an extract of the promises, set
them in order before your eyes, see them all summarily contained in that one
clause ((...), Luc. 22.20.) This is the new Testament in my blood this is a
Testament which bequeaths to every believer the whole purchase of grace,
comfort, glory, and every good thing, which the blood of Christ was the price
of. And he that bequeathed all this, would not alter it, if he were to make his
will anew; if any one will controvert my Title, Christ the Testator is to be
Judge; if any would defraud and detain my part, or any parcel of it, Christ
lives to be his own Executor, and to give the possession of all, as well as to
give me title unto any. Thus sure are the Promises of the New Testament, the
Legacies of every Believer. Here are many Arguments, and each of them I think
apt enough to persuade, were they duly improved. Reader, let thy thoughts, and
deeper meditation add strength to thy Persuasion and Faith, by drawing out the
strength of these Arguments, which may be truly called Arguments, put into thy
hand, rather than handled for thee. I hope thou will find thy Faith taking
deeper root whilst (like a tree) it spreads its roots among these firm reasons.
I hope thy experience will, as thy judgment must, subscribe the truth of that
Observation.

Look how many more are the good and fit Arguments which do persuade us of any
thing; Quo autem plura sunt argumenta bona illa atque Idonea, quae nobis
aliquid persuadent, eo persuasio altius in mente radices agit. PP. Salmur.
disp. de Sacra. in Genesis Sect. 46. -- Quanto plura sunt and illustriora
documenta quae ad unius rei cognitionem vel persuasionem ingenerandam
concurrunt tanto naturaliter sit in nobis vel rerum cognitio clarior vel
persuasio certior ac minus dubitabilis, Iidem de discrim. Sacram. Sect. 6.
so much the deeper rooting should the persuasion take in the mind.

How fit the arguments appear I know not, but certainly if they seem weak, it
is from the weakness of the handler. They are of great force in themselves, and
will be mighty to the deligent, deliberate soul, who is willing to persuade his
faith to an increase.

CAP. V. Sect. 2. Hope Improved on Christ Dying a Testator.
A Second Grace improvable by our serious and meditative remembrance of Christ
dying a Testator, is our hope. Whosoever does employ his thoughts on the last
will of the Lord Jesus, and duly reflects upon it, will find an addition to his
hope, and expectation of that good which is bequeathed to the believer, by his
Lord. Bishop Reynold's of the Passions, cap. 24.
Hope is an earnest and strong expectation of a great good future, possible and
difficult. Hope is ((...)) an expectation of things that are good, and it
springs, grows up, and flourishes with Faith, being grafted on a branch of the
same stock on which Faith is grafted. The Promise which the Lord makes to us
(for I speak of a Divine hope) in which Promise there is (ratio very) undoubted
truth, and there is (ratio boni) desirable good. The former St. Paul expresses
thus; The Promises are Yea and Amen, 2 Cor. 1.20. the lattet St. Peter
expresses thus, Exceeding great and precious Promises, 2 Pet. 1.4. And the
Royal Prophet has excellently joined both together, 2 Samuel 7.28. The word of
God (which was the Promise made to David by the Lord in the mouth of Nathan the
Prophet) is true and good. Now as Faith springs up and flourishes on the truth
of the Promise; so Hope springs up and flourishes on the goodness of the
Promise; or in the words of the Learned PP. of Saumur.

Indeed Faith embraces the Promise as it appears, Nimirum Fides Promissionem
amplectitur sub ratione very, spes vero Promissionem considerat sub ratione
Boni futuri. Disp. de Sacram. in Genesis Sect. 47.
and is true; but Hope considers the Promise as it is, and as it appears to
be good and future. And this notion of Hope is warranted by the Sciptures. The
Apostle speaking of Hope, determines it unto good as its proper object, Romans
8.24. By Hope we are saved, salvation is a great good, and to this the
Christian Hope applies it self. It is a Blessed Hope, that is a Hope of
Blessedness at the glorious appearing of Christ our Savior, Titus, 2.13. Thus
the Apostle describes the object of a believers Hope as it is good, and in
both places he includes the futurity of this good, and makes it a condition of
good as it is hoped; for Hope that is seen is not Hope, Romans 8.24.
says the Apostle, etc. So then let the notion of Hope be remembered, that we
may see the influence of the last Will of out Dying Lord giving life, and
growth to our Hopes. If our hopes are an expectation, we may expect what Christ
has given, if an expectation of great good, Christ's gift by will cannot but
be a great good: if this great good must be future and possible, it cannot but
be yet to come, for we cannot receive all in this present life; but what is
future is possible, yea sure, (though unseen and to be attained with
difficulty). Christ will invest every believer with that which he has
bequeathed to him in his last Will. But I pass from this general discourse unto
the particular discussing of the strength and growth of our Hope when it is
acted on Christ's last Will and Testament, in which the considerate soul
observes.

Sect. 1.
1. That there is an exceeding great benefit and advantage offered and proposed
to it. Christ has bequeathed most transcendent blessings to the believing
soul; the Legacies he has given are not few, small, dying or fading, but they
are many, great and eternal. All which will appear by these following
considerations.

1. The greatness of his mind, it is not to be doubted whether Christ were of a
large and noble heart. He did excel all men in true magnanimity and greatness
of mind, as much as he excelled all men in holiness, and freedom from sin. Now
let this be noted, and we shall see ((...)) as was the man, so were his gifts.
A great mind accounts small gifts below its grandeur. When a King (I think it
was Alezander) gave a gift that was complemented with, because it was too great
for him who was to receive it, answer was made. It was not too great for a King
to give. The Scripture gives us a ghess at the greatness of Araunah's mind by
the greatness of his gift, (...)
2 Samuel 24.24. Indeed they do mutually declare, and show themselves unto men,
so that the boons and Gifts of Christ unto believers do, (and could not but)
bear a proportioned greatness and a richness commensurate and suited to the
greatness and largeness of his heart.

2. Let it farther be noted as was the greatness of his heart, so was the
greatness of his interess estate and treasures. Men sometimes have hearts too
large for their houses, and minds overgrown, and exceedingly too large for
their means, and where this discord happens, there ever is a great deal less
in performance than in purpose, far less in execution than in design, and
intention. But where a great heart possesses an estate, carries an interess,
and enjoys opportunities, large as its self; there are ever great designs,
rich promises, vast expectations; and these give being to a hope that makes
not ashamed. The favorites of Kings enlarge their hopes to the greatness of
those gifts their Princes use to give. It were a dishonor to a Prince if his
Friend and favorite should hope for a mean and poor gift, such as every
ordinary man bestows upon his Friend. 1 Samuel 22.7.
Saul spoke more like a King bestowing gifts, when he talked of olive-yards,
and vine-yards, and making them Captains over thousands. And the ambitious
mother measured her hope and request for her sons, by the greatness of their
masters state, when she begged that they might sit the one on the right hand,
the other on the left hand of their Lord in his Kingdom. So let our hopes eye
the riches and treasures of our Dying Lord, and grow great as his mind and good
will, as his means and ability to enrich us, to satisfy us with most excellent
Legacies, with Royal gifts.

3. As his mind and means were great, so was his love and affections toward us.
Jonathan's love to David was a love that exceeded the love of women, but fell
short of the love of Christ to believers. It is hard to find a love that may
shadow out the love of Christ, but it is impossible to find out a love that can
equal it, or set it forth to us in its gaeatness. It is greater than the love
of a Friend, a Brother, a Father, a wife; greater than all these, could we
compound them all into one. Now where so great love to us, in so great estate
in the hands of so great mind, there out hopes cannot but exceed the hopes of a
man who has the largest hopes from his Friend, his Brother, or Father. He
knows not the heart of Christ, nor the riches of Christ, nor the love of
Christ, who contents himself with small hopes, or does not enlarge his heart
toward a hope, great as the love of Christ. See then what thou may expect
should be thy legacy; think what it likely should be that Christ Dying would
bestow upon thee; would he not give the greatest he could? should you not hope
the greatest you are capable of? do not men (close handed, narrow hearted, and
loath to leave what they have), do they not give the most they can to those
they love most at their death? have not they largest gifts by will who were
greatest sharers in their good will? is not this the standard by which waiting,
hoping Heirs measure their hopes, and expectations from a Dying Friend let it
be thine also, and at a Sacrament remember thy hope is justifiable when
exceeding great; for so much as it is raised upon so great love of so great a
mind in so great estate and means, that none can equal, or justify it self in
a comparison with it, none (I say) though it were the grandeur of a King, of
the greatest King ever the Sun did shine upon, for if more crowns than one are
at his disposal yet can he not bequeath a crown to every loyal subject, to
every faithful counselor, to every dear Friend, to every dutiful child;
Christ thy King, thy Friend (oh believing soul) could alone do this and indeed
has done it by will; Luke 22.29. (...).
this thou should remember, and consider at the Sacrament. The renewed
memorial of Christ thy Friend Dying a Testator, and renewed thoughts of thy
Friends greatness who is thy hope, will be a renewing of thy hope, and an
addition to its greatness.

Sect. 2.
2. As the greatness of our expectations, so in the next place, the goodness
and real loveliness of what we expect either does add, or might justly add to
the growth and increase of our Hopes. Their Hope may well be a growing Hope
which is animated, and quickened by such growing goodness. Among many cross
occurrences which may, this often does lessen our Hopes, their greatness may
possibly want commensurate goodness; the quality and relish of it may not be
sweet enough, though the fruit may be larger then we expected. The massy bulk
may be too great whilst the usefulness, and profit of it may be to little.
David speaks of some who had more than heart could wish but this overgrown
increase, adds to their pride and atheism, and proves a snare to them, Psalm.
73.4, 5, 6. With the 8. and 9. verses. Their vices increase as do their riches;
This a poisonous quality of all worldly greatness, and this venom frequently
emb^tters the considerate man's Hopes, and this ialwayes empoysoneth the
inconsiderate man's enjoyments. But on the other side, the believers Hope,
(through the death and Testament of Christ) has in it goodness as well as
greatness; goodness to sweeten our Hope, and to sanctify our enjoyment; the
unbelievers Hope and acquisition, makes the estate greater, and the person
viler; but this of the believer makes his estate more great, and his person
more gracious; it makes him happier in his possessions, and holier in his
affections, and so betters both the man and his condition. In this the
believers Hope excels all other which will, I hope clearly appear, if at a
Sacrament we meditate on.

1. First the Moral goodness and excellency of those things which Christ has
willed to us, they are full of purity, and therefore full of loveliness. If
Moral virtue were so desirable in the eye of the Philosopher that he could say
every one would fall in love with it, if it were, or could be set forth in its
native beauty to the eye, what then will the Holiness of Christ's Legacies be
to a gracious soul? what will Moral virtue (whereof Christ's Legacies are full)
enhaunced, and dignified with the addition of grace (which Christ does add to
his Legacies) Joh. 14.16. I will pray the Father, and he shall give you another
comforter that he may abide with you for ever, and ver. 16. The spirit of
truth. Behold here a Legacy which bequeaths all Moral virtues, and all
sanctifying graces at once; in this one gift you have greater and choicer gifts
than all the world can give. Here is greatness, and riches; here is goodness,
and righteousness. In one word, the great gifts of dying friends have corrupted
many a fair and well tempered nature, but lo! here is a Legacy greater then all
those, and which has rectifyed and beautifyed many a crooked and vitiated
nature. I pray not that thou should take them out of the world, but that
thou should keep them fom the evil, Joh. 17.15.

Now as he prays it may be so with them, he powerfully works upon them, and
it is so with them, they are kept from the evil: For he imparteth those
internal operative excellencies to his living Friends which first filled his
pure soul; of him we receive grace for grace; And he becomes a quickening
spirit. and as he took upon him our Nature that he might suffer for us, so he
imparteth his Holy Spirit, makes us partakers of the Divine Nature, that we
might reign with him; and in all this he excels: for only Christ can by Will
and Testament make over, and impart the endowments which adorn the mind. Thy
learned Friend may bequeath to thee his estate, his books, but he cannot give
thee his learning; thy Christian parent may dispose an ample estate to thee,
but he cannot be privileged to dispose a dram of his grace unto thee. But
here is such a Friend who might warrantably, and who has graciously said,
Because I live, ye shall live also, Joh. 14.16. For he can give a spiritual
life in holiness, and grace, and he can preserve and finish it; he can at last
also give an eternal life in glory and happiness; this he gives to all who are
given to him by the Father, Joh. 17.2. This is the Moral spiritual goodness of
his gift which renders not only the condition of the person, but the
disposition of the mind better, and which excels no less than virtue excels
wealth, no less than the mind excels the body, or grace and Heaven, excel gold
and earth.

2. A goodness of rest, peace and Satisfaction attends the greatness of this
Legacy. (I do wittingly change the terms which the schoolmen would here have
used, and do rather choose to call it as I have done, a goodness of rest, or
peace, or satisfaction.) 1. The possibility that our great hopes may be
attended with great anxieties and dangers. 2. The danger lest they should turn
to troubles and disquietudes as great as our Hopes. 3. The uncertainty which
will be most, our happiness that we meet with, or our unhappiness that we miss
of, our great worldly expectations and Hopes. 4. Finally the most undoubted
certainty that our great worldly Hopes shall not, and that indeed they cannot,
afford us a commensurate rest, and that our largest expectations shall (like
rivell'd half withered fruit) give the lie to the fair blossom, and ripen into
a sour, and ungrateful fruit, and set the teeth of him who feeds upon it
(like swore Grapes) on edge; Miserrimum est fuisse felicem.
and make the man for ever most miserable, because he was once most mistakenly
accounted happy. These four attendants of our worldly Hopes, like the four
winds, do interchangeably toss us, and at last, dash us on those rocks which
have wrackt others. Now the believers Hopes are of a contrary Nature, and do
give great rest whilst they are expected, and greatest satisfaction when they
are attained. There is nothing in the greatness of a believers Hope to abate
the goodness of it; for it is a Hope which at last will give an everlasting
rest. It shall never make ashamed. It is bequeathed to us in those words of our
Lord; These things have I spoken to you that in me ye might have peace, Joh.
16.33. Oh desirable gift! peace in Christ! were it no more than peace, yet
would it be more than our richest, mightiest, wisest Friends could give us:
their Legacies are often an occasion of trouble, jarrs, and bitter contention,
seldom a cause of peace to us in our outward affairs; never a cause of peace to
us in our soul. The peace of soul must be sought in Christ, and behold here it
is bequeathed to us! farther yet, it is a peace or rest with Christ in glory,
Joh. 17.24. Father, I will that they also whom thou have given me be with me
where I am, that they may behold my glory. Where we shall be like him both in
his rest, and in his glory into which he is entered to take possession for
himself, and for believers. Blessed they who have such great, who have such
good things to Hope for! look then upon the greatness and goodness of thy Hope
and expectation from such a Testator, from such a Friend whose last Will thou
do, or should consider at a Sacrament, there thou will see that thine are,
or might be, the best and greatest Hopes which are,

Sect. 3.
3. Thirdly and Lastly, Enhaunced and raised yet higher by the certainty and
assurance of possessing, enjoying and living upon them at last after we have
conquered the difficulties which lie in our way. As the greatness, and goodness
of our Hope so the assured certain, future possessing, and enjoying the great
good we Hope for, sublimateth our Hopes. This certainty of our future
possessing them is like the root of a fair and spreading Tree on which all the
branches, leaves and fruit depend for sap and beauty, with growth and life;
Great Hopes without this root are but great presumptions. And expectations of
good without this future certainty, are but waking dreams, and self-abusing
flatteries: such Hopes shall no more grow and flourish than the stock and
branches of a Tree whose root is cut off from the body; such is the Dying Hope
of hypocrites; but the Hope of a hungring, meditating, believing, communicant
is a living Hope; a Hope that has a good, vigorous and juicy root, which
though it spread among difficulties, yet takes the faster hold, and stands
(like Trees on rocky grounds much more firm. It is this future certainty which
gives both the being and the name to Hope which makes not ashamed; a wise man
will be ashamed of a Hope that has little or no probability, and the confident
self flatterer shall be ashamed of a Hope that has no truth in it. The wise
man lays such Hopes aside among unexpected possibilities, Si rueret Caelum, etc.
looking not for them before the sky falls, a net to catch larks; only the rash
and inconsiderate accounts them promising Hopes until they prove lying
vanities; of this kind are almost all our Hopes of great success and
prosperities in worldly affairs; they are very uncertain, or not very probable,
or else very unprobable, and next to impossible. But that Hope which a believer
builds upon the Death of Christ dying, and making his Will, is not clogged
with impossibility, or with improbability nor with uncertainty. The difficulty
which lies in our way of attaining our hope, is intended and proportioned to
whet and set a sharper edge on our desires and diligence. We may conquer those
difficulties, and if we conquer we shall assuredly enjoy our Hopes. Nay the
enjoyment and living on our Hopes, are not more certain than the conquering of
the difficulties which kept us at distance from our Hopes; we shall overcome
those difficulties, and conquer those enemies of our rest, and at last enjoy
our victory in our rest. And I pray who can say half so much for his worldly
hopes? if these are great, are they not uncertain? does not their uncertainty
grow as does their greatness? of all men he is most doubtful, and uncertain who
fixes his thoughts upon hopes that are most lofty and ambitious. Not so in
these hopes of the Believer, whose greatest hopes are commended to him by their
certainty. A Believer is more certain of a Crown and a Kingdom, than he is of
his Friends, Estate or Honors on Earth. Vid. supra this stability, the ground
of a Christians Faith, c. 5. sect. 1. etc.
Now this certainty lies upon the stability and firmness of the Testament of
Christ the Testator, who died to give validity and confirmation to the
Testament, and who lives to give out the Legacies which he has bequeathed.
Thus the Testament is become of force by the death of the Testator, and the
gifts become sure by the life of the Testator, who ever lives to bring us into
the possession, and to continue us in the Possession of those great and good
things which we hope for by virtue of his bequest and gift. In few words, look
over the (Bona legata) good things bequeathed, Pooro bona legata -- sunt illa,
vita aeterna, remissio peccatorum, dona Spiritus Sancti, etc. Ben. Aret.
Prolegom. in Matthew.
Life Eternal, Remission of sins, gifts of the Holy Ghost, etc. Examine the
Will of Christ, which is yet to be read in the Scriptures of the New Testament,
especially search the several Promises; see what they contain, and then say of
them, All these are the legacies my blessed Lord has given me by his last
Will; All these Promises are now Yea and Amen. Were they only the Will of a
man, yet no man should add to them, or disannul them; they are sacred, and must
not be violated: how much more inviolable should the Testament of Christ be
kept. The Testament of the true and faithful Witness, is faithfulness it self.
Until Faithfulness degenerate into Perfidiousness, until Truth turn into a Lie,
or until Darkness be Light, not sooner, nor more unexpectedly shall the
Believers interesse in the last Will of Christ deceive and fail his
expectations. Oh glorious Hope, whose bright beam may well turn the illustrious
hopes of the worldling into a darksome and undesired anxiety or despair! Oh
blessed soul! which can despise the promising confidences of worldly hopes, and
cast them off as unquestionable uncertainties (such they are) and instead of
these can pitch upon, pursue after, and long for those sure Promises, the rich
Legacies, the lively Hopes, and heavenly Treasures, which Christ makes the
firm, valid, and unchangeable Interess and Estate of every Believer.

Before thou come to a Sacrament (oh my soul!) look better to thy hopes, survey
their Greatness, weigh their Goodness, and duly consider their certainty; and
discern whether any hopes are comparable with them in either Greatness,
Goodness or Certainty; or in any thing that is a part of the best and truest
hope; and when thou have viewed the precellence and matchless worth of thy
hopes, I dare warrant thine increase and growth in this grace shall bear a
proportion to thy consideration, and weighing of those forementioned
excellencies. Remember, I confine not thy thoughts to these particulars, I
mention them as those which did first and easiest offer themselves to mine own
thoughts; if thou who read with better judgment pitchest upon more
quickening and improving meditations and arguments, bless God who gave, and
pray for me and others who would desire as lively and awakening arguments, and
help us in our need. In the mean time, this certainty of these great and good
things, does according to the measure of their clearness and strength in my
serious meditations raise in me, and improve a longing desire of an assured
interess in him who has given these things by Will, of which Desire and the
Improvement thereof I purpose to treat in the next Section.

CAP. V. Sect. 3. Christ Dying a Testator, Improves Desires of Union to Christ,
and Communion with him.
THERE is certainly as little doubt that Desire after Union to Christ, and
longing for intimate Communion with Christ, is needful and requisite in every
Communicant; as that the soul is not fit for either Union or Communion which
desires them not; and I suppose thou art no Christian if thou art so ignorant
as to presume on fitness, or to flatter thy self into expectation of any
spiritual Improvement by the use of the Sacrament without these Desires and
Longings of Soul after Christ: Fames optimum omdimentum.
these Desires are the soul's hungrings after Christ, and they add sweetness to
this Bread of Life. A man that has lost his stomach, who can taste no sweetness
in the choicest food, is as fit to be a guest at a Royal feast, as a soul
without desires of Union to, and Communion with Christ, is fit to feast with
the Lord at his table in the holy Sacrament. He that is the desire of all
nations, Hag. 2.9. will be sought after, and found out by those of every nation
which desire him. Thou who do not desire him, do reject him and despise
him, and hidest thy face from him, as the Prophet Isaiah, 53.2.3. has ranked
thee. And can rejecters of Christ be fit for communion with Christ? can
despisers of Christ Hope for a welcome entertainment with Christ? will he
disclose the secrets of his love to such as hide their face from him? either
thou must desire him, or thou shall never discern him or delight in him at a
Sacrament. Christ is that carcass to which the soul, as the Eagle, gathers; but
desires are the wings which carry the soul to Christ. He desires to draw us to
himself, these desires appear in this, that Christ does lay open his excellency
for us, and our need of him, and so attempts to raise our desires, nay gives
some strength that we may desire; If we either supinely neglect, or profanely
reject him, we shall be sure to miss and go without him. Luke 14.24.
Not one of the invited guests which put him off with an excuse did taste of
the prepared feast. They desire no such feast, and Christ at last lets them
know he expects better guests. Who ever will be a guest at the table of the
Lord; must unfeignedly desire an interess in the Lord, so as the Lord declares
himself willing, and ready to admit his guests to a communicating and partaking
of benefits by him. Now among many other habitudes, and relations he admits us
as a Dying Testator admits Legatees to partake of the benefits bequeathed by
will. And in this there lie many prevalent inducements or motives to quicken
our desires after the interess of a Legatee, in the Will of Christ the
Testator. As

Sect. 1.
1. The goodness of those gifts which Christ gives by Will, these Legacies are
not stained with the tincture of vice which would deflower the innocence of the
mind, and render the person culpable; nor have they any tincture of
unpleasantness that might distate the soul. There is neither poison in them to
kill, nor any gall in them to embitter; they neither distate, nor destroy. They
are incomparable, spiritual, eternal goods which assimilate, and render our
persons like unto God in holiness; goods which render our state like to his in
happiness, in both which we are not straightened by the narrowness of the gift,
but by the narrowness of our natures; we might have more given, could we
receive it; we are straightened in our own selves, as the Apostle said in another
case. What the goodness of the gift is to allure and woo us to desire it, I
shall not here repeat, but refer you to the foregoing sect. sect. 2. page 67.
and seq. Hoping you are able to apply goodness (the object of your Hope) unto
your desires that it may be the object of them. He can do but little that cannot
desire that were his possession which is the Hope of every Christian. I never
knew any Hope which could not easily run out into desires, especially if
attended with this.

Sect. 2.
2. A fair possibility of grasping our desired good. I know a naked possibility
makes Good the object of my desire; I may desire what I may obtain, but a fair
possibility or promising probability commands my desire.

Desire, and a supine negligence is as culpable as a desponding backwardness
when such an invitation awakeneth our diligence, and encouragerh our Hope. It
was the possibility of the attempt which made blind Bartimaeus to cry, Mat.
10.47.
this gave life to his desire, and his desire grows as the possibility grew
to a probability; his mind was quicker than his body, and he rose the sooner
when he heard he was called for; the like motive prevailed with the woman who
had a bloody issue; it were no hard task to illustrate this farther, but I must
descend to veiw what particular possibility there is of interessing the
longing, desiring heart. What fair promising liklyhood of satisfaction to our
desires after a portion and share in the Legacies of Christ.

Now there are four things which clear up the possibility of thy success, 4
Evidences of a possible success.
whoever thou art that do desire and long after a share in these great and
good things.

1. 1. Others have succeeded.
The success of others who once were as unlikely as thou art; there is not one
among the heirs and Legatees, but at first was as far off, and as unlikely to
speed as thou. They were at as great distance from Christ, cared as little for
him, saw as little of their need of him, were as secure in their poverty as
thou art, and yet many such have been admitted to a share in the riches and
goodness of these Legacies. And why should thou bar thy self? why should
thou not try with Hope, what others have tried and effected with success? the
desire of persons (as bad as thou art) have been granted when they have wished,
desired, prayed for the sanctifying, beautifying, pardoning saving gifts of
this great Testator. O then wish heartily, desire unfeignedly, pray fervently
and thou shall certainly speed, for such desires have the promise.

2. Desires, such as we speak of, 2. Such Desire are heirs of the Promises.
are the heirs of the promises. Christ has engaged himself by promise to be
their riches, their righteousness, their happiness, who thus desire him; this
the seeking which shall find; this the knocking which will at last prevail for
admission. Christ who seldom, or indeed never I think humoured the curiosity of
any man's desire, yet did graciously lay his journey by the Sycamore Tree that
Zacheur might have what he desired, a sight of the Messiah, and that he might
meet with salvation too; which I doubt not was part of his desire mixed with a
small portion of curiosity. He would see the person of that wonderworker whose
works bespake a belief that he was the Messiah, and this Messiah gave all that
Zacheus desired, and as much as he could Hope.

3. 3 Christ is very willing they should succeed.
The willingness of Christ to satisfy such desires evinceth the possibility of
thine attaining an interess in his last Will. Never was any soul so willing to
receive the Legacy as Christ is to give it; Christ gives the desires after the
Legacy, and then gives the Legacy to those desires; were thou to treat with one
who were hard to be entreated, thou could have but a faint possibility. Now
thou treatest with one that is easy to be entreated, thou have fair probability
to encourage thy desires. Christ willingly came to seek thy good when thou
did not desire it; and surely he willingly, and readily will show it, and
cause thee to find it when thou desire to seek it. He will be found of them
that seek him, since he was so gracious as to be found of them that sought him
not.

4. 4. Christ delights to distribute his riches to Desires.
The delight which Christ takes in dividing his riches among such as thus
desire them, proves thou art within a possibility of getting a share in them;
he delights to give more than thou can delight to receive. The giving them
pleases him as much as the gifts can please thee. A Dying Friend never made
his last Will, nor disposed rich Legacies to his best beloved, and highest
prized Friend with that delight which was in the heart of Christ toward such
as thou art (if thou desire him) and it will now highly please him to give
thee investiture, and possession of all that which he designed for the Desiring
soul. Now if Christ do delight to give what thou desire to receive, may
thou not rather triumph and glory in a certainty of receiving, than languish
under the fears of impossibility to obtain them? what can restrain thee from
doing what thou delightest in, and have power to do? or do thou think more
hardly of Christ than thou would have thy Friend think of thee? do thou
who art but a cistern delight to satisfy the desires, and to sedate the thirst
of thy Friend, and will not the fountain, the ocean of goodness delight to
satisfy thy desires, and to cool, allay, and remove the heat of those desires
which are the torture of the soul, until they are satisfied? Whilst Christ is
what he is, thy desires have a possibility to animate them, and to draw thy
soul into rational expectations of finding admission with the rest of those who
seek their treasures in him. These two grand primary, and choicest ingredients
of what is desirable, (goodness to satisfy our expectations, and possibility
to encourage our endeavor) are we find in this project. Now there is a third
external requisite in that which is desirable, and that is

Sect. 3. The Object of the Desires, qua tale, is apprehended as absent and
distant. Dr. Reynolds of Passions. c. 16.

3. A partial absence or distance of that possible good from the soul desiring
and pursuing it. What we desire must not be too far distant lest it seem
impossible; desires are the wings of the soul by which it travels toward its
rest; if the journey seem too long the soul is likliest to sit down, and rust
in sloth, and despair of attaining; if the good be present, and at no distance,
desires will change nature, and turn into enjoyment, and delight; or if any
thing of the nature of desire do remain, it expatiateth it self in wishes and
longing, not for the thing it self (which is present, and enjoyed) but for the
continuance, and abode of it. So then a mixture of these two, absence from what
is desired, and nearness, or convenient neighborhood of it to our industrious
diligence, is the temperament of what is properly desirable, or the object of
our longings and desires. Now this also may easily be discerned in this Will or
Testament, which proposes, promises, encourages, and ensureth most
excellently desirable good, and in doing this it sets them at convenient
distance that our Desire might do (as the Patriarchs Faith did in like case)
see them afar off, (...).
be persuaded of them, and embrace them. We are not kept wholly strangers to
these rich gifts, and Legacies, then we could not desire them; but we have
possession of some part of them which feed's our desires, which increases our
longings, as a spare diet does both feed the body, and strengthen appetite. It
is reported of the Gauls, that they had no desire to possess Italy until they
had tasted the sweet grapes of the Italian Vines; so soon as they had tasted,
they strongly desire, suddenly resolve, and vigorously attempt the conquest of
it; so is it here, total absence and ignorance quenches our desire, but a
partial knowledge, and taste enflameth it. They desire more who have tasted any
thing of Christ, and they long for full possession of the whole inheritance who
have found the advantage, joy and comfort of a smaller allowance. Just so it is
here, Christians have their present allowances both in justifying mercy,
sanctifying graces, and in refreshing consolations. But indeed, these are now
small to what they are to be hereafter. These present disbursments are from
Christ executour of his own will, as the disbursments of an executour entrusted
with orphans whose breeding must be paid for out of the improvement, but the
Legacy must be paid into their own hands at full age. Oh how does such one
desire, and long for these two things (1.) that he had greater interress in the
affections and favor of such an executour, and (2.) that his full age were
accomplished that he might have the full state in his own hand. So does the
present enjoyment of Christ's allowance set the soul on desireing more interess
in Christ, that his allowance of grace, peace and comfort may be greater; And
then, That which is absent, (which indeed is far the grater and better part)
that which the soul is fetching in by desires, that (which it wishes because
it wants,) does make it wish for that full age which alone shall receive the
full, rich and glorious Legacies. These are the common incentives of desire
which usually prevail with us to wish and desire. These are to be found as
much, nay more in these bequeathed gifts than in the best objects of natural,
or mere moral, or unsanctified rational desires. Are the objects of such
desires thought to be good? yet are they not comparable in goodness with the
gifts Christ bequeaths to us.

Are those possible? and may they be attained? so are these: And somewhat more
then possibile, they are fairly, and promisingly probable.

Are those well tempered with some present taste and with a greater sweetness
to be delighted in for future? yet in this they infinitely fall short of future
sweetness to be tasted in the gifts of Christ. And this brief comparison of the
different degrees of desireableness in these different objects should lead me
to a larger discourse of the transcendency of the one above the other, but I
will content my self to show in as few words as possibly I can this one thing,
viz. That whereas other men are content to desire good upon the uncertainty of
obtaining, or with perplexity in desiring, and withal at last do possess with
unsatisfied minds. The desiers of the believing soul excels in all these.

1. In the certainty of obtaining a portion in the rich Legacies of Christ, he
shall be sure to have his portion in them who is sure he does desire them for
his portion. No soul ever desired Christ so earnestly as Christ does desire it;
he is willinger to bring, than we are to be brought to glory. His willingness
makes it certain; But I mention three things more;

1. The form of his Will and last Testament, which is so made, that there is
room for all desirous, longing souls, the Invitations, the Call, the
perswasives, the promises, the commands of the Gospel run so general, that he
is no Christian who knows not that there is room for the desires of every
believer; other men's wills framed, sealed and published, exclude all but those
which are mentioned in them. Christ's will is so framed, that thou, and I, and
every hearty willing soul may enter our names for a Legacy, and receive it; and
farther, though none else, yet

2. All the kindred of Christ are comprised in his will, which kindred are not
by natural generation, but by gracious Adoption, and so it may be enlarged by
new additions of new Friends. Thus thy hearty desires will surely enroll thee
among the kindred of Christ, so thou may certainly (if the fault be not
thine own) be of the alliance, kindred and family of Christ, and as certainly
be sharer among others of the Legacies given by Christ, who lastly has left

3. Assets to pay every Legatee; he has grace enough to make good the Legacies
of grace; He has merit enough to make good the Legacy of justification; he
has the fullness of the spirit of holiness to satisfy the claim of every one
who would perfect holiness; he has glory great enough, and crowns many enough
to crown and glorify; and so to make good all his Legacies which concern the
glorifying of believers. This is the certainty of thy future obtaining thy
desires, if thou do heartily desire. And who would not pray, and strive after
those desires which shall certainly be so fullfilled? uncertainties awaken
other men's desires, and shall thy desires oh Christian! sleep and dye when they
have such encouragements? nay farther yet.

2. Other desires are attended with perplexing anxieties and cares. They grow
among thorns, and pierce the very heart; it is not easy to discern whether they
disquiet most in the failure, and disappointment at last; or in the solicitous
longings of the heart whilst they are expected; there is trouble more than
enough in both the wracking desire, and in the killing disappointment: Now thy
desires (O christian!) after a portion in these Legacies of Christ excel in
these two things; first when they commence and turn into enjoyments, they do
not disappoint, and next, whilst they are desires, they afford and give some
good measure of satisfaction to the soul. For they are desires fixed upon a
good which is in some degree already enjoyed; Christ and his benefits are ever
enjoyed whilst sincerely desired. These messengers of the soul seeking for
Christ are sent by Christ himself who is with the soul, much as he was
incognito with the Disciples before he made himself known in breaking of bread.
The soul desires Christ absent, but these desires are raised in the soul by
Christ present. And as a Friend in a disguise sometime visits and feasteth with
his Friend cheering, and comforting him, and minding him of his absent Friend,
and raising wishes and desires after him as absent (who indeed is present with
him, and entertaineth him; so does our blessed Lord satisfy the desires of them
that love him, and that long for him. He is enriched by Christ who truly
desires the riches of Christ. These the advantages of the Christians desires,
oh then let out thy desires, fear not to set thy soul in a longing fit for
Christ whilst thou longest thou shall enjoy, and ere long thou shall see how
much thou had of him all that time wherein thou thoughtest thou had no more
of him than an empty desire, or hungring wish for him: thy desires are like the
Mariners approaches to the spicy Islands; the sweet and delicate odours assure
them they are not far off and delight them until they set foot upon the shore,
so Christ assures and delights the desirous soul; so Christ sends abroad the
sweet perfumes of grace and glory. These refresh the soul until its arrival
where it shall live upon full satisfactions, which is a

3. Third excellency in which the believers desires after these Legacies of
Christ do exceed all the best desires of other men, who must ever write over
them, less in hand than in Hope: -- Minuit praesentia famam.
the believer on the contrary must write this as the motto of his possessed
desires, great in Hope, greater far in hand; or as the Queen of Sheba said in
another case, 1 King. 10.8
It was a true report which I heard in my own land, but the one half of their
glory was not told me. These things which draw out the desires of other men are
like the Apples of Sodom, beautiful, and please the e^e at distance, but they
moulder into ashes when the hand gathers them, and they who feed on them, feed
on ashes. Such are honors, such are pleasures, such are the riches of this
world, and of men of this world fully uncertain when we purpose to seek them;
fully vexatious whilst we are seeking them, fullest of torment and
disappointment when they are grasped, and possessed; yet our desires after them
are passionate and earnest, our contrivances to obtain them are solicitous, and
secret, our pursuit vigorous and unwearied. But Christian! here is honor, a
crown bequeathed; here is joy, an eternal feast on the fruit of the true vine,
in the Kingdom of thy heavenly Father; here are treasures bequeathed, an
inheritance, a Kingdom, and all proposed to thy desires with transcendent
advantages; they are certain that thou may pursue them with Hope; they do
refresh whilst thou art pursuing that thou may not languish and faint; they
satisfy fully and eternally, that thou may never repent thy labor. Look on
these, and let them have but as much of thy desire, as there is of
desireableness in them, above all other things, and then I am sure thou will
desire them above all, and rest in them after all. Awake! Awake! oh my soul!
and before thou make thy approach to the Lord's table, look over the last Will
and Testament of Christ thy Lord; see there is pardoning mercy to take away
death which is the desert of sin; there is purifying mercy to take away the
filth of sin, to dry up the poisonous fountain of sin; there is pacifying mercy
to take away inward distracting troubles; there is interceding mercy to procure
acceptance of all the good thou do; there is preserving mercy to keep thee
from falling away and perishing; there is crowning mercy to encourage thy
expectations, and satisfy thy best and largest desires. In a word, here is
Christ's Spirit, his Righteousness, his Kingdom with eternal life given by Will
and last Testament, and all these tendered to thee as Christ's Minister tenders
the body and blood of Christ to thee: all these things are delivered to thee in
the copy of Christ's will, sealed unto thee at the Sacrament; and thy desires
are now expected. Good things, and possible, yea certain, and ensured to thee,
(if thou will but heartily desire them.) Awake therefore a sincere wish, a
strong longing after them that they might statisfy thee. All these are thine if
thou will be Christ's; oh then desire he would unite thee to himself that thou
may be one among them that are one with Christ; these shall be heirs to
these great things; these must be of Christ's kindred and alliance; this
alliance is not by natural consanguinity, it is by a foederal covenant Union,
and this Union is effected by us for our part by willingness and desire; say
then, art thou willing to lose and miss these great things? or do thou think
them unworthy of thy desire? or rather do thou not wish thou could desire
them? do thou not feel thy heart kindly bubling forth such affectionate
desires as these after Christ? oh that I were of that happy family which are so
blessed with Christ! oh that my name were written in the will! oh that there
were a blank where I might secretly or openly write mine own name there, then I
would as Jacob (yet without offense) steal a blessing! oh that there were some
would show me how I might imbody my self with this household and kindred! why
now if such desires stir, behold here is a short, but a sure method: Longings
and desires after nearer Union and closer conjunction with Christ, heary
desires of communion with Christ will do this great work, and ensure this
exceeding rich blessing to thee. Blessed are they who thus hunger and thirst
after righteousness, for they shall be satisfied. Thus renewed meditations on
the common in centives of desires, and renewed meditations on the peculiar, and
extraordinary incentives of our desires, in likelihood can do no less than
increase our desires after this most desirable Union to Christ.

CAP. V. Sect. 4. Love and esteem of Christ, Improved by his Dying a Testator.
A Fourth Grace improveable by the meditation of Christ's Death as such a
loving and bountiful Legator, Love and Esteem of Christ 4th. Sacramental Grace
improved.
is love and high esteem of his person and concernment. There are some graces
which may be better spared in part, or in whole, others that are more needful
for a communicant at the Lord's table; joy in believing may be little, perhaps
none, yet the soul not unfit for the Sacrament. But the grace of love to
Christ, with an high esteem of the person and concernments of Christ, is so
needful, that whosoever either loves him not, or loves him not for his own
sake, is unworthy of this great ordinance. It is disputed whether Judas did
partake of this Sacrament, but it is not disputable whether a heart like his,
whether a man or woman who loves Christ no more than Judas did love him, be fit
for the Sacrament. It is a feast for Christ's Friends, it is an entertainment
for his beloved ones, if that invitation, Eat O Friends drink yea drink
abundantly O Behold, Cant. 5.1. Be not intended principally for a solemn
bidding to this feast, yet the general equity, or congruity of it warranteth
the Friends and lovers of Christ, and none else to come. The enemies of Christ
must expect other kind of entertainment; it is bring those mine enemies and
slay them before me. In one word, that heart which is not full of love to God,
is full unfit for any approach to God in any ordinary and common duty; much
more unfit for this extraordinary and solemn access to the Lord. Now in the
Testament or last Will of Christ we may discern most evidently

1. A love which deserves to be very highly prized, a love toward us which none
but Christ ever did or could bear and express toward us: A love which entitled
us to a participation of a Kingdom, for as the Father has given a Kingdom to
him, so has he given a Kingdom unto us; herein appears the largeness of his
love to us; what he has given declares how much he loved, and the time when
he gave shows the constancy of his love to us; he loved us to the last. Now
ingenuity sets a value upon men according to the love men bear to their
Friends, and I am assured who ever reads the last Will of Christ reads the
greatest, the constantest love; and why then should it not be esteemed their
duty to set the highest price on Christ?

2. The incomparable excellencies which he was master of. The Legacies which he
gives manifest what surpassing treasures he was possessour of; these for kind
are spiritual, for duration eternal, for suitableness full and satisfactory,
for use sweet, safe and pure, for certainty unchangeable; of all which somewhat
has already been spoken, therefore no more shall now be said. The vast riches
of some men have been kept close until their last will has discovered them,
and how then have some men admired them? indeed we cannot understand the full
treasures of our blessed Lord until we come to read his last Will and Testament
in the light of glory with eyes of immortality, and then he shall be admired in
all them that believe, 2 These. 1.10. The believing soul when he views the
treasures of grace, comfort and glory made over to him by Christ's will, cannot
but admire the incomparableness of his person; and although the believers
estimate of Christ be so ingenuous as to prize Christ for his own worth, yet it
cannot be unthankful, or not prize him for his gifts bestowed on us. Whenever
thou art going to a Sacrament (if other more quickening motives do not offer
themselves) think on that which Christ has given thee by will; and consider
how glorious and excellent a person he is! who bequeathed these great and good
things; and who can, and will bestow every one of them upon thee.

3. Read over the will of Christ, and ponder well what he has given and
bequeathed, then reflect upon thy self and see what thou art now, what thou
wast when he gave, and what thou art like to be so long as thou live upon
earth. And when this is well considered, thou will have cause to say, that
among all benefactours none can compare with Christ, in the noble generous and
free disposition of his mind. And indeed the excelling beneficence of Christ
toward believers does win an excelling esteem and price in believers toward
Christ; who

1. Gave these great things of pardon and life; of grace and holiness; of peace
and comfort; of victory and glory; (contained in his Legacies) to strangers,
disesteemers, rejecters; and in a word, enemies of the giver and the gifts. Now
it is a generous mind which will do good to miserable, forlorn men and women who
knew not their misery, who undervalued their recovery, who rejected the motion,
who declared their enmity against their deliverer. He is a Physician of
excellent temper, who can and will, pass by all these, and cure a Dying body
because he delight's to heal.

Our Lord notes in the parable, Luke 10.30. That a man went down from
Jerusalem, (a Jew) whom thieves robbed, and left wounded and half dead,
insensible of his danger, and unable to ask for help, The enmity of the Jews
against the Samaritanes arose on occasion of that Schism which the Samaritanes
were guilty of, and maintained against the Jews concerning the Worship of God,
Joh. 4.20. Our Fathers worshipped in this Mountain, and ye say that in
Jerusalem is the place, etc. This quarrel began soon after the Captivity of the
Ten Tribes by Salmanesar 700 years before Christ was born, and it had been
countenanced by a High Priest and a Temple in a continued Succession of 300
years, and somewhat more, before the birth of Christ: So old was this enmity.
whom a Samaritan pitied, ver. 33. Now observe, there was a very rankerous
enmity in the Jews against the Samaritanes, as appears from Joh. 4 9. and 8.
v. 48.

But this generous compassion of the Samaritan checks the old quarrel, and
lends a helping hand; such noble compassion is the compassion of our Lord to
us, to whom God commends his love, that when we were enemies Christ dyed for
us, Romans 5.8. However disingenious sinners slight and undervalue the person of
Christ, and his love toward them, whilst they were very enemies, yet
whenever grace appeath, it changes their minds, and makes sinners cease
from sin, and become Saints; they shall at once both admire the excellency of
Christ's person and love toward them, and comdemn all their former low, and
unbeseeming apprehensions of Christ and his love. As the compassion of Christ
was thus generous in pitying of an undone enemy.

2. So secondly it appears a noble and excellent compassion if it appear to
thee what thou now art; either thou do not know why self and state, or must
confess, Christ incomparably excellent in mind and disposition. There is not
now any worth in thee but what thou have by virtue of Christ's Legacy; where
had others? where have thou thy grace? but from the spirit of grace? and note
how the Apostle argues this, Gal. 3.14, 15. by an argument drawn ((...)) from
the Testament, and Will of Christ. Men do chose persons for some excellency or
other, and therefore do many times make them their heirs. But here is a
compassion and love that makes us excel others, by giving us what we could
never have expected, (ex condigno), by worthiness of our own. The least Saint
is more excellent than the eminentest carnal man: this the Saint has from
Christ by whose Testament he is heir to a Crown, yet the excellentest Saint is
less than the least of the Legacies of his Lord. In our present state there is
nothing to commend us which does not more commend our Lord who bestowed it; By
the grace of God we are what we are, whether children, heirs or Legatees. And
if we know as St. Paul did know we shall account all things as he did, loss and
dung, Phil. 3.8. (...), which the Syriack (...), Penuria defectus, who has all
without Christ is (...), Poor.
It Is loss when he computeth the product of all his hopes that are short of
Christ, and the things which Christ freely gives, and instead of ought gained,
he must writ much lost. Such then is the excellency of Christ that without him
nothing can be gain, with him nothing shall be loss: And

3. When thou have viewed the great Legacies of thy Lord, look on thy self what
thou will most certainly be so long as thou art on earth; and this will commend
the noble, excellent temper of thy Lord. He knew that thou would repine, be
unthankful, live much below his Royal gifts, and in many things dishonor the
free giver: Yet all this never could discourage, or change the resolutions, and
purpose of thy most bountiful, loving, and tender Friend and Lord. Behold here
is love as the Apostle has it 1 John 4.10. Not that we loved God, but he loved
us, etc. here love is Triumphant indeed! In a word or two, either we must
conclude the Christian a most disingenuous person, or else conclude that the
survey of the great Legacies his Lord has given him will raise the Christians
esteem of Christ, it will enlarge his affections toward Christ. Thus the love
of Christ discovered in his last Will and Testament will draw out love to him
again, and love will find wherever the excellency of what is loved does lie;
rather than want an excellency to justify the passion, we see men will fancy,
and make an excellency, and then value it. Spiritual love needs no such help to
esteem Christ, it may find an infinite worth in him, and indeed does judge him
the chief of ten thousand. None but he would dye; none but he dying would make
such provision for us.

4. This great Testator was brought to his end (as we say) by the faults, and
through the folly of us whom he did so highly befriend. We sinned and he died;
our wickedness brought him to the Cross. Isa. 53.
Now whilst we like sheep went astray, and the Lord laid on him the iniquity of
as all: the precious life of the shepherd ransomed the life of his wandering
sheep; what would have been the manner of men in this case? would it not have
been? I Will cross them out of my will; I intended a bounteous Legacy, but be it
now as far from my mind as I was from theirs; this would have been the
resolution of man. But this was not the mind of, Christ, (more excellent than
man) No no, but this his Noble disposition; I will do the most my Friends need
from me, though they have done the most they could against me; I Will conquer
their unkindness, and they (captives to my love) shall set an eternal Crown of
triumphant glory and praise on my head; I know whither to bring them, and where
they shall be of another temper and disposition toward me for my love. I will
bequeath them a Crown of glory, though they have pierced me with a Crown of
thorns; I know when they shall look on me and mourn; when they shall heartily
resent their unkindnesses, and in requital of my love, shall prize me higher
than their own life.

So let my soul ever say, thy love, oh Lord! surviving death, and conquering my
ingratitude deserves a higher esteem, and larger affections than a narrow
heart and low apprehensions can offer thee.

CAP. V. Sect. 5. Zeal for Christ Improved on Christ's Dying a Testator.
A Fifth grace suiting to the Sacrament, 5th. Sacramental Grace improvable.
and improveable by considering Christ a Testator making his will when he Died,
is Zeal to his glory and honor. I think it not needful to prove the
suitableness of this grace to the Sacrament. The height of love to Christ, the
indignation against former sins, fervent, settled, resolutions to oppose,
suppress and overthrow all lusts, and the stirrings of lusts, which, as
formerly they have risen up, so now would afresh rise up against Christ (all
which, as they are in every prepared communicant, (and which are the
constitutives of Zeal) so they would clearly prove this, but I take it none
will deny (or doubt) that Zeal to the glory and honor of Christ does well suit
with the constant ordinary course of the Christians conversation; how much more
does it beseem him in his nearer accesses to Christ? The people which are his
peculiar must be Zealous of Good works, Tit. 2.14. Romans 12.11
fervent in spirit serving the Lord. Now beside what arguments arise from the
common professed Friendship of the Christian to Christ, As

1. The candor and humanity which we show to every man who is dead, of whom
either nothing ought be said, or nothing but good; an ingenuous person is moved
with Zeal for the name and credit of the dead, when they are traduced,
especially

2. When the innocence of the person was in his whole life well known to all
who in any degree of acquaintance knew him we should not take up the buried
miscarriages of of the dead, nor may we disguise the good works of those that
are not by to plead for themselves.

3. When our Friends were useful to all that needed and would make use of them,
we endure not they should be traduced by surviving rancor and envy.

4. When all this Friendship, innocence usefulness, and generous beneficence of
our Friend met with nothing almost but causeless vexations and troubles, and of
these one succeeding the other without Rest: we think it hard (as indeed it is
very exceeding hard) measure, that it neither meet with rest in life, nor death
that it should be defamed where all men have a privilege securing them from
piercing censures, and envious reproaches: these and such like motives of Zeal
for the honor of our dear Friend who Dying from us left his love to live with
us, are equally applicable to any such Friend, if any such may be found among
the sons of men. But over and above all these in centives there are some
special incentives to Zeal for the honor of our Lord on this very account,
that he dyed a Testator making his Testament and last Will.

1. Hereby we are embodied into the family whereof Christ is the head and
chief; so that our zeal for his honor, is a zeal for the honor of our whole
family. That we are of his family, is a very high ennobling us, a very great
enriching us, it does exceedingly enhance our worth and honor, and we
therefore are highly obliged to contend for his honor; we rightly judge the
son bound to plead the honor of his dying Father, and we do as rightly judge
the Christian much more bound to plead the honor of his dying Lord, whose
Testament has made him a Son, and gave him a share both in the honor and
wealth of the family.

2. In the last Will of our Dying Lord we read his Zeal and strength of
affection for our peace, our comfort, our safety, and our happiness; all which
falls to the ground and vanishes: if the Legacies of our Lord fail us, we
had need therefore with Zeal contend for his honor; not as though our plea
would in any thing ratify, or confirm, for (as we cannot give) so neither needs
he to derive ought of his authority from us; he has received all power from
his Father. But yet (after the manner of men be it spoken) we are bound to
assert and defend the glory of his authority and power of disposing and
bequeathing to us, and to others, whatsoever he has by Will and Testamentary
disposition left to us and to them. If he had given what was not his to give,
we must either soon have parted with it, or for ever have missed of it; but
herein lies our advantage and comfort, that the large Legacies of our Lord to
us, are as the fruit of so much Zealous love for us; so they are the Acts of
Sovereign power delegated to Christ by the Father, as our Lord himself
intimates to us, Luke 22.29. As the Father has appointed unto me, so I
appoint a Kingdom unto you.

Our Zeal then for the honor of Christ does as well maintain our hope, comfort
and interess, as it does maintain his authority; and what man would suffer the
power to be nulled which gave him a rich and inestimable Legacy?

3. The least degree of good bequeathed to us by the Will of our Testator in
his will (remembered by us in the Lords supper) does greatly surpass all the
Zeal we can bear to his glory and honor: read over his will, and see there is
justification in his blood shed for remission of sin, assurance of peace with
God secured by the frequent remembrance of the blood of sprinkling,
Sanctification, consolation, and future glory; all these promised by him, who
being Mediator of the Covenant, has reduced the whole to the form of a
Testamentary disposition, and confirmed it by his death. Now when thou art
going to a Sacrament, consider and judge with thy self, should I not be very
Zealous for his honor who has given many inestimable gifts to me? am I not
less than the least of grace bequeathed? is not remission of my sin greater
love than my love can requite? is not Hope of glory greater than mine obedience
can ever equal? shall I then ever think I have affection enough? or have done
enough for his honor by whom I have received what I have already, by whom I
shall receive what I hereafter expect? No! No! I must be ever blowing my love
into a greater flame of Zeal for his honor, and yet his love and Zeal for me
will outshine and overpower all mine for him.

4. View the Will of thy Testator, be persuaded to remember that he is now
living in glory, and beholds all that Love and Zeal which thou carriest in
thy breast, which thou expressest in thy life toward him: he is not like other
men, who dying, know no more of the deportment and behavior of befriended
survivours: thou can not bury the knowledge (for dust has not blinded the
eye) of the Lord; he lives for ever, and he knows how thou receivest, improvest
and resentest his Love and Zeal for thy good, and with what face will thou
appear before him one day if thou have not been hired (shall I say?) or bought
with so great price into the love of, and into a Zeal for thy beneficent,
liberal and incomparable Friend and Lord? I observe Jacob dying, recommended
the care of his burial to Joseph above all his sons; it was likely because
cause Joseph more than any of his sons was debtor to the love and care of his
Father for a double portion bestowed on him: of all men we who have a double
portion by Christ, a portion of blessings on earth, and in Heaven, should
zealously perform his will; we must account it sacredly inviolable, and show it
in showing forth his praises, 1 Pet. 2.9.

CAP. V. Sect. 6. Joy Improved on Christ Dying a Testator.
A Sixth grace well suiting the Lord's supper, 6th Sacramental grace
Improvable, Joy.
and Improveable on account of the Lord's Dying a Testator, is joy and gladness
in the Lord, and in his goodness. It is confessed by all, that it well suiteth
with feasts of love, that the guests should joy together, and rejoice in their
Friend, who is equally Friend unto them all. The soul which comes burdened
with sins and sorrows, confesses he should rejoice in the Lord, and is well
pleased that others do it whilst he cannot: it is a spiritual joy which well
becomes this spiriritual feast. I do not say the heart is unfit for it who
does not rejoice; I know the spiritual hunger and thirst of the soul speaks
the soul fit, and such may, such indeed ought to come; yet when hunger and
thirst after the Lord are accompanied with joy in the Lord, the soul is better,
is more thoroughly prepared for this feast, this commemoration of their Dying
Lord.

Now the Christian's joy, beside the general motives of joy arising from the
general nature of the object of delight and joy, as goodness in the thing
enjoyd, propriety whereby it becomes ours, and possession, or presence of it
with us according to our present capacity and exigency, whether refreshing,
repairing, or filling us, or in what other manner of operation it affects, in
which the Christian joy, and the delight of other men do agree. The spiritual
joy of the Christian has great advantages from the last Will and Testament of
his Lord; As

1. First the transcendency of them. If there were any blessings better than
others in the possession, and at the disposal of their Lord, surely these
should be given among the beloved Friends. Servants, attenders, complemental
visiters, and such like common Friends possibly may be put off with common
gifts, but the best shall be distributed unto the best Friends. A Kingdom in
glory, the spirit of Adoption, remision of sins, increase of all grace, and
consolations through faith etc. are the choice blessings bequeathed to
believers in Christ's Will, and represented, ensured, and in praelibations, or
foretast conveyed to believers in the right reception of the Lord's Supper; let
it be therefore thoroughly considered, and when either of those forecited
mercies appear contained in his Will, ask your selves whether the least of
these do not deserve the highest pitch of your joy? are they not better worth
your delight than all the worldling can delight in; how much do spiritual
mercies excel temporal? how far do Heavenly privileges excel earthly? so much
certainly may the joy of believers in their Lord, excel the joy of carnal men;
for whilst the common bounty of a Dying Lord gives sensible, outward, and
temporal good to mankind, the special grace and love of their Dying Lord and
Savior, gives believers all spiritual mercies in heavenly things. Oh my soul!
believe thou there is love enough in the good will of Christ to make thee a
Legatee? and do thou not believe there was treasure enough in the hand of
Christ to make thy Legacy worth thy delights and joy?

2. Look over the rich gifts of thy Lord, and say, my propriety and title to
all is as sure as they are needful. There is nothing can pretend to equal them
in either of these two; necessary and certain, and therefore no joy can be
warrantably equal with the joy of a believer, what ever our eye sees here
among the visible ((...)) things are but ((...)) temporary, and every one of
them can make themselves wings swift enough to fly out of our reach; but what
Christ has bequeathed ((...)) among the invisible things are ((...)) eternal,
in his hand who can hold them, and in his right whosoever enjoys them shall
never lose them. Look then on thy title and tenure in that title and right thy
Lord had to what he gave thee, and then as thou may laugh with scorn and
derision at the impleadings of any of thy spiritual adversaries, so thou will
surely laugh with delight, and joy in the love of thy Lord, and in thy
inviolable propriety to every good thing he has bequeathed. Fox. Act. and
Monu. An. 1553. Entering of Qu. Mary.
The will of a man may possibly be evacuated, and the Legacy lost. I know a
Kingdom was once bequeathed by Will which did the Legatee no more service than
to hasten the possession of what Christ has given, which could not be lost,
though the other was with the life which by a Royal will, should have enjoyd
it. Such uncertainty and hazads attend other Legacies; those Christ gives are
sure. No man shall take your joy from you, Joh. 16.22. The object of such joy
will well justify the greatness of it; it is a delight none can imbitter.

3. Note well the present possession of these gifts and Legacies; This will
enhance thy joys. No man can rationally rejoice in any thing which is not
somewhat present to his Hopes, or to his hand; either the object of our
delights must be in actual possession, or else ensured to us in reversion. Now
in the actual possession of these good things given, and bequeathed to us,
there is somewhat that excels the manner of possessing all other goods. As,

1. Other goods are present under a Law of mutability and change to the worse,
these shall only change to the better.

2. Other goods are possessed with anxious cares lest they should, and with
tormenting fears that they will fail us at our need. But the Legacies our Lord
has given are possessed with assurance that they shall best bestead us when we
most need them.

3. Other goods present do but satisfy our sensitive appetite, or flatter the
errors of our deceived reason; these satisfy the necessary desires of a
rightly informed mind and will.

4. Other goods present do often cloy, over-load, impair, and weaken the
possessors of them as we see it too often in voluptuous persons that are
wearied with, and wasted by their own delights; the goods bequeathed by Christ
are never burdensome in their presence, possession or use.

Thou then who see thy Lord's bounty, and who tastest the sweetness of the
present possessed goods, (with these advantages over and above all the
enjoyments of the worldling,) enjoin thy self to rejoice more abundantly in
that thou do so much enjoy; it is warrantable thou should excel them in
thy affection whom thou excellest in thy possession.

5. Other goods are evermore lessened by their presence and enjoyment; flowers
the sweetest and beautifullest, do insensibly waste their sweetness is still
expiring until all be gone, their beauty fades till they shrivel into
uncomeliness: Not so here, for we do, or might daily draw out more sweetness,
discern more beauty, and find greater satisfaction in these excellent things
bequeathed to us by our Lord. The more we are acquainted with them, the more we
desire, delight in, and are satisfied with them; they grow upon us in the use,
continuance, and search after them; what thou have of them is a pledge of more
thou shall have; view then these particulars, and thy judgment will determine.
That the excelling worth of the things; the excellency of thy tenure, and
right; the excellency of the presence, and approximation of them, with
immutability, security, satisfaction, renewed sweetness, and growing content,
do call aloud for an excelling degree of joy and delight in them.

CAP. V. Sect. 7. Gratitude Improved, on Christ's Dying a Testator.
7. THE Seventh Sacramental grace I mentioned, is Gratitude, and thankful
returns to the memory of our Dying Lord. In this point I labor not for a
proof, it is confessedly owned by all who own any thing of the excellency,
continued usefulness, and efficacy of the Sacrament. It is the Eucharist, and
very unfitly, named if thankfulness be not required to fit us for it. 'Twere
strange if the generality of Christians should mistake in a practical point of
such daily occurrence. It succeeded in the room of a Sacrament which required
high measures of Gratitude; and it is the standing memorial of the greatest
benefit obtained for us; it is a standing pledge of our greatest expectation,
viz. Of the blessed Hope, and glorious appearing of the great God and our
Savior; for herein we show forth his death until he come. It becomes us to be
thankful, but why so particularly to Christ a Testator? what is in that more
than ordinary? or if you show not more than ordinary incentives to
thankfulness, yet what particular sufficient juducements are there to this in
Christ's Dying a Testator to confirm his last Will?

1. Look, see what he has as a Testator done for you and me. He has
bequeathed to us a participation with himself in every excellent thing we
needed, or are capable of. He has conveyed to us by his last will, pardon and
justification through his Death, and obedience. He has conveyed
Sanctification, and purifying grace, through the spirit which he pours out
upon us, since he died, and rose again, ascended; and sits on the right hand
of the Father: He has conveied consolation and joy through the spirit of
Adoption; and will give the possession of that inheritance of glory, which (as
yet) is reserved for us in Heaven, and which is duly ensured to us in the
Sacrament. In one word, the whole Covenant of grace framed into a Testament, is
confirmed by the Death of Christ the Testatour; so that thou, and I, are
beholding to Christ a Testator for all the riches of grace, consolation and
glory. Well worthy of thine and my praise, thanks, and hearty acknowledgments
is Christ therefore for that he by his Death has procured, and by will has
entitled us unto such great and glorious advantages and benefits.

2. Christ a Testator has deserved thy most grateful resentments of his love
for that he has by this means removed all thy fears, and prevented all thy
doubts, least at any time thou should (by reason of thy weak faith and
defective love,) fall short of the goodness and blessings thou expectest; for
this (as other Testaments) is of force now that the Testator is dead, and since
he is dead none may either null it, or alter it, but it must continue for ever
in strength. And on this consideration of certainty and validity does the
Apostle, Gal. 3.15. advance the excellency of the promises made to Abraham, and
to Abraham's seed. Now what ever does advance the excellency of the promises
made to us, does likewise advance our debt of thankfulness for the promises.

3. Christ a Testator is worthy of our highest Gratitude, for so much as he
has by his last Will and Testament disposed of his rich inheritance amongst
us, so as we may duly expect, and constantly fetch in as much as we will of
grace for our present help and comfort, reserving the fullness of all unto the
final consummation of the elect redeemed. Many a man loses all, or else much
of his thanks by an unseasonable caution in his will, that the Legatees shall
have nothing of the gift until such a time to which it is uncertain whether he
live; but Christ deserves our admiration, as well as our thanks, for the
present benefit, use, and advantages we have from his Testament. He has so
given, that we may now enjoy; we so enjoy now, that hereafter we shall
receive; present enjoyments were not to be compared with future; the present
improvement is sufficient to keep us handsomely; the future is far above mine
and your thoughts.

4. Christ a Testator worthy of thy thanks for so much as he was thus mindful
of thee at the last, when enemies insulted and vaunted against him; when
sorrows and pains did seize him; when his Friends stood aloof off, and some of
them denied him; when many were content not to be known of his acquaintance;
when he foresaw what Friends we (in our several generations) would be to him;
for what these persons were under Christ's Eye, was both an index, or discovery
of them, and also a symptom, or prognostic what we after them would prove.
And yet for all this his love continued firm to us, and made them and us Heirs
both of his own, and of his Father's love also.

5. And lastly, consider this, Christ a Testator, is Christ Voluntarily Dying
that he might make all sure to us. He was not by nature under an unchangeable
law of Death, as we are; if he had not loved us so much, he needed not to have
Died; here then is his plea and Title unto our Gratitude; he did Voluntarily,
and of choice put himself into a condition that he might dye, to procure and
confirm the promises to us. And yet the kind and manner of Dying, and pains he
did foresee in his Death, are the circumstances which, as they set off, and
advance his love to us, so do they increase and augment our debt of a loving
hearty resentment of his kindness. Sirs, Christ must dye a curse under the
vindictive justice of God ere he could convey by will the Heavenly, blessed and
everlasting Legacies, which we now expect from him as a Testator. Whosoever shall
cast an Eye upon these particulars, if others more quickening do not occur, yet
these will either persuade to thankfulness, or render unthankfulness
inexcusable. We do usually pick out such circumstances as these to commend the
worthiness of our Friends love toward us at his Death; he remembered me in what
I most needed, provided for me as much as I need, or can receive, he (I thank
him) settled it by will that I might be sure of it: And herein I am greatliest
beholden to him, that as I was unfit to be trusted with all at once, and unable
to subsist without any of it for present, he did in wise kindness to me provide
that the main part should be reserved for me, and that the lesser be now given
unto me. So Christ, that I might live, and rejoice in the present grace of my
Lord to me; that I might be rich and happy in the possession of the whole, when
I was fit for, and capable of it, did wisely bequeath me a portion of peace in
him, grace from him, comfort through him, all which I needed, but has
reserved, fullness of Glory, the immarcescible Crown, the unchangeable Kingdom,
the inconceivable, and unspeakable blessedness, until I should be prepared to
enjoy them all: herein the love of Christ excels, insomuch as he did all
this for us, when sorrows and troubles, greater than can be equalled were
besetting him; nay, he put himself into a state subject to all those sorrows
and troubles (from which by nature he was free) that he might be liable to dye,
and make all this mercy sure to thee, and me (and such like us) by Testament:
and thou, and I must thank him that he did it for us who by our folly and
wickedness were the causes of all this sorrow, and trouble to him. Here is love
to be owned with highest rensentments, and most enlarged affections; Christ is
the greatest conqueror of hearts and therefore to be crowned with a triumphant
wreath of enflamed hearts; oh live, and dye in the grateful acknowledgments of
his love. If (as some men will have it) his Table where thou suppest with him
be an Altar, let not this Altar ever want a flaming Sacrifice. Let thine heart
be offered to him; he deserves more, thou can not tender less; it were too
little if thou had ought more; it will be sufficient if thou do not think
it too much. Oh my soul! thy present income is worth thy thanks; thy future
full possession is fittest for an estimate and thanks in the highest Heavens.

CAP. V. Sect. 8. Humility Improved, on Christ's Dying a Testator.
8. THE eight Sacramental grace I did mention was Humility. The proud and lofty
heart bearing it self high upon its own deceived opinion, is not fit for the
Lords Table and Supper; the Lord stands (not as an endeared Friend to
entertain, (...), Jam. 4.6. Psalm. 22.26.
but) as an armed man to oppose, the proud. It Is the meek shall eat and be
satisfied, as the Psalmist in anocase said, who come to the Lords Table richly
provided with their self-confidences are sent empty away, Luke 1.53. 1 Pet. 5.5.
whilst he fills the hungry with good things. In this clothing must we
appear, for however plain it may seem to be, it is really a clothing of very
great price in the account of God; 1 Pet. 3.4.
to speak of the excellency of this grace is aliene to this place; and the
seasonableness, and suitableness of it to the Sacrament, I think so apparent,
that it needs not any proof, I rather address my self to point out the
incentives which from Christ Dying our Testator, do offer themselves to set
forward and improve this grace of humility; It will teach us to judge of our
selves as becomes us, and it will ever keep us lowly.

1. The Apostles motive to humility, 1 Cor. 4.7. offers it self to us in the
very entrance on this meditation; what have thou which thou have not received?
look on either the beauty of thy renewed soul, or the comeliness of thy holy
conversation, or the excellency of thy justified state, or the honor of thy
Adoption, or look on the luster of thy spiritual joys, thy heavenly Hopes. And
of all these in general, or of any of the particulars comprised in them; can
thou say, this, or that is not received? I know thou can not deny the
receiving, and if thou have received, why do thou boast? this Question, like
a needle, opens the swollen bladder of pride, and lets out the wind of vain
opinion, which would either corrupt, or break us. Thou had had as little to
pride thy self in as one who has only his shame to glory in, if thou had not
received what is now thy glory; it was the bounty of thy Rich, and Loving,
Friend at his Death, to enrich thee; thou have no reason either

1. To boast before God, who has chosen and called thee, as others like thee,
weak, foolish and base; Free and Rich mercy has raised, made wise, and
excellent; and now neither thou, I, or any flesh may boast before God, 1 Cor.
1.26, 27, 28, 29. For what we are, we are in Christ, as v. 30. And the glory is
due to God alone; as v. 31.

2. Nor to boast over thy brother who was every whit as Good as thou before
Grace made the difference, and may ere long be as Rich in Grace as any, and
more humble than thou art yet. He who has adorned and blessed thee, might with
the same freeness have adorned him whom thou despisest. Since then all that
Good which is in thee was given to thee by thy Dying Lord, it is absurd and
exceeding unseemly for thee to lift up thy self above thy brother, or to Glory
in thy self before thy God. When thou intendest to approach the Sacrament, and
when thou art there attending on the Lord, remember thou had been poor and
destitute of all those blessings therein represented, if thy Lord Dying, had
not by Will bequeathed all to thee;

2. The Second persuasive to Humility drawn from the Death of Christ as a
Testator, leaving us such Legacies, may be our incapacity to serve him in any
real service of advantage to him. We Never yet were, we never shall hereafter
be in any capacity either of deserving what we have received, or of requiting
the love which gave it to us. He that gave it, gave by Will, and Dyed to
confirm his Will, and our goodness could not extend to our Friend in the other
world. Our Lord needs it not; we are, when our best is done, unprofitable
servants. These are two things which have kept better men in a humble, lowly
thought of themselves. David's prayer, Psalm. 16.1. was from a humble heart, and
in an humbled state; and he maintained his Humility on the observation of his
uselesness and unprofitableness to his Lord, his preserver, ver. 2, 3. My
Goodness extends not unto thee, etc. It is Elihu his argument, Job 35. ver.
5. with 7. and. 8. To persuade to humility. And Eliphaz. Job. 22.2. lay's down
man's unprofitableness first, and leaves us to conclude that unprofitable man
must be a humble man; thou may not be proud before one who needs thee not;
thou must not boast in thy Best, seeing thy best is not good to him before whom
thou boastest. Should a man boast himself in his smoaky cottage before his
Sovereign in his magnificent palace? or should a lame and decrepit fool boast
of his wisdom and strength, and commend it to his Sovereign for the wars? In a
word or two,

1. Were thy Lord but a man, yet his present state of Majesty and certainest
coming in Glory confirmed, represented to thee in his Last Testament, minds
thee that he needs not thy help. Thou can not say, He can be, but not so
well without me.

2. The largeness of that state he was possessed of before he gave thee
interess in it, and which he has still in his possession since he gave thee a
right to any part of it, does clearly demonstrate that thou have nothing to
pride thy self in before thy Testator: amongst other causes of humility, we
shall find that the wealth and Riches of those we appear before, is one which
persuades us to a demiss and lowly deportment and behavior; there is an
appearance of Glory in Riches, Psalm. 49.16. For with increase of Riches there
is in common esteem an increase of Glory. Now in the gifts and Legacies of thy
Dying Lord, thou may clearly see those true, precious, and lasting Treasures
of grace, comfort and glory, which he was, and is still owner of; with him are
Riches and honor, Prove. 8.18. To him therefore reverent carriage, and humble
thoughts, (affections, and esteem) of our selves in his presence is most
suitable. And who is not affected with humility and lowliness toward Christ, is
so much the more injurious to him by how much more excellent and precious
Christ's riches and wealth excel the Riches of men which are so highly
esteemed, that they are judged sufficient ground of honor to the owner, and
sufficient cause of commanding humble carriage in the poorer.

3. In Christ Dying a Testator, thou may discern a dignity of dominion and
Lordship over the things which are disposed of by will; A dominion which comes
near to an absolute and uncontrouled dominion, what a man may give by will to
whomsoever he pleases, is more under the dominion of that man than the things
which need a farther and more large conveyance. As the estate which may be
devised by Will, and so conveyed to a Child, Friend, or stranger, is more under
the dominion of the present owner, than is that estate which some law entaileth
on the owners heirs, or Children. Now this being the case. Christ's dominion,
and absolute sovereignty over the good things he has given by Will, does
require and deserve a humble and lowly spirit in those who partake of these
gifts. Dominion is as a Ground of honor in those who are invested with it; so
a Ground of humility in those who are inferior to it. What would be esteemed
Friendly familiarity in me toward my equal, and a commendable deportment,
would be accounted insolent pride in me toward my Lord, or Sovereign, and a
carriage not to be endured. Joseph advanced to be Ruler over all the Land of
Egypt, must be saluted with a Bowing Knee, Genesis 41.43. Which was the outward
and visible expression of that double apprehension, Genesis 27.29. Isa. 49.23.
Esth. 3.2, 5.
(1.) of his worth and honor, (2.) of the meanness and lowness of the rest who
bowed. It is a very general and ancient sign of the respect we bear to the
dignity and worth of any one we bow before. The insolent soldiers in their
carriage toward Christ when they bowed the knee, Math. 27.29. Showed us what
humility becomes subjects, and what honor is due to Sovereigns. Look then on
that absolute dominion and power which appears in Christ's last Will and
Testament, be then Judge in the case, and say, What beseems thee in Receiving
gifts from Sovereign power, from an absolute Lord? will it not beseem thy low,
abject, and poor state, to attend the presence, and receive the gifts of such a
Lord (as Christ is) with a bended knee, and a humble heart?

What might be farther said in this particular I shall leave to each ones
larger meditations because I will hasten to an end of the Chapter and subject.

CAP. V. Sect. 9. Patience in Sufferings Improved, on Christ's Dying a Testator.
A Ninth Grace well suiting with the Lords Supper, and Improvable on
consideration of Christ Dying a Testator, is strong and settled resolution with
patience to undergo for him all hardships and sufferings which the Lord shall
permit to come upon us. A praemeditated survey of all the sufferings for the
Lord Christ and his Gospel, with advised purposes not to shrink from them, is
required of every Christian, and does very well fit the thoughts of a Sacrament
in which the Christian communicates with a Lord who was in his whole life a
Man of sorrows, and accquainted with griefs, for our sake. We celebrate the
memorial of his sufferings we should confirm our resolutions not to shrink away
from Christ for fear of sufferings. The ancient Christians under persecutions,
were wont to fortify their purposes and resolutions of adhering to their
Crucified Lord in midst of all persecutions; in order hereunto they were wont
to Celebrate the Lord's Supper often, thereby as often renewing their courage
and resolution to dye (if need be) for him. And the ordinary name of this
ordinance, viz. Sacrament, implies so much: For it was the old Latin word
expressing the Roman Soldiers obligation to obey his General; Sacramentum
Patres Latini, a militari jurejurando (uti opinamur) ad eam partem nostrae
Religionis significandam, etc. These. Salmur. de Sacrament. in genesis disp. sect.
2.
Now common sense tells us, that who comes and lists himself a Soldier
under a Captain or General, either knows not what he does, or else brings
Resolutions to undergo all the hardships of the war he enters on. I tell thee
Christian, thou know not fully what thou art doing at a Sacrament, if thou
do not there add strength to thy resolutions of Enduring hardship, as a good
Soldier of Jesus Christ. If thou do only confirm thy Hope of, and thy
waiting for the coming of thy Lord, and show this by showing forth his Death
until he comes, yet I must tell thee, since thou professest hope of, and
waitest for the coming of thy Lord, it well becomes this hope, this faith, to
have attendant the Resolution of Enduring all for Christ's sake. There are
these Motives in it;

1. First in thy Dear Friends Will thou see his Love to thee, and it is but
endebted ingenuity to be ready for, and patient in sufferings for one who
sincerely Loved us: As the Love of our Friend to us increases, so should our
readiness to suffer for our Friend. Christ did thus commend his Love above the
love of all other friends, That he died for us, Romans 5.8. And this Love
constrains us, 2 Cor. 5.14. It does by a sweet and invincible power draw us
into this conclusion; That we should live no longer to our selves, but to him
who died for us, ver. 15. We ought not only to bear some, but all; not little
only, but great; not common, but extraordinary dangers, distresses and
afflictions for his sake. He is by a sacred right Lord of our life, and when he
bids us venture it in hazards, or lay it down in unavoidable death for him,
we must do it: His love ought thus to constrain us. The sacred story tells us,
that Jacob served seven years for Rachel, Genesis 29.18. During which service he
underwent Losses, Genesis 31.39. was consumed with drought in the day, and with
frost in the Night: thus he served him fourteen years for his daughters; to the
younger of which, he had such love, that seven years of hardship seemed to him
but a few days, (...) for the love he had to her, Genesis 29.29. Either thy own
Reason condemns thy want of love to Christ who deserves it, insomuch as he
has given thee rich Legacies by his Will, or thy Love will command thee
resolvedly and patiently to suffer for him: Either thou must not pretend any
interess in Christ's Gifts, or thou must intend to Love him for them, and
resolve to suffer for him thou Love. In thy going to the Sacrament, view the
kindness of thy Savior in his Last Will and Testament, and judge with thy self
what sufferings for him thou could reasonably refuse. He Loved not himself or
life too well when it concerned thy life and Soul. He died for thee, and can
thou do less than venture life or estate for him? whilst thou read his love
in his Legacies, raise thy resolutions to face, stand out, and bear dangers,
losses, reproaches, or Death for him. His love to thee deserves it; for no man
has, Joh. 15.13.
or can have greater than that Christ had for thee, and the rest of his friends.

2. Thy Testator has provided by his last Will and Testament, that all thy
sufferings should be recompensed to thee with a reward that surpasses all thy
sufferings, If thou and I weigh the Sufferings for Christ, and our Gain by
Christ, this will exceedingly outweigh those. The least degree of reward
weighed with the heaviest burden of sufferings, will praeponderate and
outweigh them; (...).
for heaviest burdens of afflictions are but light, 2 Cor. 4.17. But the glory
they work for us is an exceeding and eternal weight of Glory.

And besides all that which shall hereafter be the recompense of sufferers for
Christ, they are, 1. First honored by God in that they are called to suffer
for his Son. God puts an honor on such who are called to suffer reproach for
Christ, Acts. 5.41. and 1 Pet. 4.14.2. It is a gift which God does not bestow
on every one: however men judge of it, the Apostle tells us, it is Given, Phil.
1.29. And well might the Apostle so account it; for, 3. It fitteth us for the
Kingdom of Heaven; our sufferings do not fit us with a fitness of worth, or of
merit; but with a fitness of preparedness and of meetness, 2 These. 1.5. with
Col. 1.11, 12. 4. It is very acceptable to God, 1. Pet. 2.19, 20. and. 21. (...)
It is (...), it ingratiateth with God. 5. It is a Scripture evidence of Grace
and future Glory, Phil. 1.29. and Romans 8.17. whosoever suffer for Christ, shall in
like manner be glorified with Christ. 6. And lastly, it is a condition
ordinarily privileged with great consolations in the inward man, and with an
high degree of Heroic grace in the heart, expressed by the spirit of Glory and
of God resting on the sufferer, 1 Pet. 4.13, 14. Though many other
compensations of our sufferings might be mentioned as preponderating, and
outweighing our Sufferings; yet because no one of these mentioned can be
reasonably doubted or denied to be more than sufficient present reward for our
Sufferings, I judge it reason to add no more. Think then as the Love of thy
Savior and Friend should make thee resolute in Suffering; so the present
advantage and reward will warrant thee to desire opportunity of Suffering for
him, if he shall see good so to try thee. Read then the promises made to
sufferers for Christ, the Elogies given to them, the fruits of such sufferings,
and then debate the case with thy self going to the Sacrament, or receiving it.
There are present benefits annexed to sufferings for that Lord whose Death I
celebrate; these benefits are made over to such as I am by his last Will; what
then should make me unwilling, unresolved, or afraid to suffer for him? each
particular blessing bequeathed, surpasses all the sufferings I need expect, or
fear. Seal therefore Lord thy blessings to me in the Sacrament, and help me to
seal thy cause and truth (if need be) with my blood!

3. A third inducement to Resolution in suffering for Christ our Lord Dying a
Testator deducible from his Last Will, is, That the greater these sufferings
are, the greater the compensation shall be. Our Lord Dying has so disposed his
rich gifts that he shall have greatest share in them who is greatest sufferer
for him: By a Christianlike bearing the Afflictions of the Lord, and the
Gospel, thou may increase the Crown of Glory which Christ has promised
thee; if so be we suffer with him that we may also be glorified with him, Romans
8.17. God allows us to intend and aim at obtaining Glory with Christ as the
end why we suffer with him, (...).
and for him. It is a very full expression of this which we meet with 2 Cor.
4.17. This Momentany and light affliction works for us a far more exceeding
and eternal weight of Glory. Note the words, Affliction works for us, it
effects, perfectly works, or as it is rendered, Phil. 2.12. Works out, or
in a good sense causes, as the word is rendered, 2 Cor. 9.11. The Temptation of
afflictions does as well increase the future Glory, as the present grace of the
Saints, James 1.2. And they are blessed who endure such Temptations, James
1.12. For when they are tried, they shall receive the Crown of life. Gold and
silver are purified, and get a greater measure of perfection by the refining
fire

The Glorified Saints shine with greatest luster who came out of the fires of
persecution. Those that were clothed with white robes, and had Palms in their
hands, and stood before the throne, Revel. 7.9. Were the persons who came out
of great tribulation, ver. 14. Therefore are they before the Throne, ver. 15.
In a word, Christ has prepared Thrones, on which they who did continue with
him in his Temptations do sit, and whereon they shall sit hereafter judging the
tribes of Israel; to these sufferers he has disposed the Kingdom, Luke
22.28.29. No man shall ever be loser by suffering for Christ. Mark well the
answer given to Peter's Question, Matthew. 19.27, 28. and 29. We have forsaken
all, etc. What shall we have therefore? Ye (says Christ) shall sit upon
Thrones, ye shall receive an Hundred fold, ver. 29. Judge therefore with thy
self whether the renewed Remembrance of such a Will and Testament, in which the
Testator gives most to him that does suffer most for him, be not a very fit
means to persuade thee to, and confirm thee in resolutions of patient suffering
for Christ? In a Sacrament thou do, or might see such encouragements to
sufferings sealed to thee, and will thou not endure? will thou not bear and
suffer for such Hopes? are our sufferings not worthy to be compared with that
Glory which shall be revealed? Romans 8.18. And is it not too much weakness which
dares not suffer? will you thus render your selves unworthy to expect such
Glory?

4. And Lastly Christ Dying a Testator lives and beholds what thou
suffer, and with what frame of mind thou do endure thy sufferings. And
this thou do tacitly confess in the use of the Sacrament; for under what
Notion soever thou do remember thy Lord in the Sacrament as it is complex of
thy Lord his Death, so of his future coming likewise. Thou declarest that
though he died once, yet Death has not Dominion over him, for he lives, and
knows what is designed against him by his enemies, what is laid upon his
Friends and followers for his sake. He will be Judge of thy sufferings, and of
thy reward also, Revel. 2.2. He that walks in the midst of the Golden
Candlesticks, knows the patience as well as the Labor of the Church. Now who
knows the patience, must needs know the sufferings which exercise the patience
of the Church. He knows the tribulation of the Church, Revel. 2.9. Christ is
the great overseer and Judge of the combats which his Church maintains with
his enemies who afflict, and trouble the Church for Christ's sake. He assigns
the reward and Crown to every one that overcomes, Revel. 2.7, 17, 23, and 26.
with other places. Well then, so often as thou go to the Sacrament, thou
renewest the memory of thy Lord, whose Love deserves thou should patiently
bear; whose reward when least, will surpass thy sufferings when they are
greatest; who will measure out to thee a reward proportioned to thy sufferings;
who lives to see and observe all thou suffer: thy Captain Generals Eye is
upon thee, and will not this persuade to resolutions of bearing, and constant
patience in bearing for Christ? these among other inducements to a Christian
fortitude in suffering for Christ, may be drawn from the consideration of his
Dying a Testator, and a larger improvement of them I commend to your private
meditations. I proceed to what remains.

CAP. V. Sect. 10. Sorrow for unserviceableness to Christ Improved, on Christ's
Dying a Testator.
10. THE tenth Sacramental grace I mentioned as befitting us at the Lords
Supper, was Sorrow for doing so little for him, with grief that we have done so
much against him. This temper of mind is highly improveable by pondering what
Christ has as a Testator done for us. I know there are many other motives to
Repentance which may be seasonably thought on at the Sacrament: there are also
in this sufficient inducements to that Godly sorrow which becomes the
memorials of our Dying Lord, and loving Friend.

1. First the Christian as he is a man, as he is principled and swayed with the
affections of Humane Nature, cannot but reflect with grief upon his carriages
and deportment toward a Friend who loved him entirely, who was recompensed
with the disingenuous returns of scorn; neglect, and hatred. When we have
unadvisedly, or unwittingly slighted any Friend we dearly loved, or should
have loved, we cannot remember it without shame, sorrow, confessing, praying
pardon, and excuse, with promise to be more heedful, more respectful for
future. There is no love so tender and apt to distill into tears, as that which
is won by a worthy, excellent, person conquering ungrounded prejudices,
unreasonable neglects, and unjustifiable contempts; such affronted love, when
it prevails at last, does kindle the strongest fires, and heapeth up the coals
which melt the hardest, and most stubborn metal. Many a hard heart has by such
flame been melted down to tenderness; Saul grew warm by it, 1 Samuel 24.17, 18,
19. And in the 1 Samuel 26.21. It breaks out into a flame of affection toward
David, and against himself, for his unreasonable usages toward David. Saul
accuses himself, but acquitteth David; he confesses his sin, his folly and
great error in designing evil against one who did so well deserve his love.
Though Saul were disingenuous (more than enough) against his Son David, yet the
reflection of his thoughts on David's kindness, drew him into tears, 1 Samuel
24.16. Will thou be more disingenuous to thy Lord than Saul to David? how long
did thou directly oppose, bitterly hate, scornfully reproach, and
unreasonably reason against Christ's Law, ordinances, ways and followers? what
kind of life did thou in the days of unregeneracy live? if thou wast not a
violent persecutor, yet thou did long think hardly of Christ and the Gospel,
yet then Christ did not cut thee off, nor leave thee to perish in thy contempt
of salvation; will thou not say thou have erred greatly? done foolishly? and
sinned? can thou do less than weep over the thoughts hereof? In the Sacrament
thou commemoratest the most unparalleld love, and beneficence, triumphing over
unkindness, and unthankfulness, a Testator bequeathing grace, comfort, glory
and salvation to thee, and others like thee who undervalued, opposed, hated,
and persecuted him. Can thou remember this and not grieve? can thou review
it and not be displeased with thy self? and condemn thy folly?

2. The Christian Sorrow is most highly Ingenuous and excellently tempered, and
therefore the Remembrance of such unkindness to such a Friend will work a deep
impression of Sorrow and grief upon the heart of the Remembrancer. The
Scripture tells us the People of God are a willing People, (...)
or a People of Ingenuities indeed. (...)and (...) Psalm. 51.12.
Grace renews nature to some degrees of created and primitive generousness.
Hence it is, Cant. 6.12. the Church is styled Aminadib. God calls them my
willing People, and Isaiah does very particularly describe this frame of mind,
and how it is wrought, Isa. 32.1, 2, 3, 4. and 5. By the power of Christ in the
Gospel. Now where such a sweet, generous temper of mind is, there will be
reflections of dislike, grief and Sorrow, or repentance for any unseemly
carriage toward one that deserved better. The spouse, Cant. 5.2, 3. In drousy
and careless fit neglected her beloved, but when she was thoroughly awakned, she
discovers a most deep sense of her neglect; she fell into a deep sick fit of
love, ver. 8. her heart failed her when she remembered what she had done: such
like workings of this Christian, spiritual, and renewed, ingenuity you may
observe 2 Cor. 7.11. in that sevenfold operation which conviction and
remembrance of their fault wrought in them. Carefulness, or readiness to amend
the error, clearing themselves, or duly apologizing for themselves,
indignation against the offense and offender, fear least the like should be
committed, or this not sufficiently taken away; vehement desire of firm
reconciliation, Zeal for the injured, and revenge (such as becomes a Gospel
repentance) against the offense, and against themselves for it. Either thou art
not well acquainted with what Christ has done for thee in his last Will and
Testament; or thou have not yet observed how little love, service, and honor
thou have returned him for his love; or if thou know, and observest both
these, they work in thee a readiness of mind to correct thine errors, a
defense for Christ, and blame of thy self with indignation against thy former
folly; fear of being so foolish any more, earnest desire (to be one with
Christ) and Zeal for his glory, with revenge on thy sins which eclipsed it.
Wheresoever Christian ingenuity springs from a renewed heart, renewed Sorrow
for unkindnesses will put forth it self, and spring from that ingenuity. Say
then, whatever the common ingenuity of a man, whatever the enhanced
generousness of a Christian should work in the reflections on its own unhansome
carriages toward a slighted friend, all that should the renewed memory of my
Lord Dying a Testator, (and by his Testament enriching me), produce in me, viz.
all common and ordinary effects of hearty sorrow; yea all especial and
extraordinary effects of Christian repentance. Of which I need say no more, of
which I dare not longer treat, because I must not exceed bounds to much.

CAP. V. Sect. 11. Bettered obedience the Fruit of Christ's Dying a Testator.
11. THE next grace suiting to the Lord's Supper, and improveable on the
consideration of Christ's Death as he died a Testator, is Resolution and
endeavor of New and better Obedience for future. There Is no man (that
accounts the ordinance a mercy, that looks on it as a Sealing ordinance, a
renewing our Covenant with God, or a memorial of the Death of Christ Dying for
us that we might live to him) but confesses New Obedience should be the
effect, and resolutions for new Obedience should be the preparatory for this
Sacrament. It is not therefore needful to prove it particularly, and at large;
I speak to none but such as judge it their duty after they have been at the
Lord's Supper, to endeavor a renewing of their Obedience to the commands of
Christ.

1. The gain and reward bequeathed is worthy, very well deserves our
Obedience. We have had frequent occasion to tell you, that the promises both of
the life that now is, and of that which is to come, are the Legacies of Christ;
which promises are rich and precious, they contain all necessary, noble, and
high encouragements to Obedience: when the laborers were hired, and sent into
the vineyard, the husbandman persuades them to obey and work; for (says he) I
will give you what is meet, Matthew. 20.4. What the Apostle says (in a case
little different from this,) I say to you, cast not away your Obedience for it
has great recompense of reward, Heb. 10.35. It is a harvest for its abundance,
and riches; It is a Crown of Righteousness which the Lord the righteous Judge
will give to them that finish their course, 2 Timothy 4.7, 8. It is a Crown of
Glory which fades not away, as the Apostle St. Peter has it 1 Pet. 5.4. A
Kingdom that cannot be shaken, Heb. 12.28. Let us then have grace; let us be so
ingenuous and thankful to our Lord, as to serve him to all well pleasing: the
Apostle argues from the expectation of such a reward to the reasonableness of
our serving the Lord with fear and trembling, the renewed thoughts of this
ample, glorious, eternal recompense of our sincere Obedience, will surely renew
our purposes and endeavors of bettering our Obedience; what then should you
and I do at the Lord's Supper, but meditate on the greatness of the Legacies he
has given; and with David, demand of our selves, What shall we render to the
Lord for all his benefits? Psalm. 116.12. Wherein shall we express our
thankfulness? Shall it be in Sacrifices and Offerings? No, God does not require
these, but to do justice, and love mercy, and to walk humbly with God, Micah 6.
To love him with all the heart, and with all the understanding, and with all
the soul, and with all the strength, and to love our neighbor as our selves,
is more than all whole burnt Offerings and Sacrifices, Mark 12.33. A Discerning
Obedience is a most acceptable Sacrifice to the Lord. In one word, we are
called to the Gospel, and to the Knowledge of Christ in the Gospel; and we must
walk worthy of our Calling, Ephesians. 4.1. worthy of the Lord, Col. 1.10. worthy
of the Gospel of Christ, Phil. 1.27. Now as every one who believes is bound by
his first Call to walk in New Obedience; so is every Believer bound by every
renewal of his Call, by every renewed remembrance of his Call to Christ, to
revive his Resolutions of renewing his Obedience to the Gospel of Christ.

2. Thy Renewed Obedience to Christ must be the evidence of thy Right and Title
to the Rich and Glorious Legacies which he has bequeathed to his kindred. Thou
have no more to show for thy Right, then thou have of Renewed Obedience. Christ
thy Lord has bequeathed a Kingdom and a Crown, but it is on condition thou
wait for both in a constant course of New Obedience. It is a Kingdom which
cannot be shaken, the Apostle says; and it is true, it is a Kingdom that can
neither be shaken by a Plea against your Title, nor by force against your
Possession: But observe, those who have this Right, and who shall have the
Possession of this Kingdom, are such who should

1. Have Grace which is of a growing nature; And

2. They serve God, they worship, they obey him; And

3. They do this acceptably with reverence and godly fear. The Apostle uses a
Verb of that Mood, which expresses matter of Duty, or Exhortation, (...)
habeamus, or habere oportet, and (...) serviamus sive servire debemus; the
Syriack reads (...), by (...), apprehending, which speaks a voluntary and
active seeking Grace, and accipiamus, which speaks a ready closing with Grace
offered, and retineamus, which speaks a holding fast what we sought, and
acccepted, thus furnished with Grace, (...), ministremus ceu Sacerdotes
spirituales qui Deo (...), 1 Pet. 2.5. And (...) placeamus.
They ought to be such persons, and to employ themselves in such exercises.

Do we then hear the Apostle's Exhortation? Do we see a Kingdom offered? Do we
read the Will which investeth us with it? Do we see the Will sealed in the
Sacrament? And will not all this stir us up to renew our Obedience? Will we be
so foolish to hazard our Title to it through backwardness and disobedience?
When he cast the Law of Grace and Mercy into the mould and form of a Testament
or last Will; he framed it so that he might strongly bind all to obedience who
expected benefit by it. Hence it is that we read, He became Mediator of the New
Testament, to the end he might purge our consciences from dead works to serve
the Living God, Heb. 9.14, 15. The Covenant of Promise which offers grace,
Heb. 10.16, 17.
and engages the Almighty to write his Law in our hearts, was confirmed to us,
and is made good to every believing soul through Christ our Testator; so that
obedience to Christ is as much incorporated in the Testament, as is Glory and
Blessedness. He is the Author of Eternal Salvation to those that obey him, Heb.
5.9. Obedience is required of us, as Salvation is promised to us. How can
thou then renew thy Faith and Hope in expecting of the promised Salvation, and
not renew thy resolutions to perform required obedience? How shall we look
Christ in the face, when we so separate what he has joined? How will you plead
his Promise, who have not obeyed his Precept? or how should your expectations
be answered by Christ, when his expectations have not been answered by you? It
is the unreasonableness of ignorance, and profaneness to boast of rich gifts
made over to them by the Will of Christ; and yet at the same time to slight,
neglect and refuse the duty, observance, and obedience, which Christ requires
of all his Legatees. When thou come to a Sacrament to renew thy assurance of
interess in the last Will of Christ, be sure thou observe what he expressly
requires as condition of this interess, and consider, He will be Author of
Eternal Salvation to thee on no other terms than thy obedience to him.

3. Christ dying once to conrfim the New Testament, and to make a firm Will for
our good, did not, as other Testators do, continue under the power of Death,
but he rose again from the Dead, according to the Scriptures, and now observes
how thou, and every one else do acquit themselves in this New Obedience
required of thee and of them. Let it be well weighed; Christ does now exactly
know, and particularly observe all thy works, and what obedience thou give
him. His countenance is as the Sun when it shines in its strength, Rev. 1.16.
both for the luster of it, and for the power of making manifest whatsoever is
done, both in the world, and also in the Churches, amidst which he walks,
Rev. 2.1. Knowing the works, the labor, and the patience of each Church, of
each member of the Church. He sees who it is that labors and faints not;
Rev. 2.3.
and who would not take courage from such an eyewitness to abound in the
blessed works of obedience? For whom will you labor, if you will not labor
for him who sees you? and will as certainly reward, as he sees exactly? When
Sarah's severity made Hagar weary of her service, and fly from it, I observe
she was persuaded to return, to submit her self, and to become obedient to
Sarah at the command, and upon the promise of God who lives and sees, Genesis
16.13. For memorial of which she gave name to a Well, (...)
calling it Beer-la-hai-roi. Christian, thy Lord who commands thy obedience,
and encourages thy diligence and willingness, both lives and sees. Will thou
not obey, that he may perform his promise to thee? What, shall slothful,
careless and unfaithful servants shake off sloth, and put on a show of
diligence and faithfulness whilst under the eye of their Master? and shall not
the Christian (who is ever under the eye of his Master) be thereby persuaded to
care, diligence, and faithfulness in his obedience? Whoever thou art that
attendest at the Lord's Table, do know, (or else now learn it, that for
future thou may know it, and consider it) That the Lord of the Feast comes
to entertain his Guests, and to receive their promises of renewed Obedience;
and when thou have made the promise, Christ makes the observation what
diligence thou usest in performing thy promise; he sees whether thou art
mindful of thy promise, and will one day call thee to account for it, and
require it of thee. And what will thou answer to such a demand? Friend, wast
thou not guilty enough under the single guilt of neglect, but must thou needs
add the guilt of perfidiousness and falsehood to thy other guilt? How did thou
dare to affront me to my face, to give me thy promise at the Sacrament, and
under my eye break the promise thou made me? Let me, O God! ever keep it in
mind my Testator lives and sees, may he see my obedience renewed in its
fruits! as my obligations are renewed in the Sacrament.

4. Consider in Christ a Testator living and seeing (who do, or who do not
perform the conditions qualifying the Legatees for the receiving the Legacies)
Thou may see him Judge, supreme Judge of all the claims that are made to the
whole, or to any part of what he has bequeathed. In this he excels all
other Testators, who can only make their Wills and dye, they cannot judge and
determine the pleas and pretenses which are made upon their last Testament.
Hence it often falls out that such get and possess the goods bequeathed, whom
the testator never intended should be the better for them. But here no
pretender can by sleight and fraud get any of the great and rich Legacies of
Christ: Nor shall any who has good right ever miss of them. Oh! let us look to
our Blessed Redeemer, the Sovereign Judge of his own last Testament, and
readily, diligently, constantly, do what he commands, that we may receive
what he promises. Fulfill his holy Will, that he may make good his last Will to
us: Let Sacraments bind us to an increase of Obedience; for this will be the
only Plea allowed by our Judge; this will be the only Plea advantageous to us.
These are some few of many inducements which may move us to renew our
obedience, for so much as we obey our Lord a Testator, bequeathing us Legacies
rich, and worth our greatest obedience; Legacies no way to be attained but in
the sincere obedience of our life and heart: Legacies that shall be given by
him who is now living to see who obeys him, as he once died to ensure the
reward to their obedience; Legacies that must be adjudg'd to the obedient by
him who commands the obedience, and made the Will; out of all which resulteth

1. A Motive that may prevail with our ingenuity and hopes; we obey in
expectation of a Noble Reward; our Legacies are worth better obedience.

2. A Motive that may work on, and prevail with our fears, and our less
ingenuous principles: Our Judge his eye is on us; and he is our Judge who will
give only to the obedient.

3. A Motive that may meet with, and prevail on, our mixed affections, to
encourage our hopes, to manage our fears, to enforce our backwardness, we must
obey, or lose our reward; to cherish our ingenuity, the reward is generous and
noble, exceedingly well becoming the ingenuity of the most free and noble
spirits.

CAP. V. Sect. 12. Brotherly kindness improved on Christ's last Testament.
THE Twelfth and last Grace mentioned, cap. 4. sect. 12. as a Sacramental Grace
well suiting with the Lord's Supper, that Feast of Love, and improveable by the
consideration of Christ's dying a Testator, is Brotherly Kindness and Charity;
a peaceable disposition of mind toward our Christian friends, and a loving
affection for our Brethren in Christ. This grace is so needful, that none are
so ignorant as to doubt, none so profane as to deny it, a needful
qualification: yet whilst ignorance and profaneness, confess it in words, they
are both far from the true exercise hereof. The considerate, meditating and
discerning communicant, will be careful to provide this grace for this
Sacrament, and to improve it by the Sacrament, which may very well be done by
such considerations as these.

1. First, Our Christian Brethren whom we should love, are made truly lovely by
the Legacies which Christ has bequeathed to them, and which he has in some
part already bestowed upon them. For Christ the great, bountiful and wise
Testator, has, as is already observed, so disposed his estate and treasures of
grace, consolation and glory, with other advantages, and needful supplies, that
all his friends should be handsomely maintained out of his Treasury, although
the principal of the estate be reserved in Heaven to enrich them there. As
Rebeccah was adorned with rich Jewels before she was brought to Isaac, who
invested her with all when she came to him, and the marriage was consummate. So
the Church, (so each particular Believer) is adorned with very rich Jewels of
grace, gifts and comforts, in which she is brought to Christ, who will invest
all on her when he shall consummate the Marriage in Glory. The Crown it is true
is reserved for the future state of Glory; but there are many single Jewels
already bestowed. The King's daughter is all glorious within, Psalm. 45. The
Saints of God, the Righteous ones are the excellent on earth, Psalm. 16.3. They
are filled with the Spirit of Christ; and they are led by that Spirit into all
the ways of Truth, Holiness, Meekness, Goodness, Long-sufferance, and the
like. The Philopher tells us, that true Friendship is only among the true
virtuous. Vice cannot be a cement of Friendship. In the Redeemed, Called,
Sanctified, there is what fitteth them for, and renders them worthy of our love
and brotherly affections.

Two things do ordinarily prevail with men to excite Natural love; first, the
sweetness of disposition, a skill and delight to show our selves friendly, as
Prove. 18.24. He cannot be much beloved, who is not ready and prone to love.
Secondly, the largeness of estate and wealth; it is the Rich man that has many
friends, Prove. 14.20. Both these, Motives to love, the Believer sees in every
Believer. Grace does very much sweeten Nature, and Grace does very much enrich
the person. These Motives of love may be found in every Legatee, who has share
in the choice Legacies of Christ; he gives an excellency of spirit which
sweetneth their disposition; they are meek, lowly, faithful, and without guile:
He also gives an Inheritance, a heavenly, a glorious Inheritance; these win
with the considerate Christian; and either thou know not what Christ has
bestowed on Believers, or thou must confess they are well worthy of thy love,
and brotherly affection.

2. Another Inducement to Brotherly Love contained in this consideration of
Christ Dying a Testator, may be this: Every Believer having interess in this
Will, was near to Christ's heart, as art thou, or I, or any other who
pretends title and interess in Christ's Last Testament. Now, should it not
move us to love with hearty love every Christian, for so much as every one of
them was equally near to the hearty love of Christ? Let our hearts be toward
them, Joh. 15.12.
as Christ's was toward us and them. It is a maxim in Love and Friendship, that
it extend it self to all our friends friends. Hence the advice of Solomon, that
thy Father's friend be not forsaken, Prove. 27.10
carries sound reason in it; for he that is the Father's friend, and heartily
loved him that begot, will be a friend to the Son, and love him that was
begotten too; as the Apostle argues in a like case, 1 John 5.1. The Apostle
urges this Love of Christ to us as argument to persuade us to love one
another, Romans 15.5. with verse. 7. to be of the same mind, (...), vide 2 Cor.
13.11. Idem velle, and idem nolle, ea demum est firma amicitia.
that so ye may live in Peace and Love, which is the fruit of that Union the
Apostle persuades us to, 2 Cor. 13.11. and Phil. 2.2. where he explaineth
((...)) The being of one mind, by, ((...)) having the same Love. The Love we
should have for the Brethren (of right) should be so strong as death, because
that Love which Christ had for them equally and indifferently, was even unto
death. This is the Apostle's Argument, 1 John 3.16. And there is strength in
it, whether we apprehend it or no. In the last Will of Christ thou may
discern a Love equally embracing all that believe, that seek their portion in
Christ. There we may find Christ a friend to the poor, as to the rich Believer;
to the unlearned, as to the learned Believer; to the despised, as to the
honorable Believer. As the Apostle speaks of Righteousness, (I may speak
(and you must understand) of all) the blessings of the Covenant and Testament:
The whole is by Faith of Jesus Christ unto all, and upon all them that believe;
for there is no difference, Romans 3.22. Now where Christ has made no difference
in his Love, dare thou make so great a difference in thine, as to withhold
thy love from some? Will thou not love those who are dear friends to thy
dearest Lord? thy best friend? I do not press an equality of love to all
Believers. I know, our brethren by nature, our kindred by alliances, our
acquaintance and intimate friends, have a right to our love and affections,
both Natural and Civil, and where such a Right is doubled by our Relation to
each other in Christ, our affections may be allowed to double themselves also.
Whilst Grace and common Hopes do increase our love to each other, they do allow
for the respects which Nature calls for of us. We must love all with an
unfeigned love, though we may love some with a more fervent love: whom Christ
has equally loved, we must unfeignedly love; and what renews the remembrance
of such love to us, should renew our love to others.

3. In the last Will of Christ is to be seen, That it is the express desire of
our Dying Lord we should love one another heartily and unfeignedly. He has
therefore put them all into one Will, and into the same capacity; every one by
his Will made an heir. The Saints do inherit the Riches of Glory, Ephesians. 1.18.
Their title is a joint-tenancy; (...).
they are coheirs, Heb. 11.9. And this title is by gift of Christ in his last
Testament, Joh. 17.24. Who desired they should all be where he was, that they
might behold his glory. And read we John 15.12. This is my Commandment, that ye
love one another, as I have loved you. This is that Commandment that is so
mine, as if all others were to yield place to this. This is the New
Commandment, Joh. 13.34. and 35. When Christ attended with Angels gave the Law
to Israel, the First Great Commandment was, Love the Lord, etc. The Second was,
Love thy Neighbor, etc. When he was to die he renewed the Commandment of
loving our Brethren. Yea, so resolvedly does our Lord require this Brotherly
Love, that whosoever he is pretends to Christ, must make good his pretensions
to Christ by his affections to all that are Brethren in Christ, Joh. 13.35.
Hereby shall all men know that ye are my disciples, if ye have love for one
another. Add hereto 1 John 4.20. He loves not God who loves not the Children
of God. For how shall he love God whom he has not seen, who loves not his
Brother whom he has seen? In a word, read the last words of Christ's
Intercession, John 17.26. which do breathe out the earnest desire of Christ,
that such love may be among the Brethren one to another, as was in the Father
and in the Son to them all. Now after all this vehemence of desire in Christ
that we who are heirs by his Will, should love one another. Shall any of us
dare to hate, undervalue, reject, or despise the other? Will you read the last
Testament of Love with a heart of enmity? Dare you come to the Ordinance which
renews the remembrance of Christ's Love to us, of his desire we should love
each other, and not labor to renew your love to them? Renewed meditations on
Christ's love to us will certainly renew our love to him and to all his;
renewed thoughts of his last desire, of his earnest commending mutual love,
will renew mutual love in us if any degree of ingenuity remain in us.

4. In the Testament and Last Will of our Dying Lord we have this inducement to
renew our love to the Brethren. He has by will designed one only place in
which with most perfect love to enjoy as all the blessed Legacies of our Lord,
so to enjoy all our fellow Legatees. Whether I shall persuade now I know not,
whether my arguings be powerful enough to suppress envyings, and jealousies, to
remove animosities, and quarrels from amongst saints, I cannot tell. But this I
know, and this I will tell you, when you who are now entitled to the Legacies
of this great Testator shall every one of you meet together to receive the full
and total of what you can receive, and Christ will give; there shall need no
such arguments, no such reasonings, no such entreaties to persuade you to
Mutual Love. There you shall not choose but Love, delight in, and embrace each
other. Come then think what you shall be when you Feast all together at your
Lord's Table in his Kingdom. And judge with your selves is it nor meet we
should be such now? It will be then a part of your Glory. And is not your mind
and judgment convinced that it is the Glory of a Christian to strive to be now
what he shall be hereafter? Christ will bring the Scattred sheep of his flock
into one, Joh. 11.52. When there shall remain on footsteps of their former
folly and discord. It is a high expression which the holy ghost uses, Joh.
17.11. And I will now forbear to search in into. Holy Father keep through thine
own name those whom thou have given me, that they may be one as we are. It is a
place which ensureth us that such who by the Father are kept unto the future
state of the Saints in Heaven, are kept to a most intimate and Glorious Union,
Friendship and Love. Now they who will not be persuaded to cement, to unite
affections, to love one another here, how highly do they cross the design of
Christ and of the Father? Oh that I could persuade all who hear or read my
words, and oh that more lively sense of what I write were upon mine own heart!
Lord I read thy Will, Joh. 17.22. The Glory which thou gave me, I have given
unto them that they may be one even as we are one. Oh let the Remembrance of
thy design of our future Union renewed in the Memorial of thy last Will at
each Sacrament, cause me and all believers, to study and endeavor a present
Union and Brotherly love more beseeming our future blessed Union and love. It
may be I shall be quarrelled at for this endeavor of gaining love from those
that yet love me not, and possibly lose what I thought to keep the love of some
that have embraced me with a more Brotherly affection than hereafter they will,
this may possibly be the Fruit of their passions, and the unhappiness of my
weak, and imperfect discourses. But I shall retire my self from such storms,
and view the blessed Legacies my dying Lord has bequeathed me, peace he has
left for me his peace he has given unto me. And with his Peace, his Love, I
shall at last I Hope Love them for ever who now will scarce give me leave so to
do; they shall love me who think they never will. What my words cannot
exexpress, what my explanations cannot yet make clear, that day of glorious
appearing of our blessed Testator to give us the full possession of all
bequeathed blessings shall reveal to us and we shall understand, All of grace
in its Beginnings, Improvements, Perfection, and Crowning in Glory, to have
been the free Gift of this great Testator dying far us.

(...).

The end of the Second Part.
Gal. 3. v. 13, 14. Christ has redeemed us from the Curse of the Law, being
made a Curse for us, etc.


THese two verses do acquaint us with what Christ has done for us, and how he
has done it; what he was made for us, and what we are made by him. He was made
a curse for us, we are made blessed by him. In the words you may observe,

1. A grand design of Favor proposed, Parts of the words.
i.e. the conferring on us a great Blessing, that we Gentiles might receive the
blessing of Abraham.

2. The accomplishment of the design by Christ; he has redeemed us from the
curse of the Law, etc.

3. The Manner how he has effected this being made a curse for us.

3. The Proof of this, that Christ was made a curse for us, argued from the
Manner of his Dying; For it is written, Cursed is every one that hangs on a
Tree.

From which (declining all but what directly tends to my purpose) I commend to
you this Truth, viz.

That the Blessings of Grace are procured for us, imparted to us, and increased
in us,

The full blessing of Grace descends on us through Christ made a Curse for us.

Here I shall 1. Clear the Term. 2. Prove the Truth. 3. Essay the Improvement
of Grace, by showing how this may excite and exercise Grace. Now in the
explication of the Terms, there are these Terms offer themselves;

11. What is this Blessing. 2. What is this Curse. 3. How Christ was made a
Curse. Of each in order.

Sect. 1. This Blessing then is made evident in general by the Apostle, verse.
14. who calls it, The Blessing of Abraham, and explaineth it farther; it was
that we might receive the Promise of the Spirit through Faith. That Covenant of
Grace with all the immunities of it, whereby the Jews for a long time had been
the peculiar people of God, -- Benedictionis pars maxim memorabilis in
spiritus dono sita est, P.P. Salmur. These. de Baptis. Sect. 23.
and had been advanced high above other Nations, is now made with the Gentiles,
who are now of Aliens, made Heirs to the Covenants of Promise, Children of God,
and endowed with the Spirit. A most memorable part of the Blessing lies in the
Gift of the Holy Ghost. So the words of the Apostle are a Conclusion from the
premises that the Gentiles should be made partakers of the free Blessing of
Abraham by Christ, Conclusio omnium superiorum -- gentes fieri in Christo
gratuitae benedictionis Abrahami participes -- and consequi promissam illam
Evangelii Gratiam quam vocat Spiritum.
and should obtain the promised Grace of the Gospel, which he calls the
Spirit. Or in the words of the learned Critic and Divine, Promissionem
Spiritus pro Spiritu promisso accipio -- Et Spiritus nomine benedictionem
aeternae spiritualis vitae intelligo. Th. Beza in Loc.
I take the Promise of the Spirit for the Spirit promised, and by the Spirit I
understand the blessing of an eternal spiritual life. The blessing of
Renovation, and Holiness from the Spirit of Sanctification: The blessing of
Peace in our Pardon attested by the Spirit of Adoption; The blessing of
inconceivable Glory; reward of all the obedience of our Faith. In brief, That
spiritual life we extinguished by sin; that favor with God which we lost by our
disobedience; that glory which we fell short of, when we fell from God; all
that happiness which the Law could not give to sinful man; accursed by the Law
for his transgressing of it: But the Gospel has given to many, and still
offers to all that it is sent unto: This is the Blessing that the Apostle
speaks of, and which the Doctrine I am speaking of does intend; and this does
come on us by Christ made a Curse, etc.

Sect. 2. Which Term comes next to be somewhat explained. And here I conceive
are two things ever found in a Curse, according to the sentence of the Law.

1. First, It either implies an Genesis 26.28. Ezekiel. 17.13 Genesis 49.7.
imprecation of evil in case of a persidious violation of our Faith, (as in
Covenants between equals) or a Genesis 24.21. Deuteronomy. 29.14 Dan. 9.11
donunciation of punishment from the Law of our Superior in case of our
persidious refusal or violation of the Covenant we were under by his just
ordination; by doing either of which the offender deserves and draws down
the Curse by his falsifying, or breaking with God when he was under a Covenant
of obedience, or Law of righteousness, with promise of reward and blessedness.

2. Secondly, A curse implies all that evil of sorrow and suffering which is
cast upon the guilty by the avenging wrath of a contemned and provoked God
vindicating the honor of himself and his Law, by executing the fierceness of
his displeasure on the falsifier of his just and holy Covenant. So when God
threatened to curse the perfidious people the Jews, Isa. 24.5. he first declares
their sin, They had broken the Everlasting Covenant; they had dealt
perfidiously therein, and dishonored God, who will therefore avenge the
perjury by a Curse that shall devour the earth, and lay desolate those that
dwell in it, Isa. 24.6. When God punished the most unhappy and last King of
Judah, and his Princes with him, for their perfidious breaking oath, he did it
by cursing them, Ezekiel. 57.13. with 15. and 16. v. There is always somewhat of
Divine vengeance in the execution of a Curse, and when God pronounces the
sentence with a Curse, he executes it in vindictive displeasure. So Cain was
judged. condemned and punished, Genesis 4.11. So are the workers of iniquity, Mat.
25.41. Sentenced to a Curse, and it is executed on them by an eternal avenging
Justice; and so was the Serpent condemned, Thou art cursed.

In a word, all that punishmnnt which the violation of a Righteous Law
deserved, and the violated Law threatens, and the violater is capable of
suffering, is comprised in this one word Curse; Cursed is every one that
continues not in all things written in the Book of the Law to do them, Gal.
3.10. From these things it in part appears what is the import of the third
thing to be explained.

Sect. 3. What it is to be made, and how Christ was made a Curse. Now because
there is a vast difference between these two, viz.

1. The sinner's being made a Curse; And

2. The blessed Jesus made a Curse. I intend to speak somewhat of each
distinctly; so first sinners are cursed.

1. Scelus patrando, by breaking the Law of God, which is the Covenant of
Obedience, binding every rational creature to voluntary, constant and perfect
performance of Duty. The Angels who kept not their first habitation, made
themselves accursed thus, scelus patrando, falsifying in the Covenant of their
Creator. So did man at first unhappily cast himself and his posterity under a
Curse. The transgressing creature is, Faber suae miseriae and maledictionis,
The framer or Architect of his own misery. Now while sinning creatures are, the
sinless Redeemer could never be, thus made a Curse.

2. Secondly, Lex maledicit poenam pecoanti minando, The Law accurseth the
sinner, threatening just punishment, determining what degree of punishment is
just and proportioned to the crime.

Thus the Apostle, Gal. 3.10.
As many as are of the works of the Law are under a Curse, i. e. as many as are
found seeking to justify themselves by the works of the Law, are by the Law
convicted of transgression, and so involved in a Curse which the Law threatens
against all that are guilty; for by sentence of this Law every one is cursed
who continues not in all things written in the Book of the Law to do them. In
this sense strictly and properly Christ was not made a Curse, for in this sense
the Curse presupposes the person to have sinned.

3. Thirdly, Puniendo maledicit vindex, The Judge makes the offender accursed,
by inflicting the punishment deserved through sin, when he adjudgeth the
transgressour to that misery which the Law threatened, and his misdeeds have
merited. So God the just Judge of Heaven and Earth threatened a Curse against
the unhappy King of Judah, Ezekiel. 17.15, 16. So when he brings out the Curse
against the false swearers, Zech. 5.3, 4. God makes him a Curse by executing
the sentence of the Law upon him. They are cursed whom God punishes in Hell,
Mat. 24.41. Now as this presupposes personal guilt, or sin committed by him
that is made a Curse, it is not possible it should be applicable to Christ, The
Holy One of God.

4. Fourthly, The Actores, Testes, and poenae ministri, The Impleaders, The
Witnesses and Executioners of the penalty may in some sense be accounted among
those that make the offender accursed. Of all which I shall not speak more at
this time.

5. Lastly, One may be made a Curse, alterius reatum and poenam ferendo, by
bearing another's guilt and punishment; by a voluntary taking up another
guilt, or fault, and undergoing the penalty thereof; so that the Law, Judge,
and Impleaders in the prosecution lay the punishment on the Substitute who is
receptus inter Reos, or rather receptus pro reis, as the Lawyers, if I mistake
not their language, speak. In the Prophet's words, Numbered with the
transgressors; (...) Isa. 53. ult.
so Christ did bear the sin of many. Thus he was made a Curse by his voluntary
susception of our guilt, and his submission to the penalty of our sins. And in
the transacting of this Christ was contented (which is that I apprehend
peculiar to this Case) and which I promised to unfold.

1. To be accounted, affinis culpae, to be sent in the likeness of sinful
flesh: He had our sins laid upon him; he did take them upon himself; and so
those sins which he could not either contrive, commit, or abet, he was willing
should be imputed to him. This in the Apostle's words is, He was made sin for
us.

2. Secondly, Christ charged with our sins was made a Curse, by engaging
himself to abide the sentence of the Judge and Law menacing the sins imputed.
He that will for the good of another derive guilt on himself, must resolve to
abide by all the penal consequences which a severe Law and an impartial Judge
will inflict on him. Hence it is, I suppose, that the Prophet Isa. 53. ult.
has so closely joined these two, He was numbered with transgressors, and bore
the sins of many. The praecursory sufferings from the just hand of God, who
declares his resolution to vindicate his Law and Government; and who does by
Threats, Terrors and Griefs in part poured out on the guilty, partly execute
his purposes, and give them assurances he will farther proceed, (These being
but the beginnings of sorrows) are a part of the Curse issuing from the Law,
and inflicted by one who has power to fence his Law by them. Thus Christ
exposed himself to the sad consequences of our imputed guilt, and being pleased
to interrpose himself between us and the praevious penalties of our sin, was
made a man of sorrows, and acquainted with griefs; whilst he did bear our
griefs, and carry our sorrows, Isa. 53.3, 4. The oppression and injustice he
did meet with from the world, was a fruit of that Curse he was made for us.
These things did he suffer in life, whose love to us brought him to bear the
Curse.

3. Thirdly, Christ made a Curse for us compriseth the exquisite pains, and
open shame of his Death for our sin. It is death which is most legibly the
execution of the Curse of the Law on sinners; and as then they find themselves
accursed indeed, when their own guilt has in death overtaken them; so he that
made himself a Curse for them, found in his death on the Cross the weight of
that Curse which he did bear for sinners. Therefore do I suppose it was by
Divine Providence ordered that the kind of death Christ did undergo, should be
in the sentence of the Law an accursed death, that we might more clearly
discern the import of it, and see as our deliverance by it, so our danger
without this death of Christ; He was cut off from the land of the living, Isa.
53.8. And when this was effected, it appeared that for the transgression of his
people this stroke was upon him, as that verse has it. Though the impenitent
sinner be always under the smaller measures of a Curse, yet when he dies,
Solomon observes, he dies accursed. The sufferings our Lord Jesus Christ
underwent in his life, were likewise the scattering drops, But the black and
violent shower of our deserved Curse was poured down on him at his Death.

Fourthly and lastly, Christ made a Curse, and in death bearing it was to
suffer under the strokes of vindictive Justice pleading the cause, and
vindicating the honor of the Law and Lawgiver, which by the transgressions of
sinners had been contemned and violated. This, as has been observed already,
is one ingredient in the Curse; and herein do chastlsements greatly differ from
punishments strictly taken; for in chastisements there is no vindictive justice
avenging the quarrel in order to satisfy Divine Justice, and to atone the
wrath of God; it is all in order to the humbling, melting, purifying us that we
may seek and obtain mercy. But now when vindictive punishments strictly taken
are executed, it is in order to the cutting off, and destruction of the
obdurate sinners; they, as enemies, lying under the wrath of God and his curse,
which is most evident in the execution of the last unchangeable sentence of
Condemnation, past upon the impenitent, unbelieving, and self-destroying world
at the day of God's dreadful Judgment. Depart from me ye cursed into
everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels, Matthew. 25.41. You do
not, I hope, doubt whether it be the vengeance of an angry God which the damned
in Hell suffer; and there is as little ground of doubt whether they suffer this
vengeance in Hell to satisfy the Divine Justice; neither is it to be doubted
but all they suffer is comprised in that Curse pronounced, Depart from me
cursed. Now then, answerable to what has been said, as the condemned under
their own deserved Curse suffer in order to satisfy Divine vindictive Justice
for their own offenses; so Christ made a Curse, and bearing the Curse for us,
did bear it in order to make satisfaction for us, that we might obtain
deliverance, and that avenging wrath might not fall on our heads since that we
are no more under the Curse deserved by us, but under the Blessing procured for
us by Christ. He trod the wine press of his Father's wrath alone; his stripes
were so smart and grievous, that by them we might be healed, Isa. 53.5. God did
not spare him when he gave him up for us, Romans 8. Let this then suffice for
these particulars. In sum, To be made or bear the Curse, is to stand charged
with guilt, to be threatened with punishment, to be cut off by the execution of
that punishment, to the end Justice may be satisfied on the person who is made
a Curse. So that you may now see what it was that Christ was made for us, and
what he underwent for our sakes. He took upon him our sins in the guilt of
them; exposed himself to the dreadful threats of a severe, but most righteous
Law; and whereas sin inevitably must be punished, he submitted himself to that
also, and in love to us saved us from ours, by his own punishment, wherein he
satisfied Divine Justice, and averted that Curse which inevitably would have
fallen on us from the wrath of God provoked against us by our sins; by this
it is clear, Into this capacity he put himself, the Law found him, and under
this capacity process went out against him, and he died for us to redeem us
from the Curse, and to invest us with the Blessing. I pass now to the second
thing proposed, viz. To the confirmation and proof of this, 2d. General
proposed.
That Christ did die thus for us; a curse was both threatened and executed upon
him, 2 Cor. 5. ult. He made him who knew no sin to be sin for us. There is an
elegancy in the words ((...)) He made him sin; The Apostle does not say, he
made him a sinner, but he made him sin, that it might the more evidently appear
how he did bear what was threatened against sin, the Curse coming on us as an
effect or consequent of sin; He who was made sin for us, exposes himself to
that sad effect, and takes on him the Curse due to us; and being found so
charged, must die to remove the Curse from us. This Text of the Apostle in
effect then says. That Christ had our sins imputed to him, bore the Curse of
them, and that for our good, viz. That we might be made the righteousness of
God in him; That we might be accounted and treated as righteous ones, which in
effect is the same with what we have already said, That Christ was made a
Curse, and so died for us, that we might with righteous ones live, and possess
the blessing. It is not to be doubted, that Christ made sin for us, was thereby
made a Curse for us, and therefore died, bearing that effect of our sin;
vindicating the honor of the Law which we had transgressed, and satisfying the
Lawgiver whom we had provoked. In a word, Christ made sin for us, underwent
the Curse our sin deserved, and the Law threatened, that in our stead he might
satisfy Justice; and that mercy might give the blessing which we needed, and
the Gospel promises; or in the Apostle's own words, that the blessing of
Abraham might come on us Gentiles. Again, the Apostle Romans 8.3. tells us, God
sent his Son in the likeness of sinful flesh, and for sin condemned sin in the
flesh. In which words you read expressly, that God sent his Son, and that he
sent him in the likeness of sinful flesh, not by inherent vice, but like it,
through imputed guilt, and obnoxiousness to the Curse, both which lay on all
flesh that had sinned, and both which was laid on him, who thus appeared in the
likeness of sinful flesh; in which capacity he appeared not only to the world
(which judged him whom they knew not) nor only to his enemies (who did
maliciously slander him they hated) but he presented himself to God in our
stead, bearing our Sin and Curse; for removal of both which he was made a
Sacrifice, an Expiatory Sacrifice, which the Text expresses concisely (by
(...)) and our Interpreters in the Margin have rightly explained, A Sacrifice
for sin; this being the proper import of the phrase, as is evident to all who
are able and willing to compare the Hebrew (...), with the Greek Translation of
it by the Lxxii: In the places cited, as Levit. 4.3, 14.28, 32. and Numb. 6.11;
16. and cap. 7.16, 22, 28, 34, 40.46, etc. Neh. 10.33. and Ezekiel. 40.40. and
42.13. and Psalm. 40.6. In all which, and many more which might be cited. The
Greek Interpreters use the same phrase the Apostle does, when he assures us God
sent his Son in the likeness of sinful flesh that by him made a Sin-offering,
or a sacrifice for sin; he might condemn sin, but save the sinner. In one word,
he that was sent to be a sacrifice for sin, must die, and bear the imputed
guilt of the sins of the persons for whom he is a sacrifice, and consequently
die under a Curse. To these add we that of the Prophet Isa. 53.5. where the
Prophet does thrice over in very emphatical words foretell what the Jews would
judge of Christ under his sufferings; they would esteem him (...)
stricken, (...)
smitten, and (...)
afflicted of God, as if he had been a notorious sinner, stigmatized by the
just hand of God inflicting Curses on him. Thus the blinded malice of the Jews
lead them into blasphemous mistakes of the person and the surferings he
underwent. The Gattaker on Isa. 53.4.
They thought him thus handled by God in a way of vengeance (...) his sins. The
Jew understood the import (...) their own language, but they understood (...)
^he true cause of the dolorous curses and sufferings the Messiah died under.
Whatever wrath, curse, or vengeance is implied in the phrase, he did bear it,
to remove it all from us; we sinned and should have died accursed, but he was
made a Curse to free us.

Again, verse. 5. the Prophet tells us, he was wounded for our transgressions;
so we read it, (...) Tho. Gattaker. Annot. in lo^.
but some observe the word denotes a polluted person, or one that is
profaned. Now by the Law every polluted thing or person was judged accursed.
When the Rulers of the Sanctuary are profane, and God punishes for it, Jacob
is made a Curse, Isa. 43.28. And of the polluted, defiled, or profaned, the
Law determines he shall die the death, Exodus 31.14. He shall be cut off, Lev.
19.8. and 22.9. Numb. 18.32. So that by the Law a polluted person is in danger
of that death which the Law calls a Curse, and when such are used as polluted,
they are cut off, and die under a Curse denounced by the Law. And thus was
Christ wounded for our transgressions; (...), we had really polluted our
selves, and were profaned by our sins which we had committed: But He, the Holy
One of God, was first burdened with our imputed sins; looked on as one standing
in the stead of polluted ones, and used, as they deserved, that they might be
blessed, which they deserved not. Thus also verse. 6. He laid on him the
iniquity of us all. Guilt imputed, and punishment inflicted, from both which
the consequent is, The person so used, dies an accursed death, which is (...)
we are to prove. Since then God laid (...) iniquity of us all on his Son, who
was (...) tent to bear it, we may very confi^^^ (...) conclude that our
iniquity will be the cause of his death, and that this death will have a Curse
intermixed with it, that it may be sufficient to redeem us from the Curse due
to our iniquities. There is one place more which I might urge, viz. Phil. 3.7.
He took upon him the form of a servant, and in that capacity did humble himself
unto death, even the death of the Cross, says the Apostle; which passage
possibly is not enforced to speak other than its own proper sense, if it be
thus explained: He took upon him the form of a servant, i. e. put himself into
the state and condition of an accursed person, and so died for them he loved
and represented. The Scripture does sometimes use this manner of speech to
express a Curse on a man, or on his posterity; so Genesis 9.25, 26.
Cham's Curse is expressed; so is the Curse of Genesis 25.26
Esau expressed. The elder shall serve the younger, applied by the Apostle, to
prove Jacob and his seed blessed, and to evidence Esau and his seed left out of
the blessing, and consequently abandoned under a Curse. Israel's misery in
Egypt (emblem of a cursed state) was servitude, in ((...) the house of
bondage. Thus (...), the form of a servant in which Christ appeared, bespeaks
his appearance under a Curse for us. And in this conjecture on this place I am
confirmed by the authority of Erasmus on this place. Jam quod accepit formam
servi non proprin referri videtur ad buinanam naturam assumptam, sed ad speciem
and similitudinem hominis nocentis, enjus personam pro nobis gessit dum
slagellatur, damnatur, crucifigitur.
Now (says he) that he took the form of a servant, seems not to be referred
properly to the taking of the Humane Nature, but to the taking of the species
and likeness of a guilty person, whose part he bore for us when he was
scourged, condemned, crucified. Thus far that learned Pen. But let this
conjecture be of what weight it will be, there are places enough already urged
to make good the Truth.

Christ in our stead appeared under a Curse, and so died an accursed death,
that by this means we might live in hope of a blessed life; and as the Text
has it, that the blessings of Abraham might come on us Gentiles; and that we
might receive the Spirit, viz. both of Sanctification to enliven us to our
duty, and of Adoption, to ensure us of an hoped reward; and so be delivered
from servitude and misery of sin in which lies a Curse indeed.

Now this duly considered will promote the increase of our graces. The
Communicant who can meditate on Christ dying a Curse for us, may thereby excite
his graces, and exercise them to an improvement of them; such meditations will
be as lesser streams to a River which they greaten whilst they run in the same
chanel.

A brief specimen of this will satisfy, I hope, and set the soul on work,
wherein for his help I shall show him an Essay in a rude draught of this, in
eight following particular Graces, which well become a Communicant.

1. Humility and Self-abasement is unquestionably a Sacramental grace; 1.
Sacramental grace improved.
a grace we should Bring to, exercise at, and improve by the Sacrament of our
Lord dying for us. And the consideration of his death represented under the
circumstances of a Curse, is a very suitable, and a likely means to effect
this: For it does represent to our thoughts not only the sufferings of our
dearest Lord and friend, but convinces us that it was our sin which procured
this to him; and that we must have been miserable for ever if he had not thus
died. Thus our sin and misery is set before us, and these will humble a soul;
these will bow the generous courage and stoutness of the noblest and highest
mind. Misery alone cannot break the courage of a virtuous and innocent mind,
Nil conscire sibi, etc. A soul clear and approved to its self, is an
impregnable fortress: And the spirit of a man will bear these infirmities.
Indeed a base and degenerous mind breaks into shivers under a load of crosses.
But the soul under sorrows, or in danger of deserved misery, reflecting on its
own guilt, and looking through the vileness of sin, on the greatness of its
sorrows, is the more humble, because more refined and excellent in it is temper,
principles and aims. True lowliness of spirit, or humility that is genuine, may
possibly first gush out in a tear from pain; But it is constant running is in
tears for sin. Misery may broach the vessel, but it is sin that keeps it
running. Misery may make the best despised in others eyes; sin makes him
despised in his own. Men will tread on a distressed fortune, but the humble
soul will tread on its sinful self. And now serious Reader, cast thine eye upon
Christ made a Curse, and (suppose) for thy self, and then tell me, what is
first reflected on? is not thy misery the title page of that great Volume of
sorrows, which Christ did bear for thee, when he was made a Curse, and
underwent it in thy stead? wast not thou in danger of that Curse? did thou
not dwell on the borders of an eternal, infinite misery? and wast thou not
every moment in danger to be haled, and thrust headlong into a prison of
wofullest darkness, and unspeakable sorrows? Did not the Curse laid on Christ
hang over thy head? It was thy sin, thy misery, that Christ lay under; and this
will humble thee if thou have any spark of spititual ingenuity; if there dwell
any generous dispositions within thy breast.

1. For what is it to be cursed, but to lie under the transgression of a
righteous Law? and what will abase an ingenuous spirit, if the baseness of sin
will not?

Humility is the judgment or opinion of its little worth arising from due
sense of sin. Humility what.
Thus did Moses instruct Irsael to be humble, Deuteronomy. 9.7, 12, 22. and 23. and 24.
, shows them how great their sin had been, and leaves then to say how little
their opinion of themselves ought to be; tells them how near they were to utter
ruin, when nothing but a Moses and his prayer was between them, and the
execution of that word; Deuteronomy. 9.6, 14.
I will blot out their name from under Heaven. Let thy soul renew the memory of
thy sin, when thou renewest thy thoughts of Christ's dying a Curse; Remember
thy sins, and do as they, Ezekiel. 20.43. Genesis 41.9.
Loath thy self for all thy sins. The remembrance of a fault made a Courtier
blush. In a Sacrament thou see Christ dying an accursed death; in his Curse
thou do, or should see thy own sin; and with Ezra in another case, Ezra
9.6.
Thou should be ashamed and blush to look up to Heaven. For,

2. Thou most righteous and just have condemned me, and judged what my fault
is, how great, how vile it is in the Curse my Savior did bear for me. It was
not a rash, hasty and inconsiderate passion of a man that cursed the sinner;
but it was the just, deliberate sentence of a wise and holy God, who never
curses one that deserves to be blessed; who never curses before the creature
has sinned* and deserved it. How inquisitive is a good disposition, if he be
cursed! as David by a Shimei, 2 Kings 2.23.
or as the Prophet reproached by the Boys of Bethel, or by a contemptible
beggar: How ready are best natures to enquire into the cause! Have I given an
occasion to this reproach? Have I deserved it? And how is he abashed and
ashamed that any reason is pretended for unreasonable railing? Now much more
abashed is the ingenuous spirit when a sober man, when a judicious observer of
his own words, as well as of other men's carriages shall condemn and adjudge him
worthy of a Curse. But here it is the Lord, who adjudged thee to a Curse, and
can thou remember this, and not be humble, and not reflect upon thy sin which
provoked so just a Wisdom and such deliberate Justice to execrate thee? David
was humble when Shimei cursed, because it might be God had said to him, Curse
David. When thou receivest the Sacrament, thou remembrest Christ, whom God made
a Curse for thee; there God tells thee, Thou had been forever cursed, if
Christ had non been once cursed. There thou may see a holy, wise, just and
infinitely excellent person displeased with thee, and provoked against thee;
and surely such a sight will (I am certain it should) make thee abhor thy self
and be humble.

3. Farther, thou had a fair and open trial of thy Cause, and it now stands
in the greatest Court of Record in the world: It is there registered that thou
art the son or daughter of a tainted blood, a child of an accursed stock. In
the first Adam God tried and cast thee, and told thee what thou must expect; in
the second Adam he showed thee this Record stood firm, the sentence unrepealed;
and if the blood of Christ dying, and bearing the Curse for thee, had not washed
out the stain, thou had remained still under a curse and stain. It is
accounted a glory in an Ancient Family, that the blood is not stained with any
treasonable practices against the Soveriagn; and it is a disparagement and
diminution of their glory and greatness, that the blood is embased by disloyal
designs and attempts. When thou receivest the Sacrament, and see Christ dying
an accursed death, remember this, Thou art minded of thy stained blood, and of
the recorded atteindure that God brought in against thee. Here thou see what
judicial process should have been made against thy self, see it and be humble.

4. And thou may do well to remember what proof and evidences were against
thee too, ere God adjudged thee to this Curse which thy Savior underwent for
thee; the notoriousness of the fact; the self-silencing conviction of
Conscience; thy Father against thy Mother; Adam against Eve; thy own family
evidence against thee in this matter. Thou can find no pretense of an
exception to the witness. Here thou may reflect upon thy own adjudged
baseness, and be proud if thou can, when thou have reflected on thy self.
Whoever thou art who rightly perceivest the mystery of this Ordinance, and do
rightly receive it, thou art evidence for God against thy self, and confessest
the matter, that thou deservedst to die for thy sins in that very capacity and
notion that Christ died for them. If he died an execrated, cursed death for
thee, The Sacrament is a memorial of thankfulness to God, and to Christ for
sparing thee, and letting thee escape, whilst the blessed Son of God died in
thy room. Consider this and be humble.

5. Consider lastly, How humble thy heart and hand ought to be when thou
receivest Christ in the Sacrament; since from him alone thou receivest
deliverance from a Curse. None would, none indeed could deliver thee, but
Christ: Thou could not send for another Physician to heal thy distemper. Here
thou could not, (as in a Market) seek a better bargain; No, He alone who was
made a Curse for thee, was able to deliver thee; he was over all God blessed
for ever, able to restore accursed creatures to blessedness, and to invest them
with happiness. Be then as ingenuous toward Christ thy only hope, as thou
would be toward a Patron, a Benefactor, a Lord, on whom thou do solely and
entirely depend. Thou would humbly observe, and with due reverence receive
his Commands, and abhor a seeming proud, lofty, or insolent behavior toward
him. I entreat for as much from thee toward Christ as thou do give to a man
without entreaty. At a Sacrament reflect on these things; say with thy self,
here is the renewed memorial of Christ dying a Curse, and this renewed
remembrance convinces me that I was a vile wretch, else my God had never
cursed me; I had never been attainted, arraigned, condemned and recorded among
those that were not worthy to live in a holy and happy Commonwealth and Court.
I had never recovered my former state of bliss, if the Lord had not put himself
in my stead, and bore my punishment: My life, hope and glory, are all the fruit
of another's death and shame; I must be lowly who was redeemed from so low and
cursed state.

By this thou may discern what influence is in the Death of Christ
considered as a Curse, and how it may be drawn out to abase and humble thy soul
before thy God. And let this suffice for an Essay or Pattern. Go thou and
meditate on what thou can see farther in this thing, and be humble all thy
days.

In the second place, Take an Essay in another Sacramental Grace: Let it be
supposed to be

Strong and servent Desire to be partaker of that deliverance which Christ
wrought by dying a Curse for us. A good and hungring appetite is not more
necessary at thy friend's table when thou art invited to feast with him, than
this strong Desire is needful, and required, for the Lord's Table. Our blessed
Redeemer invites the hungry, and bids the heartiest welcome to the hungriest
comers: his language is, My friends, you are welcome, and let me see you come
as to one that you know does bid you welcome, by your free eating and drinking.
I may think you either know not how excellent the provision is, or you like it
not, or you are full of somewhat else, or you doubt your welcome, if you sit as
if you came to feed your eye, but not to satisfy your souls. If the Sacrament
of the body and blood of Christ be the Supper of the Lord; if it be a feast; if
it be stored with choicest variety of spiritual and heavenly rarities; if it be
the Gospel Mannah, why are your longing desires so weak, so unconstant, so
uneasily taken off? Surely you and I should be better stomach'd for this feast;
Christ has prepared his body to be your food, and you must prepare your
desires, and awaken your hungrings after him. The best wine is drawn out for
this feast, and it is pity it should not have a thirsty soul, whose thirst can
relish its worth. He knows nothing of this Ordinance, who knows not it is a
spiritual feast, to be attended with a spiritual appetite, and therefore I
proceed to give you a specimen of that which is in this Dying of our Lord, to
whet the appetite of the soul; and so let the first Consideration for example
be this; first, In this kind of Death the soul sees both that which will awaken
and add vigor to its aversation of sin or evil, and what will awaken and
strengthen its inclination and prosecution after deliverance from that evil. In
the Curse thou see what an evil sin is, and thou must bear it, or desire
Christ that he would; if thou desire not that he may really bear the Curse
for thee, as in the Lord's Supper he Sacramentally does, it will be interpreted
that thou desire all that evil should light on thee which thy sin deserves;
and can thou desire to be cursed? can thou desire to de damned? can thou
see misery like a black storm hang over thy head, and not fly to shelter? See
then in a Sacrament Christ tendered to bear thy Curse, thy misery, and ask thy
self, whether it be not desirable? ask thy self, shall I desire this or no?
shall I wish, and entreat, and be willing to be freed from so great evil or no?
In the Sacrament the Lord tells the discerning soul, Here, take my Son, and if
thou desire it, he shall bear thy deserved Curse, and thou shall inherit an
undeserved blessing; go think on it, and tell me what thou will do, whether
thou will desire and be willing or no: And now judge what is like to be the
Answer of the soul; will it not be This? O let the Blessing be mine, and let my
loving Savior thus deliver me, thus bless me also, oh my Father, and it shall
suffice.

2. And as the proper Incentives of des^^^ are contained in the things
themselves offered; so the very language, notion and frame of words do awaken
the soul to exert its desires: A misery to be avoided by this means, will
persuade the soul to a willingness to apply the means. But surely a misery
expressed by a Curse, by an Execration, will hasten the soul's desire to escape
it: In some cases a man may commendably desire, and choose affliction, but in no
case can a man choose a Curse to himself. The Jews had a Proverb, that we must
leap to Mount Gerizzim. When God tells the soul, it must either dwell on Mount
Eball, inherit a Curse, or be willing to be led by Christ unto Mount Gerizzim,
it begins to say, Let me go, not a slow, a loitering pace, but the swiftest,
the speediest; it is ready to leap to the Blessing. Let me be any thing but a
Curse; let me by any means escape the Curse, and if by a willingness, if by an
hearty desire to have Christ I may escape it; oh let this very hour be the
happy hour of my soul's escape. Lord, if it be so, I accept thy Son, my blessed
Savior offered in the Sacrament to bear my Curse. There is a strong propensity
in man's nature carrying him wtth great desire, and with unwearied endeavors
to shun the hard speeches of all, and to hear a good report if it might be from
all; to be blessed by every one, to be cursed by no one. And there is a
cheerful forward willingness to hearken to that advice and counsel which
discovers how we may likely gain the good word of good men, and escape the hard
words of all men. Now God proposes in Christ thus dying, A sure way of
obtaining his blessing, which is infinitely better than the blessing of any
man; and in the Sacrament of his Son's body proposes a sure means for our
escaping from his Curse, which is infinitely more to be feared than the curses
of all men. God can load thee with one Curse more than all the men in the world
can do with all theirs.

3. In Christ's Death considered as a Curse, there is yet farther somewhat to
engage the Desires of the soul unto Christ, and to draw forth it is willingness
unto an embracing of Christ: And that is the infallibility and certainty of our
deliverance from this Curse upon our receiving Christ; thou may be sure to
escape, for thou may be sure Christ will not lose his life; if he die, he
will accomplish his own ends, and thy hopes, and the hopes of every believing
soul, by his death; He has indeed laid down his life, but he has not lost it.
He will not leave thee under uncertain and failing likelihoods, if he makes
himself liable to thy punishment; he will be sure that thy soul shall escape
it; And if he bear thy Curse, he will be ensured thou shall not bear it. Now
having such a good, as this deliverance, and such an evil as the Curse, in thy
eye; and such a sure and infallible means of escaping the one, and obtaining
the other, Can thou, oh considerate! oh discerning soul! do less than desire
this Christ, this share and interess in his death? If thou had no more than
faint probabilities that it might be so well with thee, thou would in other
cases strongly desire to try: oh why not in this! why not here! other
probabilities can awake, persuade, prevail and carry thee through tedious
Journies, and costly experiments, and thou justifiest thy hopes and thy desires
with the likelihood of success.

And what is the reason? whence is it that so great certainty can do so little
with thee in this? oh the deplorable stupidity of man! the senseless
backwardness of his heart! oh think, I say, think on it, Jesus Christ was made,
and died a Curse for thee, and it is certain thou may escape by him; awaken
thy desires, and look after him. But lastly,

4. If thou yet wilt not desire Christ, notwithstanding all that has been said
already, yet at least consider with thy self, and bethink thy self, What do
thou here if thou desire not Christ? Why art thou among them that apprehend
they needed, who do in the Sacrament commemorate, and seek to find Christ dying
and bearing the Curse for them? If thou need him not, why do thou pretend to
seek him? if thou seek him, why do thou not really desire to find and meet
him? Consider this, and argue it with thy soul; say, I must either contradict
my self, the ordinance, and the people of God, or I must be willing to receive
Christ the Lord into my soul, as well as to receive the symbols of Christ my
Lord into my mouth and hands. I hear, and know, that others do approach this
Table, this memorial of the Dying Jesus with desires to meet him, and to
exchange with him, to bring their wretchedness, and carry with them his
blessedness. I know (if I know the Ordinance) that it was appointed for the
hungry, thirsty, desiring soul, which would have fresh remembrances, and
vigorous longings for Christ; for them who would feel their own cursedness, and
seek blessedness in Christ, and my very presence, my very approach to the
Ordinance with others, will either argue and prove me a Hypocrite, or must
awaken my desires after Christ; if thou art not willing to find thou art an
Hypocrite for seeming to seek.

And I will tell thee, take it as thou will, Thou that art not willing to find
a blessing in Christ whom thou should desire to meet in the Sacrament, shall
find a curse which thou would not. Remember Judas and tremble! Who does
cordially and truly seek the Lord, shall find what he seeks; but he that is
careless, wants a willingness and desire, shall find what he thinks not of; and
woe to him that finds, and meets with Judas his guest at the Lord's Table! And
now give me thy thoughts, Reader, whether this should awaken in quicken thy
willingness and thy desires after Christ. And yet farther in the next place,

Closer application, faster hold, 3d. Sacramental grace Faith.
and strengthened resolutions to adhere to Christ, do very well become this
Ordinance of the Lord's Supper; none have doubted or denied this, but those who
have denied all its efficacy, and made the Sacrament a weak, and impotent
Ceremony; Every one acknowledges this as the undoubted and proper fruit of
this Ordinance, who expect any fruit from it. This spiritual feast was made to
unite the soul and Christ in a more firm and close bond of friendship, to
incorporate them, and to make them more one. It was instituted, that the memory
of our great advantage by it, Vt ejus open tanti beneficii memoria magis ac
magis in animis nojtris infigatur. These. Salm.

Multa sunt quae nos co ducunt ut existimemus Christum habuisse potissimum eum
scopum ante oculos ut fidem nostram augeret ac confirmaret cum ritum istum
Ecclesiae tradidit celebrandum. These. de usu coen. Dom. th. 11.


might be more deeply rooted in our hearts. The Learned Professors at Saumur
tell us, Many things lead us to this persuasion, that Christ chiefly eyed the
increase and confirmation of our Faith, as the end when he appointed this
Ordidinance to his Church to be celebrated. A true and lively Faith fits for
receiving this Supper of the Lord; and an increasing confirmed Faith shows that
this Ordinance is fitly received. We must not come to it without true Faith,
and we must not go from it without an increase to our Faith. We must lay hold
on Christ that we may come; and we must come that we may lay faster hold on
Christ.

Now the consideration of Christ dying as a Curse for us, will notably confirm
us in our resolutions to adhere and cleave fast to Christ. For now

The considerate, serious, meditating Communicant, may hence reflect upon the
choice which he has made, the gift he has received, the condition he is now
in by believing, and so approve the choice, keep fast the gift, settle himself
in that condition, and farther secure that state to himself by strong
resolutions of Faith, and adhering to Christ, who by this death delivers us
from that cursed death we deserved; and so you may suppose the soul to argue
with it self.

1. I do this day commemorate the death of my Lord, which died under a Curse
for me; and if I do not now believe, or if I ever should by unbelief cast off
my Lord, I must bear my own deserved Curse: I have then good grounds, I have
best reason to warrant my first believing and going to Christ: I have as good
reason to continue my purposes, and confirm my resolution of believing still.
It is not possible I should have any reason to repent my first choice of
Christ, my first fiducial adhering to Christ by that I was delivered from a
Curse; and this deliverance is freshly remembered in the Sacrament, and the
reasonable, well advised and prudent choice of my soul is presented to me; and
now my soul, thou may say, this was the wisest, most justifiable and
rational compact thou ever did make. And I assure thee, until thou see a
reason why thou should be in love with, and dote upon a Curse, thou can
not be out of love with, or weary of thy adhering to Christ. The more thou
see the wisdom and prudence of this Act, the more thou will like it, and the
more resolute and constant thou will be in it; and now the oftener thou
considerest at the Sacrament the lively pourtraiture of thy deliverance from a
Curse by Christ received and adhered to by Faith; the oftener will thou renew
thy purposes and resolutions to adhere to him, the oftener will thou look, and
take heed of that which may weaken thy adherence, or withdraw thee from Christ;
and such renewed carefulness and heed will much improve thy Faith; Renewed
purposes to believe, are renewed strength in believing.

2. Secondly, The considering soul will see in this review of Christ dying a
Curse, The benefit, profit and gain of Faith choosing and adhering unto Christ.
It will see it self repaired and made whole after the greatest and sorest
damage; sin which brought the Curse upon the soul, did the soul greatest
injury and damage, it made a shipwreck of all its excellencies and treasure.
Sinful and accursed man is the poorest, forlorn and undone wretch in the world,
a very bankrupt. But now application unto Christ with a purpose to adhere unto
him, and choose him for ever; this sets the man free from the Curse; it sets him
up again; it puts a new stock into his hand; it enricheth him with the fullness
of a Blessing. For if Christ bear thy Curse, thou shall wear his Crown; if he
take upon him thy guilt, and sin and wretchedness, he will take thy believing
soul into his blessedness; if he suffer thy deserved punishment, thou shall
inherit his glorious purchase; and what unspeakable profit is this? how good
and enriching a bargain is this? and all this does the believing soul receive
and gain by Christ dying a Curse to redeem it from the Curse, and to purchase
the blessing of Abraham for it; and all this becomes the believing souls gain;
God gives this to every one who chooses his Son. By his Poverty we are made
Rich, and by his Curse we gain the Blessing. Now at every Sacrament this
Bargain is confirmed and ratified, and the soul sees the gain of it; and until
it can rationally desire to lose such a bargain, it cannot but strongly desire
to keep to its contract: Every remembrance of our riches by Jesus Christ, is,
or ought to be a confirmation of our choice of him. Renewed views of our gain,
will be renewed purposes to hold fast our bargain; and thus may the soul grow
strong in its adhering and cleaving fast to Christ.

3. The considering soul does view its own security, and sweetest peace in the
Death of Christ thus dying a Curse for it. At the remembrance of its Lord's
Death in a Sacrament, it calls to mind that peace which is made for it through
the blood of the Cross. The soul says, if Christ has born my Curse, I shall
not bear it. If I have chosen him, if I keep to this my choice, if I first
believe and persevere in believing, I shall still have this peace in believing,
viz. that I am delivered from the misery of an accursed state. Before thou
did believe, thou did or might have heard the sad ecchos of a Curse
alarming and frighting thee; if thou had not desired, chosen and believed in
Christ dying, thou had never heard one word of peace; and if after thy first
choice, and faith, thou repent, relapse and forgo Christ through unbelief, thy
danger, sin and trouble will return upon thee; thy last state will be thy worst
state; think therefore what is best for thee, whether to go on to believe, or
to go back through unbelief. Art thou surfeited with thy peace? art thou weary
of thy rest? is trouble under the misery of a Curse more desirable than peace
under the felicity of such a blessing? I know the meditating soul which can
discern this, will never think of deserting its choice of Christ, until it can
think of parting with peace for trouble, with joy for sorrow, with blessedness
for misery. I know the more it perceives and finds its peace in believing, the
more serious and resolute will it be to believe that it may have and keep its
peace. Renewed meditations on this Death of Christ will be renewed peace to a
believer, and renewed peace will be renewed purposes of believing.

Fourthly and lastly, The considering believing soul is able to discern this
ignominious cursed Death of Christ to be the fountain of true honor and real
excellency. The soul is delivered from a state of baseness and dishonor by
this Death of Christ. A cursed condition is base and dishonorable, as well as
miserable and unhappy. The dregs of the people were by the Jews called the
people that are cursed. Came cursed by Noah is devoted to servitude to a base
condition. And Esau's loss of the Blessing was the bringing of servitude and
baseness on him. But now if Christ dying a Curse were abased for me (may the
believing soul say) I shall be exalted to honor, and my first act of believing
was my first step to honor, and my continuing to believe will be the
continuing of me in my free, noble, and honorable condition. If I depart from
Christ through unbelief, I shall go from honor to dishonor, from excellency
to baseness, from the noble state of a Son, to the ignoblestate of a servant,
of a slave: And I know the considerate soul will not easily return to the
baseness and ignominy of such a state; No! no! Faith in my dying Lord did set
me free from such baseness, and advanced me to the dignity I now enjoy; and my
persevering confirmed faith, will, and must preserve and confirm me in that
dignity: This prerogative my Dying Lord purchased for me whenever I would
believe; this prerogative he gave me so soon as ever I did believe; and there
is none can take it from me so long as I do believe; oh let me believe for
ever, that I may have it for ever! I would never lose this honor, I will never
leave my Lord. Whilst thou art able to make the best of this Death of thy Lord
commemorated in the Sacrament, and presented to thy faith, (which is done on
purpose, that thou may make the best of it,) thou can resolve, or conclude
nothing less than that thou will adhere now faster than ever.

In this manner may the Humiliation, the Desires, the Purposes of the Soul be
wrought, drawn forth and confirmed upon the consideration of Christ dying a
Curse for us: The sight of our cursed state will lay us low, and convince us;
the sight of a deliverance by Christ, will make us desire that deliverance may
be ours, and then knowledge of its being ours upon first believing, and that it
shall be ours so long as we believe, will persuade us to look that our faith
continue, lest unbelief should reduce us into the misery of a Curse, whence we
almost escaped. And let it be next observed,

4. That Love to God and unto Christ, 4th. Sacramental grace, Love to God and
Christ.
is another Sacramental grace, which I am sure will be well improved, by a due
consideration of Christ dying a Curse for us. I do verily suppose it needless
to attempt the proving of this; every one knows, that Love to Christ is a
necessary and suitable grace for a Communicant. God requires that every one of
his servants should love him, and serve him with all the heart in every duty,
much more in this which is a more solemn, and more than ordinary one. If thou will come to the Table of the Lord, thou must come with love to the Lord of the
Table; thou must not come with enmity in thy heart, nor with a sword in thy
hand. They are friends who are invited to eat and drink with Christ at his
Table, and it is a monstrous incongruity to sit down as though you would
friendly feast, Cant. 5.1.
and yet watch a season to muther the guests, or him that invites you. God will
not have an Absolon' s feast, in which one of the guests was murdered; nor
will he have a feast like the unhappy Phocus, (...).
whose guests slew him. It is the express will of our Lord, that we come to his
Table in love and charity with our Brethren, and in love, and with sincere
affections to our Lord. We must here feast without the sour leven of malice
against our Brethren, and without the swelling leven of hypocrisy toward God.
Now let me a little point out what inducements are in this Death of Christ to
draw forth our love to our Lord; and so let it be considered.

1. Did my Lord die an accursed Death for me? do I now celebrate the memorial
hereof? Would he have done this if he had not loved me as his own life? It was
a love that is ever to be blessed by me, which made my Lord take on him a Curse
for me. Greater love than this could not be shown to me, and less than love to
him for it cannot not be tendered by me. Is Love the loadstone of Love, and does
not thy heart stir toward Christ when he draws it with this attractive? When he
calls, Look upon my Living Love in my cursed Death, and give me what you judge
a reasonable acknowledgment for my Love; and when the considerate soul looks on
this, it is ready with David to say, What shall I render to the Lord for all
his goodness? What shall I render to God the Father who laid my Guilt,
Punishment and Curse on my Blessed Redeemer? What shall I render to the Lord
Jesus Christ, unto God the Son, who took this heavy load upon him? What shall I
render to God the Holy Ghost, who supported the humane nature of my Blessed
Redeemer, that he should not fail, nor be discouraged in this great work, under
this weighty burden? Oh Blessed Love of the Glorious Trinity, worthy of an
infinite Love, though a finite creature is not able to give it! Lord my Love
shall be endless, though it cannot be boundless; though it is narrow, it shall
not be short; I will make up its defect of intenseness, with an addition of
endless date; let thy Love to me which caused thee to die once for me an
accursed Death, be a spring and source of Love in my soul to thee, of such a
Love as shall never die. Lord, thou deservest more than I can give, but I would
not be unwilling to give as much as thou deservest. It was matchless Love that
the Prince of Life would die for condemned subjects. But it is, methinks more,
that the Lord of glory, (over all God Blessed for evermore) should take upon
him Death with a Curse!

2. Do I celebrate the Death of my Lord dying a Curse for me? why then, oh my
soul! thou do this day in this duty call to mind Christ's taking on him all
faults, and bearing all thy blame, being content that thy faults should be
accounted to him; and that if there be (as certainly there wlil be) anger for
it, he will bear it. Oh what endeared Love do servants in a family bear to that
Son who is willing to excuse the servants fauls, and to bear their blame; to
make up their peace, and to continue them in, or restore them to their offices
again! Reader, whoever thou art that read these lines, it is thy case, Thou
o^est unto Christ the Eternal Son of God, all thy innocence, all thy safety,
all thy peace, all thy continuance in the family of God, unto Christ I say thou
owe it, for thou had sinned, and provoked God thy Master and Lord; he had
cursed thee, and would have damned thee; he had declared thine office in his
house void, and would have turned thee out; and then thou must have said with
the unjust Steward, what shall I do when God thus deals with me? how shall I
live? Dig I cannot, beg I am ashamed; I shall be accursed on Earth, and
accursed i^ Hell for ever; oh thus had it been with me! if my Lord Jesus had
not stepped in, and took my faults upon him. Blessed be that Love which has so
loved me; Let him carry away all my affection, who thus has carried all my
transgressions; He shall have my love whilst I live, by whose love it is that I
live. Oh let my love at the Sacrament revive, where there is the revived memory
of my Lord his love to me. None but those foolish and mad creatures who are in
love with their faults, and with their misery, will withhold their love from
Christ, who delivered us from both.

3. Did Christ die such a death in thy stead, let this then awaken thee to
consider how thou would resent another man's suffering for thee, and speak
what interess thy friend should purchase in thy affections, by his undergoing
afflictions for thee. Would thou love thy rich friend, that took thy debts on
him? would thou do less than dearly love thy skilful friend, that cured thee
of thy disease? thy powerful friend at Court, who rescued thee from a prison?
thy watchful friend, who kept strict and careful watch lest thou should be
surprised, and ruined, whilst thou were sleeping secure in greatest danger, and
in greatest ignorance and security? But what would thou say if thy friend
should deliver thee from thine, by making it his own disease? or should go into
a prison, that thou might go out of it? or expose himself to ruin, that
thou might be indemnified? Just so did Christ for thee; he did bear thy
disease, and took thy sickness upon him; he became a prisoner first to unjust
hands seizing on him, and then to the grave, which could not hold him, yet a
while he was a prisoner there, for thy sake, in thy stead, and what
acknowledgment will thou make of all this? How will thou certify the Christian
world, that thou do well resent what Christ has done, if thou will not love
him for doing it? Thou love those that speak well of thee, that bless thee,
that wish well to thee, and endeavor to do thee good, and what law, reason or
equity will thou pretend why thou do not love Christ, who speaks best of thee
to his Father, and who wished best to thee, and has done most for thee, and
all this by his dying a Curse for thee? Let thy own heart ponder this, and draw
to a conclusion, what ought to be done in this case; say, Had any man whom I
know, done this for me, which Christ has done, I could not but love him; and
why do I not love Christ? if I did see my friend loaded with curses, and
reproaches, and bearing them patiently for me that I might not be reproached,
that I might not be cursed, it would endear such a friend to me: why now in the
Sacrament the visible memorial of Christ's dying a Curse for me, I do see such
a friend, so loaded for my sake, that I might not be loaded with my deserved
Curse, I may not, I will not be less to him than I would be to another; I will
love him more than any else, for he has done more for me than all could; and I
see it in the Sacrament, the blessed memorial of his cursed Death.

Fourthly and lastly, Is the Sacrament of the bloody Death of Christ, a
memorial of his dying an accursed death for me? oh then I see the evidence of a
love to me which surpasses the love of best friends, which indeed exceeds the
thoughts and belief of most considerate men. For who will believe (beside a
Christian, who is taught by the revealed word of the God of truth) that Christ
would become a Curse for us? Some men will hardly believe that the Apostle
spoke his very thoughts when he wished that he himself were accursed from
Christ for his brethren, his kinsmen after the flesh. Some judge it so
inconsistent with reason, that they think the Apostle could not soberly,
sedately and rationally desire it, but that he did use the liberty and freedom
of an Orator, to commend his greatest affection to his kindred by a greater
expression. But behold Reader, Paul's wish for his kindred, is Christ's own act
for his; what Paul wished but could not do for his brethren, Christ has
undertook and undergone for his brethren. What some do think was too great for
a rational and sober desire in the one; has been found not too great for the
choice and performance of the other. Now let Christ have but a serious view of
this he has done for thee, and answer thy self this, or such like questions;
Is that too little to engage my love which was too great for any to undertake
but Christ? Do I see Christ doing that which few men will believe a man could
wish he mght do, and do I still withhold my heart, my affection from Christ? Do
I know that his love was stronger than death? he was content to be accursed for
the sake, good, life and salvation of Believers; I see him for a while
separated from God, that he might bring me to God, and now he shall have that
love which is too great for any one, since he has done what is so great for me.

In the fifth place, 5. Joy in believing a Sacramental grace.
The Believer's Joy is, or at least might be considerably improved in the
commemoration of Christ dying as a Curse for us. It is not to be questioned
whether joy and rejoicing through faith in the Lord be seasonable in our
feasting with the Lord. Joy is the souls rest with delight in the Lord; and
such a disposition of mind does the Lord require and accept at this seast. Now
let us observe how that his dying a Curse for us, may increase our joy; and
this may appear

1. From the Nature of Joy, which is the triumph of the mind in its freedom and
deliverance from its fears; or in its attaining and possessing of its hopes. It
is a rational security of our best hopes, and a due removal of our worst fears,
singing a rest and happiness to the soul. Joy is the rapture of our soul,
hearing and observing desired events, sweetly keeping tune with our desires and
hopes. It is the Tripudium Animae, the soul's dance to the Music which the God
of Heaven makes for it. If there be any exstasies of joy, it can be from no
other harmony than which is heard not from Pythagoras his melodious spheres,
but from the Cross of our Blessed Lord seting Heaven and Earth in a blessed
concent by his accursed Death. The Philosopher will tell us, Dilatatio cordis
ob bonum praesens.
that Joy is the dilatation of the soul, the enlarging of the heart to
entertain a present desired good. Good wished for is the Sun, the heart is the
Heliotrope, the flower of the Sun; Joy is the opening and turning of this
flower toward the Sun. This, or somewhat like this is Joy. Now in what can the
soul triumph if not in its freedom from a dreadful Curse? What may possibly be
imagined will secure the rational hopes and wishes of a Christian better than
Christ's bearing his sin, its curse and punishment, that Justice may not lay
any sentence of condemnation upon it, but absolve and acquit, justify and save
it? Where can the soul better rest, and congratulate its happiness in its rest,
than in a pacified propitious God? Tell me, who ere thou art, reading or
hearing these lines, can thou desire more than happiness? Is any thing
greater and better in thy wishes? Certainly either thou know not what thou
answerest, or else do answer it is thy greatest, dailyest, hourly desire; and
that the man or woman who would assure thee of this, would fill thy heart with
raptures of joy. Now behold these desires answered in the Lord Jesus dying to
remove that Curse which kept thee from thy happiness. If Joy be the enlarging
of the heart to entertain a desired good, lo here a good worth the
entertaining, Christ bearing thy Curse: lo here a good so great, that no heart
but an enlarged heart can rightly entertain it: Oh be persuaded to receive it,
and tell me then what affection it raises in thy soul! Certainly he never
feared, because he never knew the danger of Hell, who does not greatly rejoice
in his deliverance, and escape from it. Open but thy heart to receive, and thy
Joy will as surely break out, as the streams do when the springs and fountains
are opened.

Secondly, Christ dying a Curse for thee, will heighten thy Joy; For whatever
thou can approve a ground of Joy in other men's rejoicing without this, thou
may much more approve in thine own rejoicing in this without any other,
There is very much Joy in the world which is unseemly, and there is some which
is justifiable, seemly and seasonable; but whatever makes it so seemly, that
and much more is in the Death of Christ dying an accursed Death for us, to
justify and warrant the Christian's Joy. I dare stand to plead the Christian's
Joy, to excel on this account, as much as the Joy for recovery of a Crown and
Kingdom does excel the Joy of a wise man for the finding of a Pin. Could a
Christian enlarge his Joy to the exceeding greatness of his cause of Joy, it
would incomparably excel all other men's Joy, as much as the recovery from a
mortal wound excels the healing of a scratcht finger. Indeed all other Joy
without this is the unseemly Joy of fools or madmen; but this (without all
other) is Joy of wise, considerate and knowing men; and might we enter the
comparison, it would appear what trifles men of the world (how great soever,
and how wise soever in the account of the world) do rejoice in.

It is reported of Francis the first, recovering the French shore upon his
delivery out of his Captivity, Je suis le Roy.
That he leapt and rejoiced with this, I am a King. And who that values
liberty, or safety, or power, or a Kingdom, censureth him for it, or doubts
whether it were seemly? But oh believing soul! thou see at a Sacrament a
worse prison, a more doleful Captivity, crueller enemies, and more deadly
dangers left behind thee, and thou set at liberty in a more blessed safety, and
entitled to a Crown and Kingdom, as much better as Heaven is better than France
was; and this by Christ's Death as it was an accursed Death, to free thee from
the Curse.

The men of the world rejoice in their full harvests. The victorious Conqueror
rejoiceth in the dividing of the spoils. The ambitious Courtier rejoiceth in
his Court-preferment. But what Joy will the Barns and Stores of the wealthy man
be, when he dies the accursed Death, and with Dives, is tormented in endless
fires? Will the Joy of the preferred Courtier continue to him under the
disgrace which he shall fall into when God shall arrest, imprison, condemn and
execute him as an accursed wretch? What will become of the Joys of Victories
and Triumphs, when the Crowns shall wither before the hot displeasure of God;
and when the crowned Conqueror shall be delivered up an accursed wretched
prisoner and captive in eternal chains?

In few words, there are many daggers lifted up, and striking at the Joy of
every man who rejoiceth in any thing but the Cross of Christ, and first or last
some one or other of these daggers will reach the heart, and let out the life
of such Joys. But the Believer's Joy in the Death of Christ dying a Curse for
him, is a Joy which is immortal, and cannot be destroyed: It is a Joy will most
gloriously crown the Believer, when other men's Joys do most shamefully forsake,
deceive and torture them. If then any may rejoice, the Believer may much more;
and this he may do at every remembrance of his Redeemer's dying a Curse for
him. And such renewed remembrance of our cause of Joy, will undoubtedly renew
our Joy; he may rejoice still more than yet he has rejoiced, who sees he has
more to rejoice in than all the jovial merry world ever shall have.

Thirdly, Renewed Meditations of Christ's dying such a Death for us, will renew
our Joy, appears from this, That our Joy will be most full, satisfactory and
transporting to us when we come to the distinctest, fullest and liveliest
knowledge and apprehension of this Death of Christ. They who most fully
apprehend, and who most particularly apply the Benefits of this Death to
themselves, who live upon it, and know what life it is, how excellent, how
happy, etc. These are fullest of purest Joy; and truly as we abate in our
ability and skill to meditate on this Death of Christ, or as we abate in the
exercise and actual meditation and thought of Christ's dying for us as a Curse,
the more our Joy will abate also. The Saints in glory do now rejoice, and will
forever rejoice, for they do ever behold the scars which this Curse has left
in Christ; they ever remember that Christ dying a Curse, has given them that
blessed Life in which they ever shall rejoice. Now what it has wrought on
them, and what it will work one day upon us, proves to us what it might work
in us at the present: It has now all in it which it ever will have, but we
have not all in us which we shall have, when this dying of our Lord shall fill
us with a never-dying, or abating love to him who did it, and with Joy in the
thing done for us. The reason why the Believer rejoiceth more in the sight of
Christ dying a Curse for him, as his distinct knowledge of it grows, is not
that his knowledge adds any thing to it, but because his knowledge of it now
makes more of that Death, (which appeared not so much then to his own eye) so
his Joy grows with his knowledge. But now it is not so with other Joys, they
lessen as our knowledge of them increases, and those which at distance we
flattering our selves hoped would be pure, and deep, sweet and lasting as a
Crystal stream, prove to us when we come nearer, and live on them, muddy and
shallow, scarce worth the tasting, and which is worse, yet they prove bitterer
than gall and wormwood, and of shorter continuance than a morning dew. But our
Joy in blessed peace with God, in sweet hopes of glory, in sure foundations of
faith, in endless happiness to crown our faith, to satisfy our hopes, and to
be the manner of enjoying our God, (which are the pleasant fruits of Christ
thus dying) do increase upon us as our insight into them increases, and are
purest when nearest; are deepest in the spring, or rather ocean of true Delight
and Joy; are sweetest when most lived upon; and are most lasting when we enter
at last into them. The Joys of others are never so great as their hopes, nor so
lasting as their desires. But the Joy of a Believer in his Dying Lord, is at
last greater than his hopes, and as long lived as his desires. And in this he
may exalt his Joy above the greatest that ever the world boasted of. If ever
mortal man satiated and glutted himself with worldly Joy, it was with a sudden
gush, which left him so soon, that he had the more time to lament himself, and
woefully wrack himself with the loss of it. I believe Caesar never met his
expected content and joy in obtaining Rome's Empire; I know it lasted not with
him so long as he desired; in one or both of these it proved less to him when
he knew most of it. This made a good Emperor once say, That if men knew what
thorns and cares a Crown was lined with, they would not take it up if they
found it in the street.

Now, oh blessed soul! whose Joy lives upon the Death of thy Lord, tell me, did
ever any experienced, knowing, and expert Christian abase the worth of those
Joys with such a report of them? Can thy own jealous fears suggest a rational,
probable, likely ground of suspicion, that these Joys are greater in hope than
they will be in hand? do thou think that there is any disappointment in
Heaven? Are there any complaints that less is possessed than was looked for?
Have thou ever had any cause to wish thou had known less of Christ and his
Death? or could thou ever say that the Joy had been greater if thy knowledge
and experience had been less? I know thou dare not say so, nor debase the
excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus thy Lord. Turn therefore thy
serious thoughts upon this, meditate more that thou may know more; for the
more thou know of this, the more will thou rejoice in Christ.

Thus renew thy Meditations on the Cause of thy Joys, and they will renew thy
Joys. Others will see, and thou will find in thy own soul, that the more thy
Cause of Joy abounds, the more thy Joy will abound. Now that Christ has thus
died, thy soul (oh happy Believer!) shall not be left in Hell, nor shall thou
see an eternal corruption: This is ensured to thee by the Lord, whose Death
thou commemoratest. Say then and speak it with enlarged heart, (...), etc.
Therefore my heart is glad, and my tongue rejoiceth; moreover my flesh shall
rest in hope, for God will not leave my soul in hell. And now, oh my soul! set
thy self to hear what may be spoken to thee. By these who will have to do with
thee in thy most weighty matters. And so

1. First what would a judicious and affectionate Believer say? What news would
such a one tell thee from Mount Calvary? from the Cross of Christ? Suppose thou
heardest such an one improving this Doctrine, why should I fear when the
iniquity of my heels compasses me about? has not my Lord taken away all the
Curse I feared? Do I not see him evidently set forth crucified before mine
eyes? he drank off the bitter cup of astonishment, I will therefore take the
cup of salvation, and call upon the Name of the Lord. I will rejoice in him;
yea and I will tell my Brethren the good news, that they may rejoice with me.
Come all ye that fear the Lord, hear and rejoice, for I have found at the Cross
of Christ, the blessing which I lost in Paradise, and which is more, I found
yours there too; and if you will go with me quickly, you shall find it too.
Come, oh come and see Christ laying down a Blessing for thee, when he took up
thy Curse! would not such a friend's voice sounding in thine ear ravish thy
heart, or at lest revive thy drooping spirits, and turn thy grief into joy?
Could thou do less than smile to see thy lost Heaven found? thy dying Soul
recovered to life? thy God reconciled and delighting in thee? Hear next

2. What language the Ambassador of thy Sovereign and Gracious Lord uses to
thee, when he offers a Dying Christ unto thee; a Christ bearing thy Curse for
thee. Behold thou drooping Believer, That Blood which I offer thee in this Cup,
is the purchase of that happiness which thou desire; the atonement of that
wrath thou fear. Lo here is that Blood which can abate the scorching heat of
a self-accusing, condemning, and tormenting soul! Oh taste, drink of it! this
never failed of curing, easing, comforting so many Saints in Heaven. In one
word, Christ's Minister does in Christ's Name offer thee that Blood which was
shed for the remission of the sins of many, and in which thou may find
forgiveness of thine also; and thou find little if thou find not Joy in
the forgiveness of sins. Thou art very slow of understanding, if a Public
Officer proclaiming thee acquitted and cleared, does not raise thy joy. But
yet, oh fainting soul! hearken

Lastly, What will be the language of Christ himself to thee, when he unfolds
thy blessedness, and declares before Men and Angels that he took upon him thy
sin, thy guilt, thy punishment; was made a Curse for thee, and so presents thee
to God, and makes good all thy claim to Blessedness. What heart is large enough
to conceive the thousandth par of that Joy! Oh! a single sight of this, one
unrepeated, once pronounced sentence of Christ's own mouth. Soul, thou art
blessed, for I was made a Curse for thee, would swallow up all other Joys, and
would fill the heart of the believing soul with Joy unspeakable.

Now I must tell thee, oh thou doubting, sollicitous and trembling Believer!
that Christ will so bespeak thee ere long, and so give thee an entrance into
thy Master's Joy, that thou may rejoice for ever in this Blessedness, which
I tell thee is the fruit of Christ's Death, as it was an accursed Death. And if
after all this thou will weep, and not be comforted, I must also tell thee, thy
tears are not wiped away, because thou will not suffer us to do it, and thou
art a stranger to thy desired joy, because thou art so much a stranger to the
Death of thy Lord. Oh that our eyes were opened to see that fountain whence most
refreshing streams do flow continually! Lord give me a heart knowing, how to
turn this kind of my Lord's Death into what Joy is hidden in it, and I know my
heart will need no other, will desire none but this.

Again in the sixth place, A peaceable, 6th. Sacramental grace, peaceable
disposition to the Brethren.
compassionate, and tender affection toward our Brethren, our fellow
Christians, is a Sacramental Grace, a disposition of mind which is never out of
season, and is most in season at a Sacrament. Christians should ever live in
charity, but they should feast with their Lord, and with their Brethren in
highest measures of charity. When they thus feast, they should embrace each
other; when they walk together, it should be hand in hand. This Love-feast must
not be allayed with any mixture of sour murmurings, bitter envyings, or
unsavory grudges of discontent. The Apostle does give us a most excellent Rule
for this, 1 Cor. 5.7, 8. Purge out the old leaven, etc. Let us therefore keep
the feast, not in the old leaven, nor with the leaven of malice, etc. In malice
we should ever be children, but especially at the Lord's Supper. I will not
urge reasons why we must be thus affected each to other, when we come to the
Table of the Lord; for it is so universally known by all, and it is so
necessary among many other graces, that too many think this alone sufficient to
prepare men for the Lord's Supper. It is true, who has all other, but has not
this preparatory, is unfit; Whosoever wants this alone is not fit, though this
alone will not fit him for the Lord's Table. The want of this must keep him
back from this Supper, until he has a mind full of sincere and true love to
all men, especially to all the invited guests of the Lord. Supposing therefore
that it is nothing doubted, peaceable affections, and compassionate tender love
or charity to the Brethren, is a Sacramental Quality. I shall insist a little on
the manner, how this may be improved and advanced by the Death of Christ dying
an accursed Death for us. And so

1. First, When thou art at the Lord's Supper, and see a few of thy Christian
Brethren there to celebrate the Death of thine and their Lord dying a Curse;
this in all likelihood will be thy first reasoning upon it. If Christ died a
Curse for us, then were we all under a Curse; then were we all plunged in
misery; all were under the guilt of sin, and under the wrath of God; and what
tongue can tell what this is, or what heart can think of it, and not be
compassionately tender over such poor creatures! Can your obdured, hardened
hearts, hear the groans of men tormented with the Strangury, or Gout, or Stone?
Can you look upon the miseries of an Hospital without yearning bowels? or can
you look upon the tortures of one wracked and torn upon a wheel, or between
wild horses, without a wish, oh that I might deliver them! what kind of hearts
do you bear toward persecuted, murdered and tormented Christians, when you see
the pictures of them, or read the history of them? do not your hearts drop into
tender compassions toward them? Why now look on Christ dying a Curse, he is the
lively picture of thine and their woeful state, it is to be seen in his Death;
read over the story of Christ accursed, it is the story of thy most woeful
state, and of the miserable state of them who are now communicating with thee;
they were with thee sinful, guilty, dying creatures, which ere long must have
been groaning, sighing, howling under the avenging wrath of the Almighty, if
Christ had not thus died for thee and them. Look upon them, say (as indeed they
were) behold what was saved of my shipwreck! These were tossed in the same
vessel, dashed on the same rock, taken up helpless and lifeless, etc. with me.
Oh I never see them, but it comes into my thoughts, and my heart; my heart
weeps over our common danger: We do so often renew our compassionate affections
toward our companions in dangers, as the sight of them renews the thoughts of
our danger. That which in a different case David said, When I remember these
things, I pour out my soul within me. The soul redeemed from the Curse, will be
able to say, when I remember these things, compassion and tenderness are poured
out. The remembrance of a common danger, Nihil ad misericordiam sic inclinat
atque proprii periculi cogitatio. August. Misericordia est vicina miseriae.
Seneca de Clem.
is a most prevailing enducement to compassion. The Philosopher could tell us,
That this Pity is a neighbor to misery. Whence likely it was that the Lord did
enjoin the Israelites to show a hearty compassion unto afflicted strangers; for
They know the heart of a stranger, for they were strangers in Egypt. We must
compassionately and tenderly love, wish well, and affect those whose hearts we
know, for so much as we were in like case. Now this is one part of our
brotherly love or charity; here it begins, though it does not end here. This
tenderness of heart is like the pith or tender pulp which runs through the
whole body of the tree. This indeed is the Root on which the delightful Tree
grows, and from which the beautiful fruits of love do blossom, bud, increase
and ripen. And so often you water the root of Love as you do soften and mollify
the temper of your heart, which is done when soakt in the thoughts of our
common danger.

I shall close this particular with that piercing Question, Matthew. 18.33.
Should thou not have had compassion on thy fellow servants, even as I had
pity on thee? How shall we answer this Question, if the consideration of our
common danger do not stir up in us a love of compassion to others? what bowels
have thou if they do not now yearn and move toward them? We are apt to pity
those whose tormenting diseases and sharp pains we have felt; and if ever we
felt the inward sorrow and trouble of an accursed state, we shall pity such who
are under it, and with tender affection demean our selves toward those who
were under it; it will renew our sympathy, and this will renew our love to
them. But

Secondly, In the remembrance of Christ's dying a Curse for us, there is the
renewing of a most self-abasing and humbling consideration. Now the renewal of
this will be a very likely means to improve our love, which is a humble, self
abasing grace. So that what increases our humility, will increase our charity.
Solomon tells us, that only by pride comes contention; and our own experience
proves the proud man neither sit to be chosen for a loving friend, nor to be
trusted as one that will be constant in his friendship and love: such an one
will be ever breaking the laws of friendship, of which the Apostle discoursing,
1 Cor. 13.4, 5, 6. tells us, that it neither vaunteth it self, nor is puffed
up. Indeed he can see no cause of vaunting himself, who views himself in this
cursed condition represented, and confirmed to us by Christ's undergoing it for
us. Something or other there must be indeed, or must be thought to be, which
shall exalt a man above his neighbor and brother. Now when it appears that
it was equal guilt and misery under which thou and I, and every one did lie,
until Christ redeemed us, this cuts off all vaunts, and proud boasting of our
selves above others; and where pride is laid thus low, and taken out of the
way, there meek and peaceable deportment outwardly, and meek and peaceable
temper inwardly do spring up and flourish. This will prevent all increase and
growth of malice, and dislike for whatever thou can find in thy Brother to
dislike, the same, or as bad is found in thee; for before grace appeared to
you, you were both accursed, both rebels against God, both condemned by the Law
of God, both alike miscreants and vile; nor may dislike fester and ranckle into
malice against thy Brother: For if the Grace of God has taken occasion from
his vile miserable condition, to be and appear grace indeed to him, who art
thou dare make it an occasion of wrath or malice? I know the reasonings of a
believer toward believers are of another nature and tendency, they all savor
of humility and peaceable dispositions, and forbidding all proud quarrels, and
hushing them with some such reflection upon our selves, and our condition; such
was I but I obtained mercy. Alas! how are we mistaken if we think we may boast
our selves in the difference between us and others; for who made us to differ?
There was much of reason in the penitent Thief, when he took up and reproved
the railings, reproaches and blasphemies of the other; Luke 23.20.
Do thou not fear God seeing thou art in the same condemnation? This ought
to have humbled him, and kept him in a peaceable behavior and mind toward
those who were dying with him. Oh let us manifest a humbled soul, a mind abased
and laid low with our guilt and vileness! let us manifest such a mind by meek,
peaceable, loving disposition toward our Brethren, who were first our Brethren
in a Curse, but now are our Brethren in Christ. Certainly nothing does more
become pardoned sinners, than such a peaceable behavior and disposition. Nor
do I know a more natural genuine fruit of our peace with God through Christ,
than this our peaceable mind and behavior toward men, when Angels showed the
glad tidings, viz. Salvation through Christ, they did also proclaim peace on
earth; so must we when God makes us glad with this salvation.

3. Again thirdly, In the remembrance of Christ dying a Curse for us, there is
renewed the remembrance of forgiveness and pardon granted of God to us. The
Believer communicating at the Lord's Table, does there see himself pardoned,
and the like pardon offered unto others also through Christ dying a Curse for
them. Now this does mightily persuade with the Believer to lay aside all
occasions and ground of quarrel, and so does much more promote this brotherly
love, increasing it both in the habit of charity, disposing the mind to it, and
in the exercise and acts of it in our behavior and converse among Christians.
That which God has done for us teaches us what we are to do for others, when
God might justly and righteously have cursed us, and refused us peace; he did
for Christ's sake free us from the Curse, and entered, confirmed, and still
keeps peace with us. Now says the considerate Believer, I must be like my
Heavenly Father, he has accursed but one thing for which he has not yet, for
which he never will have, thoughts of peace, and I must never make, or keep a
peace with that accursed thing, with sin. But since it has been the good
pleasure of my Heavenly Father to make peace for such who were cursed; and
seeing he has made them blessed by this peace, I must with better mind, though
I cannot in better words, say with Balaam, Number. 23.20. Behold I have received
Commandment to bless, and he has blessed, and I cannot reverse it. When any
grudge, envy or dislike, would solicit thee to break the law of Brotherly Love,
ask but this question, Is God at peace with this man with whom I am ready to
break? If God be his friend, and at peace with him, it is my best course, and
most advised, to be at peace with him also, and keep and make him my friend. It
is reported in the Life of Marius (that cruel man) that if he saluted not the
man he met, Plutarch. in vit. C. Marii.
his soldiers took it for the token that such a one must not live: But if he
saluted any one, no hurt was done to him. At this present I tell you, no hurt
must be done by you or me to such whom the Great God saluteth as he did
Abraham, and as he does still salute Abraham 's seed, calling them friends. As
then the renewed use of the Lord's Supper is a renewed testimony of God
reconciled unto us, and a renewed profession of our friendship unto God; so it
will be a renewing of our friendship with those who are so blessed and happy in
their alliance unto the Lord, who is also our God. Moreover, suppose flesh and
blood could pretend an occasion of contention and quarrel with thy Christian
Brethren, summon them to put in their Bill, and make their plea before Christ,
who once died a Curse for thee, and them; let the grievances be rightly stated,
and hearken what Christ would say to thee that contendest; He would surely tell
thee that he did not stand upon greater injuries done to him, but did bear
them, and forbear thee in them; witness thine own appearance at the Sacrament,
where thou professest to believe that Christ died an accursed death for thee,
and do thou dare to retain the thoughts, the remembrance, of farthing
damages done to thee, in that very place, and at that time where thou renewest
the remembrance of many talent-dammages by thee done to God, all forgiven to
thee by thy God, who thereupon requires thee to forgive others? How silent and
speechless will the merciless unpeaceable man be when God shall make him read
over such places as these; Should thou not have had compassion on thy
fellow servants, even as I had pity on thee? And if ye from your heart forgive
not men their trespasses, neither will your Father which is in Heaven forgive
your trespasses. And he shall have judgment without mercy, who showed no mercy.
Come then thou froward, peevish, unpeaceable soul, look what Christ has
purchased and prepared for every Believer; he has purchased a peace for them;
he has for them prepared a blessed peace through his bearing a Curse for them;
and he has sealed and confirmed this peace, taking away every thing that might
break it; and this peace made thus, thou art now again confirming with God
among those which have equal share and interess with thy self in this peace;
and will thou not judge it comely, convenient, necessary, (and what must be
done by thee, viz.) to embrace them with hearty, peaceable affections, who are
embraced by thy God, with as hearty affections as thou art, or can be? Oh
come then! make peace with all thy Brethren, and forgive them as God for
Christ's sake has forgiven thee. And thus I have very briefly drawn out three
particular inducements (among many other) which from Christ dying a Curse for
us, and all Believers should persuade us, and them to live in a Christian
brotherly peace, which becomes a Sacrament, and which should be improved by
each Sacrament. I now proceed to

A seventh Sacramental Grace, 7th. Sacramental grace, a Thankful heart.
which ought to be exercised at each Sacrament, and which may receive some
addition from the consideration of Christ's Death as a Curse in our stead. Now
this grace is a Thankful acknowledgment of the great mercy we have by Christ's
dying a Curse for us. It does exceeding well become us to be thankful, and
praise the Lord for his mercy to us in Christ dying for us: And though praise
be ever seasonable, yet a Sacrament is the season of seasons for praise; then
it is most in season, though it be never out of season. The commonness and
universal praenotion of this truth among all Christians, saves me the labor
of proving it. I need not prove that to any one which is denied by no one; let
then praise and thanks attend our communion at the Lord's Supper. And among
other motives unto praise, let us view some few arising from the Death of
Christ, as it was an accursed death for us. And so

1. First, To this kind of Death of thy Lord thou must be beholden for all the
sweetness which thou tastest in thy mercies. Thy sin which brought thee under
the Curse, imbittered every thing to thee also; nay that sin which cursed thee,
forfeited all thy mercies; thou had no right to them when once thou had
sinned, and thou could taste no sweetness in them if thou had still lain
under the Curse; thou had no more right to thy estate, and life, than a
condemned man has to his; thou could have no more enjoyed them, than a
pensive condemned person who is kept in prison with a daily allowance to keep
them alive unto the day of his near approaching execution, every morsel is
bitter to him, so would it have been to thee. Thou may read this in the
emblem of the sinner's state; a naked man cast out of a fruitful garden, and
left in a place of thorns and briars: Such was the consequence of thy sin, cast
naked out of what thou had, and turned out among grieving thorns and briars.
Now, would he not deserve thanks who restores thee to a title? gives thee a
new right unto all desirable blessings? who shall root up those cursed thorns,
and plant the Vine and the Olive to yield thee fruit? Look then, this, and more
than this done for thee by the Death of thy Lord made a Curse for thee. Lo thy
title renewed to necessary mercies, and mercies renewed unto their sweetness
and delightfulness; thou a Prodigal received as a Son, and the husks thou did
feed on turned into bread in thy Father's house. Christ was accursed for thee,
that every blessing might be sweetened to thee. Ever praised be our Physician
who has taken out the most of the poison, and has turned the rest into
necessary and seasonable Physic. God has blessed thee with every thing in
Christ, that thou might bless and praise, that thou might be thankful for
every thing, and ascribe it all to the goodness of God in Christ. We owe all to
this Death of Christ, and how little do we pay when we are thankful! Let us not
then withold this little too. In one word, read over the latter part of Deuteronomy.
28. from v. 15. to the end of the chapter, and consider how well he deserves
blessing and thanks from thee, who has delivered thee from the bitterness of
so many Curses, imbittering all thou enjoy'dst.

Secondly, The renewed thoughts of Christ bearing thy Curse, will be renewed
Thankfulness in renewed security and assurance against the fears and terrors
of a self-accusing and condemning heart. Thou shall never bear that Curse which
the righteous Law threatened; thou needst not fear it, if Christ died for thee;
for he did die a Curse for every one in whose stead he did die; and that God
who accepted his Death, will never go from his word, or disown the virtue of
his Son's Death, nor cast the Curse upon thy soul. Oh thou trembling Believer!
thy fears are the weakness of thy graces, or the want of exercising them;
either thou know not what it is to have a Christ, a Jesus dying a Curse for
thee, or else thou do not enough consider it, nor observe how little ground
of fear is left. Oh! It would be a blessed tranquillity of mind to us to feel as
little fear within our souls, as Christ has left of Curse behind him in the
Law against us. Happy soul, who believes that Christ died for him. He may look
upon the Law, and find that there is not in it any Curse against him; for
Christ made a Curse, died to redeem them who were under it. There is no doubt
to be made of this Truth; there cannot be just cause of fear where Christ has
taken away the Curse Which the Law threatened: Now there is no condemnation to
such, nor may any one lay any thing to the charge of these redeemed ones. And
when this is duly weighed, how thankful will it make us! How much would a
feeble swouning person thank you for a sweet reviving cordial! what life would
there be in his expressions of kindness for such a courtesy! what loving
embraces would such a one court his friend with! especially if his life had
certainly miscarried without this! Oh unkindness! unthankfulness of us
Christians! who lay in a swound of death, stricken with the thunderbolt of the
Law, perishing without recovery, hopeless without a Christ, accursed for ever
unless Christ become a Curse for us; and we profess to know all this, and to
believe it, and yet are straightened in our thankfulness to him. The Plutarch. in
vit. Artaxerxes.
Historian reports that Artaxerxes King of Persia, gave one a thousand The
Darick was a coin bearing the image of Darius, and the value of each piece was
two shillings four pence; so the whole sum amounted to one hundred and sixteen
pounds six shillings and eight pence, beside the Cup of Gold.
Daricks in a Cup of Gold for a recompense of a little fair water offered him
in the palms of the man's hand. But what have we given unto Jesus Christ, who
has brought us not a little water in his hands, but his heart and hands full
of love, and blood shed for us! Oh come magnify the Love of Christ, and be
thankful to him for us! Remember the days of thy fears, when thou would have
welcomed the news of thy pardon, and received it on thy knees, with ten
thousand praises to thy God. Remember the anguish of thy soul, when the Arrows
of the Almighty stuck fast, and the poison thereof drunk up thy spirits, what
pains would thou have taken then? what cost would thou gladly have been at,
to procure thy soul's peace and ease? When thou thoughtest Hell would be thy
tormenting prison for ever, and thou lookedst on it as the greatest evil,
because thou should bear thy sins there for ever, and never have one smile
from God, what thankfulness did thou then think was meet for thee to pay, and
for Christ to receive! Oh let not this be forgotten when thou come to
commemorate the Death of thy Lord; say then, and think so, Here is the blood of
my loving, gracious Redeemer, who was content to be made a Curse for me, that I
might not slavishly fear my guilt, nor be in Hell So Francis Spira thought and
spoke of his fears and tears.
before I came to Hell; that I might not go mourning under the heavy burden of
my own easeless pains, which were worse than death it self; those fears,
terrors and pains which no tongue can describe, my blessed Redeemer delivered
me from them, and duly confirms it to me in minding me that he died, and that
he died being made a Curse for me; I must therefore mind my debt of
thankfulness, I vowed, at least promised and purposed never to forget, that
more thankfulness was due to Christ then I could ever pay; Let my renewed view
of this blood so affect me, oh my dearest Lord! at every Sacrament, that it may
ever renew my thankfulness, until thankfulness be so perfected, that I may
never more need a Sacrament to put me in mind of this my duty.

Thirdly, The renewed thoughts of Christ dying thus accursed for us, will add
to our thankfulness, In that the heart of a Believer meditating on this, may
conclude, he is judicially acquitted from the charge laid in against him by the
Law. This charge is sin, deserving death, to which charge every one must make
his plea, and bring it to an issue; in which process there will be no denying
of the charge, it is so undeniably true, that all have sinned and come short of
the glory of God, only the believing soul has a gracious Redeemer who stepped in
between the passing of the righteous sentence, and the execution of it, and
offered Bail, body for body, life for life; took upon himself the Curse, which
was all the Law threatened, and died thus a Curse for the Believer, so that now
he may sue for his discharge, and plead for his release: Nay, he has the
discharge and release offered to him as it were sealed, signed and delivered to
him at the Sacrament, whilst God by his Minister does put the New Covenant into
his hand, and shows him that blood which was shed for confirmation of the
Covenant, and for remission of the sins of as many as do believe. And that we
may know how all this can be, how sinners can be acquitted, and the Curse
threatened can be avoided, we are at every Sacrament minded of this, that Christ
died for us, being made a Curse for us; that is, undertaking and performing
what he undertook on our behalf, he presented himself to the Justice of God,
abode the Trial, was found in the likeness of sinful flesh, humbled himself to
the death, even the death of the Cross, and so suffered; all which is
exemplified to us in the remembrance of his death, considered as the death of
one who lay under a Curse for us. It is not only entered in the Court Rolls in
Heaven, but it is entered in the Register-books of the Church by Christ's own
order; and every believing soul at the Sacrament may see and read it, and
conclude it for himself, and make improvement of it to his comfort. Now what
heart can look on all this, and not look on this duty of thankfulness? what
soul can receive a pardon under the broad Seal of Heaven, and not bow the knee,
and kiss the Seal! When an offender upon indictment and trial is acquitted, it
is a custom (and seemly enough) to testify his thankfulness by praying for the
King: How much more does it become us to give thanks at the remembrance of our
acquittance, absolution, and being declared acquitted, as we are so often as we
duly partake and communicate in the blood which was shed for the remission of
the sins of many. In a word, a bare promise of pardon deserves a grateful
acknowledgment, but the passing of it under seal does much more deserve it: Had
God passed his word only, and required us to believe it, and praise him for
it, we must have done it. Now he has given us greatest assurance, he has
proceeded judicially against Christ, the common and adequate representative,
bail and undertaker for us; and has appointed the Sacrament of the Lord's
Supper as an Authentic and Public Record or Testimony hereof; we ought the
rather to be thankful. Renewed thoughts of this will renew our judicious and
rational praise, if we have either judgments or reason exercised in things that
excel.

Fourthly and lastly, A fourth particular which will increase our thankfulness
to Christ for our deliverance so often as we remember it at a Sacrament, under
the notion of a deliverance by his dying a Curse for us, is this, That it
minds us we were delivered not simply from sorrow, trouble and affliction,
but we were saved from an accursed sorrow, from an accursed trouble; we are
freed from misery, but that is not all, we are freed from an accursed misery;
and this should enhance our thankfulness.

There is an affliction that has the promise of Comfort, Rev. 21.4. Jer. 31.9.
Psalm. 126.5, 6.
tears that shall be wiped away, sorrow and sighing that shall flee away; there
is a weeping which God will accompany and lead; this is a blessed weeping, for
such carry forth seed which is precious, and they shall teturn rejoicing.
Matthew. 5.4.
There are mourners whom Christ has pronounced blessed; so that trouble and
sorrow are not such evils when they are considered without the imbittering
thoughts of a Curse in them; it is the Curse which makes the Cup so full of
astonishment. It is the Curse which goes with the condemned into Hell, that
makes it Hell indeed unto them. Affliction with the favor of God is a blessed
state; but affliction with the hatred and displeasure of God, is a miserable
state, and unspeakably sad, forlorn and woeful. Now Christ dying a Curse for us,
has saved us from sorrows, and the Curse, from misery aggravated with the
hatred of God toward the miserable, so that he deserves much more thanks from
us; it had been worth our thanks if we had been by him delivered from a bloody
issue, or a deformed crookedness, or a burning fever, or a loathsome leprosy, or
a sad and solitary blindness: But more than this, more than all I can speak did
Christ deliver us from, when he did die a Curse for us. Oh unparalled love of
Christ! and oh the unparalled ingratitude of Christians! Sirs, though you and
I must leave the greatest, the best part of this work of praise to another
world, yet let us not leave it all; let us do somewhat whilst we live, and are
among men on earth. Heaven is full of those praises, which, did we hear, would
ravish us: Let Earth be witness that we do not quite forget our Lord. Whereas
you could have born all the envy, anger and malice of creatures, and it may be
have contemned the weakness of it, you could never have stood under, nor have
made head against the anger and indignation of the Lord, nor have fortified
your selves with resolutions to lessen the fury by lessening your apprehensions
of it. The dear children of God in their bitter complaints, cry out, if an
enemy, if any but God himself had done it, I could have born it. And the
hopeless unbelievers cry out the same in effect; let any thing come, let all
come upon us, rather than the wrath of the Almighty; let rocks grind us to
powder, or mountains bury us for ever under their weight: Oh the heaviest of
all these are lighter than one stroke of an angry avenging God! All these may
be more easily endured than one Curse of the Law: See then and consider what
thou owe, oh my soul! to Christ made a Curse for thee! remember and be
thankful; let thy heart, oh thou who feastest with thy Lord! weigh first the
burthensomness of that Curse which justice casts upon every sin, and then
weigh the exceeding great love of Christ who did take this Burden, and bear it
for thee; and I do nothing doubt, but as often as thou layest these in the
balance, thou will still find thy praise, thy thankfulness too light; thou will be still with the Apostle adding Glory and Power to him who loved thee,
Rev. 1.5, 6.
and washed thee in his blood: And with the great Apostle of the Gentiles,
Thanks be to God who has given us the Victory. Could you and I entertain these
things within our breasts, and renew our thoughts and meditatations, we should
more clearly discern, that if there be sweetness in our mercies, or respite
from our fears, or absolution and discharge from our guilt, or deliverance from
accursed sorrows, miseries and death, we owe it all unto this kind of Death of
our Lord; beside all the positive blessings of grace and glory, of which I may
not now speak: if the blessing of Abraham on the Gentiles be worth our thanks,
then our thanks is due to Christ dying thus; for he was made a Curse for us,
that we might be redeemed from under the Curse of the Law, and that we might be
restored to a blessed state. In one word, whosoever sees his own blessedness
procured by Christ dying a Curse for him, cannot but see so much thanks as
blessedness is worth due to Christ; and so the reviving of the memory of
Christ's Death considered as a Curse, will be the reviving of our thankfulness;
and reviving of thankfulness will be an increasing and improving of
thankfulness. So much to the seventh Sacramental Grace. The eighth and last I
shall now mention, follows, viz.

A disposition and purpose of mind to walk in new Obedience toward God in all
manner of conversation; 8th. Sacramental grace, New Obedience.
such a mind must every welcome guest bring to the Lord's Table. No man may
come thither who intends to go thence to his old course of sinning. We must
not, as Naturalists report of some venomous creatures, which lay down their
poison when they go to drink, and having drunk, suck it up again; we must not
so lay aside our old sins while we go to the Lord's Supper, as to renew our old
acquaintance with them, nor tender our service to them, so soon as we depart
from the Table of the Lord, Men will not endure such sycophants and parasites,
who come to their table for a meals meat, and to fill their bellies, but then
sort themselves for months together with the veryest enemies they have in the
world: No more will God endure him for a guest at his Table, who comes for a
meal out of a customary formality, and then sorts himself with those sins which
God hates, and commands should be slain. This above many others aggravated
Judas's treason, that he came and ate with his Lord, when he had resolved to
betray him; this is to kiss him with, All hail Master; when the kiss is the
very token by which his enemies should know and apprehend him. The Lord Jesus,
who knows what is in man, and needs not that any should testify of man,
will never let a man who lives and dies of this temper, escape deserved
punishment. He knows they flattered him with their lips, but their hearts are
far from him. Thou that come to make a Covenant with thy God at a Sacrament,
must come with a firm purpose to keep thy Covenant, for God will not be mocked.
Better never come at all, than come with a mind hating to be reformed. God will
ere long ask such hateful hypocrites what they had to do to declare this
Statute of his, or that they should take his Covenant into their mouths, Psalm.
50.16, etc. It is confessed of all sides, and would to God it were as well
practiced on all sides, that every Sacrament should engage us to better lives,
to holier conversations, that we should sin the seldomer, because we have been
so often at the Lord's Table. Now I say, that the remembrance of the Death of
Christ dying for us a Curse, has in it good and strong reasons to move us to
renew our obedience; and if these reasons be well considered, I do not doubt
but they may prevail with some to renew their purposes and endeavors of living
less to sin, because Christ died a Curse for us sinners. For,

1. First, In this manner of his dying (beside the powerful influence of his
Death considered in the general, of which I speak not now) I say, In his dying
thus as a Curse for us, we have a clear discovery of the vileness of sin, how
much it abaseth and depresseth us. We look upon cursed things as the vilest and
basest of things. A curse and a reproach go together, Jer. 42.18. This was the
thing which brought our Lord into so low estate, that he was despised of men;
this made him of no reputation, because of our sin imputed to him, and the
Curse due to us for our sin laid upon him; he became like a servant, and so
died. Now then let a sober judgment be made of this, and see how forcibly it
disswadeth from continuing in sin. Do I renew the remembrance of my Lord dying
as a Curse? Could sin which he never committed, which he never loved, which he
hated infinitely, which was no otherwise his, than by imputation; could this
bring him to such shame? What shame and confusion of face will cover and
overwhelm me, when after my serving my sins, both the guilt imputed, and the
baseness, vileness and reproach of the fact committed, shall meet in one, and
be charged upon me! Is it not high time to forsake this service which will end
in the shame and reproach of a Curse? Does the Sacrament mind me of the Death,
the accursed Death of Christ the Lord of Glory? I see then such a worm, such a
lump of worthless flesh as I am cannot expect any other event of sin, than to
lie down in shame for it; and if after (I do know this) I should still love
sin, and delight in it, how brutish and unreasonable should I appear to be, how
unlike a man! I must either renounce my reason, or renounce my sin. It is no
dallying in a matter of this nature; I see the just and righteous Judge of
Heaven and Earth would not spare his own Son, when he found him under my sins,
but laid upon him the punishment of them, the Cross and the shame; and I
deceive my self if I think he will spare me, and not cast the shame of my sin
upon me the sinner; if I live and die in this service, I shall rise with those
who rise unto everlasting shame and contempt. I will therefore resolve, and
keep my resolutions, of departing from sin, because I would not depart from my
God with the shame and reproach of a Curse for my sin. Thus the renewed
thoughts of Christ dying a Curse for us, will renew the apprehensions of that
shame which attends the sinner, and so renew our purposes against sin, as the
only thing which can clothe us with shame, and we shall be as unwilling to live
in sin, as we are to bear the shame of sin.

2. Secondly, In the renewed thoughts of our Lord's dying a Curse, there lies
a motive to New Obedience, drawn from the congruity and suitableness of the
thing it self: Nothing more unseemly than to continue in sin after our
professing our selves to be his servants, friends and followers, who died for
sin. Nothing more justifiable than their leaving of sin, whose Lord died for
sin; especially seeing sin brought upon him an accursed Death. What will thou
answer for thy self in the day when this absurd, unreasonable and monstrous
deportment of thine shall be laid open before Men and Angels? when Christ shall
ask thee whether thou had not heard and seen that he was made a Curse for thy
sins? whether thou had not often been minded of this at the Sacrament? and
when he shall farther demand of thee what thou could see in sin, or hope to
find in sin, or expect from sin, when as thy Lord could see, did find, and
expected to find nothing else but a Curse in it? wast thou so sottish to think
of finding any thing in sin better than what thy Lord found in it? or wast thou
so unthankful, that thou were resolved to offer despite to thy Lord, and serve
that which brought an accursed Death upon him? Whatever sinners now judge, I
know that a day will come when they shall judge nothing so unreasonable and
unseemly as living in continued sin, and professing a crucified Jesus. It is
such a self-contradicting course, that none ever would continue it if ever they
understood it: Nor is he, what he professes to be, who professes our
crucified Jesus to be his Lord, yet serves his own cursed lusts: Christ does
not own him; he will declare to all the world that he knows not, that he never
knew such workers of iniquity. But suppose it possibly might be (which yet
never shall be) that such a one resolvedly continuing in sin, should be owned
by Christ at last, and received into a blessed state of glory, what kind of
answer could such one make to his Lord when questioned? what was it not enough
that I was once made a Curse for thee? or did I not bear sins enough for thee
at first? or would thou indeed be crueller to me than Jews and Roman
soldiers? or had thou a design to wound my heart after I was gotten out of
the reach of all others? after wicked men and Devils had done their worst, and
I had triumphed over them, and none but my friends could wound me, would thou
be my friend that thou might do it more deeply? was this thy friendship to
me? are not they the sorest and cruellest enemies, who cover their hearty
enmity with pretenses of friendship? either then be my cordial friend (says
Christ) and renounce thy sins, serve them no more, or else come no more
pretending to commemorate my friendship to the dying a Curse for thee; nor ever
let me be provoked with such counterfeit alliance and friendship. Christ cannot
endure such seeming to be what we are not, such contradictions to his Death. In
truth it is most unseemly to live in the cursed service of sin after we are
redeemed from the Curse of sin. And therefore the believing and considerate
soul casts off the thoughts of continuing in sin, with a God forbid, (...).
how shall I live any longer in sin, since I am dead to it?

3. Thirdly, The renewed consideration of Christ dying a Curse for sin, does
renew our thoughts of the odiousness and hateful nature of sin, which carries
a Curse into every place and person where it comes. Christ's dying a Curse for
us, shows us how hateful sin is to the eyes of our God, Revera est odium quo
Deus peccatum prosequitur, ab ea perfectione quae Numinis naturam decet. Th.
Salmur. de trib. Foed. Div. th. 18.
who does (and cannot but so do) loath, detest, threaten and curse it
wherever he finds it; of which truth the considerate believing soul has so
clear proof in the Curse which Christ did bear for sin; that he stands
convinced beyond possible doubt of it, and cannot but conclude, that whoever
resolves to continue in sin, must also resolve to abide the hatred of God
against sin. He that will keep and maintain a communion with sin, must expect
that God will keep and maintain wrath and hatred against him; and this the
Communicant is at every Sacrament minded of whilst he sees his Lord evidently
set forth, crucified before his eyes, so that he is put to such a kind of
deliberation with himself: What! could not Christ take upon him my sin, but he
must also take upon him the burden of divine displeasure and hatred due to my
sin? what! is God so irreconcilable an enemy unto sin, that he would not, or
could not, restrain his just wrath against the guilt where it lay, without the
foulness of committing the fact? was the displeasure of my God so hot against
his blessed Son, who was never tainted with any one sin, only bare the guilt of
many? I see then it is self-deceiving flattery to hope for the love and favor
of God, whilst I love my sin, and continue in it; if I will have his love, and
escape his hatred, I must leave off sin; for he hates all the workers of
iniquity, Psalm. 5.6. He hates the evil way, Prove. 8.3. I must either leave the
evil way, or perish in his hatred: For none ever escaped perishing, who by
continuing to sin provoked his displeasure and wrath against them. Resolve
therefore as becomes a man, (O my soul!) fly, and hasten thy flight from wrath
to come; prevent the misery of being hated and accursed of thy God; cast off
thy sin; cease to do evil, and then God will cease to be angry. There cannot be
any thing in sin to compensate thee, to reward thee for the loss of the favor
of God. Sin can never heal the wounds which the hatred of God will make in thy
soul. Poor creature! thou were better have all the men on Earth, and all the
finite invisible powers of light and darkness to hate thee (thou might bear
this) than have one God to hate thee; thou can never bear this. In fine,
therefore says the believing, serious and considerate soul, I will not hazard,
I will not run the venture and danger of divine displeasure of the hatred of an
Almighty God, for I see in the Curse which my Lord lay under, what I must lie
under for ever, if I will by continuing longer in sin own my former sins, pull
the punishment of them upon my self, and love that which my God so perfectly
hates: I will every day labor to hate that with perfect hatred which my God
hates; I will seek his love by a present separation and divorce from sin: I
will this day renew my purpose and attempts to leave my cursed sins, for God
has renewed my thoughts of his hatred against sin by the renewed remembrance
of Christ dying a Curse for my sin.

Fourthly, In the renewed thoughts of this kind of death, The Believer has the
renewed sight and evidence of a death hanging over the head of every sinner,
which of all deaths is the most dreadful, which is fullest of horrors and
soul-tormenting fears. Death is the King of terrors, though represented and
clothed in the lest dreadful manner it can be. (...). Aristotel.
No kind of death but is terrible enough, but of all, this is the most
terrible, and only to be feared; it is this at the heels of the other that
makes it dreadful. It is a most undoubted truth, that every one continuing to
sin, and so dying, shall die under a Curse for his own sin, though the sinner
should live to an hundred; nay to many hundred years, yet if he live and die a
servant to his sin, he shall die accursed; and this we may be sufficiently
assured of by the accursed Death of our Lord; for he died so, for as much as
the sins of God's Elect and chosen ones were laid to him; he was loaded with
them, and all the guilt of them was charged on him, and therefore was he
punished, therefore he died in such a manner. He was made a Curse, because the
guilt of our sins was laid on him, and punishment due to that guilt inflicted
on him. Nothing more certain, He was wounded for our transgressions, Isa. 53.5.
He bare the sin of many, ver. 12. He his own self bare our sins in his own body
on the tree, 1 Pet. 2.24. And all this evidently set forth before our eyes, so
that the serious and considering soul soon comes to this conclusion, that
whoever does bear the guilt of sin, he must die a Curse for it, and he needs no
other proof of it but this; Christ did bear guilt, and this brought him to a
cursed Death. Now then he begins to argue the case with himself; Can I continue
in sin, and not bear the guilt of sin? Can I yield my self a servant to sin,
and yet not be accounted a servant of sin? Can I do the works of iniquity, and
not be thought by judicious and wise men, a worker of iniquity? How much more
will the just and righteous God occount me so? When I do any fact for which the
Law of man will call me to account, can I do the fact and the Law not impute it
to me? It is most sottish folly to continue in the service of sin, and to
flatter my self that I shall not be accounted a servant of sin, or to hope I
shall not be loaded with the guilt of my sin. And it is no less folly to think
that we may lie under the guilt of sin, and yet not sink under the importable
burden of a Curse. No, no, either I must leave my sinning, or I must die that
Death, which of all is the most terrible. I must be a Curse under the wrath of
God. Now therefore resolve what thou and I shall do; God proposes a Christ
dying a Curse for thee, to encourage thee to leave sin, or to show thee what
thou must trust to if thou live in sin.

He preaches to thee this Doctrine, Life through Grace, if thou will obey, if
thou will renounce thy evil way, for then thy Savior shall be thy Peace, bear
thy Guilt, and endure thy Curse; or else Death if thou will still refuse to
convert and leave thy sin. And let me tell thee, it is Death with a Curse; and
consider thou whether thou can endure it, and let me ask thee these few
questions.

1. Do thou not believe that there is somewhat more in Death, when it is
sharpened with this sharp and piercing sting? Do thou not think that the
Curse does add unto the dread and fear of Death? When God proclaims any one
blessed in death, do thou not persuade thy self that God takes away much of
the terror of death? if so, then certainly when God adds a Curse with death,
he adds terror to it; and thou must confess it also, if thou will consider
it. Now then say, Can thou contentedly think of dying for thy sin? Can thou
think of doing more than dying for thy sins? Until that time be come wherein
thou can say, thou would be willing to suffer more than death for sin,
thou should not be willing to serve sin any more in thy life. I know when we
come to die, we shall judge sin unworthy of such a pledge of love or service as
one pang, or one fear, or one sigh for its sake; oh then we shall say, He loved
sin too much who for sin's sake added the lest pang to death. Whatever thou
do therefore, leave to sin, lest tlou add the misery of a Curse to thy death.

2. Let me ask thee, Is there no manner of dying which is a terror to thee
more than ordinary? If thou were now to die, and might choose thy death,
would thou choose any that were full of pains, or loathsomness, or both these
continuing long? Are there not some kinds of death from which thou prayest to
be delivered? and what kinds of death are these? are they not those wherein
God's hand would most immediately, and most publicly, and with most
displeasure appear against thee? would thou not account it worse than death
to be long dying with such a tormenting, lingering, and loathsome disease as
Sylla the Roman? or as Maximinus the bloody persecutor? or as Herod the great?
(whose story is better known to thee) eaten up of worms? Would not others be
ready to say of thee, That God had indeed set his hand against thee, that God
judged thee unfit to live among common men, and unworthy so good a death as the
death of common men? how would this trouble thee? This was the thing wherewith
Job's friends did most aggrieve him, that they would conclude God's hand
against him as against an enemy. But now let me tell thee, The afflictions of
Job, nor the woeful death of a Sylla, or a Herod, have no such evidences of God
his displeasure and wrath in them, as the easiest death of an accursed sinner
has in it. For other deaths may, and usually are inflicted by other means;
this is inflicted by the immediate hand of God alone, and can thy heart endure,
or thy hands be strong when God shall do this? is not his wrath as he is? He
alone can bless, and he alone can curse; and this shall be known to the sinner
in the day wherein God will appear against him; think then whether sin deserve
so well, that thou should not only die, but die a Curse for it? whether there
be any thing in sin to fortify thy spirit against the terrors of God's
immediate furious rebukes, and slaying of thee? Who dies a Curse, dies under
the revenging strokes of an infinite God. Look then how much there is in
infinite Power and Justice more than can be in finite; so much indeed is there
in dying a Curse for sin, more than in naked, single dying. For,

3. Thirdly, Let me ask thee one question more, Does not Death, a cursed Death
reach the soul, and kill this? no other disease but is in the body, and is the
disease of the body, and kills the body, and so vanishes: But who dies a
Curse dies in his soul, that is, his soul is separated and disjoined from that
sweet communion and fellowship with God which is the true life of souls and
Angels. When God slays these wretches, and makes them sacrifices to his
offended Justice, he slays them with this, Depart from me ye cursed, Matthew.
25.41.

Now, is it not more dreadful to die thus a Curse, than barely to die? or if
thou could die, and be willing to lose the life of thy body for sin sake,
can thou also be willing to lose the life of thy soul for sin's sake? This is
another arrow in this quiver, and which wounds deeper than any other. The
soul dies when the man dies a Curse for sin; and let me tell thee, albeit
foolish and inconsiderate slaves of sin will cast away their souls for sin, the
wise and considerate Believer judges his soul, and the life of it, infinitely
too good to be so spent and wasted. The death of the soul is so much more
dreadful than the death of the body, as the soul is more worth than the body;
thou may not then continue in cursed sins, for they will bring down upon thy
soul a death of all most dreadful; cease therefore to sin, that thou be not a
curse for thy sin.

Fourthly, Let it be considered, after all this, (if this do not convince
enough) whether thou could be willing to die more than once for thy sin?
Would not a thousand deaths one after another be too much to undergo for sin?
He that dies a Curse for his sins, shall die more than ten thousand times for
them; he shall be ever, ever dying as many days, nay hours, nay moments, as
are in eternity; so many times shall the miserable, deplorable, cursed sinner
die in the acute, fresh and renewed pangs of soul, every lash of conscience,
every dolorous remembrance of what he suffers for, shall be a death unto him.
This makes it death indeed, and if thou can not love thy self so little, as
to choose to be ever dying, thou must not love thy sins so much as to be ever
serving them. Say then, if thou can not but fear endless dying, I must fear
and fly endless sining; who dies a Curse for his sin, is as long dying, as his
soul is living, and that is for ever and ever.

Fifthly and lastly, Can any thing sweeten the thoughts, or allay the
bitterness of such a Death? Can there be any thing wherewith others may, or
thou may bless thy self after God shall have so cursed thee? Consider what a
loss it is which is so great, that nothing can lessen it; say then, though
possibly thou could endure somewhat for sin's sake, yet I can never endure a
Curse for it, which is more than to die; it is to die under the immediate
avenging hand of God; it is to kill my soul; That is to be as often dying as
are moments in eternity; and all this without any recompense and sweetning
allay, I cannot choose so to die; therefore says the considerate Believer, the
renewed thoughts of my Lord's dying a Curse, renew my apprehensions of the
danger of sinning any longer; this renews my dislike of sin, and I must needs
reolve to leave it.

FINIS.
ERRATA'S.
PAge 44. l. 24. for woad, r. word, p. 70. l. 28. r. hither, to, p. 73. l. 21.
r. Imperfections, p. 104. in the margent, r. communionis, r. christianorum, p.
112. l. 9. r. provision, p. 123. l. 21. for his r. this, p. 143. l. 13. r.
imbitter, l. 14. dele i before always. p. 189. l. 3. r. another, p. 221. l.
ult. r. no. Part 3. p. 22. l. 34. r. easily, p. 27. l. 28. for in r. and, p.
36. l. 34. for 1. r. in, p. 39. l. 3. r. might, p. 58. l. 5. r. peace, p. 61.
l. 7. r. virtue, p. 77. l. 17. r. account, p. 78. l. 3 1. r. thou.

Books Printed for, and are to be sold by Tho. Parkhurst, at the Bible and
Three Crowns in Cheapside.
IN the Press a hundred Select Sermons; by Dr. Tho. Horton. Sermons on the
whole Epistle of St. Paul to the Colossians; br M. J. Daille, translated into
English by F. S. with Dr. Tho. Goodwin's, and Dr. J. Owen's Epistles
Recommendatory. An Exposition of Christ's Temptation on Matthew. 4. and Peter's
Sermon to Cornelius; and Circumspect Walking; by Dr. Tho. Tailor. A practical
Exposition on the 3d Chap. of the 1 Epistle of St. Paul to the Corinthians,
with the Godly Man's Choice, on Psa. 4.6, 7, 8. by Anthony Burgess. An
Exposition on four select Psalms, viz. The fourth Psalm in eight Sermons. The
forty second Psalm in ten Sermons. The fifty first Psalm in twenty Sermons. The
sixty third Psalm in seven Sermons.
Forty six Sermons upon the whole eighth Chapter of the Epistle of the Apostle
Paul to the Romans. Both by Tho. Horton, D.D. late Minister of St. Hellen's. An
Analytical Exposition of Genesis, and of 23 Chapters of Exodus; by G. Hughes,
D.D.
Books 4 to.
Present State of New England. The Door of Salvation opened by the Key of
Regeneration; by G. Swinnock, M. A. An Antidote against Quakerism; by Steph.
Scandert. An Exposition of the 5 first Chap. of Ezekiel. with usual observations
thereupon; by William Greenhill. The Gospel Covenant opened; by P. Bulkley.
God's holy Mind touching matters Moral, which he uttered in ten Commandments:
Also an Exposition on the Lord's Prayer; by Edward Eston, B. D. The
Fiery-Jesuit, or an Historical-Collection of the rise, increase, Doctrines and
Deeds of the Jesuits. Horologiographia optica; Dyaling, universal and
particular, speculative and practical; together with a description of the Court
of Arts, by a new Method; by Sylvanus Morgan. The Practical Divinity of the
Papist discovered to be destructive to true Religion, and men's Souls; by J.
Clarkson. The Creatures goodness as they came out of God's hand, and the good
man's mercy to the brute creatures, in two Sermons; by Tho. Hodges, B. D.
Certain considerations tending to promote Peace and Unity amongst Protestants.
Mediocria, or the most plain and natural apprehensions which the Scripture
offers concerning the great Doctrines of the Christian Religion; of Election,
Redemption, the Covenant, the Law and Gospel, and Perfection. The Saints
triumph over the last enemy, in a Sermon at the Funeral of Mr. Jam. Janeway; by
Nath. Vincent. The vanity of Man in his best estate, in a discourse on Psalm.
39.5. at the Funeral of the Lady Susanna Keate; by Rich. Kidder, M. A.
Peaceable Disquisitions; by Jo. Humphreys. 56 Sermons of Providence; by Joh.
Collings, D. D. Sermons concerning Grace and Temptation; by Tho. Froysell. The
Morning-Lecture against Popery, or the Principal Errors of the Church of Rome
detected and confuted in a Morning-Lecture; preached by several Ministers of
the Gospel in or near London. Four useful discourses: (1) The Art of improving
a full and prosperous condition for the glory of God; being an Appendix to the
Art of Contentment in three Sermons, on Phil. 4.12. (2) Christian submission,
on 1 Samuel 3.18. (3) Christ a Christians life and death is gain, on Phil. 1.21.
(4) The Gospel of Peace sent to the sons of Peace, in six Sermons, on Luke
10.5, 6. by Jer. Buroughs. Dr. Wilds Letter of Thanks and Poems. A new
Copy-Book of all sorts of useful hands. The Saints privilege by dying; by Mr.
Scot. The Virtuous Daughter, a Funeral Sermon; by Mr. Brian. The Miracle of
Miracles, or Christ in our Nature; by Dr. Rich. Sibbs. The unity and essence of
the Catholic Church-visible; by Mr. Hudson. View of Antiquity; by Mr. Jo.
Hanmer. The intercourse of Divine Love between Christ and the Church; or the
particular Believing soul; in several Lectures on the whole second Chap of
Cant. by John Collins, D. D.
Large Octavo.
Heart-Treasure; or a Treatise tending to fill and furnish the head and heart
of every Christian with Soul-enriching treasure of truths, graces, experiences,
and comforts. The sure mercies of David; or a second part of Heart-treasure.
Heaven or Hell here in a good or bad Conscience; by Nath. Vincent.
Closet-prayer a Christians duty; all three by O. Heyword. A practical Discourse
of Prayer; wherein is handled the nature and duty of Prayer; by Tho. Cobbet. Of
quenching the Spirit; the evil of it, in respect both of its causes and
effects, discovered; by Theophilus Polwhiele. The re-building of London
encouraged and improved in several meditations: by Samuel Rolls. The sure way
to Salvation; or a Treatise of the Saints mystical Union with Christ; by
Richard Stedman. M. A. Sober Singularity, by the same Author. Heaven taken by
Storm. The mischief of sin: both by Tho. Watson. The Child's Delight; together
with an English Grammar. Reading and Spelling made easy; both by Tho. Lie.
Aesop's Fables, with morals thereupon in English-Verse. The Young-mans
Instructor, and the Oldmans Remembrancer; being an Explanation of the
Assemblies Catechism. Captives bound in Chains, made free by Christ their
Surety; both by Tho. Doolitle. Eighteen Sermons preached upon several Texts of
Scripture, by William Whitaker. The Saints care for Church Communion; declared
in sundry Sermons, preached at St. James Dukes-place, by Zach. Crofton. The
life and death of Edmund Stanton D. D. To which is added a Treatise of
Christian-conference; and a Dialogue between a Minister and a Stranger. Sin the
Plague of plagues, or sinful sin the worst of Evils; by Ralph Venning, M. A.
Cases of Conscience practically resolved; by J. Norman. The faithfulness of God
considered and cleared in the great Events of his Word; or a second part of the
fulfilling of the Scripture. The immortality of the soul explained and proved
by Scripture and Reason; to which is added Faiths-triumph over the fears of
death; by Tho. Wadsworth. A Treatise of the incomparableness of God, in his
Being, Attributes, Works, and Word; by George Swinnock. M. A. A discourse of
the original, etc. of the Cossacks. The generation of Seekers; or the right
manner of the Saints addresses to the throne of Grace, with an exposition on
the Lords-Prayer. An Essay to facillitate the Education of Youth, by bringing
down the rudiments of Grammar to the sense of seeing, which ought to be
improved by Syncresis; by M. Lewis of Totenham. An Artificial Vestibulum;
wherein the sense of Janua Linguarum is contained, compiled into plain and
short sentences in English, for the great ease of Masters, and Expeditious
progress of Scholars, by M. Lewis. Speculum Sherlockianum, or a Looking glass,
in which the admirers of Mr. Sherlock, may behold the man, as to his Acuracy,
Judgment, Orthodoxy. A discourse of Sins of Omission; wherein is discovered
their Nature, Causes, and Cure; by George Swinnock. Quakerism no Christianity;
or a through-Quaker no Christian, proved by their Principles, and confirmed by
Scripture; by J. Faldo. The Dutch-dispensatory; showing the virtues, qualities
and properties of Simples; the virtue and use of Compounds; whereto is added
the Complete Herbalist.
Small Octavo.
A defense against the fear of death; by Zach. Crofton. Gods Sovereignty
displayed; by William Gearing. The godly man's Ark, or a City of Refuge in the
day of his distress, in five Sermons; with Mrs. Moors evidences from Heaven: by
Edmund Calamy. The Almost-Christian discovered, or the false-Professor tried
and cast, by M. Mead. The true bounds of Christian-freedom: or a discourse
showing the extent and restraints of Christian-liberty, by S. Bolton, D. D. The
sinfulness of Sin and fullness of Christ, in two Sermons; by Will. Bridge. A Plea
for the Godly, or the Righteous man's Excellency. The holy Eucharist, or the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper.

