The INVISIBLE WORLD, Discovered to Spiritual Eyes, and reduced to useful
Meditation. IN THREE BOOKS. Also, the Great MYSTERY of GODLINESS, Laid forth by
way of affectuous and feeling MEDITATION: With the Apostolical Institution of
imposition of Hands, for Confirmation of Children; setting forth the Divine
Ground, End, and Use of that, too much neglected, Institution, and now
published as an excellent Expedient to Truth and Peace.

By JOS. HALL, D.D.B. Norwich.

London, Printed by E. Cotes, for John Place at Furnivals Inne-gate, 1659

To all them that love our Lord Jesus Christ in sincerity, Grace and Peace.
Dear Brethren,
IF I have, in a sort, taken my leave of the world already; yet, not of you,
whom God has chosen out of the world, and endeared to me by a closer interest:
so as ye may justly expect from me a more special valediction; which I do now
in all Christian affection tender unto you: And, as dear friends upon a long
parting are wont to leave behind them some tokens of remembrance, where they
most affect; so have I thought good, before my setting forth on my last
journey, to recomend unto you these my two final Meditations; then which, I
suppose, nothing could be more proper for me to give; or more likely to merit
your acceptance: For, if we were half way in heaven already, what can be a
more seasonable employment of our thoughts, then the great Mystery of
Godliness, which the Angels desire to look into* And, now when our b^dily eyes
are glutted with the view of the things that are seen (a prospect, which can
afford us nothing but vanity and vexation) what can be more meet, then to feed
our spiritual eyes, with the light of Invisible glories? Make your use of
them, both, to the edifying of your selves in your most holy faith; and aspire
with me, toward that happiness which is laid up above for all those that love
the appearance of our Lord Jesus.

Withal, as the last words of friends are wont to bear the greatest weight,
and to make the deepest impression; so let these lines of holy advise,
wherewith (after many well-meant discourses) I shall close up the mouth of the
Press, find the like respect from you.

Oh that I might in the first place, effectually recommend to you the full
recovery of that precious Legacy of our blessed Savior, Peace: peace with God,
Peace with men; next to Grace the best of all blessings: Yet, woe is me, too too
long banished from the Christian world, with such animosity, as if it were the
worst of enemies, and meet to be adjudged to a perpetual mitrnatition.

Oh for a fountain of tears to bewail the stain of Gods people in all the
coasts of the Earth: How is Christendom become an universal Aceldama? How is
the earth every where drenched with humane blood? poured out, not by the hands
of cruel Infidels, but of brethren: Men need not go so far as Euphrates for
the execution of Turks and Pagans, Christians can make up an Armageddon with
their own mutual slaughter. Enough, my dear brethren, enough; yea more then
too much has been the effusion of that blood, for which our Savior has shed
his: Let us now, at the last, dry up these deadly issues, which we have made;
and with sovereign balms bind up the wounds we have given: Let us now be, not
more sparing of our tears, to wash off the memory of these our unbrotherly
dimications, and to ppease the anger of that God, whose offended justice has
raised war out of our own bowels: As our enmity, so our peace begins at heaven:
Had we not provoked our long-suffering God, we had not thus bled; and we cannot
but know and believe him that said. Prove. 16.7.
When a man's ways please the Lord, he makes his enemies to be at peace with
him; Oh that we could thoroughly reconcile our selves to that great and holy
God, whom we have irritated by our crying sins, how soon would he, who is the
commander of all hearts, make up our breaches, and calm and compose our
spirits to an happy peace and concord!

In the next place give me leave earnestly to exhort you, that, as we have been
heretofore palpably faulty in abusing the mercies of our God for which we have
soundly smarted) so that now, we should be so much the more careful to improve
the judgments of God, to our effectual reformation: we have felt the heavy
hand of the Almighty upon us to purpose; Oh that our amendment could be no
less sensible then our sufferings; But, alas, my brethren, are our ways any
whit holyer? our obedience, more exact, our sins less and fewer then before we
were thus heavily afflicted? may not our God too justly take up that complaint,
which he made once by his Prophet Jeremiah, Ye have transgressed against me,
Jer. 2.
says the Lord, In vain have I smitten your children, they received no
correction: Far be it from us, that after so many sad and solemn mournings of
our Land, any accuser should be able to charge us, as the Prophet Hosea did his
Israel, Hos. 4* 2.
By swearing, and lying, and killing, and stealing, and committing adultery,
they break out, and blood touches blood: Woe be to us, if after so many veins
opened, the blood remaining should not be the purer.

Let me have leave, in the third place, to excite you to the practice of
Christian charity, in the mutual constructions of each others persons, and
actions; which (I must tell you) we have heedlesly violated in the heat of our
holy intentions; whiles those which have varied from us in matter of opinion,
concerning some appendances of Religion, and outward forms of administration,
we have been apt to look upon with such disregard, as if they had herein
forfeit (...) their Christian profession, and were utter aliens from the
Commonwealth of Israel; though in the mean time, sound at the heart; and
endeavoring to walk close with God in all their ways: whereas the father of
all mercies allows a gracious latitude to his children, in all not-forbidden
paths: Act^ 10.35.
and in every nation and condition of men, he that fears God, and works
righteousness, is accepted with him: Beware we (my dear brethren) lest whiles
we follow the chase of Zeal, we outrun charity, without which, piety it self
would be but unwelcome: As for matter of opinion in the differences of
Religion, wherewith the whole known world, not of Christians only, but of men,
is woefully distracted, to the great prejudice of millions of souls, let this be
our sure rule. Jude. 3.
Whosoever he be that holds the faith which was once delivered to the Saints,
agreeing therefore with us in all fundamental Truths, let him be received as a
broth^r* For th^re is but one Lord, Ephesians. ^.5
one Faith, one Baptism: And, 1 Cor. 3 11.
other foundation can no man lay, then that which is laid, which is Jesus
Christ: Let those which will be a devising a new Creed, look for a new Savior,
and hope for another heaven; for us we know whom we have believed: If any man
be faulty in the doctrines of superstructure, let us pity and rectify his
error, but not abandon his person.

The Communion of Saints is not so slight that it should be violated by weak
mistakings: if any man through ignorance or simplicity, shall strike at the
foundation of faith, let us labor by all gentle means, and brotherly
conviction, in the spirit of meekness to reclaim him: If after all powerful
endeavors he will needs remain, obstinate in his evil way; let us disclaim
his fellowship, and not think him worthy of a God-speed. But if he shall not
only wilfully undermine the groundwork of Christian faith, by his own damnable
opinions, but diffuse his her^ticall blasphemies to the infection of others;
let him be cut off by spiritual censures; and so dealt with by public
authority that the mischief of his contagion may be seasonably prevented, and
himself be made sensible of his heinous crime.

In all which proceedings, just distinction must be made betwixt the seduced
soul, and the pestilent seducer, the one calls for compassion, the other, for
severity: So then my brethren let us pity and pray for all that have erred and
are deceived; let us instruct the ignorant, convince the gainsaying, avoid the
obstinate, restrain the infectious, and punish the self-convicted heresiarch.

In the fourth place, let us, I beseech you, take heed of being swayed with
selfinterests in all our designs: These have ever been the bane of the best
undertakings, as being not more plausibly insinnuative, then pernicious: For
that partial self-love, that naturally ledges in every man's breast, is ready to
put us upon those projects, which, under fair pretenses, may be extremely
prejudicial to the public weal; suggesting not how lawful or expedient they
may be for the common, but how beneficial to our selves; drawing us by
insensible degrees to sacrifice the public welfare to our own advantage, and
to underwork, and cross the better counsails of more faithful patriots:
Whereupon, many flourishing Churches, Kingdoms, States, have been brought to
miserable ruin: Oh that we could remember, that as all things are ours, so we
are not our own; that we have the least interest in our selves, being
infinitely more considerable as parts of a community, theras single persons;
that the main end of our being, (next to the glory of our maker) is an
universal serviceablenesse to others: in the attaining whereof, we shall far
more eminently advance our own happiness, then by the best of our private
self-seeking endeavors.

But withal, it will be meet for us to consider, that, as we are made to serve
all, so only in our own station: There can be no hope of a continued well being
without order: There can be no order without a due subordination of degrees,
and diversity of vocations; and in vain shall diverse vocations be ordained, if
all professions shall enterfere with each other. It is the prudent and holy
charge of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 7. 2^
Let every man abide in the same calling wherein he is called. We are all
members of the same body, every one whereof has his proper employment: The
head is to direct and govern, the feet to walk, the eyes to see, the ears to
hear: How mad would we think that man, that should affect to walk on his head,
to hear with his eye, to see with his ear? Neither surely is it less
incongruous for men in divine and civil administrations, to offer to
undertake, and manage each others function; in their nature and quality no
less d^sperate: So then, let us endeavor to advance the common good, as that
a pious Zeal may not draw in confusion; and that we may not mistakeingly rear
up the walls of Babel, whiles we intend Jerusalem: Not religion only, but
policy calls us to encouragement of all useful professions; and of the sacred
so much more, as the soul is more precious then all the world beside. Heed
therefore must be taken to avoid all means, whereby the study of learning and
knowledge may be any way disheartened; as without which the world would soon be
overrun with ignorance, and barbarism: All arts therefore, as being in their
kind excellent, may justly challenge their own rights, and if they shall want
those respects, which are due to them, will suddenly languish: But above all,
as Divinity is the Queen of Sciences, so should it be our just shame that
whiles her handmaids are mounted on horsback, she should wait on them on foot.

Fifthly, As it is our greatest honor that the name of Christ is called upon
us; so let it, I beseech you, be our care, that our profession be not formal,
empty, and barren like the Jewish fig tree, abounding with leaves, void of
fruit* but real, active, fruitful of all good works, and exemplary in an
universal obedien^e to the whole will of God: For it is a scandal never to be
enough lamented, that any of those who are Saints by calling (such we all are,
or should be) should hug some dearling sin in their bosom, which at last
breaks forth to the shame of the Gospel, and to the insultation of Gath and
Ascalon: Woe be to us if we shall thus cause the name of our God to be ^ill
spoken of: There are two many of those, whom I am loath, and sorry to style
heathen-Christians; Christians in name, Heathens in conversation: these, as
they come not within the compass of my Dedication, (for, alas, how should they
love the Lord Jesus, when they know him not?) so I can heartily bewail their
condition, who, like Gideons fleece, continue altogether dry, under so many
sweet shewres of Grace; wishing unto their souls, even thus late, a sense of
the efficacy of that water which was once poured on their faces: These, if they
run into all excess of riot, what can be other expected from them? but for us,
that have learned to know the great Mystery of Godliness, and have given up
our name, to a strict covenant of obed^ence, if we shall suffer our selves to
be miscarried into any enormious wickedness, we shall cause heaven to blush,
and hell to triumph. Oh therefore, let us be so much the more watchful over
our ways, as our engagements to the name of our God, are greater, and the
danger of our miscariages more deadly.

Lastly, let me beseech, and adjure you, in the name of the Lord Jesu, to be
careful in matter of Religion, to keep within the due bounds of Gods revealed
will. A charge which I would to God were not too needful in these last days;
wherein, who sees not what Spirits of Error are gone forth into the world, for
the seducing of simple, and ungrounded souls? Woe is me, what throngs are
carried to hell by these devilish impostures? One pretends Visions, and
Revelations of new verities, which the world was not hitherto worthy to know;
another boasts of newlights of uncouth interpretations, hidden from all former
eyes: one despises the dead letter of the scriptures? another distorts it to
his own erroneous sense. O the prodiges of damnable, heretical, Atheous
fancies, which have hereupon infested the Christian Church; (for which, what
good soul does not mourn in secret?) the danger whereof ye shall happily avoid,
if ye shall keep close to the written word of our God which is only able to
make you wise to salvation: As our Savior repelled the Devil, so do ye the
fanatic spirits of these brainsick men, with, It is written; Let those who
would be wiser then God, justly perish in their presumption; My soul for yours,
if ye keep you to S. Paul's guard, not to be wise above that which is written. I
could easily out of the exuberance of my Christian love overcharg you with
multiplicity of holy coun^ses, but I would not take a tedious farewell* May the
God of heaven bless these, and all other wholesome admonitions to the
furtherance of your souls in grace; and may his good spirit, ever lead and
guide us in all such ways, as may be pleasing to him, till we happily meet in
the participation of that incomprehensible glory, which he has prepared for
all his Saints; till when, Farewell from your fellow-pilgrim in this vale of
tears,

Jos. Hall.
HIGHAM near NORWICH, Nov. 3. 1651.
THE INVISIBLE WORLD, Discovered to spiritual Eyes, AND Reduced to useful
Meditation. In three Books.

By JOS. HALL, D.D.B. N.

London, Printed by E. Cotes, for John Place at Furnivals Inne-gate, 1659

The PREFACE.
AS those that flit from their old home, and betake themselves to dwell in
another country, where they are sure to settle; are wont to forget the faces,
and fashions whereto they were formerly inured, and to apply themselves to the
knowledge and acquaintance of those, with whom they shall afterward converse;
So it is here with me, being to remove from my earthly Tabernacle, wherein I
have worn out the few and evil days of my pilgrimage, to an abiding City
above, I have desired to acquaint my self with that Invisible world, to which I
am going: to enter-know my good God, and his blessed Angels and Saints, with
whom I hope to pass an happy eternity. And if by often and serious meditation
I have attained (through Gods mercy) to any measure of lightsome apprehension
of them, and their blisseful condition; I thought it could be no other then
profitable to my fellow-pilgrims, to have it imparted unto them: And, as
knowing we can never be sensible enough of our happiness, unless we know our
own dangers, and the woeful mis-carriages of others; nor so fully bless our
eyes with the sight of heaven, if we cast not some glances upon hell; I have
held it requisite to bestow some thoughts upon that dreadful region of
darkness, and confusion, that by the former of these, our desires may be
whetted to the fruition of their blessedness; and by the other, we may be
stirred up to a care of avoiding those paths that lead down to that second
death; and to a continual thankfulness unto that merciful God, whose infinite
goodness has delivered us from that pit of horror, and perdition.

THE INVISIBLE WORLD. The First BOOK.
SECT. I. That there is an invisible world.
WHo can think other, but that the great God of heaven loses much glory by our
ignorance? For, how can we give him the honor due to his name, whiles we
conceive too narrowly of him, and his works? To know him as he is, is past the
capacity of our finite understanding, we must have other eyes to discern that
incomprehensible essence; but to see him in his divine emanations, and
marvailous works, (which are the back parts of that glorious majesty) is that,
whereof we may be capable, and should be ambitious; Neither is there any thing
in this world, that can so much import us: For wherefore serves the eye of
sense, but to view the goodly frame and furniture of the Creation? wherefore
serves the eye of reason and faith, but to see that lively and invisible power,
which governs and comprehends it?

Even this sensible, and material world, if we could conceive aright of it, is
enough to amaze the most enlightened reason; for if this globe of earth, in
regard of the immense greatness of it, is wont (not unjustly) to be accounted
a World, what shall we say of so many thousand stars, that are (for the most
part) bigger then it? how can we but admire so many thousand worlds of light,
rolling continually over our heads; all made by the omnipotent power; all
regularly guided by the infinite providence of the great God? How poorly must
that man needs think of the workmanship of the Almighty, that looks upon all
these, but as so many Torches, set up in the firmament every evening, only so
big as they seem? and with what awful respects must he needs be carried to his
Creator, that knows the vastness, and perpetually-constant movings of those
lightsom bodies, ruled and upheld only by the mighty word that made them?

There is store of wonders in the visible, but the spiritual, and intelligible
world is that, which is more worthy to take up our hearts; both as we are men,
endued with reason, and as regenerate, enlightened by faith; being so much more
excellent then the other, by how much more it is removed from all earthly means
of apprehension. Brute creatures may behold these visible things, perhaps with
sharper eyes then we, but spiritual objects are so utterly out of their reach,
as if they had no being: Nearest therefore to beasts are those men, who suffer
themselves to be so altogether led by their senses, as to believe nothing but
what is suggested by that purblind and unfaithful informer; Nulla visibil^a
nisi per invisibilia v^dentur: Tell mentem quae non videtur, and incassum
patebit oculus. Greg.
Let such men doubt whether they have a soul in their body, because their eye
never met with it; or that there are any stars in the firmament at noonday,
because they appear not; or that there is any air wherein they breath, because
nothing appears to them but an insensible vacuity.

Of all other the Sadduces had been the most dull and sottish heretics that
ever were, if (as some have construed them) they had utterly denied the very
being of any Spirits; Camer. in Act. 23.8.
Sure (as learned Cameron pleads for them) they could not be so senseless; for
believing the books of Moses, and being conscious of their own animation, their
bosoms must needs convince them of their spiritual inmate; and what but a
spirit could enable them to argue against spirits? and how could they hold a
God, and no Spirit? it was bad enough that they denied the immortality, and
constant subsistence of those Angelical, immaterial substances; an opinion long
since hissed out, not of the School of Christianity only, but of the very
stalls and styes of the most brutish Paganism; although not very long since
(as is reported by Hosius, and Prateolus) that cursed Glazier of Gaunt, David
George, durst wickedly rake it out of the dust, and of late some Scepticks of
our own have let fall some suspicious glances this way: Surely, all that know
they have souls, must needs believe a world of spirits, which they see not; if
from no other grounds, yet out of that analogy, which they cannot but find
betwixt this lesser, and that greater world; for as this little world, Man,
consists of an outward visible body, and an inward spiritual soul, which gives
life, and motion to that organicall frame; so possessing all parts that it is
wholly in all, and in each part wholly; So must it also be in this great
Universe, the sensible and material part whereof, has being, and moving from
those spiritual powers, both supreme and subordinate, which dwell in it, and
fill and actuate it. Every illuminated soul therefore looks about him with no
other then S. Paul's eyes; whose profession it is, We look not at the things
which are seen, 2 Cor. 4.18
but at the things which are not seen, for the things which are seen are
temporal, but the things which are not seen are eternal.

SECT. II. The distribution of the Invisible world.
I Cannot quite mislike the conceit of Reuchlin, and his ^abala, seconded by
Galatinus, that as in an egg, the yelk lies in the midst encompassed round
with the white, and that again by a film and shell; so the sensible world is
enclosed within the intelligible; but withal I must add, that here is not a
mere involution only, but a spiritual permeation and inexistence; yet without
all mixture, without all confusion; for those pure and simple natures are not
capable of mingling with gross, material substances; and the God of Order
has given them their own separate essences* offices, operations; as for the
managing of their own spiritual Commonwealth, within themselves, so for the
disposing, governing, and moving of this sensible world: As therefore we shall
foully misconceive of a man, if we shall think him to be nothing but a body,
because our eyes see no more; so we shall no less grossly err, if beholding
this outward fabric, we shall conceive of nothing to be in this vast Universe,
but the mere lifelesse substance of the heavens, and elements, which runs into
our sight; those lively and active powers that dwell in them could not be such,
if they were not purely spiritual.

Here then, above and beyond all worlds, and in this material, and
intelligible world, our illuminated eyes meet first with the God of Spirits;
the DEITY incomprehensible, the fountain of all life and being; the infinite
and self-existing Essence, one most pure, simple, eternal Act; the absolute,
omnipotent, omnipresent Spirit, who in himself is more then a world of worlds,
filling and comprehending both the spiritual and sensible world; in comparison
of whom, this All is nothing; and but from him had been, and were nothing: Omne
tempus quo de Deo non cogitat, perdidisse se computat Bern. de spec. mon.
Upon this blessed object, O my soul, may thy thoughts ever dwell; where the
more they are fixed, the more shall they find themselves ravished from the
regard of all sensible things, and swallowed up with an admiration of that,
which they are still further off from comprehending. Next to this All-glorious
and infinite spirit, they meet with those immateriall and invisible powers, who
receive their original and continuance, their natures and offices from that
King of glory; Each one whereof is so mighty, as to make up a world of power
alone; each one so knowing, as to contain a world of wisdom, and all of them so
innumerably many, that their number is next to infinite; and all this
numberless number so perfectly united in one celestial polity, that their
entire communion (under the laws and government of their soverain Creator)
makes them a complete world of Spirits, invisibly living and moving both within
and above this visible globe of the material world. After these, meet we with
the glorified souls of the Just, who now let loose from this prison of clay,
enjoy the full liberty of heaven; and being at last, reunited to their then
immortal bodies, and to their most glorious head, both are, and possess a
world of everlasting bliss.

Last of all, may thy thoughts fall upon those infernal powers of darkness,
the spiritual wickednesses in heavenly places; whose number, might,
combination, makes up a dreadful world of evil Angels, conflicting where they
prevail not, and tormenting where they overcome; These, together with the
reprobate souls, whom they have captived, are the most horrible and woeful
prospects of mischief and misery, which either world is subject unto; Now all
and every of these, however in respect of largeness, they may well pass for
so many several worlds; yet as we are wont to account the whole globe of
heaven and earth, and the other enclosed elements (though vast in their
several extents) to make up but one sensible world; so shall we (in a desire
to reduce all to unity) consider all the entire specifications of spirits, but
as ranked in so many regions of one immateriall, and intelligible world.

Wherefore let us first silently adore (that mundum archetypum) that one
transcendent, self-being, and infinite essence, in three most glorious persons,
the blessed Deity, which fills heaven and earth with the majesty of his
glory, as veiled with the beams of infiniteness, and hid in an inaccessible
light; and let us turn our eyes to the spiritual guard, the invisible
attendants of that divine Majesty, without the knowledge and right apprehension
whereof, we shall never attain to conceive of their God, and ours, as we ought.

But, O ye blessed, immortal glorious spirits, who can know you, but he that is
of you? alas this soul of mine knows not it self, how shall it know you?
Surely, no more can our minds conceive of you, then our eyes can see you: Only,
since he that made you has given us some little glimpse of your subdivine
natures, properties, operations, let us weakly as we may, recount them to his
glory in yours.

SECT. III. The Angels of heaven. Their numbers.
THe good Lord forgive me for that (amongst my other offenses) I have suffered
my self so much to forget (as his divine presence, so) the presence of his holy
Angels; It is I confess my great sin, that I have filled mine eyes with other
objects, and have been slack in returning praises to my God, for the continual
assistance of those blessed and beneficent spirits, which have ever graciously
attended me, without intermission, from the first hour of my conception to this
present moment; neither shall ever (I hope) absent themselves from my tutelage,
and protection, till they shall have presented my poor soul to her final glory:
Oh that the dust and clay were so washed out of my eyes, that I might behold,
together with the presence, the numbers, the beauties and excellencies of those
my ever-present guardians.

When we are convinced of the wonderful magnitude of those goodly stars, which
we see moving in the firmament, we cannot but acknowledge, that if God had made
but one of them, he could never have been enough magnified in his power; but,
when our sense joins with our reason, to force upon us withal an
acknowledgement of the infinite numbers of those great luminaries; now we are
so far to seek of due admiration, that we are utterly lost in the amazement at
this stupendous proof of omnipotence. Neither is it otherwise with the
invisible, host of heaven: If the power of one Angel be such, that he were
able at his makers appointment, to redact the world to nothing, and the nature
of any one so eminent, that it far surmounts any part of the visible Creation,
what shall we say to those next-to-infinite numbers of mighty, and majestical
spirits, wherewith the great God of heaven has furnished his throne and
footstool? I know not upon what grounds that (by some, Brigit. l. Revelat. 4.
magnified) Prophetess, could so precisely compute, that if all men should be
reckoned up from the first Adam to the last man that shall stand upon the earth,
there might be to each man assigned more then ten Angels; Ambroses account is
yet fuller; who makes all mankind to be that one lost sheep in the parable, and
the Angels (whose chore the great shepherd left for a time, to come down to
this earthly wilderness) to be the ninety and nine: Lo here, wel-near an
hundred for one; Yet even that number is poor, Dionys. Areopag.
in comparison of the reckoning of him, who pretends to fetch it from the
chosen vessel rapt into Paradise; who presumes to tell us there are greater
numbers of Angels in every several rank, then there is of the particulars of
whatsoever material things in this world; The Bishop of Herbipolis instanceth
boldly in stars, in leaves, in spires of grass. Fo^ner. de Cust. Ange. Sermon. 4.
But, sure I am, had that Dennis of Areopagus been in S. Paul's room, and
supplied his rapture, he could no more have computed the number of Angels, then
the best Arithmetician, standing upon an hill, and seeing a huge Xerxes-like
Army swarming in the valley, can give a just reckoning of the number of those
heads: Surely, Mat. 26.53.
when our Savior speaks of more then twelve legions of Angels, he does not
say, how many ^ore: If those twelve according to Hieroms (though too short)
computation, amount to seventy-two thousand, the more then twelve were
doubtless more then many millions; He that made them can tell us; The beloved
Disciple in Pathmos, as by inspiration from that God, says, Rev. 5. 11.
I beheld, and I heard the voice of many Angels round about the throne, and the
Beasts, and the Elders, and the number of them was ten thousand times ten
thousand, and thousands of thousands; now the Elders were but 24. and the
Beasts were but four; all those other thousands were Angels; and if so many
were about his throne, how many do we think were about his missions?

Before him, the Prophet Daniel (betwixt whom and the Evangelist there is so
perfect correspondence, that we may well say, Dan. 7.10.
Daniel was the John of the old Testament, and John the Daniel of the new) has
made the like reckoning; Thousand thousands ministered unto him, and ten
thousand times ten thousand stood before him: But Bildad the Shuhite, Job 25.2.
in one word says more then all, Is there any number of his Armies? Lo, his
Armies are past all number, how much more his several soldiers? so as it may
not perhaps seem hard to believe Dionysius, that the Angels of but one rank,
are more then can be comprehended by any Arithmetical number; or Gregory, who
determines them numerable only to God that made them, to men innumerable.

O great God of heaven, how does this set forth the infinite majesty of thine
omnipotent Deity, to be thus attended! we judge of the magnificence of Princes
according to the number and quality of their retinue and guard, and other their
military powers; and yet each one of these has an equally absolute life, and
being of his own, receiving only a pay from his Sovereign; What shall we then
think of thee the great King of eternal glory, that have before thy throne,
innumerable hosts of powerful and glorious spirits of thine own making, and
upholding? Cuique electo ordinary certum propriumque Angelum qui perpetuus sit
ejus custos and comes. Zanch de operibus creat. l. 3. c. 15.
And how safe are we under so many, and so mighty Protectors? It might be
perhaps well meant, and is confessed to be seconded with much reverend
antiquity, the conceit, that each man has a special Angel designed for his
custody; and if but so, we are secure enough from all the danger of whatsoever
hostile machinations; however this may seem some scanting of the bountiful
provision of the Almighty, who has pleased to express his gracious respects
to one man in the allotment of many guardians; Psalm. 91.11.
For if Jacob speak of one Angel, David speaks of more; He shall give his
Angels charge over thee to keep thee in all thy ways: And even those which
have thought good to abet this piece of Platonic Divinity concerning the
single Guardianship of Angels, have yet yielded that according to several
relations, each one has many spiritual keepers: Insomuch as the forecited Ex
quo fa^ile colligitur, ex vobis unumquemque habere plus quam december Angelos.
Forner. de Cust^d. Ang. Sermon. 5. p. 56.
Fornerus, late Bishop of Wirtzburg, durst assure his auditors, that each of
them had ten Angels at least assigned to his custody; according to the respects
of their subordinate interests, besides their own person, of their Family,
Parish, Fraternity, City, Diocese, Country, Office, Church, World; Yet even
this computation is niggardly and How scant then is the account of the great
and voluminous Abulensis, who upon Mat. 18. v. 60. determines that the blessed
Virgin had two Angel-keepers; one, the most noble of the Angeli^^ll order,
which guarded her all her life, the other Gabriel an Arch-angell of the second
Order, who attended her from the time of Christ's conception, until his
passion. Barrad. l 6. c. 10.

As also that of Degrassalius: that the French King has two Angel-guardians,
one in regard of his private person, another in respect to his royal Dignity.
Degrassal. l. 1. Jure 20. Regal. Franciae.


pinching, since the abundant store and bounty of the Almighty can as well
afford Centuries, as Decades of Guardians; Howsoever, why should it not be all
one to us, since there is no less safety in the hands of one then many; no
less care of us from many, then from one? should but one Angel guard millions
of men, his power could secure them no less then a single charge; but now that
we are guarded with millions of Angels, what can the gates of hell do? But what
number soever be employed about us; sure I am that (together with them) those
that attend the throne of their maker, make up no less (as Nazianzen justly
accounts them) then a world of spirits: A world so much more excellent then
this visible, by how much it is more abstracted from our weak senses: O ye
blessed spirits, ye are ever by me, ever with me, ever about me; I do as good
as see you for I know you to be here; I reverence your glorious persons, I
bless God for you; I walk awfully because I am ever in your eyes, I walk
confidently because I am ever in your hands. M. Blunts Voyage to the Levant.
How should I be ashamed that in this piece of Theology, I should be out-bid by
very Turks, whose Priests shut up their Devotions with an precatory mention of
your presence, as if this were the upshot of all blessings; I am sure it is
that, wherein, next to my God and Savior, I shall ever place my greatest
comfort and confidence, neither has earth or heaven any other besides, that
looks like it.

SECT. IV. The power of Angels.
MUltitudes even of the smallest and weakest creatures have been able to
produce great effects: The swarms of but Flies and Lice could amate the great
and mighty King of Egypt: all his forces could not free him, and his Peers from
so impotent adversaries: but when multitude is seconded with strength, how must
it needs be irresistible? so it is in these blessed spirits, even their
omnipotent maker (who best knows what is derived from him) styles them by his
Apostle, Ephesians. 3.10. Colos. 2.10. Ps. 103.10.
Powers, and by his Psalmist, mighty ones in strength: A small force seems
great to the weak, but that power which is commended by the Almighty, must
needs be transcendently great: we best judge of powerfulness by the effects;
How suddenly had one Angel dispatched every firstborn in Egypt, and after
them, the hundred fourscore and five thousand of the proud Assyrian Army: 2
King. 19.35.
and if each man had been a Legion, with what ease had it been done by that
potent spirit? Neither are they less able to preserve then to destroy; That of
Aquinas is a great word, One Angel is of such power, that be were able to
govern all the corporeal creatures of the world: Justly was it exploded, as
the wild heresy of Simon Magus and his clients, the Meand^ians, that the
Angels made the world; No, this was the sole work of him that made them; but,
if we say that it pleases God by their ministration to sway and order the
marvailous affairs of this great Universe, we shall not, I suppose, vary from
truth; If we look to the highest part thereof, Philosophers have gone so far as
to teach us, (that which is seconded by the allowance of some great Divines)
that these blessed Intelligences are they by whose agency under their Almighty
Creator, the heavens and the glorious luminaries thereof continue their
ever-constant and regular motions; And, if there fall out any preternaturall
immutations in the elements, any strange concussations of the earth, any
direful prodigies in the sky, whither should they be imputed but to these
mighty Angels, whom it pleases the most high God to employ in these
extraordinary services? That dreadful magnificence which was in the delivering
of the Law on Mount Sinai, in fire, smoke, thundrings, lightnings, voices,
earthquakes, whence was it but by the operation of Angels? And indeed as they
are the nearest both in nature and place, to the majesty of the highest, so it
is most proper for them to participate most of his power, and to exercise it in
obedience to his Sovereignty; As therefore he is that infinite Spirit, who does
all things, and can do no more then all, so they (as his immediate
subordinates) are the means whereby he executes his illimited power in and
upon this whole created world. Joel 3.11.
Whence it is, that in their glorious appearances, they have been taken for
Jehovah himself, Genesis 16.3. Judge. 13.27. Genesis 22.14.
by Hagar, by Manoah and his wife, yea, by the better eyes of the Father of the
faithful.

Now, Lord, what a protection have thou provided for thy poor worms, and not
men, creeping here on thine earth; and what can we fear in so mighty, and sure
hands? He that passes with a strong convoy through a wild and perilous desert,
scorns the danger of wild beasts or robbers, no less then if he were in a
strong tower at home; so do we the onsets of the powers of darkness, whiles we
are thus invincibly guarded.

When God promised Moses that an Angel should go before Israel, and yet
withal threatened the subduction of his own presence, I marvel not if the holy
man were no less troubled, then if they had been left destitute and guardless,
and that he ceased not his importunity, till he had won the gracious engagement
of the Almighty for his presence in that whole expedition: For what is the
greatest Angel in heaven without his maker? But let thy favor, O God, order
and accompany the deputation of the lowest of thine Angels; what can all the
troops of hell hurt us? As Soon may the walls of heaven be scaled, and thy
throne deturbed, as he can be foiled that is defenced with thy power: Were it
possible to conceive that the Almighty should be but a looker on in the
conflict of spirits, we know that the good Angels have so so much advantage of
their strength as they have of their station; neither could those subdued
spirits stand in the encounter; but now, he that is strong in our weakness, is
strong in their strength for us: blessed be God for them, as the Author of
them, and their protection; Blessed be they under God as the means used by him
for our protection, and blessings.

SECT. V. The knowledge of Angels.
IF Sampson could have had his full strength in his mill, when he wanted his
eyes, it would have little availed him; such is power without knowledge; but
where both of these concur in one, how can they fail of effect? Whether of
these is more eminent in the blessed spirits, it is not easy to determine; so
perfectly knowing are they, as that the very heathen Philosophers have styled
them by the name of Intelligences, as if their very being were made up of
understanding; Indeed what is there in this whole compass of the large Universe
that is hid from their eyes? only the closet of man's heart is locked up from
them, as reserved solely to their maker; yet so, as that ^hey can by some
insensible chinks of those secret notifications which fall from us, look into
them also; all other things, whether secrets of nature, or closest counsels or
events, are as open to their sight as the most visible objects are to ours:
They do not (as we mortals are wont) look through the dim and horny spectacle
o^ senses, or understand by the mediation of Phantasms: but rather, as clear
mirrours, they receive at once the full representations of all intelligible
things; having besides that connaturall light, which is universally in them
all, certain special illuminations from the Father of lights. Even we men
think we know something, neither may our good* God lose the thank of his bounty
this way: Arist. Me^aph^s. l. 2.
but alas, he that is reputed to have known most of all the heathen, whom
B^navent. Vulcan. pra^f^t. in lib. de mundo.
some have styled the Genius of nature could confess that the clearest
understanding is to those things which are most manifest, but as a bats eyes to
the Sun: Do we see but a worm crawling under our feet, we know not what that
is, which in it self gives it a being; L. Bacon in his Natural Hist.
Do we hear but a Be humming about our ears, the greatest Naturalist cannot
know whether that noise come from within the body, or from the mouth, or from
the wings of that Fly: How can we then hope, or pretend to know those things
which are abstruse, and remote? But these heavenly spirits do not only know
things as they are in themselves, and in their inward and immediate causes, but
do clearly see the first and universal cause of all things; and that in his
glorious essence; how much more do they know our shallow dispositions,
affections, inclinations, (which peer out of the windows of our hearts)
together with all perils, and events that are incident unto us?

We walk therefore amids not more able then watchful overseers; and so are we
looked thorough in all our ways, as if heaven were all eyes; Under this blessed
vigilance, if the powers of hell can either surprise us with suddenness, or
circumvent us with subtlety, let them not spare to use their advantage. But oh
ye tutelar spirits, ye well know our weakness and their strength, our
silliness and their craft, their deadly machinations and our miserable
obnoxiousnesse; neither is your love to markinde, and fidelity to your maker,
any whit less then your knowledge, so as your charge can no more miscarry
under your hands and eyes, then your selves. As you do always enjoy the
beatifical vision of your maker, so your eye is never off from his little ones
your blessedness is no more separable from our safety, then you from your
blessedness.

SECT. VI. The employments and operations of Angels.
EVen while we see you not, O ye blessed spirits, we know what ye do: He that
made you has told us your task: As there are many millions of you attending
the all-glorious throne of your Creator, and singing perpetual Hallelujahs to
him in the highest heavens; so there are innumerable numbers of you employed in
governing and ordering the creature; in guarding the elect, in executing the
commands which ye receive from the Almighty; what variety is here of your
assistance? One while ye lead us in our way, as ye did Israel: another while ye
instruct us, as ye did Daniel: one while ye fight for us, as ye did for Joshua,
and Judas Maccabaeus: another while ye purvey for us, as for Elias: one while
ye fit us to our holy vocation, as ye did to Esaias: another while ye dispose of
the opportunities of our calling for good, as ye did of Philips to the Eunuch:
one while ye foretell our danger, as to Lot, to Joseph and Mary: another while
ye comfort our affliction, as to Hagar: one while ye oppose evil projects
against us, as to Balaam: another while ye will be striven with for a blessing,
as with Jacob: one while ye resist our offensive courses, Exodus 4.
as to Moses; another while ye encourage us in our devotions, as ye did Paul,
and Silas, and Cornelius: one while ye deliver from durance, as Peter: another
while ye preserve us from danger and death, as the three children: one while ye
are ready to restrain our presumption, as the Cherub before the gate of
Paradise: another while to excite our courage, as to Elias and Theodosius: one
while to refresh and cheer us in our sufferings, as to the Apostles; another
while to prevent our sufferings, as to Jacob, in the pursuit of Laban and Esau,
to the Sages in the pursuit of Herod: one while ye cure our bodies, as at the
pool of Bethesda; another while ye carry up our souls to glory, as ye did to
Lazarus: It were endless to instance in all the gracious offices which ye
perform; Certainly there are many thousand events, wherein common eyes see
nothing but nature, which yet are effected by the ministration of Angels: when
Abraham sent his servant to procure a wife for his son, from amongst his own
cognation; the messenger saw nothing but men like himself; but Abraham saw an
Angel fore-contriving the work; Genesis 24.7.
God (says he) shall send his Angel before thee, that thou may take a wife
thence; when the Israelites forcibly by dint of sword expelled the Canaanites,
and Amorites, and the other branded nations, nothing appeared but their own
arms; but the Lord of hosts could say, I will send mine Angel before thee, by
whom I shall drive them thence: Balaam saw his Ass disorderly starting in the
path; he that formerly had seen Visions, now sees nothing but a wall, and a
way, but in the mean time, his Ass, (who for the present had more of the
Prophet then his Master) could see an Angel and a sword. The Sodomites went
groping in the street for Lots door, and miss it; they thought of nothing but
some sudden dizzinesse of brain, that disappointed them, we know it was an
Angel that stroke them with blindness: Nothing appeared when the Egyptian
firstborn were struck dead in one night; the Astrologers would perhaps say
they were Planet-struck, we know it was done by the hand of an Angel: Nothing
was seen at the pool of Bethesda, but a moved water, when the sudden cures
were wrought, which perhaps might be attributed to some beneficial
constellation; we know that an Angel descended, and made the water thus
sanative: G^hezi saw his master strangely preserved from the Aramite troops,
but had not his eyes been opened by the Prophets prayers, he had not seen
whence that aid came: Neither is it otherwise in the frequent experiments of
our life; Have we been raised up from deadly sicknesses, when all natural
helps have given us up? Gods Angels have been our secret Physicians; Have we
had instinctive intimations of the death of some absent friends, which no
humane intelligence has bidden us to suspect, who but our Angels has wrought
it? have we been preserved from mortal dangers which we could not tell how by
our providence to have evaded? our invisible Guardians have done it.

Qualiter pueri inter tot infantiae discrimina, etc. Gers. Sermon. de Angel.
I see no reason to dislike that observation of Gerson; Whence is it (says he)
that little children are conserved from so many perils of their infancy; fire,
water, falls, suffocations, but by the agency of Angels? Surely, where we find
a probability of second causes in nature, we are apt to confine our thoughts
from looking higher; yet even there many times are unseen hands: had we seen
the house fall upon the heads of Jobs children, we should perhaps have
attributed it to the natural force of a vehement blast, when now we know it was
the work of a spirit: Had we seen those thousands of Israel falling dead of the
plague, we should have complained of some strange infection in the air, when
David saw the Angel of God acting in that mortality: Humane reason is apt to be
injuriously saucie, in ascribing those things to an ordinary course of natural
causes, which the God of nature does by supernatural agents.

A master of Philosophy traveling with others on the way* when a fearful
thunder-storm arose, checked the fear of his fellows, and discoursed to them of
the natural reasons of that uprore in the clouds, and those sudden flashes
wherewith they seemed (out of the ignorances of causes) to be too much
affrighted; in the midst of his philosophical discourse, he was stricken dead
with that dreadful eruption which he slighted; what could this be but the
finger of that God, who will have his works rather entertained with wonder, and
trembling, then with curious scanning; Neither is it otherwise in those violent
Huracans, devouring earthquakes, and more then ordinary tempests, and fiery
apparitions which we have seen and heard of; for however there be natural
causes given of the usual events of this kind, yet nothing hinders, but that
the Almighty for the manifestation of his power and justice, may set spirits
whether good or evil, on work to do the same things sometimes with more state
and magnificence of horror: like as we see Frogs bred ordinarily, both out of
putrefaction, and generation, and yet (when it was) for a plague to Egypt, they
were supernaturally produced; Hail; an ordinary meteore; murrain of Cattle an
ordinary disease, yet for a plague to obdured Pharaoh miraculously wrought.

Neither need there be any great difficulty in discerning when such like events
run in a natural course, and when spirits are actors in them; the manner of
their operation, the occasions and effects of them shall soon discry them to a
judicious eye; for when we shall find that they do manifestly deviate from the
road of nature, and work above the power of secondary causes, it is easy to
determine them to be of an higher efficiency. I could instance irrefragrably in
several tempests and thunderstorms (which to the unspeakable terror of the
inhabitants) were, in my time, seen heard, felt, in the In the Churches of Foye
Totnesse, and Withicomb. Of the same kind were those prodigious tempests at
Millain Anno 1521. and at Mechlin Aug. 7. Anno 1527.
Western parts; wherein the translocation, and transportation of huge massy
stones, and irons of the Churches above the possibility of natural distance,
together with the strange preservation of the persons assembled, with other
accidents sensibly accompanying those astonishing works of God, (still fresh in
the minds of many) showed them plainly to be wrought by a stronger hand then
natures. Nestoires prodigieuses de P. Boaistuan. cap. 8. Of the same kind was
that fearful Tempest which in the 4 year of K. Will. Rufus, blew down 600
houses in London, and reaving Bow Church carried away six beams of 27 foot
long, and struck them into the earth (the streets being then unpaved) so deep,
tha^ only four foot remained above ground. Chron. of S. Rob. Baker of the reign
of Will. 2.
And whither else should we ascribe many events which ignorance teaches us to
wonder at in silence: If murders be descryed by the fresh bleeding of cold, and
almost putrefied carcasses: If a man by some strong instinct be warned to
change that lodging, which he constantly held for some years, and finds his
wonted sleeping place that night crushed with the unexpected fall of an
unsuspected contignation: If a man distressed with care for the missing of an
important evidence ( M. Will. Cook, sen. of Waltham holy Cross.
such a one I have known) shall be informed in his dream, in what hole of his
Dove-cote he shall find it hid: If a man without all observation of Physical
criticisms, shall receive and give intelligence many days before, what hour
shall be his last, to what cause can we attribute these, but to our attending
Angels? Marc. Aurel. Antoninus his Meditat, concerning himself, l. 1. c. 17.
The like he reports of Chryses, ibid.
If a man shall in his dream (as Marcus Aurelius Antoninus professes) receive
the prescript of the remedy of his disease, which the Physicians it seems could
not cure; whence can this be but by the suggestion of spirits? And surely,
since I am convinced that their unfelt hands are in many occurrences of my
life; I have learned so much wit and grace, as rather to yield them too much
then too little stroke in ordering all my concernments: O ye blessed spirits,
many things I know ye do for me, which I discern not, whiles ye do them; but
after they are done: and many things ye may do more which I know not; I bless
my God and yours, as the author of all ye do; I bless you as the means of all
that is done by you for me.

SECT. VII. The Degrees and Orders of Angels.
HEaven has nothing in it but perfection; but even perfection it self has
degrees as the glorified souls, so the blessed Angels have their heights of
excellency and glory: He will be known for the God of Order, observes no doubt
a most exact order in his Court of heaven, nearest to the residence of his
Majesty. Equality has no place, either in earth or in hell; we have no reason
to seek it in heaven. He that was rapt into the third heaven can tell us of
Thrones, Dominions, Principalities, Angels and Archangels in that region of
blessedness. We cannot be so simple, as to think these to be but one class of
spirits; doubtless they are distinctions of diverse orders: But what their
several ranks, offices, employments are, he were not more wise that could
tell, then he is bold that dare speak: What modest indignation can forbear
stamping at the presumption of those men, who, as if upon Domingo Gonsales his
engine, they had been mounted by his Gansaes from the Moon to the Empyreall
heaven, and admitted to be the heralds, or masters of ceremonies in that higher
world, have taken upon them to marshall these Angelical spirits into their
several rooms; proportioning their stations, dignities, services, according to
the model of earthly Courts; disposing them into Ternions of three general
Hierarchies, the first relating to the immediate attendance of the Almighty;
the other two to the government of the Creature, both general, and particular.
In the first, of Assistents, placing the Seraphim as Lords of the chamber; Vt
Commensales Deo, Forner. Ser. 4. de Cust. A^g. or as Cassaneus, Cubicularii and
servi^utes, Throni Glor. mund 4 part.
Cherubim, as Lords of the cabinet-counsel; Thrones as entire Favorites, in
whom the Almighty places his rest.

In the second of universal Regency; finding Dominions to be the great
Officers of State, who, as Chancellours, Marshals, Treasurers, govern the
affairs of the world, Mights, to be the Generals of the heavenly Militia:
Powers, as the Judges Itinerant, that serve for general retributions of good
and evil.

In the third of special government, placing Principalities as rulers of
several Kingdoms and Provinces; Archangels, as guardians to several Cities
and Countries; Forner. de Custod. Ang. Sermon. 5.
and lastly, Angels as guardians of several persons: And withal presuming to
define the differences of degrees, in each order above other, in respect of the
goodlinesse, and excellency of their nature; making the Archangels no less
then ten times to surpass the beauty of Angels; Principalities, twenty times
above the Archangels; Powers, forty times more then Principalities: Mights,
fifty more then Powers: Domininions, sixty above Mights: Thrones, seventy above
Dominions: Cherubim, eighty above thrones: Seraphim, ninety times exceeding the
Cherubim. For me, I must crave leave to wonder at this boldness: and profess
my self as far to seek whence this learning should come, as how to believe it:
I do verily believe there are diverse orders of celestial spirits: I believe
they are not to be believed that dare to determine them: Compare Ephesians.1.21.
with Colos. 1.16.
especially when I see him that was rapt into the third heaven, varying the
order of their places in his several mentions of them: S. Matild. l. Revel. c.
54. Citat. etiam a Forter.
Neither can I trust to the Revelation of that Sainted Prophetess who has
ranged the degrees of the beatitude of glorified souls, into the several chores
of these heavenly Hierarchies, according to their dispositions, and demeanures
here on earth; admitting those who have been charitably helpful to the poor,
sick, strangers, into the orb of Angels: Those who have given themselves to
meditation and prayer, to the rank of Archangels; those who have vanquished all
offensive lusts in themselves, to the order of Principalities; to the height of
Powers, those, whose care and vigilance has restrained from evil, and induced
to good such as have been committed to their oversight and governance. To the
place of Mights, those who for the honor of God, have undauntedly and
valiantly suffered; and whose patience has triumphed over evils: To the
company of Dominions those who prefer poverty to riches, and devoutly conform
their wills in all things to their Makers: To the society of Thrones, those,
who do so inure themselves to the continual contemplation of heavenly things,
as that they have disposed their hearts to be a fit resting place for the
Almighty; To the honor of Cherubim, those who convey the benefit of their
heavenly meditations unto the souls of others: Lastly, to the highest eminence
of Seraphim, those who love God with their whole heart, and their neighbor for
God, and their enemies in God; and feel no wrongs but those which are done to
their Maker.

I know not whether this soaring conceit be more seemingly pious, then really
presumptuous; since it is evident enough, that these graces do incur into each
other, and are not possible to be severed: He that loves God cannot choose but
be earnestly desirous to communicate his graces unto others, cannot but have
his heart taken up with divine contemplation; the same man cannot but overlook
earthly things, and courageously suffer for the honor of his God: Shortly, he
cannot but be vigilant over his own ways, and helpful unto others: Why should
I presume to divide those virtues, or rewards which God will have inseparably
conjoined? And what a strange confusion were this, in stead of an heavenly
order of remuneration? Sure I am, that the least degree both of Saints and
Angels is blessedness: But for those stairs of Glory, it were too ambitious in
me to desire either to climb, or know them: It is enough for me to rest in the
hope that I shall once see them; in the mean time, let me be learnedly
ignorant, and incuriously devout, silently blessing the power and wisdom of my
infinite Creator, who knows how to honor himself by all these glorious, and
unrevealed subordinations.

SECT. VIII. The apparitions of Angels.
WEre these celestial spirits, though never so many, never so powerful, never
so knowing, never so excellently glorious, mere strangers to us, what were
their number, power, knowledge, glory unto us? I hear of the great riches,
state and magnificence of some remote Eastern Monarchs, what am I the better,
whiles in this distance their port and affairs are not capable of any relation
to me? To me it is all one not to be, and not to be concerned: Let us therefore
diligently inquire, what mutual communion there is, or may be betwixt these
blessed spirits and us.

And first, nothing is more plain, then that the Angels of God have not always
been kept from mortal eyes under an invisible concealment, but sometimes have
condescended so low, as to manifest their presence to men in visible forms, not
natural but assumed. I confess I have not faith enough to believe many of
those apparitions that are pretended. I could never yet know what other to
think of Ad nutum and arbitrium fibi assistentis Daemonis vel declinabat
negotia, vel petebat. Minut. Foelicis Octav.
Socrates his Genius; which (as himself reports) was wont to check him, when he
went about any unmee^ enterprise, and to forward him in good: For the modern
times, it is too hard to credit the report of Doway letters concerning our
busy neighbor P^re Cotton, Duac. 18. Febr. 1627. ex literis Pet. Rav.
that he had ordinary conference and conversation with Angels, both his own
tutelar, and those general of Provinces: If so, what need was there for him to
have propounded fifty questions, partly of Divinity, partly of Policy, to the
resolution of a Demoniack? Who can be so fondly credulous, Forn. Ser. 5.
as to believe that Jo. Carrera a young father of the Society, had a daily
companion of his Angel in so familiar a fashion, as to propound his doubts to
that secret friend, to receive his answers, to take his advise upon all
occasions; to be raised by him every morning from his bed, to his early
devotions; till once delaying caused, for a time, an intermission; Or that the
aged Cappuchin Franciscus de Bergamo (noted for the eleven precious stones
which were found in his gall) had for eight years together before his death,
the assistance of an Angel in humane shape for the performing of his Canonical
hours; Ignat. Loiol. Xavi^r. ^her^si^. Isidore. Po^ippus ^^r^us. 4 (...) Ma
(...) Anno 16^^.
Or, that the Angels helped their S. Gudwal, and S. Oswald Bishop of Worcester
to say his mass; Or* that Isidore the late Spanish Peasant (newly Sainted
amongst good company by Greg. the 15.) serving an hard master, had an Angel to
make up his daily task at his plough, whiles the good soul was at his public
devotions; like as another Angel supplied Felix, the Lay Cappuchin, in tending
his Cattle: Or that Francisca Romana (lately Canonized) had two Celestial
spirits, visibly attending her, the one of the order of Archangels, which never
left her: the other of the fourth order of Angels, who frequently presented
himself to her view: their attire, sometimes white, sometimes blew, purple more
rarely; their tresses of hair, long, and golden, as the overcredulous Bishop of
Wirtzburge reports from Gulielmus Baldesanus, not without many improbable
circumstances; these and a thousand more of the some branne, find no more
belief with me, then that story, which Franciscus Albertinus relates out of
Baronius, as done here at home; that in the year 1601. in England, there was an
Angel seen upon one of our Altars, (and therefore more likely to be known in
our own Island, then beyond the Alps) in a visible form, with a naked sword in
his hand, which he glitteringly brandished up and down, foyning sometimes, and
sometimes striking; thereby threatening so long ago an instant destruction to
this Kingdom. And indeed, why should we yield more credit to these pretenders
of apparitions, then to Adelbertus the German Heres^arch, condemned in a
Council of Rome, by Pope Zachary, who gave no less confidently out, that his
Angel-guardian appeared daily to him, and imparted to him many divine
Revelations, and directions? or if there be a difference pleaded in the
relations, where or how shall we find it?

This we know, that so sure as we see men, so sure we are that holy men have
seen Angels; Abraham saw Angels in his Tent door: Lot saw Angels in the Gate of
Sodom: Hagar in the Wilderness of Beersheba: Jacob in the way: Moses in the
bush of Horeb: Manoah and his wife in the field: Gideon in his threshing flore:
David by the threshing flore of Araunah: What should I mention the Prophets,
Elijah, Elisha, Esaias, Daniel, Zachary, Ezekiel, and the rest? In the new
Testament, Joseph, Mary, Zachariah the father of John Baptist, the Shepherds,
Mary Magdalen, the gazing Disciples at the Mount of Olives, Peter, Philip,
Cornelius, Paul, John the Evangelist, were all blessed with the sight of
Angels. In the succeeding times of the Church Primitive, I dare believe that
good Angels were no whit more sparing of their presence for the comfort of holy
Martyrs and Confessors under the pressure of tyranny for the dear name of their
Savior: Theodor. l. 3. c. 11.
I doubt not but constant Theodorus saw and felt the refreshing hand of the
Angel, no less then he reported to Julian his persecutor: I doubt not but the
holy Virgins, Theophila, Agnes, Lucia, Cecilia, and others, saw the good Angels
protectors of their chastity. As one that has learned in these cases to take
the midway betwixt distrust, and credulity; I can easily yield that those
retired Saints of the prime ages of the Church had sometimes such heavenly
companions, for the consolation of their forced solitude; But withal, I must
have leave to hold that the el^er the ^ch grew, the more rare was the use of
these apparitions, as of other miraculous actions, and events: Not that the arm
of our God is shortened, or his care and love to his beloved ones, any whit
abated: but for that his Church is now in this long process of time settled,
through his gracious providence, in an ordinary way.

Like as it was with his Israelites, who whiles they were in their longsome
passage, were miraculously preserved, and protected, but when they came once to
be fixed in the land of promise, their Angelical sustenance ceased; they then
must purvey for their own food, and either till, or famish.

Now then in these later ages of the Church, to have the visible apparition of
a good Angel, it is a thing so geason and uncouth, that it is enough for all
the world to wonder at: Some few instances our times have been known to yield:
Amongst others, that is memorable which Philip Melanchton as an eyewitness
reports. Simon Grynaeus a learned and holy man, coming from Heidelburg to
Spire; was desirous to hear a certain Preacher in that City, who in his Sermon
(it seems) did then let fall-some erroneous propositions of Popish doctrine,
much derogatory from the majesty and truth of the Son of God; wherewith
Grynaeus being not a little offended, craved speedy conference with the
Preacher, and laying before him the falsehood and danger of his doctrines,
exhorted him to an abandoning, and retractation of those mis-opinions; the
Preacher gave good words and fair semblance to Grynaeus, desiring further and
more particular conference with him, each imparted to other their names and
lodgings; yet inwardly, as being stung with that just reproof, he resolved a
revenge by procuring the imprisonment, and (if he ^ight) the death of so sharp
a censurer: Grynaeus misdoubting nothing, upon his return to his lodging,
reports the passages of the late conference to those who sat at the Table with
him; amongst whom Melancthon being one, was called out of the Room to speak
with a stranger, newly come into the house; going forth accordingly, he finds a
grave old man of a goodly countenance; seemly, and richly attired; who in a
friendly and grave manner tells him, that within one hour, there would come to
their Inn, certain Officers, as from the King of the Romans to attach
Grynaeus, and to carry him to prison; willing him to charge Grynaeus, with all
possible speed to flee out of Spires; and requiring Melancthon to see that this
advantage were not neglected; which said, the old man vanished out of his
sight: Instantly Melancthon returning to his companions, recounted unto them
the words of this strange Monitor; and hastened the departure of Grynaeus
accordingly; who had no sooner boated himself on the Rhine, then he was eagerly
searched for at his said lodging; Goulart. Histoir mem'r. ex Melanct. in Dan. c.
20.
That worthy Divine in his Commentary upon Daniel, both relates the story, and
acknowledges Gods fatherly providence in sending this Angel of his, for the
rescue of his faithful servant: Others, though not many of this kind, are
reported by Simon Goulartius in his collection of admirable and memorable
histories of our time; whither for brevity sake I refer my Reader.

But more often has it fallen out, that evil spirits have visibly presented
themselves in the glorious forms of good Angels; as to Simeon Stylites, to
Pachomius, to Valens the Monk, to Rathodus Duke of Freezland, to Macarius, to
Gertrude in Westphalia, with many others; as we find in the reports of
Ruffinus Vincentius, Caesarius Palladius: and the like delusions may still be
set on foot, whiles Satan, who loves to transform himself into an Angel of
Light, labors by these means to noursle silly souls in superstition: too
many whereof have swallowed the bait, though others have descried the book:
Bromiard. Sum. praedicant. v. Humilitas.
Amongst the rest, I like well the humility of that Hermit, into whose Cell,
when the Devil presented himself, in a goodly and glittering form, and told him
that he was an Angel sent to him from God; the Hermit turned him off with
this plain answer, See thou whence thou come; for me, I am not worthy to be
visited with such a guest as an Angel.

But the trade that we have with good spirits is not now driven by the eye, but
is like to themselves, spiritual: Yet not so, but that even in bodily
occasions, we have many times insensible helps from them in such manner, as
that by the effects, we can boldly say, Here has been an Angel though we saw
him not.

Of this kind was that (no less then miraculous) cure, which at S. S. Maternus.
Madernes in Cornwall, was wrought upon a poor Cripple One John Trelille.
whereof (besides the attestation of many hundreds of the neighbors) I took a
strict and personal examination, in that At Whitsontide.
last visitation which I either did, or ever shall hold: This man, that for
sixteen years together was fain to walk upon his hands, by reason of the close
contraction of the sinews of his legs, was, (upon three monitions in his dream
to wash in that well) suddenly so restored to his limbs, that I saw him able
both to walk, and to get his own maintenance; I found here was neither art nor
collusion, the thing done, the Author invisible. Sim. Goular. ex J. Manlio.
The like may we say of John Spangenberge Pastor of Northeuse; no sooner was
that man stepped out of his house, with his family to go to the Bayns, then the
house fell right down in the place: Our own experience at home is able to
furnish us with diverse such instances: How many have we known that have fallen
from very high towers, and into deep pits, past the natural possibility of
hope, who yet have been preserved not from death only, but from hurt: whence
could these things be, but by the secret aid of those invisible helpers? It
were easy to fill Volumes with particulars of these kinds; but the main care,
and most officious endeavors of these blessed spirits are employed about the
better part, the soul; in the instilling of good motions; enlightening the
understanding, repelling of temptations, furthering our opportunities of good,
preventing occasions of sin, comforting our sorrows, quickening our dullness,
encouraging our weakness; and lastly, after all careful attendance here
below, conveying the souls of their charge, to their glory, and presenting them
to the hands of their faithful Creator.

It is somewhat too hard to believe, that there have been ocular witnesses of
these happy Convoys; Who lists may credit that which Hierom tells us, that
Antony the Hermit saw the soul of his partner in that solitude ( Paul) carried
up by them to heaven; that Severinus Bishop of Colein saw the soul of S. Martin
thus transported, as Gregory reports in his Dialogues; That Benedict saw the
soul of Germanus in the form of a fiery globe thus conveyed; What should I
speak of the souls of the holy martyrs, Tiburtius, Valerian, Maximus,
Marcellinus, Justus, Quintinus, Severus, and others: we may if we please (we
need not unless we list) give way to these reports, to which our faith obliges
us not: In these cases we go not by eyesight: but we are well assured the soul
of Lazarus was by these glorious spirits carried up into the bosom of Abraham,
neither was this any privilege of his above all other the Saints of God; all
which as they land in one common harbor of blessedness, so they all
participate of one happy means of portage.

SECT. IX. The respects which we owe to the Angels.
SUch are the respects of good Angels to us; now what is ours to them? It was
not amiss said of one, that the life of Angels is political, full of
intercourse with themselves and with us: What they return to each other in the
course of their Theophanies, is not for us to determine; but since their good
offices are thus assiduous unto us, it is meet we do inquire what duties are
requirable from us to them. Bern. in Psalm. Qui habi^at.
Devout Bernard is but too liberal in his decision, that we owe to these
beneficient spirits reverence for their presence, devotion for their love; and
trust for their custody. Doubtless, we ought to be willing to give unto them
so much as they will be willing to take from us: if we go beyond these bounds,
we offend, and alienate them: to derogate from them is not so heinous in their
account, as to overho^our them. S. John proffers an humble geniculation to the
Angel, and is put off, Rev. 19.10.
with a See thou do it not, I am thy fellow servant: The excesses of respects
to them, Hieron. Quest ^o ^d Al^g^s^m.
have turned to abominable impiety; which howsoever Hierome sems to impute to
the Jews, eve^ since the Prophets time, yet Simon Magus was the first that we
find guilty of this impious flattery of the Angels; who fondly holding that
the world was made by them, could not ^hink fit to present them with less then
divine honor: H^ cursed cholar, Menander, (whose error Prateolus wrongfully
fathers upon Aristotle) succeeding him in that wicked heresy, as Eusebius tells
us, left behind him Saturnius, not inferior to him in this frenzy; who (as
Tertullian and Philastrius report him) fancied together with his mad fellows,
that seven Angels made the world, not acquainting God with their work: What
should I name blasphemous Cerinthus, who durst disparage Christ in comparison
with Angels? Not altogether so bad were those heretics (though bad enough)
which took their ancient denomination from the Angels; Angelici.
who professing true Christianity and detestation of Idolatry, (as having
learned that God only is to be worshipped properly) yet reserved a certain kind
of adoration to the blessed Angels; Against this opinion and practice, the
great Doctor of the Gentiles seems to bend his style, Prateolus ^l^nch. v.
Angelici.
in his Epistle to the Colossians, forbidding a voluntary humility in
worshipping of Angels; whether grounded upon the superstition of ancient Jews,
as Hierom and Anselm; or upon the Ethnic Philosophy of some Platonic, as
Estius and Cornel^us a Lapide imagine; or upon the damnable conceits of the
Simonians and Cerinthians, as Tertullian, we need not much to inquire; nothing
is more clear then the Apostles inhibition* afterward seconded by the Synod of
Laodicea; Rejecta expositio a Pontificiis, ut non modo periculosa sed and
falsa. Vid. Binium in notis in Pium pap^n Tom. 1. page 103.
whereto yet Theodorets noted Commentary would seem to give more light* who
tells us that upon the ill use made of the giving of the ^aw by the hands of
Angels, there was an error of old maintained, of Angel-worship, which still
continued in Phrygia and Pisidia, so that a Sinod was hereupon assembled at
Laodicea, the chief City of Phrygia; which by a direct Canon forbad praying to
Angels; a practice (says he) so settled amongst them that even to this day
there are to be seen amongst them, and their neighbors the Oratories of S.
Mi^hael.

Here then was this mishumility, that they thought it too much boldness to
come ^mmediately to God, but that we must first make way to his favor by the
mediation of Angels; a testimony so pregnant, that I wonder not if Caranza flee
into corners; Reading it Angulos instead of Angelos.
and all the fautors of Angel-worship be driven to hard shifts to avoid it: But
what do I with controversies? This devotion we do gladly profess to owe to
good Angels, that though we do not pray unto them, yet we do pray to God for
the favor of their assistance, and protection; and praise God for the
protection that we have from them: That faithful Patriarch, of whom the whole
Church of God receives denomination, knew well, what he said, when he gave this
blessing to his Grandchildren: The Angel that redeemed me from all evil,
Genesis 48.19
bless the children: whether this were an interpretative kind of imploration,
as Becanus and Lorichius contend; or whether (as is no less probable) this
Angel were not any created power, but the great Angel of the Covenant; the
same which Jacob wrestled with before, for a blessing upon himself, as
Athanasius and Cyril well conceive it, I will not here dispute; sure I am, that
if it were an implicit prayer, and the Angel mentioned, a creature; yet the
intention was no other then to terminate that prayer in God, who blesses us by
his Angel.

Yet further, we come short of our duty to these blessed Spirits, if we
entertain not in our hearts an high and venerable conceit of their wonderful
majesty, glory, and greatness: and an awful acknowledgment and reverentiall
awe of their presence* an holy joy, and confident assurance of their care and
protection; and lastly, a fear to do ought that might cause them to turn away
their faces, in dislike, from us: All these dispositions are copulative: for
certainly, if we have conceived so high an opinion of their excellency, and
goodness as we ought; we cannot but be bold upon their mutual interest, and
be afraid to displease them: Nothing in the world but our sins can distaste
them: They look upon our natural infirmities, deformities, loathsomnesses,
without any offense, or nauseation: but our spiritual indispositions are
odious to them* as those which are opposite to their pure natures. Jo. Bromiar.
Sum. pradic. v. superbia.
The story is famous of the Angel and the Hermit, walking together; in the
way there lay an il-sented and poisonous carrion, the Hermit stopped his nose,
and turned away his head, hasting out of that offensive air, the Angel held on
his pace, without any show of dislik: straightway they met with a proud man,
gaily dressed, strongly perfumed, looking high, walking stately, the Angel
turned away his head, and stopped his nosthrils, whiles the Hermit passed on not
without reverence to so great a person: and gave this reason; that the stench
of pride was more loathsome to God and his Angels, then that of the carcass,
could be to him.

I blush to think, O ye glorious spirits, how often I have done that whereof ye
have been ashamed for me; I abhor my self to recount your just dislikes; and do
willingly profess, how unworthy I shall be of such friends, if I be not
hereafter jealous of your just offense. Neither can I without much regret,
think of those many and horrible nuisances, which you find every moment from
sinful mankind: Woe is me, what odious sents arise to you perpetually from
those bloody murders, beastly uncleanness, cruel oppressions, noisome
disgorgings of surfeits, and drunkennesses, abominable Idolatries, and all
manner of detestable wickednesses, presumptuously committed every where; enough
to make you abhor the presence and protection of debauched and deplored
mortality.

But for us that are better principled, and know what it is to be over-lookt by
holy and glorious spirits, we desire and care to be more tender of your offense
then of a world of visible spectatours: And if the Apostle found it requisite
to give such charge, for but the observation of an outward decency; not much
beyond the lists of indifferency, because of the Angels; 1 Cor 11.
what should our care be in relation to those blessed spirits, of our
deportment in matter of morality, and religion? Surely, O ye invisible
Guardians, it is not my sense that shall make the difference, it shall be my
desire to be no less careful of displeasing you, then if I saw you present by
me, clothed in flesh: Neither shall I rest less assured of your gracious
presence and tuition, and the expectation of all spiritual offices from you,
which may tend toward my blessedness, then I am now sensible of the ^nimation
of my own soul.

THE INVISIBLE WORLD. The Second BOOK.
SECT. I. Of the Souls of Men. Of their separation and Immortality.
NExt to these Angelical Essences, the souls of men, whether in the body, or
severed from it, are those spirits which people the invisible world ^ex^ to
them, I say* not the some with them, not bett^r Those of the ancient which have
thought that the ruin of Angels is to be supplied by ^lessed souls, spoke
doubtless without the book; for he that is the truth it self has said, they be
((...)) like, not ^he same: And justly are those ^xploded, whether
Pythago^eans, or Stoics, or Gnost^cks, or Manichees, or Alma^icus* or (if
Lactantius himself were in that error, as Ludovicus Vives construes him) who
falsely dreamed that the souls of ^en were of the substance of that God, which
inspired them; These errors are more ^it for Ellebore, then for Theological
conviction: spiritual substances doubtless they ^re, and such as have no
less distant original from the body, then heaven is from earth: Galen was not
a better Physi^^an then an ill Divine, whiles ^e determines the soul to be the
complexion and temperament of the prime qualities; no other then that harmony
which the elder Naturalists dreamed of, an opinion no less brutish; then such
a soul: For how can temperamet be the cause of any progressive motion; much
less of a rational discourse? Here is no materiality, no physical
composition in this inmate of ours; nothing but a substantial act, an active
spirit, a spiritual form of the king of all visible creatures: But as for the
Essence, original derivation, powers, faculties, operations of this humane
soul as it is lodged in this clay, I leave them to the disquisition of the
great Secretaries of Nature; my way lies higher, leading me from the common
consideration of this spirit, as it is clogged with flesh, unto the meditation
of it, as it is divested of this earthly case, and clothed with an eternity
whether of joy or torment: We will begin with happiness, (our fruition whereof
(I hope) shall never end,) if first we shall have spent some thoughts upon the
general condition of this separation.

That the soul after separation from the body, has an independent life of its
own; is so clear a truth, that the very heathen Philosophers, by the dim
light of nature have determined it for irrefragable: In so much as Aristotle
himself (who is wont to hear ill for his opinion of the souls mortality) is
confidently reported to have written a book of the Soul Separate, which Thomas
Aquinas in his (so late) age professes to have seen: Sure I am, that his Master
Plato, and that heathen Martyr, Socrates (related by him) are full of divine
discourses of this kind. In so much as this latter, when Crito was asking him
how he would be buried: I perceive (said he) I have lost much labor, for I
have not yet persuaded my Crito, that I shall fly clear away, and leave
nothing behind me; meaning that the soul is the man, and would be ever it self,
when his body should have no being: And in Xenophon (as Cicero cites him)
Cyprus is brought in saying thus, Nolite arbitrari, ^icero de Senectu^e.
etc. Think not my dear sons* that when I shall depart from you, I shall then
cease to have any being; for even whiles I was with you ye saw not that soul
which I had, but yet ye well saw by those things which I did, that there was a
soul within this body: Believe ye therefore, that though ye shall see no soul
of mine, yet that it still shall have a being. Shortly, all but an hateful
Epicurus, have astipulated to this truth: And if some have fa^cied a
transmigration of souls into other bodies, others, a passage to the stars which
formerly governed them; others, to I know not what Elysian fields; all have
pitched upon a separate condition. And indeed not Divinity only, but true
natural reason will necessarily evince it: For the intellective soul being a
more spiritual substance, and therefore having in it no composition at all,
and by consequence, nothing that may tend toward a not-being, can be no other
(supposing the will and concurrence of the infinite Creator) then immortal:
Besides, (as our best way of judgging ought is wont to be by the effects)
certainly all operations are from the forms of things, and all things do so
work as they are: Now the body can do nothing at all without the help of the
soul, but the soul has actions of its own; as the acts of understanding,
thinking, judging, remembering, ratiocination; whereof, Quicquid est illud quod
sentit, qud sapit, quod vult, quod viget, coeleste and divinum est, ob eamque
rem aeternum sit necesse est. Tull Tusc. quaest. l. 1.
if (whiles it is within us) it receives the first occasions by our senses, and
phantasms; yet it does perfect and accomplish the said operations, by the
inward powers of its own faculties; much more, and also more exactly can it do
all these things, when it is merely it self; since the clog that the body
brings with it, cannot but pregravate, and trouble the soul in all her
performances: in the mean time, they do justly pass for mental actions;
neither do so much as receive a denomination from the body: we walk, move,
speak, see, feel, and do other humane acts; the power that does them is from
the soul; the means or instrument, whereby they are done, is the body; no man
will say the soul walks, or sees, but the body by it: but we can no more say
that the soul understands or thinks by the aid of the body, then we can say the
body thinks, or understands, by means of the soul: These therefore being
distinct and proper actions, do necessarily evince an independing, and
self-subsisting agent. O my soul, thou could not be thy self, unless thou
knew'st thine original, heavenly; thine essence, separable; thy continuance
eviternall. But what do we call in reason, and nature to this parle, where
faith (by which Christianity teaches us to be regulated) finds so full, and
pregnant demonstrations: No less then half our Creed sounds this way, either
by expression, or inference; where in whiles we profess to believe that Christ
our Savior rose from the dead and ascended we implie that his body was ^ot
more dead, then his soul living and active; That was whereof he said, Father
into thy hands I commend my spirit: now, we cannot imagine one life of the
head, and another of the body: his state therefore is ours; every way are we
conform to him: as our bodies then shall be once like to his, glorious; so our
souls cannot be but, as his, severed by death, crowned with immortality: and if
he shall come to judge both the quick and the dead; those dead whom he shall
judge, must be living; for (as our Savior said in the like case) God is not
the Judge of the dead, as dead, but the Judge of the living that were dead, and
therefore living in death, and after death: And whereof does the Church
Catholic consist, but of some members, warfaring on earth, others triumphant
in heaven? and what does that triumph suppose, but both a being, and a being
glorious? What communion were there of Saints, if the departed souls were not*
and the soul, when it begins to be perfect, should cease to be? to what purpose
were the resurrection of the body, but to meet with his old partner, the soul?
and that meeting only implies both a separation, and existence.

Lastly, what life can there be properly but of the soul? and how can that life
be everlasting, which is not continued? or that continued, that is not? If then
he may be a man; certainly, a Christian he cannot be, who is more assured that
he has a soul in his body, then that his soul shall once have a being without
his body: Death may tyrannize over our earthly parts, the worst he can do to
the spiritual, is to free it from a friendly bondage. Cheer up thy self
therefore, O my soul, against all the fears of thy dissolution; thy departure
is not more certain then thy advantage; thy being shall not be less sure but
more free, and absolute: Is it such a trouble to thee to be rid of a clog? or
art thou so loath to take leave of a miserable companion for a while, on
condition that he shall ere long meet thee happy?

SECT. II. Of the instant vision of God upon the egression of the soul: and the
present condition till then.
BUt if, in the mean while, we shall let fall our eyes upon the present
condition of the soul, it will appear how apt we are to misknow our selves, and
that which gives us the being of men; The most men, how ever they conceive they
have a soul within them, by which they receive their animation, yet they
entertain but dull and gloomy thoughts concerning it; as if it were no less
void of light and activity, then it is of materiality, and shape: not
apprehending the spiritual agility, and clearly-lightsome nature of that
whereby they are enlived: wherein it will not a little avail us to have our
judgments thoroughly rectified; and to know that as God is light, so the soul
of man which comes immediately from him, and bears his image, is justly, even
here, dignified with that glorious title; I spe^k not only of the regenerate
soul illuminated by divine inspirations, and supernatural knowledge; but also
even of that rational soul, which every man bears in his bosom. The spirit of
man (says wise Solomon) is the candle of the Lord, ( Prove. 20.27.) searching
all the inward parts of the belly. And the dear Apostle: In him was life, and
the life was the light of men, Lumen aliquod substantiale anim^s habere hand
improbe videmur advertere, quando iu Evangelio legitu^, quod illuminat omnem
hominem venientem in mundum: Deinde quod in cogitatione p^siti nescio quid
tenue, volubile, clarum in nob^s inesse sen^imus, quod respicit sine sole, quod
videt sine extraneo tumine: Nain si ipsum inse lucidum non esser, ^erum tantam
c^^spicientiam non haberet: Tenebrosis ista non sicut data; omnia caeca
torpescunt. Cassiodor. de Anima. Cap. 10.
Joh. 1.4. and more fully, soon after: That light was the true light that
lightneth every man that comes into the world. v. 9.

No man can be so fondly charitable, as to think every man that comes into the
world, illightned by the spirit of regeneration: Calvin in loc.
It is then that intellectual light of common nature, which the great
illuminator of the world beams forth into every soul, in such proportion as he
finds agreeable to the capacity of every subject: Know thy self therefore. O
man, and know thy maker: God has not put into thee a dark soul: or shut up thy
inward powers in a dungeon of comfortless obscurity; but he has set up a
bright shining Lamp in thy breast: whereby thou may sufficiently discern
natural and moral truths, the principles and conclusions whether of nature or
art, herein advancing thee above all other visible Creatures, whom he has
confined (at the best) to a mere opacity of outward and common sense; But if
our natural light shall, through the blessing of God, be so happily improved,
as freely to give place to the spiritual, reason to faith, so that the soul
can now attain to see him that is invisible, and in his light to see light,
now, Psalm. 36.6.
even whiles it is over-shaded with the interposition of this earth, it is
already entered within the verge of glory: But, so soon as this va^^ o^
wretched mortality is done away; now it enjoyes a clear heaven for ever, and
sees as it is seen.

Amongst many heavenly thoughts, wherewith my everdear and most honored, and
now blessed friend, the late Edward Earl of Norwich, had wont to animate
himself against the encounter with our last enemy Death; this was one not of
the meanest, that in the very instant of his souls departing out of his body,
it should immediately enjoy the v^sion of God: And certainly so it is, The
spirits of just men, need not stand upon d^stances of place, or space of time,
for this beatificall sight; but so soon as ever they are out of their clay
lodging, they are in their spiritu^ll heaven even whiles they are happily
conveying to the local; for since nothing hindered them from that happy sight,
but the interposition of this earth, which we carry about us, 2 Cor. 5.1.
the spirit being once free from that impediment, sees as it is seen, being
instantly passed into a condition like unto the Angels; well therefore are these
coupled together by the blessed Apostle, who in his divine rapture had seen
them both; Ye are come (says he) unto Mount Sion, and unto the City of the
living God, the heavenly Jerusalem; Heb. 12.22.
and to an innumerable company of Angels, and to the spirits of just men made
perfect. As then the Angels of God, wheresoever they are (though employed about
the affairs of this lower world) yet do still see and enjoy the vision of God;
so do the souls of the righteous, when they are once eased of this earthly
load: Doubtless, as they passed through degrees of Grace, whiles they took up
with these homely lodgings of clay; so they may pass through degrees of
bliss, when they are once severed. B. Andrews in his answer to Bellarmine.
And if (as some great Divines have supposed) the Angels themselves shall
receive an augmentation of happiness at the day of the last judgment, when
they shall be freed from all their charge and employments, (since the
perfection of blessedness consists in rest, which is the end of all motion) how
much more shall the Saints of God then receive an enlargment of their felicity;
but in the mean time, they are entered into the lists of their essential
beatitude, over the threshold of their heaven. How full and comfortable is that
profession of the great Apostle, who when he had sweetly diverted the thoughts
of himself and his Corinthians from their light afflictions to an eternal
weight of excelling glory, from things temporal, which are seen, to those
everlasting, which are not seen: adds; For we know that if our earthly house
of this Tabernacle be dissolved, 2 Cor. 5.1.
we have a building not made with hands eternal in the heavens; more then
implying, that our eye is no sooner off from the temporal things, then it is
taken up with eternal objects; and that the instant of the dis^olution of
these clay cottages, is the livery and seisin of a glorious and everlasting
mansion ^n heaven. Can thou believe this O my soul, and yet recoil ^t the
thought of thy departure? were thou appointed after a dolorous dissolution to
spend some hundreds of years at the fore-gates of glory (though in a painless
expectation of a late happiness) even this hope were a pain alone; but if
sense of pain were also added to the delay, this were more then enough to make
the condition justly dreadful: But now that one minute shuts our eyes, and
opens them to a clear sight of God, determines our misery, and begins our
blessedness; Oh the cowardice of our unbeleefe, if we shrink at so momentany
a purchase of eternity! How many have we known that for a false reputation of
honor have rushed into the jaws of Death, when we are sure they could not
come back to enjoy it; and do I tremble at a minutes pain, that shall feoffe me
in that glory, which I cannot but for ever enjoy? How am I ashamed to hear an
heathen Socrates, encouraging himself against the fears of Death from his
resolution of meeting with some fmous persons in that other world, and to feel
my self shrugging at a short brunt of pain, that shall put me into the
blisse-making presence of the All-glorious God, into the sight of the glorified
humanity of my dear Redeemer, into the Society of all the Angels and Saints of
heaven?

SECT. III. Of the Souls perpetual vigilance, and fruition of God.
IT is no other then a frantic dream of those erroneous spirits that have
fancied the sleep of the soul, and that so long and deep a sleep, as from the
evening of the dissolution, till the morning of the resurrection; So as all
that while, the soul has no vision of God, no touch of joy or pain. An error
wickedly raked up out of the ashes of those Arabic Heretics, whom Origin is
said to have reclaimed: and since that time, taken up (if they be not
slandered) by the Armenians, and Fratricelli; and once countenanced, and
abetted by Pope John the 22. (as Pope Adrian witnesses,) yea so enforced by
him, upon the University of Paris, as that all access to degrees was barred to
any whosoever refused to subscribe, and swear to that damnable position: The
Minorites began to find relish in that poison, which no doubt had proceeded to
further mischief, had not the interposition of Philip the-then-French king
happily quelled that uncomfortable and pernicious doctrine, so as we might have
hoped it should never have dared more to look into the light. But, woe is me,
these prodigious times amongst a world of other uncouth heresies, have not
stuck to fetch even this also (wel-worsed) back from that region of darkness,
whither it was sent: Indeed who can but wonder that any Christian can possibly
give entertainment to so absurd a thought; whiles he hears his Savior say,
Job. 17.24.
Father I will that they also whom thou have given me, be with me, where I am;
and that (not in a safe sleep) they may behold my glory, which thou have given
me: Behold it? yea, but when? at last perhaps when the body shall be resumed?
Nay, (to choke this cavil) the bliss is present, even already possessed; V.
22.
The glory which thou gave me I have given to them: It was accordingly his
gracious word to the penitent thief, This day shall thou be with me in
Paradise: How clear is that of the chosen vessel, opposing our present
condition to the succeeding: 1 Cor. 13.12.
For now we see through a glass darkly; but then (that is, upon our
dissolution) face to face, the face of the soul to the face of God: The infinite
amiableness whereof was that which inflamed the longing desire of the blessed
Apostle to depart and to be with Christ; as knowing these two inseparable, the
instant of his departure, and his presence with Christ: else the departure were
no less worthy of fear, as the utmost of evils, then now it is of wishing for,
as our entrance into blessedness: Away then with that impious frenzy of the
souls, whether mortality, or sleep in death: No, my soul, thou do then begin
to live, thou do not awake till then: now whiles thou art in the bed of this
living clay, thine eyes are shut, thy spiritual senses are tied up, thou art
apt to s^ort in a sinful security; thou dreamest of earthly vanities; then,
only then are thine eyes opened, thy spiritual faculties freed; all thy powers
quickened, and thou art perpetually presented with objects of eternal glory.
And if at any time during this pilgrimage, thine eyelids have been some little
raised by divine Meditations, yet how narrowly, how dimly art thou wont to see?
now thine eyes shall be so broadly and fully opened, that thou shall see whole
heaven at once; yea, which is more, the face of that God, whose presence makes
it heaven: Oh glorious sight! O most blessed condition! Wise Solomon could
truly observe that the eye is not satisfied with seeing; neither indeed can it
be here below; nothing is so great a glutton as the eye; for when we have seen
all that we can, we shall still wish to see more; and that more is nothing if
it be less their all; but this infinite object (which is more then all) shall
so fill and satisfy our eyes, that we cannot desire the sight of any other;
nor ever be glutted with the sight of this; Old Simeon when once he had lived
to see the Lord of life clothed in flesh, could say, lord now let thou thy
servant depart in peace for mine eyes have seen thy salvation: if he were so
full of the sight of his Savior in the weakness of humane flesh, and in the
form of a servant; how is he more then fated with the perfection of joy, and
heavenly detestation, to see that Savior clothed with majesty; to see his all
glorious Godhead; and so to see, as to enjoy them; and so enjoy them, as that
he shall never intermit their sight and fruition to all eternity.

SECT. IV. Of the knowledge of the glorified.
AS concerning all other matters, what the knowledge is of our souls,
separated, and glorified, we shall then know when ours come to be such: in the
mean time, we can much less know their thougths, then they can know ours: sure
we are, they do not know in such manner as they did, when they were in our
bosoms; by the help of senses and phantasms, by the discursive inferences of
ratiocination; but as they are elevated to a condition suitable to the blessed
Angels; so they know like them: though not by the means of a natural
knowledge, as they, yet by that supernatural light of intimation, which they
receive by their glorified estate: Whether by virtue of this divine
illumination they know the particular occurrences which we meet with here
below, he were bold that would determine. Only this we may confidently affirm,
that they do clearly know al those things which do any way appertain to their
estate of blessedness. Amongst which, whether the knowledge of each other in
that region of happiness may justly be ranked, is not unworthy of our
disquisition. Doubtless, as in God there is all perfection eminently, and
transcendently, so in the sight and fruition of God, there cannot be but full
and absolute felicity; yet this is so far from excluding the knowledge of
those things which derive their goodness and excellency from him, as that it
compriseth, and supposes it: Like as it is also in our affections; we love God
only as the chief good; yet so as that we love other things in order to God;
Charity is no more subject to loss, then knowledge, both these shall accompany
our souls to and in that other world. As then, we shall perfectly love God, and
his Saints in him; so shall we know both: and though it be a sufficient motive
of our love in heaven, that we know them* to be Saints; yet it seems to be no
small addition to our happiness, to know that those Saints were once ours: And
if it be a just joy to a parent here on earth to see his child gracious, how
much more acession shall it be to his joy above, to see the fruits of his
loins glorious, when both his love is more pure, and their improvement
absolute? Can we make any doubt that the blessed Angels know each other? how
senseless were it to grant that no knowledge is hid from them, but of
themselves? Or can we imagine that those Angelical spirits do not take
special notice of those souls which they have guarded here, and conducted to
their glory? If they do so, and if the knowledge of our beatified souls shall
be like to theirs, why should we abridg our selves more then them, of the
comfort of our interknowing? Surely* our dissolution shall abate nothing of our
natural faculties; our glory shall advance them; so as what we once knew we
shall know better: and if our souls can then perfectly know themselves, why
should they be denied the knowledge of others?

Doubt not then, O my soul, but thou shall once see (besides the face of thy
God, whose glory fills heaven and earth) the blessed spirits of the ancient
Patriarchs, and Prophets, the holy Apostles and Evangelists, the glorious
Martyrs and Confessors; those eminent Saints, whose holiness thou were wont to
magnify; and amongst them, those in whom nature and grace have especially
interessed thee, thou shall see them, and enjoy their joy and they thine: How
often have I measured a long and foul journey to see some good friend, and
digested the tediousness of the way with the expectation of a kind
entertainment, and the thought of that complacency which I should take in so
dear? presence? and yet perhaps, when I have arrived, I have found the house
disordered, one sick, another disquieted, my self indisposed; with what
cheerful resolution should I undertake this my last voyage, where I shall meet
with my best friends, and find them perfectly happy, and my self with them?

SECT. V. Of the glory of heaven enjoyed by blessed Souls.
HOw often have I begged of my God, that it would please him to show me some
little glimpse of the glory of his Saints? It is not for me to wish the sight
(as yet) of the face of that divine Majesty; This was two much for a Moses to
sue for; my ambition only is, that I might, if but as it were through some
cranie, or keyhole of the gate of heaven, see the happy condition of his
glorious servants. I know what hinders me, my miserable unworthiness, my
spiritual blindness. O God, if thou please to wash off my clay with the waters
of thy Siloam, I shall have eyes; and if thou anoint them with thy precious
eye salve, those eyes shall be clear, and enabled to behold those glories which
shall ravish my soul. And now, Lord, what pure and resplendent light is this,
wherein thy blessed ones dwell? How justly did thine Ecstatical Apostle call it
the inheritance of the Saints in light? light unexpressible, C^los. 1.12.
light unconceivable, light inaccessible? Lo, thou that have prepared such a
light to this inferior world for the use and comfort of us mortal creatures,
as the glorious Sun, which can both inlighten and dazzle the eyes of all
beholders* have proportionally ordained a light to that higher world, so much
more excellent then the Sun, as heaven is above earth, immortality above
corruption. And if wise Solomon could say truly, the light is sweet, Eccles.
11.7.
and a pleasant thing it is for the eyes to see the Sun; how infinitely
delectable is it in thy light to see such light as may make the Sun in
comparison thereof, darkness? In thy presence is the fullness of joy, and at
thy right hand are pleasures for evermore. What can be wished more, where there
is fullness of joy? and behold thy presence, O Lord, yields it. Could I neither
see Saint nor Angel in that whole Empyreall heaven, none but thine infinite
self, thy self alone were happiness for me more then enough; But as thou, in
whom here below we live, and move, and have our being, detractest nothing from
thine all sufficiency, but addest rather to the praise of thy bounty, in that
thou furnishest us with variety of means of our life and subsistence; so here
it is the praise of thy wonderful mercies which thou allowest us (besides
thine immediate presence) the Society of thy blessed Angels, and Saints,
wherein we may also enjoy thee. And if the view of any of those single glories
be enough to fill my soul with wonder, and contentment: how must it needs run
over at the sight of those worlds of beauty and excellency, which are here met
and united? Lo here the blessed H^erarchy of innumerable Angels, there the
glorious company of the Apostles here the goodly fellowship of the Patriarchs
and Prophets there the noble Army of M^rtyrs* here the troops of laborious
Pastors and Teachers, there the numberless multitudes of holy and conscionable
Professors. Lord, what exquisite order is here, what perfection of glory! And
if even in thine eyes thy poor despised Church upon earth, be so beautiful and
amiable, fair as the Moon clear as the Sun, Cant 6.10.
(which yet in the eyes of flesh seems but homely and hard-favoured) how
infinite graces and perfections shall our spiritual eyes see in thy glorified
spouse above? what pure sanctity? what sincere charity? what clear knowledge?
what absolute joy? what entire union? what wonderful majesty? what complete
felicity? All shine alike in their essential glory but not without difference
of degrees; All are adorned with crowns, some also with coronets, some glister
with a skie-like, others with a star-like clearness; the least has so much as
to make him so happy that he would not wish to have more; the greatest has so
much, that he cannot receive more; O divine distribution of bounty, where is no
possibility of either want, or envy! Oh transcendent royalty of the Saints! one
heaven is more then a thousand kingdoms; and every Saint has right to all: so
as every Subject is here a Sovereign, and every Sovereign is absolute under the
free homage of an infinite Creator. Lo here, crowns without cares, scepters
without burden, rule without trouble, reigning without change: Oh the
transitory vanity of all earthly greatness* Gold is the most during metal, yet
even that yields to age: Solomon's rich Diadem of the pure gold of Ophir, is
long since dust: these crowns of glory are immarcescible, incorruptible; beyond
all the compass of time, without all possibility of alteration. Oh the
perishing and unsatisfying contentments of earth! how many-poor great ones
below have that which they call honor and riches, and enjoy them not, and if
they have enjoyed them, complain of satiety, and worthlesness! Lo here, a free
scope of perfect joy, of constant blessedness, without mixture, without
intermission; each one feels his own joy, feels each others; all rejoice in God
with a joy unspeakeable, and full of glory; and most sweetly bathe themselves
in a pure and complete blissfulness. This very sight of blessed souls is
happiness, but oh, for the fruition! Go now, my soul, and after this prospect,
dote upon those silly profits and pleasures which have formerly bewitched thee;
and (if thou can) forbear to long after the possession of this blessed
immortality; and repine at the message of this so advantageous a translation;
and pity and lament the remove of those dear pieces of thy self, which have
gone before thee to this unspeakable felicity.

SECT. VI. Wherein the glory of the Saints above consists, and how they are
employed.
SUch is the place, such is the condition of the blessed; What is their
implement? How do they spend, not their time, but their eternity? How? but in
the exercise of the perpetual acts of their blessedness, vision, adhesion,
fruition? who knows not that there is a contract passed betwixt God and the
regenerate soul here below; out of the engagement of his mercy and love, he
endows her with the precious graces of Faith, of Hope, of Charity. Faith,
whereby she knowingly apprehends her interest in him: Hope, whereby she
cheerfully expects the full accomplishment of his gracious promises: Charity,
whereby she is feelingly and comfortably possessed of him, and clings close
unto him. In the instant of our dissolution, we enter into the consummation of
this blessed marriage: wherein it pleases our bountiful God, to endow his
glorified spouse with these three privileges and improvements of her
beatitude, answerable to these three divine graces: Vision answers to Faith,
for what our faith sees, and apprehends here on earth? and afar off as
Travelers; our estate of glorification exhibits to us clearly, and at hand, as
comprehensors: the object is the same, the degrees of manifestation differ.
Adhesion answers to our Hope; for what our hope comfortably expected, and
longed for, we do now lay hold on as present and are brought home to it
indissolubly: Fruition, lastly, answers to charity; for what is fruition, but a
taking pleasure in the thing possessed, as truly delectable, and as our own;
and what is this but the perfection of love? Shortly, what is the end of our
faith but sight? what the end of our hope but possession? what the end of our
love but enjoying? Lo then the inseparable and perpetual sight, possession,
enjoyment, of the infinitely amiable, and glorious Deity, is not more the
employment then the felicity of Saints: and what can the soul conceive
matchable to this happiness? The man after Gods own heart had one boon to ask
of his M^ker; it must be sure some great suite wherein a favorite will set up
his rest: Psalm. 27.4.
One thing have I desired of the Lord, which I will require, even that I may
dwell in the house of the Lord, all the days of my life; to behold the fair
beauty of the Lord, and to visit his holy Temple. Was it so contenting an
happiness to thee (O David) to behold for a moment of time, the fair beauty of
the Lord in his earthen Temple, where he meant not to reveal the height of his
glory; how blessed art thou now, when thy soul lives for ever in the continual
prospect of the infinite beauty and majesty of God, in the most glorious and
eternal sanctuary of heaven? It was but in a cloud and smoke, wherein God
showed himself in his material house; above, thou see him clothed in an
heavenly, and incomprehensible light; and if a little glimpse of celestial
glory in a momentary transfiguration so transported the prime Apostle, that he
wished to dwell still in Tabor: how shall we be ravished with the full view of
that all-glorious Deity, whose very sight gives blessedness? What a life does
the presence of the Sun put into all Creatures here below? yet the body of it
is afar off, the power of it created and finite: Oh then how perfect and happy
a life must we needs receive from the Maker of it, when the beams of his
heavenly glory shall shine in our face? Here below our weak senses are marred
with too excellent objects; our pure spirits above cannot complain of excess,
but by how much more of that divine light they take in, are so much the more
blessed. There is no other thing wherein our sight can make us happy; we may
see all other objects, and yet be miserable; here, our eyes conveigh into us
influences of bliss; yet not our eyes alone: but as the soul has other
spiritual senses also, they are wholly possessed of God: our ^dhesion is as it
were an heavenly touch, our fruition as an heavenly taste of the everblessed
Deity; so the glorified soul in seeing God, feelingly apprehends him as its
own; in apprehending sweetly enjoyes him, to all eternity, finding in him more
absolute contentment then it can be capable of, and finding it self capable of
so much as make it everlastingly happy. Away with those brutish Paradises of
Jews, and Turks and some Judaizing Chiliasts, who have placed happiness in the
full feed of their sensual appetite, inverting the words of the Epicurean in
the Gospel: He could say, Let us eat and drink, for to morrow we shall dye:
they, Let us dye, for we shall eat and drink; men, whose belly is their God;
their kitchen their heaven: The soul that has had the least smack, how sweet
the Lord is in the weak apprehension of Grace here below, easily contemns these
dunghil-felicities, and cannot but long after those true and satisfying
delights above, in comparison whereof all the pleasures of the paunch and
palate, are but either savorless or noisome.

Feast thou thy self, onwards O my soul, with the joyful hope of this blessed
vision, adhesion, fruition: Alas, here thy dim eyes see thy God through clouds
and vapors, and not without manifold diversions, here thou cleavest
imperfectly to that absolute goodness, but with many frail interceptions,
every prevalent temptation loses thy hold, and makes thy God and thee
strangers; here thou enjoyest him sometimes in his favors, seldom in
himself; and when thou do so, how easily art thou robbed of him by the
interpositions of a crafty, and bewitching world? There thou shall so see him,
as that thou shall never look off; so adhere to him, as never to be severed; so
enjoy him, that he shall ever be all in all to thee, even the soul of thy soul;
thy happiness is then essential; thy joy as inseparable, as thy being.

SECT. VII. In what terms the departed Saints stand to us; and what respects
they bear to us.
Such is the felicity wherein the separate souls of Gods elect ones are
feoffed, for ever: But, in the mean time, what terms do they stand in to their
once-partners, these humane bodies? to these the forlorn companions of their
pilgrimage and warfare? Do they despise these houses of clay, wherein they once
dwelt? or have they with Pharaohs Courtier, forgotten their fellow-prisoner?
Far be it from us to entertain so injurious thoughts of those spirits, whose
charity is no less exalted then their knowledge: Some graces they do
necessarily leave behind them; There is no room for faith, where there is
present vision; no room for hope, where is full fruition; no room for patience,
where is no possibility of suffering: but charity can never be out of date,
charity both to God and man: As the head and body mystical are undivided, so is
our love to both; we cannot love the head, and not the body; we cannot love
some limbs of the body, and not others: The triumphant part of the Church then,
which is above, does not more truly love each other glorified, then they love
the warfaring part beneath: neither can their love be idle, and fruitless;
they cannot but wish well therefore to those they love: That the glorified
Saints, then, above in a generality wish for the good estate, and happy
consummation of their conflicting brethren here on earth, is a truth, not more
void of scruple, then full of comfort. It was not so much revenge, Revel. 6.
which the souls under the Alter pray for upon their murderers; as the
accomplishment of that happy resurrection, in which that revenge shall be
perfectly acted. The prayer in Zachary (and Saints are herein parallel) is,
Zach. 1.12.
O Lord of hosts how long will thou not have mercy on Jerusalem, and on the
Cities of Judah, against which thou have had indignation? we do not use to joy,
but in that which we wish for: Luke 15.7.10.
There is joy in heaven, in the presence of the Angels for sinners repenting:
In the presence of the Angels, therefore, on the part of the Saints, none but
they dwell together. Oh ye blessed Saints, we praise God for you for your happy
departure, for your crown of immortality: Ye do in common, sue to God for us,
as your poor fellow members, for our happy eluctation out of those miseries
and tentations, wherewith we are continually conflicted here below, and for our
Society with you in your blessedness. Other terms of communion, we know none:
As for any local presence, or particular correspondence, that ye may have with
any of us, as we cannot come to know it; so, if we would, Job. a Jesu. Mar l.
5. de vit. There Is. c. 3
we should have no reason to disclaim it. Johannes a Jesu-Maria, a modern
Carmelite, writing the life of Theresia (Sainted lately by Gregory 15.) tells
us, that as she was a vigilant overseer of her votaries in her life; so in, and
after death she would not be drawn away from her care, and attendance; For
(says he) if any of her sisters did but talk in the set hours of their
silence, she was wont by three knocks at the door of the Cell, to put them in
mind of their enjoined taciturnity; and on a time appearing (as she did often)
in a lightsome brightness, to a certain Carmelite, Nos coelestes ac vos exules
amore ac puritati sae derate esse debemus, etc.
is said thus to bespeak him; Nos coe^estes, etc. We Citizens of heaven, and ye
exiled pilgrims on earth, ought to be linked in a league of love, and purity,
etc. Me thinks the reporter should fear this to be too much good fellowship for
a Saint; I am sure neither Divine nor ancient Story had wont to afford such
familiarity; And many have mis-doubted the agency of worse, where have appeared
less causes of suspicion* That this was (if any thing) an ill spirit under
that face, I am justly confident; neither can any man doubt, that looking
further into the relation, finds him to come with a lie in his mou^h: For thus
he goes on, [We celestial ones behold the Deity, Nos coelites intuentes
divinitatem; vos exules Euceharistiam venerantes; quam eo affectu quo nos
divinitatem suspicimus, colere debetis. Ibid.
ye banished ones worship the Eucharist; which ye ought to worship with the
same affection, wherewith we adore the Deity;] such perfume does this holy
Devil leave behind him: The like might be instanced in a thousand apparitions
of this kind, al worthy of the same entertainment.

As for the state of the souls of Lazarus, of the Widows son, of Jairus his
daughter, and of Tabitha, whether there were, by divine appointment, a
suspension of their final condition for a time (their souls awaiting not far
off from their bodies, for a further disposition) or, whether they were for the
manifestation of the miraculous power of the Son of God, called off from their
settled rest, some great Divines may dispute, none can determine: where God is
silent, let us be willingly ignorant: wi^h more safety and assurance may we
inquire into those respects, wherein the separated soul stands to that body,
which it left behind it for a prey to the worms, a captive to death, and
corruption: For certainly, though the parts be severed, the relations cannot be
so: God made it intrinsecally natural to that spiritual part to be the form
of man, and therefore to animate the body. It was in the very infusion of it
created, and in the creating, infused into this coessentiall receptacle;
wherein it holds it self so interessed, as that it knows there can be no full
consummation of its glory without the other half. It was not therefore more
loath to leave this old partner in the dissolution, then it is now desirous to
meet him again; as well knowing in how much happier condition they shall meet,
then they formerly parted: Before this drossie piece was cumbersome, and
hindered the free operations of this active spirit; now, that by a blessed
glorification it is spiritualized, it is every way become pliable to his renewed
partner, the Soul, and both of them to their infinitely glorious Creator.

SECT. VIII The reunion of the body to the soul both glorified.
LO then so happy a reunion, as this material world is not capable of (till
the last fire have refined it) of a blessed soul, met with a glorified body,
for the peopling of the new heaven; who can but rejoice in spirit to foresee
such a glorious communion of perfected Saints? to see their bodies with a clear
brightness, without all earthly opacity; with agility, without all dullness;
with subtility, without grosness; with impassibility, without the reach of
annoyance or corruption? There and then shall thou, O my soul, looking through
clarified eyes, see and rejoice to see that glorious body of thy dear God and
Savior, which he assumed here below; and wherein he wrought out the great work
of thy redemption; there shall thou see the radiant bodies of all those eminent
Saints, whose graces thou had wont to wonder at, and weakly wish to imitate;
There shall I meet with the visible partners of the same unspeakeable glory, my
once dear parents, children, friends, and (if there can be room for any more
joy in the soul, that is taken up with God) shall both communicate, and
appropriate our mutual joys: There shall we indissolubly with all the chore
of heaven pass our eviternity of bliss in lauding and praising the
incomprehensibly-glorious Majesty of our Creator, Redeemer, Sanctifier; in
perpetual Hallelujahs to him that sits upon the Throne: And can thou, O my
soul, in the expectation of this happiness, be unwilling to take leave of this
flesh for a minute of separation? How well art thou contented to give way to
this body, to shut up the windows of thy senses, and to retire it self after
the toil of the day, to a nightly rest, whence yet thou know it is not sure
to rise; or if it do, yet it shall rise but such as it lay down; some little
fresher, no whit better; and art thou so loath to bid a cheerful goodnight to
this piece of my self, which shall more surely rise then lie down, and not
more surely rise, then rise glorious? Away with this weak and wretched
infidelity: without which, the hope of my change would be my present
happiness, and the issue of it mine eternull glory: Even so, Lord Jesus, come
quickly.

THE INVISIBLE WORLD. The Third BOOK.
SECT. I. Of the Evil Angels. Of their first sin and fall.
HITHERTO our thoughts have walked through the lightsome and glorious regions
of the spiritual world; now it is no less requisite to cast some glances
toward those dreadful and darksome parts of it; where nothing dwells but horror
and torment: Of the former, it concerns us to take notice for our comfort; of
these latter for terror, caution, resistance.

I read it reported by an ancient Travailer, Haytonus, Fr. Haytonus in passagio
terrae sanctae. Anno 1300. editus a Nicol* Salcone.
of the Order of the Premonstratensis, and cousin (as he says) to the
then-King of Armenia, that he saw a country in the Kingdom of Georgia (which
he would not have believed, except his eyes had seen it) caldel Hamsen, of
three days journey about, covered over with palpable darkness, wherein some
desolate people dwell; for those which inhabit upon the borders of it, might
hear the neighing of horses, and crowing of cocks, and howling of dogs, and
other noises, but no man could go in to them, without loss of himself: Surely
this may seem some slight representation of the condition of Apostate Angels,
and reprobate souls: Their region is the kingdom of darkness, they have only
light enough to see themselves eternally miserable; neither are capable of the
least glimpse of comfort, or mitigation. But, as it falls out with those, which
in a dark night bear their own light, that they are easily discerned by an
enemy that waits for them, and good aim may be taken at them, even whiles that
enemy lurks unseen of them: so it is with us in these spiritual ambushes of
the infernal powers, their darkness and our light gives them no small
advantage against us; The same power that clears and strengthens the eyes of
our soul to see those over-excelling glories of the good Angels, can also
enable us to pierce thorough that hellish obscurity, and to descrie so much of
the natures and condition of those evil spirits as may render us both wary,
and thankful.

In their first creation there were no Angels but of light, that any of them
should bring evil with him from the moment of his first being, is the
exploded heresy of a Manes, a man fit for his name; and if Prateolus may be
believed, of the Trinit^^ians; yea, blasphemy rather, casting mire in the face
of the most pure and holy Deity: For, from an absolute goodness, what can
proceed but good? And if any then of those spirits could have been originally
evil, whence could he pretend to fetch it? Either three must be a predominant
principle of evil; or a derivation of it from the fountain of infinite
goodness, either of which were very monsters of impiety: All were once glorious
spirits; sin changed their hue, and made many of them ugly Devils: Now straight
I am apt to think, Lord! how should sin come into the world? how into Angels?
God made all things good; sin could be no work of his: How should the good that
he made, produce the evil which he hates? Even this curiosity must receive an
answer.

The great God when he would make his noblest creature, found it fit to produce
him in the nearest likeness to himself; and therefore to indue him with
perfection of understanding, and freedom of will, either of which being
wanting there could have been no excellency in that which was intended for the
best: such therefore did he make his Angels: Their will being made free had
power of their own inclinations; those free inclinations of some of them,
swayed them awry from that highest end which they should have solely aimed at,
to a faulty respect, unto oblique ends of their own.

Hence was the beginning of sin; for as it falls out in causes efficient, that
when the secondary agent swarves from the order and direction of the principal,
straight ways a fault thereupon ensues (as when the leg by reason of
crookedness, fails of the performance of that motion, which the appetitive
power injoined, an halting immediately follows) so it is in final causes also,
(as Aquinas acutely) when the secondary end is not kept in, under the order of
the principal and highest end, there grows a sin of the will, whose object is
ever good: but if a supposed, and self respective good be suffered to take the
wall of the best, and absolute good, the will instantly proves vicious. As
therefore there can be no possible fault incident into the will of him who
propounds to himself as his only good, the utmost end of all things, which is
God himself; so, in whatsoever willer, whose own particular good is contained
under the order of another higher good, there may (without Gods special
confirmation) happen a sin in the will: Thus it was with these revolting
Angels, they did not order their own particular (supposed) good to the supreme
and utmost end; but suffered their will to dwell in an end of their own; and by
this means did put themselves into the place of God; not regulating their wills
by another superior, but making their will, the rule of their own desires;
which was in effect, to affect an equality with the highest Not that their
ambition went so high as to aspire to an height of goodness, or greatness,
equal to their infini^e Creator; This (as the greater Leader of the School
has determined it) could not fall into any intelligent nature, since it were
no other, then to affect his own not being; for as much as there can be no
being at all, without a distinction of degrees, and subordinations of beeings:
This was (I suppose) the threshold of leaving their first estate: Now it was
with Angelical spirits as it is with heavy bodies, when they begin to fail
they went down at once, speedily passing through many degrees of wickedness.
Let learned Gerson see upon what grounds he conceives, that in the beginning
their sin might be venial, afterward arising to the height of maliciousness;
whom Salmeron seconds by seven reasons, alleged to that purpose; laboring to
prove that before their precipitation, they had large time, and place of
repentance; the point is too high for any humane determination: this we know
too well by our selves, that even the will of man, when it is once let loose to
sin, finds no stay; how much more of those active spirits, which by reason of
their simple and spiritual nature, convert themselves wholly to what they do
incline?

What were the particular grounds of their defection and ruin, what was their
first sin, it is neither needful, nor possible to know; I see the wracks of
this curiosity in some of the Ancient, who misguiding themselves by a false
Compass of mis-applyed Texts, have split upon those shelves which their
miscarriage shall teach me to avoid; If they have made Lucifer* (that is, the
morning Star) a Devil, Isa. 14.12.
and mistake the King of Babylon for the Prince of darkness, as they have
palpably done, I dare not follow them. Rather let me spend my thoughts in
wondering at the dreadful justice, and the incomprehensible mercy of our great
and holy God, who having cast these Apostate Angels into hell, and reserved
them in everlasting chains under darkness, unto the judgment of the great
day, has yet graciously found out a way to redeem miserable mankind from that
horible pit of destruction: It is not for me to busy my self in finding out
reasons of difference for the aggravation of the sin of Angel^ and abatement of
man's; as that sin began in them, they were their own tempters: that they sinned
irreparably, since their fall was to them as death is to us: How ever it were,
Cursed be the man who shall say that the sin of any creature exceeds the power
of thy mercy, O God, which is no other then thy self, infinite; whiles
therefore I lay one hand upon my mouth, I lift up the other in a silent wonder,
with the blessed Apostle, and say, How unsearchable are thy judgments, and thy
ways past finding out.

SECT. IV. Of the number of Apostate Spirits.
WHo can but tremble to think of the dreadful precipice of these d^^ned
Angels, which from the highest pitch of heaven, were suddenly thrown down into
the dungeon of the nethermost hell? who can but tremble to think of their
number, power, malice, cunning and deadly machinations?

Had this defection been single, yet it had been fearful: should but one star
fall down from heaven, with what horror do we think of the wrack that would
ensue to the whole world? how much more when the great Dragon draws down the
third part of the stars with his tail? And lo, these Angels were as so many
spiritual stars in the firmament of glory. It was here as in the rebellion of
great Peers, the common sort are apt to take part in any insurrection: There
are orders and degrees even in the region of confusion; we have learned of our
Savior to know, there is a Devil and his Angels; And Jewish tradition has
told us of a Prince of Devils. It was in all likelihood some prime Angel of
heaven, that first started aside from his station, and led the ring of this
highest and first revolt; millions sided with him, and had their part both in
his sin and punishment: Now how formidable is the number of these evil and
hostile spirits? Had we the eyes of that holy Hermit (for such the first were)
we might see the air full of these malignant sp^rits, laying snares for
miserable mankind: And if the possessors of one poor Demoniack, could style
themselves Legion, (a name that in the truest account, contains no less then
ten Cohorts, and every Cohort fifty Companies, and every Company 25 Soldiers,
to the number of 1225) what an army of these hellish fiends do we suppose is
that, wherewith whole mankind is beleaguered all the world over? Certainly no
man living, (as Tertullian and Nissen have too truly observed) can, from the
very hour of his nativity, to the last minute of his dissolution, be free from
one of these spiritual assailants, if not many at once. The ejected spirit
returns to his former assault with seven worse then himself. Even where there
is equality of power, inequality of number must needs be a great advantage. An
Hercules himself is no match for two Antagonists; yea, were their strength much
less then ours, if we be but as a flock of Goats feeding upon the hills; when
the evil spirits (as the Midianites and Amalekites were against Israel) are
like grasshoppers in the valley, what hope, what possibility were there, (if we
were left in our own hands) for saefty or prevalence? But now alas, their
number is great, but their power is more: Even these Evil Angels are styled by
him that knew them, no less then principalities and powers, and rulers of the
darkness of this world, and spiritual wickednesses in heavenly places.
Naturalia in damnatis Angelis manent splendidissima.
They lost not their strength when they left their station. It is the rule of
Dionysius (too true I fear) that in the reprobate Angels their natural
abilities still hold; No other then desperate therefore were the condition of
whole mankind, if we were turned loose into the lists to grapple with these
mighty spirits. Courage, O my soul, and together with it, victory: Let thine
eyes be but open (as Gehezies) and thou shall see more with us then against us;
One good Angel is able to chase whole troops of these malignant: For though
their natural powers in regard of the substance of them be still retained; yet
in regard of the exercise and execution of them, they are abated, and
restrained by the overruling order of divine Justice, and mercy; from which,
far be that infinite incongruity, that evil should prevail above God; The same
God therefore, who so disposes the issue of these humane contentions, that the
race is not to the swift, nor the battle to the strong, cowardizeth and
daunteth these mighty and insolent spirits, so as they cannot stand before one
of these glorious Angels; nor prevail any further then his most wise providence
has contrived to permit for his own most holy purposes.

How ever yet we be upon these grounds safe in the good hands of the Almighty,
and of those his blessed Guardians, to whom he has committed our charge: yet
it well befits us, to take notice of those powerful executions of the evil
Angels which it pleases the great Arbiter of the world to give way unto, that
we may know what cause we have both of vigilance and gratitude.

SECT. III. Of the power of Devils.
NO Dwarf will offer to wrestle with a Giant; it is an argument of no small
power, as well as boldness of that proud spirit, that he durst strive with
Michael the Archangell: and though he were as then foiled in the conflict, yet
he cease not still to oppose his Hierarchy to the Celestial, and not there
prevailing* he poures out his tyranny, where he is suffered, on this inferior
world; Job. 1.16.
One while fetching down fire from heaven (which the messenger called the fire
of God) upon the flocks and shepherds of Job: another while, blustering in the
air, with hurrying winds, and furious tempests, breaking down the strongest
towers, and turning up the stoutest oaks, tearing asunder the hardest rocks,
and rending of the tops of the firmest mountains: one while swelling up the
raging Sea to sudden inundations; another while causing the earth to totter
and tremble under our feet: would we descend to the particular demonstrations
of the powerful operations of evil spirits, this discourse would have no end.
If we do but cast our eyes upon Jannes and Jambres, the Egyptian Sorcerers, (in
whom we have formerly instanced in another Treatise, to this purpose) we shall
see enough to wonder at: How close did they for a time follow Moses at the
heels, imitating those miraculous works, which God had appointed, and enabled
him to do for Pharaohs conviction? Had not the faith of that worthy servant of
God been invincible, how blank must he needs have looked, to see his great
works patterned by those presumptuous rivals? Does Moses turn his rod into a
serpent? every of their rods crawleth and hisseth as well as his? Does he smite
the waters into blood? their waters are instantly as bloody as his: Does he
fetch frogs out of Nilus into Pharaohs bedchamber, and bosom, and into the
ovens and kneading troughs of his people? they can store Egypt with loathsome
cattle as well as he: All this while, Pharaoh knows no difference of a God, and
hardly yields whether Jannes or Moses be the better man; although he might
easily have decided it, out of the very acts done; he saw Moses his serpent
devoured theirs; so as now there was neither serpent, nor rod; and whiles they
would be turning their rod into aserpent, both rod and serpent were lost in
that serpent, which returned into a rod: He saw that those Sorcerers, who had
brought the frogs could not remove them; and soon after sees that those
juglers, who pretended to make serpents, blood, frogs, cannot (when God
pleases to restrain them) make so much as a louse: But supposing the
sufferance of the Almighty, who knows what limits to prescribe, to these
infernal powers? They can beguile the senses, mock the fantasy, work strongly
by philtres upon the affections, assume the shapes of man or beast, inflict
grievous torment on the body, conveigh strange things insensibly into it,
transport it from place to place in quick motions, cause no less sudden
disparitions of it; heal diseases by charms, and spells; frame hideous
apparitions, and, in short, by applying active powers to passive subjects they
can produce wonderful effects: each of all which were easy to be instanced in
whole volumes, if it were needful, out of history and experience. Who then, O
God, who is able to stand before these sons of Anak? what are we in such hands?
Oh match desperately unequal, of weakness with power, flesh with spirit, man
with Devils! Away with this cowardly diffidence: Cheer up thy self, O my soul,
against these heartlesse fears; and know the advantage is on thy side. Could
Samson have been firmly bound hand and foot by the Philistine cords, so as he
could not have stirred those mighty limbs of his, what boy or girl of Gath or
Ascalon would have feared to draw near, and spurn that awed champion: No other
is the condition of our dreadful enemies, they are fast bound up with the
adamantine chains of Gods most merciful and inviolable decree, and forcibly
restrained from their desired mischief: Who can be afraid of a muzzled and tied
up mastive? What woman or child cannot make faces at a fierce Lion, or a
bloody Bajazet locked up fast in an iron grate? were it not for this strong, and
straight curb of divine providence, what good man could breath one minute upon
earth? The Demo^iack in the Gospel could break his iron fetters i^ pieces,
through the help of his ^egion; those Devils that possessed him, could not
break theirs; they are fain to sue for leave to enter into swine, neither had
obtained it (in all likelihood) but for a just punishment to those Gadarene
owners; How sure may we then be, that this just hand of omnipotence will not
suffer these evil ones to tyrannize over his chosen vessels for their hurt?
How safe are we, since their power is limited, our protection infinite?

SECT. IV. Of the knowledge and malice of wicked Spirits.
WHo can know how much he is bound to God for safeguard, if he do not
apprehend the quality of those enemies, wherewith he is encompassed?
Obscientiam nominati. Aug. l. 9 de Civ^.
whose knowledge and skill is no whit inferior to their power: They have not
the name of Daemones for nothing; their natural knowledge was not forfeited by
their fall, the wisdom of the infinite giver of it knows how rather to turn it
to the use of his own glory: However therefore, they are kept of^ from those
divine illuminations, which the good Angels receive from God, yet they must
needs be granted to have such a measure of knowledge, as cannot but yield them
a formidable advantage. For, as spirits, being not stripped of their original
knowledge, together with their glory, they cannot but know the natures and
constitutions of the creatures, and thereby their tempers, dispositions,
inclinations, conditions, faculties; and therewith their wants, their weakness
and obnoxiousnesse, and thereupon strongly conjecture at their very thoughts,
and intentions, and the likelihood of their repulses or prevailings: out of the
knowledge of the causes of things they can foresee such future events as have a
dependence thereon. To which, if we shall add the improvement, which so many
thousand years experience can yield to active and intelligent spirits, together
with the velocity of their motitions, and the concurrent intelligence which
those powers of darkness hold with each other we shall see cause enough to
disparage our own simplicity, to tremble at our own danger, and to bless God
for our indemnity.

But if unto all these, we shall take notice of their malice, no whit inferior
to their power, and knowledge, we cannot but be transported with the wonder at
our infinite obligations to the blessed Majesty of heaven, who preserves us
from the rage of so spightfull, cunning, mighty enemies. Satan carries
hostility in his very name, and answerably in his wicked nature: hostility to
the God that made him, as the avenger of his sin; hostility for his sake to the
Creature, which that God made good: his enmity did, as himself, descend from
the highest, for it began at the Almighty, and remains as implacable, as
impotent.

It is a bold and uncouth story, and scarce safe to relate, which I find in
the book of Conformity reported, as cited by a Demoniack woman, from the mouth
of a certain Friar, named Jacobus de Pozali, in his Sermon; That S. Macarius
once went about to make peace betwixt God and Satan; That it pleased God to
say, If the Devil will acknowledge his fault I will pardon him: To which the
evil spirit returned answer, I will never acknowledge any fault of mine; yea,
that crucified Savior should rather cry me mercy for keeping me thus long in
hell: To whom Macarius, (as he well might) Avoid Satan. I know not whether more
to blame their Saint (if they report him right) for too much charity, or for
too little grace and wit, in so presumptuous an endeavor: The very treaty was
in him blasphemous; the answer no other then could be expected from a spirit
obdured in malice, and desperate in that obdurednesse; The truth is, he hates
us because he hated God first; and like the enraged Panther, tears the picture,
because he cannot reach the person whom it represents.

He that made him an Angel tells us what he is, since he made himself a
Devil, even a manslayer from the beginning: His very trade is Murder and
Destruction, and his executions unweariable: he goes abous continually like a
roaring Lion, seeking whom he may devour. It is no other then a marvailous
mystery of Divine state, too deep for the shallowness of humane souls to reach
into, that God could with one word of his powerful command destroy and
dissolve all the powers of hell; yet he knows it best not to do it: only we
know he has a justice to glorify, as well as a mercy; and that he knows how
to fetch more honor to himself, by drawing good out of evil, then by the
amotion, and prevention of evil. Glory be to that infinite power, justice,
mercy, providence, that contrives all things both in heaven and earth, and
hell, to the highest advantage of his own blessed Name, and to the greatest
benefit of his elect.

SECT. V. The variety of the spiritual assaults of Evil Spirits.
OUT of this hellish mixture of power, skill, malice, do proceed all the deadly
machinations of these infernal spirits, which have enlarged their Kingdom, and
furnished the pit of destruction. It was a great word of the chosen Vessel, We
are not ignorant of Satan's devises: 2 Cor 2.11
O blessed Apostle, thy illuminated soul which saw the height of heaven, might
also see the depth of hell: Our weak eyes are not able to pierce so low. That
Satan is full o^ crafty devises we know too well; but what those devises are,
is beyond our reach: Alas, we know not the secret projects of silly men like
our selves: yea, who knows the crooked windings of his own heart? much less
can we hope to attain unto the understanding of these infernal plots and
stratagems: such knowledge is too wonderful for us, our clew has not line
enough to fadom these depths of Satan: But though we be not able possibly to
descrie those infinite and hidden particularities of Diabolical art and
cunning; yet our woeful experience and observation has taught us some general
heads of these mischievous practices: Diverse whereof I am not unwilling to
learn, and borrow of that great Master of Meditation, Gerson, Gerson de variis
Diaboli tentationibus.
the learned Chancellor of Paris, a man singularly acquainted with tentations.
One while therefore that evil one lays before us the incommodities, dangers,
wants, difficulties of our callings; to dishearten us, and draw us to
impatience and listlesseness; and rather then fail, will make piety a color of
laziness; another while he spurs up our diligence in our worldly vocation, to
withdraw us from holy duties: one while, he hides his head, and refrains from
tempting, that we may think our selves secure, and slacken our care of defense;
another while, he seems to yield, that he may leave us proud of the victory:
one while, he tills us on to our over-hard tasks of austere mortification, that
he may tire our piety, and so stupefie us with an heartlesse melancholy:
another while, he takes us off from any higher exercises of virtue, as
superfluous: one while, he turns and fixes our eyes upon other men's sins, that
we may not take view of our own; another while, he amplifies the worth and
actions of others, to breed in us either envy or dejection: one while, he
humors our zeal in all other virtuous proceedings, for but the color of one
secret vice; another while, he lets us loose to all uncontrolled viciousness,
so as we be content to make love to some one virtue: one while, under the
pretense of discretion, he discourages us from good (if any way dangerous)
enterprises; another while, he is apt to put us upon bold hazards, with the
contempt of fear or wit, that we may be guilty of our own miscarriage: one
while, he works suspicion in love, and suggests mis-constructions of well-meant
words or actions, to cause heart-burning between dear friends; another while,
under a pretense of favor, he kills the soul with flattery: one while he stirs
up our charity to the public performance of some beneficial works, only to
win us to vainglory; another while, he moves us for avoiding the suspicion or
censure of si^gularity, to fashion our selves to the vicious guises of our
sociable neighbors: one while he persuades us to rest in the outward act done,
as meritoriously acceptable; another while, under a color of humility, he
disswades us from those good duties, whereby we might be exemplary to others:
one while, he heartens us in evil gettings, under pretense of the opportunity
of liberal almsgiving; another while, he closes our hands in a rigorous
forbearance of needful mercy, under a fair color of Justice: one while, he
incites us under a pretense of zeal, to violate charity, in unjust censures and
violent executions; another while, under pretense of mercy to bear with gross
sins: one while, he stirs us up, under a color o^ charitable caution, to wound
our neighbor with a secret detraction; another while, out of of carnal
affections he would make us the pandars of others vices: one while, he sets on
the tongue to an inordinate motion, that many words may let fall some sin;
another while he restrains it in a sullen silence, out of an affectation of a
commendable modesty: one while, out of a pretended honest desire to know some
secret and useful truth, he hooks a man into a busy curiosity, and unawares
intangles the heart in unclean affections; another while, he broaks many a sin
with only the bashfulnesse of inquiry: one while, he injects such pleasing
thoughts of fleshly delights, as may at the first seem safe and inoffensive;
which by a delayed entertai^ment prove dangerous, and inflaming; another while,
he over-layes the heart with such swarms of obscene suggestions, that when it
should be taken up with holy devotion, it has work enough to repel and answer
those sinful importunit^es: one while, he moves us to an ungrounded confidence
in God for a condescent, or deliverance; that upon our disappointment he may
work unto impatience; or, upon our prevailing to a pride, and overweening
opinion of our mistaken faith; another while, he casts into us glances of
distrust, where we have sure ground of belief: one while, he throws many
needless scruples into the conscience, for a causeless perplexing of it;
affrighting it even from lawful actions; another while he labors so to widen
the conscience, that even gross sins may pass down unfelt: one while he will
seem friendly in suggesting advise to listen unto good counsel (which yet he
more strongly keeps us off from taking) for a further obduration; another
while, he moves us to slight all the good advise of others, out of a
persuasion of our own self-sufficiency; that we may be sure to fall into evil:
one while he smooths us up in the good opinion of our own gracious disposition,
that we may rest in our measure; another while he beats us down with a
disparagement of our true graces, that we may be heartlesse and unthankful:
one while, he feeds us with a sweet contentment in a colorable devotion, that
we may not care to work our hearts to a solid piety; another while, he
endeavors to freeze up our hearts with a dullness and sadness of spirit in
our holy services, that they may prove irksome, and we negligent: one while he
injects lawful but unseasonable motions of requisite employments, to cast off
our minds from due intention in prayers, hearing, meditation; another while he
is content we should over-weary our selves with holy tasks, that they may grow
tediously distastefull: one while, he woes a man to glut himself with some
pleasurable sin, upon pretense that this satiety may breed a loathing of that,
whereof he surfeits; another while he makes this spiritual drunkenness but an
occasion of further thirst: one while, he suggests to a man the duty he owes to
the maintenance of his honor, and reputation, though unto blood; another
while, he bids him be tongue-proof, that he may render the party shamelesly
desperate in evil doing: one while, he allows us to pray long, that we may love
to hear our selves speak, and may languish in our devotion; another while, he
tells us there is no need of vocal prayers, since God hears our thoughts: one
while, he urges us to a busy search, and strong conclusion of the unfailable
assurance of our election to glory, upon slippery and unsure grounds; another
while to a careless indifferency, and stupid neglect of our future estate,
that we may perish through security: one while, sleighting the measure of
contrition as unsufficient; another while, working the heart to take up with
the least velleity of penitent sorrow, without straining it to any further
afflictive degrees of true penance: one while, suggesting such dangerous points
of our self-examination, that the resolution is every way unsafe; so as, we
must presume upon our strength, if we determine affirmatively; if negatively,
decline toward despair; another while encouraging a man by the prosperous
event of his sin, to re-act it; and by the hard successes of good actions, to
forbear them: one while, under pretense of giving glory to God for his graces,
stirring up the heart to a proud over valuing our own virtues, and abilities;
another while stripping God of the honor of his gifts by a causeless
pusillanimity: one while aggravating our unworthiness to be sons, servants,
subjects, guests, almsmen of the holy and great God; another while, upon some
poor works of piety, or charity, raising our conceits to a secret gloriation of
our worthiness, both of acceptance and reward, and Gods beholdingness to us.
Shortly, (for it were easy to exceed in instances) one while casting undue
fears into the tender hearts of weak regenerates, of Gods just desertions, and
of their own sinful deficiencies; another while, puffing them up with
ungrounded presumptions of present safety, and future glory. These and a
thousand more such arts of Deceit do the evil spirits practice upon the poor
soul of wretched man to betray it to everlasting destruction: And if at any
time, they shall pretend fair respects, it is a true observation of a strict
votary, That the Devils of Consolation, are worse then the afflictive. O my
soul, what vigilance can be sufficient for thee, whiles thou art so beset with
variety of contrary temptations.

SECT. VI. Of the apparitions and assumed shapes of evil spirits.
BEsides these mental and ordinary onsets, we find when these malignant spirits
have not stuck, for a further advantage, to cloth themselves with the
appearances of visible shapes, not of meaner creatures only, but of men, both
living and dead; yea, even of the good Angels themselves. It were easy to
write volumes of their dreadful and illusive apparitions; others have done it
before me, my pen is for other use: The times are not past the ken of our
memory, since the frequent (and in some part, true) reports of those familiar
Devils, Fayires, and Goblins, wherewith many places were commonly haunted; the
rarity whereof in these latters times, is sufficient to descry the difference
betwixt the state of ignorant superstition, and the clear light of the Gospel:
I doubt not but there were many frauds intermixed both in the acting, and
relating diverse of these oecurrences; but he that shall detrect from the truth
of all, may as well deny there were men living in those ages before us: Neither
can I make question of the authentic records of the Diabolus gloriosa forma,
diademate g^mmeo and aureo redimitus, vest regia indutus, apparuit Martin.
precanti, se Christum dicit, cui postsilentium aliquod sanctus: Ego Christum
nisi in illo babitu, formaque qua passus est, nisi crucis stigmata proferentem,
venisse non credam; hinc evanuit. Hoc narravit Sulpitio Martinus ipse, ut
refert idem Sever Sulp. in vita Martini.
examinations, and confessions of Witches and Sorcerers, in several regions of
the world, Bodin Daemonomania, ubique.
agreeing in the truth of their horrible pacts with Satan, of their set
meetings with evil spirits, their beastly homages, and conversations; I should
hate to be guilty of so much incredulity, as to charge so many grave Judges,
and credible historians with lies. Amongst such fastidious choice of whole
dry-fats of voluminous relations, I cannot forbear to single out that one
famous story of Magdalene de la Groix, in the year of our Lord Christ, 1545.
Sim. Goul. Hist. admirables. Casstod. Reney en ses Relation^, zuinger. Theater
de vie Human. Bodin. Daemonomania, l. 2.
who being borne at Cordova in Spain, whether for the indigence or devotion of
her parents, was at five years age, put into a Covent of Nuns: at that age an
evil spirit presented himself to her in the form of a Blackmore, soul and
hideous; she startled at the sight, not without much horror: but with fair
speeches and promises of all those gay ^oyes, wherewith children are wont to be
delighted, she was won to hold society with him; not without strong charges of
silence and secrecy: In the mean time giving proof of a notable quick wit, and
more then the ordinary ability incident into her age; so as she was highly
esteemed, both of the young novices, and of the aged Nuns.

No sooner was she come to the age of 12 or 13 years, then the Devil solicits
her to marry with him, and for her dowry, promises her that for the space of 30
years, she shall live in such fame and honor for the opinion of her sanctity,
as that she shall be for that time, the wonder of all Spain. Whiles this wicked
spirit held his unclean conversation with her in her chamber, he delegates
another of his hellish accomplices, to supply the place and form of his Magdalene
in the Church, in the Cloister, in all their meetings; not without marvailous
appearance of gravity, and devotion; disclosing unto her also, the affairs of
the world abroad, and furnishing her with such advertisements, as made her
wondered at; and won her the reputation, not of an holy virgin only, but of a
Prophetess. Out of which height of estimation, although she was not for years
capable of that dignity, she was by the general votes of the sister-hood chosen
unanimously, to be the Abbess of that Covent: Wonderful were the feats which
she then did. The Priest cries out in his celebration, that he missed one of
the holy Hosts, which he had consecrated: and lo, tha^ was by her wonted
Angel, invisibly conveyed to holy Magdalene; The wall that was betwixt her
lodging and the Quire, at the elevation of the host, clave asunder, that holy
Magdalene might see that sacred act: And (which was yet more notorious) on
solemn festivals, when the Nuns made their procession, Magdalene was in the
sight of all the beholders, lift up from the earth, the height of three cubits,
as if she should have been rapt up to heaven: and sometimes, while she bore in
her arm^ little image of the child Jesus, new born, and naked, weeping (like a
true Magdalene) abundantly over the babe; her hair seemed by miracle, suddenly
lengthened so low as to reach unto her ankles, for the covering of the naked
child; which so soon as she had laid aside that dear burden, returned suddenly
to the wonted length: These and many other the like miracles, made her so
famous, that Popes, Emperor* the Grandees of Spain wrote to her, beseeching
her in their letters to recommend their affairs to God in her powerful
devotions; and in requiring her advise and advertisements in matters of high
importance; as appeared afterward, by the letters found in her Cabinet. And
the great Ladies of Spain, and other parts would not wrap their newborn
infants in any clouts or swathing-bands, but such as the sacred hands of Abbess
Magdalene had first touched and blessed: All, the Nuns of Spain were proud of
so great an honor of their order, and such miraculous proofs of their
sanctity. At last it pleased God to lay open this notable fraud of the Devil;
for Magdalene after thirty years acquaintance with this her paramour, having
been Abbess now twelve years, began to conceive some remorse for her former
practices; and growing to a detestation of her horrible society wi^h that evil
spirit, found means freely to discover to the Visitors of her Order, all the
whole carriage of this abominable and prodigious wickedness. Although some
credible, wise, and learned persons have reported, that she, perceiving the
Nuns to have taken secret notice of her foul pranks, lest she should run into a
deserved condemnation, did (under the favor of those laws which give pardon to
self-accusing offenders) voluntarily confess her monstrous villainy and
impiety. This confession blankt many of her favorers and admirers; and seemed
so strange, that it was held fit not to believe it, without strict and legal
examinations, and proceedings: Magdalene was close imprisoned in her Covent;
and being called to question, confessed all this mystery of iniquity: Yet
still her Moore continued his illusions; for, while she was fast locked up in
her Cell, with a strong guard upon her doors; the Nuns were no sooner come into
the Quire, toward morning, to say their Mattins; then this deputy-apparition
of Magdalene, took up her wonted stall, and was seen devoutly tossing her beads
amongst her sisters; so as they thought the Visitors had surely freed her of
the crimes objected, upon her vehement penitence: But hearing that Magdalene
was still fast caged in her prison, they acquainted the Visitors with what they
had seen the morning before: who upon full examination found, that she had
never looked out of the doors of her Jail. The process was at last sent up to
Rome; whence, since the confession was voluntary, she had her absolution. A
Story of great note and use for many occasions, and too well known to the
world, to admit of either denial, or doubt, and ratified, as by the known
consent of the time, so by the faithful records of Zuingerus, Bodin, Reney,
Goulartius. Lord God! what cunning conveyances are here of the foul spirit?
what subtle hypocrisy? what powerful illusions? enough to make sanctity it
self suspected; enough to shame the pretense of miracles: He can for an
advantage be an holy Nun, as well as an ugly Moore, he can be as devout at
Mattins, Sacraments, Processions, as the best: What wonder? when he can at
pleasure counterfeit an Angel of light? In that glorious form did he appear to
Simeon Stylites of old, to Girtrude of Westphalia, not without the
entertainment of her joy and devotion; till Hermanus of Arnsburgh descryed the
fraud, and taught her to avoid it by a means no less advantageous to that ill
spirit, then her former devotion: Yea, yet higher, to Pachomius, and to Valens
the Monk, as Palladius reports, he durst appear and call for adoration, and had
it, under the form of the Lord of life, blessed for ever.

How vain is the observation of those Authors, who make this the difference
betwixt the apparitions of good Angels, and evil; that the good make choice of
the shapes, either of beautiful persons, or of those creatures which are
clean, and hurtlesse; as of the shape of a Lamb to Clement, or an Heart to
Eustace, or a Dove to Gummarus; whereas the evil put themselves into the forms
of deformed men, or of harmfull, and filthy beasts: as of a Goat, to the
assembly of Witches; of Hogs, in the Churches of Agatha profaned by the
Arrians; of Serpents, Dragons, Toads, and other loathsome and terrible
Creatures, to St. Hilary and Anthony, as Athanasius and Hierom (in their
supposititious relations) have reported. And that if at any time he take upon
him the shape of a man, Est haec res mirabilis; nunquam visos esse daemones
utroque pede hamano ullibi apparuisse. Forner. de Ang. Ser. 9.
yet it is with some notable defect, and incongruity of limbs; as with a right
foot cloven, or with a whole hoof; never entirely humane: when we see that the
very glory of Angels escapes not their counterfaisance. We know how easy it is
for the Almighty to ordain some such mark to be set upon the false shapes of
evil spirits, for their better discovery: but why should we rather suppose
this to be done in the case of humane bodies, then of heavenly Angels? why more
in the resemblance of men, then of all other creatures since their deceit may
be no less dangerous in either?

But as for these visible Devils, they are in these days very rare; and where
they have appeared, have wont to work more affright then spiritual prejudice.
Evil spirits are commonly most pernicious to the soul, when they are least
seen; as not caring so much for our terror, as our seduction. O God, they are
crafty, but thou art wisdom it self; they are malicious, but thou art
goodness: let thy goodness and wisdom ever protect and safeguard us; so
shall we be, not more wretched, and unsafe in our selves, then we shall be in
thee, secure and happy.

SECT. VII. The vehemence of Satan's last conflicts.
THese spirits (because such) are neither capable of sleep nor weariness: as
they are therefore ever busy, and restless in their assaults, so their last
conflicts use to be most vehement; whether it be for that, now, the soul is
passing out of their reach, as we find they did most tear and torture the
Demoniack, when they saw themselves upon the point of their ejection: or
whether it be for that the painful agonies of death yield them more hopes of
advantage; since the soul, whiles it is struggling with those last pangs, must
needs have her powers distracted in her resistances. Cruelty where it would
prevail, will be sure to lay most load upon the weakest: Hereupon it is, that
holy men have been most careful to arm themselves stronglyest against those
last onsets; and to bend all the forces of their souls upon their safe
dissolution: The holy sister of S. Basil, and Melania, whom S. Jerome magnifies
for their sanctity; beseech God with great fervency, that those envious spirits
may not hinder them in their last passage: and devout Bernard to the same
purpose, when he drew near his end, sues to his friend for his earnest prayers,
that the heel of his life might be kept safe from the Serpent, so as he might
not find where to fix his sting. Hence it is that in former times, good souls
have been so provident to hearten themselves against the faint pulls of their
death beds, with that [ viaticum sacrum] the strongest spiritual Cordial of
the blessed Eucharist, which has yielded them such vigor of heavenly
consolation, that they have boldly defied all the powers of darkness, and in
spite of all those assaults, have laid themselves down in peace.

O God, I know Satan can want no malice, nor will to hurt; I should be his, if
I looked for favor from him; he must and will do so much of his worst to me, as
thou will permit: whether thou will be pleased to restrain him, or strengthen
me, thy will be done: O lead me not into temptation: and when thou do so,
show thy self strong in my weakness; arm me for my last brunt, stand by me in
my last combat, make me faithful to the death, that thou may give me a
Crown of life.

SECT. VIII. Of our carriage toward wicked Spirits, and the ways of our
prevalence against them.
WE have seen what the carriage of the evil spirits is to us; it were fit we
should ask in what terms we must stand toward them: That we must maintain a
perpetual hostility against them, cannot be doubted; and what ever acts may
tend toward the securing of our selves and the abating of the Kingdom and
power of darkness those must be exercised by us, to the utmost Justly do we
scorn to be beholden to that deadly enemy, in receiving courtesies from him.
Favors from such hands, are both sins and curses. He that can so easily
transform himself, will seem to do good; What cures does he often work? what
discoveries of thefts? what remedies of Diabolical operations and possessions
by the agency of Witches, Wisards, Magicians? what an ordinary traffic does
he hold of Charms, Spells, Amulets? Ignorance and superstition are willing
enough to be befriended by such pernicious helps, whereby that subtle spirit
both wins and kills the soul, whiles he cures the body. It is not easy for a
man, where he receives a benefit to suspect an enmity: but withal, it is no
less then stupidity, when we find a good turn done us, not to enquire whence
it came; and if we find it to proceed from a mischievous intent of further
hurt, not to refuse it. That there have been diseases remedied, wounds healed
blood stanched, thorns plucked out, Serpents stupefied, winds procured by
Charms, is so notorious, that whosoever would doubt of it, should make himself a
wonder of incredulity; now then, by what power do we think these things done?
Natural it cannot be, for there is no such efficacy in words or characters,
(being but of mere devise and arbitrary imposition) as may produce real
effects. Preter-naturall then it must be; and if so, then either divine, or
diabolical: of God, it cannot be; where has he given warrant to any such
practice? where any promise to concur with it? Nay, how often has he testified
his prohibitions, and detestation of these courses? Needs must it therefore be
by devilish operation; whose agents, Witches and Sorcerers are; and whose means
of working, are these superstitious inventions; which by a secret compact,
receive their force and success from those infernal powers. Let those, then,
that have given to Satan their souls, take favors from him for their bodies:
Let us that defy the author, abhor the courtesy. Mine enemy offers me a rich
garment, I know it is poisoned, else he would not give it me; shall I take it
because it is rich, or refuse it because it is infectious? Let me be sick
rather then receive help from such hands; Let my goods be lost, rather then my
soul hazarded: Let me die rather then owe my life to my Makers enemy.

SECT. IX. How we are to proceed against Evil Spirits.
WE may not yield to that evil one; our next thought must be how to oppose
him: Our skillful Leade^ has prescribed a spiritual panoply, both for defense
and victory: The helmet of salvation, the breast plate of righteousness, the
girdle of verity, the sword of the spirit; and above all, the shield of faith,
wherewith we may be able both to quench and beat back the fiery darts of that
wicked one. These well put on, and well managed, shall both secure us, and foil
our adversary. But the art of repelling several ^emptations is a long work*
and wor^hy of a just volume How we ought to deal with evil spirits in their
bodily apparitions and possessions, may be seasonable for our present enquiry.
Whereas, then, there is pretended to be only a double way of proceeding for
their ejection; the one, by Pact, the other by Command: as the former is
disclaymed by all faithful Christians; so the other is wont to be challenged
and practiced by some who lay no small claim to holiness: This we call
Exorcism, or Conjuration; a course so well approved of the Churches of the
Roman correspondence, as that they make this office one of the seven stairs,
whereby they ascend to their highest Order: But so dis-relished by us, that we
ordinarily place Conjurers in the same rank with Sorcerers and Professors of
the Black and damned Arts; although indeed, upon a strict inquisition we shall
find them far different; for Conjuration or Exorcism implies a kind of force
and violence; whereas those that are in league with Satan, go on, as upon a set
match in a way cursedly amicable: this latter is hainously sinful, as being
directly against the divine law, and a professed affront to the majesty of God;
the former unjustifiable, as being without divine warrant. It is most true,
that the Disciples of Christ, and their primitive successors ejected Devils by
command; and could rejoice to see those evil spirits subjected to their
overruling charge: but withal, the same persons healed all diseases, were
perfect poyson-proof, spoke diverse languages: why should any in these latter
times challenge a right of succession i^ one of these, and not claim i^ in the
other? All these were given with one, and the sam^ breath, continued by the
same power; called in and stinted by the same providence, with their
fellow-miracles: And if still this privilege were ordinarily left in the
Church, it were not a work for puisnes, and novices, but for the greatest
Masters, and the most learned, and eminently-holy Doctors, which the times can
possibly yield: And if this were really done, as is commonly vaunted by them;
yet with how much difference from the Apostolic practice and issue? With them
of old, there was no more but a word of command, and an instant ejection: here,
what a world of business? what sprinkling? what censing? what blessing of
herbs, and other ingredients of suffumigation? what variety of direful
ceremonies? and when all is done, the success shuts up no otherwise then in
just suspicion or censure.

Not that free scope is given in these last times, without any check to the
tyranny of evil spirits: The good providence of the highest has not left us
unfurnished with means of our freedom and deliverance; whiles we can pray, we
cannot be remediless: when the Disciples power stuck at the dispossession of a
Demoniack, they heard from our Savior, This kind goes not out but by fasting
and prayer. Whence it is plain, that as there are several kinds of Devils, one
worse and more powerful then another, so the worst of them are to be
vanquished by prayer, sharpened with abstinence. What a difference then there
is of times, and means? at the first it was a greater work to disposs^sse
Devils by prayer and fasting, then by command: now, it were far greater to do
it by a mere command, then by prayer and fasting: That which was then
ordinarily done, were now strangely miraculous; and that which is the ordinary
course now, was then rare and unusual: The power of an adjuring command we see
ceased, the power of fervent prayer can never be out of date. This, and this
only is the remedy of both bodily and mental possession: thus, if we resist
the Devil, he shall flee away from us: Upon the ground of this Scripture it
was (as my self was witness) that in our age, Mr. Dayrel, a godly, and zealous
preacher, undertook, and accordingly (through the blessing of God upon his
faithful devotions) performed, those famous ejectments of evil spirits both
at Nottingham and Lanoashire, which exercised the press, and raised no small
envy from the gainsayers: Shortly, all that we have to do concerning malignant
spirits, is, to repay them with hatred, to persuade our hearts of their
continual dogging of us for mischief, to arm our selves with constant
resolutions of resistance, diligently to watch the ways of their tentations,
to keep the strongest guard upon our weakest parts, to fortify our selves by
our faithful prayers, and by the virtue of our faith to make him ours, who is
able to strengthen us, and to make us more then Conquerors.

SECT. X. Of the woeful estate of the Souls of the damned.
IT is not for our discourse to sever those whom the divine Justice will have
put together: Devils, and damned Souls. There is none of those evil spirits
which does not (wheresoever he is) carry his hell about him: yet doubtless
there are degrees of their torture: Art thou come to torment us before our
time, said those Devils to our blessed Savior; and how do they beg not to be
commanded to the deep? Reprobate souls are no less partners of their pain,
then objects of their fury. No sooner is this living spirit of ours dislodged
from the body, then it is presented as in a privy Sessions, to her Judge; from
whom she receives a speedy doom of life, or death: the Sentence is instantly
seconded with an answerable execution. The good Angels are glad actors in the
happy instalment of the Just, in their glory: The evil angels seize upon the
guilty soul, and drag it to their hell: As for any third place, or condition;
let them take thought that believe it; For me, I must profess, I never saw any
color of ground for it in the sacred Oracles of God, and shall not easily
believe that a truth mainly importing us, would have been concealed from our
eyes.

Woe is me, what a doleful, what a dreadful spectacle is this which is now
presented to my soul? the burning Tophet, the bottomless pit, the lake of fire
and brimstone, the region of horror and death: wherein there is the perfection
of all more then conceiveable anguish, the full consummation of the divine
vengeance to sinners; exquisiteness, eternity of torment; despair and
impossibility of release, or intermission; perpetual dying, perpetual living
in a death that can never end. How are my thoughts at a loss in this place of
confusion? whether shall I more tremble, O God, at the consideration of thy
terrible justice, or be swallowed up with astonishment of these infinite and
intolerable sufferings? I should not know thee, if I did not with holy
Chrysostom believe, that the utter l^sse of thy presence alone, is as a
thousand hels: to be for ever banished from thy sight, in which is the fullness
of joy, what can it be less then fullness of torment? But alas, this is far
from a mere absence.

The very sin of the damned is no small part of their hell; for as all their
powers, parts, faculties, are as so many subjects of their insupportable pain
and torture; so out of that insufferable extremity, they conceive a desperate
indignation, and hatred against God; not as he is in himself infinitely good,
(for goodness can be no object of hate) but as he is to them, a severe (though
most just) avenger of sin; to which is ever added a will obstinately fixed in
evil; whiles they were in their way, they were in a possibility of
reclamation, now, that they are ( in termino) they can be no other then they
are; As therefore the glorified souls are in a condition like to the Angels of
heaven; so the damned, are in the state of Devils; not more capable of avoiding
torment, then sin; equally reserved in everlasting chains of darkness to the
judgment of the great day. When (woe is me) that which seemed little less then
infinite, shall yet receive a further aggravation of pain and misery: when the
addition of the body shall give a further extent to this woeful cru^lation,
without all possibility of release for ever. Alas, what anguish do I feel in my
self to see the body of a malefactor flaming at a stake? and yet this is but
the act of a few minutes; for the air so vehemently incended, instantly stops
the passage of that free breath, which should maintain life, and the flesh, by
apposition of that combustible matter, which encompasses it, is soon turned
into dead cinders: but, I could conceive of a body frying a whole day in a
continued flame: Lord how should I be affected with the sad compassion of that
intolerable torment and burn inwardly with the sense of another pain? but to
think of a whole years broyling in such a fire, how can it but turn our bowels
within us? What then, Oh, what is it to conceive of lying in a fire more
intense then nature can kindle, for hundreds, thousands, millions, yea millions
of millions of years, yea further beyond these then these are beyond a minute
of time to all eternity? where (besides the indurance) every thing that makes
toward the mitigation of other pains, adds to these. Here is society of
tortures, but such as tortureth more: Those perpetual howlings, and
shriekings, and wailings of so many millions of the damned, were enough to make
the place an hell, even to him that should be exempted from those sufferings:
Here is some glimpse of knowledge of the blessed estate of glorified souls;
enough to heighten their envy, enough to perfect their torment; even as meat
is set before that man which is doomed to famish: Shortly, here is exquisite
disconsolateness, gloomy darkness, extreme horror, pain insufferable, hideous
ejulations, utter hopelesness, vexing indignation, furious blasphemies,
infinite dolor and anguish, without relaxation, without pity, without
possibility of remedy, or ease, or end. How can it be otherwise? O God, if thy
mercy have prepared such an heaven for thy poor servants, whose very best
works, for their great imperfection, deserve nothing but punishment, what an
hell has thy justice provided for those enemies of thine, that wilfully
despite thee, and offend of malicious wickedness! How infinitely art thou more
just then sinners can be miserable!

But it is enough, O my soul, to have looked into the pit; enough to make thee
lament the woeful condition of those that are there shut up: enough to warn
thee to avoid those sinful ways, that lead down to these chambers of death:
enough to make thee think no tears can be sufficient to bewail the desperate
carelessness of wretched sinners, that run on in a known course of wickedness,
without any regard of an ensuing damnation: Alas, (so as they are bewitched)
they have not the grace to pity themselves; and to foresee the danger of their
own utter perdition; which if they could but look into, they would be ready to
run mad with horror: Poor souls, could they but recover their reason, they
would then think, if a thousand days pleasure cannot weigh with one hours
torment, what do I buy one hours pleasure with the torment of more then ten
thousand ages? how do I dare to dance for a few minutes upon the mouth of hell
with the peril of an everlasting burning? Surely, if Infidelity had not robbed
men of their wits, they could not resolve to purchase the momentany pleasures
of sin with so dreadful and eternal damnation.

SECT. XI. A Recapitulation of the whole discourse.
ANd now, what is to be done? Surely, as some Traveller, that has with many
weary steps passed through diverse Kingdoms and Countries being now returned to
his quiet home, is wont to solace his leisure by recalling to his thoughts, a
short mental landscape of those regions, through which he has journyed; here
conceiving a large Plain, there a Lake; here a track of Mountains, there a
Wood; here a Fen, there a City; here a Sea, there a Desert: so do thou, O my
soul, upon this voyage of thine through the great invisible World; bethink thy
self of what thou have seen, and so abridge this large Prospect to thy self, as
that it may never be out of thine eye. Think first, that whatsoever thou see,
thou can not look besides the invisible majesty of thy God; all this
material world is his, he is in all, rather all is in him; who so comprehends
this Universe, that he is infinitely without it; think of him as with thee, as
in thee, as every where. Do thou, therefore, ever acknowledge him, ever adore
him, ever enjoy him, ever be approved of him: see him from whom thou can not
be hid; rely on him without whom thon can not subsist; glorify him without
whom thou can not be happy.

Next, as those that have their celestial life and being by from, and in him,
wonder at the glorious Hierarchy of the heavenly Angels, bless him in their
pure, and spiritual nature, in their innumerable numbers, in their mighty
power, in their excellent knowledge bless him in their comely orders, in their
divine offices, in their beneficial employments, in their gracious care, and
love of mankind: And (so far as weak flesh and blood may with pure and
majestical spirits) converse with them daily, entertain them (so thou know
they are present) with awful observances, with spiritual allocutions; ask of
thy self how pleasing thine actions are to them; receive from them their holy
injections; return to them (under thy God) thy thankful acknowledgments; expect
from them a gracious tuition here, and an happy transportation to thy glory.

After these represent to thy self the blessed society of the late charge, and
now partners of those heavenly Angels, the glorified Spirits of the just: see
the certainty of their immortal being in the state of their separation; see
them in the very instant of their parting blessed with the vision, with the
fruition of their God; see how they now bathe themselves in that celestial
bliss, as being so fully sated with joy and happiness, that they cannot so
much as desire more: see them in a mutual interknowledge, enjoying each others
blessedness: see the happy communion which they hold with their warfaring
brotherhood here upon earth, whose victory and consummation they do in a
generality sue for to the throne of Grace: Foresee them, lastly, after a
longing desire of meeting with their old, and never forgotten partner, joyfully
reunited to their now-glorified bodies, and employing their eternity of life in
continual Hallelujahs to him that sits upon the throne. Take up thy rest here,
O my soul, for ever, but do not as yet thus end thy prospect; it is good for
thee to know worse things. If in Paradise the Tree of the knowledge of good and
evil were forbidden to our first parents, the act of the knowledge of both is
not forbidden to us; Even to know evil in speculation, may avoid the knowledge
of it in a woeful experience. See then, O my soul, the best creature falling
from good into evil; in choosing it, see him, by misinclining his own will,
apostatizing from his infinite Creator, and hurled down headlong from the
height of heavenly glory, to the bottom of the nethermost hell: see the
irrecoverable condition, and dreadful numbers of those precipitated Angels;
see their formidable power, their implacable malice, their marvailous
knowledge, craft, skill, to do m^schief, their perpetual machinations of our
destruction, especially in their last assaults; see their counterfaisance in
their glorious, and seemingly-holy apparitions, for a spiritual advantage; and
when thou have recollected thy self to a resolution of defiance, and
unweariable resistance, c^st thine eye upon the deplorable condition of those
damned souls, whom they have either betrayed by their fraud, or by their
violence mastered: and whiles thou do bless and magnify the divine Justice
in their deserved torment; spend thy tears upon those, who would needs spend
their eternity of being, in weeping, wailing, and gnashing; And lastly, rouz
up thy self in this moment of thy remaining life, unto all careful and fervent
endeavors to save thy self, and to rescue others from this fearful damnation.

SECT. XII. The Comparison of both worlds: and how our thoughts and affections
should be taken up with the Invisible World.
NOw then, having taken a view of both worlds; of the material world, by the
eyes of sense and reason; of the Invisible by the eyes of reason and faith; I
cannot but admire God in both, and both of them in God; but the Invisible so
much more, as it is infinitely beyond the other; For God himself is the world
of this world: whom, whiles in the material world we admire in his creatures,
in this immaterial we admire in himself. Now, himself must needs be infinitely
more wonderful then many worlds (if such there were) of those Creations that
should proceed from him.

As for the parts of the created, but Invisible world, it must neods be said,
that the lightsome part of it has more glory, then any piece of the material
world can be capable of: on the contrary, the dark, and privative region of the
Invisible world, has infinitely more horror then the other: for what is the
worst and most disconsolate darkness of this visible world, but a privation of
the light of the Sun; which yet can never be so absolute as to exclude all
imperfect diffusion of those in sensible glimmerings; whereas the darkness of
this spiritual world, is an utter privation of the sight of God; joined with
an unconceiveable anguish Even in nature, spiritual essences must needs be
more excellent then bodily, and earthly; and of only spirits it is, that the
Invisible world consists: Besides, what vanity and inconstancy do we find
every where, in this material and elementary world? what creature is there
which does not exchange life for death? being for dissolution? sanity for
corruption? what uproars do we find in the air? what ^ommotions, and
turbulencies upon earth? the best state of things is an uncertain vicissitude;
the worst, certain desolation, and destruction: whereas, the Invisible world is
setlted in a firm and steady immutability: the blessed Angels and souls of the
Saints being so fixed in their glory, that they are now no more capable of
alteration. Shortly, he that saw both worlds, shuts up all in one word, The
things that are seen are temporal, the things that are not seen eternal.

As then, I can never open my bodily eyes, but I shall see the material world,
and I hope, I shall never see it, but I shall praise the power, and wisdom,
and goodness of the infinite Creator of it; so shall it be one of the main
cares of my life, to bless the eyes of my soul, with the perpetual view of
the spiritual and Invisible world: Every action, every occurrent shall mind me
of those hidden and better things: and I shall so admit of all material
objects, as if they were so altogether transparent, that through them I might
see the wonderful prospects of another world. And certainly, if we shall be
able so to withdraw our selves from our senses, that we shall see, not what we
see, but what we think, (as it uses to be in the strong intentions of the
mind) and shall make earthly things, not as Lunets, to shut up our sight, but
Spectacles to transmit it to spiritual objects: we shall lead a life as far
rem^ved from those beasts which we see, as near approaching to those Angels
whom we converse with, and see not.

Neither shall it be enough for us to know an Invisible world, as to consider
that all we see, is the least part of what we see not; unless we be so
affected to the unseen world, as we ought; It is our knowledge that must show us
how to be Christians, but it is our affection that must make us so: In the
acknowledgment therefore of an Invisible glory, and infiniteness, our hearts
must be ever taken up with a continual awe and reverence If some great Prince
shall vouchsafe to let me be seen of him, although he please to keep himself
unseen of me; J^. Leo Africa d^scr. ^^t.
and shall only (according to the state of some great Eastern Monarchs) speak
to me behind a Vail, or Traverse; or (as the great Prete of the South had wont
to grace Ambassadors) show me only some part of his leg, so as that I may
understand him to be present; I should think it concerned me to carry my self
in no less seemly fashion toward him, then if I saw his face; for his sight
of me, calls for a due regard from me, not my sight of him: Since therefore we
have so certain demonstrations of the undoubted presence of God and his holy
Angels ever with us, (though not discernible by our bodily eyes) with what fear
and trembling, with what reverence and devotion should we always stand, or
walk before them? making it our main care to be approved of them, to whom we
lie no less open then they are hid to us. As for the glorified Saints of God,
who are gone before us to our home; with what spiritual joy should we be
ravished at the consideration of their blessed condition? who now have attained
to the end of their hopes, glory and bliss without end; ever seeing, ever
enjoying him, at whose right hand are pleasures for evermore; how should we
bless God for their blessedness, and long for our own?

Lastly, how should our joy be seasoned with a cautious fear, when we cast our
eyes upon those objects of dread, and horror, the principalities and powers of
darkness, not so confined to their hell, as to leave us untempted, and
increasing their sin and torment by our temptation?

How should our hearts bleed with sorrow, and commiseration of those wretched
souls, which we see daily entangled in the snares of the Devil, and captived
by him at his will here on earth, and frying under his everlasting torments in
the pit of hell?

-How should our hearts be pre-possessed with a most earnest and vigilant care
to resist all the dangerous assaults of those wicked spirits, and to prevent
the peril of our own like-wofull destruction? If we i shall make this use of
our being in this visible world, happy are we that ever we came into it, more
happy in our going out of it: for having thus used it, as if we used it not, we
shall so enjoy the other, as those that shall ever enjoy it, and, in it, all
glory, honor, immortality.

Lo then, O my soul, the glorious world which thou art now aspiring unto; yea,
whereinto thou art now entering; There, there fix thy self never to be removed:
Look down upon these inferior things with an overly contempt; forget what is
past, as if it had never been. Bid a willing farewell to this visible world*
wherein as thy Creator has a just interest of glory, for that the substance
of it is the wondrous workmanship of his hands; so Satan (styled he Prince of
it) claims no small share, in regard of its sinful depravation.

Farewell then ye frivolous and windy honors, whose management is ever wont to
be in others hands, not in our own* which have ever been no less fickle then
the breath ye have depended upon; whose chief use has been for temptation, to
puff up the heart with a proud conceit of eminence above others; not requiting
in the mean while the danger with any solid contentment.

Farewell ye deceitful* Riches, which when we have, we cannot hold; and even
while we hold, we cannot enjoy: and if we offer and affect to enjoy, is it not
with our spiritual loss? for what love we yield to cast away upon you we
abate to him that is the true and all-sufficient good; More then for necessary
use, we are never the better for you, often times the worse, your load is more
uneasy, then your worth is precious.

Farewell pleasures (if I ever knew what ye were) which have always wont to
afford more sting then honey: whose only scope has professedly been, under a
pretense of delectation, to debauch and emasculate the mind, and to dis-relish
all spiritual comforts, where your expectation has been somewhat delightful,
your fruition has been unsatisfiing^, your loose displeasing, your remembrance
irksome.

Farewell friends, some of whose unsteadinesse and unfaithfulness has helped
to add to my load, which the fidelity of others had not power to ease, whose
love might be apt to condole my shipwreck, but could not spare me a plank to
swim to the shore: Shortly, whose common misery may be more ready to receive,
then give comfort.

The honor that I now reach at, is no less then a crown, and that no fading
and corruptible (as all these earthly Diadems are) but immarcescibly eternal,
a crown of righteousness, a crown of glory. The riches that I am now for are
not such as are dug out of the base entrails of the earth, obnoxious to
spoil and plunder, but treasures* laid up in heaven. The pleasures that I now
affect* are the fullness of joy at the right hand of the Almighty for eve more.
The friends that I ambitiously sue for, are those that shall receive me into
everlasting habitation. Lastly farewell vanishing life, and welcome blessed
eaernity: Even so Lord Jesu, come quickly.

FINIS.
THE CONTENTS.
THE FIRST BOOK Of God and his Angels.
THe Preface. 1. That there is an Invisible world. 2. The distribution of the
Invisible world. 3. Of the Angels of heaven Their Numbers. 4. The power of
Angels. 5. The knowledge of Angels 6. The Employment, and operations of Angels.
7. The Degrees and Orders of Angels 8. The Apparitions of Angels. 9. The
respects which we owe to the Angels.
The Second Book. Of the souls of blessed men
1 Of their Separation and Immortality. 2. Of the present vision of God upon
the egression of the soul. 3. Of the perpetual vigilance of the soul and its
fruition of God. 4. Of the knowledge of the glorified. 5. Of the glory of
heaven enjoyed by blessed souls. 6. Wherein the glory of the Saints above
consists, and how they are employed. 7. In what terms the departed Saints
stand to us, and what respects they bear us. 8. The reunion of the body to the
soul, and both glorified.
The third Book. Of the Devils and damned Souls.
1. Of the evil Angels. Of their first sin and fall. 2. Of the number of
Apostate Spirits. 3. Of the power of Devils. 4. Of the knowledge and malice of
wicked Spirits. 5. Of the variety of the spiritual assaults of evil Spirits.
6. Of the apparitions and shapes assumed of the evil Spirits. 7. The vehemence
of Satan's last conflicts. 8. Of our carriage toward wicked Spirits. 9. How we
are to proceed against evil Spirits. 10. Of the woeful estate of the damned
souls. 11: A recapitulation of the whole discourse. 12. The comparison of both
worlds. And how our thoughts and affections should be taken up with the
Invisible world.
FINIS.
COURTEOUS READER, These Books following are Printed for John Place, and are to
be sold at his Shop at Furnivalls-Inn Gate in Holborn.
Books in Folio.
1. THe History of the World, by Sir Walter Raleigh Knight. 2. Things new and
old, or a Storehouse of Similies, Sentence, Allegories, Addages, Apologies
Divine, Moral and Political, by John Spencer of Sion College. 3.
Observations on Caesar's Commentaries, by Sir Clement Edmunds Knight. 4. Shepparts
Epitomy of the Law. 5. The Reports of the learned Judge Popham, sometime Lord
chief Justice of England. 6. The Reports of the learned Judge Owen, chief
Justice of the Common Pleas. 7. Londinopolis, or a History of the Cities of
London and Westminster, by James Howell. 8. The History of Swedes, Goths, and
Vandals, by Olaus Magnus Bishop of Vpsall. 9. The Reports of the learned
Sergeant Bridgman. 10. Cowells Interpreter of hard words in the Law, etc. 11.
Maxims of Reason, or the Reason of the Common Law, by Edward VVingat* Esquire late
one of the Benchers of Gray's Inn. 12. The History of Edward the Fourth, of the
Wars between the Houses of York and Lancaster, by VV.H. Esquire. 13. The
Minister of State, wherein is showed the true use of Policy, by Monsieur de
Siton Secretary to Cardinal Richlew, Englished by Sir Henry Herbert Knight.
Books in Quarto.
1. The Complete Clerk, or Scriveners Guide, containing the Draughts of all
manner of Presidents, of Assurances, and Instruments now in use, as they were
penned by the most learned and eminent Lawyers. 2. Commentaries on the
Original Writs, in Natura Brevium, by William Hughes of Gray's Inn Esquire. 3. An
exact Abridgment of the Common Law, with the Cases thereof drawn out of the old
and new Books of the Law, etc. by William Hughes of Gray's Inn Esquire. 4. An
exact Abridgment of the Acts and Ordinances of Parliament, beginning at the
fourth year of King Charles, to the year, 1656. 5. Declarations and Pleadings,
etc. in the Upper-bench, by William Small of Furnivals-Inn, late one of the
Clerks in the Upper-bench Court. 6. Declarations, Counts and Pleadings in the
Common Pleas, by Richard Brownlow Esquire, late Prothonotary; The second part.
7. A Collection of learned Speeches and Passages in Parliament, beginning in
the year, 1640. and ending in the year 1642, 8. The Faithful Counselor, or
the Marrow of the Law in English, by William Sheppard Esquire, now Sergeant at
Law. 9. The Dead speaking, or the living man revived, in a Sermon preached at
the Funeral of Mr. Sam. Oliver, by Mr Chitwind M. A. with two exhortations of
Mr. Thom M. A. 10. The floating Island, by Dr. Strowd, acted at Oxford. 11. The
Tragedy of the fair Irene the Greek, by Gilbert Sumhoe Esquire. 12. Witchcraft
condemned, or Dr. Lamb revived in the unheard of practice of Anne Bodenham,
Arraigned at Sarum Ass^^es. 1653. 13 Bethell, or the form for Families, by
Matthew Grifith.
1. The Jurisdictions of Courts, by John K^tch^n of Barnards Inn 2. Books of
Entries of all manner of Judgments in the Upper-bench and Common Pleas. 3. The
Grounds and Maxims of the Law, by Michael Haulke of the Middle Temple. 4. A
perfect Guide for a studious young Lawyer, by Thomas Fidell of Furnivals Inn,
Gent. 5. The Arraignment of the Anabaptists, in a Dispute at Aberg^veny in
Mo^mouthshire, by John Cragge M.A. 6. A Cabinet of Jewels, wherein Gods Mercy,
Man's misery, etc. is set forth in eight Sermons, with an Appendix of the nature
of Tithes, and expedience of Marriage, by a lawful Minister, by John Cragge,
M.A.
1. The Abridgment of the Lord Dyers Reports, by Sir Thomas Ireland. 2
Observations on the Office of a Lord Chancellor, by the Lord Elsmore, late Lord
Chancellor. 3. The Laymans Lawyer, or the second part of the practick part of
the Law, by Tho. Foster Gent. 4. The County Court renewed, or all manner of
proceedings there, by William Greenwood, Studient of Furnivals Inn.
1. Transactions of the High Court of Chancery, collected by VV. Tochell. 2.
Brooks Cases in English, by J. Marsh of Grays Inn Barester. 3. Poems, by
Matthew Stevenson* 4. Perkins of the Laws of England. 5. An exact Abridgment of
Dctoor and Student. 6. Invisible World, and the Mystery of Godliness, by Joseph
Hall, Bishop of Norwich. 7. Imposition of Hands, by Jos. Hall, Bishop of
Norwich. 8. Treatise of Phlebotomy, demonstrating the necessity of it in
Diseases of Terms of Election, with the use of the Cupping-Glass, with a
Treatise of the Crisis written in French by Da. De. Plumis Campi Surgeon,
now translated into English, by E. VV. a well-wisher to Physic and Chyrurgery.
9. The Peacemaker, by William Page Doctor in Divinity. 10. A Sermon preached
at the Funeral of Sir James Penyman, by Allen Smalwood. 11. Clara stella. by
R. Heath Esquire 12. Doctor Prestons Saints Infirmities. 13. A Comment on the
Times, or a Character of the Enemies of the Church, by Thomas Wall, Mr. in
Arts. 14. A Catechism containg the Principles of Christian Religion, written
by Moses. Wall.
FINIS.

